History of Civilization in England, Vol. 1 (Henry Thomas Buckle, 1857)
==========================================================
The first positivist history: civilization as law-governed science; a sensation in its day. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (introductiontohi00buckuoft).

PRESENTED  TO
SCARBOROUGH  COLLEGE

LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO

BY

The  Hon.    Peter  Wright


INTRODUCTION    TO    THE

HISTORY    OF

CIVILIZATION    IN

ENGLAND


BY

HENRY    THOMAS    BUCKLE


NEW  AND  REVISED  EDITION
WITH    ANNOTATIONS    AND    AN    INTRODUCTION

BY

JOHN    M.    ROBERTSON

AUTHOR  OF  "BUCKLE  AND  HIS  CRITICS,"  "MODERN  HUMANISTS,"  ETC.


LONDON

GEORGE    ROUTLEDGE    &    SONS,    LIMITED

NEW   YORK:    E.   P.    BUTTON  &  CO

1904


SCARBOROUGH
CO  LUGE
LIBRARY


EDITOR'S    PREFACE

THE  present  is  an  absolutely  complete  reprint  of  Buckle's
work,  with  a  new  index.  The  two  volumes  in  which  it
originally  appeared  (1857-61)  bore  the  title  History  of
Civilization  in  England,  their  subject-matter,  however,
being  simply  the  uncompleted  "General  Introduction"
to  the  projected  work  so  entitled.  The  old  title-page
(preserved  in  the  three-volume  edition)  was  thus  some-
thing of  a  misnomer,  and  this  has  been  corrected.

It  was  suggested  to  Buckle,  before  the  issue  of  his
second  volume,  that  he  himself  should  publish  a  popular
edition  of  his  book  without  the  notes.  It  is  now  reprinted,
with  all  the  notes  and  many  fresh  annotations,  at  a  lower
price  than  would  have  been  charged  in  Buckle's  day  for
an  abridgment.  Even  notes  that  might  have  been  held
redundant  are  faithfully  reproduced,  so  that  the  student
can  everywhere  judge  of  Buckle's  work  for  himself  ;  and
the  editor's  notes  are  scrupulously  distinguished  from
his  by  brackets,  and  by  the  absence  of  reference  numbers.
Buckle's  references  in  his  second  volume  to  the  first  are
of  course  altered  to  apply  to  the  present  edition.  A  few
small  grammatical  errors,  evidently  due  to  his  weak
health  at  the  period  of  publication,  have  been  corrected  ;
but  where  correction  would  involve  interference  with  the
cadence  or  structure  of  a  sentence,  even  grammatical
laxities  have  been  left  untouched.

Some  difference  of  opinion  may  arise  on  a  point  which
has  given  the  editor  some  perplexity — the  question,

iii


iv  EDITOR'S   PREFACE

namely,  as  to  the  length  to  which  he  should  carry  anno-
tation. To  some  he  may  seem  to  have  carried  it
too  far  :  others  may  count  him  remiss  in  omitting  to
question  certain  passages.  His  rule  has  been  to  avoid
discussion  of  indeterminable  issues,  such  as  the  proposition
on  page  13  that  Homer  and  Shakspere  have  been  the
"  most  accurate  investigators  of  the  human  mind  "  ;  or
that  on  page  222  as  to  the  relative  merits  of  Barrow  and
Taylor  ;  or  the  opinion  that  Whitefield  has  been  the  most
passion-moving  orator  since  the  apostles.  But  wherever
he  has  noted  a  mis-statement  of  historical  fact,  a  fallacy
of  argument,  or  an  inconsistency  of  theory  or  phrase,  he
has  sought  to  rectify  it,  even  at  the  risk  of  seeming  offi-
cious.

Realizing  the  difficulty  of  supervising  so  discursive  a
student  as  Buckle  in  all  his  various  fields,  he  has  taken
competent  counsel  as  to  the  sections  which  treat  of
physiological  matters ;  and  in  regard  to  the  political  and
intellectual  history  of  Scotland,  with  which  Buckle  deals
so  fully,  he  has  had  welcome  aid  from  a  vigilant  student.
Finally  he  is  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Ernest  Newman  for
taking  on  himself  the  laborious  task  of  revising  the  whole
of  the  proofs.  The  result,  he  hopes,  is  a  worthily  correct
text.

J.  M.  R.


EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION

I

IT  is  said  concerning  Buckle,  by  one  who  talked  with  him,
that  "  a  book  that  would  not  descend  to  posterity  was  evidently
one  for  which  he  had  but  scant  respect."  The  test  is  at  least
one  which  every  book  must  pass  in  order  to  be  proved  important  ;
and  Buckle  himself  has  thus  far  passed  it  easily.  His  book  now
enters  on  its  period  of  non-copyright  sale  ;  and  all  who  have
followed  its  fortunes  know  that  there  still  awaits  it  a  large
welcome  from  a  new  generation.

Of  the  select  list  of  serious  works  which  have  passed  thus  far
down  the  stream  of  time  since  his  day,  few  have  weathered
more  opposition.  Only  Darwin  and  Strauss  among  his  contem-
poraries, perhaps,  gave  a  more  serious  shock  to  standing  opinions :
and  in  his  case  the  vivacity  of  the  attack  elicited  a  proportional
resentment.  For  a  generation,  most  notices  of  his  book  in  his
own  country  were  hostile.  Latterly  there  has  been  a  lull  in  the
criticism  ;  but  all  the  while  the  treatise  has  been  doing  its
work  for  thousands  of  readers — preparing  their  minds,  that  is,  for
the  reception  of  a  science  of  human  history.  Whatever  may  be
thought  of  its  merit,  its  place  in  culture-evolution  is  clear.
Where  Darwin  definitely  brought  within  the  scope  of  scientific
law  the  phenomena  of  biology,  as  previous  pioneers  had  done
those  of  geology  and  astronomy,  Buckle  began  anew  the  most
complicated  and  difficult  task  of  all — the  reduction  to  law  of  the
phenomena  of  social  evolution.  The  harder  task  might  well  be
more  imperfectly  done  ;  but  the  utility  of  his  great  effort  is  sub-
stantially proved  by  the  persistent  interest  it  evokes.  Other
scientific  thinkers  of  his  day,  approaching  the  same  problem
on  different  sides,  have  had^similar  success  ;  and  it  is  not  our
business  here  to  weigh  his  work  against  theirs.  Suffice  it  to
say  that  Buckle's  plan  of  reaching  social  science  inductively
through  a  study  of  history,  with  the  help  of  economics  and
statistics,  has  its  special  value  as  compared  with  Comte's  method


vi  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  I  j.  j.  id

of  deductive  construction  and  prescription,  and  Spencer's  great
survey  of  social  anatomy  and  functional  life  in  terms  of  the  total
process  of  evolution.

ii  i     T 1

The  first  duty,  however,  of  those  who  now  republish  {Buckle
is  to  see  that  his  work  is  revised.  The  analogy  of  those  of  Gibbon
and  Adam  Smith — to  name  no  others — reminds  us  that  the  very
qualities  of  originality  and  comprehensiveness  which  give
the  pioneer's  work  its  importance,  set  up  a  need  for  revision.
Sir  William  Hamilton,  in  editing  the  works  of  Reid  as  "  the  best
result  of  Scottish  speculation,"  is  constrained  to  oppugn  his
author  in  scores  of  notes,  some  of  them  stringently  condemnatory.
Any  one  who  will  consult  further  the  index  of  McCulloch's
edition  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  under  the  heading  "  Smith,
Dr.,"  will  find  two  and  a  half  columns  of  entries  in  small  type,
nearly  all  referring  to  errors  of  fact  or  argument  in  the  text.
"  Erroneous,"  "  wrong,"  "  oversight,"  "mistaken,"  "overstates,"
"  exaggerates,"  "defective" — such  are  the  constantly  recurring
terms  of  the  references.  If  such  criticism,  passed  by  an  appre-
ciative disciple,  hold  good  of  the  greatest  of  economic  classics,
described  by  Buckle  as  probably  the  most  important  book  ever
written,  Buckle's  own  work  cannot  conceivably  escape  the  need
for  overhauling.

It  is  thus  the  invidious  function  of  the  editor  of  such  an  issue  as
the  present  to  make  his  notes  turn  mainly  on  what  he  holds  to
be  errors  or  oversights,  either  of  statement  or  argument ;  and
Buckle's  range  of  detail  and  theory  is  so  immense  that  the
proposed  corrections  are  not  less  numerous  than  those  advanced
by  McCulloch  in  his  edition  of  Smith.  But  the  attentive  reader
will  soon  realize  that  all  this  is  in  the  normal  way  of  things
literary  ;  and  that  mistakes  in  detail,  which  no  pioneer  can  escape,
do  not  affect  the  service  which  such  a  work  is  fitted  to  render.
Already  there  has  accumulated  a  large  body  of  specialist  de-
murrers to  the  statements  and  theories  of  Darwin  ;  and  in  the
recent  anonymous  work,  The  Primrose  and  Darwinism  (1902),
the  great  naturalist  will  be  found  to  have  incurred  charges  of
positive  error  of  observation,  and  vitiating  error  of  experimental
method,  in  addition  to  the  decisive  objections  already  sustained  by
some  of  his  ablest  disciples  against  some  of  his  generalizations.
Buckle,  we  may  be  sure,  would  warmly  have  disclaimed  any
favourable  comparison  of  his  work  with  that  of  Bacon,  whom  he
so  profoundly  admired  ;  but  we  may  fitly  note  that  equally  warm


EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION  vii

admirers  admit  the  presence  of  much  downright  rubbish  in  the
total  work  of  that  great  stimulator  of  sound  thinking.

It  is  a  significant  if  not  a  surprising  fact  that  of  the  corrections
which  have  to-day  to  be  made  on  Buckle's  performance  only  a
mere  handful  were  noted  by  the  hostile  critics  of  the  past  genera-
tion. Of  the  charges  of  error  brought  by  them  against  him,  as
it  happens,  the  great  majority  are  sheer  misconceptions  of  his
plainest  teaching.  The  last  of  the  many  instances  I  have  met
with  is  the  statement  of  Professor  Jevons  that  "  Buckle  referred
the  character  of  a  nation  to  the  climate  and  the  soil  of  its  abode." :
This  is  a  repetition  of  a  statement  made  by  several  other  writers  of
high  standing  ;  and  the  reader  who  will  attentively  peruse  the
second  chapter  of  this  book  will  see  that  it  completely  misrepre-
sents him.  What  he  taught  was  that  climate  and  soil  in  early
civilizations  determined  (a)  the  food  supply,  and  so  (b)  the  degree
of  population,  and  (c)  their  economic  condition  ;  besides  further
affecting  them  as  regards  the  regularity  or  intermittence  of  their
industry.  For  the  rest,  no  one  ever  laid  more  stress  on  the
operation  of  the  "  intellectual  laws,"  which  in  Europe  he  declared
to  countervail  the  physical.

Where  a  thinker  like  Professor  Jevons  could  thus  misread  and
misjudge,  others  multiplied  misconception  and  in  justice.  The  ex-
planation is  simple.  Buckle,  like  Gibbon  and  Smith  before  him,
and  like  Darwin  in  his  own  day,  called  upon  men  to  look  at  the
process  of  things  through  new  windows,  and  most  of  the  oppo-
sition to  him,  as  to  them,  came  from  men  who  denied  either
that  he  had  opened  any  windows,  or  that  through  his  anything
could  be  truly  seen.  Beginning  in  a  state  of  oppugnancy,  they
impugned  whatever  in  his  argument  looked  like  new  principles,
and  struck  angrily  at  the  nearest  of  his  generalizations.  Invited
by  him  to  recognize  natural  laws  in  the  whole  course  of  human
affairs,  where  formerly  they  had  seen  mystery  or  "  providence,"
they  resisted  every  step  in  the  argument,  and  sought  on  the  way
to  discredit  him  on  points  of  fact  without  having  made  any  all-
round  survey.  A  study  of  much  of  their  criticism  gives  one  the
impression  that  the  first  flight  of  them  never  read  him  with
patience  ;  and  unfortunately  these  were  followed  by  others  who,
less  prejudiced,  were  yet  content  to  regard  him  as  discredited.
Yet  the  valid  objections,  whether  general  or  particular,  hitherto
brought  against  Buckle's  work  are  notably  few  ;  and  they  are
found  nearly  always  to  come  from  men  who,  while  finding  him
at  fault  in  matters  within  their  special  field,  yet  were  in  sym-
1  Letters  and  Journal  of  Stanley  Jevons,  1886,  p.  454.


viii  EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION

pathy  with  his  general  attitude  to  his  problem.  We  to-day,
accepting  his  principles  and  his  method,  and  looking  sympatheti-
cally, yet  critically,  through  the  windows  he  opened,  can  detect
ten  errors  of  fact  or  argument  for  every  one  noted  in  the  past
by  his  avowed  enemies.  It  was  so  with  Gibbon,  whose  contem-
porary opponents,  misdirected  by  their  very  antagonism,  heaped
up  against  him  mostly  idle  charges,  where  his  scholarly  modern
disciple,  Mr.  Bury,  can  make  real  corrections.  Similarly,  the  com-
pletest  body  of  criticism  passed  upon  the  Wealth  of  Nations  was
that  of  McCulloch,  who  regarded  Smith  as  the  true  founder  of
economic  science  ;  and  the  correction  of  Darwin  in  turn  is  being
done  by  convinced  Darwinians.

Ill

The  present  editor,  unfortunately,  can  claim   no  such  compe-
tence for  his  task  as  some  of  these  have  shown  for  theirs.     He  can
but  plead  that  the  task  here  is  an  uncommonly  extensive  one,
that  no  one  else  has  shown  any  disposition  to  take  it  up,  and  that
he  has  grappled  with  it  as  best  he  could  after  much  sympathetic
study  of  Buckle's  work,  in  the  conviction  that  its  essentially
sound  teaching  can  best  be  furthered  by  an  impartial  scrutiny
of  all  its  details.     He  is  sure  that  the  book  can  do  for  others  what
it  once  did  for  him— give  a  far-reaching  guidance  over  the  great
field  of  the  history  of  social  evolution,  and  a  vivid  and  lasting
stimulus  to  the  exploration.     Some  even  of  what  in  the  eye  of  a
mature  student  are  the  formal  faults  in  Buckle's  work— in  par-
ticular its  tendency   to    enthusiastic    declamation— are   rather
helps  than  hindrances  to  us  all  in  an  earlier  stage  of  our  studies  ;
and  perhaps  those  who  have  ripened  most  in  the  later  stages  will
be  the  readiest  to  admit  that  his  faults  are  the  faults  of  a  man
ot  genius.

Certain  it  is  that  students  of  all  degrees  of  culture  are  found  to

slight  in  his  energy  and  variety.     At  his  best,  indeed,  he  cannot

surpassed  in  the  great  qualifications  of  fulness  of  knowledge,

readth  of  grasp,  and  vivacity  and  lucidity  of  presentment.     In

espect  of  these  powers,  he  brought  a  freshness  and  force  of  interest

nstoncal  matters,  that  not  even  his  greatest  predecessors  had

compassed.     He  is  fuller  of  colour  than  Montesquieu,  and  more

lantly  and  exactly  informative  than  Voltaire— two  early

•i  socio-historical  exposition,  to  whom  he  paid  generously

Even  if  his  theories  of  social  causation  be  ignored,

ne    emams  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  historians  ;  and  nowhere

iar,  can  there  be  found  more  illuminating  surveys  of


EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION  ix

national  and  epochal  evolution  than  he  has  made  in  the  histories
of  England,  France,  Spain,  and  Scotland.

Since  he  wrote,  new  histories  of  Spain  and  Scotland  have  been
produced  by  thoroughly  qualified  scholars,  who  enable  us  to
rectify  some  of  his  slips  ;  but  they  leave  us  as  appreciative  as
ever  of  his  peculiar  gift  of  presenting  the  total  movement  and
causal  sequence  of  the  lives  of  the  nations.  So  with  the  periods
of  English  and  French  history  with  which  he  has  dealt  in  this
unfinished  Introduction  :  fresh  and  fruitful  investigations  help  us
to  revise  his  judgments,  but  leave  his  service  to  comprehension
only  the  clearer.

IV

Needless  to  say,  however,  Buckle  is  to  be  read  not  merely  for
his  colligations  of  historical  detail,  but  further  for  his  doctrine  as
to  historical  causation.  If  he  were  not  substantially  right  in  his
reiterated  thesis  that  human  history  is  in  its  own  way  reducible  to
science,  his  book  would  be  in  the  main  a  mistake ;  for  it  was  to  illus-
trate historical  law  that  he  planned  and  wrote  it.  On  the  general
question,  though  eminent  persons  in  England,  still  proffer  nega-
tives, the  judgment  of  modern  thought  is  now  definitely  on  his  side.
Even  in  the  England  of  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago  Mr.  Huxley
pronounced  sociology,  perhaps  prematurely,  a  constituted  science  ;
and  to-day,  though  there  is  still  not  a  single  sociological  chair  in
the  United  Kingdom,  there  are  so  many  in  France,  Germany,
Italy  and  the  United  States,  that  it  is  practically  certain  we  cannot
much  longer  do  without  them.  In  U  Annie  Sociologique  for  1902
there  are  noted  one  hundred  and  sixty-five  "  sociological  "  works
published  in  Germany,  one  hundred  and  forty-six  in  France,
fifty-two  in  England,  forty-eight  in  Italy,  and  thirty  in  the
United  States.  Of  the  one  .hundred  and  forty-six  French  books
twenty-six  deal  with  sociology  proper — the  study  and  elucidation
of  social  processes —  nine  being  devoted  to  its  objects  and  methods,
as  against  five  in  Italy,  two  in  the  United  States,  two  in  Germany
and  none  in  England.  These  figures  tell  of  our  backwardness,
but  they  broadly  suggest  that  nearly  everywhere  else  men  are
establishing  scientific  views  of  social  causation.

While,  however,  the  possibility  of  a  true  science  of  social
evolution  is  thus  increasingly  recognized,  in  the  light  of  the  first
principles  of  all  science,  its  details,  needless  to  say,  are  under  con-
stant discussion  ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Buckle  can
escape  gainsaying.  After  looking  all  round  his  work  more  than
once,  the  present  writer  is  disposed  to  say  that  its  shortcomings


x  EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION

are  in  the  ordinary  way  of  pioneer  experience.  Every  pioneer
tends  on  the  one  hand  to  think  at  times  on  the  plane  of  the  current
misconceptions  from  which  he  has  broken  away,  and  on  the  other
hand  to  propose  incomplete  reconstructions.  Smith  and  Darwin
unquestionably  did  so  ;  and  Buckle  similarly  fell  short.  Setting
out  with  the  doctrine  that  all  human  progress  is  in  terms  of  the
interaction  of  organism  and  environment,  and  recognizing  that
instead  of  setting  down  total  racial  experience  to  a  total  race
character  we  must  look  for  our  explanations  in  the  total  experi-
ence, he  more  than  once  lapses  into  the  old  occultist  way  of  dis-
cussing a  nation's  forwardness  or  backwardness  as  a  matter  of
racial  fault  or  merit.  This,  which  some  people  regard  as  an  anti-
dote to  fatalism,  is  essentially  a  fatalistic  conception,  tending  to
shut  out  the  true  view,  that  in  matters  social  a  comprehension  of
conditions  is  already  a  change  of  conditions.

As  regards  his  special  theses,  again,  Buckle  exhibits  the  usual
difficulty  of  correlating  new  theories.  He  rightly  affirms,  among
other  things,  (i)  that  new  knowledge  is  the  essential  condition
of  material  and  moral  betterment,  and  (2)  that  a  relatively  mod-
erate play  of  climatic  forces  tends  to  evoke  a  relatively  large
measure  of  human  energy.  But  in  explaining  the  rise  of  European
civilization  he  does  not  reconcile  those  propositions.  He  writes
as  if  the  special  evocation  of  human  energy  in  Europe  by  the
parsimony  or  passivity  of  nature  sufficed  to  produce  the  needed
knowledge.  Yet  he  had  also  shewn  (3)  that  for  the  accumulation
of  knowledge  there  were  originally  needed  some  such  natural  con-
ditions as  are  seen  in  ancient  Egypt,  Mexico,  Peru  and  India,  the
accumulation  of  wealth  being  antecedent  to  that  of  knowledge.

To  rectify  the  exposition  we  have  to  note  that  the  higher
European  civilization  is  derivative,  first  by  way  of  Mediter-
ranean contacts  with  the  civilizations  of  Egypt  and  Western  Asia,
then  by  way  of  Mediterranean  contacts  with  northern  barbarism.
Buckle  indeed,  though  in  his  note-book  he  had  transcribed
Crete's  statements  about  it,  came  too  early  for  the  full  recog-
nition of  the  first  process,  which  is  only  now  being  properly
realized  ;  but  he  should  have  noted  the  later  dependence  of  all
north-European  civilization  on  that  of  the  south.  It  is  somewhat
remarkable  that  his  immense  reading  does  not  appear  to
include  more  than  the  most  prominent  works  of  previous  socio-
logists, and  that  he  does  not  mention  such  Scottish  and  French
writers  of  the  previous  three  generations  as  Millar,  Dunbar,
Volney,  Walckenaer,  and  Salverte,  who  indeed  frequently  coin-
cide with  him,  but  whose  ideas  might  at  times  have  suggested  to


EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION  xi

him  new  developments.  Even  to  the  treatises  of  the  greater  socio-
logists of  the  past,  as  Bodin,  Machiavelli,  Vico  and  Montesquieu,
he  gives  no  very  searching  attention.  The  explanation  seems
to  be  that  he  had  a  good  deal  of  what  he  regarded  as  the  English
instinct  for  induction,  and  preferred  to  approach  and  present
his  theory  by  way  of  masses  of  fact,  which  the  older  writers  had
not  collected.  The  defect  that  is  apt  to  attach  to  this  otherwise
priceless  method  is  the  non-correlation  of  the  theories  thus
approached.  Thus,  after  telling  us  that  in  Europe  nature  evokes
more  energy  both  of  mind  and  body  than  elsewhere,  Buckle  gives
us  a  copious  and  interesting  chapter  which  sets  forth  the  almost
complete  lack  of  mental  initiative  in  European  life  between  the
fall  of  the  Western  Empire  and  the  beginning  of  the  Renaissance.
Fresh  facts,  no  doubt,  would  point  to  the  solution,  but  a  due
regard  to  theoretic  construction  would  have  prevented  the
hiatus.

Another  common  drawback  of  the  inductive  habit  is  that  when
the  student  does  proceed  to  draw  his  conclusions  he  is  apt  to  err
permanently  from  lack  of  the  habit  of  theoretic  synthesis.  All
early  errors  of  quasi-scientific  belief,  broadly  speaking,  stood  for
incomplete  inductions.  Men  observed  a  certain  number  of
phenomena  and  generalized  from  them,  where  a  great  many  more
phenomena  needed  to  be  taken  into  account  before  they  could
understand  the  problem.  And  as  induction  is  always  liable  to
be  thus  incomplete,  the  deductive  check  is  essential  where,  in
the  nature  of  the  case,  there  cannot  be  that  "  universal  agreement  "
which  is  the  sole  sufficient  inductive  evidence.  Thus  Buckle  at
times  pushes  a  generalization  beyond  its  true  area.  He  is  not
uniform  in  his  mastery  of  periods.  Of  the  Scotland  of  the
seventeenth  century,  and  the  Spain  of  the  eighteenth,  his  know-
ledge is  comprehensive  and  luminous  ;  no  man  before  him  ever
grasped  a  period  more  vitally  or  presented  it  more  vividly.  But
when  he  goes  about  to  trace  the  antecedents,  and  shape  his
formula  of  causation,  he  makes  a  less  complete  inquest,  being
primed  by  his  impression  of  the  later  evolution,  so  that  we  get
from  him  statements  which  are  reached  rather  by  deduction
than  by  induction,  yet  are  not  deductively  harmonized.  In
the  untranslatable  French  phrase,  he  is  trop  simpliste  :  he  makes
the  evolution  more  straightforward  and  homogeneous  than  it
really  was,  thus  erring  both  inductively  and  deductively.

Sometimes,  again,  as  in  his  account  of  the  French  intellectual
evolution  of  the  eighteenth  century,  he  even  misreads  a  general-
ization framed  by  a  predecessor,  here  proceeding  on  a  mere


xii  EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION

hypothesis,  when  a  simple  scrutiny  of  the  bibliographical  facts
would  have  kept  him  right ;  or,  yet  again,  when  possessed  by  a
doctrine  such  as  that  of  laissez  faire,  he  makes  a  mass  of  evidence,
such  as  the  history  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV,  yield  a  foregone
conclusion,  and  makes  no  allowance  for  multiplicity  of  causation.
His  service,  in  short,  is  that  of  a  great  pioneer,  a  strenuous  path-
breaker,  a  stimulator  :  in  the  vast  imbroglio   of   historical   fact
he  sees  or  sets  up  currents  of  coordination,  electrifying  us  with  a
new  sense  of  mastery  and  comprehension  :  he  is  not  the  final  and
accurate   codifier   of   sociological   law.     His   success,    in   short,
whatever  be  its  degree,  is  of  the  kind  attained  by  Montesquieu,
by  Adam  Smith,  by  Comte,  by  Herder,  by  Darwin.     As  pioneer-
ing success  goes,  that  is  no  trifle  ;  and  on  this  head  we  should
always  keep  before  us  a  wise  saying  of  his  own,  penned  when  he
was  near  the  end  of  what  he  was  able  to  achieve.     The  process
of  scientific  advance,  he  writes  "  is  always  so  slow,  that  no  single
discovery  has  ever  been  made  except  by  the  united  labours  of
several  generations.     In  estimating,  therefore,  what  each  man
has  done,  we  must  judge  him  not  by  the  errors  he  commits  but
by  the  truths  he  propounds.     Most  of  his  errors  are  not  really
his  own.     He  inherits  them  from  his  predecessors  ;  and  if  he
throws  some  of  them  off  we  should  be  grateful,  instead  of  being
dissatisfied  that  he  has  not  rejected  all."     We  may  note  an
obvious  case  in  point.     One  of  the  most  pervasive  of  his  minor
faults  of  method,  the  habit  of  ascribing  unity  of  opinion,  action,
and  character  to  whole  nations— as  when  he  says  that   "the
Spanish,"  "  the  Scotch  "  and  "  the  French  "  acted  and  thought
in  certain  ways— is  but  an  extension  into  his  sociology  of  an
inveterate  popular  hallucination,  rooting  in  elementary  psychosis
and  elementary  political  feeling.

V

When,  applying  the  only  final  critical  test,  the  comparative,

we  set  against  Buckle's  work  that  of  any  or  all  of   the   other

socio-historical  writers  of  his  day,  or  even  of  ours,  we  realize

further  that  even  his  shortcomings  are  not  salient  as  beside  theirs,

while  his  positive  attainment  is  signally  greater.     It  is  possible

tor  a  biassed  judge,  with  a  one-sided  method,  to  belittle  him  as

beside  Darwin,  or  Herder,  or  Spencer,  or  even  Comte  ;  but  it  is

•t  possible  to  put  him  at  a  disadvantage  as  beside  the  other  men

undertook  to  explain  history.     Some  of  his  critics  were

rhaps  warranted  in  calling  some  of  his  propositions  crude,  but


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  xiii

the  fact  remains  that  none  of  those  critics,  any  more  than  any
of  his  competitors,  has  thus  far  superseded  or  even  improved
upon  his  performance.  He  is  practically  the  first  historical
sociologist  of  the  modern  scientific  movement.  Other  men,
working  on  special  lines,  had  reached  a  number  of  the  general
facts,  economic  and  geographical,  on  which  he  founded,  but
none  before  him  had  turned  them  to  a  creative  historical  pur-
pose. After  all  deduction  for  error,  he  remains  a  more  satis-
factory interpreter  of  history  than  Comte,  whose  power  is  at  its
highest  in  abstract  synthesis  ;  and  he  is  on  this  side  clearly  com-
plementary to  Mr.  Spencer,  who  studies  the  anatomy  of  social
frame  rather  than  its  variously  conditioned  activities  and  their
psychic  reactions.  At  his  best,  when  fully  faithful  to  his  chosen
method,  he  yields  us  the  satisfaction  that  belongs  only  to  a  true
scientific  solution  ;  and  even  when  his  solution  is  inadequate  it
carries  the  compensation  that  has  been  justly  ascribed  to  the
errors  of  the  wise,  that  of  arousing  and  warning  and  instructing
the  judgment  where  the  bare  record  of  the  facts  which  he  sought
to  elucidate  would  have  done  no  new  service  whatever.

In  this  way  Buckle's  remarkable  discursiveness,  sometimes
censured  as  an  intellectual  vice,  is  finally  educative.  It  so  opens
up  new  lines  of  association  as  to  produce  a  widened  sense  of  the
interplay  of  social  forces  and  a  new  alertness  of  attention  to  their
phenomena.  The  result  is  that  after  we  have  appreciatively  read
him,  hardly  any  history  satisfies  us,  so  poorly  does  the  average
narrative  feed  the  curiosity  he  aroused.  Since  his  day,  indeed,
there  has  been  much  talk  of  bringing  into  history  the  "  new  "
method — really  as  old  as  Voltaire — of  keeping  national  life-
conditions  in  the  foreground  and  the  mere  political  kaleidoscope
in  the  background  ;  but  it  is  only  within  the  past  decade  or  so
that  the  promise  has  been  at  all  fulfilled  ;  and  the  average  history
still  falls  far  short  of  it.  Not  one  student  in  a  thousand,  perhaps,
combines  Buckle's  qualifications  in  respect  of  knowledge  of
languages,  of  science,  of  economics,  and  of  the  subsidiary  litera-
ture of  history,  as  travels,  memoirs,  and  theology.  Doubtless
his  variety  was  at  times  a  snare  to  him,  in  particular  when  he
passed  from  the  empirical  testimony  of  statistics  to  the  meta-
physic  of  "  law  "  and  causation,  a  kind  of  problem  for  which  he
had  no  great  faculty,  or  at  least  no  sufficient  discipline.  But
these  lapses  he  commits  in  the  company  of  Darwin,  for  one  ;  and
even  in  committing  them  he  sets  up  a  criticism  that  clears  the
air.  The  whole  matter  is  more  intelligible  since  he  stirred  it  ;
and  no  one  seemed  to  have  thought  of  clearing  it  up  before  him,


xiv  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION

VI

Lastly,  Buckle  is  to  be  appreciated,  like  every  other  author,
in  the  light  of  his  physical  life.  Criticism  of  his  work  takes  on
a  different  aspect  when  it  is  realized  that  it  was  done  by  a  self-
trained  student  whose  health,  was  always  feeble,  and  who  achieved
it  all  before  he  was  thirty-nine  years  old.  Much  of  it,  indeed,
was  done  before  he  was  thirty  ;  it  is  in  short,  as  historiography
goes,  a  young  man's  performance  ;  and  it  is  one  of  the  proofs  of
its  potency  that  we  nevertheless  cannot  so  think  of  it  save  with
an  effort.  He  was  in  reality  mentally  as  well  as  physically  aged
when  he  sank  in  the  middle  of  his  planned  task  ;  and  yet  it  has
never  had  the  gain  of  revision  in  the  light  of  mature  experience.
There  are  few  more  pathetic  passages  in  literary  biography  than
those  in  which  he  breaks  off  his  exposition  to  confess  that  he  can
never  fulfil  his  great  original  plan,  and  that  even  the  shrunken
scheme  to  which  he  had  soon  learned  to  narrow  it  was  likely  to
be  too  much  for  his  shaken  powers.  He  was  physically  faltering
on  his  path  years  before  the  end  ;  his  tone  after  his  mother's
death  is  that  of  an  aged  and  lonely  man ;  and  even  if  he  had  not
in  1862  succumbed  to  fever  on  his  eastern  journey,  undertaken
to  rest  his  brain  and  refresh  his  spirits,  it  is  doubtful  whether  he
could  have  held  out  to  the  extent  of  completing  even  the  plan
of  his  Introduction.  It  is  thus,  in  the  words  of  his  sympathetic
biographer,  Mr.  Huth,  the  fragment  of  a  fragment.

It  is,  however,  a  fragment  which  only  a  man  of  genius  could
have  wrought,  and  the  total  scheme  was  one  which  only  an
original  and  powerful  mind  could  have  framed.     In  these  aspects
Buckle  is  abundantly  revealed  to  us  in  Mr.  Huth's  deeply  inter-
esting narrative,  concerning  which  a  formerly  hostile  critic  has
admitted  that  in  reading  it  his  mental  attitude  towards  Buckle
was    radically   changed.     It   is   indeed   impossible,    after   thus
learning  how  warm  a  heart  went  with  the  great  brain,  how  much
unselfish  goodness  with  the  rigorous    theory    of    social    laissez
faire  which  he  expounded,  to  be  misled  either  by  the  aspersions
of  his  enemies  or  by  his  own  occasional  violences  of  judgment.
These  are  to  be  found  chiefly  in  the  latter  part  of  his  work,  where
failing  strength  and  the  perturbing  consciousness  of  it  set  up  at
times  an  extravagant  vehemence  of  diction,  away  from  the  pur-
pose and  spirit  of  sociology.     And  even  in  these  closing  sections
e  was  making  an  intellectual  impact  on  the  national  life  which
no  other  man  had  had  the  courage  to  attempt,  and  of  which  the
effect  is  not  yet  spent.


EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION


xv


There  is  thus  in  his  life  and  work  a  total  effect  of  originality

d  power,  whatever  criticism  we  may  pass  on  his  treatment  of

y  one  problem.  Born  in  1821,  so  sickly  a  child  that  he  could
arcely  stand  a  modicum  of  schooling,  and  surrounded  by

e  reactionary  influences  of  that  period,  he  built  up  for  himself,
3m  the  age  of  nineteen,  a  comprehensive  and  critical  knowledge
hich  no  English  publicist  of  his  day  could  surpass,  and  brought

nto  order  and  coherence  with  an  industry  which  would  have
n  admirable  in  a  strong  man — all  this  in  an  environment  about

little  favourable  to  original  thinking  as  any  man  ever  innovated
He  was  one  of  the  cases,  always  rare  and  now  growing  rarer,

a  man  of  independent  means  devoting  his  life  to  studious  toil
r  sheer  love  of  ideas.  Perpetually  studying  on  his  travels,  he
astered  nineteen  languages,  and  with  all  his  hard  work  he  was  one

the  first  chess  players  of  his  time.  Could  such  exuberance  of
ental  power  but  have  been  lodged  in  a  sound  body,  the  world
ould  have  had  from  him  a  great  performance  indeed.  As  it

he  has  left  the  record  of  a  personality  not  easily  to  be  forgotten,

d  a  book  that  will  not  soon  cease  to  interest  and  instruct.

aced  as  it  now  is  within  reach  of  the  people,  with  the  needed
feguards  against  its  oversights,  it  will  find  the  audience  which

>ve  all  he  desired  to  have  for  it,  and  which  will  probably  not

the  slowest  to  assimilate  its  message.

J.  M.  R.


ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

VOL.   I

CHAPTER     I

TATEMENT     OF     THE     RESOURCES     FOR     INVESTIGATING     HISTORY,     AND     PROOFS     OF    THE
REGULARITY   OF   HUMAN    ACTIONS.       THESE   ACTIONS   ARE   GOVERNED    BY   MENTAL  AND

PHYSICAL    LAWS  :     THEREFORE    BOTH    SETS    OF    LAWS    MUST    BE    STUDIED,    AND  THERE
CAN   BE   NO  HISTORY  WITHOUT  THE   NATURAL  SCIENCES

PAGE

Materials  for  writing  history         .........  1—2

Narrow  range  of  knowledge  possessed  by  historians          .....  2-3

Object  of  the  present  work            ..........  3

Human  actions,  if  not  the  result  of  fixed  laws,  must  be  due  to  chance  or  to  super-
natural interference      ..........  4

Probable  origin  of  free-will  and  predestination        ......  5-7

Theological  basis  of  predestination,  and  metaphysical  basis  of  free-will    .          .  7— i1
The  actions  of  men  are  caused  by  their  antecedents,  which  exist  either  in  the

human  mind  or  in  the  external  world     .......  II

Therefore  history  is  the  modification  of  man  by  nature,  and  of  nature  by  man  .  n

Statistics  prove  the  regularity  of  actions  in  regard  to  murder  and  other  crimes   .  12-14

Similar  proof  respecting  suicides            ........  15-17

Also  respecting  the  number  of  marriages  annually  contracted            .          .          .  18

And  respecting  the  number  of  letters  sent  undirected       .          .          .          .          .  18

The  historian  must  ascertain  whether  rnind  or  nature  has  most  influenced  human

actions  ;  and  therefore  there  can  be  no  history  without  physical  science     .  19

NOTE  A.     Passages  from  Kant  on  free-will  and  necessity          ....  20-21

CHAPTER    II

INFLUENCE  EXERCISED  BY  PHYSICAL  LAWS  OVER  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  SOCIETY
AND    OVER    THE    CHARACTER    OF    INDIVIDUALS

Man  is  affected  by  four  classes  of  physical  agents  ;  namely,  climate,  food,  soil,

and  the  general  aspect  of  nature    ....  22

Operation  of  these  agents  on  the  accumulation  of  wealth         .                              .  23-29

Their  operation  on  the  distribution  of  wealth           ...                               .  29~37

Illustrations  of  these  principles  from  Ireland            ,                                                    .  37-39

From  Hindustan         .........                    .  39~46

From  Egypt •  47~52

From  Central  America         ....                                                              .  53~54

And  from  Mexico  and  Peru            ....                              ...  54-57

Operation  of  physical  laws  in  Brazil       ...                                                 .  58-67

Influence  of  the  general  aspects  of  nature  upon  the  imagination  and  the  under-
standing    .......                                                  •  67-68

Under  some  aspects,  nature  is  more  prominent  than  man,  under  others  man

more  than  nature          ......  68

In  the  former  case  the  imagination  is  more  stimulated  than  the  understanding,

and  to  this  class  all  the  earliest  civilizations  belong  .  69

The  imagination  is  excited  by  earthquakes  and  volcanoes         .          »                    •  69-70

And  by  danger  generally      .......  7i-72

Also  by  an  unhealthy  climate,  making  life  precarious       .                                         •  72-74
From  these  causes  the  civilizations  exterior  to  Europe  are  mainly  influenced  by

the  imagination,  those  in  Europe  by  the  understanding     ....  74-75

xvii  &


xviii  ANALYTICAL   TABLE   OF   CONTENTS

PAGE

This  proposition  illustrated  by  a  comparison  between  Hindustan  and  Greece     .       75-83

Further  illustration  from  Central  America 84-86

Chemical  and  physiological  note  on  the  connexion  between  food  and  animal  heat  86

CHAPTER    III

EXAMINATION    OF    THE    METHOD    EMPLOYED    BY    METAPHYSICIANS    FOR
DISCOVERING    MENTAL    LAWS

In  the  last  chapter  two  leading  facts  have  been  established,  which  broadly

separate  Europe  from  other  parts  of  the  world 87-89

Hence  it  appears  that  of  the  two  classes  of  mental  and  physical  laws  the  mental

are  the  more  important  for  the  history  of  Europe  .....  90-91

Examination  of  the  two  metaphysical  methods  of  generalizing  mental  laws     .  91-94

Failure  of  these  methods     ..........  95

CHAPTER    IV

MENTAL  LAWS  ARE  EITHER  MORAL  OR  INTELLECTUAL.  COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND
INTELLECTUAL  LAWS,  AND  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  EFFECT  PRODUCED  BY  EACH  ON  THE
PROGRESS  OF  SOCIETY

The  historical  method  of  studying  mental  laws  is  superior  to  the  metaphysical

method      ............       96-99

The  progress  of  society  is  twofold,  moral  and  intellectual          .          .          .          .  99

Comparison  of  the  moral  with  the  intellectual  element     .....  100

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  natural  faculties  of  man  improve  .  .  .  100-101
Progress,  therefore,  depends  on  an  improvement  in  the  circumstances  under

which  the  faculties  com.e  into  play  .......  102

The  standard  of  action  having  varied  in  every  age,  the  causes  of  action  must  be

variable      ............  10"

But  moral  truths  have  not  changed       ........  102

And  intellectual  truths  are  constantly  changing      ......    102-103

Intellectual  truths  are  the  cause  of  progress  ......  104

Ignorant  men  are  mischievous  in  proportion  to  their  sincerity  .          .          .    105-106

Illustrations  of  this  from  Rome  and  Spain     .......    106-107

The  diminution  of  religious  persecution  is  owing  to  the  progress  of  knowledge    .    108-109
The  diminution  of  the  warlike  spirit  is  owing  to  the  same  cause       .          .          .   110-112
Illustrations  from  Russia  and  Turkey   .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .112-113

As  civilization  advances,  men  of  intellect  avoid  becoming  soldiers     .          .          .  114

Illustrations  of  this  from  ancient  Greece  and  modern  Europe    ....   114-116

The  three  principal  ways  in  which  the  progress  of  knowledge  has  lessened  the

warlike  spirit  are —

1.  The  invention  of  gunpowder    .........   116-120

2.  The  discoveries  made  by  political  economists     ......   120-125

3.  The  application  of  steam  "to  purposes  of  travelling 125-127

Inference  to  be  drawn  as  to  the  causes  of  social  progress  .         .         .         .128-129

CHAPTER    V

INQUIRY  INTO  THE  INFLUENCE  EXERCISED   BY  RELIGION,  LITERATURE,  AND  GOVERNMENT

Recapitulation  of  preceding  arguments  .          .          .          .          .          .          .130

Moral  feelings  influence  individuals,  but  do  not  affect  society  in  the  aggregate  131

This  being  as  yet  little  understood,  historians  have  not  collected  proper  materials

for  writing  history        ......  ^  131-132

Reasons  why  the  present  history  is  restricted  to  England  .  132

Comparison  of  the  history  of  England  with  that  of  France  .  133-135

With  that  of  Germany         .....  135-137

With  that  of  the  United  States  of  America     ...  .  '138

Necessity  of  ascertaining  the  fundamental  laws  of  intellectua  progress  139

Much  may  be  gained  in  that  respect  from  studying  the  histories  of  Germany

America,  France,  Spain,  and  Scotland  ...  .  139-140

Deductive  spirit  in  Scotland .  140-144

Influence  of  religion  on  the  progress  of  society         .          .  .  145-146

Illustrations  from  the  efforts  of  missionaries  .  145-146

Illustration  from  the  Hebrews      .....  .  146-147

Illustration  from  the  early  history  of  Christianity  .  147-150

And  from  Sweden  and  Scotland  ....  150-151

Influence  of  literature  on  the  progress  of  society  !  !  151-154

Influence  of  government  on  the  progress  of  society  .  I54~I55


ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS


xix


PAGE

Illustrated  by  repeal  of  the  corn-laws   .                    ......  155-156

The  best  legislation  abrogates  former  legislation     .          .          .          .          .          .  156

The  interference  of  politicians  with  trade  has  injured  trade       ....  157-158

Legislators  have  caused  smuggling  with  all  its  attendant  crimes      .          .          .  158

They  have  also  increased  hypocrisy  and  perjury     ......  159

By  their  laws  against  usury  they  have  increased  usury    ....  160-161

By  other  laws  they  have  hindered  the  advance  of  knowledge    .          .          .          .  161

England  has  been  less  interfered  with  in  these  ways  than  other  nations,  and  is

therefore  more  prosperous  than  they       .......  161-162

CHAPTER    VI

ORIGIN    OF   HISTORY   AND    STATE    OF    HISTORICAL   LITERATURE    DURING
THE   MIDDLE    AGES

Conclusions  arrived  at  by  the  preceding  investigations  .  .  .  .  .  163
An  inquiry  into  the  changes  in  historical  researches  will  throw  light  on  the

changes  in  society         ..........  163-164

The  earliest  histories  are  ballads             ........  165-167

One  cause  of  error  in  history  was  the  invention  of  writing         ....  167-169

A  change  of  religion  in  any  country  also  tends  to  corrupt  its  early  history       .  170-173

But  the  most  active  cause  of  all  was  the  influence  of  the  clergy          .          .          .  173

Absurdities  which  were  consequently  believed         ......  174-179

Illustration  of  this  from  the  history  of  Charlemagne  by  Turpin          .          .          .  180-181

And  from  the  history  of  the  Britons  by  Geoffrey     ......  181-184

The  first  improvement  in  writing  history  began  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth

centuries    .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .  184-185

But  credulity  was  still  prevalent,  as  is  seen  in  Comines    .          .          .          .          .  186

And  in  the  predictions  of  Stoeffler  respecting  the  Deluge            ....  187

Also  in  the  work  of  Dr.  Horst  on  the  Golden  Tooth 187-188


CHAPTER    VII

OUTLINE    OF    THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT    FROM    THE    MIDDLE    OF    THE
SIXTEENTH    TO    THE    END    OF   THE    EIGHTEENTH    CENTURY

This  absurd  way  of  writing  history  was  the  natural  result  of  the  state  of  the  age  189

The  spirit  of  doubt  was  a  necessary  precursor  of  improvement           .          .          .  190

Hence  the  supreme  importance  of  scepticism           .                                        .  190-191

Origin  of  religious  toleration  in  England         .......  191

Hooker  contrasted  with  Jewel      .                              ...                    .  192-195

Scepticism  and  spirit  of  inquiry  on  other  subjects             .                                        .  195-196

This  tendency  displayed  in  Chillingworth       .......  196-198

Chillingworth  compared  with  Hooker  and  Jewel     ...                    .  198-199

Subsequent  movement  in  the  same  direction,  and  increasing  indifference  to

theological  matters       .......                    .          .  199-201

Great  advantage  of  this       ..........  201-203

Under  James  I  and  Charles  I  this  opposition  to  authority  assumes  a  political

character  .          .          .         .          .          .         .         .          .         .          .          .  203-205

Under  Charles  II  it  takes  a  frivolous  form  at  court           .....  205

Influence  of  this  spirit  upon  Sir  Thomas  Browne     ......  207-208

Its  influence  upon  Boyle      ..........  208-210

It  causes  the  establishment  of  the  Royal  Society    ......  210

Impetus  now  given  to  physical  science,  and  attempts  of  the  clergy  to  oppose  it  211

The  clergy  are  naturally  hostile  to  physical  science  because  it  lessens  their  own

power          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .  -        .  211-212

Illustration  of  this  by  the  superstition  of  sailors  and  agriculturists  as  compared

with  soldiers  and  mechanics            ........  213-215

Legislative  improvements  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II  in  spite  of  political  degrada-
tion            ............  215-219

These  improvements  were  due  to  the  sceptical  and  inquiring  spirit     .          .          .  219-220

Aided  by  the  vices  of  the  king      .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .  220

And  by  his  dislike  of  the  church    .........  220

He  encouraged  Hobbes,  and  neglected  the  ablest  of  the  clergy       .                    .  220-224

The  clergy,  to  recover  their  ground,  allied  themselves  with  James  II       .  224

This  alliance  was  dissolved  by  the  Declaration  of  Indulgence     .          .                    .  224-225
The  clergy  then  united  with  the  dissenters,  and  brought  about  the  Revolution

of  1688 226-227

Importance  of  the  Revolution      .          .          .          .                    .          .          .          .  227-228

But  the  clergy  regretted  it,  and  repented  of  their  own  act         ....  228


xx          ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

PAGE

Hostility  between  them  and  William  III        .  ...   230-231

Hence  a  schism  in  the  church  .  .  .  •  •  •  •  •  .  231-232
Fresh  encouragement  thus  given  to  scepticism  ......  232-234

Convocation  first  despised,  and  then  abolished 234-235

After  the  Revolution  the  ablest  men  confined  themselves  to  secular  professions,

and  avoided  entering  the  church    ........  235

The  clergy  lost  all  offices  out  of  the  church,  and  their  numbers  diminished  in

both  Houses  of  Parliament  ........   235-236

The  church  rallied  for  a  moment  under  Anne  .....  237

But  was  weakened  by  the  dissenters,  headed  by  Wesley  and  Whitefield    ..          .   237-239
Theology  separated  from  morals  and  from  politics  .....    240-243

Rapid  succession  of  sceptical  controversies    .          .          .          .          .          .          .  243

Knowledge  begins  to  be  diffused,  and  takes  a  popular  form       ....   243-245

Political  meetings,  and  publication  of  parliamentary  debates  .          .          .  246

Doctrine  of  personal  representation,  and  idea  of  independence  .          .          .   246-247

Corresponding  change  in  the  style  of  authors  ......   247-249

Hence  great  reforms  became  inevitable  .......   248-249

This  tendency  was  aided  by  George  I  and  George  II         .....   250-251

But  discouraged  by  George  III,  under  whom  began  a  dangerous  political  re-
action        ............   251-252

Ignorance  of  George  III       ..........   252-253

Subserviency  of  Pitt  ..........   253-254

Incompetence  of  other  statesmen,  and  the  king's  hatred  of  great  men     .          .   254-255
Deterioration  of  the  House  of  Lords      ........   255-257

Ability  and  accomplishments  of  Burke  .......   258-261

He  opposed  the  views  of  George  III,  and  was  neglected  by  him       .          .          .   261-294
Burke's  subsequent  hallucinations  and  violence      ......   264-269

The  king  now  favoured  him          .........   269-270

Policy  of  George  III  respecting  America         .......   270-272

This  policy  reacted  upon  England         ........   272-273

Policy  in  regard  to  France  .........   273-274

This  also  reacted  upon  England   .........   274-275

And  produced  arbitrary  laws  against  the  liberties  of  England  .          .          .   275-278

Which  were  zealously  enforced  by  the  executive     ......    278-280

Gloomy  political  prospects  of  England  late  in  the  eighteenth  century  .  .  280-281
But,  owing  to  the  progress  of  knowledge,  a  counter  reaction  was  preparing  .  281-283
To  which,  and  to  the  increasing  power  of  public  opinion,  England  owes  her

great  reforms  of  the  nineteenth  century  ......   283-285

CHAPTER  VIII

OUTLINE  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  FRENCH  INTELLECT  FORM  THE  MIDDLE  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH
CENTURY    TO    THE    ACCESSION    TO    POWER    OF    LOUIS    XIV


28S-286


Importance  of  the  question,  as  to  whether  the  historian  should  begin  with  study-
ing the  normal  or  the  abnormal  condition  of  society  ....   to^—tou
Greater  power  of  the  church  in  France  than  in  England             ....   286-288
Hence  in  France  during  the  sixteenth  century  everything  was  more  theological

than  in  England 288-290

Hence,  too,  toleration  was  impossible  in  France      ......   291-292

But  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  scepticism  appeared  in  France,  and  with

it  toleration  began,  as  was  seen  in  the  Edict  of  Nantes       ....  293

The  first  sceptic  was  not  Rabelais,  but  Montaigne 294-206

Continuation  of  the  movement  by  Charron    ...  .  296-298

Henry  IV  encouraged  the  Protestants  ..'.'.          .          .          .   298-299

And  they  were  tolerated  even  by  the  queen-regent  during  the  minority  of  Louis

299-801

The  most  remarkable  steps  in  favour  of  toleration  were,  however,taken  by  Riche-
lieu, who  effectually  humbled  the  church          .          .          .          .  .   301-305

He  supported  the  new  secular  scheme  of  government  against  the  old  ecclesiastical

scheme        ......  ^05-306

His  liberal  treatment  of  the  Protestants         !          '.  '.   306-311

They  are  deserted  by  their  temporal  leaders,  and  the  management  of  the  party

falls  into  the  hands  of  the  clergy  .          .  311-313

Hence  the  French  Protestants,  being  headed  by  the  clergv,  become  more  intoler-

ant  than  the  French  Catholics,  who  are  headed  by  statesmen     .          .          .    314-315
Evidence  of  the  illiberahty  of  the  French  Protestants  3 16-320

They  raise  a  civil  war,  which  was  a  struggle  of  classes  rather  than  of  creeds         .  321


ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS


xxi


Richelieu  put  down  the  rebellion,  but  still  abstained  from  persecuting  the  Pro-
testants     ............   319-325

This  liberal  policy  on  the  part  of  the  government  was  only  part  of  a  much  larger

movement  ...........  327

Illustration  of  this  from  the  philosophy  of  Descartes        .....   327-335

Analogy  between  Descartes  and  Richelieu      .......   336-337

The  same  anti-ecclesiastical  spirit  was  exhibited  by  their  contemporaries  .  337

And  by  Mazarin          ...........   338-339

It  was  also  seen  in  the  wars  of  the  Fronde      .......   340-342

But  notwithstanding  all  this,  there  was  a  great  difference  between  France  and
England  ;  and  the  prevalence  of  the  protective  spirit  prevented  the  French
(        from  becoming  free      ..........   342-344

CHAPTER  IX

HISTORY  OF  THE   PROTECTIVE   SPIRIT,   AND   COMPARISON   OF  IT   IN    FRANCE   AND   ENGLAND

About  the  eleventh  century  the  spirit  of  inquiry  began  to  weaken  the  church      .  346-347
Coinciding  with  this,  the  feudal  system  and  an  hereditary  aristocracy  appeared  .  347-348
The  nobles  displace  the  clergy,  and  celibacy  is  opposed  by  the  principle  of  heredi-
tary rank  .          .                    .                    .                              ....  348-349

In  England  the  nobles  were  less  powerful  than  in  France         ....  349

And  were  glad  to  ally  themselves  with  the  people  against  the  crown      .          .  350-351
Hence  a  spirit  of  popular  independence  unknown  in  France,  where  the  nobles

were  too  powerful  to  need  the  help  of  the  people  .....  352-353

Effects  of  this  difference  between  the  two  countries  in  the  fourteenth  century     .  353-355

Centralization  was  in  France  the  natural  successor  of  feudality          .          .          .  355-356

This  state  contrasted  with  that  of  England    .......  356-358

Power  of  the  French  nobles           .........  359-360

Illustration  from  the  history  of  chivalry         .......  360-363

Another  illustration  from  the  vanity  of  the  French  and  pride  of  the  English       .  363-364

Also  from  the  practice  of  duelling          ........  364

The  pride  of  Englishmen  encouraged  the  Reformation     .....  365

Analogy  between  the  Reformation  and  the  revolutions  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury              365-367

Both  were  opposed  by  the  clergy  and  nobles.     Natural  alliance  between  these

two   classes         ...........  67

In  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  both  classes  were  weakened       .....  367-369

James  I  and  Charles  I  vainly  attempted  to  restore  their  power      .          .          .  369-370

CHAPTER  X

THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE  EXPLAINS  THE  FAILURE  OF  THE  FRONDE.
COMPARISON  BETWEEN  THE  FRONDE  AND  THE  CONTEMPORARY  ENGLISH  REBELLION

Difference  between  the  Fronde  and  the  great  English  rebellion     .          .          .   371-372
The  English  rebellion  was  a  war  of  classes     .......   372-378

But  in  France  the  energy  of  the  protective  spirit  and  the  power  of  the  nobles

made  a  war  of  classes  impossible  .......   378-379

Vanity  and  imbecility  of  the  French  nobles  ......   379-382

As  such  men  were  the  leaders  of  the  Fronde,  the  rebellion  naturally  failed  .  .  382-386
But  the  English  rebellion  succeeded  because  it  was  a  democratic  movement

headed  by  popular  leaders    .........  386

CHAPTER  XI

THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  CARRIED  BY  LOUIS  XIV  INTO  LITERATURE.  EXAMINATION  OF
THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THIS  ALLIANCE  BETWEEN  THE  INTELLECTUAL  CLASSES  AND
THE  GOVERNING  CLASSES

The  protective  spirit  in  France,  having  produced  these  political  evils,  was  carried
into  literature  under  Louis  XIV,  and  caused  an  alliance  between  literature
and  government  ......  .387

Servility  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV        ....  .   388-393

Men  of  letters  grateful  to  Louis  XIV     ....  .   393-394

But  his  system  of  pro  tec  ting  literature  is  injurious  .          .  394

Its  first  effect  was  to  stop  the  progress  of  science    .          .  .   394~396

Even  in  mechanical  arts  nothing  was  effected     .          .  .  397

Decline  in  physiology,  in  surgery,  and  in  medicine  .          .  .   397-398

Also  in  zoology  and  in  chemistry  ..,'..  .  399

Nor  was_anything  done  in  botany          ••»....          -    400-402


xxii


ANALYTICAL   TABLE   OF   CONTENTS


Intellectual  decay  under  Louis  XIV  was  seen  in  every  department  of  thought
and  was  the  natural  consequence  of  patronage

Illustrations  from  the  history  of  French  art

And  from  every  branch  of  literature      .......

Universal  decline  of  France  during  the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV


PACE

402-405
4^5

406-407
408-409


CHAPTER  XII


DEATH    OF    LOUIS    XIV.


REACTION   AGAINST   THE   PROTECTIVE   SPIRIT,    AND    PREPARATIONS
FOR    THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION

4IO-4II


English  literature  unknown  in  France  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV    .

But  began  to  be  studied  after  his  death,  when  the  most  eminent  Frenchmen

visited  England.     This  caused  a  junction  of  French  and  English  intellects    .   411-412
Admiration  of  England  expressed  by  Frenchmen   ...  .  412-419

Hence  liberal  opinions  in  France,  which  the  government  attempted  to  stifle  .  419-420
Consequent  persecution  of  literary  men  by  the  French  government  .  .  .  420-426
Violence  of  the  government  .........  426-428

In  France  literature  was  the  last  resource  of  liberty 428-4-9

Reasons  why  literary  men  at  first  attacked  the  church  and  not  the  government  .   429-432
Hence  they  were  led  to  assail  Christianity  ...  ....   432-434

But  until  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XV  the  political  institutions  of  France

might  have  been  saved  ;  after  that  period  all  was  over  ....   434-456

CHAPTER  XIII

STATE  OF  HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  IN  FRANCE  FROM  THE  END  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  TO  THE
END  OF    THE    EIGHTEENTH    CENTURY


Historical  literature  in  France  before  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century   .
Improvement  in  the  method  of  writing  history  late  in  the  sixteenth  century
Still  further  progress  early  in  the  seventeenth  century     ....

Which  became  more  marked  in  Mezeray's  history  in  1643   .
Retrograde  movement  under  Louis  XIV
Illustration  of  this  from  the  work  of  Audigier
And  from  that  of  Bossuet    ....

Immense  improvements  introduced  by  Voltaire

His  History  of  Charles  XII

His  Age  of  Louis  XIV          ....

His  Morals,  Manners,  and  Character  of  Nations

His  views  adopted  by  Mallet,  Mably,  Velly,  Villaret  Duclos,  and  Henault

His  habit  of  looking  at  epochs

A  remark  of  his  adopted  by  Constant

He  advocated  free  trade      ....

His  anticipation  of  Malthus
His  attack  on  the  Middle  Ages     .
And  on  the  pedantic  admirers  of  antiquity     .
He  weakened  the  authority  of  mere  scholars  and  theologians   .
Who  had  repeated  the  most  childish  absurdities  respecting  the  early  history
of  Rome    ............

In  attacking  which  Voltaire  anticipated  Niebuhr    .

Ignorant  prejudice  against  him  in  England    .

His  vast  labours  were  aided  by  Montesquieu

The  works  of  Montesquieu,  and  value  of  his  method

The  discourses  of  Turgot,  and  their  influence  .

All  this  hastened  the  advance  of  the  French  Revolution


437-439
439-442

442

442-443
443-447
447-448
448-454
-154-455
455-456
456-457
457-458
458-459
459-460

460

460

4 60-461
461-462
4 62-463

463

463

464-465
4  65-4  66
466-467
467-469
469-470

470


CHAPTER  XIV

PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  AFTER  THE  MIDDLE  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY

Recapitulation  of  preceding  views         ....                   .  471

Difference  between  certainty  and  precision    .          .          .                   .  471-473

The  intellect  of  France  began  to  attack  the  state  about  1750

Rise  of  the  political  economists    .....                    .  473-475

Influence  of  Rousseau          ......                    .  475-476

Just  at  the  same  time  the  government  began  to  attack  the  church   .  476-477

And  to  favour  religious  toleration 477-4  79

Abolition  of  the  Jesuits        .          .          .      • 47^80


Calvinism  is  democratic ;  Arminianisjn  is  aristocratic


480-4  82


ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS


xxin


PAGE

Jansenism  being  allied  to  Calvinism,  its  revival  in  France  aided  the  democratic
movement,  and  secured  the  overthrow  of  the  Jesuits,  whose  doctrines  are
Arminian    ............  -.82-485

After  the  fall  of  the  Jesuits  the  ruin  of  the  French  clergy  was  inevitable  .          .   -185-486
But  was  averted  for  a  time  by  the  most  eminent  Frenchmen  directing  their

hostility  against  the  state  rather  than  against  the  church   .          ...        .          .  486

Connexion  between  this  movement  and  the  rise  of  atheism  ....  486-488

Same  tendency  exhibited  in  Helve tius  .......  489-491

And  in  Condillac <9*-493

The  ablest  Frenchmen  concentrate  their  attention  on  the  external  world  .         .  493

Effects  of  this  on  the  sciences  of  heat,  light,  and  electricity  ...          .          .   493-495

Also  on  chemistry  and  geology     .          .          .          .          .          .  .          •   495-5°°

In  England  during  the  same  period  there  was  a  dearth  of  great  thinkers   .          .  5QI

But  in  France  immense  impetus  was  given  to  zoology  by  Cuvier  and  Bichat     .  502

Bichat's  views  respecting  the  tissues  ...  ....   503-505

Connexion  between  these  views  and  subsequent  discoveries     ....   5°5-5°7

Relation  between  inventions,  discoveries,  and  method  ;  and  immense  importance

of   Bichat's   method 5o7-5°9

Bichat's  work  on  life 509-512

Great  and  successful  efforts  made  by  the  French  in  botany   ....   512-514

And  in  mineralogy  by  De  Lisle  and  Haiiy •  .   51 5-5*7

Analogy  between  this  and  Pinel's  work  on  insanity  .  ...  517

All  these  vast  results  were  part  of  the  causes  of  the  French  Revolution  .          .   5I7~5I8

Physical  science  is  essentially  democratic •   518-520

The  same  democratic  tendency  was  observable  in  changes  of  dress   .  •   526-521

And  in  the  establishment  of  clubs          .          .          .          .  .          ...   52i-523

Influence  of  the  American  Rebellion  .          .         .         .         .         .         .         •   523-524

Summary  of  the  causes  of  the  French  Revolution   ......   524-5-6

General  reflections       ...  526-527


CHAPTER  XV

OUTLINES  OF  THE   HISTORY  OF  THE  SPANISH  INTELLECT  FROM  THE   FIFTH  TO  THE   MIDDLE
OF    THE    NINETEENTH    CENTURY

In  the  preceding  chapters  four  propositions  have  been  established  .  52$

The  truth  of  which  may  be  farther  verified  by  studying  the  history  of  Spain  .  528

In  Spain,  superstition  is  encouraged  by  physical  phenomena  .  •  52^~"533

It  was  also  encouraged  by  the  great  Arian  war  with  France  .  .  •  533~536

And,  subsequently,  by  the  war  with  the  Mohammedans  ...  •  536-54°

Thece  three  causes  influenced  the  policy  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  .  .  54°-54i

Continuation  of  the  same  policy  by  Charles  V  and  by  Philip  II  .  •  541-545

Philip  II,  notwithstanding  his  repulsive  qualities,  was  loved  by  the  nation  '.  5^6-547
Their  affection  for  him  was  the  result  of  general  causes,  which,  during  several

centuries,  have  made  the  Spaniards  the  most  loyal  people  in  Europe       .  547

Origin  of  Spanish  loyalty,  and  evidence  of  it   .......   547-55°

Loyalty  became  united  with  superstition,  and  each  strengthened  the  other  .  55°~55I
In  consequence  of  this  union,  great  foreign  conquests  were  made,  and  a  great

military  spirit  was  developed          ........   55I~553

But  this  sort  of  progress,  depending  too  much  upon  individuals,  is  necessarily

unstable     ............  553

The  progress  of  England,  on  the  other  hand,  depends  upon  the  ability  of  the

nation,  and,  therefore,  continues,  whether  individual  rulers  are  skilful,  or

whether  they  are  unskilful   .........   553~544

In  Spain,  the  ruling  classes  were  supreme  ;  the  people  counted  for  nothing  ;  and

hence  the  grandeur  of  the  country,  which  was  raised  up  by  the  able  princes

of  the  sixteenth  century,  was  as  quickly  pulled  down  by  the  weak  princes  of

the  seventeenth 554~557

The  decay  of  Spain,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  was  connected  with  the  increas

ing  influence  of  the  clergy 558-566

The  first  use  which  the  clergy  made  of  their  power  was  to  expel  all  the  Moors  566-572
Effect  of  this  expulsion  in  impoverishing  Spain  .....  572-575

Decline  of  manufactures,  and  of  population,  and  increase  of  poverty  .  575-5^°

In  1700,  when  affairs  were  at  their  worst,  the  Austrian  dynasty  was  succeeded  by

the  Bourbon 580


xxiv  ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF   CONTENTS

PAGE

Spain  was  now  ruled  by  foreigners         .          .          •          •.  •          •          •    581-585

Who  endeavoured  to  improve  the  country  by  weakening  the  Church   .          .   585-586
But  the  authority  of  the  Church  had  so  enfeebled  the  national  intellect,  that  the

people,  immersed  in  ignorance,  remained  inert    .....  586-593

Government  attempted  to  remedy  this  ignorance  by  calling  in  foreign  aid       .    593~598
The  influence  of  foreigners  in  Spain  was  displayed  in  the  expulsion  of  the

Jesuits,  in  1767  ....-••••••  599

And   in   the   attacks   made   on   the   Inquisition  .  ....    599-600

It  was  also  displayed  in  the  foreign  policy  of  Spain.  .          .   600-602

All  this  was  promoted  by  the  authority  and  high  character  of  Charles  III    .    602-603
But  it  was  of  no  avail  ;  because  politicians  can  do  nothing,  when  the  spirit  of

the  country  is  against  them  ......  .   603-604

Still,  Charles  III  effected  great  improvements,  from  which,  on  a  superficial  view,

permanent  benefit  might  have  been  expected          .....   604-610

Summary  of  what  was  accomplished  for  Spain,  by  the  government,  between  the

years  1700  and  1788  ..........   610-611

Inasmuch,  however,  as  these  ameliorations  were  opposed  to  the  habits  of  the

national  character,  a  reaction  was  inevitable     .....   611-612

In  1788,  Charles  III  was  succeeded  by  Charles  IV,  and  the  new  king,  being  a  true

Spaniard,  the  reaction  began        ........   612-613

In  the  nineteenth  century,  political  reformers  again  endeavoured  to  improve

Spain        .  613

For  the  reasons  already  stated,  their  efforts  were  fruitless,  notwithstanding  the
early  establishment  in  that  country  of  municipal  privileges,  and  of  popu-
lar representation      ......  ...   614-615

In  this  way,  general  causes  always  triumph  over  particular  actions     .          .   616-618
Those  general  causes  predetermined  the  country  to  superstition,  and  it  was

impossible  for  individuals  to  make  head  against  them       .          .          .   618-619
Nothing  can  weaken  superstition  but  knowledge        ....  619

Such  failures  are  the  more  observable,  because  Spain  enjoys  immense  natural

advantages       ...........   619-620

And  has  possessed  great  patriots  and  great  legislators  ....  620

The  Spaniards  have,  moreover,  long  been  celebrated  for  honour,  courage,  tem-
perance, humanity,  and  religious  sincerity  ......   620-621

So  far,  however,  as  national  progress  is  concerned,  these  noble  qualities  are

less,  while  ignorance  is  so  gross  and  so  general   .....   621-625

This  it  is,  which,  isolating  Spain  from  the  rest  of  the  civilized  world,  keeps
alive  that  spirit  of  superstition,  that  reverence  for  antiquity,  and  that
blind  and  servile  loyalty,  which,  as  long  as  they  last,  will  render  improve-
ment impossible  ;  and  which  must  last  until  ignorance  is  removed  ^  .  626-627

CHAPTER  XVI

CONDITION    OF    SCOTLAND    TO    THE    END    OF    THE    FOURTEENTH    CENTURY

Scotland  and  Spain  are  very  dissimilar  in  regard  to  loyalty   .          .          .   628-629

But  are  very  similar  in  regard  to  superstition 630

The  Scotch  unite  liberality  in  politics  with  illiberality  in  religion.  This  is  the
largest  and  most  important  fact  in  their  history  ;  and  the  rest  of  the
volume  will  be  occupied  in  investigating  its  causes  .  .  .  630

Influence  of  physical  geography  .  ...    630-631

Roman  invasion  of  Scotland  .  ...    631-632

Irish  invasion  of  Scotland         .  .  ...    632-633

Norwegian  invasion  of  Scotland  .  .    633-634

English  invasion  of  Scotland  .  ...    634-637

The    injuries  which   these  invasions  inflicted  upon  Scotland  stopped  the

growth  of  towns,  and  thereby  favoured  the  power  of  the  nobles   .          .  638

The  power  of  the  nobles  was  still  further  favoured  by  the  physical  structure

of  the  country ...  638

And  by  the  weakness  of  the  Crown  ....  -639

Hence  their  authority  had,  before  the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century,  become
enormous.  The  Crown,  completely  overshadowed  by  them,  could  derive
no  aid  from  the  citizens,  because,  owing  to  the  circumstances  just  men-

loned,  there  were  no  cities 639

For  industry  was  impossible,  and  the  commonest  arts  were  unknown  .  .  639-644
Evidence  of  the  scanty  population  of  the  Scotch  towns  ....  644-6-16
Ihey  were  too  feeble  and  insignificant  to  elect  their  own  magistrates  .  .  646


ANALYTICAL   TABLE   OF   CONTENTS  xxv

PAGE

ie  municipal  element  being  thus  imperfect,  the   only  ally  which  the  Crown

could  possibly  find  was  the  Church          .......  648

lence,  a  coalition  between  the  kings  and  the  clergy  against  the  nobles     .          .  648

clergy  were  the  only  body  who  could  withstand  the  nobles.     Causes  of  the
great  influence  of  the  clergy  ........   648-653

CHAPTER    XVII

CONDITION    OF    SCOTLAND    IN    THE    FIFTEENTH    AND    SIXTEENTH    CENTURIES

Larly  in  the  fifteenth  century  the  alliance  between  the  Crown  and  the  Church

against  the  nobles  became  obvious 654

[ames  I  attacked  the  nobles,  and  favoured  the  Church  ;  hoping  thereby  to  estab-
lish the  supremacy  of  the  throne    ....  ...   654-656

5ut  his  policy  failed,  because  it  was  opposed  by  the  operation  of  general  causes  656

ides  failing,  it  produced  his  own  destruction      .  ....  656

}ower  of  the  Douglases,  who  were  at  the  head  of  the  southern  nobility    .          .   656-657

[ames  II  murdered  the  chiefs  of  that  family 658

ie  Crown,  in  its  efforts  against  the  nobles,  was  encouraged  by  the  clergy  ;  and
before  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  Church  and  the  aristocracy
were  completely  estranged  from  each  other      ......   659-660

[ames  III,  like  James  II  and  James  I,  allied  himself  with  the  clergy  against  the

nobles         ............  660

Their  power,  however,  was  too  deeply  rooted  to  be  shaken  ;  and,  in  1488,  they

put  the  king  to  death  .........   660-661

Still,  and  notwithstanding  these  successive  failures,  James  IV  followed  the  same

policy  as  his  predecessors      ........  661

So  did  James  V.     Consequently  the  nobles  imprisoned  him,  and  ejected  the

clergy  from  all  offices  in  the  state  .......  662

In  1528  James  V  escaped  ;  the  Crown  and  the  Church  regained  the  ascendant,

and  the  principal  nobles  were  banished  .  .  663

From  this  moment  the  nobles  hated  the  Church  more  than  ever.    Their  hatred

brought  about  the  Reformation     .  ......   663-664

Active  measures  of  the  government  against  the  nobles     .....   663-664

The  nobles  revenged  themselves  by  becoming  Reformers          ....  664

James  V,  on  the  other  hand,  threw  himself  entirely  into  the  arms  of  the  Church  664-666
As  the  nobles  took  the  opposite  side,  and  as  the  people  had  no  influence,  the  suc-
cess or  failure  of  the  Reformation  in  Scotland  was  simply  a  question  of  the
success  or  failure  of  the  aristocratic  power        ......   667-668

In  1542  the  nobles  openly  refused  obedience  to  James  V  ;  and  their  treatment  of

him  at  this  critical  period  of  his  life  broke  his  heart          ....  668

Directly  he  died,  they  regained  authority.     The  clergy  were  displaced,  and

measures  favourable  to  Protestantism  were  adopted        ....   669-670

In  1546  Cardinal  Beaton  was  assassinated,  and  Knox  began  his  career    .          .   671-672
Subsequent  proceedings  of  Knox  .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .   672-674

While  Knox  was  abroad,  the  nobles  established  the  Reformation      .          .          .  674

He  returned  to  Scotland  in  1559,  by  which  time  the  struggle  was  nearly  over  674

In  1559  the  queen  regent  was  deposed  ;    the  nobles  became  supreme  ;  and  in

1560  the  Church  was  destroyed      ........   675-677

Immediately  this  revolution  was  completed,  the  nobles  and  the  preachers  began

to  quarrel  about  the  wealth  of  the  Church        ......  677

The  nobles,  thinking  that  they  ought  to  have  it,  took  it  into  their  own  hands    .   677-680
Thereupon  the  Protestant  preachers  said  that  the  nobles  were  instigated  by  the

devil 681

Morton,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  nobility,  became  enraged  at  the  proceedings

of  the  new  clergy,  and  persecuted  them  ......  682

A  complete  rupture  between  the  two  classes  ......  683

The  clergy,  finding  themselves  despised  by  the  governing  class,  united  them-

telves  heartily  with  the  people,  and  advocated  democratic  principles    .          .  683

In  1574  Melville  became  their  leader.     Under  his  auspices  that  great  struggle
began,  which  never  stopped  until,  sixty  years  later,  it  produced  the  re-
bellion against  Charles  I        .........  683

The  first  manifestation  of  this  rebellious  spirit  was  the  attack  on  the  bishops    .  684

In  1575 'the  attack  began.     In  1580  episcopacy  was  abolished        .          .          .   684-685
But  the  nobles  upheld  that  institution,  because  they  loved  inequality  for  the

same  reasons  which  made  the  clergy  love  equality  ....   €85-686

Struggle  between  the  upper  classes  and  the  clergy  respecting  episcopacy   .          .   686-688
In  1582  James  VI  was  imprisoned  ;  and  his  captivity  was  justified  by  the  clergy,

whose  democratic  principles  were  now  openly  proclaimed  .          .          .   688-689


xxvi  ANALYTICAL   TABLE   OF   CONTENTS

PAGE

Violent  language  used  by  the  clergy  against  the  king  and  against  the  nobles     .   689-692
Their  leader,  Melville,  personally  insulted  the  king,  and  they  were  probably  privy

to  the  Gowrie  conspiracy  in  1600  .......  693

Still  the  clergy,  notwithstanding  the  indecency  of  their  conduct,  conferred  the
greatest  of  all  boons  upon  Scotland,  by  keeping  alive  and  nurturing  the
spirit  of  liberty  ...........  694-695

CHAPTER    XVIII

CONDITION    OF   SCOTLAND    DURING   THE   SEVENTEENTH   AND    EIGHTEENTH    CENTURIES

In  1603  the  King  of  Scotland  became  also  King  of  England,  and  determined  to

use  his  new  resources  in  curbing  and  chastizing  the  Scotch  clergy        .          .  696

His  cruel  treatment  of  them         .........   697-701

In  1610  James,  backed  by  the  power  of  England,  forced  episcopacy  upon  Scot-
land.    Courts  of  High  Commission  were  also  set  up  .          .          .          .   701-702

Tyrannical  conduct  of  the  bishops         ........   702-704

Meanwhile  a  reaction  was  preparing     ........   704-705

In  1637  the  reaction  declared  itself,  and,  in  1638,  the  bishops  were  overthrown  706

The  movement  being  essentially  democratic,  could  not  stop  there,  but  quickly
spread  from  the  Church  to  the  State.     In  1639  war  was  made  upon  Charles  I
by  the  Scotch,  who,  having  defeated  the  king,  sold  him  to  the  English,  who
executed  him       ...........   707-708

The  Scotch,  before  they  would  crown  Charles  II,  compelled  him  to  humble  him-
self, and  to  confess  his  own  errors  and  the  errors  of  his  family    .          .          .   708-709
But,  after  Charles  II  mounted  the  throne  of  England,  he  became  powerful
enough  to  triumph  over  the  Scotch.     He  availed  himself  of  that  power  to
oppress  Scotland  even  more  grievously  than  his  two  predecessors  had  done  709-710
Happily  x  however,  the  spirit  of  liberty  was  strong  enough  to  baffle  his  attempts

to  establish  a  permanent  despotism       .          .          .          .          .          .          .  711

Still,  the  crisis  was  terrible,  and  the  people  and  their  clergy  were  exposed  to

every  sort  of  outrage    ..........   711-714

Now,  as  before,  the  bishops  aided  the  government  in  its  efforts  to  enslave  Scot-
land.    Being  hated  by  the  people,  they  allied  themselves  with  the  Crown,
and  displayed  the  warmest  affection  towards  James  II,  during  whose  reign
cruelties  were  perpetrated  worse  than  any  previously  known     .          .          .   715-717
In  1688  another  reaction,  in  which  the  Scotch  again  freed  themselves  from  their

oppressors 718

The  only  powerful  friends  of  this  bad  government  were  the  Highlanders  .  .  718
Reasons  which  induced  the  Highlanders  to  rebel  in  favour  of  the  Stuarts  .  .  718-719
The  Highland  rebellions  of  1715  and  1745  were  not  the  result  of  loyalty  .  .  719-723
After  1745  the  Highlanders  sank  into  complete  insignificance,  and  the  progress  of

Scotland  was  uninterrupted  ........  723

Begininng  of  the  trading  spirit 724

Connexion  between  the  rise  of  the  trading  spirit  and  the  abolition,  in  1748,  of

hereditary  jurisdictions         .........  724

The  abolition  of  these  jurisdictions  was  a  symptom  of  the  declining  power  of  the

Scotch  nobles,  but  not  a  cause  of  it 724

One  cause  of  the  decline  of  their  power  was  the  Union  with  England,  in  1707    .   725-727

Another  cause  was  the  failure  of  the  Rebellion  of  1745 728

The  nobles,  being  thus  weakened,  were,  in  1748,  easily  deprived  of  their  right
of    jurisdiction.     In  this  way  they  lost  the  last   emblem  of    their    old
authority  ............  729

This  great  democratic  and  liberating  movement  was  aided  by'the  growth  of  the

mercantile  and  manufacturing  classes     .......   729-730

And  their  growth  was  itself  assisted  by  the  Union  with  England    ...  730

Evidence  of  the  rapid  progress  of  the  industrious  classes  in  the  first  half  of  the

eighteenth  century       ..........   731-736

During  the  same  period,  a  new  and  splendid  literature  arose  in  Scotland   .          .  736

Jut,  unfortunately,  this  literature,  notwithstanding  its  bold  and  inquisitive  spirit,

was  unable  to  diminish  national  superstition 737-738

It  is  the  business  of  the  historian  to  ascertain  the  causes  of  its  failure.     If  he

cannot  do  this  he  cannot  understand  the  history  of  Scotland    .          .          .   738-739

st  and  most  essential  quality  of  an  historian  is  a  clear  perception  of  the
great  scientific  doctrine  of  Law.  But  whoever  seeks  to  apply  this  doctrine
to  the  whole  course  of  history  and  to  elucidate,  by  its  aid,  the  march  and
theory  of  affairs,  is  met  by  obstacles  which  no  single  mind  can  remove  .  739-740


ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF   CONTENTS  xxvii

PAGE

CHAPTER    XIX

AN    EXAMINATION    OF   THE   SCOTCH    INTELLECT   DURING   THE    SEVENTEENTH    CENTURY

ie  rest  of  the  volume  will  be  occupied  with  a  still  closer  investigation  of   the
double  paradox  presented  by  the  history  of  Scotland  ;  namely,  ist,  that  the
same  people  should  be  liberal  in  politics,  and  illiberal  in  religion  ;  and  and,
that  the  free  and  sceptical  literature  which  they  produced  in  the  eighteenth
century  should  have  been  unable  to  lessen  their  religious  illiberality     .          .  74 1

jir  religious  illiberality  was  the  result  of  the  immense  power  possessed  by
their  clergy  in  the  seventeenth  century.     The  causes  of  that  power  will  be
examined  in  the  present  chapter    .  .....  741

ie  failure  of  their  literature  in  diminishing  this  illiberality  during  the  eight-
eenth century,  was  the  result  of  the  peculiar  method  of  inquiry  adopted
by  the  Scotch  philosophers.     The  causes  of  the  universal  diffusion  of  that
method,  the  nature  of  the  method,  and  the  consequences  of  it,  will  be  exa-
mined in  the  next  chapter,  which  will  conclude  the  Volume     .          .          .  742
rcumstances  in  the  seventeenth  century  favourable  to  the  influence  of  the

Scotch  clergy      ...........  743

lile  the  English  war  against  Charles  I  was   essentially  political,  the  Scotch
war  against  him  was  essentially  religious          ......   744-745

lough  this  was  the  effect  of  Scotch  superstition,  it  was  also  a  cause  of  its  further

progress     ....  ....  .   746-747

snce,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  secular  interests  were  neglected,  and  theo-
logical ones  became  supreme.     Illustration  of  this,  from  the  zeal  of  the
people  to  hear  sermons  of  inordinate  frequency  and  of  terrible  length  ;  so
that  they  passed  the  greater  part  of  their  lives  in  what  were  erroneously
termed  religious  exercises    .  .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .   748-749

The  clergy  availed  themselves  of  these  habits  to  extend  and  consolidate  their

own  authority    ...........  749

The  great  engine  of  power  was  the  Kirk-Session.     Tyranny  of  the  Kirk-Sessions  749

Monstrous  pretensions  of  tl  e  clergy    ........   750-752

Cases  in  which  it  was  believed  that  these  pretensions  were  upheld  and  vindi-
cated by  miracles         ..........   752-757

The  clergy,  becoming  elated,  indulge  in  language  of  extraordinary  arrogance    .   757-762
They  asserted  that  miracles  were  wrought  in  their  behalf,  and  often  on  their

persons       ............   762-763

Effect  of  yiese  proceedings  upon  the  Scotch  mind  ......   763-764

The  clergy,  to  intimidate  the  people,  and  bring  them  completely  under  control,

advocated  horrible  notions  concerning  evil  spirits  and  future  punishments  764-767
With  the  same  object  they  propounded  notions  more  horrible  still,  respecting
the  Deity,  whom  they  represented  as  a  cruel,  passionate,  and  sanguinary
Being          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .   768-776

They,  moreover,  declared  that  harmless  and  even  praiseworthy  actions  were

sinful,  and  would  provoke  the  Divine  wrath    ......   776-781

To  prevent  such  imaginary  sins,  the  clergy  made  arbitrary  regulations,  and
punished  those  who  disobeyed  them,  sometimes  by  flogging,  and  some-
times by  branding  with  hot  irons,  and  sometimes  in  other  ways  .          .          .   78i-7f2
Specimens  of  the  sins  which  the  clergy  invented    ......   782-7^5

The  result  was,  that  all  mirth,  all  innocent  gaiety,  all  demonstrations  of  happi-
ness, and  nearly  all  physical  enjoyments,  were  destroyed  in  Scotland  .          .  785
Hence,  the  national  character  was  mutilated.     For  the  pleasures  of  the  body
are,  in  our  actual  condition,  as  essential  a  part  of  the  great  scheme  of  life,
and  are  as  necessary  to  human  affairs,  as  are  the  pleasures  of  the  mind  .          .  785-786
But  the  clergy,  by  denouncing  these  pleasures  of  the  senses,  do  what  they  can
in  every  country  to  diminish  the  total  amount  of   happiness  of   which
humanity  is  susceptible,  and  which  it  has  a  right  to  enjoy      .          .          .   786-788
In  no  Protestant  country  have  the  clergy  pushed  these  narrow  and  unsocial

tenets  so  far  as  in  Scotland   .........  788

Indeed,  in  some  respects,  the  Scotch  clergy  were  more  ascetic  than  those  of  any
branch  of  the  Catholic  Church,  except  the  Spanish  ;  since  they  attempted
to  destroy  the  affections,  and  to  sever  the  holiest  ties  of  domestic  love  .  789-791

CHAPTER    XX

AN   EXAMINATION   OF  THE  SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  THE   EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY

The  Scotch  philosophical  literature  of  the  eighteenth  century   was  a  reaction

against  the  theological  spirit  of  the  seventeenth    .          .          .          .          .  792


xxviii  ANALYTICAL   TABLE    OF   CONTENTS

PAGE

But  the  peculiarity  of  the  philosophy  which  now  arose,  is  that,  instead  of  being

an    inductive  philosophy,  it  was  a  deductive  one    .....   792-796

This  is  well  worthy  of  notice  ;  because  the  inductive  method  being  essentially  anti-
theological,  it  might  have  been  expected  that  the  opponents  of  the  theo-
logical spirit  would  have  followed  that  method      .          .     '     .          .          .    793-794
The  truth,  however,  was,  that  the  theological  spirit  had  taken  such  hold  of  the
Scotch  mind,  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  inductive  method  to  gain  a
hearing       .............   794~796

Hence,  the  secular  philosophy  of   the  eighteenth   century,  though  new  in  its

results,  was  not  new  in  the  method  by  which  those  results  were  obtained  .  797
In  this  respect,  Scotland  is  similar  to  Germany,  but  dissimilar  to  England  .          .   797-798
Summary  of  the  most  important  distinctions  between  induction  and  deduction  798
The  whole  of  the  Scotch  philosophy,  physical  as  well  at  metaphysical,  is  deduc-
tive              798

Hutcheson's  philosophy      .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .   798-805

Its  results  and  tendency     ..........   798-802

Its  method 803-805

Adam  Smith's  philosophy  .          .          .          .  .          .          .          .   805-820

His  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments  and  his  Wealth  of  Nations  are  different  parts  of

one  subject.     To  understand  either,  we  must  study  both       .          .          .   805-806
His  deductive  method  depended  upon  a  suppression  of  premisses    .          .          .   806-808
Account  of  his  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments    .         .          .          .          .  .   808-811

Account  of  his  Wealth  of  Nations       ........   811-820

Hume's  philosophy    ...........  820

His  want  of  imagination     ..........   820-830

Importance  and  novelty  of  his  doctrines     .......   821-823

His  method  was  eminently  deductive  ;  and  he,  like  Adam  Smith,  cared  little

for  experience 823-824

Hence  his  injustice  to  Bacon,  whose  method  was  diametrically   opposed  to  his

own 824-826

His  Natural  History  of  Religion    .........   826-829

Comparison  between  the  method  of  this  work,  and  the  method  employed  by

Cudwprth  ...........  830

Reid's  philosophy      ...........    830-837

His  timidity  made  him  look  at  the  practical  tendency  of  speculative  doctrines,

instead  of  confining  himself  to  the  question  of  their  truth  or  falsehood    .    830-833
But  a  philosopher  should  deem  it  his  business  to  ascertain  new  truths,  without

regard  to  their  consequences      ........  830

Reid  attacked  Hume's  method,  because  he  disliked  the  results  to  which  that

method  had  led    ...........  833

And  yet,  in  raising  his  own  philosophy,  he  followed  the  very  same  method  him-
self   834

Estimate  of  the  value  of  what  Reid  effected 834-836

Opposition  between  the  method  of  Reid  and  that  of  Bacon    ....   836-857
In  physical  philosophy,  the  deductive  method  was  equally  prevalent  in  Scotland     '      837

The  laws  of  heat .          .          .  837

Indestructibility  of  force.     Interchange  of  forces 838-840

Black's  philosophy     ........."...—.   840-848

His  theory  of  latent  heat  prepared  the  way  for  subsequent  discoveries    .          .   840-842
His  method  was  deductive,  and  does  not  come  under  any  of  the  rules  of  the

Baconian  philosophy    ..........  842

He  reasoned  from  his  principles  speculatively,  instead  of  occupying  himself  with

a  long  course  of  experiments 842

To  do  this  was  to  indulge  the  imagination,  which  is  deemed  dangerous  by  the
inductive  school  of  English  physicists.  But,  in  the  pursuit  of  truth,  we  need
all  our  powers ;  and  the  advance  of  physical  science  is  retarded  by  our  neglect

i     fu    imaginative  and  emotional  faculties 842-848

Black,  therefore,  did  immense  service  by  giving  free  scope  to  the  imagination.

ine  same  plan  was  pursued  by  his  successor,  Leslie  848

Leslie  s  philosophy  of  heat        ....  .   848-851

He  derived  great  aid  from  poetry       ....  850

And  was  unjust  to  Bacon,  whose  inductive  views  he  disliked    !  85 1

attons    geological    philosophy 851-859

and  water  are  the  two  causes  which  have  altered,  and  are  still  altering,  the
J5?  earth'     The  suPP°sition  that  volcanic  action  was  formerly  more
srtul  than  at  present  is  quite  consistent  with  the  doctrines  of  an  unbroken
sequence  of  events,  and  of  the  uniformity  of  natural  laws  .          .          .    851-852


I


ANALYTICAL   TABLE   OF    CONTENTS  xxix


The  action  of  fire  and  water  on  the  crust  of  the  earth  may  be  studied  deductively,
by  computing  separately  the  probable  operation  of  each.  Or  they  may  be
studied  inductively,  by  observing  their  united  effects,  and  rising  from  the
effects  to  the  causes  ;  while  the  deductive  plan  is  to  descend  from  the  causes

to  the  effects 852-853

Of  these  two  methods,  the   English  followed  the  inductive  ;    the  Scotch   and

Germans  followed  the  deductive  .......  853

English  geology  founded  by  William  Smith        ......   853-854

German  geology  founded  by  Werner     ........   854-855

Scotch    geology    founded    by    Hutton          .......   855-856

The  English  observed  effects  in  order  to  ascertain  causes.     The  Germans,  assum-
ing water  to  be  the  cause,  reasoned  from  it  to  the  effects.     The  Scotch,
assuming  heat  to  be  the  cause,  made  its  principles  the  first  step  in  their
argument   .......:..  .   853-856

Reasons  which  made  the  Scotch  geologists  argue  from  the  principles  of  heat,

instead  of,  like  the  German  geologists,  arguing  from  the  principles  of  water   .  856

Though  Hutton  founded  the  theory  of  metamorphic  rocks,  and  ascribed  such
immense  importance  to  heat,  he  would  not  take  the  trouble  of  examining
a  single  region  of  active  volcanoes,  where  he  might  have  seen  those  very
operations  of  nature,  respecting  which  he  speculated      .          .          .  856

But,  by  a  deductive  application  of  the  principles  unfolded  by  Black,  he  arrived

at  a  conclusion  concerning  the  consolidation  of  strata  by  heat       .          .   857-859
That  conclusion  was  entirely  speculative,  and  unsupported  by  experience      .  857

Though  experiment  might  perhaps  verify  it,  no  one  had  yet  made  the  trial ;  and
Hutton  was  too  averse  to  the  inductive  method  to  undertake  the  investiga-
tion himself        ...........  858

Sir  James  Hall  afterwards  took  the  matter  up,  and  empirically  verified  the  great

idea  which  Hutton  had  propounded        .......   858-859

Watt's  invention  of  the  steam-engine,  and  discovery  of  the  composition  of  water  859-860
Contrast  between  the  method  by  which  he,  as  a  Scotchman,  discovered  the
composition  of  water,  and  the  opposite  method  by  which  the  Englishman,
Cavendish,  made  the  same  discovery  at  the  same  time    ....   860-861

Nature  of  the  evidence  of  the  supposed  difference  between  the  organic  and  in-
organic world.     Life  is  probably  a  property  of  all  matter  .          .          .   861-863
Assuming,  however,  for  the  purposes  of  classification,  that  the  organic  world  is
fundamentally  different  from  the  inorganic,  we  may  divide  organic  science
into  physiology  and  pathology         ...  ...   863-864

The  two  great  Scotch  pathologists  are  Cullen  and  John  Hunter.     Hunter,

having  a  larger  mind  than  Cullen,  was  also  a  physiologist  .          .  864

Account  of  Cullen's  philosophy     .........  864

His  love  of  theory        ...........  865

Theory,  though  necessary  in  science,  is  dangerous  in  practice  .  .  .  865-866
Difference  between  the  science  of  pathology  and  the  art  of  therapeutics  .  866-867
Comparison-between  the  method  of  Cullen's  pathology  and  the  method  employed

by  Adam  Smith 867-868

Cullen's  theory  of  the  solids        .  ........

He  refused  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  the-princlples  from  which  he  argued     .   868-869
His  conclusions,  like  his  premisses,  represent  only  a  part  of  the  truth,  and  were
extremely  one-sided.     Still,  their  value  is  unquestionable,  forming,  as  they
did,  a  necessary  part  of  the  general  progress    .  .....   869-870

His  theory  of  fever     ...........   870-872

His  nosology      ............  872

The  philosophy  of  John  Hunter 873-889

His  grandeur,  and,  unfortunately,  his  obscurity  of  language        .          .          .   873-874
In  his  mind,  the  inductive  and  deductive  methods  struggled  for  mastery.  Their
conflict  oppressed  him.     This  is  one  of  the  causes  of  the  darkness  of  his
thoughts  and  consequently  of  his  style    .          .  875

His   natural   disposition   was   towards    deduction         .  875

But  circumstances  made  him  inductive,  and  he  collected  facts  with  untiring

industry 875

By  this  means  he  made  a  large  number  of  curious  physiological  discoveries      .   876-877
He  traced  the  history  of  the  red  globules  of  the  blood,  and  arrived  at  the  con-
clusion that  their  function  is  to  strengthen  the  system  rather  than  to  repair  it  877-878
Long  after  his  death,  this  inference  was  corroborated  by  the  progress  of  micro-
scopical   and   chemical    researches.     It   was   especially   corroborated   by
Lecanu's  comparison  of  the  blood  in  different  sexes  and  in  different  tem-
peraments     878-879


xxx  ANALYTICAL   TABLE   OF   CONTENTS

PAGE

Hunter's  inquiries  concerning  the  movements  of  animate  and  vegetables    .          .   879-880

He  recognized  the  great  truth  that  the  sciences  of  the  inorganic  world  must  be

the  foundation  of  those  of  the  organic     .......  88 1

His  object  was  to  unite  all  the  physical  sciences,  in  order  to  show  that,  the
operations  of  nature  being  always  uniform,  regularity  prevails  even  amidst
the  greatest  apparent  irregularity 881-882

Hence,  aiming  chiefly  at  a  generalization  of  irregularities,  his  favourite  study

was  pathology     ...........  882

In  his  pathological  inquiries,  he  took  into  account  the  malformations  of  crystals  .  882

As  a  physiologist,  he  was  equalled  or  excelled  by  Aristotle  ;  but  as  a  pathologist,

he  is  unrivalled  for  the  grandeur  of  his  views       .          .          .          .          .  883

In  pathology,  his  love  of  deduction  was  more  obvious  than  in  physiology      .  883

His  pathological  speculations  respecting  the  principles  of  action  and  the  prin-
ciples of  sympathy 885-887

But  his  English  contemporaries,  being  eminently  inductive,  so  disliked  his

method,  that  he  exercised  scarcely  any  influence  over  them      .          .          .  887

This  is  the  more  observable,  because  his  discoveries  respecting  disease  have
caused  him  to  be  recognized  as  the  founder  of  modern  surgery,  and  the
principal  author  of  the  doctrines  now  taught  in  the  medical  profession  .  887-889

Such  were  the  great  results  achieved  by  Scotchmen  in  the  eighteenth  century.
Difference  between  this  splendid  literature  and  the  wretched  productions
of  the  Scotch  mind  in  the  seventeenth  century 889-890

Notwithstanding  this  difference,  the  deductive  method  was  supreme  in  both

centuries  ...........  891

The  deductive  method  strikes  the  senses  less  than  the  inductive.  Hence,  in-
duction being  more  accessible  to  average  understandings,  is  more  popular
than  deduction.  Hence,  too,  the  teachings  of  an  inductive  philosophy  are
more  likely  to  affect  national  character  than  the  teaching  of  a  deductive
philosophy  ...........  891-893

Theology  forms  the  only  exception  to  this  rule    ......  893

The  Scotch  literature  of  the  eighteenth  century,  being  essentially  deductive,  was,
on  that  account,  unable  to  affect  the  nation.  It  was,  therefore,  unable  to
weaken  national  superstition  ........  893-894

Superstition  and  religious  illiberality  still  existing  in  Scotland  .....   894-896

The  notions  countenanced  there  respecting  the  origin  of  epidemic^.  Corre-
spondence which,  in  consequence  of  those  notions,  took  place,  in  1853,
between  the  Scotch  Church  and  the  English  Government  .  .  .  896-900

These  superstitions  are  eminently  irreligious,  and  are  everywhere  becoming
effaced,  as  physical  science  advances.  Nothing  else  can  touch  them.  Hence
the  gradual  liberation  of  the  human  mind  from  the  slavish  and  unmanly
fears  by  which  it  has  long  been  oppressed  ......  900-902


LIST  OF   AUTHORS    OJJOTED

L  order  to  assist  those  who  wish  to  verify  my  references,  and  also  with  the  view  of  indicating  the  nature
and  extent  of  the  materials  which  I  have  used,  I  have  drawn  up  the  following  list  of  the  principal
works  quoted  in  the  present  volume.  When  no  edition  is  mentioned,  the  size  is  8vo  et  infra.
When  the  name  of  the  author  is  enclosed  between  brackets  the  book  is  anonymous ;  but  in  such
cases,  I  have  usually  subjoined  some  authority  who  gives  evidence  of  the  authorship.

[Aarsens  de  Sommerdyck],  Voyage  d'Espagne,  fait  en  Fannee  1655.     Paris  1665.     4to.

Barbier  (Dictionnaire  des  Ouvrages  Anonymes,  vol.  ii.  p.  468,  Paris,  1806)  refers

to  an  edition  of  1666.

Abd-Allatif,  Relation  de  1'Egypte,  traduite  par  Silvestre  de  Sacy.     Paris,  1810.  4to.
Aberdeen  :  Extracts  from  the  Council  Register  of  the  Burgh  of  Aberdeen,  from  1398  to

I37o,  printed  for  the  Spalding  Club.     Aberdeen,  1844.     4to.

Ibid.,  from  1570  to  1625,  printed  for  the  Spalding  Club.     Aberdeen,  1848.    4to.
Abernethy  (J.),  The  Hunterian  Oration  for  the  year  1819.     London,  1819.
Abernethy  (M.I.),  Physicke  for  the  Soule.     London,  1622.  4to.
Acts  of  the   Parliaments  of  Scotland  from   1124   to   1707.     London,   1814-1844.     n

volumes,  folio.
Acts  and  Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  from  1560  to

1618.     Edinburgh,  1839-1845.     3  volumes,  4to.

Acts  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  from  1638  to  1842.     Edin-
burgh, 1843.
Adams  (J.),  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Doctrines  of  John  Hunter.     2d  edit.     London,

1818.
Adolphus  (J.),'  History  of  England  from  the  accession  of  George  III.     Lond.  1840-1845.

7  vols.

Aguesseau  (Chancelier  d'),  Lettres  in6dites.     Paris,  1823.     2  vols.
Aikin  (L.),  Life  of  Addison.     Lond.  1843.     2  vols.

Albemarle  (Earl  of),  Memoirs  of  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham.     Lond.  1852.     2  vols.
Alberoni  (Cardinal),  The  History  of.     London,  1719.
Alison  (Sir  A.),  History  of  Europe,  from  the  commencement  of  the  French  Revolution  to

1815.     Edinb.  1849-1850.     14  vols.

Allen  (J.),  Rise  and  Growth  of  the  Royal  Prerogative  in  England.     Lond.  1849.
Anderson  (J.),  Prize  Essay  on  the  State  of  Society  and  Knowledge  in  the  Highlands  of

Scotland.     Edinburgh,  1827.

Antequera  (D.J.M.),  Historia  de  la  Legislacion  Espanola.     Madrid,  1849.
Argyll  (The  Duke  of),  Presbytery  Examined.     London,  1848.
Arnold  (Dr.),  Lectures  on  Modern  History.     Lond.  1843.
Arnot  (H.),  The  History  of  Edinburgh.     Edinburgh,  1788.     4to.
Asiatic  Researches.     Lond.  and  Calcutta,  1799-1836.     20  vols.  4to.
Aubrey  (J.),  Letters  and  Lives  of  Eminent  Men.     Lond.  1813.     2  vols.
Audigier  (M.),  L'Origine  des  Francois.     Paris,  1676,  2  vols.
Azara  (F.),  Voyages  dans  I'Amerique  Mcridionale.     Paris,  1809.     4  vols.

Bacallar  (V.),  Comentarios  de  la  Guerra  de  Espana,  e  Historia  de  su  Rey  Phelipe  V.

Geneva.     2  vols.  4 to.  (no  date.)
Bacon  (J.  F.).  Six  Years  in  Biscay.     London,  1838.
Bailhe  (R.),  Letters  and  Journals  from  1637  to  1662,  edited  by  D.  Laing.     Edinburgh,

1841-1842.     3  vols.

Bain  (A.),  The  Senses  and  the  Intellect.     London,  1855.
Bakewell  (R.),  Introduction  to  Geology.     Lond.  1838.
Balfour  (Sir  J.),  Historical  Works,  containing  the  Annales  of  Scotland.     London,  1825.

4  vols.

xxxi


xxxii  LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED

Balfour  (J.  H.),  A  Manual  of  Botany.     Lond.  1849.

Bancroft  (G.),  History  of  the  American  Revolution.     Lond.  1852-1854.     3  vols.

Bannatyne  (J.),  Journal  of  Transactions  in  Scotland,  from  1570  to  1573.     Edinburgh,

1806.

Barante  (M.),  Tableau  de  la  Litterature  Francaise  au  XVIII6  Siecle.     Paris,  1847.
Barrington(D-),  Observations  on  the  Statutes.     5th  edit.     Lond.  1796.     4to.
Barruel  (L'Abbe),  Memoires  pour  THistoire  du  Jacobinisme.     Hambourg,  1803.     5  vols.
Barry  (G.),  History  of  the  Orkney  Islands.     Edinb.  1805.     4to.   •
Bassompierre  (Marechal  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1822,  1823.     3  vols.
Bates  (G.),  Account  of  the  late  Troubles  in  England.     Lond.  1685.     2  vols.
Baxter  (R.),  Life  and  Times,  by  himself.      Published  by  M.  Sylvester.     Lond.  1696.

Folio,  3  parts.

Bazin  (M.  A.),  Histoire  de  France  sous  Louis  XIII.     Paris,  1838.   ^vols.
Beausobre  (M.),  Histoire  Critique  de  Manichee  et  du  Manicheisme.  Amsterdam,  1734-9.

4to,  2  vols.

Beclard  (P.  A.),  Elements  d'Anatomie  Generale.     Paris,  1852.
Bedford  Correspondence,  edited  by  Lord  J .  Russell.     1842-1846.     3  vols.
Beechey  (F.  W.),  Voyage  to  the  Pacific.     Lond.  1831.     2  vols.
Belsham  (W.),  History  of  Great  Britain,  from  1688  to  1802.     Lond.  1805.     12  vols.     (Of

this  work  I  have  used  only  the  last  seven  volumes,  which  refer  to  a  period  for  which

Belsham  was  a  contemporary  authority.     The  earlier  volumes  are  worthless.)
[Benoist],  Histoire  de  1'Edit  de  Nantes.     Delft,  1693-1695,  410.     5  vols.
Berkeley  (Bishop  of  Cloyne),  Works.     Lond.  1843.     2  vols.
Berwick  (Marechal  de),  Memories  ecrits  par  lui-meme.     Paris,  1778.     2  vols.
Bichat  (X.),  Traite  des  Membranes.     Paris,  1802.
Bichat  (X.),  Anatomie  Generale.     Paris,  1821.     4  vols.
Bichat  (X.),  Recherches  sur  la  Vie  et  la  Mort,  edit.  Magendie.     Paris,  1829.
Binning  (H.),  Sermons,  edited  by  J.  Cochrane.     Edinburgh,  1839,  1840.     3  vols.
Biographie  Universelle.     Paris,  1811-1828.     52  vols.
Birch  (T.),  Life  of  Tillotson,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.     Lond.  1753.
Bisset(R-),  Life  of  Edmund  Burke.     2 d  edit.     Lond.  1800.     2  vols.
Black  (J.),  Lectures  on  Chemistry,  edited  by  John  Robison.     Edinburgh,   1803.

2  vols,  4to.

Blackstone's  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England.     Lond.  1809.     4  vols.
Blainville  (D.).     Physiologic  Generale  et  Compar6e.     Paris,  1833.     3  vols.
Blair  (R.),  Autobiography,  from  1593  to  1636  ;  with  a  continuation  to  1680,  by

W.  Row,  edited  by  T.  M'Crie  for' the  Wodrow  Society.  Edinburgh,  1848.
Blanqui  (M.),  Histoire  de  1'Economie  Politique  en  Europe.  Paris,  1845.  2  vols.
Bogue  (D.)  and  Bennett  (J.),  History  of  the  Dissenters,  from  1688  to  1808.  Lond.  1808-

1812.     4  vols.
Bohlen  (P.),  Das  alte  Indien,  mit  besonderer  Rucksicht  auf  JEgypten.     Konigsberg,  1830.

2  vols.

[Boisel],  Journal  du  Voyage  d'Espagne.     Paris,  1669.  4to.     See  Barbier,       Diet,  des

Anonymes,  vol.  ii.  p.  621,  Paris,  1806.
Bordas-Demoulin,  Le  Cartesianisme.     Paris,  1843.     2  vols.
Bossuet  (Ev£que  de  Meaux),  Discours  sur  1' Histoire  Universelle.     Paris,  1844.
Boston  (T.),  Sermons.     Glasgow,  1752.

Boston  (T.),  Human  Nature  in  its  Four-fold  State.     Reprinted,  London,  1809.
Bouillaud  (J.),  Philosophic  Medicale.     Paris,  1836.

Bouille  (M.  de),  Memoires  sur  la  Revolution  Francaise.     Paris,  1801-9,  2  vols.
Boulainvilliers  (Comte),  Histoire  de  1'Ancien  Gouvernement  de  la  France.     La  Have,

1727.     3  vols.
Boullier  (M.),  Histoire  des  divers  Corps  de  la  Maison  Militaire  des  Rois  de  France.     Paris,

1818.
Bourgoing  (J.  F.),  Tableau  de  1'Espagne  Moderne,  quatrieme  edition.         Paris,  1807.

3  vols.

Bouterwek    (F.),  History     of     Spanish     and     Portuguese  Literature.  London,  1823.

2  vols.

Bowdich  (T.  E.),  Mission  to  Ashantee.     Lond.  1819.     4to.

Bower      (A.),      History   of   the  University    of   Edinburgh.      Edinburgh,     1817-1830.

3  vols.

Bowles  (G.),  Introduccion  a  la  Historia  Natural  y  a  la  Geografia  Fisica  de  Espana.

Tercera  edicion.     Madrid,  1789,     4to.

Bowles  (W.  L.),  Life  of  Bishop  Ken.     Lond.  1830,  1831.     2  vols.
Boyle  (R.),  Works.     Lond.  1744-     5  vols.  folio.
Brand  (J.),  Description  of  Orkney,  Zetland,  Pightland-Firth,  and  Caithness.  Edinburgh,


LIST   OF   AUTHORS    QUOTED  xxxiii

Brande  (W.  T.),  A  Manual  of  Chemistry.     Lond.  1848.     2  vols.

Brewster  (Sir  D.),  Memoirs  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton.     Edinb.  1855.     2  vols.

Brienne  (L.  H.  de  Lomenie),  Memoires  inedits.     Paris,  1828.     2  vols.

Brissot  (J.  P.),  Memoires.     Paris,  1830.-    2  vols.

British  Association  for  Advancement  of  Science,  Reports  of.     Lond.  1833-1853.     21  vols.

Brodie  (Sir  B.),  Lectures  on  Pathology  and  Surgery.     Lond.  1846.

Brodie  (Sir  B.),  Physiological  Researches.     Lond.  1851.

Brougham  (Lord),  Sketches   of  Statesmen  in  the  time  of  George   III.     Lond.    1845.

6  vols.
Brougham  (Lord),  Lives  of  Men  of  Letters  and  Science  in  the  time  of  George  III.     Lond.

1845-1847.     2  vols.

Brougham  (Lord),  Political  Philosophy.     2d  edit.  Lond.  1849.     3  vols.
Broussais  (F.  J.  V.),  Cours  de  Phrenologie.     Paris,  1836.

Broussais  (F.  J.  V.),  Examen  des  Doctrines  Medicales.     Paris,  1829-1834.     4  vols.
Brown  (A.),  History  of  Glasgow.     Glasgow,  1795,  and  Edinburgh,  1797-     2  vols.
Brown  (T.),  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Mind.     Edinb.  1838.
Browne  (J.),  History  of  the  Highlands  and  of  the  Highland  Glens.     Glasgow,  1838.

4  vols.

Browne  (Sir  Thomas),  Works  and  Correspondence,  by  S.  Wilkin.     Lond.  1836.     4  vols.
Buchanan  ( F. ),  J  ourney  through  Mysore,  Canara,  and  Malabar.     Lond.  1 807.     3  vols.  4to.
Buchanan  (G.),  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,  cura  Man.     Abredoniac,  1762.
Buchanan  (J.),  Sketches  of  the  North- American  Indians.     Lond.  1824.

Buckingham  (Duke  of),  Memoirs  of  George  III.     Lond.  1853.     2  vols.

Bullock  (W.),  Travels  in  Mexico.     Lond.  1824.

Bulstrode  (Sir  R.),  Memoirs  of  Charles  I  and  Charles  II.     Lond.  1721. .

Bunbury  (Sir  H.),  Correspondence  of  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer.     Lond.  1838.

Bunsen  (C.  C.  J.),  Egypt's  Place  in  Universal  History.     Lond.  1848-1854.     2  vols.

Burckhardt  (J.  L.),  Travels  in  Arabia.     Lond.  1829.     2  vols.

Burdach  (C.  F.),  Traite  de  Physiologic  consideree  comme  Science  d'Observation.     Pans,
1837-1841.     9  vols.

Burke  (E.),  Correspondence  with  Laurence.     Lond.  1827.

Burke  (E.),  Correspondence  between  1744  and  1797.     Lond.  1844.     4  vols.

Burke  (E.),  Works,  by  H.  Rogers.     Lond.  1841.     2  vols.

Burnes(Sir  A.),  Travels  into  Bokhara.     Lond.  1834.     3  vols.

Burnet  (Bishop),  History  of  his  own  Time.     Oxford,  1823.     6  vols.

Burnet  (Bishop),  Lives  and  Characters,  edit.  Jebb.     Lond.  1833.

Burnet  (G),  Memoirs  of  the  Lives  of  James  and  William,  Dukes  of  Hamilton  and  Castle-
Herald.     Oxford,  1852.

Burton  (J.  H.),  History  of  Scotland,  from  1689  to  1748.     London,  1853.     2  vols.

Burton  (J.  H.),  Life  and  Correspondence  of  David  Hume.     Edinburgh,  1846.     2  vols.

Burton  (J.  H.),  Lives  of  Simon  Lord  Lovat,  and  Duncan  Forbes  of  Culloden.     London,
1847.

Burton  (J.  H.),  Narratives  from  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland.     London,   1852.  2  vols.

Burton  (R.  F.),  Sindh,  and~the  Races  in  the  Valley  of  the  Indus.     Lond.  1851.

Burton  (T.),  Diary,  from  1655  to  1659.     Lond.  1828.     4  vols.

Butler  (C.),  Memoirs  of  the  English,  Irish,  and  Scottish  Catholics.     Lond.  1822.     4  vols.

Butler  (C.),  Reminiscences.     Lond.  1824-1827.     2  vols.

Cabanis  (P.  J.  G.),  Rapports  du  Physique  et  du  Moral  de  l'Homme.     Paris,  1843.
Cabarrus  (Conde  de),  Cartas  sobre  los  Obstaculos  que  la  Naturaleza,  la  Opinion,  y  las

Leyes  oponen  a  la  Felicidad  Publica.     Madrid,  1813.
Cabarrus  (D.  F.),  Elogio   de  Carlos  III.     Madrid,  1789.     4 to.
Calamy  (E.),  Account  of  my  own  Life,  1671-1731.     Lond.  1829.     2  vols.
Calderwood  (D.),  History  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  edited  by  T.  Thomson  for  the  Wodrow

Society.     Edinburgh,    1842-1849.     8    vols.

Campan  (Madame),  Memoires  sur  Marie  Antoinette.     Paris,  1826.     3  vols.
Campany  (A.  de),  Questiones  Criticas  sobre  varios  Puntos  de  Historia  economica,  &c.

Madrid,  1807.
Campbell  (Lord),  Lives  of  the  Lord  Chancellors  of  England.     3d  edit.     Lond.  1848-1850.

7  vols.

Campbell  (Lord),  Lives  of  the  Chief- Justices  of  England.     Lond.  1849.     2  vols.
Campion  (H.  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1807.

[Campomanes],  Discurso  sobre  la  Educacion  Popular  de  los  Artesanos.     Madrid,  i775*
[Campomanes],  Apendice  a  la  Educacion  Popular.     Madrid,  I775-I777-     4  vols.
Capefigue  (M.),  Histoire  de  la  Reforme,  de  la  Ligue,  et  du  Regne  de  Henri  IV.     Bruxelles,

1834,  1835.     8  vols.
Capefigue  (M.),  Louis  XIV.     Paris,  1844.     2  vols.


xxxiv  LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED

Capefigue  (M.),  Richelieu,  Mazarin,  et  la  Fronde.     Paris,  1844,  2  vols.

Cappe  (C.),  Memoirs,  written  by  herself.     Lond.  1822.

Carlyle  (Rev.  Dr.  Alexander),  Autobiography,  2d  edit.     Edinburgh,  1860.

Carlyle  (T.),  Letters  and  Speeches  of  Cromwell.     2d  edit.     Lond.  1846.     3  vols.

Carpenter  (W.  B.),  Principles  of  Human  Physiology.     3d  edit.     Lond.  1846.

Cartwright  (Major),  Life  and  Correspondence.     Lond.  1826.     2  vols.

Carwithen  (J.  B.  S.),  History  of  the  Church  of  England.     Oxford,  1849.     2  vols.

Cams  (C.  G.),  Comparative  Anatomy  of  Animals.     Lond.  1827,     2  vols.

Cassagnac  (M.  A.  G.  de),  Causes  de  la  Revolution  Francaise.     Paris,  1850.     3  vols.

Castro  (A.),  Examen  Filosofico  sobre  las  principales  causas  de  la  Decadencia  de  Espafia.
Cadiz,  1852.

Catlin  (G.),  Letters  on  the  North- American  Indians.     Lond.  1841,     2  vols.

Chalmers  (G.),  Caledonia.     London,  1807-1824,     3  vols.  4to.

Chalmers  (P.),  Historical  and  Statistical  Account  of  Dunfermline.     Edinburgh,  1844.

Chambers  (R.),  Domestic  Annals  of  Scotland,  from  the  Reformation  to  the  Revolution.
Edinburgh,  1858.     2  vols.

Charron  (P.),  De  la  Sagesse.     Amsterdam,  1782.     2  vols.

Chatham  (Earl  of),  Correspondence.     Lond.  1838-1840.     4  vols.

Chillingworth  (W.),  The  Religion  of  Protestants.     Lond.  1846.

Chronicle  of  Perth  (The),  from  1210  to  1668.     Edinburgh,  1831.  4to.     Published  by  the

Maitland  Club.
Circourt  (A.  de),  Histoire  des  Arabes  d'  Espagne.     Paris,  1846.     3  vols.

Clapperton  (H.),  Second  Expedition  into  the  Interior  of  Africa.     Lond.  1829.     4to.
Clarendon  Correspondence  and  Diary,  by  S.  W.  Singer.     Lond.  1828.     2  vols.     4to.
Clarendon  (Earl  of),  State  Papers.     Oxford,  1767-1786.     3  vols,  folio.
Clarendon  (Earl  of),  The  History  of  the  Rebellion  and  Civil  Wars  in  England  ;  also  his

Life,  written  by  Himself.     Oxford,  1843.    -

Clarendon's  History  of  the  Rebellion  ;   and  Life,  by  Himself.     Oxford,  1843.
Clarke  (C.),  An  Examination  of  the  Internal  State  of  Spain.     London,  1818.
Clarke  (E.),  Letters  concerning  the  Spanish  Nation,  written  at  Madrid  in  1760  and  1761.

London,  1763.     4to.

Cloncurry  (Lord),  Recollections  and  Correspondence.     Dublin,  1849.
Clot-Bey  (A.  B.),  De  la  Peste  observee  en  Egypte.     Paris,  1840:
Cloud  (A)>f  Witnesses  for  the  Royal  Prerogatives  of  Jesus  Christ,  loth  edit.     Glasgow,

1779.

Cockburn  (J.),  Jacob's  Vow,  or  Man's  Felicity  and  Duty.     Edinburgh,  1696.
Colebrooke  (H.  T.),  A  Digest  of  Hindu  Law.     Calcutta,  1801.     3  vols.
Coleman(C.),  Mythology  of  the  Hindus.     Lond.  1832.     4to.
Coleridge  (S.  T.),  Literary  Remains.     Lond.  1836-1839.     4  vols.
Coleridge  (S.  T.),  The  Friend.     Lond.  1844.     3  vols.

Combe  (G.),  Notes  on  the  United  States  of  North  America.     Edinb.  1841.     3  vols.
Comines  (P.  de),  Memoires,  edit.  Petitot.     1826.     3  vols.
Comte  (A.),  Cours  de  Philosophic  Positive.     Paris,  1830-1842.     6  vols.
Comte  (C.),  Traite  de  Legislation.     Paris,  1835.     4  vols.

Conde  (J.  A.),  Historia  de  la  Dominacion  de  los  Arabes  en  Espafia.     Paris,  1840.
Condillac  (E.  B.),  Traite  des  Sensations.     Paris,  1798.
Condorcet  (Marquis  de),  Vie  de  Turgot.     Londres,  1786.

Condorcet  (Marquis  de),  Vie  de  Voltaire,  in  vol  i.  of  CEuvres  de  Voltaire.     Paris,  1820.
Conrart,  (V.),  Memoires.     Paris,  1825.

Cook  (J.),  Three  Voyages  round  the  World.     Lond.  1821.     7  vols.
Cook  (S.  S.),  Sketches  in  Spain,  from  1829  to  1832.     London,  1834.     2  vols
Cooke  (G.  W.),  History  of  Party.     Lond.  1836, 1837.     3  vols.

Copleston  (E.),  Inquiry  into  the  Doctrines  of  Necessity  and  Predestination.     Lond.  1821.
Costa  y  Borras  (J.  D.,  Obispo  de  Barcelona),  Observaciones  sobre  el  Presente  y  el  Por-

venir  de  la  Iglesia  en  Espana.     Segunda  edicion.     Barcelona,  1857.

Cousin  (V.),  Cours  deT Histoire  de  la  Philosophic  moderne,  I  serie.     Paris,  1846.     5  vols.
Cousin  (V.)  Idem  Idem  II  serie.     Paris,  1847.     3  vols.

Cowper  (W.),  Heaven  Opened.     London,  1631.     4to.
Coxe  (W.),  Memoirs  of  the  Kings  of  Spain  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,  2d  edit.  London,

1815.     5  vols.

Crantz  (D.),  History  of  Greenland.     Lond.  1767.     2  vols.

Crawfurd  (G.),  The  History  of  the  Shire  of  Renfrew.     Paisley,  1782.     3  Parts.     4to.
Crawfurd  (J.),  History  of  the  Indian  Archipelago.     Edinb.  1820.     3  vols
Cnchton  (A.),  The  Life  and  Diary  of  Lieut.-Col/J.  Blackader.     Edinburgh   1824
Croker  (R.),  Travels  through  several  Provinces  of  Spain  and  Portugal.     London,  1799.
Crookshank  (W.  ,  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  from  1660  to  1688.     Edinburgh,

l8l2.       2


LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED  xxxv

Cudworth  (R.),  The  True  Intellectual  System  of  the  Universe.     Lond.  1820.     4  vols.

Cullen  (W.),  Works.     Edinburgh,  1827.     2  vols.

Currie  (J.),  Life  and  Correspondence,  by  his  Son.     Lond.  1831.     2  vols.

Custine  (Marquis  de),  La  Russie  en  1839.     Paris,  1843.     4  vols.

Cuvier  (G.),  Histoire  des  Progres  des  Sciences  Naturelles  depuis  1789.     Bruxelles,  1837,

1838.     2  vols.

Cuvier  (G.),  Histoire  des  Sciences  Naturelles  depuis  leur  Origine.     Paris,  1831.
Cuvier  (G.),  Le  Regne  Animal.     Paris,  1829.     5  vols.
Cuvier  (G.),  Recueil  des  ^loges  Historiques.     Paris,  1819-1827.     3  vols.

Dabistan  (The),  translated  from  the  Persian,  by  D.  Shea  and  A.  Troyer.     Paris,  1843.

3  vols.
Dacier  (M.),  Rapport  sur  les  Progres  de  1'Histoire  et  de  la  Litt6rature  depuis  1789.     Paris,

1810.     4to.

Dalrymple  (J.),  History  of  Feudal  Property  in  Great  Britain.     Lond.  1758.
Dalrymple  (J.),  Memoirs  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.     Lond.  1790.     3  vols.
Dalrymple  (Sir  D.),  Annals  of  Scotland,  from  1057  to  1371.     sd  edit.     Edinburgh,  1819.

3  vols.

Dalrymple  (W.),  Travels  through  Spain  and  Portugal  in  1774.     London,  1777.     4to.
Daniel  (G.),  Histoire  de  la  Milice  Francoise.     Paris,  1721.     2  vols.  4to.
Daniell  (J.  F.),  Meteorological  Essays.     Lond.  1827.

Darwin  (C.),  Journal  of  Researches  in  Geology  and  Natural  History.     Lond.  1840.
[D'Aulnoy   (Madame)],    Relation   du  Voyage   d'Espagne.     Lyon,    1693.     2   vols.     See

Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  ii.  pp.  320,  321.
Davies  (C.  M.),  History  of  Holland.     London,  1841-1844.     3  vols.
Davila  (G.  G.),  Historia  de  la  Vida  y  Hechos  del  Inclito  Monarca  Amado  y  Santo  D.

Felipe  Tercero.     Reprinted,  Madrid,  1771,  folio.
Davis  (J.  F.),  The  Chinese.     Lond.  1844.     3  vols.
De  Foe  (D.),  The  History  of  the  Union  between  England   and  Scotland.      London,

1786.     4to.

De  Lisle  (Rome),  Cristallographie.     Paris,  1783.     4  vols.  8vo.
De  Lisle  (Rom6),  Essai  de  Cristallographie.     Paris,  1772.
Denham  (D.),  Travels  in  Northern  and  Central  Africa.     Lond.  1826.     4tp.
Denholm  (J.),  The  History  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  and  Suburbs,     sd  edition.     Glasgow,

1804.

Descartes  (R.),  (Euvres,  par  V.  Cousin.     Paris,  1824-1826.     n  vols.
De  Stael  (Madame),  Considerations  sur  la  Revolution  Francoise.     Paris,  1820.     3  vols.
De  Thou  (J.  A.),  Histoire  Universelle,  depuis  1543  jusqu'en  1607.     Londres,  1734.     16

vols.  4to.

De  Maizeaux  (P.),  Life  of  Chillingwprth.     Lond.  1745.
Des  Reaux  (Tallemant),  Les  Historiettes.     Paris,  1840.     10  vols.
Dickson  (D.),  A  Brief  Explication  of  the  first  Fifty  Psalms.     London,  1653.
Dickson  (D.),  Truth's  Victory  over  Error.     Reprinted  Glasgow,  1772.
Diderot  (D.),  Memoires  et  Correspondance.     Paris,  1830,  1831.     4  vols.
Dillon  (J.  T.),   Travels  through  Spain.     Dublin,  1781.

Diodori  Siculi  Bibliotheca  Historica ;  recensione  Wesselingii.     Bipont,  1793-1807.  1 1  vols.
Diogenes  Laertius,  De  Vitis  Philosophorum,  edit.  Meibomius.     Amstel.  1692.  2  vols.  4to.
Disney  (J.),  Life  of  Dr.  John  Jebb,  in  vol.  i.  of  J  ebb's  Works.     Lond.  1787.
Diurnal  (A)  of  Remarkable  Occurrents  that  have  passed  within  the  Country  of  Scotland,

since  the  Death  of  James  IV  till  the  year  1575.      Published  by  the  Bannatyne  Club.

Edinburgh,  1833.     4to.

Dobell  (P.),  Travels  in  Kamtchatka  and  Siberia.     Lond.  1830.     2  vols.
Doblado's  Letters  from  Spain  (by  Rev.  B.  White).     Lond.  1822.
Doddridge  (P.),  Correspondence  and  Diary.     Lond.  1829-1831.     5  vcls.
Doubleday  (T.).'The  True'Law  of  Population.     Lond.  1847.

Dpwling  (J.  G.),  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Ecclesiastical  History.     Lond.  1838.
D'Oyly  (G.),  Life  of  Sancroft,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.     Lond.  1840.
Duclos  (M.),  Memoires  secrets  sur  LoiaVXIV  et  Louis  XV.     Paris,  1791.     2  vols.
Du  Deffand  (Madame),  Correspondence  inedite.     Paris,  1809.     2  vols.
Du  Deffand  (Madame),  Lettres  a  H.'Walpole.     Paris,  1827.     4  vols/
Dufau  (P.  A.),"Traite  de'Statistique.     Paris,  1840.
Du  Mesnil  (M.),'Memoires"sur  le  Prince^Le  Brun.     Paris,'i828.
Dumont  (E.),  Souvenirs  sur  Mirabeau. "  Londres,  1832."
[Dunham],  History  of  Spain  and  Portugal.     London,   1832.     5  vols.     See  Prescott's

Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol,  iii.  p.  214.
Dunlop  (J.),  Memoirs  of  Spain,  from  1621  to  1700.     Edinburgh,  1834.     2  vols.


xxxvi  LIST   OF  AUTHORS   QUOTED

Duplessis  Mornay  (P.),  Memoires  et  Correspondance.     Paris,  1824,  1825.     12  vols.

Durham  (J.),  Exposition  of  the  Song  of  Solomon.     1669.     Reprinted,  Glasgow,  1788.

Durham  (J.),  The  Law  Unsealed.     1675.     Reprinted,  Glasgow,  1798.

Durham  (J.),  A  Commentarie  upon  the  Book  of  the  Revelation.     Glasgow,  1680.     4to.

Dutens  (L.),  Memoires  d'un  Voyageur  qui  se  repose.     Londres,  1806.     3  ^oh.

Duvernet  (J.),  Vie  de  Voltaire.     Geneve,  1786.

Duvernet  (J.),  Histoire  de  la  Sorbonne.     Paris,  1791.     2  vols.

Eccleston  (J.),  Introduction  to  English  Antiquities.     Lond.  1847.

Edwards  (M.),  Zoologie.     Paris,  1841,  1842.     2  parts.

Elliotson  (J.),  Human  Physiology.     Lond.  1840.

Ellis  Correspondence  (The),  1686-1688,  edited  by  G.  A.  Ellis.     Lond.  1829.     2  vols.

Ellis  (Sir  H.),  Original  Letters  of  Literary  Men.     Camden'Soc.  1843.    4to.

Ellis  (W.),  A  Tour  through  Hawaii.     Lond.  1827.

Ellis  (W.),  Polynesian  Researches.     Lond.  1831.     4  vols.

Ellis  (W.),  History  of  Madagascar.     Lond.  1838.     2  vols.

Elphinstone  (M.),  The  History  of  India.     Lond.  1849.

Encyclopaedia  of  the  Medical  Sciences.     Lond.  1847.     4to.

Epinay  (Madame  d'),  Memoires  et  Correspondance.     Paris,  1818.     3  vols.

Erichsen  (J.),  The  Science  and  Art  of  Surgery,     ad  edit.     London,  1857.

Erman  (A.),  Travels  in  Siberia.    ,Lond.  1848.     2  vols.

Es3hbach  (M.),  Introduction  a  1'Etude  du  Droit.     Paris,  1846.

Esquirol  (E.),  Des  Maladies  Mentales.     Paris,  1838.     2  vols.

Estat  (L',),  de  1'Espagne.     Geneve,  1681.

Evelyn  (J.),  Diary  and  Correspondence.     Lond.  1827.     5  vols.

Extracts  from  the  Presbytery  Book  of  Strathbogie,  from  1631  to  1664.     Printed  for  the

Spalding  Club.     Aberdeen,  1843.     4to.
Extracts  from  the  Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Glasgow,  and  of  the  Kirk  Sessions

of  the  Parishes  of  Cambusnethan,  Humbie/and  Stirling.     4to.     (no  date.)

Fairfax  Correspondence  (The),  edited  by  G.  W.  Johnson  and  R.  Bell.     Lond.  1848,  1849.

4  vols.

Fanshawe  (Lady),  Memoirs,  written  by  herself.     London,  1830.
Faraday  (M.),  Discourse  on  the  Conservation  of  Force.     London,  1857.
Fauriel  (H.),  Histoire  de  la  Gaule  Meridionale  sousla  Domination  des  conquerants  Ger-

mains.     Paris,  1836.     4  vols.

Felice  (G.),  History  of 'the  Protestants  of  France.     Lond.  1853.
Fergusson  (J.),  A  Brief  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul.  London,  reprinted  from  the

original  editions,  1656-1674.

Feuchtersleben  (E.),  The  Principles  of  Medical  Psychology.     Sydenham  Soc.  1847.
Flassan  (M.),  Histoire  de  la  Diplomatic  Francaise.     Paris,  1811.     7  vols.
[Fleming  (R.),  ]  The  Fulfilling  of  the  Scripture,  1681  [no  date].     See  Fleming's  Rise  and

Fall  of  Rome,  edit.  London,  1848,  p.  xi.
Fletcher  (A.  of  Saltoun),  Political  Works.     Glasgow,  1749.
Fleury  (H.),  Histoire  Ecclesiastique.     Paris,   1758-1761.     36  vols.
Florez  (F.  H.),  Memorias  de  las  Reynas  Catholicas.     Madrid,  1761.     2  vols.  410.
Flourens  (P.),  Histoire  des  Travaux  de  Cuvier.     Paris,  1845.
Fontenay-Mareuil  (Marquis  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1826.     2  vols. '
Fontenelle  (B.  de),  Eloges,  in  vols.  v.  and  vi.  of  GEuvres.     Paris,  1766.
Foot  (J.),  The  Life  of  John  Hunter.     London,  1794.

Forbes  (J.),  Certaine  Records  touching  the  Estate  of  the  Kirk,  in  1605  and  1606.     Pub-
lished by  the  Wodrow  Society.     Edinburgh,  1846.
Forbes  (J.),  Oriental  Memoirs.     Lond.  1834.     2  vols.
Ford  (R.),  Hand-Book  for  Spain.     2d  edit.     London,  1847.
Fordun  (J.),  Scotichronicon,  cum  Supplements  et  Continuation  W.  Boweri,  cura  W.

Goodall.     Edinburgi,  1775.     2  vols.  folio.
Forner  (J.  P.),  Oracion  Apologetica  por  la  Espafia  y  su  Merito  Literario.     Madrid,

1786.

Forry  (S.),  Climate  of  the  United  States,  and  its  Endemic  Influences.     New  York,  1842.
Forster  (J.),  Life  and  Times  of  Goldsmith.     2d  edit.  Lond.  1854.     2  vols.
Fountamhall  (Lord),  Notes  of  Scottish  Affairs,  from  1680  till  1701.     Edinburgh,  1822.

4to.

Fox  (C.  J.),  History  of  the  Early  Part  of  the  Reign  of  James  II.     Lond.  1808.     4to.
Franck  (R.),  Northern  Memoirs,  writ  in  the  year  1658.     A  new  edition.     Edinb.  1821.
Franklin  (B.),  Private  Correspondence.     Lond.  1817.     2  vols.
Franklin  (B.),  Life,  by  himself.     Lond.  1818.     2  vols.
Galfridus  Monumentensis,  Historia  Britonum,  edit.  Giles.     Lond.  1844.


LIST   OF   AUTHORS    QUOTED  xxxvii

Gardner  (G.),  Travels  in  the  Interior  of  Brazil.     Lond.  1849.

Geddes  (M.)>  Miscellaneous  Tracts,     3d  edit.     London,  1730-     3  vols.

Genlis  (Madame  de),  Memoires  sur  le  XVIIIe  Siecle.     Paris,  1825.     10  vols.

Gent  (T.),  Life,  by  himself.     Lond.  1832.

Geoffrey  Saint  Hilaire  (I.),  Histoire  des  Anomalies  de  1' Organisation  chez  1'Homme  et  les

Animaux.     Bruxelles,  1837.     3  vols.
Georgel  (L'Abbe),  Memoires.     Paris,  1817-1818.     6  vols.
Georget  (M,),  De  la  Folie.     Paris,  1820.
Gibson  ().),  History  of  Glasgow.     Glasgow,  1777.
Gillespie  (G.),  Aaron's  Rod  Blossoming,  or  the  Divine  Ordinance  of  Church  Government

Vindicated.     London,  1646.  4  to.

Giraud  (C.),  Precis  de  1'Ancien  Droit  coutumier  Francais.     Paris,  1852.
Godoy  (Prince  of  the  Peace),  Memoirs,  written  by  himself.     London,  1836.     2  vols.
Godwin  (W.),  Of  Population  ;  or  the  Power  of  Increase  in  Mankind.     Lond.  1820.
Goethe  (J.  W.),  Wahrheit  undDichtung,  in  vol.  ii.  of  Werke.     Stuttgart,  1837.
Gordon  (P.),  A  short  Abridgement  of  Britane's  Distemper,  from  1639  to  1649.     Printed

for  the  Spalding  Club.     Aberdeen,  1844.  4 to.
Government  (The)  and  Order  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  1641.     Reprinted,  Edinburgh,

1690.
Gramont   (Le  Marechal  de),  Memoires,  edit.  Petitot  et  Monmerque.       Paris,  1826,  1827.

2  vols.

Grant  (R.),  History  of  Physical  Astronomy.     Lond.  1852.
Grant  (R.  E.),  Comparative  Anatomy.     Lond.  1841.
Gray  (A.),  Great  and  Precious  Promises.     Glasgow,  1740.
Gray  (A.),  The  Spiritual  Warfare,  or  Sermons  concerning  the  Nature  of  Mortification.

Glasgow,  1840.

Green  (J.  H.),  Vital  Dynamics.     London,  1840.
Gregoire  (M.),  Histoire  des  Confesseurs.     Paris,  1824.
Gregory  (D.),  History  of  the  Western  Highlands  and  Isles  of  Scotland,  from  1493  to

1625.     Edinburgh,   1836.

Grenville  Papers  (The),  edited  by  W.  J.  Smith.     Lond.  1852,  1853.     4  vols.
Grierson  (Dr.),  History  of  St.  Andrews.     Cupar,  1838.
Grieve  (J.),  The  History  of  Kamtschatka,  translated  from  the  Russian.     Gloucester,  1764.

4to.

Grimm  et  Diderot,  Correspondance  Litteraire.     Paris,  1813,  1814.     17  vols.     (This  im-
portant work  consists  of    three  parts,  besides  a  supplement ;    but  in  quoting  it  I

have  always  followed  the  ordinary  lettering,  making  the  supplement  vol.  xvii.)
Grose  (F.),  Military  Antiquities  ;    a  History  of  the  English  Army.     Lond.  1812.     4to.

2  vols.

Grosley  (M.),  A  Tour  to  London.     Lond.  1772.     2  vols.
Grote  (G.),  History  of  Greece.     Lond.  1846-1856.     12  vols.     ist  edit,  of  vols.  i.  ii.  iii.

iv.  ix.  x.  xi.  xii.  ;  2d  edit,  of  vols.  v.  vi.  vii.  viii.

Grove  (W.  R.),  The  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces.     3d  edit.     London,  1855.
Guizot  (M.),  Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  en  France.     Paris,  1846.     4  vols.
Guizot  (M.),  Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  en  Europe.     Paris,  1846.
Guizot  (M.),  Essais  sur  1'Histoire  de  France.     Paris,  1847.
Guthrie  (J.),  Considerations  Contributing  unto  the  Discovery  of  the  Dangers  that  threaten

Religion  in  the  Church  of  Scotland.     Reprint,  Edinburgh,  1846.
Guthry  (H.,  Bishop  of  Dunkeld),  Memoirs.     London,  1702.

Halhed  (N.  B.),  Code  of  Gentoo  Laws.     Lond.  1777.

Halkett  (J.),  Notes  respecting  the  Indians  of  North  America.     Lond.  1825.

Hallam  (H.),  Constitutional  History  of  England.     Lond.  1842.     2  vols.

Hallam  (H.),  Introduction  to  the  Literature  of  Europe.     Lond.  1843.     3  vols.

Hallam  (H.),  Europe  during  the  Middle  Ages.     Lond.  1846.     2  vols.

Hallam  (H.),  Supplemental  Notes  to  Europe  during  the  Middle  Ages.     Lond.  1848.

Halyburton  (T.),  The  Great  Concern  of  Salvation.     Edinburgh,  1722.

Hamilton  (Sir  W.),  Notes  and  Dissertations  to  Reid.     Edinb.  1852.

Hamilton  (Sir  W.),  Discussions  on  Philosophy  and  Literature.     Lond.  1852.

Hamilton  (W.),  ^gyptiaca.     Lond.  1809.     4to.

Hare's  Guesses  at  Truth.     First  and  second  series.     Lond.  1847,  1848.     2  vols.

Harford  (J.  S.),  Life  of  T.  Burgess,  Bishop  of  Salisbury.     Lond.  1841.

Harris  (G.),  Life  of  Lord  Chancellor  Hardwicke.      Lond.  1847.      3  vols.

Harris  (W.),  Lives  of  James  I,  Charles  I,  Cromwell,  and  Charles  II.     Lond.  1814.    5  vols.

Hasse  (C.  E.),  An  Anatomical  Description  of  the  Disease^  of  the  Organs  of  Circulation

and  Respiration.     Sydenham  Society.     London,  1846.
Hausset  (Madame  du),  Memoires.     Paris,  1824.


xxxviii  LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED

Haiiy  (R.  J.)»  Traite  de  Mineralogie.     Paris,  1801.     5  vols.

Hawkins  (B.),  Elements  of  Medical  Statistics.     Lond.  1829.

Heber  (Bishop),  Life  of  Jeremy  Taylor,  in  vol.  i.  of  Taylor's  Works.     Lond.  1828.

Heber  (Bishop),  Journey  through  the  Upper  and  Southern  Provinces  of  India.     Lond.

1828.     3  vols.
Heeren  (A.  y.  L.),  Politics,  Intercourse/and  Trade  of  the  African  Nations.     Oxford,  1838.

2  vols.
Heeren  (A.  H.  L.),  Politics,  Intercourse,  and  Trade  of  the  Asiatic  Nations.     Lond.  1846.

2  vols.

Helvetius  (C.  A.),  De  1'Esprit.     Amsterdam,  1759.  2  vols.
Henderson  (J.),  History  of  Brazil.     Lond.  1821.  4to.
Henle  (J.).  Traite  d' Anatomic  Generate.     Paris,  1843.  2  vols.
Henslow  (J.  S.),  Descriptive  and  Physiological  Botany.     Lond.  1837.
Herder  (J.  G.),  Ideen  zur  Geschichte  der  Menschheit.     Stuttgart,  1827,  1828.  4  vols.
Herodoti  Musa?,  edit.  Baehr.     Lipsiae  1830-1835.     4  vols.
Heron  (R.),  Observationsjnade  in  a  Journey  through  the  Western  Counties  of  Scotland

in  1792.     2dedit.     Perth,  1799.      2  vols.

Herschel  (Sir  J.),  Discourse  on  the  Study  of  Natural  Philosophy.     Lond.  1831.
Hewson  (W.),  Works,  edited  by  G.  Gulliver  for  the  Sydenham  Society.     London  1846.
Historic  (The)  and  Life  of  King  James  the  Sext,  from  1566  to  1596.     Published  by  the

Bannatyne  Club.     Edinburgh,  1825,  4to.
Hitchcock  (E.),  The  Religion  of  Geology.     Lond.  1851.
Hodgson  (J.),  The  Hunterian  Oration,  delivered  at  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  in

1855.     London  (no  date).

Hodgson  (R.),  Life  of  Porteus,  Bishop  of  London.     Lond,  1811.
Holcroft  (T.),  Memoirs,  by  himself :  continued  by  Hazlitt.     Lond.  1816.  3  vols.
Holland  (Lord),  Memoirs  of  the  Whig  Party.     Lond.  1852-1854.  2  vols.
Holland  (Sir  H.),  Medical  Notes.     Lond.  1839.
Holies  (Lord),  Memoirs.     Lond.  1699.

Hollinshead  (R.),  The  Scottish  Chronicle.     Arbroath,  1805.    2  vols.     4to.
Home  (J.),  The  History  of  the  Rebellion  in  the  year  1745.     London,  1802.  4to.
Hooker  (R.),  Ecclesiastical  Polity.     Lond.  1830.  3  vols.
Hoskins  (G.  A.),  Spain  as  it  is.     London,  1851.  2  vols.
Howell  (J.),  Letters.     Eleventh  edition.     London,  1754.
Howie  (J.),  Biographia  Scoticana.     2d  edit.     Glasgow,  1781.
Huetius  (P.  D.),  Commentarius  de  Rebus  ad  eum  pertinentibus.     Amstel.  1718
Humboldt  (A.),  Essai  sur  la  Nouvelle  Espagne.     Paris,  1811.  2  vols.  4to.
Humboldt  (A.),  Cosmos.     Lond.  1848-1852.  4  vols.
Hume  (D.),  Philosophical  Works.     Edinb.  1826.  4  vols.
Hume  (D.),  Letters  of  Eminent  Persons  to.     Edinb.  1849.
Hume  (D.  of  Godscroft),  The  History  of  the  House  and  Race  of  Douglas  arid  Angus.

Edinburgh,  1743.      2  vols.
Hume  (D.),  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Scotland  respecting  Crimes.     Edinburgh,  1797.

2  vols,  4to.

Hunt  (F.  K.),  History  of  Newspapers.     Lond,  1850.  2  vols.

Hunter  (J.),  Works,  edited  by  J.  F.  Palmer.     London,  1835-1837.  4  vols.

Hunter  (J.),  Essays  and  Observations  on  Natural  History,  &c.,  edited  by    R.    Owen.

London,  1861,  2  vols.
Hutcheson  (F.),  An  Inquiry  into   the  Original  of  our  Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue.

4th  edit.     London,  1738.
Hutcheson  (F.),  An  Essay  on  the  Nature  and  Conduct  of  the  Passions  and  Affections.

3d  edit.     Glasgow,  1769.
Hutcheson  (F.),  A  System  of  Moral  Philosophy  ;  with  the  Life  of  Hutcheson,  by  W.

Leechman.     London,  1755.  2  vols.  4  to.
Hutcheson  (G.),  Exposition   on    the   Twelve   Small    Prophets.      London,  1654,  1655.

3  vols.

Hutcheson;  (G.),  An  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job,   being  the  sum  of  316  Sermons

preached  in  the  city  of  Edinburgh.     London,  1669,  folio.
Hutchinson  (Colonel),  Memoirs  of,  by  his  Widow.     Lond.  1846.
Hutton  (J.),  Theory  of  the  Earth.     Edinburgh,  1795,  2  vols.
Hutton  (W.),  Life  of,  by  himself.     Lond.  1816.

Ibn  Batuta,  Travels  in  the  Fourteenth  Century,  translated  from  Arabic  by  S.  Lee.     Lond.

1829.    4 to.

Inglis  (H.  D.),  Spain  in  1830.     London,  1831,  2  vols.

Interest  (The)  of  Scotland  Considered  with  regard  to  Police,  Trade,  &c.    Edinb.  1733.
Irving  (J.),  The  History  of  Dumbartonshire.     2d  edit.     Dumbarton,  1860.    4to.


LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED  xxxix

Jxtlilxochitl,  Histoire  des  Chichimeques  ou  des  anciens  Rois  de  Tezcuco.       Paris,  1840.
2  vols.

Jacobite  Memoirs  of  the  Rebellion  of  1745,  edited  from  the   Manuscripts  of   the  late

Bishop  Forbes,  by  R.  Chambers.     Edinburgh,  1834.
James  II,  The  Life  'of,  from  Memoirs  by  his  own  hand,  by  J.  S.  Clarke.     Lond.  1816.

2  vols.  4to.

Janer  (F.),  Condicion  Social  de  los  Moriscos  de  Espafia.     Madrid,  1857.
Jefferson  (T.),  Memoirs  and  Correspondence,  by  Randolph.     Lond.  1829.  4  vols.
Jehangueir  (The^Emperor),  Memoirs,  by  himself,  translated  from  Persian  by  D.  Price.

Lond.   1829.  4 to.

Jewel  (J.),  Apologia  Ecclesias  Anglicana?.     Lond.  1581.
Jobert  (A.  C.  G.),  Ideas  or  Outlines  of  a  New  System  of  Philosophy.     Lond,  1848,  1849.

2  vols.

Johnston  (L.  F.  C.  ),  Institutes  of  the  Civil  Law  of  Spain.     London,  1825.
Johns  tone  (The  Chevalier  de),  Memoirs  of  the  Rebellion  in  1745  and  1746.     3d  ed.

London,  1822.

Joly  (G.),  Memoires.     Paris,   1825.

Jones  (C.  H.),  and  Sieyeking  (E.  H.),  Pathological  Anatomy.     Lond.  1854.
Jones  (R.),  Organization  of  the  Animal  Kingdom.     Lond.  1855.  ..^,

Jones  (Sir  W.),  Works.     Lond.  1799.    6  vols,  4to.
Jones  (W.),  Life  of  G.  Horne,  Bishop  of  Norwich.     Lond.  1795.
Journal  Asiatique.     Paris,  1822-1827.  n  vols.
Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society.     Lond.  1834-1851.  14  vols.

Journal  of  the  Geographical  Society.     Lond.  1833  (2d  edit,  of  vol.  i.)-i853.     23  vols.
Jussieu's  Botany,  by  J.  H.  Wilson.     Lond.  1849.

Kaemtz  (L.  F.),  Course  of  Meteorology.     Lond.  1845.

Kant  (J.),  Werke.     Leipzig,  1838,  1839.  10  vols.

Kay  (J.),  Condition  and  Education  of  the  People  in  England  and  Europe.     Lond.   1850.

2  vols.

Keith  (R.),  A  Catalogue  of  the  Bishops  of  Scotland.     Edinburgh,  1755.  4to.
Keith  (R.),  History  of  the  Affairs  of  Church  and  State  in  Scotland,  from  the  beginning

of  the  Reformation  to  1568.     Published  by  the  Spottiswoode  Society.     Edinburgh,

1844-1850.  3  vols.

Kemble  (J.  M.),  The  Saxons  in  England.     Lond.  1849.  2  vols.
Ken  (Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells),  Life  of,  by  a  Layman.     London,  1854.     2  vols.
Kennedy  (W.),  Annals  of  Aberdeen.     London,  1818.  2  vols.  4to.
King  (Lord),  Life  of  J.  Locke.     Lond.  1830.  2  vols.
Kirkton  (J.),The  Secret  and  True  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  from  the  Restoration

to  1678,  edited  from  the  MSS,  by  C.  K.  Sharpe.  Edinburgh,  1817.  4to.
Klimrath  (H.),  Travaux  sur  1'Histoire  du  Droit  Francais.  Paris,  1843.  2  vols.
Knox  (J.),  History  of  the  Reformation  in  Scotland,  edited  by  D.  Laing,  for  the  Wodrow

Society.     Edinburgh,  1846-1848.  2  vols.

Koch  (M.),  Tableau  des  Revolutions  de  1'Europe.     Paris,  1823.  3  vols.
Kohl  (J.  G.),  Russia.     Lond.  1842.

Labat  (P.),  Voyages  en  Espagne  et  en  Italic.     Paris,  1730.     Vol.  i.,  containing  his  travels

in  Spain.

Laborde  (A.),  A  View  of  Spain.     London,  1809.      5  vols.

Lacretelle  (C.),  Histoire  de  France  pendant  le  XVIII6  Siecle.     Bruxelles,  1819.  3  vols.    ;
Lafayette  (General),  Memoires,  Correspondance  et  Manuscrits.     Bruxelles.  "1837-1839.

2  vols.

Lafuente  (M.),  Historia  General  de  Espana.     Madrid,  1850-1857.     19  vols.
Laing  (M.),  The  History  of  Scotland,  from  1603  to  1707.     36.  edit.  London,  1819.  4  vols.'
Laing  (S.),  Sweden  in  1838.     Lond.  1839.

Laing  (S.),  Notes  on  the  Social  and  Political  State  of  Europe.     Lond.  1842.
Laing  (S.),  Second  Series  of  Notes  on  Europe.     Lond.  1850.
Laing  (S.),  Denmark,  being  the  Third  Series  of  Notes.     Lond.  1852.
Laird  (M.),  Memoirs  of  cfte  Life  and  Experiences,  with  a  Preface  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Cock.

2d  edit.  Glasgow,  1781.

Lamartine  (A.  de),|;Histoire  des  Girondins.     Bruxelles,  1847.    8  vols.
Lamont  (J.  of  Newton),  Diary,  from  1649  to  1671.     Edinburgh,  1830.  4to.
Lankester  (E.),  Memorials  of  John  Ray.     Ray  Soc.  1846.
Larenaudiere  (M.  de),  Mexique  et  Guatemala.     Paris,  1843.
Lathbury  (T.),  History  of  the  Convocation  of  the  Church  of  England.     Lond.  1842.


xi  LIST  OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED

Lathbury  (T.),  History  of  the  Noujurors.  Lond.  1845.
Lavallee  (T.),  Histoire  des  Fran?ais.  Paris,  1847.  4  vols.
Lawrence  (W.),  Lectures  on  Comparative  Anatomy,  and  the  Natural  History  of  Man.

Lond.  1844.

Lawson  (J.  P.),  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  Scotland.     Edinburgh,  1836.
Lawson  (J.  P.),  The  Book  of  Perth.     Edinburgh,  1847.
Le  Blanc  (L'Abbe),  Lettres  d'un  Fran?ois.     Lyon,  1758.  3  vols.
Ledwich  (E.),  Antiquities  of  Ireland.     Dublin,  1804.  4to.

Le  Long  (J.),  Bibliotheque  Historique  de  la  France.     Paris,  1768-1778.     5  vols.  folio.
Lemontey  (P.  E.),  L'    tablissement  Monarchique  de  Louis  XIV.     Paris,  1818.
Lenet  (P.),  Memoires.     Paris,   1826.     2  vols.
Lepan  (M.),  Vie  de  Voltaire.     Paris,  1837.

Lepelletier  (A.),  Physiologic  Medicale.     Paris,  1831-1833.  4  vols.
Lerminier  (E.),  Philosophic  du  Droit.     Paris,  1831.  2  vols.
Lesley  (J.),  The  History  of  Scotland,  from  1436  to  1561.     Published  by  the  Bannatyne

Club.     Edinburgh,  1830.     4  to.
Leslie  (J.),  An  Experienced  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Propagation  of  Heat.     London,

1804.

Leslie  (J.),  Treatises  on  Natural  and  Chemical  Philosophy.     Edinburgh,  1838.
Leslie  (Sir  J.),  Natural  and  Chemical  Philosophy.     Ediiib.  1838.
Letters  of  Queen  Elizabeth  and  J  ames  VI  of  Scotland,  edited  by  J .  Bruce,  for  the  Camden

Society.     London,  1849.   4to.

Letters  from  a  Gentleman  in  the  North  of  Scotland.     London,  1815.     2  vols.
Letters  from  Spain,  &c.,  by  an  English  Officer.     London,  1788.     2  vols.
Lettice  (L),  Letters  on  a  Tour  through  Various  Parts  of  Scotland  in  1792.     Edinburgh,

1794.

Le  Vassor  (M.),  Histoire  du  Regne  de  Louis  XIII.     Amst  1701-1711.     10  vols.
Lewes  (G.  H.),  The  Spanish  Drama.     London,  1846.
Liebig  and  Kopp's  Reports  of  the  Progress  of  Chemistry  and  the  allied  Sciences.     Lond.

1849-1853.     4  vols.

Liebig  (J.),  Animal  Chemistry.     Lond.  1846.

Liebig  (J.),  Letters  on  Chemistry  in  its  relation  to  Physiology.     Lond.  1851.
Lindley  (J.),  The  Vegetable  Kingdom.     Lond.  1847.
Lindley  (J.),  An  Introduction  to  Botany.     Lond.  1848.  2  vols.
Lindsay  (R.  of  Pitscottie),  The  Chronicles  of  Scotland.     Edinburgh,  1814.     2  vols.
Lingard  (J.),  History  of  England.     Paris  1840.     8  vols.
Lister  (M.),  An  Account  of  Paris  at  the  close  of  the  Seventeenth  Century.      Shaf t.esbury

(no  date).
Lister  (T.H.),  Life  and  Correspondence  of  the  first  Earl  of  Clarendon.     Lond.  1837,  1838.

3  vols.

Llorente  (D.  J.  A.),  Histoire  Critique  de  1'Inquisition  d'Espagne.     Paris,  1817,  1818.

4  vols.

Locke  (J.),  Works.     Lond.  1794.  9  vols.

Lockhart  Papers  (The).     London,  1817.     2  vols.  4to.

Longchamp  et  Wagniere,  Memoires  sur  Voltaire.     Paris,  1826.  2  vols.

Loudon  (J.  C.),  An  Encyclopaedia  of  Agriculture.     Lond.  1844.

Louville  (Marquis  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1818.     2  vols.

Low  (H.),  Sarawak  ;  its  Inhabitants  and  Productions.     Lond.  1835.

Ludlow  (E.),  Memoirs.     Edinb.  1751.     3  vols.

Lyell  (Sir  C.),  Principles  of  Geology.     9th  edit.     Lond.  1853.

Lyon  (C.  J.),  History  of  St.  Andrews.     Edinburgh,  1843.     2  v


Baltimore,


Edinburgh,  1843.     2  vols.

Mably  (L'Abbe),  Observations  sur  1'Histoire  de  France.     Paris,  1823.     3  vols.
Macaulay  (T.  B.),  History  of  England.     Lond.  1849-1855.     ist  edit.     4  vols.
*lr  i  °u  /  IJ'rJV'  The  PrinciPles  of  Political  Economy.     Edinb.  1843.

182  Researches  concerning  the  Aboriginal  History  of  America.

M'-Cne  (T.),  History  of  the  Progress  and  Suppression  of  the  Reformation  in  Spain  in  the

Sixteenth  Century.     Edinburgh,  1829.

M^rS  ff'l'S'eTL-i/e  °/AJ°5n  Knox'  edited  by  A-  Crichton.     2d  edit.     Edinburgh,  1841.
Markav  VR    w  ill     Andrew  Melville.     Edinburgh,  1819.     2  vols.
ackay  (R.  W.),  The  Progress  of  the  Intellect  in  the  Religious  Development  of  the

Greeks  and  Hebrews.     Lond.  1850.     2  vols.

T6£fr!e  folio        ThC  LaWS  Snd  Customs  of  Scotland  in  Matters  Criminal.     Edinburgh,


j.uyy.    1U11U.

Mackintosh  (Sir  J .),  Memoirs,  by  his  Son.     Lond.  1835.     2  vols.

Mackintosh  (Sir  J.),  History  of  the  Revolution Jn  England  in  1688.     Lond.  1834.     4 to


LIST   OF   AUTHORS    QUOTED  xli

Mackintosh  (Sir  J.),  Dissertation  on  the  Progress  of  Ethical  Philosophy.     Edinb.  1837.
[Macky  (J.)|,  A  Journey  through  Scotland.     2d  edit.  London,  1732.     See  Watt's  Biblio-

ttieca  Britannica,  vol.  ii.  p.  631,  M.

Macpherson  (D.),  Annals  of  Commerce.     London,  1805.     4  vols.  410.
Macpherson  (J.),  Original  Papers,  from  the  Restoration  to  the  Accession  of  the  House

of  Hanover.     Lond.    1775.     2   vols.  4to.

M'Ure  (J.),  The  History  of  Glasgow.     A  new  edition.     Glasgow,  1830.
M'William  (J.  O.),  Medical  History  of  the  Expedition  to  the  Niger.     Lond.  1843.
Mahon  (Lord),  History  of  England,  from  1713  to  1783.     Lond.  1853,  1854.     7  vols.
Mahon  (Lord),  Spain  under  Charles  II,  or  Extracts  from  the  Correspondence  of  A.  Stan-
hope, 1690-1699.     London,  1840.
Maintenon  (Madame  de),  Lettres  inedits  de,  et  de  la  Princesse  des  Ursins.       Paris,

1826.  4  vols.

Malcolm  (Sir  J.),  History  of  Persia.     Lond.  1829.      2  vols.
Mallet  (Messrs.  R.  and  J.  W.),  The  Earthquake  Catalogue  of  the  British  Association.

From  the  Transactions  of  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science.

London,  1858.

Mallet  du  Pan,  Memoirs  and  Correspondence.     Lond.  1852.      2  vols.
Mallet's  Northern  Antiquities,  edit.  Blackwell.     Lond.  1847.
Malthus  (T.  R.),  An  Essay  on  the  Principles  of  Population.     Lond.  1826.     2  vols.
Manning  (W.  O.),  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Nations.     Lond.  1839.
Marchant  (J.),  The  History  of  the  Present  Rebellion.     London,  1746.
Marchmont  Papers,  from  1685  to  1750.     Lond.  1831.     3  vols.
Mariana  (P.  J.),  Historia  General  de  Espafia,  y  la  Continuacion  por  Miniana.     Madrid,

i794»  1795-     10  vols.

Mariner  (W.),  An  Account  of  the  Natives  of  the  Tonga  Islands.     Lond.  1818.     2  vols.
Marmontel  (J.  F.),  Memoires.     Paris,  1805.     4  vols.
Marsden  (W.),  History  of  Sumatra.     Lond.  1783.     4to.
Martinez  de  la  Mata,  Dos  Discursos,  los  publica  J.  A.  Canga.      Madrid,  1794.     This

author  wrote  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  supplies  some  extremely

curious  information  respecting  the  economical  state  of  Spain.
Matter  (M.),  Histoire  du  G;iosticisme.     Paris,  1828.     2  vols.
Matter  (M.),  Histoire  de  1'Ecole  d'Alexandrie.     Paris,  1840-1844.     2  vols.
Matthai  Paris  Historia  Major,  edit.  Wats.     Lond.  1684.  folio.
Matthasi  Westmonasteriensis  Flores  Historiarum.     Lond.  1570.     2  vols.  folio.
Maury  (L.  F.  A.),  Legendes  Pieuses  du  Moyen  Age.     Paris,  1843.
May  (T.),  History  of  the  Long  Parliament.     Lond.  1647.  3  books,  folio,
Mayo  (H.),  Outlines  of  Human  Physiology.     Lond.  1837.
Meadley  (G.  W.),  Memoirs  of  W.  Paley.    'Edinb.  1810.
Meiners  (E.),  Betrachtungen  liber  die  Fruchtbarkeit,  &c.,  der  Lander  in  Asien.     Lubeck,

X795»  1796,  2  vols.
Melvill  (J.),  Autobiography  and  Diary,  edited  by  R.  Pitcairn   for  the  Wodrow  Society.

Edinburgh,  1842.
Mendoza  (D.  H.),  Guerra  de  Granada  que  hizo  el  Rei  D.  Felipe  II  contra  los    Moriscos.

Valencia,  1776.  4to.

Mercer  (A.),  The  History  of  Dunfermline.     Dunfermline,  1828.
Mercier  (M.).  J-  J-  Rousseau  considere  comme  1'un  des  premiers  Auteurs  de  la  Revolution.

Paris,  1791.     2  vols.

Meyen  (F.  J.  F.),  Outlines  of  the  Geography  of  Plants.     Lond.  1846.
Meyer  (J.  D.),  Esprit,  Origine  et  Progres  des  Institutions  Judiciaires.     Paris,   1823.

5  vols.

Mezeray  (F.  E.),  Histoire  de  France.     Paris,  1643-1651.     3  vols.     folio.
Michelet  (M.),  Origines  du  Droit  Francais,  in  vol.  ii.  of  CEuvres.     Bruxelles,  1840.
Mignet  (M.),  Negotiations  relatives  a  la  Succession  d'Espagne  sous  Louis  XIV.     Paris,

1835-1842.  4  vols.  4to.

Mill  (J.),  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Human  Mind.     Lond.  1829.     2  vols.
Mill  (J.),  The  History  of  British  India,  edited  by  N.  H.  Wilson.     Lond.  1848  (the  first

two  vols.  only).

Mill  ( J.  S.),  Principles    of  Political  Economy.     Lond.  1849.    2  vols.
Mills  (C.),  History  of  Chivalry.     Lond.  1825.     2  vols.

Miscellany  (The)  of  the  Wodrow  Society,  edited  by  D.  Laing.     Edinburgh,  1844
Moflfat  (R.),  Southern  Africa.     Lond.  1842.
Monconys  (M.  de),  Voyages  de.     Paris,  1695.     5  vols.
Monk   (Bishop  of  Gloucester),  Life  of  R.  Bentley.     Lond.  1833.     2  vols.
Monro  (A.),  Sermons.     London,  1693.
Montaigne  (M.),   Essais.     Paris,    1843.
Montbarey  (Prince  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1826,  1827.     3  vols.


xlii  LIST   OF   AUTHORS    QUOTED

Monteil  (A.  A.),  Histoire  des  Francais  des  divers  Etats.     Bruxelles,  1843.     8  vols.

Montesquieu  (C.),  CEuvres  completes.     Paris,  1835.

Montglat  (Marquis  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1825.  1826.     3  vols.

Montlosier  (Comte  de),  La  Monarchic  Francaise.     Paris,  1814.     3  vols.

Montucla  (J.  F.),  Histoire  des  Mathematiques.     Paris,  1799-1802.     4  vols.     4to.

Morellet  (L'Abbe),  Memoires.     Paris,   1821.     2  vols.

[Morer  (T.)],  A  Short  Account  of  Scotland.     London,  1702.     This  work  is  anonymous.

The  author  was  "  chaplain  to  a  Scotch  regiment."      See  Records  of  the  Kirk  Session,

etc.,  of  Aberdeen,  edit.  Spalding  Club.     Aberdeen,  1846,  4to,  pp.  Ixi.,  Ixv.
Mosheim  (J.  L.),  Ecclesiastical  History.     Lond.  1839.    2  vols.

Motley  (J.  L.),  History  of  the  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic.     London,  1858.     3  vols.
Motteville  (Mme.),  Memoires,  edit.  Petitot.     Paris,  1824.     5  vols.
Moysie  (D.),  Memoirs  of  the  Affairs  of  Scotland,  from  1577  to  1603.     Printed  by  the

Banna  tyne  Club.     Edinburgh,  1830.  4to.

Muirhead  (J.  P.),  The  Life  of  James  Watt.     2d  edit.  London,  1859.
Miiller  (J.),  Elements  of  Physiology.     Lond.  1840-1842.     2  vols.
Murchison  (Sir  R.),  Siluria.     Lond.  1854.
Mure  (W.),  History  of  the  Language  and  Literature  of  Ancient  Greece.     Lond.  1850-

1853.     4  vols.

Muriel  (A.),  Gobierno  del  Senor  Rey  Don  Carlos  III.     Madrid,  1839.
Murray  (A.),  Life  of  J.  Bruce.     Edinb.  1808.     4to.
Musset  Pathay  (V.  D.),  Vie  de  J.  J.  Rousseau.     Paris,  1822.     2  vols.

Naphtali,  or  the  Wrestlings  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  for  the  Kingdom  of  Christ.     Printed
in  the  year  1667.  <

Napier  (M.),  The  Life  and  Times  of  Montrose,  illustrated  from  original  Manuscripts.

Edinburgh,  1840.

Navarrete  (M.  F.),  Vida  de  Cervantes,  prefixed  to  Don  Quijote.     Barcelona,  1839.
Navarrete  (M.  F.),  Noticia  Biografica  del  Marques  de  la  Ensenada,  in  vol  ii.  of  Navarrete,

Opuscules.     Madrid,  1848.

Neal  (D.),  History  of  the  Puritans,  from  1517  to  1688.     Lond.  1822.     5  vols.
Neander  (A.),  History  of  the  Christian  Religion  and  Church.    Lond.  1850-1852.     8  vols.
Newman  (F.  W.),  Natural  History  of  the  Soul,  as  the  Basis  of  Theology.     Lond.  1849.
Newman  (F.  W.),  Phases  of  Faith.     Lond.  1850.

Newman  (J.  H.),  Essay  on  the  Development  of  Christian  Doctrine.     Lond.  1845.
Newton  (Bishop  of  Bristol),  Life  of,  by  himself.     Lond.  1816.
Nicholls  (J.),  Recollections.     Lond.   1822.     2  vols.

Nichols  (J.),  Literary  Anecdotes  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.     Lond.  1812-1815.     9  vols.
Nichols  (J.),  Illustrations  of  Literary  History  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.     Lond.  1817-

1848.     7  vols.
Nicoll  (J.),  Diary,  from  January,  1650,  to  June,  1667.    Published  by  the  Bannatyne

Club.     Edinburgh,  1836.  4to.

Niebuhr  (C),  Description  de  1'  Arabic.     Amsterdam,  1774.     4to.
Nrnirno  (W.),  History  of  Stirlingshire.     Edinburgh,  1777.
Noailles  (Due  de),  Memoires  par  1'Abbe  Millot,  edit.  Petitot  et  Monmerque.     Paris,  18*8,

1829.    4  vols.

Noble  (D.),  The  Brain  and  its  Physiology.     Lond.  1846.
Noble  (M.),  Memoirs  of  the  House  of  Cromwell.     Birmingham,  1784.     2  vols.
22S  So'!'  tuves  of  the  English  Regicides.     Lond.  1798.     2  vols.
North  (R.),  The  Lives  of  the  Norths.     Lond.  1826.  3  vols.

Orme  (W.),  Life  of  John  Owen.     Lond.  1820.

Ortiz  y  Sanz  (D.  J.),  Compendio  Cronologico  de  la  Historia  de  Espafia.     Madrid,  1795-

1803.  7  vols.

)tter  (W.),  Life  of  E.  D.  Clarke.     Lond.  1825.     2  vols.

uwen  (R.),  Lectures  on  the  Comparative  Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  the  Invertebrate
Animals.     2d  edit.  London    1


\Ur^  on  S^gical  Pathology.     Lond.  1853-     2  vols.
Progress  of  the  English  Commonwealth.


Lond.  1832.     2  vols.


Palissot(M.)  ,  Memoires  pour  1'HistoiredenotreLitterature.     Paris,  1803-     2  vols.
Pa  Ime    L),  Travels  in  Kordofan.     Lond.  1844.
Palmer  (W.),  A  Treatise  on  the  Church.     Lond.  1839.


2  vols.


LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED  xliii

Park  (Mungo),  Travels  in  Africa.     Lond.  1817.     2  vols.

Parker  (Bishop),  History  of  his  own  Time.     LoucL  1727.

Parliamentary  History  of  England,  to  1803.     Lond.  36  vols.

Parr  (S.),  Works.     Lond.  1828.     8  vols.

Pa  tin  (G.),  Lettres.     Paris,  1846.     3  vols.

Patten  (R.),  The  History  of  the  Late  Rebellion.     London,  1717."

Peignot  (G.),  Dictionnaire  des  Livres  condamnes  au  feu.     Paris,  1806.     2  vols.

Pellew  (G.),  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Lord  Sidmouth.     Lond.  1847.     3  vols.

Pennant  (T.),  Tour  in  Scotland.     4th  edit.  Dublin,  1775.  2  vols.

Penny  (G.),  Traditions  of  Perth.     Perth,  1836.

Pepys  (S.),  Diary,  from  1659  to  1669.     Lond.  1828.     5  vols.

Percival  (R.),  Account  of  the  Island  of  Ceylon.     Lond.  1805.     4 to.

Peterborough  (C.  M.,  Earl  of),  Memoir  of,  with  selections  from  his  Correspondence.

London,  1853.  2  vols.

Petrie  (G.),  Ecclesiastical  Architecture  and  Round  Towers  of  Ireland.     Dublin,  1845.
Phillimore,  (R.),  Memoirs  of  Lord  Lyttelton,  from  1734  to  1773.     Lond.  1845.     2  vols.
Phillips  (B.),  Scrofula,  its  Nature,  Causes,  and  Prevalence.     Lond.  1846.
Pinel  (P.),  Traite  sur  1' Alienation  Mentale,  2d  edit.     Paris,  1809.
Pinkertpn  (J.),  An  Enquiry  into  the  History  of    Scotland,  preceding  the  year  1056.

Edinburgh,  1814.  2  vols.
Pinkerton  (J.),  History  of  Scotland,  from  the  Accession  of  the  House  of  Stuart  to  that

of  Mary.     London,  1797.  2  vols.  4to.
Pitcairn  (R.),  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  from  1488  to  1624.     Edinburgh,  1833.  3  vols.

4to,  in  four  parts.
Playfair   (J.),  Works.     Edinburgh,    1822  ;   the  first  and  fourth  volumes,   containing

Illustrations  of  the  Huttonian  Theory,  and  the  Life  of  Hutton.
Pontchartrain  (P.  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1822.  2  vols.
Porter  (G.  R.),  The  Progress  of  the  Nation.     Lond.  1836-1843.     3  vols.
Pouillet  (M.),  Elemens  de  Physique.     Paris,  1832.     2  vols.
Presbytery  Displayed,  1644.     Reprinted,  London,  1663.  4to.
Prescott  (W.  H.),  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico.     Lond.  1850.     3  vols.
Prescott  (W.  H.),  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Peru.     Lond.  1850.     3  vols.
Prescott  (W.  H.),  History  of  the  Reign  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella.     Paris,  1842.  3  vols.
Prescott  (W.  H.),  History  of  the  Reign  of  Philip  II.     London,  1857-1859.  3  vols.
Prichard  (J.  C.),  A  Treatise  on  Insanity.     Lond.  1835.
Prichard  (J.  C.),  Insanity  in  relation  to  Jurisprudence.     Lond.  1842.
Prichard  (J.  C.),  Researches  into  the  Physical  History  of  Mankind.     Lond.  1841-1847.

5  vols.

Priestley  (J.),  Memoirs  by  himself,  continued  by  his  Son.     Lond.  1806,  1807.     2  vols.
Prior  (J.),  Life  of  O.  Goldsmith.     Lond.  1837.     2  vols.
Prior  ( J .),  Memoir  of  E.  Burke.     Lond.  1839.
Prout  (W.),  Bridgewater  Treatise  on  Chemistry,  etc.     Lond.  1845.
Pulteney  (R.),  Historical  Sketches  of  the  Progress  of  Botany  in  England.     Lond.  1790.

2  vols.

Cjuatremere  (E.),  Recherches  sur  la  Langue  et  la  Litterature  de  1'Egypte.     Paris,  1808.
Querard  (J.  M.),  La  France  Litteraire.     Paris,  1827-1839.     10  vols.
Quetelet  (A.),  Sur  I'Homme  et  le  Developpement  de  ses  Facultes.     Paris,  1835.     2  vols.
Quetelet  (A.),  La  Statistique  Morale,  in  vol.  xxi.  of  Mem.  de  1'Acad.  de  Belgique.     Brux-

elles,  1848.     410.
Quick  (J.),  Syiiodicon  in  Gallia  ;   the  Acts  etc.  of  the  Councils  of  the  Reformed  Churches

in  France.     Lond.  1692.     2  vols.  folio.
Cjuin  (M.  J.),  Memoirs  of  Ferdinand  VII,  King  of  the  Spains.      London,  1824.

Rabelais  (F.),  (Euvres.     Amsterdam,  1725.     5  vols.

Rae  (P.),  The  History  of  the  Rebellion  against  George  I.     2d  edit.  London,  1746.

Raffles  (Sir  T.  S.),  History  of  Java.     Lond.  1830.  2  vols.

Rammohun  Roy,  Translations  from  the  Veds  and  works  on  Brahmanical  Theology.

Lond.  1832.

Rammohun  Roy  on  the  Judicial  and  Revenue  Systems  of  India.     Lond.  1832.
Ramsay  (E.  B.,  Dean  of  Edinburgh),  Reminiscences  of  Scottish  Life  and  Character.

5th  edit.  Edinburgh,  1859.
Ranke  (L.),  The  Ottoman  and  the  Spanish  Empires  in  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth

Centuries.     London,  1843.
Ranke  (L.),  Die  Romischen  Papste.     Berlin,  1838,  1839.     3  vols.


xliv  LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED

Ranke  (L.),  Civil  Wars  and  Monarchy  in  France  in  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Centuries.

Lond.  1852.     2  vols.
Raumer  (F.  Von),  History  of  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Centuries,  illustrated  by

original  Documents.     London,   1835.  2   vols.
Ray  (J.),  Second  Itinerary  in  1661,  in  Memorials  of  Ray,  edited  by  E.  Lankester  for  the

Ray  Society.     London,  1846.

Ray  (J.),  Correspondence,  edited  by  E.  Lankester.     Ray  Soc.  1848.
Reid  (T.),  An  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind  on  the  Principles  of  Common  Sense.     7th

edit.  Edinburgh,  1814.

Reid  (T.),  Essays  on  the  Powers  of  the  Human  Mind.     Edinburgh,  1808.     3  vols.
Relations  des  Ambassadeurs  Venitiens  sur  les  Affaires  de  France  au  XVIe     Siecle.  Paris,

1838.     2  vols.  4  to.

Renouard  (P.  V.),  Histoire  de  la  Medecine.     Paris,  1846.     2  vols.
Reports  on  Botany  by  the  Ray  Society.     Lond.  1846.
Reresby  (Sir  J.),  Travels  and  Memoirs  during  the  Time  of    Cromwell,  Charles  II,  and

James  II.     Lond.  1831.

Retz  (Cardinal  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1844.     2  vols.

Revelations  of  Spain  in  1845,  by  an  English  Resident.     London,  1845.     2  vols.
Rey  (J.  A.),  Theorie  et  Pratique  de  la  Science  Sociale.     Paris,  1842.     3  vols.
Reynier  (L.),  De  1'Economie  Publique  et  Rurale  des  Arabes  et  des  Juifs.    Geneve,  1820.
Reynolds  (Sir  J .),  Literary  Works.     Lond.  1846.     2  vols.
Rhode  (J.  G.),  Religiose  Bildung,  Mythologie  und  Philosophic  der   Hindus.      Leipzig,

1827.     2  vols.

Ricardo  (D.),  Works.     Lond.  1846.

Richard  (A.),  Nouveaux  Elements  de  Botanique.     Paris,  1846.
Richardson  (J.),  Travels  in  the  Desert  of  Sahara.     Lond.  1848.     2  vols.
Richardson  (J.),  A  Mission  to  Central  Africa.     Lond.  1853.     2  vols.
Richardson(SirJ-),  Arctic  Searching  Expedition.     Lond.  1851.     2  vols.
Richelieu  (Cardinal),  Memoires  sur  le  Regne  de  Louis  XIII.     Paris,  1823.     10  vols.
Ridpath  (G.),  The  Border  History  of  England  and  Scotland.     Berwick,  1848.  4to.
Rig-Veda-Sanhita,  translated  from  Sanscrit  by  H.  H.  Wilson.     Lond.  1850-1854.     2  vols,
Rio  (A.  F.),  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III  en  Espafta.     Madrid,  1856.  4  vols.
Ripperda  (Duke  de),  Memoirs  of.     2d  edit.  London,  1740.
Ritchie  (T.  E.),  Life  of  David  Hume.     London,  1807.
Ritter  (H.),  History  of  Ancient  Philosophy.     Lond.  1838-1846.     4  vols.
Rivarol  (M.),  Memoires.     Paris,  1824.
Robe  (J.),  Narratives  of  the  Extraordinary  Work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.      Glasgow,

1790.

Robertson  (W.),   History  of  Scotland,   in   Robertson's  Works.     London,    1831.
Robertson  (W.),  History  of  the  Reign  of  Charles  V,  with  additions  by  W.  H.  Prescott,

London,  1857.

Robertson  (W.),  Works.     Lond.  1831.

Robin  (C.)  et  Verdeil  (F.),  Traite  de  Chimie  Anatomique.     Paris,  1853.     3  vols.
Rochefoucauld  (Due  de  la),  Memoires.     Paris,  1826.     2  vols.
Rohan  (H.  Due  de),  Memoires.     Paris,  1822.
Rokitansky  (C.),  A  Manual  of  Pathological  Anatomy.     Published  by  the  Sydenham

bociety.     London,   1849-1854.  4  vols.
Roland  (Mme),  Memoires.     Paris,  1827.     2  vols.
Romilly  (Sir  S.),  Life,  written  by  himself.     Lond.  1842.     2  vols.
Roscoe  (H.),  The  Life  of  W.  Roscoe.     Lond.  1833.     2  vols.
Row  (J.),  The  History  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  from  1558  to  1637,  with  a  Continuation

to  July,  1639.     Published  by  the  Wodrow  Society.      Edinburgh,  1842.
Russell  (M.),  History  of  the  Church  in  Scotland.     London,  1834.  2  vols.
Russell  (Lord  J.),  Memorials  and  Correspondence  of  C.  J.  Fox.     Lond.  1853,  1854.  3  vols.
Rutherford  (S.),  Three  Hundred  and  Fifty-Two  Religious   Letters,  between   1638   and

1649.     Reprinted,  Glasgow,  1824.
Rutherford  (S.),  Christ  Dying.     London,  1647.  4to.
Rutherford  (S.),  A  Free  Disputation  against  Pretended  Liberty  of  Conscience.     London,

1649.  4to.

Sadler  (M.  T.),  The  Law  of  Population.     Lond.  1830.     2  vols.

badler  (Sir  R.),  State  Papers  and  Letters,  edited  by  R.  Clifford,  with  Notes  by  W.  Scott.

Edinburgh,  1809.  2  vols.  4to.
ainte-Aulaire  (Le  Comte  de),  Histoire  de  la  Fronde.     Paris,  1843.     2  vols.

vols;  Curne)>  Memoires  sur  1'Ancienne  Chevalerie.     Paris,  1759-1781^

Schlosser  (F.  C.),  History  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.     Lond.  1843-5.     6  vols.


LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED  xlv

Scot  (J.),  The  Staggering  State  of  the  Scots  Statesmen,  from  1550  to  1660.     Edinburgh,

I754-

Scot  (W.),  An  Apologetical  Narration  of  the  State  and  Government  of  the  Kirk  of
Scotland  since  the  Reformation.  Published  by  the  Wodrow  Society.  Edinburgh,
1846.

Scotch  Presbyterian  Eloquence,     3d  edit.  London,  1719-
Scotland,  a  Modern  Account  of,  written  from  thence  by  an  English  Gentleman,  printed

in  the  year  1670,  in  vol.  vi.  of  the  Harleian  Miscellany.     4to,  1810.
Scotland  :  Reasons  for  Improving  the  Fisheries   and  Linen  Manufacture  of   Scotland.

London,  1727.

Scriptores  post  Bedam  Rerum  Anglicarum.     Lond.  1596.    folio.
Segur  (Le  Comte  de),  Memoires  ou  Souvenirs.     Paris,  1825-1827.     3  vols.
Select  Biographies,  edited  for  the  Wodrow  Society  by  the  Rev.  W.  K.  Tweedie.     Edin-
burgh, 1845-1847.  2  vols.
Selections  from  the  Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of  St  Andrews  and  Cupar,  from  1641

to  1698.     Printed  for  the  Abbotsford  Club.     Edinburgh,  1837.  4to.
Selections  from  the  Minutes  of  the  Synod  of  Fife,  from  1611  to  1687.     Printed  for  the

Abbotsford  Club.     Edinburgh.  1837.  4to.
Selections  from  the  Records  of  the  Kirk-Session,  Presbytery,  and  Synod  of  Aberdeen.

Printed  for  the  Spalding  Club.     Aberdeen,  1846.  4to.
Selections  from  the  Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Lanark,  from  1623  to  1709.     Printed

for  the  Abbotsford  Club.     Edinburgh,  1839.  4to.
Sempere  (M.),  Considerations  sur  les  Causes  de  la  Grandeur  et  de  la  Decadence  de  la

Monarchic  Espagnole.     Paris,  1826.  2  vols.
Sempere  (M).,  Histoire  des  Cortes  d'Espagne.     Bordeaux,  1815.
Sermons  by  Eminent  Divines  in  the  two  last  Centuries.     Edinburgh,  1814.
Sevigne  (Madame  de),  Lettres.     Paris,  1843.     6  vols.
Sewell  (W.),  Christian  Politics.     Lond.  1845.

Sharp  (Archbishop  of  York),  Life,  edited  by  T.  Newcome.     Lond.  1825.     2  vols.
Sharp  (Sir  C.),  Memorials  of  the  Rebellion  of  1569.     Lond.  1840.
Sharpe  (S.),  History  of  Egypt.     Lond.  1852.     2  vols.
[Shields  (A.)],  A  Hind  Let  Loose.      Printed  in  the  year  1687.      See  Howie's  Biographia

Scoticana,  p.  576.

Shields  (A.),  The  Scots  Inquisition.     Edinburgh,  1745.

Shields  (A.),  An  Enquiry  into  Church  Communion.     2d  edit.     Edinburgh,  1747.
Short  (Bishop  of  St.  Asaph),  History  of  the  Church  of  England,  to  1688.     Lond.  1847.
Simon  (Due  de),  Memoires  publics  sur  le  Manuscrit  original.     Paris,  1842.     40  vols.
Simon  (J.),  Lectures  on  General  Pathology.     Lond.  1850.
Simon  (J.  F.),  Animal  Chemistry.     Lond.  1845,  1846.     2  vols.
Simpson  (T.),  Discoveries  on  the  North  Coast  of  America.     Lond.  1843.
Sinclair  (G.),   Satan's  Invisible  World  Discovered.     Reprinted,   Edinburgh,   1780.
Sinclair  (Sir  J.),  History  of  the  Public  Revenue  of  the  British  Empire.     Lond.  1803,  1804.

3  vols.

Sinclair  (Sir  J.),  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland.     Edinburgh,  1791-1799.     21  vols.
Sinclair  (Sir  J.),  The  Correspondence  of.     Lond.  1831.     2  vols.
Sismondi  (J.  C.  L.),  Historical  View  of  the  Literature  of  the  South  of  Europe,  with  notes

by  T.  Roscoe.     London,  1846.  2  vols.

Sismondi  (J.  C.  L.  S.  de),  Histoire  des  Frangais.     Paris,  1821-1844.     31  vols.
Skene  (W.  F.),  The  Highlanders  of  Scotland,  their  Origin,  History,  and  Antiquities.

London,  1837.  2  vols.
Smedley  (E.),  History  of  the  Reformed  Religion  in  France.     Lond.  1832-1834.     3  vols.

8vo.

Smith  (A.)*  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments.     London,  1822.  2  vols.
Smith  (A.),  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations.     Edinburgh,

1839.

Smith  (Sir  J.  E.),  Memoir  and  Correspondence  of.     Lond.  1832.     2  vols.
Somers  Tracts,  edited  by  Sir  W.  Scott.     Lond.  1809-1815.     13  vols.  4to.
Somerville  (Lord),  Memorie  of  the  Somervilles.     Edinburgh,  1815.  2  vols.
Somerville  (M.),  Connexion  of  the  Physical  Sciences.     Lond.  1849.
Somerville  (M.),  Physical  Geography.     Lond.  1851.     2  vols.
Sorbiere  (M.),  A  Voyage  to  England.     Lond.  1709.
Sorel  (M.  C.),  La  Bibliotheque  Francoise.     Paris,  1867.
Soulavie  (J.  L.),  Memoires  du  Regne  de  Louis  XVI.     Paris,  1801.     6  vols.
Sou  they  (R.),  Chronicle  of  the  Cid.     Lowell,  1846.

Southey(R-),  History  of  Brazil.     Lond.  1819-1822.     3  vols.  4to.     (2d  edit,  of  vol.  i.)
Sou  they  (R.),  Letters  written  in  Spain  and  Portugal.  2d  edit.  Bristol,  1799.
Sou  they  (R.),  The  Life  of  Wesley.     Lond.  1846.     2  vols.


xlvi  LIST   OF   AUTHORS    QUOTED

Spain  by  an  American.     London,  1831.  2  vols.

Spalding  (J.),  The  History  of  the  Troubles  in  Scotland  and  England,  from  1624  to

1645.     Edinburgh,  1828-1829.  2  vols.  4to.
Spalding  Club  Miscellany.     Aberdeen,  1841-1852.  5  vols.  4to.
Spence  (G.),  Origin  of  the  Laws  and  Political  Institutions  of  Europe.     Lond.  1826.
Spencer  (H.),  First  Principles.    London,  1860-1861.     Only  three  parts  have  yet  appeared

of  this  able  and  remarkable  work.

Spix  (J.  B.)  and  Martius  (C.  F.),  Travels  in  Brazil.     Lond.  1824-     2  vols.
Spottiswoode  (J.,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews),  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.

Edinburgh,  1851,  3  vols.
Spottiswoode  Miscellany  (The),  A  Collection  of  Original  Papers  and  Tracts  illustrative

of  the  History  of  Scotland.     Edinburgh,  1844,  1845.  2  vols.
Sprengel  (K.),  Histoire  de  la  Medecine.     Paris,  1815-1820.     9  vols.
Squier  (E.  G.),  Travels  in  Central  America.     New  York,  1853.     2  vols.
State  Papers  of  the  Reign  of  Henry  VIII.     London,  1836.  4to  ;  vols.  iv.  and  v.  containing

the  Correspondence  relative  to  Scotland  and  the  Borders.
Statistical  Society  (Journal  of).     Lond.  1839-1855.     i8vols.
Staudlin  (C.  F.),  Geschichte  der  theologischen  Wissenschaften.     Gottingen,  1810,  1811.

2  vols.

Stephens  (A.),  Memoirs  of  J.  H.  Tooke.     Lond.  1813.     2  vols.
Stephens  (J.  L.),  Travels  in  Central  America.     Lond.  1842,  1843.     4  vols.
Stevenson  (A.),  History  of  the  Church  and  State  of  Scotland,  from  the  Accession  of

Charles  I.  to  1649.     Reprinted,  Edinburgh,  1840.
Stevenson  (J.),  A  Rare  Soul-strengthening  and  Comforting  Cordial  for  Old  and  Young

Christians.     Edited,  in  1729,  by  the  Rev  William  Cupples.     Paisley,  1786.
Stewart   (D.),   Biographical   Memoirs   of   Smith,    Robertson,    and   Reid.      Edinburgh,

1811.  4to.

Stewart  (D.),  Elements  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind.     Lond.  1792-1827.    3  vols.
Story  (J.),  Commentaries  on  the  Conflict  of  Laws.     Lond.  1841.
Sully  (Due  de),  Memoires  de  Sages  et  Royales  (Economies,  edit.  Petitot.     Paris,  1820,

1821.     9  vols.

Swainson  (W.),  Discourse  on  the  Study  of  Natural  History.     Lond.  1834.
Swainson  (W.),  Geography  and  Classification  of  Animals.     Lond.  1835.
Swinburne  (H.),  The  Courts  of  Europe  at  the  close  of  the  last  Century.     Lond.  1841.

2  vols.

Swinburne  (H).,  Travels  through  Spain  in  1775  and  1776.     2d  edit.     London,  1787.  2  vols-
Symes  (M.),  Embassy  to  the  Kingdom  of  Ava.     2d  edit.     Lond.  1800.  3  vols.

Talon  (Omer),  Memoires.     Paris,  1827.     3  vols.

Talvi's  Historical  View  of  the  Languages  and  Literature  of  the  Slavic  Nations.     New

York,  1850.

Tapia  (E.  de),  Historia  de  la  Civilizacion  Espanola.     Madrid,  1840.  4  vols.
Taylor  (A.  S.),  Manual  of  Medical  Jurisprudence.     Lond.  1846.
Temple  (Sir  W.),  Works.     Lond.  1814.     4  vols.

Tennemann  (W.  G.),  Geschichte  der  Philosophic.     Leipzig,  1798-1819.     n  vols.
Thirlwall  (Bishop  of  St.  David's),  History  of  Greece.     Lond.  1835-1850.     8  vols.
Thomson  (J.),  Life  of  William  Cullen.  "  Edinburgh,  1832.
Thomson  (Mrs.),  Memoirs  of  the  Jacobites  of  1715  and  1745.     London,   1845,  1846.

3  vols.

Thomson  (T.),  Chemistry  of  Vegetables.     Lond.  1838.

Thomson  (T.),  Chemistry  of  Animal  Bodies.     Edinb.  1843.

Thomson  (T.),  History  of  the  Royal  Society.     Lond.  1812.     4to.

Thomson  (T.),  History  of  Chemistry.     2  vo'ls.  (no  date).

Thornton  (W.  T.),  Over-Population,  and  its  Remedy.     Lond.  1846.

Ticknor  (G.),  History  of  Spanish  Literature.     London,  1849.     3  vols.

Timour's  Political  and  Military  Institutes,  edited  by  Davy  and  White.     Oxford,  1783.  4to.

Tocqueville  (A.  de),  De  la  Democratic  en  Amerique.     Bruxelles,  1840.     5  vols.  in  2  parts.

Tocqueville  (A.  de),  L'Ancien  Regime  et  la  Revolution.     Paris,  1856.

Tocqueville  (Le  Comte  de),  Histoire  Philosophique  du  Regne  de  Louis  XV.     Paris,  1847.

2  VOls.

Tomline  (Bishop  of  Winchester),  LHe  of  W.  Pitt.     Lond.  1821.     2  vols.  4to.

Torcy  (Le  Marquis  de\  Memoires,  edit.  Petitot  et  Monmerque.     Paris,  1828.     2  vols.

Townsend  (J.),  A  Journey  through  Spain  in  1786  and  1787.     2d  edit.     London,  1702.

3  vols.

Trail  (W.),  Account  of, the  Life  and  Writings  of  Robert  Simson.     Lond.  1812.     4to.
Transactions  of  the  Literary  Society  of  Bombay.     Lond.  1819-1823.     3  vols.  4to.


,


LIST   OF   AUTHORS    QUOTED  xlvii


nsactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.     Lond.  1827-1835.     3  vols.     4to.

Travels  through  Portugal,  Spain,  etc.,  by  a  Gentleman.     London,  1702.

Trotter  (J.  B.),  Memoirs  of  the  Latter  Years  of  C.  J.  Fox.     Lond.  1811.

Tschudi  (J.  J.),  Travels  in  Peru.     Lond.  1847.

Tucker  (G.),  The  Life  of  T.  Jefferson.     Lond.  1837.     2  vols.

Tuckey  (J.  K.),  Expedition  to  the  Zaire,  in  South  Africa.     1818.  4to.

Turgot  (M.),  (Euvres.     Paris,  1811.     9  vols.

Turner  (E.),  Elements  of  Chemistry.     Lond.  1847.     2  vols.

Turner  (Sir  J.)f  Memoirs  of  his  own  Life,  from  1632  to  1670.     Edinburgh,  1829.     4to.

Turner  (Samuel),  An  Embassy  to  Tibet.     Lond.  1800.     4to.

Turner  (Sharon),  History  of  England.     Lond.  1839.     12  vols.

Turpinus,  De  Vita  Caroli  Magni,  edit.  S.  Ciampi.     Florent.  1822.

Twiss  (H.),  The  Life  of  Lord  Chancellor  Eldon.     Lond.  1846.     2  vols.

Twiss  (T.),  Progress  of  Political  Economy  in  Europe.     Lond.  1847.  .

Tytler  (P.  F.),  History  of  Scotland.     3d  edit.     Edinburgh,  1845.     7  vols.

Udal  ap  Rhys,  A  tour  through  Spain  and  Portugal.     2d  edit.     London,  1760.
Ulloa  (A.),  A  Voyage  to  South  America.     Lond.  1772.     2  vols.

Uztanz  (G.),  Theorica  y  Practica  de  Comercio  y  de  Marina.  Tercera  impression.  Madrid,
1757.  Folio.

Vander  Hammen  (L.),  Don  Filipe  el  Prudente,  segundo  deste  Nombre.  Madrid,  1632.
4to.

Vattel  (M.  de),  Le  Droit  des  Gens.     Paris,  1820.     2  vols.

Vaughan  (R.),  The  Protectorate  of  Cromwell.     Lond.  1839.     2  vols.

Velazquez  (L.  J.),  Origenes  de  la  Poesia  Castellana.     Malaga,  1754.     4to.

Vernon  (J.),  Letters,  from  1696  to  1708.     Lond.  1841.     3  vols.

Villars  (Madame  de),  Lettres.     Amsterdam,  1759.      These  letters  were  written  from

1        Madrid  between  1679  an(l  1681,  by  the  wife  of  the  French  Ambassador.

Villemain  (M.),  De  la  Litterature  au  XVIIIe    Siecle.     Paris,  1846.     4  vols.

Villemarque  (T.  H.),  Chants  Populaires  de  la  Bretagne.  Paris,  1846.  2  vols.  (Intro-
duction only  quoted.)

Vishnu  Purana  ;  a  System  of  Hindu  Mythology,  translated  from  the  Sanscrit  by  H.  H.
Wilson.  Lond.  1840.  4to.

Vogel  (J.),  The  Pathological  Anatomy  of  the  Human  Body.     Lond.  1847.

Volney  (C.  F.),  Voyage  in  Syrie  et  en  Egypte.     Paris,  an  vii.    2  vols.

Voltaire  (Euvres  completes.     Paris,  1820-1826.     70  vols.

Voltaire,  Lettres  inedites.     Paris,  1856.     2  vols.

Voyages  faits  en  Divers  Temps  en  Espagne,  etc.,  par  Monsieur  M****.  Amsterdam,
1700.

Vyse  (H.),  Operations  at  the  Pyramids.     Lond.  1840-1842.     3  vols.

Wagner  (R.),  Elements  of  Physiology.     Lond.  1841.

Wakefield  (G.),  Life  of,  by  himself.     Lond.  1804.     2  vols.

Walker  (C.),  The  History  of  Independency.     Lond.  1660,  1661.     4  parts.     4to.

Walker  (P.),  Biographia  Presbyteriana.     Reprinted,  Edinburgh,   1827.     2  vols.

Walker  (Sir  E.),  A  Journal  of  Affairs  in  Scotland  in  1650,  in  Walker's  Historical  Discourses.

London,  1705.     Folio.

Walpole  (H.),  Letters,  from  1735  to  1797.     Lond.  1840.     6  vols.
Walpole  (H.),  Memoirs  of  George  II.     Lond.  1847.     3  vols.
Walpole  (H.),  Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  George  III.     Lond.  1845.     4  vols.
Walsh  (R.),  Notices  of  Brazil.     Lond.  1830.     2  vols.
Walton  (W.),  The  Revolutions  of  Spain,  from  1808  to  the  end  of  1836.     London,  1837.

2  vols.

Warburton's  Letters  to  Kurd.  Lond.  1809.
Ward  (H.  G.),  Mexico.  Lond.  1829.  2  vols.
Ward  (W.),  A  View  of  the  History,  Literature,  and  Religion  of  the  Hindoos.  Lond.

1817-1820.     4  vols.

Ward  (W.  G.),  The  Ideal  of  a  Christian  Church.     Lond.  1844.
Warwick  (Sir  P.),  Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  Charles  I.     Lond.  1702.
Wast  (E),  Memoirs,  written  by  her  own  hand.     Edinburgh,  1724.
Watson  (R.,  Bishop  of  Llandaff),  Life,  by  himself.     Lond.  1818.     2  vols.
Watson  (R.),  Observations  on  Southey's  Life  of  Wesley.     Lond.  1821.
Watson   (R.),    Historicall   Collections   of   Ecclesiastick   Affairs  in   Scotland.     London,

1657.
Watson  (R.),  The  History  of  the  Reign  of  Philip  II,  King  of  Spain.     7th  edit.     London,

1839.


xlviii  LIST   OF   AUTHORS   QUOTED

Watson  (R.),  The  History  of  the  Reign  of  Philip  III,  King  of  Spain.     3d  edit.     London,

1839.
Watson  (T.),  Lectures  on  the    Principles  and  Practice  of  Physic.      4th  edit.     London,

1857.     2  vols.
Watt  (J.),  Correspondence,  on  his  Discovery  of  the  Theory  of  the  Composition  of  Water,

edited  by  J.  P.  Muirhead.     London,  1846.
Wellsted  (J.  R.),  Travels  in  Arabia.     Lond.  1838.     2  vols.
Wesley  (John),  The  Journals  of.     Lond.  1851.
Whately  (Archbishop  of  Dublin),  The  Errors  of  Romanism  traced  to  their  Origin  in

Human  Nature.     Lond.  1830.
Whately  (Archbishop  of  Dublin),  Essays  on  some  of  the  Dangers  to  Christian  Faith.

Lond.  1839.

Wheaton  (H.),  History  of  the  Northmen,  to  the  Conquest  of  England  by  William  of
•      Normandy.     Lond.  1831.

Whewell  (W.),  History  of  the  Inductive  Sciences.     Lond.  1847.     3  vols.
Whewell  (W.),  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  founded  upon  their  History.     Lond.

1847.     2  vols.

Whewell  (W.),  Bridgewater  Treatise.     Lond.  1852.

Whewell  (W.),  Lectures  on  the  History  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  England.     Lond.  1852.
Whiston  (W.),  Memoirs,  written  by  himself.     Lond.  1749.
[White  (B.)],  Dobladp's  Letters  from  Spain.     London,   1822.
White  (Blanco),  Practical  and  Internal  Evidence  against  Catholicism.     Lond.  1826:
Whitelocke  (Commissioner),  Journal  of  the  Swedish  Embassy  in  1653  and  1654.     Lon.

1772.     2  vols.  4to.

Wilberforce  (W.),  Life,  by  his  Sons.     Lond.  1838.     5  vols.
Wilkinson  (Sir  J.  G.),  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,     ist  series,  edit.

1842  ;  2d  series,  edit.  1841.     5  vols.

Williams  (C.  J.  B.),  Principles  of  Medicine.     2d  edit.     London,  1848.
Wilson  (H.),  Account  of  the  Pelew  Islands.     2d  edit.  Lond.  1788.     4to.
Wilson  (H.  H.),  Specimens  of  the  Theatre  of  the  Hindus,  translated  from  the  Sanscrit.

Calcutta,  1827.     3  vols.

Wilson  (W.),  Memoirs  of  Daniel  Defoe.     Lond.  1830.     3  vols.
Winckler  (E.),  Geschichte  der  Botanik.     Frankfurt-am-M.  1854.
Winstanley  (W.),  The  Loyal  Martyrology.     Lond.      1665.
Winwood  (Sir  R.),  Memorials  of  Affairs  of  State,  from  his  Papers.     London,   1725.

3  vols.  folio.

Wishart  (G.),  Memoirs  of  James  Graham,  Marquis  of  Montrose.     Edinburgh,  1819.
Wodrow  (R.),  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.     Glasgow,  1838.     4  vols.
Wodrow  (R.),  Collections  upon  the  Lives  of  the  Reformers  and  Ministers  of  the  Church

of  Scotland.     Edit.  Maitland  Club.     Glasgow,   1834-1848.     4to.  4  vols.  in  2.
Wodrow  (R.),  Analecta,  or  Materials  for  a  History  of  Remarkable  Providences.     Edit.

Maitland  Club.     1842,  1843.     4  vols  410.
Wodrow  (R.),  Life  of  the  Rev.   Robert  Bruce,  prefixed  to  Bruce's  Sermons.     Edit.

Wodrow  Society.     Edinburgh,   1843.
Wodrow    (R.),    Correspondence.     Edit.    Wodrow    Society.     Edinburgh,     1842,     1843.

3  vols.

Wordsworth  (C.),  Ecclesiastical  Biography.     Lond.  1839.     4  vols.
Wrangel  (F.),  Narrative  of  an  Expedition  to  the  Polar  Sea.     Lond.  1840.
Wright  (T.),  Biographia  Britannica  Literaria  ;   Anglo-Saxon  and  Anglo-Norman  Periods.

Lond.  1842-1846.     2  vols.

Ximenez  (F.  J.),  Vida  y  Virtudes  del  Venerable  Siervo  de  Dios  D.  J.  de  Ribera,  Arcobispo
de  Valencia.     Roma,  1734.     4to.

Yaftez  (J.)    Memorias  para  la  Historia  de  Don  Felipe  III.     Madrid,  1723.     4to.
Yonge  (W.),  Diary,  from  1604  to  1628,  edited  by  G.  Roberts.     Camd.  Soc.  1848.     4to.


NTRODUCTION    TO    THE    HISTORY    OF
CIVILIZATION    IN    ENGLAND


CHAPTER  I

STATEMENT  OF  THE  RESOURCES  FOR  INVESTIGATING  HISTORY,  AND  PROOFS  OF
THE  REGULARITY  OF  HUMAN  ACTIONS.  THESE  ACTIONS  ARE  GOVERNED  BY
MENTAL  AND  PHYSICAL  LAWS  :  THEREFORE  BOTH  SETS  OF  LAWS  MUST  BE

STUDIED,  AND  THERE  CAN  BE  NO  HISTORY  WITHOUT  THE  NATURAL  SCIENCES.

OF  all  the  great  branches'  of  human  knowledge,  history  is  that  upon  which  most
has  been  written,  and  which  has  always  been  most  popular.  And  it  seems  to  be
the  general  opinion  that  the  success  of  historians  has,  on  the  whole,  been  equal
to  their  industry  ;  and  that  if  on  this  subject  much  has  been  studied,  much  also
is  understood.

This  confidence  in  the  value  of  history  is  very  widely  diffused,  as  we  see  in  the
extent  to  which  it  is  read,  and  in  the  share  it  occupies  in  all  plans  of  education.
Nor  can  it  be  denied  that,  in  a  certain  point  of  view,  such  confidence  is  perfectly
justifiable.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  materials  have  been  collected  which,  when
looked  at  in  the  aggregate,  have  a  rich  and  imposing  appearance.  The  political
and  military  annals  of  all  the  great  countries  in  Europe,  and  of  most  of  those  out
of  Europe,  have  been  carefully  compiled,  put  together  in  a  convenient  form,  and
the  evidence  on  which  they  rest  has  been  tolerably  well  sifted.  Great  attention
has  been  paid  to  the  history  of  legislation,  also  to  that  of  religion  :  while  con-
siderable, though  inferior,  labour  has  been  employed  in  tracing  the  progress  of
science,  of  literature,  of  the  fine  arts,  of  useful  inventions,  and,  latterly,  of  the
manners  and  comforts  of  the  people.  In  order  to  increase  our  knowledge  of  the
past,  antiquities  of  every  kind  have  been  examined  ;  the  sites  of  ancient  cities
have  been  laid  bare,  coins  dug  up  and  deciphered,  inscriptions  copied,  alphabets
restored,  hieroglyphics  interpreted,  and,  in  some  instances,  long  forgotten  lan-
guages reconstructed  and  rearranged.  Several  of  the  laws  which  regulate  the
changes  of  human  speech  have  been  discovered,  and,  in  the  hands  of  philologists,
have  been  made  to  elucidate  even  the  most  obscure  periods  in  the  early  migration
of  nations.  Political  economy  has  been  raised  to  a  science,  and  by  it  much  light
has  been  thrown  on  the  causes  of  that  unequal  distribution  of  wealth  which  is
the  most  fertile  source  of  social  disturbance.  Statistics  have  been  so  sedulously
cultivated,  that  we  have  the  most  extensive  information,  not  only  respecting
the  material  interests  of  men,  but  also  respecting  their  moral  peculiarities  ;  such
as,  the  amount  of  different  crimes,  the  proportion  they  bear  to  each  other,  and
the  influence  exercised  over  them  by  age,  sex,  education,  and  the  like.  With
this  great  movement  physical  geography  has  kept  pace  :  the  phenomena  of
climate  have  been  registered,  mountains  measured,  rivers  surveyed  and  tracked
to  their  source,  natural  productions  of  all  kinds  carefully  studied,  and  their
hidden  properties  unfolded  ;  while  every  food  which  sustains  life  has  been
chemically  analyzed,  its  constituents  numbered  and  weighed,  and  the  nature  of
the  connexion  between  them  and  the  human  frame  has,  in  many  cases,  been

i  i


2  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

satisfactorily  ascertained.  At  the  same  time,  and  that  nothing  should  be  left
undone  which  might  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  the  events  by  which  man  is  affected,
there  have  been  instituted  circumstantial  researches  in  many  other  departments  ;
so  that  in  regard  to  the  most  civilized  peoples,  we  are  now  acquainted  with  the
rate  of  their  mortality,  of  their  marriages,  the  proportion  of  their  births,  the
character'  of  their  employments,  and  the  fluctuations  both  in  their  wages  and  in
the  prices  of  the  commodities  necessary  to  their  existence.  These  and  similar
facts  have  been  collected,  methodized,  and  are  ripe  for  use.  Such  results,  which
form,  as  it  were,  the  anatomy  of  a  nation,  are  remarkable  for  their  minuteness  ;
and  to  them  there  have  been  joined  other  results  less  minute,  but  more  exten-
sive. Not  only  have  the  actions  and  characteristics  of  the  great  nations  been
recorded,  but  a  prodigious  number  of  different  tribes  in  all  parts  of  the  known
world  have  been  visited  and  described  by  travellers,  thus  enabling  us  to  compare
the  condition  of  mankind  in  every  stage  of  civilization,  and  under  every  variety
of  circumstance.  When  we  moreover  add  that  this  curiosity  respecting  our
fellow -creatures  is  apparently  insatiable  ;  that  it  is  constantly  increasing  ;  that
the  means  of  gratifying  it  are  also  increasing  ;  and  that  most  of  the  observa-
tions which  have  been  made  are  still  preserved  ; — when  we  put  all  these  things
together,  we  may  form  a  faint  idea  of  the  immense  value  of  that  vast  body  of
facts  which  we  now  possess,  and  by  the  aid  of  which  the  progress  of  mankind  is
to  be  investigated.

'  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  to  describe  the  use  that  has  been  made  of
these  materials,  we  must  draw  a  very  different  picture.  The  unfortunate  pecu-
liarity of  the  history  of  man  is,  that  although  its  separate  parts  have  been  ex-
amined with  considerable  ability,  hardly  any  one  has  attempted  to  combine  them
into  a  whole,  and  ascertain  the  way  in  which  they  are  connected  with  each  other.
In  all  the  other  great  fields  of  inquiry  the  necessity  of  generalization  is  universally
admitted,  and  noble  efforts  are  being  made  to  rise  from  particular  facts  in  order
to  discover  the  laws  by  which  those  facts  are  governed.  So  far,  however,  is  this
from  being  the  usual  course  of  historians,  that  among  them  a  strange  idea  pre-
vails that  their  business  is  merely  to  relate  events,  which  they  may  occasionally
enliven  by  such  moral  and  political  reflections  as  seem  likely  to  be  useful.  Ac-
cording to  this  scheme,  any  author  who,  from  indolence  of  thought,  or  from
natural  incapacity,  is  unfit  to  deal  with  the  highest  branches  of  knowledge,  has
only  to  pass  some  years  in  reading  a  certain  number  of  books,  and  then  he  is
qualified  to  be  an  historian  :  he  is  able  to  write  the  history  of  a  great  people,  and
his  work  becomes  an  authority  on  the  subject  which  it  professes  to  treat.

The  establishment  of  this  narrow  standard  has  led  to  results  very  prejudicial
to  the  progress  of  our  knowledge.  Owing  to  it,  historians,  taken  as  a  body,  have
never  recognized  the  necessity  of  such  a  wide  and  preliminary  study  as  would
enable  them  to  grasp  their  subject  in  the  whole  of  its  natural  relations.  Hence
the  singular  spectacle  of  one  historian  being  ignorant  of  political  economy  ;
another  knowing  nothing  of  law  ;  another  nothing  of  ecclesiastical  affairs  and
changes  of  opinion  ;  another  neglecting  the  philosophy  of  statistics,  and  another
physical  science  ;  although  these  topics  are  the  most  essential  of  all,  inasmuch
as  they  comprise  the  principal  circumstances  by  which  the  temper  and  character
of  mankind  have  been  affected,  and  in  which  they  are  displayed.  These  im-
portant pursuits  being,  however,  cultivated,  some  by  one  man,  and  some  by
another,  have  been  isolated  rather  than  united  :  the  aid  which  might  be  derived
from  analogy  and  from  mutual  illustration  has  been  lost  ;  and  no  disposition  has
been  shown  to  concentrate  them  upon  history,  of  which  they  are,  properly  speak-
ing, the  necessary  components.

Since  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  a  few  great  thinkers  have  indeed
arisen  who  have  deplored  the  backwardness  of  history,  and  have  done  everything
in  their  power  to  remedy  it.  But  these  instances  have  been  extremely  rare  :  so
rare,  that  in  the  whole  literature  of  Europe  there  are  not  more  than  three  or  four
really  original  works  which  contain  a  systematic  attempt  to  investigate  the  his-
tory of  man  according  to  those  exhaustive  methods  which  in  other  branches  of
knowledge  have  proved  successful,  and  by  which  alone  empirical  observations
can  be  raised  to  scientific  truths.


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  3

Among  historians  in  general,  we  find,  after  the  sixteenth  century,  and  especially
during  the  last  hundred  years,  several  indications  of  an  increasing  comprehen-
siveness of  view,  and  of  a  willingness  to  incorporate  into  their  works  subjects
which  they  would  formerly  have  excluded.  By  this  means  their  assemblage  of
topics  has  become  more  diversified,  and  the  mere  collection  and  relative  position
of  parallel  facts  has  occasionally  suggested  generalizations  no  traces  of  which  can
be  found  in  the  earlier  literature  of  Europe.  This  has  been  a  great  gain,  in  so
far  as  it  has  familiarized  historians  with  a  wider  range  of  thought,  and  encouraged
those  habits  of  speculation  which,  though  liable  to  abuse,  are  the  essential  con-
dition of  all  real  knowledge,  because  without  them  no  science  can  be  constructed.
But,  notwithstanding  that  the  prospects  of  historical  literature  are  certainly
more  cheering  now  than  in  any  former  age,  it  must  be  allowed  that,  with  ex-
tremely few  exceptions,  they  are  only  prospects,  and  that  as  yet  scarcely  any-
thing has  been  done  towards  discovering  the  principles  which  govern  the  character
•and  destiny  of  nations.  What  has  been  actually  effected  I  shall  endeavour  to
estimate  in  another  part  of  this  Introduction  :  at  present  it  is  enough  to  say,
that  for  all  the  higher  purposes  of  human  thought  history  is  still  miserably  defi-
cient, and  presents  that  confused  and  anarchical  appearance  natural  to  a  subject
of  which  the  laws  are  unknown,  and  even  the  foundation  unsettled.1

Our  acquaintance  with  history  being  so  imperfect,  while  our  materials  are  so
numerous,  it  seems  desirable  that  something  should  be  done  on  a  scale  far  larger
than  has  hitherto  been  attempted,  and  that  a  strenuous  effort  should  be  made
to  bring  up  this  great  department  of  inquiry  to  a  level  with  other  departments,
in  order  that  we  may  maintain  the  balance  and  harmony  of  our  knowledge.  It
is  in  this  spirit  that  the  present  work  has  been  conceived.  To  make  the  execution
(of  it  fully  equal  to  the  conception  is  impossible  :  still  I  hope  to  accomplish  for
the  history  of  man  something  equivalent,  or  at  all  events  analogous,  to  what  has
been  effected  by  other  inquirers  for  the  different  branches  of  natural  science.
In  regard  to  nature,  events  apparently  the  most  irregular  and  capricious  have
been  explained,  and  have  been  shown  to  be  in  accordance  with  certain  fixed  and
universal  laws.  This  has  been  done  because  men  of  ability,  and,  above  all,  men
of  patient,  untiring  thought,  have  studied  natural  events  with  the  view  of  dis-
covering their  regularity:  and  if  human  events  were  subjected  to  a  similar  treat-
ment, we  have  every  right  to  expect  similar  results.  For  it  is  clear  that  they
who  affirm  that  the  facts  of  history  are  incapable  of  being  generalized,  take  for
granted  the  very  question  at  issue.  Indeed  they  do  more  than  this.  They  not
only  assume  what  they  cannot  prove,  but  they  assume  what  in  the  present
state  of  knowledge  is  highly  improbable.  Whoever  is  at  all  acquainted  with
•what  has  been  done  during  the  last  two  centuries  must  be  aware  that  every
.generation  demonstrates  some  events  to  be  regular  and  predictable,  which  the
preceding  generation  had  declared  to  be  irregular  and  unpredictable  ;  so  that
'the  marked  tendency  of  advancing  civilization  is  to  strengthen  our  belief  in  the
universality  of  order,  of  method  and  of  law.  This  being  the  case,  it  follows  that
if  any  facts,  or  class  of  facts,  have  not  yet  been  reduced  to  order,  we,  so  far  from
pronouncing  them  to  be  irreducible,  should  rather  be  guided  by  our  experience
of  the  past,  and  should  admit  the  probability  that  what  we  now  call  inexplicable
'will  at  some  future  time  be  explained.  This  expectation  of  discovering  regularity
in  the  midst  of  confusion  is  so  familiar  to  scientific  men,  that  among  the  most
<eminent  of  them  it  becomes  an  article  of  faith  :  and  if  the  same  expectation  is
not  generally  found  among  historians,  it  must  be  ascribed  partly  to  their  being
of  inferior  ability  to  the  investigators  of  nature,  and  partly  to  the  greater  com-
plexity of  those  social  phenomena  with  which  their  studies  are  concerned.

Both  these  causes  have  retarded  the  creation  of  the  science  of  history.     The
most  celebrated  historians  are  manifestly  inferior  to  the  most  successful  culti-

1  A  living  writer,  who  has  done  more  than  any  other  to  raise  the  standard  of  history,
'contemptuously  notices  "  1'incoherente  compilation  de  faits  deja  improprement  qualinee
•dhistoire"  Comte,  Philosophic  Positive,  vol.  v.  p.  18.  There  is  much  in  the  method
•and  in  the  conclusions  of  this  great  work  with  which  I  cannot  agree  ;  but  it  would  be
unjust  to  deny  its  extraordinary  merits.


4  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

vators  of  physical  science  :  no  one  having  devoted  himself  to  history  who  in
point  of  intellect  is  at  all  to  be  compared  with  Kepler,  Newton,  or  many  others
that  might  be  named.2  And  as  to  the  greater  complexity  of  the  phenomena,
the  philosophic  historian  is  opposed  by  difficulties  far  more  formidable  than
those  which  meet  the  student  of  nature  ;  since,  while  on  the  one  hand,  his  obser-
vations are  more  liable  to  those  causes  of  error  which  arise  from  prejudice  and
passion,  he,  on  the  other  hand,  is  unable  to  employ  the  great  physical  resource
of  experiment,  by  which  we  can  often  simplify  even  the  most  intricate  problems
in  the  external  world.

It  is  not,  therefore,  surprising  that  the  study  of  the  movements  of  Man  should
be  still  in  its  infancy,  as  compared  with  the  advanced  state  of  the  study  of  the
movements  of  Nature.  Indeed  the  difference  between  the  progress  of  the  two
pursuits  is  so  great,  that  while  in  physics  the  regularity  of  events,  and  the  power
of  predicting  them,  are  often  taken  for  granted,  even  in  cases  still  unproved,
a  similar  regularity  is  in  history  not  only  not  taken  for  granted,  but  is  actually
denied.  Hence  it  is  that  whoever  wishes  to  raise  history  to  a  level  with  other
branches  of  knowledge  is  met  by  a  preliminary  obstacle  ;  since  he  is  told  that
in  the  affairs  of  men  there  is  something  mysterious  and  providential,  which
makes  them  impervious  to  our  investigations,  and  which  will  always  hide  from
us  their  future  course.  To  this  it  might  be  sufficient  to  reply,  that  such  an  asser-
tion is  gratuitous  ;  that  it  is  by  its  nature  incapable  of  proof  ;  and  that  it  is
moreover  opposed  by  the  notorious  fact  that  everywhere  else  increasing  know-
ledge is  accompanied  by  an  increasing  confidence  in  the  uniformity  with  which,
under  the  same  circumstances,  the  same  events  must  succeed  each  other.  It
will,  however,  be  more  satisfactory  to  probe  the  difficulty  deeper,  and  inquire
at  once  into  the  foundation  of  the  common  opinion  that  history  must  always
remain  in  its  present  empirical  state,  and  can  never  be  raised  to  the  rank  of  a
science.  We  shall  thus  be  led  to  one  vast  question,  which  indeed  lies  at  the  root
of  the  whole  subject,  and  is  simply  this  :  Are  the  actions  of  men,  and  therefore
of  societies,  governed  by  fixed  laws,  or  are  they  the  result  either  of  chance  or  of
supernatural  interference  ?  The  discussion  of  these  alternatives  will  suggest
some  speculations  of  considerable  interest.

For,  in  reference  to  this  matter,  there  are  two  doctrines,  which  appear  to  re-
present different  stages  of  civilization.  According  to  the  first  doctrine,  every
event  is  single  and  isolated,  and  is  merely  considered  as  the  result  of  a  blind
chance.  This  opinon,  which  is  most  natural  to  a  perfectly  ignorant  people,*

2  I  speak  merely  of  those  who  have  made  history  their  main  pursuit.  Bacon  wrote
on  it,  but  only  as  a  subordinate  object ;  and  it  evidently  cost  him  nothing  like  the  thought
which  he  devoted  to  other  subjects.

[As  the  test  applied  in  the  last  clause  of  this  note  will  not  exclude  Voltaire,  to  whose
work  as  an  historian  Buckle  in  a  later  chapter  gives  his  warmest  praise,  it  is  to  be  presumed
that  his  assertion  in  the  text  is  an  oversight.  He  would  probably  not  have  denied  that
Fra  Paolo,  Clarendon,  Hume,  Gibbon,  Grote,  Thirlwall,  James  Mill,  Hallam,  Carlyle,
Milman,  Macaulay,  Guizot,  Sismondi,  Koch,  Heeren,  K.  O.  Miiller,  and  Ranke  (to  say
nothing  of  the  ancients  or  of  such  students  of  the  science  of  history  as  Vicoand  Montes-
quieu) were  reasonably  to  be  compared  with  the  great  physicists  on  points  of  intellect
apart  from  physics  and  mathematics. — ED.]

[*  Buckle's  discussion  of  "  chance  "  does  not  proceed  upon  an  analysis  of  the  conception,
and  assumes  that  it  is  a  conceptual  negation  of  causation.  In  reality  it  has  never  been
so.  The  "  perfectly  ignorant  peoples,"  so  far  from  having  such  an  idea,  have  at  all  times
ascribed  phenomena  which  transcended  their  knowledge  and  control  to  unseen  powers
or  wills  vaguely  resembling  their  own.  The  "  doctrine  of  Chance  "  of  the  ancient  atom-
ists,  which  is  disparaged  below,  was  really  an  attempt  to  supersede  the  latter  conception
by  positing  sequences  in  nature  independent  of  volition.  Thus,  though  they  did  not  clear
their  own  conception,  and  left  a  free  field  for  meaningless  contrary  rhetoric  against  an
idea  of  "  blind  "  chance,  they  in  a  measure  prepared  the  way  for  the  conception  of
"  natural  law  "  as  distinct  from  "  particular  providence."  In  any  critical  use  of  the
term,  "  chance  "  means  simply  untraced  or  untraceable  sequence  or  coincidence — in
other  words,  unknown  law. — ED.]


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  5

would  soon  be  weakened  by  that  extension  of  experience  which  supplies  a  know-
ledge of  those  uniformities  of  succession  and  of  co-existence  that  nature  constantly
presents.  If,  for  example,  wandering  tribes,  without  the  least  tincture  of  civili-
zation, lived  entirely  by  hunting  and  fishing,  they  might  well  suppose  that  the
appearance  of  their  necessary  food  was  the  result  of  some  accident  which  ad-
mitted of  no  explanation.  The  irregularity  of  the  supply,  and  the  apparent
caprice  with  which  it  was  sometimes  abundant  and  sometimes  scanty,  would
prevent  them  from  suspecting  anything  like  method  in  the  arrangements  of
nature  ;  nor  could  their  minds  even  conceive  the  existence  of  those  general
principles  which  govern  the  order  of  events,  and  by  a  knowledge  of  which  we
are  often  able  to  predict  their  future  course.  But  when  such  tribes  advance  into
the  agricultural  state,  they  for  the  first  time  use  a  food  of  which  not  only  the
appearance,  but  the  very  existence,  seems  to  be  the  result  of  their  own  act.
What  they  sow,  that  likewise  do  they  reap.  The  provision  necessary  for  their
wants  is  brought  more  immediately  under  their  own  control,  and  is  more  palpably
the  consequence  of  their  own  labour.  They  perceive  a  distinct  plan,  and  a
regular  uniformity  of  sequence,  in  the  relation  which  the  seed  they  put  into  the
ground  bears  to  the  corn  when  arrived  at  maturity.  They  are  now  able  to  look
to  the  future,  not  indeed  with  certainty,  but  with  a  confidence  infinitely  greater
than  they  could  have  felt  in  their  former  and  more  precarious  pursuits.3  Hence
there  arises  a  dim  idea  of  the  stability  of  events,  and  for  the  first  time  there  begins
to  dawn  upon  the  mind  a  faint  conception  of  what  at  a  later  period  are  called
the  Laws  of  Nature.  Every  step  in  the  great  progress  will  make  their  view  of
this  more  clear.  As  their  observations  accumulate,  and  as  their  experience  ex-
tends over  a  wider  surface,  they  meet  with  uniformities  that  they  had  never
suspected  to  exist,  and -the  discovery  of  which  weakens  that  doctrine  of  chance
with  which  they  had  originally  set  out.  Yet  a  little  further,  and  a  taste  for
abstract  reasoning  springs  up  ;  and  then  some  among  them  generalize  the  ob-
servations that  have  been  made,  and,  despising  the  old  popular  opinion,  believe
that  every  event  is  linked  to  its  antecedent  by  an  inevitable  connexion,  that  such
antecedent  is  connected  with  a  preceding  fact  ;  and  that  thus  the  whole  world
forms  a  necessary  chain,  in  which  indeed  each  man  may  play  his  part,  but  can  by
no  means  determine  what  that  part  shall  be.

Thus  it  is  that,  in  the  ordinary  march  of  society,  an  increasing  perception  of
the  regularity  of  nature  destroys  the  doctrine  of  Chance,  and  replaces  it  by  that
of  Necessary  Connexion.  And  it  is,  I  think,  highly  probable  that  out  of  these
two  doctrines  of  Chance  and  Necessity  there  have  respectively  arisen  the  subse-
quent dogmas  of  Free  Will  and  Predestination.*  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  under-
stand the  manner  in  which,  in  a  more  advanced  state  of  society,  this  metamor-
phosis would  occur.  In  every  country,  as  soon  as  the  accumulation  of  wealth
has  reached  a  certain  point,  the  produce  of  each  man's  labour  becomes  more  than
sufficient  for  his  own  support  :  it  is  therefore  no  longer  necessary  that  all  should
work  ;  and  there  is  formed  a  separate  class,  the  members  of  which  pass  their
lives  for  the  most  part  in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  ;  a  very  few,  however,  in  the
acquisition  and  diffusion  of  knowledge.  Among  these  last  there  are  always
found  some  who,  neglecting  external  events,  turn  their  attention  to  the  study
of  their  own  minds  ;  4  and  such  men,  when  possessed  of  great  abilities,  become

3  Some  Of  the  moral  consequences  of  thus  diminishing  the  precariousness  of  food  are
noticed  by  M.  Charles  Comte  in  his  Traite  de  Legislation,  vol.  ii.  pp.  273-275.      Compare
Mill's  History  of  India,  vol.  i.  pp.  180-181.     But  both  these  able  writers  have  omitted  to
observe  that  the  change  facilitates  a  perception  of  the  regularity  of  phenomena.

4  On  the  relation  between  this  and  the  previous  creation  of  wealth,  see  Tennemann,
Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  vol.  i.  p.  30  :    "  Ein  gewisser  Grad  von  Cultur  und  Wohlstand
ist  eine  nothwendige  aussere  Bedingung  der  Entwickelung  des  philosophischen  Geistes.

[*The  historical  fact  is  that  the  doctrine  of  Free  Will,  equally  with  that  of  Predesti-
nation, arose  on  the  ground  of  theology,  not  on  that  of  non-theistic  atomism.  Compare
Luthardt,  History  of  Christian  Ethics,  §  43  ;A  Milman,  History  of  Latin  Christianity,  Bk,
ii.  ch.  ii. — ED.]


6  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  founders  of  new  philosophies  and  new  religions,  which  often  exercise  immense
influence  over  the  people  who  receive  them.  But  the  authors  of  these  systems
are  themselves  affected  by  the  character  of  the  age  in  which  they  live.  It  is  im-
possible for  any  man  to  escape  the  pressure  of  surrounding  opinions  ;  and  what
is  called  a  new  philosophy  or  a  new  religion  is  generally  not  so  much  a  creation
of  fresh  ideas  as  a  new  direction  given  to  ideas  already  current  among  contem-
porary thinkers.5  Thus,  in  the  case  now  before  us,  the  doctrine  of  Chance  in
the  external  world  corresponds  to  that  of  Free  Will  in  the  internal  ;  while  the
other  doctrine  of  Necessary  Connexion  is  equally  analogous  to  that  of  Predesti-
nation ;  the  only  difference  being  that  the  first  is  a  development  by  the  meta-
physician, the  second  by  the  theologian.  In  the  first  instance,  the  metaphysician,
setting  out  with  the  doctrine  of  Chance,  carries  into  the  study  of  the  mind  this
arbitrary  and  irresponsible  principle,  which  in  its  new  field  becomes  Free  Will  ;
an  expression  by  which  all  difficulties  seem  to  be  removed,  since  perfect  freedom,
itself  the  cause  of  all  actions,  is  caused  by  none,  but,  like  the  doctrine  of  Chance,
is  an  ultimate  fact  admitting  of  no  further  explanation.6  In  the  second  instance,
the  theologian,  taking  up  the  doctrine  of  Necessary  Connexion,  recasts  it  into  a
religious  shape  ;  and  his  mind  being  already  full  of  conceptions  of  order  and  of
uniformity,*  he  naturally  ascribes  such  undeviating  regularity  to  the  prescience
of  Supreme  Power  ;  and  thus  to  the  magnificent  notion  of  One  God  there  is
added  the  dogma  that  by  Him  all  things  have  from  the  beginning  been  absolutely
predetermined  and  pre-ordained.

So  lange  der  Mensch  noch  mit  den  Mitteln  seiner  Existenz  und  der  Befriedigung  seiner
thierischen  Bediirfnisse  beschaftiget  ist,  so  lange  gehet  die  Entwickelung  und  Bildung
seiner  Geisteskrafte  nur  langsam  von  statten,  und  er  nahert  sich  nur  Schritt  vor  Schritt
einer  freiern  Vernunftthatigkeit."  ....  "  Daher  finden  wir,  dass  man  nur  in
denen  Nationen  anfing  zu  philosophiren,  welche  sich  zu  einer  betrachtlichen  Stufe  des
Wohlstandes  und  der  Cultur  emporgehoben  batten."  Hence,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to
prove  in  the  next  chapter,  the  immense  importance  of  the  physical  phenomena  which
precede  and  often  control  the  metaphysical.  In  the  history  of  the  Greek  mind  we  can
distinctly  trace  the  passage  from  physical  to  metaphysical  inquiries.  See  Grate's  History
of  Greece,  vol.  iv.  p.  519,  edit.  1847.  That  the  atomic  doctrine,  in  its  relation  to  chance,
was  a  natural  precursor  of  Platonism,  is  marked  in  Broussais,  Examen  des  Doctrines
Medicates,  vol.  i.  pp.  53,  54,  an  able  thougto  one-sided  work.  Compare,  respecting  the
Chance  of  the  atomists,  Ritter's  History  of  Ancient  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  553  ;  an  hypo-
thesis, as  Ritter  says,  "  destructive  of  all  inner  energy,"  consequently  antagonistic  to
the  psychological  hypothesis  which  subsequently  sprang  up  and  conquered  it.  That
physical  researches  came  first,  is  moreover  attested  by  Diogenes  Laertius  :  M^/nj  5£
(J)i\o<TO(f>ia.s  rpia,  (pvffixov,  -fjdiKbv,  did\€KTtK6v'  (pvffiKov  /aer,  TO  irepi  K6ff/j.ov,  /ecu  r&v  iv  airnp.

TjdlKOV  §£,  TO  TTf/M  ftlOV  Kdi  T&V  7Tp6s  -tyUCtS'  OloiKcKTlKOV  5£,  TO  6,fJL(f)OT^pWV  TOI>S  \6yOVS  TrpefffieVOV.

Kai  fM^xP1  ptv  'ApxeXdov  TO  <pv<n/<bv  etSos  ty  airb  8£  "ZwKpaTovs,  wsirpoeiprjTcu,  TO  i)diK.bv'  ctTro
ot  Zr/vuvos  ToD'EXecb-ou,  TO  dia\€KTii<6i>.  De  Vitis  Philosophorum,  Procem.  segrn.  18,  vol.  i.
p.  12  :  compare  lib.  ii.  segm.  16,  vol.  i.  p.  89.

6  Beausobre  has  some  good  remarks  on  this  in  his  learned  work  Histoire  Critique  de
Manichee.  vol.  i.  p.  179,  where  he  says  that  the  great  religious  heresies  have  been  founded
on  previous  philosophies.  Certainly  no  one  acquainted  with  the  history  of  opinions  will
admit  the  sweeping  assertion  of  M.  Stahl  that  "  la  philosophic  d'un  peuple  a  sa  racine
dans  sa  theologie."  Klimrath,  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  p.  454,  Paris,  1843.  [Stahl  had  in  view
the  fact  that  all  the  currently  accepted  or  "  orthodox  "  philosophies  of  modern  Europe
had  started  from  theological  presuppositions. — ED.]

"  Also  ist  ein  Wille,  dem  die  blose  gesetzgebende  Form  der  Maxime  allein  zum  Gesetze
dienen  kann,  ein  freier  Wille."  Kritik  der  praktischen  Vernunft  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  iv.
p.  128.  "  Hat  selber  flir  sich  eigentlich  keinen  Bestimmungsgrund."  Metaphysik  der
Sitten  in  Werke,  vol.  v.  p.  12.  "  Die  unbedingte  Causalitat  der  Ursache."  Kritik  der

[*  The  generalization  as  to  "  the  "  theologian  overlooks  the  constant  oppositions  of
theological  schools.  The  Pelagians  and  Armenians  were  theologians  no  less  than  the
Predestinarians  ;  and  the  doctrine  of  prayer  at  all  times  tends  to  limit  "  conceptions  of
order  and  of  uniformity." — ED.]


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  7

These  opposite  doctrines  of  free  will  and  predestination  7  do,  no  doubt,  supply
a  safe  and  simple  solution  of  the  obscurities  of  our  being  ;  and  as  they  are  easily
understood,  they  are  so  suited  to  the  average  capacity  of  the  human  mind,  that
even  at  the  present  day  an  immense  majority  of  men  are  divided  between  them  ;
and  they  have  not  only  corrupted  the  sources  of  our  knowledge,  but  have  given
rise  to  religious  sects,  whose  mutual  animosities  have  disturbed  society,  and  too
often  embittered  the  relations  of  private  life.  Among  the  more  advanced  Euro-
pean thinkers  there  is,  however,  a  growing  opinion  that  both  doctrines  are  wrong,
or,  at  all  events,  that  we  have  no  sufficient  evidence  of  their  truth.  And  as  this  is  a
matter  of  great  moment,  it  is  important,  before  we  proceed  further,  to  clear  up  as
much  of  it  as  the  difficulties  inherent  in  these  subjects  will  enable  us  to  do.

Whatever  doubts  may  be  thrown  on  the  account  which  I  have  given  of  the
probable  origin  of  the  ideas  of  free  will  and  predestination,  there  can,  at  all
events,  be  no  dispute  as  to  the  foundation  on  which  those  ideas  are  now  actually
based.  The  theory  of  predestination  is  founded  on  a  theological  hypothesis  ;
that  of  free  will  on  a  metaphysical  hypothesis.  The  advocates  of  the  first  pro-
ceed on  a  supposition  for  which,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  they  have  as  yet  brought
forward  no  good  evidence.  They  require  us  to  believe  that  the  Author  of  Cre-
ation, whose  beneficence  they  at  the  same  time  willingly  allow,  has,  notwith-
standing His  supreme  goodness,  made  an  arbitrary  distinction  between  the  elect
and  the  non -elect  ;  that  He  has  from  all  eternity  doomed  to  perdition  millions
of  creatures  yet  unborn,  and  whom  His  act  alone  can  call  into  existence  :  and
that  He  has  done  this,  not  in  virtue  of  any  principle  of  justice,  but  by  a  mere
stretch  of  despotic  power.8  This  doctrine  owes  its  authority  among  Protestants
to  the  dark  though  powerful  mind  of  Calvin  :  but  in  the  early  Church  it  was  first
systematically  methodized  by  Augustin,  who  appears  to  have  borrowed  it  from
the  Manicha^ans.9  At  all  events,  and  putting  aside  its  incompatibility  with
other  notions  which  are  supposed  to  be  fundamental,10  it  must,  in  a  scientific

retnen  Vernunft  in  Werke,  vol.  ii.  p.  339.     See  also  Prolegomena  zu  jeder  kunftigen  Meta-
physik  in  vol.  iii.  p.  268.

7  That  these  doctrines,  when  treated  according  to  the  ordinary  methods  of  reasoning,
not  only  oppose  but  exclude  each  other,  would  be  universally  admitted  if  it  were  not  for
a  desire  generally  felt  to  save  certain  parts  of  each  :   it  being  thought  dangerous  to  give
up  free  will  on  account  of  weakening  moral  responsibility,  and  equally  dangerous  to  give
up  predestination  on  account  of  impugning  the  power  of  God.     Various  attempts  have
therefore  been  made  to  reconcile  liberty  with  necessity,  and  make  the  freedom  of  man
harmonize  with  the  foreknowledge  of  the  Deity.     Compare  on  this  point  a  remarkable
letter  from  Locke  to  Molyneux  (Locke's  Works,  vol.  viii.  p.  305),  with  the  argument  in
one  of  Bentley's  Sermons  (Monk's  Life  of  Bentley,  vol.  ii.  pp.  7,  8)  ;   also  Ritter's  Hist,  of
Ancient  Philosophy,  vol.  iv.  pp.  143,  144  ;  Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philosophie,  vol.  iv.  pp.
301-304  ;   Copleston's  Inquiry  into  the  Doctrines  of  Necessity  and  Predestination,  pp.  6,  7,
46,  69,  70,  85,  92,  108,  136  ;   Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  207,  vol.  ii.  p.  96  ;
N zander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  iv.  pp.  294,  389-391  ;   Bishop  of  Lincoln  on  Tertullian,
1845,  p.  323  ;  Hodgson  on  Buddhism,  in  Transac.  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol  ii.  p.  232.

8  Even  Ambrose,  who  never  went  so  far  as  Augustin,  states  this  principle  in  its  repul  -
sive  nakedness  :   "  Deus  quos  dignat  vocat,  quos  vult  religiosos  facit."     Neander,  vol.  iv.
p.  287.     Calvin  declares  "  that  God,  in  predestinating  from  all  eternity  one  part  of  man-
kind to  everlasting  happiness,  and  another  to  endless  misery,  was  led  to  make  this  dis  -
tinction  by  no  other  motive  than  His  own  good  pleasure  and  free  will,"     Mosheim' s
Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  103,  see  also  p.  100  ;  and  Carwithen's  Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,
vol.  i.  p.  552.

9  On  the  Manichaan  origin  of  Augustin's  opinions,  compare  Potter,  Esprit  de  r£glise
vol.  ii.  p.  171,  Paris,  1821  :   Tomline's  Refutation  of  Calvinism,  1817,  pp.  571-576  ;   Sou  -
they's  Book  of  the  Church,  1824,  vol.  i.  pp.  301,  302  ;  Matter,  Hist,  du  Gnosticisme,  1828,  vol.
i.  p.  325.     However,  Beausobre  (Histoire  de  ManicMe,  vol.  ii.  pp.  33-40)  seems  to  have
proved  a  difference  between  the  election  of  Augustin  and  that  of  Basilides.

10  On  the  absurdity  of  "  an  omnipotent  arbitrary  Deity,"  and  on  the  incongruity  of
such,  a  cornbinatipn  with  (pveei.  /caXoV  /cqi  §t'/caiQ><,  see  Cudworth^  Intellect.  Syst.  vol.  i..


8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

instigation    be  regarded  as  a  barren   hypothesis,  because,  being   beyond   one
provmcge  of  oui  -  knmvledge,  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  either  its  truth  or


o'  doctrine,  which  has  long  been  celebrated  under  the  name  of  Free
is  connected  with  Arminianism  ;  but  it  in  reality  rests  on  the  metaphysical
dogma  of  the  supremacy  of  human  consciousness.  Every  man  it  is  alleged,
feels  and  knows  that  he  is  a  free  agent  :  nor  can  any  subtleties  of  argument  do
away  with  our  consciousness  of  possessing  a  free  will."  Now  the  existence  of
this  supreme  jurisdiction,  which  is  thus  to  set  at  defiance  all  the  ordinary  methods
of  reasoning  involves  two  assumptions  :  of  which  the  first,  though  possibly
true  has  never  been  proved  ;  and  the  other  is  unquestionably  false.  These
assumptions  are  that  there  is  an  independent  faculty  called  consciousness,  and
that  the  dictates  of  that  faculty  are  infallible.  But,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  by  no
means  certain  that  consciousness  is  a  faculty  ;  and  some  of  the  ablest  thinkers
have  been  of  opinion  that  it  is  merely  a  state  or  condition  of  the  mind.12  Should
this  turn  out  to  be  the  case,  the  argument  falls  to  the  ground  ;  since,  even  if  we
admit  that  all  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  when  completely  exercised,  are  equally
accurate,  no  one  will  make  the  same  claim  for  every  condition  into  which  the
mind  itself  may  be  casually  thrown.*  However,  waiving  this  objection,  we
may,  in  the  second  place,  reply,  that  even  if  consciousness  is  a  faculty,  we  have
the  testimony  of  all  history  to  prove  its  extreme  fallibility.13  All  the  great  stages

pp.  45,  419,  vol.  iii.  p.  241,  vol.  iv.  p.  160.  See  also  Theodicee  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  vi.
pp.  141,  142,  and  Metaphysik  der  Sitten  in  vol.  v.  p.  332,  upon  "  den  gottlichen  Zweck  in
Ansehung  des  menschlichen  Geschlechts."

11  Johnson  said  to  Boswell,  "  Sir,  we  know  our  will  is  free,  and  there's  an  end  on't."
BoswelVs  Life  of  Johnfon,  edit.  Croker,  1848,  p.  203.  "  La  question  :  Sommes-nous  libres  ?
me  parait  au-dessous  de  la  discussion.  Elle  est  resolue  par  le  temoignage  de  la  conscience
attestant  que  dans  certains  cas  nous  pourrions  faire  le  contraire  de  ce  que  nous  faisons."
Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philosophic,  I.  Serie,  vol.  i.  pp.  190,  191.  "Die  Freiheit  des  Menschen,
als  moralischen  Wesens,  griindet  sich  auf  das  sittliche  Bewusstseyn."  Tennemann,  Gesch.
der  Philosophic,  vol.  v.  p.  161.  That  this  is  the  only  ground  for  believing  in  the  freedom
of  the  will  is  so  evident,  that  we  need  not  notice  the  mystical  proof  of  Philo  (Ritter's
Ancient  Philosophy,  vol.  iv.  p.  447);  nor  the  physical  one  of  the  Basilidian  monads
(Beausobre,  Hist,  de  ManicMe,  vol.  ii.  p.  23)  ;  still  less  the  argument  of  Bardesanes,  who
thought  to  demonstrate  freedom  by  the  variety  of  human  customs  !  Matter,  Hist,  du
Gnosiicisme,  vol.  i.  p.  323,  which  should  be  compared  with  Burdach's  Physiologic  comme
Science  d1  Observation,  vol.  v.  p.  50,  Paris,  1839.

2  Mr.  James  Mill  (Analysis  of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.  pp.  171,  172)  says  that  consciousness

and  belief  are  the  same,  and  that  great  error  has  arisen  from  calling  "  consciousness  a

feeling  distinct  from  all  other  feelings."     According  to  Locke  (Essay  concerning  Human

Understanding,  book  ii.  chap,  i.,  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  89),  "  consciousness  is  the  perception  of

what  passes  in  a  man's  own  mind."     Brown  (Philosophy  of  the  Mind,  pp.  67,  68)  denies

that  consciousness  is  a  faculty  :   and  Sir  W.  Hamilton  complains  of  "  Reid's  degradation

ot  consciousness  into  a  special  faculty."     Notes  to  Reid's  Works,  pp.  223,  297,  373.     M.

Cousin  (Hist,  de  la  Philosophic,  II.  Serie,  vol.  i.  p.  131)  pronounces  consciousness  to  be

"  phenomene  complexe  "  ;  and  at  p.  94,  "  la  condition  necessaire  de  1'intelligence  c'est  la

cience  "  Awhile  a  still  later  writer  (Joberfs  New  System  of  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  25)

ires  that  "  we  have  the  consciousness  of  our  consciousness—  this  is  certain."      The

statement  in  Alciphron,  Dialogue  vii.  (Berkeley's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  505,  506)  is  equallv

nsatisfactory  :   and  what  still  further  perplexes  the  question  is  the  existence  of  what  is

now  recognized  as  "  double  consciousness."     See  on  this  extraordinary  phenomenon

Elhotsons  Physiology,  pp.  367-369,  1165  ;   Mayo's  Physiology,  pp.  195,  196  ;  PrichartFs

«  Tif-0*  Insantty'  PP-  450,  451  ;  Carpenter's  Human  Physiology,  p.  379.

requires  explanation.     Consciousness  is  infallible  as  to  the  fact  of  its  testimony  ;

thai  R^li111^"0!1  °f  fhC  id6a  "  merdy  a  State  °r  condition  of  the  mind,"  goes  to  show


,

had  not  realized  the  full  force  of  the  criticisms  he  cites.    Briefly  put,  thev
>  saying  that  consciousness  is  mind,  or  a  name  for  the  mind,  not  a  "  condition  »
into  which  it  «•  may  be  casually  thrown."—  ED.}


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  9

irough  which,  in  the  progress  of  civilization,  the  human  race  has  successively
issed,  have  been  characterized  by  certain  mental  peculiarities  or  convictions,
/hich  have  left  their  impress  upon  the  religion,  the  philosophy,  and  the  morals
the  age.  Each  of  these  convictions  has  been  to  one  period  a  matter  of  faith,
another  a  matter  for  derision  ;  14  and  each  of  them  has,  in  its  own  epoch,  been
intimately  bound  up  with  the  minds  of  men,  and  become  as  much  a  part  of
icir  consciousness,  as  is  that  opinion  which  we  now  term  freedom  of  the  will.
ret  it  is  impossible  that  all  these  products  of  consciousness  can  be  true,  because
many  of  them  contradict  each  other.  Unless,  therefore,  in  different  ages  there
are  different  standards  of  truth,  it  is  clear  that  the  testimony  of  a  man's  con-
sciousness is  no  proof  of  an  opinion  being  true  ;  for  if  it  were  so,  then  two  pro-
positions diametrically  opposed  to  each  other  might  both  be  equally  accurate.
Besides  this,  another  view  may  be  drawn  from  the  common  operations  of  ordi-
nary life.  Are  we  not  in  certain  circumstances  conscious  of  the  existence  of
spectres  and  phantoms  ;  and  yet  is  it  not  generally  admitted  that  such  things
have  no  existence  at  all  ?  Should  it  be  attempted'  to  refute  this  argument  by
saying  that  such  consciousness  is  apparent  and  not  real,  then  I  ask,  What  is  it
that  judges  between  the  consciousness  which  is  genuine  and  that  which  is  spuri-
ous ?15  If  this  boasted  faculty  deceives  us  in  some  things,  what  security  have

but  fallible  as  to  the  truth.  That  we  are  conscious  of  certain  phenomena,  is  a  proof  that
those  phenomena  exist  in  the  mind,  or  are  presented  to  it ;  but  to  say  that  this  demon  -
strates  the  truth  of  the  phenomena  is  to  go  a  step  further,  and  not  only  offer  a  testimony,
but  also  pass  a  judgment.  The  moment  we  do  this,  we  introduce  the  element  of  falli-
bility ;  because  consciousness  and  judgment  put  together  cannot  be  always  right,  inas-
much as  judgment  is  often  wrong.

The  late  Blanco  White — a  thinker  of  considerable  subtlety — says  :  "  The  important
distinction  between  libertas  a  necessitate  and  libertas  a  coactione,  is  seldom  attended  to.
Nothing  whatever  can  force  my  will :  every  man  is  more  or  less  conscious  of  that  fact  :
but  at  the  same  time  we  are,  or  may  be,  equally  conscious  that  we  are  never  decided  with
out  a  motive."  Life  of  B.  White,  by  Himself,  1845,  vol.  iii.  p.  90.  But  how  can  a  man
be  conscious  that  "  nothing  whatever  can  force  his  will  "  ?  This  is  not  consciousness
but  judgment :  it  is  a  judgment  of  what  may  be,  not  a  consciousness  of  what  is.  If
there  is  any  meaning  in  the  word  '  consciousness,'  it  must  refer  solely  to  the  present,  and
can  never  include  future  contingencies  as  to  what  may  be  or  can  be.  [The  rebuttal  here
miscarries  somewhat.  White  might  have  said,  "  nothing  has  ever  forced  my  will,"
and  this  would  have  served  the  purpose  of  his  argument  without  being  open  to  Buckle's
verbal  demurrer.  The  true  answer  is  that  the  conception  of  "  freedom  "  is  irrelevant
to  that  of  volition,  being  relevant  only  to  action.  A  natural  sequence  is  neither
"  free  "  nor  "  unfree." — ED.]

i*  As  Herder  says,  "  Was  diese  Nation  ihrem  Gedankenkreise  unentbehrlich  halt,
daran  hat  jene  nie  gedacht  oder  halt  es  gar  fur  schadlich."  Ideen  zur  Gesch.  der  Menschheit  ,
vol.  ii.  p.  130.

15  Plato  was  struck  by  the  extreme  difficulty  of  finding  a  standard  in  the  human  mind
whereby  we  may  test  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  spectral  phenomena  and  dreams.  And
the  only  conclusion  to  which  this  consummate  thinker  could  arrive,  was  that  whatever
appears  true  to  the  individual  mind  is  true  for  him  :  which,  however,  is  an  evasion  of  the
problem,  not  a  solution  of  it.  See  the  Theaetetus,  where  Plato,  as  usual,  puts  his  own
speculations  into  the  mouth  of  Socrates.  He  opens  the  question  at  the  beginning  of  sec.
39  (  Platonis  Opera,  vol.  iii.  p.  426,  edit.  Bekker,  Lond.  1826),  M^  rolvvv  airoXiirwuev
6(rov  f\\eiTTov  avrov.  XetVerai  de  evvirviuv  re  tr^pi  Kal  voauv,  r&v  re  <5L\\wi'  Kai  /uavias,  etc.
[P.  1 5/.E.]  These  are  the  supposed  sources  of  error,  but  Socrates,  after  discussing  them,  and
entangling  Theastetus  in  a  maze,  sums  up  at  the  end  of  sec.  45,  p.  434,  d\r}0^  &pa  e/j.ol  i}efj.-r]
cuo-tf77<7is.  See  further  p.  515,  on  the  formation  of  erroneous  judgments  ;  and  respecting
the  assertions  made  by  many  of  the  Greeks  that  iraaa  <f>ai>Ta.(ria  d\T)6r)s  and  Tra<ra  5<i£a
d\?;t%,  compare  Cudworth,  vol.  iii.  p.  379,  vol.  iv.  p.  118.  For  physiological  considerations
concerning  the  preservation  of  consciousness  in  dreams  and  in  insanity,  see  Broiissais,
Examen  des  Doctrines  Mtdicales,  vol.  i.  p.  406  ;  his  Cours  de  Phrtnologie,  p.  49 ;  Esquirol,
maladies JMentates,  vol.  i.  p.  97,  vol.  ii.  p.  790  ;  Simon's  Pathology,  p.  204 ;  Holland's


io  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

we  that  it  will  not  deceive  us  in  others  ?  If  there  is  no  security,  the  faculty  is
not  trustworthy.  If  there  is  a  security,  then  whatever  it  may  be,  its  existence
shows  the  necessity  for  some  authority  to  which  consciousness  is  subordinate,
and  thus  does  away  with  that  doctrine  of  the  supremacy  of  consciousness,  on
which  the  advocates  of  free  will  are  compelled  to  construct  the  whole  of  their
theory.  Indeed,  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  existence  of  consciousness  as  an  inde-
pendent faculty,  and  the  manner  in  which  that  faculty,  if  it  exists,  has  contra-
dicted its  own  suggestions,  are  two  of  the  many  reasons  which  have  long  since
convinced  me  that  metaphysics  will  never  be  raised  to  a  science  by  the  ordinary
method  of  observing  individual  minds  ;  but  that  its  study  can  only  be  successfully
prosecuted  by  the  deductive  application  of  laws  which  must  be  discovered  his-
torically, that  is  to  say,  which  must  be  evolved  by  an  examination  of  the  whole
of  those  vast  phenomena  which  the  long  course  of  human  affairs  presents  to  our
view.

Fortunately,  however,  for  the  object  of  this  work,  the  believer  in  the  possibility
of  a  science  of  history  is  not  called  upon  to  hold  either  the  doctrine  of  predestined
events,  or  that  of  freedom  of  the  will  ;  16  and  the  only  positions  which,  in  this
stage  of  the  inquiry,  I  shall  expect  him  to  concede  are  the  following  :  That  when
we  perform  an  action,  we  perform  it  in  consequence  of  some  motive  or  motives  ;
that  those  motives  are  the  results  of  some  antecedents  ;  and  that,  therefore,  if
we  are  acquainted  with  the  whole  of  the  antecedents,  and  with  all  the  laws  of
their  movements,  we  could  with  unerring  certainty  predict  the  whole  of  their
immediate  results.  This,  unless  I  am  greatly  mistaken,  is  the  view  which  must
be  held  by  every  man  whose  mind  is  unbiased  by  system,  and  who  forms  his
opinions  according  to  the  evidence  actually  before  him.17  If,  for  example,  I  am
intimately  acquainted  with  the  character  of  any  person,  I  can  frequently  tell
how  he  will  act  under  some  given  circumstances.  Should  I  fail  in  this  prediction,
I  must  ascribe  my  error  not  to  the  arbitrary  and  capricious  freedom  of  his  will,
nor  to  any  supernatural  pre -arrangement,  for  of  neither  of  these  things  have  we

Medical  Notes,  p.  434  ;  Henle,  Anatomie  G£n£rale,  vol.  ii.  p.  287  ;  Burdach,  Trait£  de
Physiologic,  vol.  v.  p.  223.  See,  too,  the  passages  in  Tennemann  which  connect  this
difficulty  with  the  theory  of  representation  (Geschichte  der  Philosophie,  vol.  i.  p.  357,  vol.
ii.  pp.  119,  159,  vol.  iii.  p.  406,  vol.  iv.  p.  418)  ;  and  the  attempt  of  Berkeley  (Works,  vol.  i.
pp.  93,  101,  176)  to  turn  it  into  a  defence  of  his  own  system  on  the  ground  that  our  belief
respecting  the  external  world  may  be  as  false  when  we  are  awake  as  when  we  dream.
The  solution  offered  by  the  Stoics  is  merely  a  verbal  and  unproved  distinction  :  dtafapei
8£  (f>avra.ffia  /cat  <f>dvTa<T/J.a.  (f>avraafj.a  fj.ev  yap  eari  8oKf]ffis  diavoias  ol'a  yivercu  Kara  roi)s
UTTJ/OUS'  (pavTaffia  5£  eon  rvirwats  iv  if/vxy  TOVT£<TTIV  aXXotwcrts,  u>s  6  Xpvcrnriros  ev  rrj  Svu-
deKdryirepi  i/a>x??s  vQiaraTau.  Diog.  Laert.  de  Vitis  Philos.  lib.  vii.  segm.  50,  vol.  i.  p.  395.

16  Meaning  by  free  will,  a  cause  of  action  residing  in  the  mind,  and  exerting  itself  in-
dependently of  motives.     If  any  one  says  that  we  have  this  power  of  acting  without
motives,  but  that  in  the  practical  exercise  of  the  power  we  are  always  guided  by  motives
either  conscious  or  unconscious, — if  any  one  says  this,  he  asserts  a  barren  proposition,
which  does  not  interfere  with  my  views,  and  which  may  or  may  not  be  true,  but  which
most  assuredly  no  one  has  ever  yet  succeeded  in  proving.

17  That  is,  according  to  the  phenomenal  evidence  presented  to  the  understanding,  and
estimated  by  the  ordinary  logic  with  which  the  understanding  is  conversant.     But  Kant
has  made  a  most  remarkable  attempt  to  avoid  the  practical  consequences  of  this,  by
asserting  that  freedom,  being  an  idea  produced  by  the  reason,  must  be  referred  to  tran-
scendental laws  of  the  reason  ;   that  is,  to  laws  which  are  removed  from  the  domain  of
experience,  and  cannot  be  verified  by  observation.     In  regard,  however,  to  the  scientific
conceptions  of  the  understanding  (as  distinguished  from  the  Reason)  he  fully  admits  the
existence  of  a  Necessity  destructive  of  Liberty.     In  Note  A,  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,
I  shall  put  together  the  most  important  passages  in  which  Kant  unfolds  this  view.     [The
phrase  "  destructive  of  Liberty  "  is  again  an  obscuring  of  the  issue,  inasmuch  as  it  suggests
a  spurious  alternative.     Liberty  is  predicable  only  of  actions,  when  an  alternative  does
exist.     Let  willing  be  realized  as=wishing,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  concept  of  freedom,
is.  as  irrelevant  to  the  phenomenon  as,  to  that  qf  gravitation. — ED.],


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  n

the  slightest  proof  ;  but  I  must  be  content  to  suppose  either  that  I  had  been
misinformed  as  to  some  of  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed,  or  else  that
I  had  not  sufficiently  studied  the  ordinary  operations  of  his  mind.  If,  however,
I  were  capable  of  correct  reasoning,  and  if,  at  the  same  time,  I  had  a  complete
knowledge  both  of  his  disposition  and  of  all  the  events  by  which  he  was  sur-
rounded, I  should  be  able  to  foresee  the  line  of  conduct  which,  in  consequence
of  those  events,  he  would  adopt.18

Rejecting,  then,  the  metaphysical  dogma  of  free  will  and  the  theological
dogma  of  predestined  events,19  we  are  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  the
actions  of  men,  being  determined  solely  by  their  antecedents,  must  have  a
character  of  uniformity,  that  is  to  say,  must,  under  precisely  the  same  circum-
stances, always  issue  in  precisely  the  same  results.  And  as  all  antecedents
are  either  in  the  mind  or  out  of  it,  we  clearly  see  that  all  the  variations  in  the
results,  in  other  words,  all  the  changes  of  which  history  is  full,  all  the  vicissi-
tudes of  the  human  race,  their  progress  or  their  decay,  their  happiness  or  their
misery,  must  be  the  fruit  of  a  double  action  ;  an  action  of  external  phenomena
upon  the  mind,  and  another  action  of  the  mind  upon  the  phenomena.

These  are  the  materials  out  of  which  a  philosophic  history  can  alone  be  con-
structed. On  the  one  hand,  we  have  the  human  mind  obeying  the  laws  of
its  own  existence,  and,  when  uncontrolled  by  external  agents,  developing
itself  according  to  the  conditions  of  its  organization.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have
what  is  called  Nature,  obeying  likewise  its  laws  ;  but  incessantly  coming  into
contact  with  the  minds  of  men,  exciting  their  passions,  stimulating  their  intellect,
and  therefore  giving  to  their  actions  a  direction  which  they  would  not  have
taken  without  such  disturbance.*  Thus  we  have  man  modifying  nature,  and
nature  modifying  man  ;  while  out  of  this  reciprocal  modification  all  events  must
necessarily  spring.

The  problem  immediately  before  us  is  to  ascertain  the  method  of  discovering
the  laws  of  this  double  modification  :  and  this,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  leads
us  into  a  preliminary  inquiry  as  to  which  of  the  two  modifications  is  the  more
important  ;  that  is  to  say,  whether  the  thoughts  and  desires  of  men  are  more
influenced  by  physical  phenomena,  or  whether  the  physical  phenomena  are
more  influenced  by  them.  For  it  is  evident  that  whichever  class  is  the  more

18  This  is,  of  course,  an  hypothetical  case,  merely  given  as  an  illustration.     We  never
can  know  the  whole  of  any  man's  antecedents,  or  even  the  whole  of  our  own  ;   but  it  is
certain  that  the  nearer  we  approach  to  a  complete  knowledge  of  the  antecedent,  the  more
likely  we  shall  be  to  predict  the  consequent.

19  The  doctrine  of  providential  interference  is  bound  up  with  that  of  predestination,
because  the  Deity,  foreseeing  all  things,  must  have  foreseen  His  own  intention  to  inter-
fere.    To  deny  this  foresight,  is  to  limit  the  omniscience  of  God.     Those,  therefore,  who
hold  that,  in  particular  cases,  a  special  providence  interrupts  the  ordinary  course  of
events,  must  also  hold  that  in  each  case  the  interruption  had  been  predestined  ;   other-
wise they  impeach  one  of  the  Divine  attributes.     For,  as  Thomas  Aquinas  puts  it  (Nean-
der's  History  of  the  Church,  vol.  viii.  p.  176),  "  knowledge,  as  knowledge,  does  not  imply,
indeed,  causality  ;  but  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  knowledge  belonging  to  the  artist  who  forms,  it
stands  in  the  relation  of  causality  to  that  which  is  produced  by  his  art."

The  same  argument  is  stated  by  Alciphron,  though  not  quite  so  conclusively  ;  Dialogue
vii.  sec.  20  in  Berkeley's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  515  :  and  as  to  the  impossibility  of  Omniscience
having  new  knowledge  or  an  afterthought,  see  Hitchcock's  Religion  of  Geology,  1851,  pp.
267,  328  ;  an  ingenious  work,  but  one  which  leaves  all  the  real  difficulties  untouched.
Compare  Ritter's  Hist,  of  Ancient  Philos.  vol.  iv.  pp.  326,  327,  with  Tennemann,  Gesch.
der  Philos.  vol.  vi.  pp.  151,  342-345,  vol.  ix.  pp.  81-94,  vol.  xi.  p,  178  ;  and,  in  par-
ticular, the  question  raised  (vol.  viii.  p.  242),  "  Ob  das  Vorherwissen  Gottes  die
Ursache  der  kiinftigen  Dinge  sey,  oder  nicht."  It  was  to  meet  all  this,  that  some  asserted
the  eternity  of  matter,  and  others  the  existence  of  two  original  principles,  one  good  and
one  evil.  Beausobre,  Histoire  de  Manich£e,  vol.  ii.  pp.  145,  146,  252,  336.

[*  As  "  disturbance  "  here  means  the  whole  of  the  correlations,  the  last  clause  cieatf  &
a-  confusion.     "  Without  such  disturbance  "  men  would  not  exist. — ED.]


12  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

active,  should,  if  possible,  be  studied  before  the  other ;  and  this  partly  because
its  results  will  be  more  prominent,  and  therefore  more  easy  to  observe  ;  and
partly  because  by  first  generalizing  the  laws  of  the  greater  power  we  shall  leave
a  smaller  residue  of  unexplained  facts  than  if  we  had  begun  by  generalizing
the  laws  of  the  lesser  power.  But  before  entering  into  this  examination,  it
will  be  convenient  to  state  some  of  the  most  decisive  proofs  we  now  possess  of
the  regularity  with  which  mental  phenomena  succeed  each  other.  By  this
means  the  preceding  views  will  be  considerably  strengthened  ;  and  we  shall,
at  the  same  time,  be  able  to  see  what  those  resources  are  which  have  been  already
employed  in  elucidating  this  great  subject.

That  the  results  actually  effected  are  extremely  valuable,  is  evident  not  only
from  the  wide  surface  which  the  generalizations  cover,  but  also  from  the  extra-
ordinary precautions  with  which  they  have  been  made.  For  while  most  moral
inquiries  have  depended  on  some  theological  or  metaphysical  hypothesis,  the
investigations  to  which  I  allude  are  exclusively  inductive  ;  they  are  based  on
collections  of  almost  innumerable  facts,  extending  over  many  countries,  thrown
into  the  clearest  of  all  forms,  the  form  of  arithmetical  tables  ;  and  finally,  they
have  been  put  together  by  men  who,  being  for  the  most  part  mere  government
officials,20  had  no  particular  theory  to  maintain,  and  no  interest  in  distorting
the  truth  of  the  reports  they  were  directed  to  make.

The  most  comprehensive  inferences  respecting  the  actions  of  men,  which  are
admitted  by  all  parties  as  incontestable  truths,  are  derived  from  this  or  from
analogous  sources  ;  they  rest  on  statistical  evidence,  and  are  expressed  in  mathe-
matical language.  And  whoever  is  aware  of  how  much  has  been  discovered
by  this  single  method,  must  not  only  recognize  the  uniformity  with  which
mental  phenomena  succeed  each  other,  but  must,  I  think,  feel  sanguine  that
still  more  important  discoveries  will  be  made  so  soon  as  there  are  brought  into
play  those  other  powerful  resources  which  even  the  present  state  of  knowledge
will  abundantly  supply.  Without  however,  anticipating  future  inquiries,  we
are,  for  the  moment,  only  concerned  with  those  proofs  of  the  existence  of  a
uniformity  in  human  affairs  which  statisticians  have  been  the  first  to  bring
forward.

The  actions  of  men  are  by  an  easy  and  obvious  division  separated  into  two
classes,  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious ;  and  as  these  classes  are  correlative,  and
when  put  together  compose  the  total  of  our  moral  conduct,  it  follows  that  what-
ever increases  the  one,  will  in  a  relative  point  of  view  diminish  the  other  ;  so
that  if  we  can  in  any  period  detect  a  uniformity  and  a  method  in  the  vices  of  a
people  there  must  be  a  corresponding  regularity  in  their  virtues  ;  or  if  we
could  prove  a  regularity  in  their  virtues  we  should  necessarily  infer  an
equal  regularity  in  their  vices ;  the  two  sets  of  actions  being,  according
to  the  terms  of  the  division,  merely  supplementary  to  each  other.21
Or,  to  express  this  proposition  in  another  way,  it  is  evident  that  if  it  can
be  demonstrated  that  the  bad  actions  of  men  vary  in  obedience  to  the
changes  in  the  surrounding  society,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  infer  that  their  good
actions,  which  are,  as  it  were,  the  residue  of  their  bad  ones,  vary  in  the  same
manner  ;  and  we  shall  be  forced  to  the  further  conclusion,  that  such  variations
are  the  result  of  large  and  general  causes,  which,  working  upon  the  aggregate

20  Dufau,  Traiti  de  Statistique,  pp.  75,  148.

21  Some  moralists  have  also  established  a  third  class  of  actions,  which  they  call  in-
different, as  belonging  neither  to  virtue  nor  to  vice  ;  and  hence  there  arose  the  famous
doctrine  of  probability,  set  up  by  several  eminent  Romish  casuists,  and  hotly  attacked
by  Pascal.       But  this,  if  we  put  aside  its  worst  feature,  namely  its  practical  bearings,
is  merely  a  question  of  definition  ;  inasmuch  as  every  indifferent  act  must  lean  on  the
side  either  of  evil  or  of  good,  and  may  therefore  be  referred  to  the  category  to  which  it
inclines  ;  and  certainly  every  increase  of  vice  diminishes  virtue  relatively  though  not
always  absolutely.     Among  the  Greek  philosophers  there  was  a  schism  on  this  point :
AptffK€i  d£  avrots  (i.e.  the  Stoics)  /xTjSei/  i*.taov  eli/at  apexes  /cat  /caca'as'  rwv  TrepnraT-riTiKujv

/iera£i>    dper^s   Ko.1  Kaidas  elvai  \ey6vrwv  rrjv  TT/JOKOTT^J/.       Diog.  Laert.  de    Vitis    Philo-
sophorum,  lib.  vii.  segm.  127,  vol.  i.  p.  445.


I  RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  13

society,  must  produce  certain  consequences,  without  regard  to  the  volition
those  particular  men  of  whom  the  society  is  composed.
Such  is  the  regularity  we  expect  to  find',  if  the  actions  of  men  are  governed
by  the  state  of  the  society  in  which  they  occur  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we
can  find  no  such  regularity,  we  may  believe  that  their  actions  depend  on  some
capricious  and  personal  principle  peculiar  to  each  man,  as  free  will  or  the  like.
It  becomes,   therefore,   in  the  highest  degree  important  to  ascertain  whether
or  not  there  exists  a  regularity  in  the  entire  moral  conduct  of  a  given  society  ;
and  this  is  precisely  one  of  those  questions  for  the  decision  of  which  statistics
supply  us  with  materials  of  immense  value.

For  the  main  object  of  legislation  being  to  protect  the  innocent  against  the
guilty,  it  naturally  followed  that  European  governments,  so  soon  as  they  became
aware  of  the  importance  of  statistics,  should  begin  to  collect  evidence  respect-
ing the  crimes  they  were  expected  to  punish.  This  evidence  has  gone  on
accumulating,  until  it  now  forms  of  itself  a  large  body  of  literature,  containing,
with  the  commentaries  connected  with  it,  an  immense  array  of  facts,  so  carefully
compiled,  and  so  well  and  clearly  digested,  that  more  may  be  learned  from  it
respecting  the  moral  nature  of  Man  than  can  be  gathered  from  all  the  accumu-
lated experience  of  preceding  ages.22  But  as  it  will  be  impossible  in  this  Intro-
duction to  give  anything  like  a  complete  statement  of  those  inferences  which,
in  the  actual  state  of  statistics,  we  are  authorized  to  draw,  I  shall  content  myself
with  examining  two  or  three  of  the  most  important,  and  pointing  out  the  con-
nexion between  them.

Of  all  offences,  it  might  well  be  supposed  that  the  crime  of  murder  is  one  of
the  most  arbitrary  and  irregular.  For  when  we  consider  that  this,  though
generally  the  crowning  act  of  a  long  career  of  vice,  is  often  the  immediate  result
of  what  seems  a  sudden  impulse  ;  that  when  premeditated,  its  committal,  even
with  the  least  chance  of  impunity,  requires  a  rare  combination  of  favourable
circumstances  for  which  the  criminal  will  frequently  wait  ;  that  he  has  thus
to  bide  his  time,  and  look  for  opportunities  he  cannot  control  ;  that  when  the
time  has  come,  his  heart  may  fail  him  ;  that  the  question  whether  or  not  he
shall  commit  the  crime  may  depend  on  a  balance  of  conflicting  motives,  such
as  fear  of  the  law,  a  dread  of  the  penalties  held  out  by  religion,  the  prickings
of  his  own  conscience,  the  apprehension  of  future  remorse,  the  love  of  gain,
jealousy,  revenge,  desperation  ; — when  we  put  all  these  things  together,  there
arises  such  a  complication  of  causes,  that  we  might  reasonably  despair  of
detecting  any  order  or  method  in  the  result  of  those  subtle  and  shifting  agencies
by  which  murder  is  either  caused  or  prevented.  But  now,  how  stands  the
fact  ?  The  fact  is,  that  murder  is  committed  with  as  much  regularity,  and
bears  as  uniform  a  relation  to  certain  known  circumstances,  as  do  the  movements
of  the  tides,  and  the  rotations  of  the  seasons.  M.  Quetelet,  who  has  spent
his  life  in  collecting  and  methodizing  the  statistics  of  different  countries,  states,
as  the  result  of  his  laborious  researches,  that  "  in  everything  which  concerns
crime,  the  same  numbers  re-occur  with  a  constancy  which  cannot  be  mistaken  ;
and  that  this  is  the  case  even  with  those  crimes  which  seem  quite  independent
of  human  foresight,  such,  for  instance,  as  murders,  which  are  generally  com-
mitted after  quarrels  arising  from  circumstances  apparently  casual.  Never -

22  I  say  this  advisedly  :  and  whoever  has  examined  these  subjects  must  be  aware
of  the  way  in  which  writers  on  morals  repeat  the  commonplace  and  hackneyed  notions
of  their  predecessors  ;  so  that  a  man,  after  reading  everything  that  has  been  written
on  moral  conduct  and  moral  philosophy,  will  find  himself  nearly  as  much  in  the  dark
as  when  his  studies  first  began.  The  most  accurate  investigators  of  the  human  mind
have  hitherto  been  the  poets,  particularly  Homer  and  Shakespeare;  but  these  extra-
ordinary observers  mainly  occupied  themselves  with  the  concrete  phenomena  of  life  ;
and  if  they  analyzed,  as  they  probably  did,  they  have  concealed  the  steps  of  the  process,
so  that  we  can  now  only  verify  their  conclusions  empirically.  The  great  advance  made
by  the  statisticians  consists  in  applying  to  these  inquiries  the  doctrine  of  averages,
which  no  one  thought  of  doing  before  the  eighteenth  century.


I4  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

theless  we  know  from  experience  that  every  year  there  not  only  take  place
,e  number  of  murders,  but  that  even  the  instruments  by  which
"hey  yare  committed  are  employed  in  the  same  proportion."-  This  was  the
language  used  in  1835  by  confessedly  the  first  statistician  in  Europe,  and  every
subsequent  investigation  has  confirmed  its  accuracy.  For  later  inquiries  have
ascertained  the  extraordinary  fact  that  the  uniform  reproduction  of  crime  is
more  clearly  marked,  and  more  capable  of  being  predicted,  than  are  the  physical
laws  connected  with  the  disease  and  destruction  of  our  bodies.  Thus,  for
instance  the  number  of  persons  accused  of  crime  in  France  between  1826  and
1844  was  by  a  singular  coincidence,  about  equal  to  the  male  deaths  which  took
place  in  Paris  during  the  same  period,  the  difference  being  that  the  fluctuations
in  the  amount  of  crime  were  actually  smaller  than  the  fluctuations  in  the  mor-
tality ;  while  a  similar  regularity  was  observed  in  each  separate  offence,  all  of
which  obeyed  the  same  law  of  uniform  and  periodical  repetition.24

This,  indeed,  will  appear  strange  to  those  who  believe  that  human  actions
depend  more  on  the  peculiarities  of  each  individual  than  on  the  general  state
of  society.  But  another  circumstance  remains  behind  still  more  striking.
Among  public  and  registered  crimes  there  is  none  which  seems  so  completely
dependent  on  the  individual  as  suicide.  Attempts  to  murder  or  to  rob  may
be,  and  constantly  are,  successfully  resisted  ;  baffled  sometimes  by  the  party
attacked,  sometimes  by  the  officers  of  justice.  But  an  attempt  to  commit
suicide  is  much  less  liable  to  interruption.  The  man  who  is  determined  to  kill
himself  is  not  prevented  at  the  last  moment  by  the  struggles  of  an  enemy  ;.
and  as  he  can  easily  guard  against  the  interference  of  the  civil  power,25  his  act

23  "  Dans  tout  ce  qui  se  rapporte  aux  crimes,  les  memes  nombres  se  reproduisent
avec  une  Constance  telle,  qu'il  serait  impossible  de  la  meconnaitre,  meme  pour  ceux
des  crimes  qui  sembleraient  devoir  echapper  le  plus  a  toute  prevision  humaine,  tels  que
les  meurtres,  puisqu'ils  se  commettent,  en  general,  a  la  suite  de  rixes  qui  naissent  sans
motifs,  et  dans  les  circonstances,  en  apparence,  les  plus  fortuites.     Cependant   1'ex-
perience  prouve  que  non  seulement  les  meurtres  sont  annuellement  a  peu  presenmeme
nombre,  mais  encore  que  les  instrumens  qui  secvent  £  les  commettre  ?ont  employes
dan  les  memes  proportions."     Quetelei  sur  VHomme,  Paris,  1835,  vol.  i.  p.  7  ;  see  also
vol.  ii.  pp.  164,  247.

24  "  Thus,  in  twenty  years'  observations,  the  number  of  persons  accused  of  various
crimes  in  France,  and  registered  under  their  respective  ages,  scarcely  varies  at  any  age
from  year  to  year,  comparing  the  proportion  per  cent,  under  each  age  with  the  totals.
The  number  of  persons  accused  in  all  France,  in  the  years  1826  to  1844,  was  about  equal
to  the  deaths  of  males  registered  in  Paris  ;  but  singularly  enough,  the  former  results
are  more  regular  than  the  latter,  notwithstanding  the  accidental  causes  which  might
affect  them  ;  notwithstanding  even  a  revolution  in  Paris,  which  convulsed  society  and
brought  in  a  new  dynasty."     Brown  on  the  Uniform  Action  of  the  Human  Will,  in  The
Assurance  Magazine,  no.  viii.,  July  1852,  pp.  349,  350.     That  the  variations  in  crime
are  less  than  those  of  mortality  is  also  noticed  in  Statistique  Morale,  pp.  18,  34,  in
Memoir es  de  V Academic  de  Belgique,  vol.  xxi.,  Bruxelles,  1848,  4to.

25  The  folly  of  lawgivers  thinking  that  by  their  enactments  they  can  diminish  suicide,
is  exposed  by  M.  C.  Comte  in  his  Traite  de  Legislation,  vol.  i.  p.  486.    See  also  some  good
remarks  by  Jefferson,  in  his  observations  on  criminal  law  in  Appendix  to  Jefferson's
Memoirs,  by  Randolph,  vol.  i.  pp.  126,  127.     Heber  (Journey  through  India,  vol  i.  pp.  389,
390)  found  that  the  English  Government  had  vainly  attempted  to  check  the  suicides
frequently  committed  at  Benares  by  drowning;  and  in  our  country  the  interference  of
legislators  is  met  by  the  perjury  of  jurors,  since,  as  Bentham  says,  English  juries  do
not  hesitate  to  violate  their  oaths  by  declaring  the  suicide  to  be  non  compos.     Principles
of  Penal  Law,  in  Bentham's  Works,  edit.  Bowring,  1843,  vol.  i.  pp.  479,  480.     In  regard
to  the  determination  of  the  individual,  and  the  impossibility  of  baffling  his  intention,
there  are  cases  recorded  of  persons  who,  being  deprived  of  the  ordinary  means  of  destruc-
tion, put  an  end  to  life  by  holding  their  breath  ;  while  others  effected  their  purpose

V  turning  back  the  tongue  so  as  to  exclude  air  from  the  larynx.     Elliotson's  Human
Physiology,  pp.  491,  492.


j


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  15

omes  as  it  were  isolated  ;  it  is  cut  off  from  foreign  disturbances,  and  seems
ore  clearly  the  product  of  his  own  volition  than  any  other  offence  could  possibly
We  may  also  add  that,  unlike  crimes  in  general,  it  is  rarely  caused  by  the
tigation  of  confederates;  so  that  men,  not  being  goaded  into  it  by  their  com-
nions,  are  uninfluenced  by  one  great  class  of  external  associations  which
might  hamper  what  is  termed  the  freedom  of  their  will.  It  may,  therefore,  very
naturally  be  thought  impracticable  to  refer  suicide  to  general  principles,  or  to
detect  anything  like  regularity  in  an  offence  which  is  so  eccentric,  so  solitary,
so  impossible  to  control  by  legislation,  and  which  the  most  vigilant  police  can
do  nothing  to  diminish.  There  is  also  another  obstacle  that  impedes  our  view  :
this  is,  that  even  the  best  evidence  respecting  suicide  must  always  be  very
imperfect.  In  case  of  drowning,  for  example,  deaths  are  liable  to  be  returned
as  suicides  which  are  accidental ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  some  are  called
accidental  which  are  voluntary.2^  Thus  it  is,  that  self-murder  seems  to  be  not
only  capricious  and  uncontrollable,  but  also  very  obscure  in  regard  to  proof  ;
so  that  on  all  these  grounds  it  might  be  reasonable  to  despair  of  ever  tracing
't  to  those  general  causes  by  which  it  is  produced.

These  being  the  peculiarities  of  this  singular  crime,  it  is  surely  an  astonishing
t  that  all  the  evidence  we  possess  respecting  it  points  to  one  great  conclusion,
and  can  leave  no  doubt  on  our  minds  that  suicide  is  merely  the  product  of  the
general  condition  of  society,  and  that  the  individual  felon  only  carries  into
effect  what  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  preceding  circumstances.27  In  a  given
state  of  society  a  certain  number  of  persons  must  put  an  end  to  their  own  life.
This  is  the  general  law  ;  and  the  special  question  as  to  who  shall  commit  the
crime  depends  of  course  upon  special  laws  ;  which,  however,  in  their  total  action
must  obey  the  large  social  law  to  which  they  are  all  subordinate.*  And  the

26  This  also  applies  to  other  cases  besides  those  of  drowning.     See  Taylor's  Medical
Jurisprudence,  1846,  pp.  587,  597  ;  and  on  the  difficulty  of  always  distinguishing  a  real
suicide  from  an  apparent  one,  see  Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,  vol.  i.  p.  575.     From  a
third  to  a  half  of  all  suicides  are  by  drowning.     Compare  Dufau,  Traiti  de  Statistique,
p.  304  ;  Winslow's  Anatomy  of  Suicide,  1840,  p.  277  ;   Quetelet,  Statistique  Morale,  p.  66.
But  among  these,  many  are  no  doubt  involuntary  ;   and  it  is  certain  that  popular  opinion
grossly   exaggerates  the  length   of   time  during  which  it  is  possible   to  remain   under
water.     Brodie's  Surgery,  1846,  pp.  89-92.

[The  note  is  not  clear.  "  Among  these  "  presumably  means  "  among  the  recorded
cases  of  drowning  "  ;  and  the  last  clause  is  probably  meant  to  convey  that  suicide  by
drowning  is  ultimately  "  involuntary  "  in  the  sense  that  one  cannot  of  one's  own  accord
stay  under  water  until  dead. — ED.]

27  "Tout  semble  dependre  de  causes  determinees.     Ainsi,  nous  trouvons  annuelle-
ment  a  peu  pres  le  meme  nombre  de  suicides,  non-seulement  en  general,  mais  encore
en  faisant  la  distinction  des  sexes,  celle  des  ages,  ou  meme  celle  des  instruments  em-
ployes pour  se  detruire.     Une  annee  reproduit  si  ndelement  les  chiffres  de  1' annee  qui  a

[*  The  conception  of  "  law  "  here  set  forth  is  incorrect :  and  the  idea  that  one  law
"  obeys  "  another  must  be  put  aside.  "  Law  in  nature  "  is  merely  a  name  for  an  observed
constancy  of  relation  between  phenomena,  e.g.  that  water  boils  at  a  certain  temperature
and  barometrical  pressure.  In  this  sense,  the  alleged  "  general  law  "  is  merely  the  sum
total  of  the  so-called  "  special  laws,"  the  whole  causation  occurring  in  terms  of  specific
relations :  e.g.  a  certain  organism,  under  certain  moral  or  physiological  conditions,
and  at  a  certain  temperature,  will  aim  at  suicide,  and  will  under  certain  con-
ditions succeed.  But  the  law  is  solely  in  terms  of  specific  series,  which  are  part  of  the
"  given  state  of  society  " — and  of  the  environment ;  not  of  any  "  general  "  predestina-
tion to  death  of  a  given  number  of  victims.  Mr.  Venn  (Logic  of  Chance,  2nd  ed.  p.  236)
records  that  a  "  sort  of  panic  "  was  set  up  "  in  many  quarters  "  by  Buckle's  exposition.
The  truth  involved,  however,  is  really  on  all  fours  with  that  embodied  in  any  other  set
of  "  vital  statistics."  In  note  32,  below,  Buckle  points  to  a  truer  conception  of  law  ;  but
there  also  the  phrasing  is  lax,  and  in  the  text  at  that  point  it  is  still  more  so.  The  phrase
"  prodigious  energy  of  those  vast  social  laws  "  must  have  been  penned  before  the  note
in  question. — ED.]


16  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

power  of  the  larger  law  is  so  irresistible,  that  neither  the  love  of  life  nor  the
fear  of  another  world  can  avail  anything  towards  even  checking  its  operation.
The  causes  of  this  remarkable  regularity  I  shall  hereafter  examine  ;  but  the
existence  of  the  regularity  is  familiar  to  whoever  is  conversant  with  moral
statistics.  In  the  different  countries  for  which  we  have  returns,  we  find  year
by  year  the  same  proportion  of  persons  putting  an  end  to  their  own  existence  :
so  that,  after  making  allowance  for  the  impossibility  of  collecting  complete
evidence,  we  are  able  to  predict,  within  a  very  small  limit  of  error,  the  number
of  voluntary  deaths  for  each  ensuing  period  ;  supposing,  of  course,  that  the
social  circumstances  do  not  undergo  any  marked  change.  Even  in  London,
notwithstanding  the  vicissitudes  incidental  to  the  largest  and  most  luxurious
capital  in  the  world,  we  find  a  regularity  greater  than  could  be  expected  by
the  most  sanguine  believer  in  social  laws  ;  since  political  excitement,  mercantile
excitement,  and  the  misery  produced  by  the  dearness  of  food,  are  all  causes
of  suicide,  and  are  all  constantly  varying.28  Nevertheless,  in  this  vast  metro-
polis, about  240  persons  every  year  make  away  with  themselves  ;  the  annual
suicides  oscillating,  from  the  pressure  of  temporary  causes,  between  266,  the
highest,  and  213,  the  lowest.  In  1846,  which  was  the  great  year  of  excitement
caused  by  the  railway  panic,  the  suicides  in  London  were  266  ;  in  1847  began
a  slight  improvement,  and  they  fell  to  256  ;  in  1848  they  were  247  ;  in  1849
they  were  213  ;  and  in  1850  they  were  229.29

Such  is  some,  and  only  some,  of  the  evidence  we  now  possess  respecting  the
regularity  with  which,  in  the  same  states  of  society,  the  same  crimes  are  neces-
sarily reproduced.  To  appreciate  the  full  force  of  this  evidence,  we  must
remember  that  it  is  not  an  arbitrary  selection  of  particular  facts,  but  that  it
is  generalized  from  an  exhaustive  statement  of  criminal  statistics,  consisting
of  many  millions  of  observations,  extending  over  countries  in  different  grades
of  civilization,  with  different  laws,  different  opinions,  different  morals,  different
habits.  If  we  add  to  this,  that  these  statistics  have  been  collected  by  persons
specially  employed  for  that  purpose,  with  every  means  of  arriving  at  the  truth,
and  with  no  interest  to  deceive,  it  surely  must  be  admitted  that  the  existence
of  crime  according  to  a  fixed  and  uniform  scheme,  is  a  fact  more  clearly  attested
than  any  other  in  the  moral  history  of  man.  We  have  here  parallel  chains
of  evidence  formed  with  extreme  care,  under  the  most  different  circumstances,
and  all  pointing  in  the  same  direction  ;  all  of  them  forcing  us  to  the  conclusion
that  the  offences  of  men  are  the  result  not  so  much  of  the  vices  of  the  individual
offender  as  of  the  state  of  society  into  which  that  individual  is  thrown.30  This
is  an  inference  resting  on  broad  and  tangible  proofs  accessible  to  all  the  world  ;
and  as  such  cannot  be  overturned,  or  even  impeached,  by  any  of  those  hypo-
theses with  which  metaphysicians  and  theologians  have  hitherto  perplexed
the  study  of  past  events.

Those  readers  who  are  acquainted  with  the  manner  in  which  in  the  physical
world  the  operations  of  the  laws  of  nature  are  constantly  disturbed,  will  expect

precede,  qu'on  peut  prevoir  ce  qui  doit  arriver  dans  1'annee  qui  va  suivre."  Quetelet,
Statistique  Morale,  1848,  p.  35  ;  see  also  p.  40.

28  On  the  causes  of  suicides,  see  BurdacWs  Traite  de  Physiologic,  vol.  v.  pp.  476-478 ;
and  Forty's  Climate  and  its  Endemic  Influences,  p.  329.  The  latest  researches  of  M.  Casper
confirm  the  statement  of  earlier  statisticians,  that  suicide  is  more  frequent  among
Protestants  than  among  Catholics.  Casper,  Denkwiirdigkeiten  zur  medicinischen  Statistik,
Berlin,  1846,  p.  139.  [The  alleged  rule  is  not  invariable. — ED.]

!9  See  the  tables  in  The  Assurance  Magazine,  no.  iv.  p.  309,  no.  v.  p.  34,  no.  viii.  p.  350.
These  are  the  only  complete  consecutive  returns  of  London  suicides  yet  published  ;  those
issued  by  the  police  being  imperfect.  Assurance  Magazine,  no.  v.  p.  53.  From  inquiries
made  for  me  at  the  General  Register  Office,  in  January  1856,  I  learnt  that  there  was  an
intention  of  completing  the  yearly  returns,  but  I  do  not  know  if  this  has  since  been  done.
"  L' experience  demontre  en  effet,  avec  toute  1'evidence  possible,  cette  opinion,
quipourra  sembler  paradoxale  au  premier  abord,  que  c'est  la  societe  qui  prepare  le  crime,
et  que  le  coupable  n'est  que  I' 'instrument  qui  r execute."  Quetelet  sur  VHomme,  vol.  ii.  p.  325.


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  i?

to  find  in  the  moral  world  disturbances  equally  active.  Such  aberrations  proceed,
in  both  instances,  from  minor  laws  which  at  particular  points  meet  the  larger
laws,  and  thus  alter  their  normal  action.  Of  this,  the  science  of  mechanics
affords  a  good  example  in  the  instance  of  that  beautiful  theory  called  the
parallelogram  of  forces  ;  according  to  which  the  forces  are  to  each  other  in  the
same  proportion  as  is  the  diagonal  of  their  respective  parallelograms.31  This
is  a  law  pregnant  with  great  results  ;  it  is  connected  with  those  important  me-
chanical resources,  the  composition  and  resolution  of  forces  ;  and  no  one  ac-
quainted with  the  evidence  on  which  it  stands  ever  thought  of  questioning  its
truth.  But  the  moment  we  avail  ourselves  of  it  for  practical  purposes,  we
find  that  in  its  action  it  is  warped  by  other  laws,  such  as  those  concerning  the
friction  of  air,  and  the  different  density  of  the  bodies  on  which  we  operate,
arising  from  their  chemical  composition,  or,  as  some  suppose,  from  their  atomic
arrangement.  Perturbations  being  thus  let  in,  the  pure  and  simple  action  of
the  mechanical  law  disappears.  Still,  and  although  the  results  of  the  law  are
incessantly  disturbed,  the  law  itself  remains  intact.32  Just  in  the  same  way,
the  great  social  law,  that  the  moral  actions  of  men  are  the  product  not  of  their
volition,  but  of  their  antecedents,*  is  itself  liable  to  disturbances  which
trouble  its  operation  without  affecting  its  truth.  And  this  is  quite  sufficient
to  explain  those  slight  variations  which  we  find  from  year  to  year  in  the  total
amount  of  crime  produced  by  the  same  country.  Indeed,  looking  at  the  fact
that  the  moral  world  is  far  more  abundant  in  materials  than  the  physical  world,
the  only  ground  for  astonishment  is,  that  these  variations  should  not  be  greater ;
and  from  the  circumstance  that  the  discrepancies  are  so  trifling,  we  may  form
some  idea  of  the  prodigious  energy  of  those  vast  social  laws  which,  though  con-
stantly interrupted,  seem  to  triumph  over  every  obstacle,  and  which,  when
examined  by  the  aid  of  large  numbers,  scarcely  undergo  any  sensible  pertur-
bation.33

31  The  diagonal  always  giving  the  resultant  when  each  side  represents  a  force  ;  and
if  we  look  on  the  resultant  as  a  compound  force,  a  comparison  of  diagonals  becomes  a
comparison  of  compounds.

33  A  law  of  nature  being  merely  a  generalization  of  relations,  and  having  no  existence
except  in  the  mind,  is  essentially  intangible  ;  and  therefore,  however  small  the  law
may  be,  it  can  never  admit  of  exceptions,  though  its  operation  may  admit  of  innumerable
exceptions.  Hence,  as  Dugald  Stewart  (Philosophy  of  the  Mind,  vol.  ii.  p  211)  rightly
says,  we  can  only  refer  to  the  laws  of  nature  "  by  a  sort  of  figure  or  metaphor."  This
is  constantly  lost  sight  of  even  by  authors  of  repute  ;  some  of  whom  speak  of  laws  as  if
they  were  causes,  and  therefore  liable  to  interruption  by  larger  causes  ;  while  other
writers  pronounce  them  to  be  "  delegated  agencies  "  from  the  Deity.  Compare  Pr out's
Bridgewater  Treatise,  pp.  318,  435,  495  ;  Sadler's  Law  of  Population,  vol.  ii.  p.  67  ;
BurdacWs  Physiologic,  vol.  i.  p.  160.  Mr.  Paget,  in  his  able  work,  Lectures  on  Pathology,
vol.  i.  p.  481,  vol.  ii.  p.  542,  with  much  greater  accuracy  calls  such  cases  "  apparent
exceptions  "  to  laws  ;  but  it  would  be  better  to  say,  "  exceptions  to  the  operations  of
laws."  The  context  clearly  proves  that  Mr.  Paget  distinctly  apprehends  the  difference  ;
but  a  slight  alteration  of  this  kind  would  prevent  confusion  in  the  minds  of  ordinary
readers.

33  Mr.  Rawson,  in  his  Inquiry  into  the  Statistics  of  Crime  in  England  and  Wales
(published  in  the  Journal  of  the  Statistical  Society,  vol.  ii.  pp.  316-344),  says,  p.  327,
"  No  greater  proof  can  be  given  of  the  possibility  of  arriving  at  certain  constants  with
regard  to  crime,  than  the  fact  which  appears  in  the  following  table,  that  the  greatest
variation  which  has  taken  place  during  the  last  three  years,  in  the  proportion  of  any
class  of  criminals  at  the  same  period  of  life,  has  not  exceeded  a  half  per  cent."  See  also
Report  of  British  Association  for  1839,  Transac.  of  Sec.,  p.  118.  Indeed,  all  writers  who
have  examined  the  evidence  are  forced  to  admit  this  regularity,  however  they  may
wish  to  explain  it.  M.  Dufau  (Trait&  de  Statistique,  p.  144)  says,  "  Les  faits  de  1'ordre

[*  The  antithesis  here  put  is  fallacious.  The  volitions  are  the  products  of  the  ante-
cedents ;  and  the  moral  actions  express  the  volitions.  The  formula  "  not  .  .  .  but
..."  is  thus  beside  the  case. — ED.]

2


1 8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Nor  is  it  merely  the  crimes  of  men  which  are  marked  by  this  uniformity  of
sequence.  Even  the  number  of  marriages  annually  contracted  is  determined,
not  by  the  temper  and  wishes  of  individuals,  but  by  large  general  facts,  over
which  individuals  can  exercise  no  authority.*  It  is  now  known  that  marriages
bear  a  fixed  and  definite  relation  to  the  price  of  corn  ;  34  and  in  England  the
experience  of  a  century  has  proved  that,  instead  of  having  any  connexion  with
personal  feelings,  they  are  simply  regulated  by  the  average  earnings  of  the
great  mass  of  the  people  :  35  so  that  this  immense  social  and  religious  institution
is  not  only  swayed,  but  is  completely  controlled,  by  the  price  of  food  and  by
the  rate  of  wages.  In  other  cases,  uniformity  has  been  detected,  though  the
causes  of  the  uniformity  are  still  unknown.  Thus,  to  give  a  curious  instance,
we  are  now  able  to  prove  that  even  the  aberrations  of  memory  are  marked  by
this  general  character  of  necessary  and  invariable  order.  The  post-offices
of  London  and  of  Paris  have  lately 'published  returns  of  the  number  of  letters
which  the  writers,  through  forgetfulness,  omitted  to  direct  ;  and  making  allow-
ance for  the  difference  of  circumstances,  the  returns  are  year  after  year  copies
of  each  other.  Year  after  year  the  same  proportion  of  letter -writers  forget
this  simple  act  ;  so  that  for  each  successive  period  we  can  actually  foretell  the
number  of  persons  whose  memory  will  fail  them  in  regard  to  this  trifling  and,
as  it  might  appear,  accidental  occurrence.36

To  those  who  have  a  steady  conception  of  the  regularity  of  events,  and  have
firmly  seized  the  great  truth  that  the  actions  of  men,  being  guided  by  their
antecedents,  are  in  reality  never  inconsistent,  but,  however  capricious  they
may  appear,  only  form  part  of  one  vast  scheme  of  universal  order  of  which
we  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  can  barely  see  the  outline, — to  those  who
understand  this,  which  is  at  once  the  key  and  the  basis  of  history,  the  facts
just  adduced,  so  far  from  being  strange,  will  be  precisely  what  would  have
been  expected  and  ought  long  since  to  have  been  known.  Indeed,  the  progress
of  inquiry  is  becoming  so  rapid  and  so  earnest,  that  I  entertain  little  doubt
that  before  another  century  has  elapsed,  the  chain  of  evidence  will  be  complete,
and  it  will  be  as  rare  to  find  an  historian  who  denies  the  undeviating  regularity
of  the  moral  world,  as  it  now  is  to  find  a  philosopher  who  denies  the  regularity
of  the  material  world.

It  will  be  observed,  that  the  preceding  proofs  of  our  actions  being  regulated
by  law,  have  been  derived  from  statistics  ;  a  branch  of  knowledge  which,  though

moral  sont,  aussi  bien  que  ceux  de  1'ordre  naturel,  le  produit  de  causes  constantes  et
regulieres,"  etc.  ;  and  at  p.  367,  "  C'est  ainsi  que  le  monde  moral  se'presente  a  nous,
de  ce  point  de  vue,  comme  offrant,  de  meme  que  le  monde  physique,  un  ensemble
continu  d'effets  dus  a  des  causes  constantes  et  regulieres,  dont  il  appartient  surtout
a  la  statistique  de  constater  1'action."  See  to  the  same  effect  Moreau-Christophe  des
Prisons  en  France,  Paris,  1838,  pp.  53,  189.

34  "  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  intimate  a  relation  exists  between  the  price  of  food
and  the  number  of  marriages."  ..."  The   relation    that  subsists  between  the  price
of  food  and  the  number  of  marriages  is  not  confined  to  our  own  country  ;  and  it  is  not
improbable  that,  had  we  the  means  of  ascertaining  the  facts,  we  should  see  the  like
result  in  every  civilized  community.     We  possess  the  necessary  returns  from  France  ;
and  these  fully  bear  out  the  view  that  has  been  given."     Porter's  Progress  of  the  Nation,
vol.  ii.  pp.  244,  245,  London,  1838.

35  "The  marriage  returns  of  1850  and  1851  exhibit  the  excess  which  since  1750  has
been  invariably  observed  when  the  substantial  earnings  of   the  people  are  above   the
average."     Journal  of  Statistical  Society,  vol.  xv.  p.  185.

36  See  Somerville's  Physical  Geography,  vol.  ii.  pp.  409-411,  which,  says  this  able
writer,  proves  that  "  forgetfulness  as  well  as  free-will  is  under  constant  laws."     But
this  is  using  the  word  free-will  in  a  sense  different  from  that  commonly  employed.

[*  In  this  and  the  following  sentence  we  have  again  spurious  antitheses.  The  "  large
general  facts  "  exist  solely  through  "  the  temper  and  wishes  of  individuals  "  in  relation
to  the  changes  in  the  environment.  The  "  personal  feelings  "  are  simply  adjusted  to
the  economic  conditions. — ED.]


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  19

still  in  its  infancy,37  has  already  thrown  more  light  on  the  study  of  human  nature
than  all  the  sciences  put  together.  But  although  the  statisticians  have  been
the  first  to  investigate  this  great  subject  by  treating  it  according  to  those
methods  of  reasoning  which  in  other  fields  have  been  found  successful  ;  and
although  they  have,  by  the  application  of  numbers,  brought  to  bear  upon  it  a
very  powerful  engine  for  eliciting  truth, — we  must  not,  on  that  account,  suppose
that  there  are  no  other  resources  remaining  by  which  it  may  likewise  be  cul-
tivated :  nor  should  we  infer  that  because  the  physical  sciences  have  not  yet
been  applied  to  history,  they  are  therefore  inapplicable  to  it.  Indeed,  when
we  consider  the  incessant  contact  between  man  and  the  external  world,  it  is
certain  that  there  must  be  an  intimate  connexion  between  human  actions  and
physical  laws  ;  so  that  if  physical  science  has  not  hitherto  been  brought  to  bear
upon  history,  the  reason  is,  either  that  historians  have  not  perceived  the  connexion,
or  else  that,  having  perceived  it,  they  have  been  destitute  of  the  knowledge
by  which  its  workings  can  be  traced.  Hence  there  has  arisen  an  unnatural
separation  of  the  two  great  departments  of  inquiry,  the  study  of  the  internal
and  that  of  the  external  :  and  although,  in  the  present  state  of  European
literature,  there  are  some  unmistakable  symptoms  of  a  desire  to  break  down
this  artificial  barrier,  still  it  must  be  admitted  that  as  yet  nothing  has  been
actually  accomplished  towards  effecting  so  great  an  end.  The  moralists,  the
theologians,  and  the  metaphysicians,  continue  to  prosecute  their  studies  with-
out much  respect  for  what  they  deem  the  inferior  labours  of  scientific  men  ;
whose  inquiries,  indeed,  they  frequently  attack  as  dangerous  to  the  interests
of  religion,  and  as  inspiring  us  with  an  undue  confidence  in  the  resources
of  the  human  understanding.  On  the  other  hand,  the  cultivators  of  physical
science,  conscious  that  they  are  an  advancing  body,  are  naturally  proud  of
their  own  success  ;  and,  contrasting  their  discoveries  with  the  more  stationary
position  of  their  opponents,  are  led  to  despise  pursuits  the  barrenness  of  which
has  now  become  notorious.

It  is  the  business  of  the  historian  to  mediate  between  these  two  parties,  and
reconcile  their  hostile  pretensions  by  showing  the  point  at  which  their  respective
studies  ought  to  coalesce.  To  settle  the  terms  of  this  coalition,  will  be  to  fix
the  basis  of  all  history.  For  since  history  deals  with  the  actions  of  men,  and
since  their  actions  are  merely  the  product  of  a  collision  between  internal  and
external  phenomena,  it  becomes  necessary  to  examine  the  relative  importance
of  those  phenomena,  to  inquire  into  the  extent  to  which  their  laws  are  known,
and  to  ascertain  the  resources  for  future  discovery  possessed  by  these  two  great
classes,  the  students  of  the  mind  and  the  students  of  nature.  This  task  I  shall
endeavour  to  accomplish  in  the  next  two  chapters  :  and  if  I  do  so  with  any-
thing approaching  to  success,  the  present  work  will  at  least  have  the  merit
of  contributing  something  towards  filling  up  that  wide  and  dreary  chasm  which,
to  the  hindrance  of  our  knowledge,  separates  subjects  that  are  intimately  related,
and  should  never  be  disunited.

37  Achenwall,  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  is  usually  considered  to  be
the  first  systematic  writer  on  statistics,  and  is  said  to  have  given  them  their  present
name.  See  Lewis,  Methods  of  Observation  and  Reasoning  in  Politics,  1852,  vol.  i.  p.  72  ;
Biographic  Universelle,  vol.  i.  p.  140  :  Dufau,  Traite  de  Statistique,  pp.  9,  10.  Even
so  late  as  1800,  the  Bishop  of  Llandaff  wrote  to  Sir  John  Sinclair,  "  I  must  think  the
kingdom  is  highly  indebted  to  you  for  bringing  forward  a  species  of  knowledge  (statistics)
wholly  new  in  this  country,  though  not  new  in  other  parts  of  Europe."  Sinclair's
Correspondence,  vol.  i.  p.  230.  Sinclair,  notwithstanding  his  industry,  was  a  man  of
slender  powers,  and  did  not  at  all  understand  the  real  importance  of  statistics,  of  which,
indeed,  he  took  a  mere  practical  view.  Since  then  statistics  have  been  applied  extensively
to  medicine  ;  and  still  more  recently,  and  on  a  similar  scale,  to  philology  and  to  juris-
prudence. Compare  Bouillaud,  Philosophic  Medicate,  pp.  96,  186  ;  Renouard,  Hist,
de  la  Medecine,  vol.  ii.  pp.  474,  475  ;  Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,  vol.  ii.  pp.  665-667;
Holland's  Medical  Notes,  pp.  5,  472  ;  VogeVs  Pathological  Anatomy,  pp.  15-17  ;  Simon's
Pathology,  p.  180  ;  Phillips  on  Scrofula,  pp.  70,  118,  etc.  ;  Prichard's  Physical  Hist,  of
Mankind,  vol.  iv.  p.  414  ;  Eschbach,  Etude  du  Droit,  pp.  392-394.


20  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

NOTE  A.

"  Der  Begriff  der  Freiheit  ist  ein  reiner  Vernunftbegriff,  der  eben  darum  fur  die
theoretische  Philosophic  transcendent,  d.  i.  ein  solcher  ist,  dem  kein  angemessenes  Beispiel
in  irgend  einer  moglichen  Erfahrung  gegeben  werden  kann,  welcher  also  keinen  Gegen-
stand  einer  uns  moglichen  theoretischen  Erkenntiss  ausmacht,  und  schlechterdings  nicht
f iir  ein  constitutives,  sondern  lediglich  als  regulatives,und  zwarnur  blosnegativesPrincip
der  speculativen  Vernunf  t  gelten  kann,  im  praktischen  Gebrauche  der  selben  aber  seine
Realitat  durch  praktische  Grundsatze  beweist,  die,  als  Gesetze,  eine  Causalitat
der  reinen  Vernunft,  unabhangig  von  alien  empirischen  Bedingungen  (dem  Sinnlichen
iiberhaupt)  die  Willkiihr  zu  bestimmen,  und  einen  reinen  Willen  in  uns  beweisen,  in
welchem  die  sittlichen  Begriffe  und  Gesetze  ihren  Ursprung  haben."  Metaphysik  der
Silten,  in  Kanfs  Werke,  vol.  v.  p.  20,  21.  "  Wiirden  die  Gegenstande  der  Sinnenwelt
fiir  Dinge  an  sich  selbst  genommen,  und  die  oben  angefuhrten  Naturgesetze  fur  Gesetze
der  Dinge  an  sich  selbst,  so  ware  der  Widerspruch  "  (i.e.  between  Liberty  and  Necessity)
"  unvermeidlich.  Ebenso,  wenn  das  Subject  der  Freiheit  gleich  den  iibrigen  Gegen-
standenalsblose  Erscheinung  vorgestellt  wiirde,  so  konnte  ebensowohl  der  Widerspruch
nicht  vermieden  werden  :  denn  es  wiirde  ebendasselbe  von  einerlei  Gegenstande  in
derselben  Bedeutung  zugleich  bejaht  und  verneint  werden.  Ist  aber  Naturnothwen-
digkeit  bios  auf  Erscheinungen  bezogen,  und  Freiheit  bios  auf  Dinge  an  sich  selbst,
so  entspringt  kein  Widerspruch,  wenn  man  gleich  beide  Arten  von  Causalitat  annimmt
oder  zugibt,  so  schwer  oder  unmoglich  es  auch  sein  mochte,  die.  von  der  letzteren  Art
begreiflich  zu  machen."  ..."  Natur  also  und  Freiheit  ebendemselben  Dinge,
aber  in  verschiedener  Beziehung,  einmal  als  Erscheinung,  das  andremal  als  einem  Dinge
an  sich  selbst  ohne  Widerspruch  beigelegt  werden  konnen."  ..."  Nun  kann  ich
ohne  Widerspruch  sagen  :  alle  Handlungen  verniinf tiger  Wesen,  sofern  sie  Erschein-
ungen sind  (in  irgend  einer  Erfahrung  angetroffen  werden)  stehen  unter  der  Naturnoth-
wendigkeit ;  ebendieselben  Handlungen  aber,  bios  respective  auf  das  verniinftige  Subject
und  dessen  Vermogen,  nach  bloser  Vernunft  zu  handeln,  sind  frei."  Prolegomena  zu
jeder  kunftigen  Metaphysik,  in  Kanfs  Werke,  vol.  iii.  pp.  268-270.  "  Denn  ein  Geschopf
zu  sein  und  als  Naturwesen  bios  dem  Willen  seines  Urhebers  zu  folgen  ;  dennoch
aber  als  freihandelndes  Wesen,  (welches  seinen  vom  ausseren  Einfluss  unabhangigen
Willen  hat,  der  dem  ersteren  vielfaltig  zuwider  sein  kann,)  der  Zurechnung  fahig  zu
sein,  und  seine  eigene  That  doch  auch  zugleich  als  die  Wirkung  eines  hoheren  Wesens
anzusehen  :  ist  eine  Vereinbarung  von  Begriffen,  die  wir  zwar  in  der  Idee  einer  Welt,
als  des  hochsten  Gutes,  zusammen  denken  miissen  ;  die  aber  nur  der  einsehen  kann,
welcher  bis  zur  Kenntniss  der  iibersinnlichen  (intelligiblen)  Welt  durchdringt  und  die
Art  einsieht,  wie  sie  der  Sinnenwelt  zum  Grunde  liegt."  Theodicee,  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.
vi.  p.  149.  "  Nun  wollen  wir  annehmen,  die  durch  unsere  Kritik  nothwendig  gemachte
Unterscheidung  der  Dinge,  als  Gegenstande  der  Erfahrung,  von  eben  denselben,  als
Dingen  an  sich  selbst,  ware  gar  nicht  gemacht,  so  musste  der  Grundsatz  der  Causalitat
und  mithin  der  Naturmechanismus  in  Bestimmung  derselben  durchaus  von  alien
Dingen  iiberhaupt  als  wirkenden  Ursachen  gelten.  Von  eben  demselben  Wesen  also,  z.  B.
der  menschlichen  Seele,  wurde  ich  nicht  sagen  konnen,  ihr  Wille  sei  frei,  und  er  sei  doch
zugleich  der  Naturnothwendigkeit  unterworfen,  d.  i.  nicht  frei,  ohne  in  einen  offenbaren
Widerspruch  zu  gerathen ;  weil  ich  die  Seele  in  beiden  Satzen  in  eben  derselben  Bedeutung,
namlich  als  Ding  iiberhaupt  (als  Sache  an  sich  selbst),  genommen  habe,  und,  ohne  vor-
hergehende  Kritik,  auch  nicht  anders  nehmen  konnte.  Wenn  aber  die  Kritik  nicht  geirrt
hat,  da  sie  das  Object  in  zweierlei  Bedeutung  nehmen  lehrt,  namlich,  als  Erscheinung,
oder  als  Ding  an  sich  selbst  ;  wenn  die  Deduction  ihrer  Verstandesbegriffe  richtig  ist,
mithin  auch  der  Grundsatz  der  Causalitat  nur  auf  Dinge  im  ersten  Sinne  genommen,
namlich  so  fern  sie  Gegenstande  der  Erfahrung  sind,  geht,  eben  dieselben  aber  nach  der
zweiten  Bedeutung  ihm  nicht  unterworfen  sind,  so  wird  eben  derselbe  Wille  in  der  Er-
scheinung (den  sichtbaren  Handlungen)  als  dem  Naturgesetze  nothwendig  gemass  und  so
fern  nicht  frei,  und  doch  andererseits,  als  einem  Dinge  an  sich  selbst  angehorigjenem  nicht
unterworfen,  mithin  als  frei  gedacht,  ohne  dass  hiebei  ein  Widerspruch  vorgeht."  Kritik
der  reinen  Vernunft,  in  Jtanfs  Werke,  vol.  ii.  p.  24.  "  Und  hier  zeigt  die  zwar  gemeine
aber  betriigliche  Voraussetzung  der  absoluten  Realitat  der  Erscheinungen  sogleich
ihren  nachtheiligen  Einfluss,  die  Vernunft  zu  verwirren.  Denn  sind  Erscheinungen
Dinge  an  sich  selbst,  so  ist  die  Freiheit  nicht  zu  retten.  Alsdann  ist  Natur  die  vollstan  .


RESOURCES    FOR    INVESTIGATING    HISTORY  21

dige  und  an  sich  hinreichend  bestimmende  Ursache  jeder  Begebenheit,  und  die  Bedin-
gung  derselben  1st  jederzeit  nur  in  der  Reihe  der  Erscheinungen  enthalten,  die  sammt
ihrer  Wirkung  imter  dem  Naturgesetze  nothwendig  sind.  Wenn  dagegen  Erscheinungen
fiir  nichts  mehr  gelten,  als  die  in  der  That  sind,  namlich  nicht  fur  Dinge  an  sich,  sondern
blose  Vorstellungen,  sie  nach  empirischen  Gesetzen  zusammenhangen,  so  miissen  sie
selbst  noch  Griinde  haben,  die  nicht  Erscheinungen  sind."  ..."  Hier  habe  ich  nur
die  Anmerkung  machen  wollen,  dass,  da  der  durchgangige  Zusammenhang  aller  Erschein-
ungen in  einem  Context  der  Natur  ein  u'nnachlassliches  Gesetz  ist,  dieses  alle  Freiheit
nothwendig  umstiirzen  miisste,  wenn  man  der  Realitat  der  Erscheinungen  hartnackig
anhangen  wollte.  Daher  auch  diejenigen,  welche  hierin  der  gemeinen  Meinung  folgen,
niemals  dahin  haben  gelangen  konnen,  Natur  und  Freiheit  mit  einander  zu  vereinigen."
Kritik,  in  Werke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  419,  420.  Finally,  at  p.  433,  "  Man  muss  wohl  bemerken
dass  wir  hiedurch  nicht  die  Wirklichkeit  der  Freiheit,  als  eines  der  Vermogen,  welche  die
Ursache  von  den  Erscheinungen  unserer  Sinnenwelt  enthalten,  haben  darthun  wollen.
Denn  ausser  dass  dieses  gar  Heine  transcendentale  Betrachtung,  die  bios  mit  Begriffen
zu  thun  hat,  gewesen  sein  wurde,  so  konnte  es  auch  nicht  gelingen,  indem  wir  aus  der
Erfahrung  niemals  auf  etwas  was  gar  nicht  nach  Erfahrungsgesetzen  gedacht  werden  muss,
schliessen  konnen.  Ferner  haben  wir  auch  gar  nicht  einmal  die  Moglichkeit  der  Freiheit
beweisen  wollen  ;  denn  dieses  ware  auch  nicht  gelungen,  weil  wir  iiberhaupt  von  keinem
Realgrunde  und  keiner  Causalitat  aus  blosen  Begriffen  a  priori  die  Moglichkeit  erkennen
konnen.  Die  Freiheit  wird  hier  nur  als  transcendentale  Idee  behandelt,  wodurch  die
Vernunft  die  Reihe  der  Bedingungen  in  der  Erscheinung  durch  das  sinnlich  Unbedingte
schlechthin  anzuheben  denkt,  dabei  sich  aber  in  eine  Antinomie  mit  ihren  eigenen
Gesetzen,  welche  sie  dem  empirischen  Gebrauche  des  Verstandes  vorschreibt,  verwickelt.
Dass  nun  diese  Antinomie  auf  einem  blosen  Scheme  beruhe,  und  dass  Natur  der  Causa-
litat aus  Freiheit  wenigstens  nicht  widerstreite,  das  war  das  Einzige,  was  wir  leisten
konnten  und  woran  es  uns  auch  einzig  und  allein  gelegen  war."

These  passages  prove  that  Kant  saw  that  the  phenomenal  reality  of  Free  Will  is  an
indefensible  doctrine  :  and  as  the  present  work  is  an  investigation  of  the  laws  of  phenom-
ena, his  transcendental  philosophy  does  not  affect  my  conclusions.  According  to  Kant's
view  (with  which  I  am  inclined  to  agree)  the  ordinary  metaphysical  and  theological
treatment  of  this  dark  problem  is  purely  empirical,  and  therefore  has  no  value.  The
denial  of  the  supremacy  of  consciousness  follows  as  a  natural  consequence,  and  is  the
result  of  the  Kantian  philosophy,  and  not,  as  is  often  said,  the  base  of  it.


CHAPTER    II

INFLUENCE  EXERCISED  BY  PHYSICAL  LAWS  OVER  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF
SOCIETY  AND  OVER  THE  CHARACTER  OF  INDIVIDUALS

IF  we  inquire  what  those  physical  agents  are  by  which  the  human  race  is  most
powerfully  influenced,  we  shall  find  that  they  may  be  classed  under  four  heads  :
namely.Climate,  Food,  Soil,  and  the  General  Aspect  of  Nature  ;  by  which  last  I  mean
those  appearances  which,  though  presented  chiefly  to  the  sight,  have,  through  the
medium  of  that  or  other  senses,  directed  the  association  of  ideas,  and  hence  in  differ-
ent countries  have  given  rise  to  different  habits  of  national  thought.  To  one  of
these  four  classes  may  be  referred  all  the  external  phenomena  by  which  Man
has  been  permanently  affected.  The  last  of  these  classes,  or  what  I  call  the
General  Aspect  of  Nature,  produces  its  principal  results  by  exciting  the  imagin-
ation, and  by  suggesting  those  innumerable  superstitions  which  are  the  great
obstacles  to  advancing  knowledge.  And  as,  in  the  infancy  of  a  people,  the
power  of  such  superstitions  is  supreme,  it  has  happened  that  the  various  Aspects
of  Nature  have  caused  corresponding  varieties  in  the  popular  character,  and
have  imparted  to  the  national  religion  peculiarities  which,  under  certain  cir-
cumstances, it  is  impossible  to  efface.  The  other  three  agents,  namely,  Climate,
Food,  and  Soil,  have,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  had  no  direct  influence  of  this
sort  ;  but  they  have,  as  I  am  about  to  prove,  originated  the  most  important
consequences  in  regard  to  the  general  organization  of  society,  and  from  them
there  have  followed  many  of  those  large  and  conspicuous  differences  between
nations  which  are  often  ascribed  to  some  fundamental  difference  in  the  various
races  into  which  mankind  is  divided.  But  while  such  original  distinctions  of
race  are  altogether  hypothetical,1  the  discrepancies  which  are  caused  by  differ-
ence of  climate,  food,  and  soil,  are  capable  of  a  satisfactory  explanation,  and,
when  understood,  will  be  found  to  clear  up  many  of  the  difficulties  which  still
obscure  the  study  of  history.  I  purpose,  therefore,  in  the  first  place,  to  examine
the  laws  of  these  three  vast  agents  in  so  far  as  they  are  connected  with  Man
in  his  social  condition  ;  and  having  traced  the  working  of  those  laws  with  as

i  I  cordially  subscribe  to  the  remark  of  one  of  the  greatest  thinkers  of  our  time,  who
says  of  the  supposed  differences  of  race,  "  Of  all  vulgar  modes  of  escaping  from  the
consideration  of  the  effect  of  social  and  moral  influences  on  the  human  mind,  the  most
vulgar  is  that  of  attributing  the  diversities  of  conduct  and  character  to  inherent  and
natural  differences."  .Mill's  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  vol.  i.  390.  Ordinary
writers  are  constantly  falling  into  the  error  of  assuming  the  existence  of  this  difference,
which  may  or  may  not  exist,  but  which  most  assuredly  has  never  been  proved.  Some
singular  instances  of  this  will  be  found  in  Alison's  History  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  p.  336,  vol.
vi.  p.  136,  vol.  viii.  pp.  525,  526,  vol.  xiii.  p.  347  ;  where  the  historian  thinks  that  by
a  few  strokes  of  his  pen  he  can  settle  a  question  of  the  greatest  difficulty,  connected  with
some  of  the  most  intricate  problems  in  physiology.  On  the  supposed  relation  between
race  and  temperament,  see  Comte,  Philosophic  Positive,  vol.  iii.  p.  355.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  23

much  precision  as  the  present  state  of  physical  knowledge  will  allow,  I  shall  then
examine  the  remaining  agent,  namely,  the  General  Aspect  of  Nature,  and  shall
endeavour  to  point  out  the  most  important  divergences  to  which  its  variations
have,  in  different  countries,  naturally  given  rise.

Beginning,  then,  with  climate,  food,  and  soil,  it  is  evident  that  these  three
physical  powers  are  in  no  small  degree  dependent  on  each  other  :  that  is  to  say,
there  is  a  very  close  connexion  between  the  climate  of  a  country  and  the  food
which  will  ordinarily  be  grown  in  that  country  ;  while  at  the  same  time  the  food
is  itself  influenced  by  the  soil  which  produces  it,  as  also  by  the  elevation  or  depres-
sion of  the  land,  by  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  and,  in  a  word,  by  all  those  con-
ditions to  the  assemblage  of  which  the  name  of  Physical  Geography  is,  in  its
largest  sense,  commonly  given.2

The  union  between  these  physical  agents  being  thus  intimate,  it  seems  advisable
to  consider  them  not  under  their  own  separate  heads,  but  rather  under  the
separate  heads  of  the  effects  produced  by  their  united  action.  In  this  way  we
shall  rise  at  once  to  a  more  comprehensive  view  of  the  whole  question  ;  we  shall
avoid  the  confusion  that  would  be  caused  by  artificially  separating  phenomena
which  are  in  themselves  inseparable  ;  and  we  shall  be  able  to  see  more  clearly  the
extent  of  that  remarkable  influence  which,  in  an  early  stage  of  society,  the  powers
of  Nature  exercise  over  the  fortunes  of  Man.

Of  all  the  results  which  are  produced  among  a  people  by  their  climate,  food,
and  soil,  the  accumulation  of  wealth  is  the  earliest,  and  in  many  respects  the
most  important.  For  although  the  progress  of  knowledge  eventually  accelerates
the  increase  of  wealth,  it  is  nevertheless  certain  that,  in  the  first  formation  of
society,  the  wealth  must  accumulate  before  the  knowledge  can  begin.  As  long
as  every  man  is  engaged  in  collecting  the  materials  necessary  for  his  own  sub-
sistence, there  will  be  neither  leisure  nor  taste  for  higher  pursuits  ;  no  science  can
possibly  be  created,  and  the  utmost  that  can  be  effected  will  be  an  attempt  to
economize  labour  by  the  contrivance  of  such  rude  and  imperfect  instruments  as
even  the  most  barbarous  people  are  able  to  invent.

In  a  state  of  society  like  this,  the  accumulation  of  wealth  is  the  first  great  step
that  can  be  taken,  because  without  wealth  there  can  be  no  leisure,  and  without
leisure  there  can  be  no  knowledge.  If  what  a  people  consume  is  always  exactly
equal  to  what  they  possess,  there  will  be  no  residue,  and  therefore,  no  capital
being  accumulated,  there  will  be  no  means  by  which  the  unemployed  classes  may
be  maintained.3  But  if  the  produce  is  greater  than  the  consumption,  an  overplus
arises,  which,  according  to  well  known  principles,  increases  itself,*  and  eventu-
ally becomes  a  fund  out  of  which,  immediately  or  remotely,  every  one  is  sup-
ported who  does  not  create  the  wealth  upon  which  he  lives.  And  now  it  is  that
the  existence  of  an  intellectual  class  first  becomes  possible,  because  for  the  first
time  there  exists  a  previous  accumulation,  by  means  of  which  men  can  use  what
they  did  not  produce,  and  are  thus  enabled  to  devote  themselves  to  subjects  for
which  at  an  earlier  period  the  pressure  of  their  daily  wants  would  have  left  them
no  time.

2  As  to  the  proper  limits  of  physical  geography,  see  Prichard  on  Ethnology,  in  Report  of
the  British  Association  for  1847,  p.  235.     The  word  '  climate  '  I  always  use  in  the  narrow
and  popular  sense.     Dr.  Forry  and  many  previous  writers  make  it  nearly  coincide  with
'  physical  geography '  :  "  Climate  constitutes  the  aggregate  of  all  the  external  physical
circumstances  appertaining  to  each  locality  in  its  relation  to  organic  nature."     Forty's
Climate  of  the  United  States  and  its  Endemic  Influences,  New  York,  1842,  p.  127.

3  By  unemployed  classes,  I  mean  what  Adam  Smith  calls  the  unproductive  classes  ;
and  though  both  expressions  are  strictly  speaking  inaccurate,  the  word  '  unemployed  '
seems  to  convey  more  clearly  than  any  other  the  idea  in  the  text.

[*  The  "  principles  "  alluded  to  seem  to  be  the  formulas  of  the  "  Wage -Fund  theory  "
to  the  effect  that  saved  capital  "  increases  itself  "  by  employing  labour.  But  this  doc-
trine, now  abandoned  by  economists  even  as  an  account  of  the  processes  of  a  capitalistic
industrial  State,  is  doubly  inapplicable  to  the  phenomena  of  wealth-accumulation  in  a
primary  civilization.  This  seems  {o  be  recognized  by  Buckle  in  th$  next  paragraph, — -Eo,


24  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Thus  it  is  that  of  all  the  great  social  improvements  the  accumulation  of  wealth
must  be  the  first,  because  without  it  there  can  be  neither  taste  nor  leisure  for
that  acquisition  of  knowledge  on  which,  as  I  shall  hereafter  prove,  the  progress
of  civilization  depends.  Now,  it  is  evident  that  among  an  entirely  ignorant
people,  the  rapidity  with  which  wealth  is  created  will  be  solely  regulated  by  the
physical  peculiarities  of  their  country.  At  a  later  period,  and  when  the  wealth
has  been  capitalized,  other  causes  come  into  play  ;  but  until  this  occurs,  the
progress  can  only  depend  on  two  circumstances  :  first  on  the  energy  and  regularity
with  which  labour  is  conducted,  and  secondly  on  the  returns  made  to  that  labour
by  the  bounty  of  nature.  And  these  two  causes  are  themselves  the  result  of
physical  antecedents.  The  returns  made  to  labour  are  governed  by  the  fertility
of  the  soil,  which  is  itself  regulated  partly  by  the  admixture  of  its  chemical  com-
ponents, partly  by  the  extent  to  which,  from  rivers  or  from  other  natural  causes,
the  soil  is  irrigated,  and  partly  by  the  heat  and  humidity  of  the  atmosphere.  On
the  other  hand,  the  energy  and  regularity  with  which  labour  is  conducted  will
be  entirely  dependent  on  the  influence  of  climate.  This  will  display  itself  in  two
different  ways.  The  first,  which  is  a  very  obvious  consideration,  is,  that  if  the
heat  is  intense,  men  will  be  indisposed,  and  in  some  degree  unfitted,  for  that  active
industry  which  in  a  milder  climate  they  might  willingly  have  exerted.  The
other  consideration,  which  has  been  less  noticed,  but  is  equally  important,  is,
that  climate  influences  labour  not  only  by  enervating  the  labourer  or  by  invigorat-
ing him,  but  also  by  the  effect  it  produces  on  the  regularity  of  his  habits.4  Thus
we  find  that  no  people  living  in  a  very  northern  latitude  have  ever  possessed  that
steady  and  unflinching  industry  for  which  the  inhabitants  of  temperate  regions
are  remarkable.  The  reason  of  this  becomes  clear,  when  we  remember  that  in
the  more  northern  countries  the  severity  of  the  weather,  and,  at  some  seasons,
the  deficiency  of  light,  render  it  impossible  for  the  people  to  continue  their  usual
out-of-door  employments.  The  result  is,  that  the  working-classes,  being  com-
pelled to  cease  from  their  ordinary  pursuits,  are  rendered  more  prone  to  desultory
habits  ;  the  chain  of  their  industry  is  as  it  were  broken,  and  they  lose  that  impetus
which  long-continued  and  uninterrupted  practice  never  fails  to  give.  Hence
there  arises  a  national  character  more  fitful  and  capricious  than  that  possessed
by  a  people  whose  climate  permits  the  regular  exercise  of  their  ordinary  industry.
Indeed,  so  powerful  is  this  principle,  that  we  may  perceive  its  operation  even
under  the  most  opposite  circumstances.  It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive  a
greater  difference  in  government,  laws,  religion,  and  manners,  than  that  which
distinguishes  Sweden  and  Norway,  on  the  one  hand,  from  Spain  and  Portugal  on
the  other.  But  these  four  countries  have  one  great  point  in  common.  In  all  of
them  continued  agricultural  industry  is  impracticable.  In  the  two  southern
countries,  labour  is  interrupted  by  the  heat,  by  the  dryness  of  the  weather,  and
by  the  consequent  state  of  the  soil.  In  the  two  northern  countries,  the  same
effect  is  produced  by  the  severity  of  the  winter  and  the  shortness  of  the  days.
The  consequence  is,  that  these  four  nations,  though  so  different  in  other  respects,
are  all  remarkable  for  a  certain  instability  and  fickleness  of  character  ;  presenting
a  striking  contrast  to  the  more  regular  and  settled  habits  which  are  established
in  countries  whose  climate  subjects  the  working  classes  to  fewer  interruptions,
and  imposes  on  them  the  necessity  of  a  more  constant  and  unremitting  employ-
ment.5

These  are  the  great  physical  causes  by  which  the  creation  of  wealth  is  governed.
There  are,  no  doubt,  other  circumstances  which  operate  with  considerable  force,

4  This  has  been  entirely  neglected  by  the  three  most  philosophical  writers  on  climate —
Montesquieu,  Hume,  and  M.  Charles  Comte  in  his  Traiti  de  Legislation.     It  is  also  omitted
in  the  remarks  of  M.  Guizot  on  the  influence  of  climate,  Civilisation  en  Europe,  p.  97.

5  See  the  admirable  remarks  in  Laing's  Denmark,  1852,  pp.  204,  366,  367  ;  though
Norway  appears  to  be  a  better  illustration  than  Denmark.     In  Key's  Science  Sociale,
vol.  i.  pp.  195,  196,  there  are  some  calculations  respecting  the  average  loss  to  agricultural
industry  caused  by  changes  in  the  weather ;  but  no  notice  is  taken  of  the  connexion
between  these  changes,  when  abrupt,  and  the  tone  of  the  national  character,


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  25

and  which,  in  a  more  advanced  state  of  society,  possess  an  equal,  and  sometimes
a  superior,  influence.  But  this  is  at  a  later  period  ;  and  looking  at  the  history
of  wealth  in  its  earliest  stage,  it  will  be  found  to  depend  entirely  on  soil*  and
climate  :  the  soil  regulating  the  returns  made  to  any  given  amount  of  labour  ;
the  climate  regulating  the  energy  and  constancy  of  the  labour  itself.  It  requires
but  a  hasty  glance  at  past  events,  to  prove  the  immense  power  of  these  two  great
physical  conditions.  For  there  is  no  instance  in  history  of  any  country  being
civilized  by  its  own  efforts,  unless  it  has  possessed  one  of  these  conditions  in  a
very  favourable  form.  In  Asia,  civilization  has  always  been  confined  to  that
vast  tract  where  a  rich  and  alluvial  soil  f  has  secured  to  man  that  wealth  without
some  share  of  which  no  intellectual  progress  can  begin.  This  great  region  extends,
with  a  few  interruptions,  from  the  east  of  Southern  China  to  the  western  coasts
of  Asia  Minor,  of  Phoenicia,  and  of  Palestine.  To  the  north  of  this  immense
belt,  there  is  a  long  line  of  barren  country  which  has  invariably  been  peopled
by  rude  and  wandering  tribes,  who  are  kept  in  poverty  by  the  ungenial  nature
of  the  soil,  and  who,  as  long  as  they  remained  on  it,  have  never  emerged  from
their  uncivilized  state.  How  entirely  this  depends  on  physical  causes  is  evident
from  the  fact  that  these  same  Mongolian  and  Tartarian  hordes  have,  at  different
periods,  founded  great  monarchies  in  China,  in  India,  and  in  Persia,  and  have
on  all  such  occasions  attained  a  civilization  nowise  inferior  to  that  possessed  by
the  most  flourishing  of  the  ancient  kingdoms.  For  in  the  fertile  plains  of  Southern
Asia,6  nature  has  supplied  all  the  materials  of  wealth  ;  and  there  it  was  that  these
barbarous  tribes  acquired  for  the  first  time  some  degree  of  refinement,  produced
a  national  literature,  and  organized  a  national  polity  ;  none  of  which  things
they,  in  their  native  land,  had  been  able  to  effect.7  In  the  same  way,  the  Arabs,
in  their  own  country,  have,  owing  to  the  extreme  aridity  of  their  soil,8  always
been  a  rude  and  uncultivated  people  ;  for  in  their  case,  as  in  all  others,  great
ignorance  is  the  fruit  of  great  poverty.  But  in  the  seventh  century  they  con-
quered Persia  ;9  in  the  eighth  century  they  conquered  the  best  part  of  Spain  ;io
in  the  ninth  century  they  conquered  the  Punjaub,  and  eventually  nearly  the

6  This  expression  has  been  used  by  different  geographers  in  different  senses  ;  but  I  take
it  in  its  common  acceptation,  without  reference  to  the  more  strictly  physical  view  of
Ritter  and  his  followers  in  regard  to  Central  Asia.     See  Prichard's  Physical  History  of
Mankind,  vol.  iv.  p.  278,  edit.  1844.     At  p.  92,  Prichard  makes  the  Himalaya  the  southern
boundary  of  Central  Asia.

7  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  Tartars  of  Tibet  received  even  their  alphabet  from
India.     See  the  interesting  Essay  on  Tartarian  Coins  in  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  iv.
pp.  276,  277  :  and  on  the  Scythian  Alphabet,  see  vol.  xii.  p.  336.

8  In  Somerville' s  Physical  Geography,  vol.  i.  p.  132,  it  is  said  that  in  Arabia  there  are
"  no  rivers  "  ;  but  Mr.  Wellsted  (Travels  in  Arabia,  vol.  ii.  p.  409)  mentions  one  which
empties  itself  into  the  sea  five  miles  west  of  Aden.     On  the  streams  in  Arabia,  see  Meiners
iiber  die  Fruchtbarkeit  der  Lander,  vol.  i.  pp.  149,  150.     That  the  sole  deficiency  is  want  of
irrigation  appears  from  Burckhardt,  who  says  (Travels  in  Arabia,  vol.  i.  p.  240),  "  In
Arabia,  wherever  the  ground  can  be  irrigated  by  wells,  the  sands  may  be  soon  made
productive."     And  for  a  striking  description  of  one  of  the  oases  of  Oman,  which  shows
what  Arabia  might  have  been  with  a  good  river  system,  see  Journal  of  Geographical  Society,
vol.  vii.  pp.  1 06,  107.

9  Mr.  Morier  (Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  vii.  p.  230)  says,  "  the  conquest  of  Persia  by
the  Saracens,  A.D.  651."     However,  the  fate  of  Persia  was  decided  by  the  battles  of
Kudseah  and  Nahavund,  which  were  fought  in  638  and  641  :  see  Malcolm's  History  of
Persia,  vol.  i.  pp.  xvi.  139,  142.

10  In  712.     Hallam's  Middle  Ages,  vol.  i.  p.  369.

[*  Soil  here  includes  such  a  factor  as  the  annual  overflow  of  the  Nile,  noted  below.
—ED.]

[t  It  is  important  to  note  that  in  Mesopotamia,  as  in  Egypt,  the  fertility  of  the  soil
depended  on  the  annual  overflow  of  the  great  rivers,  with  canalization.  Cp.  E.  Meyer,
Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  i.  $  128  ;  Jastrow,  Religion  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  1898,
pp.  29-31.]


26  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

whole  of  India.11  Scarcely  were  they  established  in  their  fresh  settlements,
when  their  character  seemed  to  undergo  a  great  change.  They,  who  in  their
original  land  were  little  else  than  roving  savages,  were  now  for  the  first  time  able
to  accumulate  wealth,  and,  therefore,  for  the  first  time  did  they  make  some
progress  in  the  arts  of  civilization.  In  Arabia  they  had  been  a  mere  race  of
wandering  shepherds  ;12  in  their  new  abodes  they  became  the  founders  of  mighty
empires, — they  built  cities,  endowed  schools,  collected  libraries  ;  and  the  traces
of  their  power  are  still  to  be  seen  at  Cordova,  at  Bagdad,  and  at  Delhi.13

11  They  were  established  in  the  Punjaub  early  in  the  ninth  century,  but  did  not  conquer
Guzerat  and  Malwa  until  five  hundred  years  later.     Compare  Wilson's  note  in  the  Vishnu
Purana,  pp.  481,  482,  with  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  ix.  pp.  187,  188,  203.  On  their  progress
in  the  more  southern  part  of  the  Peninsula,  see  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  iii.  pp.  222,
223,  vol.  iv.  pp.  28-30.

12  «<A  race  of  pastoral  barbarians."     Dickinson  on  the  Arabic  Language,  in  Journal  of
Asiat.  Society,  vol.  v.  p.  323.     Compare  Reynier,  Economie  des  Arabes,  pp.  27,  28  ;
where,  however,  a  very  simple  question  is  needlessly  complicated.     The  old  Persian
writers  bestowed  on  them  the  courteous  appellation  of  "  a  band  of  naked  lizard-eaters."
Malcolm's  Hist,  of  Persia,  vol.  i.  p.  133.     Indeed,  there  are  few  things  in  history  better
proved   than   the  barbarism   of  a  people  whom  some  writers  wish   to  invest  with  a
romantic  interest.     The  eulogy  passed  on  them  by  Meiners  is  rather  suspicious  ;  for  he
concludes  by  saying,  "  die  Eroberungen  der  Araber  waren  hochst  selten  so  blutig  und
zerstorend,  als  die   Eroberungen   der  Tataren,  Persen,   Turken,  u.s.w.,  in  altern  und
neuern  Zeiten  waren."     Fruchtbarkeit  der  Lander,  vol.  i.  p.  153.     If  this  is  the  best  that
can  be  said,  the  comparison  with  Tartars  and  Turks  does  not  prove  much  ;  but  it  is
singular  that  this  learned  author  should  have  forgotten  a  passage  in  Diodorus  Siculus
which  gives  a  pleasant  description  of  them  nineteen  centuries  ago  on  the  eastern  side.
Bibliothec.  Hist.  lib.  ii.  vol.  ii.  p.  137.     ^xovffl  ^  fi'-ov  \"Q<rTpiidn>,  KCLI  TroAXV  r?}y  6/j,6pov
X&PO-S  KdTaTptxovTes  \r)(rTeiJov<Ti.t>,  etc.

[The  civilization  of  ancient  Arabia  is  here  underestimated  ;  and  the  notion  of  "the"
Arabians  as  a  homogeneous  people  at  one  state  of  culture  is  erroneous.  Arabia  has
a  considerable  area  of  rain  and  spring- watered  country,  especially  in  the  south-west,
and  many  of  the  valleys  are  very  fertile.  Hughes'  Manual  of  Geography,  ii.  §  25.  In  South
Arabia,  from  five  to  eight  centuries  B.C.,  there  was  a  wealthy  civilization,  carrying  on
commerce  with  the  neighbouring  countries  (Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  i.  §§  186, 403 ),
and  of  this  there  are  notable  architectural  remains.  At  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  of
our  era,  only  a  fifth  of  the  population  lived  the  Bedouin  life  ;  and  not  only  in  the  Hedjaz
but  in  Nedj  there  were  a  number  of  towns,  whose  inhabitants  practised  agriculture  and
commerce.  As  of  old,  they  dealt  in  the  precious  metals,  frankincense  and  slaves  (Hauri,
Der  Islam,  1882,  pp.  6-7).  As  the  records  of  the  life  of  Mohammed  show,  he  was  born  of
town-dwellers  ;  in  his  yotfth  he  was  a  car  a  van -trader  as  well  as  a  shepherd  ;  and  among
town-dwellers  he  made  his  first  converts.  When  Islam  became  a  movement  for  con-
quest, it  naturally  enrolled  Arabs  of  all  modes  of  life. — ED.]

13  The  only  branch  of  knowledge  which  the  Arabians  ever  raised  to  a  science  was
astronomy,  which  began  to  be  cultivated  under  the  caliphs  about  the  middle  of  the  eighth
century,  and  went  on  improving  until  "  la  ville  de  Bagdad  fut,  pendant  le  dixieme  siecle,
le  theatre  principal  de  1'astronomie  chez  les  orientaux."     Montucla,  Histoire  des  Math£ma  •
liques,  vol.  i.  pp.  355,  364.     The  old  Pagan  Arabs,  like  most  barbarous  people  living  in  a
clear  atmosphere,  had  such  an  empirical  acquaintance  with  the  celestial  phenomena  as
was  useful  for  practical  purposes  ;  but   there   is  no   evidence  to  justify  the   common
opinion  that  they  studied  this  subject  as  a  science.     Dr.  Dorn  (Transactions  of  the  Asiatic
Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  371 )  says,  "  Of  a  scientific  knowledge  of  astronomy  among  them  no
traces  can  be  discovered."   Beausobre  (Histoire  de  Manichee,  vol.  i.  p.  20)  is  quite  enthusi-
astic about  the  philosophy  of  the  Arabs  in  the  time  of  Pythagoras  !  and  he  tells  us,  that
"  ces  peuples  ont  toujours  cultive  les  sciences."     To  establish  this  fact,  he  quotes  a  long
passage  from  a  life  of  Mohammed  written  early  in  the  eighteenth  century  by  Boulain-
villiers,  whom  he  calls  "  un  des  plus  beaux  genies  de  France."    If  this  is  an  accurate
description,  those  who  have  read  the  works  of  Boulainvilliers  will  think  that  France  was
badly  off  for  men  of  genius ;  and  as  to  his  life  of  Mohammed,  it  is  little  better  than  a,


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  27

Precisely  in  the  same  manner,  there  is  adjoining  Arabia  at  the  north,  and  only
separated  from  it  elsewhere  by  the  narrow  waters  of  the  Red  Sea,  an  immense
sandy  plain,  which,  covering  the  whole  of  Africa  in  the  same  latitude,  extends
westward  until  it  reaches  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic.14  This  enormous  tract  is,
like  Arabia,  a  barren  waste  ;15  and  therefore,  as  in  Arabia,  the  inhabitants  have
always  been  entirely  uncivilized,  acquiring  no  knowledge,  simply  because  they
have  accumulated  no  wealth.16  But  this  great  desert  is,  in  its  eastern  part,
irrigated  by  the  waters  of  the  Nile,  the  overflowing  of  which  covers  the  sand  with
a  rich  alluvial  deposit,  that  yields  to  labour  the  most  abundant,  and  indeed  the
most  extraordinary,  returns.17  The  consequence  is,  that  in  that  spot,  wealth
was  rapidly  accumulated,  the  cultivation  of  knowledge  quickly  followed,  and

romance  :  the  author  was  ignorant  of  Arabic,  and  knew  nothing  which  had  not  been
already  communicated  by  Maracci  and  Pococke.  See  Biographic  Universelle,  vol.  v.
p.  321.

In  regard  to  the  later  Arabian  astronomers,  one  of  their  great  merits  was  to  approximate
to  the  value  of  the  annual  precession  much  closer  than  Ptolemy  had  done.  See  Grant's
History  of  Physical  Astronomy,  1852,  p.  319.

14  Indeed  it  goes  beyond  it :  "  the  trackless  sands  of  the  Sahara  desert,  which  is  even
prolonged  for  miles  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean  in  the  form  of  sandbanks."  Somerville's
Physical  Geography,  vol.  i.  p.  149.  For  a  singular  instance  of  one  of  these  sandbanks
being  formed  into  an  island,  see  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  284.  The  Sahara
desert,  exclusive  of  Bornou  and  Darfour,  covers  an  area  of  194,000  square  leagues  ;  that
is,  nearly  three  times  the  size  of  France,  or  twice  the  size  of  the  Mediterranean.  Compare
Lyell's  Geology,  p.  694,  with  Somerville's  Connexion  of  the  Sciences,  p.  294.  As  to  the
probable  southern  limits  of  the  plateau  of  the  Sahara,  see  Richardson's  Mission  to  Central
Africa,  1853,  vol.  ii.  pp.  146,  156  ;  and  as  to  the  part  of  it  adjoining  the  Mandingo  country,
see  Mungo  Park's  Travels,  vol.  i.  pp.  237,  238.  Respecting  the  country  south  of  Mandara,
some  scanty  information  was  collected  by  Denham  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Tchad.
Denham's  Northern  and  Central  Africa,  pp.  121,  122,  144-146.

13  Richardson,  who  travelled  through  it  south  of  Tripoli,  notices  its  "  features  of
sterility,  of  unconquerable  barrenness."  Richardson's  Sahara,  1848,  vol.  i.  p.  86  ;  and
see  the  striking  picture  at  p.  409.  The  long  and  dreary  route  from  Mourzouk  to  Yeou,
on  Lake  Tchad,is  described  by  Denham,  one  of  the  extremely  few  Europeans  who  have
performed  that  hazardous  journey.  Denham' s  Central  Africa,  pp.  2-60.  Even  on  the
shore  of  the  Tchad  there  is  hardly  any  vegetation,  "  a  coarse  grass  and  a  small  bell-flower
being  the  only  plants  that  I  could  discover,"  p.  90.  Compare  his  remark  on  Bornou,
p.  317.  The  condition  of  part  of  the  desert  in  the  fourteenth  century  is  described  in  the
Travels  of  Ibn  Batuta,  p.  233,  which  should  be  compared  with  the  account  given  by
Diodorus  Siculus  of  the  journey  of  Alexander  to  the  temple  of  Ammon.  Bibliothec.
Historic,  lib.  xvii.  vol.  vii.  p.  348.

16  Richardson,  who  travelled  in  1850  from  Tripoli  to  within  a  few  days  of  Lake  Tchad,
was  struck  by  the  stationary  character  of  the  people.     He  says,  "Neither  in  the  desert
nor  in  the  kingdoms  of  Central  Africa  is  there  any  march  of  civilization.     All  goes  on
according  to  a  certain  routine  established  for  ages  past."     Mission  to  Central  Africa,
vol.  i.  pp.  304,  305.     See  similar  remarks  in  Pallme's  Travels  in  Kordofan,  pp.  108,  109.

17  Abd-Allatif,  who  was  in  Egypt  early  in  the  thirteenth  century,  gives  an  interesting
account  of  the  rising  of  the  Nile,  to  which  Egypt  owes  its  fertility.     Abd-Allatif,  Relation
de  I'Egypte,  pp.  329-340,  374-376,  and  Appendix,  p.  504.     See  also  on  these  periodical
inundations,   Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  iv.  pp.   101-104  ;  and  on  the  half-
astronomical  half -theological  notions  connected  with  them,  pp.  372-377,  vol.  v.  pp.  291,
292.     Compare  on  the  religious  importance  of  the  Nile  Bunsen's  Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  409.
The  expression,  therefore,  of  Herodotus  (book  ii.  chap.  v.  vol.  i.  p.  484),  Supov  TOV  Trora^toD.
is  true  in  a  much  larger  sense  than  he  intended ;  since  to  the  Nile  Egypt  owes  all  the  phy-
sical peculiarities  which  distinguish  it  from  Arabia  and  the  great  African  desert.  Compare
Heeren's  African  Nations,  vol.  ii.  p.  58  ;  Reynier,  Economie  des  Arabes,  p.  3  ;  Postans  on
the  Nile  and  Indus,  in  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  vii.  p.  275  ;  and  on  the  difference
between  the  soil  of  the  Nile  and  that  of  the  surrounding  desert,  see  Volney,  Voyage  en
Syrie  et  en  Egypte,  vol.  i.  p.  14,


28  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

this  narrow  strip  of  land  18  became  the  seat  of  Egyptian  civilization;  a  civilization
which,  though  grossly  exaggerated,19  forms  a  striking  contrast  to  the  barbarism  of
the  other  nations  of  Africa,  none  of  which  have  been  able  to  work  out  their
own  progress,  or  emerge,  in  any  degree,  from  the  ignorance  to  which  the  penury
of  nature  has  doomed  them.*

These  considerations  clearly  prove  that  of  the  two  primary  causes  of  civiliza-
tion, the  fertility  of  the  soil  is  the  one  which  in  the  ancient  world  exercised  most
influence.  But  in  European  civilization,  the  other  great  cause,  that  is  to  say,
climate,  has  been  the  most  powerful  ;  and  this,  as  we  have  seen,  produces  an
effect  partly  on  the  capacity  of  the  labourer  for  work,  partly  on  the  regularity
or  irregularity  of  his  habits.  The  difference  in  the  result  has  curiously  corre-
sponded with  the  difference  in  the  cause.  For  although  all  civilization  must  have
for  its  antecedent  the  accumulation  of  wealth,  still  what  subsequently  occurs  will
be  in  no  small  degree  determined  by  the  conditions  under  which  the  accumulation
took  place.  In  Asia,  and  in  Africa,  the  condition  was  a  fertile  soil,  causing  an
abundant  return  ;  in  Europe,  it  was  a  happier  climate,  causing  more  successful
labour.  In  the  former  case,  the  effect  depends  on  the  relation  between  the  soil
and  its  produce  ;  in  other  words,  the  mere  operation  of  one  part  of  external
nature  upon  another. f  In  the  latter  case,  the  effect  depends  on  the  relation
between  the  climate  and  the  labourer  ;  that  is  the  operation  of  external  nature
not  upon  itself,  but  upon  man.  Of  these  two  classes  of  relations,  the  first,  being
the  less  complicated,  is  the  less  liable  to  disturbance,  and  therefore  came  sooner
into  play.  Hence  it  is  that,  in  the  march  of  civilization,  the  priority  is  un-
questionably due  to  the  most  fertile  parts  of  Asia  and  Africa.  But  although
their  civilization  was  the  earliest,  it  was  very  far  indeed  from  being  the  best  or
most  permanent.  Owing  to  circumstances  which  I  shall  presently  state,  the
only  progress  which  is  really  effective  depends,  not  upon  the  bounty  of  nature,
but  upon  the  energy  of  man.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  civilization  of  Europe,
which  in  its  earliest  stage  was  governed  by  climate,  has  shown  a  capacity  of
development  unknown  to  those  civilizations  which  were  originated  by  soil.  For
the  powers  of  nature,  notwithstanding  their  apparent  magnitude,  are  limited

18  "  The  average  breadth  of  the  valley  from  one  mountain -range  to  the  other,  between
Cairo  in  Lower,  and  Edfoo  in  Upper  Egypt,  is  only  about  seven  miles  ;  and  that  of  the
cultivable  land,  whose  limits  depend  on  the  inundation,  scarcely  exceeds  five  and  a  half."
Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  p.  216.     According  to  Gerard,  "  the  mean  width
of  the  valley  between  Syene  and  Cairo  is  about  nine  miles."     Note  in  Heeren's  African
Nations,  vol.  ii.  p.  62.

19  I  will  give  one  instance  of  this  from  an  otherwise  sensible  writer,  and  a  man  too  of
considerable  learning  :  "As  to  the  physical  knowledge  of  the  Egyptians,  their  contem-
poraries gave  them  credit  for  the  astonishing  power  of  their  magic  ;  and  as  we  cannot
suppose  that  the  instances  recorded  in  Scripture  were  to  be  attributed  to  the  exertion  of
supernatural  powers,  we  must  conclude  that  they  were  in  possession  of  a  more  intimate
knowledge  of  the  laws  and  combinations  of  nature  than  what  is  professed  by  the  most
learned  men  of  the  present  age."     Hamilton's  Mgyptiaca,  pp.  61,  62.     It  is  a  shame  that
such  nonsense  should  be  written  in  the  nineteenth  century  :  and  yet  a  still  more  recent
author  (Vyse  on  the  Pyramids,  vol.  i.  p.  28)  assures  us  that  "  the  Egyptians,  for  especial
purposes,'  were  endowed  with  great  wisdom  and  science."     Science  properly  so  called,
the  Egyptians  had  none  ;  and  as  to  their  wisdom,  it  was  considerable  enough  to  distin-
guish them  from  barbarous  nations  like  the  old  Hebrews,  but  it  was  inferior  to  that  of
the  Greeks,  and  it  was  of  course  immeasurably  below  that  of  modern  Europe.

1  [*  In  terms  of  the  evolution  theory  this  statement  must  of  course  be  reduced  to  merely
relative  terms,  the  Africans  having,  like  all  other  races,  evolved  from  a  lower  order  of
animal  life. — ED.]

[f  This  generalization  omits  to  note  the  special  reaction  of  nature  on  men's  habits  in
the  case  of  the  annual  inundations  of  the  Euphrates,  the  Tigris,  and  the  Nile.  It  also
underrates  the  habits  of  industry  of  the  Chinese  ;  and,  as  will  be  seen  later,  the  theory  of
the  reaction  of  climate  on  man  in  Europe  overlooks  the  influence  of  culture -contacts
from  Asia  and  Egypt. — ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  29

and  stationary  ;  at  all  events,  we  have  not  the  slightest  proof  that  they  have  ever
increased,  or  that  they  will  ever  be  able  to  increase.  But  the  powers  of  man,  so
far  as  experience  and  analogy  can  guide  us,  are  unlimited  ;  nor  are  we  possessed
of  any  evidence  which  authorizes  us  to  assign  even  an  imaginary  boundary  at
which  the  human  intellect  will  of  necessity  be  brought  to  a  stand.  And  as  this
power  which  the  mind  possesses  of  increasing  its  own  resources  is  a  peculiarity
confined  to  man,  and  one  eminently  distinguishing  him  from  what  is  commonly
called  external  nature,  it  becomes  evident  that  the  agency  of  climate,  which
gives  him  wealth  by  stimulating  his  labour,  is  more  favourable  to  his  ultimate
progress  than  the  agency  of  soil,  which  likewise  gives  him  wealth,  but  which  does
so,  not  by  exciting  his  energies,  but  by  virtue  of  a  mere  physical  relation  between
the  character  of  the  soil  and  the  quantity  or  value  of  the  produce  that  it  almost
spontaneously  affords.*

Thus  far  as  to  the  different  ways  in  which  climate  and  soil  affect  the  creation
of  wealth.  But  another  point  of  equal,  or  perhaps  of  superior,  importance
remains  behind.  After  the  wealth  has  been  created,  a  question  arises  as  to  how
it  is  to  be  distributed;  that  is  to  say,  what  proportion  is  to  go  to  the  upper  classes
and  what  to  the  lower.  In  an  advanced  stage  of  society,  this  depends  upon
several  circumstances  of  great  complexity,  and  which  it  is  not  necessary  here  to
examine.20  But  in  a  very  early  stage  of  society,  and  before  its  later  and  refined
complications  have  begun,  it  may,  I  think,  be  proved  that  the  distribution  of
wealth  is,  like  its  creation,  governed  entirely  by  physical  laws  ;  and  that  those
laws  are  moreover  so  active  as  to  have  invariably  kept  a  vast  majority  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  fairest  portion  of  the  globe  in  a  condition  of  constant  and
inextricable  poverty.  If  this  can  be  demonstrated,  the  immense  importance  of
such  laws  is  manifest.  For  since  wealth  is  an  undoubted  source  of  power,  it  is
evident  that,  supposing  other  things  equal,  an  inquiry  into  the  distribution  of
wealth  is  an  inquiry  into  the  distribution  of  power,  and,  as  such,  will  throw  great
light  on  the  origin  of  those  social  and  political  inequalities,  the  play  and  opposi-
tion of  which  form  a  considerable  part  of  the  history  of  every  civilized  country.

If  we  take  a  general  view  of  this  subject,  we  may  say  that  after  the  creation
and 'accumulation  of  wealth  have  once  fairly  begun,  it  will  be  distributed  among
two  classes,  those  who  labour,  and  those  who  do  not  labour  ;  the  latter  being,  as
a  class,  the  more  able,  the  former  the  more  numerous.  The  fund  by  which  both
classes  are  supported  is  immediately  created  by  the  lower  class,  whose  physical
energies  are  directed,  combined,  and  as  it  were  economized,  by  the  superior  skill
of  the  upper  class.  The  reward  of  the  workmen  is  called  their  wages  ;  the  reward
of  the  contrivers  is  called  their  profits.  At  a  later  period,  there  will  arise  what
may  be  called  the  saving  class  ;  that  is,  a  body  of  men  who  neither  contrive  nor
work,  but  lend  their  accumulations  to  those  who  contrive,  and  in  return  for  the
loan,  receive  a  part  of  that  reward  which  belongs  to  the  contriving  class.  In  this

20  Indeed  many  of  them  are  still  unknown  ;  for,  as  M.  Rey  justly  observes,  most  writers
pay  too  exclusive  an  attention  to  the  production  of  wealth,  and  neglect  the  laws  of  its
distribution.  Rey,  Science  Sociale,  vol.  iii.  p.  271.  In  confirmation  of  this,  I  may  mention
the  theory  of  rent,  which  was  only  discovered  about  half  a  century  ago,  and  which  is  con-
nected with  so  many  subtle  arguments  that  it  is  not  yet  generally  adopted  ;  and  even
some  of  its  advocates  have  shown  themselves  unequal  to  defending  their  own  cause.
The  great  law  of  the  ratio  between  the  cost  of  labour  and  the  profits  of  stock  is  the  highest
generalization  we  have  reached  respecting  the  distribution  of  wealth  ;  but  it  cannot  be
consistently  admitted  by  any  one  who  holds  that  rent  enters  into  price.  [As  is  pointed
out  by  McCulloch  in  his  Literature  of  Political  Economy  (1845),  and  in  his  edition  of  the
Wealth  of  Nations  (1838,  pp.  xlvii,  452-3),  the  theory  of  rent  was  clearly  set  forth  by
Dr.  James  Anderson  in  1777,  a  year  after  the  issue  of  Adam  Smith's  great  work.  It
seems  to  have  been  independently  rediscovered  by  West  and  Malthus  in  1815. — ED.]

[*  Strictly  speaking,  the  alleged  increase  of  "  the  mind's  "  resources  takes  place  by
way  of  comprehension  and  exploitation  of  the  resources  of  nature,  which  are  thus  not
limited  and  stationary  any  more  than  man's.  And  man  obviously  cannot  transcend
the  resources  of  nature,  wherein  he  exists. — ED.]


30  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

case,  the  members  of  the  saving  class  are  rewarded  for  their  abstinence  in  refrain-
ing from  spending  their  accumulations,*  and  this  reward  is  termed  the  interest
of  their  money  ;  so  that  there  is  made  a  threefold  division, — Interest,  Profits,
and  Wages.  But  this  is  a  subsequent  arrangement,  which  can  only  take  place
to  any  extent  when  wealth  has  been  considerably  accumulated  ;  and  in  the  stage
of  society  we  are  now  considering,  this  third,  or  saving  class,  can  hardly  be  said
to  have  a  separate  existence.21  For  our  present  purpose,  therefore,  it  is  enough
to  ascertain  what  those  natural  laws  are,  which,  as  soon  as  wealth  is  accumulated,
regulate  the  proportion  in  which  it  is  distributed  to  the  two  classes  of  labourers
and  employers.

Now,  it  is  evident  that  wages  being  the  price  paid  for  labour,  the  rate  of  wages
must,  like  the  price  of  all  other  commodities,  vary  according  to  the  changes  in
the  market.  If  the  supply  of  labourers  outstrips  the  demand,  wages  will  fall  ;
if  the  demand  exceeds  the  supply,  they  will  rise.  Supposing,  therefore,  that  in
any  country  there  is  a  given  amount  of  wealth  to  be  divided  between  employers
and  workmen,  every  increase  in  the  number  of  the  workmen  will  tend  to  lessen
the  average  reward  each  can  receive.  And  if  we  set  aside  those  disturbing  causes
by  which  all  general  views  are  affected,  it  will  be  found  that,  in  the  long  run,  the
question  of  wages  is  a  question  of  population  ;  for  although  the  total  sum  of  the
wages  actually  paid  depends  upon  the  largeness  of  the  fund  from  which  they
are  drawn,  still  the  amount  of  wages  received  by  each  man  must  diminish  as  the
claimants  increase,  unless,  owing  to  other  circumstances,  the  fund  itself  should
so  advance  as  to  keep  pace  with  the  greater  demands  made  upon  it.22

al  In  a  still  more  advanced  stage,  there  is  a  fourth  division  of  wealth,  and  part  of  the
produce  of  labour  is  absorbed  by  Rent.  This,  however,  is  not  an  element  of  price,  but
a  consequence  of  it ;  and  in  the  ordinary  march  of  affairs,  considerable  time  must  elapse
before  it  can  begin.  Rent,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  is  the  price  paid  for  using  the
natural  and  indestructible  powers  of  the  soil,  and  must  not  be  confused  with  rent  com-
monly so  called  ;  for  this  last  also  includes  the  profits  of  stock.  I  notice  this,  because
several  of  the  opponents  of  Ricardo  have  placed  the  beginning  of  rent  too  early,  by  over-
looking the  fact  that  apparent  rent  is  very  often  profits  disguised.  [Ricardo's  principal
opponent  in  this  matter  was  the  Rev.  Richard  Jones.  See  his  Essay  on  the  Distribution
of  Wealth,  pt.  i.  1831,  and  Whewell's  preface  to  his  Literary  Remains,  1859.  Below,  p.  42,
Buckle  seems  to  follow  Jones  rather  than  Ricardo. — ED.]

22  "  Wages  depend,  then,  on  the  proportion  between  the  number  of  the  labouring
population,  and  the  capital  or  other  funds  devoted  to  the  purchase  of  labour  ;  we  will  say,
for  shortness,  the  capital.  If  wages  are  higher  at  one  time  or  place  than  at  another,  if
the  subsistence  and  comfort  of  the  class  of  hired  labourers  are  more  ample,  it  is,  and  can
be,  for  no  other  reason  than  because  capital  bears  a  greater  proportion  to  population.  1 1
is  not  the  absolute  amount  of  accumulation  or  of  production  that  is  of  importance  to  the
labouring  class  ;  it  is  not  the  amount  even  of  the  funds  destined  for  distribution  among
the  labourers  ;  it  is  the  proportion  between  those  funds  and  the  numbers  among  whom
they  are  shared.  The  condition  of  the  class  can  be  bettered  in  no  other  way  than  by
altering  that  proportion  to  their  advantage  ;  and  every  scheme  for  their  benefit  which
does  not  proceed  on  this  as  its  foundation,  is,  for  all  permanent  purposes,  a  delusion."  MilVs
Principles  of  Political  Economy,  1849,  vol.  i.  p.  425.  See  also  vol.  ii.  pp.  264,  265,  and
M' Outlook's  Political  Economy,  pp.  379,  380.  Ricardo,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Influence  of  a
Low  Price  of  Corn,  has  stated,  with  his  usual  terseness,  the  three  possible  forms  of  this
question  :  "  The  rise  or  fall  of  wages  is  common  to  all  states  of  society,  whether  it  be  the
stationary,  the  advancing,  or  the  retrograde  state.  In  the  stationary  state,  it  is  regulated
wholly  by  the  increase  or  falling  off  of  the  population.  In  the  advancing  state,  it  depends
on  whether  the  capital  or  the  population  advance  at  the  more  rapid  course.  In  the  retro-

[*  The  conception  of  "  the  reward  of  abstinence  "  is  the  contribution  of  Prof.  N.  W.
Senior  (1836)  to  the  "  Wage-Fund  theory,"  which,  as  above  noted,  is  now  virtually
abandoned  by  economists.  It  is  unduly  hard  on  that  theory,  however,  to  represent  the
"  abstainers  "  as  "  a  body  of  men  who  neither  contrive  nor  work."  How  then  did  they
get  the  money  they  save  ?  Obviously  the  contrivers  and  workers  alike  may  and  do  save
in  their  degree. — ED.]


oi

=


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  31

To  know  the  circumstances  most  favourable  to  the  increase  of  what  may  be
termed  the  wages -fund  is  a  matter  of  great  moment,  but  is  one  with  which  we  are
not  immediately  concerned.  The  question  we  have  now  before  us  regards  not
the  accumulation  of  wealth,  but  its  distribution  ;  and  the  object  is  to  ascertain
what  those  physical  conditions  are,  which,  by  encouraging  a  rapid  growth  of
population,  over-supply  the  labour-market,  and  thus  keep  the  average  rate  of
wages  at  a  very  low  point.

Of  all  the  physical  agents  by  which  the  increase  of  the  labouring  classes  is
affected,  that  of  food  is  the  most  active  and  universal.  If  two  countries,  equal
in  all  other  respects,  differ  solely  in  this, — that  in  one  the  national  food  is  cheap
and  abundant,  and  in  the  other  scarce  and  dear,  the  population  of  the  former
country  will  inevitably  increase  more  rapidly  than  the  population  of  the  latter.23
And,  by  a  parity  of  reasoning,  the  average  rate  of  wages  will  be  lower  in  the
former  than  in  the  latter,  simply  because  the  labour-market  will  be  more  amply
stocked.24  An  inquiry,  therefore,  into  the  physical  laws  on  which  the  food  of
different  countries  depends,  is,  for  our  present  purpose,  of  the  greatest  import-
ance ;  and  fortunately  it  is  one  respecting  which  we  are  able,  in  the  present  state
of  chemistry  and  physiology,  to  arrive  at  some  precise  and  definite  conclusions.

The  food  consumed  by  man  produces  two,  and  only  two,  effects  necessary  to
his  existence.  These  are,  first,  to  supply  him  with  that  animal  heat  without

hich  the  functions  of  life  would  stop  ;  and  secondly,  to  repair  the  waste  con-
tantly  taking  place  in  his  tissues,  that  is,  in  the  mechanism  of  his  frame.*  For
each  of  these  separate  purposes  there  is  a  separate  food.  The  temperature  of  our
body  is  kept  up  by  substances  which  contain  no  nitrogen,  and  are  called  non-
azotized  ;  the  incessant  decay  in  our  organism  is  repaired  by  what  are  known  as
azotized  substances,  in  which  nitrogen  is  always  found.25  In  the  former  case,
the  carbon  of  non-azotized  food  combines  with  the  oxygen  we  take  in,  and  gives
rise  to  that  internal  combustion  by  which  our  animal  heat  is  renewed.  In  the
latter  case,  nitrogen  having  little  affinity  for  oxygen,26  the  nitrogenous  or  azotized

grade  state,  it  depends  on  whether  population  or  capital  decrease  with  the  greater  rapid -
i  ty."     Ricardo's  Works,  p.  379.

23  The  standard  of  comfort  being  of  course  supposed  the  same.

24  "  No  point  is  better  established,  than  that  the  supply  of  labourers  will  always  ulti-
mately be  in  proportion  to  the  means  of  supporting  them."    Principles  of  Political
Economy,    chap,  xxi.,  in  Ricardo's  Works,  p.  176.     Compare  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,
book  i.  chap.  xi.  p.  86,  and  JVT Culloch's  Political  Economy,  p.  222.     [The  passage  cited
from  Ricardo  is  vitally  qualified  by  another  in  his  fifth  chapter  (same  ed.,  p.  52),  pointing
out  that  the  required  "  means  of  support "  vary  indefinitely  according  to  the  standard
of  comfort  of  the  labourers.     Cp.  p.  54,  where  he  advocates  a  "  reduction  of  people,"
and  assumes  its  possibility.     These  remarks  put  on  the  passage  quoted  by  Buckle  another
sense  than  it  separately  carries.     At  these  and  many  other  points,  Ricardo  failed  to
coordinate  his  teaching. — ED.]

23  The  division  of  food  into  azotized  and  non-azotized  is  said  to  have  been  first  pointed
out  by  Magendie.  See  Mutter's  Physiology,  vol.  i.  p.  525.  It  is  now  recognized  by  most
of  the  best  authorities.  See,  for  instance,  Liebig's  Animal  Chemistry,  p.  134  ;  Carpenter's
Human  Physiology,  p.  685  ;  Brande's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1218,  1870.  The  first  tables
of  food  constructed  according  to  it  were  by  Boussingault ;  see  an  elaborate  essay  by
Messrs.  Lawes  and  Gilbert  on  The  Composition  of  Foods,  in  Report  of  British  Association
for  1852,  p.  323  :  but  the  experiments  made  by  these  gentlemen  are  neither  numerous  nor
diversified  enough  to  establish  a  general  law  ;  still  less  can  we  accept  their  singular  asser-
tion, p.  346,  that  the  comparative  prices  of  different  foods  are  a  test  of  the  nutriment
they  comparatively  contain.  [The  term  azote,  the  old  name  for  nitrogen,  is  now
abandoned. — ED.]

26  "Of  all  the  elements  of  the  animal  body,  nitrogen  has  the  feeblest  attraction  for

[*  Modern  physiologists  prefer  to  say  that  foods,  besides  replacing  tissue,  supply  to  the
organism  potential  energy,  of  which  heat  is  one  form  and  work  another.  See  Dr.  R.
Hutchison,  Address  on  Dietetics,  Lancet,  April  25/1903,  p.  1154.  Cp.  Kirke-Haliburton,
Handbook  of  Physiology,  ed.  1900,  p.  579. — ED.]


32  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

food  is,  as  it  were,  guarded  against  combustion  ;27  and  being  thus  preserved,  is
able  to  perform  its  duty  of  repairing  the  tissues,  and  supplying  those  losses
which  the  human  organism  constantly  suffers  in  the  wear  and  tear  of  daily  life.

These  are  the  two  great  divisions  of  food  ;  2S  and  if  we  inquire  into  the  laws
which  regulate  the  relation  they  bear  to  man,  we  shall  find  that  in  each  division
the  most  important  agent  is  climate.  When  men  live  in  a  hot  country,  their
animal  heat  is  more  easily  kept  up  than  when  they  live  in  a  cold  one  ;  therefore
they  require  a  smaller  amount  of  that  non-azotized  food,  the  sole  business*  of
which  is  to  maintain  at  a  certain  point  the  temperature  of  the  body.  In  the
same  way,  they,  in  the  hot  country,  require  a  smaller  amount  of  azotized  food,
because  on  the  whole  their  bodily  exertions  are  less  frequent,  and  on  that  account
the  decay  of  their  tissues  is  less  rapid.29

oxygen  ;  and,  what  is  still  more  remarkable,  it  deprives  all  combustible  elements  with
which  it  combines,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  of  the  power  of  combining  with  oxygen,
that  is,  of  undergoing  combustion."  Liebig's  Letters  on  Chemistry,  p.  372.  [It  is  now
recognized  that  the  nitrogenous  foods  (proteids)  do  undergo  some  combustion,  and  yield
some  heat.  Kirke-Haliburton,  Handbook  of  Physiology,  1900,  p.  581.  Compare  Burney
Yeo,  Food  in  Health  and  Disease,  ed.  1893,  p.  13. — ED.]

27  The  doctrine  of  what  may  be  called  the  protecting  power  of  some  substances  is
still  imperfectly  understood,  and,  until  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  its  existence  was
hardly  suspected.     It  is  now  known  to  be  connected  with  the  general  theory  of  poisons.
See  Turner's  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  516.     To  this  we  must  probably  ascribe  the  fact,  that
several  poisons  which  are  fatal  when  applied  to  a  wounded  surface,  may  be  taken  into
the  stomach  with  impunity.     Brodie's  Physiological  Researches,  1851,  pp.  137,  138.     It
seems  more  reasonable  to  refer  this  to  chemical  laws  than  to  hold,  with  Sir  Benjamin
Brodie,  that  some  poisons  "  destroy  life  by  paralysing  the  muscles  of  respiration  without
immediately  affecting  the  action  of  the  heart."     [If  we  read  "  the  respiratory  nerve-
centres,"  Brodie's  statement  accords  with  the  established  opinion. — ED.]

28  Prout's  well-known  division  into  saccharine,  oily,  and  albuminous,  appears  to  me
of  much  inferior  value,  though  I  observe  that  it  is  adopted  in  the  last  edition  of  Elliot -
son's  Human  Physiology,  pp.  65,  160.     The  division  by  M.  Lepelletier  into  "  les  alimens
solides  et  les  boissons  "  is  of  course  purely  empirical.     Lepelletier,  Physiologic  Medicale,
vol.  ii.  p.   100,   Paris,   1832.     In  regard  to  Prout's  classification,  compare  Burdach's
Traite  de  Physiologic,  vol.  ix.  p.   240,  with   Wagner's  Physiology,  p.   452.     [Prout's
division  is  in  substance  now  generally  adopted,  as  the  current  formula  runs  :  sugars  (or
carbohydrates),  fats,  and  proteids  (albumens) — it  being  understood  that  certain  necessary
mineral  elements,  as  salts,  exist  in  all.       Dr.  Hutchison  (as  cited  above)  points  out  that
potential  energy  is  derivable  from  both  carbohydrates  and  fats,  and  that  the  former  are
as  a  rule  (though  of  course  not  for  Eskimos)  the  cheaper — a  fact  of  some  importance
from  Buckle's  point  of  view.     See  below,  at  note  40. — ED.]

29  The  evidence  of  an  universal  connexion  in  the  animal  frame  between  exertion  and
decay,  is  now  almost  complete.     In  regard    to    the    muscular    system,  see  Carpenter's
Human  Physiology,  pp.  440,  441,  581,  edit.  1846  :  "  There  is  strong  reason  to  believe  the
waste  or  decomposition  of  the  muscular  tissue  to  be  in  exact  proportion  to  the  degree  in
which  it  is  exerted."     This  perhaps  would  be  generally  anticipated  even  in  the  absence
of  direct  proof ;  but  what  is  more  interesting,  is  that  the  same  principle  holds  good  of
the  nervous  system.     The  human  brain  of  an  adult  contains  about  one  and  a  half  per
cent,    of    phosphorus  ;     and  it  has  been  ascertained  that    after    the    mind    has    been
much   exercised,  phosphates    are    excreted,  and    that    in    the  case  of   inflammation  of
the  brain  their  excretion  (by  the  kidneys)  is  very  considerable.     See  Paget's  Lectures  on
Surgical  Pathology,  1853,  vol.  i.  pp.  6,  7,  434  ;  Carpenter's  Human  Physiology,  pp.  192,
193,  222  ;  Simon's  Animal  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.  426  ;  Henle,  Anatomic  Generale,  vol.  ii.
p.  172.     The  reader  may  also  consult  respecting  the  phosphorus  of  the  brain,  the  recent
very  able  work  of  MM.  Robin  et  Verdeil,  Chimie  Anatomique,  vol.  i.  p.  215,  vol.  ii.  p.  348,
Paris,  1853.     According  to  these  writers  (vol.  iii.  p.  445),  its  existence  in  the  brain  was
first  announced  by  Hensing,  in  1779.

[*  This  is  not  strictly  accurate.     Fats  in  some  measure  replace  tissue.     Comp.  Burney
Yeo,  as  cited,  p.  22  ;  Kirke-Haliburton,  as  cited,  p.  573. — ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  33

Since,  therefore,  the  inhabitants  of  hot  climates  do,  in  their  natural  and
ordinary  state,  consume  less  food  than  the  inhabitants  of  cold  ones,  it  inevitably
follows  that,  provided  other  things  remain  equal,  the  growth  of  population  will
be  more  rapid  in  countries  which  are  hot  than  in  those  which  are  cold.  For
practical  purposes  it  is  immaterial  whether  the  greater  plenty  of  a  substance  by
which  the  people  are  fed  arises  from  a  larger  supply,  or  whether  it  arises  from  a
smaller  consumption.  When  men  eat  less,  the  result  will  be  just  the  same  as  if
they  had  more  ;  because  the  same  amount  of  nutriment  will  go  further,  and  thus
population  will  gain  a  power  of  increasing  more  quickly  than  it  could  do  in  a
colder  country,  where,  even  if  provisions  were  equally  abundant,  they,  owing
to  the  climate,  would  be  sooner  exhausted.

This  is  the  first  point  of  view  in  which  the  laws  of  climate  are,  through  the
medium  of  food,  connected  with  the  laws  of  population,  and  therefore  with  the
laws  of  the  distribution  of  wealth.  But  there  is  also  another  point  of  view,
which  follows  the  same  line  of  thqught,  and  will  be  found  to  strengthen  the
argument  just  stated.  This  is,  that  in  cold  countries,  not  only  are  men  com-
pelled to  eat  more  than  in  hot  ones,  but  their  food  is  dearer,  that  is  to  say,  to  get
it  is  more  difficult,  and  requires  a  greater  expenditure  of  labour.  The  reason  of
this  I  will  state  as  briefly  as  possible,  without  entering  into  any  details  beyond
those  which  are  absolutely  necessary  for  a  right  understanding  of  this  interesting
subject.

The  objects  of  food  are,  as  we  have  seen,  only  two  :  *  namely,  to  keep  up  the
warmth  of  the  body,  and  repair  the  waste  in  the  tissues.30  Of  these  two  objects,
the  former  is  effected  by  the  oxygen  of  the  air  entering  our  lungs,  and,  as  it
travels  through  the  system,  combining  with  the  carbon  which  we  take  in  our
food.31  This  combination  of  oxygen  and  carbon  never  can  occur  without  pro-

30  Though  both  objects  are  equally  essential,  the  former  is  usually  the  more  pressing  ;
and  it  has  been  ascertained  by  experiment,  what  we  should  expect  from  theory,  that
when  animals  are  starved  to  death,  there  is  a  progressive  decline  in  the  temperature  of
their  bodies  ;  so  that  the  proximate  cause  of  death  by  starvation  is  not  weakness,  but
cold.     [The  cold  is  the  result  of  the  diminished  combustion — an  effect  or  symptom,  not
the  cause. — ED.]     See  Williams'  Principles  of  Medicine,  p.  36  ;  and  on  the  connexion
between  the  loss  of  animal  heat  and  the  appearance  of  rigor  mortis  in  the  contractile  parts
of  the  body,  see  VogeVs  Pathological  Anatomy  of  the  Human  Body,  p.  532.     Compare  the
important  and  thoughtful  work  of  Burdach,  Physiologie  comme  Science  a' Observation,
vol.  v.  pp.  144,  436,  vol.  ix.  p.  231.     [In  reality,  rigor  mortis  is  delayed  by  cold.     See
Kirke-Haliburton,  Handbook,  pp.  154-5. — ED.]

31  Until  the  last  twenty  or  five -and -twenty  years,  it  used  to  be  supposed  that  this
combination  took  place  in  the  lungs  ;  but  more  careful  experiments  have  made  it  probable
that  the  oxygen  unites  with  the  carbon  in  the  circulation,  and  that  the  blood -corpuscles
are  the  carriers  of  the  oxygen.     Comp.  Liebig's  Animal  Chemistry,  p.  78  ;  Letters  on
Chemistry,  pp.  335,  336  ;  Turner's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.  1319  ;  Mutter's  Physiology,  vol.  i.
pp.  92,  159.     That  the  combination  does  not  take  place  in  the  air-cells  is  moreover
proved  by  the  fact  that  the  lungs  are  not  hotter  than  other  parts  of  the  body.     See
Mutter,  vol.  i.  p.  348  ;  Thomson's  Animal  Chemistry,  p.  633  ;  and  Brodie's  Physiol.   Re-
searches, p.  33.     Another  argument  in  favour  of  the  red  corpuscles  being  the  carriers  of
oxygen,  is  that  they  are  most  abundant  in  those  classes  of  vertebrata  which  maintain
the  highest  temperature  ;  while  the  blood  of  invertebrata  contains  very  few  of  them  ;
and  it  has  been  doubted  if  they  even  exist  in  the  lower  articulata  and  mollusca.     See
Carpenter's  Human  Physiol.  pp.  109,  532  ;  Grant's  Comparative  Anatomy,  p.  472  ;  Elliot-
son's  Human  Physiol.,  p.  159.     In  regard  to  the  different  dimensions  of   corpuscles,  see
Henle,  Anatomie  Generate,  vol.  i.  pp.  457-467,  494,  495  ;  Blainville,  Physiologie  Com-
paree,  vol.  i.  pp.  298,  299,  301-304  ;  Milne  Edwards,  Zoologie,  part  i.  pp.  54-56  ;  Fourth
Report  of  British  Association,   pp.  117,  118  ;  Simon's  Animal  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  pp.  103,
104  ;  and,  above  all,  the  important  observations  of  Mr.  Gulliver  (Carpenter,  pp.  105,  106).
These  additions  to  our  knowledge,  besides  being  connected  with  the  laws  of  animal  heat
and  of  nutrition,  will,  when  generalized,  assist  speculative  minds  in  raising  pathology

[*  See  additional  note  above,  p.  32. — ED.]


34  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

during  a  considerable  amount  of  heat,  and  it  is  in  this  way  that  the  human  frame
is  maintained  at  its  necessary  temperature.32  By  virtue  of  a  law  familiar  to
chemists,  carbon  and  oxygen,  like  all  other  elements,  will  only  unite  in  certain
definite  proportions  ;  33  so  that  to  keep  up  a  healthy  balance,  it  is  needful  that
the  food  which  contains  the  carbon  should  vary  according  to  the  amount  of
oxygen  taken  in  :  while  it  is  equally  needful  that  we  should  increase  the  quantity
of  both  of  these  constituents  whenever  a  greater  external  cold  lowers  the  tem-
perature of  the  body.  Now  it  is  obvious  that  in  a  very  cold  climate  this  neces-
sity of  providing  a  nutriment  more  highly  carbonized  will  arise  in  two  distinct
ways.  In  the  first  place,  the  air  being  denser,  men  imbibe  at  each  inspiration  a
greater  volume  of  oxygen  than  they  would  do  in  a  climate  where  the  air  is
rarefied  by  heat.34  In  the  second  place,  cold  accelerates  their  respiration,  and
thus  obliging  them  to  inhale  more  frequently  than  the  inhabitants  of  hot  coun-
tries, increases  the  amount  of  oxygen  which  they  on  an  average  take  in.35  On

to  a  science.  In  the  meantime  I  may  mention  the  relation  between  an  examination  of
the  corpuscles,  and  the  theory  of  inflammation  which  Hunter  and  Broussais  were  un-
able to  settle  :  this  is,  that  the  proximate  cause  of  inflammation  is  the  obstruction  of  the
vessels  by  the  adhesion  of  the  pale  corpuscles.  Respecting  this  striking  generalization,
which  is  still  on  its  trial,  compare  Williams's  Principles  of  Medicine,  1848,  pp.  258-265,
with  Paget's  Surgical  Pathology,  1853,  vol.  i.  pp.  313-317  ;  Jones  and  Sieveking's  Patho-
logical Anatomy,  1854,  PP-  28,  105,  106.  The  difficulties  connected  with  the  scientific
study  of  inflammation  are  evaded  in  VogeVs  Pathological  Anatomy,  p.  418  ;  a  work  which
appears  to  me  to  have  been  greatly  overrated.  [The  adhesion  of  the  pale  corpuscles  is
merely  one  of  the  stages  of  the  inflammatory  process.  See  Gibson's  Text -Book  of
Medicine,  ed.  1901,  i.  18-21. — ED.]

32  On  the  amount  of  heat  disengaged  by  the  union  of  carbon  and  oxygen,  see  the
experiments  of  Dulong,  in  Liebig's  Animal  Chemistry,  p.  44  ;  and  those  of  Despretz,  in
Thomson's  Animal  Chemistry,  p.  634.     Just  in  the  same  way,  we  find  that  the  tempera-
ture of  plants  is  maintained  by  the  combination  of  oxygen  with  carbon  :  see  Balfour's
Botany,  pp.  231,  232,  322,  323.     As  to  the  amount  of  heat  caused  generally  by  chemical
combination,  there  is  an  essay  well  worth  reading  by  Dr.  Thomas  Andrews  in  Report  of
British  Association  for  1849,  pp.  63-78.    See  also  Report  for  1852,  Transac.  of  Sec.  p.  40,
and  Liebig  and  Kopp's  Reports  on  the  Progress  of  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  34 >  v°l-  ui-  P-  l6»
vol.  iv.  p.  20  ;  also  Pouillet,  Elemens  de  Physique,  Paris,  1832,  vol.  i.  part  i.  p.  411.

33  The  law  of  definite  proportions,  which,  since  the  brilliant  discoveries  by  Dalton,  is
the  corner-stone  of  chemical  knowledge,  is  laid  down  with  admirable  clearness  in  Turner's
Elements  of  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  pp.  146-151.     Compare  Brande's  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  pp.  139-
144  ;  Cuvier,  Progres  des  Sciences,  vol.  ii.  p.  255  ;  Somerville's  Connexion  of  the  Sciences,
pp.  120,  121.     But  none  of  these  writers  have  considered  the  law  so  philosophically  as
M.  A.  Comte,  Philosophic  Positive,  vol.  iii.  pp..  133-176,  one  of  the  best  chapters  in  his
very  profound,  but  ill -understood  work.

3*  "  Ainsi,  dans  des  temps  egaux,  la  quantite  d'oxygene  consommee  par  le  meme
animal  est  d'autant  plus  grande  que  la  temperature  ambiante  est  moins  elevee."  Robin
et  Verdeil,  Chimie  Anatomique,  vol.  ii.  p.  44.  Compare  Simon's  Lectures  on  Pathology,
1850,  p.  1 88,  for  the  diminished  quantity  of  respiration  in  a  high  temperature  ;  though
one  may  question  Mr.  Simon's  inference  that  therefore  the  blood  is  more  venous  in  hot
countries  than  in  cold  ones.  This  is  not  making  allowance  for  the  difference  of  diet,
which  corrects  the  difference  of  temperature.

35  "  The  consumption  of  oxygen  in  a  given  time  may  be  expressed  by  the  number  of
respirations."  Liebig s  Letters  on  Chemistry,  p.  314;  and  see  Thomson's  Animal
Chemistry,  p.  611.  It  is  also  certain  that  exercise  increases  the  number  of  respirations  ;
and  birds,  which  are  the  most  active  of  all  animals,  consume  more  oxygen  than  any
others.  Milne  Edwards,  Zoologie,  part  i.  p.  88,  part  ii.  p.  371  ;  Flour  ens,  Travau*  de
Cuvier,  pp.  153,  154,  265,  266.  Compare,  on  the  connexion  between  respiration  and  the
locomotive  organs,  Beclard,  Anatomic  Generale,  pp.  39,  44;  Burdach,  Traite  de  Physio -
logie,  vol.  ix.  pp.  485,  556-559  ;  Carus'  Comparative  Anatomy,  vol.  i.  pp.  99,  164,  35«,
vol.  ii.  pp.  142,  160  ;  Grant's  Comparative  Anatomy,  pp.  455,  495,  522,  529.  537  ;  Rymer
Jones'  Animal  Kingdom,  pp.  369,  440,  692,  714,  720  ;  Owen's  Invertebrata,  pp.  322,  345.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  35

both  these  grounds  the  consumption  of  oxygen  becomes  greater  :  it  is  therefore
requisite  that  the  consumption  of  carbon  should  also  be  greater  ;  since  by  the
union  of  these  two  elements  in  certain  definite  proportions,  the  temperature  of
the  body  and  the  balance  of  the  human  frame  can  alone  be  maintained.38

Proceeding  from  these  chemical  and  physiological  principles,  we  arrive  at  the
conclusion  that  the  colder  the  country  is  in  which  a  people  live,  the  more  highly
carbonized  will  be  their  food.  And  this,  which  is  a  purely  scientific  inference,  has
been  verified  by  actual  experiment.  The  inhabitants  of  the  polar  regions  con-
sume large  quantities  of  whale-oil  and  blubber  ;  while  within  the  tropics  such
food  would  soon  put  an  end  to  life,  and  therefore  the  ordinary  diet  consists
almost  entirely  of  fruit,  rice,  and  other  vegetables.  Now  it  has  been  ascertained
by  careful  analysis  that  in  the  polar  food  there  is  an  excess  of  carbon  ;  in  the
tropical  food  an  excess  of  oxygen.  Without  entering  into  details,  which  to  the
majority  of  readers  would  be  distasteful,  it  may  be  said  generally,  that  the  oils
contain  about  six  times  as  much  carbon  as  the  fruits,  and  that  they  have  in  them
very  little  oxygen  ;  37  while  starch,  which  is  the  most  universal,  and,  in  reference
to  nutrition,  the  most  important  constituent  in  the  vegetable  world,38  is  nearly
half  oxygen.39

The  connexion  between  this  circumstance  and  the  subject  before  us  is  highly
curious  :  for  it  is  a  most  remarkable  fact,  and  one  to  which  I  would  call  par-
ticular attention,  that  owing  to  some  more  general  law,  of  which  we  are  ignorant,

386,  505.  Thus  too  it  has  been  experimentally  ascertained  that  in  human  beings
exercise  increases  the  amount  of  carbonic  acid  gas.  Maya's  Hitman  Physiology,  p.  64  ;
Liebig  and  Kopp's  Reports,  vol.  iii.  p.  359.

If  we  now  put  these  facts  together,  their  bearing  on  the  propositions  in  the  text  will
become  evident ;  because,  on  the  whole,  there  is  more  exercise  taken  in  cold  climates
than  in  hot  ones,  and  there  must  therefore  be  an  increased  respiratory  action.  For  proof
that  greater  exercise  is  both  taken  and  required,  compare  Wrangel's  Polar  Expedition,
PP-  79,  102  ;  Richardson's  Arctic  Expedition,  vol.  i.  p.  385  ;  Simpson's  North  Coast  of
A  merica,  pp.  49,  88,  which  should  be  contrasted  with  the  contempt  for  such  amusements
in  hot  countries.  Indeed,  in  polar  regions  all  this  is  so  essential  to  preserve  a  normal
state,  that  scurvy  can  only  be  kept  off  in  the  northern  part  of  the  American  continent  by
taking  considerable  exercise  :  see  Crantz,  History  of  Greenland,  vol.  i.  pp.  46,  62,  338.
[It  is  now  agreed  that  exercise  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  prevention  or  cure  of  scurvy.
See  Gibson,  Text-Book  cited,  ii.  18-23. — ED.]

36  See  the  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.

37  "  The  fruits  used  by  the  inhabitants  of  southern  climes  do  not  contain,  in  a  fresh
state,  more  than  12  per  cent,  of  carbon  ;  while  the  blubber  and  train  oil  which  feed  the
inhabitants  of  polar  regions  contain  66  to  80  per  cent,  of  that  element."    Liebig's  Letters
on  Chemistry,  p.  320  ;  see  also  p.  375,  and  Turner's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.  1315.     According
to  Prout  (Maya's  Human  Physiol.  p.  136),  "  the  proportion  of  carbon  in  oily  bodies
varies  from  about  60  to  80  per  cent."     The  quantity  of  oil  and  fat  habitually  consumed
in  cold  countries  is  remarkable.     Wrangel  (Polar  Expedition,  p.  21)  says  of  the  tribes  in
the  north-east  of  Siberia,  "  fat  is  their  greatest  delicacy.     They  eat  it  in  every  possible
shape  ;  raw,  melted,  fresh,  or  spoilt."     See  also  Simpson's  Discoveries  on  the  North  Coast
of  America,  pp.  147,  404.

38  "  So  common,  that  no  plant  is  destitute  of  it."     Lindley's  Botany,  vol.  i.  p.  in  ;
and  at  p.  121,  "  starch  is  the  most  common  of  all  vegetable  productions."    Dr.  Lindley
adds  (vol.  i.  p.  292),  that  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  the  grains  of  starch  secreted  by
plants  from  cytoblasts.      See  also  on  the  starch -granules,  first  noticed  by  M.  Link,
Reports  on  Botany  by  the  Ray  Society,  pp.  223,  370  ;  and  respecting  its  predominance  in
the  vegetable  world,  compare  Thomson's  Chemistry  of  Vegetables,  pp.  650-652,  875  ;
Brande's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.  1160;  Turner's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.  1236;  Liebig  and
Kopp's  Reports,  vol.  ii.  pp.  97,  98,  122.

19  The  oxygen  is  49.39  out  of  100.  See  the  table  in  Liebig's  Letters  on  Chemistry,  p.
379-  Amidin,  which  is  the  soluble  part  of  starch,  contains  53.33  per  cent  of  oxygen.
See  Thomson's  Chemistry  of  Vegetables,  p.  654,  on  the  authority  of  Prout,  who  has  the
reputation  of  being  an  accurate  experimenter.


36  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

highly  carbonized  food  is  more  costly  than  food  in  which  comparatively  little
carbon  is  found.  The  fruits  of  the  earth,  of  which  oxygen  is  the  most  active
principle,  are  very  abundant  ;  they  may  be  obtained  without  danger,  and  almost
without  trouble.  But  that  highly  carbonized  food  which  in  a  very  cold  climate
is  absolutely  necessary  to  life,  is  not  produced  in  so  facile  and  spontaneous  a
manner.  It  is  not,  like  vegetables,  thrown  up  by  the  soil  ;  but  it  consists  of  the
fat,  the  blubber,  and  the  oil,40  of  powerful  and  ferocious  animals.  To  procure
it,  man  must  incur  great  risk,  and  expend  great  labour.  And  although  this  is
undoubtedly  a  contrast  of  extreme  cases,  still  it  is  evident  that  the  nearer  a
people  approach  to  either  extremity,  the  more  subject  will  they  be  to  the  con-
ditions by  which  that  extremity  is  governed.  It  is  evident  that,  as  a  general
rule,  the  colder  a  country  is,  the  more  its  food  will  be  carbonized  ;  the  warmer  it
is,  the  more  its  food  will  be  oxidized.41  At  the  same  time,  carbonized  food,
being  chiefly  drawn  from  the  animal  world,  is  more  difficult  to  obtain  than
oxidized  food,  which  is  drawn  from  the  vegetable  world.42  The  result  has  been,
that  among  nations  where  the  coldness  of  the  climate  renders  a  highly  carbonized
diet  essential,  there  is  for  the  most  part  displayed,  even  in  the  infancy  of  society,
a  bolder  and  more  adventurous  character  than  we  find  among  those  other  nations
whose  ordinary  nutriment,  being  highly  oxidized,  is  easily  obtained,  and  indeed
is  supplied  to  them,  by  the  bounty  of  nature,  gratuitously  and  without  a  struggle.43
From  this  original  divergence  there  follow  many  other  consequences,  which,
however,  I  am  not  now  concerned  to  trace  ;  my  present  object  being  merely  to
point  out  how  this  difference  of  food  affects  the  proportion  in  which  wealth  is
distributed  to  the  different  classes.

The  way  in  which  this  proportion  is  actually  altered  has,  I  hope,  been  made
clear  by  the  preceding  argument.  But  it  may  be  useful  to  recapitulate  the  facts
on  which  the  argument  is  based.  The  facts,  then,  are  simply  these.  The  rate
of  wages  fluctuates  with  the  population  ;  increasing  when  the  labour-market  is
under-supplied,  diminishing  when  it  is  over-supplied.  The  population  itself,
though  affected  by  many  other  circumstances,  does  undoubtedly  fluctuate  with
the  supply  of  food  ;  advancing  when  the  supply  is  plentiful,  halting  or  receding

40  Of  which  a  single  whale  will  yield  "  cent  vingt  tonneaux."     Cuvier,  Regne  Animal,
vol.  i.  p.  297.     In  regard  to  the  solid  food,  Sir  J.  Richardson  (Arctic  Expedition,  1851,
vol.  i.  p.  243)  says  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  Arctic  regions  only  maintain  themselves
by  chasing  whales  and  "  consuming  blubber."

41  It  is  said,  that  to  keep  a  person  in  health,  his  food,  even  in  the  temperate  parts  of
Europe,  should  contain  "  a  full  eighth  more  carbon  in  winter  than  in  summer."   Liebig's
Animal  Chemistry,  p.  16.

42  The  most  highly  carbonized  of  all  foods  are  undoubtedly  yielded  by  animals  ;  the
most  highly  oxidized  by  vegetables.     In  the  vegetable  kingdom  there  is,  however,  so
much  carbon,  that  its  predominance,  accompanied  with  the  rarity  of  nitrogen,  has  in-
duced chemical  botanists  to  characterize  plants  as  carbonized,  and  animals  as  azotized.
But  we  have  here  to  attend  to  a  double  antithesis.     Vegetables  are  carbonized  in  so  far
as  they  are  non -azotized  ;  but  they  are  oxidized  in  opposition  to  the  highly  carbonized
animal  food  of  cold  countries.     Besides  this,  it  is  important  to  observe  that  the  carbon
of  vegetables  is  most  abundant  in  the  woody  and  unnutritious  part,  which  is  not  eaten  ;
while  the  carbon  of  animals  is  found  in  the  fatty  and  oily  parts,  which  are  not  only
eaten,  but  are,  in  cold  countries,  greedily  devoured.

43  Sir  J.  Malcolm  (History  of  Persia,  vol.  ii.  p.  380),  speaking  of  the  cheapness  of
vegetables  in  the  East,  says,  "  In  some  parts  of  Persia  fruit  has  hardly  any  value."
Cuvier,  in  a  striking  passage  (Regne  Animal,  vol.  i.  pp.  73,  74),  has  contrasted  vegetable
with  animal  food,  and  thinks  that  the  former,  being  so  easily  obtained,  is  the  more
natural.     But  the  truth  is  that  they  are  equally  natural :  though  when  Cuvier  wrote
scarcely  anything  was  known  of  the  laws  which  govern  the  relation  between  climate  and
food.     On  the  skill  and  energy  required  to  obtain  food  in  cold  countries,  see  Wrangel's
Polar  Expedition,  pp.  70,  71,  191,  192  ;  Simpson's  Discoveries  on  the  North  Coast  oj
America,  p.  249  ;  Crantz,  History  of  Greenland,  vol.  i.  pp.  22,  32,  105,  131,  154,  155,  vol.  ii.
pp.  203,  265,  324-


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  37

when  the  supply  is  scanty.  The  food  essential  to  life  is  scarcer  in  cold  countries
than  in  hot  ones  ;  and  not  only  is  it  scarcer,  but  more  of  it  is  required  ;  44  so  that
on  both  grounds  smaller  encouragement  is  given  to  the  growth  of  that  population
from  whose  ranks  the  labour-market  is  stocked.  To  express,  therefore,  the
conclusion  in  its  simplest  form,  we  may  say,  that  there  is  a  strong  and  constant
tendency  in  hot  countries  for  wages  to  be  low,  in  cold  countries  for  them  to  be
high.

Applying  now  this  great  principle  to  the  general  course  of  history,  we  shall
find  proofs  of  its  accuracy  in  every  direction.  Indeed,  there  is  not  a  single
instance  to  the  contrary.  In  Asia,  in  Africa,  and  in  America,  all  the  ancient
civilizations  were  seated  in  hot  climates  ;  and  in  all  of  them  the  rate  of  wages
was  very  low,  and  therefore  the  condition  of  the  labouring  classes  very  depressed.
In  Europe,  for  the  first  time,  civilization  arose  in  a  colder  climate  :  hence  the
reward  of  labour  was  increased,  and  the  distribution  of  wealth  rendered  more
equal  than  was  possible  in  countries  where  an  excessive  abundance  of  food
stimulated  the  growth  of  population.  This  difference  produced,  as  we  shall
presently  see,  many  social  and  political  consequences  of  immense  importance.
But  before  discussing  them,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  only  apparent  excep-
tion to  what  has  been  stated,  is  one  which  strikingly  verifies  the  general  law.
There  is  one  instance,  and  only  one,  of  a  great  European  people  possessing  a
very  cheap  national  food.  This  people,  I  need  hardly  say,  is  the  Irish.  In
Ireland  the  labouring  classes  have  for  more  than  two  hundred  years  been  prin-
cipally fed  by  potatoes,  which  were  introduced  into  their  country  late  in  the
sixteenth,  or  early  in  the  seventeenth  century.45  Now,  the  peculiarity  of  the
potato  is,  that  until  the  appearance  of  the  late  disease,  it  was,  and  perhaps  still
is,  cheaper  than  any  other  food  equally  wholesome.  If  we  compare  its  repro-
ductive power  with  the  amount  of  nutriment  contained  in  it,  we  find  that  one
acre  of  average  land  sown  with  potatoes  will  support  twice  as  many  persons  as
the  same  quantity  of  land  sown  with  wheat.46  The  consequence  is,  that  in  a
country  where  men  live  on  potatoes,  the  population  will,  if  other  things  are
tolerably  equal,  increase  twice  as  fast  as  in  a  country  where  they  live  on  wheat.

44  Cabanis  (Rapports  du  Physique  et  du  Moral,  p.  313)  says,  "  Dans  les  temps  et  dans
les  pays  froids  on  mange  et  Ton  agit  davantage."     That  much  food  is  eaten  in  cold
countries,  and  little  in  hot  ones,  is  mentioned  by  numerous  travellers,  none  of  whom  are
aware  of  the  cause.     See  Simpson's  Discov.  on  North  Coast  of  America,  p.  218  ;  Custine's
Russie,  vol.  iv.  p.  66  ;  WrangeFs  Expedition,  pp.  21,  327  ;  Crantz,  History  of  Greenland,
vol.  i.  pp.  145,  360  ;  Richardson's  Central  Africa,  vol.  ii.  p.  46  ;  Richardson's  Sahara,  vol.  i.
p.  137  ;  Denham's  Africa,  p.  37  ;  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  v.  p.  144,  vol.  viii.  p.  188  ;
Burckhardf  s  Travels  in  Arabia,  vol.  ii.  p.  265  ;  Niebuhr,  Description  de  FArabie,  p.  45  ;
UUoa's  Voyage  to  South  A  merica,  vol.  i.  pp.  403,  408  ;  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  iii.
p.  283,  vol.  vi.  p.  85,  vol.  xix.  p.  121  ;  Spix  and  Martius's  Travels  in  Brazil,  vol.  i.  p.  164  ;
Southey's  History  of  Brazil,  vol.  iii.  p.  848  ;  Volney,  Voyage  en  Syr'e  et  en  Egypte,  vol.  i.
PP-  379.  380,  460  ;  Low's  Sarawak,  p.  140.

45  Meyen  (Geography  of  Plants,  1846,  p.  313)  says  that  the  potato  was  introduced  into
Ireland  in  1586  ;  but  according  to  Mr.  M'Culloch  (Dictionary  of  Commerce,  1849,  p.
1048),  "potatoes,  it  is  commonly  thought,  were  not  introduced  into  Ireland  till  1610,
when  a  small  quantity  was  sent  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  to  be  planted  in  a  garden  on  his
estate  in  the  vicinity  of  Youghal."     Compare  Loudon's  Encyclop.  of  Agriculture,  p.  845  :
"  first  planted  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  on  his  estate  of  Youghall,  near  Cork."

46  Adam  Smith  (Wealth  of  Nations,  book  i.  chap.  xi.  p.  67)  supposes  that  it  will  sup-
port  three  times  as  many  ;  but  the  statistics  of  this  great  writer  are  the  weakest  part  oi
his  work,  and  the  more  careful  calculations  made  since  he  wrote,  bear  out  the  statement
in  the  text.     "It  admits  of  demonstration  that  an  acre  of  potatoes  will  feed  double  the
number  of  people  that  can  be  fed  from  an  acre  of  wheat."     Loudon's  Encyclop.  of  Agri-
culture, 5th  edit.,  1844,  p.  845.     So,  too,  in  M'Culloch's  Diet.,  p.  1048,  "  an  acre  of
potatoes  will  feed  double  the  number  of  individuals  that  can  be  fed  from  an  acre  of
wheat."     The  daily  average  consumption  of  an  able-bodied  labourer  in  Ireland  is  esti-
mated at  nine -and -a -half    pounds  of   potatoes    for  men,   and  seven -and -a -half  for
women.     See  Phillips  on  Scrofula,  1846,  p.  177,


38  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

And  so  it  has  actually  occurred.  Until  a  very  few  years  ago,  when  the  face  of
affairs  was  entirely  altered  by  pestilence  and  emigration,  the  population  of
Ireland  was,  in  round  numbers,  increasing  annually  three  per  cent.  ;  the  popula-
tion of  England  during  the  same  period  increasing  one-and-a-half  per  cent.47
The  result  was,  that  in  these  two  countries  the  distribution  of  wealth  was  alto-
gether different.  Even  in  England  the  growth  of  population  is  somewhat  too
rapid  ;  and  the  labour-market  being  overstocked,  the  working -classes  are  not
sufficiently  paid  for  their  labour.48  But  their  condition  is  one  of  sumptuous
splendour  compared  to  that  in  which  only  a  few  years  ago  the  Irish  were  forced
to  live.  The  misery  in  which  they  were  plunged  has  no  doubt  always  been
aggravated  by  the  ignorance  of  their  rulers,  and  by  that  scandalous  misgovern  -
ment  which,  until  very  recently,  formed  one  of  the  darkest  blots  on  the  glory  of
England.  The  most  active  cause,  however,  was,  that  their  wages  were  so  low
as  to  debar  them,  not  only  from  the  comforts,  but  from  the  common  decencies  of
civilized  life  ;  and  this  evil  condition  was  the  natural  result  of  that  cheap  and
abundant  food,  which  encouraged  the  people  to  so  rapid  an  increase,  that  the
labour-market  was  constantly  gorged.49  So  far  was  this  carried,  that  an  intel-
ligent observer  who  travelled  through  Ireland  twenty  years  ago,  mentions  that
at  that  time  the  average  wages  were  fourpence  a  day  ;  and  that  even  this
wretched  pittance  could  not  always  be  relied  upon  for  regular  employment.50

Such  have  been  the  consequences  of  cheap  food  in  a  country  which,  on  the
whole,  possesses  greater  natural  resources*  than  any  other  in  Europe.51  And  if
we  investigate  on  a  larger  scale  the  social  and  economical  condition  of  nations,
we  shall  see  the  same  principle  everywhere  at  work.  We  shall  see  that,  other

47  Malthus,  Essay  on  Population,  vol.  i.  pp.  424,  425,  431,  435.  441*  442  ;  M'Culloch's
Political  Economy,  pp.  381,  382.

48  The  lowest  agricultural  wages  in  our  time  have  been  in  England  about  is.  a  day  ;
while  from  the  evidence  collected  by  Mr.  Thornton  in  1845,  the  highest  wages  then  paid
were  in  Lincolnshire,  and  were  rather  more  than  135.  a  week  ;  those  in  Yorkshire  and
Northumberland  being  nearly  as  high.     Thornton  on  Over -Population,  pp.  12-15,  24,  25.
Godwin,  writing  in  1820,  estimates  the  average  at  is.  6d.  a  day.  Godwin  on  Population,
p.  574.    Mr.  Phillips,  in  his  work  On  Scrofula,  1846,  p.  345,  says,  "At  present  the  ratio
of  wages  is  from  95.  to  IDS."

49  The  most  miserable  part,  namely  Connaught,  in  1733  contained  242,160  inhabitants  ;
and  in  1821,  1,110,229.     See  Sadler's  Law  of  Population,  vol.  ii.  p.  490.

50  Mr.  Inglis,  who  in  1834  travelled  through  Ireland  with  a  particular  view  to  its  eco-
nomical state,  says,  as  the  result  of  very  careful  inquiries,  "  I  am  quite  confident,  that  if
the  whole  yearly  earnings  of  the  labourers  of  Ireland  were  divided  by  the  whole  number
of  labourers,  the  result  would  be  under  this  sum — Fourpence  a  day  for  the  labourers  of
Ireland."     Inglis,  Journey  throughout  Ireland  in  1834,  Lond.  1835,  2d  edit.  vol.  ii.  p.  300.
At  Balinasloe,  in  the  county  of  Galway,  "  A  gentleman  with  whom  I  was  accidentally  in
company  offered  to  procure,  on  an  hour's  warning,  a  couple  of  hundred  labourers  at
fourpence  even  for  temporary  employment."     Inglis,  vol.    ii.  p.  17.     The  same  writer
says  (vol.  i.  p.  263),  that  at  Tralee  "  it  often  happens  that  the  labourers,  after  working  in
the  canal  from  five  in  the  morning  until  eleven  in  the  forenoon,  are  discharged  for  the
day  with  the  pittance  of  twopence."     Compare,  in  Cloncurry's  Recollections,  Dublin,
1849,  p.  310,  a  letter  from  Dr.  Doyle  written  in  1829,  describing  Ireland  as  "  a  country
where  the  market  is  always  overstocked  with  labour,  and  in  which   a  man's  labour  is  not
worth,  at  an  average,  more  than  threepence  a  day."

[*  It  is  difficult  to  attach  to  this  phrase  any  meaning  which  can  be  reconciled  with  the
facts  ;  and  as  no  explanation  is  offered  in  the  footnote,  some  slip  of  the  pen  is  to  be  sur-
mised.— ED.]

51  It  is  singular  that  so  acute  a  thinker  as  Mr.  Kay  should,  in  his  otherwise  just  re-
marks on  the  Irish,  entirely  overlook  the  effect  produced  on  their  wages  by  the  increase
of  population.     Kay's  Social  Condition  of  the  People,  voL  i.  pp.  8,  9,  92,  223,  306-324.
This  is  the  more  observable,  because  the  disadvantages  of  cheap  food  have  been  noticed
not  only  by  several  common  writers,  but  by  the  highest  of  all  authorities  on  population,
Mr.  Malthus  :  see  the  sixth  edition  of  his  Essay  on  Population,  vol.  i.  p.  469,  vol.  ii.  pp.
123,  124,  383,  384.     If  these  things  were  oftener  considered,  we  should  not  hear  so  much


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  39

things  remaining  equal,  the  food  of  a  people  determines  the  increase  of  their
numbers,  and  the  increase  of  their  numbers  determines  the  rate  of  their  wages.
We  shall  moreover  find  that  when  the  wages  are  invariably  low,52  the  distri-
bution of  wealth  being  thus  very  unequal,  the  distribution  of  political  power  and
social  influence  will  also  be  very  unequal  ;  in  other  words,  it  will  appear  that  the
normal  and  average  relation  between  the  upper  and  lower  classes  will,  in  its
origin,  depend  upon  those  peculiarities  of  nature,  the  operations  of  which  I  have
endeavoured  to  indicate.53  After  putting  all  these  things  together,  we  shall,  I
trust,  be  able  to  discern,  with  a  clearness  hitherto  unknown,  the  intimate  con-
nexion between  the  physical  and  moral  world ;  the  laws  by  which  that  connexion
is  governed  ;  and  the  reasons  why  so  many  ancient  civilizations  reached  a  certain
stage  of  development,  and  then  fell  away,  unable  to  resist  the  pressure  of  nature,
or  make  head  against  those  external  obstacles  by  which  their  progress  was
effectually  retarded.

If,  in  the  first  place,  we  turn  to  Asia,  we  shall  see  an  admirable  illustration
of  what  may  be  called  the  collision  between  internal  and  external  phenomena.
Owing  to  circumstances  already  stated,  Asiatic  civilization  has  always  been
confined  to  that  rich  tract  where  alone  wealth  could  be  easily  obtained.*  This

about  the  idleness  and  levity  of  the  Celtic  race  ;  the  simple  fact  being,  that  the  Irish
are  unwilling  to  work,  not  because  they  are  Celts,  but  because  their  work  is  badly  paid.
When  they  go  abroad,  they  get  good  wages,  and  therefore  they  become  as  industrious  as
any  other  people.  Compare  Journal  of  Statistical  Society,  vol.  vii.  p.  24,  with  Thornton
on  Over -Population,  p.  425  ;  a  very  valuable  work.  Even  in  1799,  it  was  observed  that
the  Irish  as  soon  as  they  left  their  own  country  became  industrious  and  energetic.  See
Parliamentary  History,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  222.  So  too,  in  North  America,  "  they  are  most
willing  to  work  hard."  Ly ell's  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States,  1849,  vol.  i.  p.  187.

52  By  low  wages,  I  mean  low  reward  of  labour,  which  is  of  course  independent  both
of  the  cost  of  labour  and  of  the  money -rate  of  wages.     [The  meaning  is  that  low-paid
labour  may  be  so  inefficient  as  to  be  "  dear  "  to  the  employer  ;  while  in  some  countries
or  periods  a  low  money -wage  may  have  high  purchasing  power,  or  vice  versd. — ED.]

53  In  a  recent  work  of  considerable  ingenuity  (Doubleday's  True  Law  of  Population,
1847,  pp.  25-29,  69,  78,  123,  124,  etc.)  it  is  noticed  that  countries  are  more  populous
when  the  ordinary  food  is  vegetable  than  when  it  is  animal ;  and  an  attempt  is  made  to
explain  this  on  the  ground  that  a  poor  diet  is  more  favourable  to  fecundity  than  a  rich
one.     But  though  the  fact  of  the  greater  increase  of  population  is  indisputable,  there  are
several  reasons  for  being  dissatisfied  with  Mr.  Doubleday's  explanation.

ist.  That  the  power  of  propagation  is  heightened  by  poor  living,  is  a  proposition
which  has  never  been  established  physiologically  ;  while  the  observations  of  travellers
and  of  governments  are  not  sufficiently  numerous  to  establish  it  statistically.

2d.  Vegetable  diet  is  as  generous  for  a  hot  country  as  animal  diet  is  for, a  cold  country  ;
and  since  we  know  that,  notwithstanding  the  difference  of  food  and  climate,  the  tempera  -
ture  of  the  body  varies  little  between  the  equator  and  the  poles  (compare  Liebig's
Animal  Chemistry,  p.  19  ;  Holland's  Medical  Notes,  p.  473  ;  Pouillet,  Elemens  de  Physique,
vol.  i.  part  i.  p.  414  ;  Burdach's  Traite  de  Physiologic,  vol.  ix.  p.  663),  we  have  no  reason
to  believe  that  there  is  any  other  normal  variation,  but  should  rather  suppose  that,  in
regard  to  all  essential  functions,  vegetable  diet  and  external  heat  are  equivalent  to
animal  diet  and  external  cold.

3d.  Even  conceding,  for  *the  sake  of  argument,  that  vegetable  food  increases  the
procreative  power,  this  would  only  affect  the  number  of  births,  and  not  the  density  of
population  ;  for  a  greater  number  of  births  may  be,  and  often  are,  remedied  by  a  greater
mortality  ;  a  point  in  regard  to  which  Godwin,  in  trying  to  refute  Malthus,  falls  into
serious  error.  Godwin  on  Population,  p.  317.

Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  found  that  these  views  of  Mr.  Doubleday's  were  in  a
great  measure  anticipated  by  Fourier.  See  Rey,  Science  Sociale,  vol.  i.  p.  185.

[*The  "  ease  "  must  have  varied  greatly  in  the  areas  of  the  actual  known  civilizations.
In  China,  where  civilization  is  of  very  old  standing,  immense  industry  is  spent  in  agri-
culture ;  and  this  seems  to  have  been  the  case  also  in  ancient  Mesopotamia,  where
canalization  was  indispensable. — ED.]


40  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

immense  zone  comprises  some  of  the  most  fertile  parts  of  the  globe  ;  and  of  all
its  provinces,  Hindostan  is  certainly  the  one  which  for  the  longest  period  has
possessed  the  greatest  civilization.54  And  as  the  materials  for  forming  an
opinion  respecting  India  are  more  ample  than  those  respecting  any  other  part
of  Asia,55  I  purpose  to  select  it  as  an  example,  and  use  it  to  illustrate  those  laws
which,  though  generalized  from  political  economy,  chemistry,  and  physiology,
may  be  verified  by  that  more  extensive  survey,  the  means  of  which  history  alone
can  supply.

In  India,  the  great  heat  of  the  climate  brings  into  play  that  law  already
pointed  out,  by  virtue  of  which  the  ordinary  food  is  of  an  "oxygenous  rather  than
of  a  carbonaceous  character.  This,  according  to  another  law,  obliges  the  people
to  derive  their  usual  diet  not  from  the  animal,  but  from  the  vegetable  world,  of
which  starch  is  the  most  important  constituent.  At  the  same  time  the  high
temperature,  incapacitating  men  for  arduous  labour,  makes  necessary  a  food  of
which  the  returns  will  be  abundant,  and  which  will  contain  much  nutriment  in
a  comparatively  small  space.  Here,  then,  we  have  some  characteristics,  which,
if  the  preceding  views  are  correct,  ought  to  be  found  in  the  ordinary  food  of  the
Indian  nations.  So  they  all  are.  From  the  earliest  period  the  most  general
food  in  India  has  been  rice,56  which  is  the  most  nutritive  of  all  the  cerealia  ;  57
which  contains  an  enormous  proportion  of  starch  ;  58  and  which  yields  to  the
labourer  an  average  return  of  at  least  sixty-fold.59

54  I  use  the  word  '  Hindostan  '  in  the  popular  sense,  as  extending  south  to  Cape
Comorin  ;  though,  properly  speaking,  it  only  includes  the  country  north  of  the  Nerbudda.
Compare  Mill's  History  of  India,  vol.  ii.  p.  178  ;  Bohlen,  das  alte  Indien,  vol.  i.  p.  n  ;
Meiners  uber  die  Lander  in  Asien,  vol.  i.  p.  224.     The  word  itself  is  not  found  in  the  old
Sanscrit,  and  is  of  Persian  origin.     Halhed's  Preface  to  the  Gentoo  Laws,  pp.  xx.  xxi.  ;
Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  iii.  pp.  368,  369.     [The  generalization  in  the  text  underestimates
the  civilizations  of  ancient  China  and  Mesopotamia,  which  seem  to  have  reached  a  high
stage  long  before  that  of  India,  and  to  have  remained  at  it  for  very  long  periods.     As  to
Mesopotamia  the  facts  have  been  unearthed  since  Buckle  wrote  ;  but  to  Chinese  history
he  seems  to  have  given  no  special  study. — ED.]

55  So  that,  in  addition  to  works  published  on  their  philosophy,  religion,  and  juris-
prudence, a  learned  geographer  stated  several  years  ago,  that  "  kein  anderes  Asiatisches
Reich  ist  in  den  letzten  drey  J  ahrhunderten  von  so  vielen    und    so    einsichtsvollen
Europaern  durchreist,  und  beschrieben  worden,  als  Hindostan."     Meiners  Lander  in
Asien,  vol.  i.  p.  225.     Since  the  time  of  Meiners,  such  evidence  has  become  still  more
precise  and  extensive  ;  and  is,   I  think,  too  much  neglected  by  M.  Rhode  in  his  valuable
work  on  India.     "  Dem  Zwecke  dieser  Arbeit  gemass,  betrachten  wir  hier  nur  Werke  der
Hindus  selbst,  oder  Ausziige  aus  denselben  als  Quellen."      Rhode,  Religiose  Bildung  der
Hindus,  vol.  i.  p.  43.

56  This  is  evident  from  the  frequent  and  familiar  mention  of  it  in  that  remarkable
relic  of  antiquity,  the  Institutes  of  Menu.     See  the  Institutes,  in  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,
vol.  iii.  pp.  87,  132,  156,  200,  215,  366,  400,  403,  434.     Thus  too,  in  the  enumeration
of  foods  in  Vishnu  Purana,  pp.  46,  47,  rice  is  the  first  mentioned.     See  further  evidence
in  Bohlen,  das  alte  Indien,  vol.  i.  p.  22,  vol.  ii.  pp.  159,  160  ;  Wilson's  Theatre  of  the
Hindus,  vol.  i.  part  ii.  pp.  15,  16,  37,  92,  95,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  35,  part  iii.  p.  64  ;  Notes  on
the  Mahabharata,  in  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  vii.  p.  i^r  ;  Travels  of  Ibn  Batuta  in
Fourteenth  Century,  p.  164  ;  Colebrooke's  Digest  of  Hindu  Law,  vol.  i.  p.  499,  vol.  ii.  pp.
44,  48,  436,  569,  vol.  iii.  pp.  n,  148,  205,  206,  207,  266,  364,  530  ;  Asiatic  Researches,
vol.  vii.  pp.  299,  302  ;  Ward  on  the  Hindoos,  vol.  i.  p.  209,  vol.  iii.  p.  105.

57  "  It  contains  a  greater  proportion  of  nutritious  matter  than  any  of  the  cerealia."
Somerville's  Physical  Geography,  vol.  ii.  p.  202.

58  It  contains  from  83-8  to  85-07  per  cent,  of  starch.     Brandt's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.
1624  ;  Thomson's  Chemistry  of  Organic  Bodies,  p.  883.

59  It  is  difficult  to  collect  sufficient  evidence  to. strike  an  average;  but  in  Egypt,
according  to  Savary,  rice  "  produces  eighty  bushels  for  one."     Loudon's  Encyclop.  of
Agriculture,  p.  173.     In  Tennasserim,  the  yield  is  from  80  to  100.     Low's  History  of
Tennasserim,  in  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  iii.  p.  29.     In  South  America,  250  fold.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  41

Thus  possible  is  it,  by  the  application  of  a  few  physical  laws,  to  anticipate

what  the  national  food  of  a  country  will  be,  and  therefore  to  anticipate  a  long

train  of  ulterior  consequences.     What  in  this  case  is  no  less  remarkable,  is  that

though,  in  the  south  of  the  peninsula,  rice  is  not  so  much  used  as  formerly,  it

las  been  replaced,  not  by  animal  food,  but  by  another  grain  called  ragi.60     The

riginal  rice,  however,  is  so  suited  to  the  circumstances  I  have  described,  that  it

still  the  most  general  food  of  nearly  all  the  hottest  countries  of  Asia,61  from

rhich    at    different    times    it    has    been    transplanted    to  other   parts    of    the


In  consequence  of  these  peculiarities  of  climate,  and  of  food,  there  has  arisen
India  that  unequal  distribution  of  wealth  which  we  must  expect  to  find  in
nmtries  where  the  labour-market  is  always  redundant.63  If  we  examine  the
irliest  Indian  records  which  have  been  preserved  —  records  between  two  and
iree  thousand  years  old  —  we  find  evidence  of  a  state  of  things  similar  to  that
/hich  now  exists,  and  which,  we  may  rely  upon  it,  always  has  existed  ever
>ince  the  accumulation  of  capital  once  fairly  began.  We  find  the  upper  classes
lormously  rich,  and  the  lower  classes  miserably  poor.  We  find  those  by  whose
ibour  the  wealth  is  created  receiving  the  smallest  possible  share  of  it  ;  the
linder  being  absorbed  by  the  higher  ranks  in  the  form  either  of  rent  or  of
rofit.  And  as  wealth  is,  after  intellect,  the  most  permanent  source  of  power,
has  naturally  happened  that  a  great  inequality  of  wealth  has  been  accom-

according  to  Spix  and  Martius  (Travels  in  Brazil,  vol.  ii.  p.  79)  ;  or  from  200  to  300,
according  to  Southey  (History  of  Brazil,  vol.  hi.  pp.  658,  806).  The  lowest  estimate
given  by  M.  Meyen  is  forty  fold  ;  the  highest,  which  is  marsh  rice  in  the  Philippine
Islands,  400  fold.  Meyen's  Geography  of  Plants,  1846,  p.  301.

60  Elphinstone'  's  History  of  India,  p.  7.     Ragi  is  the  Cynosurus  Corocanus  of  Linnaeus  ;
and,  considering  its  importance,  it  has  been  strangely  neglected  by  botanical  writers.

The  best  account  I  have  seen  of  it  is  in  Buchanan's  Journey  through  the  Countries  of
Mysore,  Canara,  and  Malabar,  vol.  i.  pp.  100-104,  285,  286,  375,  376,  403,  vol.  ii.  pp.  103,
104,  vol.  iii.  pp.  239,  240,  296,  297.  In  the  large  cities,  millet  is  generally  used  ;  of  which
"  a  quantity  sufficient  for  two  meals  may  be  purchased  for  about  a  half  -penny."  Gibson
on  Indian  Agriculture,  in  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  viii.  p.  100.

61  Marsden's  History  of  Sumatra,  pp.  56,  59  ;  Raffles'  History  of  Java,  vol.  i.  pp.  39,
106,  119,  129,  240  ;  PercivaVs  Ceylon,  pp.  337,  364  ;  Transac.  of  Society  of  Bombay,  vol.  ii.
p.  155  ;  Transac.  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  510  ;  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  i.  pp.
228,  247,  vol.  ii.  pp.  44,  64,  251,  257,  262,  336,  344,  vol.  iii.  pp.  8,  25,  300,  340,  vol.  iv.  pp..
82,  83,  104,  vol.  v.  pp.  241,  246  ;  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  v.  pp.  124,  229,  vol.  xii.  p.  148,
vol.  xvi.  pp.  171,  172  ;  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  86,  vol.  iii.  pp.  124,  295,
300,  vol.  v.  p.  263,  vol.  viii.  pp.  341,  359,  vol.  xix.  pp.  132,  137.

62  Rice,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  trace  it,  has  travelled  westward.     Besides  the
historical  evidence,  there  are  philological  probabilities  in  favour  of  its  being  indigenous
to  Asia,  and  the  Sanscrit  name  for  it  has  been  very  widely  diffused.     Compare  Hum-
boldfs  Cosmos,  vol.  ii.  p.  472,  with  Craufurd's  History  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  vol.  i.
p.  358.     In  the  fourteenth  century,  it  was  the  common  food  on  the  Zanguebar  coast  ;
and  is  now  universal  in  Madagascar.     Travels  of  Ibn  Batuta  in  Fourteenth  Century,  p.
56  ;  Ellis'  s  History  of  Madagascar,  vol.  i.  pp.  39,  297-304,  vol.  ii.  p.  292  ;  Journal  of
Geograph.  Society,  vol.  iii.  p.   212.     From  Madagascar  its  seeds  were,    according   to
ii'CuUoch's  Dictionary  of  Commerce,  p.  1105,  carried  to  Carolina  late  in  the  seventeenth
century.     It  is  now  cultivated  in  Nicaragua  (Squier's  Central  America,  vol.  i.  p.  38)
and  in  South  America  (Henderson's  Hist,  of  Brazil,  pp.  292,  307,  395,  440,  488),  where  it
is  said  to  grow  wild.     Compare  Meyen's  Geography  of  Plants,  pp.  291,  297,  with  Azara,
Voyages  dans  VAmerique  Meridionale.  vol.  i.]  p.  100,  vol.  ii.  p.  80.     The  ancient  Greeks,
though  acquainted  with  rice,  did  not  cultivate  it  ;  and  its  cultivation  was  first  introduced
into  Europe  by  the  Arabs.     See  Humboldt,  Nouvelle  Espagne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  409,  410.

63  So  far  as  food  is  concerned,  Diodorus  Siculus  notices  the  remarkable  fertility  of
India,  and  the  consequent  accumulation  of  wealth.     See  two  interesting  passages  in
Bibliothec.  Hist.  lib.  ii.  vol.  ii.  pp.  49,  50,  108,  109.     But  of  the  economical  laws  of  dis*
tribution,  he,  like  all  the  ancient  writers,  was  perfectly  ignorant.


42  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

parried  by  a  corresponding  inequality  of  social  and  political  power.  It  is  not,
therefore,  surprising  that  from  the  earliest  period  to  which  our  knowledge  ot
India  extends,  an  immense  majority  of  the  people,  pinched  by  the  most  galling
poverty,  and  just  living  from  hand  to  mouth,  should  always  have  remained
'in  a  state  of  stupid  debasement,  broken  by  incessant  misfortune,  crouching
before  their  superiors  in  abject  submission,  and  only  fit  either  to  be  slaves  them-
selves or  to  be  led  to  battle  to  make  slaves  of  others.64

To  ascertain  the  precise  value-  of  the  average  rate  of  wages  in  India  for  any
long  period,  is  impossible  ;  because,  although  the  amount  might  be  expressed  in
money,  still  the  value  of  money,  that  is,  its  purchasing  power,  is  subject  to
incalculable  fluctuations,  arising  from  changes  in  the  cost  of  production.65  But,
for  our  present  purpose,  there  is  a  method  of  investigation  which  will  lead  to
results  far  more  accurate  than  any  statement  could  be  that  depended  merely
on  a  collection  of  evidence  respecting  the  wages  themselves.  The  method  is
simply  this  :  that  inasmuch  as  the  wealth  of  a  country  can  only  be  divided  into
wages,  rent,  profits,  and  interest,  and  inasmuch  as  interest  is  on  an  average  an
exact  measure  of  profits,66  it  follows  that  if  among  any  people  rent  and  interest
are  both  high,  wages  must  be  low.67  If,  therefore,  we  can  ascertain  the  current
interest  of  money,  and  the  proportion  of  the  produce  of  the  soil  which  is  absorbed
by  rent,  we  shall  get  a  perfectly  accurate  idea  of  the  wages  ;  because  wages  are
the  residue,  that  is,  they  are  what  is  left  to  the  labourers  after  rent,  profits,  and
interest  have  been  paid.

Now  it  is  remarkable,  that  in  India,  both  interest  and  rent  have  always  been

64  An  able  and  very  learned  apologist  for  this  miserable  people  says,  "  The  servility
so  generally  ascribed  to  the  Hindu  is  never  more  conspicuous  than  when  he  is  examined
as  an  evidence.     But  if  it  be  admitted  that  he  acts  as  a  slave,  why  blame  him  for  not
possessing  the  virtues  of  a  free  man  ?     The  oppression  of  ages  has  taught  him  implicit
submission."     Vans  Kennedy,  in  Transactions  of  Society  of  Bombay,  vol.  iii.  p.   144.
Compare    the    observations    of    Charles    Hamilton    in    Asiatic   Researches,    vol.    i.    p.
305.

65  The  impossibility  of  having  a  standard  of  value,  is  clearly  pointed  out  in  Turgofs
Reflexions  sur  la  Formation  et  la  Distribution  des  Richesses,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  v.  pp.  51,  52.
Compare  Ricardo' s  Works,  pp.   n,  28-30,  46,   166,  253,  270,  401,  with  M'Culloch's
Principles  of  Political  Economy,  pp.  298,  299,  307.

66  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  book  i.  chap.  ix.  p.  37  ;  where,  however,  the  proposition
is  stated  rather  too  absolutely,  since  the  risks  arising  from  an  insecure  state  of  society
must  be  taken  into  consideration.    But  that  there  is  an  average  ratio  between  interest
and  profits  is  obvious,  and  is  distinctly  laid  down  by  the  Sanscrit  jurists.     See  Cole-
brooke's  Digest  of  Hindu  Law,  vol.  i.  pp.  72,  81.

67  Ricardo  (Principles  of  Political  Economy,  chap.  vi.  in  Works,  p.  65)  says,  "  Whatever
increases  wages,  necessarily  reduces  profits."     And  in  chap.  xv.  p.   122,  "  Whatever
raises  the  wages  of  labour,  lowers  the  profits  of  stock."     In  several  other  places  he  makes
the  same  assertion,  very  much  to  the  discomfort  of  the  ordinary  reader,  who  knows  that
in  the  United  States,  for  instance,  wages  and  profits  are  both  high.     But  the  ambiguity
is  in  the  language,  not  in  the  thought ;  and  in  these  and  similar  passages  Ricardo  by
wages  meant  cost  of  labour,  in  which  sense  the  proposition  is  quite  accurate.     If  by
wages  we  mean  the  reward  of  labour,  then  there  is  no  relation  between  wages  and  profits ;
for  when  rent  is  low,  both  of  them  may  be  high,  as  is   the  case  in  the  United  States.
That  this  was  the  view  of  Ricardo  is  evident  from  the  following  passage  :  "  Profits,  it
cannot  be  too  often  repeated,  depend  on  wages  ;  not  on  nominal  but  real  wages  ;  not  on
the  number  of  pounds  that  may  be  annually  paid  to  the  labourer,  but  on  the  number  of
days'  work  necessary  to  obtain  those  pounds."     Political  Economy,  chap,  vii.,  Ricardo's
Works,  p.  82.     Compare  Mill's  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  vol.  i.  p.  509,  vol.  ii.  p.
225.     [The  passage  last  quoted  from  Ricardo  confuses  the  distinction  between  nominal
and  real  wages  with  that  between  high  and  low  "  reward  "  on  the  one  hand  and  high  and
low  "  cost "  on  the  other.     The  last -quoted  clause  refers  really  to  reward  and  not  to
cost  of  labour  (see  note  52,  above).     His  argument,  in  fact,  was  not  adjusted  to  the  case
of  the  United  States.— ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  43

/ery  high.*     In  the  Institutes  of  Menu,  which  were  drawn  up  about  B.C.  9OO,68

the  lowest  legal  interest  for  money  is  fixed  at  fifteen  per  cent.,  the  highest  at

>ixty  per  cent.*59     Nor  is  this  to  be  considered  as  a  mere  ancient  law  now  fallen
ito  disuse.     So  far  from  that,  the  Institutes  of  Menu  are  still  the  basis  of  Indian

jurisprudence  ;  70  and  we  know  on  very  good  authority,  that  in  1810  the  interest
dd  for  the  use  of  money  varied  from  thirty -six  to  sixty  per  cent.71
Thus  much  as  to  one  of  the  elements  of  our  present  calculation.     As  to  the

)ther  element,  namely,  the  rent,  we  have  information  equally  precise  and  trust-
)rthy.     In  England  and  Scotland,  the  rent  paid  by  the  cultivator  for  the  use

)f  land  is  estimated  in  round  numbers,   taking  one  farm  with  another,   at  a
)urth  of  the  gross  produce.72     In  France,  the  average  proportion  is  about  a

third  ;  73  while  in  the  United  States  of  North  America  it  is  well  known  to  be
mch  less,  and,  indeed,  in  some  parts,  to  be  merely  nominal.74  But  in  India,
legal  rent,  that  is,  the  lowest  rate  recognized  by  the  law  and  usage  of  the
mntry,  is  one-half  of  the  produce  ;  and  even  this  cruel  regulation  is  not  strictly
[forced,  since  in  many  cases  rents  are  raised  so  high,  that  the  cultivator  not
ily  receives  less  than  half  the  produce,  but  receives  so  little  as  to  have  scarcely

the  means  of  providing  seed  to  sow  the  ground  for  the  next  harvest.75

68  I  take  the  estimate  of  Mr.  Elphinstone  (History  of  India,  pp.  225-228)  as  midway
^tween  Sir  William  Jones  (Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  56)  and  Mr.  Wilson  (Rig  Veda  Sanhita

TO\.  i.  p.  xlvii.).  »

69  Institutes  of  Menu,  chap.  viii.  sec.  140-142,  in  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  295.
he  subsequent  Sanscrit  commentators  recognize  nearly  the  same  rate  of  interest,  the

minimum  being  fifteen  per  cent.     See  Colebrooke's  Digest  of  Hindu  Law,  vol.  i.  pp.  29,  36,
43,  98,  99,  237,  vol.  ii.  p.  70.

70  In  Colebrooke's  Digest,  vol.  i.  p.  454,  and  Vol.  iii.  p.  229,  Menu  is  called  "  the  highest
authority  of  memorial  law,"  and  "  the  founder  of  memorial  law."     The  most  recent
historian  of  India,  Mr.  Elphinstone,  says  (Hist,  of  India,  p.  83),  "  The  code  of  Menu  is
still  the  basis  of  the  Hindu  jurisprudence  ;  and  the  principal  features  remain  unaltered  to
the  present  day."     This  remarkable  code  is  also  the  basis  of  the  laws  of  the  Burmese,  and
even  of  those  of  the  Laos.     Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  271,  vol.  iii.  pp.  28,  296
332,  vol.  v.  p.  252.

71  See,  in  Mill's  History  of  India,  vol.  i.  p.  317,  the  report  of  a  committee  of  the  House
of  Commons  in  1810,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  the  ryots  paid  "  the  heavy  interest  of
three,  four,  and  five  per  cent,  per  month."   Ward,  writing  about  the  same  time,  mentions
as  much  as  seventy -five  per  cent,  being  given,  and  this  apparently  without  the  lender
incurring  any  extraordinary  risk.     Ward  on  the  Hindoos,  vol.  ii.  p.  190.

72  Compare  the  table  in  Loudon's  Encyclopedia  of  Agriculture,  p.  778,  with  Mavor's
note  in  Tusser's  Five  Hundred  Points  of  Husbandry,  p.  195,  Lond.  1812,  and  M'Culloch's
Statistical  Account  of  the  British  Empire,  1847,  vol.  i.  p.  560.

73  This  is  the  estimate  I  have  received  from  persons  well  acquainted  with  French
agriculture.      The  rent,  of  course,  varies  in  each  separate  instance,  according  to  the
natural  powers  of  the  soil,  according  to  the  extent  to  which  those  powers  have  been  im-
proved, and  according  to  the  facilities  for  bringing  the  produce  to  market.     But,  not-
withstanding these  variations,  there  must  be  in  every  country  an  average  rent,  depending
upon  the  operation  of  general  causes.

74  Owing  to  the  immense  supply  of  land  preventing  the  necessity  of  cultivating  those
inferior  soils  which  older  countries  are  glad  to  use,  and  are  therefore  willing  to  pay  a  rent
for  the  right  of  using.     In  the  United  States,  profits  and  wages  (i.e.  the  reward  of  the
labourer,  not  the  cost  of  labour)  are  both  high,  which  would  be  impossible  if  rent  were
also  high.     [Strictly,  both  the  "  cost  "  and  the  "  reward  "  of  labour  (see  note  52,  above)
might  be  high  alongside  of  high  profits  when  rent  is  low,  as  scarcity  of  labour  raises  its
cost.     But  increased  efficiency  reduces  cost,  other  things  being  equal. — ED.]

™  See  Rammohun  Roy  on  the  Judicial  and  Revenue  Systems  of  India,  1832,  pp.  59-61,
63/69,  92,  94.  At  p.  69,  this  high  authority  says  of  the  agricultural  peasantry  of  Bengal :
"  In  an  abundant  season,  when  the  price  of  corn  is  low,  the  sale  of  their  whole  crops  is
required  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  landholder,  leaving  little  or  nothing  for  seed  or

[*  Compare  note  21,  above,  p.  30. — ED.]


44  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  these  facts  is  manifest.  Rent  and  interest
being  always  very  high,  and  interest  varying,  as  it  must  do,  according  to  the
rate  of  profits,  it  is  evident  that  wages  must  have  been  very  low  ;  for  since  there
was  in  India  a  specific  amount  of  wealth  to  be  divided  into  rent,  interest,  profits,
and  wages,  it  is  clear  that  the  first  three  could  only  have  been  increased  at  the
expense  of  the  fourth  ;  which  is  saying,  in  other  words,  that  the  reward  of  the
labourers  was  very  small  in  proportion  to  the  reward  received  by  the  upper
classes.  And  though  this,  being  an  inevitable  inference,  does  not  require
extraneous  support,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  in  modern  times,  for  which  alone
we  have  direct  evidence,  wages  have  in  India  always  been  excessively  low,  and
the  people  have  been,  and  still  are,  obliged  to  work  for  a  sum  barely  sufficient  to
meet  the  exigencies  of  life.76

This  was  the  first  great  consequence  induced  in  India  by  the  cheapness  and
abundance  of  the  national  food.77  But  the  evil  by  no  means  stopped  there.
In  India,  as  in  every  other  country,  poverty  provokes  contempt,  and  wealth
produces  power.  When  other  things  are  equal,  it  must  be  with  classes  of  men
as  with  individuals,  that  the  richer  they  are,  the  greater  the  influence  they  will

subsistence  to  the  labourer  or  his  family."  In  Cashmere,  the  sovereign  received  half
the  produce  of  the  rice -crop,  leaving  the  other  half  to  the  cultivator.  MoorcrofCs
Notices  of  Cashmere,  in  Journal  of  Geog.  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  266.

76  Heber  (Journey  through  India,  vol.  i.  pp.  209,  356,  357,  359)  gives  some  curious
instances  of  the  extremely  low  rate  at  which  the  natives  are  glad  to  work.     As  to  the
ordinary  wages  in  India  in  the  present  century,  see  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  i.  p.
255,  vol.  v.  p.  171  ;  Rammohun  Roy  on  the  Judicial  and  Revenue  Systems,  pp.  105,  106  ;
Sykes's  Statistics  of  the  Deccan,  in  Reports  of  the  British  Association,  vol.  vi.  p.  321  ;
Ward's  View  of  the  Hindoos,  vol.  iii.  p.  207  ;  Colebrooke's  Digest  of  Hindu  Law,  vol.  ii.  p.
184.     On  wages  in  the  south  of  India,  the  fullest  information  will  be  found  in  Buchanan's
valuable  work,  Journey  through  the  Mysore,  Canara,  and  Malabar,  vol.  i.  pp.  124,  125,
I33»  i7i»  i75»  216,  217,  298,  390,  415,  vol.  ii.  pp.  12,  19,  22,  37,  90,  108,  132,  217,  218,
315,  481,  523,  525.  562,  vol.  iii.  pp.  35,  181,  226,  298,  321,  349,  363,  398,  428,  555.     I
wish  that  all  travellers  were  equally  minute  in  recording  the  wages  of  labour  ;  a  subject
of  far  greater  importance  than  those  with  which  they  usually  fill  their  books.

On  the  other  hand,  the  riches  possessed  by  the  upper  classes  have,  owing  to  this  mal-
distribution of  wealth,  been  always  enormous,  and  sometimes  incredible.  See  Forbes's
Oriental  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  297  ;  Bohlen,  das  alte  Indien,  vol.  ii.  p.  119  ;  Travels  of  Ibn
Batuta,  p.  41  ;  Ward's  Hindoos,  vol.  iii.  p.  178.  The  autobiography  of  the  Emperor
Jehangueir  contains  such  extraordinary  statements  of  his  immense  wealth,  that  the
editor,  Major  Price,  thinks  that  some  error  must  have  been  made  by  the  copyist ;  but
the  reader  will  find  in  Grote's  History  of  Greece  (vol.  xii.  pp.  229,  245)  evidence  of  the
treasures  which  it  was  possible  for  Asiatic  rulers  to  collect  in  that  state  of  society.  The
working  of  this  unequal  distribution  is  thus  stated  by  Mr.  Glyn  (Transac.  of  Asiatic
Society,  vol.  i.  p.  482)  :  "The  nations  of  Europe  have  very  little  idea  of  the  actual
condition  of  the  inhabitants  of  Hindustan  ;  they  are  more  wretchedly  poor  than  we  have
any  notion  of.  Europeans  have  hitherto  been  too  apt  to  draw  their  opinions  of  the
wealth  of  Hindustan  from  the  gorgeous  pomp  of  a  few  emperors,  sultans,  nawabs,  and
rajahs ;  whereas  a  more  intimate  and  accurate  view  of  the  real  state  of  society  would
have  shown  that  these  princes  and  nobles  were  engrossing  all  the  wealth  of  the  country,
whilst  the  great  body  of  the  people  were  earning  but  a  bare  subsistence,  groaning  under
intolerable  burdens,  and  hardly  able  to  supply  themselves  with  the  necessaries  of  life,
much  less  with  its  luxuries."

77  Turner,  who  travelled  in  1783  through  the  north-east  of  Bengal,  says  :  "  Indeed,
the  extreme  poverty  and  wretchedness  of  these  people  will  forcibly  appear,  when  we
recollect  how  little  is  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  a  peasant  in  these  regions.     The
value  of  this  can  seldom  amount  to  more  than  one  penny  per  day,  even  allowing  him  to
make  his  meal  of  two  pounds  of  boiled  rice,  with  a  due  proportion  of  salt,  oil,  vegetables,
fish  and  chili."  Turner's  Embassy  to  Tibet,  p.  ii.  Ibn  Batuta,  who  travelled  in  Hindostan
in  the  fourteenth  century,  says  :  "  I  never  saw  a  country  in  which  provisions  were  so
cheap."     Travels  of  Ibn  Batuta,  p.  194,


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  45

possess.  It  was  therefore  to  be  expected,  that  the  unequal  distribution  of
wealth  should  cause  an  unequal  distribution  of  power  ;  and  as  there  is  no  instance
on  record  of  any  class  possessing  power  without  abusing  it,  we  may  easily
understand  how  it  was  that  the  people  of  India,  condemned  to  poverty  by  the
physical  laws  of  their  climate,  should  have  fallen  into  a  degradation  from  which
they  have  never  been  able  to  escape.  A  few  instances  may  be  given  to  illustrate,
rather  than  to  prove,  a  principle  which  the  preceding  arguments  have,  I  trust,
placed  beyond  the  possibility  of  dispute.

To  the  great  body  of  the  Indian  people  the  name  of  Sudras  is  given  ;  78  and
the  native  laws  respecting  them  contain  some  minute  and  curious  provisions.
If  a  member  of  this  despised  class  presumed  to  occupy  the  same  seat  as  his
superiors,  he  was  either  to  be  exiled  or  to  suffer  a  painful  and  ignominious
punishment.79  If  he  spoke  of  them  with  contempt,  his  mouth  was  to  be
burned  ;  80  if  he  actually  insulted  them,  his  tongue  was  to  be  slit  ;  81  if  he
molested  a  Brahmin,  he  was  to  be  put  to  death  ;  82  if  he  sat  on  the  same  carpet
with  a  Brahmin,  he  was  to  be  maimed  for  life  ;  83  if,  moved  by  the  desire  of
instruction,  he  even  listened  to  the  reading  of  the  sacred  books,  burning  oil  was
to  be  poured  into  his  ears  ;  84  if,  however,  he  committed  them  to  memory,  he
was  to  be  killed  ;  85  if  he  were  guilty  of  a  crime,  the  punishment  for  it  was  greater
than  that  inflicted  on  his  superiors  ;  86  but  if  he  himself  were  murdered,  the
penalty  was  the  same  as  for  killing  a  dog,  a  cat,  or  a  crow.87  Should  he  marry
his  daughter  to  a  Brahmin,  no  retribution  that  could  be  exacted  in  this  world
was  sufficient  ;  it  was  therefore  announced  that  the  Brahmin  must  go  to  hell,
for  having  suffered  contamination  from  a  woman  immeasurably  his  inferior.88

78  The  Sudras  are  estimated  by  Ward  (View  of  the  Hindoos,  vol.  iii.  p.  281)  at  "  three -
fourths  of  the  Hindoos."     At  all  events,  they  comprise  the  whole  of  the  working  -
classes  ;  the  Vaisyas  not  being  husbandmen,  as  they  are  often  called,  but  landlords,
owners  of  cattle,  and  traders.     Compare  Institutes  of  Menu,  chap.  ix.  sec.  326-333,  in
Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  iii.  pp.  380,  381,  with  Cclebrooke's  Digest,  vol.  i.  p.  15,  from
which  it  appears  that  the  Vaisyas  were  always  the  masters,  and  that  the  Sudra  was  to
"rely  on  agriculture  for  his  subsistence."     The  division,  therefore,  between  "the  in-
dustrious and  the  servile  "  (Elphinstone' s  History  of  India,  p.  12)  is  too  broadly  stated  ;
and  we  must,  I  think,  take  the  definition  of  M.  Rhode  :  "  Die  Kaste  der  Sudras  umfasst
die  ganze  arbeitende,  oder  um  Lohn  dienende  Classe  des  Volks."     Relig.  Bildung  der
Hindus,  vol.  ii.  p.  561.

79  "  Either  be  banished  with  a  mark  on  his  hinder  parts,  or  the  king  shall  cause  a
gash  to  be  made  on  his  buttock."     Institutes  of  Menu,  chap.  viii.  sec.  281,  in  Works  of
Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  315.     See  also  Ward's  View  of  the  Hindoos,  vol.  iii.  p.  67.

80  Menu,  chap.  viii.  sec.  271,  in  Jones's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  314.

81  Menu,  chap.  viii.  sec.  270.

82  "  If  a  Sooder  gives  much  and  frequent  molestation  to  a  Brahmin,  the  magistrate
shall  put  him  to  death."     Halhed's  Code  of  Gentoo  Laws,  p.  262.

83  Halhed's  Code  of  Gentoo  Laws,  p.  207.      As  to  the  case  of  striking  a   Brahmin,  see
Rammohun  Roy  on  the  Veds,  p.  227,  2d  edit.  1832.

84  "  And  if  a  Sooder  listens  to  the  Beids  of  the  Shaster,  then  the  oil,  heated  as  before,
shall  be  poured  into  his  ears  ;  and  arzeez  and  wax  shall  be  melted  together,  and  the
orifice  of  his  ears  shall  be  stopped  up  therewith."     Halhed,  p.  262.     Compare  the  pro-
hibition in  Menu,  chap.  iv.  sec.  99,  chap.  x.  sec.  109-111,  in  Jones's  Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.
174.  398.

85  Halhed,  p.  262  :  "  the  magistrate  shall  put  him  to  death."     In  Mrichchakati,  the
judge  says  to  a  Sudra,  "  If  you  expound  the  Vedas,  will  not  your  tongue  be  cut  out  ?  "
Wilson's  Theatre  of  the  Hindus,  vol.  i.  part  ii.  p.  170.

86  Ward's  View  of  the  Hindoos,  vol.  iv.  p.  308.     To  this  the  only  exception  was  in  the
case  of  theft.     Mill's  History  of  India,  vol.  i.  pp.  193,  260.     A  Brahmin  could  "  on  no
account  be  capitally  punished."     Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xv.  p.  44.

87  Menu,  chap.  xi.  sec.  132,  in  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  422.

88  "  A  Brahmin,  if  he  take  a  Sudra  to  his  bed  as  his  first  wife,  sinks  to  the  regions  of
torment."     Institutes  of  Menu,  chap.  iii.  sec.  17,  in  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  121.     Compare  the


46  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Indeed,  it  was  ordered  that  the  mere  name  of  a  labourer  should  be  expressive
of  contempt,  so  that  his  proper  standing  might  be  immediately  known.89  And
lest  this  should  not  be  enough  to  maintain  the  subordination  of  society,  a  law
was  actually  made  forbidding  any  labourer  to  accumulate  wealth  ;  90  while
another  clause  declared  that  even  though  his  master  should  give  him  freedom,
he  would  in  reality  still  be  a  slave  ;  "  for,"  says  the  lawgiver — "  for  of  a  state
which  is  natural  to  him,  by  whom  can  he  be  divested  ?  "  91

By  whom,  indeed,  could  he  be  divested  ?  I  ween  not  where  that  power  was
by  which  so  vast  a  miracle  could  be  worked.  For  in  India,  slavery,  abject,
eternal  slavery,  was  the  natural  state  of  the  great  body  of  the  people  ;  it  was  the
state  to  which  they  were  doomed  by  physical  laws  utterly  impossible  to  resist.
The  energy  of  those  laws  is,  in  truth,  so  invincible,  that  wherever  they  have
come  into  play,  they  have  kept  the  productive  classes  in  perpetual  subjection.
There  is  no  instance  on  record  of  any  tropical  country,  in  which  wealth  having
been  extensively  accumulated,  the  people  have  escaped  their  fate  ;  no  instance
in  which  the  heat  of  the  climate  has  not*  caused  an  abundance  of  food,  and  the
abundance  of  food  caused  an  unequal  distribution,  first  of  wealth,  and  then  of
political  and  social  power.  Among  nations  subjected  to  these  conditions,  the
people  have  counted  for  nothing  ;  they  have  had  no  voice  in  the  management
of  the  state,  no  control  over  the  wealth  their  own  industry  created.  Their  only
business  has  been  to  labour  ;  their  only  duty  to  obey.  Thus  there  have  been
generated  among  them  those  habits  of  tame  and  servile  submission  by  which,
as  we  know  from  history,  they  have  always  been  characterized.  For  it  is  an
undoubted  fact  that  their  annals  furnish  no  instance  of  their  having  turned
upon  their  rulers,  no  war  of  classes,  no  popular  insurrections,  not  even  one  great
popular  conspiracy.  In  those  rich  and  fertile  countries  there  have  been  many
changes,  but  all  of  them  have  been  from  above,  not  from  below.  The  demo-
cratic element  has  been  altogether  wanting.  There  have  been,  in  abundance,
wars  of  kings,  and  wars  of  dynasties.  There  have  been  revolutions  in  the  govern-
ment, revolutions  in  the  palace,  revolutions  on  the  throne  ;  but  no  revolutions
among  the  people,^  no  mitigation  of  that  hard  lot  which  nature,  rather  than

denial  of  funeral  rites,  in  Colebrooke's  Digest  of  Hindu  Law,  vol.  iii.  p.  328.  And  on  the
different  hells  invented  by  the  Hindu  clergy,  see  Vishnu  Purana,  p.  207  ;  Ward's  View
of  the  Hindoos,  vol.  ii.  pp.  182,  183  ;  Coleman's  Mythology  of  the  Hindus,  p.  113.  The
curious  details  in  Rhode,  die  Religiose  Bildung  der  Hindus,  vol.  i.  pp.  392,  393,  rather
refer  to  Buddhism,  and  should  be  compared  with  Journal  Asiatique,  I  serie.  vol.  viii.
pp.  80,  81,  Paris,  1826.

89  Menu,  chap.  ii.  sec.  31,  in  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  87  ;  also  noticed  in  Rhode,  Relig.  Bildung,
vol.  ii.  p.  561  :  "  sein  Name  soil  schon  Verachtung  ausdrucken."     So,  too,  Mr.  Elphin-
stone  (History  of  India,  p.  17)  :  "  the  proper  name  of  aSudra  is  directed  to  be  expressive
of  contempt."     Compare  Origines  du  Droit,  in    CEuvres  de  Michelet,  vol.    ii.  p.    387,
Bruxelles,  1840.

90  Menu,  chap.  x.  sec.  129,  in  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  401.     This  law  is  pointed  out  by  Mill
(History  of  India,  vol.  i.  p.  195)  as  an  evidence  of  the  miserable  state  of  the  people,  which
Mr.  Wilson  (note  in  p.  194)  vainly  attempts  to  evade.

91  "  A  Sudra,  though  emancipated  by  his  master,  is  not  released  from  a  state  of  servi-
tude ;  for  of  a  state  which  is  natural  to  him,  by  whom  can  he  be  divested  ?  "    Institutes  of
Menu,  chap.  viii.  sec.  414,  in  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  333.

92  An  intelligent  observer  says,  "  It  is  also  remarkable  how  little  the  people  of  Asiatic
countries  have  to  do  in  the  revolutions  of  their  governments.     They  are  never  guided
by  any  great  and  common  impulse  of  feeling,  and  take  no  part  in  events  the  most
interesting  and  important  to  their  country  and  their  own  prosperity."     M'Murdo  on
the  Country  of  Sindh,  in  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,   vol.  i.  p,  250.     Compare   similar
remarks  in  Herder's  Ideen  zur  Geschichte,  vol.  iii.  p.  114  ;  and  even  in  Alison's  History
of  Europe,  vol.  x.  pp.  419,  420.

[*  There  is  here  a  slip  of  expression.  Heat  often  fails  to  produce  abundant  food.  The
proposition  should  run  that  where  abundant  food  is  yielded  by  the  primary  natural  con-
ditions, the  results  in  question  always  follow. — ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  47

man,  assigned  to  them.  Nor  was  it  until  civilization  arose  in  Europe  that  other
physical  laws  came  into  operation,  and  therefore  other  results  were  produced.
In  Europe,  for  the  first  time,  there  was  some  approach  to  equality,  some  ten-
dency to  correct  that  enormous  disproportion  of  wealth  and  power,  which  formed
the  essential  weakness  of  the  greatest  of  the  more  ancient  countries.  As  a
natural  consequence,  it  is  in  Europe  that  everything  worthy  of  the  name  of
civilization  has  originated  ;  *  because  there  alone  have  attempts  been  made
to  preserve  the  balance  of  its  relative  parts.  There  alone  has  society  been
organized  according  to  a  scheme,  not  indeed  sufficiently  large,  but  still  wide
enough  to  include  all  the  different  classes  of  which  it  is  composed,  and  thus,  by
leaving  room  for  the  progress  of  each,  to  secure  the  permanence  and  advance-
ment of  the  whole.

The  way  in  which  certain  other  physical  peculiarities,  confined  to  Europe,
have  also  accelerated  the  progress  of  Man  by  diminishing  his  superstition,  will
be  indicated  towards  the  end  of  this  chapter  ;  but  as  that  will  involve  an  ex-
amination of  some  laws  which  I  have  not  yet  noticed,  it  seems  advisable,  in  the
first  place,  to  complete  the  inquiry  now  before  us  ;  and  I  therefore  purpose
proving  that  the  line  of  argument  which  has  been  just  applied  to  India,  is  like-
wise applicable  to  Egypt,  to  Mexico,  and  to  Peru.  For  by  thus  including  in  a
single  survey,  the  most  conspicuous  civilizations  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,
we  shall  be  able  to  see  how  the  preceding  principles  hold  good  of  different  and
distant  countries  ;  and  we  shall  be  possessed  of  evidence  sufficiently  comprehen-
sive to  test  the  accuracy  of  those  great  laws  which,  without  such  precaution,  I
might  be  supposed  to  have  generalized  from  scanty  and  imperfect  materials.

The  reasons  why,  of  all  the  African  nations,  the  Egyptians  alone  were  civilized,
have  been  already  stated,  and  have  been  shown  to  depend  on  those  physical
peculiarities  which  distinguish  them  from  the  surrounding  countries,  and  which,
facilitating  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  not  only  supplied  them  with  material  re-
sources that  otherwise  they  could  never  have  obtained,  but  also  secured  to
their  intellectual  classes  the  leisure  and  the  opportunity  of  extending  the
boundaries  of  knowledge.  It  is,  indeed,  true  that,  notwithstanding  these  advan-
tages, they  effected  nothing  of  much  moment  ;  but  this  was  owing  to  circum-
stances which  will  be  hereafter  explained  ;  and  it  must,  at  all  events,  be  admitted
that  they  raised  themselves  far  above  every  other  people  by  whom  Africa  was
inhabited.

The  civilization  of  Egypt  being,  like  that  of  India,  caused  by  the  fertility  of
the  soil,  and  the  climate  being  also  very  hot,93  there  were  in  both  countries
brought  into  play  the  same  laws  ;  and  there  naturally  followed  the  same  results.
In  both  countries  we  find  the  national  food  cheap  and  abundant  ;  hence  the
labour-market  over-supplied  ;  hence  a  very  unequal  division  of  wealth  and
power  ;  and  hence  all  the  consequences  which  such  inequality  will  inevitably
produce.  How  this  system  worked  in  India,  I  have  just  attempted  to  examine;
and  although  the  materials  for  studying  the  former  condition  of  Egypt  are  much
less  ample,  they  are  still  sufficiently  numerous  to  prove  the  striking  analogy
between  the  two  civilizations,  and  the  identity  of  those  great  principles  which
regulated  the  order  of  their  social  and  political  development.

If  we  inquire  into  the  most  important  circumstances  which  concerned  the
people  of  ancient  Egypt,  we  shall  see  that  they  are  exactly  the  counterpart  of
those  that  have  been  noticed  in  India.  For,  in  the  first  place,  as  regards  their

'3  Volney  (Voyage  en  Egypte,  vol.  i.  pp.  58-63)  has  a  good  chapter  on  the  climate  of
Egypt.

[*  The  "  approach  to  equality  "  seen  in  the  more  primitive  life  of  Europe  was  equally
present  in  the  more  primitive  (in  particular  the  pastoral)  life  of  Asia.  It  was  the  ac-
quisition of  Asiatic  and  Egyptian  culture  that  for  a  time  made  possible  high  civilization
with  comparative  equality  in  European  Greece  and  elsewhere.  And  this  equality  in
turn  was  lost.  The  phrase  "  everything  worthy  of  the  name  of  civilization  "  is  merely  a
trope,  and  is  not  to  be  read  positively,  being  inconsistent  with  the  preceding  argument.
And  see  Buckle's  own  account  of  ancient  classic  civilization,  below,  ch.  v.  at  note  34. — ED.]


48  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ordinary  food,  what  rice  is  to  the  most  fertile  parts  of  Asia,  that  are  dates  to
Africa.  The  palm-tree  is  found  in  every  country  from  the  Tigris  to  the  At-
lantic ;  94  and  it  supplies  millions  of  human  beings  with  their  daity  food  in
Arabia,95  and  in  nearly  the  whole  of  Africa  north  of  the  equator.96  In  many
parts  of  the  great  African  desert  it  is  indeed  unable  to  bear  fruit  ;  but  naturally
it  is  a  very  hardy  plant,  and  produces  dates  in  such  profusion,  that  towards  the
north  of  the  Sahara  they  are  eaten  not  only  by  man,  but  also  by  domestic
animals.9?  And  in  Egypt,  where  the  palm  is  said  to  be  of  spontaneous  growth,98
dates,  besides  being  the  chief  sustenance  of  the  people,  are  so  plentiful,  that
from  a  very  early  period  they  have  been  commonly  given  to  camels,  the  only
beasts  of  burden  generally  used  in  that  country.99

From  these  facts  it  is  evident  that,  taking  Egypt  as  the  highest  type  of  African
civilization,  and  India  as  the  highest  type  of  Asiatic  civilization,  it  may  be  said
that  dates  are  to  the  first  civilization  what  rice  is  to  the  second.  Now  it  is
observable  that  all  the  most  important  physical  peculiarities  found  in  rice  are
also  found  in  dates.  In  regard  to  their  chemistry,  it  is  well  known  that  the
chief  principle  of  the  nutriment  they  contain  is  the  same  in  both  ;  the  starch  of

9*  It  is,  however,  unknown  in  South  Africa.  See  the  account  of  the  Palmaceae  in
Lindley's  Vegetable  Kingdom,  1847,  p.  136,  and  Meyen's  Geog.  of  Plants,  p.  337.

as  "  Of  all  eatables  used  by  the  Arabs,  dates  are  the  most  favourite."  Burckhardt's
Travels  in  Arabia,  vol.  i.  p.  56.  See  also  for  proof  of  their  abundance  in  the  west  of
Arabia,  vol.  i.  pp.  103,  157,  238,  vol.  ii.  pp.  91,  100,  105,  118,  209,  210,  214,  253,  300,  331.
And  on  the  dates  of  Oman  and  the  east  of  Arabia,  see  Wellsted's  Travels  in  Arabia,  vol.  i.
pp.  188,  189,  236,  276,  290,  349.  Compare  Niebuhr,  Description  de  VArabie,  pp.  142,
296.  Indeed,  they  are  so  important,  that  the  Arabs  have  different  names  for  them,
according  to  the  stages  of  their  growth.  Djewhari  says,  "  La  denomination  balah
precede  le  nom  bosr  ;  car  la  datte  se  nomme  d'abord  tala,  en  suite  khalal,  puis  balah,
puis  bosr,  puis  rotab,  et  enfin  tamr"  De  Sacy's  note  to  Abd-Allatif,  Relation  de  I'Egypte
p.  74,  and  see  p.  118.  Other  notices  of  the  dates  of  Arabia  will  be  found  in  Travels  of
Ibn  Batuta  in  Fourteenth  Century,  p.  66  ;  Journal  of  Asiatic  Soc.  vol.  viii.  p.  286  ;  Journal
of  Geograph.  Soc.  vol.  iv.  p.  201,  vol.  vi.  pp.  53,  55,  58,  66,  68,  74,  vol.  vii.  p.  32,  vol.  ix.
pp.  147,  151.

96  Heeren  (Trade  of  the  African  Nations,  vol.  i.  p.  182)  supposes  that  in  Africa,  dates
are  comparatively  little  known  south  of  26°  north  lat.     But  this  learned  writer  is
certainly  mistaken  ;  and  a  reference  to  the  following  passages  will  show  that  they  are
common  as  far  down  as  the  parallel  of  Lake  Tchad,  which  is  nearly  the  southern  limit
of  our  knowledge  of  Central  Africa  :  Denham's  Central  Africa,  p.  295  ;  Clapperton's
Journal,  in  Appendix  to  Denhant,  pp.  34,  59  ;  Clapperton's  Second  Expedition,  p.  159.
Further  east  they  are  somewhat  scarcer,  but  are  found  much  more  to  the  south  than
is  supposed  by  Heeren  :  see  Pallme's  K  or  do  fan,  p.  220.

97  "  Dates  are  not  only  the  principal  growth  of  the  Fezzan  oases,  but  the  main  sub-
sistence of  their  inhabitants.     All  live  on  dates  ;  men,  women,  and  children,  horses,
asses,  and  camels,  and  sheep,  fowls,  and  dogs."     Richardson's  Travels  in  the  Sahara,
vol.  ii.  p.  323,  and  see  vol.  i.  p.  343  :  as  to  those  parts  of  the  desert  where  the  palm  will
not  bear,  see  vol.  i.  pp.  387,  405,  vol.  ii.  pp.  291,  363.     Respecting  the  dates  of  Western
Africa,  see  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  xii.  p.  204.

98  "  It  flourished  spontaneously  in  the  valley  of  the    Nile."     Wilkinson's    Ancient
Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  p.  372.     As  further  illustration  of  the  importance  to  Africa  of  this
beautiful  plant,  it  may  be  mentioned    that  from  the  high -palm  there  is  prepared  a
peculiar  beverage,  which  in  some  parts  is  in  great  request.     On  this,  which  is  called
palm -wine,  see  M' William's  Medical  Expedition  to  the  Niger,  pp.  71,  116  ;  Meredith's
Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  1812,  pp.  55,  56  ;  Laird  and  Oldfield's  Expedition  into  the  Interior
of  Africa,  1837,  vol.  ii.  pp.  170,  213  ;  Bowdich,  Mission  to  Ashantee,  pp.  69,  100,  152,
293.  386,  392.     But  I  doubt  if  this  is  the  same  as  the  palm -wine  mentioned  in  Balfour's
Botany,  1849,  p.  532.     Compare  Tuckey's  Expedition  to  the  Zaire,  pp.  155,  216,  224,  356.

98  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  pp.  175-178.  See  also  on  the  abundance  of
dates,  the  extracts  from  an  Arabian  geographer  in  Quatremere,  Recherches  sur  I'Egypte,
pp.  220,  221.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  49

the  Indian  vegetable  being  merely  turned  into  the  sugar  of  the  Egyptian.  In
regard  to  the  laws  of  climate,  their  affinity  is  equally  obvious  ;  since  dates,  like
rice,  belong  to  hot  countries,  and  flourish  most  in  or  near  the  tropics.100  In
regard  to  their  increase,  and  the  laws  of  their  connexion  with  the  soil,  the
analogy  is  also  exact  ;  for  dates,  just  the  same  as  rice,  require  little  labour,  and
-field  abundant  returns,  while  they  occupy  so  small  a  space  of  land  in  comparison

~ith  the  nutriment  they  afford,  that  upwards  of  two  hundred  palm-trees  are

>metimes  planted  on  a  single  acre.101

Thus  striking  are  the  similarities  to  which,  in  different  countries,  the  same
physical  conditions  naturally  give  rise.  At  the  same  time,  in  Egypt,  as  in  India,
the  attainment  of  civilization  was  preceded  by  the  possession  of  a  highly  fertile
soil  ;  so  that,  while  the  exuberance  of  the  land  regulated  the  speed  with  which
wealth  was  created,  the  abundance  of  the  food  regulated  the  proportions  into
which  the  wealth  was  divided.  The  most  fertile  part  of  Egypt  is  the  Said  ;  102
and  it  is  precisely  there  that  we  find  the  greatest  display  of  skill  and  knowledge,
the  splendid  remains  of  Thebes,  Carnac,  Luxor,  Dendera,  and  Edfou.103  It  is
also  in  the  Said,  or,  as  it  is  often  called,  theThebaid,  that  a  food  is  used  which
multiplies  itself  even  more  rapidly  than  either  dates  or  rice.  This  is  the  dhourra,
which  until  recently  was  confined  to  Upper  Egypt,104  and  of  which  the  repro-
ductive power  is  so  remarkable,  that  it  yields  to  the  labourer  a  return  of  two
hundred  and  forty  for  one.105  In  Lower  Egypt  the  dhourra  was  formerly  un-
known ;  but,  in  addition  to  dates,  the  people  made  a  sort  of  bread  from  the  lotos,
which  sprang  spontaneously  out  of  the  rich  soil  of  the  Nile.106  This  must  have

100  On  their  relation  to  the  laws  of  climate,  see  the  remarks  respecting  the  geographical
limits  of  their  power  of  ripening,  in  Jussieu's  Botany,  edit.  Wilson,  1849,  p.  734.

101  "  jn  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  a  feddan  (if  acre)  is  sometimes  planted  with  400  trees."
Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  p.  178.     At  Moorzuk  an  entire  date-palm  is  only
worth  about  a  shilling.     Richardson's  Central  Africa,  vol.  i.  p.  in.

102  On  the  remarkable  fertility  of  the  Said,  see  Abd-Allatif,  Relation  de  VEgypte,  p.  3.

103  The  superiority  of  the  ruins  in  Southern  Egypt  over  those  in  the  northern  part  is
noticed  by  Heeren  (African  Nations,  vol.  ii.  p.  69),  and  must,  indeed,  be  obvious  to
whoever  has  studied  the  monuments.     In  the  Said  the  Coptic  was  preserved  longer  than
in  Lower  Egypt,  and  is  known  to  philologists  by  the  name  of  Misr.     See  Quatremere,
Recherches  sur  la  Langue  de  VEgypte,  pp.  20,  41,  42.     See  also  on  the  Saidic,  pp.  134-
140,  and  some  good  remarks  by  Dr.  Prichard  (Physical  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  202) ;  who,  how-
ever, adopts  the  paradoxical  opinion  of  Georgi  respecting  the  origin  of  the  language  of
the  Thebaid.

104  Abd-Allatif   (Relation  de  VEgypte,  p.  32)  says,  that  in  his  time  it  was  only  culti-
vated in  the  Said.     This  curious  work  by  Abd-Allatif  was  written  in  A.D.  1203.     Rela-
tion, p.  423.     Meiners  thinks  that  Herodotus  and  other  ancient  writers  refer  to  the
dhourra  without  mentioning  it :  "  diese  Durra  muss  daher  im  Herodot,  wie  in  andern
alten  Schriftstellern,  vorziiglich  verstanden  werden,  wenn  von  hundert,  zwey  hundert,
und  mehrfiiltigen  Friichten,  welche  die  Erde  trage,  die  Rede  ist."     Meiners,  Frucht-
barkeit  der  Lander,  vol.  i.  p.  139.     According  to  Volney,  it  is  the  Holcus  Arundinaceus
of  Linnaeus,  and  appears  to  be  similar  to  millet ;  and  though  that  accurate  traveller
distinguishes  between  them,  I  observe  that  Captain  Haines,  in  a  recent  memoir,  speaks
of  them  as  being  the  same.     Compare  Haines  in  Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  xv.  p.  118,
with  Volney,  Voyage  en  Egypte,  vol.  i.  p.  195.

105  "  The  return  is  in  general  not  less  than  240  for  one  ;  and  the  average  price  is  about
35.  gd.  the  ardeb,  which  is  scarcely  3^.  per  bushel."     Hamilton's  &gyptiaca,  p.  420.     In
Upper  Egypt,  "  the  doura  constitutes  almost  the  whole  subsistence  of  the  peasantry,"
p.  419.     At  p.  96,  Hamilton  says,  "  I  have  frequently  counted  3000  grains  in  one  ear
of  doura,  and  each  stalk  has  in  general  four  or  five  ears."     For  an  account  of  the  dhourra
bread,  see  Volney,  Voyage  en  Egypte,  vol.  i.  p.  161.

6  'ETredj'  TrX^p^s  ytvyraL  6  TroTajJibs,  /cat  ra  TTfSi'a  TreXcryiV?;,  <£i5eTat  ev  T$  vdan
Kplvea  TroXXd,  ra  Atyvimoi  KO\^OV<TI  \ur6v  raura  e-jrfav  5p^^/wcrt,  avaivovffi  irpbs  rj\iov.
Kal  ^TretTa  r6  £K  TOV  uttrov  TOV  XwroO  TTTJ  p.'fjKwvi.  £bv  ^u</>ep£s,  Trrurapres,  iroievvrat  l^  avrov
provs  o&iTTotis  TTVpi.  Herodot.  ii.  92,  vol.  i.  p.  688.


5o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

been  a  very  cheap  and  accessible  food  ;  while  to  it  there  was  joined  a  profusion  of
other  plants  and  herbs,  on  which  the  Egyptians  chiefly  lived.107  Indeed  so  in-
exhaustible was  the  supply,  that  at  the  time  of  the  Mohammedan  invasion  there
were,  in  the  single  city  of  Alexandria,  no  less  than  four  thousand  persons  occupied
in  selling  vegetables  to  the  people.108

From  this  abundance  of  the  national  food,  there  resulted  a  train  of  events
strictly  analogous  to  those  which  took  place  in  India.  In  Africa  generally,  the
growth  of  population,  though  on  the  one  hand  stimulated  by  the  heat  of  the
climate,  was  on  the  other  hand  checked  by  the  poverty  of  the  soil.  But  on  the
banks  of  the  Nile  this  restraint  no  longer  existed,109  and  therefore  the  laws
already  noticed  came  into  uncontrolled  operation.  By  virtue  of  those  laws,  the
Egyptians  were  not  only  satisfied  with  a  cheap  food,  but  they  required  that  food
in  comparatively  small  quantities  ;  thus  by  a  double  process  increasing  the
limit  to  which  their  numbers  could  extend.  At  the  same  time,  the  lower  orders
were  able  to  rear  their  offspring  with  the  greater  ease,  because,  owing  to  the
high  rate  of  temperature,  another  considerable  source  of  expense  was  avoided  ;
the  heat  being  such  that,  even  for  adults,  the  necessary  clothes  were  few  and
slight,  while  the  children  of  the  working-classes  went  entirely  naked  ;  affording
a  striking  contrast  to  those  colder  countries  where,  to  preserve  ordinary  health,
a  supply  of  warmer  and  more  costly  covering  is  essential.  Diodorus  Siculus,
who  travelled  in  Egypt  nineteen  centuries  ago,  says  that  to  bring  up  a  child  to
manhood  did  not  cost  more  than  twenty  drachmas,  scarcely  thirteen  shillings
English  money  ;  a  circumstance  which  he  justly  notices  as  a  cause  of  the  popu-
lousness  of  the  country.110

To  compress  into  a  single  sentence  the  preceding  remarks,  it  may  be  said  that
in  Egypt  the  people  multiplied  rapidly,  because  while  the  soil  increased  their
supplies,  the  climate  lessened  their  wants.  The  result  was,  that  Egypt  was  not
only  far  more  thickly  peopled  than  any  other  country  in  Africa,  but  probably
more  so  than  any  in  the  ancient  world.  Our  information  upon  this  point  is
indeed  somewhat  scanty,  but  it  is  derived  from  sources  of  unquestioned  credi-
bility. Herodotus,  who  the  more  he  is  understood,  the  more  accurate  he  is

107  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  pp.  370-372,  400,  vol.  iv.  p.  59.     Abd-
Allatif  gives  a  curious  account  of  the  different  vegetables  grown  in  Egypt  early  in  the
thirteenth  century.     Relation,  pp.  16-36,  and  the  notes  of  De  Sacy,  pp.  37-134.     On
the  /cria/ios  of  Herodotus  there  are  some  botanical  remarks  worth  reading  in   the  Corre-
spondence of  Sir  J.  E.  Smith,  vol.  ii.  pp.  224-232  ;  but  I  doubt  the  assertion,  p.  227,  that
Herodotus  "  knew  nothing  of  any  other  kind  of  Ktia/Jios  in    Eygpt  than    that  of   the
ordinary  bean."

108  "  When  Alexandria  was  taken  by  Amer,  the  lieutenant  of  the  Caliph  Omer,  no  less
than  4000  persons  were  engaged  in    selling  vegetables  in   that  city."     Wilkinson's
Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  p.  372,  and  see  vol.  i.  p.  277,  vol.  iv.  p.  60.     Niebuhr  (Descrip-
tion de  V Arabie,  p.  136)  says,  that  the  neighbourhood  of  Alexandria  is  so  fertile,  that
"  le  froment  y  rend  le  centuple."     See  also,  on  its  rich  vegetation,  Matter,  Histoire  de
I'Ecole  d'Alexandrie,  vol.  i.  p.  52.

109  The  encouragement  given  to  the  increase  of  population  by  the  fertility  arising  from
the  inundation  of  the  Nile,  is  observed  by  many  writers,  but  by  none  so  judiciously  as
Mai  thus  ;  Essay  on  Population,  vol.  i.  pp.  161-163.     This  great  work,  the  principles  of
which  have  been  grossly  misrepresented,  is  still  the  best  which  has  been  written  on  the
important  subject  of  population  ;  though  the  author,  from  a  want  of  sufficient  reading,
often  errs  in  his  illustrations  ;  while  he  unfortunately  had  no  acquaintance  with  those
branches   of  physical   knowledge   which   are  intimately   connected    with   economical
inquiries.

0  fptyowi  8t  TCL  iraidia  /-lerd,  rivos  etfxepefas  dSairdvov,  /ecu  iravre^ws  diriarov.  .  .  .
avvTroS^Tdtv  8£  T&V  ir\flaruv  KO.I  yv/j-vuv  Tpffai^vuv  Sid  TTJV  evKpafflav  T&V  TOTTWV,  ryv
irdaav  8a.irdvr)v  ol  yove^s,  &xpi$  &t>  ets  i]\iKiav  2\dri  TO  T£KVOV,  ov  TrXe/co  iroiovffi  Spaxn&v
ftitoai.  5t'  As  airlas  /xdAtara  TTJV  AiyvirTov  cri'/u/Sa/vei  iroKvavOputriq  5ia<ptpfii>,  /ecu  Sid  TOVTO
trXei'crTas  fyfw  ^e-yctXwv  tpywv  /ecu-acr/eei/cis.  Bibliothec.  Hist,  book  i.  chap.  Ixxx.  vol.  i.
p.  238.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  51

found  to  be,111  states  that  in  the  reign  of  Amasis  there  were  said  to  have  been
twenty  thousand  inhabited  cities.112  This  may,  perhaps,  be  considered  an
exaggeration  ;  but  what  is  very  observable  is,  that  Diodorus  Siculus,  who
travelled  in  Egypt  four  centuries  after  Herodotus,  and  whose  jealousy  of  the
reputation  of  his  great  predecessor  made  him  anxious  to  discredit  his  state-
ments,113 does  nevertheless,  on  this  important  point,  confirm  them.  For  he  not
only  remarks  that  Egypt  was  at  that  time  as  densely  inhabited  as  any  existing
country,  but  he  adds,  on  the  authority  of  records  which  were  then  extant,  that
it  was  formerly  the  most  populous  in  the  world,  having  contained,  he  says,
upwards  of  eighteen  thousand  cities.11*

These  were  the  only  two  ancient  writers  who,  from  personal  knowledge,  were
well  acquainted  with  the  state  of  Egypt  ;  115  and  their  testimony  is  the  more
valuable  because  it  was  evidently  drawn  from  different  sources  ;  the  information
of  Herodotus  being  chiefly  collected  at  Memphis,  that  of  Diodorus  at  Thebes.116
And  whatever  discrepancies  there  may  be  between  these  two  accounts,  they

111  Frederick  Schlegel  (Philos.  of  Hist.  p.  247,  London,  1846)  truly  says,  "  The  deeper
and  more  comprehensive  the  researches  of  the  moderns  have^been  on  ancient  history,
the  more  have  their  regard  and  esteem  for  Herodotus  increased."  His  minute  informa-
tion respecting  Egypt  and  Asia  Minor  is  now  admitted  by  all  competent  geographers  ;
and  I  may  add,  that  a  recent  and  very  able  traveller  has  given  some  curious  proofs  of
his  knowledge  even  of  the  western  parts  of  Siberia.  See  Erman's  valuable  work,
Travels  in  Siberia,  vol.  i.  pp.  211,  297-301.  [This  praise  must  be  much  modified  in
view  of  the  recent  discoveries  of  Egyptology  and  Assyriology.  Herodotus  knew  very
little  of  Egyptian  history  ;  and  his  fidelity  seems  to  have  been  even  less  than  his  know-
ledge. See  Sayce's  Ancient  Empires  of  the  East,  1884,  pref.  pp.  xiv.-xxii.  "  Modern
research,"  says  Mr.  Sayce,  "  obliges  us  to  endorse  the  judgment  passed  upon  Herodotus
almost  as  soon  as  his  history  was  published  :  it  is  not  only  untrustworthy  but  un-
veracious  "  ;  and  see  below,  chap.  vi.  note  41. — ED.]

2  'E?r'  'A/xdo'ios  5£  BacrtX^os  X^yerat  Aiyvwros  fj-dXiffra  0)77  Tore  evdai/mov ^aat,  /cat  rd
dirb  TOV  Trora/xou  rfj  x&Pfl  yiv6fj.€va,  /cat  ret  dirb  T?}S  X^/97?*  Tolffi  avdpuTroiffi.  /cat  TroXts  ev
avrrj  yevicrdau  ras  aTrdtras  r6re  dicr/uvpias  raj  ot/ceo/xeVas.  Herodot.  book  ii.  chap,  clxxvii.
vol.'  i.  pp.  881,  288.

113  Diodorus,  who,  though  an  honest  and  painstaking  man,  was  in  every  respect
inferior  to  Herodotus,  says,  impertinently  enough,  6Va  p£v  o$v  'Rpbdoros  /cat  rt^es  T&V
Tas  AlyvTrrLuv  irpdi-fis  ffvvra^a^vwv  e<rx£5td/ca<rt»>,  eKOVffiws  Trpo/cptVavres  TTJS  dX?70etas  TO
7ra/)a5o£oXo7erj>,  /cat  ftvOovs  TrXaTTa*'  \f/vxa>y<*>yias  ei'e/ca,  iraprjvofj.ej'.  Biblioth.  Hist,  book
i.  chap.  Ixix.  vol.  i.  p.  207.  In  other  places  he  alludes  to  Herodotus  in  the  same  tone,
without  actually  mentioning  him.

14  \\o\vav  6  ptairLa.  5£  rb  JJL^V  TraXatov  TroXj)  Trpofoxe  TTO-VTUV  TWV  yvupi^o/j-^uv  TOTTUV
KCLTOL  rty  oiKOVfj.£vr)t>,  /cat  /ca0'  r^uas  5£  ovdevbs  rCov  aXXwj'  5o/cet  Xe/7reer$at.  eVi  /*£>  yap  r&v
dpxaiwJ/  Xp6Vu»'  &7/Ke  /ctijuas  d|toX6^yous,  /cat  7r6Xets  TrX&'ous  TU)J>  [Avplw  /cat  6/CTa/cto"-
XtXt'ow,  (is  tv  Tats  dvaypcKpats  opdv  tan  /caTa/ccxw/Hayx^oj/.  Diod.  Sic.  Biblioth.  Hist,  book
i.  chap.  xxxi.  vol.  i.  p.  89  .

115  Notwithstanding  the  positive  assertions  of  M.  Matter  (Hist,  de  VEcole  d'Alexandrie,
vol.  ii.  p.  285 ;  compare  Hist,  du  Gnosticisme,  vol.  i.  p.  48),  there  is  no  good  evidence  for
the  supposed  travels  in  Egypt  of  the  earlier  Greeks,  and  it  is  even  questionable  if  Plato
ever  visited  that  country.     ("  Whether  he  was  ever  in  Egypt  is  doubtful."     Bunserfs
Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  60.)     The  Romans  took  little  interest  in  the  subject  (Bunsen,  vol.  i.  pp.
152-158)  ;  and,  says  M.  Bunsen,  p.  152,  "  with  Diodorus  all  systematic  inquiry  into  the
history  of  Egypt  ceases,  not  only  on  the  part  of  the  Greeks,  but  of  the  ancients  in  general."
Mr.  Leake,  in  an  essay  on  the  Quorra,  arrives  at  the  conclusion,  that  after  the  time  of
Ptolemy,  the  ancients  made  no  additions  to  their  knowledge  of  African  geography.
Journal  of  Geographical  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  9.

116  See  on  this  some  good  remarks  in  Heeren's  African  Nations,  vol.  ii.  pp.  202-207  ;
and  as  to  the  difference  between  the  traditions  of  Thebes  and  Memphis,  see  Matter,
Histoire  de  VEcole  d'Alexandrie,  vol.  i.  p.  7.     The  power  and  importance  of  the  two  cities
fluctuated,  both  being  at  different  periods  the  capital.     Bunsen's  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  54,
55,  244,  445,  446  ;  Vyse  on  the  Pyramids,  vol.  iii.  pp.  27,  100  ;  Sharpens  History  of  Egypt,
vol.  i.  pp.  9,  19,  24,  34,  167,  185.


52  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

are  both  agreed  respecting  the  rapid  increase  of  the  people,  and  the  servile  condi-
tion into  which  they  had  fallen.  Indeed,  the  mere  appearance  of  those  huge  and
costly  buildings,  which  are  still  standing,  is  a  proof  of  the  state  of  the  nation  that
erected  them.  To  raise  structures  so  stupendous,11?  and  yet  so  useless,11^
there  must  have  been  tyranny  on  the  part  of  the  rulers,  and  slavery  on  the  part
of  the  people.  No  wealth,  however  great,  no  expenditure,  however  lavish,
could  meet  the  expense  which  would  have  been  incurred,  if  they  had  been  the
work  of  free  men,  who  received  for  their  labour  a  fair  and  honest  reward.119
But  in  Egypt,  as  in  India,  such  considerations  were  disregarded,  because  every-
thing tend'ed  to  favour  the  upper  ranks  of  society,  and  depress  the  lower.  Be-
tween the  two  there  was  an  immense  and  impassable  gap.12o  If  a  member  of
the  industrious  classes  changed  his  usual  employment,  or  was  known  to  pay
attention  to  political  matters,  he  was  severely  punished  ;  m  and  under  no
circumstances  was  the  possession  of  landvallowed  to  an  agricultural  labourer,  to
a  mechanic,  or  indeed  to  any  one  except  the  king,  the  clergy,  and  the  army.122
The  people  at  large  were  little  better  than  beasts  of  burden  ;  and  all  that  was
expected  from  them  was  an  unremitting  and  unrequited  labour.  If  they
neglected  their  work,  they  were  flogged  ;  and  the  same  punishment  was  fre-
quently inflicted  upon  domestic  servants,  and  even  upon  women.123  These  and
similar  regulations  were  well  conceived  ;  they  were  admirably  suited  to  that
vast  social  system,  which,  because  it  was  based  on  despotism,  could  only  be
upheld  by  cruelty.  Hence  it  was  that,  the  industry  of  the  whole  nation  being
at  the  absolute  command  of  a  small  part  of  it,  there  arose  the  possibility  of
rearing  those  vast  edifices,  which  inconsiderate  observers  admire  as  a  proof  of
civilization,124  but  which,  in  reality,  are  evidence  of  a  state  of  things  altogether
depraved  and  unhealthy  ;  a  state  in  which  the  skill  and  the  arts  of  an  imperfect
refinement  injured  those  whom  they  ought  to  have  benefited  ;  so  that  the  very
resources  which  the  people  had  created  were  turned  against  the  people  them-
selves.

That  in  such  a  society  as  this,  much  regard  should  be  paid  to  human  suffering,
it  would  indeed  be  idle  to  expect.125      Still,  we  are  startled  by  the  reckless

117  Sir  John  Herschel  (Disc,  on  Natural  Philosophy,  p.  60)  calculates  that  the  great
pyramid  weighs  twelve  thousand  seven  hundred  and  sixty  million  pounds.     Compare
LyelVs  Principles  of  Geology,  p.  459,  where  the  still  larger  estimate  of  six  million  tons  is
given.     But  according  to  Perring,  the  present  quantity  of  masonry  is  6,316,000  tons,
or  82,110,000  cubic  feet.     See  Bunsen's  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  155,  London,  1854,  and  Vyse
on  the  Pyramids,  1840,  vol.  ii.  p.  113.

118  Many  fanciful  hypotheses  have  been  put  forward  as  to  the  purpose  for  which  the
pyramids  were  built ;  but  it  is  now  admitted  that  they  were  neither  more  nor  less  than
tombs  for  the  Egyptian  kings  !     See  Bun  sen's  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  xvii.  88,  105,  372,  389  ;
and  Sharpens  History  of  Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  21.

119  For  an  estimate  of  the  expense  at  which  one  of  the  pyramids  could  be  built  in  our
time  by  European  workmen,  see  Vyse  on  the  Pyramids,  vol.  ii.  p.  268.     On  account,
however,  of  the  number  of  disturbing  causes,  such  calculations  have  little  value.

120  Those  who  complain  that  in  Europe  this  interval  is  still  too  great,  may  derive  a
species  of  satisfaction  from  studying  the  old  extra-European  civilizations.

121  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  pp.  8,  9.     "Nor  was  any  one  permitted  to
meddle  with  political  affairs,  or  to  hold  any  civil  office  in  the  state."  .  ..."  If  any
artizan  meddled  with  political  affairs,  or  engaged  in  any  other  employment  than  the  one
to  which  he  had  been  brought  up,  a  severe  punishment  was  instantly  inflicted  upon  him."
Compare  Diod.  Sic.  Bibliothec.  Hist,  book  i.  chap.  Ixxiv.  vol.  i.  p.  223.

122  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  p.  263,  vol.  ii.  p.  2  ;  Sharpens  History  of
Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  24.

123  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  pp.  41,  42,  vol.  iii.  p.  69,  vol.  iv.  p.  131.
Compare  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  in  Hamilton's  Mgyptiaca,  p.  309.

524  Vyse  on  the  Pyramids,  vol.  i.  p.  61,  vol.  ii.  p.  92.

125  "  ]?m  Konig  ahmte  den  andern  nach,  oder  suchte  ihn  zu  ubertreffen  ;  indess  das
gutmiithige   Volk   seine   Lebenstage   am   Baue   dieser   Monuments   verzehren   musste.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  53

prodigality  with  which,  in  Egypt,  the  upper  classes  squandered  away  the  labour
and  the  lives  of  the  people.  In  this  respect,  as  the  monuments  yet  remaining
abundantly  prove,  they  stand  alone  and  without  a  rival.  We  may  form  some
idea  of  the  almost  incredible  waste,  when  we  hear  that  two  thousand  men  were
occupied  for  three  years  in  carrying  a  single  stone  from  Elephantine  to  Sais  ;  126
that  the  Canal  of  the  Red  Sea  alone  cost  the  lives  of  a  hundred  and  twenty
thousand  Egyptians  ;  12?  and  that  to  build  one  of  the  pyramids  required  the
labour  of  three  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  men  for  twenty  years.12®

If,  passing  from  the  history  of  Asia  and  Africa,  we  now  turn  to  the  New  World,
we  shall  meet  with  fresh  proof  of  the  accuracy  of  the  preceding  views.  The  only
parts  of  America  which  before  the  arrival  of  the  Europeans  were  in  some  degree
civilized,  were  Mexico  and  Peru  ;  129  to  which  may  probably  be  added  that  long
and  narrow  tract  which  stretches  from  the  south  of  Mexico  to  the  Isthmus  of
Panama.  In  this  latter  country,  which  is  now  known  as  Central  America,  the
inhabitants,  aided  by  the  fertility  of  the  soil,130  seem  to  have  worked  out  for
themselves  a  certain  amount  of  knowledge  ;  since  the  ruins  still  extant  prove
the  possession  of  a  mechanical  and  architectural  skill  too  considerable  to  be
acquired  by  any  nation  entirely  barbarous.131  Beyond  this,  nothing  is  known

So  entstanden  wahrscheinlich  die  Pyramiden  und  Obelisken  /Egyptens.  Nur  in  den
altesten.  Zeiten  wurden  sie  gebauet :  denn  die  spat  ere  Zeit  und  jede  Nation,  die  ein
nutzliches  Gewerbe  treiben  lernte,  bauete  keine  Pyramiden  mehr.  Weit  gefehlt  also,
dass  Pyramiden  ein  Kennzeichen  von  der  Gliickseligkeit  und  Aufklarung  des  alien
/Egyptens  seyn  sollten,  sind  sie  ein  unwidersprechliches  Denkmal  von  dem  Aberglauben
und  der  Gedankenlosigkeit  sowohl  der  Armen,  die  da  baueten,  als  der  Ehrgeizigen,  die
den  Bau  befahlen."  Herder's  Ideen  zur  Geschichte,  vol.  iii.  pp.  103,  104  :  see  also  p.
293,  and  some  admirable  remarks  in  Volney's  Voyage  en  Egypte,  vol.  i.  pp.  240,  241.
Even  M.  Bunsen,  notwithstanding  his  admiration,  says  of  one  of  the  pyramids, "  The
misery  of  the  people,  already  grievously  oppressed,  was  aggravated  by  the  construction

of  this  gigantic  building The  bones  of  the  oppressors  of  the  people  who  for  two

whole  generations  harassed  hundreds  of  thousands  from  day  to  day,"  etc.  Bunsen's
Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  176,  a  learned  and  enthusiastic  work.

126  Kai  TOVTO  fKo^ov  (JL€V  £TT'  £rea  rpt'a,  durx&t-ot  5^  ol  TrpofffTtTa.xo.To  avdpes  aywy&s.
HerodoL  book  ii.  chap,  clxxv.  vol.  i.  p.  879.     On  the  enormous  weight  of  the  stones
which  the  Egyptians  sometimes  carried,  see  Bunsen's  Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  379  ;  and  as  to  the
machines  employed,  and  the  use  of  inclined  roads  for  the  transit,  see  Vyse  on  the  Pyra-
mids, vol.  i.  p.  197,  vol.  iii.  pp.  14,  38.

127  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  p.  70  :  but  this  learned  writer  is  unwilling
to  believe  a  statement  so  adverse  to  his  favourite  Egyptians.     It  is  likely  enough  that
there  is  some  exaggeration  ;  still  no  one  can  dispute  the  fact  of  an  enormous  and  un-
principled waste  of  human  life.

128  TpiaKOvra   ntv    yap  Kai  ££   pvptddes  avdp&v,  ws  <£a<ri,  rats  TUV  Zpywv  \eiTOvpyiais
irpo<rr)8p€Vffav,    TO    d£    irav    KuracrKeuaoyia     rA.05    20"Xe   A^yis     CTWV     efaoffi    8ie\06vTUv.
Diod.  Sic.  Bibliothec.  Hist,  book  i.  chap.  Ixiii.  vol.  i.  p.  188.

129  "  When  compared  with  other  parts  of  the  New  World,  Mexico  and  Peru  may  be
considered  as  polished  states."     History  of  America,  book  vii.  in  Robertson's  Works,  p.
904.     See,  to  the  same  effect,  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  v.  p.  355.

130  Compare  Squier"s  Central  America,  vol.  i.  pp.  34,  244,  358,  421,  vol.  ii.  p.  307,
with  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  iii.  p.  59,  vol.  viii.  pp.  319,  323.

131  Mr.  Squier  (Central  America,  vol.  ii.  p.  68),  who  explored  Nicaragua,  says  of  the
statues, "  The  material,  in  every  case,  is  a  black  basalt,  of  great  hardness,  which,  with
the  best  of  modern  tools,  can  only  be  cut  with  difficulty."     Mr.  Stephens   (Central
America,  vol.  ii.  p.  355)  found  at  Palenque  "elegant  specimens  of  art  and  models  for
study."     See  also  vol.  iii.  pp.  276,  389,  406,  vol.  iv.  p.  293.     Of  the  paintings  at  Chichen
he  says  (vol.  iv.  p.  311 ),  "  They  exhibit  a  freedom  of  touch  which  could  only  be  the  result
of  discipline  and  training  under  masters."     At  Copan  (vol.  i.  p.  151),  "  it  would  be  im-
possible, with  the  best  instruments  of  modern  times,  to  cut  stones  more  perfectly."
And  atUxmal  (vol.  ii.  p.  431),  "  Throughout,  the  laying  and  polishing  of  the  stones  are
as  perfect  as  under  the  rules  of  the  best  modern  masonry."     Our  knowledge  of  Central
America  is  almost  entirely  derived  from  these  two  writers  ;  and  although  the  work  of


54  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  their  history  ;  but  the  accounts  we  have  of  such  buildings  as  Copan,  Palenque,
and  Uxmal,  make  it  highly  probable  that  Central  America  was  the  ancient  seat
of  a  civilization,  in  all  essential  points  similar  to  those  of  India  and  Egypt  ;  that
is  to  say,  similar  to  them  in  respect  to  the  unequal  distribution  of  wealth  and
power,  and  the  thraldom  in  which  the  great  body  of  the  people  consequently
remained.132

But  although  the  evidence  from  which  we  might  estimate  the  former  condition
of  Central  America  is  almost  entirely  lost,133  we  are  more  fortunate  in  regard  to
the  histories  of  Mexico  and  Peru.  There  are  still  existing  considerable  and
authentic  materials,  from  which  we  may  form  an  opinion  on  the  ancient  state
of  those  two  countries,  and  on  the  nature  and  extent  of  their  civilization.  Be-
fore, however,  entering  upon  this  subject,  it  will  be  convenient  to  point  out  what
those  physical  laws  were  which  determined  the  localities  of  American  civiliza-
tion ;  or,  in  other  words,  why  it  was  that  in  these  countries  alone  society  should
have  been  organized  into  a  fixed  and  settled  system,  while  the  rest  of  the  New
World  was  peopled  by  wild  and  ignorant  barbarians.  Such  an  inquiry  will  be
found  highly  interesting,  as  affording  further  proof  of  the  extraordinary,  and
indeed  irresistible,  force  with  which  the  powers  of  Nature  have  controlled  the
fortunes  of  man.

The  first  circumstance  by  which  we  must  be  struck,  is  that  in  America,  as  in
Asia  and  Africa,  all  the  original  civilizations  were  seated  in  hot  countries  ;  the
whole  of  Peru  proper  being  within  the  southern  tropic,  the  whole  of  Central
America  and  Mexico  within  the  northern  tropic.  How  the  heat  of  the  climate
operated  on  the  social  and  political  arrangements  of  India  and  Egypt,  I  have
attempted  to  examine  ;  and  it  has,  I  trust,  been  proved  that  the  result  was
brought  about  by  diminishing  the  wants  and  requirements  of  the  people,  and
thus  producing  a  very  unequal  distribution  of  wealth  and  power.  But,  besides
this,  there  is  another  way  in  which  the  average  temperature  of  a  country  affects
its  civilization,  and  the  discussion  of  which  I  have  reserved  for  the  present
moment,  because  it  may  be  more  clearly  illustrated  in  America  than  elsewhere.
Indeed,  in  the  New  World,  the  scale  on  which  Nature  works,  being  much  larger
than  in  the  Old,  and  her  forces  being  more  overpowering,  it  is  evident  that  her
operations  on  mankind  may  be  studied  with  greater  advantage  than  in  countries
where  she  is  weaker,  and  where,  therefore,  the  consequences  of  her  movements
are  less  conspicuous.

If  the  reader  will  bear  in  mind  the  immense  influence  which  an  abundant
national  food  has  been  shown  to  exercise,  he  will  easily  understand  how,
owing  to  the  pressure  of  physical  phenomena,  the  civilization  of  America  was,

Mr.  Stephens  is  much  the  more  minute,  Mr.  Squier  says  (vol.  ii.  p.  306),  what  I  believe
is  quite  true,  that  until  the  appearance  of  his  own  book  in  1853,  the  monuments  in
Nicaragua  were  entirely  unknown.  Short  descriptions  of  the  remains  in  Guatemala
and  Yucatan  will  be  found  in  Larenaudiere1  s  Mexique  et  Guatemala,  pp.  308-327,  and  in
Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  iii.  pp.  60—63.

132  See  the  remarks  on  Yucatan  in  Prichard' s  Physical  History  of  Mankind,  vol.  v.
p.  348  :  "A  great  and  industrious,  though  perhaps,  as  the  writer  above  cited  (Gallatin)
observes,  an  enslaved  population.     Splendid  temples  and  palaces  attest  the  power  of
the  priests  and  nobles,  while  as  usual  no  trace  remains  of  the  huts  in  which  dwelt  the
mass  of  the  nation."

133  Dr.  M'Culloh  (Researches  concerning  the  Aboriginal  History  of  America,  pp.  272-
340)  has  collected  from  the  Spanish  writers  some  meagre  statements  respecting  the  early
condition  of  Central  America  ;  but  of  its  social  state  and   history  properly  so   called
nothing  is  known  ;  nor  is  it  even  certain  to  what  family  of  nations  the  inhabitants
belonged,  though  a  recent  author  can  find  "  la  civilization  guatemalienne  ou  misteco-
zapoteque  et  mayaquiche  vivante  pour  nous  encore  dans  les  ruines    de  Mitla  et    de
Palenque."     Mexique  et  Guatemala,  par  Larenaudiere,  p.  8,  Paris,  1843.     Dr.  Prichard,
too,  refers  the  ruins  in  Central  America  to  "  the  Mayan  race  "  :  see  Prichard  on  Ethno-
logy, in  Report  of  British  Association  for  1847,  p.  252.     But  the  evidence  for  these  and
similar  statements  is  very  unsatisfactory.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  55

of  necessity,  confined  to  those  parts  where  alone  it  was  found  by  the  discoverers
of  the  New  World.  For,  setting  aside  the  chemical  and  geognostic  varieties
of  soil,  it  may  be  said  that  the  two  causes  which  regulate  the  fertility  of  every
country  are  heat  and  moisture.134  Where  these  are  abundant,  the  land  will
be  exuberant  ;  where  they  are.  deficient,  it  will  be  sterile.  This  rule  is,  of  course,
in  its  application  subject  to  exceptions,  arising  from  physical  conditions  which
are  independent  of  it  ;  but  if  other  things  are  equal,  the  rule  is  invariable.  And
the  vast  additions  which,  since  the  construction  of  isothermal  lines,  have  been
made  to  our  knowledge  of  geographical  botany,  enable  us  to  lay  this  down  as
a  law  of  nature,  proved  not  only  by  arguments  drawn  from  vegetable  physiology,
but  also  by  a  careful  study  of  the'  proportions  in  which  plants  are  actually  dis-
tributed in  different  countries.135

A  general  survey  of  the  continent  of  America  will  illustrate  the  connexion
between  this  law  and  the  subject  now  before  us.  In  the  first  place,  as  regards
moisture,  all  the  great  rivers  in  the  New  World  are  on  the  eastern  coast,  none
of  them  on  the  western.  The  causes  of  this  remarkable  fact  are  unknown  ;  136
but  it  is  certain  that  neither  in  North,  nor  in  South  America,  does  one  con-
siderable river  empty  itself  into  the  Pacific  ;  while  on  the  opposite  side  there
are  numerous  rivers,  some  of  enormous  magnitude,  all  of  great  importance,

134  Respecting  the  connexion  between  the  vegetable  productions  of  a  country  and
its  geognostic  peculiarities,  little  is  yet  known  ;  but  the  reader  may  compare  Meyeris
Geography  of  Plants,  p.  64,  with  Reports  on  Botany  by  the  Ray  Society,  1846,  pp.  70,  71  •
The  chemical  laws  of  soil  are  much  better  understood,  and  have  a  direct  practical  bear-
ing on  the  use  of  manures.     See  Turner's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1310-1314;  Brande's
Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  691,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1867-1869  ;  Balfour's  Botany,  pp.  116-122  ;  Liebig
and  Kopp's  Reports,  vol.  ii.  pp.  315,  328,  vol.  iii.  p.  463,  vol.  iv.  pp.  438,  442,  446.

135  As  to  the  influence  of  heat  and  moisture  on  the  geographical  distribution  of  plants,
see  Henslow's  Botany,  pp    295-300,  and  Balfour's  Botany,  pp.  560-563.     Meyen  (Geog.
of  Plants,  p.  263)  says,   "  I   therefore,  after  allowing  for  local  circumstances,  bring  the
vegetation  of  islands  also  under  that  law  of  nature,  according  to  which  the  number  of
species  constantly  increases  with  increasing  heat  and  corresponding  humidity."     On
the  effect  of  temperature  alone,  compare  a  note  in  Erman's  Siberia,  vol.  i.  pp.  64,  65,
with  Reports  on  Botany  by  the  Ray  Society,  pp.  339,  340.     In  the  latter  work,  it  is  sup-
posed that  heat  is  the  most  important  of  all  single  agents  ;  and  though  this  is  probably
true,  still  the  influence  of  humidity  is  immense.     I  may  mention,  as  an  instance  of  this,
that  it  has  been  recently  ascertained  that  the  oxygen  used  by  seeds  during  germination,
is  not  always  taken  from  the  air,  but  is  obtained  by  decomposing  water.     See  the  curious
experiments  of  Edwards  and  Colin  in  Lindley's  Botany,  vol.  ii.  pp.  261,  262,  London,
1848  ;  and  on  the  direct  nourishment  which  water  supplies  to  vegetables,  see  Burdach's
great  work,  TraiU  de  Physiologic,  vol.  ix.  pp.  254,  398.

136  There  is  a  difference  between  the  watersheds  of  the  eastern  and  western  ranges,
which  explains  this  in  part,  but  not  entirely  ;  and  even  if  the  explanation  were  more
satisfactory  than  it  is,  it  is  too  proximate  to  the  phenomenon  to  have  much  scientific
value,  and  must  itself  be  referred  to  higher  geological  considerations.     [It  is  difficult
to  know  what  is  here  meant.     The  watersheds  are  perfectly  sufficient  to  explain  the
phenomena  (see   below,  note  148).     The  Rocky  Mountains  divide  North  America   so
that  the  area  to  the  east  of  them  is  more  than  twice  that  to  the  west ;  and  in  Central
and  South  America  there  runs  a  great  mountain  range  near  the  west  coast  from  Mexico
to  Patagonia.     Yet  even  thus  the  statement  in  the  text  is  inaccurate.     In  North  America
the  western  rivers  Yukon,  Fraser,  Sacramento,  and  Colorado,  are  certainly  "consider-
able," being  much  longer  than  several  of  the  eastern  rivers  named  by  Buckle,  while
the  Yukon  is  a  mile  and  a  quarter  wide  at  600  miles  above  the  sea.     The  Colorado  (840
miles  long)  falls,  it  is  true,  into  the  Gulf  of  California,  but  that  is  a  gulf  of  the  Pacific  ;
while  the  Mississippi,  which  drains  into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  is  not  strictly  an  eastern
river.     The  total  Pacific  drainage  basin,  in  the  United  States,  is  700,000  square  miles ;
the  total  Atlantic  basin,  including  that  of  the  St.  Lawrence  (U.S.  portion)  is  450,000
square  miles.     By  far  the  greatest  drainage-basin  is  that  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  1,700,000
square  miles ;  and  for  this  the  watershed  begins  just  east  of  theJRocky  Mountains.

— ED.]


56  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

as  the  Negro,  the  La  Plata,  the  San  Francisco,  the  Amazon,  the  Orinoco,  the
Mississippi,  the  Alabama,  the  Saint  John,  the  Potomac,  the  Susquehannah,
the  Delaware,  the  Hudson,  and  the  Saint  Lawrence.  By  this  vast  water-system
the  soil  is  towards  the  east  constantly  irrigated  :  137  but  towards  the  west  there
is  in  North  America  only  one  river  of  value,  the  Oregon  ;  13S  while  in  South
America,  from  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  there  is  no
great  river  at  all.

But  as  to  the  other  main  cause  of  fertility,  namely  heat,  we  find  in  North
America  a  state  of  things  precisely  the  reverse.  There  we  find  that  while  the
irrigation  is  on  the  east,  the  heat  is  on  the  west.139  This  difference  of  tem-
perature between  the  two  coasts  is  probably  connected  with  some  great  meteoro-
logical law  ;  for  in  the  whole  of  the  northern  hemisphere,  the  eastern  part  of
continents  and  of  islands  is  colder  than  the  western.140  Whether,  however,  this
is  owing  to  some  large  and  comprehensive  cause,  or  whether  each  instance  has
a  cause  peculiar  to  itself,  is  an  alternative,  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge,
impossible  to  decide  ;  but  the  fact  is  unquestionable,  and  its  influence  upon  the
early  history  of  America  is  extremely  curious.  In  consequence  of  it,  the  two
great  conditions  of  fertility  have  not  been  united  in  any  part  of  the  continent
north  of  Mexico.  The  countries  on  the  one  side  have  wanted  heat  ;  those  on
the  other  side  have  wanted  irrigation.*  The  accumulation  of  wealth  being
thus  impeded,  the  progress  of  society  was  stopped  ;  and  until,  in  the  sixteenth
century,  the  knowledge  of  Europe  was  brought  to  bear  upon  America,  there
is  no  instance  of  any  people  north  of  the  twentieth  parallel  reaching  even  that
imperfect  civilization  to  which  the  inhabitants  of  India  and  of  Egypt  easily

137  Of  this  irrigation  some  idea  may  be  formed  from  an  estimate  that  the  Amazon
drains  an  area  of  2,500,000  square  miles  ;  that  its  mouth  is  ninety -six  miles  wide  ;  and
that  it  is  navigable  2,200  miles  from  its  mouth.    Somerville's  Physical  Geography,  vol.  i.
p.  423.     Indeed,  it  is  said  in  an  Essay  on  the  Hydrography  of  South  America  (Journal
of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  250),  that  "  with  the  exception  of  one  short  portage  of
three  miles,  water  flows,  and  is  for  the  most  part  navigable,  between  Buenos  Ayres,
in  35°  south  latitude,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Orinoco,  in  nearly  9°  north."    See  also  on  this
river-system,  vol.  v.  p.  93,  vol.  x.  p.  267.     In  regard  to  North  America,  Mr.  Rogers
(Geology  of  North  America,  p.  8,  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1834)  says,  "The  area  drained  by  the
Mississippi  and  all  its  tributaries  is  computed  at  1,099,000  square  miles."     Compare
Richardson's  Arctic  Expedition,  vol.  ii.  p.  164.

138  The  Oregon,  or  Columbia  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  forms  a  remarkable  botanical
line,  which  is  the  boundary  of  the  Californian  flora.     See  Reports  on  Botany  by  the  Ray
Society,  p.  113.

J9  For  proof  that  the  mean  temperature  of  the  western  coast  of  North  America  is
higher  than  that  of  the  eastern  coast,  see  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  ix.  p.  380,
vol.  xi.  pp.  168,  216  ;  Humboldt,  la  Nouvelle  Espagne,  vol.  i.  pp.  42,  336  ;  Richardson's
Arctic  Expedition,  vol.  ii.  pp.  214,  218,  219,  259,  260.  This  is  well  illustrated  by  the
botanical  fact,  that  on  the  west  coast  the  coniferae  grow  as  high  as  68°  or  70°  north  lati-
tude ;  while  on  the  east  their  northern  limit  is  60°.  See  an  Essay  on  the  Morphology
of  the  Coniferae,  in  Reports  on  Botany  by  the  Ray  Society,  p.  8,  which  should  be  compared
with  Forry  on  the  Climate  of  the  United  States  and  its  Endemic  Influences,  New  York,  1842,
p.  89.

no  "  Writers  on  climate  have  remarked  that  the  eastern  coasts  of  continents  in  the
northern  hemisphere  have  a  lower  mean  temperature  than  the  western  coasts."  Richard-
son on  North- American  Zoology,  p.  129,  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1836  :  see  also  Report  for  1841,
Sections,  p.  28  ;  Davis' s  China,  vol.  Hi.  pp.  140, 141  ;  Journ.  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  xxii.
p.  176.

[*  Both  of  these  statements  are  excessive.  Sufficient  heat  and  moisture  to  admit
of  fertility  existed  in  the  eastern  parts  of  North  America  between  the  3oth  and  4oth
parallels  ;  but  other  conditions — such  as  great  forest  growth  relatively  to  population,
leading  to  a  prolongation  of  the  state  of  tribal  war, — prevented  there  the  due  social
development  in  the  pre-Christian  period.  The  same  state  of  things,  broadly  speaking,
prevailed  in  parts  of  the  middle  and  western  territories.— ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  57

attained.141  On  the  other  hand,  south  of  the  twentieth  parallel,  the  continent
suddenly  changes  its  form,  and,  rapidly  contracting,  becomes  a  small  strip  of
land,  until  it  reaches  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.  This  narrow  tract  was  the  centre
of  Mexican  civilization  ;  and  a  comparison  of  the  preceding  arguments  will
easily  show  why  such  was  the  case  ;  for  the  peculiar  configuration  of  the  land
secured  a  very  large  amount  of  coast,  and  thus  gave  to  the  southern  part  of
North  America  the  character  of  an  island.  Hence  there  arose  one  of  the  char-
acteristics of  an  insular  climate,  namely,  an  increase  of  moisture,  caused  by
the  watery  vapour  which  springs  from  the  sea.142  While,  therefore,  the  position
of  Mexico  near  the  equator  gave  it  heat,  the  shape  of  the  land  gave  it  humidity  ;
and  this  being  the  only  part  of  North  America  in  which  these  two  conditions
were  united,  it  was  likewise  the  only  part  which  was  at  all  civilized.  There
can  be  no  doubt  that  if  the  sandy  plains  of  California  and  southern  Columbia,
instead  of  being  scorched  into  sterility,  had  been  irrigated  by  the  rivers  of  the
east,  or  if  the  rivers  of  the  east  had  been  accompanied  by  the  heat  of  the  west,
the  result  of  either  combination  would  have  been  that  exuberance  of  soil  by
which,  as  the  history  of  the  world  decisively  proves,  every  early  civilization
was  preceded.  But  inasmuch  as,  of  the  two  elements  of  fertility,  one  was
deficient  in  every  part  of  America  north  of  the  twentieth  parallel,  it  followed
that,  until  that  line  was  passed,  civilization  could  gain  no  resting-place  ;  and
there  never  has  been  found,  and  we  may  confidently  assert  never  will  be  found,
any  evidence  that  even  a  single  ancient  nation,  in  the  whole  of  that  enormous
continent,  was  able  to  make  much  progress  in  the  arts  of  life,  or  organize  itself
into  a  fixed  and  permanent  society.

Thus  far  as  to  the  physical  agents  which  controlled  the  early  destinies  of
North  America,     But  in  reference  to  South  America,  a  different  train  of  cir-

141  The  little  that  is  known  of  the  early  state  of  the  North -American  tribes  has  been
brought  together  by  Dr.  M'Culloh  in  his  learned  work,  Researches  concerning  America,
pp.  119-146.     He  says,  p.  121,  that  they  "lived  together  without  laws  and  civil  regu-
lations."    In  that  part  of  the  world,  the  population  has  probably  never  been  fixed  ;
and  we  now  know  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  north-east  of  Asia  have  at  different  times
passed  over  to  the  north-west  of  America,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Tschuktschi,  who  are
found  in  both  continents.     Indeed,  Dobell  was  so  struck  by  the  similarity  between  the
North -American  tribes  and  some  he  met  with  nearly  as  far  west  as  Tomsk,  that  he  be-
lieved their  origin  to  be  the  same.     See  DobelVs  Travels  in  Kamtchatka  and  Siberia,
1830,  vol.  ii.  p.  112.     And  on  this  question  of  intercourse  between  the  two  continents,
compare  Crantz's  History  of  Greenland,  vol.  i.  pp.  259,  260,  with  Richardson's  Arctic
Expedition,  vol.  i.  pp.  362,  363,  and  Prichard's  Physical  History  of  Mankind,  vol.  iv.
pp.  458-463,  vol.  v.  pp.  371,  378.     [For  later  discussion  see  Winsor's  History  of  the  United
States,  vol.  i.  118.     As  regards  the  redskins  the  view  of  M'Culloh  must  be  rejected —
being  indeed  false  for  any  human  tribe.     In  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries
most  of  the  redskins  were  agriculturists  and  fruit-growers  as  well  as  hunters,  being  thus
at  a  higher  level  of  civilization  than  the  Teutons  of  the  time  of  Caesar.     For  an  admirably
complete  view  of  what  is  known  as  to  their  way  of  life,  see  the  following  works  of  Mr.
Lucien  Carr  :  The  Social  and  Political  Position  of  Women  among  the  Huron-Iroquois
Tribes  (Salem,  1884)  ;  The  Mounds  of  the  Mississippi  Valley,  in  the  Smithsonian  Report
for  1891  (Washington,  1893)  ;  Dress  and  Ornaments  of  certain  American  Indians  (Wor-
cester, 1897).     The  historic  fact  is  that  their  civilization  was  virtually  destroyed  by
the  French  and  English  colonists. — ED.]

142  From  general  physical  considerations,  we  should  suppose  a  relation  between  amount
of  rain  and  extent  of  coast ;  and  in  Europe,  where  alone  we  have  extensive  meteoro-
logical records,  the  connexion  has  been  proved  statistically.     "  If  the  quantity  of  rain
that  falls  in  different  parts  of  Europe  is  measured,  it  is  found  to  be  less,  other  things
being  equal,  as  we  recede  from  the  sea-shore."     Kaemtz's  Meteorology,  1845,  p.  139.
Compare  pp.  qi,  94.     Hence,  no  doubt,  the  greater  rarity  of  rain  as  we  advance  north
from  Mexico.     "  Au  nord  du  20°,  surtout  depuis  les  22°  au  30°  de  latitude,  les  pluies,
qui  ne  durent  que  pendant  les  mois  de  juin,  de  juillet,  d'aout  et  de  septembre,  sont
peu  frequentes  dans  I'interieur    du    pays."      Humboldt,  la  Nouvelle  Espagne,  vol.  i.
p.  46.


58  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

cnmstances  came  into  play  ;  for  the  law  by  virtue  of  which  the  eastern  coasts
are  colder  than  the  western,  is  not  only  inapplicable  to  the  southern  hemisphere,
but  is  replaced  by  another  law  precisely  the  reverse.  North  of  the  eqiiator
the  east  is  colder  than  the  west  ;  south  of  the  equator,  the  east  is  hotter  than
the  west.143  If  now,  we  connect  this  fact  with  what  has  been  noticed  respecting
the  vast  river-system  which  distinguishes  the  east  of  America  from  the  west,
it  becomes  evident  that  in  South  America  there  exists  that  co-operation  of
heat  and  humidity  in  which  North  America  is  deficient.  The  result  is,  that
the  soil  in  the  eastern  part  of  South  America  is  remarkable  for  Us  exuberance,
not  onlv  within  the  tropic,  but  considerably  beyond  it  ;  the  south  of  Brazil,
and  even  part  of  Uruguay,  possessing  a  fertility  not  to  be  found  in  any  country
of  North  America  situated  under  a  corresponding  latitude.

.On  a  hasty  view  .of  the  preceding  generalizations,  it  might  be  expected  that
the  eastern  "side  of  South  America,  being  thus  richly  endowed  by  nature,14*
would  have  been  the  seat  of  those  civilizations,  which,  in  other  parts  of  the
world,  similar  causes  produced.  But  if  we  look  a  little  further,  we  shall  find
that  what  has  just  been  pointed  out,  by  no  means  exhausts  even  the  physical
bearings  of  this  subject,  and  that  we  must  take  into  consideration  a  third 'great
agent,  vihich  has  sufficed  to  neutralize  the  natural  results  of  the  other  two,  and
to  retain  in  barbarism  the  inhabitants  of  what  otherwise  would  have  been  the
most  nourishing  of  all  the  countries  of  the  New  World.

The  agent  to  which  I  allude  is  the  trade-wind  ;  a  striking  phenomenon,  by
which,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  all  the  civilizations  anterior  to  those  of  Europe  *
were  greatly  and  injuriously  influenced.  This  wind  covers  no  less  than  56°
of  latitude  ;  28°  north  of  the  equator,  and  28°  south  of  it.145  In  this  large  tract,
which  comprises  some  of  the  most  fertile  countries  in  the  world,  the  trade-wind
blows,  during  the  whole  year,  either  from  the  north-east  or  from  the  south-east.146
The  causes  of  this  regularity  are  now  well  understood,  and  are  known  to  depend
partly  on  the  displacement  of  air  at  the  equator,  and  partly  on  the  motion  of
the  earth  ;  for  the  cold  air  from  the  poles  is  constantly  flowing  towards  the
equator,  and  thus  producing  northerly  winds  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  and
southerly  winds  in  the  southern.  These  winds  are,  however,  deflected  from
their  natural  course  by  the  movement  of  the  earth,  as  it  revolves  on  its  axis
from  west  to  east.  And  as  the  rotation  of  the  earth  is,  of  course,  more  rapid

143  "  The  difference  between  the  climates  of  the  east  and  west  coasts  of  continents
and  islands,  has  also  been  observed  in  the  southern  hemisphere  ;  but  here  the  west
coasts  are  colder  than  the  east,  while  in  the  northern  hemisphere  the  east  coasts  are  the
colder."     Meyen's  Geography  of  Plants,  1846,  p.  24.

144  Mr.  Darwin,  who  has  written  one  of  the  most  valuable  works  ever  published  on
South  America,  was  struck  by  this  superiority  of  the  eastern  coast ;  and  he  mentions
that  "  fruits  which  ripen  well  and  are  very  abundant,  such  as  the  grape  and  fig,  in  lati-
tude 41°  on  the  east  coast,  succeed  very  poorly  in  a  lower  latitude  on  the  opposite  side
of  the  continent."     Darwin's  Journal  of  Researches,   Lond.    1840,  p.   268.     Compare,
Mey'eris  Geog.  of  Plants,  pp.  25,  188.     So  that  the  proposition  of  Daniell  (Meteorological
Essays,  p.  104,  sec.  xiv. )  is  expressed  too  generally,  and  should  be  confined  to  continents
north  of  the  equator.

145  The  trade-winds  sometimes  reach  the  thirtieth  parallel.     See  DanielVs  Meteoro-
logical Essays,  p.  469.     Dr.  Traill  (Physical  Geography,  Edin.  1838,  p.  200)  says,  "They
extend  to  about  30°  on  each  side  of  the  equator  "  :  but  I  believe  they  are  rarely  found
so  high  ;  though  Robertson  is  certainly  wrong  in  supposing  that  they  are  peculiar  to
the  tropics  ;  History  of  America,  book  iv.  in  Robertson's  Works,  p.  781.

146  "  In  the  northern  hemisphere  the  trade-wind  blows  from  the  north-east,  and  in
the  southern  from  the  south-east."     Meyen's  Geog.  of  Plants,  p.  42.     Compare  Walsh's
Brazil,  vol.  i.  p.  112,  vol.  ii.  p.  494  ;  and  on  the  "  tropical  east  -  wind  "  of  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,  see  Forry's  Climate  of  the  United  States,  p.  206.     Dr.  Forry  says  that  it  has  given
to  the  growth  of  the  trees  "  an  inclination  from  the  sea."

[*  That  is,  all  the  South  American  civilizations  anterior  to  those  imported  from  Europe.
But  in  reality  they  too  have  been  affected. — ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  59


at  the  equator  than  elsewhere,  it  happens  that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
equator  the  speed  is  so  great  as  to  outstrip  the  movements  of  the  atmosphere
irom  the  poles,  and  forcing  them  into  another  direction,  gives  rise  to  those  east-
erly currents  which  are  called  trade-winds.147  What,  however,  we  are  now
rather  concerned  with,  is  not  so  much  an  explanation  of  the  trade-winds,  as
an  account  of  the  way  in  which  this  great  physical  phenomenon  is  connected
with  the  history  of  South  America.

The  trade-wind,  blowing  on  the  eastern  coast  of  South  America,  and  pro-
ceeding from  the  east,  crosses  the  Atlantic  ocean,  and  therefore  reaches  the
land  surcharged  with  the  vapours  accumulated  in  its  passage.  These  vapours,
on  touching  the  shore,  are,  at  periodical  intervals,  condensed  into  rain  ;  and
,  as  their  progress  westward  is  checked  b}^  that  gigantic  chain  of  the  Andes,  which
they  are  unable  to  pass,148  they  pour  the  whole  of  their  moisture  on  Brazil,
which,  in  consequence,  is  often  deluged  by  the  most  destructive  torrents.149
This  abundant  supply,  being  aided  by  that  vast  river -system  peculiar  to  the
eastern  part  of  America,  and  being  also  accompanied  by  heat,  has  stimulated
the  soil  into  an  activity  unequalled  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  15°  Brazil,
which  is  nearly  as  large  as  the  whole  of  Europe,  is  covered  with  a  vegetation
of  incredible  profusion.  Indeed,  so  rank  and  luxuriant  is  the  growth,  that
Nature  seems  to  riot  in  the  very  wantonness  of  power.  A  great  part  of  this
immense  country  is  filled  with  dense  and  tangled  forests,  whose  noble  trees,
blossoming  in  unrivalled  beauty,  and  exquisite  with  a  thousand  hues,  throw
out  their  produce  in  endless  prodigality.  On  their  summit  are  perched  birds
of  gorgeous  plumage,  which  nestle  in  their  dark  and  lofty  recesses.  Below,
their  base  and  trunks  are  crowded  with  brushwood,  creeping  plants,  innumer-
able parasites,  all  swarming  with  life.  There,  too,  are  myriads  of  insects  of

147  Respecting  the  causes  of  the  trade -winds,  see  Somerville's  Connexion  of  the  Physical
Sciences,  pp.   136,   137  ;  Leslie's  Natural  Philosophy,  p.   518  ;  DanielVs  Meteorological
Essays,  pp.  44,   102,  476-481  ;  Kaemtz's  Meteorology,  pp.  37-39  ;  Proufs  Bridge-water
Treatise,  pp.  254-256.     The  discovery  of  the  true  theory  is  often  ascribed  to  Mr.  Daniell :
but  Hadley  was  the  real  discoverer.     Note  in  Prout,  p.  257.     The  monsoons,  which
popular  writers  frequently  confuse  with  the  trade -winds,  are  said  to  be  caused  by  the
predominance  of  land,  and  by  the  difference  between  its  temperature  and  that  of  the
sea  :  see  Kaemtz,  pp.'  42-45.     On  what  may  be  called  the  conversion  of  the  trades  into
monsoons,  according  to   the  laws  very  recently  promulgated  by  M.  Dove,  see  Report
of  British  Association  for  1847  (Transac.  of  Sections,  p.  30),  and  Report  for  1848,  p.  94.
The  monsoons  are  noticed  in  Humboldfs  Cosmos,  vol.  ii.  p.  485  ;  Asiatic  Researches,
vol.  xviii.  part  i.  p.  261  ;  ThirlwalVs  History  of  Greece,  vol.  vii.  pp..  13,  55  ;  Journal  of
Geograph.  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  90,  vol.  iv.  pp.  8-9,  148,  149,  169,  vol.  xi.  p.  162,  vol.  xv.
pp.  146-149,  vol.  xvi.  p.  185,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  67,  68,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  112  ;  Low's  Sarawak.
p.  30.

148  LyelVs  Principles  of  Geology,  pp.   201,   714,  715  :  see  also  Somerville's  Physical
Geography,  vol.  ii.  p.  71.     And  on  this  confining  power  of  the  Cordillera  of  the  Andes,
see  Azara,  Voyages  dans  I'Amerique  Meridionale,  vol.  i.  p.  33.     According  to  Dr.  Tschudi,
the  eastern  chain  is  properly  the  Andes,  and  the  western  the  Cordillera  ;  but  this  dis-
tinction is  rarely  made.     Tschudi's  Travels  in  Peru,  p.  290.

149  On  the  rain  of  Brazil,  see  DanielVs  Meteorological  Essays,  p.  335  ;  Darwin's  Journal,
pp.  ii.  33  ;  Spix  and  Marlins's  Travels  in  Brazil,  vol.  ii.  p,  113  :  Gardner's  Travels  in
Brazil,  pp.  53,  99,  114,  175,  233,  394.

150  Dr.  Gardner,  who  looked  at  these  things  with  the  eye  of  a  botanist,  says  that  near
Rio  de  Janeiro  the  heat  and  moisture  are  sufficient  to  compensate  even  the  poorest  soil ;
so  that  "  rocks,  on  which  scarcely  a  trace  of  earth  is  to  be  observed,  are  covered  with
vellozias,  tillandsias,  melastomaceae,  cacti,  orchideae,  and  ferns,  and  all  in  the  vigour
of  life."     Gardner's  Travels  in  Brazil,  p.  9.     See  also  on  this  combination,  Walsh's  Brazil,
vol.  ii.  pp.  297,  298,  a  curious  description  of  the  rainy  season  :  "  For  eight  or  nine  hours
a  day,  during  some  weeks,  I  never  had  a  dry  shirt  on  me  ;  and  the  clothes  I  divested
myself  of  at  night,  I  put  on  quite  wet  in  the  morning.     When  it  did  not  rain,  which  was
very  rare,  there  shone  out  in  some  places  a  burning  sun  ;  and  we  went  smoking  along,
the  wet  exhaling  by  the  heat,  as  if  we  were  dissolving  into  vapour."


60  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

every  variety  ;  reptiles  of  strange  and  singular  form  ;  serpents  and  lizards,
spotted  with  deadly  beauty  :  all  of  which  find  means  of  existence  in  this  vast
workshop  and  repository  of  Nature.  And  that  nothing  may  be  wanting  to  this
land  of  marvels,  the  forests  are  skirted  by  enormous  meadows,  which,  reeking
with  heat  and  moisture,  supply  nourishment  to  countless  herds  of  wild  cattle,
that  browse  and  fatten  on  their  herbage  ;  while  the  adjoining  plains,  rich  in
another  form  of  life,  are  the  chosen  abode  of  the  subtlest  and  most  ferocious
animals,  which  prey  on  each  other,  but  which  it  might  almost  seem  no  human
power  can  hope  to  extirpate.151

Such  is  the  flow  and  abundance  of  life  by  which  Brazil  is  marked  above  all
the  other  countries  of  the  earth.152  But  amid  this  pomp  and  splendour  of  nature,
no  place  is  left  for  Man.  He  is  reduced  to  insignificance  by  the  majesty  with
which  he  is  surrounded.  The  forces  that  oppose  him  are  so  formidable,  that
he  has  never  been  able  to  make  head  against  them,  never  able  to  rally  against
their  accumulated  pressure.  The  whole  of  Brazil,  notwithstanding  its  immense
apparent  advantages,  has  always  remained  entirely  uncivilized  ;  its  inhabitants
wandering  savages,  incompetent  to  resist  those  obstacles  which  the  very  bounty
of  Nature  had  put  in  their  way.  For  the  natives,  like  every  people  in  the  infancy
of  society,  are  averse  to  enterprise  ;  and  being  unacquainted  with  the  arts  by
which  physical  impediments  are  removed,  they  have  never  attempted  to  grapple
with  the  difficulties  that  stopped  their  social  progress.  Indeed,  those  difficulties
are  so  serious,  that  during  more  than  three  hundred  years  the  resources  of
European  knowledge  have  been  vainly  employed  in  endeavouring  to  get  rid
of  them.  Along  the  coast  of  Brazil,  there  has  been  introduced  from  Europe
a  certain  amount  of  that  civilization,  which  the  natives  by  their  own  efforts
could  never  have  reached.  But  such  civilization,  in  itself  very  imperfect,  has
never  penetrated  the  recesses  of  the  country  ;  and  in  the  interior  there  is  still
found  a  state  of  things  similar  to  that  which  has  always  existed.  The  people,
ignorant,  and  therefore  brutal,  practising  no  restraint,  and  recognizing  no  law,
continue  to  live  on  in  their  old  and  inveterate  barbarism.153  In  their  country,
the  physical  causes  are  so  active,  and  do  their  work  on  a  scale  of  such  unrivalled
magnitude,  that  it  has  hitherto  been  found  impossible  to  escape  from  the  effects
of  their  united  action.  The  progress  of  agriculture  is  stopped  by  impassable

151  On  the  natural  history  of  Brazil,  I  have  compared  a  few  notices  in  Swainson's
Geography  of  Animals,  pp.  75-87,  with  Cuvier,  Regne  Animal,  vol.  i.  p.  460,  vol.  ii.  pp.  28,
65,  66,  89,  vol.  iv.  pp.  51,  75,  258,  320,  394,  485,  561,  vol.  v.  pp.  40,  195,  272,  334,  553  ;
Azara,  Amerique  Meridionale,  vol.  i.  pp.  244-388,  and  the  greater  part  of  vols.  iii.  and  iv.  ;
Winckler,  Geschichte  der  Botanik,  pp.  378,  576-578  ;  Southey's  History  of  Brazil,  vol.  i»
p.  27,  vol.  iii.  pp.  315,  823  ;  Gardner's  Brazil,  pp.  18,  32-34,  41-44,  131,  330  ;  Spix  and
Martius's  Brazil,  vol.  i.  pp.  207-209,  238-248,  vol.  ii.  pp.  131,  160-163.     And  as  to  the
forests,  which  are  among  the  wonders  of  the  world,  Somerville's  Physical  Geog.  vol.  ii.
pp.  204-206  ;  Prichard's  Physical  History,  vol.  v.  p.  497  ;  Darwin's  Journal,  pp.  ii,  24  ;
Walsh's  Brazil,  vol.  i.  p.  145,  vol.  ii.  pp.  29,  30,  253.

152  This  extraordinary  richness  has  excited  the  astonishment  of  all  who  have  seen  it.
Mr.  Walsh,  who  has  travelled  in  some  very  fertile  countries,  mentions  "  the  exceeding
fecundity  of  nature  which  characterizes  Brazil."     Walsh's  Brazil,  vol.  ii.  p.  19.     And
a  very  eminent  naturalist,  Mr.  Darwin,  says  (Journal,  p.  29),  "  In  England,  any  person
fond  of  natural  history  enjoys  in  his  walks  a  great  advantage,  by  always  having  some-
thing to  attract  his  attention  ;  but  in  these  fertile  climates,  teeming  with  life,  the  attrac-
tions are  so  numerous  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  walk  at  all."

153  Azara  (Amerique  Meridionale,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1-168)  gives  a  curious,  but  occasionally
a  disgusting  account  of  the  savage  natives  in  that  part  of  Brazil  south  of  16°,  to  which
his  observations  were  limited.     And  as  to  the  inhabitants  of  other  parts,  see  Henderson's
History  of  Brazil,  pp.  28,  29,  107,  173,  248,  315,  473  ;  M'Culloh's  Researches  concerning
America,  p.  77  ;  and  the  more  recent  account  of  Dr.  Martius,  in  Journal  of  Geograph.
Society,  vol.  ii.  pp.  191-199.     Even  in  1817,  it  was  rare  to  see  a  native  in  Rio  de  Janeiro
(Spix  and  Martius' s  Travels  in  Brazil,  vol.  i.  p.  142) ;  and  Dr.  Gardner  (Travels  in  Brazil,
pp.  61,  62)  says,  that  "more  than  one  nation  of  Indians  in  Brazil"  have  returned  to
that  savage  life  from  which  they  had  apparently  been  reclaimed.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  61

forests,  and  the  harvests  are  destroyed  by  innumerable  insects.154  The  moun-
tains are  too  high  to  scale,  the  rivers  are  too  wide  to  bridge  ;  everything  is  con-
trived to  keep  back  the  human  mind,  and  repress  its  rising  ambition.  It  is
thus  that  the  energies  of  Nature  have  hampered  the  spirit  of  Man.  Nowhere
else  is  there  so  painful  a  contrast  between  the  grandeur  of  the  external  world
and  the  littleness  of  the  internal.  And  the  mind,  cowed  by  this  unequal  struggle,
has  not  only  been  unable  to  advance,  but  without  foreign  aid  it  would  un-
doubtedly have  receded.  For  even  at  present,  with  all  the  improvements  con-
stantly introduced  from  Europe,  there  are  no  signs  of  real  progress  ;  while  not-
withstanding the  frequency  of  colonial  settlements,  less  than  one-fiftieth  of
the  land  is  cultivated.155  The  habits  of  the  people  are  as  barbarous  as  ever  :
and  as  to  their  numbers,  it  is  well  worthy  of  remark,  that  Brazil,  the  country
where,  of  all  others,  physical  resources  are  most  powerful,  where  both  veget-
ables and  animals  are  most  abundant,  where  the  soil  is  watered  by  the  noblest
rivers,  and  the  coast  studded  by  the  finest  harbours, — this  immense  territory,
which  is  more  than  twelve  times  the  size  of  France,  contains  a  population  not
exceeding  six  millions  of  people.156

These  considerations  sufficiently  explain  why  it  is,  that  in  the  whole  of  Brazil
there  are  no  monuments  even  of  the  most  imperfect  civilization  ;  no  evidence
that  the  people  had,  at  any  period,  raised  themselves  above  the  state  in  which
they  were  found  when  their  country  was  first  discovered.  But  immediately
opposite  to  Brazil  there  is  another  co'untry,  which,  though  situated  in  the  same
continent,  and  lying  under  the  same  latitude,  is  subjected  to  different  physical
conditions,  and  therefore  was  the  scene  of  different  social  results.  This  is  the
celebrated  kingdom  of  Peru,  which  included  the  whole  of  the  southern  tropic,
and  which,  from  the  circumstances  just  stated,  was  naturally  the  only  part  of
South  America  where  anything  approaching  to  civilization  could  be  attained.
In  Brazil,  the  heat  of  the  climate  was  accompanied  by  a  twofold  irrigation,
arising  first  from  the  immense  river-system  incidental  to  the  eastern  coast  ;
and  secondly,  from  the  abundant  moisture  deposited  by  the  trade-winds.  From
this  combination  there  resulted  that  unequalled  fertility,  which,  so  far  as  Man
was  concerned,  defeated  its  own  ends,  stopping  his  progress  by  an  exuberance,
which,  had  it  been  less  excessive,  it  would  have  aided.  For,  as  we  have  clearly
seen,  when  the  productive  powers  of  Nature  are  carried  beyond  a  certain  point,
the  imperfect  knowledge  of  uncivilized  men  is  unable  to  cope  with  them,  or  in
any  way  turn  them  to  their  own  advantage.  If,  however,  those  powers,  being
very  active,  are  nevertheless  confined  within  manageable  limits,  there  arises
a  state  of  things  similar  to  that  noticed  in  Asia  and  Africa,  where  the  profusion
of  Nature,  instead  of  hindering  social  progress,  favoured  it,  by  encouraging

154  Sir  C.  Lyell  (Principles  of  Geology,  p.  682)  notices  "  the  incredible  number  of  insects
which  lay  waste  the  crops  in  Brazil  "  ;  and  Mr.  Swainson,  who  had  travelled  in  that
country,  says,  "  The  red  ants  of  Brazil  are  so  destructive,  and  at  the  same  time  so  prolific,
that  they  frequently  dispute  possession  of  the  ground  with  the  husbandman,  defy  all
his  skill  to  extirpate  their  colonies,  and  fairly  compel  him  to  leave  his  fields  uncultivated."
Swainson  on  the  Geography  and  Classification  of  Animals,  p.  87.     See  more  about  these
insects  in  Darwin's  Journal,  pp.  37-43  ;  Southey's  History  of  Brazil,  vol.  i.  pp.  144,  256,
333-335>  343>  vol.  ii.  pp.  365,  642,  vol.  iii.  p.  876  ;  Spix  and  Marlins's  Travels  in  Brazil,
vol.  i.  p.  259,  vol.  ii.  p.  117  ;  Cuvier,  Regne  Animal,  vol.  iv.  p.  320.

155  The  cultivated  land  is  estimated  at  from  i|  to  2  per  cent.     See  M'Culloch's  Geog.
Diet.,  1849,  vol.  i.  p.  430.

156  During  the  present  century,  the  population  of  Brazil  has  been  differently  stated
at  different  times  ;  the  highest  computation  being  7,000,000,  and  the  lowest  4,000,000.
Comp.  Humboldt,  Nouv.  Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  855  ;  Gardner's  Brazil,  p.  12  ;  M'Culloch's
Geog.  Diet.,  1849,  v°l-  i-  PP-  43°>  434*     Mr.  Walsh  describes  Brazil  as  "  abounding  in
lands  of  the  most  exuberant  fertility,  but  nearly  destitute  of  inhabitants."     Walsh's
Brazil,  vol.  i.  p.  248.     This  was  in  1828  and  1829.  since  which  the  European  population
has  increased  ;  but,  on  the  whole,  6,000,000  seems  to  be  a  fair  estimate  of  what  can  only
be  known  approximately.      In    Alison's   History,  vol.  x.  p.  229,  the   number  given  is

5,000,000  ;  but  the  area  also  is  rather  understated.     [Population  in  1891,    17,000,000.


62  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

that  accumulation  of  wealth,  without  some  share  of  which  progress  is  im-
possible.

tfftln  estimating,  therefore,  the  physical  conditions  by  which  civilization  was
originally  determined,  we  have  to  look,  not  merely  at  the  exuberance,  but  also
at  what  may  be  called  the  manageability  of  Nature  ;  that  is,  we  have  to  con-
sider the  ease  with  which  the  resources  may  be  used,  as  well  as  the  number  of
the  resources  themselves.  Applying  this  to  Mexico  and  Peru,  we  find  that  they
were  the  countries  of  America  where  this  combination  most  happily  occurred.
For  though  their  resources  were  much  less  numerous  than  those  of  Brazil,  they
were  far  more  easy  to  control  ;  while  at  the  same  time  the  heat  of  the  climate
brought  into  play  those  other  laws  by  which,  as  I  have  attempted  to  show,  all
the  early  civilizations  were  greatly  influenced.  It  is  a  very  remarkable  fact,
which,  I  believe,  has  never  been  observed,  that  even  in  reference  to  latitude,
the  present  limit  of  Peru  to  the  south  corresponds  with  the  ancient  limit  of  Mexico
to  the  north  ;  while,  by  a  striking,  but  to  me  perfectly  natural  coincidence,
both  these  boundaries  are  reached  before  the  tropical  line  is  passed  ;  the  boundary
of  Mexico  being  21°  N.  lat.,  that  of  Peru  21^°  S.  lat.157

Such  is  the  wonderful  regularity  which  history,  when  comprehensively  studied,
presents  to  our  view.  And  if  we  compare  Mexico  and  Peru  with  those  countries
of  the  Old  World  which  have  been  already  noticed,  we  shall  find,  as  in  all  the
civilizations  anterior  to  those  of  Europe,  that  their  social  phenomena  were
subordinate  to  their  physical  laws.  In  the  first  place,  the  characteristics  of  their
national  food  were  precisely  those  met  with  in  the  most  flourishing  parts  of
Asia  and  Africa.  For  although  few  of  the  nutritious  vegetables  belonging  to
the  Old  World  were  found  in  the  New,  their  place  was  supplied  by  others  exactly
analogous  to  rice  and  dates  ;  that  is  to  say,  marked  by  the  same  abundance,
by  the  same  facility  of  growth,  and  by  the  same  exuberant  returns.;  therefore,
followed  by  the  same  social  results.  In  Mexico  and  Peru,  one  of  the  most  im-
portant articles  of  food  has  always  been  maize,  which,  we  have  every  reason
to  believe,  was  peculiar  to  the  American  continent.158  This,  like  rice  and  dates,
is  eminently  the  product  of  a  hot  climate  ;  and  although  it  is  said  to  grow  at
an  elevation  of  upwards  of  7,000  feet,159  it  is  rarely  seen  beyond  the  fortieth
parallel,160  and  its  exuberance  rapidly  diminishes  with  the  diminution  of  tem-
perature. Thus,  for  example,  in  New  California  its  average  yield  is  seventy

157  Vidica  being  the   most  southerly  point  of  the  present  Peruvian  coast ;    though
the  conquests  of  Peru,  incorporated  with  the  empire,  extended  far  into  Chili,  and  within
a  few  degrees  of  Patagonia.     In  regard  to  Mexico,  the  northern  limit  of  the  empire  was
21°  on  the  Altantic  coast,  and  19°  on  the  Pacific.     Prescotfs  History  of  Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  2.

158  A  question  has  been  raised  as  to  the  Asiatic  origin  of  maize  :  Reynier,  Economie
des  Arabes,  pp.  94,  95.     But  later  and  more  careful  researches  seem  to  have  ascertained
beyond  much  doubt  that  it  was  unknown  before  America  was  discovered.     Compare
Meyen's  Geography  of  Plants,  pp.  44,  303,  304  ;  Walckenaer's  note  in  Azara,  Amerique
Meridionale,  vol.  i.  p.  149  ;  Cuvier,  Progres  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  vol.  ii.  p.  354  ;  Cuvier,
Eloges  Historiques,    vol.   ii.    p.    178  ;    London's   Encyclopedia   of   Agriculture,    p.    829 ;
M'Culloch's  Diet,  of  Commerce,  1849,  p.  831.     The  casual  notices  of  maize  by  Ixtlilxochitl,
the  native  Mexican  historian,  shows  its  general  use  as  an  article  of  food  before  the  arrival
of  the  Spaniards  :  see  Ixtlilxochiil,  Histoire  des  Chichimeques,  vol.  i.  pp.  53,  64,  240,
vol.  ii.  p.  19.

159  "  Maize,  indeed,  grows  to  the  height  of  7,200  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  but
only  predominates  between  3,000  and  6,000  of  elevation."     Lindley's  Vegetable  King-
dom, 1847,  p.  112.     This  refers  to  the  tropical  parts  of  South  America;  but  the  Zea
Mais  is  said  to  have  been  raised  on  the  slopes  of  the  Pyrenees  "  at  an  elevation  of  3,000
to  4,000  feet."     See  Austen  on  the  Forty  Days'  Maize,  in  Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1849,
Trans,  of  Sec.  p.  68.

160  M.  Meyen  (Geog.  of  Plants,  p.  302)  and  Mr.  Balfour  (Botany,  p.  567)  suppose  that
in  America  40°  is  about  its  limit ;  and  this  is  the  case  in  regard  to  its  extensive  cultiva-
tion ;  but  it  is  grown  certainly  as  high  as  52°,  perhaps  as  high  as  54°,  north  latitude  :
see  Richardson's  Arctic  Expedition,  1851,  vol.  ii.  pp.  49,  234.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  63

or  eighty  fold  ;  161  but  in  Mexico  proper  the  same  grain  yields  three  or  four
hundred  fold,  and,  under  very  favourable  circumstances,  even  eight  hundred
fold.16*

A  people  who  derived  their  sustenance  from  a  plant  of  such  extraordinary
fecundity,  had  little  need  to  exercise  their  industrious  energies  ;  while  at  the
same  time  they  had  every  opportunity  of  increasing  their  numbers,  and  thus
producing  a  train  of  social  and  political  consequences  similar  to  those  which  I
have  noticed  in  India  and  in  Egypt.  Besides  this,  there  were,  in  addition  to
maize,  other  kinds  of  food  to  which  the  same  remarks  are  applicable.  The
potato,  which  in  Ireland  has  brought  about  such  injurious  effects  by  stimulating
the  growth  of  population,  is  said  to  be  indigenous  to  Peru  ;  and  although  this
is  denied  by  a  very  high  authority,163  there  is,  at  all  events,  no  doubt  that  it
was  found  there  in  great  abundance  when  the  country  was  first  discovered  by
the  Europeans.164  In  Mexico,  potatoes  were  unknown  till  the  arrival  of  the
Spaniards  ;  but  both  Mexicans  and  Peruvians  lived  to  a  great  extent  on  the
produce  of  the  banana  ;  a  vegetable  whose  reproductive  powers  are  so  extra-
ordinary, that  nothing  but  the  precise  and  unimpeachable  testimony  of
which  we  are  possessed  could  make  them  at  all  credible.  This  remarkable
plant  is,  in  America,  intimately  connected  with  the  physical  laws  of  climate  ;
since  it  is  an  article  of  primary  importance  for  the  subsistence  of  man  whenever
the  temperature  passes  a  certain  point.165  Of  its  nutritive  powers,  it  is  enough
to  say,  that  an  acre  sown  with  it  will  support  more  than  fifty  persons  ;  whereas
the  same  amount  of  land  sown  with  wheat  in  Europe  will  only  support  two
persons.166  As  to  the  exuberance  of  its  growth,  it  is  calculated  that,  other
circumstances  remaining  the  same,  its  produce  is  forty-four  times  greater  than
that  of  potatoes,  and  a  hundred  and  thirty-three  times  greater  than  that  of
wheat. 16?

161  "  Sous  la  zone  ternperee,  entre  les  33  et  38  degres  de  latitude,  par  exemple  dans
la  Nouvelle  Californie,  le  mai's  ne  produit,  en  general,  annee  commune,  que  70  a  80  grains
pour  un."     Humboldt,  la  Nouvelle  Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  375.

162  "  La  fecondite  du  Tlaolli,  ou  mai's  mexicain,  est  au-dela  de  tout  ce  que  Ton  pent
imaginer  en   Europe.     La   plante,  favorisee  par  de  fortes   chaleurs  et   par  beaucoup
d'humidite,  acquiert  une  hauteur  de  deux  a  trois  metres.     Dans  les  belles  plaines  qui
s'etendent  depuis  San  Juan  del  Rio  a  Queretaro,  par  exemple  dans  les  terres  de  la  grande
metairie  de  1'Esperanza,  une  fanegue  de  mai's  en  produit  quelquefois  huit  cents.     Des
terrains  fertiles  en  donnent,  annee  commune,  trois  &  quatre  cents."     Humboldt,  Nouv.
Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  374.     Nearly  the  same  estimate  is  given  by  Mr.  Ward  :  see  Ward's
Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  32,  vol.  ii.  p.  230.     In  Central  America  (Guatemala),  maize  returns
three  hundred  for  one.     Mexique  et  Guatemala  par  Larenaudiere,  p.  257.

.  163  "  La  pomme  de  terre  n'est  pas  indigene  au  Perou."  Humboldt,  Nouv.  Espagne,
vol.  ii.  p.  400.  On  the  other  hand,  Cuvier  (Histoire  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  part  ii.  p.  185 )
peremptorily  says,  "  II  est  impossible  de  douter  qu'elle  ne  soit  originaire  du  Perou  "  :
see  also  his  Eloges  Historiques,  vol.  ii.  p.  171.  Compare  Winckler,  Gesch.  der  Botanik,
p.  92  :  "  Von  einem  gewissen  C/arate  unter  den  Gewachsen  Peru's  mit  dem  Namen  papas
aufgefiihrt."

164  And  has  been  used  ever  since  for  food.     On  the  Peruvian  potato,  compare  Tschudfs
Travels  in  Peru,  pp.  178,  368,  386  ;  Ulloa's  Voyage  to  South  America,  vol.  i.  pp.  287,  288.
In  Southern  Peru,  at  the  height  of  13,000  or  14,000  feet,  a  curious  process  takes  place,
the  starch  of  the  potato  being  frozen  into  saccharine.     See  a  valuable  paper  by  Mr.
Bollaert  in  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  xxi.  p.  119.

165  Humboldt  (Nouv.  Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  359)  says,  "Partout  ou  la  chaleur  moyenne
de  1' annee  excede  vingt-quatre  degres  centigrades,  le  fruit  du  bananier  est  un  objet  de
culture  du  plus  grand  interet   pour  la  subsistance  de  l'homme."      Compare  Bullock's
Mexico,  p.  281.

166  M'Culloch's  Geograph.  Diet.,  1849,  vol.  ii.  p.  315.

167  "  Je  doute  qu'il  existe  une  autre  plante  sur  le  globe,  qui,  sur  un  petit  espace  de
terrain,  puisse  produire  une  masse  de  substance  nourrissante  aussi  considerable."  .  .  .
"  Le  produit  des  bananes  est  par  consequent  a  celui  du  froment  comme  133  :  i — &  celui
des  pornmes  de  terre  comme  44  :  i."     Humboldt,  Nouvelle  Espagne, -vol.  ii.  pp.  362,  363.


64  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  will  now  be  easily  understood  why  it  was  that,  in  all  important  respects,
the  civilizations  of  Mexico  and  Peru  were  strictly  analogous  to  those  of^India
and  Egypt.  In  these  four  countries,  as  well  as  in  a  few  others  in  Southern  Asia
and  Central  America,  there  existed  an  amount  of  knowledge,  despicable  indeed
if  tried  by  an  European  standard,  but  most  remarkable  if  contrasted  with  the
gross  ignorance  which  prevailed  among  the  adjoining  and  coternporary  nations.
But  in  all  of  them  there  was  the  same  inability  to  diffuse  even  that  scanty
civilization  which  they  really  possessed  ;  there  was  the  same  utter  absence  of
anything  approaching  to  the  democratic  spirit  ;  there  was  the  same  despotic
power  on  the  part  of  the  upper  classes,  and  the  same  contemptible  subservience
on  the  part  of  the  lower.  For,  as  we  have  clearly  seen,  all  these  civilizations
were  affected  by  certain  physical  causes,  which,  though  favourable  to  the  ac-
cumulation of  wealth,  were  unfavourable  to  a  just  subdivision  of  it.  And
as  the  knowledge  of  men  was  still  in  its  infancy,168  it  was  found  impossible  to
struggle  against  these  physical  agents,  or  prevent  them  from  producing  those
effects  on  the  social  organization  which  I  have  attempted  to  trace.  Both  in
Mexico  and  in  Peru,  the  arts,  and  particularly  those  branches  of  them  which
minister  to  the  luxury  of  the  wealthy  classes,  were  cultivated  with  great  success.
The  houses  of  the  higher  ranks  were  filled  with  ornaments  and  utensils  of  admir-
able workmanship  ;  their  chambers  were  hung  with  splendid  tapestries ;  their
dresses  and  their  personal  decorations  betrayed  an  almost  incredible  expense  ;
their  jewels  of  exquisite  and  varied  form  ;  their  rich  and  flowing  robes  em-
broidered with  the  rarest  feathers,  collected  from  the  most  distant  parts  of  the
empire  :  all  supplying  evidence  of  the  possession  of  unlimited  wealth,  and  of
the  ostentatious  prodigality  with  which  that  wealth  was  wasted.169  Immediately
below  this  class  came  the  people ;  and  what  their  condition  was,  may  be  easily
imagined.  In  Peru  the  whole  of  the  taxes  were  paid  by  them  ;  the  nobles  and
the  clergy  being  altogether  exempt.  17<>  But  as  in  such  a  state  of  society  it  was
impossible  for  the  people  to  accumulate  property,  they  were  obliged  to  defray
the  expenses  of  government  by  their  personal  labour,  which  was  placed  under
the  entire  command  of  the  state.171  At  the  same  time,  the  rulers  of  the  country

See  also  Prout's  Bridgewater  Treatise,  p.  333,  edit.  1845  ;  Prescotfs  Peru,  vol.  i.  pp.  131,
132  ;  Prescotfs  Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  114.  Earlier  notices,  but  very  imperfect  ones,  of  this
remarkable  vegetable  may  be  found  in  Ulloa's  South  America,  vol.  i.  p.  74  ;  and  in  Boyle's
Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  590.

168  The  only  science  with  which  they  had  much  acquaintance  was  astronomy,  which
the  Mexicans  appear  to  have  cultivated  with  considerable  success.     Compare  the  remark
of  La  Place,  in  Humboldt,  Nouvelle  Espagne,  vol.  i.  p.  92,  with  Prichard's  Physical  History,
vol.  v.  pp.   323,   329  ;    M'Culloh's  Researches,  pp.   201-225  ;  Larenaudiere's    Mexique,
pp.  51,  52  ;  Humboldfs  Cosmos,  vol.  iv.  p.  456  ;  Journ.  of  Geog.  Society,  vol.  vii.  p.  3.
However,  their  astronomy,  as  might  be  expected,  was  accompanied  by  astrology  :  see
Ixtlilxochitl,  Histoire  des  Chichimeques,  vol.  i.  p.  168,  vol.  ii.  pp.  94,  in.

169  The  works  of  art  produced  by  the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians  are  underrated  by
Robertson  ;  who,  however,  admits  that  he  had  never  seen  them.     History  of  America,
book  vii.,  in  Robertson's  Works,  pp.  909,  920.     But  during  the  present  century  consider-
able attention  has  been  paid  to  this  subject :  and  in  addition  to  the  evidence  of  skill
and  costly  extravagance  collected  by  Mr.  Prescott  (History  of  Peru,  vol.  i.  pp.  28,  142 ;
History  -of  Mexico,  vol.  i.  pp.  27,  28,  122,  256,  270,  307,  vol.  ii.  pp.  115*  n6),  I  may  refer
to  the  testimony  of  M.  Humboldt,  the  only  traveller  in  the  New  World  who  has  possessed
a  competent  amount  of  physical  as  well  as  historical  knowledge.     Humboldt,  Nouvelle
Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  483,  and  elsewhere.     Compare  Mr.  Pentland's  observation  on  the
tombs  in  the   neighbourhood  of  Titicaca  (Journ.  of  Geog.  Soc.,  vol.    x.  p.  554)   with
M'Culloh's  Researches,  pp.  364-366  ;  Mexique  par  Larenaudiere,  pp.  41,  42,  66  ;   Ulloa's
South  America,  vol.  i.  pp.  465,  466.

170  "  xhe  members  of  the  royal  house,  the  great  nobles,  even  the  public  functionaries,
and  the  numerous  body  of  the  priesthood,  were  all  exempt  from  taxation.     The  whole
duty  of  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  government  belonged  to  the  people."     Prescott's
History  of  Peru,  vol.  i.  p.  56.

171  Ondegardo  emphatically  says,  "  Solo  el  trabajo  de  las  personas  era  el  tribute  que


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  65

were  well  aware  that,  with  a  system  like  this,  feelings  of  personal  independence
were  incompatible  ;  they  therefore  contrived  laws  by  which,  even  in  the  most
minute  matters,  freedom  of  action  was  controlled.  The  people  were  so  shackled
that  they  could  neither-  change  their  residence,  nor  alter  their  clothes,  without
permission  from  the  governing  powers.  To  each  man  the  law  prescribed  the
trade  he  was  to  follow,  the  dress  he  was  to  wear,  the  wife  he  was  to  marry,  and
the  amusements  he  was  to  enjoy.172  Among  the  Mexicans  the  course  of  affairs
was  similar  ;  the  same  physical  conditions  being  followed  by  the  same  social
results.  In  the  most  essential  particular  for  which  history  can  be  studied,
namely,  the  state  of  the  people,  Mexico  and  Peru  are  the  counterpart  of  each
other.  For  though  there  were  many  minor  points  of  difference,173  both  were
agreed  in  this,  that  there  were  only  two  classes — the  upper  class  being  tyrants,
and  the  lower  class  being  slaves.  This  was  the  state  in  which  Mexico  was  found
when  it  was  discovered  by  the  Europeans,174  and  towards  which  it  must  have
been  tending  from  the  earliest  period.  And  so  insupportable  had  all  this  become,
that  we  know,  from  the  most  decisive  evidence,  that  the  general  disaffection
it  produced  among  the  people  was  one  of  the  causes  which,  by  facilitating  the
progress  of  the  Spanish  invaders,  hastened  the  downfall  of  the  Mexican  empire.175
The  further  this  examination  is  carried,  the  more  striking  becomes  the  simi-
larity between  those  civilizations  which  flourished  anterior  to  what  may  be  called
the  European  epoch  of  the  human  mind.  The  division  of  a  nation  into  castes
would  be  impossible  in  the  great  European  countries  ;  but  it  existed  from  a
remote  antiquity  in  Egypt,  in  India,  and  apparently  in  Persia.176  The  very
same  institution  was  rigidly  enforced  in  Peru  ;  177  and  what  proves  how  con-

se  dava,  porque  ellos  no  poseian  otra  cosa."  Prescotfs  Peru,  vol.  i.  p.  57.  Compare
M'CulloVs  Researches,  p.  359.  In  Mexico,  the  state  of  things  was  just  the  same  :  "  Le
petit  peuple,  qui  ne  possedait  point  de  biens-fonds,  et  qui  ne  faisait  point  de  commerce,
payait  sa  part  des  taxes  en  travaux  de  differents  genres  ;  c'etait  par  lui  qui  les  terres
de  la  couronne  etaient  cultivees,  les  ouvrages  publics  executes,  et  les  diverses  maisons
appartenantes  a  1'empereur  construites  ou  entretenues."  Larenaudiere's  Mexique,  p.  39.

172  Mr.  Prescott  notices  this  with  surprise,  though,  under  the  circumstances,  it  was
in  truth  perfectly  natural.     He  says  (Hist,  of  Peru,  vol.  i.  p.  159),  "  Under  this  extra-
ordinary polity,  a  people,  advanced  in  many  of  the  social  refinements,  well  skilled  in
manufactures  and  agriculture,  were  unacquainted,  as  we  have  seen,  with  money.     They
had  nothing  that  deserved  to  be  called  property.     They  could  follow  no  craft,  could
engage  in  no  labour,  no  amusement,  but  such  as  was  specially  provided  by  law.     They
could  not  change  their  residence  or  their  dress  without  a  licence  from  the  government.
They  could  not  even  exercise  the  freedom  which  is  conceded  to  the  most  abject  in  other
countries — that  of  selecting  their  own  wives."

173  The  Mexicans  being,  as  Prichard  says  (Physical  History,  vol.  v.  p.  467),  of  a  more
cruel  disposition  than  the  Peruvians  ;  but  our  information  is  too  limited  to  enable  us
to  determine  whether  this  was  mainly  owing  to  physical  causes  or  to  social  ones.     Herder
preferred  the  Peruvian  civilization  :  "  der  gebildetste  Staat  dieses  Welttheils,  Peru."
Ideen  zur  Geschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  i.  p.  33.

174  See  in  Humboldfs  Nouvelle  Espagne,  vol.  i.  p.  101,  a  striking  summary  of  the  state
of  the  Mexican  people  at  the  time  of  the  Spanish  conquest :  see  also  History  of  America,
book  vii.,  in  Robertson's  Works,  p.  907.

175  Prescotfs  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  34.     Compare  a  similar  remark
on  the  invasion  of  Egypt  in  Bunseris  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  414.

176  That  there  were  castes  in  Persia  is  stated  by  Firdousi ;  and  his  assertion,  putting
aside  its  general  probability,  ought  to  outweigh  the  silence  of  the  Greek  historians,  who,
for  the  most  part,  knew  little  of  any  country  except  their  own.     According  to  Malcolm,
the  existence  of  caste  in  the  time  of  Jemsheed,  is  confirmed  by  "  some  Mahometan
authors  "  ;  but  he  does  not  say  who  they  were.     Malcolm's  History  of  Persia,  vol.  i.
PP-  505,  506.     Several  attempts  have  been  made,  but  very  unsuccessfully,  to  ascertain
the  period  in  which  castes  were  first  instituted.      Compare  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.    vi.
p.  251  :  Heererfs  African  Nations,  vol.  ii.  p.  121  ;  Bunscrts  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  410  ;  Ram-
mohun  Roy  on  the  Veds,  p.  269.

177  Prescotfs  History  of  Peru,  vol.  i.  pp.  143,  156.

5


66  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

sonant" it  was  to  that  stage  of  society,  is  that  in  Mexico,  where  castes  were  not
established  by  law,  it  was  nevertheless  a  recognized  custom  that  the  son  should
follow  the  occupation  of  his  father.178  This  was  the  political  symptom  of  that
stationary  and  conservative  spirit,  which,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  has  marked
every  country  in  which  the  upper  classes  have  monopolized  power.  The  religious
symptom  of  the  same  spirit  was  displayed  in  that  inordinate  reverence  for  an-
tiquity, and  in  that  hatred  of  change,  which  the  greatest  of  all  the  writers  on
America  has  well  pointed  out  as  an  analogy  between  the  natives  of  Mexico  and
those  of  Hindostan.179  To  this  may  be  added,  that  those  who  have  studied  the
history  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  have  observed  among  that  people  a  similar
tendency.  Wilkinson,  who  is  well  known  to  have  paid  great  attention  to  their
monuments,  says  that  they  were  more  unwilling  than  any  other  nation  to  alter
their  religious  worship  ;  iso  anci  Herodotus,  who  travelled  in  their  country  two
thousand  three  hundred  years  ago,  assures  us  that,  while  they  preserved  old  cus-
toms, they  never  acquired  new  ones.181  In  another  point  of  view,  the  similarity
between  these  distant  countries  is  equally  interesting,  since  it  evidently  arises  from
the  causes  already  noticed  as  common  to  both.  In  Mexico  and  Peru,  the  lower
classes  being  at  the  disposal  of  the  upper,  there  followed  that  frivolous  waste
of  labour  which  we  have  observed  in  Egypt,  and  evidence  of  which  may  also
be  seen  in  the  remains  of  those  temples  and  palaces  that  are  still  found  in  several
parts  of  Asia.  Both  Mexicans  and  Peruvians  erected  immense  buildings,  which
were  as  useless  as  those  of  Egypt,  and  which  no  country  could  produce,  unless
the  labour  of  the  people  were  ill-paid  and  ill-directed.182  The  cost  of  these
monuments  of  vanity  is  unknown  ;  but  it  must  have  been  enormous  ;  since

178  Prescott's  History  of  Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  124.

17»  "  Les  Americains,  comme  les  habitans  de  1'Indoustan,  et  comme  tous  les  peuples
qui  ont  gemi  longtemps  sous  le  despotisme  civil  et  religieux,  tiennent  avec  une  opinia-
trete  extraordinaire  a  leurs  habitudes,  a  leurs  mceurs,  a  leurs  opinions.  .  .  .  Au  Mexique,
comme  dans  1'Indoustan,  il  n'etoit  pas  permis  aux  fi  deles  de  changer  la  moindre  chose
aux  figures  des  idoles.  Tout  ce  qui  appartenoit  au  rite  des  Azteques  et  des  Hindous
etoit  assujeti  a  des  lois  immuables."  Humboldt,  Nouv.  Espagne,  vol.  i.  pp.  95,  97.  Turgot
((Euvres,  vol.  ii.  pp.  226,  313,  314)  has  some  admirable  remarks  on  this  fixity  of  opinion
natural  to  certain  states  of  society.  See  also  Herder's  Ideen  zur  Geschichte,  vol.  iii.
PP-  34»  35  ?  and  for  other  illustrations  of  this  unpliancy  of  thought,  and  adherence  to
old  customs,  which  many  writers  suppose  to  be  an  eastern  peculiarity,  but  which  is  far
more  widely  spread,  and  is,  as  Humboldt  clearly  saw,  the  result  of  an  unequal  distribution
of  power,  compare  Turner's  Embassy  to  Tibet,  p.  41  ;  Forbes 's  Oriental  Memoirs,  vol.  i.
pp.  15,  164,  vol.  ii.  p.  236  ;  Mill's  History  of  India,  vol.  ii.  p.  214  ;  Elphinstone' s  History
of  India,  p.  48 ;  Otter's  Life  of  Clarke,  vol.  ii.  p.  109  ;  Transac.  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  ii.
p.  64  ;  Journal  of  Asiat.  Society,  vol.  viii.  p.  116.

iso  «  HOW  scrupulous  the  Egyptians  were,  above  all  people,  in  permitting  the  intro-
duction of  new  customs  in  matters  relating  to  the  gods."  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,
vol.  iii.  p.  262.  Compare  p.  275'  Thus,  too,  M.  Bunsen  notices  "  the  tenacity  with
which  the  Egyptians  adhered  to  old  manners  and  customs."  Bunsen's  Egypt,  vol.  ii.
p.  64.  See  also  some  remarks  on  the  difference  between  this  spirit  and  the  love  of  novelty
among  the  Greeks,  in  Ritter's  History  of  Ancient  Philosophy,  vol.  iv.  pp.  625,  626.

181  Herod,  book  ii.  chap.  79  :  7raT/>ioi<n  5£  xpt^fJ-evoi  vofj,oi<n.  a\\ov  ovSeva  eTriKT^uvTai :
and   see   the   note  in   Baehr,  vol.  i.  p.  660  :  "  POPOVS   priores   interpretes   explicarunt
cantilenas,   hymnos  ;  Sch \\eighaeuserus   rectius   intellexit   instituta  ac  mores."     In    the
same  way,  in  Timaeus,  Plato  represents  an  Egyptian  priest  saying  to  Solon,    "EXX^j/es
del  walSts  eVre,  ytpwv  5e  "EXX?;!/  OVK  t<rriv.     And  when  Solon  asked  what  he  meant,  N<foi
etrr^,  was  the  reply,  ras  i/'i'xas  iravrer  ovde/Jiiav  yap  iv  avrais  ?X€T€  &'    dpxa'a"    aK°V
iraXaiav  86%av  otfde  /id^^a  xpoVy  iroXibv  ottev.     Chap.  v.  in  Platonis   Opera,  vol.    vii.
p.  242,  edit.  Bekker,  Lond.  1826.

182  Xhe   Mexicans    appear   to   have   been  even   more   wantonly  prodigal   than   the
Peruvians.     See,  respecting  their  immense  pyramids,  one  of  which,  Cholula,  had  a  base
"  twice  as  broad  as  the  largest  Egyptian  pyramid,"  M'Culloh's  Researches,  pp.  252,  256  ;
Bullock's    Mexico,  pp.   111-115,  414;    Humboldt' s  Nouvelle  Espagne,  vol.  i.  pp.  240,
241.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  67

the  Americans,  being  ignorant  of  the  use  of  iron,183  were  unable  to  employ  a
resource  by  which,  in  the  construction  of  large  works,  labour  is  greatly  abridged.
Some  particulars,  however,  have  been  preserved,  from  which  an  idea  may  be
formed  on  this  subject.  To  take,  for  instance,  the  palaces  of  their  kings  :  we
find  that  in  Peru,  the  erection  of  the  royal  residence  occupied,  during  fifty  years,
20,000  men  ;  184  while  that  of  Mexico  cost  the  labour  of  no  less  than  200,000  :
striking  facts,  which,  if  all  other  testimonies  had  perished,  would  enable  us  to
appreciate  the  condition  of  countries  in  which,  for  such  insignificant  purposes,
such  vast  power  was  expended.185

The  preceding  evidence,  collected  from  sources  of  unquestioned  credibility,
proves  the  force  of  those  great  physical  laws,  which,  in  the  most  nourishing
countries  out  of  Europe,  encouraged  the  accumulation  of  wealth,  but  prevented
its  dispersion  ;  and  thus  secured  to  the  upper  classes  a  monopoly  of  one  of  the
most  important  elements  of  social  and  political  power.  The  result  was,  that
in  all  those  civilizations  the  great  body  of  the  people  derived  no  benefit  from
the  national  improvements  ;  hence,  the  basis  of  the  progress  being  very  narrow,
the  progress  itself  was  very  insecure.186  When,  therefore,  unfavourable  cir-
cumstances arose  from  without,  it  was  but  natural  that  the  whole  system  should
fall  to  the  ground.  In  such  countries,  society,  being  divided  against  itself,
was  unable  to  stand.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  long  before  the  crises
of  their  actual  destruction,  these  one-sided  and  irregular  civilizations  had  begun
to  decay  ;  so  that  their  own  degeneracy  aided  the  progress  of  foreign  invaders,
and  secured  the  overthrow  of  those  ancient  kingdoms,  which,  under  a  sounder
system,  might  have  been  easily  saved.

Thus  far  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  great  civilizations  exterior  to  Europe
have  been  affected  by  the  peculiarities  of  their  food,  climate,  and  soil.  It  now
remains  for  me  to  examine  the  effect  of  those  other  physical  agents  to  which  I
have  given  the  collective  name  of  Aspects  of  Nature,  and  which  will  be  found
suggestive  of  some  very  wide  and  comprehensive  inquiries  into  the  influence
exercised  by  the  external  world  in  predisposing  men  to  certain  habits  of  thought,
and  thus  giving  a  particular  tone  to  religion,  arts,  literature,  and,  in  a  word,
to  all  the  principal  manifestations  of  the  human  mind.  To  ascertain  how  this
is  brought  about,  forms  a  necessary  supplement  to  the  investigations  just  con-
cluded. For,  as  we  have  seen  that  climate,  food,  and  soil  mainly  concern  the
accumulation  and  distribution  of  wealth,  so  also  shall  we  see  that  the  Aspects
of  Nature  concern  the  accumulation  and  distribution  of  thought.  In  the  first
case,  we  have  to  do  with  the  material  interests  of  Man  ;  in  the  other  case,  with
his  intellectual  interests.  The  former  I  have  analyzed  as  far  as  I  am  able,  and

183  Prescott's  History  of  Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  117,  vol.  iii.  p.  341  ;  and  Prescotfs  History
of  Peru,  vol.  i.  p.  145.  See  also  Hauy,  Traite  de  Mineralogie,  Paris,  1801,  vol.  iv.  p.  372.

18*  Prescotfs  History  of  Peru,  vol.  i.  p.  18.

183  Mr.  Prescott  (History  of  Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  153)  says,  "  We  are  not  informed  of  the
time  occupied  in  building  this  palace  ;  but  200,000  workmen,  it  is  said,  were  employed
oil  it.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  Tezcucan  monarchs,  like  those  of
Asia  and  ancient  Egypt,  had  the  control  of  immense  masses  of  men,  and  would  some-
times turn  the  whole  population  of  a  conquered  city,  including  the  women,  into  the
public  works.  The  most  gigantic  monuments  of  architecture  which  the  world  has  wit-
nessed would  never  have  been  reared  by  the  hands  of  freemen."  The  Mexican  his-
torian, Ixtlilxochitl,  gives  a  curious  account  of  one  of  the  royal  palaces.  See  his  His-
toire  des  Chichimeques,  translated  by  Ternaux-Compans,  Paris,  1840,  vol.  i.  pp.  257-262,
chap,  xxxvii.

186  This  may  be  illustrated  by  a  good  remark  of  M.  Matter,  to  the  effect  that  when  the
Egyptians  had  once  lost  their  race  of  kings,  it  was  found  impossible  for  the  nation  to
reconstruct  itself.  Matter,  Histoire  de  I  Ecole  d?  Alexandrie,  vol.  i.  p.  68  ;  a  striking
passage.  In  Persia,  again,  when  the  feeling  of  loyalty  decayed,  so  also  did  the  feeling
of  national  power.  Malcolm's  History  of  Persia,  vol.  ii.  p.  130.  The  history  of  the
most  civilized  parts  of  Europe  presents  a  picture  exactly  the  reverse  of  this.


68  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

perhaps  as  far  as  the  existing  state  of  knowledge  will  allow. 18?  But  the  other,
namely,  the  relation  between  the  Aspects  of  Nature  and  the  mind  of  Man,  in-
volves speculations  of  such  magnitude,  and  requires  such  a  mass  of  materials
drawn  from  every  quarter,  that  I  feel  very  apprehensive  as  to  the  result  ;
and  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  make  no  pretensions  to  anything  approaching
an  exhaustive  analysis,  nor  can  I  hope  to  do  more  than  generalize  a  few  of  the
laws  of  that  complicated,  but  as  yet  unexplored,  process  by  which  the  external
world  has  affected  the  human  mind,  has  warped  its  natural  movements,  and
too  often  checked  its  natural  progress.

The  Aspects  of  Nature,  when  considered  from  this  point  of  view,  are  divisible
into  two  classes  :  the  first  class  being  those  which  are  most  likely  to  excite  the
imagination  ;  and  the  other  class  being  those  which  address  themselves  to  the
understanding  commonly  so  called,  that  is,  to  the  mere  logical  operations  of
the  intellect.  For  although  it  is  true  that,  in  a  complete  and  well-balanced
mind,  the  imagination  and  the  understanding  each  play  their  respective  parts,
and  are  auxiliary  to  each  other,  it  is  also  true  that,  in  a  majority  of  instances,
the  understanding  is  too  weak  to  curb  the  imagination  and  restrain  its  dan-
gerous licence.  The  tendency  of  advancing  civilization  is  to  remedy  this  dis-
proportion, and  invest  the  reasoning  powers  with  that  authority  which,  in  an
early  stage  of  society,  the  imagination  exclusively  possesses.  Whether  or  not
there  is  ground  for  fearing  that  the  reaction  will  eventually  proceed  too  far,
and  that  the  reasoning  faculties  will  in  their  turn  tyrannize  over  the  imaginative
ones,  is  a  question  of  the  deepest  interest  ;  but,  in  the  present  condition  of  our
knowledge,  it  is  probably  an  insoluble  one.  At  all  events,  it  is  certain  that
nothing  like  such  a  state"  has  yet  been  seen  ;  since,  even  in  this  age,  when  the
imagination  is  more  under  control  than  in  any  preceding  one,  it  has  far  too  much
power  ;  as  might  be  easily  proved,  not  only  from  the  superstitions  which  in
every  country  still  prevail  among  the  vulgar,  but  also  from  that  poetic  reverence
for  antiquity,  which,  though  it  has  been  long  diminishing,  still  hampers  the
independence,  blinds  the  judgment,  and  circumscribes  the  originality  of  the
educated  classes.

Now,  so  far  as  natural  phenomena  are  concerned,  it  is  evident  that  whatever
inspires  feelings  of  terror,  or  of  great  wonder,  and  whatever  excites  in  the  mind
an  idea  of  the  vague  and  uncontrollable,  has  a  special  tendency  to  inflame  the
imagination,  and  bring  under  its  dominion  the  slower  and  more  deliberate
operations  of  the  understanding.  In  such  cases,  Man,  contrasting  himself  with
the  force  and  majesty  of  Nature,  becomes  painfully  conscious  of  his  own  in-
significance. A  sense  of  inferiority  steals  over  him.  From  every  quarter
innumerable  obstacles  hem  him  in,  and  limit  his  individual  will.  His  mind,
appalled  by  the  indefined  and  indefinable,  hardly  cares  to  scrutinize  the  details
of  which  such  imposing  grandeur  consists.188  On  the  other  hand,  where  the
works  of  Nature  are  small  and  feeble,  Man  regains  confidence  :  he  seems  more
able  to  rely  on  his  own  power  ;  he  can,  as  it  were,  pass  through,  and  exercise
authority  in  every  direction.  And  as  the  phenomena  are  more  accessible,  it
becomes  easier  for  him  to  experiment  on  them,  or  to  observe  them  with  minute-

187  I  mean,  in  regard  to  the  plwsical  and  economical  generalizations.  As  to  the
literature  of  the  subject,  I  am  conscious  of  many  deficiencies,  particularly  in  respect
to  the  Mexican  and  Peruvian  histories.

18  The  sensation  of  fear,  even  when  there  is  no  danger,  becomes  strong  enough  to
destroy  the  pleasure  that  would  otherwise  be  felt.  See,  for  instance,  a  description  of
the  great  mountain  boundary  of  Hindostan,  in  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xi.  p.  469  :  "  It
is  necessary  for  a  person  to  place  himself  in  our  situation  before  he  can  form  a  just  con-
ception of  the  scene.  The  depth  of  the  valley  below,  the  progressive  elevation  of  the
intermediate  hills,  and  the  majestic  splendour  of  the  cloud -capt  Himalaya,  formed  so
grand  a  picture,  that  the  mind  was  impressed  with  a  sensation  of  dread  rather  than  of
pleasure."  Comp.  vol.  xiv.  p.  116,  Calcutta,  1822.  In  the  Tyrol,  it  has  been  observed
that  the  grandeur  of  the  mountain -scenery  imbues  the  minds  of  the  natives  with  fear,
and  has  caused  the  invention  of  many  superstitious  legends.  Alison's  Europe,  vol.  ix.
pp.  79.  80.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  69

less  ;  an  inquisitive  and  analytic  spirit  is  encouraged,  and  he  is  tempted  to
meralize  the  appearances  of  Nature,  and  refer  them  to  the  laws  by  which  they
ire  governed.

Looking  in  this  way  at  the  human  mind  as  affected  by  the  Aspects  of  Nature,
it  is  surely  a  remarkable  fact,  that  all  the  great  early  civilizations  were  situated
dthin  and  immediately  adjoining  the  tropics,  where  those  aspects  are  most
iblime,  most  terrible,  and  where  Nature  is,  in  every  respect,  most  dangerous
Man.  Indeed  generally,  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  the  external  world
more  formidable  than  in  Europe.  This  holds  good  not  only  of  the  fixed  and
>ermanent  phenomena,  such  as  mountains,  and  other  great  natural  barriers,
it  also  of  occasional  phenomena,  such  as  earthquakes,  tempests,  hurricanes,
istilences  ;  all  of  which  are  in  those  regions  very  frequent,  and  very  disastrous.
These  constant  and  serious  dangers  produce  e fleets  analogous  to  those  caused
)y  the  sublimity  of  Nature,  in  so  far,  that  in  both  cases  there  is  a  tendency  to
icrease  the  activity  of  the  imagination.  For  the  peculiar  province  of  the
lagination  being  to  deal  with  the  unknown,  every  event  which  is  unexplained
well  as  important  is  a  direct  stimulus  to  our  imaginative  faculties.  In  the
)pics,  events  of  this  kind  are  more  numerous  than  elsewhere  ;  it  therefore
Hows  that  in  the  tropics  the  imagination  is  most  likely  to  triumph.  A  few
lustrations  of  the  working  of  this  principle  will  place  it  in  a  clearer  light,  and
ill  prepare  the  reader  for  the  arguments  based  upon  it.

Of  those  physical  events  which  increase  the  insecurity  of  Man,  earthquakes
re  certainly  among  the  most  striking,  in  regard  to  the  loss  of  life  which  they
mse,  as  also  in  regard  to  their  sudden  and  unexpected  occurrence.  There  is
reason  to  believe  that  they  are  always  preceded  by  atmospheric  changes  which
strike  immediately  at  the  nervous  system,  and  thus  have  a  direct  physical  ten-
dency to  impair  the  intellectual  powers.189  However  this  may  be,  there  can
be  no  doubt  as  to  the  effect  they  produce  in  encouraging  particular  associations
and  habits  of  thought.  The  terror  which  they  inspire  excites  the  imagination
even  to  a  painful  extent,  and,  overbalancing  the  judgment,  predisposes  men  to
superstitious  fancies.  And  what  is  highly  curious  is  that  repetition,  so  far  from
blunting  such  feelings,  strengthens  them.  In  Peru,  \\here  earthquakes  appear
to  be  more  common  than  in  any  other  country,190  every  succeeding  visitation
increases  the  general  dismay  ;  so  that,  in  some  cases,  the  fear  becomes  almost
insupportable.191  The  mind  is  thus  constantly  thrown  into  a  timid  and  anxious

1S9  "  Une  augmentation  d'electricite  s'y  manifesto  aussi  presque  toujours,  et  ils  sont
generalement  annonces  par  le  mugissement  des  bestiaux,  par  l'inquietude  des  animaux
domestiques,  et  dans  les  hommes  par  cette  sorte  de  malaise  qui,  en  Europe,  precede
les  orages  dans  les  personnes  nerveuses."  Cuvier,  Prog,  des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  p.  265.  See
also  on  this  "  Vorgefiihl,"  the  observation  of  Von  Hoff,  in  Mr.  Mallet's  valuable  essay  on
earthquakes  (Brit.  Assoc.  for  1850,  p.  68)  ;  and  the  "  foreboding  "  in  Tschudi' s  Pern,
p.  165  ;  and  a  letter  in  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  iv.  p.  504.
The  probable  connexion  between  earthquakes  and  electricity  is  noticed  in  BakewelVs
Geology,  p.  434.

190  "  Peru  is  more  subject,  perhaps,  than  any  other  country  to  the  tremendous  visitation
of  earthquakes."     M'CuUoch's  Geog.  Diet.  1849,  vol.  ii.  p.  499.     Dr.  Tschudi  (Travels
in  Peru,  p.  162)  says  of  Lima,  "At  an  average  forty -five  shocks  maybe  counted  on  in
the  year."     See  also  on  the  Peruvian  earthquakes,  pp.  43,  75,  87,  90.

191  A  curious  instance  of  association  of  ideas  conquering  the  deadening  effect  of  habit.
Dr.  Tschudi  (Peru,  p.  170),  describing  the  panic,  says,  "  No  familiarity  with  the  phe-
nomenon can  blunt  this  feeling."     Beale  (South-Sea  Whaling  Voyage,  Lond.  1839,  p.  205)
writes,  "  It  is  said  at  Peru,  that  the  oftener  the  natives  of  the  place  feel  those  vibrations
of  the  earth,  instead  of  becoming  habituated  to  them,  as  persons  do  who  are  constantly
exposed  to  other  dangers,  they  become  more  filled  with  dismay  every  time  the  shock  is
repeated,  so  that  aged  people  often  find  the  terror  a  slight  shock  will  produce  almost
insupportable."     Compare  Darwin's  Journal,  pp.  422,  423.     So,  too,  in  regard  to  Mexican
earthquakes,  Mr.  Ward  observes  that  "  the  natives  are  both  more  sensible  than  strangers
of  the  smaller  shocks,  and  more  alarmed  by  them."  '  Ward's  Mexico,  vol.  ii.  p.  55.     On
the  physiological  effects  of  the  fear  caused  by  earthquakes,  see  the  remarkable  state-


70  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

state  ;  and  men  witnessing  the  most  serious  dangers,  which  they  can  neither
avoid  nor  understand,  become  impressed  with  a  conviction  of  their  own  inability
and  of  the  poverty  of  their  own  resources.192  In  exactly  the  same  proportion,
the  imagination  is  aroused,  and  a  belief  in  supernatural  interference  actively
encouraged.  Human  power  failing,  superhuman  power  is  called  in  ;  the  mys-
terious and  the  invisible  are  believed  to  be  present  ;  and  there  grow  up  among
the  people  those  feelings  of  awe,  and  of  helplessness,  on  which  all  superstition
is  based,  and  without  which  no  superstition  can  exist.193

Further  illustration  of  this  may  be  found  even  in  Europe,  where  such  phe-
nomena are,  comparatively  speaking,  extremely  rare.  Earthquakes  and  volcanic
eruptions  are  more  frequent  and  more  destructive  in  Italy,  and  in  the  Spanish
and  Portuguese  peninsula,  than  in  any  other  of  the  great  countries  ;  and  it  is
precisely  there  that  superstition  is  most  rife,  and  the  superstitious  classes  most
powerful.  Those  were  the  countries  where  the  clergy  first  established  their
authority,  where  the  worst  corruptions  of  Christianity  took  place,  and  where
superstition  has  during  the  longest  period  retained  the  firmest  hold.  To  this
may  be  added  another  circumstance,  indicative  of  the  connexion  between  these
physical  phenomena  and  the  predominance  of  the  imagination.  Speaking
generally,  the  fine  arts  are  addressed  more  to  the  imagination  ;  the  sciences
to  the  intellect.194  Now  it  is  remarkable  that  all  the  greatest  painters,  and
nearly  all  the  greatest  sculptors,  modern  Europe  has  possessed,  have  been  pro-
duced by  the  Italian  and  Spanish  peninsulas.  In  regard  to  science,  Italy  has
no  doubt  had  several  men  of  conspicuous  ability  ;  but  their  numbers  are  out
of  all  proportion  small  compared  with  her  artists  and  poets.  As  to  Spain  and
Portugal,  the  literature  of  those  two  countries  is  eminently  poetic,  and  from
their  schools  have  proceeded  some  of  the  greatest  painters  the  world  has  ever
seen.*  On  the  other  hand,  the  purely  reasoning  faculties  have  been  neglected,

ment  by  Osiander  in  Burdach's  Physiologic  comme  Science  d' Observation,  vol.  ii.  pp.  223,  224.
That  the  fear  should  be  not  deadened  by  familiarity,  but  increased  by  it,  would  hardly
be  expected  by  speculative  reasoners  unacquainted  with  the  evidence  ;  and  we  find,  in
fact,  that  the  Pyrrhonists  asserted  that  oi  yovv  ffeia/mol  Trap1  ots  cri/i/e^tus  aTroreXoOj/rai,
ov  davfj-afrovrai'  ovd'  6  TJ\IOS,  8n  /ca#'  yfj-epav  oparat.  Diog.  Laert.  de  Vitis  Philos.  lib.  ix.
segm.  87,  vol.  i.  p.  591.

192  Mr.  Stephens,  who  gives  a  striking  description  of  an  earthquake  in  Central  America,
emphatically  says,  "  I  never  felt  myself  so  feeble  a  thing  before."     Stephens'*  Central
America,  vol.  i.  p.  383.     See  also  the  account  of  the  effects  produced  on  the  mind  by
an  earthquake,  in  Transac.  of  Soc.  of  Bombay,  vol.  iii.  p.  98,  and  the  note  at  p.  105.

193  The  effect  of  earthquakes  in  encouraging  superstition  is  noticed  in  Lyell's  admir-
able work,  Principles  of  Geology,  p.  492.     Compare  a  myth  on  the  origin  of  earthquakes
in  Beausobre,  Histoire  Critique  de  Manichee,  vol.  i.  p.  243.

194  The  greatest  men  in  science,  and  in  fact  all  very  great  men,  have  no  doubt  been
remarkable  for  the  powers  of  their  imagination.     But  in  art  the  imagination  plays  a
far  more  conspicuous  part  than  in  science  ;  and  this  is  what  I  mean  to  express  by  the

[*  While  the  facts  as  to  earthquakes  in  Italy  and  Spain  are  here  quite  accurately
stated,  the  inference  from  that  datum  is  drawn  too  far.  Portugal  has  not,  as  alleged,
produced  some  of  the  greatest  painters  of  the  world,  and  the  art  developments  in  Italy
and  Spain  are  not  mere  sequela?  of  the  imaginativeness  produced  by  earthquakes.  As
had  been  stated  in  the  previous  paragraph  :  "  In  Peru  earthquakes  appear  to  be  more
common  than  in  any  other  country";  but  there  has  not  there  arisen  an  imaginative
literature  or  a  great  art.  Buckle  overlooked  the  principle  of  economic  evocation,  which
alone  finally  accounts  for  the  development  of  sculpture  in  ancient  Greece,  and  of  art
in  Renaissance  Italy.  The  main  factor  was  the  economic  demand  of  the  church  for
pictures  ;  and  in  Spain  this  was  followed  up,  as  regards  the  greatest  artist  of  all,  by  royal
support  to  Velasquez.  The  fact  that  a  great  art  school  rose  in  the  Low  Countries,  in
a  commonplace  environment  and  alongside  of  an  unimaginative  literature,  proves  that  it  is
the  economic  and  not  the  "physical"  factor  that  determines  an  artistic  evolution.
Modern  French  art,  finally,  has  greatly  distanced  Italian,  science  and  art  in  this  case
flourishing  together. — ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  7*

tnd  the  whole  Peninsula,  from  the  earliest  period  to  the  present  time,  does  not
ipply  to  the  history  of  the  natural  sciences  a  single  name  of  the  highest  merit ;
)t  one  man  whose  works  form  an  epoch  in  the  progress  of  European  know-
dge.195

The  manner  in  which  the  Aspects  of  Nature,  when  they  are  very  threatening,
timulate  the  imagination,190  and  by  encouraging  superstition,  discourage  know-
Ige,  may  be  made  still  more  apparent  by  one  or  two  additional  facts.    Among
ignorant  people,  there  is  a  direct  tendency  to  ascribe  all  serious  dangers  to
ipernatural  intervention  ;  and  a  strong  religious  sentiment  being  thus  aroused,197
it  constantly  happens,  not  only  that  the  danger  is  submitted  to,  but  that  it  is
:tually  worshipped.     This  is  the  case  with  some  of  the  Hindus  in  the  forests
Malabar  ;  198  and  many  similar  instances  will  occur  to  whoever  has  studied
the  condition  of  barbarous  tribes.199     Indeed,  so  far  is  this  carried,  that  in  some
nmtries  the  inhabitants,  from  feelings  of  reverential  fear,  refuse  to  destroy
rild  beasts  and  noxious  reptiles  ;    the  mischief  these  animals  inflict  being  the
tuse  of  the  impunity  they  enjoy.200

>roposition  in  the  text.  Sir  David  Brewster,  indeed,  thinks  that  Newton  was  deficient
imagination  :  "  the  weakness  of  his  imaginative  powers."  Brewster's  Life  of  Newton,

1855,  vol.  ii.  p.  133.  It  is  impossible  to  discuss  so  large  a  question  in  a  note  ;  but
my  apprehension,  no  poet,  except  Dante  and  Shakespeare,  ever  had  an  imagination

lore  soaring  and  more  audacious  than  that  possessed  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton.

195  The  remarks  made  by  Mr.  Ticknor  on  the  absence  of  science  in  Spain,  might  be
extended  even  further  than  he  has  done.     See  Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,
vol.  iii.  pp.  222,  223.    He  says,  p.  237,  that  in  1771,  the  University  of  Salamanca  being
urged  to  teach  the  physical  sciences,  replied,  "  Newton  teaches  nothing  that  would  make
a  good  logician  or  metaphysician,  and  Gassendi  and  Descartes  do  not  agree  so  well  with
revealed  truth  as  Aristotle  does."

196  In  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  vi.  pp.  35,  36,  there  is  a  good  instance  of  an  earthquake
giving  rise  to  a  theological  fiction.     See  also  vol.  i.  pp.  154-157  ;  and  compare  Coleman's
Mythology  of  the  Hindus,  p.  17,

197  See,  for  example,  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  iv.  pp    56,  57,  vol.  vii.  p.  94  :  and  the
effect  produced  by  a  volcano,  in  Journal  of  Geograph.  Society,  vol.  v.  p.  388.     See  also
vol.  xx.  p.  8,  and  a  partial  recognition  of  the  principle  by  Sextus  Empiricus,  in  Tenne
mann's  Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  vol.  i.  p.  292.     Compare  the  use  the  clergy  made  of
a  volcanic  eruption  in  Iceland  (Wheaton's  History  of  the  Northmen,  p.  42)  ;  and  see  further
Raffles'  History  of  Java,  vol.  i.  pp.  29,  274,  and  Tschudi's  Peru,  pp.  64,  167,  171.

198  The  Hindus  in  the  Iruari  forests,  says  Mr.  Edye,  "  worship  and  respect  everything
from  which  they  apprehend  danger."     Edye  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  in  Journal  of  Asiatic
Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  337.

199  Dr.  Prichard  (Physical  History,  vol.  iv.  p.  501)  says,  "The  tiger  is  worshipped
by  the  Hajin  tribe  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Garrows  or  Garudus."     Compare  Transactions
of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  iii.  p.  66.     Among  the  Garrows  themselves,  this  feeling  is  so  strong
that  "  the  tiger's  nose  strung  round  a  woman's  neck  is  considered  as  a  great  preservative
in  childbirth."     Coleman's  Mythology  of  the  Hindus,  p.  321.     The  Seiks  have  a  curious
superstition  respecting  wounds  inflicted  by  tigers  (Burnes'  Bokhara,  1834,  vol.  iii.  p.  14°)  '•
and  the  Malasir  believe, that  these  animals  are  sent  as  a  punishment  for  irreligion.
Buchanan's  Journey  through  the  Mysore,  vol.  ii.  p.  385.

200  The  inhabitants  of  Sumatra  are,  for  superstitious  reasons,  most  unwilling  to  destroy
tigers,  though  they  commit  frightful  ravages.     Marsden's  History  of  Sumatra,  pp.  i49»
254.     The  Russian  account  of  the  Kamtschatkans  says,  "  Besides  the  above-mentioned
gods,  they  pay  a  religious  regard  to  several  animals  from  which  they  apprehend  danger."
Grieve' s  History  of  Kamtschatka,  p.  205.     Bruce  mentions  that  in  Abyssinia,  hyaenas
are  considered  "  enchanters  "  ;  and  the  inhabitants  "  will  not  touch  the  skin  of  a  hyaena
till  it  has  been  prayed  over  and  exorcised  by  a  priest."     Murray's  Life  of  Bruce,  p.  472.
Allied  to  this,  is  the  respect  paid  to  bears  (Erman's  Siberia,  vol.  i.  p.  492,  vol.  ii.  pp.
42,  43) ;  also  the  extensively -diffused  worship  of  the  serpent,  whose  wily  movements
are  well  calculated  to  inspire  fear,  and  therefore  rouse  the  religious  feelings.     The  danger
apprehended  from  noxious  reptiles  is  connected  with  the  Dews  of  the  Zendavesta.    See
Matter's  Histoire  du  Gnosticisme,  vol.  i.  p.  380,  Paris,  1828.


72  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  is  in  this  way  that  the  old  tropical  civilizations  had  to  struggle  with  in-
numerable difficulties  unknown  to  the  temperate  zone,  where  European  civiliza-
tion has  long  flourished.  The  devastations  of  animals  hostile  to  man,  the
ravages  of  hurricanes,  tempests,  earthquakes,201  and  similar  perils,  constantly
pressed  upon  them,  and  affected  the  tone  of  their  national  character.  For  the
mere  loss  of  life  was  the  smallest  part  of  the  inconvenience.  The  real  mischief
was,  that  there  were  engendered  in  the  mind  associations  which  made  the  imagi-
nation predominate  over  the  understanding  ;  which  infused  into  the  people  a
spirit  of  reverence  instead  of  a  spirit  of  inquiry  ;  and  which  encouraged  a  dis-
position to  neglect  the  investigation  of  natural  causes,  and  ascribe  events  to
the  operation  of  supernatural  ones.

Everything  we  know  of  those  countries  proves  how  active  this  tendency  must
have  been.  With  extremely  few  exceptions,  health  is  more  precarious,  and
disease  more  common,  in  tropical  climates  than  in  temperate  ones.  Now,  it
has  been  often  observed,  and  indeed  is  very  obvious,  that  the  fear  of  death  makes
men  more  prone  to  seek  supernatural  aid  than  they  would  otherwise  be.  So
complete  is  our  ignorance  respecting  another  life,  that  it  is  no  wonder  if  even
the  stoutest  heart  should  quail  at  the  sudden  approach  of  that  dark  and  untried
future.  On  this  subject  the  reason  is  perfectly  silent  ;  the  imagination,  there-
fore, is  uncontrolled.  The  operation  of  natural  causes  being  brought  to  an  end,
supernatural  causes  are  supposed  to  begin.  Hence  it  is,  that  whatever  increases
in  any  country  the  amount  of  dangerous  disease,  has  an  immediate  tendency
to  strengthen  superstition,  and  aggrandize  the  imagination  at  the  expense  of
the  understanding.  This  principle  is  so  universal,  that,  in  every  part  of  the
world,  the  vulgar  ascribe  to  the  intervention  of  the  Deity  those  diseases  which
are  peculiarly  fatal,  and  especially  those  which  have  a  sudden  and  mysterious
appearance.  In  Europe  it  used  to  be  believed  that  every  pestilence  was  a  mani-
festation of  the  divine  anger  ;  202  and  this  opinion,  though  it  has  long  been
dying  away,  is  by  no  means  extinct  even  in  the  most  civilized  countries.203

201  To  give  one  instance  of  the  extent  to  which  these  operate,  it  may  be  mentioned
that  in  1815  an  earthquake  and  volcanic  eruption  broke  forth  in  Sumbawa,  which  shook
the  ground  "  through  an  area  of  1,000  miles  in  circumference,"  and  the  detonations  of
which  were  heard  at  a  distance  of  9/0  geographical  miles.     Somerville' s  Connexion  of
the  Physical  Sciences,  p.  283  ;  Hitchcock's  Religion  of  Geology,  p.  190  ;  Low's  Sarawak,
p.  10  ;  BakewelVs  Geology,  p.  438.

202  In  the  sixteenth  century,  "  Les  differentes  sectes  s'accorderent  neanmoins  a  re-
garder  les  maladies  graves  et  dangereuses  comme  un  effet  immediat  de  la  puissance
divine  ;  idee   que   Fernel   contribua   encore   a  repandre   davantage.     On   trouve   dans
Pare  plusieurs  passages  de  la  Bible,  cites  pour  prouver  que  la  colere  de  Dieu  est  la  seule
cause  de  la  peste,  qu'elle  suffit  pour  provoquer  ce  fleau,  et  que  sans  elle  les  causes
eloignees  ne  sauraient  agir."     Sprengel,  Histoire  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  iii.  p.  112.     The
same  learned  writer  says  of  the  Middle  Ages  (vol.  ii.  p.  372),  "  D'apres  1'esprit  generale-
ment  repandu  dans  ces  siecles  de  barbarie,  on  croyait  la  lepre  envoyee  d'une  maniere
immediate  par  Dieu."     See  also  pp.  145,  346,  431.     Bishop  Heber  says  that  the  Hindus
deprive  lepers  of  caste  and  of  the  right  of  possessing  property,  because  they  are  objects
of  "  Heaven's  wrath."     Heber' s  Journey  through  India,  vol.  ii.  p.  330.     On  the  Jewish
opinion,  see  Le  Clerc,  Bibliotheque  Universelle,  vol.  iv.  p.  402,  Amsterdam,  1702.     And
as  to  the  early  Christians,  see  Maury,  Legsndes  Pieuses,  p.  68,  Paris,  1843  :  though  M.
Maury  ascribes  to  "  les  idees  orien tales  recues  par  le  christianisme,"  what  is  due  to  the
operation  of  a  much  wider  principle.     [Medieval  Europe  treated  lepers  exactly  as  do
the  Hindus,  driving  them  out  of  the  community  and  depriving  them  of  their  property.
Cp.  Monteil,  Hist,  des  Francais  des  divers  etats,  36  edit,  torn.  i.  ep.  vi.  and  refs.  ;  Denton,
England  in  the  Fifteenth  Century,  1888,  pp.  206-8  ;  Cochran -Pa trick,  Mediceval  Scotland,
1892,  pp.  18,  68,  116. — ED.]

203  Under  the  influence  of  the  inductive  philosophy,  the  theological  theory  of  disease
was  seriously  weakened  before  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  ;  and  by  the
middle,  or  at  all  events  the  latter  half,  of  the  eighteenth  century,  it  had  lost  all  its  par
tizans  among  scientific  men.     At  present  it  still  lingers  on  among  the  vulgar  ;  and
traces  of  it  may  be  found  in  the  writings  of  the  clergy,  and  in  the  works  of  other  persons


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  73

Superstition  of  this  kind  will  of  course  be  strongest,  either  where  medical  know-
Ige  is  most  backward,  or  where  disease  is  most  abundant.  In  countries  where
>th  these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  the  superstition  is  supreme  ;  and  even  where

nly  one  of  the  conditions  exists,  the  tendency  is  so  irresistible,  that,  I  believe,

there  are  no  barbarous  people  who  do  not  ascribe  to  their  good  or  evil  deities,
)t  only  extraordinary  diseases,  but  even  many  of  the  ordinary  ones  to  which

they  are  liable.204

ittle  acquainted  with  physical  knowledge.     When  the  cholera  broke  out  in  England,
ittempts  were  made  to  revive  the  old  notion  ;  but  the  spirit  of  the  age  was  too  strong
such  efforts  to  succeed  :  and  it  may  be  safely,  predicted  that  men  will  never  return
their  former  opinions,  unless  they  first  return  to  their  former  ignorance.     As  a  speci-
icn  of  the  ideas  which  the  cholera  tended  to  excite,  and  of  their  antagonism  to  all
:ientific  investigation,  I  may  refer  to  a  letter  written  in  1832  by  Mrs.  Grant,  a  woman
some  accomplishments,  and  not  devoid  of  influence  (Correspondence  of  Mrs.  Grant,
idon,  1844,  vol.  iii.  pp.  216,  217),  where  she  states  that  "  it  appears  to  me  great  pre-
sumption to  indulge  so  much  as  people  do  in  speculation  and  conjecture  about  a  disease
evidently  a  peculiar  infliction,  and  different  from  all  other  modes  of  suffering  hitherto
mown."     This  desire  to  limit  human  speculation   is  precisely  the  feeling  which  long
stained  Europe  in  darkness  ;  since  it  effectually  prevented  those  free  inquiries  to  which
are  indebted  for  all  the  real  knowledge  we  possess.     The  doubts  of  Boyle  upon  this
ibject  supply  a  curious  instance  of  the  transitionary  state  through  which  the  mind
as  passing  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  by  which  the  way  was  prepared  for  the
reat  liberating  movement  of  the  next  age.     Boyle,  after  stating  both  sides  of  the  ques-
tion, namely  the  theological  and  the  scientific,  adds,  "  and  it  is  the  less  likely  that  these
sweeping  and  contagious  maladies  should  be  always  sent  for  the  punishment  of  impious
men,  because  I  remember  to  have  read  in  good  authors,  that  as  some  plagues  destroyed
both  men  and  beasts,  so  some  other  did  peculiarly  destroy  brute  animals  of  very  little
consideration  or  use  to  men,  as  cats,  etc."

"  Upon  these  and  the  like  reasons,  I  have  sometimes  suspected  that  in  the  controversy
about  the  origin  of  the  plague,  namely  whether  it  be  natural  or  supernatural,  neither
of  the  contending  parties  is  altogether  in  the  right ;  since  it  is  very  possible  that  some
pestilences  may  not  break  forth  without  an  extraordinary,  though  perhaps  not  imme-
diate, interposition  of  Almighty  God,  provoked  by  the  sins  of  men ;  and  yet  other  plagues
may  be  produced  by  a  tragical  concourse  of  merely  natural  causes."  Discourse  on  the
Air,  in  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  288,  289.  "  Neither  of  the  contending  parties  is  alto-
gether in  the  right !  " — an  instructive  passage  towards  understanding  the  compromising
spirit  of  the  seventeenth  century  ;  standing  midway,  as  it  did,  between  the  credulity
of  the  sixteenth,  and  the  scepticism  of  the  eighteenth.

204  To  the  historian  of  the  human  mind,  the  whole  question  is  so  full  of  interest,  that
I  shall  refer  in  this  note  to  all  the  evidence  I  have  been  able  to  collect :  and  whoever
will  compare  the  following  passages  may  satisfy  himself  that  there  is  in  every  part  of
the  world  an  intimate  relation  between  ignorance  respecting  the  nature  and  proper
treatment  of  a  disease,  and  the  belief  that  such  disease  is  caused  by  supernatural  power,
and  is  to  be  cured  by  it.  Burton's  Sindh,  p.  146,  London,  1851  ;  Ellis's  Polynesian
Researches,  vol.  i.  p.  395,  vol.  iii.  pp.  36,  41,  vol.  iv.  pp.  293,  334,  375  ;  Cullen's  Works,
Edinb.  1827,  vol.  ii.  pp.  414,  434  ;  Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,  vol.  i.  pp.  274,  482  ;
Cabanis,  Rapports  du  Physique  et  du  Moral,  p.  277  ;  Volney,  Voyage  en  Syrie,  vol.  i.
p.  426  ;  Turner's  Embassy  to  Tibet,  p.  104  ;  Syme's  Embassy  to  Ava,  vol.  ii.  p.  211  ;
Ellis's  Tour  through  Hawaii,  pp.  282,  283,  332,  333  ;  Renouard,  Histoire  de  la  Medecine,
vol.  i.  p.  398  ;  Broussais,  Examen  des  Doctrines  Medicales,  vol.  i.  pp.  261,  262  ;  Grote's
History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  485  (compare  p.  251,  and  vol.  vi.  p.  213)  ;  Grieve' s  History  of
Kamtschatka,  p.  217  ;  Journal  of  Statist.  Soc.  vol.  x.  p.  10  ;  Buchanan's  North-American
Indians,  pp.  256,  257  ;  Halkett's  North -American  Indians,  pp.  36,  37,  388,  393,  394  ;
Catlin's  North -American  Indians,  vol.  i.  pp.  35-41  ;  Briggs  on  the  Aboriginal  Tribes  of
India,  in  Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1850,  p.  172  ;  Transactions  of  Soc.  of  Bombay,  vol.  ii.
p.  30  ;  Percival's  Ceylon,  p.  201  ;  Buchanan's  Journey  through  the  Mysore,  vol.  ii.  pp.  27,
152,  286,  528,  vol.  iii.  pp.  23,  188,  253  (so,  too,  M.  Geoffrey  Saint  Hilaire,  Anomalies
de  V Organization,  vol.  iii.  p.  380,  says  that  when  we  were  quite  ignorant  of  the  cause  of
monstrous  births,  the  phenomenon  was  ascribed  to  the  Deity, — "  de  la  aussi  1'inter-


74  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Here,  then,  we  have  another  specimen  of  the  unfavourable  influence  which*
in  the  old  civilizations,  external  phenomena  exercised  over  the  human  mind.
For  those  parts  of  Asia  where  the  highest  refinement  was  reached,  are,  from
various  physical  causes,  much  more  unhealthy  than  the  most  civilized  parts
of  Europe.205  This  fact  alone  must  have  produced  a  considerable  effect  on  the
national  character,2^  and  the  more  so,  as  it  was  aided  by  those  other  circum-
stances which  1  have  pointed  out,  all  tending  in  the  same  direction.  To  this
may  be  added,  that  the  great  plagues  by  which  Europe  has  at  different  periods
been  scourged,  have  for  the  most  part  proceeded  from  the  East,  which  is  their
natural  birthplace,  and  where  they  are  most  fatal.  Indeed,  of  those  cruel  dis-
eases now  existing  in  Europe,  scarcely  one  is  indigenous  ;  and  the  worst  of  them
were  imported  from  tropical  countries  in  and  after  the  first  century  of  the  Chris-
tian era.207

Summing  up  these  facts,  it  may  be  stated,  that  in  the  civilizations  exterior
to  Europe,  all  nature  conspired  to  increase  the  authority  of  the  imaginative
faculties,  and  weaken  the  authority  of  the  reasoning  ones.  With  the  materials
now  existing,  it  would  be  possible  to  follow  this  vast  law  to  its  remotest  conse-
quences, and  show  how  in  Europe  it  is  opposed  by  another  law  diametrically
opposite,  and  by  virtue  of  which  the  tendency  of  natural  phenomena  is,  on  the
whole,  to  limit  the  imagination,  and  embolden  the  understanding  :  *  thus
inspiring  Man  with  confidence  in  his  own  resources,  and  facilitating  the  increase

vention  supposee  de  la  divinite  "  ;  and  for  an  exact  verification  of  this,  compare  Burdach,
Traite  de  Physiologic,  vol.  ii.  p.  247,  with  Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  xvi.  p.  113)  ;  Ellis1 s
History  of  Madagascar,  vol.  i.  pp.  224,  225  ;  Prichard's  Physical  History,  vol.  i.  p.  207,
vol.  v.  p.  492  ;  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  iii.  p.  230,  vol.  iv.  p.  158  ;  Asiatic  Re-
searches, vol.  iii.  p.  29,  156,  vol.  iv.  pp.  56,  58,  74,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  215,  280  ;  Neander's
History  of  the  Church,  vol.  iii.  p.  119  ;  Crawfurd's  History  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,
vol.  i.  p.  328  ;  Low's  Sarawak,  pp.  174,  261  ;  Cook's  Voyages,  vol.  i.  p.  229  ;  Mariner's
Tonga  Islands,  vol.  i.  pp.  194,  350-360,  374,  438,  vol.  ii.  pp.  172,  230  ;  Hue's  Travels  in
Tartary  and  Thibet,  vol.  i.  pp.  74-77  ;  Richardson's  Travels  in  the  Sahara,  vol.  i.  p.  27  ;
M'Culloh's  Researches,  p.  105  ;  Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  i.  p.  41,  vol.  iv.  p.  260,  vol.  xiv.
p.  37.  And  in  regard  to  Europe,  compare  Spence.  Origin  of  the  Laws  of  Europe,  p.  322  ;
Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  443  ;  Phillips  on  Scrofula,  p.  255  ;  Otter's  Life  of
Clarke,  vol.  i.  pp.  265,  266,  which  may  be  illustrated  by  the  "  sacred  "  disease  of  Cambyses,
no  doubt  epilepsy  :  see  Herodot.  lib.  iii.  chap,  xxxiv.  vol.  ii.  p.  63.

205  Heat,  moisture,   and  consequent  rapid  decomposition  of  vegetable  matter,   are
certainly  among  the  causes  of  this ;  and  to  them  may  perhaps  be  added  the  electrical
state  of  the  atmosphere  in  the  tropics.     Compare  Holland's  Medical  Notes,  p.  477  ;
M' William's  Medical  Expedition  to  the  Niger,  pp.  157,  185  ;  Simon's  Pathology,  p.  269  ;
Forry's  Climate  and  its  Endemic  Influences,  p.  158.     M.  Lepelletier  says,  rather  vaguely
(Physiologie  Medicale,  vol.  iv.  p.  527),  that  the  temperate  zones  are  "  favorables  a  1'exer-
cice  complet  et  regulier  des  phenomenes  vitaux."

206  And  must  have  strengthened  the  power  of  the  clergy  ;  for,  as  Charlevoix  says
with  great  frankness,  "  pestilences  are  the  harvests  of  the  ministers  of  God."     Southey's
History  of  Brazil,  vol.  ii.  p.  254.

207  For  evidence  of  the  extra-European  origin  of  European  diseases,  some  of  which,
such  as  the  small -pox,  have  passed  from  epidemics  into  endemics,  compare  Encyclop.  of
the  Medical  Sciences,  4to,  1847,  p.  728;  Transactions  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  ii.  pp.  54,  55  ;
Michaelis  on  the  Laws  of  Moses,  vol.  iii.  p.  313  ;  Sprengel,  Histoire  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  ii.
PP-  33.  *95  J  Wallace's  Dissertation  on  the  Numbers  of  Mankind,  pp.  81,  82  ;  Huetiana,
Amst.  1723,  pp.  132-135  ;  Sanders  on  the  Small-Pox,  Edinb.  1813,  pp.  3-4  ;  Wilks's
Hist,  of  the  South  of  India,  vol.  iii.  pp.  16-21  ;  Clot-Bey  de  la  Peste,  Paris,  1840,  p.  227.

[*  On  this  view  the  long  prevalence  of  primitive  credulity  and  superstition  in  Europe,
even  in  the  Christian  era  (indicated  by  Buckle  below,  chaps,  vi.  viii.  and  xiii.),  is  inex-
plicable. The  explanation  of  the  phenomena  must  include  recognition  of  the  part
played  by  Asiatic  and  Egyptian  culture  in  promoting  the  Mediterranean  civilization,
and  by  the  latter  in  the  culture -history  of  northern  Europe.  See  below,  p.  87,  note.
—Bo.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  75

of  his  knowledge,  by  encouraging  that  bold,  inquisitive,    and  scientific  spirit,
which  is  constantly  advancing,  and  on  which  all  future  progress  must  depend.
It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  I  can  trace  in  detail  the  way  in  which,  owing  to
these  peculiarities,  the  civilization  of  Europe  has  diverged  from  all  others  that
preceded  it.     To  do   this  would  require  a  learning  and  a  reach  of  thought  to
which  hardly  any  single  man  ought  to  pretend  ;    since  it  is  one  thing  to  have  a
?rception  of  a  large  and  general  truth,  and  it  is  another  thing  to  follow  out
that  truth  in  all  its  ramifications,  and  prove  it  by  such  evidence  as  will  satisfy
linary  readers.     Those,  indeed,  who  are  accustomed  to  speculations  of  this
character,  and  are  able  to  discern  in  the  history  of  man  something  more  than  a
lere  relation  of  events,  will  at  once  understand  that  in  these  complicated  sub-
;ts,  the  wider  any  generalization  is,  the  greater  will  be  the  chance  ot  apparent
cceptions  ;   and  that  when  the  theory  covers  a  very  large  space,  the  exceptions
lay  be  innumerable,  and  yet  the  theory  remain  perfectly  accurate.     The  two
fundamental  propositions  which  I  hope  to  have  demonstrated,  are,   ist,  That
there  are  certain  natural  phenomena  which  act  on  the  human  mind  by  exciting
the  imagination  ;    and  2ndly,  That  those  phenomena  are  much  more  numerous
nit  of  Europe  than  in  it.     If  these  two  propositions  are  admitted,  it  inevitably
)llows,  that  in  those  countries  where  the  imagination  has  received  the  stimulus,
)me  specific  effects  must  have  been  produced  ;    unless,  indeed,  the  effects  have
?en  neutralized  by  other  causes.     Whether  or  not  there  have  been  antagonistic
tuses,  is  immaterial  to  the  truth  of  the  theory,  which  is  based  on  the  two  pro-
itions  just  stated.     In  a  scientific  point  of  view,  therefore,  the  generalization
is  complete  ;   and  it  would  perhaps  be  prudent  to  leave  it  as  it  now  stands,  rather
than  attempt  to  confirm  it  by  further  illustrations,  since  all  particular  facts  are
liable  to  be  erroneously  stated,  and  are  sure  to  be  contradicted  by  those  who
dislike  the  conclusions  they  corroborate.     But  in  order  to  familiarize  the  reader
with  the  principles  I  have  put  forward,  it  does  seem  advisable  that  a  few  instances
should  be  given  of   their  actual  working  :    and  I   will    therefore    briefly  notice
the  effects  they  have  produced  in  the  three  great  divisions  of  Literature,  Re-
ligion, and  Art.     In  each  of  these  departments,   I  will  endeavour  to  indicate
how  the  leading  features  have  been  affected  by  the  Aspects  of  Nature ;  and  with
a  view  of  simplifying  the  inquiry,  I  will  take  the  two  most  conspicuous  instances
on  each  side,  and  compare  the  manifestations  of  the  intellect  of  Greece  with
those  of  the  intellect  of  India  :    these  being  the  two  countries  respecting  which
the  materials  are  most  ample,  and  in  which  the  physical  contrasts  are  most
striking.

If,  then,  we  look  at  the  ancient  literature  of  India,  even  during  its  best  period,
we  shall  find  the  most  remarkable  evidence  of  the  uncontrolled  ascendency  of
the  imagination.  In  the  first  place,  we  have  the  striking  fact  that  scarcely
any  attention  has  been  paid  to  prose  composition  ;  all  the  best  writers  having
devoted  themselves  to  poetry,  as  being  most  congenial  to  the  national  habits
of  thought.  Their  works  on  grammar,  on  law,  on  history,  on  medicine,  on
mathematics,  on  geography,  arid  on  metaphysics,  are  nearly  all  poems,  and  are
put  together  according  to  a  regular  system  of  versification.208  The  consequence  is

"208  So  verwandelt  das  geistige  Leben  des  Hindu  sich  in  wahre  Poesie,  und  das  be-
zeichnende  Merkmal  seiner  ganzen  Bildung  ist :  Herrschaft  der  Einbildungskraft  liber
den  Verstand  ;  im  geraden  Gegensatz  mit  der  Bildung  des  Europiiers,  deren  allgemeiner
Charakter  in  der  Herrschaft  des  Verstandes  liber  die  Einbildungskraft  besteht.  Es
wird  dadurch  begreiflich,  dass  die  Literatur  der  Hindus  nur  eine  poetische  ist ;  das  sie
iiberreich  an  Dichterwerken,  aber  arm  am  wissenschaftlichen  Schriften  sind  ;  dass  ihre
heiligen  Schriften,  ihre  Gesetze  und  Sagen  poetisch,  und  grosstentheils  in  Versen  ge-
schrieben  sind;  ja  dass  Lehrbvicher  der  Grammatik,  der  Heilkunde,  der  Mathematik und
Erdbeschreibung  in  Versen  verfasst  sind."  Rhode.  Religiose  Bildung  der  Hindus,
vol.  ii.  p.  626.  Thus,  too,  we  are  told  respecting  one  of  their  most  celebrated  meta-
physical systems,  that  "  the  best  text  of  the  Sanchya  is  a  short  treatise  in  verse."  Cole-
brooke  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Hindus,  in  Transactions  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  23.
And  in  another  place  the  same  high  authority  says  (Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  x.  p.  439),
"  The  metrical  treatises  on  law  and  other  sciences  are  almost  entirely  composed  in  this


76  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

that  while  prose  writing  is  utterly  despised,  the  art  of  poetry  has  been  cultivated
so  assiduously,  that  the  Sanscrit  can  boast  of  metres  more  numerous  and  more
complicated  than  have  ever  been  possessed  by  any  of  the  European  languages.209

This  peculiarity  in  the  form  of  Indian  literature  is  accompanied  by  a  corre-
sponding peculiarity  in  its  spirit.  For  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say,  that  in  that
literature  everything  is  calculated  to  set  the  reason  of  man  at  open  defiance.
An  imagination,  luxuriant  even  to  disease,  runs  riot  on  every  occasion.  This
is  particularly  seen  in  those  productions  which  are  most  eminently  national,
such  as  the  Ramayana,  the  Mahabharat,  and  the  Puranas  in  general.  But  we
also  find  it  even  in  their  geographical  and  chronological  systems,  which  of  all
others  might  be  supposed  least  liable  to  imaginative  flights.  A  few  examples
of  the  statements  put  forward  in  the  most  authoritative  books  will  supply  the
means  of  instituting  a  comparison  with  the  totally  opposite  condition  of  the
European  intellect,  and  will  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  extent  to  which
credulity  can  proceed,  even  among  a  civilized  people.210

Of  all  the  various  ways  in  which  the  imagination  has  distorted  truth,  there
is  none  that  has  worked'so  much  harm  as  an  exaggerated  respect  for  past  ages.
This  reverence  for  antiquity  is  repugnant  to  every  maxim  of  reason,  and  is
merely  the  indulgence  of  n  poetic  sentiment  in  favour  of  the  remote  and  unknown.
It  is,  therefore,  natural  that,  in  periods  when  the  intellect  was,  comparatively
speaking,  inert,  this  sentiment  should  have  been  far  stronger  than  it  now  is ;  and
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  will  continue  to  grow  weaker,  and  that  in  the
same  proportion  the  feeling  of  progress  will  gain  ground  ;  so  that  veneration
for  the  past  will  be  succeeded  by  hope  for  the  future.  But  formerly  the  venera-
tion was  supreme,  and  innumerable  traces  of  it  may  be  found  in  the  literature
and  popular  creed  of  every  country.  It  is  this,  for  instance,  which  inspired  the
poets  with  their  notion  of  a  golden  age,  in  which  the  world  was  filled  with  peace,
in  which  evil  passions  were  stilled,  and  crimes  were  unknown.  It  is  this,  again,
which  gave  to  theologians  their  idea  of  the  primitive  virtue  and  simplicity  of
man,  and  of  his  subsequent  fall  from  that  high  estate.  And  it  is  this  same  prin-
ciple which  diffused  a  belief  that  in  the  olden  -times  men  were  not  only  more
virtuous  and  happy,  but  also  physically  superior  in  the  structure  of  their  bodies  ;

easy  verse."  M.  Klaproth,  in  an  analysis  of  a  Sanscrit  history  of  Cashmere,  says,
"  Comme  presque  toutes  les  compositions  hindoues,  il  est  ecrit  en  vers."  Journal
Asiatique,  I.  serie,  vol.  vii.  p.  8,  Paris,  1825.  See  also,  in  vol.  vi.  pp.  175,  176,  the  re-
marks of  M.  Burnouf  :  "  Les  philosophes  indiens,  comme  s'ils  ne  pouvaient  echapper
aux  influences  poetiques  de  leur  climat,  traitent  les  questions  de  la  metaphysique  le
plus  abstraite  par  similitudes  et  metaphores."  Compare  vol.  vi.  p.  4,  "  le  genie  indien
si  poetique  et  si  religieux  "  ;  and  see  Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philosophie,  II.  serie,  vol.  i.  p.  27.
[It  should  be  remembered  that  down  till  the  fifth  century  B.C.  all  literature  in  Greece
took  the  verse  form.  Diogenes  Laertius,  i.  3,  §  8  (ii.),  states  that  Anaxagoras  was  the
first  man  who  wrote  a  book  in  prose.  And  in  England,  "  until  the  end  of  the  fourteenth
century  we  practically  had  no  prose  literature  worthy  of  the  name  "  (The  Age  of  Shake-
speare, by  T.  Seccombe  and  J.  W.  Allen,  1903,  i.  211).  And  see  below,  chap.  vi.  note  14.
—ED.]

209  Mr.  Yates  says  of  the  Hindus,  that  no  other  people  have  ever  "  presented  an  equal
variety  of  poetic  compositions.     The  various  metres  of  Greece  and  Rome  have  filled
Europe  with  astonishment ;  but  what  are  these,  compared  with  the  extensive  range  of
Sanscrit  metres  under  its  three  classes  of  poetical  writing  ?  "     Yates  on  Sanscrit  Allitera-
tion, in  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xx.  p.  159,  Calcutta,  1836.     See  also  on  the  Sanscrit
metres,  p.  321,  and  an  Essay  by  Colebrooke,  vol.  x.  pp.  389-474.     On  the  metrical
system  of  the  Vedas,  see  Mr.  Wilson's  note  in  the  Rig  Veda  Sanhita,  vol.  ii.  p.  135.

210  In  Europe,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  this  volume,  the  credulity  was
at  one  time  extraordinary  ;  but  the  age  was  then  barbarous,  and  barbarism  is  always
credulous.     On  the  other  hand,  the  examples  gathered  from  Indian  literature  will   be
taken  from  the  works  of  a  lettered  people,  written  in  a  language  extremely  rich,  and  so
highly  polished,  that  some  competent  judges  have  declared  it  equal,  if  not  superior,  to
the  Greek.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  77

id  that  by  this  means  they  attained  to  a  larger  stature,  and  lived  to  a  greater

than  is  possible  for  us,  their  feeble  and  degenerate  descendants.
Opinions  of  this  kind  being  adopted  by  the  imagination  in  spite  of  the  under  -
Landing,  it  follows  that  the  strength  of  such  opinions  becomes,  in  any  country,
me  of  the  standards  by  which  we  may  estimate  the  predominance  of  the
laginative  faculties.  Applying  this  test  to  the  literature  of  India,  we  shall
ind'a  striking  confirmation  of  the  conclusions  already  drawn.  The  marvellous
its  of  antiquity  with  which  the  Sanscrit  books  abound,  are  so  long  and  so
>mplicated,  that  it  would  occupy  too  much  space  to  give  even  an  outline  of
lem  ;  but  there  is  one  class  of  these  singular  fictions  which  is  well  worth  atten-
m,  and  admits  of  being  briefly  stated.  I  allude  to  the  extraordinary  age
man  was  supposed  to  have  attained  in  former  times.  A  belief  in  the
igevity  of  the  human  race  at  an  early  period  of  the  world,  was  the  natural
duct  of  those  feelings  which  ascribed  to  the  ancients  an  universal  superiority
rer  the  moderns  ;  and  this  we  see  exemplified  in  some  of  the  Christian,  and
many  of  the  Hebrew  writings.  But  the  statements  in  these  works  are  tame
id  insignificant  when  compared  with  what  is  preserved  in  the  literature  ot
idia.  On  this,  as  on  every  subject,  the  imagination  of  the  Hindus  distanced
11  competition.  Thus,  among  an  immense  number  of  similar  facts,  we  find
recorded  that  in  ancient  times  the  duration  of  the  life  of  common  men  was
.ooo  years,211  and  that  holy  men  lived  to  be  upwards  of  ico.ooo.212  Some
ied  a  little  sooner,  others  a  little  later  ;  but  in  the  most  flourishing  period  of
itiquity,  if  we  take  all  classes  together,  100,000  years  was  the  average.213  Of  one
king,  whose  name  was  Yudhishthir,  it  is  casually  mentioned  that  he  reigned
27,000  years  ;  214  while  another,  called  Alarka,  reigned  66,ooo.215  They  were
cut  off  in  their  prime,  since  there  are  several  instances  of  the  early  poets  living
to  be  about  half-a-million.216  But  the  most  remarkable  case  is  that  of  a  very
shining  character  in  Indian  history,  who  united  in  his  single  person  the  functions
of  a  king  and  a  saint.  This  eminent  man  lived  in  a  pure  and  virtuous  age,  and
his  days  were  indeed  long  in  the  land  ;  since,  when  he  was  made  king,  he  was
two  million  years  old  :  he  then  reigned  6,300,000  years  ;  having  done  which,
he  resigned  his  empire,  and  lingered  on  for  100,000  years  more.2*7

The  same  boundless  reverence  for  antiquity  made  the  Hindus   refer  every-
thing important  to  the  most  distant  periods  ;    and  they  frequently  assign  a  date

"  The  limit  of  life  was  80,000  years."  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xvi.  p.  456,  Calcutta,
1828.  This  was  likewise  the  estimate  of  the  Tibetan  divines,  according  to  whom  men
formerly  "  parvenaient  a  1'age  de  80,000  ans."  Journal  Asiatique,  I.  serie,  vol.  iii.
p.  199,  Paris,  1823.

212  "  Den  Hindu  macht  dieser  Widerspruch  nicht  verlegen,  da  er  seine  Heiligen  100,000
Jahre  und  langer  leben  lasst."     Rhode,  Relig.  Bildung  der  Hindus,  vol.  i.  p.  175.

213  In  the  Dabistan,  vol.  ii.  p.  47,  it  is  stated  of  the  earliest  inhabitants  of   the  world
that  "  the  duration  of  human  life  in  this  age  extended  to  one  hundred  thousand  common
years."

214  Wilford  (Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  v.  p.  242)  says,  "When  the  Puranas  speak  of
the  kings  of  ancient  times,  they  are  equally  extravagant.     According  to  them,  King
Yudhishthir  reigned  seven -and -twenty  thousand  years."

215  "  For  sixty  thousand  and  sixty  hundred  years  no  other  youthful  monarch  except
Alarka  reigned  over  the  earth."     Vishnu  Purana,  p.  408.

216  And  sometimes  more.     In  the  Essay  on  Indian  Chronology  in  Works  of  Sir  W.
Jones,  vol.  i.  p.  325,  we  hear  of  "  a  conversation  between  Valmic  and  Vyasa,  .  .  .  two
bards  whose  ages  were  separated  by  a  period  of  864,000  years."     This  passage  is  also
in  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  ii.  p.  399.

217  "  He  was  the  first  king,  first  anchoret,  and  first  saint ;  and  is  therefore  entitled
Prathama-Raja,  Prathama  Bhicshacara,   Prathama  Jin  a,  and  Prathama  Tirthancara.
At  the  time  of  his  inauguration  as  king,  his  age  was  2,000,000  years.     He  reigned
6,300,000  years,  and  then  resigned  his  empire  to  his  sons  :  and  having  employed  100,000
years  in  passing  through  the  several  stages  of  austerity  and  sanctity,  departed  from
this  world  on  the  summit  of  a  mountain  named  Ashtapada."     Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  ix.
P-  305-


78  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

which  is  absolutely  bewildering.21^  Their  great  collection  of  laws,  called  the
Institutes  of  Menu,  is  certainly  less  than  3000  years  old ;  but  the  Indian  chrono-
logists,  so  far  from  being  satisfied  with  this,  ascribe  to  them  an  age  that  the
sober  European  mind  finds  a  difficulty  even  in  conceiving.  According  to  the
best  native  authorities,  these  Institutes  were  revealed  to  man  about  two  thou-
sand million  years  before  the  present  era.219

All  this  is  but  a  part  of  that  love  of  the  remote,  that  straining  after  the  infinite,
and  that  indifference  to  the  present,  which  characterizes  every  branch  of  the
Indian  intellect.  Not  only  in  literature,  but  also  in  religion  and  in  art,  this
tendency  is  supreme.  To  subjugate  the  understanding,  and  exalt  the  imagina-
tion, is  the  universal  principle.  In  the  dogmas  of  their  theology,  in  the  character
of  their  gods,  and  even  in  the  forms  of  their  temples,  we  see  how  the  sublime
and  threatening  aspects  of  the  external  world  have  filled  the  mind  of  the  people
with  those  images  of  the  grand  and  the  terrible,  which  they  strive  to  reproduce
in  a  visible  form,  and  to  which  they  owe  the  leading  peculiarities  of  their  national
culture.

Our  view  of  this  vast  process  may  be  made  clearer  by  comparing  it  with  the
opposite  condition  of  Greece.  In  Greece,  we  see  a  country  altogether  the  reverse
of  India.  The  works  of  Nature,  which  in  India  are  of  startling  magnitude,  are
in  Greece  far  smaller,  feebler,  and  in  every  way  less  threatening  to  man.  In
the  great  centre  of  Asiatic  civilization,  the  energies  of  the  human  race  are  con-
fined, and  as  it  were  intimidated,  by  the  surrounding  phenomena.  Besides
the  dangers  incidental  to  tropical  climates,  there  are  those  noble  mountains,
which  seem  to  touch  the  sky,  and  from  whose  sides  are  discharged  mighty  rivers,
which  no  art  can  divert  from  their  course,  and  which  no  bridge  has  ever  been
able  to  span.  There  too  are  impassable  forests,  whole  countries  lined  with
interminable  jungle,  and  beyond  them,  again,  dreary  and  boundless  deserts  ;
all  teaching  Man  his  own  feebleness,  and  his  inability  to  cope  with  natural  forces.
Without,  and  on  either  side,  there  are  great  seas,  ravaged  by  tempests  farm  ore
destructive  than  any  known  in  Europe,  and  of  such  sudden  violence,  that  it
is  impossible  to  guard  against  their  effects.  And  as  if  in  those  regions  every-
thing combined  to  cramp  the  activity  of  Man,  the  whole  line  of  coast,  from
the  mouth  of  the  Ganges  to  the  extreme  south  of  the  peninsula,  does  not
contain  a  single  safe  and  capacious  harbour,  not  one  port  that  affords  a
refuge,  which  is  perhaps  more  necessary  there  than  in  any  other  part  of  the
world.22(>

But  in  Greece,  the  aspects  of  Nature  are  so  entirely  different,  that  the  very
conditions  of  existence  are  changed.  Greece,  like  India,  forms  a  peninsula ;
but  while  in  the  Asiatic  country  everything  is  great  and  terrible,  in  the  European
country  everything  is  small  and  feeble.*  The  whole  of  Greece  occupies  a  space

218  "  Speculationen  iiber  Zahlen  sind  dem  Inder  so  gelaufig,  dass  selbst  die  Sprache
einen  Ausdruck  hat  fur  eine  Unitat  rait  63  Nullen,  namlich  Asanke,  eben  weil  die
Berechnung  der  Weltperioden  diese  enorme  Grossen    nothwendig  machte,  denn  jene
einfachen  12,000  Jahre  schienen  einem    Volke,  welches   so  gerne  die   hochstmogliche
Potenz  auf  seine  Gottheit  libertragen  mogte,  viel  zu  geringe  zu  seyn."     Bohlen,  das
alte  Indien,  vol.  ii.  p.  298.

219  Elphinstone*  s  History  of  India,  p.  136,  "  a  period  exceeding  4,320,000  multiplied
by  six  times  seventy-one."     [Elphinstone  himself  dated  the   Institutes  some  centuries
too  early.     See  Cowell's  notes  on  his  History,  7th  ed.  pp.  12,  249. — ED.]

220  Symes  (Embassy  to  Ava,  vol.  iii.  p.  278)  says  :  "  From  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges
to  Cape  Comorin,  the  whole  range  of  our  continental  territory,  there  is  not  a  single  har-
bour capable  of  affording  shelter  to  a  vessel  of  500  tons  burden."     Indeed,  according
to  Percival,  there  is,  with  the  exception  of  Bombay,  no  harbour,  "  either  on  the  Coro-
mandelor  Malabar  coasts,  in  which  ships  can  moor  in  safety  at  all  seasons  of  the  year."
PercivaVs  Account  of  Ceylon,  pp.  2,  15,  66.

[*  This  is  not  true  of  the  mountains ;  and  the  argument  overlooks  the  phenomena'of
the  sea — ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  79

somewhat  less  than  the  kingdom  of  Portugal,221  that  is,  about  a  fortieth  part
of  what  is  now  called  Hindostan.222  Situated  in  the  most  accessible  part  of
a  narrow  sea,  it  had  easy  contact  on  the  east  with  Asia  Minor,  on  the  west  with
Italy,  on  the  south  with  Egypt.  Dangers  of  all  kinds  were  far  less  numerous
than  in  the  tropical  civilizations.  The  climate  was  more  healthy  ;  223  earth-
quakes were  less  frequent  ;  hurricanes  were  less  disastrous  ;  wild  beasts  and
noxious  animals  less  abundant.  In  regard  to  the  other  great  features,  the  same
law  prevails.  The  highest  mountains  in  Greece  are  less  than  one-third  of  the
Himalaya,  so  that  nowhere  do  they  reach  the  limit  of  perpetual  snow.224  As
to  rivers,  not  only  is  there  nothing  approaching  those  imposing  volumes  which
are  poured  down  from  the  mountains  of  Asia,  but  Nature  is  so  singularly  sluggish,
that  neither  in  Northern  nor  in  Southern  Greece  do  we  find  anything  beyond
a  few  streams,  which  are  easily  forded,  and  which,  indeed,  in  the  summer  season,
are  frequently  dried  up.225

These  striking  differences  in  the  material  phenomena  of  the  two  countries
gave  rise  to  corresponding  differences  in  their  mental  associations.  For  as
all  ideas  must  arise  partly  from  what  are  called  spontaneous  operations  in  the
mind,  and  partly  from  what  is  suggested  to  the  mind  by  the  external  world,
it  was  natural  that  so  great  an  alteration  in  one  of  the  causes  should  produce
an  alteration  in  the  effects.  The  tendency  of  the  surrounding  phenomena  was,
in  India,  to  inspire  fear  ;  in  Greece,  to  give  confidence.  In  India,  Man  was
intimidated  ;  in  Greece  he  was  encouraged.  In  India,  obstacles  of  every  sort
were  so  numerous,  so  alarming,  and  apparently  so  inexplicable,  that  the  diffi-
culties of  life  could  only  be  solved  by  constantly  appealing  to  the  direct  agency
of  supernatural  causes.  Those  causes  being  beyond  the  province  of  the  under-
standing, the  resources  of  the  imagination  were  incessantly  occupied  in  studying
them  ;  the  imagination  itself  was  overworked,  its  activity  became  dangerous,
it  encroached  on  the  understanding,  and  the  equilibrium  of  the  whole  was  de-
stroyed. In  Greece,  opposite  circumstances  were  followed  by  opposite  results.
In  Greece,  Nature  was  less  dangerous,  less  intrusive,  and  less  mysterious  than
in  India.  In  Greece,  therefore,  the  human  mind  was  less  appalled,  and  less
superstitious  ;  natural  causes  began  to  be  studied  ;  physical  science  first  became
possible  ;  and  Man,  gradually  waking  to  a  sense  of  his  own  power,  sought  to
investigate  events  with  a  boldness  not  to  be  expected  in  those  other  countries,

221  "  Altogether  its  area  is  somewhat  less  than  that  of  Portugal."    Grate's  History  of
Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  302  ;  and  the  same  remark  in  ThirlwalVs  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  2,
and  in  Heererfs  Ancient  Greece,  1845,  p.  16.     M.  Heeren  says,  "  But  even  if  we  add  all
the  islands,  its  square  contents  are  a  third  less  than  those  of  Portugal."

222  The  area  of  Hindostan  being,  according  to  Mr.  M'Culloch  (Geog.  Diet.  1849,  vol.  i.
P-  993 )>  "between  1,200,000  and  1,300,000  square  miles."

223  In  the  best  days  of  Greece,  those  alarming  epidemics  by  which  the  country  was
subsequently  ravaged,   were   comparatively   little   known  :  see   ThirlwalVs  History  of
Greece,  vol.  iii.  p.  134,  vol.  viii.  p.  471.     This  may  be  owing  to  large  cosmical  causes,
or  to  the  simple  fact  that  the  different  forms  of  pestilence  had  not  yet  been  imported
from  the  East  by  actual  contact.     On  the  vague  accounts  we  possess  of  the  earlier  plagues
see  Clot-Bey  de  la  Peste,  Paris,  1840,  pp.  21,  46,  184.      The  relation  even  of  Thucydides
is  more  satisfactory  to  scholars  than  to  pathologists.

224  "  Mount  Guiona,  the  highest  point  in  Greece,  and  near  its  northern  boundary,  is
8,239  feet  high.  .  .  .  No  mountain  in  Greece  reaches  the  limit  of   perpetual   snow."
M'Culloch' s  Geog.  Diet.  1849,  vol.  i.  p.  924.      [They  are  nevertheless  great  mountains,
and  Mount  Olympus  (not  in  modern  Greece,  but  part  of  the  ancient)  is  9,754  feet  high.
Both  Olympus  and  Ossa  usually  keep  their  winter  snows  till  well  into  summer  (Duruy,
Hist.  Grecque,  p.  2).     Thirlwall  says  the  heights  of  Olympus  are  "  scarcely  ever  entirely
free  from  snow."    Hist,  of  Greece,  ed.  1835,  i.  4. — ED.]    Compare  the  table  of  mountains
in  Baker's  Memoir  on  North  Greece,  in  Journal  of  Geographical  Society,  vol.  vii.  p.  94,
with  BakewelVs  Geology,  pp.  621,  622.

225  "  Greece  has  no  navigable  river."     M'Culloch's  Geog.  Diet.  vol.  i.  p.  924.     "  Most
of  the  rivers  of  Greece  are  torrents  in  early  spring,  and  dry  before  the  end  of  the  summer."
Grate's  History  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  286.


8o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

where  the  pressure  of  Nature  troubled  his  independence,  and  suggested  ideas
with  which  knowledge  is  incompatible.*

The  effect  of  these  habits  of  thought  on  the  national  religion  must  be  very
obvious  to  whoever  has  compared  the  popular  creed  of  India  with  that  of  Greece.
The  mythology  of  India,  like  that  of  every  tropical  country,  is  based  upon  terror,
and  upon  terror  too  of  the  most  extravagant  kind.  Evidence  of  the  universality
of  this  feeling  abounds  in  the  sacred  books  of  the  Hindus,  in  their  traditions,
and  even  in  the  very  form  and  appearance  of  their  gods.  And  so  deeply  is  all
this  impressed  on  the  mind,  that  the  most  popular  deities  are  invariably  those
with  whom  images  of  fear  are  most  intimately  associated.  Thus,  for  example,
the  worship  of  Siva  is  more  general  than  any  other  ;  and  as  to  its  antiquity,
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  borrowed  "by  the  Brahmins  from  the  original
Indians.226  At  all  events,  it  is  very  ancient,  and  very  popular  ;  and  Siva  him-
self forms,  with  Brahma  and  Vishnu,  the  celebrated  Hindu  Triad.  We  need
not,  therefore,  be  surprised  that  with  this  god  are  connected  images  of  terror,
such  as  nothing  but  a  tropical  imagination  could  conceive.  Siva  is  represented
to  the  Indian  mind  as  a  hideous  being,  encircled  by  a  girdle  of  snakes,  with  a
human  skull  in  his  hand,  and  wearing  a  necklace  composed  of  human  bones.
He  has  three  eyes  ;  the  ferocity  of  his  temper  is  marked  by  his  being  clothed
in  a  tiger's  skin  ;  he  is  represented  as  wandering  about  like  a  madman,  and  over
his  left  shoulder  the  deadly  cobra  di  capella  rears  its  head.  This  monstrous
creation  of  an  awe-struck  fancy  has  a  wife,  Doorga,  called  sometimes  Kali,
and  sometimes  by  other  names.227  She  has  a  body  of  dark  blue  ;  while  the
palms  of  her  hands  are  red,  to  indicate  her  insatiate  appetite  for  blood.  She
has  four  arms,  with  one  of  which  she  carries  the  skull  of  a  giant  ;  her  tongue
protrudes,  and  hangs  lollingly  from  her  mouth  ;  round  her  waist  are  the  hands
of  her  victims  ;  and  her  neck  is  adorned  with  human  heads  strung  together  in
a  ghastly  row.228

If  we  now  turn  to  Greece,  we  find,  even  in  the  infancy  of  its  religion,  not  the

226  See  Stevenson  on  The  Anti-Brahmanical  Religion  of  the  Hindus,  in  Journal  of
Asiatic  Society,  vol.  viii.  pp.  331,  332,  336,  338.     Mr.  Wilson  (Journal,  vol.  iii.  p.  204)
says,  "  The  prevailing  form  of  the  Hindu  religion  in  the  south  of  the  peninsula  was,  at
the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era,  and  some  time  before  it  most  probably,  that  of
Siva."  See  also  vol.  v.  p.  85,  where  it  is  stated  that  Siva  "  is  the  only  Hindu  god  to  whom
honour  is  done  at  Ellora."     Compare  Transac.  of  Soc.  of  Bombay,  vol.  iii.  p.  521  ;  Heeren's
Asiatic  Nations,  1846,  vol.  ii.  pp.  62,  66.     On  the  philosophical  relation  between  the
followers  of  Siva  and  these  of  Vishnu,  see  Hitter's  Hist,  of  Ancient  Philosophy,  vol.  iv.
PP-  334»  335  5  and  the  noticeable  fact  (Buchanan's  Mysore,  vol.  ii.  p.  410),  that  even  the
Naimar  caste,  whose  "  proper  deity  "  is  Vishnu,  "  wear  on  their  foreheads  the  mark  of
Siva."     As  to  the  worship  of  Siva  in  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  see  ThirlwalVs
History  of  Greece,  vol.  vii.  p.  36  ;  and  for  further  evidence  of  its  extent,  Bohlen,  das  alte
Indien,  vol.  i.  pp.  29,  147,  206,  and  Transac.  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  294.

227  So  it  is  generally  stated  by  the  Hindu  theologians  ;  but  according  to  Rammohun
Roy,  Siva  had  two  wives.     See  Rammohun  Roy  on  the  Veds,  p.  90.

228  On  these  attributes  and  representations  of  Siva  and  Doorga,  see  Rhode,  Religiose
Bildung  der  Hindus,  vol.  ii.  p.  241  ;  Coleman's  Mythology  of  the  Hindus,  pp.  63,  92  ;
Bohlen,  das  alte  Indien,  vol.  i.  p.  207  ;  Ward's  Religion  of  the  Hindoos,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxxvii.
27, 145  ;  Transac.  of  Society  of  Bombay,  vol.  i.  pp.  215,  221.     Compare  the  curious  account
of  an  image  supposed  to  represent  Mahadeo,  in  Journal  Asiatique,  I.  serie,  vol.  i.  p.  354,
Paris,  1823.

[*  The  beginnings  of  Greek  science  were  in  Ionia,  in  the  sphere  of  the  older  Semitic
civilization,  wherein  had  taken  place  the  beginnings  of  astronomy.  Modern  Assyriology
clearly  proves  the  Babylonian  derivation  of  astronomy  and  mathematics  (Meyer,  Gesch.
des  Alterthums,  i.  §  756)  ;  and  the  Greeks  also  derived  much  of  their  astronomy  and
mathematics,  as  well  as  their  medicine,  from  Egypt  (Id.  ;  Kenrick,  Ancient  Egypt,  1850,
'•  327,  345-6).  Burckhardt  sums  up  (Griechische  Culturgeschichte,  iii.  416)  that  as  regards
natural  science  "  Aegypter,  Babylonier  und  Assyrier  viel  fruher  gesammelt  und  viel
reichere  Kenntnisse  von  Thatsachen  besessen  haben  als  die  Griechen." — ED.]


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  81

faintest  trace  of  anything  approaching  to  this.  For  in  Greece,  the  causes  of
fear  being  less  abundant,  the  expression  of  terror  was  less  common.  The  Greeks,
therefore,  were  by  no  means  disposed  to  incorporate  into  their  religion  those
feelings  of  dread  natural  to  the  Hindus.  The  tendency  of  Asiatic  civilization
was  to  widen  the  distance  between  men  and  their  deities  ;  the  tendency  of  Greek
civilization  was  to  diminish  it.*  Thus  it  is,  that  in  Hindostan  all  the  gods
had  something  monstrous  about  them  ;  as  Vishnu  with  four  hands,  Brahma
with  five  heads,  and  the  like.229  But  the  gods  of  Greece  were  always  repre-
sented in  forms  entirely  human.230  In  that  country,  no  artist  would  have
gained  attention,  if  he  had  presumed  to  portray  them  in  any  other  shape.  He
might  make  them  stronger  than  men,  he  might  make  them  more  beautiful  ;  but
still  they  must  be  men.  The  analogy  between  God  and  Man,  which  excited
the  religious  feelings  of  the  Greeks,  would  have  been  fatal  to  those  of  the  Hindus.
This  difference  between  the  artistic  expressions  of  the  two  religions  was
accompanied  by  an  exactly  similar  difference  between  their  theological  tra-
ditions. In  the  Indian  books,  the  imagination  is  exhausted  in  relating  the
feats  of  the  gods  ;  and  the  more  obviously  impossible  any  achievement  is,  the
greater  the  pleasure  with  which  it  was  ascribed  to  them.  But  the  Greek  gods
had  not  only  human  forms,  but  also  human  attributes,  human  pursuits,  and
human  tastes.231  The  men  of  Asia,  to  whom  every  object  of  Nature  was  a  source
of  awe,  acquired  such  habits  of  reverence,  that  they  never  dared  to  assimilate

229  Ward  on  the  Religion  of  the  Hindoos,  vol.  i.  p.  35  ;   Transac.  of  Society  of  Bombay,
vol.  i.  p.  223.     Compare  the  gloss  in  the  Dabistan,  vol.  ii.  p.  202.

230  "  xhe  Greek  gods  were  formed  like  men,  with  greatly  increased  powers  and  faculties,
and  acted  as  men  would  do  if  so  circumstanced,  but  with  a  dignity  and  energy  suited
to  their  nearer  approach  to  perfection.     The  Hindu  gods,  on  the  other  hand,  though
endued  with  human  passions,  have  always  something  monstrous  in  their  appearance,
and  wild  and  capricious  in  their  conduct.     They  are  of  various  colours,  red,  yellow,  and
blue  ;  some  have  twelve  heads,  and  some  have  four  hands.     They  are  often  enraged
without  a  cause,  and  reconciled  without  a  motive."     Elphinstone 's  History  of  India,
pp.  96,  97.     See  also  Erskine  on  the  Temple  of  Elephanta,  in  Transac.  of  Soc.  of  Bombay,
vol.  i.  p.  246  ;  and  the  Dabistan,  vol.  i.  p.  cxi.

231  "  In  the  material  polytheism  of  other  leading  ancient  nations,   the  Egyptian?,
for  example,  the  incarnation  of  the  Deity  was  chiefly,  or  exclusively,  confined  to  animals,
monsters,  or  other  fanciful  emblems.  ...  In  Greece,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  an  almost
necessary  result  of  the  spirit  and  grace  with  which  the  deities  were  embodied  in  human
forms,  that  they  should  also  be  burdened  with  human  interests  and  passions.     Heaven,
like  earth,  had  its  courts  and  palaces,  its  trades  and  professions,  its  marriages,  intrigues,
divorces."     Mitre's  History  of  the  Literature  of  Ancient  Greece,  vol.  i.  pp.  471,  472.     So,
too,  Tennemann   (Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  vol.  iii.  p.  419)  :  "  Diese  Gotter  haben
Menschengestalt.  .  .  .  Haben  die  Gotter  aber  nicht  nur  menschliche  Gestalt,  sondern
auch  einen  menschlichen  Korper,  so  sind  sie  als  Menschen  auch  denselben  Unvollkom-
menheiten,  Krankheiten  und  dem  Tode  unterworfen  ;  dieses  streitet  mit  dem  Begriffe,'*
i.e.  of  Epicurus.     Compare  Grate's  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  596  :  "  The  mythical  age
was  peopled  with  a  mingled  aggregate  of  gods,  heroes,  and  men,  so  confounded  together
that  it  was  often  impossible  to  distinguish  to  which  class  any  individual  name  belonged."
See  also  the  complaint  of  Xenophanes,  in  Miiller's  Hist,  of  Lit.  of  Greece,  London,  1856,
p.  251.     [Mure's  account  of  Egyptian  religion  is  misleading.     The  Egyptian  gods  were
often  represented  in  human  form  ;  and  the  animal  forms  in  sculpture  are  not  to  be
confounded  with   the  religious  conception.     So  with   the  Asiatic  deities.     They,  like
those  of  Greece,  are  fundamentally  and  inevitably  "  anthropomorphic  "  ;  their  many
hands  and  heads  being  mere  symbolic  devices  to  express  supernatural  power. — ED.]

[*  On  the  other  hand,  Asiatic,  like  all  other  religions,  evolved  mediatorial  gods,  nearer
to  men  than  the  Supreme  God — e.g.  Agni,  Krishna,  Merodach,  Mithra.  And  while  the
gods  of  Greek  sculpture,  which  was  a  late  development,  were  wholly  human,  the  Greeks
too  had  their  hundred -headed  Typhon,  their  dragon -nymphs,  their  Minotaur,  their
Zeus  transformed  into  a  bull  and  into  a  swan,  and  their  Dionysos  in  the  form  of  a
bull.  The  Homeric  gois,  further,  were  of  vast  size. — ED.]  \

6


82  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

their  own  actions  with  the  actions  of  their  deities.  The  men  of  Europe,  en-
couraged by  the  safety  and  inertness  of  the  material  world,  did  not  fear  to  strike
a  parallel,  from  which  they  would  have  shrunk  had  they  lived  amid  the  dangers
of  a  tropical  country.  It  is  thus  that  the  Greek  divinities  are  so  different  from
those  of  the  Hindus,  that  in  comparing  them  we  seem  to  pass  from  one  creation
into  another.  The  Greeks  generalized  their  observations  upon  the  human  mind,
and  then  applied  them  to  the  gods.232  The  coldness  of  women  was  figured  in
Diana  ;  their  beauty  and  sensuality  in  Venus  ;  their  pride  in  Juno  ;  their  accom-
plishments in  Minerva.  To  the  ordinary  avocations  of  the  gods,  the  same
principle  was  applied.  Neptune  was  a  sailor  ;  Vulcan  was  a  smith  ;  Apollo
was  sometimes  a  fiddler,  sometimes  a  poet,  sometimes  a  keeper  of  oxen.  As
to  Cupid,  he  was  a  wanton  boy,  who  played  with  his  bow  and  arrows  ;  Jupiter
was  an  amorous  and  good-natured  king  ;  while  Mercury  was  indifferently  repre-
sented either  as  a  trustworthy  messenger  or  else  as  a  common  and  notorious  thief.
Precisely  the  same  tendency  to  approximate  human  forces  towards  super-
human ones,  is  displayed  in  another  peculiarity  of  the  Greek  religion.  I  mean,
that  in  Greece  we  for  the  first  time  meet  with  he'ro- worship,  that  is,  the  deification
of  mortals.*  According  to  the  principles  already  laid  down,  this  could  not  be
expected  in  a  tropical  civilization,  where  the  Aspects  of  Nature  filled  Man  with
a  constant  sense  of  his  own  incapacity.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  it  should
form  no  part  of  the  ancient  Indian  religion  ;  233  neither  was  it  known  to  the
Egyptians,23*  nor  to  the  Persians,235  nor,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  to  the  Arabians.2^
But  in  Greece,  Man  being  less  humbled,  and,  as  it  were,  less  eclipsed,  by  the
external  world,  thought  more  of  his  own  powers,  and  human  nature  did  not
fall  into  that  discredit  in  which  it  elsewhere  sank.  The  consequence  was,  that
the  deification  of  mortals  was  a  recognized  part  of  the  national  religion  at  a  very
early  period  in  the  history  of  Greece  ;  237  and  this  has  been  found  so  natural

232  The  same  remark  applies  to  beauty  of  form,  which  they  first  aimed  at  in  the  statues
of  men,  and  then  brought  to  bear  upon  the  statues  of  the  gods.     This  is  well  put  in  Mr.
Grote's  important  work,  History  of  Greece,  vol.  iv.  pp.  133,  134,  edit.  1847.     [The  con-
ceptions of  the  Greek  gods  cannot  have  originated  in  the  manner  alleged  in  the  text.
The  Homeric  pantheon  is  a  literary  development  from  much  simpler  naturalistic  begin-
nings.— ED.]

233  "  But  the  worship  of  deified  heroes  is  no  part  of  that  system."     Colebrooke  on  the
Vedas,  in  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  viii.  p.  495.

234  Mackay's  Religious  Development,  vol.  ii.  p.  53,  Lond.  1850.     Compare  Wilkinson's
Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  iv.  pp.  148,  318  ;  and  Matter,  Histoire  de  VEcole  d'Alexandrie,  vol.
i.  p.  2  ;  the  "  culte  des  grands  hommes,"  which  afterwards  arose  in  Alexandria  (Matter,
vol.  i.  p.  54),  must  have  been  owing  to  Greek  influence.

235  There  are  no  indications  of  it  in  the  Zendavesta  ;  and  Herodotus  says,  that  the
Persians  were  unlike  the  Greeks,  in  so  far  as  they  disbelieved  in  a  god  having  a  human
form  ;  book  i.  chap,  cxxxi.  vol.  i.  p.  308  :  OVK  ai>6 pwirotyvtas  evo/jt-urav  TOVS  6covs,  Kara-rep
01  "EXXTji/es  elvat.    [Yet  Ahuramazda  was  so  represented  in  the  time  of  Herodotus. — ED.]

236  I  am  not  acquainted  with  any  evidence  connecting  this  worship  with  the  old
Arabian  religion  ;  and  it  was  certainly  most  alien  to  the  spirit  of  Mohammedanism.

237  Mitre's  History  of  the  Literature  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  pp.  28,  500,  vol.  ii.  p.  402  :  very
good  remarks  on  a  subject  handled  unsatisfactorily  by  Coleridge  ;  Literary  Remains,  vol.
i.  p.  185.     Thirlwall  (History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  207)  admits  that  "  the  views  and  feelings
out  of  which  it  (the  worship  of  heroes)  arose,  seem  to  be  clearly  discernible  in  the  Homeric
poems."     Compare  Cudworth's  Intellectual  System,  vol.  ii.  pp.  226,  372.     In  the  Cratylus,
chap,  xxxiii.,  Socrates  is  represented  as  asking,  OVK  olvda  6Vt  ^ut'0eoi  o!  ijpwes ;  Platonis
Opera,  vol.  iv.  p.  227,  edit.  Bekker,  Lond.  1826.     And  in  the  next  century,  Alexander
obtained  for  his  friend  Hephaestion  the  right  of  being  "  worshipped  as  a  hero."     Grote's
History  of  Greece,  vol.  xii.  p.  339.

[*  This  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  common  feature  in  the  religion  of  savage  and  semi-
civilized  peoples,  though  some  recent  hierologists  put  the  fact  in  obscurity  by-  a
factitious  definition  of  the  term  "mortal."  The  Greek  demigods,  on  the  other  hand,
are  frequently  the  reductions  of  alien  gods  to  quasi-human  status. — ED.].


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  83

to  Europeans,  that  the  same  custom  was  afterwards  renewed  with  eminent
success  by  the  Romish  Church.  Other  circumstances,  of  a  very  different  charac-
ter, are  gradually  eradicating  this  form  of  idolatry  ;  but  its  existence  is  worth
observing,  as  one'  of  the  innumerable  illustrations  of  the  way  in  which  European
civilization  has  diverged  from  all  those  that  preceded  it.23^  "

It  is  thus,  that  in  Greece  everything  tended  to  exalt  the  dignity  of  Man,
while  in  India  everything  tended  to  depress  it.239  To  sum  up  the  whole,  it  may
be  said  that  the  Greeks^  had  more  respect  for  human  powers  ;  the  Hindus  for
superhuman.  The  first  dealt  more  with  the  known  and  available  ;  the  other
with  the  unknown  and  mysterious.240.  And  by  a  parity  of  reasoning,  the  ima-
gination, which  the  Hindus,  being  oppressed  by  the  pomp  and  majesty  of  Nature,
never  sought  to  control,  lost  its  supremacy  in  the  little  peninsula  of  ancient
Greece.  In  Greece,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  world,  the  imagination
was  in  some  degree  tempered  and  confined  by  the  understanding.  Not  that
its  strength  was  impaired,  or  its  vitality  diminished.  It  was  broken  in  and  tamed  ;
its  exuberance  was  checked,  its  follies  were  chastised.  But  that  its  energy
remained,  we  have  ample  proof  in  those  productions  of  the  Greek  mind  which
have  survived  to  our  own  time.  The  gain,  therefore,  .was  complete  ;  since  the
inquiring  and  sceptical  faculties  of  the  human  understanding  were  cultivated,
without  destroying  the  reverential  and  poetic  instincts  of  the  imagination.
Whether  or  not  the  balance  was  accurately  adjusted,  is  another  question  ;  but
it  is  certain  that  the  adjustment  was  more  nearly  arrived  at  in  Greece  than  in
any  previous  civilization.241  There  can,  I  think,  be  little  doubt  that,  notwith-
standing what  was  effected,  too  much  authority  was  left  to  the  imaginative
faculties,  and  that  the  purely  reasoning  ones  did  not  receive,  and  never  have
received,  sufficient  attention.  Still,  this  does  not  affect  the  great  fact,  that  the
Greek  literature  is  the  first  in  which  this  deficiency  was  somewhat  remedied,
and  in  which  there  was  a  deliberate  and  systematic  attempt  to  test  all  opinions

238  The  adoration  of  the  dead,  and  particularly  the  adoration  of  martyrs,  was  one
great  point  of  opposition  between  the  orthodox  church  and  the  Manichaeans  (Beausobre,
Histoire  Critique  de  Manichee,  vol.  i.  p.  316,  vol.  ii.  pp.  651,  669) ;  and  it  is  easy  to  under-
stand how  abhorrent  such  a  practice  must  have  been  to  the  Persian  heretics.

239  M.  Cousin,  in  his  eloquent  and  ingenious  work  (Histoire  de  la  Philosophic,  III.  serie,
vol.  i.  pp.  183-187),  has  some  judicious  observations  on  what  he  calls  "  1'epoque  de
Tinfini  "  of  the  East,  contrasted  with  that  "  du  fini,"  which  began  in  Europe.     But  as
to  the  physical  causes  of  this,  he  only  admits  the  grandeur  of  Nature,  overlooking  those
natural  elements  of  mystery  and  of  danger  by  which  religious  sentiments  were  constantly
excited.

240  A  learned  orientalist  says,  that  no  people  have  made  such  efforts  as  the  Hindus
"  to  solve,  exhaust,  comprehend,  what  is  insolvable,  inexhaustible,  incomprehensible."
Troyer's  Preliminary  Discourse  on  the  Dabistan,  vol.  i.  p.  cviii.

241  This  is  noticed  by  Tennemann,  who,  however,  has  not  attempted  to  ascertain  the
cause  :  "  Die  Einbildungskraft  des  Griechen  war  schopferisch,  sie  schuf  in  seinen  Innern
neue  Ideenwelten  ;  aber  er  wurde  doch  nie  verleitet,  die  idealische  Welt  mit  der  wirk-
lichen  zu  verwechseln,  weil  sie  immer  mit  einem  richtigen  Verstande  und  gesunder
Beurtheilungskraft  verbunden  war."     Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  vol.  i.  p.  8  ;  and  vol.  vi.
p.  490,  he  says,  "  Bei  alien  diesen  Mangeln  und  Fehlern  sind  doch  die  Griechen  die  einzige
Nation  der  alten  Welt,  welche  Sinn    fur  Wissenschaft  hatte,  und   zu  diesem  Behufe
forschte.     Sie  haben  doch  die  Bahn  gebrochen,  und  den  Weg  zur  Wissenschaft  geeb-
net."     To  the  same  effect,  Sprengel,  Histoire  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  i.  p.  215.     And  on  this
difference  between  the  Eastern  and  the  European  mind,  see  Matter,  Histoire  du  Gnosti-
cisme,  vol.  i.  pp.  18,  233,  234.      So,  too,  Kant  (Logik,  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  i.  p.  350),
"  Unter  alien  Volkern  haben  also  die  Griechen  erst  angefangen  zu  philosophiren.     Denn
sie  haben  zuerst  versucht,  nicht  an  dem  Leitfaden  der  Bilder  die  Vernunfterkenntnisse
zu  cultiviren,  sondern  in  abstracto  ;  statt  dass  die  anderen  Volker  sich  die  Begriffe  immer
nur  durch  Bilder  in  concrete  verstandlich  zu  machen  such  ten."     [The  generalizations  here
cited  from  Tennemann  and  Kant  as  to  the  non-Hellenic  civilizations  of  antiquity  will
not  bear  examination  in  the  light  of  later  knowledge. — ED.]


84  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

by  their  consonance  with  human  reason,  and  thus  vindicate  the  right  of  Man  to
judge  for  himself  on  matters  which  are  of  supreme  and  incalculable  importance.

1  have  selected  India  and  Greece  as  the  two  terms  of  the  preceding  comparison,
because  our  information  respecting  those  countries  is  most  extensive,  and   lias
been  most  carefully  arranged.      Hut  everything  we  know  of   the   other  tropiral
civilizations  confirms  the  views  I  have  advocated  respecting  the  effects  produced
by   the  Aspects  ot    Nature.     In  Central  America,   extensive  excavations  have
been  made  ;  and  what  has  been  brought  to  light  proves  that  the  national  religion
was,  like  that  of  India,  a  system  of  complete  and  unmitigated  terror.242    Neither
there,  nor  in  Mexico,  nor  in  Peru,  nor  in  Egypt,  did  the  people  desire  to  represent
their  deities  in  human  forms,  or  ascribe  to"  them  human  attributes.    Even  their
temples  are  huge  buildings,  often  constructed  with  great  skill,  but  showing  an
evident  wish  to  impressXthe  mind  with  fear,  and  offering  a  striking  contrast  t<»
the  lighter  and  smaller  structures  which  the  Greeks  employed  for  religious  pur-
poses.     Thus,  even  in  the  style  of  architecture  do  we  see  the  same  principle
at  work  ;  the  dangers  of  the  tropical  civilization  being  more  suggestive  of  the
infinite,  while  the  safety  of  the  European  civilization  was  more  suggestive  oi
the  finite.     To  follow  out  the  consequences  of  this  great  antagonism,  it  would
be  necessary  io  indicate  how  the  infinite,  the  imaginative,  the  synthetic,  and
the  deductive,  are  all  connected;  and  are  opposed,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the
finite,  the  sceptical,  the  analytic,  and  the  inductive.     A  complete  illustration  of
this  would  carry  me  beyond  the  plan  of  this  Introduction,  and  would  perhaps
exceed  the  resources  of  my  own  knowledge  ;  and  I  must  now  leave  to  the  candour
of  the  reader  what  I  am  conscious  is  but  an  imperfect  sketch,  but  what  may,
nevertheless,  suggest  to  him  materials  for  future  thought,  and,  if  I  might  indulge
the  hope,  may  open  to  historians  a  new  field,  by  reminding  them  that  everywhere
the  hand  of  Nature  is  upon  us,  and  that  the  history  of  the  human  mind  can  only
be  understood  by  connecting  with  it  the  history  and  the  aspects  of  the  material
universe.

[The  following  note  proceeds  upon  a  superseded  definition  of  the  functions  of  the
liver.  The  view  now  accepted  is  that  the  liver  has  three  functions  :  (i)  the  glycogenic
(metabolism  of  carbohydrates);  (2)  the  production  of  urea  and  uric  acid  (metabolism
of  nitrogenous  material)  ;  (3)  the  formation  of  bile,  which,  instead  of  being,  as  Buckle
stated,  the  "  principal  business  "  of  the  organ,  "  must  very  largely  be  regarded  as  a
subsidiary  one,  bile  containing  the  waste  products  of  the  liver,  the  results  of  its  other
activities."  (Kirke-Haliburton,  Handbook  of  Physiology,  ed.  1900,  p.  487.) — ED.]

NOTE  36  to  p.  35.

As  these  views  have  a  social  and  economical  importance  quite  independent  of  their
physiological  value,  I  will  endeavour,  in  this  note,  to  fortify  them  still  further,  by  showing
that  the  connexion  between  carbonized  food  and  the  respiratory  functions  may  be  illus-
trated by  a  wider  survey  of  the  animal  kingdom.

The  gland  most  universal  among  the  different  classes  of  animals  is  the  liver;*  and  its
principal  business  is  to  relieve  the  system  of  its  superfluous  carbon,  which  it  accomplishes
by  secreting  bile,  a  highly  carbonized  fluid.b  Now,  the  connexion  between  this  process

2  Thus,  of  one  of  the  idols  at  Copan,  "  The  intention  of  the  sculptor  seems  to  have
been  to  excite  terror."     Stephens' s  Central  America,  vol.  i.  p.  152  ;  at  p.  159,  "  The  form
of  sculpture  most  generally  used  was  a  death's  head."     At  Mayapan  (vol.  iii.  p.  133),
"  representations  of  human  figures,  or  animals  with  hideous  features  and  expressions,
in  producing  which  the  skill  of  the  artist  seems  to  have  been  expended";  and  again,
p.  412,  "  unnatural  and  grotesque  faces."

•''The  most  constant  gland  in  the  animal  kingdom  is  the  liver."  Grant's  Comp.  A  nat.  p  576.  See  also
Ueclard,  Anal.  Gen.  p.  18,  and  Rurdach,  Traiti  de  Physiol.  vol.  ix.  p.  580.  Burdach  says,  "  II  existc  dans
jresque  tout  le  rogue  animal  "  ;  and  the  latest  researches  have  detected  the  rudiments  of  a  liver  even  in
the  Entozoa  and  Rotifera.  Rymer  Jones's  Animal  Kingdom,  1855,  p.  183,  and  Owen's  Invertebrata,  1855,
p.  104.

''  Until  the  analysis  made  by  pemarc*ay  in  1837,  hardly  anything  was  known  of  the  composition  of
t  this  accomplished  chemist  ascertained  that  its  essential  coiistituent  is  choleate  of  soda,  and  that
Dleic  acid  contains  nearly  sixty- three  per  cent,  of  carbon.     Compare  Thomson's  Animal  Chemistry,
PP-  59,  60,  412,  602,  with  Simon's  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  pp.  17-21.


INFLUENCE    EXERCISED    BY    PHYSICAL    LAWS  85


iul  the  respiratory  functions  is  highly  curious.  For  if  we  take  a  general  view  of  animal
lite,  we  shall  find  tliat  the  liver  and  lungs  arc  nearly  always  compensatory  ;  that  is  to  say,
when  one  organ  is  small  and  inert,  the  other  is  large  and  active.  Thus,  reptiles  have
treble  lungs,  but  a  considerable  liver  ;  c  and  thus  too  in  fishes,  which  have  no  lungs,  in
the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  the  size  of  the  liver  is  often  enormous.'1  On  the  other
hand,  insects  have  a  very  large  and  complicated  system  of  air-tubes  ;  but  their  liver
is  minute,  and  its  functions  are  habitually  sluggish.'1  If,  instead  of  comparing  the  different
classes  of  animals,  we  compare  the  different  stages  through  which  the  same  animal  passes,
we  shall  find  further  confirmation  of  this  wide  and  striking  principle.  For  the  law  holds
good  rvcu  before  birth  ;  since  in  the  unborn  infant  the  lungs  have  scarcely  any  activity,
but  there  is  an  immense  liver,  which  is  full  of  energy,  and  pours  out  bile  in  profusion.'
And  so  invariable  is  this  relation,  that  in  man.  the  liver  is  the  first  organ  which  is  formed  ;
it  is  preponderant  during  the  whole  period  of  foetal  life  ;  but  it  rapidly  diminishes,  when,
after  birth,  the  lungs  come  into  play,  and  a  new  scheme  of  compensation  is  established
in  the  system. ••'•

These  facts,  interesting  to  the  philosophic  physiologist,  are  of  great  moment  in  reference
to  the  doctrines  advocated  in  this  chapter.  Inasmuch  as  the  liver  and  lungs  are  com-
pensatory  in  the  history  of  their  organization,  it  is  highly  probable  that  they  are  also  com-
pensatory in  the  functions  they  perform;  and  that  what  is  left  undone  b\  one,  will  have
to  be  accomplished  by  the  other.  The  liver,  therefore,  fulfilling  the  duty,  as  chemistry
teaches  us,  of  decarbonizing  the  system  by  secreting  a  carboni/ed  fluid,  we  should  expect,
(•veil  in  the  absence  of  any  further  evidence,  that  the  lungs  would  be  likewise  decarboniz-
iiif,  ;  in  other  words,  we  should  expert  that  if,  from  any  cause.  \ve  are  surcharged  with
carbon,  our  hmgs  must  assist  in  remedying  the  evil.  This  brings  us,  by  another  road,
to  the  conclusion  that  highly  carbonized  food  has  a  tendency  to  tax  the  lungs  ;  so  that
the  connexion  between  a  carbonized  diet  and  the  respiratory  functions,  instead  of  being,
as  some  assert,  a  crude  hypothesis,  is  an  eminently  scientific  theory,  and  is  corroborated
not  only  by  chemistry,  but  by  the  general  scheme  of  the  animal  kingdom,  and  even  by
the  observation  of  embryological  phenomena.  The  views  of  Liebig,  and  of  his  followers,
are  indeed  supported  by  so  many  analogies,  and  harmonize  so  well  with  other  parts  of
our  knowledge,  that  nothing  but  a  perverse  hatred  of  generalization,  or  an  incapacity
for  dealing  with  large  speculative  truths,  can  explain  the  hostility  directed  against  con-
clusions which  have  been  gradually  forcing  themselves  upon  us  since  Lavoisier,  seventy
years  ago,  attempted  to  explain  the  respiratory  functions  by  subjecting  them  to  the  laws
of  chemical  combination.

c  "  The  size  of  the  liver  and  the  quantity  of  the  bile  are  not  proportionate  to  the  quantity  of  the  food
and  fivquency  of  eating  ;  but  inversely  to  the  size  and  perfection  of  the  lungs.  .  .  .  The  liver  is  propor-
tionately larger  in  reptiles,  which  have  lungs  with  large  cells  incapable  of  rapidly  decarbonizing  the  blood."
r,Ws  Study  o/  Medicine,  1829,  vol.  i.  pp.  32,  33.  See  Cuvier,  Rtgne  Animal,  vol.  ii.  p.  2,  on  "  la  petitess.-
ilfs  v.iissf.mx  pulmonaires  "  of  reptiles.

•'  Curus's  Comparative  Anatomy,  vol.  ii.  p.  230  ;  Grant's  Comp.  Anat.  pp.  385,  596  ;  Rymer  Jones's  Animal
Kingdom,  p.  646.

•  Indeed  it  has  been  supposed  by  M.  Gaede  that  the  "  vaisseaux  biliares  "  of  some  insects  were  not
tears  ;  "  but  this  opinion  appears  to  be  erroneous.     See  Latreille,  in  Cuvier,  Rtgne  Animal,  vol.  iv.
pp.   2<>7,  298.

1  "  La  predominance  du  foie  avant  la  naissance  "  is  noticed  by  Bichat  (Anatomif  Gentralc,  vol.  ii.  p.  272),
ami  l>y  many  other  physiologists ;  but  Dr.  Elliotson  appears  to  have  been  one  of  the  first  to  understand
,i  t.u  i,  the  explanation  of  which  we  might  vainly  seek  for  in  the  earlier  writers.  "  The  hypothesis,  that
one  threat  use  of  the  liver  was,  like  that  of  the  lungs,  to  remove  carbon  from  the  system,  with  this  difference,
that,  the  alteration  of  the  capacity  of  the  air  caused  a  reception  of  caloric  into  the  blood,  in  the  case  of  the
liin;;s,  while  the  hepatic,  excretion  takes  place  without  introduction  of  caloric,  was,  I  recollect,  a  great
favourite  with  me  when  a  student.  .  .  .  The  Heidelberg  professors  have  adduced  many  arguments  to  the
s.mie  efiect.  In  the  foetus,  for  whose  temperature  the  mother's  heat  must  be  sufficient,  the  lungs  perform
no  function  ;  but  the  liver  is  of  great  size,  and  bile  is  secreted  abundantly,  so  that  the  meconium  accumu-
lates considerably  during  the  latter  months  of  pregnancy."  Elliotson's  Human  Physiology,  1840,  p.  102.
In  /  i-pelleiie-r's  Physiologic  Medicale,  vol.  i.  p.  466,  vol.  ii.  pp.  14,  546,  550.  all  this  is  sadly  confused.

8  "  The  liver  is  the  first-formed  organ  in  the  embryo.  It  is  developed  from  the  alimentary  canal,  and  at
about  the  third  week  fills  the  whole  abdomen,  and  is  one-half  the  weight  of  the  entire  embryo.  ...  At
birth  it  is  of  very  large  size,  and  occupies  the  whole  upper  part  of  the  abdomen.  .  .  .  The  liver  diminishes
rapidly  alter  birth,  probably  from  obliteration  of  the  umbilical  vein."  Wilson's  Human  Anatomy,  185 1/
p.  638.  Compare  Hurdach's  Physiologie,  vol.  iv.  p.  447,  where  it  is  said  of  the  liver  in  childhood,  "  Cet
orpine  croft  avec  lenteur,  surtout  comparativement  aux  poumons  ;  le  rapport  de  ceux-ci  au  foie  etant  a
pen  ores  de  i  :  3  avant  la  respiration,  il  etait  de  i  .  i'86  apres  1'etablissement  de  cette  derniere  fonction."
See  also  p.  91,  and  vol.  iii.  p.  483  ;  and  on  the  predominance  of  the  liver  in  fcr-tal  life,  see  the  remarks  of
Serres  (Gtoffroy  Saint  Hilaire,  Anomalies  de  r Organisation,  vol.  ii.  p.  ii).  whose  generali/ation  is  perhaps_a
little  premature.


86  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

In  this,  and  previous  notes  (see  in  particular  notes  30,  31,  35),  I  have  considered  the
connexion  between  food,  respiration,  and  animal  heat,  at  a  length  which  will  appear
tedious  to  readers  uninterested  in  physiological  pursuits  ;  but  the  investigation  has
become  necessary,  on  account  of  the  difficulties  raised  by  experimenters,  who,  not  having
studied  the  subject  comprehensively,  object  to  certain  parts  of  it.  To  mention  what,
from  the  ability  and  reputation  of  the  author,  is  a  conspicuous  instance  of  this,
Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  has  recently  published  a  volume  (Physiological  Researches,  1851)
containing  some  ingeniously  contrived  experiments  on  dogs  and  rabbits,  to  prove  that
heat  is  generated  rather  by  the  nervous  system  than  by  the  respiratory  organs.  [Buckle
himself  has  said  above  that  it  is  generated  by  neither  of  these,  but  by  combustion.
ED.]  Without  following  this  eminent  surgeon  into  all  his  details,  I  may  be  permitted
to  observe,  ist,  That  as  a  mere  matter  of  history,  no  great  physiological  truth  has
ever  yet  been  discovered,  nor  has  any  great  physiological  fallacy  been  destroyed,  by  such
limited  experiments  on  a  single  class  of  animals  ;  and  this  is  partly  because  in  physiology
a  crucial  instance  is  impracticable,  owing  to  the  fact  that  we  deal  with  resisting  and  living
bodies,  and  partly  because  every  experiment  produces  an  abnormal  condition,  and  thus
lets  in  fresh  causes,  the  operation  of  which  is  incalculable  ;  unless,  as  often  happens  in  the
inorganic  world,  we  can  control  the  whole  phenomenon,  ad,  That  the  other  department
of  the  organic  world,  namely,  the  vegetable  kingdom,  has,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  no
nervous  system,  but  nevertheless  possesses  heat ;  and  we  moreover  know  that  the  heat
is  a  product  of  oxygen  and  carbon  (see  note  32  to  chapter  ii.).  3d,  That  the  evidence
of  travellers  respecting  the  different  sorts  of  food,  and  the  different  quantities  of  food,
used  in  hot  countries  and  in  cold  ones,  is  explicable  by  the  respiratory  and  chemical
theories  of  the  origin  of  animal  heat,  but  is  inexplicable  by  the  theory  of  the  nervous
origin  of  heat.


CHAPTER  III

EXAMINATION  OF  THE  METHOD  EMPLOYED  BY  METAPHYSICIANS  FOR
DISCOVERING  MENTAL  LAWS

THE  evidence  that  i  have  collected  seems  to  establish  two  leading  facts,  which,
unless  they  can  be  impugned,  are  the  necessary  basis  of  universal  history.  The
first  fact  is,  that  in  the  civilizations  out  of  Europe,  the  powers  of  Nature  have
been  far  greater  than  in  those  in  Europe.  The  second  fact  is,  that  those  powers
have  worked  immense  mischief  ;  and  that  while  one  division  of  them  has  caused
an  unequal  distribution  of  wealth,  another  division  of  them  has  caused  an  un-
equal distribution  of  thought,  by  concentrating  attention  upon  subjects  which
inflame  the  imagination.  So  far  as  the  experience  of  the  past  can  guide  us,
we  may  say  that  in  all  the  extra -European  civilizations  these  obstacles  were
insuperable  ;  certainly  no  nation  has  ever  yet  overcome  them.  But,  Europe
being  constructed  upon  a  smaller  plan  than  the  other  quarters  of  the  world —
being  also  in  a  colder  region,  having  a  less  exuberant  soil,  a  less  imposing  aspect,
and  displaying  in  all  her  physical  phenomena  much  greater  feebleness — it  was
easier  for  Man  to  discard  the  superstitions  which  Nature  suggested  to  his  imagi-
nation ;  *  and  it  was  also  easier  for  him  to  effect,  not  indeed  a  just  division
of  wealth,  but  something  nearer  to  it,  than  was  practicable  in  the  older  countries.
Hence  it  is  that,  looking  at  the  history  of  the  world  as  a  whole,  the  tendency
has  been,  in  Europe,  to  subordinate  nature  to  man  ;  out  of  Europe,  to  subordi-
nate man  to  nature.  To  this  there  are,  in  barbarous  countries,  several  excep-
tions ;  but  in  civilized  countries  the  rule  has  been  universal.  The  great  division,
therefore,  between  European  civilization  and  non -European  civilization,  is  the
basis  of  the  philosophy  of  history,  since  it  suggests  the  important  consideration
that  if  we  would  understand,  for  instance,  the  history  of  India,  we  must  make
the  external  world  our  first  study,  because  it  has  influenced  man  more  than  man
has  influenced  it.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  would  understand  the  history  of
a  country  like  France  or  England,  we  must  make  man  our  principal  study,
because,  Nature  being  comparatively  weak,  every  step  in  the  great  progress  has
increased  the  dominion  of  the  human  mind  over  the  agencies  of  the  external
world.  Even  in  those  countries  where  the  power  of  man  has  reached  the  highest
point,  the  pressure  of  Nature  is  still  immense;  but  it  diminishes  in  each  suc-
ceeding generation,  because  our  increasing  knowledge  enables  us  not  so  much
to  control  Nature  as  to  foretell  her  movements,  and  thus  obviate  many  of  the
evils  she  would  otherwise  occasion.  How  successful  our  efforts  have  been,  is
evident  from  the  fact  that  the  average  duration  of  life  constantly  becomes
longer,  and  the  number  of  inevitable  dangers  fewer  ;  and  what  makes  this  the
more  remarkable  is  that  the  curiosity  of  men  is  keener,  and  their  contact  with

[*  It  appears  to  be  here  assumed  that  the  discarding  was  done  by  Europeans  spon-
taneously, in  virtue  of  their  "  feebler  "  environment ;  but  the  early  Mediterranean  civili-
zation grew  from  Asiatic  seed  ;  and  the  northern  civilizations  from  the  Mediterranean
But  for  these  transmissions  of  culture,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  northern  Europe
would  have  emerged  from  barbarism. — ED.]


88  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

each  other  closer,  than  in  any  former  period  ;  so  that  while  apparent  hazards
are  multiplied,  we  find  from  experience  that  real  hazards  are,  on  the  whole,
diminished.1

If,  therefore,  we  take  the  largest  possible  view  of  the  history  of  Europe,  and
confine  ourselves  entirely  to  the  primary  cause  of  its  superiority  over  other  parts
of  the  world,  we  must  resolve  it  into  the  encroachment  of  the  mind  of  man  upon
the  organic  and  inorganic  forces  of  Nature.  To  this  all  other  causes  are  sub-
ordinate.2 For  we  have  seen  that  wherever  the  powers  of  Nature  reached  a
certain  height,  the  national  civilization  was  irregularly  developed,  and  the
advance  of  the  civilization  stopped.  The  first  essential  was,  to  limit  the  inter-
ference of  these  physical  phenomena  ;  and  that  was  most  likely  to  be  accom-
plished where  the  phenomena  were  feeblest  and  least  imposing.  This  was  the
case  with  Europe  ;  it  is  accordingly  in  Europe  alone  that  man  has  really  suc-
ceeded in  taming  the  energies  of  nature,  bending  them  to  his  own  will,  turning
them  aside  from  their  ordinary  course,  and  compelling  them  to  minister  to  his
happiness,  and  subserve  the  general  purposes  of  human  life.*

All  around  us  are  the  traces  of  this  glorious  and  successful  struggle.  Indeed,
it  seems  as  if  in  Europe  there  was  nothing  man  feared  to  attempt.  The  invasions
of  the  sea  repelled,  and  whole  provinces,  as  in  the  case  of  Holland,  rescued  from
its  grasp  ;  mountains  cut  through,  and  turned  into  level  roads  ;  soils  of  the  most
obstinate  sterility  becoming  exuberant,  from  the  mere  advance  of  chemical
knowledge ;  while,  in  regard  to  electric  phenomena,  we  see  the  subtlest,  the
most  rapid,  and  the  most  mysterious  of  all  forces,  made  the  medium  of  thought,
and  obeying  even  the  most  capricious  behests  of  the  human  mind.

In  other  instances,  where  the  products  of  the  external  world  have  been  re-
fractory, man  has  succeeded  in  destroying  what  he  could  hardly  hope  to  subju-
gate. The  most  cruel  diseases,  such  as  the  plague,  properly  so  called,  and  the
leprosy  of  the  Middle  Ages,3  have  entirely  disappeared  from  the  civilized  parts

1  This  diminution  of  casualties  is  undoubtedly  one  cause,  though  a  slight  one,  of  the
increased  duration  of  life  ;  but  the  most  active  cause  is  a  general  improvement  in  the
physical  condition  of  man  :  see  Sir  B.  Brodie's  Lectures  on  Pathology  and  Surgery,  p.  212  ;
and  for  proof  that  civilized  men  are  stronger   than  uncivilized  ones,  see  Quetelet  sur
rHomme,  vol.  ii.  pp.  67,  272  ;  Lawrence's  Lectures  on  Man,  pp.  275,  276  ;  Ellis's  Polynesian
Researches,  vol.  i.  p.  98  ;  Whately's  Lectures  on  Political  Economy,  8vo,  1831,  p.  59  ;  Journal
of  the  Statistical  Society,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  32,  33  ;  Dufau,  Traite  de  Statistique,  p.  107  ;  Haw-
kins's Medical  Statistics,  p.  232.

2  The  general  social  consequences  of  this  I  shall  hereafter  consider  ;  but  the  mere
economical  consequences  are  well  expressed  by  Mr.  Mill :  "  Of  the  features  which  char-
acterize this  progressive  economical  movement  of  civilized  nations,   that  which  first
excites  attention,  through  its  intimate  connexion  with  the  phenomena  of  Production,
is  the  perpetual,  and,  so  far  as  human  foresight  can  extend,  the  unlimited,  growth  of
man's  power  over  Nature.    Our  knowledge  of  the  properties  and  laws  of  physical  objects
shows  no  sign  of  approaching  its  ultimate  boundaries  ;  it  is  advancing  more  rapidly,
and  in  a  greater  number  of  directions  at  once,  than  in  any  previous  age  or  generation,
and  affording  such  frequent  glimpses  of  unexplored  fields  beyond,  as  to  justify  the  belief
that  our  acquaintance  with  Nature  is  still  almost  in  its  infancy."     Mill's  Principles  of
Polit.  Economy,  vol.  ii.  pp.  246-7.

3  What  this  horrible  disease  once  was,  may 'be  estimated  from  the  fact  "  qu'au  trei-
zieme  siecle  on  comptait  en  France  seulement,  deux  mille  leproseries,  et  que  1'Europe
entiere  renfermait  environ  dix-neuf  mille  etablissemens  semblables."     Sprengel,  Histoire
de  la  Medecine,  vol.  ii.  p.  374.     As  to  the  mortality  caused  by  the  plague,  see  Clot -Bey  de
la  Peste,  Paris,  1840,  pp.  62,  63,  185,  292.

[*  These  passages  disregard  not  only  the  great  works  of  irrigation  undertaken  in  ancient
times  in  Mesopotamia  and  Syria,  and  thereafter  in  India,  but  the  success  of  Peruvians
and  Chinese  in  artificial  soil -making.  Mesopotamian  canalization  and  Indian  tank-
building  were  great  achievements,  although  done  with  "  naked  human  strength,"  and
it  was  an  Asiatic,  Xerxes,  who  caused  a  canal  to  be  dug  through  the  promontory  of
Mount  Athos  for  the  passage  of  one  fleet. — ED.]


THE    METHOD    EMPLOYED    BY    METAPHYSICIANS         89

of  Europe  ;  and  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  they  should  ever  again  be  seen  there.
Wild  beasts  and  birds  of  prey  have  been  extirpated,  and  are  no  longer  allowed
to  infest  the  haunts  of  civilized  men.  Those  frightful  famines  by  which  Europe
used  to  be  ravaged  several  times  in  every  century,4  have  ceased  ;  and  so  success-
fully have  we  grappled  with  them,  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  fear  of  their
ever  returning  with  anything  like  their  former  severity.  Indeed,  our  resources
are  now  so  great  that  we  could  at  worst  only  suffer  from  a  slight  and  tem-
porary scarcity  ;  since,  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge,  the  evil  would  be  met
at  the  outset  by  remedies  which  chemical  science  could  easily  suggest.5

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  notice  how,  in  numerous  other  instances,  the  progress
of  European  civilization  has  been  marked  by  the  diminished  influence  of  the
external  world  :  I  mean,  of  course,  those  peculiarities  of  the  external  world
which  have  an  existence  independent  of  the  wishes  of  man,  and  were  not  created
by  him.  The  most  advanced  nations  do,  in  their  present  state,  owe  compara-
tively little  to  those  original  features  of  nature  which,  in  every  civilization  out
of  Europe,  exercised  unlimited  power.  Thus,  in  Asia  and  elsewhere,  the  course
of  trade,  the  extent  of  commerce,  and  many  similar  circumstances,  were  deter-
mined by  the  existence  of  rivers,  by  the  facility  with  which  they  could  be  navi-
gated, and  by  the  number  and  goodness  of  the  adjoining  harbours.  But  in
Europe  the  determining  cause  is  not  so  much  these  physical  peculiarities,  as
the  skill  and  energy  of  man.  Formerly  the  richest  countries  were  those  in
which  nature  was  most  bountiful  ;  now  the  richest  countries  are  those  in  which
man  is  most  active.*  For  in  our  age  of  the  world,  if  nature  is  parsimonious,
we  know  how  to  compensate  her  deficiencies.  If  a  river  is  difficult  to  navigate,
or  a  country  difficult  to  traverse,  our  engineers  can  correct  the  error,  and  remedy
the  evil.  If  we  have  no  rivers,  we  make  canals  ;  if  we  have  no  natural  harbours,
we  make  artificial  ones.  And  so  marked  is  this  tendency  to  impair  the  authority
of  natural  phenomena,  that  it  is  seen  even  in  the  distribution  of  the  people,
since,  in  the  most  civilized  parts  of  Europe,  the  population  of  the  towns  is  every-
where outstripping  that  of  the  country  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  the  more  men
congregate  in  great  cities,  the  more  they  will  become  accustomed  to  draw  their
materials  of  thought  from  the  business  of  human  life,  and  the  less  attention  they
will  pay  to  those  peculiarities  of  nature  which  are  the  fertile  source  of  super-
stition, and  by  which,  in  every  civilization  out  of  Europe,  the  progress  of  man
was  arrested.

From  these  facts  it  may  be  fairly  inferred  that  the  advance  of  European
civilization  is  characterized  by  a  diminishing  influence  of  physical  laws,  and
an  increasing  influence  of  mental  laws.  The  complete  proof  of  this  generaliza-
tion can  be  collected  only  from  history  ;  and  therefore  I  must  reserve  a  large
share  of  the  evidence  on  which  it  is  founded,  for  the  future  volumes  of  this  work.

4  For  a  curious  list  of  famines,  see  an  essay  by  Mr.  Farr,  in  Journal  of  the  Statistical
Society,  vol.  ix.  pp.  159-163.     He  says  that  in  the  eleventh,  twelfth,  and   thirteenth
centuries,  the  average  was,  in  England,  one  famine  every  fourteen  years.

5  In  the  opinion  of  one  of  the  highest  living  authorities,  famine  is,  even  in  the  present
state  of  chemistry,  "  next  to  impossible."     HerscheVs  Discourse  on  Natural  Philosophy,
p.  65.     Cuvier  (Recueil  des  Eloges,  vol.  i.  p.  10)  says  that  we  have  succeeded  "  a  rendre
toute  famine  impossible."     See  also  Godwin  on  Population,  p.  500  ;  and  for  a  purely
economical  argument  to  prove  the  impossibility  of  famine,  see  Mill's  Principles  of  Politi-
cal Economy,  vol.  ii.  p.  258  ;  and  compare  a  note  in  Ricardo's  Works,  p.  191.     The  Irish
famine  may  seem  an  exception  :  but  it  could  have  been  easily  baffled  except  for  the
poverty  of  the  people,  which  frustrated  our  efforts  to  reduce  it  to  a  dearth.

[*  This  activity  again,  however,  has  been  above  denned  as  a  result  of  the  evocative  or
propulsive  power  of  Nature.  To  call  the  energy  of  man,  then,  the  "  determining  cause,"
is  strictly  an  inconsistency.  And  where  man's  activity  is  specifically  stimulated  by  the
possession  of  coal  and  iron,  "  Nature  "  again  must  be  recognized  as  the  determining
condition ;  even  if  we  ignore  the  fact  that  European  culture  derives  from  Asiatic.  Three
thousand  years  ago,  northern  Europeans  did  not  "  know  how  "  to  compensate  the
"  deficiencies  "  of  Nature. — ED.]


90  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

But  that  the  proposition  is  fundamentally  true,  must  be  admitted  by  whoever,
in  addition  to  the  arguments  just  adduced,  will  concede  two  premisses,  neither
of  which  seems  susceptible  of  much  dispute.  The  first  premiss  is,  that  we  are
in  possession  of  no  evidence  that  the  powers  of  nature  have  ever  been  perma-
nently increased  ;  and  that  we  have  no  reason  to  expect  that  any  such  increase
can  take  place.  The  other  premiss  is,  that  we  have  abundant  evidence  that  the
resources  of  the  human  mind  have  become  more  powerful,  more  numerous,
and  more  able  to  grapple  with  the  difficulties  of  the  external  world  ;  because
every  fresh  accession  to  our  knowledge  supplies  fresh  means  with  which  we  can
either  control  the  operations  of  nature,  or,  failing  in  that,  can  foresee  the  con-
sequences, and  thus  avoid  what  it  is  impossible  to  prevent  ;  in  both  instances,
diminishing  the  pressure  exercised  on  us  by  external  agents.

If  these  premisses  are  admitted,  we  are  led  to  a  conclusion  which  is  of  great
value  for  the  purpose  of  this  Introduction.  For  if  the  measure  of  civilization
is  the  triumph  of  the  mind  over  external  agents,  it  becomes  clear  that  of  the  two
classes  of  laws  which  regulate  the  progress  of  mankind,  the  mental  class  is  more
important  than  the  physical.*  This,  indeed,  is  assumed  by  one  school  of  thinkers
as  a  matter  of  course,  though  I  am  not  aware  that  its  demonstration  has  been
hitherto  attempted  by  anything  even  approaching  an  exhaustive  analysis.
The  question,  however,  as  to  the  originality  of  my  arguments,  is  one  of  very
trifling  moment  ;  but  what  we  have  to  notice  is  that  in  the  present  stage  of  our
inquiry  the  problem  with  which  we  started  has  become  simplified,  and  a  dis-
covery of  the  laws  of  European  history  is  resolved,  in  the  first  instance,  into  a
discovery  of  the  laws  of  the  human  mind.  These  mental  laws,  when  ascer-
tained, will  be  the  ultimate  basis  of  the  history  of  Europe  ;  the  physical  laws
will  be  treated  as  of  minor  importance,  and  as  merely  giving  rise  to  disturbances,
the  force  and  the  frequency  of  which  have,  during  several  centuries,  perceptibly
diminished.

If  we  now  inquire  into  the  means  of  discovering  the  laws  of  the  human  mind,
the  metaphysicians  are  ready  with  an  answer  ;  and  they  refer  us  to  their  own
labours  as  supplying  a  satisfactory  solution.  It  therefore  becomes  necessary
to  ascertain  the  value  of  their  researches,  to  measure  the  extent  of  their  resources,
and,  above  all,  to  test  the  validity  of  that  method  which  they  always  follow,
and  by  which  alone,  as  they  assert,  great  truths  can  be  elicited.

The  metaphysical  method,  though  necessarily  branching  into  two  divisions,
is  in  its  origin  always  the  same,  and  consists  in  each  observer  studying  the
operations  of  his  own  mind.6  This  is  the  direct  opposite  of  the  historical  method  ;
the  metaphysician  studying  one  mind,  the  historian  studying  many  minds.
Now,  the  first  remark  to  make  on  this  is  that  the  metaphysical  method  is  one
by  which  no  discovery  has  ever  yet  been  made  in  any  branch  of  knowledge.
Everything  we  at  present  know  has  been  ascertained  by  studying  phenomena,
from  which  all  casual  disturbances  having  been  removed,  the  law  remains  as  a
conspicuous  residue.7  And  this  can  only  be  done  by  observations  so  numerous

6  "  As  the  metaphysician  carries  within  himself  the  materials  of  his  reasoning,  he  is
not  under  a  necessity  of  looking  abroad  for  subjects  of  speculation  or  amusement."
Stewart's  Philosophy  of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.  p.  462  ;  and  the  same  remark,  almost  literally
repeated,  at  vol.  iii.  p.  260.     Locke  makes  what  passes  in  each  man's  mind  the  sole
source  of  metaphysics,  and  the  sole  test  of  their  truth.     Essay  concerning  Human  Under-
standing, in  Locke's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  18,  76,  79,  121,  146,  152,  287,  vol.  ii.  pp.  141,  243.

7  The  deductive  sciences  form,  of  course,  an  exception  to  this  ;  but  the  whole  theory
of  metaphysics  is  founded  on  its  inductive  character,  and  on  the  supposition  that  it
consists  of  generalized  observations,  and  that  from  them  alone  the  science  of  mind  can

[*  There  is  here  a  reversion  to  the  formerly  noticed  fallacy  as  to  "  law."  Mental
"  laws  "  are  involved  alike  in  the  two  evolutions  of  civilization  under  notice ;  and  it  was
as  much  a  matter  of  such  "  lawj"  that  Asiatic  civilizations  should  have  been  arrested  as
that  the  modern  European  should  still  progress.  The  true  statement  is  that  there  is
always  an  equation  of  organism  and  environment,  but  that  the  terms  of  the  equation
alter.— ED.]


THE    METHOD    EMPLOYED    BY    METAPHYSICIANS         91

as  to  eliminate  the  disturbances,  or  else  by  experiments  so  delicate  as  to  isolate
the  phenomena.  One  of  these  conditions  is  essential  to  all  inductive  science  ;
but  neither  of  them  does  the  metaphysician  obey.  To  isolate  the  phenomenon
is  for  him  an  impossibility  ;  since  no  man,  into  whatever  state  of  reverie  he  may
be  thrown,  can  entirely  cut  himself  off  from  the  influence  of  external  events,
which  must  produce  an  effect  on  his  mind,  even  when  he  is  unconscious  of  their
presence.  As  to  the  other  condition,  it  is  by  the  metaphysician  set  at  open
defiance  ;  for  his  whole  system  is  based  on  the  supposition  that,  by  studying  a
single  mind,  he  can  get  the  laws  of  all  minds  ;  so  that  while  he,  on  the  one" hand,
is  unable  to  isolate  his  observations  from  disturbances,  he  on  the  other  hand
refuses  to  adopt  the  only  remaining  precaution, — he  refuses  so  to  enlarge  his
survey  as  to  eliminate  the  disturbances  by  which  his  observations  are  troubled.8

This  is  the  first  and  fundamental  objection  to  which  metaphysicians  are
exposed,  even  on  the  threshold  of  their  science.  But  if  we  penetrate  a  little
deeper,  we  shall  meet  with  another  circumstance,  which,  though  less  obvious,
is  equally  decisive.  After  the  metaphysician  has  taken  for  granted  that,  by
studying" one  mind,  he  can  discover  the  laws  of  all  minds,  he  finds  himself  in-
volved in  a  singular  difficulty  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  apply  even  this  imperfect
method.  The  difficulty  to  which  I  allude  is  one  which,  not  being  met  with  in
any  other  pursuit,  seems  to  have  escaped  the  attention  of  those  who  are  un-
acquainted with  metaphysical  controversies.  To  understand,  therefore,  its
nature,  it  is  requisite  to  give  a  short  account  of  those  two  great  schools,  to  one
of  which  all  metaphysicians  must  necessarily  belong.

In  investigating  the  nature  of  the  human  mind,  according  to  the  metaphysical
scheme,  there  are  two  methods  of  proceeding,  which  are  equally  obvious,
and  which  yet  lead  to  entirely  different  results.  According  to  the  first
method,  the'"  inquirer  begins  by  examining  his  sensations.  According  to  the
other  method,  he  begins  by  examining  his  ideas.  These  two  methods  always  have
led,  and  always  must  lead,  to  conclusions  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other.
Nor  are  the  reasons  of  this  difficult  to  understand.  In  metaphysics,  the  mind
is  the  instrument,  as  well  as  the  material  on  which  the  instrument  is  employed.
The  means  by  which  the  science  must  be  worked  out  being  thus  the  same  as  the
object  upon  which  it  works,  there  arises  a  difficulty  of  a  very  peculiar  kind.
This  difficulty  is,  the  impossibility  of  taking  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  whole
of  the  mental  phenomena  ;  because,  however  extensive  such  a  view  may  be,  it
must  exclude  the  state  of  the  mind  by  which,  or  in  which,  the  view  itself  is  taken.
Hence  we  may  perceive  what,  I  think,  is  a  fundamental  difference  between
physical  and  metaphysical  inquiries.  In  physics,  there  are  several  methods  of
proceeding,  all  of  which  lead  to  the  same  results.  But  in  metaphysics  it  will
invariably  be  found  that  if  two  men  of  equal  ability,  and  equal  honesty,  employ
different  methods  in  the  study  of  the  mind,  the  conclusions  which  they  obtain
will  also  be  different.  To  those  who  are  unversed  in  these  matters,  a  few  illus-
trations will  set  this  in  a  clearer  light.  Metaphysicians  who  begin  by  the  study
of  ideas,  observe  in  their  own  minds  an  idea,  of  space.  Whence,  they  ask,  can
this  arise  ?  It  cannot,  they  say,  owe  its  origin  to  the  senses,  because  "the  senses

be  raised.  [This  statement  does  not  appear  to  consist  with  others  made  by  Buckle  on
the  subject  of  induction  and  deduction  in  a  later  chapter. — ED.]

8  These  remarks  are  applicable  only  to  those  who  follow  the  purely  metaphysical
method  of  investigation.  There  is,  however,  a  very  small  number  of  metaphysicians,
among  whom  M.  Cousin  is  the  most  eminent  in  France,  in  whose  works  we  find  larger
views,  and  an  attempt  to  connect  historical  inquiries  with  metaphysical  ones  ;  thus
recognizing  the  necessity  of  verifying  their  original  speculations.  To  this  method  there
can  be  no  objection,  provided  the  metaphysical  conclusions  are  merely  regarded  as
hypotheses  which  require  verification  to  raise  them  to  theories.  But  instead  of  this
cautious  proceeding,  the  almost  invariable  plan  is,  to  treat  the  hypothesis  as  if  it  were
a  theory  already  proved,  and  as  if  there  remained  nothing  to  do  but  to  give  historical
illustrations  of  truths  established  by  the  psychologist.  This  confusion  between  illustra-
tion and  verification  appears  to  be  the  universal  failing  of  those  who,  like  Vice  and
Fichte,  speculate  upon  historical  phenomena  d  priori.


92  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

supply  only  what  is  finite  and  contingent  ;  whereas  the  idea  of  space  is  infinite
and  necessary.9  It  is  infinite,  since  we  cannot  conceive  that  space  has  an  end  ;
and  it  is  necessary,  since  we  cannot  conceive  the  possibility  of  its  non-existence.
Thus  far  the  idealist.  But  the  sensualist,  as  he  is  called,10 — he  who  begins,  not
with  ideas,  but  with  sensations,  arrives  at  a  very  different  conclusion.  He  remarks,
that  we  can  have  no  idea  of  space,  until  we  have  first  had  an  idea  of  objects  ,
and  that  the  ideas  of  objects  can  only  be  the  results  of  the  sensations  which
those  objects  excite.  As  to  the  idea  of  space  being  necessary,  this,  he  says,
only  results  from  the  circumstance  that  we  never  can  perceive 'an  object  which
does  not  bear  a  certain  position  to  some  other  object.  This  forms  an  indis-
soluble association  between  the  idea  of  position  and  the  idea  of  an  object  ;  and
as  this  association  is  constantly  repeated  before  us,  we  at  length  find  ourselves
unable  to  conceive  an  object  without  position,  or,  in  other  words,  without  space.11
As  to  space  being  infinite,  this,  he  says,  is  a  notion  we  get  by  conceiving  a  con-
tinual addition  to  lines,  or  to  surfaces,  or  to  bulk,  which  are  the  three  modifications
of  extension.12  On  innumerable  other  points,  we  find  the  same  discrepancy
between  the  two  schools.  The  idealist,13  for  example,  asserts  that  our  notions
of  cause,  of  time,  of  personal  identity,  and  of  substance,  are  universal  and  neces-
sary ;  that  they  are  simple  ;  and  that,  not  being  susceptible  of  analysis,  they
must  be  referred  to  the  original  constitution  of  the  mind.14  On  the  other  hand,

9  Compare  Stewart's  Philosophy  of  the  Mind,  vol.  ii.  p.  194,  with  Cousin,  Hist,  de  la
Philosophie,  II.  serie,  vol.  ii.  p.  92.     Among  the  Indian  metaphysicians,  there  was  a  sect
which  declared  space  to  be  the  cause  of  all  things.     Journal  of  Asiatic  Soc.,  vol.  vi.
pp.  268,  290.    See  also  the  Dabistan,  vol.  ii.  p.  40 ;  which,  however,  was  contrary  to  the
Vedas.     Rammohun  Roy  on  the  Veds,  1832,  pp.  8,  in,     In  Spain,  the  doctrine  of  the
infinity  of  space  is  heretical.     Doblado's  Letters,  p.  96  ;  which  should  be  compared  with
the  objection  of  Irenaeus  against  the  Valentinians,  in  Beausobre,  Histoire  de  Manichee,
vol.  ii.  p.  275.     For  the  different  theories  of  space,  I  may,  moreover,  refer  to  Hitter's  Hist,
of  Ancient  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  pp.  451,  473,  477,  vol.  ii.  p.  314,  vol.  iii.  pp.  195-204  ;  Cud-
worth's  Intellectual  System,  vol.  i.  p.  191,  vol.  iii.  pp.  230,  472  ;  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,
in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  23,  62,  81,  120,  139,  147,  256,  334,  347  ;   Tennemann,  Ge-
schichte  der  Philosophie,  vol.  i.  p.  109,  vol.  ii.  p.  303,  vol.  iii.  pp.  130-137,  vol.  iv.  p.  284,
vol.  v.  pp.  384-387,  vol.  vi.  p.  99,  vol.  viii.  pp.  87,  88,  683,  vol.  ix.  pp.  257,  355»  410,
vol.  x.  p.  79,  vol.  xi.  pp.  195,  385-389.

10  This  is  the  title  conferred  by  M.  Cousin  upon  nearly  all  the  greatest  English  meta-
physicians, and  upon  Condillac  and  all  his  disciples  in  France,  their  system  having  "  le
nom  merite  de  sensualisme."     Cousin,  Histoire  de  la  Philosophie,  II.  serie,  vol.  ii.  p.  88.
The  same  name  is  given  to  the  same  school,  in  Feuchtersleben's  Medical  Psychology,  p.  52,
and  in  Renouard's  Histoire  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  i.  p.  346,  vol.  ii.  p.  368.     In  Jobert's  New
System  of  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  p.  334,  8vo,  1849,  it  is  called  "  sensationalism,"  which  seems
a  preferable  expression.

11  This  is  very  ably  argued  by  Mr.  James  Mill  in  his  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the
Human  Mind,  vol.  ii.  pp.  32,  93-95,  and  elsewhere.     Compare  Essay  concerning  Human
Understanding,  in  Locke's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  147,  148,  154,  157,  and  the  ingenious  dis-
tinction, p.  198,  "  between  the  idea  of  the  infinity  of  space,  and  the  idea  of  a  space  in-
finite."    At  p.  208,  Locke  sarcastically  says,  "  But  yet,  after  all  this,  there  being  men
who  persuade  themselves  that  they  have  clear,  positive,  comprehensive  ideas  of  infinity,
it  is  fit  they  enjoy  their  privilege  ;  and  I  should  be  very  glad  (with  some  others  that  I
know,  who  acknowledge  they  have  none  such)  to  be  better  informed  by  their  communi-
cation."

12  Mill's  Analysis  of  the  Mind,  vol.  ii.  pp.  96,  97.     See  also  the  Examination  of  Male-
branche,  in  Locke's  Works,  vol.  viii.  pp.  248,  249  ;  and  Miiller's  Elements  of  Physiology,
vol.  ii.  p.  1081,  which  should  be  compared  with  Comte,  Philosophie  Positive,  vol.  i.  p.  354.

13  I  speak  of  idealists  in  opposition  to  sensationalists  ;  though  the  word  idealist  is  often
used  by  metaphysicians  in  a  very  different  sense.    On  the  different  kinds  of  idealism,  see
Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  and  Prolegomena  zu  jeder  kiinftigen  Metaphysik,  in  Kant's
Werke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  223,  389,  vol.  iii.  pp.  204,  210,  306,  307.     According  to  him,  the  Car-
tesian idealism  is  empirical.

14  Thus,  Dugald  Stewart  (Philosophical  Essays,  Edin.  1810,  p.  33)  tells  us  of  "  the


THE    METHOD    EMPLOYED    BY    METAPHYSICIANS         93

the  sensationalist,  so  far  from  recognizing  the  simplicity  of  these  ideas,  con-
siders them  to  be  extremely  complex,  and  looks  upon  their  universality  and
necessity  as  merely  the  result  of  a  frequent  and  intimate  association.15

This  is  the  first  important  difference  which  is  inevitably  consequent  on  the
adoption  of  different  methods.  The  idealist  is  compelled  to  assert  that  neces-
sary truths  and  contingent  truths  have  a  different  origin. ^  The  sensationalist
is  bound  to  affirm  that  they  have  the  same  origin.1'  The  further  these  two
great  schools  advance,  the  more  marked  does  their  divergence  become.  They
are  at  open  war  in  every  department  of  morals,  of  philosophy,  and  of  art.  The
idealists  say  that  all  men  have  essentially  the  same  notion  of  the  good,  the  true,
and  the  beautiful.  The  sensationalists  affirm  that  there  is  no  such  standard,
because  ideas  depend  upon  sensations,  and  because  the  sensations  of  men  depend
upon  the  changes  in  their  bodies,  and  upon  the  external  events  by  which  their
bodies  are  affected.

Such  is  a  short  specimen  of  the  opposite  conclusions  to  which  the  ablest  meta-
physicians have  been  driven,  by  the  simple  circumstance  that  they  have  pur-
sued opposite  methods  of  investigation.  And  this  is  the  more  important  to  ob-
serve, because  after  these  two  methods  have  been  employed,  the  resources  of
metaphysics  are  evidently  exhausted.18  Both  parties  agree  that  mental  laws
can  be  discovered  only  by  studying  individual  minds,  and  that  there  is  nothing
in  the  mind  which  is  not  the  result  either  of  reflection  or  of  sensation.  The  only
choice,  therefore,  they  have  to  make,  is  between  subordinating  the  results  of
sensation  to  the  laws  of  reflection,  or  else  subordinating  the  results  of  reflection
to  the  laws  of  sensation.  Every  system  of  metaphysics  has  been  constructed
according  to  one  of  these  schemes  ;  and  this  must  always  continue  to  be  the
case,  because  when  the  two  schemes  are  added  together,  they  include  the  totality

simple  idea  of  personal  identity."  And  Reid  (Essays  on  the  Powers  of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.
p.  354)  says,  "  I  know  of  no  ideas  or  notions  that  have  a  better  claim  to  be  accounted
simple  and  original  than  those  of  space  and  time."  In  the  Sanscrit  metaphysics,  time
is  "  an  independent  cause."  See  the  Vishnu  Purana,  pp.  10,  216.

is  "As  Space  is  a  comprehensive  word,  including  all  positions,  or  the  whole  of  syn-
chronous order,  so  Time  is  a  comprehensive  word,  including  all  successions,  or  the  whole
of  successive  order."  Mill's  Analysis  of  the  Mind,  vol.  ii.  p.  100  ;  and  on  the  relation  of
time  to  memory,  vol.  i.  p.  252.  In  Jobert's  New  System  of  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  33,  it  is
said  that  "  time  is  nothing  but  the  succession  of  events,  and  we  know  events  by  experi-
ence only."  See  also  p.  133,  and  compare  respecting  time  Condillac,  Traite  des  Sensations,
pp.  104-114,  222,  223,  331-333.  To  the  same  effect  is  Essay  concerning  Human  Under-
standing, book  ii.  chap,  xiv.,  in  Locke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  163  ;  and  see  his  second  reply  to
the  Bishop  of  Worcester,  in  Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.  414-416 ;  and  as  to  the  idea  of  substance,
see  vol.  i.  pp.  285-290,  292,  308,  vol.  iii.  pp.  5,  10,  17.

16  Reid  (Essays  on  the  Powers  of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.  p.  281)  says  that   necessary  truths
"  cannot  be  the  conclusions  of  the  senses  ;  for  our  senses  testify  only  what  is,  and  not
what  must  necessarily  be."     See  also  vol.  ii.  pp.  53,  204,  239,  240,  281.     The  same  dis-
tinction is  peremptorily  asserted  in  WhewelVs  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  8vo,
1847,  vol.  i.  pp.  60-73,  I4°  5  and  see  Dugald  Stewart's  Philosophical  Essays,  pp.  123,  124.
Sir  W.  Hamilton  (Additions  to  Reid's  Works,  p.  754)  says,  that  non -contingent  truths
"  have  their  converse  absolutely  incogitable."     But  this  learned  writer  does  not  mention
how  we  are  to  know  when  anything  is  "  absolutely  incogitable."     That  we  cannot  cogi-
tate an  idea,  is  certainly  no  proof  of  its  being  incogitable  :  for  it  may  be  cogitated  at  some
later  period,  when  knowledge  is  more  advanced.

17  This  is  asserted  by  all  the  followers  of  Locke  ;  and  one  of  the  latest  productions  of
that  school  declares,  that  "  to  say  that  necessary  truths  cannot  be  acquired  by  experi-
ence, is  to  deny  the  most  clear  evidence  of  our  senses  and  reason."     Jobert's  New  System
of  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  58.

18  To  avoid  misapprehension,  I  may  repeat,  that,  here  and  elsewhere,  I  mean  by
metaphysics,  that  vast  body  of  literature  which  is  constructed  on  the  supposition  that
the  laws  of  the  human  mind  can  be  generalized  solely  from  the  facts  of  individual  con-
sciousness.    For  this  scheme,  the  word  '  metaphysics '  is  rather  inconvenient,  but  it  will
cause  no  confusion  if  this  definition  of  it  is  kept  in  view  by  the  reader.


94  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  metaphysical  phenomena.  Each  process  is  equally  plausible  ;19  the  supporters
of  each  are  equally  confident  ;  and  by  the  very  nature  of  the  dispute,  it  is  im-
possible that  any  middle  term  should  be  found  ;  nor  can  there  ever  be  an  umpire,
because  no  one  can  mediate  between  metaphysical  controversies  without  being
a  metaphysician,  and  no  one  can  be  a  metaphysician  without  being  either  a
sensationalist  or  an  idealist  ;  in  other  words,  without  belonging  to  one  of  those
very  parties  whose  claims  he  professes  to  judge.20

On  these  grounds,  we  must,  I  think,  arrive  at.  the  conclusion  that  as  meta-
physicians are  unavoidably,  and  by  the  very  nature  of  their  inquiry,  broken  up
into  two  completely  antagonistic  schools,  the  relative  truth  of  which  there  are
no  means  of  ascertaining  ;  as  they,  moreover,  have  but  few  resources,  and  as  they
use  those  resources  according  to  a  method  by  which  no  other  science  has  ever
been  developed, — we,  looking  at  these  things,  ought  not  to  expect  that  they
can  supply  us  with  sufficient  data  for  solving  those  great  problems  which  the
history  of  the  human  mind  presents  to  our  view.  And  whoever  will  take  the
pains  fairly  to  estimate  the  present  condition  of  mental  philosophy,  must  admit
that,  notwithstanding  the  influence  it  has  always  exercised  over  some  of  the  most
powerful  minds,  and  through  them  over  society  at  large,  there  is  nevertheless
no  other  study  which  has  been  so  zealously  prosecuted,  so  long  continued,  and
yet  remains  so  barren  of  results.  In  no  other  department  has  there  been  so  much
movement,  and  so  little  progress.  Men  of  eminent  abilities,  and  of  the  greatest
integrity  of  purpose,  have  in  every  civilized  country,  for  many  centuries,  been
engaged  in  metaphysical  inquiries  ;  and  yet  at  the  present  moment  their  systems,
so  far  from  approximating  towards  truth,  are  diverging  from  each  other  with  a
velocity  which  seems  to  be  accelerated  by  the  progress  of  knowledge.  The
incessant  rivalry  of  the  hostile  schools,  the  violence  with  which  they  have  been
supported,  and  the  exclusive  and  unphilosophic  confidence  with  which  each  has
advocated  its  own  method, — all  these  things  have  thrown  the  study  of  the  mind
into  a  confusion  only  to  be  compared  to  that  in  which  the  study  of  religion  has

19  What  a  celebrated  historian  of  philosophy  says  of  Platonism,  is  equally  true  of  all
the   great   metaphysical   systems  :    "  Dass   sie   ein   zusammenhangendes   harmonisches
Ganzes  ausmachen  (i.e.  the  leading  propositions  of  it)  fallt  in  die  Augen."     Tennemann,
Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  vol.  ii.  p.  527.     And  yet  he  confesses  (vol.  iii.  p.  52)  of  it  and
the  opposite  system ;  "  und  wenn  man  auf  die  Beweise  siehet,  so  ist  der  Empirismus  des
Aristoteles  nicht  besser  begriindet  als  der  Rationalismus  des  Plato."     Kant  admits  that
there  can  be  only  one  true  system,  but  is  confident  that  he  has  discovered  what  all  his
predecessors  have  missed.     Die  Metaphysik  der  Sitten,  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  v.  p.  5,  where
he  raises  the  question,  "  ob  es  wohl  mehr  als  eine  Philosophic  geben  konne."     In  the
Kritik,  and  in  the  Prolegomena  zu  jeder  kunftigen  Metaphysik,  he  says  that  metaphysics
have  made  no  progress,  and  that  the  study  can  hardly  be  said  to  exist.     Werke,  vol.  ii.
pp.  49,  50,  vol.  iii.  pp.  1 66,  246.

20  We  find  a  curious  instance  of  this,  in  the  attempt  made  by  M.  Cousin  to  found  an
eclectic  school ;  for  this  very  able  and  learned  man  has  been  quite  unable  to  avoid  the  one-
sided view  which  is  to  every  metaphysician  an  essential  preliminary  ;  and  he  adopts  that
fundamental  distinction  between  necessary  ideas  and  contingent  ideas,  by  which  the
idealist  is  separated  from  the  sensationalist :  "  la  grande  division  des  idees  aujourd'hui
etablie  est  la  division  des  idees  contingentes  et  des  idees  necessaires."     Cousin,  Hist,  de
la  Philosophic,  II.  serie,  vol.  i.  p.  82  :  see  also  vol.  ii.  p.  92,  and  the  same  work,  I.  serie,
vol.  i.  pp.  249,  267,  268,  311,  vol.  iii.  pp.  51-54.     M.  Cousin  constantly  contradicts  Locke,
and  then  says  he  has  refuted  that  profound  and  vigorous  thinker  ;  while  he  does  not  even
state  the  arguments  of  James  Mill,  who,  as  a  metaphysician,  is  the  greatest  of  our  modern
sensationalists,  and  whose  views,  whether  right  or  wrong,  certainly  deserve  notice  from
an  eclectic  historian  of  philosophy.

Another  eclectic,  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  announces  (Discussions  on  Philosophy,  p.  597)
"  an  undeveloped  philosophy,  which,  I  am  confident,  is  founded  upon  truth.  To  this
confidence  I  have  come,  not  merely  through  the  convictions  of  my  own  consciousness,
but  by  finding  in  this  system  a  centre  and  conciliation  for  the  most  opposite  of  philosophi  -
cal  opinions."  But  at  p.  589,  he  summarily  disposes  of  one  of  the  most  important  of
these  philosophical  opinions  as  "  the  superficial  edifice  of  Locke."


THE    METHOD    EMPLOYED    BY    METAPHYSICIANS         95

been  thrown  by  the  controversies  of  theologians.21  The  consequence  is,  that
if  we  except  a  very  few  of  the  laws  of  association,  and  perhaps  I  may  add*  the
modern  theories  of  vision  and  of  touch,22  there  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  whole
compass  of  metaphysics  a  single  principle  of  importance,  and  at  the  same  time
of  incontestable  truth.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  a
suspicion  that  there  is  some  fundamental  error  in  the  manner  in  which  these
inquiries  have  been  prosecuted.  For  my  own  part,  I  believe  that,  by  mere  ob-
servation of  our  own  minds,  and  even  by  such  rude  experiments  as  we  are
able  to  make  upon  them,  it  will  be  impossible  to  raise  psychology  to  a  science  ;
and  I  entertain  very  little  doubt  that  metaphysics  can  be  successfully  studied
only  by  an  investigation  of  history  so  comprehensive  as  to  enable  us  to  under-
stand the  conditions  which  govern  the  movements  of  the  human  race.23

21  Berkeley,  in  a  moment  of  candour,  inadvertently  confesses  what  is  very  damaging
to  the  reputation  of  his  own  pursuits  :  "  Upon  the  whole,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the
far  greater  part,  if  not  all,  of  those  difficulties  which  have  hitherto  amused  philosophers,
and  blocked  up  the  way  to  knowledge,  are  entirely  owing  to  ourselves.     That  we  have
first  raised  a  dust,  and  then  complain  we  cannot  see."     Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,
in  Berkeley's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  74.     Every  metaphysician  and  theologian  should  get  this
sentence  by  heart :  "  That  we  have  first  raised  a  dust,  and  then  complain  we  cannot  see.''

22  Some  of  the  laws  of  association,  as  stated  by  Hume  and  Hartley,  are  capable  of  his-
torical verification,  which  would  change  the  metaphysical  hypothesis  into  a  scientific
theory.     Berkeley's  theory  of  vision,  and  Brown's  theory  of  touch,  have  in   the  same
way  been  verified  physiologically  :  so  that  we  now  know  what  otherwise  we  could  only
have  suspected.

23  In  regard  to  one  of  the  difficulties  stated  in  this  chapter  as  impeding  metaphysicians,
it  is  only  just  to  quote  the/emarks  of  Kant :  "  Wie  aber  das  Ich,  der  ich  denke,  von  dem
Ich,  das  sich  selbst  anschaut,  unterschieden  (indem  ich  mir  noch  andere  Anschauungsart
wenigstens  als  moglich  vorstellen  kann),  und  doch  mit  diesem  letzteren  als  dasselbe
Subject  einerlei  sei,  wie  ich  also  sagen  konne  :  Ich  als  Intelligenz  und  denkend  Subject,
erkenne  mich  selbst  als  gedachtes  Object,  so  fern  ich  mir  noch  iiber  das  in  der  Anschauung
gegeben  bin,  nur,  gleich  anderen  Phanomenen,  nicht  wie  ich  vor  dem  Verstande  bin,
sondern  wie  ich  mir  erscheine,  hat  nicht  mehr  auch  nicht  weniger  Schwierigkeit  bei  sich,
als  wie  ich  mir  selbst  iiberhaupt  ein  Object  und  zwar  der  Anschauung  und  innerer  Wahr-
nehmungen  sein  konne."     Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  ii.  p.  144.     I
am  very  willing  to  let  the  question  rest  on  this  :  for  to  me  it  appears  that  the  two  cases
are  not  only  equally  difficult,  but,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  are  equally
impossible.


CHAPTER  IV

MENTAL  LAWS  ARE  EITHER  MORAL  OR  INTELLECTUAL.     COMPARISON  OF  MORAL
AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS,  AND  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  EFFECT  PRODUCED  BY

EACH  ON  THE  PROGRESS  OF  SOCIETY

IN  the  preceding  chapter,  it  has,  I  trust,  been  made  apparent  that,  whatever
may  hereafter  be  the  case,  we,  looking  merely  at  the  present  state  of  our  know-
ledge, must  pronounce  the  metaphysical  method  to  be  unequal  to  the  task,  often
imposed  upon  it,  of  discovering  the  laws  which  regulate  the  movements  of  the
human  mind.  We  are  therefore  driven  to  the  only  remaining  method,  accord-
ing to  which  mental  phenomena  are  to  be  studied,  not  simply  as  they  appear  in
the  mind  of  the  individual  observer,  but  as  they  appear  in  the  actions  of  mankind
at  large.  The  essential  opposition  between  these  two  plans  is  very  obvious  :  but
it  may  perhaps  be  well  to  bring  forward  further  illustration  of  the  resources
possessed  by  each  for  the  investigation  of  truth  ;  and  for  this  purpose,  I  will  select
a  subject  which,  though  still  imperfectly  understood,  supplies  a  beautiful  instance
of  the  regularity  with  which,  under  the  most  -conflicting  circumstances,  the  great
Laws  of  Nature  are  able  to  hold  their  course.*

The  case  to  which  I  refer  is  that  of  the  proportion  kept  up  in  the  births  of  the
sexes  ;  a  proportion  which,  if  it  were  to  be  greatly  disturbed  in  any  country,  even
for  a  single  generation,  would  throw  society  into  the  most  serious  confusion,  and
would  infallibly  cause  a  great  increase  in  the  vices  of  the  people.1  Now,  it  has
always  been  suspected  that,  on  an  average,  the  male  and  female  births  are  toler-
ably equal  ;  but,  until  very  recently,  no  one  could  tell  whether  or  not  they  are
precisely  equal,  or,  if  unequal,  on  which  side  there  is  an  excess.2  The  births  being

1  Thus  we  find  that  the  Crusades,  by  diminishing  the  proportion  of  men  to  women  in
Europe,    increased   licentiousness.     See  a  curious   passage  in  Sprengel,   Historic  de  la
Medecine,  vol.  ii.  p.  376.     In  Yucatan,  there  is  generally  a  considerable  excess  of  women,
and  the  result  is  prejudicial  to  morals.     Stephens 's  Central  America,  vol.  iii.  pp.  380,  429.
On  the  other  hand,  respecting  the  state  of  society  produced  by  an  excess  of  males,  see
Mallet's  Northern  Antiquities,  p.  259  ;  Journal  of  Geographical  Society,  vol.  xv.  p.  45,
vol.  xvi.  p.  307  ;  Southey's  Commonplace  Book,  third  series,  p.  579.

2  On  this  question,  a  variety  of  conflicting  statements  may  be  seen  in  the  older  writers.
Goodman,  early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  supposed  that  more  females  were  born  than
males.     Southey's  Commonplace  Book,   third  series,  p.   696.     Turgot   (CEuvres,  vol.  ii.
p.  247)  rightly  says,  "  il  nait  un  peu  plus  d'hommes  que  de  femmes"  :  but  the  evidence
was  too  incomplete  to  make  this  more  than  a  lucky  guess  ;  and  I  find  that  even  Herder,
writing  in  1785,  takes  for  granted  that  the  proportion  was  about  equal :  "  ein  ziemliches
Gleichmass  in  den  Geburten  beider  Geschlechter  "  (Ideen  zur  Geschichte,  vol.  ii.  p.  149),
and  was  sometimes  in  favour  of  girls,  "  ja,  die  Nachrichten  mehrerer  Reisenden  machen
es  wahrscheinlich,  dass  in  manchen  dieser  Gegenden  wirklich  mehr  Tochter  als  Sohne
geboren  werden."

[*  Another  reversion  to  the  conception  of  laws  a=  forces. — ED.]

96


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS       97

the  physical  result  of  physical  antecedents,  it  was  clearly  seen  that  the  laws  of
the  births  must  be  in  those  antecedents  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  the  causes  of  the
proportion  of  the  sexes  must  reside  in  the  parents  themselves.3  Under  these
circumstances,  the  question  arose,  if  it  was  not  possible  to  elucidate  this  difficulty
by  our  knowledge  of  animal  physiology  ;  for  it  was  plausibly  said,  "  Since  physio-
logy is  a  study  of  the  laws  of  the  body,4  and  since  all  births  are  products  resulting
from  the  body,  it  follows  that  if  we  know  the  laws  of  the  body,  we  shall  know  the
laws  of  the  birth."  This  was  the  view  taken  by  physiologists  of  our  origin;  5
and  this  is  precisely  the  view  taken  by  metaphysicians  of  our  history.  Both
parties  believed  that  it  was  possible  at  once  to  rise  to  the  cause  of  the  phenomenon,
and  by  studying  its  laws  predict  the  phenomenon  itself.  The  physiologist  said,
"  By  studying  individual  bodies,  and  thus  ascertaining  the  laws  which  regulate
the  union  of  the  parents,  I  will  discover  the  proportion  of  the  sexes,  because  the
proportion  is  merely  the  result  to  which  the  union  gives  rise."  Just  in  the  same
way,  the  metaphysician  says,  "  By  studying  individual  minds,  I  will  ascertain
the  laws  which  govern  their  movements  ;  and  in  that  way  I  will  predict  the
movements  of  mankind,  which  are  obviously  compounded  of  the  individual
movements. "«  These  are  the  expectations  which  have  been  confidently  held
out,  by  physiologists  respecting  the  laws  of  the  sexes,  and  by  metaphysicians
respecting  the  laws  of  history.  Towards  the  fulfilment,  however,  of  these
promises  the  metaphysicians  have  done  absolutely  nothing  ;  nor  have  the  physio-
logists been  more  successful,  although  their  views  have  the  support  of  anatomy,
which  admits  of  the  employment  of  direct  experiment,  a  resource  unknown  to
metaphysics.  But  towards  settling  the  present  question,  all  this  availed  them
nothing  ;  and  physiologists  are  not  yet  possessed  of  a  single  fact  which  throws

3  A  question,  indeed,  has  been  raised  as  to  the  influence  exercised  by  the  state  of  the
mind  during  the  period  of  orgasm.      But  whatever  this  influence  may  be,  it  can  only
affect  the  subsequent  birth  through  and  by  physical  antecedents,  which  in  every  case
must  be  regarded  as  the  proximate  cause.     If,  therefore,  the  influence  were  proved  to
exist,  we  should  still  have  to  search  for  physical  laws  :  though  such  laws  would  of  course
be  considered  merely  as  secondary  ones,  resolvable  into  some  higher  generalization.

4  Some  writers  treat  physiology  as  a  study  of  the  laws  of  life.     But  this,  looking  at  the
subject  as  it  now  stands,  is  far  too  bold  a  step,  and  several  branches  of  knowledge  will
have  to  be  raised  from  their  present  empirical  state,  before  the  phenomena  of  life  can  be
scientifically  investigated.     The  more  rational  mode  seems  to  be,  to  consider  physiology
and  anatomy  as  correlative  :  the  first  forming  the  dynamical,  and  the  second  forming  the
statical  part  of  the  study  of  organic  structure.

5  "  Voulez-vous  savoir  de  quoi  depend  le  sexe  des  enfants  ?     Fernei  vous  r6pond,  sur
la  foi  des  anciens,  qu'il  depend  des  qualites  de  la  semence  du  pere  et  de  la  mere."  Renouard,
Histoire  de  la  Medecine,  Paris,  1846,  vol.  ii.  p.  106  :  see  also,  at  p.  185,  the  opinion  of
Hippocrates,  adopted  by  Galen  ;  and  similar  views  in  Lepclletier,  Physiologic  Medicale,
vol.  iv.  p.  332,  and  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  i.  pp.  252,  310,  vol.  ii.  p.  115,  vol.  iv.
p.  62.     For  further  information  as  to  the  opinions  which  have  been  held  respecting  the
origin  of  sexes,  see  Beausobre,  Histoire  de  Manichee,  vol.  ii.  p.  417  ;  Asiatic  Researches,
vol.  iii.  pp.  358,  361  ;  Vishnu  Purana,  p.  349  ;  Works  of  Sir  William  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  126  ;
Ritter's  History  of  Ancient  Philosophy,  vol.  iii.  p.  191  ;  Denham  and  Clapperton's  Africa,
PP-  323.  324  ;  Maintenon,  Lettres  Inedites,  vol.  ii.  p.  62  ;  and  the  view  of  Hohl  (Burdach's
Physiologic,  vol.  ii.  p.  472),  "  que  les  femmes  chez  lesquelles  predomine  le  systeme  arteriel
procreent  des  garcons,  au  lieu  que  celles  dont  le  systeme  veineux  a  la  predominance
mettent  au  monde  des  filles."     According  to  Anaxagoras,  the  question  was  extremely
simple  :    /cat  tifipeva.  IJL&V  euro  TWP  dej-tuv,  0ir)\€a  5e  airb  TUV  apLffrepuv.     Diog.  Laert.  ii.  9,
vol.  i.  p.  85.

6  "  Le  metaphysicien  se  voit  comme  la  source  de  1' evidence  et  le  confident  de  la  nature  :
Moi  seul,  dit-il,  je  puis  generaliser  les  idees,  et  decouvrir  le  germe  des  evenements  qui  se
developpent  journellement  dans  le  monde  physique  et  moral ;  et  c'est  par  moi  seul  que
I'homme  peut  etre  eclaire."     Helvetius  de  V Esprit,  vol.  i.  p.  86.     Compare  Herder,  Ideen
zur  Geschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  ii.  p.  105.     Thus  too  M.  Cousin  (Hist,  de  la  Philosophic,
II.  serie,  vol.  i.  p.  131)  says,  "  Le  fait  de  la  conscience  transports  de  1'individu  dans
1'espece  et  dans  1'histoire,  est  la  clef  de  tous  les  developpements  de  I'humanite."

7


98  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

any  light  on  this  problem  :  Is  the  number  of  male  births  equal  to  female  births,
is  it  greater,  or  is  it  less  ?

These  are  questions  to  which  all  the  resources  of  physiologists,  from  Aristotle
down  to  our  own  time,  afford  no  means  of  reply.1?  And  yet  at  the  present  day
we,  by  the  employment  of  what  now  seems  a  very  natural  method,  are  possessed
of  a  truth  which  the  united  abilities  of  a  long  series  of  eminent  men  failed  to
discover.  By  the  simple  expedient  of  registering  the  number  of  births  and  their
sexes — by  extending  this  registration  over  several  years,  in  different  countries, —
we  have  been  able  to  eliminate  all  casual  disturbances,  and  ascertain  the  existence
of  a  law  which,  expressed  in  round  numbers,  is,  that  for  every  twenty  girls  there
are  born  twenty-one  boys  :  and  we  may  confidently  say  that  although  the
operations  of  this  law  are  of  coiirse  liable  to  constant  aberrations,  the  law  itself
is  so  powerful,  that  we  know  of  no  country  in  which  during  a  single  year  the  male
births  have  not  been  greater  than  the  female  ones.s

The  importance  and  the  beautiful  regularity  of  this  law  make  us  regret  that
it  still  remains  an  empirical  truth,  not  having  yet  been  connected  with  the
physical  phenomena  by  which  its  operations  are  caused.9  But  this  is  immaterial

7  Considering  the  very  long  period  during  which  physiology  has  been  studied,  it  is
remarkable  how  little  the  physiologists  have  contributed  towards  the  great  and  final
object  of  all  science,  namely,  the  power  of  predicting  events.     To  me  it  appears  that  the
two  principal  causes  of  this  are,  the  backwardness  of  chemistry,  and  the  still  extremely
imperfect  state  of  the  microscope,  which  even  now  is  so  inaccurate  an  instrument,  that
when  a  high  power  is  employed,  little  confidence  can  be  placed  in  it ;  and  the  examination,
for  instance,  of  the  spermatozoa  has  led  to  the  most  contradictory  results.     In  regard  to
chemistry,  MM.  Robin  and  Verdeil,  in  their  recent  great  work,  have  ably  proved  what
manifold  relations  there  are  between  it  and  the  further  progress  of  our  knowledge  of  the
animal  frame  ;  though  I  venture  to  think  that  these  eminent  writers  have  shown  occasion-
ally an  undue  disposition  to  limit  the  application  of  chemical  laws  to  physiological  pheno-
mena.    See  Robin  et  Verdeil,  Chimie  Anatomique  et  Physiologique,  Paris,  1853,  vol.  i.
pp.  20,  34,  167,  337,  338,  437,  661,  vol.  ii.  pp.  136,  137,  508,  vol.  hi.  pp.  135,  144,  183,
281,  283,  351,  547.     The  increasing  tendency  of  chemistry  to  bring  under  its  control  what
are  often  supposed  to  be  purely  organic  phenomena,  is  noticed  cautiously  in  Turner's
Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.  1308,  London,  1847  ;  and  boldly  in  Liebig's  Letters  on  Chemistry,
1851,  pp.  250,  251.     The  connexion  between  chemistry  and  physiology  is  touched  on
rather  too  hastily  in  Bouilland,  Philosophie  Medicale,  pp.  160,  257  ;  Broussais,  Examen
des  Doctrines  Medicates,  vol.  iii.  p.  166  ;  Brodie's  Lectures  on  Pathology,  p.  48  ;  Henle,
Traite  d'Anatomie,  vol.  i.  pp.  25,  26  ;  Feuchtersleben's  Medical  Psychology,  p.  88  ;  but
better  in  Holland's  Medical  Notes,  1839,  p.  270,  a  thoughtful  and  suggestive  work.     On
the  necessity  of  chemistry  for  increasing  our  knowledge  of  embryology,  compare  Wagner's
Physiology,  pp.  131,  132  note,  with  Burdach,  Traite  de  Physiologic,  vol..  iv.  pp.  59,  168.

8  It  used  to  be  supposed  that  some  of  the  eastern  countries  formed  an  exception  to
this  ;  but  more  precise  observations  have  contradicted  the  loose  statements  of  the  earlier
travellers,  and  in  no  part  of  the  world,  so  far  as  our  knowledge  extends,  are  more  girls
born  than  boys  ;  while  in  every  part  of  the  world  for  which  we  have  statistical  returns,
there  is  a  slight  excess  on  the  side  of  male  births.     Compare  Marsden's  History  of  Sumatra,
p.  234  ;  Raffles'  History  of  Java,  vol.  i.  pp.  81,  82  ;  Sykes  on  the  Statistics  of  the  Deccan,
in  Reports  of  British  Association,  vol.  vi.  pp.  246,  261,  262  ;  Niebuhr,  Description  de
I' Arabic,  p.  63  ;  Humboldt,  Nouv.  Espagne,  vol.  i.  p.  139  ;  M' William,  Medical  History  of
Expedition  to  the  Niger,  p.  113  ;  Elliotson's  Human  Physiology,  p.  795  ;  Thomson's  Hist,
of  Royal  Society,  p.  531  ;  Sadler's  Law  of  Population,  vol.  i.  pp.  507,  511,  vol.  ii.  pp.  324,
335  ;  Paris  and  Fonblanque's  Medical  Jurisprudence,  vol.  i.  p.  259  ;  Journal  of  Statist.
Soc.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  263,  264,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  46, 123  ;  Journal  of  Geographical  Soc.,  vol.  xx.  p.  17 ;
Fourth  Report  of  British  Association,  pp.  687,  689,  Report  for  1842,  pp.  144,  145  ;  Transac.
of  Sections  for  1840,  p.  174,  for  1847,  p.  96,  for  1849,  p.  87  ;  Dufau,  Traite  de  Statistique,
pp.  24,  209,  210  ;  Burdach,  Traite  de  Physiologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56,  57,  273,  274,  281,  vol.  v.
P-  373  ;  Hawkins's  Medical  Statistics,  pp.  221,  222.

9  In  Miiller's  Physiology,  vol.  ii.  p.  1657,  a  work  of  great  authority,  it  is  said,  that  "  the
causes  which  determine  the  sex  of  the  embryo  are  unknown,  although  it  appears  that  the
relative  age  of  the  parents  has  some  influence  over  the  sex  of  the  offspring."     That  the


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS       99

to  my  present  purpose,  which  is  only  to  notice  the  method  by  which  the  discovery
has  been  made.  For  this  method  is  obviously  analogous  to  that  by  which  I
propose  to  investigate  the  operations  of  the  human  mind  ;  while  th'e  old  and
unsuccessful  method  is  analogous  to  that  employed  by  the  metaphysicians.  As
long  as  physiologists  attempted  to  ascertain  the  laws  of  the  proportion  of  sexes
by  individual  experiments,  they  effected  absolutely  nothing  towards  the  end
they  hoped  to  achieve.  But  when  men  became  dissatisfied  with  these  individual
experiments,  and  instead  of  them  began  to  collect  observations  Jess  minute,  but
more  comprehensive,  then  it  was  that  the  great  law  of  nature  for  which  during
many  centuries  they  had  vainly  searched,  first  became  unfolded  to  their  view.
Precisely  in  the  same  way,  as  long  as  the  human  mind  is  only  studied  according
to  the  narrow  and  contracted  method  of  metaphysicians,  we  have  every  reason
for  thinking  that  the  laws  which  regulate  its  movements  will  remain  unknown.
If,  therefore,  we  wish  to  effect  anything  of  real  moment,  it  becomes  necessary
that  we  should  discard  those  old  schemes,  the  insufficiency  of  which  is  demon-
strated by  experience  as  well  as  by  reason  ;  and  that  we  should  substitute  in  their
place  such  a  comprehensive  survey  of  facts  as  will  enable  us  to  eliminate  those
disturbances  which,  owing  to  the  impossibility  of  experiment,  we  shall  never  be
able  to  isolate.

The  desire  that  I  feel  to  make  the  preliminary  views  of  this  Introduction  per-
fectly clear,  is  my  sole  apology  for  having  introduced  a  digression  which,  though
adding  nothing  to  the  strength  of  the  argument,  may  be  found  useful  as  illustrat-
ing it,  and  will  at  all  events  enable  ordinary  readers  to  appreciate  the  value  of
the  proposed  method.  It  now  remains  for  us  to  ascertain  the  manner  in  which,
by  the  application  of  this  method,  the  laws  of  mental  progress  may  be  most
easily  discovered.

If,  in  the  first  place,  we  ask  what  this  progress  is,  the  answer  seems  very  simple  :
that  it  is  a  twofold  progress.  Moral  and  Intellectual  ;  the  first  having  more  im-
mediate relation  to  our  duties,  the  second  to  our  knowledge.  This  is  a  classifica-
tion which  has  been  frequently  laid  down,  and  with  which  most  persons  are
familiar.  And  so  far  as  history  is  a  narration  of  results,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  division  is  perfectly  accurate.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  people  are
not  really  advancing  if,  on  the  one  hand,  their  increasing  ability  is  accompanied
by  increasing  vice,  or  if  on  the  other  hand,  while  they  are  becoming  more  virtuous,
they  likewise  become  more  ignorant.  This  double  movement,  moral  and  intel-
lectual, is  essential  to  the  very  idea  of  civilization,  and  includes  the  entire  theory
of  mental  progress.  To  be  willing  to  perform  our  duty  is  the  moral  part  ;  to
know  how  to  perform  it  is  the  intellectual  part  :  while  the  closer  these  two  parts
are  knit  together,  the  greater  the  harmony  with  which  they  work  ;  and  the  more
accurately  the  means  are  adapted  10  the  end,  the  more  completely  will  the  scheme
of  our  life  be  accomplished,  and  the  more  securely  shall  we  lay  a  foundation  for
the  further  advancement  of  mankind.

A  question,  therefore,  now  arises  of  great  moment  :  namely,  which  of  these  two

relative  age  of  the  parents  does  affect  the  sex  of  their  children,  may,  from  the  immense
amount  of  evidence  now  collected,  be  considered  almost  certain  ;  but  M.  Miiller,  instead
of  referring  to  physiological  writers,  ought  to  have  mentioned  that  the  statisticians,  and
not  the  physiologists,  were  the  first  to  make  this  discovery.  On  this  curious  question,
see  Carpenter's  Human  Physiology,  p.  746  ;  Sadler's  Law  of  Population,  vol.  ii.  pp.  333,
336,  342  ;  Journal  of  Statistical  Society,  vol.  iii.  pp.  263,  264.  In  regard  to  animals  below
man,  we  find  from  numerous  experiments  that  among  sheep  and  horses  the  age  of  the
parents  "  has  a  very  great  general  influence  upon  the  sex  "  of  the  offspring.  Elliotsons
Physiology,  pp.  708,  709  ;  and  see  Cuvier,  Progres  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  vol.  ii.  p.  406.
As  to  the  relation  between  the  origin  of  sex  and  the  laws  of  arrested  development,  compare
Geoffroy  Saint  Hilaire,  Hist,  des  Anomalies  de  /' Organisation,  vol.  ii.  pp.  33,  34,  73,  vol.  iii.
p.  278,  with  Lindley's  Botany,  vol.  ii.  p.  81.  In  Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,  vol.  L
p.  302,  there  is  a  singular  case  recorded  by  Lamotte,  which  would  seem  to  connect  this
question  with  pathological  phenomena,  though  it  is  uncertain  whether  the  epilepsy  was
an  effect  or  a  cognate  symptom.


loo  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

parts  or  elements  of  mental  progress  is  the  more  important.  For  the  progress
itself  being  the  result  of  their  united  action,  it  becomes  necessary  to  ascertain
which  of  them  works  more  powerfully,  in  order  that  we  may  subordinate  the
inferior  element  to  the  laws  of  the  superior  one.  If  the  advance  of  civilization
and  the  general  happiness  of  mankind  depend  more  on  their  moral  feelings  than
on  their  intellectual  knowledge,  we  must  of  course  measure  the  progress  of  society
by  those  feelings  ;  while  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  depends  principally  on  their
knowledge,  we  must  take  as  our  standard  the  amount  and  success  of  their  intel-
lectual activity.  As  soon  as  we  know  the  relative  energy  of  these  two  compo-
nents, we  shall  treat  them  according  to  the  usual  plan  for  investigating  truth  ;
that  is  to  say,  we  shall  look  at  the  product  of  their  joint  action  as  obeying  the
laws  of  the  more  powerful  agent,  whose  operations  are  casually  disturbed  by  the
inferior  laws  of  the  minor  agent.

In  entering  into  this  inquiry,  we  are  met  by  a  preliminary  difficulty,  arising
from  the  loose  and  careless  manner  in  which  ordinary  language  is  employed  on
subjects  that  require  the  greatest  nicety  and  precision.  For  the  expressi)n,
Moral  and  Intellectual  Progress,  is  suggestive  of  a  serious  fallacy.  In  the  manner
in  which  it  is  generally  used,  it  conveys  an  idea  that  the  moral  and  intellectual
faculties  of  men  are,  in  the  advance  of  civilization,  naturally  more  acute  and
more  trustworthy  than  they  were  formerly.  But  this,  though  it  may  possibly
be  true,  has  never  been  proved.  It  may  be  that,  owing  to  some  physical  causes
still  unknown,  the  average  capacity  of  the  brain  is,  if  we  compare  long  periods  of
time,  becoming  gradually  greater  ;  and  that  therefore  the  mind,  which  acts
through  the  brain,  is,  even  independently  of  education,  increasing  in  aptitude
and  in  the  general  competence  of  its  views.10  Such,  however,  is  still  our  ignor-
ance of  physical  laws,  and  so  completely  are  we  in  the  dark  as  to  the  circumstances
which  regulate  the  hereditary  transmission  of  character,  temperament,11  and


10  That  the  natural  powers  of  the  human  brain  are  improving  because  they  are  capable
of  transmission,  is  a  favourite  doctrine  with  the  followers  of  Gall,  and  is  adopted  by  M.A.
Comte  (Philosophic  Positive,  vol.  iv.  pp.  384,  385)  ;  who,  however,  admits  that  it  has
never  been  sufficiently  verified  :  "  sans  que  toutefois  1'experience  ait  encore  suffisamment
prononce.  '       Dr.  Prichard,  whose  habits  of  thought  were  very  different,  seems,  never-
theless, inclined  to  lean  in  this  direction  ;  for  his  comparison  of  skulls  led  him  to  the  con-
clusion  that   the  present  inhabitants  of  Britain,  "  either  as  the  result  of  many  ages  of
greater  intellectual  cultivation,  or  from  some  other  cause,  have,  as  I  am  persuaded,  much
more   capacious  brain-cases   than   their  forefathers."     Prichard's   Physical  History   of
Mankind,  vol.  i.  p.  305.     Even  if  this  were  certain,  it  would  not  prove  that  the  contents
of  the  crania  were  altered,  though  it  might  create  a  presumption  ;  and  the  general  question
must,  I  think,  remain  unsettled  until  the  researches  begun  by  Blumenbach,  and  recently
continued  by  Morton,  are  carried  out  upon  a  scale  far  more  comprehensive  than  has
hitherto  been  attempted.     Compare  Burdach,  Traite  de  Physiologic,  vol.  ii.  p.  253  ;  where,
however,  the  question  is  not  stated  with  sufficient  caution.

11  None  of  the  laws  of  hereditary  descent  connected  with  the  formation  of  character
have  yet  been  generalized  ;  nor  is  our  knowledge  much  more  advanced  respecting  the
theory  of  temperaments,  which  still  remains  the  principal  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the
phrenologists.     The  difficulties  attending  the  study  of  temperaments,  and  the  obscurity
in  which  this  important  subject  is  shrouded,  may  be  estimated  by  whoever  will  compare
what  has  been  said  upon  it  by  the  following  writers  :  Miiller's  Physiology,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1406-
1410  ;  Elliotson's  Human  Physiology,  pp.  1059-1062  ;  Blainville,  Physiologic  Generate  et
Comparee,  vol.  i.  pp.  168,  264,  265,  vol.  ii.  pp.  43,  130,  214,  328,  329,  vol.  iii.  pp.  54,  74,
118,  148,  149,  284,  285  ;  Williams' s  Principles  of  Medicine,pp.  iG,  17,  112,  113  ;  Geoffroy
Saint  Hilaire,  Anomalies  de  r Organisation,  vol.  i.  pp.  186,  190  ;  Broussais,  Examen  des
Doctrines  Medicales,  vol.  i.  pp.  204,  205,  vol.  iii.  p.  276  ;  Renouard,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,
vol.  i.  p.  326;  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  i.  p.  380,  vol.  ii.  p.  408,  vol.  iii.  p.  21,
vol.  v.  p.  325,  vol.  vi.  p.  492  ;  Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,  vol.  i.  pp.  39,  226,  429,  594,
vol.  ii.  p.  29  ;  Lepelletier,  Physiol.  Medicale,  vol.  i.  pp.  139,  281,  vol.  iii.  pp.  372-429,
vol.  iv.  pp.  93,  123,  133,  143,  148,  177  ;  Henle,  Anatomic  Generale,  vol.  i.  p.  474,  vol.  ii.
pp.  288,  289,  316  ;  Bichat,  Anatomic  Generale,  vol.  i.  p.  207,  vol.  ii.  p.  444,  vol.  iii.  pp.  310,


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     101

other  personal  peculiarities,  that  we  must  consider  this  alleged  progress  as  a
very  doubtful  point  ;  and  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  we  cannot  safely
assume  that  there  has  been  any  permanent  improvement  in  the  moral  or  intel-
lectual faculties  of  man ;  nor  have  we  any  decisive  ground  for  saying  that  these
faculties  are  likely  to  be  greater  in  an  infant  born  in  the  most  civilized  part  of
Europe,  than  in  one  born  in  the  wildest  region  of  a  barbarous  country.12

Whatever,  therefore,  the  moral  and  intellectual  progress  of  men  may  bo,  it

507,  vol.  iv.  pp.  281,  399,  400,  504  ;  Bichat  sur  la  Vie,  pp.  80,  81,  234,  235  ;  Phillips  on
Scrofula,  p.  9  ;  Feuchtersleben's  Medical  Psychology,  pp.  143-145  ;  (Euvres  de  Fontenelle,
Paris,  1766,  vol.  v.  p.  no  ;  Cullen's  Works,  Edinb.  1827,  vol.  i.  pp.  214-221  ;  Cabanis,
Rapports  du  Physique  ct  du  Moral,  pp.  76-83,  229-261,  520-533  ;  Noble  on  the  Brain,
pp.  370-376  ;  Combe's  North  America,  vol.  i.  pp.  126-128.  Latterly,  attention  has  been
paid  to  the  chemistry  of  the  blood  as  it  varies  in  the  various  temperaments  ;  and  this
seems  a  more  satisfactory  method  than  the  old  plan  of  merely  describing  the  obvious
symptoms  of  the  temperament.  Clark  on  Animal  Physiology,  in  Fourth  Report  of  the
British  Association,  p.  126  ;  Simon's  Animal  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  236  ;  Wagner's  Physio
logy,  p.  262.

12  We  often  hear  of  hereditary  talents,  hereditary  vices,  and  hereditary  virtues  ;  but
whoever  will  critically  examine  the  evidence  will  find  that  we  have  no  proof  of  their
existence.  The  way  in  which  they  are  commonly  proved  is  in  the  highest  degree  illogical ;
the  usual  course  being  for  writers  to  collect  instances  of  some  mental  peculiarity  found  in
a  parent  and  in  his  child,  and  then  to  infer  that  the  peculiarity  was  bequeathed.  By
this  mode  of  reasoning  we  might  demonstrate  any  proposition  ;  since  in  all  large  fields  of
inquiry  there  are  a  sufficient  number  of  empirical  coincidences  to  make  a  plausible  case
in  favour  of  whatever  view  a  man  chooses  to  advocate.  But  this  is  not  the  way  in  which
truth  is  discovered  ;  and  we  ought  to  inquire  not  only  how  many  instances  there  are  of
hereditary  talents,  &c.,  but  how  many  instances  there  are  of  such  qualities  not  being
hereditary.  Until  something  of  this  sort  is  attempted,  we  can  know  nothing  about  the
matter  inductively  ;  while,  until  physiology  and  chemistry  are  much  more  advanced,  we
can  know  nothing  about  it  deductively.

These  considerations  ought  to  prevent  us  from  receiving  statements  (Taylor's  Medical
Jurisprudence,  pp.  644,  678,  and  many  other  books)  which  positively  affirm  the  existence
of  hereditary  madness  and  hereditary  suicide  ;  and  the  same  remark  applies  to  hereditary
disease  (on  which  see  some  admirable  observations  in  Phillips  on  Scrofula,  pp.  101-120,
London,  1846)  :  and  with  still  greater  force  does  it  apply  to  hereditary  vices  and  heredi-
tary virtues  ;  inasmuch  as  ethical  phenomena  have  not  been  registered  as  carefully  as
physiological  ones,  and  therefore  our  conclusions  respecting  them  are  even  more  precarious.
[Since  Buckle's  time  the  investigation  of  heredity  has  been  carried  somewhat  further.
On  the  side  of  physique  it  is  now  held  as  beyond  question  that  certain  diseases  are  inherited
by  offspring,  though  some  formerly  supposed  to  be  hereditary — e.g.  phthisis — are  now
preferably  described  as  diseases  accruing  upon  hereditary  weakness.  The  common
hereditary  transmission  of  insanity  is  now  regarded  as  beyond  dispute  ;  and  the  bias  to
suicide  is  "  recognized  by  all  authorities  to  be  one  of  the  most  commonly  transmitted
of  abnormal  conditions  "  (Strahan,  Suicide  and  Insanity,  1893,  p.  88).  As  regards  intel-
lectual heredity  the  question  is  still  partly  open,  largely  by  reason  of  the  practice  of
inquirers  who  discuss  heredity  with  regard  to  one  parent  only.  A  measure  of  particular
proof  is  established  by  Galton  (Hereditary  Genius,  new  ed.  1892)  ;  but  some  of  the  socio-
logical inferences  drawn  by  him  have  been  emphatically  challenged  (e.g.  Prof.  Cooley'
essay  in  the  Annals  of  the  American  A  cad.  of  Polit.  and  Social  Science,  May,  1897 ;  and  that
of  the  editor  on  "  The  Economics  of  Genius  "  in  the  Forum,  April,  1 898 ).  The  question  of
racial  heredity  is  complicated  by  the  variety  of  lines  and  stages  of  civilization,  and  by  the
difficulty  as  to  striking  averages  for  different  epochs  of  evolution.  Modern  science
recognizes  degeneration  of  the  human  as  of  other  species  in  given  conditions  (Cp.  Hay-
craft,  Darwinism  and  Race  Progress,  1895).  But  on  Darwinian  principles  the  entire
human  race  has  evolved  from  a  much  lower  species,  and  all  from  a  primal  cell ;  though
the  school  of  Weismann  denies  "  inheritance  of  acquired  characteristics  "  without  properly
defining  acquired  characteristics,  or  offering  any  explanation  whatever  of  variation,
which  it  takes  as  an  irreducible  datum. — ED.]


102  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

resolves  itself  not  into  a  progress  of  natural  capacity,13  but  into  a  progress,  if  I
may  so  say,  of  opportunity  ;  that  is,  an  improvement  in  the  circumstances  under
which  that  capacity  after  "birth  comes  into  play.  Here,  then,  lies  the  gist  of  the
whole  matter.  The  progress  is  one,  not  of  internal  power,  but  of  external  advan-
tage. The  child  born  in  a  civilized  land  is  not  likely,  as  such,  to  be  superior  to
one  born  among  barbarians  ;  and  the  difference  which  ensues  between  the  acts
of  the  two  children  will  be  caused,  so  far  as  we  know,  solely  by  the  pressure  of
external  circumstances ;  by  which  I  mean  the  surrounding  opinions,  knowledge,
associations,  in  a  word,  the  entire  mental  atmosphere  in  which  the  two  children
are  respectively  nurtured.

On  this  account  it  is  evident  that  if  we  look  at  mankind  in  the  aggregate,  their
moral  and  intellectual  conduct  is  regulated  by  the  moral  and  intellectual  notions
prevalent  in  their  own  time.  There  are,  of  course,  many  persons  who  will  rise
above  those  notions,  and  many  others  who  will  sink  below"  them.  But  such  cases
are  exceptional,  and  form  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  total  amount  of  those
who  are  nowise  remarkable  either  for  good  or  for  evil.  An  immense  majority  of
men  most  always  remain  in  a  middle  state,  neither  very  foolish  nor  very  able,
neither  very  virtuous  nor  very  vicious,  but  slumbering  on  in  a  peaceful  and  decent
mediocrity,  adopting  without  much  difficulty  the  current  opinions  of  the  day,
making  no  inquiry,  exciting  no  scandal,  causing  no  wonder,  just  holding  them-
selves on  a  level  with  their  generation,  and  noiselessly  conforming  to  the  standard
of  morals  and  of  knowledge  common  to  the  age  and  country  in  which  they  live.

Now,  it  requires  but  a  superficial  acquaintance  with  history  to  be  aware  that
this  standard  is  constantly  changing,  and  that  it  is  never  precisely  the  same  even
in  the  most  similar  countries,  or  in  two  successive  generations  in  the  same  country.
The  opinions  which  are  popular  in  any  nation,  vary  in  many  respects  almost  from
year  to  year  ;  and  what  in  one  period  is  attacked  as  a  paradox  or  a  heresy,  is  in
another  "period  welcomed  as  a  sober  truth  ;  which,  however,  in  its  turn  is  replaced
by  some  subsequent  novelty.  This  extreme  mutabilitv  in  the  ordinary  standard
of  human  actions,  shows  that  the  conditions  on  which  the  standard  depends  must
themselves  be  very  mutable  ;  and  those  conditions,  whatever  they  may  be,  are
evidently  the  originators  of  the  moral  and  intellectual  conduct  of  the  great  average
of  mankind.

Here,  then,  we  have  a  basis  on  which  we  can  safely  proceed.  We  know  that
the  main  cause  of  human  actions  is  extremely  variable  ;  we  have  only,  therefore,
to  apply  this  test  to  any  set  of  circumstances  which  are  supposed  to  be  the  cause,
and  if  we  find  that  such  circumstances  are  not  very  variable,  we  must  infer  that
they  are  not  the  cause  we  are  attempting  to  discover.

Applying  this  test  to  moral  motives,  or  to  the  dictates  of  what  is  called  moral
instinct,  we  shall  at  once  see  how  extremely  small  is  the  influence  those  motives
have  exercised  over  the  progress  of  civilization.  For  there  is,  unquestionably,
nothing  to  be  found  in  the  world  which  has  undergone  so  little  change  as  those
great  dogmas  of  which  moral  systems  are  composed.  To  do  good  to  others  ;  to

u  To  what  has  been  already  stated,  I  will  add  the  opinions  of  two  of  the  most  profound
among  modern  thinkers.  "  Men,  I  think,  have  been  much  the  same  for  natural  endow-
ments in  all  times."  Conduct  of  the  Understanding,  in  Locke's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  361 .  "  Les
dispositions  primitives  agissent  egalement  chez  les  peuples  barbares  et  chez  les  peuples
polices ;  ils  sont  vraisemblablement  les  memes  dans  tous  les  lieux  et  dans  tous  les  terns.
.  -  .  Plus  il  y  aura  d'hommes,  et  plus  vous  aurez  de  grands  homines  ou  d'hommes  pro-
pres  a  devenir  grands."  ProgresdeF Esprit  Humain,  in  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  ii.  p.  264.
The  remarks  of  Dr.  Brown  (Lectures  on  the  Mind,  p.  57),  if  I  rightly  understand  his
rhetorical  language,  apply  not  to  natural  capacity,  but  to  that  which  is  acquired  :  see  the
end  of  his  ninth  Lecture.  [Locke,  of  course,  proceeded  on  the  belief  that  the  human
species  had  been  created  about  six  thousand  years  ago,  and  he  was  arguing  against  the
assumption  that  the  understanding  of  the  ancients  was  superior  to  that  of  the  moderns.
Turgot,  again,  may  have  meant  not  that  average  capacity  was  the  same  among  savages
and  civilized,  but  simply  that  variation  of  capacity — involving  a  certain  proportion  of
gjenius—  takes  place  at  all  stages.— ED.]


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     103

sacrifice  for  their  benefit  your  own  wishes  ;  to  love  your  neighbour  as  yourself  ;
to  forgive  your  enemies  ;  to  restrain  your  passions  ;  to  honour  your  parents  ;  to
respect  those  who  are  set  over  you  ;  these,  and  a  few  others,  are  the  sole  essentials
of  morals  ;  but  they  have  been  known  for  thousands  of  years,  and  not  one  jot  or
tittle  has  been  added  to  them  by  all  the  sermons,  homilies,  and  text -books  which
moralists  and  theologians  have  been  able  to  produce.14

But  if  we  contrast  this  stationary  aspect  of  moral  truths  with  the  progressive
aspect  of  intellectual  truths,  the  difference  is  indeed  startling.15  All  the  great

14  That  the  system  of  morals  propounded  in  the  New  Testament  contained  no  maxim
which  had  not  been  previously  enunciated,  and  that  some  of  the  most  beautiful  passages
in  the  Apostolic  writings  are  quotations  from  Pagan  authors,  is  well  known  to  every
scholar  ;  and  so  far  from  supplying,  as  some  suppose,  an  objection  against  Christianity,
it  is  a  strong  recommendation  of  it,  as  indicating  the  intimate  relation  between  the
doctrines  of  Christ  and  the  moral  sympathies  of  mankind  in  different  ages.  But  to
assert  that  Christianity  communicated  to  man  moral  truths  previously  unknown,  argues,
on  the  part  of  the  assertor,  either  gross  ignorance  or  else  wilful  fraud.  For  evidence  of
the  knowledge  of  moral  truths  possessed  by  barbarous  nations,  independently  of  Christ-
ianity, and  for  the  most  part  previous  to  its  promulgation,  compare  Mackay's  Religious
Development,  vol.  ii.  pp.  376-380  ;  Mure's  Hist,  of  Greek  Literature,  vol.  ii.  p.  398,  vol.  iii.
p.  380  ;  Prescott's  History  of  Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  31  ;  Elphinstone 's  History  of  India,  p.  47  ;
Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  i.  pp.  87,  168,  vol.  iii.  pp.  105,  114  ;  MilVs  History  of  India,
vol.  i.  p.  419  ;  Bohlen,  das  alte  Indien,  vol.  i.  pp.  364-366  ;  Beausobre,  Histoire  de  Manichee,
vol.  i.  pp.  318,  319  ;  Coleman's  Mythology  of  the  Hindus,  p.  193  ;  Transac.  of  Soc.  of  Bom-
bay, vol.  iii.  p.  198  ;  Transac.  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  5,  vol.  iii.  pp.  283,  284  ;  Asiatic
Researches,  vol.  vi.  p.  271,  vol.  vii.  p.  40,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  130,  277,  vol.  xx.  pp.  460,  461 :  The
Dabistan,  vol  i.  pp.  328,  338  ;  Catlings  North -American  Indians,  vol.  ii.  p.  243  ;  Syme's
Embassy  to  Ava,  vol.  ii.  p.  389  ;  Davis's  Chinese,  vol.  i.  p.  196,  vol.  ii.  pp.  136,  233  ;  Journal
Asiatique,  I.  serie,  vol.  iv.  p.  77,  Paris,  1824.  [Buckle  has  been  severely  criticized  for
his  statement  as  to  "  some  of  the  most  beautiful  passages  in  the  Apostolic  writings."
The  known  passages  in  question  are  : — Acts  xvii.  29  ;  i  Cor.  xv.  33  (from  Menander)  ;
and  Romans  vii.  15  (echoing  Ovid,  but  probably  proverbial).  His  phrase  was  thus
unduly  loose.  But  his  main  proposition  is  now  above  dispute.  As  regards  the  ethics  of
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  he  might  have  cited  Hennell,  Inquiry  Concerning  the  Origin  of
Christianity,  1838,  ch.  xvii.  Compare  Professor  Flint,  St.  Giles  Lectures:  The  Faiths  of
the  World,  p.  419.— ED.]

15  Sir  Tames  Mackintosh  was  so  struck  by  the  stationary  character  of  moral  principles,
that  he  denies  the  possibility  of  their  advance,  and  boldly  affirms  that  no  further  dis-
coveries can  be  made  in  morals  :  "  Morality  admits  no  discoveries.  .  .  .  More  than  three
thousand  years  have  elapsed  since  the  composition  of  the  Pentateuch  ;  and  let  any  man,
if  he  is  able,  tell  me  in  what  important  respect  the  rule  of  life  has  varied  since  that  distant
period.  Let  the  Institutes  of  Menu  be  explored  with  the  same  view  ;  we  shall  arrive  at
the  same  conclusion.  Let  the  books  of  false  religion  be  opened  ;  it  will  be  found  that  their
moral  system  is,  in  all  its  grand  features,  the  same.  .  .  .  The  fact  is  evident,  that  no
improvements  have  been  made  in  practical  morality.  .  .  .  The  facts  which  lead  to  the
formation  of  moral  rules  are  as  accessible,  and  must  be  as  obvious,  to  the  simplest  bar-
barian as  to  the  most  enlightened  philosopher.  .  .  .  The  case  of  the  physical  and  specu-
lative sciences  is  directly  opposite.  There  the  facts  are  remote  and  scarcely  accessible.
.  .  .  From  the  countless  variety  of  the  facts  with  which  they  are  conversant,  it  is  impos-
sible to  prescribe  any  bounds  to  their  future  improvement.  It  is  otherwise  with  morals.
They  have  hitherto  been  stationary  ;  and,  in  my  opinion,  they  are  likely  for  ever  to  con-
tinue so."  Life  of  Mackintosh,  edited  by  his  Son,  London,  1835,  vol.  i.  pp.  119—122.  Con-
dorcet  (Vie  de  Turgot,  p.  180)  says,  "  La  morale  de  toutes  les  nations  a  et6  la  meme  ;  "
and  Kant  (Logik,  in  Kanfs  Werke,  vol.  i.  p.  356),  "  In  der  Moral-philosophic  sind  wir
nicht  weiter  gekommen,  als  die  Alten."  [Mackintosh's  thesis  (which  had  been  previously
put  by  Burke  :  "  We  know  that  we  make  no  discoveries,  and  we  think  that  no  discoveries
are  to  be  made,  in  morality,"  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution,  ed.  1790,  p.  128)
obscures  the  facts  inasmuch  as  it  fails  to  note  that  much  of  the  ethics  of  the  Pentateuch
and  of  the  Institutes  of  Menu  is  now  repudiated,  by  all  ciyili^ed,  moralists.  The  truth.


104  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

moral  systems  which  have  exercised  much  influence,  have  been  fundamentally
the  same  ;  all  the  great  intellectual  systems  have  been  fundamentally  different.
In  reference  to  our  moral  conduct,  there  is  not  a  single  principle  now  known  to
the  most  cultivated  Europeans,  which  was  not  likewise  known  to  the  ancients.
In  reference  to  the  conduct  of  our  intellect,  the  moderns  have  not  only  made  the
most  important  additions  to  every  department  of  knowledge  that  the  ancients
ever  attempted  to  study,  but  besides  this,  they  have  upset  and  revolutionized
the  old  methods  of  inquiry  ;  they  have  consolidated  into  one  great  scheme  all
those  resources  of  induction  which  Aristotle  alone  dimly  perceived  ;  and  they
have  created  sciences,  the  faintest  idea  of  which  never  entered  the  mind  of  the
boldest  thinker  antiquity  produced.

These  are,  to  every  educated  man,  recognized  and  notorious  facts  ;  and  the
inference  to  be  drawn  from  them  is  immediately  obvious.  Since  civilization  is
the  product  of  moral  and  intellectual  agencies,  and  since  that  product  is  con-
stantly changing,  it  evidently  cannot  be  regulated  by  the  stationary  agent  ;
because,  when  surrounding  circumstances  are  unchanged,  a  stationary  agent  can
only  produce  a  stationary  effect.  The  only  other  agent  is  the  intellectual  one  ;
and  that  this  is  the  real  mover  may  be  proved  in  two  distinct  ways  :  first,  because
being,  as  we  have  already  seen,  either  moral  or  intellectual,  and  being,  as  we  have
also  seen,  not  moral,  it  must  be  intellectual ;  and  secondly,  because  the  intellectual
principle  has  an  activity  and  a  capacity  for  adaptation,  which,  as  I  undertake  to
show,  is  quite  sufficient  to  account  for  the  extraordinary  progress  that,  during
several  centuries,  Europe  has  continued  to  make.

Such  are  the  main  arguments  by  which  my  view  is  supported  ;  but  there  are
also  other  and  collateral  circumstances  which  are  well  worthy  of  consideration.
The  first  is,  that  the  intellectual  principle  is  not  only  far  more  progressive  than
the  moral  principle,  but  is  also  far  more  permanent  in  its  results.  The  acquisi-
tions made  by  the  intellect  are,  in  every  civilized  country,  carefully  preserved,
registered  in  "certain  well-understood  formulas,  and  protected  by  the  use  of
technical  and  scientific  language  ;  they  are  easily  handed  down  from  one  genera-
tion to  another,  and  thus  assuming  an  accessible,  or,  as  it  were,  a  tangible  form,
they  often  influence  the  most  distant  posterity,  they  become  the  heirlooms  of
mankind,  the  immortal  bequest  of  the  genius  to'which'they  owe  their  birth.  But
the  good  deeds  effected  by  our  moral  faculties  are  less  capable  of  transmission  ;
they  are  of  a  more  private  and  retiring  character  ;  while,  as  the  motives  to  which
they  owe  their  origin  are  generally  the  result  of  self -discipline  and  of  self-sacrifice,
they  have  to  be  worked  out  by  every  man  for  himself  ;  and  thus,  begun  by  each
anew,  they  derive  little  benefit  from  the  maxims  of  preceding  experience,  nor
can  they  well  be  stored  up  for  the  use  of  future  moralists.  The  consequence  is,
that  although  moral  excellence  is  more  amiable,  and  to  most  persons  more  attrac-
tive, than  intellectual  excellence,  still  it  must  be  confessed  that,  looking  at  ulterior
results,  it  is  far  less  active,  less  permanent,  and,  as  I  shall  presently  prove,  less
productive  of  real  good.  Indeed,  if  we  examine  the  effects  of  the  most  active
philanthropy,  and  of  the  largest  and  most  disinterested  kindness,  we  shall  find

contained  in  the  thesis  is,  that  the  essential  principle  of  all  morals,  sympathy  or  recipro-
city, was  very  anciently  formulated  among  all  civilized  peoples,  and  is  not  yet  generally
acted  on.  Mackintosh  wrote  in  a  mood  of  despondency  after  the  miscarriage  of  the  French
Revolution  (Life,  as  cited,  i,  123,  129,  1.31),  and  fell  back,  as  men  have  done  since,  on  a
denial  of  all  moral  progress  because  of  a  great  relapse  in  national  practice.  But  the
higher  moral  doctrines  of  antiquity  were  themselves  the  expression  not  only  of  a  long
prior  evolution,  but  of  the  special  moral  insight  of  the  few  ;  and  the  question  resolves
itself  into  one  of  the  successful  application  of  the  principles  men  profess  to  accept.  While
that  application  is  still  very  imperfect,  it  is  much  less  so  than  it  was  in  the  very  codes
cited  by  Mackintosh  ;  e.g.  in  respect  to  slavery,  toleration,  and  the  treatment  of  criminals,
the  insane,  the  sick,  the  poor,  and  the  vanquished  in  war — all  matters  of  "  practical
morality."  The  problem  can  be  rightly  seen  only  in  the  light  of  the  theory  of  evolution,
which  regards  human  progress  as  a  far  more  protracted  process  than  it  was  formerly  held
tq  be.— ED.]


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     105

that  those  effects  are,  comparatively  speaking,  short-lived  ;  that  there  is  only  a
small  number  of  individuals  they  come  in  contact  with  and  benefit  ;  that  they
rarely  survive  the  generation  which  witnessed  their  commencement  ;  and  that,
when  they  take  the  more  durable  form  of  founding  great  public  charities,  such
institutions  invariably  fall,  first  into  abuse,  then  into  decay,  and  after  a  time  arc
either  destroyed,  or  perverted  from  their  original  intention,  mocking  the  effort
by  which  it  is  vainly  attempted  to  perpetuate  the  memory  even  of  the  purest  and
most  energetic  benevolence.

These  conclusions  are  no  doubt  very  unpalatable  ;  and  what  makes  them
peculiarly  offensive  is,  that  it  is  impossible  to  refute  them.  For  the  deeper  we
penetrate  into  this  question,  the  more  clearly  shall  we  see  the  superiority  of
intellectual  acquisitions  over  moral  feeling.16  There  is  no  instance  on  record  of
an  ignorant  man  who,  having  good  intentions,  and  supreme  power  to  enforce
them,  has  not  done  far  more  evil  than  good.  And  whenever  the  intentions  have
been  very  eager,  and  the  power  very  extensive,  the  evil  has  been  enormous.  But
if  you  can  diminish  the  sincerity  of  that  man,  if  you  can  mix  some  alloy  with  his
motives,  you  will  likewise  diminish  the  evil  which  he  works.  If  he  is  selfish  as
well  as  ignorant,  it  will  often  happen  that  you  may  play  off  his  vice  against  his
ignorance,  and  by  exciting  his  fears  restrain  his  mischief.  If,  however,  he  has  no
fear,  if  he  is  entirely  unselfish,  if  his  sole  object  is  the  good  of  others,  if  he  pursues
that  object  with  enthusiasm,  upon  a  large  scale,  and  with  disinterested  zeal,  then
it  is  that  you  have  no  check  upon  him,  you  have  no  means  of  preventing  the
calamities 'which,  in  an  ignorant  age,  an  ignorant  man  will  be  sure  to  inflict.
How  entirely  this  is  verified  by  experience,  we  may  see  in  studying  the  history  of
religious  persecution.  To  punish  even  a  single  man  for  his  religious  tenets,  is
assuredly  a  crime  of  the  deepest  dye  ;  but  to  punish  a  large  body  of  men,  to
persecute  an  entire  sect,  to  attempt  to  extirpate  opinions  which,  growing  out  of
the  state  of  society  in  which  they  arise,  are  themselves  a  manifestation  of  the
marvellous  and  luxuriant  fertility  of  the  human  mind, — to  do  this  is  not  only
one  of  the  most  pernicious  but  one  of  the  most  foolish  acts  that  can  possibly  be
conceived.  Nevertheless,  it  is  an  undoubted  fact  that  an  overwhelming  majority
of  religious  persecutors  have  been  men  of  the  purest  intentions,  of  the  most
admirable  and  unsullied  morals.*  It  is  impossible  that  this  should  be  otherwise.
For  they  are  not  bad-intentioned  men  who  seek  to  enforce  opinions  which  they
believe  to  be  good.  Still  less  are  they  bad  men  who  are  so  regardless  of  temporal
considerations  as  to  employ  all  the  resources  of  their  power,  not  for  their  own
benefit,  but  for  the  purpose  of  propagating  a  religion  which  they  think  necessary
to  the  future  happiness  of  mankind.  Such  men  as  these  are  not  bad,  they  are
only  ignorant  ;  ignorant  of  the  nature  cf  truth,  ignorant  of  the  consequences  of
their  own  acts.  But  in  a  moral  point  of  view,  their  motives  are  unimpeachable,
indeed,  it  is  the  very  ardour  of  their  sincerity  which  warms  them  into  persecution.
It  is  the  holy  zeal  by  which  they  are  fired,  that  quickens  their  fanaticism  into  a
deadly  activity.  If  you  can  impress  any  man  with  an  absorbing  conviction  of
the  supreme  importance  of  some  moral  or  religious  doctrine  ;  if  you  can  make  him
believe  that  those  who  reject  that  doctrine  are  doomed  to  ete'rnal  perdition  ;  if
you  then  give  that  man  power,  and  by  means  of  his  ignorance  blind  him  to  the

16  One  part  of  the  argument  is  well  stated  by  Cuvier,  who  says,  "  Le  bien  que  Ton  fait
aux  hommes,  quelque  grand  qu'il  soit,  est  toujours  passager  ;  les  verites  qu'on  leur  laisse
sont  eternelles."  Cuvier,  Eloges  Historiques,  vol.  ii.  p.  304.  [This  does  not  justify  the
use  of  the  expression  "  superiority  over."  The  true  formula  is,  in  the  terms  of  the  case,
"  wider  effectiveness  than."  And  it  is  partly  illegitimate  to  draw  an  absolute  distinction
between  "  intellectual  acquisitions  "  and  moral  feeling  when  in  the  terms  of  the  case  the
former  include  moral  perceptions,  and  when  there  can  be  no  such  perception  without
a  concomitant  moral  feeling. — ED.]

[*  Such  a  proposition  is  clearly  incapable  of  proof.  In  ages  of  persecution  the  majority
are  persecutors,  and  Buckle  had  just  before  said  (p.  102)  that  the  "  immense  majority  of
men  "  must  always  be  "  neither  very  virtuous  nor  very  vicious."  He  is  now  forcing  his
argument  for  the  purpose  of  his  immediate  thesis. — ED.]


io6  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ulterior  consequences  of  his  own  act, — he  will  infallibly  persecute  those  who  deny
his  doctrine  ;  and  the  extent  of  his  persecution  will  be  regulated  by  the  extent  o"f
his  sincerity.  Diminish  the  sincerity,*  and  you  will  diminish  the  persecution  ;
in  other  words,  by  weakening  the  virtue  you  may  check  the  evil.  This  is  a  truth
of  which  history  furnishes  such  innumerable  examples  that  to  deny  it  would  be
not  only  to  reject  the  plainest  and  most  conclusive  arguments,  but  to  refuse  the
concurrent  testimony  of  every  age.  I  will  merely  select  two  cases,  which,  from
the  entire  difference  in  their  circumstances,  are  very  apposite  as  illustrations  :
the  first  being  from  the  history  of  Paganism,  the  other  from  the  history  of  Christ-
ianity ;  and  both  proving  the  inability  of  moral  feelings  to  control  religious
persecution.

I.  The  Roman  emperors,  as  is  well  known,  subjected  the  early  Christians  to
persecutions,  which,  though  they  have  been  exaggerated,  were  frequent  and  very
grievous  But,  what  to  some  persons  must  appear  extremely  strange,  is,  that
among  the  active  authors  of  these  cruelties,  we  find  the  names  of  the  best  men
who  ever  sat  on  the  throne  ;  while  the  worst  and  most  infamous  princes  were
precisely  those  who  spared  the  Christians,  and  took  no  heed  of  their  increase.
The  two  most  thoroughly  depraved  of  all  the  emperors  were  certainly  Commodus
and  Elagabalus  ;  neither  of  whom  persecuted  the  new  religion,  or  indeed  adopted
any  measures  against  it.  They  were  too  reckless  of  the  future,  too  selfish,  too
absorbed  in  their  own  infamous  pleasures,  to  mind  whether  truth  or  error  pre
vailed  ;  and  being  thus  indifferent  to  the  welfare  of  their  subjects,  they  cared
nothing  about  the  progress  of  a  creed,  which  they,  as  Pagan  emperors,  were  bound
to  regard  as  a  fatal  and  impious  delusion.  They  therefore  allowed  Christianity
to  run  its  course,  unchecked  by  those  penal  laws  which  more  honest,  but  more
mistaken,  rulers  would  assuredly  have  enacted. w  We  find,  accordingly,  that
the  great  enemy  of  Christianity  was  Marcus  Aurelius,  a  man  of  kindly  temper,
and  of  fearless,  unflinching  honesty,  but  whose  reign  was  characterized  by  a
persecution  from  which  he  would  have  refrained  had  he  been  less  in  earnest  about
the  religion  of  his  fathers.^  And  to  complete  the  argument,  it  may  be  added,
that  the  last  and  one  of  the  most  strenuous  of  the  opponents  of  Christianity  who

17  "  The  first  year  of  Commodus  must  be  the  epocha  of  the  toleration.     From  all  these
authorities,  it   appears  beyond  exception  that  Commodus  put  a  stop  to  the  persecution
in  the  first  year  of  his  reign.  .  .  .  Not  one  writer,  either  heathen  or  Christian,  makes
Commodus  a  persecutor."     Letters  concerning  the  Thundering  Legion,  in  Moyle's   Works.
vol.  ii.  p.  266,  London,  1726.     "  Heliogabalus  also,  though  in  other  respects  the  most
infamous  of  all  princes,  and  perhaps  the  most  odious  of  all  mortals,  showed  no  marks  of
bitterness  or  aversion  to  the  disciples  of  Jesus."     Mosheim's  Eccl.  History,  vol.  i.  p.  66  :
see  also  Milman's  Hist,  of  Christianity,  Lond.  1840,  vol.  ii.  p.  225.

18  Dr.  Milman  (History  of  Christianity,  1840,  vol.  ii.  p.  159)  says,  "  A  blameless  disciple
in  the  severest  school  of  philosophic  morality,  the  austerity  of  Marcus  rivalled  that  of  the
Christians  in  its  contempt  of  the  follies  and  diversions  of  life  ;  yet  his  native  kindliness  of
disposition  was  not  hardened  or  embittered  by  the  severity  or  the  pride  of  his  philosophy.
With  Aurelius,  nevertheless,  Christianity  found  not  only  a  fair  and  high-minded  com-
petitor for  the  command  of  the  human  mind  ;  not  only  a  rival  in  the  exaltation  of  the
soul  of  man  to  higher  views  and  more  dignified  motives  ;  but  a  violent  and  intolerant
persecutor."     M.  Guizot  compares  him  with  Louis  IX.  of  France  ;  and  certainly  there
was  in  both  an  evident  connexion  between  sincerity  and  persecution  :  "  Marc  Aurele  et
saint  Louis  sont  peut  etre  les  deux  seuls  princes  qui,  en  toute  occasion,  aient  fait  de  leurs
croyances  morales  la  premiere  regie  de  leur  conduite  :  Marc  Aurele,  stoicien  ;  saint  Louis,
chretien."     Guizot,   Civilisation  en  France,   vol.   iv.   p.    142.     Even  Duplessis  Mornay
(Mem.  vol.  iv.  p.  374)  calls  him  "  le  meilleur  des  empereurs  payens  ;  "  and  Ritter  (Hist,
of  Philos.  vol.  iv.  p.  222),  "  the  virtuous  and  noble  emperor."

[*  The  expression  here  is  again  lax.  It  should  be  "  diminish  his  conviction."  Sin-
cerity is  correlative  with  profession  :  with  diminished  conviction,  sincerity  would  involve
diminution  of  persecution.  Men  may  persecute  unrelentingly  from  sheer  malice — a
circumstance  not  noted  by  Buckle. — ED.]


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     107

occupied  the  throne  of  the  Caesars  was  Julian  ;  a  prince  of  eminent  probity,
whose  opinions  are  often  attacked,  but  against  whose  moral  conduct  even  calumny
itself  has  hardly  breathed  a  suspicion.19

TI.  The  second  illustration  is  supplied  by  Spain  ;  a  country  of  which  it  must  be
confessed  that  in  no  other  have  religious  feelings  exercised  such  sway  over  the
affairs  of  men.  No  other  European  nation  has  produced  so  many  ardent  and
disinterested  missionaries,  zealous  self-denying  martyrs,  who  have  cheerfully
sacrificed  their  lives  in  order  to  propagate  truths  which  they  thought  necessary
to  be  known.  Nowhere  else  have  the  spiritual  classes  been  so  long  in  the  ascen-
dant ;  nowhere  else  are  the  people  so  devout,  the  churches  so  crowded,  the  clergy
so  numerous.  But  the  sincerity  and  the  honesty  of  purpose  by  which  the  Spanish
people,  taken  as  a  whole,  have  always  been  marked,  have  not  only  been  unable
to  prevent  religious  persecution,  but  have  proved  the  means  of  encouraging  it.
If  the  nation  had  been  more  lukewarm,  it  would  have  been  more  tolerant.  As
it  was,  the  preservation  of  the  faith  became  the  first  consideration  ;  and  every-
thing being  sacrificed  to  this  one  object,  it  naturally  happened  that  zeal  begat
cruelty,  and  the  soil  was  prepared  in  which  the  Inquisition  took  root  and  flour-
ished.* The  supporters  of  that  barbarous  institution  were  not  hypocrites,  but

19  Neander  (History  of  the  Church,  vol.  i.  p.  122)  observes,  that  the  best  emperors
opposed  Christianity,  and  that  the  worst  ones  were  indifferent  to  its  encroachments.
The  same  remark,  in  regard  to  Marcus  and  Commodus,  is  made  by  Gibbon  ;  Decline  and
Fall,  chap.  xvi.  p.  220,  Lond.  1836.  Another  writer,  of  a  very  different  character,  ascribes
this  peculiarity  to  the  wiles  of  the  devil  :  "  In  the  primitive  times,  it  is  observed  that  the
best  emperors  were  some  of  them  stirred  up  by  Satan  to  be  the  bitterest  persecutors  of
the  Church."  Memoirs  of  Colonel  Hutchinson,  p.  85.  [The  problem  of  the  persecu-
tions of  the  early  Church  is  not  so  simple  as  it  is  here  made  to  seem.  Some  emperors  of
good  character  are  not  charged  with  persecution  at  all — e.g.  Titus,  Nerva.  Pertinax,  and
Alexander  Severus ;  while  Hadrian,  Trajan,  and  Antoninus  Pius  are  credited  with  restrain-
ing it ;  and  Julian,  the  most  theological  of  all  the  emperors,  abstained  from  it  under  great
provocation.  He  was  a  "  strenuous  opponent  "  by  way  of  criticism,  not  at  all  by  way  of
coercion.  The  persecution  charged  upon  Domitian  is  doubtful ;  but  if  it  be  admitted,  it
upsets  Buckle's  rule  on  the  other  side  also.  As  regards  Marcus  Aurelius,  he  has  been
misled  by  Milman,  who  reproduced  one  of  Mosheim's  imputations  (De  rebus  Christianorum,
saec.  ii.  §  15)  without  acknowledging  that  in  a  footnote  Mosheim  cancels  the  charge,  and
that  in  the  later  Ecclesiastical  History  he  treats  it  as  cancelled.  Milman  seems  to  have
made  no  analysis  of  Mosheim's  original  grounds,  which  are  untenable,  and  to  have  over-
looked or  ignored  the  express  testimony  of  Tertullian  ( Apol.  5 )  to  the  protection  of  the
Christians  by  Marcus  Aurelius.  Renan  justifiably  sums  up  that  "  Marc  Aurele  ne
changea  rien  aux  regies  etablies  centre  les  Chretiens.  Les  persecutions  etaient  la  conse-
quence des  principes  fondamentaux  de  1'empire  en  fait  d' association.  Marc  Aurele,
loin  cl'exagerer  la  legislation  anterieure,  1'attenua  de  toutes  ses  forces,  et  une  des  gloires
de  son  regne  est  1'extension  qu'il  donna  aux  droits  des  colleges  "  (Marc  Aurele,  p.  57).
The  laws  from  which  the  Christians  suffered  were  directed  against  all  secret  societies,
not  against  religions  as  such  ;  and  while  the  Christians  must  have  suffered  much  from
local  pagan  malice,  they  often  gave  much  provocation  by  their  attitude  towards  pagan

f*  Buckle  here  ignores  the  facts  that  the  Spanish  people  made  a  prolonged  and  strenu-
ous resistance  to  the  establishment  of  the  Inquisition,  even  murdering  an  Inquisitor
before  the  altar.  See  U.  R.  Burke,  History  of  Spain,  1895,  ii.,  97,  98,  101,  103,  in  ;
McCrie,  The  Reformation  in  Spain,  ed.  1856,  pp.  52-3  ;  Llorente,  Hist.  Crit.  de  Vlnquisi-
tion  de  VEspagne,  2  eed.  i.,  185-213  ;  and  Armstrong,  Introd.  to  Major  Hume's  Spain,
pp.  14,  18.  He  further  disregards  the  fact  that, before  the  Reformation,  "nowhere  was
the  persecution  of  heretics  more  relentless  than  in  the  Netherlands  " — at  the  hands  of
their  fellow-countrymen  (Motley,  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic,  i-vol.  ed.  1863,  pp.  36,  81,
132).  Philip  II.  pointed  out  that  "  the  Inquisition  of  the  Netherlands  is  much  more  pitiless
than  that  of  Spain."  Motley,  p.  174.  And  see  below,  note  23.  Finally,  as  regards  Spain
before  the  Inquisition  "  it  appears  in  general  that  heretics  were  more  mildly  treated  there
than  in  other  countries  "  (McCrie,  as  cited,  p.  41). — ED.]


io8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

enthusiasts.  Hypocrites  are  for  the  most  part  too  supple  to  be  cruel.  For
cruelty  is  a  stern  and  unbending  passion  ;  while  hypocrisy  is  a  fawning  and
flexible  art,  which  accommodates  itself  to  human  feelings,  and  flatters  the  weak-
ness of  men  in  order  that  it  may  gain  its  own  ends.  In  Spain,  the  earnestness  of
the  nation,  being  concentrated  on  a  single  topic,  carried  everything  before  it ;
and  hatred  of  heresy  becoming  a  habit,  persecution  of  heresy  was  thought  a
duty.  The  conscientious  energy  with  which  that  duty  was  fulfilled  is  seen  in  the
history  of  the  Spanish  Church.  Indeed,  that  the  inquisitors  were  remarkable
for  an  undeviating  and  incorruptible  integrity,  may  be  proved  in  a  variety  of
ways,  and  from  different  and  independent  sources  of  evidence.*  This  is  a  question
to  which  I  shall  hereafter  return  ;  but  there  are  two  testimonies  which  I  cannot
omit,  because,  from  the  circumstances  attending  them,  they  are  peculiarly
unimpeachable.  Llorente,  the  great  historian  of  the  Inquisition,  and  its  bitter
enemy,  had  access  to  its  private  papers  ;  and  yet,  with  the  fullest  means  of  infor-
mation, he  does  not  even  insinuate  a  charge  against  the  moral  character  of  the
inquisitors  ;  but  while  execrating  the  cruelty  of  their  conduct,  he  cannot  deny
the  purity  of  their  intentions.20  Thirty  years  earlier,  Townsend,  a  clergyman  of
the  Church  of  England,  published  his  valuable  work  on  Spain  ;21  and  though,  as  a
Protestant  and  an  Englishman,  he  had  every  reason  to  be  prejudiced  against  the
infamous  system  which  he  describes,  he  also  can  bring  no  charge  against  those
who  upheld  it  ;  but  having  occasion  to  mention  its  establishment  at  Barcelona,
one  of  its  most  important  branches,  he  makes  the  remarkable  admission,  that  all
its  members  are  men  of  worth,  and  that  most  of  them  are  of  distinguished
humanity.22

These  facts,  startling  as  they  are,  form  a  very  small  part  of  that  vast  mass  of
evidence  which  history  contains,  and  which  decisively  proves  the  utter  inability
of  moral  feelings  to  diminish  religious  persecution.  The  way  in  which  the  diminu-

life  and  towards  the  empire,  as  well  as  by  actual  sacrilege.  There  is  not  the  least  reason
to  suppose  that  Commodus  abrogated  any  oppressive  laws,  or  passed  any  protective  ones  ;
and  the  relative  immunity  alleged  of  his  reign  is  fairly  to  be  ascribed  to  the  reforms  of
Marcus  (refs.  in  Renan,  p.  29),  respect  for  whom  seems  also  to  have  made  the  Christians
latterly  less  aggressive.  Elagabalus,  though  vicious,  was  a  cult-maker,  and  ought  en
Buckle's  theory  to  have  been  a  persecutor. — ED.]

20  By  which,  indeed,  he  is  sorely  puzzled.     "  On  reconnaitra  mon  impartialite  dans  quel-
ques  circonstances  ou  je  fais  remarquer  chez  Jes  inquisiteurs  des  dispositions  genereuses  ;
ce  qui  me  porte  a  croire  que  les  atroces  sentences  rendues  par  le  Saint -Office,  sont  plutot
une  consequence  de  ses  lois  organiques,  qu'un  effet  du  caractere  particulier  de  ses  mem-
bres."  Llorente,  Histoire  Critique  de  I 'Inquisition  d'Espagne,  vol.  i.  p.  xxiii.  :  compare
vol.  ii.  pp.  267,  268,  vol.  iv.  p.  153.     [Llorente's  statement  is  not  here  rightly  interpreted.
He  speaks  only  of  "  quelques  circonstances  "  of  a  favourable  kind,  and  goes  on  to  say
that  "  les  inquisiteurs  des  regnes  de  Ferdinand  VI.,  de  Charles  III.,  et  de  Charles  IV.,
ont  tenu  une  conduite  si  differente  de  ce  qu'on  avait  vu  dans  les  premiers  siecles  de  V Inquisi-
tion, qu'ils  paraissent  des  modeles  de  douceur."     Townsend's  testimony  likewise  applies
only  to  the  eighteenth  century,  when  great  restraints  had  been  put  on  the  Inquisition.
—En.]

21  Highly  spoken  of  by  the  late  Blanco  White,  a  most  competent  judge.     See  Doblado's
Letters  from  Spain,  p.  5.

22  "  It  is,  however,  universally  acknowledged,  for  the  credit  of  the  corps  at  Barcelona,
that  all  its  members  are  men  of  worth,  and  most  of  them  distinguished  for  humanity."
Townsend's  Journey  through  Spain  in  1786  and  1787,  vol.  i.  p.  122,  Lond.  1792.

[*  This  statement  must  be  pronounced  extravagant.  Not  only  are  the  inquisitors
proved  (a)  to  have  adopted  grossly  unfair  judicial  methods,  and  (6)  to  have  accepted  the
most  worthless  testimony  against  accused  persons,  while  permitting  only  the  most  un-
impeachable to  be  heard  for  them  (McCrie,  as  cited,  p.  48,  and  refs.),  but  it  was
formally  charged  against  them  in  the  report  of  the  Grand  Junto  in  1696  that  "  the  slight-
est offence,  the  least  injury,  against  their  servants,  attracts  their  vengeance,  and  they
punish  it  as  if  it  were  a  crime  against  religion,  observing  neither  rule  nor  measure"
(Llorente,  as  cited,  iv.  13). — ED.]


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     109

tion  has  been  really  effected  by  the  mere  progress  of  intellectual  acquirements,
will  be  pointed  out  in  another  part  of  this  volume  ;  when  we  shall  see  that  the
great  antagonist  of  intolerance  is  not  humanity,  but  knowledge.  It  is  to  the
diffusion  of  knowledge,  and  to  that  alone,  that  we  owe  the  comparative  cessation
of  what  is  unquestionably  the  greatest  evil  men  have  ever  inflicted  on  their  own
species.  For  that  religious  persecution  is  a  greater  evil  than  any  other,  is
apparent,  not  so  much  from  the  enormous  and  almost  incredible  number  of  its
known  victims,23  as  from  the  fact  that  the  unknown  must  be  far  more  numerous,
and  that  history  gives  no  account  of  those  who  have  been  spared  in  the  body,  in
order  that  they  might  suffer  in  the  mind.  We  hear  much  of  martyrs  and  con-
fessors—-of  those  who  were  slain  by  the  sword,  or  consumed  in  the  fire  ;  but  we
know  little  of  that  still  larger  number  who  by  the  mere  threat  of  persecution
have  been  driven  into  an  outward  abandonment  of  their  real  opinions ;  and  who,
thus  forced  into  an  apostasy  the  heart  abhors,  have  passed  the  remainder  of  their
life  in  the  practice  of  a  constant  and  humiliating  hypocrisy.  It  is  this  which  is
the  real  curse  of  religious  persecution.  For  in  this  way,  men  being  constrained
to  mask  their  thoughts,  there  arises  a  habit  of  securing  safety  by  falsehood,  and
of  purchasing  impunity  with  deceit.  In  this  way,  fraud  becomes  a  necessary  of
life  ;  insincerity  is  made  a  daily  custom  ;  the  whole  tone  of  public  feeling  is  viti-
ated, and  the  gross  amount  of  vice  and  of  error  fearfully  increased.*  Surely,
then,  we  have  reason  to  say  that,  compared  to  this,  all  other  crimes  are  of  small
account  ;  and  we  ma}'  well  be  grateful  for  that  increase  of  intellectual  pursuits
which  has  destroyed  an  evil  that  some  among  us  would  even  now  willingly  restore.
The  principle  I  am  advocating  is  of  such  immense  importance  in  practice  as
well  as  in  theory,  that  I  will  give  yet  another  instance  of  the  energy  with  which
it  works.  The  second  greatest  evil  known  to  mankind — the  one  by  which,  with
the  exception  of  religious  persecution,  most  suffering  has  been  caused — is,  un-
questionably, the  practice  of  war.  That  this  barbarous  pursuit  is,  in  the  progress
of  society,  steadily  declining,  must  be  evident,  even  to  the  most  hasty  reader  of
European  history.24  If  we  compare  one  century  with  another,  we  shall  find  that
for  a  very  long  period  wars  have  been  becoming  less  frequent  ;  and  now  so  clearly
is  the  movement  marked,  that  until  the  late  commencement  of  hostilities  we
had  remained  at  peace  for  nearly  forty  years  :  a  circumstance  unparalleled,  not

23  In  1546,  the  Venetian  ambassador  at  the  court  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  stated,  in
an  official  report  to  his  own  government  on  his  return  home,  "  that  in  Holland  and  in
Friesland,  more  than  30,000  persons  have  suffered  death  at  the  hands  of  justice  for  Ana-
baptist errors."     Correspondence  of  Charles  V.  and  his  Ambassadors,  edited  by  William
Bradford,  Lond.  8vo,  1850,  p.  471.     In  Spain,  the  Inquisition,  during  the  eighteen  years
of  Torquemada's  ministry,  punished,  according  to  the  lowest  estimate,  upwards  of  105,000
persons,  of  whom  8,800  were  burned.     Prescotfs  History  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  i.
p.  265.     In  Andalusia  alone,  during  a  single  year,  the  Inquisition  put  to  death  2,000  Jews,
"  besides  17,000  who  underwent  some  form  of  punishment  less  severe  than  that  of  the
stake."     Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i.  p.  410.     For  other  statistical
evidence  on  this  horrible  subject,  see  Llorente,  Histoire  de  V Inquisition,  vol.  i.  pp.  160,
229,  238,  239,  279,  280,  406,  407,  455,  vol.  ii.  pp.  77,  116,  376,  vol.  iv.  p.  31  ;  and,  above  all,
the  summary  at  pp.  242-273.

24  On  the  diminished  love  of  war,  which  is  even  more  marked  than  the  actual  diminu-
tion of  war,  see  some  interesting  remarks  in  Comte,  Philosophie  Positive,  vol.  iv.  pp.  488,
713,  vol.  vi.  pp.  68,  424-436,  where  the  antagonism  between  the  military  spirit  and  the
industrial  spirit  is,  on  the  whole,  well  worked  out ;  though  some  of  the  leading  phenomena
have  escaped  the  attention  of  this  eminent  philosopher,  from  his  want  of  acquaintance
with  the  history  and  present  state  of  political  economy.

[*  The  "  real  curse  of  religious  persecution  "  goes  further  than  this.  The  most  serious
result  in  Spain  has  been  on  one  hand  the  elimination  of  the  best  intelligence,  and  on  the
other  the  paralysis  of  what  is  left.  In  a  later  chapter  Buckle  speaks  of  the  Spanish
people  as  "  high-minded,  generous,  truthful,  full  of  integrity,  warm  and  zealous  friends
.  .  .  frank,  charitable,  and  humane."  That  does  not  consist  with  the  present  proposi-
tion.—ED.]


i io  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

only  in  our  own  country,  but  also  in  the  annals  of  every  other  country  which  has
been  important  enough  to  play  a  leading  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  world.25  The
question  arises,  as  to  what,  share  our  moral  feelings  have  had  in  bringing  about
this  great  improvement.  And  if  this  question  is  answered,  not  according  to
preconceived  opinions,  but  according  to  the  evidence  we  possess,  the  answer  will
certainly  be,  that  those  feelings  have  had  no  share  at  all.  For  it  surely  will  not
be  pretended  that  the  moderns  have  made  any  discoveries  respecting  the  moral
evils  of  war.  On  this  head,  nothing  is  now  known  that  has  not  been  known  for
many  centuries.  That  defensive  wars  are  just,  and  that  offensive  wars  are
unjust,  are  the  only  two  principles  which,  on  this  subject,  moralists  are  able  to
teach.  These  two  principles  were  as  clearly  laid  down,  as  well  understood,  and
as  universally  admitted,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  when  there  was  never  a  week  without
war,  as  they  are  at  the  present  moment,  when  war  is  deemed  a  rare  and  singular
occurrence.  Since,  then,  the  actions  of  men  respecting  war  have  been  gradually
changing,  while  their  moral  knowledge  respecting  it  has  not  been  changing,  it  is
palpably  evident  that  the  changeable  effect  has  not  been  produced  by  the  un-
changeable cause.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  an  argument  more  decisive  than
this.  If  it  can  be  proved  that,  during  the  last  thousand  years,  moralists  or
theologians  have  pointed  out  a  single  evil  caused  by  war,  the  existence  of  which
was  unknown  to  their  predecessors, — if  this  can  be  proved,  I  will  abandon  the  view
for  which  I  am  contending.  But  if,  as  I  most  confidently  assert,  this  cannot  be
proved,  then  it  must  be  conceded,  that,  no  additions  having  been  made  on  this
subject  to  the  stock  of  morals,  no  additions  can  have  been  made  to  the  result
which  the  morals  produce.26

Thus  far  as  to  the  influence  exercised  by  moral  feelings  in  increasing  our  distaste
for  war.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  turn  to  the  human  intellect,  in  the  nar-
rowest sense  of  the  term,  we  shall  find  that  every  great  increase  in  its  activity
has  been  a  heavy  blow  to  the  war -like  spirit.  The  full  evidence  for  this  I  shall
hereafter  detail  at  considerable  length  ;  and  in  this  Introduction  I  can  only
pretend  to  bring  forward  a  few  of  those  prominent  points  which,  being  on  the
surface  of  history,  will  be  at  once  understood.

Of  these  points,  one  of  the  most  obvious  is,  that  every  important  addition
made  to  knowledge  increases  the  authority  of  the  intellectual  classes,  by  increasing
the  resources  which  they  have  to  wield.  Now,  the  antagonism  between  these
classes  and  the  military  class  is  evident  :  it  is  the  antagonism  between  thought

25  In  Pellew's  Life  of  Sidmouth,  1847,  vol.  iii.  p.  137,  this  prolonged  peace  is  gravely
ascribed  to  "  the  wisdom  of  the  adjustment  of  1815  ;  "  in  other  words,  to  the  proceedings
of  the  Congress  of  Vienna  !

26  Unless  more  zeal  has  been  displayed  in  the  diffusion  of  moral  and  religious  principles  :
in  which  case  it  would  be  possible  for  the  principles  to  be  stationary,  and  yet  their  effects
be  progressive.     But  so  far  from  this,  it  is  certain  that  in  the  Middle  Ages  there  were,
relatively  to  the  population,  more  churches  than  there  are  now  ;  the  spiritual  classes  were
far  more  numerous,  the  proselyting  spirit  far  more  eager,  and  there  was  a  much  stronger
determination  to  prevent  purely  scientific  inferences  from  encroaching  on  ethical  ones.
Indeed,  during  the  Middle  Ages,  the  moral  and  religious  literature  outweighed  all  the
profane  literature  put  together  ;  and  surpassed  it,  not  only  in  bulk,  but  also  in  the  ability
of  its  cultivators.     Now,  however,  the  generalizations  of  moralists  have  ceased  to  control
the  affairs  of  men,  and  have  made  way  for  the  larger  doctrine  of  expediency,  which  includes
all  interests  and  all  classes.     Systematic  writers  on  morals  reached  their  zenith  in  the
thirteenth  century  ;  fell  off  rapidly  after  that  period  ;  were,  as  Coleridge  well  says,  opposed
by  "  the  genius  of  Protestantism  :  "  and,  by  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  became
extinct  in  the  most  civilized  countries  ;  the  Ductor  Dubitantium  of  Jeremy  Taylor  being
the  last  comprehensive  attempt  of  a  man  of  genius  to  mould  society  solely  according  to
the  maxims  of  moralists.     Compare  two  interesting  passages  in  Mosheim's  Ecclesiast.
Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  338,  and  Coleridge's  Friend,  vol.  iii.  p.  104.     [The  phrase  "  systematic
writers  on  morals  "  here  applies,  of  course,  to  the  a  priori  moralists,  and  especially  to  the
casuists.     Buckle  has  been  charged  with  gross  error  in  this  passage  on  the  strength  of  a
gross  misconception. — ED.]


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     in

and  action,  between  the  internal  and  the  external,  between  argument  and  vio-
lence, between  persuasion  and  force  ;  or,  to  sum  up  the  whole,  between  men  who
live  by  the  pursuits  of  peace  and  those  who  live  by  the  practice  of  war.  What-
ever, therefore,  is  favourable  to  one  class,  is  manifestly  unfavourable  to  the  other.
Supposing  the  remaining  circumstances  to  be  the  same,  it  must  happen,  that  as
the  intellectual  acquisitions  of  a  people  increase,  their  love  of  war  will  diminish  ;
and  if  their  intellectual  acquisitions  are  very  small,  their  love  of  war  will  be  very
great.27  In  perfectly  barbarous  countries,  there  are  no  intellectual  acquisitions  ;
and  the  mind  being  a  blank  and  dreary  waste,  the  only  resource  is  external
activity,28  the  only  merit  personal  courage.  No  account  is  made  of  any  man
unless  he  has  killed  an  enemy  ;  and  the  more  he  has  killed,  the  greater  the  reputa-
tion he  enjoys.29  This  is  the  purely  savage  state  ;  and  it  is  the  state  in  which
military  glory  is  most  esteemed,  and  military  men  most  respected.30  From  this
frightful  debasement,  even  up  to  the  summit  of  civilization,  there  is  a  long  series
of  consecutive  steps  ;  gradations,  at  each  of  which  something  is  taken  from  the
dominion  of  force,  and  something  given  to  the  authority  of  thought.  Slowly,
and  one  by  one,  the  intellectual  and  pacific  classes  begin  to  arise  ;  at  first  held  in

27  Herder  boldly  asserts  that  man,  originally  and  by  virtue  of  his  organization,  is
peaceably  disposed  ;  but  this  opinion  is  decisively  refuted  by  the  immense  additions  which,
since  the  time  of  Herder,  have  been  made  to  our  knowledge  of  the  feelings  and  habits  of
savages.     "  Indessen  ist's  wahr,  dass  der  Bau  des  Menschen  vorziiglich  auf  die  Vertheidi-
gung,  nicht  auf  den  Angriff  gerichtet  ist :  in  diesem  muss  ihm  die  Kunst  zu  Hiilfe  kommen,
in  jener  aber  ist  er  von  Natur  das  kraftigste  Geschopf  der  Erde.     Seine  Gestalt  selbst
lehret  ihn  also  Friedlichkeit,  nicht  rauberische  Mordverwiistung, — der  Humanitat  erstes
Merkmal."     Ideen  zur  Geschichte,  vol.  i.  p.  185.

28  Hence,  no  doubt,  that  acuteness  of  the  senses,  natural  and  indeed  necessary  to  an
early  state  of  society,  and  which,  being  at  the  expense  of  the  reflecting  faculties,  assimi-
lates man  to  the  lower  animals.     See  Carpenter's  Human  Physiology,  p.  404  ;  and  a  fine
passage  in  Herder's  Ideen  zur  Geschichte,  vol.  ii.  p.  12  :  "  Das  abstehende  thierische  Ohr,
das  gleichsam  immer  lauscht  und  horchet,  das  kleine  scharfe  Auge,  das  in  der  weitesten
Feme  den  kleinsten  Rauch  oder  Staub  gewahr  wird,  der  weisse  hervorbleckende,  knochen-
benagende  Zahn,  der  dicke  Hals  und  die  zuriickgebogene  Stellung  ihres  Kopfes  auf
demselben."     Compare  Prichard's  Physical  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.  pp.  292  293  ;  Azara,
Amerique  Meridionale,  vol.  ii.  p.  18  ;  Wrangle's  Polar  Expedition,  p.  384  ;  Pallme's  Travels
in  Kordofan,  pp.  132,  133.

29  "  Among  some  Macedonian   tribes,  the  man   who  had  never  slain  an  enemy  was
marked  by  a  degrading  badge."     Grote's  History  of  Greece,  vol.  xi.  p.  397.     Among  the
Dyaks  of  Borneo,  "  a  man  cannot  marry  until  he  has  procured  a  human  head  ;  and  he
that  has  several  may  be  distinguished  by  his  proud  and  lofty  bearing,  for  it  constitutes
his  patent  of  nobility."     Earl's  Account  of  Borneo,  in  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  iv.
p.  181.    See  also  Crawfurd  on  Borneo,  in  Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  xxiii.  pp.  77,  80.    And
for  similar  instances  of  this  absorption  of  all  other  ideas  into  warlike  ones,  compare  Journal
of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  x.  p.  357;  Mallet's  Northern  Antiquities,  pp.  158,  159,  195  ;  Thirlwall's
Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  pp.  226,  284,  vol.  viii.  p.  209  ;  Henderson's  History  of  Brazil,  p.  475  ;
Southey's  History  of  Brazil,  vol.  i.  pp.  126,  248  ;  Asiatic  Researches,  vol  ii.  p.  188,  vol.  vii.
p.  193  ;  Transactions  of  Bombay  Society,  vol.  ii.  pp.  51,  52  ;  Hoskins'  Travels  in  Ethiopia,
p.  163  ;  Origines  du  Droit,  in  (Euvres  de  Michelet,  vol.  ii.  pp.  333,  334  note.     See  also  the
Thracians :    7775   5£   ^pyaTfjv   ari^TdTov.   rb    ffiv    dir6    iroXtfj-ov   /ecu  XTJI'ITTVOS,  /cdAXtaror.
Herodotus,  book  v.  chap.  6,  vol.  iii.  p.  10,  edit.  Baehr.

30  Malcolm  (History  of  Persia,  vol.  i.  p.  204)  says  of  the  Tartars,  "  There  is  only  one
path  to  eminence,  that  of  military  renown."     Thus,  too,  in  the  Institutes  of  Timour,
p.  269  :   "  He  only  is  equal  to  stations  of  power  and  dignity  who  is  well  acquainted  with
the  military  art,  and  with  the  various  modes  of  breaking  and  defeating  hostile  armies."
The  same  turn  of  mind  is  shown  in  the  frequency  and  evident  delight  with  which  Homer
relates  battles — a  peculiarity  noticed  in  Mure's  Greek  Literature,  vol.  ii.  pp.  63,  64,  where
an  attempt  is  made  to  turn  it  into  an  argument  to  prove  that  the  Homeric  poems  are  all  by
the  same  author  ;  though  the  more  legitimate  inference  would  be  that  the  poems  were  all
composed  in  a  barbarous  age.


ii2  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

great  contempt  by  warriors,  but  nevertheless  gradually  gaining  ground,  increas-
ing in  number  and  in  power,  and  at  each  increase  weakening  that  old  military
spirit  in  which  all  other  tendencies  had  formerly  been  absorbed.  Trade,  com-
merce, manufactures,  law,  diplomacy,  literature,  science,  philosophy, — all  these
things,  originally  unknown,  become  organized  into  separate  studies,  each  study
having  a  separate  class,  and  each  class  insisting  on  the  importance  of  its  own
pursuit.  Of  these  classes,  some  are,  no  doubt,  less  pacific  than  others  ;  but  even
those  which  are  the  least  pacific  are  of  course  more  so  than  men  whose  associa-
tions are  entirely  military,  and  who  see  in  every  fresh  war  that  chance  of  personal
distinction,  from  which,  during  peace,  they  are  altogether  debarred.31

Thus  it  is  that,  as  civilization  advances,  an  equipoise  is  established,  and  military
ardour  is  balanced  by  motives  which  none  but  a  cultivated  people  can  feel.  But
among  a  people  whose  intellect  is  not  cultivated,  such  a  balance  can  never  exist.
Of  this  we  see  a  good  illustration  in  the  history  of  the  present  war.32  For  the
peculiarity  of  the  great  contest  in  which  we  are  engaged  is,  that  it  was  produced,
not  by  "the  conflicting  interests  of  civilized  countries,  but  by  a  rupture  between
Russia  and  Turkey,  the  two  most  barbarous  monarchies  now  remaining  in  Europe.
This  is  a  very  significant  fact.  It  is  highly  characteristic  of  the  actual  condition
of  society,  that  a  peace  of  unexampled  length  should  have  been  broken,  not,  as
former  peaces  were  broken,  by  a  quarrel  between  two  civilized  nations,  but  by
the  encroachments  of  the  uncivilized  Russians  on  the  still  more  uncivilized  Turks.
At  an  earlier  period,  the  influence  of  intellectual,  and  therefore  pacific,  habits
was  indeed  constantly  increasing,  but  was  still  too  weak,  even  in  the  most
advanced  countries,  to  control  the  old  warlike  habits  :  hence  there  arose  a  desire
for  conquest,  which  often  outweighed  all  other  feelings,  and  induced  great  nations
like  France  and  England  to  attack  each  other  on  the  slightest  pretence,  and  seek
every  opportunity  of  gratifying  the  vindictive  hatred  with  which  each  contem-
plated the  prosperity  of  its  neighbour.  Such,  however,  is  now  the  progress  of
affairs,  that  these  two  nations,  laying  aside  the  peevish  and  irritable  jealousy
they  once  entertained,  are  united  in  a  common  cause,  and  have  drawn  the  sword,
not  for  selfish  purposes,  but  to  protect  the  civilized  world  against  the  incursions
of  a  barbarous  foe.*

This  is  the  leading  feature  which  distinguishes  the  present  war  from  its  prede-
cessors. That  a  peace  should  last  for  nearly  forty  years,  and  should  then  be
interrupted,  not,  as  heretofore,  by  hostilities  between  civilized  states,  but  by  the
ambition  of  the  only  empire  which  is  at  once  powerful  and  uncivilized, — is  one  of
many  proofs  that  a  dislike  to  war  is  a  cultivated  taste  peculiar  to  an  intellectual
people.  For  no  one  will  pretend  that  the  military  predilections  of  Russia  are

31  To  the  prospect  of  personal  distinction,  there  was  formerly  added  that  of  wealth  ;
and  in  Europe,  during  the  Middle  Ages,  war  was  a  very  lucrative  profession,  owing  to  the
custom  of  exacting  heavy  ransom  for  the  liberty  of  prisoners.  See  Harrington's  learned
work,  Observations  on  the  Statutes,  pp.  390-393.  In  the  reign  of  Richard  II.  "  a  war  with
France  was  esteemed  as  almost  the  only  method  by  which  an  English  gentleman  could
become  rich."  Compare  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vi.  p.  21.  Sainte  Palaye
(Memoires  sur  Vancienne  Chevalerie,  vol.  i.  p.  311)  says,  "  La  guerre  enrichissoit  alors  par
le  butin,  et  par  les  rangons,  celui  qui  la  faisoit  avec  le  plus  de  valeur,  de  vigilance  et
d'activite.  La  rancon  etoit,  ce  semble,  pour  1'ordinaire,  une  annee  des  revenus  du
prisonnier."  For  an  analogy  with  this,  see  Rig  Veda  Sanhita,  vol.  i.  p.  208,  sec.  3,  and
vol.  ii.  p.  265,  sec.  13.  In  Europe,  the  custom  of  paying  a  ransom  for  prisoners-of-war
survived  the  Middle  Ages,  and  was  only  put  an  end  to  by  the  peace  of  Munster,  in  1648.
Manning's  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Nations,  1839,  p.  162  ;  and  on  the  profits  formerly
made,  pp.  157,  158.

33  I  wrote  this  in  1855.

[*  This  favourable  view  of  the  Crimean  war  is  now  almost  universally  abandoned.  It
appears  that  Buckle  himself  was  thus  carried  away  by  the  popular  infatuation  of  his  day,
while  men  of  a  more  idealistic  turn  of  mind — including  such  different  types  as  Bright  and
Carlyle— took  the  sanely  critical  view.  The  spirit  of  social  science  was,  however,  repre-
sented among  them  by  Cobden. — ED.]


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     113

caused  by  a  low  state  of  morals,  or  by  a  disregard  of  religious  duties.  So  far  from
this,  all  the  evidence  we  have,  shows  that  vicious  habits  are  not  more  common  in
Russia  than  in  France  or  England  ;33  and  it  is  certain  that  the  Russians  submit
to  the  teachings  of  the  church  with  a  docility  greater  than  that  displayed  by
their  civilized  opponents.34  It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  Russia  is  a  warlike  country,
not  because  the  inhabitants  are  immoral,  but  because  they  are  unintellectual.*
The  fault  is  in  the  head,  not  in  the  heart.  In  Russia,  the  national  intellect  being
little  cultivated,  the  intellectual  classes  lack  influence  ;  the  military  class,  there-
fore, is  supreme.  In  this  early  stage  of  society,  there  is  as  yet  no  middle  rank,35
and  consequently  the  thoughtful  and  pacific  habits  which  spring  from  the  middle
ranks  have  no  existence.  The  minds  of  men,  deprived  of  mental  pursuits,3*5
naturally  turn  to  warlike  ones,  as  the  only  resource  remaining  to  them.  Hence
it  is  that  in  Russia  all  ability  is  estimated  by  a  military  standard.  The  army  is
considered  to  be  the  greatest  glory  of  the  country  :  to  win  a  battle,  or  outwit  an
enemy,  is  valued  as  one  of  the  no'blest  achievements  of  life  ;  and  civilians,  what-
ever their  merits  may  be,  are  despised  by  this  barbarous  people,  as  beings  of  an
altogether  inferior  arid  subordinate  character.37

33  Indeed  some  have  supposed  that  there  is  less  immorality  in  Russia  than  in  Western
Europe  ;  but  this  idea  is  probably  erroneous.     See  Stirling's  Russia,  Lond.  1841,  pp.  59,
60.     The  benevolence  and  charitable  disposition  of  the  Russians  are  attested  by  Pinker-
ton,  who  had  good  means  of  information,  and  was  by  no  means  prejudiced  in  their  favour.
See  Pinkerton's  Russia,  Lond.  1833,  pp.  335,  336.     Sir  John  Sinclair  also  says  they  are
"  prone  to  acts  of  kindness  and  charity."     Sinclair's  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  241.

34  The  reverence  of  the  Russian  people  for  their  clergy  has  attracted  the  attention  of
many  observers,  and  is,  indeed,  too  notorious  to  require  proof.

35  A  very  observing  and  intelligent  writer  says,  "  Russia  has  only  two  ranks — the
highest  and  the  lowest."     Letters  from  the  Baltic,  Lond.  1841,  vol.  ii.  p.   185.     "  Les
marchands,  qui  formeraient  une  classe  moyenne,  sont  en  si  petit  nombre  qu'ils  ne  peuvent
marquer  dans  1'etat  :  d'ailleurs  presque  tous  sont  etrangers  ;  .  .  .  ou  done  trouver  cette
classe  moyenne  qui  fait  la  force  des  etats  ?  "     Custine's  Russie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  125,  126  :  see
also  vol.  iv.  p.  74.

36  A  recent  authoress,  who  had  admirable  opportunities  of  studying  the  society  of  St.
Petersburg,  which  she  estimated  with  that  fine  tact  peculiar  to  an  accomplished  woman,
was  amazed  at  this  state  of  things  among  classes  surrounded  with  every  form  of  luxury
and  wealth  :  "  a  total  absence  of  all  rational  tastes  or  literary  topics.  .  .  .  Here  it  is
absolutely  mauvais  genre  to  discuss  a  rational  subject — mere  pedanterie  to  be  caught
upon  any  topics  beyond  dressing,  dancing,  and  a  jolie  tournure."     Letters  from  the  Baltic,
1841,  vol.  ii.  p.  233.     M.  Custine  (La  Russie  en  1839,  vol.  i.  p.  321 )  says,  "  Regie  generate,
personne  ne  profere  jamais  un  mot  qui  pourrait  interesser  vivement  quelqu'un."     At
vol.  ii.  p.  195,  "  De  toutes  les  facultes  de  1'intelligence,  la  seule  qu'on  estime  ici  c'est  le
tact."      Another  writer  of  repute,  M.  Kohl,  contemptuously  observes,  that  in  Russia
"  the  depths  of  science  are  not  even  guessed  at."     Kohl's  Russia,  1842,  Lond.  p.  142.

37  According  to  Schnitzler,  "  Precedence  is  determined,  in  Russia,  by  military  rank  ;
and  an  ensign  would  take  the  pas  of  a  nobleman  not  enrolled  in  the  army,  or  occupying
some  situation  giving  military  rank."     M'Culloch's  Geog.  Diet.  1849,  vol.  ii.  p.  614.     The
same  thing  is  stated  in  Pinkerton's  Russia,  1833,  p.  321.     M.  Erman,  who  travelled  through
great  part  of  the  Russian  empire,  says,  "  In  the  modern  language  of  St.  Petersburg,  one
constantly  hears  a  distinction  of  the  greatest  importance,  conveyed  in  the  inquiry  which
is  habitually  made  respecting  individuals  of  the  educated  class  :  Is  he  a  plain -coat  or  a
uniform  ?  "     Erman' s  Siberia,  vol.  i.  p.  45.     See  also  on  this  preponderance  of  the  military
classes,  which  is  the  inevitable  fruit  of  the  national  ignorance,  Kohl's  Russia,  pp.  28,
194  ;  Stirling's  Russia  under  Nicholas  the  First,  p.  7  ;  Custine's  Russie,  vol.  i.  pp.  I47>  152,
252,  266,  vol.  ii.  pp.  71,  128,  309,  vol.  in.  p.  328,  vol.  iv.  p.  284.     Sir  A.  Alison  (History

[*  It  is  hardly  correct  to  say  that  "  the  Russians  "  sought  the  Crimean  war,  which  was
begun  by  France  and  Britain.  In  so  far  as  "  Russia  "  was  responsible,  the  autocracy
and  the  higher  bureaucracy  settled  everything.  And  no  English  or  French  writer  made
a  more  trenchant  exposure  of  the  mindlessness  of  war  in  that  connexion  than  did  Tolstoy
in  his  Sevastopol. — ED.]

8


H4  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

In  England,  on  the  other  hand,  opposite  caiises  have  produced  opposite  results.
With  us  intellectual  progress  is  so  rapid,  and  the  authority  of  the  middle  class  so
great,  that  not  only  have  military  men  no  influence  in  the  government  of  the
state,  but  there  seemed  at  one  time  even  a  danger  lest  we  should  push  this  feeling
to  an  extreme  ;  and  lest,  from  our  detestation  of  war,  we  should  neglect  those
defensive  precautions  which  the  enmity  of  other  nations  makes  it  advisable  to
adopt.  But  this  at  least  we  may  safely  say,  that,  in  our  country,  a  love  of  war
is,  as  a  national  taste,  utterly  extinct.*  And  this  vast  result  has  been  effected,
not  by  moral  teachings,  nor  by  the  dictates  of  moral  instinct  ;  but  by  the  simple
fact,  that  in  the  progress  of  civilization  there  have  been  formed  certain  classes  of
society  which  have  an  interest  in  the  preservation  of  peace,  and  whose  united
authority  is  sufficient  to  control  those  other  classes  whose  interest  lies  in  the
prosecution  of  war.

It  would  be  easy  to  conduct  this  argument  further,  and  to  prove  how,  by  an
increasing  love  of  intellectual  pursuits,  the  military  service  necessarily  declines,
not  only  in  reputation,  but  likewise  in  ability.  In  a  backward  state  of  society,
men  of  distinguished  talents  crowd  to  the  army,  and  are  proud  to  enrol  them-
selves in  its  ranks.  But  as  society  advances,  new  sources  of  activity  are  opened,
and  new  professions  arise,  which,  being  essentially  mental,  offer  to  genius  oppor-
tunities for  success  more  rapid  than  any  formerly  known.  The  consequence  is
that  in  England,  where  these  opportunities  are  more  numerous  than  elsewhere,
it  nearly  always  happens  that  if  a  father  has  a  son  whose  faculties  are  remarkable,
he  brings  him  up  to  one  of  the  lay  professions,  where  intellect,  when  accompanied
by  industry,  is  sure  to  be  rewarded.  If,  however,  the  inferiority  of  the  boy  is
obvious,  a  suitable  remedy  is  at  hand  :  he  is  made  either  a  soldier  or  a  clergyman  ;
he  is  sent  into  the  army,  or  hidden  in  the  church.  And  this,  as  we  shall  hereafter
see,  is  one  of  the  reasons  why,  as  society  advances,  the  ecclesiastical  spirit  and
the  military  spitit  never  fail  to  decline.  As  soon  as  eminent  men  grow  unwilling
to  enter  any  profession,  the  lustre  of  that  profession  will  be  tarnished  :  first  its
reputation  will  be  lessened,  and  then  its  power  will  be  abridged.  This  is  the
process  through  which  Europe  is  actually  passing,  in  regard  both  to  the  church
and  to  the  army.  The  evidence,  so  far  as  the  ecclesiastical  profession  is  con-
cerned, will  be  found  in  another  part  of  this  work.  The  evidence  respecting  the
military  profession  is  equally  decisive.  For  although  that  profession  has  in
modern  Europe  produced  a  few  men  of  undoubted  genius,  their  number  is  so
extremely  small  as  to  amaze  us  at  the  dearth  of  original  ability.  That  the
military  class,  taken  as  a  whole,  has  a  tendency  to  degenerate,  will  become  still
more  obvious,  if  we  compare  long  periods  of  time.  In  the  ancient  world,  the
leading  warriors  were  not  only  possessed  of  considerable  accomplishments,  but
were  comprehensive  thinkers  in  politics  as  well  as  in  war,  and  were  in  every
respect  the  first  characters  of  their  age.  Thus, — to  give  only  a  few  specimens
from  a  single  people, — we  find  that  the  three  most  successful  statesmen  Greece
ever  produced  were  Solon,  Themistocles,  and  Epaminondas, — all  of  whom  were
distinguished  military  commanders.  Socrates,  supposed  by  some  to  be  the  wisest
of  the  ancients,  was  a  soldier  ;  and  so  was  Plato  ;  and  so  was  Antisthenes,  the
celebrated  founder  of  the  Cynics.  Archytas,  who  gave  a  new  direction  to  the
Pythagorean  philosophy,  and  Melissus,  who  developed  the  Eleatic  philosophy,

of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  pp.  391,  392 )  says,  "  The  whole  energies  of  the  nation  are  turned  towards
the  army.  Commerce,  the  law,  and  all  civil  employments,  are  held  in  no  esteem  ;  the
whole  youth  of  any  consideration  betake  themselves  to  the  profession  of  arms."  The
same  writer  (vol.  x.  p.  566)  quotes  the  remark  of  Bremner,  that  "  nothing  astonishes  the
Russian  or  Polish  nobleman  so  much  as  seeing  the  estimation  in  which  the  civil  professions,
and  especially  the  bar,  are  held  in  Great  Britain."

[*  This  claim  will  not  stand.  Continental  critics  latterly  charge  upon  Englishmen  an
exceptional  levity  in  contemplating  war,  resulting  from  the  fact  that  they  have  not  to
apprehend  its  being  waged  in  their  own  country.  As  regards  disinclination  for  domestic
war,  civilized  nations  are  very  much  on  a  par  ;  and  even  Turkey  does  not  undertake  wars
of  aggression. — Eo.J


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     115

were  both  of  them  well  known  generals,  famous  alike  in  literature  and  in  war.
Among  the  most  eminent  orators,  Pericles,  Alcibiades,  Andocides,  Demosthenes,
and  ^Eschines,  were  all  members  of  the  military  profession  ;  as  also  were  the  two
greatest  tragic  writers,  ^Eschylus  and  Sophocles.  Archilochus,  who  is  said  to
have  invented  iambic  verses,  and  whom  Horace  took  as  a  model,  was  a  soldier  ;
and  the  same  profession  could  likewise  boast  of  Tyrtseus,  one  of  the  founders  of
elegiac  poetry,  and  of  Alcaeus,  one  of  the  best  composers  of  lyric  poetry.  The
most  philosophic  of  all  the  Greek  historians  was  certainly  Thucydides  ;  but  he,
as  well  as  Xenophon  and  Polybius,  held  high  military  appointments,  and  on  more
than  one  occasion  succeeded  in  changing  the  fortunes  of  war.  In  the  midst  of
the  hurry  and  turmoil  of  camps,  these  eminent  men  cultivated  their  minds  to
the  highest  point  that  the  knowledge  of  that  age  would  allow  :  and  so  wide  is  the
range  of  their  thoughts,  and  such  the  beauty  and  dignity  of  their  style,  that  their
works  are  read  by  thousands  who  care  nothing  about  the  sieges  and  battles  in
which  they  were  engaged.

These  were  among  the  ornaments  of  the  military  profession  in  the  ancient
world  ;  and  all  of  them  wrote  in  the  same  language,  and  were  read  by  the  same
people.  But  in  the  modern  world  this  identical  profession,  including  many
millions  of  men,  and  covering  the  whole  of  Europe,  has  never  been  able,  since  the
sixteenth  century,  to  produce  ten  authors  who  have  reached  the  first  class  either
as  writers  or  as  thinkers.  Descartes  is  an  instance  of  an  European  soldier  com-
bining the  two  qualities  ;  he  being  as  remarkable  for  the  exquisite  beauty  of  his
style  as  for  the  depth  and  originality  of  his  inquiries.  This,  however,  is  a  solitary
case  ;  and  there  is,  I  believe,  no  second  one  of  a  modern  military  writer  thus
excelling  in  both  departments.  Certainly  the  English  army,  during  the  last  two
hundred  and  fifty  years,  affords  no  example  of  it,  and  has,  in  fact,  possessed  only
two  authors,  Raleigh  and  Napier,  whose  works  are  recognized  as  models,  and  are
studied  merely  for  their  intrinsic  merit.  Still,  this  is  simply  in  reference  to
style  ;  and  these  two  historians,  notwithstanding  their  skill  in  composition,  have
never  been  reputed  profound  thinkers  on  difficult  subjects,  nor  have  they  added
anything  of  moment  to  the  stock  of  our  knowledge.  In  the  same  way,  among
the  ancients,  the  most  eminent  soldiers  were  likewise  the  most  eminent  politicians,
and  the  best  leaders  of  the  army  were  generally  the  best  governors  of  the  state.
But  here  again  the  progress  of  society  has  wrought  so  great  a  change  that  for  a
long  period  instances  of  this  have  been  excessively  rare.  Even  Gustavus  Adolphus
and  Frederick  the  Great  failed  ignominiously  in  their  domestic  policy,  and  showed
themselves  as  short-sighted  in  the  arts  of  peace  as  they  were  sagacious  in  the  arts
of  war.  Cromwell,  Washington,  and  Napoleon  are,  perhaps,  the  only  first-rate
modern  warriors  of  whom  it  can  be  fairly  said  that  they  were  equally  competent
to  govern  a  kingdom  and  command  an  army.  And  if  we  look  at  England  as
furnishing  a  familiar  illustration,  we  see  this  remark  exemplified  in  our  two
greatest  generals,  Marlborough  and  Wellington.  Marlborough  was  a  man  not
only  of  the  most  idle  and  frivolous  pursuits,  but  was  so  miserably  ignorant  that
his  deficiences  made  him  the  ridicule  of  his  contemporaries  ;  and  of  politics  he
had  no  other  idea  *  but  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  sovereign  by  flattering  his
mistress,  to  desert  the  brother  of  that  sovereign  at  his  utmost  need,  and  afterwards,
by  a  double  treachery,  turn  against  his  next  benefactor,  and  engage  in  a  criminal,
as  well  as  a  foolish,  correspondence  with  the  very  man  whom  a  few  years  before
he  had  infamously  abandoned.  These  were  the  characteristics  of  the  greatest
conqueror  of  his  age,  the  hero  of  a  hundred  fights,  the  victor  of  Blenheim  and  of
Ramilies.  As  to  our  other  great  warrior,  it  is  indeed  true  that  the  name  of
Wellington  should  never  be  pronounced  by  an  Englishman  without  gratitude

[*  This  account  of  Marlborough  will  be  pronounced  unjudicial  by  many  who  agree  with
Buckle  in  denouncing  his  character.  In  his  foreign  diplomacy  he  is  proved  to  have  shown
endless  tact  and  sagacity.  Compare  the  estimate  of  Lecky  (History  of  England  in  the
Eighteenth  Century,  ed.  1892,  i.  145-6),  who  sums  up  that  "  as  a  negociator  he  ranks  with
the  most  skilful  diplomatists  of  his  age,"  and  cites  Bolingbroke's  opinion  that  he  was  not
only  the  greatest  general,  but  also  "  the  greatest  minister  our  country  or  any  other  has
produced." — ED.]


ii6  THE    HISfORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  respect  :  these  feelings  are,  however,  due  solely  to  his  vast  military  services,
the  importance  of  which  it  would  ill  become  us  to  forget.  But  whoever  has
studied  the  civil  history  of  England  during  the  present  century,  knows  full  well
that  this  military  chief,  who  in  the  field  shone  without  a  rival,  and  who,  to  his
still  greater  glory  be  it  said,  possessed  an  integrity  of  purpose,  an  unflinching
honesty,  and  a  high  moral  feeling,  which  could  not  be  surpassed,  was  nevertheless
utterly  unequal  to  the  complicated  exigencies  of  political  life.  It  is  notorious,
that  in  his  views  of  the  most  important  legislative  measures  he  was  always  in  the
wrong.  It  is  notorious,  and  the  evidence  of  it  stands  recorded  in  our  Parlia-
mentary Debates,  that  every  great  measure  which  was  carried,  every  great
improvement,  every  great  step  in  reform,  every  concession  to  the  popular  wishes,
was  strenuously  opposed  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  became  law  in  spite  of  his
opposition,  and  after  his  mournful  declarations  that  by  such  means  the  security
of  England  would  be  seriously  imperilled.  Yet  there  is  now  hardly  a  forward
schoolboy  who  does  not  know  that  to  these  very  measures  the  present  stability
of  our  country  is  mainly  owing.  Experience,  the  great  test  of  \visdom,  has
amply  proved  that  those  vast  schemes  of  reform,  which  the  Duke  of  Wellington
spent  his  political  life  in  opposing,  were,  I  will  not  say  expedient  or  advisable,
but  indispensably  necessary.  That  policy  of  resisting  the  popular  will  which
he  constantly  advised,  is  precisely  the  policy  which  has  been  pursued,  since
the  Congress  of  Vienna,  in  every  monarchy  except  our  own.  The  result  of  that
policy  is  written  for  our  instruction  :  it  is  written  in  that  great  explosion  of
popular  passion,  which  in  the  moment  of  its  wrath  upset  the  proudest  thrones,
destroyed  princely  families,  ruined  noble  houses,  desolated  beautiful  cities.  And
if  the  counsel  of  our  great  general  had  been  followed,  if  the  just  demands  of  the
people  had  been  refused, — this  same  lesson  would  have  been  written  in  the  annals
of  our  own  land  ;  and  we  should  most  assuredly  have  been  unable  to  escape  the
consequence  of  that  terrible  catastrophe  in  which  the  ignorance  and  selfishness
of  rulers  did,  only  a  few  years  ago,  involve  a  large  part  of  the  civilized  world.

Thus  striking  is  the  contrast  between  the  military  genius  of  ancient  times  and
the  military  genius  of  modern  Europe.  The  causes  of  this  decay  are  clearly
traceable  to  the  circumstance  that,  owing  to  the  immense  increase  of  intellectual
employments,  few  men  of  ability  will  now  enter  a  profession  into  which,  in  anti-
quity, men  of  ability  eagerly  crowded,  as  supplying  the  best  means  of  exercising
those  faculties  which,  in  more  civilized  countries,  are  turned  to  a  better  account.
This,  indeed,  is  a  very  important  change  ;  and  thus  to  transfer  the  most  powerful
intellects  from  the  arts  of  war  to  the  arts  of  peace,  has  been  the  slow  work  of
many  centuries,  the  gradual  but  constant  encroachments  of  advancing  know-
ledge. To  write  the  history  of  those  encroachments  would  be  to  write  the
history  of  the  human  intellect  ;  a  task  impossible  for  any  single  man  adequately
to  perform.  But  the  subject  is  one  of  such  interest,  and  has  been  so  little  studied,
that  though  I  have  already  carried  this  analysis  further  than  I  had  intended,  I
cannot  refrain  from  noticing  what  appear  to  me  to  be  the  three  leading  ways
in  which  the  warlike  spirit  of  the  ancient  world  has  been  weakened  by  the  progress
of  European  knowledge.

The  first  of  these  arose  out  of  the  invention  of  Gunpowder  ;  which,  though  a
warlike  contrivance,  has  in  its  results  been  eminently  serviceable  to  the  interests
of  peace.38  This  important  invention  is  said  to  have  been  made  in  the  thirteenth
century  ;39  but  was  not  in  common  use  until  the  fourteenth,  or  even  the  beginning

38  The  consequences  of  the  invention  of  gunpowder  are  considered  very  superficially
by  Frederick  Schlegel  (lectures  on  the  History  of  Literature,  vol.  ii.  pp.  37,  38),  and  by
Dugald  Stewart  (Philosophy  of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.  p.  262).     They  are  examined  with  much
greater  ability,  though  by  no  means  exhaustively,  in  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  book  v.
chap.  i.  pp.  292,  296,  297 ;  Herder's  Ideen  zur  Geschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  iv.  p.  301  ;
Hallam's  Middle  Ages,  vol.  ii.  p.  470.

39  From  the  following  authorities,  it  appears  impossible  to  trace  it  further  back  than
the  thirteenth  century  ;  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  Arabs  were,  as  is  commonly  sup-
posed, the  inventors  :  Humboldfs  Cosmos,  vol.  ii.  p.  590  ;  Koch,  Tableau  des  Revolutions,
vol.  i.  p.  242  ;  Beckmann's  History  of  Inventions,  1846,  vol.  ii.  p.  505  ;  Histoire  Lit.  de  la


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     117

of  the  fifteenth  century.  Scarcely  had  it  come  into  operation,  when  it  worked
a  great  change  in  the  whole  scheme  and  practice  of  war.  Before  this  time,  it
was  considered  the  duty  of  nearly  every  citizen  to  be  prepared  to  enter  the  mili-
tary service,  for  the  purpose  either  of  defending  his  own  country,  or  of  attacking
others.40  Standing  armies  were  entirely  unknown  ;  and  in  their  place  there
existed  a  rude  and  barbarous  militia,  always  ready  for  battle,  and  always  un-
willing to  engage  in  those  peaceful  pursuits  which  were  then  universally  despised.
Nearly  every  man  being  a  soldier,  the  military  profession,  as  such,  had  no  separate
existence  ;  or,  to  speak  more  properly,  the  whole  of  Europe  composed  one  great,
army,  in  which  all  other  prof essions"  were  merged.  To  this  the  only  exception
was  the  ecclesiastical  profession  ;  but  even  that  was  affected  by  the  general
tendency,  and  it  was  not  at  all  uncommon  to  see  large  bodies  of  troops  led  to  the
field  by  bishops  and  abbots,  to  most  of  whom  the  arts  of  war  were  in  those  days
perfectly  familiar.41  At  all  events,  between  these  two  professions  men  were
necessarily  divided  :  the  only  avocations  were  war  and  theology  ;  and  if  you
refused  to  enter  the  church,  you  were  bound  to  serve  in  the  army.  As  a  natural
consequence,  everything  of  real  importance  was  altogether  neglected.  There
were,  indeed,  many  priests  and  many  warriors,  many  sermons  and  many  battles.42
But  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  neither  trade,  nor  commerce,  nor  manufactures  ;
there  was  no  science,  no  literature  :  the  useful  arts  were  entirely  unknown  ;  and
even  the  highest  ranks  of  society  were  unacquainted,  not  only  with  the  most
ordinary  comforts,  but  with  the  commonest  decencies  of  civilized  life.

But  so  soon  as  gunpowder  came  into  use,  there  was  laid  the  foundation  of  a
great  change.  According  to  the  old  system,  a  man  had  only  to  possess,  what  he
generally  inherited  from  his  father,  either  a  sword  or  a  bow,  and  he  was  ready
equipped  for  the  field.43  According  to  the  new  system,  new  means  were  required,

France,  vol.  xx.  p.  236  ;  Thomson's  History  of  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  36  ;  Hallam's  Middle
Ages,  vol.  i.  p.  341.  The  statements  in  Erman's  Siberia,  vol.  i.  pp.  370,  371,  are  more
positive  than  the  evidence  we  are  possessed  of  will  justify ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that
a  sort  of  gunpowder  was  at  an  early  period  used  in  China,  and  in  other  parts  of  Asia.

40  Vattel,  le  Droit  des  Gens,  vol.  ii.  p.  129  ;  Lingard's  History  of  England,  vol.  ii.  pp.  356,
357.     Among  the  Anglo-Saxons,  "  all  free  men  and  proprietors  of  land,  except  the  minis-
ters of  religion,  were  trained  to  the  use  of  arms,  and  always  held  ready  to  take  the  field
at  a  moment's  warning."     Eccleston's  English  Antiquities,  p.  62.      '  There  was  no  distinc-
tion between  the  soldier  and  the  citizen."     Palgrave's  Anglo-Saxon  Commonwealth,  vol.  i.
p.  200.

41  On  these  warlike  ecclesiastics,  compare  Grose's  Military  Antiq.  vol.  i.  pp.  67-8  ;
Lingard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  pp.  26,  183,  vol.  iii.  p.  14  ;  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,
vol.  iv.  p.  458,  vol.  v.  pp.  92,  402,  406  ;  Mosheim's  Eccl.  History,  vol.  i.  pp.  173,  193,  241  ;
Crichton's  Scandinavia,  Edinb.  1838,  vol.  i.  p.  220.     Such  opponents  were  the  more
formidable,  because  in  those  happy  days  it  was  sacrilege  for  a  layman  to  lay  hands  on  a
bishop.     In  1095  his  Holiness  the  Pope  caused  a  council  to  declare,  "  Quod  qui  appre-
henderit  episcopum  omnino  ex  lex  fiat."     Matthcei  Paris  Historia  Major,  p.  18.     As  the
context  contains  no  limitation  of  this,  it  would  follow  that  a  man  became  spiritually  out-
lawed if  he,  even  in  self-defence,  took  a  bishop  prisoner.

42  As  Sharon  Turner  observes  of  England  under  the  Anglo-Saxon  government,  "  war
and  religion  were  the  absorbing  subjects  of  this  period."     Turner's  History  of  England,
vol.  iii.  p.  263.     And  a  recent  scientific  historian  says  of  Europe  generally  :  "  alle  Kiinste
und  Kenntnisse,  die  sich  nicht  aut  das  edle  Kriegs-,  Rauf-  und  Raubhandwerk  bezogen,
waren  uberflussig  und  schadlicb.     Nur  etwas  Theologie  war  vonnothen,   um  die  Erde
mit  dem  Himmel  zu  verbinden."     Winckler,  Geschichte  der  Botanik,  1854,  p.  56.

43  In  1181,  Henry  II.  of  England  ordered  that  every  man  should  have  either  a  sword  or
bow  ;  which  he  was  not  to  sell,  but  leave  to  his  heir  :  "  cseteri  autem  omnes  haberent
wanbasiam,  capellum  ferreum,  lanceam  et  gladium,  vel  arcum  et  sagittas  :  et  prohibuit
ne  aliquis  arma  sua  venderet  vel  invadiaret ;  sed  cum  moreretur,  daret  ilia  propinquiori
haeredi  suo."     Rog.  de  Hov.  Annal.  in  Scriptores  post  Bedam,  p.  348  rev.     In  the  reign  of
Edward  I.,  it  was  ordered  that  every  man  possessing  land  to  the  value  of  forty  shillings
should  keep  "  a  sword,  bow  and  arrows,  and  a  dagger.  .  .  .  Those  who  were  to  keep  bows
and  arrows  might  have  them  out  of  the  forest."     Grose's  Military  Antiquities,  vol.  ii.


n8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  the  equipment  became  more  costly  and  more  difficult.  First,  there  was  the
supply  of  gunpowder  ;44  then  there  was  the  possession  of  muskets,  which  were
expensive  weapons,  and  considered  difficult  to  manage.45  Then,  too,  there  were
other  contrivances  to  which  gunpowder  naturally  gave  rise,  such  as  pistols,
bombs,  mortars,  shells,  mines,  and  the  like.46  All  these  things,  by  increasing  the
complication  of  the  military  art,  increased  the  necessity  of  discipline  and  practice  ;
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  change  that  was  being  effected  in  the  ordinary
weapons  deprived  the  great  majority  of  men  of  the  possibility  of  procuring  theni.
To  suit  these  altered  circumstances,  a  new  system  was  organized  ;  and  it  was
found  advisable  to  train  up  bodies  of  men  for  the  sole  purpose  of  war,  and  to
separate  them  as  much  as  possible  from  those  other  employments  in  which
formerly  all  soldiers  were  occasionally  engaged.  Thus  it  was  that  there  arose
standing  armies  ;  the  first  of  which  were  formed  in  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth
century,47  almost  immediately  after  gunpowder  was  generally  known.  Thus,

pp.  301,  302.  Compare  Geijer's  History  of  the  Swedes,  part  i.  p.  94.  Even  late  in  the
fifteenth  century,  there  were  at  the  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  "  in  each
from  four  to  five  thousand  scholars,  all  grown  up,  carrying  swords  and  bows,  and  in  great
part  gentry."  Sir  William  Hamilton  on  the  History  of  Universities,  in  Hamilton's  Philo-
soph.  Discussions,  p.  414.  One  of  the  latent  attempts  made  to  revive  archery,  was  a
warrant  issued  by  Elizabeth  in  1596,  and  printed  by  Mr.  Collier  in  the  Egerton  Papers,
pp.  217-220,  edit.  Camden  Soc.  1840.  In  the  south-west  of  England,  bows  and  arrows
did  not  finally  disappear  from  the  muster-rolls  till  1599  ;  and  in  the  meantime  the  musket
gained  ground.  See  Yonge's  Diary,  edit.  Camden  Soc.  1848,  p.  xvii.

44  It  is  stated  by  many  writers  that  no  gunpowder  was  manufactured  in  England
until  the  reign  of  Elizabeth.     Camden's  Elizabeth,  in  Kennetfs  History,  vol.  ii.  p.  388,
London,  1719  ;  Strickland's  Queens  of  England,  vol.  vi.  p.  223,  Lond.  1843  ;  Grose's  Mili-
tary Antiquities,  vol.  i.  p.  378.     But  Sharon  Turner  (History  of  England,  vol.  vi.  pp.  490,
491,  Lond.  1839)  has  shown,  from  an  order  of  Richard  III.  in  the  Harleian  manuscripts,
that  it  was  made  in  England  in  1483  ;  and  Mr.  Eccleston  (English  Antiquities,  p.  182,
Lond.  1847)  states  that  the  English  both  made  and  exported  it  as  early  as  1411  :  compare
p.  202.     At  all  events,  it  long  remained  a  costly  article  ;  and  even  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I.,
I  find  a  complaint  of  its  dearness,  "  whereby  the  train -bands  are  much  discouraged  in
their  exercising."     Parliament.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  655.     In  1686,  it  appears  from  the  Claren-
don Correspondence,  vol.  i.  p.  413,  that  the  wholesale  price  ranged  from  about  £2  IDS.  to
£3  a  barrel.     On  the  expense  of  making  it  in  the  present  century,  see  Liebig  and  Kopp's
Reports  on  Chemistry,  vol  hi.  p.  325,  Lond.  1852.

45  The  muskets  were  such  miserable  machines   that   in  the  middle  of  the   fifteenth
century  it  took  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  charge  and  fire  one.      Hallam's  Middle  Ages,
vol.  i.  p.  342.     Grose  (Military  Antiquities,  vol.  i.  p.  146,  vol.  ii.  pp.  292,  337)  says,  that
the  first  mention  of  muskets  in  England  is  in  1471  ;  and  that  rests  for  them  did  not  become
obsolete  until  the  reign  of  Charles  I.     In  the  recent  edition  of  Beckmann's  History  of
Inventions,  Lond.  1846,  vol.  ii.  p.  535,  it  is  strangely  supposed  that  muskets  were  "  first  used
at  the  battle  of  Pavia."     Compare  Daniel,  Histoire  de  la  Milice,  vol.  i.  p.  464,  with  Smythe's
Military  Discourses,  in  Ellis's  Original  Letters,  p.  53,  edit.  Carnden  Society.

46  Pistols  are  said  to  have  been  invented  early  in  the  sixteenth  century.     Grose's
Military  Antiq.  vol.  i.  pp.  102,  146.     Gunpowder  was  first  employed  in  mining  towns  in
1487.     Prescotfs  Hist,  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  ii.  p.  32  ;  Koch,  Tableau  des  Revolu-
tions, vol.  i.  p.  243  ;  Daniel,  Histoire  de  la  Milice  Francaise,  vol.  i.  p.  574.     Daniel  (Milice
Francaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  580,  581)  says,  that  bombs  were  not  invented  till  1588  ;  and  the
same  thing  is  asserted  in  Biographic  Universelle,  vol.  xv.  p.  248  :  but,  according  to  Grose
(Military  Antiq.  vol.  i.  p.  387),  they  are  mentioned  by  Valturinus  in  1472.     On  the
general  condition  of  the  French  artillery  in  the  sixteenth  century,  see  Relations  des  Ambas-
sadeurs  Venitiens,  vol.  i.  pp.  94,  476,  478,  Paris,  1838,  4to  ;  a  curious  and  valuable  publica-
tion.    There  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  period  in  which  cannons  were  first  known  ;
but  they  were  certainly  used  in  war  before  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century.     See
Bohlen,  das  alte  Indien,  vol.  ii.  p.  63  ;  and  Daniel,  Histoire  de  la  Milice,  vol.  i.  pp.  441,
442.

47  Blackstone's  Commentaries,  vol.  i.  p.  413  ;  Daniel,  Hist,  de  la  Milice,  vol.  i.  p.  210,
vol.  ii.  pp.  491,  493  ;  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  viii.  p.  228.


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     119

too,  there  arose  the  custom  of  employing  mercenary  troops  ;  of  which  we  find  a
few  earlier  instances,  though  the  practice  was  not  fully  established  until  the  latter
part  of  the  fourteenth  century.48

The  importance  of  this  movement  was  soon  seen,  by  the  change  it  effected  in
the  classification  of  European  society.  The  regular  troops  being,  from  their
discipline,  more  serviceable  against  the  enemy,  and  also  more  immediately  under
the  control  of  the  government,  it  naturally  followed  that,  as  their  merits  became
understood,  the  old  militia  should  fall,  first  into  disrepute,  then  be  neglected,
and  then  sensibly  diminish.  At  the  same  time,  this  diminution  in  the  number
of  undisciplined  soldiers  deprived  the  country  of  a  part  of  its  warlike  resources,
and  therefore  made  it  necessary  to  pay  more  attention  to  the  disciplined  ones,
and  to  confine  them  more  exclusively  to  their  military  duties.  Thus  it  was  that
a  division  was  first  broadly  established  between  the  soldier  and  the  civilian  ;  and
there  arose  a  separate  military  profession,49  which,  consisting  of  a  comparatively
small  number  of  the  total  amount  of  citizens,  left  the  remainder  to  settle  in  some
other  pursuit.50  In  this  way,  immense  bodies  of  men  were  gradually  weaned
from  their  old  warlike  habits  ;  and  being,  as  it  were,  forced  into  civil  life,  their
energies  became  available  for  the  general  purposes  of  society,  and  for  the  cultiva-
tion of  those  arts  of  peace  which  had  formerly  been  neglected.  The  result  was,
that  the  European  mind,  instead  of  being,  as  heretofore,  solely  occupied  either
with  war  or  with  theology,  now  struck  out  into  a  middle  path,  and  created  those
great  branches  of  knowledge  to  which  modern  civilization  owes  its  origin.  In
each  successive  generation  this  tendency  towards  a  separate  organization  was
more  marked  ;  the  utility  of  a  division  of  labour  became  clearly  recognized  ;  and
as  by  this  means  knowledge  itself  advanced,  the  authority  of  this  middle  or
intellectual  class  correspondingly  increased.  Each  addition  to  its  power  lessened
the  weight  of  the  other  two  classes,  and  checked  those  superstitious  feelings  and
that  love  of  war,  on  which,  in  an  early  state  of  society,  all  enthusiasm  is  concen-
trated. The  evidence  of  the  growth  and  diffusion  of  this  intellectual  principle  is
so  full  and  decisive,  that  it  would  be  possible,  by  combining  all  the  branches  of
knowledge,  to  trace  nearly  the  whole  of  its  consecutive  steps.  At  present  it  is
enough  to  say  that,  taking  a  general  view,  this  third  or  intellectual  class  first
displayed  an  independent,  though  still  a  vague,  activity  in  the  fourteenth  and
fifteenth  centuries  ;  *  that  in  the  sixteenth  century,  this  activity,  assuming  a  dis-

48  The  leading  facts  respecting  the  employment   of  mercenary  troops  are  indicated
with  great  judgment  by  Mr.  Hallam,  in  his  Middle  Ages,  vol.  i.  pp.  328-337

49  Grose  (Military  Antiquities,  vol.  i.  pp.  310,  311)  says,  that  until  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, English  soldiers  had  no  professional  dress  ;  but  "  were  distinguished  by  badges  of
their  leaders'  arms,  similar  to  those  now  worn  by  watermen."     It  was  also  early  in  the
sixteenth  century  that  there  first  arose  a  separate,  military  literature.     Daniel,  Hist,  de
la  Milice,  vol.  i.  p   380  :  "  Les  auteurs  qui  ont  ecrit  en  detail  sur  la  discipline  militaire.
or  ce  n'est  gueres  que  sous  Francois  I.,  et  sous  1'Empereur  Charles  V.,  que  les  Italiens,
les  Francois,  les  Espagnols  et  les  Allemans  ont  commence  a  ecrire  sur  ce  sujet."

50  The  change  from  the  time  when  every  layman  was  a  soldier,  is  very  remarkable.
Adam  Smith  (Wealth  of  Nations,  book  v.  chap.  i.  p.  291)  says,  "  Among  the  civilized
nations  of  modern  Europe,  it  is  commonly  computed,  that  not  more  than  the  one-
hundredth  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  any  country  can  be  employed  as  soldiers,  without
ruin  to  the  country  which  pays  the  expense  of  their  service."     The  same  proportion  is
given  in  Sadler's  Law  of  Population,  vol.  i.  p.  292  ;  and  in  Grandeur  et  Decadence  des

[*  This  statement  is  in  itself  unduly  vague,  and  is  inconsistent  with  that  made  below,
in  the  second  paragraph  of  the  ninth  chapter.  The  scholastic  life  in  France  in  the  twelfth
century  was  already  active  and  far-reaching  ;  and  the  movement  of  Abailard's  pupil,
Arnold  of  Brescia,  in  Italy  (1139-1155)  comes  under  the  definition  implied  in  the  text.
The  manifold  heresy  in  Provence  and  Languedoc,  crushed  by  the  so-called  Albigensian
Crusades  early  in  the  thirteenth  century,  included  similar  intellectual  elements.  Such
a  treatise,  again,  as  the  Defensor  Pads  of  Marsiglio  of  Padua  (1324)  is  hardly  to  be  called
vague  ;  and  the  Lollard  movement  in  England  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries
was  in  some  respects  more  intellectual  than  that  of  the  Reformation.— ED.]


izo  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

tinct  form,  showed  itself  in  religious  outbreaks  ;  that  in  the  seventeenth  century,
its  energy,  becoming  more  practical,  was  turned  against  the  abuses  of  govern-
ment, and  caused  a  series  of  rebellions,  from  which  hardly  any  part  of  Europe
escaped  ;  and  finally,  that  in  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries,  it  has
extended  its  aim  to  every  department  of  public  and  private  life,  diffusing  educa-
tion, teaching  legislators,  controlling  kings,  and,  above  all,  settling  on  a  sure
foundation  that  supremacy  of  Public  Opinion,  to  which  not  only  constitutional
princes,  but  even  the  most  despotic  sovereigns,  are  now  rendered  strictly  amen-
able.

These,  indeed,  are  vast  questions  ;  and  without  some  knowledge  of  them,  no
one  can  understand  the  present  condition  of  European  society,  or  form  the  least
idea  of  its  future  prospects.  It  is,  however,  sufficient  that  the  reader  can  now
perceive  the  way  in  which  so  slight  a  matter  as  the  invention  of  gunpowder
diminished  the  warlike  spirit,  by  diminishing  the  number  of  persons  to  whom  the
practice  of  war  was  habitual.  There  were,  no  doubt,  other  and  collateral  circum-
stances which  tended  in  the  same  direction  ;  but  the  use  of  gunpowder  was  the
most  effectual,  because,  by  increasing  the  difficulty  and  expense  of  war,  it  made
a  separate  military  profession  indispensable  ;  and  thus,  curtailing  the  action  of
the  military  spirit,  left  an  overplus,  an  unemployed  energy,  which  soon  found  its
way  to  the  pursuits  of  peace,  infused  into  them  a  new  life,  and  began  to  control
that  lust  of  conquest  which,  though  natural  to  a  barbarous  people,  is  the  great
enemy  of  knowledge,  and  is  the  most  fatal  of  those  diseased  appetites  by  which
even  civilized  countries  are  too  often  afflicted.

The  second  intellectual  movement  by  which  the  love  of  war  has  been  lessened
is  much  more  recent,  and  has  not  yet  produced  the  whole  of  its  natural  effects.
I  allude  to  the  discoveries  made  by  Political  Economy  ;  a  branch  of  knowledge
with  which  even  the  wisest  of  the  ancients  had  not  the  least  acquaintance,  but
which  possesses  an  importance  it  would  be  difficult  to  exaggerate,  and  is,  more-
over, remarkable,  as  being  the  only  subject  immediately  connected  with  the  art
of  government  that  has  yet  been  raised  to  a  science.  The  practical  value  of  this
noble  study,  though  perhaps  only  fully  known  to  the  more  advanced  thinkers,  is
gradually  becoming  recognized  by  men  of  ordinary  education  :  but  even  those
by  whom  it  is  understood,  seem  to  have  paid  little  attention  to  the  way  in  which,
by  its  influence,  the  interests  of  peace,  and  therefore  of  civilization,  have  been
directly  promoted.51  The  manner  in  which  this  has  been  brought  about  I  will
endeavour  to  explain,  as  it  will  furnish  another  argument  in  support  of  that  great
principle  which  I  wish  to  establish.

It  is  well  known  that  among  the  different  causes  of  war  commercial  jealousy
was  formerly  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  ;  and  there  are  numerous  instances  ol
quarrels  respecting  the  promulgation  of  some  particular  tariff,  or  the  protection
of  some  favourite  manufacture.  Disputes  of  this  kind  were  founded  upon  the
very  ignorant  but  the  yery  natural  notion,  that  the  advantages  of  commerce
depend  upon  the  balance  of  trade,  and  that  whatever  is  gained  by  one  country
must  be  lost  by  another.  It  was  believed  that  wealth  is  composed  entirely  of
money  ;  and  that  it  is  therefore  the  essential  interest  of  every  people  to  import
few  commodities  and  much  gold.  Whenever  this  was  done,  affairs  were  said  to
be  in  a  sound  and  healthy  state  ;  but  if  this  was  not  done,  it  was  declared  that  we
were  being  drained  of  our  resources,  and  that  some  other  country  was  getting
the  better  of  us,  and  was  enriching  itself  at  our  expense.52  For  this  the  only

Romains,  chap,  in'., — CEuvres  de  Montesquieu,  p.  130  :  also  in  Sharpens  History  of  Egypt,
vol.  i.  p.  105  ;  and  in  Alison's  History  of  Europe,  vol.  xii.  p.  318.

51  The  pacific  tendencies  of  political  economy  are  touched  on  very  briefly  in  Blanqui,
Histoire  de  V Economic  Politique,  vol.  ii.  p.  207  ;  and  in  Twiss's  Progress  of  Political  Economy,
p.  240.

52  This  favourite  doctrine  is  illustrated  in  a  curious  "  Discourse,"  written  in  1578,  and
printed  in  Blow's  London,  in  which  it  is  laid  down,  that  if  our  exports  exceed  our  imports,
we  gain  by  the  trade  ;  but  that  if  they  are  less,  we  lose.     Stow's  London,  edit.  Thorns,
1842,  p.  205.     Whenever  this  balance  was  disturbed,  politicians  were  thrown  into  an
agony  of  fear.     In  1620,  James  I.  said,  in  one  of  his  long  speeches,  "  It's  strange  that  my


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     121

remedy  was,  to  negotiate  a  commercial  treaty,  which  should  oblige  the  offending
nation  to  take  more  of  our  commodities,  and  give  us  more  of  their  gold  :  if,  how-
ever, they  refused  to  sign  the  treaty,  it  became  necessary  to  bring  them  to  reason  ;
and  for  this  purpose  an  armament  was  fitted  out  to  attack  a  people  who,  by
lessening  our  wealth,  had  deprived  us  of  that  money  by  which  alone  trade  could
be  extended  in  foreign  markets.53

This  misconception  of  the  true  nature  of  barter  was  formerly  universal  ;54  and
being  adopted  even  by  the  ablest  politicians,  was  not  only  an  immediate  cause
of  war,  but  increased  those  feelings  of  national  hatred  by  which  war  is  encour-
aged ;  each  country  thinking  that  it  had  a  direct  interest  in  diminishing  the
wealth  of  its  neighbours.55  In  the  seventeenth,  or  even  late  in  the  sixteenth
century,  there  were,  indeed,  one  or  two  eminent  thinkers  who  exposed  some  of

Mint  hath  not  gone  this  eight  or  nine  years  :  but  I  think  the  fault  of  the  want  of  money  is
the  uneven  balancing  of  trade."  Part.  History,  vol.  i.  p.  1179  :  see  also  the  debate  "  On
the  Scarcity  of  Money,"  pp.  1194-1196.  In  1620,  the  House  of  Commons,  in  a  state  of
great  alarm,  passed  a  resolution,  "  That  the  importation  of  tobacco  out  of  Spain  is  one
reason  of  the  scarcity  of  money  in  this  kingdom."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  1198.  In  1627,
it  was  actually  argued  in  the  House  of  Commons  that  the  Netherlands  were  being  weak-
ened by  their  trade  with  the  East  Indies,  because  it  carried  money  out  of  the  country  !
Part.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  220.  Half  a  century  later,  the  same  principle  was  advocated  by
Sir  William  Temple  in  his  Letters,  and  also  in  his  Observations  upon  the  United  Provinces.
Temple's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  175,  vol.  ii.  pp.  117,  118.

53  In  1672,  the  celebrated  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  then  Lord  Chancellor,  announced  that
the  time  had  come  when  the  English  must  go  to  war  with  the  Dutch  ;  for  that  it  was
"  impossible  both  should  stand  upon  a  balance  ;  and  that  if  we  do  not  master  their  trade,
they  will  ours.     They  or  we  must  truckle.     One  must  and  will  give  the  law  to  the  other.
There  is  no  compounding,  where  the  contest  is  for  the  trade  of  the  whole  world."     Somers
Tracts,  vol.  viii.  p.  39.     A  few  months  later,  still  insisting  on  the  propriety  of  the  war,  he
gave  as  one  of  his  reasons,  that  it  "  was  necessary  to  the  trade  of  England  that  there
should  be  a  fair  adjustment  of  commerce  in  the  East  Indies."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iv.  p.  587.
In  1701,  Stepney,  a  diplomatist  and  one  of  the  lords  of  trade,  published  an  essay,  strongly
insisting  on  the  benefits  which  would  accrue  to  English  commerce  by  a  war  with  France.
Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xi.  pp.  199,  217  ;  and  he  says,  p.  205,  that  one  of  the  consequences  of
peace  with  France  would  be  "  the  utter  ruin  and  destruction  of  our  trade."     See  also,  in
vol.  xiii.  p.  688,  the  remarks  on  the  policy  of  William  III.     In  1743,  Lord  Hardwicke,
one  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  his  time,  said  in  the  House  of  Lords,  "  If  our  wealth  is
diminished,  it  is  time  to  ruin  the  commerce  of  that  nation  which  has  driven  us  from  the
markets  of  the  Continent — by  sweeping  the  seas  of  their  ships,  and  by  blockading  their
ports."     Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  v.  p.  89.

54  In  regard  to  the  seventeenth  century,  see  Mill's  History  of  India,  vol.  i.  pp.  41,  42.
To  this  I  may  add,  that  even  Locke  had  very  confused  notions  respecting  the  use  of
money  in  trade.     See  Essay  on  Money,  in  Locke's  Works,  vol.  iv.  ;  and  in  particular  pp.  9,
10,  12,  20,  21,  49-52.     Berkeley,  profound  thinker  as  he  was,  fell  into  the  same  errors,
and  assumes  the  necessity  of  maintaining  the  balance  of  trade,  and  lessening  our  imports
in  proportion  as  we  lessen  our  exports.     See  the  Querist,  Nos.  xcix.  clxi.,  in  Berkeley's
Works,  vol.  ii.  pp.  246,  250  :  see  also  his  proposal  for  a  sumptuary  law.  in  Essay  towards
preventing  the  Ruin  of  Great  Britain,  in  Works,  vol.  ii.  190.     [Also  in  the  Querist,  ciii.]
The  economical  views  of  Montesquieu  (Esprit  des  Lois,  livre  xx.  chap.  xii.  in  (Euvres,
P-  353)  are  as  hopelessly  wrong  ;  while  Vattel  (Droit  des  Gens,  vol.  i.  pp.  in,  117,  118,
206)  goes  out  of  his  way  to  praise  the  mischievous  interference  of  the  English  government,
which  he  recommends  as  a  pattern  to  other  states.

55  The  Earl  of  Bristol,  a  man  of  some  ability,  told  the  House  of  Lords  in  1642,  that  it
was  a  great  advantage  to  England  for  other  countries  to  go  to  war  with  each  other  ;
because  by  that  means  we  should  get  their  money,  or,  as  he  called  it,  their  "  wealth."
See  his  speech,  in  Parl.  History,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1274-1279.     [The  view  in  question  is  still
common.     A  few  years  ago  an  hon.  member  was  loudly  applauded  in  the  House  of  Com-
mons when  he  told  how,  in  China,  he  had  been  able  to  prevent  certain  proposed  trade
concessions  to  France.     See  also  the  extracts  in  the  editor's  Patriotism  and  Empire,  1899,
PP-  56-59-— ED.]


122  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  fallacies  upon  which  this  opinion  was  based.56  But  their  arguments  found
no  favour  with  those  politicians  by  whom  European  affairs  were  then  adminis-
tered. It  is  doubtful  if  they  were  known  ;  and  it  is  certain  that,  if  known,  they
were  despised  by  statesmen  and  legislators,  who,  from  the  constancy  of  their
practical  occupations,  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  sufficient  leisure  to  master
each  new  discovery  that  is  successively  made  ;  and  who  in  consequence  are,  as  a
body,  always  in  the  rear  of  their  age.  The  result  was,  that  they  went  blundering
on  in  the  old  track,  believing  that  no  commerce  could  flourish  without  their  inter-
ference, troubling  that  commerce  by  repeated  and  harassing  regulations,  and
taking  for  granted  that  it  was  the  duty  of  every  government  to  benefit  the  trade
of  their  own  people  by  injuring  the  trade  of  others.57

But  in  the  eighteenth  century,  a  long  course  of  events,  which  I  shall  hereafter
trace,  prepared  the  way  for  a  spirit  of  improvement,  and  a  desire  for  reform,  of
which  the  world  had  then  seen  no  example.  This  great  movement  displayed  its
energy  in  every  department  of  knowledge  ;  and  now  it  was  that  a  successful
attempt  was  first  made  to  raise  Political  Economy  to  a  science,  by  discovering
the  laws  which  regulate  the  creation  and  diffusion  of  wealth.  In  the  year  1776,
Adam  Smith  published  his  Wealth  of  Nations  ;  which,  looking  at  its  ultimate
results,  is  probably  the  most  important  book  that  has  ever  been  written,  and  is
certainly  the  most  valuable  contribution  ever  made  by  a  single  man  towards
establishing  the  principles  on  which  government  should  be  based.  In  this  great
work,  the  old  theory  of  protection  as  applied  to  commerce  was  destroyed  in
nearly  all  its  parts  ;58  the  doctrine  of  the  balance  of  trade  was  not  only  attacked,
but  its  falsehood  was  demonstrated  ;  and  innumerable  absurdities,  which  had
been  accumulating  for  ages,  were  suddenly  swept  away.59

56  Serra,  who  wrote  in  1613,  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  to  prove  the  absurdity  of
discouraging  the  exportation  of  the  precious  metals.     See  Twiss  on  the  Progress  of  Political
Economy,  pp.  8,  12,  13.     But  I  believe  that  the  earliest  approach  towards  modern  econo-
mical discoveries  is  a  striking  essay  published  in  1581,  and  ascribed  to  William  Stafford.
It  will  be  found  in  the  Harleian  Miscellany,  vol.  ix.  pp.  139-192,  edit.  Park,  1812  ;  and
the  title,  Brief  Conceipt  of  English  Pollicy,  gives  an  inadequate  idea  of  what  is,  on  the
whole,  the  most  important  work  on  the  theory  of  politics  which  had  then  appeared  :
since  the  author  not  only  displays  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  price  and  value,  such  as
no  previous  thinker   possessed,  but  he  points  out  clearly  the  causes  of  that  system  of
enclosures  which  is  the  leading  economical  fact  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  and  is  intimately
connected  with  the  rise  of  the  poor-laws.     Some  account  of  this  essay  is  given  by  Dr.
Twiss,  but  the  original  is  easily  accessible,  and  should  be  read  by  every  student  of  Eng-
lish history.     Among  other  heretical  propositions,  it  recommends  free  trade  in  corn.
[Prof.  Ingram  (History  of  Political  Economy,  1888,  p.  45)  thinks  Stafford  was  acquainted
with  the  writings  of  Bodin,  who  in  his  Reponse  aux  paradoxes  de  M.  Malestroit  (1568)
and  his  La  Republique  (1576)  sets  forth  similar  views  (Id.  pp.  43-4).     At  other  points,
Stafford  held  by  current  fallacies  (Id.  p.  45). — ED.]

57  In  regard  to  the  interference  of  the  English  legislature,  it  is  stated  by  Mr.  M'Culloch
(Polit.  Econ.  p.  269),  on  the  authority  of  a  committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  that
before  the  year  1820,  "  no  fewer  than  two  thousand  laws  with  respect  to  commerce  had
been  passed  at  different  periods."     It  may  be  confidently  asserted,  that  every  one  of
those  laws  was  an  unmitigated  evil,  since  no  trade,  and  indeed  no  interest  of  any  kind,
can  be  protected  by  government  without  inflicting  immeasurably  greater  loss  upon  the
unprotected  interests  and  trades  ;  while  if  the  protection  is  universal,  the  loss  will  be
universal.     Some  striking  instances  of  the  absurd  laws  which  have  been  passed  respecting
trade,  are  collected  in  Barrington's  Observations  on  the  Statutes,  pp.  279-285.     Indeed,  it
was  considered  necessary  that  every  parliament  should  do  something  in  this  way  ;  and
Charles  II.,  in  one  of  his  speeches,  says,  "  I  pray,  contrive  any  good  short  bills  which  may
improve  the  industry  of  the  nation  .  .  .  and  so  God  bless  your  councils."      Parl.  History,
vol.  iv.  p.  291.     Compare  the  remarks  on  the  fishery-trade,  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xii.  p.  33-

58  To  this  the  only  exception  of  any  moment  is  the  view  taken  of  the  usury -laws,  which
Jeremy  Bentham  has  the  honour  of  demolishing.

59  Before  Adam  Smith,  the  principal  merit  is  due  to  Hume  ;  but  the  works  of  that
profound  thinker  were  too  fragmentary  to  produce  much  effect.     Indeed  Hume,  notwith-


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     123

If  the  Wealth  of  Nations  had  appeared  in  any  preceding  century,  it  would  have
shared  the  fate  of  the  great  works  of  Stafford  and  Serra  ;  and  although  the  princi-
ples which  it  advocated  would  no  doubt  have  excited  the  attention  of  specu-
lative thinkers,  they  would  in  all  probability  have  produced  no  effect  on  practical
politicians,  or,  at  all  events,  would  only  have  exercised  an  indirect  and  precarious
influence.  But  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  had  now  become  so  general,  that  even
our  ordinary  legislators  were  in  some  degree  prepared  for  these  great  truths
which  in  a  former  period  they  would  have  despised  as  idle  novelties.  The
result  was,  that  the  doctrines  of  Adam  Smith  soon  found  their  way  into  the
House  of  Commons  ;60  and,  being  adopted  by  a  few  of  the  leading  members,
were  listened  to  with  astonishment  by  that  great  assembly,  whose  opinions  were
mainly  regulated  by  the  wisdom  of  their  ancestors,  and  who  were  loth  to  believe
that  anything  could  be  discovered  by  the  moderns  which  was  not  already  known
to  the  ancients.  But  it  is  in  vain  that  such  men  as  these  always  set  themselves
up  to  resist  the  pressure  of  advancing  knowledge.  No  great  truth,  which  has
once  been  found,  has  ever  afterwards  been  lost  ;  nor  has  any  important  discovery
yet  been  made  which  has  not  eventually  carried  everything  before  it.  Even  so,
the  principles  of  Free  Trade,  as  demonstrated  by  Adam  Smith,  and  all  the  conse-
quences which  flow  from  them,  were  vainly  struggled  against  by  the  most  over-
whelming majorities  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament.  Year  by  year  the  great
truth  made  its  way  ;  always  advancing,  never  receding.61  The  majority  was  at
first  deserted  by  a  few  men  of  ability,  then  by  ordinary  men,  then  it  became  a
minority,  then  even  the  minority  began  to  dwindle  ;  and  at  the  present  day,
eighty  years  after  the  publication  of  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  there  is  not  to  be
found  any  one  of  tolerable  education  who  is  not  ashamed  of  holding  opinions
which,  before  the  time  of  Adam  Smith,  were  universally  received.

Such  is  the  way  in  which  great  thinkers  control  the  affairs  of  men,  and  by  their
discoveries  regulate  the  march  of  nations.  And  truly  the  history  of  this  one
triumph  alone  should  be  enough  to  repress  the  presumption  of  statesmen  and
legislators,  who  so  exaggerate  the  importance  of  their  craft,  as  to  ascribe  great
results  to  their  own  shifting  and  temporary  contrivances.  For,  whence  did  they
derive  that  knowledge,  of  which  they  are  always  ready  to  assume  the  merit  ?
How  did  they  obtain  their  opinions  ?  How  did  they  get  at  their  principles  ?
These  are  the  elements  of  their  success  ;  and  these  they  can  only  learn  from  their

standing  his  vast  powers,  was  inferior  to  Smith  in  comprehensiveness  as  well  as  in  industry.
[Below,  ch.  v.  note  21,  Hume  is  admitted  to  have  been  right  on  the  law  of  rent  when
Smith  was  wrong.  Hume's  range  was  certainly  wider  than  Smith's  ;  and  his  total  out-
put greater.  The  entire  passage  further  fails  to  do  justice  to  the  French  Physiocrats,
from  whom  Smith  learned  much.  See  below,  ch.  v.  p.  135,  note. — ED.]

60  The  first  notice  I  have  observed  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations  in  Parliament  is  in  1783  ;
and  between  then  and  the  end  of  the  century  it  is  referred  to  several  times,  and  latterly
with  increasing  frequency.     See  Parliamentary  History,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  1152,  vol.  xxvi.
pp.  481,  1035,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  385,  vol.  xxix.  pp.  834,  905,  982,  1065,  vol.  xxx.  pp.  330,
333,  vol.  xxxii.  p.  2,  vol.  xxxiii.  pp.  353,  386,  522,  548,  549,  563,  774,  777,  778,  822,  823,
824,  825,  827,  1249,  vol.  xxxiv.  pp.  n,  97,  98,  141,  142,  304,  473,  850,  901,  902,  903.     It
is  possible  that  one  or  two  passages  may  have  been  overlooked  ;  but  I  believe  that  these
are  the  only  instances  of  Adam  Smith  being  referred  to  during  seventeen  years.     From
a  passage  in  Pellew's  Life  of  Sidmouth,  vol.  i.  p.  51,  it  appears  that  even  Addington  was
studying  Adam  Smith  in  1787.

61  In  1797,  Pulteney,  in  one  of  his  financial  speeches,  appealed  to  "  the  authority  of
Dr.  Smith,  who,  it  was  well  said,  would  persuade  the  present  generation  and  govern  the
next."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  778.     In  1813,  Dugald  Stewart  (Philosophy  of  the
Human  Mind,  vol.  ii.  p.  472)  announced  that  the  doctrine  of  free  trade  "has  now,  I
believe,  become  the  prevailing  creed  of  thinking  men  all  over  Europe."     And  in  1816,
Ricardo  said,  "  The  reasoning  by  which  the  liberty  of  trade  is  supported  is  so  powerful,
that  it  is  daily  obtaining  converts.     It  is  with  pleasure  that  I  see  the  progress  which  this
great  principle  is  making  amongst  those  whom  we  should  have  expected  to  cling  the
longest  to  old  prejudices."     Proposals  for  an  Economical  Currency,  in  Ricardo's  Works,
p.  407.


124  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

masters, — from  those  great  teachers,  who,  moved  by  the  inspiration  of  genius,
fertilize  the  world  with  their  discoveries.*  Well  may  it  be  said  of  Adam  Smith,
and  said  too  without  fear  of  contradiction,  that  this  solitary  Scotchman  has,  by
the  publication  of  one  single  work,  contributed  more  towards  the  happiness  of
man  than  has  been  effected  by  the  united  abilities  of  all  the  statesmen  and
legislators  of  whom  history  has  preserved  an  authentic  account.

The  result  of  these  great  discoveries  I  am  not  here  concerned  to  examine,
except  so  far  as  they  aided  in  diminishing  the  energy  of  the  warlike  spirit.  And
the  way  in  which  they  effected  this  may  be  easily  stated.  As  long  as  it  was
generally  believed  that  the  wealth  of  a  country  consists  of  its  gold,  it  was  of
course  also  believed  that  the  sole  object  of  trade  is  to  increase  the  influx  of  the
precious  metals  :  it  therefore  became  natural  that  Government  should  be  ex-
pected to  take  measures  by  which  such  influx  could  be  secured.  This,  however,
could  only  be  done  by  draining  other  countries  of  their  gold  ;  a  result  which  they,
for  precisely  the  same  reasons,  strenuously  resisted.  The  consequence  was,
that  any  idea  of  real  reciprocity  was  impossible  :  every  commercial  treaty  was  an
attempt  made  by  one  nation  to  outwit  another  ;62  every  new  tariff  was  a  declara-
tion of  hostility  ;  and  that  which  ought  to  be  the  most  peaceable  of  all  pursuits,
became  one  of  the  causes  of  those  national  jealousies  and  national  animosities,
by  which  war  is  mainly  promoted.63  But  when  it  was  once  clearly  understood
that  gold  and  silver  are  not  wealth,  but  are  merely  the  representatives  of  wealth  ;
when  men  began  to  see  that  wealth  itself  solely  consists  of  the  value  which  skill
and  labour  can  add  to  the  raw  material,  and  that  money  is  of  no  possible  use  to  a
nation  except  to  measure  and  circulate  their  riches  ;  when  these  great  truths
were  recognized,64  all  the  old  notions  respecting  the  balance  of  trade,  and  the
supreme  importance  of  the  precious  metals,  at  once  fell  to  the  ground.  These
enormous  errors  being  dispersed,  the  true  theory  of  barter  was  easily  worked  out.
It  was  perceived,  that  if  commerce  is  allowed  to  be  free,  its  advantages  will  be
shared  by  every  country  which  engages  in  it  ;  that,  in  the  absence  of  monopoly,
the  benefits  of  trade  are  of  necessity  reciprocal  ;  and  that,  so  far  from  depending
on  the  amount  of  gold  received,  they  simply  arise  from  the  facility  with  which  a
nation  gets  rid  of  those  commodities  which  it  can  produce  most  cheaply,  and
receives  in  return  those  commodities  which  it  could  only  produce  at  a  great

62  Sir  Theodore  Janson,  in  his  General  Maxims  of  Trade,  published  in  1713,  lays  it  down
as  a  principle  universally  recognized,  that  "  All  the  nations  of  Europe  seem  to  strive  who
shall  outwit  one  another  in  point  of  trade  ;  and  they  concur  in  this  maxim,  That  the  less
they  consume  of  foreign  commodities,  the  better  it  is  for  them."     Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xiii.
p.  292.     Thus,  too,  in  a  Dialogue  between  an  Englishman  and  a  Dutchman,  published  in
1700,  the  Dutchman  is  represented  as  boasting  that  his  government  had  "  forced  treaties
of  commerce  exclusive  to  all  other  nations."     Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xi.  p.  376.     This  is  the
system  of  "  narrow  selfishness  "  denounced  by  Dr.  Story,  in  his  noble  work,  Conflict  of
Laws,  1841,  p.  32.

63  "  It  cannot,  indeed,  be  denied,  that  mistaken  views  of  commerce,  like  those  so
frequently  entertained  of  religion,  have  been  the  cause  of  many  wars  and  of  much  blood-
shed."    M'Culloch's  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  p.  140.     See  also  pp.  37,  38  :  "  It
has  made  each  nation  regard  the  welfare  of  its  neighbours  as  incompatible  with  its  own  :
hence  the  reciprocal  desire  of  injuring  and  impoverishing  each  other  ;  and  hence  that
spirit  of  commercial  rivalry,  which  has  been  the  immediate  or  remote  cause  of  the  greater
number  of  modern  wars."

64  On  the  rapid  diffusion  during  the  present  century  of  the  principles  worked  out  by
the  economists,  compare  Laing's  Sweden,  pp.  356-358,  with  a  note  to  the  last  edition  of
Malthus  on  Population,  1826,  vol.  ii.  pp.  354,  355.

[*  This  is  scarcely  consistent  with  the  praise  bestowed  below,  in  ch.  viii.,  on  Richelieu,
who  is  not  shown  to  have  been  instructed  by  any  teachers.  It  also  overlooks  the  fact
that  Turgot,  justly  praised  at  the  end  of  ch.  xiii.,  was  both  a  great  teacher  and  a  states-
man. In  Portugal  before  him,  too,  the  great  Marquis  of  Pombal,  who  held  some  enlightened
views  on  bullion  and  trade,  appears  to  have  thought  for  himself.  See  The  Marquis  o
Pombal,  by  the  Conde  di  Carnota,  2nd  ed.  1871. — ED.]


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     125

expense,  but  which  the  other  nation  can,  from  the  skill  of  its  workmen,  or  from
the  bounty  of  nature,  afford  to  supply  at  a  lower  rate.  From  this  it  followed
that,  in  a  mercantile  point  of  view,  it  would  be  as  absurd  to  attempt  to  impoverish
a  people  with  whom  we  trade,  as  it  would  be  in  a  tradesman  to  wish  for  the  insol-
vency of  a  rich  and  frequent  customer.  The  result  is,  that  the  commercial  spirit,
which  formerly  was  often  warlike,  is  now  invariably  pacific.65  And  although  it
is  perfectly  true  that  not  one  merchant  out  of  a  hundred  is  familiar  with  the
arguments  on  which  these  economical  discoveries  are  founded,  that  does  not
prevent  the  effect  which  the  discoveries  themselves  produce  on  his  own  mind.
The  mercantile  class  is,  like  every  other,  acted  upon  by  causes  which  only  a  few
members  of  that  class  are  able  to  perceive.  Thus,  for  instance,  of  all  the  in-
numerable opponents  of  protection,  there  are  very  few  indeed  who  can  give
valid  reasons  to  justify  their  opposition.  But  this  does  not  prevent  the  opposition
from  taking  place.  For  an  immense  majority  of  men  always  follow  with  implicit
submission  the  spirit  of  their  own  time  ;  and  the  spirit  of  the  times  is  merely  its
knowledge,  and  the  direction  that  knowledge  takes.  As,  in  the  ordinary  avoca
tions  of  daily  life,  every  one  is  benefited,  in  the  increase  of  his  comforts,  and  of
his  general  security,  by  the  progress  of  many  arts  and  sciences,  of  which  perhaps
he  does  not  even  know  the  name,  just  so  is  the  mercantile  class  benefited  by  those
great  economical  discoveries  which,  in  the  course  of  two  generations,  have  already
effected  a  complete  change  in  the  commercial  legislation  of  this  country,  and
which  are  now  operating  slowly  but .  steadily  upon  those  other  European  states,
where,  public  opinion  being  less  powerful,  it  is  more  difficult  to  establish  great
truths  and  extirpate  old  abuses.  While,  therefore,  it  is  perfectly  true  that
among  merchants  a  comparatively  small  number  are  acquainted  with  political
economy,*  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  they  owe  a  large  part  of  their  wealth  to  the
political  economists  ;  who,  by  removing  the  obstacles  with  which  the  ignorance
of  successive  governments  had  impeded  trade,  have  now  settled  on  a  solid  founda-
tion that  commercial  prosperity  which  is  by  no  means  the  least  of  our  national
glories.  Most  assuredly  is  it  also  true,  that  this  same  intellectual  movement  has
lessened  the  chance  of  war,  by  ascertaining  the  principles  which  ought  to  regulate
our  commercial  relations  with  foreign  countries  ;  by  proving,  not  only  the  inutility,
but  the  positive  mischief,  caused  by  interfering  with  them  ;  and  finally,  by
exploding  those  long -established  errors,  which,  inducing  men  to  believe  that
nations  are  the  natural  enemies  of  each  other,  encouraged  those  evil  feelings,
and  fostered  those  national  jealousies,  to  the  strength  of  which  the  military  spirit
owed  no  small  share  of  its  former  influence.

The  third  great  cause  by  which  the  love  of  war  has  been  weakened,  is  the  way
in  which  discoveries  respecting  the  application  of  Steam  to  the  purposes  of  travel-
ling have  facilitated  the  intercourse  between  different  countries,  and  thus  aided
in  destroying  that  ignorant  contempt  which  one  nation  is  too  apt  to  feel  for  another.
Thus,  for  instance,  the  miserable  and  impudent  falsehoods  which  a  large  class  of
English  writers  formerly  directed  against  the  morals  and  private  character  of  the
French,  and,  to  their  shame  be  it  said,  even  against  the  chastity  of  French  women,

65  "  The  feelings  of  rival  tradesmen,  prevailing  among  nations,  overruled  for  centuries
all  sense  of  the  general  community  of  advantage  which  commercial  countries  derive  from
the  prosperity  of  one  another  ;  and  that  commercial  spirit,  which  is  now  one  of  the  strong-
est obstacles  to  wars,  was  during  a  certain  period  of  European  history  their  principal
cause."  Mill's  Political  Economy,  1849,  vol.  ii-  p-  221.  This  great  change  in  the  feelings
of  the  commercial  classes  did  not  begin  before  the  present  century,  and  has  not  been  visible
to  ordinary  observers  until  the  last  five-and-twenty  or  thirty  years;  but  it  was  foretold
in  a  remarkable  passage  written  by  Herder  in  1787  :  see  his  Ideen  zur  Geschichte,  vol.  iii.
pp.  292,  293.  [Buckle's  proposition  will  no  longer  hold  good.  Since  his  day,  through
disregard  of  economic  science,  and  in  respect  of  new  developments  of  capitalism,  the
commercial  classes  have  frequently  favoured  aggression  (e.g.  in  the  annexation  of  Burmah,
the  invasion  of  Egypt,  and  the  war  in  South  Africa)  ;  and  the  old  belief  in  the  need  of
fighting  for  markets  has  again  become  common. — ED.]

[*  The  number  in  England  is  probably  smaller  to-day  than  when  Buckle  wrote. — ED.]


126  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

tended  not  a  little  to  embitter  the  angry  feelings  then  existing  between  the  two
first  countries  of  Europe  ;  irritating  the  English  against  French  vices,  irritating
the  French  against  English  calumnies.  In  the  same  way,  there  was  a  time  when
every  honest  Englishman  firmly  believed  that  he  could  beat  ten  Frenchmen  ;  a
class  of  beings  whom  he  held  in  sovereign  contempt,  as  a  lean  and  stunted  race,
who  drank  claret  instead  of  brandy,  who  lived  entirely  off  frogs  ;  miserable
infidels,  who  heard  mass  every  Sunday,  who  bowed  down  before  idols,  and  who
even  worshipped  the  Pope.  On  the  other  hand,  the  French  were  taught  to
despise  us  as  rude  unlettered  barbarians,  without  either  taste*  or  humanity  ;
surly,  ill-conditioned  men,  living  in  an  unhappy  climate,  where  a  perpetual  fog,
only  varied  by  rain,  prevented  the  sun  from  ever  being  seen  ;  suffering  from  so
deep  and  inveterate  a  melancholy,  that  physicians  had  called  it  the  English
spleen  ;  and,  under  the  influence  of  this  cruel  malady,  constantly  committing
suicide,  particularly  in  November,  when  we  were  well  known  to  hang  and  shoot
ourselves  by  thousands.66

Whoever  has  looked  much  into  the  older  literature  of  France  and  England,
knows  that  these  were  the  opinions  which  the  two  first  nations  of  Europe,  in  the
ignorance  and  simplicity  of  their  hearts,  held  respecting  each  other.  But  the
progress  of  improvement,  by  bringing  the  two  countries  into  close  and  intimate
contact,  has  dissipated  these  foolish  prejudices,  and  taught  each  people  to  admire,
and,  what  is  still  more  important,  to  respect  each  other.  And  the  greater  the
contact,  the  greater  the  respect.  For,  whatever  theologians  may  choose  to
assert,  it  is  certain  that  mankind  at  large  has  far  more  virtue  than  vice,  and  that
in  every  country  good  actions  are  more  frequent  than  bad  ones.  Indeed,  if  this
were  otherwise,  the  preponderance  of  evil  would  long  since  have  destroyed  the
human  race,  and  not  even  have  left  a  single  man  to  lament  the  degeneracy  of  his
species.  An  additional  proof  of  this  is  the  fact,  that  the  more  nations  associate
with  each  other,  and  the  more  they  see  and  know  of  their  fellow-creatures,  the
more  quickly  do  ancient  enmities  disappear.  This  is  because  an  enlarged  experi-
ence proves  that  mankind  is  not  so  radically  bad  as  we  from  our  infancy  are
taught  to  believe.  But  if  vices  were  really  more  frequent  than  virtues,  the
result  would  be,  that  the  increasing  amalgamation  of  society  would  increase  our
bad  opinion  of  others  ;  because,  though  we  may  love  our  own  vices,  we  do  not
generally  love  the  vices  of  our  neighbours.  So  far,  however,  is  this  from  being
the  actual  consequence,  that  it  has  always  been  found,  that  those  whose  extensive
knowledge  makes  them  best  acquainted  with  the  general  course  of  human  actions,
are  precisely  those  who  take  the  most  favourable  view  of  them.  The  greatest
observer  and  the  most  profound  thinker  is  invariably  the  most  lenient  judge.
It  is  the  solitary  misanthrope,  brooding  over  his  fancied  wrongs,  who  is  most
prone  to  depreciate  the  good  qualities  of  our  nature,  and  exaggerate  its  bad
ones.  Or  else  it  is  some  foolish  and  ignorant  monk,  who,  dreaming  away  his
existence  in  an  idle  solitude,  flatters  his  own  vanity  by  denouncing  the  vices  of
others  ;  and  thus  declaiming  against  the  enjoyments  of  life,  revenges  himself  on
that  society  from  which  by  his  own  superstition  he  is  excluded,  f  These  are  the
sort  of  men  who  insist  most  strongly  on  the  corruption  of  our  nature,  and  on  the
degeneracy  into  which  we  have  fallen.  The  enormous  evil  which  such  opinions

66  That  there  are  more  suicides  in  gloomy  weather  than  in  fine  weather  used  always
to  be  taken  for  granted,  and  was  a  favourite  topic  with  the  French  wits,  who  were  never
weary  of  expatiating  on  our  love  of  self-murder,  and  on  the  relation  between  it  and  our
murky  climate.  Unfortunately  for  such  speculations,  the  fact  is  exactly  opposite  to
what  is  generally  supposed,  and  we  have  decisive  evidence  that  there  are  more  suicides
in  summer  than  in  winter.  See  Quetelet  surVHomme,  vol.  ii.  pp.  152,  158  ;  Tissot  de  la
Manie  du  Suicide,  Paris,  1840,  pp.  50,  149,  150  ;  Journal  of  Statistical  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  102  ;
Winslow's  Anatomy  of  Suicide,  1840,  pp.  131, 132  ;  Hawkins's  Medical  Statistics,  p.  170.

[*  If  every  honest  Englishman  thought  and  spoke  as  is  alleged  in  the  previous
sentence,  this  would  not  be  far  wrong.  Both  sentences  are  exaggerations. — ED.]

[f  Frederick  the  Great,  who  called  mankind  "diese  verdammte  Rasse,"  hardly
belonged  to  either  order. — ED.]


COMPARISON  OF  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  LAWS     127

have  brought  about,  is  well  understood  by  those  who  have  studied  the  history  of
countries  in  which  they  are,  and  have  been,  most  prevalent.  Hence  it  is  that,
among  the  innumerable  benefits  derived  from  advancing  knowledge,  there  are
few  more  important  than  those  improved  facilities  of  communication,67  which,
by  increasing  the  frequency  with  which  nations  and  individuals  are  brought  into
contact,  have  to  an  extraordinary  extent  corrected  their  prejudices,  raised
the  opinion  which  each  forms  of  the  other,  diminished  their  mutual  hostility,
and  thus  diffusing  a  more  favourable  view  of  our  common  nature,  have  stimulated
us  to  develop  those  boundless  resources  of  the  human  understanding,  the  very
existence  of  which  it  was  once  considered  almost  a  heresy  to  assert.

This  is  precisely  what  has  occurred  in  modern  Europe.  The  French  and
English  people  have,  by  the  mere  force  of  increased  contact,  learned  to  think
more  favourably  of  each  other,  and  to  discard  that  foolish  contempt  in  which
both  nations  formerly  indulged.  In  this,  as  in  all  cases,  the  better  one  civilized
country  is  acquainted  with  another,  the  more  it  will  find  to  respect  and  to
imitate.  For  of  all  the  causes  of  national  hatred,  ignorance  is  the  most  powerful.
When  you  increase  the  contact,  you  remove  the  ignorance,  and  thus  you  diminish
the  hatred.68  This  is  the  true  bond  of  charity  ;  and  it  is  worth  all  the  lessons
which  moralists  and  divines  are  able  to  teach.  They  have  pursued  their  vocation
for  centuries,  without  producing  the  least  effect  in  lessening  the  frequency  of
war.  But  it  may  be  said  without  the  slightest  exaggeration,  that  every  new
railroad  which  is  laid  down,  and  every  fresh  steamer  which  crosses  the  Channel,
are  additional  guarantees  for  the  preservation  of  that  long  and  unbroken  peace
which,  during  forty  years,  has  knit  together  the  fortunes  and  the  interests  of  the
two  most  civilized  nations  of  the  earth.

I  have  thus,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  will  permit,  endeavoured  to  indicate  the
causes  which  have  diminished  religious  persecution  and  war  ;  the  two  greatest
evils  with  which  men  have  yet  contrived  to  afflict  their  fellow-creatures.  The
question  of  the  decline  of  religious  persecution  I  have  only  briefly  noticed,  because
it  will  be  more  fully  handled  in  a  subsequent  part  of  this  volume.  Enough  how-
ever, has  been  advanced  to  prove  how  essentially  it  is  an  intellectual  process,
and  how  little  good  can  be  effected  on  this  subject  by  the  operation  of  moral
feelings.  The  causes  of  the  decline  of  the  warlike  spirit  I  have  examined  at
considerable,  and  perhaps,  to  some  readers,  at  tedious  length  ;  and  the  result  of
that  examination  has  been,  that  the  decline  is  owing  to  the  increase  of  the  intel-
lectual classes,  to  whom  the  military  classes  are  necessarily  antagonistic.  In
pushing  the  inquiry  a  little  deeper,  we  have,  by  still  further  analysis,  ascertained
the  existence  of  three  vast  though  subsidiary  causes,  by  which  the  general  move-
ment has  been  accelerated.  These  are — the  invention  of  Gunpowder,  the  dis-
coveries of  Political  Economy,  and  the  discovery  of  improved  means  of  Locomo-
tion. Such  are  the  three  great  modes  or  channels  by  which  the  progress  of
knowledge  has  weakened  the  old  warlike  spirit  ;  and  the  way  in  which  they  have
effected  this  has,  I  trust,  been  clearly  pointed  out.  The  facts  and  arguments
which  I  have  brought  forward  have,  I  can  conscientiously  say,  been  subjected
to  careful  and  repeated  scrutiny  ;  and  I  am  quite  unable  to  see  on  what  possible
ground  their  accuracy  is  to  be  impugned.  That  they  will  be  disagreeable  to

67  Respecting  which  I  will  only  mention  one  fact,  in  regard  to  our  own  country.     By
the  returns  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  it  appears  that  the  passengers  annually  travelling  by
railway  amounted  in  1842  to  nineteen  millions  ;  but  in  1852  they  had  increased  to  more
than  eighty -six  millions.     Journal  of  Statistical  Society,  vol.  xvi.  p.  292.

68  Of  this  Mr.  Stephens  (in  his  valuable  work,  Central  America,  vol.  i.  pp.  247-8)  relates
an  interesting  instance  in  the  case  of  that  remarkable  man  Carrera  :  "  Indeed,  in  no
particular  had  he  changed  more  than  in  his  opinion  of  foreigners  ;  a  happy  illustration  of
the  effect  of  personal  intercourse  in  breaking  down  prejudices  against  individuals  or
classes."     Mr.  Elphinstone  (History  of  India,  p.  195)  says,  "  Those  who  have  known  the
Indians  longest,  have  always  the  best  opinion  of  them  :  but  this  is  rather  a  compliment  to
human  nature  than  to  them,  since  it  is  true  of  every  other  people."     Compare  an  instructive
passage  in  Darwin's  Journal  of  Researches,  p.  421,  with  Burdach,  Traite  de  Physiologie.
eomme  Science  d' Observation,  vol.  ii.  p.  61.


128  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

certain  classes,  I  am  well  aware  ;  but  the  unpleasantness  of  a  statement  is  hardly
to  be  considered  a  proof  of  its  falsehood.  The  sources  from  which  the  evidence
has  been  derived  are  fully  indicated  ;  and  the  arguments,  I  hope,  fairly  stated.
And  from  them  there  results  a  most  important  conclusion.  From  them  we  are
bound  to  infer  that  the  two  oldest,  greatest,  most  inveterate,  and  most  widely-
spread  evils  which  have  ever  been  known,  are  constantly,  though  on  the  whole  slowly,
diminishing  ;  and  that  their  diminution  has  been  effected,  not  at  all  by  moral
feelings,  nor  by  moral  teachings,  but  solely  by  the  activity  of  the  human  intellect,
and  by  the  inventions  and  discoveries  which,  in  a  long  course  of  successive  ages,
man  has  been  able  to  make.

Since,  then,  in  the  two  most  important  phenomena  which  the  progress  oi
society  presents,  the  moral  laws  have  been  steadily  and  invariably  subordinate
to  the  intellectual  laws,*  there  arises  a  strong  presumption  that  in  inferior  matters
the  same  process  has  been  followed.  To  prove  this  in  its  full  extent,  and  thus
raise  the  presumption  to  an  absolute  certainty,  would  be  to  write,  not  an  Intro-
duction to  history,  but  the  History  itself.  The  reader  must  therefore  be  satisfied
for  the  present  with  what,  I  am  conscious,  is  merely  an  approach  towards  demon-
stration ;  and  the  complete  demonstration  must  necessarily  be  reserved  for  the
future  volumes  of  this  work  :  in  which  I  pledge  myself  to  show  that  the  progress
Europe  has  made  from  barbarism  to  civilization  is  entirely  due  to  its  intellectual
activity  ;  that  the  leading  countries  have  now,  for  some  centuries,  advanced
sufficiently  far  to  shake  off  the  influence  of  those  physical  agencies  by  which  in
an  earlier  state  their  career  might  have  been  troubled  ;  and  that  although  the
moral  agencies  are  still  powerful,  and  still  cause  occasional  disturbances,  these
are  but  aberrations,  which,  if  we  compare  long  periods  of  time,  balance  each  other,
and  thus  in  the  total  amount  entirely  disappear.  So  that,  in  a  great  and  com-
prehensive view,  the  changes  in  every  civilized  people  are,  in  their  aggregate,
dependent  solely  on  three  things  :  first,  on  the  amount  of  knowledge  possessed
by  their  ablest  men  ;  secondly,  on  the  direction  which  that  knowledge  takes,
that  is  to  say,  the  sort  of  subjects  to  which  it  refers  ;  thirdly,  and  above  all,  on
the  extent  to  which  the  knowledge  is  diffused,  and  the  freedom  with  which  it
pervades  all  classes  of  society.

These  are  the  three  great  movers  of  every  civilized  country  ;  and  although
their  operation  is  frequently  disturbed  by  the  vices  or  the  virtues  of  powerful
individuals,  such  moral  feelings  correct  each  other,  and  the  average  of  long  periods
remains  unaffected.  Owing  to  causes  of  which  we  are  ignorant,  the  moral
qualities  do,  no  doubt,  constantly  vary  ;  so  that  in  one  man,  or  perhaps  even  in
one  generation,  there  will  be  an  excess  of  good  intentions,  in  another  an  excess
of  bad  ones.  But  we  have  no  reason  to  think  that  any  permanent  change  has
been  effected  in  the  proportion  which  those  who  naturally  possess  good  intentions
bear  to  those  in  whom  bad  ones  seem  to  be  inherent.  In  what  may  be  called  the
innate  and  original  morals  of  mankind,  there  is,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  no  pro-
gress. Of  the  different  passions  with  which  we  are  born,  some  are  more  prevalent
at  one  time,  some  at  another  ;  but  experience  teaches  us  that,  as  they  are  always
antagonistic,  they  are  held  in  balance  by  the  force  of  their  own  opposition.  The
activity  of  one  motive  is  corrected  by  the  activity  of  another.  For  to  every  vice
there  is  a  corresponding  virtue.  Cruelty  is  counteracted  by  benevolence  ;  sym-
pathy is  excited  by  suffering  ;  the  injustice  of  some  provokes  the  charity  of
others  ;  new  evils  are  met  by  new  remedies,  and  even  the  most  enormous  offences
that  have  ever  been  known  have  left  behind  them  no  permanent  impression.
The  desolation  of  countries  and  the  slaughter  of  men  are  losses  which  never  fail
to  be  repaired,  and  at  the  distance  of  a  few  centuries  every  vestige  of  them  is
effaced.  The  gigantic  crimes  of  Alexander  or  Napoleon  become  after  a  time  void
of  effect,  and  the  affairs  of  the  world  return  to  their  former  level.  This  is  the  ebb
and  flow  of  history,  the  perpetual  flux  to  which  by  the  laws  of  our  nature  we  are
subject.  Above  all  this,  there  is  a  far  higher  movement  ;  and  as  the  tide  rolls  on,
now  advancing,  now  receding,  there  is,  amid  its  endless  fluctuations,  one  thing,
and  one  alone,  which  endures  for  ever.  The  actions  of  bad  men  produce  only

[*  For  "  laws  "  it  would  be  well  to  read  here  "  factors."      See  above,  p.  26,  note. — ED.]


COMPARISON    OF    MORAL    AND    INTELLECTUAL    LAWS     129

temporary  evil,  the  actions  of  good  men  only  temporary  good  ;  and  eventually
the  good  and  the  evil  altogether  subside,  are  neutralized  by  subsequent  generations,
absorbed  by  the  incessant  movement  of  future  ages.  But  the  discoveries  of
great  men  never  leave  us  ;  they  are  immortal,  they  contain  those  eternal  truths
which  survive  the  shock  of  empires,  outlive  the  struggles  of  rival  creeds,  and
witness  the  decay  of  successive  religions.  All  these  have  their  different  measures
and  their  different  standards  ;  one  set  of  opinions  for  one  age,  another  set  for
another.  They  pass  away  like  a  dream  ;  they  are  as  the  fabric  of  a  vision,  which
leaves  not  a  rack  behind.  The  discoveries  of  genius  alone  remain  :  it  is  to  them
we  owe  all  that  we  now  have ;  they  are  for  all  ages  and  all  times  ;  never  young,
and  never  old,  they  bear  the  seeds  of  their  own  life  ;  they  flow  on  in  a  perennial
and  undying  stream  ;  they  are  essentially  cumulative,  and,  giving  birth  to  the
additions  which  they  subsequently  receive,  they  thus  influence  the  most  distant
posterity,  and  after  the  lapse  of  centuries  produce  more  effect  than  they  were
able  to  do  even  at  the  moment  of  their  promulgation.


CHAPTER  V

INQUIRY    INTO   THE   INFLUENCE   EXERCISED    BY    RELIGION,  LITERATURE,  AND

GOVERNMENT.

BY  applying  to  the  history  of  Man  those  methods  of  investigation  which  have
been  found  successful  in  other  branches  of  knowledge,  and  by  rejecting  all  pre-
conceived notions  which  would  not  bear  the  test  of  those  methods,  we  have  ar
rived  at  certain  results,  the  heads  of  which  it  may  now  be  convenient  to  recapitu.
late.  We  have  seen  that  our  actions,  being  solely  the  result  of  internal  and
external  agencies,  must  be  explicable  by  the  laws  of  those  agencies  ;  that  is  to
say,  by  mental  laws  and  by  physical  laws.  We  have  also  seen  that  mental  laws
are,  in  Europe,  more  powerful  than  physical  laws  ;  *  and  that,  in  the  progress
of  civilization,  their  superiority  is  constantly  increasing,  because  advancing
knowledge  multiplies  the  resources  of  the  mind,  but  leaves  the  old  resources  of
nature  stationary.  On  this  account,  we  have  treated  the  mental  laws  as  being
the  great  regulators  of  progress  ;  arid  we  have  looked  at  the  physical  laws  as
occupying  a  subordinate  place,  and  as  merely  displaying  themselves  in  oc-
casional disturbances,  the  force  and  frequency  of  which  have  been  long  declining,
and  are  now,  on  a  large  average,  almost  inoperative.  Having  by  this  means
resolved  the  study  of  what  may  be  called  the  dynamics  of  society  into  the  study
of  the  laws  of  the  mind,  we  have  subjected  these  last  to  a  similar  analysis  ;  and
we  have  found  that  they  consist  of  two  parts,  namely,  moral  laws  and  intellectual
laws.  By  comparing  these  two  parts,  we  have  clearly  ascertained  the  vast
superiority  of  the  intellectual  laws  ;  and  we  have  seen  that  as  the  progress  of
civilization  is  marked  by  the  triumph  of  the  mental  laws  over  the  physical,  just
so  is  it  marked  by  the  triumph  of  the  intellectual  laws  f  over  the  moral  ones.
This  important  inference  rests  on  two  distinct  arguments.  First,  that  moral
truths  being  stationary,  and  intellectual  truths  being  progressive,  it  is  highly
improbable  that  the  progress  of  society  should  be  due  to  moral  knowledge,  which
for  many  centuries  has  remained  the  same,  rather  than  to  intellectual  knowledge,
which  for  many  centuries  has  been  incessantly  advancing.  The  other  argument
consists  in  the  fact,  that  the  two  greatest  evils  known  to  mankind  have  not  been
diminished  by  moral  improvement  ;  but  have  been,  and  still  are,  yielding  to  the
influence  of  intellectual  discoveries.  From  all  this  it  evidently  follows,  that  if
we  wish  to  ascertain  the  conditions  which  regulate  the  progress  of  modern  civili-
zation, we  must  seek  them  in  the  history  of  the  amount  and  diffusion  of  intel-
lectual knowledge  ;  and  we  must  consider  physical  phenomena  and  moral
principles  as  causing,  no  doubt,  great  aberrations  in  short  periods,  but  in  long
periods  correcting  and  balancing  themselves,  and  thus  leaving  the  intellectual
laws  to  act  uncontrolled  by  these  inferior  and  subordinate  agents.

Such  is  the  conclusion  to  which  we  have  been  led  by  successive  analyses,  and

[*  See  above,  pp.  86-90,  notes. — ED.]

[t  That  is,  factors.     See  above,  p.  26,  note. — ED.]

130


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  131

on  which  we  now  take  our  stand.  The  actions  of  individuals  are  greatly  affected
by  their  moral  feelings  and  by  their  passions  r  but  these  being  antagonistic  to
the  passions  and  feelings  of  other  individuals,  are  balanced  by  them  ;  so  that
their  effect  is,  in  the  great  average  of  human  affairs,  nowhere  to  be  seen  ;  and
the  total  actions  of  mankind,  considered  as  a  whole,  are  left  to  be>  regulated
by  the  total  knowledge  of  which  mankind  is  possessed.  And  of  the  way  in  which
individual  feeling  and  individual  caprice  are  thus  absorbed  and  neutralized,  we
find  a  clear  illustration  in  the  facts  already  brought  forward  respecting  the  his-
tory of  crime.  For  by  those  facts  it  is  decisively  proved  that  the  amount  of
crime  committed  in  a  country  is,  year  after  year,  reproduced  with  the  most
startling  uniformity,  not  being  in  the  least  affected  by  those  capricious  and
personal  feelings  to  which  human  actions  are  too  often  referred.  But  if,  instead
of  examining  the  history  of  crime  year  by  year,  we  were  to  examine  it  month  by
month,  we  should  find  less  regularity  ;  and  if  we  were  to  examine  it  hour  by
hour,  we  should  find  no  regularity  at  all  ;  neither  would  its  regularity  be  seen  if,
instead  of  the  criminal  records  of  a  whole  country,  we  only  knew  those  of  a  single
street,  or  of  a  single  family.  This  is  because  the  great  social  laws  by  which
crime  is  governed  can  be  perceived  only  after  observing  great  numbers  or  long
periods  ;  but  in  a  small  number,  and  a  short  period,  the  individual  moral  prin-
ciple triumphs,  and  disturbs  the  operation  of  the  larger  and  intellectual  law.
While,  therefore,  the  moral  feelings  by  which  a  man  is  urged  to  commit  a  crime,
or  to  abstain  from  it,  will  produce  an  immense  effect  on  the  amount  of  his  own
crimes,  they  will  produce  no  effect  on  the  amount  of  crimes  committed  by  the
society  to  which  he  belongs  ;  because,  in  the  long-run,  they  are  sure  to  be
neutralized  by  opposite  moral  feelings,  which  cause  in  other  men  an  opposite
conduct.  Just  in  the  same  way,  we  are  all  sensible  that  moral  principles  do
affect  nearly  the  whole  of  our  actions  ;  but  we  have  incontrovertible  prooi  that
they  produce  not  the  least  effect  on  mankind  in  the  aggregate,  or  even  on  men  in
very  large  masses,  provided  that  we  take  the  precaution  of  studying  social
phenomena  for  a  period  sufficiently  long,  and  on  a  scale  sufficiently  great,  to
enable  the  superior  laws  to  come  into  uncontrolled  operation.

The  totality  of  human  actions  being  thus,  from  the  highest  point  of  view,
governed  by  the  totality  of  human  knowledge,  it  might  seem  a  simple  matter
to  collect  the  evidence  of  the  knowledge,  and,  by  subjecting  it  to  successive
generalizations,  ascertain  the  whole  of  the  laws  which  regulate  the  progress  of
civilization.  And  that  this  will  be  eventually  done,  I  do  not  entertain  the
slightest  doubt.  But,  unfortunately,  history  has  been  written  by  men  so  in-
adequate to  the  great  task  they  have  undertaken,  that  few  of  the  necessary
materials  have  yet  been  brought  together.  Instead  of  telling  us  those  things
which  alone  have  any  value, — instead  of  giving  us  information  respecting  the
progress  of  knowledge,  and  the  way  in  which  mankind  has  been  affected  by  the
diffusion  of  that  knowledge, — instead  of  these  things,  the  vast  majority  of  his-
torians fill  their  works  with  the  most  trifling  and  miserable  details  :  personal
anecdotes  of  kings  and  courts  ;  interminable  relations  of  what  was  said  by  one
minister,  and  what  was  thought  by  another  ;  and,  what  is  worse  than  all,  long
accounts  of  campaigns,  battles,  and  sieges,  very  interesting  to  those  engaged  in
them,  but  to  us  utterly  useless,  because  they  neither  furnish  new  truths,  nor  do
they  supply  the  means  by  which  new  truths  may  be  discovered.*  This  is  the
real  impediment  which  now  stops  our  advance.  It  is  this  want  of  judgment,
and  this  ignorance  of  what  is  most  worthy  of  selection,  which  deprive  us  of
materials  that  ought  long  since  to  have  been  accumulated,  arranged,  and  stored
up  for  future  use.  In  other  great  branches  of  knowledge,  observation  has  pre-
ceded discovery  ;  first  the  facts  have  been  registered,  and  then  their  laws  have
been  found.  But  in  the  study  of  the  history  of  Man,  the  important  facts  have

[*  It  was  one  of  the  many  originalities  of  Bodin  to  stipulate,  in  the  sixteenth  century,
for  a  more  rational  handling  of  history  in  Buckle's  sense.  See  his  proposals  described
and  discussed  by  Monteil  (Histoire  des  Franfais  des  divers  etats,  36  edit.,  torn,  iii.,
station  Ivii. ),  the  most  energetic  preacher  of  the  reform  of  history  since  Voltaire. — ED.]


I32  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

been  neglected,  and  the  unimportant  ones  preserved.  The  consequence  is,
that  whoever  now  attempts  to  generalize  historical  phenomena,  must  collect
the  facts,  as  well  as  conduct  the  generalization.  He  finds  nothing  ready  to  his
hand.  He  must  be  the  mason  as  well  as  the  architect  ;  he  must  not  only  scheme
the  edifice;  but  likewise  excavate  the  quarry.  The  necessity  of  performing  this
double  labour  entails  upon  the  philosopher  such  enormous  drudgery,  that  the
limits  of  an  entire  life  are  unequal  to  the  task  ;  and  history,  instead  of  being
ripe,  as  it  ought  to  be,  for  complete  and  exhaustive  generalizations,  is  still  in  so
crude  and  informal  a  state,  that  not  the  most  determined  and  protracted  in-
dustry will  enable  any  one  to  comprehend  the  really  important  actions  of  man-
kind, during  even  so  short  a  period  as  two  successive  centuries.

On  account  of  these  things,  I  have  long  since  abandoned  my  original  scheme  ;
and  T  have  reluctantly  determined  to  write  the  history,  not  of  general  civiliza-
tion, but  of  the  civilization  of  a  single  people.  While,  however,  by  this  means,
we  curtail  the  field  of  inquiry,  we  unfortunately  diminish  the  resources  of  which
the  inquiry  is  possessed.  For  although  it  is  perfectly  true  that  the  totality
of  human  actions,  if  considered  in  long  periods,  depends  on  the  totality  of  human
knowledge,  it  must  be  allowed  that  this  great  principle,  when  applied  only  to
one  country,  loses  something  of  its  original  value.  The  more  we  diminish  our
observations,  the  greater  becomes  the  uncertainty  of  the  average  ;  in  other
words,  the  greater  the  chance  of  the  operation  of  the  larger  laws  being  troubled
by  the  operation  of  the  smaller.  The  interference  of  foreign  governments  ;  the
influence  exercised  by  the  opinions,  literature,  and  customs  of  a  foreign  people  ;
their  invasions,  perhaps  even  their  conquests  ;  the  forcible  introduction  by
them  of  new  religions,  new  laws,  and  new  manners, — all  these  things  are  pertur-
bations, which,  in  a  view  of  universal  history,  equalize  each  other,  but  which,
in  any  one  country,  are  apt  to  disturb  the  natural  march,  and  thus  render  the
movements  of  civilization  more  difficult  to  calculate.  The  manner  in  which  I
have  endeavoured  to  meet  this  difficulty  will  be  presently  stated  ;  but  what  I
first  wish  to  point  out,  are  the  reasons  which  have  induced  me  to  select  the
history  of  England  as  more  important  than  any  other,  and  therefore  as  the  most
worthy  of  being  subjected  to  a  complete  and  philosophic  investigation.

Now,  it  is  evident  that,  inasmuch  as  the  great  advantage  of  studying  past
events  consists  in  the  possibility  of  ascertaining  the  laws  by  which  they  were
governed,  the  history  of  any  people  will  become  more  valuable  in  proportion  as
their  movements  have  been  least  disturbed  by  agencies  not  arising  from  them-
selves. Every  foreign  or  external  influence  which  is  brought  to  bear  upon  a
nation  is  an  interference  with  its  natural  development,*  and  therefore  compli-
cates the  circumstances  we  seek  to  investigate.  To  simplify  complications  is,
in  all  branches  of  knowledge,  the  first  essential  of  success.  This  is  very  familiar
to  the  cultivators  of  physical  science,  who  are  often  able,  by  a  single  experiment,
to  discover  a  truth  which  innumerable  observations  had  vainly  searched  ;  the
reason  being,  that  by  experimenting  on  phenomena  we  can  disentangle  them
from  their  complications  ;  and  thus  isolating  them  from  the  interference  of  un-
known agencies,  we  leave  them,  as  it  were,  to  run  their  own  course,  and  disclose
the  operation  of  their  own  law.

This,  then,  is  the  true  standard  by  which  we  must  measure  the  value  of  the
history  of  any  nation.  The  importance  of  the  history  of  a  country  depends,  not
upon  the  splendour  of  its  exploits,  but  upon  the  degree  to  which  its  actions  are
due  to  causes  springing  out  of  itself.  If,  therefore,  we  could  find  some  civilized
people  who  had  worked  out  their  civilization  entirely  by  themselves  ;  who  had
escaped  all  foreign  influence,  and  who  had  been  neither  benefited  nor  retarded
by  the  personal  peculiarities  of  their  rulers, — the  history  of  such  a  people  would

[*  On  this  view,  the  "  natural  development  "  of  the  northern  nations  would  have  been
to  remain  forever  in  a  state  of  barbarism.  To  say  that  their  history  would  in  that  case
have  been  "  more  valuable  "  is  preposterous.  This  reductio  ad  absunlitm,  however,
cancels  the  proposition  in  the  text,  which  is  a  verbal  fallacy  due  to  insufficient  reflec-
tion.— ED.]


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  133

be  of  paramount  importance  ;  *  because  it  would  present  a  condition  of  normal
and  inherent  development  ;  it  would  show  the  laws  of  progress  acting  in  a  state
of  isolation  ;  it  would  be,  in  fact,  an  experiment  ready-made,  and  would  possess
all  the  value  of  that  artificial  contrivance  to  which  natural  science  is  so  much
indebted.

To  find  such  a  people  as  this  is  obviously  impossible  ;  but  the  duty  of  the
philosophic  historian  is  to  select  for  his  special  study  the  country  in  which  the
conditions  have  been  most  closely  followed.  Now,  it  will  be  readily  admitted,
not  only  by  ourselves,  but  by  intelligent  foreigners,  that  in  England,  during,  at
all  events,  the  last  three  centuries,  f  this  has  been  done  more  constantly  and
more  successfully  than  in  any  other  country.  I  say  nothing  of  the  number  of
our  discoveries,  the  brilliancy  of  our  literature,  or  the  success  of  our  arms.  These
are  invidious  topics  ;  and  other  nations  may  perhaps  deny  to  us  those  superior
merits  which  we  are  apt  to  exaggerate.  But  I  take  up  this  single  position,  that
of  all  European  countries  England  is  the  one  where,  during  the  longest  period,
the  government  has  been  most  quiescent,  and  the  people  most  active  ;  where
popular  freedom  has  been  settled  on  the  widest  basis  ;  where  each  man  is  most
able  to  say  what  he  thinks,  and  do  what  he  likes  ;  where  every  one  can  follow
his  own  bent,  and  propagate  his  own  opinions  ;  where,  religious  persecution
being  little  known,  the  play  and  flow  of  the  human  mind  may  be  clearly  seen,
unchecked  by  those  restraints  to  which  it  is  elsewhere  subjected  ;  where  the
profession  of  heresy  is  least  dangerous,  and  the  practice  of  dissent  most  common  :
where  hostile  creeds  flourish  side  by  side,  and  rise  and  decay  without  disturbance,
according  to  the  wants  of  the  people,  unaffected  by  the  wishes  of  the  church,
and  uncontrolled  by  the  authority  of  the  state  ;  where  all  interests,  and  all
classes,  both  spiritual  and  temporal,  are  most  left  to  take  care  of  themselves  ;
where  that  meddlesome  doctrine  called  Protection  was  first  attacked,  and  where
alone  it  has  been  destroyed  ;  and  where,  in  a  word,  those  dangerous  extremes
to  which  interference  gives  rise  having  been  avoided,  despotism  and  rebellion
are  equally  rare,  and  concession  being  recognized  as  the  groundwork  of  policy,
the  national  progress  has  been  least  disturbed  by  the  power  of  privileged  classes,
by  the  influence  of  particular  sects,  or  by  the  violence  of  arbitrary  rulers.

That  these  are  the  characteristics  of  English  history  is  notorious  ;  to  some
men  a  matter  of  boast,  to  others  of  regret.  And  when  to  these  circumstances
we  add  that  England,  owing  to  its  insular  formation,1  was  until  the  middle  of
the  last  century  rarely  visited  by  foreigners,  it  becomes  evident  that,  in  our
progress  as  a  people,  we  have  been  less  affected  than  any  other  by  the  two  main
sources  of  interference,  namely,  the  authority  of  government,  and  the  influence
of  foreigners.  In  the  sixteenth  century,  it  became  a  fashion,  among  the  English
nobility,  to  travel  abroad  ;  2  but  it  was  by  no  means  the  fashion  for  foreign
nobility  to  travel  in  England.  In  the  seventeenth  century,  the  custom  of

1  Coleridge  well  says,  "  It  is  the  chief  of  many  blessings  derived  from  the  insular
character  and  circumstances  of  our  country,  that  our  social  institutions  have  formed
themselves  out  of  our  proper  needs  and  interests."  Coleridge  on  the  Constitution  of  the
Church  and  State,  8vo,  1830,  pp.  20,  21.  The  political  consequences  of  this  were  much
noticed  at  the  time  of  the  French  Revolution.  See  Memoires  de  La  Fayette,  vol.  i.
p.  404,  Bruxelles,  1837.

-  In  another  place,  I  shall  collect  the  evidence  of  the  rapidly  increasing  love  of  travel-
ling in  the  sixteenth  century;  but  it  is  interesting  to  observe,  that  during  the  latter  half
of  the  century  there  was  first  established  the  custom  of  appointing  travelling  tutors.
Compare  Harrington's  Observations  on  the  Statutes,  p.  218,  with  a  letter  from  Beza,  written
in  1598,  in  Memoires  et  Correspondance  de  Du  Plessis  Mornay,  vol.  ix.  p.  81.

[*  The  nearest  approach  to  such  a  history  is  that  of  ancient  Egypt,  which  Buckle  has
briefly  handled  above.  Next  would  come  the  history  of  China,  which  he  has  not  dealt
with  at  all.  Next,  perhaps,  would  be  that  of  Iceland,  or  that  of  Turkey,  which  he  said
he  could  "  write  on  the  back  of  his  hand  " — (Life,  by  Huth,  ii.  171 )— another  raluctin
ad  absurdum. — ED.]

[t  This  qualification  surrenders  the  thesis. — ED.]


134  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

travelling  for  amusement  spread  so  much,  that,  among  the  rich  and  idle  classes,
there  were  few  Englishmen  who  did  not,  at  least  once  in  their  life,  cross  the
Channel  ;  while  the  same  classes  in  other  countries,  partly  because  they  were
less  wealthy,  partly  from  an  inveterate  dislike  to  the  sea,  hardly  ever  entered
our  island,  unless  compelled  to  do  so  on  some  particular  business.  The  result
was  that  in  other  countries,  and  particularly  in  France  and  Italy,  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  great  cities  became  gradually  accustomed  to  foreigners,  and,  like
all  men,  were  imperceptibly  influenced  by  what  they  often  saw.*  On  the  other
hand,  there  were  many  of  our  cities  in  which  none  but  Englishmen  ever  set
their  feet  ;  3  and  inhabitants,  even  of  the  metropolis,  might  grow  old  without
having  once  seen  a  single  foreigner,  except,  perhaps,  some  dull  and  pompous
ambassador  taking  his  airing  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames.  And  although  it  is
often  said  that,  after  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.,  our  national  character  began
to  be  greatly  influenced  by  French  example,4  this,  as  I  shall  fully  prove,  was  con-
fined to  that  small  and  insignificant  part  of  society  which  hung  about  the  court  ;
nor  did  it  produce  any  marked  effect  upon  the  two  most  important  classes, —
the  intellectual  class  and  the  industrious  class.  The  movement  may,  indeed,
be  traced  in  the  most  worthless  parts  of  our  literature, — in  the  shameless  pro-
ductions of  Buckingham,  Dorset,  Etherege,  Killigrew,  Mulgrave,  Rochester,
and  Sedley.f  But  neither  then,  nor  at  a  much  later  period,  were  any  of  our
great  thinkers  influenced  by  the  intellect  of  France  ;  5  on  the  contrary,  we  rind
in  their  ideas,  and  even  in  their  style,  a  certain  rough  and  native  vigour,  which,
though  offensive  to  our  more  polished  neighbours,  has  at  least  the  merit  of
being  the  indigenous  product  of  our  own  country.6  The  origin  and  extent  of

3  In  regard  to  the  society  of  women,  this  was  still  more  observable,  even  at  a  much
later  period  ;  and  when  the  Countess  de  Boufflers  visited  England,  at  the  beginning  of
the  reign  of  George  III.,  "  on  lui  faisoit  un  merite  de  sa  curiosite  de  voir  1'Angleterre  ;
car  on  remarquoit  qu'elle  etoit  la  seule  dame  francoise  de  qualite  qui  fut  venue  en  voya-
geuse  depuis  deux  cents  ans  :  on  ne  comprenoit  point,  dans  cette  classe,  les  ambassa-
drices,  ni  la  duchesse  de  Mazarin,  qui  y  etoient  venues  par  necessite."     Dutens,  Memoir es
d'un  Voyageur,  vol.  i.  p.  217.     Compare  Memoir  es  de  Madame  de  Genlis,  vol.  viii.  p.  241.

4  Orme's  Life  of  Owen,  p.  288  ;  Mahon's  History  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  211  ;  and  many
other  writers.

5  Tne  only  Englishman  of  genius  who,  during  this  period,  was  influenced  by  the  French
mind,  was  Dryden  ;  but  this  is  chiefly  apparent  in  his  plays,  the  whole  of  which  are  now
deservedly  forgotten.     [See  the  preceding   note. — ED.]     His  great  works,  and,  above
all,  those  wonderful  satires,  in  which  he  distances  every  competitor,  except  Juvenal,  are
thoroughly  national,  and   as  mere  specimens  of  English  are,  if  I  may  express  my  own
judgment,  to  be  ranked  immediately  after  Shakespeare.     In  Dryden's  writings  there
are  unquestionably  many  Gallicisms  of  expression,  but  few  Gallicisms  of  thought ;  and  it
is  by  these  last  that  we  must  estimate  the  real  amount  of  foreign  influence.     Sir  Walter
Scott  goes  so  far  as  to  say,  "  It  will  admit  of  question,  whether  any  single  French  word
has  been  naturalized  upon  the   sole   authority  of   Dryden."     Scotfs   Life  of  Dryden,
p.  523, 8vo,  1808.    Rather  a  bold  assertion.    As  to  the  opinion  of  Fox,  see  Lord  Holland's
preface  to  Fox's  James  II.,  4to,  1808,  p.  xxxii.

6  Another  circumstance  which  has  maintained  the  independence,  and  therefore  in-
creased the  value,  of  our  literature,  is,  that  in  no  great  country  have  literary  men  been

[*  This  line  of  reasoning  overlooks  the  fact  that  the  chief  influence  exerted  by  travel
is  often  that  on  the  traveller,  not  his  on  the  people  among  whom  he  travels.  English
thought  and  literature  were  much  more  influenced  by  the  contact  of  Englishmen  with
Italy,  down  to  Milton,  than  were  Italian  thought  and  literature  by  the  passage  of  English-
men through  Italy. — ED.]

[f  This  entirely  overlooks  the  great  influence  of  French  criticism  on  English  literature
for  two  or  three  generations  after  the  Restoration.  Dryden  was  much  influenced  by  it,
and  so  were  Shaftesbury  and  Addison  ;  and  a  whole  series  of  the  French  critics,  including
Rapin,  Bossu,  Du  Bos,  Bouhours,  Fontenelle,  and  Dacier  were  translated.  See  refs.
in  the  editor's  Essays  towards  a  Critical  Method,  1889,  pp.  26-27.  Cp.  Shaftesbury,
Characteristics,  ed.  1900,  i.  94. — ED.]


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  135

that  connexion  between  the  French  and  English  intellects  which  subsequently
arose,  is  a  subject  of  immense  importance  ;  but,  like  most  others  of  real  value,
it  has  been  entirely  neglected  by  historians.  In  the  present  work,  I  shall  attempt
to  supply  this  deficiency  :  in  the  meantime  I  may  say,  that  although  we  have
been,  and  still  are,  greatly  indebted  to  the  French  for  our  improvement  in  taste,
in  refinement,  in  manners,  and  indeed  in  all  the  amenities  of  life,  we  have  bor-
rowed from  them  nothing  absolutely  essential,*  nothing  by  which  the  destinies
of  nations  are  permanently  altered.  On  the  other  hand,  the  French  have  not
only  borrowed  from  us  some  very  valuable  political  institutions,  but  even  the
most  important  event  in  French  history  is  due,  in  no  small  degree,  to  our  influ-
ence. Their  Revolution  of  1789  was,  as  is  well  known,  brought  about,  or,  to
speak  more  properly,  was  mainly  instigated,  by  a  few  great  men,  whose  works,
and  afterwards  whose  speeches,  roused  the  people  to  resistance  ;  but  what  is  less
known,  and  nevertheless  is  certainly  true,  is,  that  these  eminent  leaders  learnt
in  England  that  philosophy  and  those  principles  by  which,  when  transplanted
into  their  own  country,  such  fearful  and  yet  such  salutary  results  were  effected.7

It  will  not,  I  hope,  be  supposed  that  by  these  remarks  I  mean  to  cast  any
reflection  on  the  French  :  a  great  and  admirable  people  ;  a  people  in  many  respects
superior  to  ourselves  ;  a  people  from  whom  we  have  still  much  to  learn,  and
whose  deficiencies,  such  as  they  are,  arise  from  the  perpetual  interference  of  a
long  line  of  arbitrary  rulers.  But,  looking  at  this  matter  historically,  it  is  un-
questionably true  that  we  have  worked  out  our  civilization  with  little  aid  from
them,  while  they  have  worked  out  theirs  with  great  aid  from  us.  At  the  same
time,  it  must  also  be  admitted  that  our  governments  have  interfered  less  with
us  than  their  governments  have  interfered  with  them.  And  without  in  the
least  prejudging  the  question  as  to  which  is  the  greater  country,  it  is  solely  on
these  grounds  that  I  consider  our  history  more  important  than  theirs  :  and  I
select  for  especial  study  the  progress  of  English  civilization  simply  because,
being  less  affected  by  agencies  not  arising  from  itself,  we  can  the  more  clearly
discern  in  it  the  normal  march  of  society,  and  the  undisturbed  operation  of  those
great  laws  by  which  the  fortunes  of  mankind  are  ultimately  regulated.

After  this  comparison  between  the  relative  value  of  French  and  English  his-
tory, it  seems  scarcely  necessary  to  examine  the  claims  which  may  be  put  for-
ward for  the  history  of  other  countries.  Indeed,  there  are  only  two  in  whose  favour
anything  can  be  said  :  I  mean  Germany,  considered  as  a  whole,  and  the  United
States  of  North  America.  As  to  the  Germans,  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  since
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  they  have  produced  a  greater  number  of

so  little  connected  with  the  government,  or  rewarded  by  it.  That  this  is  the  true  policy,
and  that  to  protect  literature  is  to  injure  it,  are  propositions  for  the  proof  of  which  I
must  refer  to  chap.  xi.  of  this  volume — on  the  system  of  Louis  XIV.  In  the  meantime,
I  will  quote  the  following  words  from  a  learned  and,  what  is  much  better,  a  thoughtful
writer  :  "  Nor  must  he  who  will  understand  the  English  institutions  leave  out  of  view
the  character  of  the  enduring  works  which  had  sprung  from  the  salient  energy  of  the
English  mind.  Literature  had  been  left  to  develop  itself.  William  of  Orange  was
foreign  to  it ;  Anne  cared  not  for  it ;  the  first  George  knew  no  English  ;  the  second  not
much."  Bancroft's  History  of  the  American  Revolution,  vol.  ii.  p.  48.  Compare  Forster's
Life  of  Goldsmith,  1854,  vol.  i.  pp.  93-96,  vol.  ii.  p.  480.

7  See  for  evidence  of  this  influence  of  England,  chap.  xii.  of  the  present  volume.  [The
passage  in  the  text  assumes  that  the  French  Revolution  resulted  solely  or  mainly  from
the  influence  of  English  thought  on  the  French  mind.  It  really  was  in  large  measure
determined  by  the  example  of  the  American  Revolution. — ED.]

[*  While  here  making  the  "  absolutely  essential  "  the  only  alternative  to  influences
on  "  the  amenities  of  life,"  Buckle  below  (ch.  vi.  p.  184)  admits  that  "  the  great  French
thinkers  "  led  the  way  in  comprehensive  thinking  on  history.  But  he  wholly  omits  to
note  that  Adam  Smith,  to  whose  work  he  attributes  such  immense  importance,  was
preceded  and  deeply  influenced  by  the  French  Physiocrats.  Cp.  McCulloch,  Principles
of  Political  Economy,  2nd  ed.  p.  59  ;  H.  Higgs,  The  Physiocrats,  1897,  p.  127  ;  Ingram,
History  of  Political  Economy,  1888,  p.  88.  And  see  below,  ch,  xiv,  notes  3  and  4.— ED.]


136  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

profound  thinkers  than  any  other  country,  I  might  perhaps  say,  than  all  other
countries  put  together.  But  the  objections  which  apply  to  the  French  are  still
more  applicable  to  the  Germans.  For  the  protective  principle  has  been,  and
still  is,  stronger  in  Germany  than  in  France.  Even  the  best  of  the  German
governments  are  constantly  interfering  with  the  people  ;  never  leaving  them  to
themselves,  always  looking  after  their  interests,  and  meddling  in  the  commonest
affairs  of  daily  life.  Besides  this,  the  German  literature,*  though  now  the  first
in  Europe,  owes  its  origin,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  to  that  great  sceptical  move-
ment, by  which,  in  France,  the  Revolution  was  preceded.  Before  the  middle
of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Germans,  notwithstanding  a  few  eminent  names,
such  as  Kepler  and  Leibnitz,  had  no  literature  of  real  value  ;  and  the  first  impetus
which  they  received,  was  caused  by  their  contact  with  the  French  intellect,  and
by  the  influence  of  those  eminent  Frenchmen  who,  in  the  reign  of  Frederick  the
Great,  flocked  to  Berlin,8  a  city  which  has  ever  since  been  the  head-quarters
of  philosophy  and  science.  From  this  there  have  resulted  some  very  important
circumstances,  which  I  can  here  only  briefly  indicate.  The  German  intellect,
stimulated  by  the  French  into  a  sudden  growth,  has  been  irregularly  developed  ;
and  thus  hurried  into  an  activity  greater  than  the  average  civilization  of  the
country  requires.  The  consequence  is,  that  there  is  no  nation  in  Europe  in  which
we  find  so  wide  an  interval  between  the  highest  minds  and  the  lowest  minds.
The  German  philosophers  possess  a  learning,  and  a  reach  of  thought,  which
places  them  at  the  head  of  the  civilized  world.  The  German  people  are  more
superstitious,  more  prejudiced,  and,  notwithstanding  the  care  which  the  govern-
ment takes  of  their  education,  more  really  ignorant,  and  more  unfit  to  guide
themselves,  than  are  the  inhabitants  either  of  France  or  of  England.9  This

8  The  history  of  this  remarkable,  though  short-lived,  union  between  the  French  and
German  intellects  will  be  traced  in  the  next  volume  ;  but  its  first  great  effect,  in  stimulat-
ing, or  rather  in  creating,  the  German  literature,  is  noticed  by  one  of  the  most  learned
of  their  own  writers  :  "  Denn  einestheils  war  zu  diesen  Gegenstanden  immer  die  lateinische
Sprache   gebraucht,   und  die   Muttersprache   zu   wenig  cultivirt  worden,   anderntheils
wurden  diese  Schriften  auch  meistentheils  nur  von  Gelehrten,  und  zwar  Universitatsge-
lehrten,  fur  welche  sie  auch  hauptsachlich  bestimmt  waren,  gelesen.     Gegen  die  Mitte
des  achtzehnten  J  ahrhunderts,  als  mehrere  englische  und  franzosische  Werke  gelesen
und  ubersetzt  wurden,  und  durch  die  Vorliebe  des  Konigs  von  Preussen  Friedrichs  II.,
der  von  Franzosen  gebildet  worden  war,  franzosische  Gelehrte  besonders  geehrt  und
angestellt  wurden,  entstand  ein  Wetteifer  der  Deutschen,  auch  in  dem  schriftlichen
Vortrage  nicht  zuriick  zu  bleiben,  und  die  Sprache  hob  sich  bald  zu  einem  hohen  Grade
von  Vollkommenheit."     Tennemann,  Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  vol.  xi.  pp.  286,  287.
[For  the  truth  of  Buckle's  proposition,  which  has  been  frequently  called  in  question,  see
the  evidence  collected  in  the  editor's  Buckle  and  his  Critics,  ch.  vi.  §  5. — ED.]

9  A  popular  view  of  the  system  of  national  education  established  in  Germany  will  be
found  in  Kay's  Social  Condition  and  Education  of  the  People  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1-344.
But  Mr.  Kay,  like  most  literary  men,  overrates  the  advantages  of  literary  acquirements,
and  underrates  that  education  of  the  faculties  which  neither  books  nor  schools  can  im-
part to  a  people  who  are  debarred  from  the  exercise  of  civil  and  political  rights.     In  the
history  of  the  protective  spirit  (chaps,  ix.  and  x.  of  the  present  volume),  I  shall  return
to  this  subject,  in  connexion  with  France ;  and  in  the  next  volume  I  shall  examine  it  in
regard  to  German  civilization.     In  the  meantime,  I  must  be  allowed  to  protest  against
the  account  Mr.  Kay  has  given  of  the  results  of  compulsory  education  ;  an  agreeable
picture,  drawn  by  an  amiable  and  intelligent  writer,  but  of  the  inaccuracy  of  which  I
possess  decisive  evidence.     Two  points  only  I  will  now  refer  to.     ist.  The  notorious  fact,
that  the  German  people,  notwithstanding  their  so-called  education,  are  unfit  to  take
any  share  in  political  matters,  and  have  no  aptitude  for  the  practical  and  administrative
parts  of  government.     2nd.  The  fact,  equally  notorious  to  those  who  have  studied  the
subject,  that  there  are  more  popular  superstitions  in  Prussia,  the  most  educated  part

[*  Buckle  here  and  often  elsewhere,  though  not  always,  uses  the  term  "  literature  "
as  covering  philosophic  and  scientific  works  as  well  as,  or  rather  than,  belles  lettres.  See
below,  note  32. — ED.]


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  137

separation  and  divergence  of  the  two  classes  is  the  natural  result  of  that  ai  tificial
stimulus,  which  a  century  ago  was  administered  to  one  of  the  classes,  and  which
thus  disturbed  the  normal  proportions  of  society.  Owing  to  this,  the  highest
intellects  have,  in  Germany,  so  otitstripped  the  general  progress  of  the  nation,
that  there  is  no  sympathy  between  the  two  parties  ;  nor  are  there  at  present
any  means  by  which  they  may  be  brought  into  contact.  Their  great  authors
address  themselves,  not  to  their  country,  but  to  each  other.  They  are  sure  of
a  select  and  learned  audience,  and  they  use  what,  in  reality,  is  a  learned  lan-
guage :  they  turn  their  mother-tongue  into  a  dialect,  eloquent  indeed,  and  very
powerful,  but  so  difficult,  so  subtle,  and  so  full  of  complicated  inversions,  that
to  their  own  lower  classes  it  is  utterty  incomprehensible.10  From  this,  there
have  arisen  some  of  the  most  marked  peculiarities  of  German  literature.  For,
being  deprived  of  ordinary  readers,  it  is  cut  off  from  the  influence  of  ordinary
prejudice  ;  and  hence,  it  has  displayed  a  boldness  of  inquiry,  a  recklessness  in
the  pursuit  of  truth,  and  a  disregard  of  traditional  opinions,  which  entitle  it  to
the  highest  praise.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  this  same  circumstance  has  pro-
duced that  absence  of  practical  knowledge,  and  that  indifference  to  material
and  physical  interests,  for  which  the  German  literature  is  justly  censured.  As
a  matter  of  course,  all  this  has  widened  the  original  breach,  and  increased  the
distance  which  separates  the  great  German  thinkers  from  that  dull  and  plodding

of  Germany,  than  there  are  in  England  ;  and  that  the  tenacity  with  which  men  cling  to
them  is  greater  in  Prussia  than  in  England.  For  illustration  of  the  practical  working,
in  individual  cases,  of  compulsory  education,  and  of  the  hardship  it  causes,  see  a  scan-
dalous occurrence,  related  in  Laing's  Notes  of  a  Traveller,  8vo,  1842,  p.  165,  first  series  ;
and  on  the  physical  evils  produced  by  German  education,  see  Phillips  on  Scrofula,  London,
1846,  pp.  253,  254,  where  there  is  some  useful  evidence  of  the  consequences  of  "  that
great  German  sin  of  over-regulation."  [The  first  of  the  above  propositions  will  not  now
be  affirmed  by  any  one.  The  second  was  denied  in  1858  by  Theodore  Parker  (Works,
xii.  126).  The  absence  of  evidence  on  Buckle's  side  puts  the  assertion  out  of  court.  It
should  be  noted  however  that  the  above  promise  to  discuss  German  civilization  in  the
second  volume  was  not  fulfilled. — ED.]

10  This  is  well  stated  by  Mr.  Laing,  by  far  the  ablest  traveller  who  has  published
observations  on  European  society  :  "  German  authors,  both  the  philosophic  and  the
poetic,  address  themselves  to  a  public  far  more  intellectual,  and  more  highly  cultivated,
than  our  reading  public.  ...  In  our  literature,  the  most  obscure  and  abstruse  of  meta-
physical or  philosophical  writers  take  the  public  mind  in  a  far  lower  state,  simply  cognisant
of  the  meaning  of  language,  and  possessed  of  the  ordinary  reasoning  powers.  .  .  .  The
social  influence  of  German  literature  is,  consequently,  confined  within  a  narrower  circle.  1 1
has  no  influence  on  the  mind  of  the  lower,  or  even  of  the  middle  classes  in  active  life,  who
have  not  the  opportunity  or  leisure  to  screw  their  faculties  up  to  the  pitch -note  of  their
great  writers.  The  reading  public  must  devote  much  time  to  acquire  the  knowledge,
tone  of  feeling,  and  of  imagination,  necessary  to  follow  the  writing  public.  The  social
economist  finds  accordingly  in  Germany  the  most  extraordinary  dullness,  inertness  of
mind,  and  ignorance,  below  a  certain  level,  with  the  most  extraordinary  intellectual
development,  learning,  and  genius,  at  or  above  it."  Laing' s  Notes  of  a  Traveller,  first
series,  pp.  266,  267.  The  same  acute  observer  says  in  a  later  work  (Notes,  third  series,
8vo.  1852,  p.  12)  :  "  The  two  classes  speak  and  think  in  different  languages.  The  culti-
vated German  language,  the  language  of  German  literature,  is  not  the  language  of  the
common  man,  nor  even  of  the  man  far  up  in  the  middle  ranks  of  society, — the  farmer,
tradesman,  shopkeeper."  See  also  pp.  351,  352,  354.  It  is  singular  that  so  clear  and
vigorous  a  thinker  as  Mr.  Laing  evidently  is,  should  have  failed  in  detecting  the  cause
of  this  peculiar  phenomenon.  [Taine,  who  says  of  French  literature  what  Laing  and
Buckle  say  of  German,  affirms  on  the  other  hand  that  "  in  Germany,  on  Sunday,  a
servant  reads  and  listens  to  Schiller."  (Lafontaine  et  ses  Fables,  ye  edit.  pp.  59~6i )  ;
and  M.  Bossert,  making  the  same  statement  concerning  France,  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that
"  in  Germany  the  public  which  judges  intellectual  products  is  the  entire  nation  "  (Goethe,
ses  Precurseurs  et  ses  Contemporains,  1872,  p,  v, ),  The  truth  probably  lies  midway  in
both  cases. — ED.],


138  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

class,  which,  though  it  lies  immediately  beneath  them,  still  remains  uninfluenced
by  their  knowledge,  and  uncheered  by  the  glow  and  fire  of  their  genius.

In  America,  on  the  other  hand,  we  see  a  civilization  precisely  the  reverse  of
this.  We  see  a  country  of  which  it  has  been  truly  said,  that  in  no  other  are
there  so  few  men  of  great  learning,  and  so  few  men  of  great  ignorance.11  In
Germany,  the  speculative  classes  and  the  practical  classes  are  altogether  dis-
united ;  in  America,  they  are  altogether  fused.  In  Germany,  nearly  every  year
brings  forward  new  discoveries,  new  philosophies,  new  means  by  which  the
boundaries  of  knowledge  are  to  be  enlarged.  In  America,  such  inquiries  are
almost  entirely  neglected  :  since  the  time  of  Jonathan  Edwards  no  great  meta-
physician has  appeared  ;  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  physical  science  ;  *
and,  with  the  single  exception  of  jurisprudence,12  scarcely  anything  has  been
done  for  those  vast  subjects  on  which  the  Germans  are  incessantly  labouring.
The  stock  of  American  knowledge  is  small,  but  it  is  spread  through  all  classes  ;
the  stock  of  German  knowledge  is  immense,  but  it  is  confined  to  one  class.  Which
of  these  two  forms  of  civilization  is  the  more  advantageous,  is  a  question  we  are
not  now  called  upon  to  decide.  It  is  enough  for  our  present  purpose  that  in
Germany  there  is  a  serious  failure  in  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  ;  and,  in  America,
a  no  less  serious  one  in  its  accumulation.  And  as  civilization  is  regulated  by  the
accumulation  and  diffusion  of  knowledge,  it  is  evident  that  no  country  can  even
approach  to  a  complete  and  perfect  pattern,  if,  cultivating  one  of  these  con-
ditions to  an  excess,  it  neglects  the  cultivation  of  the  other.  Indeed,  from  this
want  of  balance  and  equilibrium  between  the  two  elements  of  civilization,  there
have  arisen  in  America  and  in  Germany  those  great  but  opposite  evils,  which,
it  is  to  be  feared,  will  not  be  easily  remedied  ;  and  which,  until  remedied,  will
certainly  retard  the  progress  of  both  countries,  notwithstanding  the  temporary
advantages  which  such  one-sided  energy  does  for  the  moment  always  procure.

I  have  very  briefly,  but  I  hope  fairly,  and  certainly  with  no  conscious  partiality,
endeavoured  to  estimate  the  relative  value  of  the  history  of  the  four  leading
countries  of  the  world.     As  to  the  real  greatness  of  the  countries  themselves,  I
offer  no  opinion  ;  because  each  considers  itself  to  be  the  first.     But,  unless  the
facts  I  have  stated  can  be  controverted,  it  certainly  follows  that  the  history  of
England  is,  to  the  philosopher,  more  valuable  than  any  other  ;  because  he  can
more  clearly  see  in  it  the  accumulation  and  diffusion  of  knowledge  going  hand-
in-hand  ;  because  that  knowledge  has  been  less  influenced  by  foreign  and  exter-
nal agencies  ;  and  because  it  has  been  less  interfered  with,  either  for  good  or  for

II  "  Je  ne  pense  pas  qu'il  y  ait  de  pays  dans  le  monde  ou,  proportion  gardee  avec  la
population,  il  se  trouve  aussi  pen  d'ignorants  et  moins  de  savants  qu'en  Amerique."
Tocqueville  de  la  Democratic  en  Amerique,  vol.  i.  p.  91.

12  The  causes  of  this  exception  I  shall  endeavour  to  trace  in  the  next  volume  ;  but  it
is  interesting  to  notice  that,  as  early  as  1775,  Burke  was  struck  by  the  partiality  of  the
Americans  for  works  on  law.  See  Burke's  Speech,  in  Parliamentary  History,  vol.  xviii.
p.  495  ;  or  in  Burke' s  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  188.  He  says  :  "  In  no  country  perhaps  in  the
world  is  the  law  so  general  a  study.  The  profession  itself  is  numerous  and  powerful ;  and
in  most  provinces  it  takes  the  lead.  The  greater  number  of  the  deputies  sent  to  the
Congress  were  lawyers.  But  all  who  read, — and  most  do  read, — endeavour  to  obtain
some  smattering  in  that  science.  I  have  been  told  by  an  eminent  bookseller,  that  in  no
branch  of  his  business,  after  tracts  of  popular  devotion,  were  so  many  books  as  those  on
the  law  exported  to  the  plantations.  The  colonists  have  now  fallen  into  the  way  of
priuting  them  for  their  own  use.  I  hear  that  they  have  sold  nearly  as  many  of  Black-
stone's  Commentaries  in  America  as  in  England."  Of  this  state  of  society,  the  great
works  of  Kent  and  Story  were,  at  a  later  period,  the  natural  result.  On  the  respect  at
present  felt  for  the  legal  profession,  see  LyelVs  Second  Visit  to  ihe  United  States,  1849,  vol.  i.
p.  45  ;  and  as  to  the  judges,  Combe's  N.  America,  vol.  ii.  p.  329.

[*  The  phrase  "  little  attention  has  been  paid  "  is  inaccurate,  as  was  pointed  out  by
Theodore  Parker,  who  on  the  other  hand  held  that  Buckle  overstated  the  degree  of
diffusion  of  knowledge  in  the  United  States.  (Works,  xii.  149.)  Though  in  1857  little
original  work  had  been  done  there  for  science,  the  sciences  were  widely  studied, — ED.]


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  139

evil,  by  those  powerful,  but  frequently  incompetent  men,  to  whom  the  adminis-
tration of  public  affairs  is  intrusted.

It  is  on  account  of  these  considerations,  and  not  at  all  from  those  motives
which  are  dignified  with  the  name  of  patriotism,  that  I  have  determined  to
write  the  history  of  my  own  country,  in  preference  to  that  of  any  other  ;  and
to  write  it  in  a  manner  as  complete,  and  as  exhaustive,  as  the  materials  which
are  now  extant  will  enable  me  to  do.  But  inasmuch  as  the  circumstances  al-
ready stated  render  it  impossible  to  discover  the  laws  of  society  solely  by  study-
ing the  history  of  a  single  nation,  I  have  drawn  up  the  present  Introduction,
in  order  to  obviate  some  of  the  difficulties  with  which  this  great  subject  is
surrounded.  In  the  earlier  chapters,  I  have  attempted  to  mark  out  the  limits
of  the  subject  considered  as  a  whole,  and  fix  the  largest  possible  basis  upon
which  it  can  rest.  With  this  view,  I  have  looked  at  civilization  as  broken  into
two  vast  divisions  :  the  European  division,  in  which  Man  is  more  powerful  than
Nature  ;  and  the  non-European  division,  in  which  Nature  is  more  powerful  than
Man.  This  has  led  us  to  the  conclusion  that  national  progress,  in  connexion
with  popular  liberty,  could  have  originated  in  no  part  of  the  world  except  in
Europe  ;  where,  therefore,  the  rise  of  real  civilization,  and  the  encroachments  of
the  human  mind  upon  the  forces  of  nature,  are  alone  to  be  studied.  The  superi-
ority of  the  mental  laws  over  the  physical  being  thus  recognized  as  the  ground-
work of  European  history,  the  next  step  has  been,  to  resolve  the  mental  laws
into  moral  and  intellectual,  and  prove  the  superior  influence  of  the  intellectual
ones  in  accelerating  the  progress  of  Man.  These  generalizations  appear  to  me
the  essential  preliminaries  of  history,  considered  as  a  science  ;  and,  in  order  to
connect  them  with  the  special  history  of  England  we  have  now  -merely  to  ascer-
tain the  fundamental  condition  of  intellectual  progress,  as,  until  that  is  done,
the  annals  of  any  people  can  only  present  an  empirical  succession  of  events,
connected  by  such  stray  and  casual  links  as  are  devised  by  different  writers,
according  to  their  different  principles.  The  remaining  part  of  this  Introduction
will  therefore  be  chiefly  occupied  in  completing  the  scheme  I  have  sketched,
by  investigating  the  history  of  various  countries  in  reference  to  those  intellectual
peculiarities  on  which  the  history  of  our  own  country  supplies  no  adequate
information.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  Germany  the  accumulation  of  knowledge
has  been  far  more  rapid  than  in  England  ;  the  laws  of  the  accumulation  of  know-
ledge may  on  that  account  be  most  conveniently  studied  in  German  history,
and  then  applied  deductively  to  the  history  of  England.  In  the  same  way,
the  Americans  have  diffused  their  knowledge  much  more  completely  than  we
have  done  ;  I  therefore  propose  to  explain  some  of  the  phenomena  of  English
civilization  by  those  laws  of  diffusion,  of  which,  in  American  civilization,  the
workings  may  be  most  clearly  seen,  and  hence  the  discovery  most  easily  made.
Again,  inasmuch  as  France  is  the  most  civilized  country  in  which  the  protective
spirit  is  very  powerful,  we  may  trace  the  occult  tendencies  of  that  spirit  among
ourselves,  by  studying  its  obvious  tendencies  among  our  neighbours.  With
this  view,  I  shall  give  an  account  of  French  history,  in  order  to  illustrate  the
protective  principle,  by  showing  the  injury  it  has  inflicted  on  a  very  able  and
enlightened  people.  And,  in  an  analysis  of  the  French  Revolution,  I  shall  point
out  how  that  great  event  was  a  reaction  against  the  protective  spirit  ;  while,  as
the  materials  for  the  reaction  were  drawn  from  England,  we  shall  also  see  in  it
the  way  in  which  the  intellect  of  one  country  acts  upon  the  intellect  of  another  ;
and  we  shall  arrive  at  some  results  respecting  that  interchange  of  ideas  which  is
likely  to  become  the  most  important  regulator  of  European  affairs.  This  will
throw  much  light  on  the  laws  of  international  thought  ;  and,  in  connexion  with
it,  two  separate  chapters  will  be  devoted  to  a  History  of  the  Protective  Spirit
and  an  Examination  of  its  relative  intensity  in  France  and  England.  But  the
French  as  a  people  have  since  the  beginning  or  middle  of  the  seventeenth
century  been  remarkably  free  from  superstition  ;  and,  notwithstanding  the
•  efforts  of  their  government,  they  are  very  averse  to  ecclesiastical  power  :  so
that,  although  their  history  displays  the  protective  principle  in  its  political
form,  it  supplies  little  evidence  respecting  its  religious  form  ;  while,  in  our  own
country,  the  evidence  is  also  scanty.  Hence  my  intention  is  to  give  a  view


140  THE    HISTORY    OF  CIVILIZATION

cf  Spanish  history  ;  because  in  it  we  may  trace  the  full  results  of  that  protection
against  error  which  the  spiritual  classes  are  always  eager  to  afford.  In  Spain,
the  church  has,  from  a  very  early  period,  possessed  more  authority,  and  the
clergy  have  been  more  influential,  both  with  the  people  and  the  government,
than  in  any  other  country  ;  it  will  therefore  be  convenient  to  study  in  Spain
the  laws  of  ecclesiastical  development,  and  the  manner  in  which  that  develop-
ment affects  the  national  interests.  Another  circumstance  which  operates  on
the  intellectual  progress  of  a  nation  is  the  method  of  investigation  that  its  ablest
men  habitually  employ.  This  method  can  only  be  one  of  two  kinds  ;  it  must
be  either  inductive  or  deductive.  Each  of  these  belongs  to  a  different  form  of
civilization,  and  is  always  accompanied  by  a  different  style  of  thought,  par-
ticularly in  regard  to  religion  and  science.  These  differences  are  of  such  im-
mense importance  that,  until  their  laws  are  known,  we  cannot  be  said  to  under-
stand the  real  history  of  past  events.  Now  the  two  extremes  of  the  difference
are,  undoubtedly,  Germany  and  the  United  States  ;  the  Germans  being  pre-
eminently deductive,  the  Americans  inductive.  But  Germany  and  America  are
in  so  many  other  respects  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other,  that  I  have
thought  it  expedient  to  study  the  operations  of  the  deductive  and  inductive
spirit  in  countries  between  which  a  closer  analogy  exists  ;  because  the  greater
the  similarity  between  two  nations,  the  more  easily  can  we  trace  the  conse-
quences of  any  single  divergence,  and  the  more  conspicuous  do  the  laws  of  that
divergence  become.  Such  an  opportunity  occurs  in  the  history  of  Scotland,  as
compared  with  that  of  England.  Here  we  have  two  nations,  bordering  on  each
other,  speaking  the  same  language,  reading  the  same  literature,  and  knit  to-
gether by  the  same  interests.  And  yet  it  is  a  truth,  which  seems  to  have  escaped
attention,  but  the  proof  of  which  I  shall  fully  detail,  that  until  the  last  thirty
or  forty  years  the  Scotch  intellect  has  been  even  more  entirely  deductive  than
the  English  intellect  has  been  inductive.  The  inductive  tendencies  of  the  Eng-
lish mind,  and  the  almost  superstitious  reverence  with  which  we  cling  to  them,
have  been  noticed  with  regret  by  a  few,  and  a  very  few,  of  our  ablest  men.13
On  the  other  hand,  in  Scotland,  particularly  during  the  eighteenth  century,
the  great  thinkers,  with  hardly  an  exception,  adopted  the  deductive  method.
Now  the  characteristic  of  deduction,  when  applied  to  branches  of  knowledge
not  yet  ripe  for  it,  is,  that  it  increases  the  number  of  hypotheses  from  which
we  reason  downwards,  and  brings  into  disrepute  the  slow  and  patient  ascent
peculiar  to  inductive  inquiry.  This  desire  to  grasp  at  truth  by  speculative,
and,  as  it  were,  foregone  conclusions,  has  often  led  the  way  to  great  discoveries  ;
and  no  one,  properly  instructed,  will  deny  its  immense  value.  But  when  it  is
universally  followed,  there  is  imminent  danger  lest  the  observation  of  mere
empirical  uniformities  should  be  neglected  ;  and  lest  thinking  men  should  grow
impatient  at  those  small  and  proximate  generalizations,  which,  according  to
the  inductive  scheme,  must  invariably  precede  the  larger  and  higher  ones.
Whenever  this  impatience  actually  occurs,  there  is  produced  serious  mischief.
For  these  lower  generalizations  form  a  neutral  ground,  which  speculative  minds
and  practical  minds  possess  in  common,  and  on  which  they  meet.  If  this  ground
is  cut  away,  the  meeting  is  impossible.  In  such  case,  there  arises  among  the
scientific  classes  an  undue  contempt  for  inferences  which  the  experience  of  the
vulgar  has  drawn,  but  of  which  the  laws  seem  inexplicable  ;  while,  among  the
practical  classes,  there  arises  a  disregard  of  speculations  so  wide,  so  magnificent,
and  of  which  the  intermediate  and  preliminary  steps  are  hidden  from  their  gaze.
The  results  of  this  in  Scotland  are  highly  curious,  and  are,  in  several  respects,
similar  to  those  which  we  find  in  Germany  ;  since  in  both  countries  the  intel-
lectual classes  have  long  been  remarkable  for  their  boldness  of  investigation
and  their  freedom  from  prejudice,  and  the  people  at  large  equally  remarkable

1:1  Particularly  Coleridge  and  Mr.  John  Mill.  But,  with  the  greatest  possible,  respect
for  Mr.  Mill's  profound  work  on  Logic,  I  must  venture  to  think  that  he  has  ascribed  too
much  to  the  influence  of  Bacon  in  encouraging  the  inductive  spirit,  and  too  little  to  those
other  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  the  Baconian  philosophy,  and  to  which  that
philosophy  owes  its  success.


.


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  141


the  number  of  their  superstitions  and  the  strength  of  their  prejudices.     In
Scotland   this  is  even  more  striking  than  in  Germany  ;    because  the  Scotch,
owing  to  causes  which  have  been  little  studied,  are,  in  practical  matters,  not
ly  industrious  and  provident,  but  singularly  shrewd.     This,  however,  in  the
igher  departments  of  life,  has  availed  them  nothing  ;  and,  while  there  is  no
untry  which  possesses  a  more  original,  inquisitive,  and  innovating  literature
n  Scotland  does,  so  also  is  there  no  country  equally  civilized    in    which    so
uch  of  the  spirit  of  the  Middle  Ages  still  lingers,  in  which  so  many  absurdities
,re  still  believed,  and  in  which  it  would  be  so  easy  to  rouse  into  activity  the  old
slings  of  religious  intolerance.*

The  divergence,  and  indeed  the  hostility,  thus  established  between  the  practical
d  speculative  classes,  is  the  most  important  fact  in  the  history  of  Scotland,
id  is  partly  cause  and  partly  effect  of    the  predominance  of    the    deductive
icthod.     For  this  descending  scheme  being  opposed  to  the  ascending  or  indue -
ive  scheme,  neglects  those  lower  generalizations  which  are  the  only  ones  that
>th  classes  understand,  and,  therefore,  the  only  ones  where  they  sympathize
riih  each  other.     The  inductive  method,  as  popularized  by  Bacon,  gave  great
rominence  to  these  lower  or  proximate  truths  ;  and  this,  though  it  has  often
tade  the  intellectual  classes  in  England  too  utilitarian,  has  at  all  events  saved
lem  from  that  state  of  isolation  in  which  they  would  otherwise  have  remained.
>ut  in  Scotland  the  isolation  has  been  almost  complete,  because  the  deductive
lethod  has  been  almost  universal. f     Full  evidence  of  this  will  be  collected  in
le  next  volume^;  but,  that  I  may  not  leave  the  subject  entirely  without  illustra-
m,  I  will  notice  very  briefly  the  principal  instances  that  occurred  during  those
iree  generations  in  which  Scotch  literature  reached  its  highest  excellence.
During  this  period,  which  comprises  nearly  a  century,  the  tendency  was  so
imistakeable   as   to  form  a  striking  phenomenon  in  the  annals  of  the  human
lind.     The  iirst  great  symptom  was  a  movement  begun  by  Simson,  professor  at
le  University  of  Glasgow,  and  continued  by  Stewart,  professor  at  the  University
)f  Edinburgh.     These  able  men  made  strenuous  efforts  to  revive  the  pure  Greek
geometry,  and  depreciate  the  algebraic  or  symbolical  analysis.1*     Hence  there
arose  among  them,  and  among  their  disciples,  a  love  of  the  most  refined  methods

14  Simson  was  appointed  in  1711  ;  and  even  before  he  began  to  lecture,  he  drew  up
"  a  translation  of  the  three  first  books  of  L'Hopital's  Conic  Sections,  in  which  geometri-
cal demonstrations  are  substituted  for  the  algebraical  of  the  original,  according  to  Mr.
Sitnson's  early  taste  on  this  subject."  Trail's  Life  and  Writings  of  Robert  Simson,  1812,
4to,  p.  4.  This  was  probably  the  rudiment  of  his  work  on  Conic  Sections,  published  in
1735.  Montucla,  Histoire  des  Mathematiques,  vol.  iii.  p.  12.  On  the  difference  between
the  ancient  and  modern  schemes,  there  are  some  ingenious,  though  perhaps  scarcely
tenable,  remarks  in  Dugald  Stewart's  Philosophy  of  the  Mind,  vol.  ii.  pp.  354  seq.  and
p.  380.  See  also  Comte,  Philosophic  Positive,  vol.  i.  pp.  383-395.  Matthew  Stewart,  the
mathematical  professor  at  Edinburgh,  was  the  father  of  Dugald.  See,  respecting  him
and  his  crusade  against  the  modern  analysis,  Bower's  History  of  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh, vol.  ii.  pp.  357-360,  vol.  iii.  p.  249  ;  and  a  strange  passage  in  First  Report  of  the
British  Association,  p.  59.

[*  Buckle  seems  to  have  been  much  struck  by  the  Sabbatarianism  of  Scotland  in  his
day,  and  to  have  had  this  chiefly  in  view  in  the  above  passage.  In  other  regards,  his
statement  will  hardly  stand,  most  Catholic  countries  showing  a  greater  survival  of
general  superstitions  than  is  seen  in  non -Gaelic  Scotland.  And  Buckle  seems  to  have
known  little  of  the  rural  life  of  England. — ED.]

[f  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  whereas  in  England,  e.g.,  Bacon  and  Hobbes  and
Locke  and  Bentham  had  so  dealt  with  practical  questions  as  to  have  much  influence  on
public  policy  or  individual  research,  the  Scottish  writers  had  had  no  such  influence.  This
is  on  the  face  of  it  inconsistent  with  the  account  previously  given  of  the  influence  of
Adam  Smith  ;  but  in  a  subsequent  chapter  (xx)  it  is  explained  that  Smith's  influence  on
trade  and  politics  was  due  not  to  his  deductive  method  but  to  his  coinciding  there  with
the  needs  and  the  movement  of  his  age  and  country. —  ED.]

f  £  /  e.  in  the  later  chapters  of  the  present  volume. — ED.]


142  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  solution,  and  a  contempt  for  those  easier,  but  less  elegant  ones,  which  we
owe  to  algebra.15  Here  we  clearly  see  the  isolating  and  esoteric  character  of
a  scheme  which  despises  what  ordinary  understandings  can  quickly  master,
and  which  had  rather  proceed  from  the  ideal  to  the  tangible,  than  mount  from
the  tangible  to  the  ideal.  Just  at  the  same  time,  the  same  spirit  was  displayed,
in  another  branch  of  inquiry,  by  Hutcheson,  who,  though  an  Irishman  by  birth,
was  educated  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  and  was  professor  there.  In  his  cele-
brated moral  and  aesthetic  researches,  he,  in  the  place  of  inductive  reasoning
from  palpable  facts,  substituted  deductive  reasoning  from  impalpable  principles  ;
ignoring  the  immediate  and  practical  suggestions  of  the  senses,  and  believing
that  by  a  hypothetical  assumption  of  certain  laws,  he  could  descend  upon  the
facts,  instead  of  rising  from  the  facts  in  order  to  learn  the  laws.16  His  philosophy
exercised  immense  influence  among  metaphysicians  ;  17  and  his  method  of  work-
ing downwards,  from  the  abstract  to  the  concrete,  was  adopted  by  another  and
a  still  greater  Scotchman,  the  illustrious  Adam  Smith.  How  Smith  favoured
the  deductive  form  of  investigation  is  apparent  in  his  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,
likewise  in  his  Essay  on  Language,^  and  even  in  his  fragment  on  the  History  of
Astronomy,  in  which  he,  from  general  considerations,  undertook  to  prove  what
the  march  of  astronomical  discovery  must  have  been,  instead  of  first  ascertaining
what  it  had  been.19  The  Wealth  of  Nations,  again,  is  entirely  deductive,  since
in  it  Smith  generalizes  the  laws  of  wealth,  not  from  the  phenomena  of  wealth,
nor  from  statistical  statements,  but  from  the  phenomena  of  selfishness  ;  thus

15  One  of  Simson's  great  reasons  for  recommending  the  old  analysis,  was  that  it  was
"  more  elegant  "  than  the  comparatively  modern  practice  of  introducing  algebraic  calcu-
lations into  geometry.     See  Trail's  Simson,  1812,  4to,  pp.  27,  67  ;  a  valuable  work,  which
Lord  Brougham,  in  his  hasty  life  of  Simson,  calls  "  a  very  learned  and  exceedingly  ill-
written,  indeed  hardly  readable  "  book.     Brougham's  Men  of  Letters  and  Science,  vol.  i.
p.  482,  8vo,  1845.     Dr.  Trail's  style  is  clearer,  and  his  sentences  are  less  involved,  than
Lord  Brougham's  ;  and  he  had  moreover  the  great  advantage  of  understanding  the  sub-
ject upon  which  he  wrote.

16  Sir  James  Mackintosh  (Dissertation  on  Ethical  Philosophy,  p.  208)  says  of  Hutcheson,
"  To  him  may  also  be  ascribed  that  proneness  to  multiply  ultimate  and  original  principles
in  human  nature,  which  characterized  the  Scottish  school  till  the  second  extinction  of
passion  for  metaphysical  speculation  in  Scotland."     There  is  an  able  view  of  Hutcheson's
philosophy  in  Cousin,  Histoire  de  la  Philosophic,  I.  serie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  31  seq.  ;  written  with
clearness  and  eloquence,  but  perhaps  overpraising  Hutcheson.

17  On  its  influence,  see  a  letter  from  Mackintosh  to  Parr,  in  Memoirs  of  Mackintosh,
by  his  Son,  vol.  i.  p.  334.     Compare  Letters  from  Warburton  to  Hurd,  pp.  37,  82.

19  Which  is  added  to  his  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  edit.  1822,  2  volumes.  Compare
a  letter  which  Smith  wrote  in  1763  on  the  origin  of  language  (in  Nichols's  Literary  Illus-
trations of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  iii.  pp.  515,  516),  which  exhibits,  on  a  small  scale,
the  same  treatment,  as  distinguished  from  a  generalization  of  the  facts  which  are  sup-
plied by  a  comprehensive  comparison  of  different  languages.  Dr.  Arnold  speaks  slight-
ingly of  such  investigations.  He  says,  "  Attempts  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  language
a  priori  seem  to  me  unwise."  Arnold's  Miscellaneous  Works,  p.  385.  This  would  lead
into  a  discussion  too  long  for  a  note  :  but  it  appears  to  me  that  these  a  priori  inferences
are,  to  the  philologist,  what  hypotheses  are  to  the  inductive  natural  philosopher  ;  and  if
this  be  the  case,  they  are  extremely  important,  because  no  really  fruitful  experiment
ever  can  be  made  unless  it  is  preceded  by  a  judicious  hypothesis.  In  the  absence  of  such
an  hypothesis,  men  may  grope  in  the  dark  for  centuries,  accumulating  facts  without
obtaining  knowledge.

19  See,  for  instance,  his  attempt  to  prove,  from  general  reasonings  concerning  the
human  mind,  that  there  was  a  necessary  relation  in  regard  to  the  order  in  which  men
promulgated  the  system  of  concentric  spheres  and  that  of  eccentric  spheres  and  epicycles.
History  of  Astronomy,  in  Smith's  Philosophical  Essays,  1795,  4to,  pp.  31,  36,  which  it  may
be  convenient  to  compare  with  WhewelVs  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  1847,
vol.  ii.  pp.  53,  60,  61.  This  striking  fragment  of  Adam  Smith's  is  probably  little  read
now  ;  but  it  is  warmly  praised  by  one  of  the  greatest  living  philosophers,  M.  A.  Comte,
in  his  Philosophic  Positive,  vol.  vi.  p.  319.


RELIGION,    LITERATURE     AND    GOVERNMENT  143

laking  a  deductive  application  of  one  set  of  mental  principles  to  the  whole  set
of  economical  facts.20  The  illustrations  with  which  his  great  book  abounds  are

10  part  of  the  real  argument  :  they  are  subsequent  to  the  conception  ;  and  if
they  were  all  omitted,  the  work,  though  less  interesting,  and  perhaps  less  influ  -
ential,  would,  in  a  scientific  point  of  view,  be  equally  valuable.  To  give  another
'nstance  :  the  works  of  Hume,  his  metaphysical  essays  alone  excepted,  are  all
leductive  ;  his  profound  economical  inquiries  are  essentially  a  priori,  and  might
lave  been  written  without  any  acquaintance  with  those  details  of  trade  and
inance  from  which,  according  to  the  inductive  scheme,  they  should  have  been
generalized.21  Thus,  too,  in  his  Natural  History  of  Religion,  he  endeavoured

imply  by  reflection,  and  independently  of  evidence,  to  institute  a  purely  specu-

itive  investigation  into  the  origin  of  religious  opinions.22  In  the  same  way,  in
History  of  England,  instead  of  first  collecting  the  evidence  and  then  drawing

iferences  from  it,  he  began  by  assuming  that  the  relations  between  the  people
and  the  government  must  have  followed  a  certain  order,  and  he  either  neglected
or  distorted  the  facts  by  which  this  supposition  was  contradicted.23  These

20  The  two  writers  who  have  inquired  most  carefully  into  the  method  which  political
lomists  ought  to  follow,  are  Mr.  John  Mill  (Essays  on  Unsettled  Questions  of  Political

Economy,  1844,  pp.  120-164)  and  Mr.  Rae  (New  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  1834,
pp.  328-351).  Mr.  Rae,  in  his  ingenious  work,  objects  to  Adam  Smith  that  he  trans-
gressed the  rules  of  the  Baconian  philosophy,  and  thus  prevented  his  inferences  from
being  as  valuable  as  they  would  have  been  if  he  had  treated  his  subject  inductively.
But  Mr.  Mill,  with  great  force  of  reasoning,  has  proved  that  the  deductive  plan  is  the
only  one  by  which  political  economy  can  be  raised  to  a  science.  He  says,  p.  143,  political
economy  is  "  essentially  an  abstract  science,  and  its  method  is  the  method  a  priori ;  "
and  at  p.  146,  that  the  a  posteriori  method  is  "  altogether  inefficacious."  To  this  I  may
add,  that  the  modern  theory  of  rent,  which  is  now  the  corner-stone  of  political  economy,
was  got  at,  not  by  generalizing  economical  facts,  but  by  reasoning  downwards  after  the
manner  of  geometricians.  Indeed,  those  who  oppose  the  theory  of  rent,  always  do  so
on  the  ground  that  it  is  contradicted  by  facts  ;  and  then,  with  complete  ignorance  of  the
philosophy  of  method,  they  infer  that  therefore  the  theory  is  wrong.  See,  for  instance,
Jones  on  the  Distribution  of  Wealth,  8vo,  1831  ;  a  book  containing  some  interesting  facts,
but  vitiated  by  this  capital  defect  of  method.  See  also  Journal  of  Statistical  Society.
vol.  i.  p.  317,  vol.  vi.  p.  322  ;  where  it  is  said  that  economical  theories  should  be  generalized
from  statistical  facts.  Compare  vol.  xvii.  p.  116,  vol.  xviii.  p.  101.

21  A  striking  instance  has  lately  come  to  light  of  the  sagacity  with  which  Hume  em-
ployed this  method.     See  Burton's  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Hume,  vol.  ii.  p.  486  ;  where
we  find,  that  immediately  Hume  had  read  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  he  detected  Smith's
error  concerning  rent  being  an  element  of  price  ;  so  that  it  now  appears  that  Hume  was
the  first  to  make  this  great  discovery,  as  far  as  the  idea  is  concerned  ;  though  Ricardo
has  the  merit  of  proving  it.     [As  noted  above,  p.  29,  the  law  of  rent  was  fully  proved
in  1777,  by  Anderson,  a  generation  before  Ricardo. — ED.]

22  The  historical  facts  he  introduces  are  merely  illustrations  ;  as  any  one  will  see  who
will  read  The  Natural  History  of  Religion,  in  Hume's  Philos.  Works,  Edinb.  1826,  vol.  iv.
PP-  435-5I3-     I    may  mention   that   there  is   a  considerable   similarity  between   the
views  advocated  in  this  remarkable  essay  and  the  religious  stages  of  Comte's  Philosophic
Positive  ;  for  Hume's  early  form  of  polytheism  is  evidently  the  same  as  M.  Comte's
fetichism,  from  which  both  these  writers  believe  that  monotheism  subsequently  arose,
as  a  later  and  more  refined  abstraction.     That  this  was  the  course  adopted  by  the  human
mind  is  highly  probable,  and  is  confirmed  by  the  learned  researches  of  Mr.  Grote.     See
his  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  pp.  462,  497,  vol.  v.  p.  22.     The  opposite  and  more  popular
opinion,  of  monotheism  preceding  idolatry,  was  held  by  most  of  the  great  earlier  writers,
and  is  defended  by  many  moderns,  and  among  others  by  Dr.  Whewell  (Bridgewater
Treatise,  p.  256),  who  expresses  himself  with  considerable  confidence  :  see  also  Letters
from  Warburton  to  Hurd,  p.  239.     Compare  ThirlwalVs  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  183,
Lond.  1835,  with  the  "  einige  Funken  des  Monotheismus "  of  Kant,  Kritik  der  reinen
Vernunft,  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  ii.  p.  455.

23  That  is  to  say,  he  treated  historical  facts  as  merely  illustrative  of  certain  general
principles,  which  he  believed  could  be  proved  without  the  facts  ;  so  that,  as  M-  Schlosser


144  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

different  writers,  though  varying  in  their  principles,  and  in  the  subjects  they
studied,  were  all  agreed  as  to  their  method  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  were  all  agreed
to  investigate  truth  rather  by  descent  than  by  ascent."  The  immense  social
importance  of  this  peculiarity  I  shall  examine  in  the  next  volume,  where  I
shall  endeavour  to  ascertain  how  it  affected  the  national  civilization,  and  caused
some  curious  contrasts  with  the  opposite,  and  more  empirical,  character  of
English  literature.  In  the  meantime,  and  merely  to  state  what  will  be  here-
after proved,  I  may  add  that  the  deductive  method  was  not  only  employed
by  those  eminent  Scotchmen  I  have  mentioned,  but  was  carried  into  the  specu-
lative Historv  of  Civil  Society  by  Ferguson  ;  into  the  study  of  legislation  by  Mill  ;
into  the  study  of  jurisprudence  by  Mackintosh  ;  into  geology  by  Hutton  ;  into
thermotics  by  Black  and  Leslie  ;  into  physiology  by  Hunter,  by  Alexander
Walker,  and  bv  Charles  Bell  ;  into  pathology  by  Cullen  ;  into  therapeutics  by
Brown  and  Currie.

This  is  an  outline  of  the  plan  I  purpose  to  follow  in  the  present  Introduction,
and  by  means  of  which  I  hope  to  arrive  at  some  results  of  permanent  value.
For  by  studying  different  principles  in  those  countries  where  they  have  been
most  developed,  the  laws  of  the  principles  will  be  more  easily  unfolded  than  if
we  had  studied  them  in  countries  where  they  are  very  obscure.  And  inasmuch
as  in  England  civilization  has  followed  a  course  more  orderly,  and  less  disturbed,
than  in  any  other  country,  it  becomes  the  more  necessary,  in  writing  its  history,
to  use  some  resources  like  those  which  I  have  suggested.  What  makes  the  his-
tory of  England  so  eminently  valuable  is,  that  nowhere  else  has  the  national
progress  been  so  little  interfered  with,  either  for  good  or  for  evil.*  But  the
mere  fact  that  our  civilization  has,  by  this  means,  been  preserved  in  a  more
natural  and  healthy  state,  renders  it  incumbent  on  us  to  study  the  diseases  to
which  it  is  liable,  by  observing  those  other  countries  where  social  disease  is  more
rife.  The  security  and  the  durability  of  civilization  must  depend  on  the  regu-
larity with  which  its  elements  are  combined,  and  on  the  harmony  with  which
they  work.  If  any  one  element  is  too  active,  the  whole  composition  will  be  in
danger.  Hence  it  is,  that  although  the  laws  of  the  composition  of  the  elements
will  be  best  ascertained  wherever  we  can  find  the  composition  most  complete,
we  must,  nevertheless,  search  for  the  laws  of  each  separate  element,  wherever  we
can  find  the  element  itself  most  active.  While,  therefore,  I  have  selected  the
history  of  England,  as  that  in  which  the  harmony  of  the  different  principles  has
been  longest  maintained,  I  have,  precisely  on  that  account,  thought  it  advisable
to  study  each  principle  separately  in  the  country  where  it  has  been  most  power-
ful, and  where,  by  its  inordinate  development,  the  equilibrium  of  the  entire
structure  has  been  disturbed.

By  adopting  these  precautions,  we  shall  be  able  to  remove  many  of  the  diffi-
culties which  still  beset  the  study  of  history.  Before,  however,  entering  that
wide  field  which  now  lies  in  our  way,  it  will  be  well  to  clear  up  some  preliminary
points,  which  I  have  not  yet  noticed,  and  the  discussion  of  which  may  obviate
certain  objections  that  might  otherwise  be  raised.  The  subjects  to  which  I
allude  are  Religion,  Literature,  and  Government  :  three  topics  f  of  vast  im-
portance, and  which,  in  the  opinion  of  many  persons,  are  the  prime  movers  of
human  affairs.  That  this  opinion  is  altogether  erroneous,  will  be  amply  proved

(History  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  ii.  p.  76)  well  says,  "  History  with  Hume  was  only
a  subordinate  pursuit,  only  a  means  by  which  he  might  introduce  his  philosophy,"  etc.
Considering  how  little  is  known  of  the  principles  which  govern  social  and  political  changes,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Hume  was  premature  in  the  application  of  this  method  ;  but
it  is  absurd  to  call  the  method  dishonest,  since  the  object  of  his  History  was,  not  to
prove  conclusions,  but  to  illustrate  them  ;  and  he  therefore  thought  himself  justified  in
selecting  the  illustrations.  I  am  simply  stating  his  views,  without  at  all  defending  them  ;
indeed,  I  believe  that  in  this  respect  he  was  seriously  in  the  wrong.

[*  See  above,  pp.  132,  133,  notes. — ED.]
ft  For  "topics"  read  "forces." — ED.]


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  145

the  present  work  ;  but  as  the  opinion  is  widely  spread,  and  is  very  plausible,
is  necessary  that  we  should  at  once  come  to  some  understanding  respecting
and  inquire  into  the  real  nature  of  that  influence,  which  these  three  great
>wers  do  actually  exercise  over  the  progress  of  civilization.
Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  evident  that  if  a  people  were  left  entirely  to  them-
;lves,  their  religion,  their  literature,  and  their  government  would  be,  not  the
luses  of  their  civilization,  but  the  effects  of  it.     Out  of  a  certain  condition  of
;iety,  certain  results  naturally  follow.     Those  results  may,  no  doubt,  be  tam-
pered with  by  some  external  agency  ;  but  if  that  is  not  done,  it  is  impossible  that
a  highly  civilized  people,  accustomed  to  reason  and  to  doubt,  should  ever  em-
;e  a  religion  of  which  the  glaring  absurdities  set  reason  and  doubt  at  defiance.
lere  are  many  instances  of  nations  changing  their  religion,  but  there  is  no
stance  of  a  progressive  country  voluntarily  adopting  a  retrogressive  religion  ;
either  is  there  any  example  of  a  declining  country  ameliorating  its  religion.    It
of  course  true  that  a  good  religion  is  favourable  to  civilization,  and  a  bad  one
[favourable  to  it.     Unless,  however,  there  is  some  interference  from  without,
people  will  ever  discover  that  their  religion  is  bad  until  their  reason  tells  them
;  but  if  their  reason  is  inactive,  and  their  knowledge  stationary,  the  discovery
dll  never  be  made.      A  country  that  continues  in  its  old  ignorance  will  always
jmain  in  its  old  religion.     Surely  nothing  can  be  plainer  than  this.     A  very
lorant  people  will,  by  virtue  of  their  ignorance,  incline  towards  a  religion  full
marvels  ;  a  religion  which  boasts  of  innumerable  gods,  and  which  ascribes  every
:urrence  to  the  immediate  authority  of  those  gods.     On  the  other  hand,  a
>ple  whose  knowledge  makes  them  better  judges  of  evidence,  and  who  are
accustomed  to  that  most  difficult  task,  the  practice  of  doubting,  will  require  a
religion  less  marvellous,  less  obtrusive  ;  one  that  taxes  their  credulity  less  heavily.
But   will   you    therefore   say    that  the  badness  of  the  first  religion  causes  the
ignorance  ;  and  that  the  goodness  of  the  second  religion  causes  the  knowledge  ?
Will  you  say  that  when  one  event  precedes  another,  the  one  which  comes  first
is  the  effect,  and  the  one  which  follows  afterwards  is  the  cause  ?     This  is  not  the
way  in  which  men  reason  on  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life  ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  see
why  they  should  reason  thus  respecting  the  history  of  past  events.

The  truth  is  that  the  religious  opinions  which  prevail  in  any  period  are  among
the  symptoms  by  which  that  period  is  marked.  When  the  opinions  are  deeply
rooted,  they  do,  no  doubt,  influence  the  conduct  of  men  ;  but  before  they  can  be
deeply  rooted,  some  intellectual  change  must  first  have  taken  place.  We  may
as  well  expect  that  the  seed  should  quicken  in  the  barren  rock  as  that  a  mild  and
philosophic  religion  should  be  established  among  ignorant  and  ferocious  savages.
Of  this  innumerable  experiments  have  been  made,  and  always  with  the  same
result.  Men  of  excellent  intentions,  and  full  of  a  fervent,  though  mistaken  zeal,
have  been,  and  still  are,  attempting  to  propagate  their  own  religion  among  the
inhabitants  of  barbarous  countries.  By  strenuous  and  unremitting  activity,
and  frequently  by  promises,  and  even  by  actual  gifts,  they  have  in  many  cases
persuaded  savage  communities  to  make  a  profession  of  the  Christian  religion.
But  whoever  will  compare  the  triumphant  reports  of  the  missionaries  with  the
long  chain  of  evidence  supplied  by  competent  travellers,  will  soon  find  that  such
profession  is  only  nominal,  and  that  these  ignorant  tribes  have  adopted,  indeed,
the  ceremonies  of  the  new  religion,  but  have  by  no  means  adopted  the  religion
itself.  They  receive  the  externals,  but  there  they  stop.  They  may  baptize
their  children  ;  they  may  take  the  sacrament  ;  they  may  flock  to  the  church.
All  this  they  may  do,  and  yet  be  as  far  removed  from  the  spirit  of  Christianity
as  when  they  bowed  the  knee  before  their  former  idols.  The  rites  and  forms  of
a  religion  lie  on  the  surface  ;  they  are  at  once  seen,  they  are  quickly  learned,
easily  copied  by  those  who  are  unable  to  penetrate  to  that  which  lies  beneath.
It  is  this  deeper  and  inward  change  which  alone  is  durable  ;  and  this  the  savage
can  never  experience  while  he  is  sunk  in  an  ignorance  that  levels  him  with  the
brutes  by  which  he  is  surrounded.  Remove  the  ignorance,  and  then  the  religion
may  enter.  This  is  the  only  course  by  which  ultimate  benefit  can  be  effected.
After  a  careful  study  of  the  history  and  condition  of  barbarous  nations,  I  do  most
confidently  assert  that  there  is  ho  well-attested  case  of  any  people  being  per-

10


146  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

manently  converted  to  Christianity,  except  in  those  very  few  instances  where
missionaries,  being  men  of  knowledge  as  well  as  men  of  piety,  have  familiarized
the  savage  with  habits  of  thought,  and  by  thus  stimulating  his  intellect  have
prepared  him  for  the  reception  of  those  religious  principles  which,  without  such
stimulus,  he  could  never  have  understood.24

It  is  in  this  way  that,  looking  at  things  upon  a  large  scale,  the  religion  of  man-
kind is  the  effect  of  their  improvement,  not  the  cause  of  it.  But,  looking  at
things  upon  a  small  scale,  or  taking  what  is  called  a  practical  view  of  some  short
and  special  period,  circumstances  will  occasionally  occur  which  disturb  this
general  order,  and  apparently  reverse  the  natural  process.  And  this,  as  in  all
such  cases,  can  only  arise  from  the  peculiarities  of  individual  men  ;  who,  moved
by  the  minor  laws  which  regulate  individual  actions,  are  able,  by  their  genius
or  their  energy,  to  interfere  with  the  operation  of  those  greater  laws  which  regu-
late large  societies.  Owing  to  circumstances  still  unknown,  there  appear  from
time  to  time  great  thinkers,  who,  devoting  their  lives  to  a  single  purpose,  are
able  to  anticipate  the  progress  of  mankind,  and  to  produce  a  religion  or  a
philosophy  by  which  important  effects  are  eventually  brought  about.  But  if
we  look  into  history  we  shall  clearly  see  that,  although  the  origin  of  a  new
opinion  may  be  thus  due  to  a  single  man,  the  result  which  the  new  opinion  pro-
duces will  depend  on  the  condition  of  the  people  among  whom  it  is  propagated.
If  either  a  religion  or  a  philosophy  is  too  much  in  advance  of  a  nation,  it  can  do
no  present  service,  but  must  bide'its  time,  until  the  minds  of  men  are  ripe  for  its
reception.  Of  this  innumerable  instances  will  occur  to  most  readers.  Every
science  and  every  creed  has  had  its  martyrs  ;  men  exposed  to  obloquy,  or  even
to  death,  because  they  knew  more  than  their  contemporaries,  and  because
society  was  not  sufficiently  advanced  to  receive  the  truths  which  they  com-
municated. According  to  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,  a  few  generations  pass
away,  and  then  there  comes  a  period  when  these  very  truths  are  looked  upon  as
commonplace  facts  ;  and  a  little  later  there  comes  another  period,  in  which  they
are  declared  to  be  necessary,  and  even  the  dullest  intellects  wonder  how  they
could  ever  have  been  denied.  This  is  what  happens  when  the  human  mind  is
allowed  to  have  fair  play,  and  to  exercise  itself  with  tolerable  freedom  in  the
accumulation  and  diffusion  of  knowledge.  If,  however,  by  violent,  and  there-
fore by  artificial,  means,  this  same  society  is  prevented  from  exercising  its
intellect,  then  the  truths,  however  important  they  may  be,  can  never  be  re-
ceived. For  why  should  certain  truths  be  rejected  in  one  age,  and  acknow-
ledged in  another  ?  The  truths  remain  the  same  ;  their  ultimate  recognition
must  therefore  be  due  to  a  change  in  the  society  which  now  accepts  what  it  had
before  despised.  Indeed,  history  is  full  of  evidence  of  the  utter  inefficiency  even
of  ihe  noblest  principles,  when  they  are  promulgated  among  a  very  ignorant
nation.  Thus  it  was  that  the  doctrine  of  One  God,  taught  to  the  Hebrews  of  old,
remained  for  many  centuries  altogether  inoperative.*  The  people  to  whom -it

24  A  writer  of  great  authority  has  made  some  remarks  on  this,  which  are  worth  attend-
ing to  :  "  Ce  fut  alors  que  les  Jesuites  penetrerent  dans  la  Chine  pour  y  precher  1'evangile.
Us  ne  tarderent  pas  &  s'apercevoir  qu'un  des  moyens  les  plus  efficaces  pour  s'y  maintenir,
en  attendant  le  moment  que  le  ciel  avoit  marque  pour  eclairer  ce  vaste  empire,  etoit
d'etaler  des  connoissances  astronomiques."  Montucla,  Histoire  des  Mathematiques,  vol.  i.
p.  468  ;  and  see  vol.  ii.  pp.  586,  587.  Cuvier  delicately  hints  at  the  same  conclusion.
He  says  of  Emery  :  "  II  se  souvenait  que  1'epoque  ou  le  christianisme  a  fait  le  plus  de
conquetes,  et  ou  ses  minis tres  ont  obtenu  le  plus  de  respect,  est  celle,  ou  ils  portaient
chez  les  peuples  convertis  les  lumieres  des  lettres,  en  meme  temps  que  les  verites  de  la

[*  The  critical  study  of  Hebrew  history,  which  had  made  little  progress  in  Buckle's
day,  has  made  an  end  of  the  belief  that  a  monotheistic  doctrine  was  preached  to  the
early  Hebrews.  It  was  certainly  a  late  development.  Cp.  Stade,  Geschichte  des  Volkes
Israel,  1881-88,  i.  428;  Wellhausen,  Israel  (in  same  vol.  with  Prolegomena)  p.  440;
Kuenen,  The  Religion  of  Israel,  Eng.  tr.  1874,  i.  10-11  ;  Sharpe's  History  of  the  Hebrew
Nation,  4th  ed.  1882,  pref.  pp.  xi.-xiii.  ;  Robertson  Smith,  The  Old  Testament  in  the
Jewish  Church,  2nd  ed.  1892,  Lectures  viii.  and  ix.,  and  pp.  310-12. — ED.]


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT          147

was  addressed  had  not  yet  emerged  from  barbarism  ;  they  were,  therefore,  imable
to  raise  their  minds  to  so  elevated  a  conception.  Like  all  other  barbarians,  they
craved  after  a  religion  which  would  feed  their  credulity  with  incessant  wonders  ;
and  which,  instead  of  abstracting  the  Deity  to  a  single  essence,  would  multiply
their  gods  until  they  covered  every  field,  and  swarmed  in  every  forest.  This  is
the  idolatry,  which  is  the  natural  fruit  of  ignorance  ;  and  this  it  is  to  which  the
Hebrews  were  perpetually  recurring.  Notwithstanding  the  most  severe  and
unremitting  punishments,  they  at  every  opportunity  abandoned  that  pure
theism  which  their  minds  were  too  backward  to  receive,  and  relapsed  into  super-
stitions which  they  could  more  easily  understand, — into  the  worship  of  the  golden
calf,  and  the  adoration  of  the  brazen  serpent.  Now,  and  in  this  age  of  the
world,  they  have  long  ceased  to  do  these  things.  And  why  ?  Not  because
their  religious  feelings  "are  more  easily  aroused,  or  their  religious  fears  more  often
excited.  So  far  from  this,  they  are  dissevered  from  their  old  associations  ;  they
have  lost  for  ever  those  scenes  by  which  men  might  well  have  been  moved.  They
are  no  longer  influenced  by  those  causes  which  inspired  emotions,  sometimes  of
terror,  sometimes  of  gratitude.  They  no  longer  witness  the  pillar  of  cloud  by
day,  or  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night  ;  they  no  longer  see  the  Law  being  given  from
Sinai,  nor  do  they  hear  the  thunder  rolling  from  Horeb.  In  the  presence  of
these  great  appeals,  they  remained  idolaters  in  their  hearts,  and  whenever  an
opportunity  occurred  they  became  idolaters  in  their  practice  ;  and  this  they  did
because  they  were  in  that  state  of  barbarism,  of  which  idolatry  is  the  natural
product.  To  what  possible  circumstance  can  their  subsequent  change  be
ascribed,  except  to  the  simple  fact  that  the  Hebrews,  like  all  other  people,  as
they  advanced  in  civilization,  began  to  abstract  and  refine  their  religion,  and,
despising  the  old  worship  of  many  gods,  thus  by  slow  degrees  elevated  their
minds  to  that  steady  perception  of  One  Great  Cause,  which,  at  an  earlier  period,
it  had  been  vainly  attempted  to  impress  upon  them  ?

Thus  intimate  is  the  connexion  between  the  opinions  of  a  people  and  their
knowledge  ;  and  thus  necessary  is  it  that,  so  far  as  nations  are  concerned,  intel-
lectual activity  should  precede  religious  improvement.  If  we  require  further
illustrations  of  this  important  truth,  we  shall  find  them  in  the  events  which
occurred  in  Europe  soon  after  the  promulgation  of  Christianity.  The  Romans
were,  with  rare  exceptions,  an  ignorant  and  barbarous  race  ;  ferocious,  dissolute,
and  cruel.  For  such  a  people,  Polytheism  was  the  natural  creed  ;  and  we  read,
accordingly,  that  they  practised  an  idolatry  which  a  few  great  thinkers,  and
only  a  few,  ventured  to  despise.  The  Christian  religion,  falling  among  these
men,  found  them  unable  to  appreciate  its  sublime  and  admirable  doctrines,
And  when,  a  little  later,  Europe  was  overrun  by  fresh  immigrations,  the  in-
vaders, who  were  even  more  barbarous  than  the  Romans,  brought  with  them
those  superstitions  which  were  suited  to  their  actual  condition.  It  was  upon
the  materials  arising  from  these  two  sources  that  Christianity  was  now  called
to  do  her  work.  The  result  is  most  remarkable.  For  after  the  new  religion
seemed  to  have  carried  all  before  it,  and  had  received  the  homage  of  the  best
part  of  Europe,  it  was  soon  found  that  nothing  had  been  really  effected.  It
was  soon  found  that  society  was  in  that  early  stage  in  which  superstition  is
inevitable  ;  and  in  which  men,  if  they  do  not  have  it  in  one  form,  will  have  it
in  another.  It  was  in  vain  that  Christianity  taught  a  simple  doctrine,  and
enjoined  a  simple  worship.  The  minds  of  men  were  too  backward  for  so  great
a  step,  and  required  more  complicated  forms  and  a  more  complicated  belief.
What  followed  is  well  known  to  the  students  of  ecclesiastical  history.  The

religion,  et  ou  ils  formaient  a  la  fois  dans  les  nations  1'ordre  le  plus  eminent  et  le  plus
eclaire."  Cuvier,  Eloges  Historiques,  vol.  iii.  p.  170.  Even  Southey  (History  of  Brazil,
vol.  ii.  p.  378)  says:  "Missionaries  have  always  complained  of  the  fickleness  of  their
converts  ;  and  they  must  always  complain  of  it,  till  they  discover  that  some  degree  of
Civilization  must  precede  conversion,  or  at  least  accompany  it."  And  see,  to  the  same
effect,  Halketfs  Notes  on  the  North -American  Indians,  pp.  352,  353  ;  and  Combe's  North
America,  vol.  i.  p.  250,  vol.  nV  p.  353.


148  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

superstition  of  Europe,  instead  of  being  diminished,  was  only  turned  into  a
fresh  channel.  The  new  religion  was  corrupted  by  the  old  follies.  The  adora-
tion of  idols  was  succeeded  by  the  adoration  of  saints  ;  the  worship  of  the  Virgin
was  substituted  for  the  worship  of  Cybele  ;  25  Pagan  ceremonies  were  established
in  Christian  churches  ;  not  only  the  mummeries  of  idolatry,  but  likewise  its
doctrines,  were  quickly  added,  and  were  incorporated  and  worked  into  the
spirit  of  the  new  religion  ;  until,  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  generations,  Christianity
exhibited  so  grotesque  and  hideous  a  form,  that  its  best  features  were  lost,
and  the  lineaments  of  its  earlier  loveliness  altogether  destroyed.2*5

After  some  centuries  were  passed,  Christianity  slowly  emerged  from  these
corruptions  ;  many  of  which,  however,  even  the  most  civilized  countries  have
not  yet  been  able  to  throw  off.27  Indeed,  it  was  found  impossible  to  effect
even  the  beginning  of  a  reform,  until  the  European  intellect  was  in  some  de-
gree roused  from  its  lethargy.  The  knowledge  of  men,  gradually  advancing,
made  them  indignant  at  superstitions  which  they  had  formerly  admired.  The
way  in  which  their  indignation  increased,  until,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  it
broke  out  into  that  great  event  which  is  well  called  the  Reformation,  forms
one  of  the  most  interesting  subjects  in  modern  history.  But  for  our  present
purpose  it  is  enough  to  keep  in  mind  the  memorable  and  important  fact,  that
for  centuries  after  Christianity  was  the  established  religion  of  Europe,  it  failed
to  bear  its  natural  fruit,  because  its  lot  was  cast  among  a  people  whose  ignorance
compelled  them  to  be  superstitious,  and  who,  on  account  of  their  superstition,
defaced  a  system  which,  in  its  original  purity,  they  were  unable  to  receive.28

Indeed,  in  every  page  of  history,  we  meet  with  fresh  evidence  of  the  little
effect  religious  doctrines  can  produce  upon  a  people,  unless  preceded  by  intel-
lectual culture.  The  influence  exercised  by  Protestantism,  as  compared  with
Catholicism,  affords  an  interesting  example  of  this.  The  Catholic  religion
bears  to  the  Protestant  religion  exactly  the  same  relation  that  the  Dark  Ages
bear  to  the  sixteenth  century.  In  the  Dark  Ages,  men  were  credulous  and
ignorant  ;  they  therefore  produced  a  religion  which  required  great  belief  and
little  knowledge.  In  the  sixteenth  century,  their  credulity  and  ignorance,
though  still  considerable,  were  rapidly  diminishing,  and  it  was  found  necessary
to  organize  a  religion  suited  to  their  altered  circumstances  :  a  religion  more

25  This  is  curiously  illustrated  by  the  fact,  that  the  25th  of  March,  which  is  now  colled
Lady -day,  in  honour  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  was  in   Pagan  times  called  Hilaria,  and  was
dedicated  to  Cybele,   the  mother  of  the  gods.     Compare  Blunfs  Vestiges  of  Ancient
Manners,  8vo,  1823,  pp.  51-55,  with  Hampsorfs  Medii  Mvi  Kalendarium,  8vo,  1841,
vol.  i.  pp.  56,  177.

26  On  this  interesting  subject,  the  two  best  English  books  are  Middleton's  Letter  from
Rome,  and  Priestley's  History  of  the  Corruptions  of  Christianity  ;  the  former  work  being
chiefly  valuable   for  ritual  corruptions,   the  latter  work  for  doctrinal  ones.     Blunfs
Vestiges  of  Ancient  Manners  is  also  worth  reading;  but  is  very  inferior    to  the    two
treatises  just  named,  and  is  conceived  in  a  much  narrower  spirit.

27  The  large  amount  of  Paganism  which  still  exists  in  every  Christian  sect,  forms
an  argument  against  an  ingenious  distinction  which  M.  Bunsen  has  made  between  the
change  of  a  religion  and  that  of  a  language  ;  alterations  in  a  religion  being,  as  he  sup-
poses, always  more  abrupt  than  those  in  a  language.     Bunserfs  Egypt,  vol.  i.  pp.  358,

359-

2s  It  was  necessary,  says  M.  Maury,  that  the  church  "  se  rapprochat  davantage  de
1'esprit  grossier,  inculte,  ignorant  du  barbare."  Maury,  Legendes  Pieuses  du  Moyen
Age,  p.  101.  An  exactly  similar  process  has  taken  place  in  India,  where  the  Puranas
are  to  the  Vedas  what  the  works  of  the  Fathers  are  to  the  New  Testament.  Compare
Elphins tone's  History  of  India,  pp.  87,  88,  98  ;  Wilson's  Preface  to  the  Vishnu  Purana,
p.  vii.  ;  and  Transactions  of  Bombay  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  205.  So  that,  as  M.  Max  MUller
well  expresses  it,  the  Puranas  are  "  a  secondary  formation  of  Indian  mythology."
Miiller  on  the  Languages  of  India,  in  Reports  of  British  Association  for  1847,  p.  324.
[The  Puranas,  however,  deal  with  the  lives  of  the  gods,  greatly  elaborating  them,
whereas  the  works  of  "  the  Fathers  "  do  not  thus  add  to  the  New  Testament.  The
Apocryphal  Gospels  and  the  Lives  of  the  Saints  make  a  nearer  parallel. — ED.]


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  149

favourable  to  free  inquiry  ;  a  religion  less  full  of  miracles,  saints,  legends,  and
idols  ;  a  religion  of  which  the  ceremonies  were  less  frequent  and  less  burden-
some ;  a  religion  which  should  discourage  penance,  fasting,  confession,  celibacy,
and  those  other  mortifications  which  had  long  been  universal.  All  this  was
done  by  the  establishment  of  Protestantism  ;  a  mode  of  worship  which,  being
thus  suited  to  the  age,  made,  as  is  well  known,  speedy  progress.  If  this  great
movement  had  been  allowed  to  proceed  without  interruption,  it  would  in  the
>urse  of  a  few  generations  have  overthrown  the  old  superstition,  and  estab-
lished in  its  place  a  simpler  and  less  troublesome  creed  ;  the  rapidity  with  which
this  was  done  being  of  course  proportioned  to  the  intellectual  activity  of  the
different  countries.  But  unfortunately  the  European  governments,  who  are
always  meddling  in  matters  with  which  they  have  no  concern,  thought  it  their
duty  to  protect  the  religious  interests  of  the  people  ;  and,  making  common
cause  with  the  Catholic  clergy,  they  in  many  instances  forcibly  stopped  the
heresy,  and  thus  arrested  the  natural  development  of  the  age.*  This  inter-
rence  was,  in  nearly  all  cases,  well  intended,  and  is  solely  to  be  ascribed  to
the  ignorance  of  rulers  respecting  the  proper  limits  of  their  functions  :  but  the
evils  caused  by  this  ignorance  it  would  be  difficult  to  exaggerate.  During
Imost  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  Europe  was  afflicted  by  religious  wars,  re-
ligious massacres,  and  religious  persecutions  ;  not  one  of  which  would  have
risen  if  the  great  truth  had  been  recognized,  that  the  state  has  no  concern
rith  the  opinions  of  men,  and  no  right  to  interfere,  even  in  the  slightest  degree,
nth  the  form  of  worship  which  they  may  choose  to  adopt.  This  principle
fas,  however,  formerly  unknown,  or  at  all  events  unheeded  ;  and  it  was  not
mtil  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  that  the  great  religious  contests
brought  to  a  final  close,  and  the  different  countries  settled  down  into
their  public  creeds  ;  which,  in  the  essential  points,  have  never  since  been  per-
nanently  altered  ;  no  nation  having,  for  more  than  two  hundred  years,  made
war  upon  another  on  account  of  its  religion  ;  and  all  the  great  Catholic  countries
having,  during  the  same  period,  remained  Catholic,  all  the  great  Protestant
ones  remained  Protestant.

From  this  it  has  arisen  that,  in  several  of  the  European  countries,  the  re-
ligious development  has  not  followed  its  natural  order,  but  has  been  artificially
forced  into  an  unnatural  one.f  According  to  the  natural  order,  the  most  civilized
countries  should  all  be  Protestants,  and  the  most  uncivilized  ones  Catholics.
In  the  average  of  instances,  this  is  actually  the  case  ;  so  that  many  persons  have
been  led  into  the  singular  error,  of  ascribing  all  modern  enlightenment  to  the
influence  of  Protestantism  ;  overlooking  the  important  fact,  that  until  the
enlightenment  had  begun,  Protestantism  was  never  required.  But  although,
in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,  the  advance  of  the  Reformation  would  have
been  the  measure,  and  the  symptom,  of  that  advance  of  knowledge  by  which
it  was  preceded,  still,  in  many  cases,  the  authority  of  the  government  and  of
the  church  acted  as  disturbing  causes,  and  frustrated  the  natural  progress  of
religious  improvement.  And,  after  the  treaty  of  Westphalia  had  fixed  the
political  relations  of  Europe,  the  love  of  theological  strife  so  greatly  subsided,
that  men  no  longer  thought  it  worth  their  while  to  raise  a  religious  revolution,
and  to  risk  their  lives  in  an  attempt  to  overturn  the  creed  of  the  state.  At  the
same  time,  governments,  not  being  themselves  particularly  fond  of  revolutions,
have  encouraged  this  stationary  condition  ;  and  very  naturally,  and,  as  it

[*  As  the  religious  wars  in  France  showed,  and  as  Buckle  himself  insists  in  chapter  viii.,
the  Protestants  there  were  always  in  a  minority,  that  is  to  say,  the  Catholic  laity  as
well  as  the  Government  were  opposed  to  them.  In  ch.  xiii.,  again,  he  writes  that  "  in
1598  the  French  Government  for  the  first  time  ventured  upon  a  great  public  act  of
religious  toleration  " — ventured,  that  is,  to  resist  the  prejudice  of  a  great  mass  of  the
laity.  Thus  the  formula  of  "  the  spirit  of  the  age  "  must  be  qualified.  The  determin-
ing forces  were  economic  and  political ;  and  it  was  the  balance  of  economic  and  political
interest,  and  not  a  larger  share  of  any  intellectual  "  spirit,"  that  determined  the
distribution  of  Protestantism  in  Europe. — ED.]

[t  The  terms  here  revert  to  the  fallacy  noted  above,  pp.  132,  133,  notes. —  ED.]


150  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

appears  to  me,  very  wisely,  have  made  no  great  alteration,  but  have  left  the
national  establishments  as  they  found  them  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Protestant
ones  Protestant,  the  Catholic  ones  Catholic.  Hence  it  is,  that  the  national
religion  professed  by  any  country  at  the  present  moment,  is  no  decisive  criterion
of  the  present  civilization  of  the  country  ;  because  the  circumstances  which
fixed  the  religion  occurred  long  since,  and  the  religion  remains  endowed  and
established  by  the  mere  continuance  of  an  impetus  which  was  formerly  given.

Thus  far  as  to  the  origin  of  the  ecclesiastical  establishments  of  Europe.  But,
in  their  practical  consequences,  we  see  some  results  which  are  highly  instructive.
For  many  countries  owing  their  national  creed,  not  to  their  own  proper  ante-
cedents, but  to  the  authority  of  powerful  individuals,  it  will  be  invariably  found,
that  in  such  countries  the  creed  does  not  produce  the  effects  which  might  have
been  expected  from  it,  and  which,  according  to  its  terms,  it  ought  to  produce.
Thus,  for  instance,  the  Catholic  religion  is  more  superstitious,  and  more  intolerant,
than  the  Protestant  ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows,  that  those  countries  which
profess  the  former  creed,  must  be  more  superstitious,  and  more  intolerant,  than
those  which  profess  the  latter.  So  far  from  this,  the  French  are  not  only  quite
as  free  from  those  odious  qualities  as  are  the  most  civilized  Protestants,  but
they  are  more  free  from  them  than  some  Protestant  nations,  as  the  Scotch  and
the  Swedes.  Of  the  highly-educated  class  I  am  not  here  speaking  ;  but  of  the
clergy,  and  of  the  people  generally,  it  must  be  admitted,  that  in  Scotland  there
is  more  bigotry,  more  superstition,  and  a  more  thorough  contempt  for  the  re-
ligion of  others,  than  there  is  in  France.*  And  in  Sweden,  which  is  one  of  the
oldest  Protestant  countries  in  Europe,29  there  is,  not  occasionally,  but
habitually,  an  intolerance  and  a  spirit  of  persecution,  which  would  be  discredit-
able to  a  Catholic  country  ;  but  which  is  doubly  disgraceful  when  proceeding
from  a  people  who  profess  to  base  their  religion  on  the  right  of  private  judg-
ment.30

These  things  show,  what  it  would  be  easy  to  prove  by  a  wider  induction,
that  when  from  special,  or,  as  they  are  called,  accidental  causes,  any  people
profess  a  religion  more  advanced  than  themselves,  it  will  not  produce  its  legiti-
mate effect.31  The  superiority  of  Protestantism  over  Catholicism  consists  in

2S)  The  doctrines  of  Luther  were  first  preached  in  Sweden  in  1519  ;  and,  in  1527,  the
principles  of  the  Reformation  were  formally  adopted  in  an  assembly  of  the  States  at
Westeraas,  which  enabled  Gustavus  Vasa  to  seize  the  property  of  the  church.  Geijer's
History  of  the  Swedes,  part  i.  pp.  no,  118,  119  ;  Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical  History,  vol.  ii.
p.  22  ;  Crichton  and  Wheatorfs  History  of  Scandinavia,  vol.  i.  pp.  399,  400.  The  apostasy
proceeded  so  favourably,  that  De  Thou  (Histoire  Univ.  vol.  xiii.  p.  312)  says,  in  1598,
"  II  y  avoit  deja  si  long-terns  que  ce  culte  etoit  etabli  en  Suede,  qu'il  etoit  comme  im-
possible de  trouver,  soit  parmi  le  peuple,  soit  parmi  les  seigneurs,  quelqu'un  qui  se
souvint  d'avoir  vu  dans  ce  roi'aume  1'exercice  public  de  la  religion  catholique."

30  On  the  state  of  things  in  1838,  see  some  curious,  and  indeed  shameful,  details  in
Laing's  Sweden,  London,  8vo,   1839.     Mr.  Laing,  though  himself  a  Protestant,   truly
says,  that  in  Protestant  Sweden  there  "  is  inquisition  law,  working  in  the  hands  of  a
Lutheran  state -church,  as  strongly  as  in  Spain  or  Portugal  in  the  hands  of  a  Roman  -
Catholic  church."    Laing's  Sweden,  p.  324.     In  the  seventeenth  century,  it  was  ordered
by  the  Swedish  church,  and  the  order  was  confirmed  by  government,  that  "  if  any
Swedish  subject  change  his  religion,  he  shall  be  banished  the  kingdom,  and  lose  all  right

of  inheritance,  both  for  himself  and  his  descendants If  any  bring  into  the  country

teachers  of  another  religion,  he  shall  be  fined  and  banished."  Burton's  Diary,  vol.  ii.
p.  387,  8vo,  1828.     To  this  may  be  added,  that  it  was  not  till  1781  that  Roman  Catholics
were  allowed  to  exercise  their  religion  in  Sweden.     See  Crichton 's  History  of  Scandinavia,
Edinb.  1838,  vol.  ii.  p.  320.  See  also,  on  this  intolerant  spirit,  Whitelocke's  Journal  of
the  Swedish  Embassy,  vol.  i.  pp.  164,  412,  vol.  ii.  p.  212.

31  We  see  a  good  instance  of  this  in  the  case  of  the  Abyssinians,  who  have  professed
Christianity  for  centuries  ;  but,  as  no  pains  were  taken  to  cultivate  their  intellect,  they
found   the]  religion  too  pure  for  them  :  they  therefore   corrupted  it,  and,  down  to  the

[*  See  note  above,  p.  141. — ED.}


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  151

its  diminution  of  superstition  and  intolerance,  and  in  the  check  which  it  gives
to  ecclesiastical  power.  But  the  experience  of  Europe  teaches  us  that  when  the
superior  religion  is  fixed  among  an  inferior  people,  its  superiority  is  no  longer
seen.  The  Scotch  and  the  Swedes, — and  to  them  might  be  added  some  of  the
Swiss  cantons, — are  less  civilized  than  the  French,  and  are  therefore  more  super-
stitious. This  being  the  case,  it  avails  them  little  that  they  have  a  religion
better  than  the  French.  It  avails  them  little  that,  owing  to  circumstances
which  have  long  since  passed  away,  they,  three  centuries  ago,  adopted  a  creed
to  which  the  force  of  habit  and  the  influence  of  tradition  now  oblige  them  to
cling.  Whoever  has  travelled  in  Scotland  with  sufficient  attention  to  observe
the  ideas  and  opinions  of  the  people,  and  whoever  will  look  into  Scotch  theology,
and  read  the  history  of  the  Scotch  Kirk,  and  the  proceedings  of  the  Scotch
Assemblies  and  Consistories,  will  see  how  little  the  country  has  benefited  by
its  religion,  and  how  wide  an  interval  there  is  between  its  intolerant  spirit  and
the  natural  tendencies  of  the  Protestant  Reformation.*  On  the  other  hand,
whoever  will  subject  France  to  a  similar  examination,  will  see  an  illiberal  re-
ligion accompanied  by  liberal  views,  and  a  creed  full  of  superstitions  professed
by  a  people  among  whom  superstition  is  comparatively  rare.

The  simple  fact  is,  that  the  French  have  a  religion  worse  than  themselves  ;
the  Scotch  have  a  religion  better  than  themselves.  The  liberality  of  France  is
as  ill  suited  to  Catholicism,  as  the  bigotry  of  Scotland  is  ill  suited  to  Protes-
tantism. In  these  as  in  all  similar  cases,  the  characteristics  of  the  creed  are  over-
powered by  the  characteristics  of  the  people  ;  and  the  national  faith  is,  in  the
most  important  points,  altogether  inoperative,  because  it  does  not  harmonize
with  the  civilization  of  the  country  in  which  it  is  established.  How  idle,  then,
it  is  to  ascribe  the  civilization  to  the  creed  ;  and  how  worse  than  foolish  are
the  attempts  of  government  to  protect  a  religion  which,  if  suited  to  the  people,
will  need  no  protection,  and,  if  unsuited  to  them,  will  work  no  good  !

If  the  reader  has  seized  the  spirit  of  the  preceding  arguments,  he  will  hardly
require  that  I  should  analyze  with  equal  minuteness  the  second  disturbing
cause,  namely,  Literature.  It  is  evident  that  what  has  already  been  said
respecting  the  religion  of  a  people  is  in  a  great  measure  applicable  to  their
literature.  Literature,32  when  it  is  in  a  healthy  and  unforced  state,  is  simply
the  form  in  which  the  knowledge  of  a  country  is  registered  ;  the  mould  in  which
it  is  cast.  In  this,  as  in  the  other  cases  we  have  considered,  individual  men
may  of  course  take  great  steps,  and  rise  to  a  great  height  above  the  level  of
their  age.  But  if  they  rise  beyond  a  certain  point,  their  present  usefulness
is  impaired  ;  if  they  rise  still  higher,  it  is  destroyed.33  When  the  interval  between

present  moment,  they  have  not  made  the  slightest  progress.  The  accounts  given  by
Bruce  of  them  are  well  known  ;  and  a  traveller,  who  visited  them  in  1839,  says  :
"  Nothing  can  be  more  corrupt  than  the  nominal  Christianity  of  this  unhappy  nation.
It  is  mixed  up  with  Judaism,  Mohammedanism,  and  idolatry,  and  is  a  mass  of  rites  and
superstitions  which  cannot  mend  the  heart."  Kraff's  Journal  at  Ankobar,  in  Journal
of  Geographical  Society,  vol.  x.  p.  488  ;  see  also  vol.  xiv.  p.  13  :  and  for  a  similar  state  of
things  in  America,  see  the  account  of  the  Quiche  Indians,  in  Stephens' s  Central  America,
vol.  ii.  pp.  191,  192.  Compare  Squier's  Central  America,  vol.  i.  pp.  322,  323,  with
Halketfs  North-American  Indians,  pp.  29,  212,  268.  For  further  confirmation  of  this
view,  in  another  part  of  the  world,  see  Tuckey's  Expedition  to  the  Zaire,  pp.  79»  80,  165.

32  I  use  the  word  literature,  not  as  opposed  to  science,  but  in  its  larger  sense,  including
•everything  which   is  written—"  taking  the  term  literature  in  its  primary  sense  of  an
application  of  letters  to  the  records  of  facts  or  opinions."     Mure's  History  of  the  Litera-
ture of  Greece,  vol.  iv.  p.  50.

33  Compare  Tocqueville,  Democratic  en  Amerique,  vol.  ii.  p.  130,  with  some  admirable
remarks  on  the  Sophists  in  Grote's  History  of  Greece,  vol.  viii.  p.  481-     Sir  W.  Hamilton,
whose  learning  respecting  the  history  of    opinions  is  well  known,  says,  "  Precisely  in

[*  As  Buckle  shows  in  his  eighth  chapter,  the  Reformation  was  extremely  intolerant
in  France,  and  the  hatreds  of  Lutherans  and  Calvinists  in  northern  Europe  were  long
proverbial.  Thus  the  Reformation  never  exhibited  its  "  natural  tendencies."— ED.]


152  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  intellectual  classes  and  the  practical  classes  is  too  great.'the  former  will  possess
no  influence,  the  latter  will  reap  no  benefit.  This  is  what  occurred  in  the  ancient
world,  when  the  distance  between  the  ignorant  idolatry  of  the  people  and  the  re-
fined systems  of  philosophers  was  altogether  impassable  ;  34  and  this  is  the  principal
reason  why  the  Greeks  and  Romans  were  unable  to  retain  the  civilization  which
they  for  a  short  time  possessed.*  Precisely  the  same  process  is  at  the  present
moment  going  on  in  Germany,  where  the  most  valuable  part  of  literature  forms
an  esoteric  system,  which,  having  nothing  in  common  with  the  nation  itself,
produces  no  effect  on  the  national  civilization.  The  truth  is,  that  although
Europe  has  received  grea.t  benefit  from  its  literature,  this  is  owing,  not  to  what
the  literature  has  originated,  but  to  what  it  has  preserved.  Knowledge  must
be  acquired  before  it  can  be  written  ;  and  the  only  use  of  books  is  to  serve  as
a  storehouse  in  which  the  treasures  of  the  intellect  are  safely  kept,  and  where
they  may  be  conveniently  found.  Literature  in  itself  is  but  a  trifling  matter  ;
and  is  merely  valuable  as  being  the  armory  in  which  the  weapons  of  the  human
mind  are  laid  up,  and  from  which,  when  required,  they  can  be  quickly  drawn.
But  he  would  be  a  sorry  reasoner  who,  on  that  account,  should  propose  to
sacrifice  the  end  that  he  might  obtain  the  means  ;  who  should  hope  to  defend
the  armory  by  giving  up  the  weapons,  and  who  should  destroy  the  treasure,  in
order  to  improve  the  magazine  in  which  the  treasure  is  kept.

Yet  this  is  what  many  persons  are  apt  to  do.  From  literary  men,  in  par-
ticular, we  hear  too  much  of  the  necessity  of  protecting  and  rewarding  literature,
and  we  hear  too  little  of  the  necessity  of  that  freedom  and  boldness,  in  the
absence  of  which  the  most  splendid  literature  is  altogether  worthless.  Indeed,
there  is  a  general  tendency,  not  to  exaggerate  the  advantages  of  knowledge, —
for  that  is  impossible, — but  to  misunderstand  what  that  is  in  which  knowledge
really  consists.  Real  knowledge,  the  knowledge  on  which  all  civilization  is
based,  solely  consists  in  an  acquaintance  with  the  relations  which  things  and
ideas  bear  to  each  other  and  to  themselves  ;  in  other  words,  in  an  acquaintance
with  physical  and  mental  laws.  If  the  time  should  ever  come  when  all  these
laws  are  known,  the  circle  of  human  knowledge  will  then  be  complete  ;  and,
in  the  interim,  the  value  of  literature  depends  upon  the  extent  to  which  it
communicates  either  a  knowledge  of  the  laws,  or  the  materials  by  which  the
laws  may  be  discovered.  The  business  of  education  is  to  accelerate  this  great
movement,  and  thus  increase  the  fitness  and  aptitude  of  men,  by  increasing
the  resources  which  they  possess.  Towards  this  purpose,  literature,  so  far  as
it  is  auxiliary,  is  highly  useful.  But  to  look  upon  an  acquaintance  with  litera-

proportion  as  an  author  is  in  advance  of  his  age,  is  it  likely  that  his  works  will  be
neglected."  Hamilton's  Discussions  on  Philosophy,  p.  186.  Thus  too,  in  regard  to  the
fine  arts,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  (Fourth  Discourse,  in  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  363)  says,  "  Present
time  and  future  may  be  considered  as  rivals  ;  and  he  who  solicits  the  one,  must  expect
to  be  discountenanced  by  the  other."

34  Hence  the  intellectually  exclusive  and,  as  M.  Neander  well  terms  it,  "  aristocratic
spirit  of  antiquity."  Neander's  History  of  the  Church,  vol.  i.  pp.  40,  97,  vol.  ii.  p.  31.
This  is  constantly  overlooked  by  writers  who  use  the  word  '  democracy  '  loosely  ;  for-
getting that,  in  the  same  age,  democracies  of  politics  may  be  very  common,  while
democracies  of  thought  are  very  rare.  For  proof  of  the  universal  prevalence  formerly
of  this  esoteric  and  aristocratic  spirit,  see  the  following  passages  :  Ritter's  History  of
Ancient  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  338,  vol.  hi.  pp.  9,  17  ;  Tennemann,  Geschichte  der  Philoso-
phic, vol.  ii.  pp.  200,  205,  220  ;  Beausobre,  Histoire  Critique  de  Manichee,  vol.  ii.  p.  41  ;
Matter,  Histoire  du  Gnosticisme,  vol.  i.  p.  13,  vol.  ii.  pp.  83,  370  ;  Sprengel,  Histoire  de
la  Medecine,  vol.  i.  p.  250  ;  Grote's  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  561,  vol.  iv.  p.  544  ;  Thirl-
walVs  History  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  150,  vol.  vi.  p.  95  ;  Warburton's  Works,  vol.  vii.
pp.  962,972,  4to,  1788  ;  Sharpens  History  of  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  174  ;  Cudworth's  Intellect.
System,  vol.  ii.  pp.  114,  365,  443,  vol.  iii.  p.  20.

[*  The  state  of  things  described  is  rather  an  aspect  of  the  problem  than  a  solution.
We  need  «"  reason  why  "'  for  the  sunderance  in  question  — ED.]


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  153

ture  as  one  of  the  objects  of  education,  is  to  mistake  the  order  of  events,  and  to
make  the  end  subservient  to  the  means.  It  is  because  this  is  done  that  we
often  find  what  are  called  highly  educated  men,  the  progress  of  whose  know-
ledge has  been  actually  retarded  by  the  activity  of  their  education.  We  often
find  them  burdened  by  prejudices,  which  their  reading,  instead  of  dissipating,
has  rendered  more  inveterate.35  For  literature,  being  the  depository  of  the
thoughts  of  mankind,  is  full  not  only  of  wisdom  but  also  of  absurdities.  The
benefit,  therefore,  which  is  derived  from  literature,  will  depend  not  so  much
upon  the  literature  itself,  as  upon  the  skill  with  which  it  is  studied,  and  the
judgment  with  which  it  is  selected.  These  are  the  preliminary  conditions  of
success  ;  and  if  they  are  not  obeyed,  the  number  and  the  value  of  the  books  in
a  country  become  a  matter  quite  unimportant.  Even  in  an  advanced  stage  of
civilization,  there  is  always  a  tendency  to  prefer  those  parts  of  literature  which
favour  ancient  prejudices,  rather  than  those  which  oppose  them  ;  and  in  cases
where  this  tendency  is  very  strong,  the  only  effect  of  great  learning  will  be,  to
supply  the  materials  which  may  corroborate  old  errors,  and  confirm  old  super-
stitions. In  our  time  such  instances  are  not  uncommon  ;  and  we  frequently
meet  with  men  whose  erudition  ministers  to  their  ignorance,  and  who  the  more
they  read,  the  less  they  know.  There  have  been  states  of  society  in  which  this
disposition  was  so  general,  that  literature  has  done  far  more  harm  than  good.
Thus,  for  example,  in  the  whole  period  from  the  sixth  to  the  tenth  centuries,*
there  were  not  in  all  Europe  more  than  three  or  four  men  who  dared  to  think
for  themselves  ;  and  even  they  were  obliged  to  veil  their  meaning  in  obscure
and  mystical  language.  The  remaining  part  of  society  was,  during  these  four
centuries,  sunk  in  the  most  degrading  ignorance.  Under  these  circumstances,
the  few  who  were  able  to  read,  confined  their  studies  to  works  which  encouraged
and  strengthened  their  superstition,  such  as  the  legends  of  the  saints,  and  the
homilies  of  the  fathers.  From  these  sources  they  drew  those  lying  and  impu-
dent fables,  of  which  the  theology  of  that  time  is  principally  composed.36  These
miserable  stories  were  widely  circulated,  and  were  valued  as  solid  and  important
truths.  The  more  the  literature  was  read,  the  more  the  stories  were  believed  ;
in  other  words,  the  greater  the  learning,  the  greater  the  ignorance.37  And  I
entertain  no  doubt  that  if,  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries,  which  were  the

35  Locke  has  noticed  this  "  learned  ignorance,"  for  which  many  men  are  remarkable.
See  a  fine  passage  in  the  Essay  on  Human  Understanding,  book  iii.  chap.  x.  in  Locke's
Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  27,  and  similar  remarks  in  his  Conduct  of  the  Understanding,  vol.  ii.
PP-  350.  364,  365,  and  in  his  Thoughts  on  Education,  vol.  viii.  pp.  84-87.  If  this  profound
writer  were  now  alive,  what  a  war  he  would  wage  against  our  great  universities  and
public  schools,  where  innumerable  things  are  still  taught  which  no  one  is  concerned  to
understand,  and  which  few  will  take  the  trouble  to  remember !     Compare  Condorcet,  Vie
de  Turgot,  pp.  255,  256  note.

36  The  statistics  of  this  sort  of  literature  would  prove  a  curious  subject  for  inquiry.
No  one,  I  believe,  has  thought  it  worth  while  to  sum  them  up  ;  but  M.  Guizot  has  made
an  estimate  that  the  Bollandist  collection  contains  more  than  twenty -five  thousand
lives  of  saints  :  "  a  en  juger  par  approximation,  ils  contiennent  plus  de  25,000  vies  de
saints."     Guizot,  Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  en  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  3?.     It  is  said  (Ledwich's
Antiquities  of  Ireland,  p.  62)  that  of  Saint  Patrick  alone  there  were  sixty -six  biographers
before  Joceline.

37  For,  as  Laplace  observes,  in  his  remarks  on  the  sources  of  error  in  connexion  with
the  doctrine  of  probabilities,  "  C'est  a  1'influence  de  1'opinion  de  ceux  que  la  multitude
juge  les  plus  instruits,  et  a  qui  elle  a  coutume  de  donner  sa  confiance  sur  les  plus  im-
portants  objets  de  la  vie,  qu'est  due  la  propagation  de  ces  erreurs  qui,  dans  les  temps
d'ignorance,  ont  couvert  la  face  du  monde."     Bouillaud,  Philosophic  Mldicale,  p.  218.

[*  This  is  an  exaggeration  ;  but  even  the  corrected  statement,  much  more  this,  shows
the  inadequacy  of  the  previous  generalization  that  the  relative  weakness  of  nature  in
Europe  evoked  the  superior  powers  of  man.  An  explanation  is  clearly  needed  in  terms
of  culture  forces.  See  notes  on  pp.  74,  87,  89,  above. — ED.)


154  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

worst  part  of  that  period,38  all  knowledge  of  the  alphabet  had  for  a  while  been
lost,  so  that  men  could  no  longer  read  the  books  in  which  they  delighted,  the
subsequent  progress  of  Europe  would  have  been  more  rapid  than  it  really  was.
For  when  the  progress  began,  its  principal  antagonist  was  that  credulity  which
the  literature  had  fostered.  It  was  not  that  better  books  were  wanting,  but
it  was  that  the  relish  for  such  books  was  extinct.  There  was  the  literature  of
Greece  and  Rome,  which  the  monks  not  only  preserved,  but  even  occasionally
looked  into  and  copied.  But  what  could  that  avail  such  readers  as  they  ?
So  far  from  recognizing  the  merit  of  the  ancient  writers,  they  were  unable  to
feel  even  the  beauties  of  their  style,  and  they  trembled  at  the  boldness  of  their
inquiries.  At  the  first  glimpse  of  the  light,  their  eyes  were  blinded.  They
never  turned  the  leaves  of  a  pagan  author  without  standing  aghast  at  the  risk
they  were  running  ;  and  they  were  in  constant  fear,  lest  by  imbibing  any  of  his
o  Unions,  they  should  involve  themselves  in  a  deadly  sin.  The  result  was  that
thsy  willingly  laid  aside  the  great  masterpieces  of  antiquity  ;  and  in  their  place
they  substituted  those  wretched  compilations  which  corrupted  their  taste,
increased  their  credulity,  strengthened  their  errors,  and  prolonged  the  ignorance
of  Europe,  by  embodying  each  separate  superstition  in  a  written  and  accessible
form,  thus  perpetuating  its  influence,  and  enabling  it  to  enfeeble  the  understand-
ing even  of  a  distant  posterity.

It  is  in  this  way  that  the  nature  of  the  literature  possessed  by  a  people  is  of
very  inferior  importance,  in  comparison  with  the  disposition  of  the  people  by
whom  the  literature  is  to  be  read.  In  what  are  rightly  termed  the  Dark  Ages,
there  was  a  literature  in  which  valuable  materials  were  to  be  found  ;  but  there
was  no  one  who  knew  how  to  use  them.  During  a  considerable  period,  the
Latin  language  was  a  vernacular  dialect  ;  39  and  if  men  had  chosen  they  might
have  studied  the  great  Latin  authors.  But  to  do  this  they  must  have  been
in  a  state  of  society  very  different  from  that  in  which  they  actually  lived.  They,
like  every  other  people,  measured  merit  by  the  standard  commonly  received
in  their  own  age  ;  and  according  to  their  standard  the  dross  was  better  than
the  gold.  They  therefore  rejected  the  gold,  and  hoarded  up  the  dross.  What
took  place  then  is,  on  a  smaller  scale,  taking  place  now.  Every  literature  con-
tains something  that  is  true,  and  much  that  is  false  ;  and  the  effect  it  produces
will  chiefly  depend  upon  the  skill  with  which  the  truth  is  discriminated  from  the
falsehood.  New  ideas  and  new  discoveries  possess  prospectively  an  importance
difficult  to  exaggerate;  but  until  the<ideas  are  received,  and  the  discoveries
adopted,  they  exercise  no  influence  and  therefore  work  no  good.  No  literature
can  ever  benefit  a  people  unless  it  finds  them  in  a  state  of  preliminary  prepara-
tion. In  this  respect,  the  analogy  with  religious  opinions  is  complete.  If  the
religion  and  the  literature  of  a  country  are  unsuited  to  its  wants,  they  will  be
useless,  because  the  literature  will  be  neglected,  and  the  religion  will  be  dis-
obeyed. In  such  cases,  even  the  ablest  books  are  unread,  and  the  purest
doctrines  despised.  The  works  fall  into  oblivion  ;  the  faith  is  corrupted  by
heresy.

•  The  other  opinion  to  which  I  have  referred  is,  that  the  civilization  of  Europe
is  chiefly  owing  to  the  ability  which  has  been  displayed  by  the  different  govern-
ments, and  to  the  sagacity  with  which  the  evils  of  society  have  been  palliated
by  legislative  remedies.  To  any  one  who  has  studied  history  in  its  original
sources,  this  notion  must  appear  so  extravagant,  as  to  make  it  difficult  to  refute
it  with  becoming  gravity.  Indeed,  of  all  the  social  theories  which  have  ever
been  broached,  there  is  none  so  utterly  untenable,  and  so  unsound  in  all  its
parts,  as  this.  In  the  first  place  we  have  the  obvious  consideration  that  the
rulers  of  a  country  have,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  always  been  the  in-

38  M.  Guizot  (Civilisation .en  France, .vol.  ii.  pp.  171,  172)  thinks  that,  on  the  whole,
the  seventh  was  even  worse  than  the  eighth  :  but  it  is  difficult  to  choose  between  them.

39  Some  of  the  results  of  Latin  being  colloquially  employed  by  the  monks  are  judici-
ously stated  in  Herder's  Ideen  zur  Geschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  iv.  pp.  202,  203.  The
remarks  on  this  custom  by  Dugald  Stewart  refer  to  a  later  period.     Stewart's  Philosophy
of  the  Mind,  vol.  iii.  pp.  no,  in.


I

habitai


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  155


labitants  of  that  country  ;  nurtured  by  its  literature,  bred  to  its  traditions,
and  imbibing  its  prejudices.  Such  men  are  at  best  only  the  creatures  of  the
ige,  never  its  creators.  Their  measures  are  the  result  of  social  progress,  not  the
tuse  of  it.  This  may  be  proved,  not  only  by  speculative  arguments,  but  also
a  practical  consideration,  which  any  reader  of  history  can  verify  for  himself,
fo  great  political  improvement,  no  great  reform,  either  legislative  or  executive,
ever  been  originated  in  any  country  by  its  rulers.  The  first  suggesters  of
ich  steps  have  invariably  been  bold  and  able  thinkers,*  who  discern  the  abuse,
jnounce  it,  and  point  out  how  it  is  to  be  remedied.  But  long  after  this  is  done,
the  most  enlightened  governments  continue  to  uphold  the  abuse,  and
t  the  remedy.  At  length,  if  circumstances  are  favourable,  the  pressure
without  becomes  so  strong  that  the  government  is  obliged  to  give  way  ;
the  reform  being  accomplished,  the  people  are  expected  to  admire  the
lorn  of  their  rulers,  by  whom  all  this  has  been  done.  That  this  is  the  course
political  improvement,  must  be  well  known  to  whoever  has  studied  the  law-
)ks  of  different  countries  in  connexion  with  the  previous  progress  of  their
lowledge.  Full  and  decisive  evidence  of  this  will  be  brought  forward  in  the
it  work  ;  but,  by  way  of  illustration,  I  may  refer  to  the  abolition  of  the
i-laws,  undoubtedly  one  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  in  the  history  of
igland  during  this  century.  The  propriety,  and,  indeed,  the  necessity,  of
abolition,  is  now  admitted  by  every  one  of  tolerable  information  ;  and
the  question  arises  as  to  how  it  was  brought  about.  Those  Englishmen  who
are  little  versed  in  the  history  of  their  country  will  say  that  the  real  cause  was
the  wisdom  of  Parliament  ;  while  others,  attempting  to  look  a  little  further,
will  ascribe  it  to  the  activity  of  the  Anti-Corn-Law  League,  and  the  consequent
pressure  put  upon  Government.  But  whoever  will  minutely  trace  the  different
stages  through  which  this  great  question  successively  passed,  will  find  that  the
Government,  the  Legislature,  and  the  League,  were  the  unwitting  instruments
of  a  power,  far  greater  than  all  other  powers  put  together.  They  were  simply
the  exponents  of  that  march  of  public  opinion,  which  on  this  subject  had  beguii
nearly  a  century  before  their  time.t  The  steps  of  this  vast  movement  I  shall
examine  on  another  occasion  ;  at  present  it  is  enough  to  say  that  soon  after
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  absurdity  of  protective  restrictions
on  trade  was  so  fully  demonstrated  by  the  political  economists,  as  to  be  ad-
mitted by  every  man  who  understood  their  arguments,  and  had  mastered  the
evidence  connected  with  them.  From  this  moment,  the  repeal  of  the  corn-
laws  became  a  matter,  not  of  party,  nor  of  expediency,  but  merely  of  know-
ledge. Those  who  knew  the  facts,  opposed  the  laws  ;  those  who  were  ignorant
of  the  facts,  favoured  the  laws.J  It  was  therefore  clear  that  whenever  the
diffusion  of  knowledge  reached  a  certain  point,  the  laws  must  fall.  The  merit
of  the  League  was,  to  assist  this  diffusion  ;  the  merit  of  the  Parliament  was,  to
yield  to  it.  It  is  however  certain  that  the  members  both  of  League  and
Legislature  could  at  best  only  slightly  hasten  what  the  progress  of  knowledge
rendered  inevitable^  If  they  had  lived  a  century  earlier,  they  would  have  been
altogether  powerless,  because  the  age  would  not  have  been  ripe  for  their  labours.
They  were  the  creatures  of  a  movement  which,  began  long  before  any  of  them

[*  As  these  thinkers  were,  also  necessarily  natives  of  their  own  country,  the  distinction
drawn  between  them  and  the  rulers  is  not  enlightening.  What  Buckle  had  in  view  was
the  fact  that  the  thinkers  escape  many  of  the  intellectual  trammels  as  well  as  the  pre-
occupations of  rulers.  But,  as  before,  he  here  overlooks  the  progressive  action  of  some
rulers,  which  he  elsewhere  recognizes. — ED.]

[f  The  League  were  certainly  creators  as  well  as  "  exponents  "  of  "  public  opinion,"

being  in  a  minority  to  start  with.     To  communicate  knowledge  is  to  create  opinion. — ED.]

J  Much  too  little  allowance  is  here  made  for  interest  as  distinct  from  knowledge. — ED.]

[§  As  the  progress  of  knowledge  could  take  place  only  by  the  communication  of  it,
the  phrase  "  could  at  best  only  slightly  hasten  "  is  strictly  meaningless.  There  was
nothing  "  inevitable  "  in  the  case,  had  there  been  no  propaganda  ;  and  there  could  have
been  no  consummation  apart  from  the  Legislature. — ED.]


156  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  born  ;  and  the  utmost  they  could  do  was,  to  put  into  operation  what  others
had  taught,  and  repeat,  in  louder  tones,  the  lessons  they  had  learned  from
their  masters.  For,  it  was  not  pretended,  they  did  not  even  pretend  themselves,
that  there  was  anything  new  in  the  doctrines  which  they  preached  from  the
hustings,  and  disseminated  in  every  part  of  the  kingdom.  The  discoveries
had  long  since  been  made,  and  were  gradually  doing  their  work  ;  encroaching
upon  old  errors,  and  making  proselytes  in  all  directions.  The  reformers  of  our
time  swam  with  the  stream  :  they  aided  what  it  would  have  been  impossible
long  to  resist.  Nor  is  this  to  be  deemed  a  slight  or  grudging  praise  of  the
services  they  undoubtedly  rendered.  The  opposition  they  had  to  encounter
was  still  immense  ;  and  it  should  always  be  remembered,  as  a  proof  of  the
backwardness  of  political  knowledge,  and  of  the  incompetence  of  political
legislators,  that  although  the  principles  of  free  trade  had  been  established  for
nearly  a  century  by  a  chain  of  arguments  as  solid  as  those  on  which  the
truths  of  mathematics  are  based,  they  were  to  the  last  moment  stren-
uously resisted  ;  and  it  was  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  Parliament
was  induced  to  grant  what  the  people  were  determined  to  have,  and  the  neces-
sity of  which  had  been  proved  by  the  ablest  men  during  three  successive
generations.

I  have  selected  this  instance  as  an  illustration,  because  the  facts  connected
u'.Vth.  it  are  undisputed,  and  indeed  are  fresh  in  the  memory  of  us  all.  For  it
was  iflPt  concealed  at  the  time,  and  posterity  ought  to  know,  that  this  great
measure,*-- which,  with  the  exception  of  the  Reform  Bill,  is  by  far  the  most  im-
portant ever' gassed  by  a  British  parliament,  was,  like  the  Reform  Bill,  extorted
from  the  legislature  by  a  pressure  from  without  ;  that>  it  was  conceded,  not
cheerfully,  but  with  icv?ar  ;  and  that  it  was  carried  by  statesmen  who  had  spent
their  lives  in  opposing  ^'Jiat  they  now  suddenly  advocated.  Such  was  the
history  of  these  events  ;  and  such  likewise  has  been  the  history  of  all  those
improvements  which  are  important  enough  to  rank  as  epochs  in  the  history  of
modern  legislation.  ^x

Besides  this,  there  is  another  circuiNMance  worthy  the  attention  of  those
writers  who  ascribe  a  large  part  of  European Civilization  to  measures  originated
by  European  governments.  This  is,  that  every  great  reform  which  has  been
effected  has  consisted,  not  in  doing  something  n<sw,  but  in  undoing  something
old.  The  most  valuable  additions  made  to  legislation  have  been  enactments
destructive  of  preceding  legislation  ;  and  the  best  la^  which  have  been  passed
have  been  those  by  which  some  former  laws  were  repealed.  In  the  case  just
mentioned,  of  the  corn -laws,  all  that  was  done  was  toi  repeal  the  old  laws,  and
leave  trade  to  its  natural  freedom.  When  this  great  reform  was  accomplished,
the  only  result  was,  to  place  things  on  the  same  footing  as  if  legislators  had
never  interfered  at  all.  Precisely  the  same  remark  is  applicable  to  another
leading  improvement  in  modern  legislation,  namely  the  decrease  of  religious
persecution.  This  is  unquestionably  an  immense  boon  ;  though,  unfortunately,
it  is  still  imperfect,  even  in  the  most  civilized  countries.  But  it  is  evident
that  the  concession  merely  consists  in  this  :  that  legislators  have  retraced  their
own  steps,  and  undone  their  owji  work.  If  we  examine  the  policy  of  the  most
humane  and  enlightened  governments,  we  shall  find  this  to  be  the  course  they
have  pursued.  The  whole  scope  and  tendency  of  modern  legislation  is,  to
restore  things  to  that  natural  channel  from  which  the  ignorance  of  preceding
legislation  has  driven  them.  This  is  one  of  the  great  works  of  the  present  age  ;
and  if  legislators  do  it  well,  they  will  deserve  the  gratitude  of  mankind.  But
though  we  may  thus  be  grateful  to  individual  lawgivers,  we  owe  no  thanks  to
lawgivers  considered  as  a  class.  For  since  the  most  valuable  improvements
in  legislation  are  those  which  subvert  preceding  legislation,  it  is  clear  that  the
balance  of  good  cannot  be  on  their  side.  It  is  clear  that  the  progress  of  civiliz-
ation cannot  be  due  to  those  who,  on  the  most  important  subjects,  have  done
so  much  harm,  that  their  successors  are  considered  benefactors  simply  because
they  reverse  their  policy,  and  thus  restore  affairs  to  the  state  in  which  they
would  have  remained,  if  politicians  had  allowed  them  to  run  on  in  the  course
which  the  wants  of  society  required.


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT          157

Indeed,  the  extent  to  which  the  governing  classes  have  interfered,  and  the
mischiefs  which  that  interference  has  produced,  are  so  remarkable  as  to  make
thoughtful  men  wonder  how  civilization  could  advance,  in  the  face  of  such
repeated  obstacles.  In  some  of  the  European  countries  the  obstacles  have  in
fact  proved  insuperable,  and  the  national  progress  is  thereby  stopped.  Even
in  England,  where,  from  causes  which  I  shall  presently  relate,  the  higher  ranks
have  for  some  centuries  been  less  powerful  than  elsewhere,  there  has  been
inflicted  an  amount  of  evil  which,  though  much  smaller  than  that  incurred  in
other  countries,  is  sufficiently  serious  to  form  a  melancholy  chapter  in  the
history  of  the  human  mind.  To  sum  up  these  evils  would  be  to  write  a  history
of  English  legislation  ;  for  it  may  be  broadly  stated  that,  with  the  exception
of  certain  necessary  enactments  respecting  the  preservation  of  order,  and  the
punishment  of  crime,  nearly  every  thing  which  has  been  done,  has  been  done
amiss.  Thus,  to  take  only  such  conspicuous  facts  as  do  not  admit  of  contro-
versy, it  is  certain  that  all  the  most  important  interests  have  been  grievously
damaged  by  the  attempts  of  legislators  to  aid  them.*  Among  the  accessories
of  modern  civilization,  there  is  none  of  greater  moment  than  trade,  the  spread
of  which  has  probably  done  more  than  any  other  single  agent  to  increase  the
comfort  and  happiness  of  man.  But  every  European  government  which  has
legislated  much  respecting  trade,  has  acted  as  if  its  main  object  were  to  suppress
the  trade,  and  ruin  the  traders.  Instead  of  leaving  the  national  industry  to  take
its  own  course,  it  has  been  troubled  by  an  interminable  series  of  regulations,  all
intended  for  its  good,  and  all  inflicting  serious  harm.  To  such  a  height  has  this
been  carried,  that  the  commercial  reforms  which  have  distinguished  England
during  the  last  twenty  years,  have  solely  consisted  in  undoing  this  mischievous
and  intrusive  legislation.  The  laws  formerly  enacted  on  this  subject,  and  too
many  of  which  are  still  in  force,  are  marvellous  to  contemplate.  It  is  no  ex-
aggeration to  say  that  the  history  of  the  commercial  legislation  of  Europe
presents  every  possible  contrivance  for  hampering  the  energies  of  commerce.
Indeed,  a  very  high  authority,  who  has  maturely  studied  this  subject,  has
recently  declared  that  if  it  had  not  been  for  smuggling,  trade  could  not  have
been  conducted,  but  must  have  perished,  in  consequence  of  this  incessant  inter-
ference.40 However  paradoxical  this  assertion  may  appear,  it  will  be  denied
by  no  one  who  knows  how  feeble  trade  once  was,  and  how  strong  the  obstacles
were  which  opposed  it.  In  every  quarter,  and  at  every  moment,  the  hand  of
government  was  felt.  Duties  on  importation,  and  duties  on  exportation  ;
bounties  to  raise  up  a  losing  trade,  and  taxes  to  pull  down  a  remunerative  one  ;
this  branch  of  industry  forbidden,  and  that  branch  of  industry  encouraged  ;  one
article  of  commerce  must  not  be  grown,  because  it  was  grown  in  the  colonies,
another  article  might  be  grown  and  bought,  but  not  sold  again,  while  a  third
article  might  be  bought  and  sold,  but  not  leave  the  country.  Then,  too,  we
find  laws  to  regulate  wages  ;  laws  to  regulate  prices  ;  laws  to  regulate  profits  ;
laws  to  regulate  the  interest  of  money  ;  custom-house  arrangements  of  the  most
vexatious  kind,  aided  by  a  complicated  scheme,  which  was  well  called  the
sliding-scale, — a  scheme  of  such  perverse  ingenuity,  that  the  duties  constantly
varied  on  the  same  article,  and  no  man  could  calculate  beforehand  what  he
would  have  to  pay.  To  this  uncertainty,  itself  the  bane  of  all  commerce,  there
was  added  a  severity  of  exaction,  felt  by  every  class  of  consumers  and  pro-
ducers. The  tolls  were  so  onerous  as  to  double  and  often  quadruple  the  cost
of  production.  A  system  was  organized,  and  strictly  enforced,  of  interference
with  markets,  interference  with  manufactories,  interference  with  machinery,

40  "  C'est  a  la  contrebande  que  le  commerce  doit  de  n'avoir  pas  peri  sous  1'influence
du  regime,  prohibitif ;  tandis  que  ce  regime  condamnait  les  peuples  a  s'approvisionner
aux  sources  les  plus  eloignees,  la  contrebande  rapprochait  les  distances,  abaissait  les  prix,
et  neutralisait  1'action  funeste  des  monopoles."  Blanqui,  Histoire  de  I'Economie
Politique  en  Europe,  Paris,  1845,  vol.  ii.  pp.  25,  26.

[*  "  Interests  "  being  here  distinguished  from  "  classes  "— i.e.  "  agriculture  "  and
"  commerce  "  as  distinct  from  the  landed  or  trading  class. — ED.]


158  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

interference  even  with  shops.  The  towns  were  guarded  by  excisemen,  and
the  ports  swarmed  with  tide-waiters,  whose  sole  business  was  to  inspect  nearly
every  process  of  domestic  industry,  peer  into  every  package,  and  tax  every
article  ;  while,  that  absurdity  might  be  carried  to  its  extreme  height,  a  large
part  of  all  this  was  by  way  of  protection  :  that  is  to  say,  the  money  was
avowedly  raised,  and  the  inconvenience  suffered,  not  for  the  use  of  the  govern-
ment, but  for  the  benefit  of  the  people  ;  in  other  words,  the  industrious  classes
were  robbed,  in  order  that  industry  might  thrive.

Such  are  some  of  the  benefits  which  European  trade  owes  to  the  paternal
care  of  European  legislators.  But  worse  still  remains  behind.  For  the  eco-
nomical evils,  great  as  they  were,  have  been  far  surpassed  by  the  moral  evils
which  this  system  produced.  The  first  inevitable  consequence  was  that  in
every  part  of  Europe  there  arose  numerous  and  powerful  gangs  of  armed
smugglers,  who  lived  by  disobeying  the  laws  which  their  ignorant  rulers  had
imposed.  These  men,  desperate  from  the  fear  of  punishment,41  and  accustomed
to  the  commission  of  every  crime,  contaminated  the  surrounding  population  ;
introduced  into  peaceful  villages  vices  formerly  unknown  ;  caused  the  ruin  of
entire  families  ;  spread,  wherever  they  came,  drunkenness,  theft,  and  dissolute-
ness ;  and  familiarized  their  associates  with  those  coarse  and  swinish  de-
baucheries which  were  the  natural  habits  of  so  vagrant  and  lawless  a  life.42
The  innumerable  crimes  arising  from  this43  are  directly  chargeable  upon  the
European  governments  by  whom  they  were  provoked.  The  offences  were  caused
by  the  laws  ;  and  now  that  the  laws  are  repealed,  the  offences  have  disappeared.
But  it  will  hardly  be  pretended  that  the  interests  of  civilization  have  been
advanced  by  such  a  policy  as  this.  It  will  hardly  be  pretended  that  we  owe
much  to  a  system  which,  having  called  into  existence  a  new  class  of  criminals,
at  length  retraces  its  steps  and,  though  it  thus  puts  an  end  to  the  crime,  only
destroys  what  its  own  acts  had  created.

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  these  remarks  do  not  affect  the  real  services
rendered  to  society  by  every  tolerably  organized  government.  In  all  countries,
a  power  of  punishing  crime,  and  of  framing  laws,  must  reside  somewhere  ;

41  The  19  Geo.  II.  c.  34,  made  "  all  forcible  acts  of  smuggling,  carried  on  in  defiance
of  the  laws,  or  even  in  disguise  to  evade  them,  felony  without  benefit  of  clergy."     Black-
stone's   Commentaries,  vol.  iv.  p.    155.     Townsend,  who  travelled  through    France  in
1786,  says   that  when  any  of  the  numerous  smugglers  were  taken,  "  some  of  them  are
hanged,  some  are  broken  upon  the  wheel,  and  some  are.  burnt  alive."     Town-send' s
Spain,  vol.  i.  p.  85,  edit.  1792.     On  the  general  operation  of  the  French  laws  against
smugglers  in  the  eighteenth  century,  compare  Tucker's  Life  of  Jefferson,  vol.  i.  pp.  213,
214,  with  Parliamentary  History,  vol.  ix.  p.  1240.

42  In  a  work  of  considerable  ability,  the  following  account  is  given  of  the  state  of
things  in  England  and  France  so  late  as  the  year  1824  :  "  While  this  was  going  forward
on  the  English  coast,  the  smugglers  on  the  opposite  shore  were  engaged,  with  much  more
labour,  risk,  and  expense,  in  introducing  English  woollens,  by  a  vast  system  of  fraud
and  lying,  into  the  towns,  past  a  series  of  custom-houses.     In  both  countries,  there  was
an  utter  dissoluteness  of  morals  connected  with  these  transactions.     Cheating  and  lying
were  essential  to  the  whole  system  ;  drunkenness  accompanied  it ;  contempt  for  all  law
grew  up  under  it ;  honest  industry  perished  beneath  it :  and  it  was  crowned  with  murder."
Martineau's  History  of  England  during  Thirty  Years'  Peace,  vol.  i.  p.  341,  8vo,  1849.

43  For  evidence  of  the  extraordinary  extent  to  which  smuggling  was  formerly  carried,
and  that  not  secretly,  but  by  powerful  bodies  of  armed  men,  see  Parliamentary  History,
vol.  ix.  pp.  243,  247,  1290,  1345,  vol.  x.  pp.  394,  405,  530,  532,  vol.  xi.  p.  935.     And  on
the  number  of  persons  engaged  in  it,  compare  Tomline's  Life  of  Pitt,  vol.  i.  p.  359  :  see
also  Sinclair's  History  of  the  Public  Revenue,  vol.  iii.  p.  232  ;  Otter's  Life  of  Clarke,  vol.  i.
p.  391,     In  France,  the  evil  was  equally  great.     M.  Lemon tey  says,  that  early  in  the
eighteenth  century,  "  la  contrebande  devenait  une  profession  ouverte,  et  des  compagnies
de  cavalerie  deserterent  tout  entieres  leurs  etendards  pour  suivre  centre  le  fisc  cette
guerre  populaire."     Lemontey,   Essai  sur  /' ' Etablissetnent  monarchique  de  Louis  XIV.,
p.  430.      According  to  Townsend,  there  were  in  1786  "  more  than  1500  smugglers  in
the  Pyrenees."     Townsend's  Journey  through  Spain,  vol.  i.  p.  84.


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  159

otherwise  the  nation  is  in  a  state  of  anarchy.  But  the  accusation  which  the
historian  is  bound  to  bring  against  every  government  which  has  hitherto  existed
is,  that  it  has  overstepped  its  proper  functions,  and  at  each  step  has  done
incalculable  harm.  The  love  of  exercising  power  has  been  found  to  be  so
universal,  that  no  class  of  men  who  have  possessed  authority  have  been  able
to  avoid  abusing  it.  To  maintain  order,  to  prevent  the  strong  from  oppressing
the  weak,  and  to  adopt  certain  precautions  respecting  the  public  health,  are
the  only  services  which  any  government  can  render  to  the  interests  of  civiliza-
tion. That  these  are  services  of  immense  value,  no  one  will  deny  ;  but  it  cannot
be  said  that  by  them  civilization  is  advanced,  or  the  progress  of  Man  accelerated.
All  that  is  done  is  to  afford  the  opportunity  of  progress  ;  the  progress  itself
must  depend  upon  other  matters.  And  that  this  is  the  sound  view  of  legislation
is  moreover  evident  from  the  fact  that  as  knowledge  is  becoming  more  diffused,
id  as  an  increasing  experience  is  enabling  each  successive  generation  better
understand  the  complicated  relations  of  life,  just  in  the  same  proportion  are
len  insisting  upon  the  repeal  of  those  protective  laws,  the  enactment  of  which
ras  deemed  by  politicians  to  be  the  greatest  triumph  of  political  foresight.
Seeing,  therefore,  that  the  efforts  of  government  in  favour  of  civilization  are,
len  most  successful,  altogether  negative  ;  and  seeing  too,  that  when  those
forts  are  more  than  negative  they  become  injurious, — it  clearly  follows  that
speculations  must  be  erroneous  which  ascribe  the  progress  of  Europe  to  the
risdom  of  its  rulers.  This  is  an  inference  which  rests  not  only  on  the  argu-
lents  already  adduced,  but  on  facts  which  might  be  multiplied  from  every  page
)f  history.  For,  no  government  having  recognized  its  proper  limits,  the  result
that  every  government  has  inflicted  on  its  subjects  great  injuries  ;  and  has
le  this  nearly  always  with  the  best  intentions.  The  effects  of  its  protective
licy  in  injuring  trade,  and,  what  is  far  worse,  in  increasing  crime,  have  just
ien  noticed  ;  and  to  these  instances  innumerable  others  might  be  added.  Thus,
luring  many  centuries,  every  government  thought  it  was  its  bounden  duty  to
icourage  religious  truth,  and  discourage  religious  error.  The  mischief  this
is  produced  is  incalculable.  Putting  aside  all  other  considerations,  it  is
tough  to  mention  its  two  leading  consequences  ;  which  are,  the  increase  of
lypocrisy,  and  the  increase  of  perjury.  The  increase  of  hypocrisy  is  the  in-
Stable  result  of  connecting  any  description  of  penalty  with  the  profession
particular  opinions.  Whatever  may  be  the  case  with  individuals,  it  is  certain
it  the  majority  of  men  find  an  extreme  difficulty  in  long'  resisting  constant
iptation.  And  when  the  temptation  comes  to  them  in  the  shape  of  honour
id  emolument,  they  are  too  often  ready  to  profess  the  dominant  opinions,  and
>andon,  not  indeed  their  belief,  but  the  external  marks  by  which  that  belief
is  made  public.  Every  man  who  takes  this  step  is  a  hypocrite  ;  and  every
government  which  encourages  this  step  to  be  taken,  is  an  abettor  of  hypocrisy
and  a  creator  of  hypocrites.  Well,  therefore,  may  we  say,  that  when  a  govern-
ment holds  out  as  a  bait,  that  those  who  profess  certain  opinions  shall  enjoy
certain  privileges,  it  plays  the  part  of  the  tempter  of  old,  and,  like  the  Evil  One,
baseiy  offers  the  good  things  of  this  world  to  him  who  will  change  his  worship
and  deny  his  faith.  At  the  same  time,  and  as  apart  of  this  system,  the  increase
of  perjury  has  accompanied  the  increase  of  hypocrisy.  For  legislators,  plainly
seeing  that  proselytes  thus  obtained  could  not  be  relied  upon,  have  met  the
danger  by  the  most  extraordinary  precautions  ;  and  compelling  men  to  confirm
their  belief  by  repeated  oaths,  have  thus  sought  to  protect  the  old  creed  against
the  new  converts.  It  is  this  suspicion  as  to  the  motives  of  others,  which  has
given  rise  to  oaths  of  every  kind  and  in  every  direction.  In  England,  even  the
boy  at  college  is  forced  to  swear  about  matters  which  he  cannot  understand,
and  which  far  riper  minds  are  unable  to  master.  If  he  afterwards  goes  into
Parliament,  he  must  again  swear  about  his  religion  ;  and  at  nearly  every  stage
of  political  life  he  must  take  fresh  oaths  ;  the  solemnity  of  which  is  often  strangely
contrasted  with  the  trivial  functions  to  which  they  are  the  prelude.  A  solemn
adjuration  of  the  Deity  being  thus  made  at  every  turn,  it  has  happened,  as
might  have  been  expected,  that  oaths,  enjoined  as  a  matter  of  course,  have  at
length  degenerated  into  a  matter  of  form.  What  is  lightly  taken  is  easily


1 60  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

broken.  And  the  best  observers  of  English  society, — observers  too  whose
characters  are  very  different,  and  who  hold  the  most  opposite  opinions, — are
all  agreed  on  this,  that  the  perjury  habitually  practised  in  England,  and  of  which
government  is  the  immediate  creator,  is  so  general,  that  it  has  become  a  source
of  national  corruption,  has  diminished  the  value  of  human  testimony,  and
shaken  the  confidence  which  men  naturally  place  in  the  word  of  their  fellow -
creatures.*4

The  open  vices,  and,  what  is  much  more  dangerous,  the  hidden  corruption,
thus  generated  in  the  midst  of  society  by  the  ignorant  interference  of  Christian
rulers,  is  indeed  a  painful  subject  ;  but  it  is  one  which  I  could  not  omit  in  an
analysis  of  the  causes  of  civilization.  It  would  be  easy  to  push  the  inquiry  still
further,  and  to  show  how  legislators,  in  every  attempt  they  have  made  to  pro-
tect some  particular  interests,  and  uphold  some  particular  principles,  have  not
only  failed,  but  have  brought  about  results  diametrically  opposite  to  those
which  they  proposed.  We  have  seen  that  their  laws  in  favour  of  industry
have  injured  industry  ;  that  their  laws  in  favour  of  religion  have  increased
hypocrisy  ;  and  that  their  laws  to  secure  truth  have  encouraged  perjury.
Exactly  in  the  same  way,  nearly  every  country  has  taken  steps  to  prevent
usury,  and  keep  down  the  interest  of  money  ;  and  the  invariable  effect  has  been
to  increase  usury,  and  raise  the  interest  of  money.  For,  since  no  prohibition,
however  stringent,  can  destroy  the  natural  relation  between  demand  and  supply,
it  has  followed,  that  when  some  men  want  to  borrow,  and  other  men  want  to
lend,  both  parties  are  sure  to  find  means  of  evading  a  law  which  interferes  with
their  mutual  rights.45  If  the  two  parties  were  left  to  adjust  their  own  bargain
undisturbed,  the  usury  would  depend  on  the  circumstances  of  the  loan  ;  such  as  the
amount  of  security,  and  the  chance  of  repayment.  But  this  natural  arrange-
ment has  been  complicated  by  the  interference  of  government.46  A  certain
risk  being  always  incurred  by  those  who  disobey  the  law,  the  usurer,  very
properly,  refuses  to  lend  his  money  unless  he  is  also  compensated  for  the  danger
he  is  in  from  the  penalty  hanging  over  him.  This  compensation  can  only  be
made  by  the  borrower,  who  is  thus  obliged  to  pay  what  in  reality  is  a  double
interest  :  one  interest  for  the  natural  risk  on  the  loan,  and  another  interest
for  the  extra  risk  from  the  law.  Such,  then,  is  the  position  in  which  every

44  Archbishop  Whately  says,  what  hardly  any  thinking  man  will    now  deny,  "  If
Oaths  were  abolished — leaving  the  penalties  for  false  witness  (no  unimportant  part  of
our  security)  unaltered — I  am  convinced  that,  on  the  whole,  Testimony  would  be  more
trustworthy  than  it  is."     Whately' s  Elements  of  Rhetoric,  8vo,  1850,  p.  47.     See  also
on  the  amount  of  perjury  caused  by  English  legislation,  Jeremy  Bentham's  Works,  edit.
Bowring,  vol.  ii.  p.  210,  vol.  v.  pp.  191—229,  454-466,  vol.  vi.  pp.  314,  315  ;  Orme's  Life
of  Owen,  p.  195  ;  Locke's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  6  ;  Berkeley's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  196  ;  Whiston's
Memoirs,  pp.  33,  411-413  ;  Hamilton's  Discussions  on  Philosophy  and  Literature,  pp.  454,
522,   527,   528.      Sir  W.   Hamilton  sums  up  :    "  But  if  the  perjury  of  England  stands
pre-eminent  in  the  world,  the  perjury  of  the  English  Universities,  and  of  Oxford  in
particular,  stands  pre-eminent  in    England."  p.   528.     Compare    Priestley's  Memoirs,
vol.  i.  p.  374  ;  and  Baker's  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Bernard,  1819,  pp.  188,  189.

45  "  L' observation  rigoureuse  de  ces  loix  seroit  destructive  de  tout  commerce  ;  aussi
ne  sont-elles  pas  observees  rigoureusement."      Memoir e  sur  les  Prets  d' Argent,  sec.  xiv.,
in  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  v.  pp.  278,  279.     Compare  Ricardo's  Works,  pp.  178,  179,  with
Condorcet,  Vie  de  Turgot,  pp.  53,  54,  228.

46  Aided  by  the  church.     Ecclesiastical  councils  contain  numerous  regulations  against
usury  ;  and,  in  1179,  Pope  Alexander  ordered  that  usurers  were  not  to  be  buried  :  "  Quia
in  omnibus  fere  locis  crimen  usurarum  invaluit ;  ut  multi  negotiis  prffltermissis  quasi
licite   usuras  exerceant ;   et   qualiter  utriusque   testamenti   pagina   condemnetur,   non
attendunt  :  ideo  constituimus,  ut  usurarii  manifest!  nee  ad  communionem  recipiantur
altaris,  nee  Christianam,  si  in  hoc  peccato  decesserint,  accipiant  sepulturam,  sed  nee
oblationem  eorum  quisquam  accipiat."     Rog.  de  Hoved.  Annal.  in  Rerum  Anglicarum
Scriptores  post  Bedam,  p.  335,  Lond.  1596,  folio.     In  Spain,  the  Inquisition  took  cog-
nizance  of   usury.     See   Llorente,   Histoire  de  V Inquisition,   vol.   i.   p.    339.     Compare
Ledwich's  Antiquities  of  Ireland,  p.  133.


RELIGION,    LITERATURE,    AND    GOVERNMENT  161

European  legislature  has  placed  itself.     By  enactments  against  usury,  it  has
increased  what  it  wished  to  destroy  ;  it  has  passed  laws  which  the  imperative
necessities  of  men  compel  them  to  violate  :  while,  to  wind  up  the  whole,  the
penalty  for  such  violation  falls  on  the  borrowers  ;  that  is,  on  the  very  class  in
whose  favour  the  legislators  interfered.47

In  the  same  meddling  spirit,  and  with  the  same  mistaken  notions  of  protec-
tion, the  great  Christian  governments  have  done  other  things  still  more  in-
jurious. They  have  made  strenuous  and  repeated  efforts  to  destroy  the  liberty
of  the  press,  and  prevent  men  from  expressing  their  sentiments  on  the  most
important  questions  in  politics  and  religion.  In  nearly  every  country,  they,
with  the  aid  of  the  church,  have  organized  a  vast  system  of  literary  police  ;  the
sole  object  of  which  is  to  abrogate  the  undoubted  right  of  every  citizen  to  lay
his  opinions  before  his  fellow -citizens.  In  the  very  few  countries  where  they
have  stopped  short  of  these  extreme  steps,  they  have  had  recourse  to  others  less
violent,  but  equally  unwarrantable.  For  even  where  they  have  not  openly
forbidden  the  free  dissemination  of  knowledge,  they  have  done  all  that  they
could  to  check  it.  On  all  the  implements  of  knowledge,  and  on  all  the  means
by  which  it  is  diffused,  such  as  paper,  books,  political  journals,  and  the  like,
they  have  imposed  duties  so  heavy,  that  they  could  hardly  have  done  worse
if  they  had  been  the  sworn  advocates  of  popular  ignorance.  Indeed,  looking
at  what  they  have  actually  accomplished,  it  may  be  emphatically  said  that
they  have  taxed  the  human  mind.  They  have  made  the  very  thoughts  of  men
pay  toll.  Whoever  wishes  to  communicate  his  ideas  to  others,  and  thus  do
what  he  can  to  increase  the  stock  of  our  acquirements,  must  first  pour  his
contributions  into  the  imperial  exchequer.  That  is  the  penalty  inflicted  on
him  for  instructing  his  fellow-creatures.  That  is  the  blackmail  which  govern-
ment extorts  from  literature  ;  and  on  receipt  of  which  it  accords  its  favour,  and
agrees  to  abstain  from  further  demands.  And  what  causes  all  this  to  be  the
more  insufferable,  is  the  use  which  is  made  of  these  and  similar  exactions,
wrung  from  every  kind  of  industry,  both  bodily  and  mental.  It  is  truly  a  fright-
ful consideration,  that  knowledge  is  to  be  hindered,  and  that  the  proceeds  of
honest  labour,  of  patient  thought,  and  sometimes  of  profound  genius,  are  to  be
diminished,  in  order  that  a  large  part  of  their  scanty  earnings  may  go  to  swell
the  pomp  of  an  idle  and  ignorant  court,  minister  to  the  caprice  of  a  few  powerful
individuals,  and  too  often  supply  them  with  the  means  of  turning  against  the
people  resources  which  the  people  called  into  existence.

These  and  the  foregoing  statements,  respecting  the  effects  produced  on
European  society  by  political  legislation,  are  not  doubtful  or  hypothetical
inferences,  but  are  such  as  every  reader  of  history  may  verify  for  himself.  In-
deed, some  of  them  are  still  acting  in  England  ;  and,  in  one  country  or  another,
the  whole  of  them  may  be  seen  in  full  force.  When  put  together,  they  compose
an  aggregate  so  formidable,  that  we  may  well  wonder  how,  in  the  face  of  them,
civilization  has  been  able  to  advance.  That  under  such  circumstances  it  has
advanced,  is  a  decisive  proof  of  the  extraordinary  energy  of  Man  ;  and  justifies
a  confident  belief  that  as  the  pressure  of  legislation  is  diminished,  and  the
human  mind  less  hampered,  the  progress  will  continue  with  accelerated  speed.
But  it  is  absurd,  it  would  be  a  mockery  of  all  sound  reasoning,  to  ascribe  to
legislation  any  share  in  the  progress,  or  to  expect  any  benefit  from  future
legislators,  except  that  sort  of  benefit  which  consists  in  undoing  the  work  of
their  predecessors.  This  is  what  the  present  generation  claims  at  their  hands  ;
and  it  should  be  remembered  that  what  one  generation  solicits  as  a  boon,  the
next  generation  demands  as  a  right.  And,  when  the  right  is  pertinaciously
refused,  one  of  two  things  has  always  happened  :  either  the  nation  has  retro-
graded, or  else  the  people  have  risen.  Should  the  government  remain  firm,

47  The  whole  subject  of  the  usury  laws  has  been  treated  by  Bentham  in  so  complete
and  exhaustive  a  manner,  that  I  cannot  do  better  than  refer  the  reader  to  his  admirable
"  Letters."  A  part  only  of  the  question  is  discussed,  and  that  very  imperfectly,  in
Rey's  Science  Sociale,  vol.  iii.  pp.  64,  65.  On  the  necessity  of  usury  to  mitigate  the
effects  of  a  commercial  panic,  see  Mill's  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  vol.  ii.  p.  185.

II


162  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

this  is  the  cruel  dilemma  in  which  men  are  placed.  If  they  submit,  they  injure
their  country  ;  if  they  rebel,  they  may  injure  it  still  more.  In  the  ancient
monarchies  of  the  East,  their  usual  plan  was  to  yield  ;  in  the  monarchies  of
Europe,  it  has  been  to  resist.  Hence  those  insurrections  and  rebellions  which
occupy  so  large  a  space  in  modern  history,  and  which  are  but  repetitions  of  the
old  story,  the  undying  struggle  between  oppressors  and  oppressed.  It  would,
however,  be  unjust  to  deny  that  in  one  country  the  fatal  crisis  has  now  for
several  generations  been  successfully  averted.  In  one  European  country,  and
in  one  alone,  the  people  have  been  so  strong,  and  the  government  so  weak,
that  the  history  of  legislation,  taken  as  a  whole,  is,  notwithstanding  a  few
aberrations,  the  history  of  slow  but  constant  concession  :  reforms  which  would
have  been  refused  to  argument,  have  been  yielded  from  fear  ;  while,  from  the
steady  increase  of  democratic  opinions,  protection  after  protection,  and  privilege
after  privilege,  have,  even  in  our  own  time,  been  torn  away  ;  until  the  old
institutions,  though  they  retain  their  former  name,  have  lost  their  former  vigour,
and  there  no  longer  remains  a  doubt  as  to  what  their  fate  must  ultimately  be.
Nor  need  we  add  that  in  this  same  country,  where,  more  than  in  any  other  of
Europe,  legislators  are  the  exponents  and  the  servants  of  the  popular  will,  the
progress  has,  on  this  account,  been  more  undeviating  than  elsewhere  ;  there
has  been  neither  anarchy  nor  revolution  ;  and  the  world  has  been  made  familiar
with  the  great  truth,  that  one  main  condition  of  the  prosperity  of  a  people  is,
that  its  rulers  shall  have  very  little  power,  that  they  shall  exercise  that  power
very  sparingly,  and  that  they  shall  by  no  means  presume  to  raise  themselves
into  supreme  judges  of  the  national  interests,  or  deem  themselves  authorized
to  defeat  the  wishes  of  those  for  whose  benefit  alone  they  occupy  the  post  in
trusted  to  them.


CHAPTER    VI.

ORIGIN   OF   HISTORY,    AND   STATE   OF   HISTORICAL  LITERATURE   DURING  THE

MIDDLE    AGES.

1  HAVE  now  laid  before  the  reader  an  examination  of  those  conspicuous  circum-
stances to  which  the  progress  of  civilization  is  commonly  ascribed  ;  and  I  have
proved  that  such  circumstances,  so  far  from  I  being  the  cause  of  civilization,
are  at  best  only  its  effects  ;  and  that  although  religion,  literature,  and  legislation
do  undoubtedly  modify  the  condition  of  mankind,  they  are  still  more  modified
by  it.*  Indeed,  as  we  have  clearly  seen,  they,  even  in  their  most  favourable
position,  can  be  but  secondary  agents  ;  because  however  beneficial  their  ap-
parent influence  may  be,  they  are  themselves  the  product  of  preceding  changes,
and  their  results  will  vary  according  to  the  variations  of  the  society  on  which
they  work.

It  is  thus  that,  by  each  successive  analysis,  the  field  of  the  present  inquiry
has  been  narrowed,  until  we  have  found  reason  to  believe  that  the  growth  of
European  civilization  is  solely  due  to  the  progress  of  knowledge,  and  that  the
progress  of  knowledge  depends  on  the  number  of  truths  which  the  human
intellect  discovers,  and  on  the  extent  to  which  they  are  diffused.  In  support  of
this  proposition  I  have  as  yet  only  brought  forward  such  general  arguments
as  establish  a  very  strong  probability  ;  which  to  raise  to  a  certainty  will  require
an  appeal  to  history  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term.  Thus  to  verify  speculative
conclusions  by  an  exhaustive  enumeration  of  the  most  important  particular
facts,  is  the  task  which  I  purpose  to  execute  so  far  as  my  powers  will  allow  ;  and
in  the  preceding  chapter  I  have  briefly  stated  the  method  according  to  which
the  investigation  will  be  conducted.  Besides  this,  it  has  appeared  to  me  that
the  principles  which  I  have  laid  down  may  also  be  tested  by  a  mode  of  pro-
ceeding which  I  have  not  yet  mentioned,  but  which  is  intimately  connected
with  the  subject  now  before  us.  This  is,  to  incorporate  with  an  inquiry  into  the
progress  of  the  history  of  Man,  another  inquiry  into  the  progress  of  History  itself.
By  this  means,  great  light  will  be  thrown  on  the  movements  of  society  ;  since
there  must  always  be  a  connexion  between  the  way  in  which  men  contemplate
the  past,  and  the  way  in  which  they  contemplate  the  present  ;  both  views  being
in  fact  different  forms  of  the  same  habits  of  thought,  and  therefore  presenting,
in  each  age,  a  certain  sympathy  and  correspondence  with  each  other.  It  will
moreover  be  found  that  such  an  inquiry  into  what  I  call  the  history  of  history
will  establish  two  leading  facts  of  considerable  value.  The  first  fact  is,  that
during  the  last  three  centuries,  historians,  taken  as  a  class,  have  shown  a  con-
stantly increasing  respect  for  the  human  intellect,  and  an  aversion  for  those
innumerable  contrivances  by  which  it  was  formerly  shackled.  The  second
fact  is,  that  during  the  same  period  they  have  displayed  a  growing  tendency

[*  As  the  "  condition  of  mankind  "  has  been  shown  to  be  determined  by  knowledge,
and  knowledge  comes  as  literature  (by  Buckle's  definition),  this  formula  must  be  regarded
as  inexact. — ED.]

163


1 64  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

to  neglect  matters  once  deemed  of  paramount  importance,  and  have  been  more
willing  to  attend  to  subjects  connected  with  the  condition  of  the  people  and  the
diffusion  of  knowledge.  These  two  facts  will  be  decisively  established  in  the
present  Introduction  ;  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  their  existence  corroborates
the  principles  which  I  have  propounded.  If  it  can  be  ascertained  that  as
society  has  improved,  historical  literature  has  constantly  tended  in  one  given
direction,  there  arises  a  very  strong  probability  in  favour  of  the  truth  of  those
views  towards  which  it  is  manifestly  approaching.  Indeed,  it  is  a  probability
of  this  sort  which  makes  it  so  important  for  the  student  of  any  particular  science
to  be  acquainted  with  its  history  ;  because  there  is  always  a  fair  presumption
that  when  general  knowledge  is  advancing,  any  single  department  of  it,  if  studied
by  competent  men,  is  also  advancing,  even  when  the  results  may  have  been  so
small  as  to  seem  unworthy  of  attention.  Hence  it  becomes  highly  important  to
observe  the  way  in  which,  during  successive  ages,  historians  have  shifted  their
ground  ;  since  we  shall  find  that  such  changes  have  in  the  long-run  always
pointed  to  the  same  quarter,  and  are  in  reality  only  part  of  that  vast  move-
ment by  which  the  human  intellect,  with  infinite  difficulty,  has  vindicated  its
own  rights,  and  slowly  emancipated  itself  from  those  inveterate  prejudices
which  long  impeded  its  action.

With  a  view  to  these  considerations,  it  seems  advisable  that,  when  examining
the  different  civilizations  into  which  the  great  countries  of  Europe  have  diverged,
I  should  also  give  an  account  of  the  way  in  which  history  has  been  commonly
written  in  each  country.  In  the  employment  of  this  resource  I  shall  be  mainly
guided  by  a  desire  to  illustrate  the  intimate  connexion  between  the  actual  con-
dition of  a  people  and  their  opinions  respecting  the  past  ;  and,  in  order  to  keep
this  connexion  in  sight,  I  shall  treat  the  state  of  historical  literature,  not  as  a
separate  subject,  but  as  forming  part  of  the  intellectual  history  of  each  nation.
The  present  volume  will  contain  a  view  of  the  principal  characteristics  of  French
civilization  until  the  great  Revolution  ;  and  with  that  there  will  be  incorporated
an  account  of  the  French  historians,  and  of  the  remarkable  improvements  they
introduced  into  their  own  departments  of  knowledge.  The  relation  which  these
improvements  bore  to  the  state  of  society  from  which  they  proceeded,  is  very
striking,  and  will  be  examined  at  some  length  ;  while,  in  the  next  volume,  the
civilization  and  the  historical  literature  of  the  other  leading  countries  will  be
treated  in  a  similar  manner.*  Before,  however,  entering  into  these  different
subjects,  it  has  occurred  to  me  that  a  preliminary  inquiry  into  the  origin  of
European  history  would  be  interesting,  as  supplying  information  respecting
matters  which  are  little  known,  and  also  as  enabling  the  reader  to  understand
the  extreme  difficulty  with  which  history  has  reached  its  present  advanced,  but
still  very  imperfect,  state.  The  materials  for  studying  the  earliest  condition  of
Europe  have  long  since  perished  ;  but  the  extensive  information  we  now  possess
concerning  barbarous  nations  will  supply  us  with  a  useful  resource,  because
they  have  all  much  in  common  ;  the  opinions  of  extreme  ignorance  being,  indeed,
everywhere  the  same,  except  when  modified  by  the  differences  which  nature
presents  in  various  countries.  I  have  therefore  no  hesitation  in  employing
the  evidence  which  has  been  collected  by  competent  travellers,  and  drawing
inferences  from  it  respecting  that  period  of  the  European  mind,  of  which  we
have  no  direct  knowledge.  Such  conclusions  will  of  course  be  speculative  ;
but,  during  the  last  thousand  years,  we  are  quite  independent  of  them,  inasmuch
as  every  great  country  has  had  chroniclers  of  its  own  since  the  ninth  century,
while  the  French  have  an  uninterrupted  series  since  the  sixth  century.  In  the
present  chapter  I  intend  to  give  specimens  of  the  way  in  which,  until  the  six-
teenth century,  history  was  habitually  written  by  the  highest  European
authorities.  Its  subsequent  improvement  during  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth
centuries  will  be  related  under  the  separate  heads  of  the  countries  where  the
progress  was  made  ;  and  as  history,  previous  to  the  improvement,  was  little
else  than  a  tissue  of  the  grossest  errors,  I  will,  in  the  first  place,  examine  the
leading  causes  of  its  universal  corruption,  and  indicate  the  steps  by  which  it

[*  This  promise  was  not  fulfilled. — ED.]


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      165

was  so  disfigured  that,  during  several  centuries,  Europe  did  not  possess  a  single
man  who  had  critically  studied  the  past,  or  who  was  even  able  to  record  with
tolerable  accuracy  the  events  of  his  own  time.

At  a  very  early  period  in  the  progress  of  a  people,  and  long  before  they  are
acquainted  with  the  use  of  letters,  they  feel  the  want  of  some  resource,  which
in  peace  may  amuse  their  leisure,  and  in  war  may  stimulate  their  courage.
This  is  supplied  to  them  by  the  invention  of  ballads  ;  which  form  the  ground  -
work  of  all  historical  knowledge,  and  which,  in  one  shape  or  another,  are  found
among  some  of  the  rudest  tribes  of  the  earth.  They  are,  for  the  most  part,
sung  by  a  class  of  men  whose  particular  business  it  is  thus  to  preserve  the  stock
of  traditions.  Indeed,  so  natural  is  this  curiosity  as  to  past  events,  that  there
are  few  nations  to  whom  these  bards  or  minstrels  are  unknown.  Thus,  to
select  a  few  instances,  it  is  they  who  have  preserved  the  popular  traditions,  not
only  of  Europe,1  but  also  of  China,  Tibet,  and  Tartary  ;  2  likewise  of  India,3  of
Scinde.,4  of  Belochistan,5  of  Western  Asia,6  of  the  islands  of  the  Black  Sea,7  of
Egypt,8  of  Western  Africa,9  of  North  America,10  of  South  America,11  and  of
the  islands  in  the  Pacific.12

1  For  an  account  of  the  ancient  bards  of  Gaul,  see  the  Benedictine  Hist.  Lit.  de  la
France,  vol.  i.  part  i.  pp.  25-28.     Those  of  Scotland  are  noticed  in  Barry's  Hist,  of  the
Orkney  Islands,  p.  89  ;  and  for  a  modern  instance  in  the  island  of  Col,  near  Mull,  see
Otter's  Life  of  Clarke,  vol.  i.  p.  307.     As  to  the  Irish  bards  in  the  seventh  century,  see
Sharon  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  571.     Spenser's  account  of  them  in  the
sixteenth  century  (Somers  Tracts,  vol.  i.  pp.  590,  591)  shows  that  the  order  was  then
falling  into  contempt ;  and  in  the  seventeenth  century  this  is  confirmed  by  Sir  William
Temple  ;  Essay  on  Poetry,  in  Temple's  Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.  431,  432.     But  it  was  not  till
the  eighteenth  century  that  they  became  extinct ;  for  Mr.  Prior  (Life  of  Goldsmith,  vol.  i.
PP-    36,    37)   says  that   Carolan,  "  the  last  of   the  ancient   Irish  bards,"  died  in  1738.
Without  them  the  memory  of  many  events  would  have  been  entirely  lost ;   since  even
at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  there  being  no  registers  in  Ireland,  the  ordinary
means  of  recording  facts  were  so  little  known,  that  parents  often  took  the  precaution
of  having  the  names  and  ages  of  children  marked  on  their  arms  with  gunpowder.     See
Kirkman's  Memoirs  of  Charles  Macklin,  8vo,  1799,  vol.  i.  pp.  144,  145,  a  curious  book.
Compare,  respecting  Carolan,  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  vii.
pp.  688-694.

2  On  these  Toolholos,  as  they  are  called,  see  Hue's  Travels  tn  Tartary,  Thibet,  and
China,  vol.  i.  pp.  65-67.     Hue  says,  p.  67,  "  These  poet -singers,  who  remind  us  of  the
minstrels  and  rhapsodists  of  Greece,  are  also  very  numerous  in  China  ;  but  they  are,
probably,  nowhere  so  numerous  or  so  popular  as  in  Thibet."

3  On  the  bards  of  the  Deccan,  see  Wilks's  History  of  the  South  of  India,  4to,  1810,  vol.  i.
pp.  20,  21,  and  Transac.  of  the  Bombay  Soc.  vol.  i.  p.  162.     For  those  of  other  parts  of
India,  see  Heber's.  Journey,  vol.  ii.  pp.  452-455  ;  Burnes  on  the  North-west  Frontier  of
India,  in  Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  iv.  pp.  no,  in  ;  Prinsep,  in  Journal  of  Asiat.  Soc.
vol.  viii.  p.  395  ;  Forbes' s  Oriental  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  pp.  376,  377,  543  ;  and  Asiatic  Re-
searches, vol.  ix.  p.  78.     They  are  mentioned  in  the  oldest  Veda,  which  is  also  the  oldest
of  all  the  Indian  books.     See  Rig  Veda  Sanhita,  vol.  i.  p.  158.

4  See  Burton's  Sindh,  p.  56,  8vo,  1851.

5  Burton's  Sindh,  p.  59.

6  Burnes' s  Travels  into  Bokhara,  8vo,  1834,  vol.  ii.  pp.  107,  115,  116.

7  Clarke's  Travels,  8vo,  1816,  vol.  ii.  p.  101.

8  Compare  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  p.  304,  with  Bunsen's  Egypt,  vol.  i.
p.  96,  vol.  ii.  p.  92.

9  I  have  mislaid  my  note  on  the  bards  of  Western  Africa,  and  can  only  refer  to  a  hasty
notice  in  Mungo  Park's  Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  70,  8vo,  1817.

10  Buchanan's  Sketches  of  the  North- American  Indians,  p.  337.

11  Prescott's  History  of  Peru,  vol.  i.  pp.  31,  32,  117.

12  Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches,  vol.  i.  pp.  85,  199,  411  ;  Ellis,  Tour  through  Hawaii,
p.  or.     Compare  Cook's  Voyages,  vol.  v.  p.  237,  with  Beechey's  Voyage  to  the  Pacific,
voFii.  p.  106.     Some  of  these  ballads  have  been  collected,  but,  I  believe,  not  published.
See  Cheever's  Sandwich  Islands,  8vo,  1851,  p.  181.


1 66  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

In  all  these  countries,  letters  were  long  unknown  ;  and,  as  a  people  in  that
state  have  no  means  of  perpetuating  their  history  except  by  oral  tradition,  they
select  the  form  best  calculated  to  assist  their  memory  ;  and  it  will,  I  believe,
be  found  that  the  first  rudiments  of  knowledge  consist  always  of  poetry,  and
often  of  rhyme.13  The  jingle  pleases  the  ear  of  the  barbarian,  and  affords  a
security  that  he  will  hand  it  down  to  his  children  in  the  unimpaired  state  in
which  he  received  it.14  This  guarantee  against  error  increases  still  further  the
value  of  these  ballads  ;  and  instead  of  being  considered  as  a  mere  amusement,
they  rise  to  the  dignity  of  judicial  authorities.15  The  allusions  contained  in
them  are  satisfactory  proofs  to  decide  the  merits  of  rival  families,  or  even  to  fix
the  limits  of  those  rude  estates  which  such  a  society  can  possess.  We  therefore
find  that  the  professed  reciters  and  composers  of  these  songs  are  the  recognized
judges  in  all  disputed  matters  ;  and  as  they  are  often  priests,  and  believed  to
be  inspired,  it  is  probably  in  this  way  that  the  notion  of  the  divine  origin  of
poetry  first  arose.16  These  ballads  will  of  course  vary  according  to  the  ciis-

13  It  is  a  singular  proof  of  the  carelessness  with  which  the  history  of  barbarous  nations
has  been  studied,  that  authors  constantly  assert  rhyme  to  be  a  comparatively  recent
contrivance  ;  and  even  Pinkerton,  writing  to  Laing  in  1799,  says,  "  Rhyme  was  not
known  in  Europe  till  about  the  ninth  century."     Pinkerton's  Literary  Correspondence,
vol.  ii.  p.  92.     The  truth  is,  that  rhyme  was  not  only  known  to  the  ancient  Greeks  and
Romans,  but  was  used,  long  before  the  date  Pinkerton  mentions,  by  the  Anglo-Saxons,
by  the  Irish,  by  the  Welsh,  and,  I  believe,  by  the  Bretons.     See  Mure's  Hist,  of  the
Literature  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  113  ;  Hallatn's  Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  31  ;  Villemarque,
Chants  Populates  de  la  Bretagne,  vol.  i.  pp.  Iviii.  lix.    compared  with  Souvestre,  Les
Derniers  Bretons,  p.  143  ;    Turners   Hist,  of  England,  vol.   hi.   pp.    383,    643,  vol.    vii.
pp.  324,  328,  330.    Rhyme  is  also  used  by  the  Fan  tees  (Bowdich,  Mission  to  Ashantee,
p.  358)  ;  by  the  Persians  (Transac.  of  Bombay  Soc.  vol.  ii.  p.  82 );  by  the  Chinese  (Transac-
of  Asiatic  Soc.  vol.  ii.  pp.  407,  409,  and  Davis' 's  Chinese,  vol.  ii.  p.  269) ;  by  the  Malays
(Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  x.  pp.  176,  196) ;  by  the  Javanese  (Crawfurd's  Hist,  of  the
Indian  Archipelago,  vol.  ii.  pp.  19,  20)  ;  and  by  the  Siamese  (Transac.  of  Asiatic  Soc.
vol.  iii.  p.  299).

14  The  habit  thus  acquired  long  survives  the  circumstances  which  made  it  necessary.
During  many  centuries,  the  love  of  versification  was  so  widely  diffused,  that  works  in
rhyme  were  composed  on  nearly  all  subjects,  even  in  Europe  ;  and  this  practice,  which
marks  the  ascendency  of  the  imagination,  is,  as  I  have  shown,  a  characteristic  of  the
great  Indian  civilization,  where  the  understanding  was  always  in  abeyance.     On  early
French  historians  who   wrote   in   rhyme,   see  Monteil,  Hist,  des   divers   Etats,  vol.   vi.
p.  147.  Montucla  (Hist,  des  Mathemat.  vol.  i.  p.  506)  mentions  a  mathematical  treatise,
written  in  the  thirteenth  century,  "  en  vers  techniques."     Compare  the  remarks  of
Matter  (Hist,  de  VEcole  d' 'Alexandrie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  179-183)  on  the  scientific  poetry   of
Aratus  ;  and  on  that  of  Hygin,  p.  250.  Thus,  too,  we  find  an  Anglo-Norman  writing  "  the
Institutes  of  Justinian  in  verse  "  ;  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vii.  p.  307  :  and  a
Polish  historian  composing  "  his  numerous  works  on  genealogy  and  heraldry  mostly  in
rhyme."      Talvfs    Language  and  Literature  of  the  Slavic  Nations,  8vo,   1850,  p.  246.
Compare  Origines  du  Droit  Francais,  in  (Euvres  de  Michelet,  vol.  ii.  p.  310.

15  Mr.  Ellis,  a  missionary  in  the  South -Sea  Islands,  says  of  the  inhabitants,  "  Their
traditionary  ballads  were  a  kind  of  standard,  or  classical  authority,  to  which  they
referred  for  the  purpose  of  determining  any  disputed  fact  in  their  history."     And  when
doubts  arose,  "  as  they  had  no  records  to  which  they  could  at  such  times  refer,  they
could  only  oppose  one  oral  tradition  to  another  ;  which  unavoidably  involved  the  parties
in  protracted    and   often   obstinate   debates."      Ellis,    Polynesian   Researches,   vol.    i.
pp.  202,  203.     Compare  Elphinstone 's  Hist,  of  India,  p.   66  ;    Laing's  Heimskringla,
8vo,   1844,  vol.  i.  pp.  50,  51  ;  TwelVs  Life  of  Pocock,  edit.  1816,  p.  143.

16  The  inspiration  of  poetry  is  sometimes  explained  by  its  spontaneousness  (Cousin,
Hist,  de  la  Philosophic,  II.  serie,  vol.  i.  pp.  135,  136) ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  one
cause  of    the  reverence  felt  for  great  poets  is  the  necessity  they  seem  to  experience  of
pouring  out  their  thoughts  without  reference  to  their  own  wishes.     Still,  it  will,  I  belreve,
be  found  that  the  notion  of  poetry  being  a  divine  art  is  most  rife  in  those  states  of


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING    THE    MIDDLE  AGES    167

toms  and  temperaments  of  the  different  nations,  and  according  to  the  climate
to  which  they  are  accustomed.  In  the  south  they  assume  a  passionate  and
voluptuous  form  ;  in  the  north  they  are  rather  remarkable  for  their  tragic  and
warlike  character.1 7  But,  notwithstanding  these  diversities,  all  such  produc-
tions have  one  feature  in  common.  They  are  not  only  founded  on  truth,  but,
making  allowance  for  the  colourings  of  poetry,  they  are  all  strictly  true.  Men
who  are  constantly  repeating  songs  which  they  constantly  hear,  and  who  appeal
to  the  authorized  singers  of  them  as  final  umpires  in  disputed  questions,  are
not  likely  to  be  mistaken  on  matters,  in  the  accuracy  of  which  they  have  so
lively  an  interest.18

This  is  the  earliest,  and  most  simple,  of  the  various  stages  through  which
history  is  obliged  to  pass.  But  in  the  course  of  time,  unless  unfavourable
circumstances  intervene,  society  advances,  and,  among  other  changes,  there
is  one  in  particular  of  the  greatest  importance  :  I  mean  the  introduction  of  the
art  of  writing,  which,  before  many  generations  are  passed,  must  effect  a  com-
plete alteration  in  the  character  of  the  national  traditions.  The  manner  in
which  this  occurs  has,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  never  been  pointed  out  ;  and  it  will,
therefore,  be  interesting  to  attempt  to  trace  some  of  its  details.

The  first  and  perhaps  the  most  obvious  consideration  is  that  the  introduc-
tion of  the  art  of  writing  gives  permanence  to  the  national  knowledge,  and  thus
lessens  the  utility  of  that  oral  information  in  which  all  the  acquirements  of
an  unlettered  people  must  be  contained.  Hence  it  is  that  as  a  country  advances,
the  influence  of  tradition  diminishes,  and  traditions  themselves  become  less
trustworthy.19  Besides  this,  the  preservers  of  these  traditions  lose,  in  this
stage  of  society,  much  of  their  former  reputation.  Among  a  perfectly  un-
lettered people,  the  singers  of  ballads  are,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  sole
depositaries  of  those  historical  facts  on  which  the  fame,  and  often  the  property,
of  their  chieftains  principally  depend.  But  when  this  same  nation  becomes
acquainted  with  the  art  of  writing,  it  grows  unwilling  to  intrust  these  matters
to  the  memory  of  itinerant  singers,  and  avails  itself  of  its  new  art  to  preserve

society  in  which  knowledge  is  monopolized  by  the  bards,  and  in  which  the  bards  are
both  priests  and  historians.  On  this  combination  of  pursuits,  compare  a  note  in  Mal-
colm's Hist,  of  Persia,  vol.  i.  p.  90,  with  Mure's  Hist,  of  the  Lit.  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  148,
volv  ii.  p.  228,  and  Petrie's  learned  work,  Ecclesiastical  Architecture  of  Ireland,  Dublin,
1845,  p.  354.  For  evidence  of  the  great  respect  paid  to  bards,  see  Mallet's  Northern
Antiquities,  pp.  234-236  ;  Wheaton's  Hist,  of  the  Northmen,  pp.  50,  51  ;  Wright's  Biog.
Brit.  Lit.  vol.  i.  p.  3  ;  Warton's  Hist,  of  English  Poetry,  1840,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxvi.  xl.  ;  Grote's
Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  182,  ist  edit.  ;  and  on  their  important  duties,  see  the  laws  of
Mcelmund,  Villemarque,  Chants  Populaires  de  la  Bretagne,  1846,  vol.  i.  pp.  v.  and  vi.  ;
Thirlwall's  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.'p.  229  ;  and  Origines  du  Droit,  in  (Euvres  de  Michelet,
vol.  ii.  p.  372.

"  Villemarque,  Chants  Populaires,  vol.  i.  p.  Iv.  [This  author  is  little  to  be  trusted.
His  work  has  been  described  by  Prof.  York  Powell  (Folk  Lore,  March,  1903,  p.  109)  as
"  a  brilliant  forgery  by  a  man  of  talent  who  amused  himself  by  his  artificial  and  ro-
mantic '  reconstruction  '  of  a  period  he  never  knew." — ED.]

18  As  to  the  general  accuracy  of  the  early  ballads,  which  has  been  rashly  attacked  by
several  writers,  and  among  others  by  Sir  Walter  Scott,  see  Villemarque,  Chants  Popu-
laires, vol.  i.  pp.  xxv.-xxxi.,  and  Talvi's  Slavic  Nations,  p.  150.     On  the  tenacity  of
oral  tradition,  compare  Niebuhr's  History  of  Rome,  1847,  vol.  i.  p.  230,  with  Laing's
Denmark,  pp.  197,  198,  350  ;   Wheaton's  Hist,  of  the  Northmen,  pp.  38,  39,  57-59.  Another
curious  illustration  of  this  is,  that  several  barbarous  nations  continue  to  repeat  the  old
traditions  in  the  old  words,  for  so  many  generations,  that  at  length  the  very  language
becomes  unintelligible  to  the  majority  of  those  who  recite  them.     See  Mariner's  Account
of  the  Tonga  Islands,  vol.  i.  p.  156,  vol.  ii.  p.  217,  and  Catlin's  North -American  Indians,
vol.  i.  p.  126.

19  That  the  invention  of  letters  would  at  first  weaken  the  memory,  is  noticed  in
Plato's  Phaedrus,  chap.  135  (Platonis  Opera,  vol.  i.  p.  187,  edit.  Bekker,  Lond.  1826)
where,  however,  the  argument  is  pushed  rather  too  far.


1 68  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

them  in  a  fixed  and  material  form.  As  soon  as  this  is  effected,  the  importance
of  those  who  repeat  the  national  traditions  is  sensibly  diminished.  They
gradually  sink  into  an  inferior  class,  which,  having  lost  its  old  reputation,  no
longer  consists  of  those  superior  men  to  whose  abilities  it  owed  its  former  fame.20
Thus  we  see  that  although,  without  letters,  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of  much
importance,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  their  introduction  is  injurious  to  his-
torical traditions  in  two  distinct  ways  :  first  by  weakening  the  traditions,  and
secondly  by  weakening  the  class  of  men  whose  occupation  it  is  to  preserve  them.
But  this  is  not  all.  Not  only  does  the  art  of  writing  lessen  the  number  of
traditionary  truths,  but  it  directly  encourages  the  propagation  of  falsehoods.
This  is  effected  by  what  may  be  termed  a  principle  of  accumulation,  to  which  all
systems  of  belief  have  been  deeply  indebted.  In  ancient  times,  for  example,
the  name  of  Hercules  was  given  to  several  of  those  great  public  robbers  who
scourged  mankind,  and  who,  if  their  crimes  were  successful  as  well  as  enormous,
were  sure  after  their  death  to  be  worshipped  as  heroes.21  How  this  appellation
originated  is  uncertain  ;  but  it  was  probably  bestowed  at  first  on  a  single  man,
and  afterwards  on  those  who  resembled  him  in  the  character  of  their  achieve-
ments.22 This  mode  of  extending  the  use  of  a  single  name  is  natural  to  a
barbarous  people  ;  23  and  would  cause  little  or  no  confusion,  as  long  as  the
traditions  of  the  country  remained  local  and  unconnected.  But  as  soon  as
these  traditions  became  fixed  by  a  written  language,  the  collectors  of  them,
deceived  by  the  similarity  of  name,  assembled  the  scattered  facts,  and,  ascribing
to  a  single  man  these  accumulated  exploits,  degraded  history  to  the  level  of  a
miraculous  mythology.24  In  the  same  way,  soon  after  the  use  of  letters  was
known  in  the  North  of  Europe,  there  was  drawn  up  by  Saxo  Grammaticus  the
life  of  the  celebrated  Ragnar  Lodbrok.  Either  from  accident  or  design,  this
great  warrior  of  Scandinavia,  who  had  taught  England  to  tremble,  had  re-
ceived the  same  name  as  another  Ragnar,  who  was  prince  of  Jutland  about  a
hundred  years  earlier.  This  coincidence  would  have  caused  no  confusion,  as
long  as  each  district  preserved  a  distinct  and  independent  account  of  its  own
Ragnar.  But,  by  possessing  the  resource  of  writing,  men  became  able  to

20  This  inevitable  decline  in  the  ability  of  the  bards  is  noticed,  though,  as  it  appears  to
me,  from  a  wrong  point  of  view,  in  Mure's  Literal,  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  230.

21  Varro  mentions  forty -four  of  these  vagabonds,  who  were  all  called  Hercules.   See  a
learned  article  in  Smith's  Biog.  and  Mythology,  vol.  ii.  p.  401,  8vo,   1846.     See  also
Mackay's  Religious  Development  of  the  Greeks  and  Hebrews,  vol.  ii.  pp.  71-79.     On  the
relation  between  Hercules  and  Melcarth,  compare  Matter,  Hist,  du  Gnosticisme,  vol.  i.
p.  257,  with  Heeren's  Asiatic  Nations,  vol.  i.  p.  295,  8vo,  1846.     And  as  to  the  Hercules
of  Egypt,  Prichard's  Analysis  of  Egyptian  Mythology,  1838,  pp.  109,  115-119.     As  to
the  confusion  of  the  different  Hercules  by  the  Dorians,  see  ThirlwalVs  Hist,  of  Greece,
vol.  i.  p.  257  ;  and  compare  p.  130.     [Varro's  words  are  :  "  Omnes  qui  fecerant  fortiter,
Hercules  vocabantur."      They  are  cited  by  Servius  on  Virgil,  Aen.  viii.  564,  with  the
addendum  :   "  Licet  eos  primo,  xliii.   enumeravit"       Nothing  is  said  as  to  their  being
robbers  or  vagabonds  ;  and  the  "  opinion  of  Frederick  Schlegel,"  given  in  the  next  note,
must  be  set  aside  as  pre -scientific.     Hercules  (properly  Herakles,  the  Latin  Hercules
being  a  Vegetation -God)  is  the  name  of  an  ancient  Sun-God  ;  and  his  legend  is  ap-
parently evolved  from  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac,  regarded  as  story -symbols.     There
is  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  it  originates  in  the  biography  of  a  real  hero. — ED.]

22  This  appears  to  be  the  opinion  of  Frederick  Schlegel ;  SchlegeVs  Lectures  on  the
History  of  Literature,  Edinb.  1818,  vol.  i.  p.  260.

23  The  habit  of  generalizing  names  precedes  that  more  advanced  state  of  society
in  which  men  generalize  phenomena.     If  this  proposition  is  universally  true,  which  I
take  it  to  be,  it  will  throw  some  light  on  the  history  of  disputes  between  the  nominalists
and  the  realists.

24  We  may  form  an  idea  of  the  fertility  of  this  source  of   error  from  the  fact  that  in
Egypt  there  were  fifty-three  cities  bearing  the  same  name  :  "  L'auteur  du  Kamous  nous
apprend  qu'il  y  a  en  Egypte  cinquante-trois  villes  du  nom  de  Schobra  :   en  effet,  j'ai
retrouve  tous  ces  noms  dans  les  deux  denombremens  dej&  cites."      Quatremere,  Re-
cherches  sur  la  Langue  et  la  Literature  de  V Egypte,  p.  199.


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      169

consolidate  the  separate  trains  of  events,  and,  as  it  were,  fuse  two  truths  into
one  error.  And  this  was  what  actually  happened.  The  credulous  Saxo  put
together  the  different  exploits  of  both  Ragnars,  and,  ascribing  the  whole  of
them  to  his  favourite  hero,  has  involved  in  obscurity  one  of  the  most  interest-
ing parts  of  the  early  history  of  Europe.25

The  annals  of  the  North  afford  another  curious  instance  of  this  source  of
error.  A  tribe  of  Finns,  called  Quaens,  occupied  a  considerable  part  of  the
eastern  coast  of  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia.  Their  country  was  known  as  Quaenland  ;
and  this  name  gave  rise  to  a  belief  that,  to  the  north  of  the  Baltic,  there  was  a
nation  of  Amazons.  This  would  easily  have  been  corrected  by  local  knowledge  :
but,  by  the  use  of  writing,  the  flying  rumour  was  at  once  fixed  ;  and  the  existence
of  such  a  people  is  positively  affirmed  in  some  of  the  earliest  European  histories.26
Thus,  too,  Abo,  the  ancient  capital  of  Finland,  was  called  Turku,  which  in  the
Swedish  language  means  a  market-place.  Adam  of  Bremen,  having  occasion
to  treat  of  the  countries  adjoining  the  Baltic,2?  was  so  misled  by  the  word  Turku,
that  this  celebrated  historian  assures  his  readers  that  there  were  Turks  in
Finland.  28

To  these  illustrations  many  others  might  be  added,  showing  how  mere  names
deceived  the  early  historians,  and  gave  rise  to  relations  which  were  entirely
false,  and  might  have  been  rectified  on  the  spot  ;  but  which,  owing  to  the  art  of
writing,  were  carried  into  distant  countries,  and  thus  placed  beyond  the  reach
of  contradiction.  Of  such  cases,  one  more  may  be  mentioned,  as  it  concerns
the  history  of  England.  Richard  I.,  the  most"  barbarous  of  our  princes,  was
known  to  his  contemporaries  as  the  Lion  ;  an  appellation  conferred  upon  him
on  account  of  his  fearlessness,  and  the  ferocity  of  his  temper.2^  Hence  it  was
said  that  he  had  the  heart  of  a  lion  ;  and  the  title  Cceur  de  Lion  not  only  became
indissolubly  connected  with  his  name,  but  actually  gave  rise  to  a  story,  re-
peated by  innumerable  writers,  according  to  which  he  slew  a  lion  in  single
combat.30  The  name  gave  rise  to  the  story  ;  the  story  confirmed  the  name  ;

25  On  this  confusion  respecting  Ragnar  Lodbrok,  see  Geijer's  History  of  Sweden,
part  i.   pp.  13,  14  ;  Lappenberg's  Anglo-Saxon  Kings,  vol.  ii.  p.  31  ;  Wheaton's  Hist,  of
the  Northmen,  p.  150  ;  Mallet's    Northern  Antiquities,  p.  383  ;  Crichton's  Scandinavia,
vol.  i.  p.  116.     A  comparison  of  these  passages  will  justify  the  sarcastic  remark  of  Koch
on  the  history  of  Swedish  and  Danish  heroes  ;  Koch,  Tableau  des  Revolutions,  vol.  i.  p.  571
note.

26  Prichard's  Physical  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  iii.  p.  273.     The  Norwegians  still  give
to  the  Finlanders  the  name  of  Quasner.     See  Dillon's  Lapland  and  Iceland,  8vo,  1840,
vol.  ii.  p.  221.     Compare  Laing's  Sweden,  pp.  45,  47.     The  Amazon  river  in  South
America  owes  its  name  to  a  similar  fable.  Henderson's  Hist,  of  Brazil,  p.  453  ;  Southey's
Hist,  of  Brazil,  vol.  i.  p.  112  ;   M'Culloh's  Researches  concerning  America,  pp.  407,408  ;
and  Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  xv.  p.  65,  for  an  account  of  the  wide,  diffusion  of  this  error.

27  Sharon  Turner  (Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iv.  p.  30)  calls  him  "  the  Strabo  of  the  Bal-
tic ;  "  and  it  was  from  him  that  most  of  the  geographers  in  the  Middle  Ages  derived  their
knowledge  of  the  North.

28  "It  was  called  in  Finnish  Turku,  from  the  Swedish  word  torg,  which  signifies  a
market-place.     The  sound  of  this  name  misled  Adam  of  Bremen  into  the  belief  that
there  were  Turks  in  Finland."     Cooley's  Hist,  of  Maritime  and  Inland  Discovery,  Lon-
don, 1830,  vol.  i.  p.  211.

29  The  chronicler  of  his  crusade  says,  that  he  was  called  Lion  on  account  of  his  never
pardoning  an  offence  :  "  Nihil  injuriarum  reliquit  inultum  :  unde  et  unus  (i.e.  the  King
of  France)  dictus  est  Agnus  a  Griffonibus,  alter  Leonis  nomen  accepit."     Chronicon
Ricardi  Divisiensis  de  Rebus  gestis  Ricardi  Primi,  edit.  Stevenson,  Lond.  1838,  p.  18.
Some  of  the  Egyptian  kings  received  the  name  of  Lion  "  from  their  heroic  exploits."
Vyse  on  the  Pyramids,  vol.  iii.  p.  116.

30  See  Price's  learned  Preface  to  Warton's  History  of  English  Poetry,  vol.  i.  p.  21  ;  and
on  the  similar  story  of  Henry  the  Lion,  see  Maury,  Legendes  du  Moyen  Age,  p.  160.
Compare  the  account  of  Duke  Godfrey's  conflict  with  a  bear,  in  Matthia  Paris  Historia
Major,  p.  29,  Lond.  1684,  folio.     I  should  not  be  surprised  if  the  story  of  Alexander  and
the  Lion  (ThirlwalV s  History  of  Greece,  vol.  vi.  p.  305)  were  equally  fabulous.


170  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  another  fiction  was  added  to  that  long  series  of  falsehoods  of  which  history
mainly  consisted  during  the  Middle  Ages.

The  corruptions  of  history,  thus  naturally  brought  about  by  the  mere  intro-
duction of  letters,  were  in  Europe  aided  by  an  additional  cause.  With  the  art
of  writing,  there  was,  in  most  cases,  also  communicated  a  knowledge  of  Chris-
tianity ;  and  the  new  religion  not  only  destroyed  many  of  the  Pagan  traditions,
but  falsified  the  remainder,  by  amalgamating  them  with  monastic  legends.  The
extent  to  which  this  was  carried  would  form  a  curious  subject  for  inquiry  ;  but
one  or  two  instances  of  it  will  perhaps  be  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  generality  of
readers.

Of  the  earliest  state  of  the  great  Northern  nations  we  have  little  positive
evidence  ;  but  several  of  the  lays  in  which  the  Scandinavian  poets  related  the
feats  of  their  ancestors,  or  of  their  contemporaries,  are  still  preserved  ;  and,
notwithstanding  their  subsequent  corruption,  it  is  admitted  by  the  most  com-
petent judges  that  they  embody  real  and  historical  events.  But  in  the  ninth  and
tenth  centuries,  Christian  missionaries  found  their  way  across  the  Baltic,  and
introduced  a  knowledge  of  their  religion  among  the  inhabitants  of  Northern
Europe.31

Scarcely  was  this  effected,  when  the  sources  of  history  began  to  be  poisoned.
At  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century,  Saemund  Sigfussen,  a  Christian  priest,
gathered  the  popular,  and  hitherto  unwritten,  histories  of  the  North  into  what
is  called  the  Elder  Edda  ;  and  he  was  satisfied  with  adding  to  his  compilation
the  corrective  of  a  Christian  hymn.32  A  hundred  years  later,  there  was  made
another  collection  of  the  native  histories  ;  but  the  principle  which  I  have  men-
tioned, having  had  a  longer  time  to  operate,  now  displayed  its  effects  still  more
clearly.  In  this  second  collection,  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  the  Younger
Edda,  there  is  an  agreeable  mixture  of  Greek,  Jewish,  and  Christian  fables  ;
and.  for  the  first  time  in  the  Scandinavian  annals,  we  meet  with  the  widely  diffused
fiction  of  a  Trojan  descent.33

If,  by  way  of  further  illustration,  we  turn  to  other  parts  of  the  world,  we
shall  find  a  "series  of  facts  confirming  this  view.  We  shall  find  that,  in  those
countries  where  there  has  been  no  change  of  religion,  history  is  more  trustworthy
and  connected  than  in  those  countries  where  such  a  change  has  taken  place.  In
India,  Brahmanism,  which  is  still  supreme,  was  established  at  so  early  a  period,
that  its  origin  is  lost  in  the  remotest  antiquity.34  The  consequence  is  that  the
native  annals  have  never  been  corrupted  by  any  new  superstition  ;  and  the  Hindus

31  The  first  missionary  was  Ebbo,  about  the  year  822.     He  was  followed  by  Anschar,
who  afterwards  pushed  his  enterprise  as  far  as  Sweden.      The    progress  was  however
slow  ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  latter  half  of  the  eleventh  century  that  Christianity  was  estab-
lished firmly  in  the  North.     See  Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  v.  pp.  373,  374,  379,
380,  400-402  ;  Mosheim's  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  i.  pp.  188,  215,  216  ;  Barry's  Hist,  of  the
Orkney  Islands,  p.  125.     It  is  often  supposed  that  some  of  the  Dane?  in  Ireland  were
Christians  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Ivar  I.  ;  but  this  is  a  mistake,  into  which  Ledwich  fell
by  relying  on  a  coin,  which  in  reality  refers  to  Ivar  II.     Petrie's  Ecclesiastical  Architec-
ture of  Ireland,  p.  225  ;  and  Ledwich 's  Antiquities  of  Ireland,  p.  159.

32  Mr.  Wheaton  (History  of  Northmen,  p.  60)  says,  that  Ssemund  "  merely  added  one
song  of  his  own  composition,  of  a  moral  and  Christian  religious  tendency  ;  so  as  thereby
to  consecrate  and  leaven,  as  it  were,  the  whole  mass  of  Paganism."

33  Wheaton' s  Hist,  of  the  Northmen,  pp.  89,  90  ;  Mallet's  Northern  Antiquities,  pp.  377,
378,  485  ;  Schlegel's  Lectures  on  the  History  of  Literature,  vol.  i.  p.  265.     Indeed,  these
interpolations  are  so  numerous,  that  the  earlier  German  antiquaries  believed  the  Edda
to  be  a  forgery  by  the  northern  monks, — a  paradox  which  Miiller  refuted  more  than
forty  years  ago.     Note  in  Wheaton,  p.  61.     Compare  Palgrave's  English  Commonwealth*
Anglo-Saxon  Period,  vol.  i.  p.  135.

34  As  is  evident  from  the  conflicting  statements  made  by  the  best  orientalists,  each
of  whom  has  some  favourite  hypothesis  of  his  own  respecting  its  origin.    It  is  enough  to
say  that  we  have  no  account  of  India  existing  without  Brahmanism  ;  and  as  to  its  real
history,  nothing  can  be  understood  until  more  steps  have  been  taken  towards  generaliz «
ing  the  laws  which  regulate  the  growth  of  religious  opinions.


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      171

are  possessed  of  historic  traditions  more  ancient  than  can  be  found  among  any
other  Asiatic  people.35  In  the  same  way,  the  Chinese  have  for  upwards  of
2000  years  preserved  the  religion  of  Fo,  which  is  a  form  of  Buddhism.36  In
China,  therefore,  though  the  civilization  has  never  been  equal  to  that  of  India,
there  is  a  history,  not,  indeed,  as  old  as  the  natives  would  wish  us  to  believe,
but  still  stretching  back  to  several  centuries  before  the  Christian  era,  from  whence
it  has  been  brought  down  to  our  own  times  in  an  uninterrupted  succession.37
On  the  other  hand,  the  Persians,  whose  intellectual  development  was  certainly
superior  to  that  of  the  Chinese,*  are  nevertheless  without  any  authentic  infor-
mation respecting  the  early  transactions  of  their  ancient  monarchy.38  For  this
I  can  see  no  possible  reason,  except  the  fact  that  Persia,  soon  after  the  promul-
gation of  the  Koran,  was  conquered  by  the  Mohammedans,  who  completely
subverted  the  Parsee  religion,  and  thus  interrupted  the  stream  of  the  national
traditions.39  Hence  it  is  that,  putting  aside  the  myths  of  the  Zendavesta,  we

3">  Dr.  Prichard  (Physical  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  iv.  pp.  101-105)  thinks  that  the
Hindus  have  a  history  beginning  B.C.  1391.  Compare  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  i.
pp.  311,  312.  Mr.  Wilson  says  that  even  the  genealogies  in  the  Puranas  are,  "  in  all  prob-
ability, much  more  authentic  than  has  been  sometimes  supposed."  Wilson's  note  in
Mill's  Hist,  of  India,  vol.  i.  pp.  161,  162.  See  also  his  Preface  to  the  Vishnu  Pur  ana,
p.  Ixv.  ;  and  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  v.  p.  244.

3(5  Journal  of  Asiatic  Soc.  vol.  vi.  p.  251  ;  Herder,  Ideen  zur  Geschichte,  vol.  iv.  p.  70  ;
Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  i.  p.  104.  I  learn  from  a  note  in  Erman's  Siberia,  vol.  ii.,
p.  306,  that  one  of  the  missionaries  gravely  suggests  "  that  Buddhism  originated  in  the
errors  of  the  Manichaeans,  and  is  therefore  but  an  imitation  of  Christianity."  [Fo  is  the
Chinese  name  for  Buddha. — ED.]

37  M.  Bunsen  says,  that  the  Chinese  have  "  a  regular  chronology,  extending  back
3000  years  B.C."     Buns  en's  Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  240.     See  also  Humboldt's  Cosmos,  vol.  ii.
p.  475,  vol.  iv.  p.  455  ;  Renouard,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  i.  pp.  47,  48  ;  and  the  state-
ments of  Klaproth  and  Remusat,  in  Prichard's  Physical  Hist.  vol.  iv.  pp.  476,  477.     The
superior  exactness  of  the  Chinese  annals  is  sometimes  ascribed  to  their  early  knowledge
of  printing,  with  which  they  claim  to  have  been  acquainted  in  B.C.  noo.     Meidinger's
Essay,  in  Journal  of  Statistical  Society,  vol.  iii.  p.  163.     But  the  fact  is,  that  printing  was
unknown  in  China  till  the  ninth  or  tenth  century  after  Christ,  and  movable  types  were
not  invented  before   1041.     Humboldt's  Cosmos,  vol.   ii.  p.   623  ;   Transac.  of  Asiatic
Society,  vol.  i.  p.  7  ;  Journal  Asiatique,  vol.  i.  p.  137,  Paris,  1822  ;  Davis' s  Chinese,  vol.  i.
pp.  174,  178,  vol.  iii.  p.  i.     There  are  some  interesting  papers  on  the  early  history  of
China  in  Journal  of  Asiat.  Soc.  vol.  i.  pp.  57-86,  213-222,  vol.  ii.  pp.  166-171,  276-287.

38  "  From  the  death  of  Alexander  (323  B.C.)  to  the  reign  of  Ardeshir  Babegan  (Arta-
xerxes),  the  founder  of  the  Sassanian  dynast}^  (200  A.D.),  a  period  of  more  than  five
centuries,  is  almost  a  blank  in  the  Persian  history."     Troyer's  Preliminary  Discourse  to
the  Dabistan,  8vo,  1843,  vol.  i.  pp.  Iv.  Ivi.     See  to  the  same  effect  Erskine  on  the  Zend-
Avesta,  in  Transar.  of  Soc.  of  Bombay,  vol.  ii.  pp.  303-305  ;  and  Malcolm's  Hist,  of  Persia,
vol.  i.  p.  68.  The  ancient  Persian  traditions  are  said  to  have  been  Pehlvi ;  Malcolm,  vol.  i.
pp.  501-505  ;  but  if  so,   they  have  all  perished,  p.  555  :  compare   Rawlinson's  note  in
Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  x.  p.  82.

39  On  the  antagonism  between  Mohammedanism  and  the  old  Persian  history,  see  a
note  in  Grote's  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  623.     Even  at  present,  or,  at  all  events,  during
this  century,  the  best  education  in  Persia  consisted  in  learning  the  elements  of  Arabic
grammar,  "  logic,  jurisprudence,  the  traditions  of  their  prophet,  and  the  commentaries
on  the  Koran."     Vans  Kennedy  on  Persian  Literature,  in  Transac.  of  Bombay  Society,
vol.  ii.  p.  62.     In  the  same  way,  the  Mohammedans  neglected  the  old  history  of  India,
and  would,  no  doubt,  have  destroyed  or  corrupted  it ;  but  they  never  had  anything  like
the  hold  of  India  that  they  had  of  Persia,  and,  above  all,  they  were  unable  to  displace
the  native  religion.     However,  their  influence,  so  far  as  it  went,  was  unfavourable  ;  and

[*  This  judgment  does  not  appear  to  be  based  on  any  study  of  Chinese  literature.  There
is  no  old  Persian  literature  that  can  be  compared  for  intellectual  power  with  the  writings
of  Lao-Tsze,  Confucius,  and  Mencius. — ED.]


172  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

have  no  native  authorities  for  Persian  history  of  any  value,  until  the  appearance,
in  the  eleventh  century,  of  the  Shah  Nameh  ;  in  which,  however,  Ferdousi  has
mingled  the  miraculous  relations  of  those  two  religions  by  which  his  country
had  been  successively  subjected.40  The  result  is,  that  if  it  were  not  for  the
various  discoveries  which  have  been  made,  of  monuments,  inscriptions,  and
coins,  we  should  be  compelled  to  rely  on  the  scanty  and  inaccurate  details  in
the  Greek  writers  for  our  knowledge  ol  the  history  of  one  of  the  most  important
of  the  Asiatic  monarchies.41

Even  among  more  barbarous  nations,  we  see  the  same  principle  at  work.
The  Malayo -Polynesian  race  is  well  known  to  ethnologists,  as  covering  an
immense  series  of  islands,  extending  from  Madagascar  to  within  2000  miles
of  the  western  coast  of  America.42  The  religion  of  these  widely  scattered  people
was  originally  Polytheism,  of  which  the  purest  forms  were  long  preserved  in  the
Philippine  Islands.43  But  in  the  fifteenth  century,  many  of  the  Polynesian
nations  were  converted  to  Mohammedanism  ;  44  and  this  was  followed  by  a

Mr.  Elphinstone  (Hist,  of  India,  p.  468)  says  that  till  the  sixteenth  century  there  was  no
instance  of  a  Mussulman  carefully  studying  Hindu  literature.

40  On  the  Shah  Nameh,  see  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  iv.  pp.  544,  545,  vol.  v.  p.  594  ;
Mill's  Hist,  of  India,  vol.  ii.  pp.  64,  65  ;  Journal  of  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  iv.  p.  225.     It
is  supposed  by  a  very  high  authority  that  the  Persian  cuneiform  inscriptions  "  will
enable  us,  in  the  end,  to  introduce  something  like  chronological  accuracy  and  order  into
the  myths  and  traditions  embodied  in  the  Shah  Nameh."     Rawlinson  on  the  Inscrip-
tions of  Assyria  and  Babylonia,  in  Journal  of  Asiat.  Soc.  vol.  xii.  p.  446.

41  On  the  ignorance  of  the  Greeks  respecting  Persian  history,  see  Vans  Kennedy,  in
Transac.  of  Soc.  of  Bombay,  vol.  ii.  pp.  119,  127-129,  136.     Indeed,  this  learned  writer
says  (p.  138)  he  is  "  inclined  to  suspect  that  no  Greek  author  ever  derived  his  information
from  any  native  of  Persia  proper,  that  is,  of  the  country  to  the  east  of  the  Euphrates."
See  also  on  the  perplexities  in  Persian  chronology,  Grote's  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  vi.  p.  496,
vol.  ix.  p.  3,  vol.  x.  p.  405    and  Donaldson's  New  Cratylus,  1839,  p.  87  note.     As  to  the
foolish  stories  which  the  Greeks  relate  respecting  Achaemenes,  compare  Malcolm's  Hist,
of  Persia,  vol.  i.  p.  18,  with  Heeren's  Asiatic  Nations,  vol.  i.  p.  243.     Even  Herodotus,
who  's  invaluable  in  regard  to  Egypt,  is  not  to  be  relied  upon  for  Persia  ;  as  was  noticed
long  ago  by  Sir  W.  Jones,  in  the  Preface  to  his  Nader  Shah   (Jones's  Works,  vol.  v.
p.  540),  and  is  partly  admitted  by  Mr.  Mure  (History  of  the  Literature  of  Ancient  Greece,
vol.  iv.  p.  338,  8vo,  1853).     [As  to  Herodotus  and  Egypt,  see  ed.  note  above,  p.  51. —
ED.]

42  That  is,  to  Easter  Island,  which  appears  to  be  its  furthest  boundary  (Prichard's
Phys.  Hist.  vol.  v.  p.  6) ;  and  of  which  there  is  a  good  account  in  Beechey's  Voyage  to  the
Pacific,  vol.  i.  pp.  43-58,  and  a  notice  in  Jour,  of  Geog.  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  195.     The
language  of  Easter  Island  has  been  long  known  to  be  Malayo-Polynesian  ;  for  it  was
understood  by  a  native  of  the  Society  Islands,  who  accompanied  Cook  (Cook's  Voyages,
vol.  iii.  pp.  294,  308  ;    and  Prichard,  vol.  v.  p.   147  :    compare    Marsden's  History  of
Sumatra,  p.  164).     Ethnologists  have  not  usually  paid  sufficient  honour  to  this  great
navigator,  who  was  the  first  to  remark  the  similarity  between  the  different  languages  in
Polynesia  proper.     Cook's  Voyages,  vol.  ii.  pp.  60,  61,  vol.  iii.  pp.  230,  280,  290,  vol  iv.
P«  305»  vol.  vi.  p.  230,  vol.  vii.  p.  115.     As  to  Madagascar  being  the  western  limit  of  this
vast  race  of  people,  see  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  iv.  p.  222  ;  Reports  on  Ethnology  by  Brit.
Assoc.  for  1847,  pp.  154,  216,  250  ;  and  Ellis's  Hist,  of  Madagascar,  vol.  i.  p.  133.

43  Also  the  seat  of  the  Tagala  language  ;  which,  according  to  William  Humboldt,  is
the  most  perfect  of  all  the  forms  of  the  Malayo-Polynesian.     Prichard's  Physical  Hist.
vol.  v.  pp.  36,  51,  52.

44  Marsden's  History  of  Sumatra,  p.  281.  De  Thou  (Hist.  Univ.  vol.  xiii.  p.  59)  supposes
that  the  Javanese  did  not  become  Mohammedans  till  late  in  the  sixteenth  century  ;
but  it  is  now  known  that  their  conversion  took  place  at  least  a  hundred  years  earlier,
the  old  religion  being  finally  abolished  in  1478.     See  Crawfurd's  Hist,  of  the  Indian
Archipelago,  vol.  ii.  p.  312  ;    Low's  Sarawak,  p.  96  ;  and  Raffles'  Hist,  of  Java,  vol.  i.
pp.  309,  349,  vol.  ii.  pp.  i,  66,254.   The  doctrines  of  Mohammed  spread  quickly  ;  and  the
Malay  pilgrims  enjoy  the  reputation,  in  modern  times,  of  being  among  the  most  scrupu-
lously religious  of  those  who  go  to  the  Hadj.     Burckhardt's  Arabia,  vol.  ii.  pp.  96,  97.


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      173

process  precisely  the  same  as  that  which  I  have  pointed  out  in  other  countries.
The  new  religion,  by  changing  the  current  of  the  national  thoughts,  corrupted
the  purity  of  the  national  history.  Of  all  the  islands  in  the  Indian  Archipelago,
Java  was  the  one  which  reached  the  highest  civilization.45  Now,  however,  the
Javanese  have  not  only  lost  their  historical  traditions,  but  even  those  lists  of
their  kings  which  are  extant  are  interpolated  with  the  names  of  Mohammedan
saints.46  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  that  in  the  adjacent  island  of  Bali,  where
the  old  religion  is  still  preserved,47  the  legends  of  Java  are  remembered  and
cherished  by  the  people.48

It  would  be  useless  to  adduce  further  evidence  respecting  the  manner  in  which,
among  an  imperfectly  civilized  people,  the  establishment  of  a  new  religion  will
always  affect  the  accuracy  of  their  early  history.  I  need  only  observe  that  in
this  way  the  Christian  priests  have  obscured  the  annals  of  every  European
people  they  converted,  and  have  destroyed  or  corrupted  the  traditions  of  the
Gauls,4^  of  the  Welsh,  of  the  Irish,5°  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,51  of  the  Sclavonic
nations,52  of  the  Finns,53  and  even  of  the  Icelanders.54

Besides  all  this,  there  occurred  other  circumstances  tending  in  the  same
direction.  Owing  to  events  which  I  shall  hereafter  explain,  the  literature  of
Europe,  shortly  before  the  final  dissolution  of  the  Roman  Empire,  fell  entirely
into  the  hands  of  the  ciergy,  who  were  long  venerated  as  the  sole  instructors  of
mankind.*  For  several  centuries,  it  was  extremely  rare  to  meet  with  a  layman

45  The  Javanese  civilization  is  examined  at  great  length  by  William  Humboldt,  in  his
celebrated  work,  Ueber  die  Kawi  Sprache,  Berlin,  1836.     From  the  evidence  supplied
by  some  early  Chinese  writings,  which  have  only  recently  been  published,  there  are  good
grounds  for  believing  that  the  Indian  colonies  were  established  in  Java  in  the  first
century  after  Christ.     See  Wilson  on  the  Foe  Kue  Ki,  in  Journal  of  Asiat.  Soc.  vol.  v.
p.  137  ;  compare  vol.  vi.  p.  320.

46  Crawfurd's  Hist,  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  vol.  ii.  p.  297.     Compare  with  this
the  exactness  with  which,  even  in  the  island  of  Celebes,  the  dates  were  preserved  "  before
the  introduction  of  Mahometanism."      Crawfurd,  vol.  i.  p.  306.      For  similar  instances
of  royal  genealogies  being  obscured  by  the  introduction  into  them  of  the  names  of  gods,
see  Kemble's  Saxons  in  England,  vol.  i.  pp.  27,  335.

47  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  x.  p.  191,  vol.  xiii.  p.  128.     In  the  Appendix  to  Raffles'
Hist,  of  Java,  vol.  ii.  p.  cxlii.,  it  is  said,  that  "  in  Bali  not  more  than  one  in  two  hundred,
if  so  many,  are  Mahometans."      See  also  p.  65,  and  vol.  i.p.  530.

48  Indeed,  the  Javanese  appear  to  have  no  other  means  of  acquiring  the  old  Kawi
traditions  than  by  learning  them  from  natives  of  Bali.     See  note  to  an  Essay  on  the
Island  of  Bali,  in  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xiii.  p.  162,  Calcutta,  1820,  4to.     Sir  Stamford
Raffles  (Hist,  of  Java,  vol.  i.  p.  400)  says,  "  It  is  chiefly  to  Bali  that  we  must  look  for
illustrations  of  the  ancient  state  of  the  Javans."     See  also  p.  414.

49  Respecting  the  corruption  of  Druidical  traditions  in  Gaul  by  Christian  priests,  see
Villemarque,  Chants  Populaires  de  la  Bretagne,  Paris,  1846,  vol.  i.  pp.  xviii.  xix.

50  The  injury  done  to  the  traditions  handed  down  by  Welsh  and  Irish  bards,  is  noticed
in  Dr.  Prichard's  valuable  work,  Physical  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  iii.  p.  184,  8vo,  1841.
See  also  Warton's  Hist,  of  English  Poetry,  vol.  i.  p.  xxxvii.  note.

51  See  the  remarks  on  Beowulf,  in  Wright's  Biog.  Brit.  Lit.  vol.  i.  p.  7,  8vo,  1842.     See
also  pp.  13,  14  :  and  compare  Kemble's  Saxons  in  England,  vol.  i.  p.  331.

52  Talvi's  Language  and  Literature  of  the  Slavic  Nations,  8vo,   1850,  p.   231.     The
Pagan  songs  of  the  Slovaks,  in  the  north-west  of  Hungary,  were  for  a  time  preserved  ;
but  even  they  are  now  lost.     Talvi,  p.  216.

53  The  monkish  chroniclers  neglected  the  old  Finnish  traditions  ;  and  allowing  them
to  perish,  preferred  the  inventions  of  Saxo  and  Johannes  Magnus.     Prichard's  Physical
Hist.  vol.  iii.  pp.  284,  285.

54  For  an  instance  in  which  the  monks  have  falsified  the  old  Icelandic  traditions,  see
Mr.  Keightley's  learned  book  on  Fairy  Mythology,  8vo,  1850,  p.  159.

[*  This  is  an  overstatement.  After  the  fall  of  the  Western  Empire  came  Boethius ,
Cassiodorus,  Priscian  (writing  at  Constantinople,  but  in  Latin),  and  Jordanis(Jornandes).
The  next  sentence  overlooks  the  class  of  jurists,  who  never  died  out  in  Italy. — ED.]


174  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

who  could  read  or  write  ;  and  of  course  it  was  still  rarer  to  meet  with  one  able
to  compose  a  work.  Literature,  being  thus  monopolized  by  a  single  class,
assumed  the  peculiarities  natural  to  its  new  masters.55  And  as  the  clergy,
taken  as  a  body,  have  always  looked  on  it  as  their  business  to  enforce  belief,
rather  than  encourage  inquiry,  it  is  no  wonder  if  they  displayed  in  their  writings
the  spirit  incidental  to  the  habits  of  their  profession.  Hence,  as  I  have  already
observed,  literature,  during  many  ages,  instead  of  benefiting  society,  injured
it,  by  increasing  credulity,  and  thus  stopping  the  progress  of  knowledge.  Indeed,
the  aptitude  for  falsehood  became  so  great,  that  there  was  nothing  men  were
unwilling  to  believe.  Nothing  came  amiss  to  their  greedy  and  credulous  ears.
Histories  of  omens,  prodigies,  apparitions,  strange  portents,  monstrous  appear-
ances in  the  heavens,  the  wildest  and  most  incoherent  absurdities,  were  repeated
from  mouth  to  mouth,  and  copied  from  book  to  book,  with  as  much  care  as  if
they  were  the  choicest  treasures  of  human  wisdom.56  That  Europe  should  have
ever  emerged  from  such  a  state,  is  the  most  decisive  proof  of  the  extraordinary
energy  of  Man,  since  we  cannot  even  conceive  a  condition  of  society  more  un-
favourable to  his  progress.  But  it  is  evident  that  until  the  emancipation  was
effected,  the  credulity  and  looseness  of  thought  which  were  universal,  unfitted
men  for  habits  of  investigation,  and  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  engage  in  a
successful  study  of  past  affairs,  or  even  record  with  accuracy  what  was  taking
place  around  them.57

If,  therefore,  we  recur  to  the  facts  just  cited,  we  may  say  that,  omitting
several  circumstances  altogether  subordinate,  there  were  three  leading  causes
of  the  corruption  of  the  history  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages.  The  first  cause
was,  the  sudden  introduction  of  the  art  of  writing,  and  the  consequent  fusion
of  different  local  traditions,  which,  when  separate,  were  accurate,  but  when
united  were  false.  The  second  cause  was  the  change  of  religion  ;  which  acted
in  two  ways,  producing  not  merely  an  interruption  of  the  old  traditions,  but
also  an  interpolation  of  them.  And  the  third  cause,  probably  the  most  power-
ful of  all,  was  that  history  became  monopolized  by  a  class  of  men  whose  pro-
fessional habits  made  them  quick  to  believe,  and  who,  moreover,  had  a  direct
interest  in  increasing  the  general  credulity,  since  it  was  the  basis  upon  which
their  own  authority  was  built.

By  the  operation  of  these  causes,  the  history  of  Europe  became  corrupted  to
an  extent  for  which  we  can  find  no  parallel  in  any  other  period.  That  there  was,

55  The  Rev.  Mr.  Bowling,  who  looks  back  with  great  regret  to  this  happy  period,  says,
"  Writers  were  almost  universally  ecclesiastics.     Literature  was  scarcely  anything  but  a
religious  exercise  ;  for  everything  that  was  studied,  was  studied  with  a  reference  to
religion.     The  men,  therefore,  who  wrote  history,  wrote  ecclesiastical  history."     Dow-
ling's  Introduction  to  the  Critical  Study  of  Ecclesiastical  History,  8vo,  1838,  p.  56  ;  a
work  of  some  talent,  but  chiefly  interesting  as  a  manifesto  by  an  active  party.

56  Thus,  for  instance,  a  celebrated  historian,  who  wrote  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,
says  of  the  reign  of  William  Rufus  :  "  Ejusdem  regis  tempore,  ut  ex  parte  supradictum
est,  in  sole,  luna,  et  stellis,  multa  signa  visa  sunt,  mare  quoque  littus  persaepe  egredieba-
tur,  et  homines  et  animalia  submersit,  villas,  et  domos  quamplures  subvertit.     In  pago
qui  Barukeshire  nominatur,  ante  occisionem  regis  sanguis  de  fonte  tribus  septimanis
emanavit.     Multis  etiam  Normannis  diabolus  in  horribili  specie  se  frequenter  in  silvis
ostendens,  plura  cum  eis  de  rege  et  Ranulfo,  et  quibusdam  aliis  locutus  est.     Nee  mirum,
nam  illorum  tempore  fere  omnis  legum  siluit  justitia,  causisque  justitiae  subpositis,  sola
in  principibus  imperabat  pecunia."     Rog.  de  Hoveden  Annal.  in  Scriptores  post  Bedarn,
p.  268.     See  also  the  same  work,  pp.  356-358  ;  and  compare  Matthcei  Westmonast.
Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.  pp.  266,  289,  part  ii.  p.  298.     [A  good  view  of  the  general
credulity  of  the  Dark  and  Middle  Ages  may  be  had  from  the  learned  work  of  Mr.  G.  F.
Fort,  Medical  Economy  during  the  Middle  Ages,  New  York,  1883. — ED.]

57  Even  the  descriptions  of  natural  objects  which  historians  attempted  in  the  Middle
Ages,  were  marked  by  the  same  carelessness.     See  some  good  observations  by  Dr.
Arnold,  on  Bede's  account  of  the  Solent  Sea.     Arnold's  Lectures  on  Modern  History,
pp.  102,  103.


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      175

properly  speaking,  no  history,  was  the  smallest  part  of  the  inconvenience  ;  but
unhappily  men,  not  satisfied  with  the  absence  of  truth,  supplied  its  place  by
the  invention  of  falsehood.  Among  innumerable  instances  of  this,  there  is  one
species  of  inventions  worth  noticing,  because  they  evince  that  love  of  antiquity
which  is  a  marked  characteristic  of  those  classes  by  whom  history  was  then
written.  I  allude  to  fictions  regarding  the  origin  of  different  nations,  in  all  of
which  the  spirit  of  the  Middle  Ages  is  very  discernible.  During  many  centuries
it  was  believed  by  every  people  that  they  were  directly  descended  from  ancestors
who  had  been  present  at  the  siege  of  Troy.  That  was  a  proposition  which  no
one  thought  of  doubting.58  The  only  question  was,  as  to  the  details  of  so
illustrious  a  lineage.  On  this,  however,  there  was  a  certain  unanimity  of
opinion  ;  since,  not  to  mention  inferior  countries,  it  was  admitted  that  the
French  were  descended  from  Francus,  whom  everybody  knew  to  be  the  son  of
Hector  ;  and  it  was  also  known  that  the  Britons  came  from  Brutus,  whose  father
was  no  other  than  ^Eneas  himself.59

Touching  the  origin  of  particular  places,  the  great  historians  of  the  Middle
Ages  are  equally  communicative.  In  the  accounts  they  give  of  them,  as  well
as  in  the  lives  they  write  of  eminent  men,  the  history  usually  begins  at  a  very
remote  period  ;  and  the  events  relating  to  their  subject  are  often  traced  back,
in  an  unbroken  series,  from  the  moment  when  Noah  left  the  ark,  or  even  when
Adam  passed  the  gates  of  Paradise.60  On  other  occasions,  the  antiquity  they
assign  is  somewhat  less  ;  but  the  range  of  their  information  is  always  extra-
ordinary. They  say  that  the  capital  of  France  is  called  after  Paris,  the  son  of

58  In  Le  Long's  Bibliotheque  Historique  de  la  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  3,  it  is  said  that  the
descent  of  the  kings  of  France  from  the  Trojans  was  universally  believed  before  the
sixteenth  century  :  "  Cette  descendance  a  etc  crue  veritable  pres  de  huit  cent  ans,  et
soutenue  par  tous  les  ecrivains  de  notre  histoire  ;  la  faussete  n'en  a  ete  reconnue  qu'au
commencement  du  seizieme  siecle."  Polydore  Vergil,  who  died  in  the  middle  of  the  six-
teenth century,  attacked  this  opinion  in  regard  to  England,  and  thereby  made  his
history  unpopular.     See  Ellis' s  Preface  to  Polydore  Vergil,  p.  xx.  4 to,  1844,  published
by  the  Camden  Society.     "  He  discarded  Brute,  as  an  unreal  personage."     In  1128,
Henry  1.,  king  of  England,  inquired  from  a  learned  man  respecting  the  early  history  of
France.     The  answer  is  preserved  by  an  historian  of  the  thirteenth  century  :  "  Regum
potentissime,  inquiens,  sicut  pleraeque  gentes  Europae,  ita  Franci  a  Trojanis  originem
duxerunt."     Matthczi  Paris  Hist.  Major,  p.  59.     See  also  Rog.  de  Hov.  in  Scriptores  post
Bedam,  p.  274.     On  the  descent  of  the  Britons  from  Priam  and  ^Eneas,  see  Matthcei
Westmonast.  Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.  p.  66.     Indeed,  at  the  beginning  of  the  four-
teenth century,  their  Trojan  origin  was  stated  as  a  notorious  fact,  in  a  letter  written  to
Pope  Boniface  by  Edward  I.,  and  signed  by  the  English  nobility.     See  Wartorfs  Hist,
of  English  Poetry,  vol.  i.  pp.  131,  132  ;  and  Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  i.
p.   185.

59  The  general  opinion  was  that  Brutus,  or  Brute,  was  the  son  of  ^Eneas ;   but  some
historians  affirmed  that  he  was  the  great-grandson.     See  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,
vol.  i.  p.  63,  vol.  vii.  p.  220.

60  In  the  Notes  to  a  Chronicle  of  London  from  1089  to  1483,  pp.  183-187,  edit.  4to,  1827,
there  is  a  pedigree   in  which  the  history  of  the  bishops  of  London  is  traced  back,  not
only  to  the  migration  of  Brutus  from  Troy,  but  also  to  Noah  and  Adam.     Thus,  too,
Goropius,  in  his  history  of  Antwerp,  written  in  the  sixteenth  century  :  "  Vond  zoowel
de  Nederlandsche  taal  als  de  Wysbegeerte  van  Orpheus  in  de  ark  van  Noach."     Van
Kampen,  Geschiedenis  der  Letteren,  8vo,  1821,  vol.  i.  p.  91  ;  see  also  p.  86.     In  the  thir-
teenth century,  Matbew  Paris  (Historia  Major,  p.  352)  says  of  Alfred,  "  Hujus  genealogia
in  Anglorum  historiis  perducitur  usque  ad  Adam  primum  parentem."     See,  to  the  same
effect,  Matthcei  Westmonast.  Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.  pp.  323,  324,  415.     In  William
of  Malmesbury's  Chronicle  (Scriptores  post  Bedam,  p.  22  rev. )  the  genealogy  of  the  Saxon
kings  is  traced  back  to  Adam.     Tor  other  and  similar  instances,  see  a  note  in  Lingard's
History  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  403.  And  Mr.  Ticknor  (History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i.
p.  509)  mentions  that   the  Spanish  chroniclers  present   "  an  uninterrupted  succession
of  Spanish  kings  from  Tubal,  a  grandson  of  Noah."


176  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Pria.m,  because  he  fled  there  when  Troy  was  overthrown.61  They  also  mention
that  Tours  owed  its  name  to  being  the  burial-place  of  Turonus,  one  of  the
Trojans  ;  62  while  the  city  of  Troyes  was  actually  built  by  the  Trojans,  as  its
etymology  clearly  proves.63  It  was  well  ascertained  that  Nuremberg  was
called  after  the  Emperor  Nero  :  64  and  Jerusalem  after  King  Jebus,65  a  man  of
vast  celebrity  in  the  Middle  Ages,  but  whose  existence  later  historians  have
not  been  able  to  verify.  The  river  Humber  received  its  name  because,  in
ancient  times,  a  king  of  the  Huns  had  been  drowned  in  it.66  The  Gauls  derived
their  origin,  according  to  some,  from  Galathia,  a  female  descendant  of  Japhet  ;
according  to  others,  from  Gomer,  the  son  of  Japhet.67  Prussia  was  called  after
Prussus,  a  brother  of  Augustus.63  This  was  remarkably  modern  ;  but  Silesia
had  its  name  from  the  prophet  Elisha, — from  whom,  indeed,  the  Silesians  de-
scended ;  69  while  as  to  the  city  of  Zurich,  its  exact  date  was  a  matter  of  dispute,
but  it  was  unquestionably  built  in  the  time  of  Abraham.70  It  was  likewise  from
Abraham  and  Sarah  that  the  gipsies  immediately  sprung.71  The  blood  of  the
Saracens  was  less  pure,  since  they  were  only  descended  from  Sarah, — in  what

61  Monteil,  in  his  curious  book,  Histcire  des  divers  Etats,  vol.  v.  p.  70,  mentions  the  old
belief  "  que  les  Parisiens  sont  du  sang  des  rois  des  anciens  Troyens,  par  Paris,  fils  de
Priam."     Even  in  the  seventeenth  century  this  idea  was  not  extinct ;  and  Coryat,  who
travelled  in  France  in  1608,  gives  another  version  of  it.     He  says,  "  As  for  her  name  of
Paris,  she  hath  it  (as  some  write)  from  Paris,  the  eighteenth  king  of  Gallia  Celtica,  whom
some  write  to  have  been  lineally  descended  from  Japhet,  one  of  the  three  sons  of  Noah,
and  to  have  founded  this  city."     Coryafs  Crudities,  1611,  reprinted  1776,  vol.  i.  pp.  27,
28.

62  "  Erat  ibi  quidam  Tros  nomine  Turonus  Bruti  nepos De  nomine  ipsius

praedicta  civitas  Turonis  vocabulum  nacta  est ;  quia  ibidem  sepultus  fuit."     Galfredi
Monument.  Hist.  Briton,  lib.  i.  cap.  xv.  p.  19.  And  Matthew  of  Westminster,  who  wrote
in  the  fourteenth  century,  says   (Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.  p.   17):   "Tros  nomine

Turnus De  nomine  vero  ipsius  Turonorum  civitas  vocabulum  traxit,   quia

ibidem,  ut  testatur  Homerus,  sepultus  fuit."

63  "  On  convient  bien  que  les  Troyens  de  notre  Troyes  sont  du  sang  des  anciens
Troyens."     Monteil,  Divers  Etats,  vol.  v.  p.  69.

64  Monconys,  who  was  in  Nuremberg  in  1663,  found  this  opinion  still  held  there  ;
and  he  seems  himself  half  inclined  to  believe  it ;  for,  in  visiting  a  castle,  he  observes,
"  Mais  je  ne  s?ai  si  c'est  un  ouvrage  de  Neron,  comme  Ton  le  dit,  et  que  meme  le  nom
de  Nuremberg  en  vient."     Voyages  de  Monconys,  vol.  iv.  p.  141,  edit.  Paris,  1695.

65  "  Deinceps  regnante  in  ea  Jebusaeo,  dicta  Jebus,  et  sic  ex  Jebus  et  Salem  dicta  est
Jebussalem.     Unde  post  dempta  b  littera  et  addita  r,  dicta  est  Hierusalem."     Matthcei
Paris  Historia  Major,  p.  43.     This  reminds  me  of  another  great  writer,  who  was  one  of
the  fathers,  and  was  moreover  a  saint,  and  who,  says  M.  Matter,  "  derive  les  Samaritains
du  roi  Samarius,  fils  de  Canaan."     Matter,  Hist,  du  Gnosticisme,  vol.  i.  p.  41.

66  "  Humber   rex    Hunnorum ad    flumen    diffugiens,    submersus    est    intra

ipsum,  et  nomen  suum  flumini  reliquit."     Matthcei  Westmonast.  Flores  Historiarum,
part  i.  p.  19.

67  These  two  opinions,  which  long  divided  the  learned  world,  are  stated  in  Le  Long,
Bibliotheque  Historique  de  la  France,  vol.  ii.  pp.  5,  49.

68  See  a  curious  allusion  to  this  in  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  viii.  p.  160  ;  where,  how-
ever, it  is  erroneously  supposed  to  be  a  Russian  invention.

69  "  The  Silesians  are  not  without  voluminous  writers  upon  their  antiquities  ;  and
one  of  them  gravely  derives  the  name  and  descent  of  his  country  from  the  prophet
Elisha."     Adams's  Letters  on  Silesia,  p.  267,  Lond.  8vo,  1804.

70  In  1608,  Coryat,  when  in  Zurich,  was  "  told  by  the  learned  Hospinian  that  their  city
was  founded  in  the  time  of  Abraham."     Coryafs  Crudities,  vol.  i.  Epistle  to  the  Reader,
sig.  D.     I  always  give  the  most  recent  instance  I  have  met  with,  because,  in  the  history
of  the  European  intellect,  it  is  important  to  know  how  long  the  spirit  of  the  Middle  Ages
survived  in  different  countries.

71  They  were  "  seuls  enfants  legitimes  "  of  Abraham  and  Sarah.     Monteil,  Divers
Etats,  vol.  v.  p.   19.


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      177

way  is  not  mentioned  ;  but  she  probably  had  them  by  another  marriage,  or,  may
be,  as  the  fruit  of  an  Egyptian  intrigue.72  At  all  events,  the  Scotch  certainly
came  from  Egypt  ;  for  they  were  originally  the  issue  of  Scota,  who  was  a  daugh-
ter of  Pharaoh,  and  who  bequeathed  to  them  her  name.73  On  sundry  similar
matters,  the  Middle  Ages  possessed  information  equally  valuable.  It  was  well
known  that  the  city  of  Naples  was  founded  on  eggs  ;  7*  and  it  was  also  known,
that  the  order*of  St.  Michael  was  instituted  in  person  by  the  archangel,  who
was  himself  the  first  knight,  and  to  whom,  in  fact,  chivalry  owes  its  origin.75
In  regard  to  the  Tartars,  that  people,  of  course,  proceeded  from  Tartarus  ;
which  some  theologians  said  was  an  inferior  kind  of  hell,  but  others  declared
to  be  hell  itself.76  However  this  might  be,  the  fact  of  their  birth-place  being
from  below  was  indisputable,  and  was  proved  by  many  circumstances  which
showed  the  fatal  and  mysteiious  influence  they  were  able  to  exercise.  For  the
Turks  were  identical  with  the  Tartars  ;  and  it  was  notorious  that  since  the
Cross  had  fallen  into  Turkish  hands,  all  Christian  children  had  ten  teeth  less  than
formerly  ;  an  universal  calamity,  which  there  seemed  to  be  no  means  of  re-
pairing.77

72  Matthew  Paris,  who  is  apprehensive  lest  the  reputation'of  Sarah  should  suffer,  says  •
"  Saraceni  perverse  se  putant  ex  Sara  dici ;   sed  verius  Agareni  dicuntur  ab  Agar  ;   et
Ismaelitas,  ab  Ismaele  filio  Abrahae."     Hist.  Major,  p.  357.     Compare  a  similar  passage
in  Mezeray,  Histoire  de  France,  vol.  i.  p.  127  :  "  Sarrasins,  ou  de  la  ville  de  Sarai,  ou  de
Sara  femme  d' Abraham,  duquel  ils  se  disent  faussement  legitimes  heritiers."     After  this,
the  idea,  or  the  fear  of  the  idea,  soon  died  away  ;  and  Beausobre  (Histoire  Critique  de
Manich£e,  vol.  i.  p.  24)  says  :  "  On  derive  vulgairement  le  nom  de  Sarasins  du  mot  arabe
Sarah,  ou  Sarak,  qui  signifie  effectivement  voleur."     A  good  example  of  a  secular  turn
given  to  a  theological  etymology.     For  a  similar  case  in  northern  history,  see  White -
locke's  Journal  of  the  Swedish  Embassy,  vol.  i.  pp.  190,  191.

73  Early  in  the  fourteenth  century,  this  was  stated,  in  a  letter  to  the  Pope,  as  a  well-
known  historical  fact.     See  Lingard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  187  :  "  They  are  sprung
from  Scota  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  who  landed  in  Ireland,  and  whose  descendants
wrested,  by  force  of  arms,  the  northern  half  of  Britain  from  the  progeny  of  Brute."

74  Mr.  Wright  (Narratives  of  Sorcery,  8vo,  1851,  vol.  i.  p.  115)  says,  "The  foundation
of  the  city  of  Naples  upon  eggs,  and  the  egg  on  which  its  fate  depended,  seem  to  have
been  legends  generally  current  in  the  Middle  Ages  ;  "  and  he  refers  to  Montfaucon,
Monumens  de  la  Mon.  Fr.  vol.  ii.  p.  329,  for  proof,  that  by  the  statutes  of  the  order  of  the
Saint  Esprit,  "  a  chapter  of  the  knights  was  appointed  to  be  held  annually  in  castello
ovi  incantati  in  mirabili  periculo."

75  "  The  order  of  Saint  Michael,  in  France,  pretends  to  the  possession  of  a  regular
descent  from  Michael  the  Archangel,  who,  according  to  the  enlightened  judgment  of
French  antiquarians,  was  the  premier  chevalier  in  the  world  ;  and  it  was  he,  they  say,
who  established  the  earliest  chivalric  order  in  Paradise  itself."     Mills' 's  Hist,  of  Chivalry,
vol.  i.  pp.  363,  364.

76  The  etymology  of  Tartars  from  Tartarus  is  ascribed  to  the  piety  of  Saint  Louis  in
Prichdrd's  Physical  History,  vol.  iv.  p.  278  ;  but  I  think  that  I  have  met  with  it  before  his
time,  though  I  cannot  now  recover  the  passage.  The  earliest  instance  I  remember  is  in
1241,  when  the  saint  was  twenty -six  years  old.    See  a  letter  from  the  Emperor  Frederick,
in  Matthcei  Paris  Historia  Major,  p.  497  :  "  Pervenissent  dicti  Tartari  (imo  Tartarei),"
etc.  ;  and  on  the  expression  of  Louis,  see  p.  496  :  "  Quos  vocamus  Tartaros  ad  suas  Tar-
tareas  sedes."     Since  the  thirteenth  century,  the  subject  has  attracted  the  attention  of
English  divines  ;  and  the  celebrated  theologian  Whiston  mentions  "  my  last  famous
discovery,  or  rather  my  revival  of  Dr.  Giles  Fletcher's  famous  discovery,  that  the  Tartars
are  no  other  than  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel,  which  have  been  so  long  sought  for  in  vain."
Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Writings  of  William  Whiston,  p.  575.     Compare,  on  the  opinions
held  respecting  the  Tartars,  Journal  Asiatique,  I.  serie,  vol.  vi.  p.  374,  Paris,  1825.

77  Peignot  (Diet,  des  Livres,  vol.  ii.  p.  69,  Paris,  1806)   says  that  Rigord,  in  his  history
of  Philip  Augustus,  assures  his  readers  "  que  depuis  que  la  vraie  croix  a  ete  prise  par
les  Turcs,  les  enfans  n'ont  plus  que  20  ou  23  dents,  au  lieu  qu'ils  en  avaient  30  ou  32
auparavant."     Even  in  the  fifteenth  century,  it  was'  believed  that  the  number  of  teeth
had  diminished  from  32  to  22,  or  at  most  24.  See  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  M6decine,  vol.  ii.

12


i?8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Other  points  relating  to  the  history  of  past  events  were  cleared  up  with  equal
facility.  In  Europe,  during  many  centuries,  the  only  animal  food  in  general
use  was  pork  ;  beef,  veal,  and  mutton,  being  comparatively  unknown.78  It
was  therefore  with  no  small  astonishment  that  the  crusaders,  on  returning
from  the  East,  told  their  countrymen  that  they  had  been  among  a  people  who,
like  the  Jews,  thought  pork  unclean,  and  refused  to  eat  it.  But  the  feelings
of  lively  wonder  which  this  intelligence  excited,  were  destroyed*as  soon  as  the
cause  of  the  fact  was  explained.  The  subject  was  taken  up  by  Mathew  Paris,
the  most  eminent  historian  during  the  thirteenth  century,  and  one  of  the  most
eminent  during  the  Middle  Ages.79  This  celebrated  writer  informs  us  that
the  Mohammedans  refuse  to  eat  pork  on  account  of  a  singular  circumstance
which  happened  to  their  prophet.  It  appears  that  Mohammed,  having  on  one
occasion  gorged  himself  with  food  and  drink  till  he  was  in  a  state  of  insensi-
bility, fell  asleep  on  a  dunghill,  and,  in  this  disgraceful  condition,  was  seen  by  a
litter  of  pigs.  The  pigs  attacked  the  fallen  prophet,  and  suffocated  him  to
death  ;  for  which  reason  his  followers  abominate  pigs,  and  refuse  to  partake
of  their  flesh.80  This  striking  fact  explains  one  great  peculiarity  of  the  Mo-
hammedans ;  81  and  another  fact,  equally  striking,  explains  how  it  was  that

pp.   481,   482,   Paris,    1815.     Compare  Hecker  on  the  Black  Death,   pp.  31,    32,  in   his
learned  work,  Epidemics  of  the  Middle  Ages,  published  by  the  Sydenham  Society.

78  In  the  sacred  books  of  the  Scandinavians,  pork  is  represented  as  the  principal  food,
even  in  heaven.     See  Mallet's  Northern  Antiquities,  p.  105.     It  was  the  chief  food  of  the
Irish  in  the  twelfth  century  :  Ledwich,  Antiquities  of  Ireland,  Dublin,  1804,  p.  370  ;
and  also  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  at  an  earlier  period.     Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iii.
p.  22.     In  France  it  was  equally  common,  and  Charlemagne  kept  in  his  forests  immense
droves  of  pigs.     Note  in  Esprit  des  Lois,  in  (Euvres  de  Montesquieu,  p.  513.      In  Spain,
those  who  did  not  like  pork  were  tried  by  the  Inquisition  as  suspected  Jews.     Llorente,
Hist,  de  I 'Inquisition,  vol.  i.  pp.  269,  442,  445.      Late  in  the  sixteenth  century,  there
was  a  particular  disease,  said  to  be  caused  by  the  quantity  of  it  eaten  in  Hungary.
Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  M6decine,  vol.  iii.  p.  93  ;  and  even  at  present,  the  barbarous  Lettes
are  passionately  fond  of  it.     Kohl's  Russia,  pp.  386,  387.     In  the  middle  of  the  six-
teenth century,  I  find  that  Philip  II.,  when  in  England,  generally  dined  on  bacon  :  of
which  he  ate  so  much,  as  frequently  to  make  himself  very  ill.     See  Ambassades  de
Messieurs  de  Noailles  en  Angleterre,  vol.  v.  pp-  240,  241,  edit.  1763.     The  ambassador
writes  that  Philip  was  "  grand  mangeur  oultre  mesure,"  and  used  to  consume    large
quantities  "  de  lard,  dont  il  faict  le  plus  souvent  son  principal  repas."     In  the  Middle
Ages,  "  les  Thuringiens  payaient  leur  tribut  en  pores,  la  denree  la  plus  precieuse  de  leur
pays."     (Euvres  de  Michelet,  vol.  ii.  p.  389.

79  Sismondi  (Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  vii.  pp.  325,  326)  passes  a  high  eulogy  upon  him  ;
and  Mosheim  (Ecclesiast.  History,  vol.  i.  p.  313)  says:  "Among  the  historians  (of  the
thirteenth  century),  the  first  place  is  due  to  Mathew  Paris  ;  a  writer  of  the  highest  merit,
both  in  point  of  knowledge  and  prudence."

80  Matthczi  Paris  Historia  Major,  p.  362.     He  concludes  his  account  by  saying,  "  Unde
adhuc  Saraceni  sues  prae  caeteris  animalibus  exosas  habent  et  abominabiles."     Mathew
Paris  obtained  his  information  from  a  clergyman,  "  quendam  magni  nominis  celebrem
praedicatorem,"  p.  360.     According  to  Mathew  of  Westminster,  the  pigs  not  only  suffo-
cated Mohammed,  but  actually  ate  the  greater  part  of  him  :  "  In  maxima  parte  a  porcis
corrosum  invenerunt."     Matthai  Westmonast.  Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.  p.  215.

81  By  a   singular  contradiction,  the   African    Mohammedans  now    "  believe  that  a
great  enmity  subsists  between  hogs  and  Christians."     Mungo  Park's  Travels,  vol.  i.
p.  185.  Many  medical  authors  have  supposed  that  pork  is  peculiarly  unwholesome  in  hot
countries  ;  but  this  requires  confirmation  :    and  it  is  certain  that  it  is  recommended  by
Arabian  physicians,  and  is  more  generally  eaten  both  in  Asia  and  in  Africa  than  is
usually  believed.     Comp.  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  M6decine,  vol.  ii.  p.  323  ;  Volney,  Voyage
en  Syrie,  vol.  i.  p.  440  ;  Buchanan's  Journey  through  the  Mysore,  vol.  ii.  p.  88,  vol.  iii.
p.  57  ;  Raffles'  Hist,  of  Java,  vol.  ii.  p.  5  ;  Ellis' s  Hist,  of  Madagascar,  vol.  i.  pp.  201,  403,
416  ;  Cook's  Voyages,  vol.  ii.  p.  265  ;  Burnes's  Travels  into  Bokhara,  vol.  iii.  p.  141.     As
facts  of  this  sort  are  important  physiologically  and  socially,  it  is  advisable  that  they


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES    179

their  sect  came  into  existence.  For  it  was  well  known  that  Mohammed  was
originally  a  cardinal,  and  only  became  a  heretic  because  he  failed  in  his  design
of  being  elected  pope.82  i  «

In  regard  to  the  early  history  of  Christianity,  the  great  writers  of  the  Middle
Ages  were  particularly  inquisitive  ;  and  they  preserved  the  memory  of  events
of  which  otherwise  we  should  have  been  entirely  ignorant.  After  Froissart,
the  most  celebrated  historian  of  the  fourteenth  century  was  certainly  Mathew
of  Westminster,  with  whose  name,  at  least,  most  readers  are  familiar.  This
eminent  man  directed  his  attention,  among  other  matters,  to  the  history  of
Judas,  in  order  to  discover  the  circumstances  under  which  the  character  of  that
arch -apostate  was  formed.  His  researches  seem  to  have  been  very  extensive  ;
but  their  principal  results  were,  that  Judas,  when  an  infant,  was  deserted  by  his
parents,  and  exposed  on  an  island  called  Scarioth,  from  whence  he  received
the  name  of  Judas  Tscariot.  To  this  the  historian  adds,  that  after  Judas  grew
up  he,  among  other  enormities,  slew  his  own  father,  and  then  married  his  own
mother.83  The  same  writer,  in  another  part  of  his  history,  mentions  a  fact
interesting  to  those  who  study  the  antiquities  of  the  Holy  See.  Some  questions
had  been  raised  as  to  the  propriety  of  kissing  the  pope's  toe,  and  even  theo-
logians had  their  doubts  touching  so  singular  a  ceremony.  But  this  difficulty
also  was  set  at  rest  by  Mathew  of  Westminster,  who  explains  the  true  origin
of  the  custom.  He  says  that  formerly  it  was  usual  to  kiss  the  hand  of  his
holiness  ;  but  that  towards  the  end  of  the  eighth  century,  a  certain  lewd  woman,
in  making  an  offering  to  the  pope,  not  only  kissed  his  hand,  but  also  pressed  it.
The  pope — his  name  was  Leo — seeing  the  danger,  cut  off  his  hand,  and  thus
escaped  the  contamination  to  which  he  had  been  exposed.  Since  that  time,  the
precaution  has  been  taken  of  kissing  the  pope's  toe  instead  of  his  hand  ;  and
lest  any  one  should  doubt  the  accuracy  of  this  account,  the  historian  assures
us  that  the  hand,  which  had  been  cut  off  five  or  six  hundred  years  before,  still
existed  in  Rome,  and  was  indeed  a  standing  miracle,  since  it  was  preserved
in  the  Lateran  in  its  original  state,  free  from  corruption.84  And  as  some  readers
might  wish  to  be  informed  respecting  the  Lateran  itself,  where  the  hand  was
kept,  this  also  is  considered  by  the  historian,  in  another  part  of  his  great  work,
where  he  traces  it  back  to  the  Emperor  Nero.  For  it  is  said  that  this  wicked
persecutor  of  the  faith,  on  one  occasion,  vomited  a  frog  covered  with  blood,
which  he  believed  to  be  his  own  progeny,  and  therefore  caused  to  be  shut  up
in  a  vault,  where  it  remained  hidden  for  some  time.  Now,  in  the  Latin  language,
latente  means  hidden,  and  rana  means  a  frog  ;  so  that,  by  putting  these  two
words  together,  we  have  the  origin  of  the  Lateran,  which,  in  fact,  was  built
where  the  frog  was  found.85

should  be  collected ;  and  I  therefore  add,  that  the  North -American  Indians  are  said  to
have  "  a  disgust  for  pork,"  Journal  of  the  Geog.  Society,  vol.  xv.  p.  30  ;  and  that  Dobell
(Travels,  vol.  ii.  p.  260,  8vo,  1830)  says,  "  I  believe  there  is  more  pork  eaten  in  China
than  in  all  the  rest  of  the  world  put  together."

82  This  idea,  which  was  a' favourite  one  in  the  Middle  Ages,  is  said  to  have  been  a
Rabbinical  invention.     See  Lettres  de  Gut  Patin,  vol.  iii.  p.  127  :  "  que  Mahomet,  le  faux
prophete,  avait  ete  cardinal ;  et  que,  par  depit  de  n'avoir  etc  pape,  il  s'etoit  fait  here-
siarque."

83  See  the  ample  details  in  Matthcei  Westmonast.  Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.  pp.  86,
87  ;  and  at  p.   88,   "  Judas  matrem  suam    uxorem  duxerat,  et    quod    patrem    suum
occiderat."

84  This  took  place  in  the  year  798.     Matthcei  Westmonast.  Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.
p.  293.     The  historian  thus  concludes  his  relation  :  "  Et  statutum  est  nunc  quod  num-
quam  extunc  manus  Papae  ab  offerentibus  deoscularetur,  sed  pes.     Cum  ante  fuerat
consuetude  quod  manus,  non  pes,  deoscularetur.     In  hujus  miraculi  memoriam  reser-
vatur  adhuc  manus  abscissa  in  thesauro  lateranensi,  quam  dominus  custodit  incorruptam
ad  laudem  raatris  suae."

83  ".  .  .    Ita  ut  Nero  se  puero  gravidum  existimaret Tandem  dolore  nimio

vexatus,  medicis  ait :  Accelerate  tempus  partus,  quia  languore  vix  anhelitum  habeo
respirandi.  Tune  ipsum  ad  vomitum  impotionaverunt,  et  ranam  visu  terribilem,


i8o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  would  be  easy  to  fill  volumes  with  similar  notions  ;  all  of  which  were
devoutly  believed  in  those  ages  of  darkness,  or,  as  they  have  been  well  called,
Ages  of  Faith.  Those,  indeed,  were  golden  days  for  the  ecclesiastical  profession,
since  the  credulity  of  men  had  reached  a  height  which  seemed  to  ensure  to  the
clergy  a  long  and  universal  dominion.  How  the  prospects  of  the  church  were
subsequently  darkened,  and  how  the  human  reason  began  to  rebel,  will  be  re-
lated in  another  part  of  this  Introduction,  where  I  shall  endeavour  to  trace  the
rise  of  that  secular  and  sceptical  spirit  to  which  European  civilization  owes  its
origin.  But,  before  closing  the  present  chapter,  it  may  be  well  to  give  a  few
more  illustrations  of  the  opinions  held  in  the  Middle  Ages  ;  and  for  this  purpose
I  will  select  the  two  historical  accounts  which,  of  all  others,  were  the  most
popular,  exercised  most  influence,  and  were  most  universally  believed.

The  histories  to  which  I  refer  are  those  of  Arthur  and  Charlemagne  ;  both
of  which  bear  the  names  of  dignitaries  of  the  church,  and  were  received  with
the  respect  due  to  their  illustrious  authors.  That  concerning  Charlemagne
is  called  the  Chronicle  of  Turpin,  and  purports  to  be  written  by  Turpin,  arch-
bishop of  Rheims,  a  friend  of  the  emperor,  and  his  companion  in  war.86  From
some  passages  it  contains,  there  is  reason  to  think  that  it  was  really  composed
at  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century  ;  87  but  in  the  Middte  Ages  men  were
not  nice  in  these  matters,  and  no  one  was  likely  to  dispute  its  authenticity.
Indeed,  the  name  of  an  archbishop  of  Rheims  was  sufficient  recommendation  ;
and  we  find  accordingly  that  in  the  year  1 122  it  received  the  formal  approbation
of  the  pope  ;  88  and  that  Vincent  de  Beauvais,  one  of  the  most  celebrated  writers
in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  tutor  to  the  sons  of  Louis  IX.,  mentions  it  as  a
work  of  value,  and  as  "being  the  principal  authority  for  the  reign  of  Charle-
magne.89

A  book  thus  generally  read,  and  sanctioned  by  such  competent  judges,  must
be  a  tolerable  standard  for  testing  the  knowledge  and  opinions  of  those  times.
On  this  account,  a  short  notice  of  it  will  be  useful  for  our  present  purpose,  as  it
will  enable  us  to  understand  the  extreme  slowness  with  which  history  has  im-
proved, and  the  almost  imperceptible  steps  by  which  it  advanced,  until  fresh
life  was  breathed  into  it  by  the  great  thinkers  of  the  eighteenth  century.

In  the  Chronicle  of  Turpin,  we  are  informed  that  the  invasion  of  Spain  by
Charlemagne  took  place  in  consequence  of  the  direct  instigation  of  St.  James,
the  brother  of  St.  John.90  The  apostle,  being  the  cause  of  the  attack,  adopted
measures  to  secure  its  success.  When  Charlemagne  besieged  Pamplona,  that
city  made  an  obstinate  resistance  ;  but  as  soon  as  prayers  were  offered  up  by

humoribus  infectam,  et  sanguine  edidit  cruentatam Unde  et  pars  ilia  civitatis,

ut  aliqui  dicunt,  ubi  rana  latuerat,  Lateranum  a  latente  rana,  nomen  accepit."  Matthczi
Westmonast.  part  i.  p.  98.  Compare  the  account  given  by  Roger  of  Hoveden,  of  a  woman
who  vomited  two  toads.  Script,  post  Bedam,  p.  457  rev.  In  the  Middle  Ages  there
were  many  superstitions  respecting  these  animals,  and  they  appear  to  have  been  used
by  heralds  as  marks  of  degradation.  See  Lankester's  Memorials  of  Ray,  p.  197.

SB  " Ego  Turpinus  in  valle  Caroli  loco  praefato,   astante  rege,"   etc.     De

Vita  Caroli  Magni,  p.  74,  edit.  Ciampi.

87  Turner  (History  of  England,  vol.  vii.  pp.  256-268)  has  attempted  to  prove  that  it
was  written  by  Calixtus  II.  ;  but  his  arguments,  though  ingenious  and  learned,   are
not  decisive.      Warton  (Hist.  Eng.  Poetry,  vol.  i.  p.  128)  says  it  was  composed  about
mo.

88  The  pope  "  statuit  historiam  Sancti  Caroli  descriptam  a  beato  Turpino  Remensi
Archiepiscopo  esse  authenticam."     Note  in  Turner,  vol.  vii.  p.  250.

89  In  his  famous  Speculum,   "  il  recommande  specialement  les  etudes  historiques,
dont  il  parait  que  la  plupart  de  ses  contemporains  meconnaissaient  1'utilite  ;  mais
lorsqu'il  indique  les  sources  ou  il  puisera  ce  genre  d'instruction,  c'est  Turpin  qu'il
designe  comme  le  principal  historien  de  Charlemagne."     Histoire  Litteraire  de  la  France,
vol.  xviii.  p.  474,  Paris,  1835,  4to  ;  see  also  p.  517  ;  and  on  its  influence  in  Spain,  see
Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i.  pp.  222,  223.

90  Caroli  Magni  Historia,  edit.  Ciampi,  pp.  3-5.


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING    THE    MIDDLE  AGES    181

the  invaders,  the  walls  suddenly  fell  to  the  ground.91  After  this,  the  emperor
rapidly  overran  the  whole  country,  almost  annihilated  the  Mohammedans,
and  built  innumerable  churches.92  But  the  resources  of  Satan  are  inexhaus-
tible. On  the  side  of  the  enemy  a  giant  now  appeared,  whose  name  was
Fenacute,  and  who  was  descended  from  Goliath  of  old.93  This  Fenacute  was
the  most  formidable  opponent  the  Christians  had  yet  encountered.  His
strength  was  equal  to  that  of  forty  men  ; 94  his  face  measured  one  cubit  ;  his
arms  and  legs  four  cubits  ;  his  total  height  was  twenty  cubits.  Against  him
Charlemagne  sent  the  most  eminent  warriors  ;  but  they  were  easily  discomfited
by  the  giant  ;  of  whose  prodigious  force  some  idea  may  be  formed  from  the  fact,
that  the  length  even  of  his  fingers  was  three  palms.95  The  Christians  were  filled
with  consternation.  In  vain  did  more  than  twenty  chosen  men  advance  against
the  giant  ;  not  one  returned  from  the  field  ;  Fenacute  took  them  all  under  his
arms,  and  carried  them  off  into  captivity.9*5  At  length  the  celebrated  Orlando
came  forward,  and  challenged  him  to  mortal  combat.  An  obstinate  fight  en-
sued ;  and  the  Christian,  not  meeting  with  the  success  he  expected,  engaged
his  adversary  in  a  theological  discussion.9''  Here  the  Pagan  was  easily  de-
feated, and  Orlando,  warmed  by  the  controversy,  pressed  on  his  enemy,  smote
the  giant  with  his  sword,  and  dealt  him  a  fatal  wound.  After  this,  the  last
hope  of  the  Mohammedans  was  extinct;  the  Christian  arms  had  finally
triumphed,  and  Charlemagne  divided  Spain  among  those  gallant  followers  who
had  aided  him  in  effecting  its  conquest.98

On  the  history  of  Arthur,  the  Middle  Ages  possessed  information  equally
authentic.  Different  accounts  had  been  circulated  respecting  this  celebrated
king  ;  "  but  their  comparative  value  was  still  unsettled,  when,  early  in  the
twelfth  century,  the  subject  attracted  the  attention  of  Geoffrey,  the  well-known
Archdeacon  of  Monmouth.  This  eminent  man,  in  A.D.  1147,  published  the
result  of  his  inquiries,  in  a  work  which  he  called  History  of  the  Britons.™  In
this  book  he  takes  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  whole  question  ;  and  not  only
relates  the  life  of  Arthur,  but  also  traces  the  circumstances  which  prepared  the
way  for  the  appearance  of  that  great  conqueror.  In  regard  to  the  actions  of
Arthur,  the  historian  was  singularly  fortunate,  inasmuch  as  the  materials
necessary  for  that  part  of  his  subject  were  collected  by  Walter  Archdeacon  of
Oxford,  who  was  a  friend  of  Geoffrey,  and  who,  like  him,  took  great  interest

91  "...  Muri  collapsi  funditus  corruerunt."     De  Vita  Caroli,  p.  5.     On  this,  Ciampi,
in  his  notes  on  Turpin,  gravely  says  (pp.  94,  95)  :  "  Questo  fatto  della  presa  di  Pamplona
e  reso  maraviglioso  per  la  subitanea  caduta  delle  mura,  a  somiglianza  delle  mura  di
Gerico."     This  reminds  me  of  a  circumstance  mentioned  by  Monconys,  who,  on  visiting
Oxford  in  1663,  was  shown  a  horn  which  was  preserved  in  that  ancient  city,  because  it
was  said  to  be  made  in  the  same  way  as  that  by  which  the  walls  of  Jericho  were  blown
down:  "  Les  Juifs  tiennent  que  leurs  ancetres  se  servirent de pareilles  pour  abbattre  les
murailles  de  Jerico."     Voyages  de  Monconys,  vol.  iii.  p.  95,  edit.  Paris,  1695.

92  De  Vita  Caroli,  cap  v.  pp.  n,  12  ;  is  headed  "  De  ecclesiis  quas  Carolus  fecit."

93  "  Gigas  nomine  Ferracutus,  qui  fuit  de  genere  Goliat."     De  Vita  Caroh,  p.  39.

94  "  Vim  xl.  fortium  possidebat."     p.  39.

95  "  Erat  enim  statura  ejus  quasi  cubitis  xx.,  facies  erat  longa  quasi  unius  cubiti,  et
nasus  illius  unius  palmi  mensurati,  et  brachia  et  crura  ejus  quatuor  cubitorum  erant,
et  digiti  ejus  tribus  palmis."  p.  40.

96  De  Vita  Caroli,  p.  40.  9?  Ibid.  pp.  43-47.

98  Ibid.  p.  52.     On  the  twelve  peers  of  Charlemagne,  in  connexion  with  Turpin,  see
Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  v.  pp.  246,  537,  538,  vol.  vi.  p.  534.

99  The  Welsh,  however,  accused  Gildas  of  having  thrown  his  history  "  into  the  sea."
Palgrave's  Anglo-Saxon  Commonwealth,  vol.  i.  p.  453.     The  industrious  Sharon  Turner
(Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.  pp.  282-295)  has  collected  a  great  deal  of  evidence  respecting
Arthur  ;  of  whose  existence  he,  of  course,  entertains  no  doubt.     Indeed,  at  p.  292,  he
gives  us  an  account  of  the  discovery,  in  the  twelfth  century,  of  Arthur's  body  !

100  In  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vii.  pp.  269,  270,  it  is  said  to  have  appeared  in
1128  ;  but  Mr.  Wright  (Biog.  Brit.  Lit.  vol.  ii.  p.  144)  seems  to  have  proved  that  the  real
date  is  1147.


1 82  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

in  the  study  of  history.101  The  work  is,  therefore,  the  joint  composition  of  the
two  archdeacons  ;  and  is  entitled  to  respect,  not  only  on  this  account,  but  also
because  it  was  one  of  the  most  popular  of  all  the  productions  of  the  Middle  Ages.

The  earlier  part  of  this  great  history  is  occupied  with  the  result  of  those
researches  which  the  Archdeacon  of  Monmouth  had  made  into  the  state  of
Britain  before  the  accession  of  Arthur.'  With  this  we  are  not  so  much  con-
cerned ;  though  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  archdeacon  ascertained  that,
after  the  capture  of  Troy,  Ascanius  fled  from  the  city,  and  begat  a  son,  who
became  father  to  Brutus.102  In  those  days  England  was  peopled  by  giants,
all  of  whom  were  slain  by  Brutus  ;  who,  having  extirpated  the  entire  race,
built  London,  settled  the  affairs  of  the  country,  and  called  it,  after  himself,  by
the  name  of  Britain.103  The  archdeacon  proceeds  to  relate  the  actions  of  a
long  line  of  kings  who  succeeded  Brutus,  most  of  whom  were  remarkable  for
their  abilities,  and  some  were  famous  for  the  prodigies  which  occurred  in  their
time.  Thus,  during  the  government  of  Rivallo,  it  rained  blood  for  three  con-
secutive days  ;  104  and  when  Morvidus  was  on  the  throne,  the  coasts  were  infested
by  a  horrid  sea -monster,  which,  having  devoured  innumerable  persons,  at
length  swallowed  the  king  himself.105

These  and  similar  matters  are  related  by  the  Archdeacon  of  Monmouth  as  the
fruit  of  his  own  inquiries  ;  but  in  the  subsequent  account  of  Arthur,  he  was  aided
by  his  friend  the  Archdeacon  of  Oxford.  The  two  archdeacons  inform  their
readers  that  King  Arthur  owed  his  existence  to  a  magical  contrivance  of  Merlin,
the  celebrated  wizard  :  the  particulars  of  which  they  relate  with  a  minuteness
which,  considering  the  sacred  character  of  the  historians,  is  rather  remarkable.106
The  subsequent  actions  of  Arthur  did  not  belie  his  supernatural  origin.  His
might  nothing  was  able  to  withstand.  He  slew  an  immense  number  of  Saxons  ;
he  overran  Norway,  invaded  Gaul,  fixed  his  court  at  Paris,  and  made  prepara-
tions to  effect  the  conquest  of  all  Europe.107  He  engaged  two  giants  in  single
combat,  and  killed  them  both.  One  of  these  giants,  who  inhabited  the  Mount
of  St.  Michael,  was  the  terror  of  the  whole  country,  and  destroyed  all  the  soldiers
sent  against  him,  except  those  he  took  prisoners  in  order  to  eat  them  while
they  were  yet  alive.108  But  he  fell  a  victim  to  the  prowess  of  Arthur  ;  as  also
did  another  giant,  named  Ritho,  who  was,  if  possible,  still  more  formidable.
For  Ritho,  not  content  with  warring  on  men  of  the  meaner  sort,  actually  clothed


101  Geoffrey  says,   "  A  Gualtero  Oxinefordensi  in  multis  historiis  peritissimo  viro
audivit "   (i.e.  ille  Geoffrey)  "  vili  licet  stylo,  breviter  tamen  propalabit,  quae  proelia
inclytus  ille  rex  post  victoriam  istam,  in  Britanniam  reversus,  cum   nepote  suo  com-
miserit."     Galfredi  Monumetensis  Historia  Britonum,  lib.  xi.  sec.  i.  p.  200.     And  in  the
dedication  to  the  Earl  of  Gloucester,  p.  i,  he  says,  "  Walterus  Oxinefordensis  archi-
diaconus,  vir  in  oratoria  arte  atque  in  exoticis  historiis  eruditus."     Compare  Matthai
W estmonast.  Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.  p.  248.

102  Galfredi  Historia  Britonum,  pp.  3,  4.

103  "  Erat  tune  nomen  insulae  Albion,   quae  a  nemine,  exceptis  paucis  gigantibus,

inhabitabatur Denique  Brutus  de  nomine  suo  insulam  Britanniam,  sociosque

suos  Britones  appellat."     Golf.  Hist.  Britonum,  p.  20.

104  "  in  tempore  ejus  tribus  diebus  cecidit  pluvia  sanguinea,  et  muscarum  affluentia  ;
quibus  homines  moriebantur."     Hist.  Brit.  p.  36.

105  "  Advenerat  namque  ex  partibus  Hibernici  maris  inauditse  feritatis  bellua,  quae
incolas  maritimos  sine  intermissione  devorabat.     Cumque  fama  aures  ejus  attigisset,
accessit  ipse  ad  illam,  et  solus  cum  sola  congressus  est.     At  cum  omnia  tela  sua  in  illam
in  vanum  consumpsisset,  acceleravit  monstrum  illud,  et  apertis  faucibus  ipsum  velut
pisciculum  devoravit."     Hist.  Brit.  p.  51.

106  The  particulars  of  the  intrigue  are  in  Galf.  Hist.  Brit.  pp.  151,  152.     For  informa-
tion respecting  Merlin,  see  also  Matth&i  Westmonast.  Flores  Historiarum,  part  i.  pp.  161,
162  ;  and  Naude,  Apologie  pour  les  Grands  Hommes,  pp.  308,  309,  318,  319,  edit.  Amster-
dam, 1712.

107  Hist.  Britonum,  pp.  167-170  ;  a  brilliant  chapter.

i°8  "  Sed  et  plures  capiebat  quos  semivivos  devorabat."    Hist,  Brit.  p.  x8x.


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      183

himself  in  furs  which  were  entirely  made  of  the  beards  of  the  kings  he  had
killed.1*®

Such  were  the  statements  which,  under  the  name  of  history,  were  laid  before
the  world  in  the  twelfth  century ;  and  that,  too,  not  by  obscure  writers,  but  by
high  dignitaries  of  the  church.  "Nor  was  anything  wanting  by  which  the  success
of  the  work  might  be  ensured.  Its  vouchers  were  the  Archdeacon  of  Mon-
mouth  and  the  Archdeacon  of  Oxford ;  it  was  dedicated  to  Robert  Earl  of
Gloucester,  the  son  of  Henry  I.  ;  and  it  was  considered  so  important  a  contribu-
tion to  the  national  literature,  that  its  principal  author  was  raised  to  the
bishopric  of  Asaph — a  preferment  which  he  is  said  to  owe  to  his  success  in  in-
vestigating the  annals  of  English  history.110  A  book  thus  stamped  with  every
possible  mark  of  approbation  is  surely  no  bad  measure  of  the  age  in  which  it
was  admired.  Indeed,  the  feeling  was  so  universal  that,  during  several  cen-
turies, there  are  not  more  than  two  or  three  instances  of  any  critic  suspecting
its  accuracy.111  A  Latin  abridgment  of  it  was  published  by  the  well-known
historian,  Alfred  of  Beverley  ;  112  and,  in  order  that  it  might  be  more  generally
known,  it  was  translated  into  English  by  Layamon,113  and  into  Anglo-Norman,

109  "  Hie  namque  ex  barbis  regum  quos  peremerat,  fecerat  sibi  pelles,  et  mandaverat
Arturo  ut  barbam  suam  diligenter  excoriaret,  atque  excoriatam  sibi  dirigeret :  ut
quemadmodum  ipse  ceteris  praeerat  regibus,  ita  quoque  in  honorem  ejus  ceteris  barbis
ipsam  superponeret."  Galf.  Hist.  Brit  p.  184.

no  "it  was  partly,  perhaps,  the  reputation  of  this  book,  which  procured  its  author
the  bishopric  of  St.  Asaph."  Life  of  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  in  Wright's  Biog,  Brit.  Lit.
vol.  ii.  p.  144,  8vo,  1846.  According  to  the  Welsh  writers,  he  was  Bishop  of  Llandaff.
See  Stephens' s  Literature  of  the  Kymry,  8vo,  1849,  p.  323.

"i  Mr.  Wright  (Biog.  Brit.  Lit.  vol.  ii.  p.  146)  says  :  "  Within  a  century  after  its  first
publication,  it  was  generally  adopted  by  writers  on  English  history  ;  and  during  several
centuries,  only  one  or  two  rare  instances  occur  of  persons  who  ventured  to  speak  against
its  veracity."  And  Sir  Henry  Ellis  says  of  Polydore  Vergil,  who  wrote  early  in  the  six-
teenth century,  "  For  the  repudiation  of  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  history,  Polydore  Vergil
was  considered  almost  as  a  man  deprived  of  reason.  Such  were  the  prejudices  of  the
time."  Polydore  Vergil's  English  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  x.  edit.  Ellis,  1846,  4to.  See  also,  on  its
popularity,  Lappenberg's  Hist,  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Kings,  vol.  i.  p.  102.  In  the  seventeenth
century,  which  was  the  first  sceptical  century  in  Europe,  men  began  to  open  their  eyes
on  these  matters  ;  and  Boyle,  for  example,  classes  together  "  the  fabulous  labours  of
Hercules,  and  exploits  of  Arthur  of  Britain."  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  425.  ["  First
sceptical  century  "  is  to  be  understood  loosely,  as  pointing  to  the  more  general  diffusion
of  scepticism.  See  above,  p.  119,  note.  So  early  as  the  year  1376  we  find  a  number
of  the  students  of  Paris  publishing  theses  denying  the  chief  Christian  dogmas,  and  sug-
gesting that  there  are  fables  and  falsehoods  in  the  gospels  as  in  other  books  (John  of
Goch,  De  libertate  Christiana,  1.  i.  cc.  17,  18  :  cited  by  Ullmann,  Reformers  before  the
Reformation,  Eng.  tr.  i.  37.  There  had  been  a  great  growth  of  new  scepticism  in  the
sixteenth  century,  signalized  at  length  in  literature  by  Sanchez  and  Montaigne.  In  the
seventeenth  century  the  literary  development  went  much  further.  But  Boyle  himself
remained  uncritical  at  many  points  ;  and  even  in  his  own  field  remained  credulous  on
the  subject  of  the  transmutation  of  the  precious  metals.  See  Fox  Bourne's  Life  of
Locke,  1876,  ii.  223-5.  And  see  below,  ch.  xiii.,  at  note  43  sq.,  for  cases  of  reversion,
late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  to  medieval  credulity. — ED.]

112  Wright's  Biog.  Brit.  Lit.  vol.  ii.  p.  156  ;  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vii.  p.  282.

113  According  to  Mr.  Wright  (Biog.  Brit.  vol.  ii.  p.  439),  it  was  translated  through
the  medium  of  Wace.     But  it  would  be  more  correct  to  say,  that  Layamon  made  the
absurdities  of  Geoffrey  the  basis  of  his  work,  rather  than  translated  them  ;    for  he
amplifies  15,000  lines  of  Wace's  Brut  into  32,000  of  his  own  jargon.     See  Sir  F.  Madden's
Preface  to  Layamon' s  Brut,  8vo,  1847,  vol.  i.  p.  xiii.     I  cannot  refrain  from  bearing
testimony  to  the  great  philological  value  of  this  work  of  Layamon's,  by  the  publication
of  which  its  accomplished  editor  has  made  an  important  contribution  towards  the  study
of  the[history  of  the  English  language.     So|far,  however,  as  Layamon  is  concerned,  we
can  only  contemplate  with  wonder  an  age  of  which  he  was  considered  an  ornament,


1 84  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

first  by  Gaimar,  and  afterwards  by  Wace  ;  114  zealous  men,  who  were  anxious
that  the  important  truths  it  contained  should  be  diffused  as  widely  as  circum-
stances would  allow.

It  will  hardly  be  necessary  that  I  should  adduce  further  evidence  of  the  way
in  which  history  was  written  during  the  Middle  Ages  ;  for  the  preceding  speci-
mens have  not  been  taken  at  random,  but  have  been  selected  from  the  ablest
and  most  celebrated  authors  ;  and  as  such  present  a  very  favourable  type  of  the
knowledge  and  judgment  of  Europe  in  those  days.  In  the  fourteenth  and
fifteenth  centuries  there  appeared,  for  the  first  time,  faint  signs  of  an  ap-
proaching change  : 115  but  this  improvement  was  not  very  marked  until  late
in  the  sixteenth  century,  or  even  early  in  the  seventeenth.  The  principal  steps
of  this  interesting  movement  will  be  traced  in  another  part  of  the  Introduction,
when  I  shall  show,  that  although  in  the  seventeenth  century  the  progress  was
unmistakeable,  there  was  no  attempt  to  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  history
until  nearly  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  ;  when  the  subject  was  studied,
first  by  the  great  French  thinkers,  then  by  one  or  two  of  the  Scotch,  and,  some
years  later,  by  the  Germans.  This  reformation  of  history  was  connected,  as  I
shall  point  out,  with  other  intellectual  changes,  which  corresponded  to  it,  and
which  affected  the  social  relations  of  all  the  principal  countries  of  Europe.  But
without  anticipating  what  will  be  found  in  another  part  of  this  volume,  it  is
sufficient  to  say  that  not  only  was  no  history  written  before  the  end  of  the
sixteenth  century,  but  that  the  state  of  society  was  such  as  to  make  it  im-
possible for  one  to  be  written.  The  knowledge  of  Europe  was  not  yet  ripe
enough  to  enable  it  to  be  successfully  applied  to  the  study  of  past  events.  For
we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  deficiencies  of  the  early  historians  were  caused
by  a  lack  of  natural  abilities.  The  average,  intellect  ol  men  is  probably  always
the  same*  ;  but  the  pressure  exercised  on  them  by  society  is  constantly  varying.
It  was,  therefore,  the  general  condition  of  society  which,  in  former  days,  com-
pelled even  the  ablest  writers  to  believe  the  most  childish  absurdities.  Until
that  condition  was  altered,  the  existence  of  history  was  impossible,  because  it
was  impossible  to  find  any  one  who  knew  what  was  most  important  to  relate,
what  to  reject,  and  what' to  believe.

The  consequence  was,  that  even  when  history  was  studied  by  men  of  such
eminent  abilities  as  Machiavelli  and  Bodin,  they  could  turn  it  to  no  better
account  than  to  use  it  as  a  vehicle  for  political  speculations  ;  and  in  none  of
their  works  do  we  find  the  least  attempt  to  rise  to  generalizations  large  enough
to  include  all  the  social  phenomena.!  The  same  remark  applies  to  Comines,
who,  though  inferior  to  Machiavelli  and  Bodin,  was  an  observer  of  no  ordinary
acuteness,  and  certainly  displays  a  rare  sagacity  in  his  estimation  of  particular
characters.  But  this  was  due  to  his  own  intellect  ;  while  the  age  in  which  he
lived  made  him  superstitious,  and,  for  the  larger  purposes  of  history,  miserably
shortsighted.  His  shortsightedness  is  strikingly  shown  in  his  utter  ignorance

114  Wright's  Biog.  Brit.  Lit.  vol.  ii.  pp.  151,  207  ;  Hallam's  Literature  of  Europe,  vol.  i.

P.  35-

115  Of  which  Froissart  is  the  earliest  instance  ;  since  he  is  the  first  who  took  a  secular
view  of  affairs,  all  the  preceding  historians  being  e&sentially  theological.     In  Spain,
too,  we  find,  late  in  the  fourteenth  century,  a  political  spirit  beginning  to  appear  among
historians.     See  the  remarks  on  Ayala,  in  Ticknor's  Hist,  of  Spanish  Lit.  vol.  i.  pp.  165,
1 66  ;  where,  however,  Mr.  Ticknor  represents  Froissart  as  more  unworldly  than  he
really  was.

[*  See  above,  ch.  iv.  note  12. — ED.]

[f  The  meaning  of  this  objection  is  not  clear.  Buckle's  own  work  might  as  fairly  as
those  of  Machiavelli  and  Bodin  be  described  as  making  history  "  a  vehicle  for  political
speculations."  That  charge  has  no  relevance  to  the  preceding  exposition.  Machiavelli
and  Bodin  read  ancient  history  to  very  good  purpose,  and  were  not  mere  victims  of
medieval  myth-mongering.  To  say  that  they  made  no  attempt  to  rise  to  generalizations
including  all  the  social  phenomena,  is  again  to  bring  a  charge  that  might  lie  against  all
subsequent  works  of  sociology,  including  Buckle's. — ED.]


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      185

of  that  great  intellectual  movement  which,  in  his  own  time,  was  rapidly  over-
throwing the  feudal  institutions  of  the  Middle  Ages  ;  but  to  which  he  never  once
alludes,  reserving  his  attention  for  those  trivial  political  intrigues  in  the  relation
of  which  he  believed  history  to  consist.116  As  to  his  superstition,  it  would  be  idle
to  give  many  instances  of  that  ;  since  no  man  could  live  in  the  fifteenth  century
without  having  his  mind  enfeebled  by  the  universal  credulity.  It  may,  however,
be  observed  that  though  he  was  personally  acquainted  with  statesmen  and
diplomatists,  and  had  therefore  the  fullest  opportunity  of  seeing  how  enter-
prises of  the  fairest  promise  are  constantlv  nrned,  merely  by  the  incapacity  of
those  who  undertake  them,  he  on  all  important  occasions  ascribes  such  failure,
not  to  the  real  cause,  but  to  the  immediate  interference  of  the  Deity.  So
marked,  and  so  irresistible,  was  the  tendency  of  the  fifteenth  century,  that  this
eminent  politician,  a  man  of  the  world,  and  well  skilled  in  the  arts  of  life,  de-
liberately asserts  that  battles  are  lost,  not  because  the  army  is  ill  supplied,  nor
because  the  campaign  is  ill  conceived,  nor  because  the  genera,!  is  incompetent  ;
but  because  the  people  or  their  prince  are  wicked,  and  Providence  seeks  to
punish  them.  For,  says  Comines,  war  is  a  great  mystery  ;  and  being  used  by
God  as  the  means  of  accomplishing  his  wishes,  He  gives  Victory,  sometimes  to
one  side,  sometimes  to  the  other.11?  Hence,  too,  disturbances  occur  in  the  state,
solely  by  divine  disposition  ;  and  they  never  would  happen,  except  that  princes
or  kingdoms,  having  become  prosperous,  forget  the  source  from  which  their
prosperity  proceeded.118

Such  attempts  as  these  to  make  politics  a  mere  branch  of  theology,119  are
characteristic  of  the  time  ;  and  they  are  the  more  interesting,  as  the  work  of  a
man  of  great  ability,  and  of  one,  too,  who  had  grown  old  in  the  experience  of

116  On  this,  Arnold  says,  truly  enough,  "  Comines's  Memoirs  are  striking  from  their
perfect  unconsciousness  :  the  knell  of  the  Middle  Ages  had  been  already  sounded,  yet
Comines  has  no  other  notions  than  such  as  they  had  tended  to  foster  ;  he  describes  their
events,  their  characters,  their  relations,  as  if  they  were  to  continue  for  centuries."
Arnold's  Lectures  on  Modern  History,  p.  118.     To  this  I  may  add,  that  whenever  Comines
has  occasion  to  mention  the  lower  classes,  which  is  very  rarely  the  case,  he  speaks  of
them  with  great  contempt.     See  two  striking  instances  in  Memoires  de  Philippe  de
Comines,  vol.  ii.  pp.  277,  287,  edit.  Paris,  1826.

117  He  says  that  a  field  of  battle  is  "  un  des  accomplissemens  des  oeuvres  que  Dieu  a
commencees  aucunes  fois  par  petites  mouvetez  et  occasions,  et  en  donnant  la  victoire
aucunes  fois  &  1'un,  et  aucunes  fois  a  1'autre  :  et  est  cecy  mystere  si  grand,  que  les  royaumes
et  grandes  seigneuries  en  prennent  aucunes  fois  fins  et  desolations,  et  les  autres  ac-
croissement,  et  commencement  de  regner."     Mem,  de  Comines,  vol.  i.  pp.  361,  362.     Re-
specting the  wanton  invasion  of    Italy,  he  says  that  the  expedition  might  have  been
easily  ruined  if  the  enemy  had  thought  of  poisoning  the  wells  or  the  food  :  "  mais  ils
n'y  eussent  point  failly,  s'ils  y  eussent  voulu  essayer  ;  mais  il  est  de  croire  que  nostre
sauveur  et  redempteur  Jesus-Christ  leur  ostoit  leur  vouloir."  vol.  iii.  p.  154.     So,  he  adds,
p.   155,   "  pour  conclure  1' article,  semble  que  nostre  seigneur  Jesus -Christ  ait  voulu
que  toute  la  gloire  du  voyage  ait  este  attribute  £  luy."     Compare  the  Institutes  of
Timour,  p.  7  ;  an  instructive  combination  of  superstition  and  ferocity.

118  "  Mais  mon  advis  est  que  cela  ne  se  fait  que  par  disposition  divine  ;  car  quand  les
princes  ou  royaumes  ont  este  en  grande  prosperite  ou  richesses,  et  ils  ont  mesconnois-
sance  dont  precede  telle  grace,  Dieu  leur  dresse  un  ennemi  ou  ennemie,  dont  nul  ne  se
douteroit,  comme  vous  pouvez  voir  par  les  rois  nommez  en  la  Bible,  et  par  ce  que  puis
peu  d'annees  en  avez  veu  en  cette  Angleterre,  et  en  cette  maison  de  Bourgogne  et  autres
lieux  que  avez  veu  et  voyez  tous  les  jours."     Mem.  de  Comines,  vol.  i.  pp.  388,  389.     See
also  his  remarks  on  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,  vol.  ii.  p.  179  ;    and  in  particular  his  ex
traordinary  digression,  livre  v.  chap,  xviii.  vol.  ii.  pp.  290-298.

119  Dr.  Lingard  (Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  357)  says,  "  From  the  doctrine  of  a  super-
intending providence,  the  piety  of  our  ancestors  had  drawn  a  rash  but  very  convenient
inference,  that  success  is  an  indication  of  the  Divine  will,  and  that,  of  course,  to  resist  a
victorious  competitor  is  to  resist  the  judgment  of  heaven  :  "  see  also  p.  114.     The  last
vestige  of  this  once  universal  opinion  is  the  expression,  which  is  gradually  falling  into
disuse,  of  "  appealing  to  the  God  of  Battles."


1 86  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

public  life.  When  views  of  this  sort  were  advocated,  not  by  a  monk  in  his
cloister,  but  by  a  distinguished  statesman,  well  versed  in  public  affairs,  we  may
easily  imagine  what  was  the  average  intellectual  condition  of  those  who  were
every  way  his  inferiors.  It  is  but  too  evident  that  from  them  nothing  could  be
expected  ;  and  that  many  steps  had  yet  to  be  taken  before  Europe  could  emerge
from  the  superstition  in  "which  it  was  sunk,  and  break  through  those  grievous
impediments  which  hindered  its  future  progress.

But  though  much  remained  to  be  done,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
movement  onward  was  uninterrupted,  and  that  even  while  Comines  was  writing
there  were  unequivocal  symptoms  of  a  great  and  decisive  change.  Still,  they
were  only  indications  of  what  was  approaching  ;  and  about  a  hundred  y  ears
elapsed,  after  his  death,  before  the  progress  was  apparent  in  the  whole  of  its
results.  For  though  the  Protestant  Reformation  was  a  consequence  of  this
progress,  it  was  for  some  time  unfavourable  to  it,  by  encouraging  the  ablest
men  in  the  discussion  of  questions  inaccessible  to  human  reason,  and  thus
diverting  them  from  subjects  in  which  their  efforts  would  have  been  available
for  the  general  purposes  of  civilization.  Hence  we  find  that  little  was  really
accomplished  until  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  when,  as  we  shall  see  in
the  next  two  chapters,  the  theological  fervour  began  to  subside  in  England  and
France,  and  the  way  was  prepared  for  that  purely  secular  philosophy  of  which
Bacon  and  Descartes  were  the  exponents,  but  by  no  means  the  creators.120
This  epoch  belongs  to  the  seventeenth  century,  and  from  it  we  may  date  the
intellectual  regeneration  of  Europe  ;  just  as  from  the  eighteenth  century  we  may
date  its  social  regeneration.  But  during  the  greater  part  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, the  credulity  was  still  universal,  since  it  affected  not  merely  the  lowest
and  most  ignorant  classes,  but  even  those  who  were  best  educated.  Of  this
innumerable  proofs  might  be  given  ;  though,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  I  will
confine  myself  to  two  instances,  which  are  particularly  striking,  from  the  cir-
cumstances attending  them,  and  from  the  influence  they  exercised  over  men
who  might  be  supposed  little  liable  to  similar  delusions.

120  See  Guizot,  Civilisation  en  Europe,  p.  166  ;  the  best  passage  in  that  able,  but  rather
unequal  work  :  "  Parcourez  1'histoire  du  ve  au  xvie  siecle  ;  c'est  la  theologie  qui  possede
et  dirige  1'esprit  humain  ;  toutes  les  opinions  sont  empreintes  de  theologie  ;  les  questions
philosophiques,  politiques,  historiques,  sont  toujours  considerees  sous  un  point  de  vue
theologique.  L'eglise  est  tellement  souveraine  dans  1'ordre  intellectuel,  que  meme  les
sciences  mathematiques  et  physiques  sont  tenues  de  se  soumettre  a  ses  doctrines.
L' esprit  theologique  est  en  quelque  sort  le  sang  qui  a  coulee  dans  les  veines  du  monde
europeen  jusqu'a  Bacon  et  Descartes.  Pour  la  premiere  fois,  Bacon  en  Angleterre,  et
Descartes  en  France,  ont  jete  1' intelligence  hors  des  voies  de  la  theologie."  A  noble
passage,  and  perfectly  true  :  but  what  would  have  been  the  effect  produced  by  Bacon
and  Descartes  if,  instead  of  living  in  the  seventeenth  century,  they  had  lived  in  th  e
seventh  ?  Would  their  philosophy  have  been  equally  secular  ;  or,  being  equally  secular,
would  it  have  been  equally  successful  ?  [As  regards  historiography,  Guizot's  sum-
mary does  not  justly  describe  Machiavelli,  Guicciardini,  More,  and  Bodin  in  the  six-
teenth century ;  and  Buckle  had  just  before  admitted  the  secularity  even  of  Froissart
(above,  note  115).  Neither,  however,  does  it  truly  classify  Roger  Bacon,  or  Bishop
Per.ock  (1395-1460),  or  such  a  scholar  as  Joseph  Scaliger.  Above  all,  it  makes  no
account  whatever  of  Montaigne,  to  whose  rationalistic  importance  Buckle  later  bears
testimony.  But  even  as  regards  the  scholastic  philosophy  of  the  twelfth,  thirteenth,
and  fourteenth  centuries,  it  is  a  mistake  to  assume  that  theology  was  always  dominant,
there  being  many  evidences  that  the  bolder  thinkers  proceeded  only  formally  on  its  pre-
misses. Intellectual  progress,  in  short,  has  not  been  so  "  all  of  a  piece  "  as  Guizot
represents.  As  Buckle  admits,  Bacon  and  Descartes  were  "  by  no  means  the  creators  "
of  a  purely  secular  philosophy  (see  also  Buckle's  note  13  on  ch.  v.).  There  had  been
progress  before  them,  and  they  themselves  were  neither  completely  delivered  from
theology  nor  even  successful  in  bringing  the  mind  of  the  seventeenth  century  as  a  whole
to  their  own  level.  It  is  therefore  misleading  to  speak  of  dating  the  "regeneration''
from  "  the  seventeenth  century."  In  terms  of  this  style  of  generalization,  intellectual
history  is  a  mere  series  of  new-births, — ED.]


HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  DURING  THE  MIDDLE  AGES      187

At  the  end  of  the  fifteenth,  and  early  in  the  sixteenth  century,  Stoeffler,  the
celebrated  astronomer,  was  professor  of  mathematics  at  Tubingen.  This  eminent
man  rendered  great  services  to  astronomy,  and  was  one  of  the  first  who  pointed
out  the  way  of  remedying  the  errors  in  the  Julian  calendar,  according  to  which
time  was  then  computed.121  But  neither  his  abilities  nor  his  knowledge  could
protect  him  against  the  spirit  of  his  age.  In  1524  he  published  the  result  of  some
abstruse  calculations,  in  which  he  had  been  long  engaged,  and  by  which  he  had
ascertained  the  remarkable  fact,  that  in  that  same  year  the  world  would  again
be  destroyed  by  a  deluge.  This  announcement,  made  by  a  man  of  such  eminence,
and  made,  too,  with  the  utmost  confidence,  caused  a  lively  and  universal  alarm.122
News  of  the  approaching  event  was  rapidly  circulated,  and  Europe  was  filled  with
consternation.  To  avoid  the  first  shock,  those  who  had  houses  by  the  sea,  or  on
rivers,  abandoned  them  ;123  while  others,  perceiving  that  such  measures  could  only
be  temporary,  adopted  more  active  precautions.  It  was  suggested  that,  as  a
preliminary  step,  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  should  appoint  inspectors  to  survey
the  country,  and  mark  those  places  which,  being  least  exposed  to  the  coming
flood,  would  be  most  likely  to  afford  a  shelter.  That  this  should  be  done  was  the
wish  of  the  imperial  general,  who  was  then  stationed  at  Florence,  and  by  whose
desire  a  work  was  written  recommending  it.124  But  the  minds  of  men  were  too
distracted  for  so  deliberate  a  plan  ;  and  besides,  as  the  height  of  the  flood  was
uncertain,  it  was  impossible  to  say  whetherat  would  not  reach  the  top  of  the  most
elevated  mountains.  In  the  midst  of  these  and  similar  schemes,  the  fatal  day
drew  near,  and  nothing  had  yet  been  contrived  on  a  scale  large  enough  to  meet  the
evil.  To  enumerate  the  different  proposals  which  were  made  and  rejected,  would
fill  a  long  chapter.  One  proposal  is,  however,  worth  noticing,  because  it  was
carried  into  effect  with  great  zeal,  and  is  moreover  very  characteristic  of  the  age.
An  ecclesiastic  of  the  name  of  Auriol,  who  was  then  professor  of  canon  law  at  the
University  of  Toulouse,  revolved  in  his  own  mind  various  expedients  by  which
this  universal  disaster  might  be  mitigated.  At  length  it  occurred  to  him  that  it
was  practicable  to  imitate  the  course  which,  on  a  similar  emergency,  Noah  had
adopted  with  eminent  success.  Scarcely  was  the  idea  conceived,  when  it  was
put  into  execution.  The  inhabitants  of  Toulouse  lent  their  aid  ;  and  an  ark  was
built,  in  the  hope  that  some  part,  at  least,  of  the  human  species  might  be  pre-
served, to  continue  their  race,  and  repeople  the  earth,  after  the  waters  should
have  subsided,  and  the  land  again  become  dry.125

About  seventy  years  after  this  alarm  had  passed  away,  there  happened  another
circumstance,  which  for  a  time  afforded  occupation  to  the  most  celebrated  men
in  one  of  the  principal  countries  of  Europe.  At  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century
terrible  excitement  was  caused  by  a  report  that  a  golden  tooth  had  appeared
in  the  jaw  of  a  child  born  in  Silesia.  The  rumour,  on  being  investigated,  turned

121  Compare  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xliii.  p.  577,  with  Montucla,  Hist,  des  Mathematiques,
vol.  i.  p.  678.

122  Naude  mentions  that  in  France  it  drove  many  persons  almost  mad  :    "In  Gallia
parum  afuit  quin  ad  insaniam  homines  non  paucos  periculi  metu  (diluvium)  adegerit."
Bayle,  in  voce  Stofflerus,  note  B.

123  "  Nam  Petrus  Cirvellus  Hispanorum  omnium  sui  temporis  doctissimus,  cum  theo  -
logiae,  in  almo  Complutensi  gymnasio,  lectoris  munere  fungeretur,  et  vero  multos,  ut
ipsemet  in  quit,  fluviis  vel  mari  finitimos  populos,  jam  stupido  metu  perculsos,  domicilia
ac  sedes  mutare  vidisset,  ac  praedia,  supellectilem,  bonaque  omnia,  contra  justum  valorem
sub  actione  distrahere,  ac  alia  loca  vel  altitudine,  vel  siccitate  magis  secura  requirere,  sui
officii  esse  putavit,  in  publica  ilia  consternatione,  quam  de  nihilo  excitare  persuasum  non
habebat,"  etc.    Bayle,  note  B.

i2*  Ibid.

125  In  addition  to  the  account  in  Bayle,  the  reader  may  refer  to  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  iii.  p.  88,
vol.  xxxi.  p.  283,  vol.  xliii.  pp.  577,  578  ;  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  iii.  p.  251  ;
Delambre,  Hist,  de  I 'Astronomic  du  Moyen  Age,  Paris,  1819,  4to,  p.  376  ;  Montucla,  Hist,
des  Mathematiques,  vol.  i.  p.  622  ;  Diet,  Philosoph.,  article  Astrologie,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,
vol,  xxxvii.  pp.  148,  149.


188  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

out  to  be  too  true.  It  became  impossible  to  conceal  it  from  the  public  ;  and  the
miracle  was  soon  known  all  over  Germany,  where,  being  looked  on  as  a  mysteri-
ous omen,  universal  anxiety  was  felt  as  to  what  this  new  thing  might  mean.  Its
real  import  was  first  unfolded  by  Dr.  Horst.  In  1595,  this  eminent  physician
published  the  result  of  his  researches,  by  which  it  appears  that,  at  the  birth  of  the
child,  the  sun  was  in  conjunction  with  Saturn,  at  the  sign  Aries.  The  event,  there-
fore, though  supernatural,  was  by  no  means  alarming.  The  golden  tooth  was
the  precursor  of  a  golden  age,  in  which  the  emperor  would  drive  the  Turks  from
Christendom,  and  lay  the  foundations  of  an  empire  that  would  last  for  thousands
of  years.  And  this,  says  Horst,  is  clearly  alluded  to  by  Daniel,  in  his  well-
known  second  chapter,  where  the  prophet  speaks  of  a  statue  with  a  golden  head. 126

12C  This  history  of  the  golden  tooth  is  partly  related  by  De  Thou  :  see  his  Hist.  Univ.
vol.  xi.  pp.  634,  635.  And  on  the  controversy  to  which  it  gave  rise,  compare  Hist,  des
Oracles,  chap.  iv.  in  (Euvres  de  Fontenelle,  vol.  ii.  pp.  219,  220,  ed.  Paris,  1766 ;  Sprenge!,
Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  iii.  pp.  247-249  ;  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xx.  p.  579.


CHAPTER    VII

OUTLINE  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  INTELLECT  FROM  THE  MIDDLE  OF
THE  SIXTEENTH  TO  THE  END  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY

IT  is  difficult  for  an  ordinary  reader,  living  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth
century,  to  understand  that  only  three  hundred  years  before  he  was  born  the
public  mind  was  in  the  benighted  state  disclosed  in  the  preceding  chapter.  It  is
still  more  difficult  for  him  to  understand  that  the  darkness  was  shared  not  merely
by  men  of  an  average  education,  but  by  men  of  considerable  ability,  men  in  every
respect  among  the  foremost  of  their  age.  A  reader  of  this  sort  may  satisfy  himself
that  the  evidence  is  indisputable ;  he  may  verify  the  statements  I  have  brought
forward,  and  admit  that  there  is  no  possible  doubt  about  them  ;  but  even
then  he  will  find  it  hard  to  conceive  that  there  ever  was  a  state  of  society  in
which  such  miserable  absurdities  were  welcomed  as  sober  and  important  truths,
and  were  supposed  to  form  an  essential  part  of  the  general  stock  of  European
knowledge.

But  a  more  careful  examination  will  do  much  to  dissipate  this  natural  astonish-
ment. In  point  of  fact,  so  far  from  its  being  wonderful  that  such  things  were  be-
lieved, the  wonder  would  have  been  if  they  were  rejected.  For  in  those  times,  as
in  all  others,  everything  was  of  a  piece.  Not  only  in  historical  literature,  but
in  all  kinds  of  literature,  on  every  subject, — in  science,  in  religion,  in  legislation, —
the  presiding  principle  was  a  blind  and  unhesitating  credulity.  The  more  the
history  of  Europe  anterior  to  the  seventeenth  century  is  studied,  the  more
completely  will  this  fact  be  verified.  Now  and  then  a  great  man  arose,  who  had
his  doubts  respecting  the  universal  belief  ;  who  whispered  a  suspicion  as  to  the
existence  of  giants  thirty  feet  high,  of  dragons  with  wings,  and  of  armies  flying
through  the  air  ;  who  thought  that  astrology  might  be  a  cheat,  and  necromancy
a.  bubble  ;  and  who  even  went  so  far  as  to  raise  a  question  respecting  the  pro-
priety of  drowning  every  witch  and  burning  every  heretic.  A  few  such  men  there
undoubtedly  were  ;  but  they  were  despised  as  mere  theorists,  idle  visionaries,
who,  unacquainted  with  the  practice  of  life,  arrogantly  opposed  their  own  reason
to  the  wisdom  of  their  ancestors.  In  the  state  of  society  in  which  they  were  born
it  was  impossible  that  they  should  make  any  permanent  impression.  Indeed,
they  had  enough  to  do  to  look  to  themselves,  and  provide  for  their  own  security  ;
for,  until  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century,  there  was  no  country  in  which
a  man  was  not  in  great  personal  peril  if  he  expressed  open  doubts  respecting  the
belief  of  his  contemporaries.

Yet  it  is  evident  that  until  doubt  began,  progress  was  impossible.  For,  as
we  have  clearly  seen,  the  advance  of  civilization  solely  depends  on  the  acquisitions
made  by  the  human  intellect,  and  on  the  extent  to  which  those  acquisitions
are  diffused.  But  men  who  are  perfectly  satisfied  with  their  own  knowledge
will  never  attempt  to  increase  it.  Men  who  are  perfectly  convinced  of  the  accur-
acy of  their  opinions  will  never  take  the  pains  of  examining  the  basis  on  which
they  are  built.  They  look  always  with  wonder,  and  often  with  horror,  on


I9o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

views  contrary  to  those  which  they  inherited  from  their  fathers ;  and  while  they
are  in  this  state  of  mind,  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  receive  any  new  truth
which  interferes  with  their  foregone  conclusions.

On  this  account  it  is,  that  although  the  acquisition  of  fresh  knowledge  is  the
necessary  precursor  of  every  step  in  social  progress,  such  acquisition  must  itself
lie  preceded  by  a  love  of  inquiry,  and  therefore  by  a  spirit  of  doubt  ;  because
without  doubt  there  will  be  no  inquiry,  and  without  inquiry  there  will  be  no
knowledge.  For  knowledge  is  not  an  inert  and  passive  principle  which
comes  to  us  whether  we  will  or  no  ;  but  it  must  be  sought  before  it  can
be.  won;  it  is  the  product  of  great  labour  and  therefore  of  great  sacri-
fice. And  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  men  will  incur  the  labour,  and  make
the  sacrifice,  for  subjects  respecting  which  they  are  already  perfectly  content.
They  who  do  not  feel  the  darkness,  will  never  look  for  the  light.  If  on  any  point
we  have  attained  to  certainty,  we  make  no  further  inquiry  on  that  point  ;  because
inquiry  would  be  useless,  or  perhaps  dangerous.  The  doubt  must  intervene,
before  the  investigation  can  begin.  Here,  then,  we  have  the  act  of  doubting  as
the  originator,  or,  at  all  events,  the  necessary  antecedent,  of  all  progress.  Here
we  have  that  scepticism,  the  very  name  of  which  is  an  abomination  to  the  ignorant ;
because  it  disturbs  their  lazy  and  complacent  minds  ;  because  it  troubles  their
cherished  superstitions  ;  because  it  imposes  on  them  the  fatigue  of  inquiry  ;  and
because  it  rouses  even  sluggish  understandings  to  ask  if  things  are  as  they  are
commonly  supposed,  and  if  all  is  really  true  which  they  from  their  childhood  have
been  taught  to  believe.

The  more  we  examine  this  great  principle  of  scepticism,  the  more  distinctly
shall  we  see  the  immense  part  it  has  played  in  the  progress  of  European  civilization.
To  state  in  general  terms  what  in  this  Introduction  will  be  fully  proved,  it  may  be
said,  that  to  scepticism  we  owe  that  spirit  of  inquiry,  which,  during  the  last  two
centuries,  has  gradually  encroached  on  every  possible  subject  ;  has  reformed  every
department  of  practical  and  speculative  knowledge  ;  has  weakened  the  authority
of  the  privileged  classes,  and  thus  placed  liberty  on  a  surer  foundation  ;  has
chastized  the  despotism  of  princes  ;  has  restrained  the  arrogance  of  the  nobles,
and  has  even  diminished  the  prejudices  of  the  clergy.  In  a  word,  it  is  this  which
has  remedied  the  three  fundamental  errors  of  the  olden  time  :  errors  which  made
the  people,  in  politics  too  confiding;  in  science  too  credulous  ;  in  religion  too  in-
tolerant.

This  rapid  summary  of  what  has  actually  been  effected  may  perhaps  startle
those  reade-s  to  whom  such  large  investigations  are  not  familiar.  The  importance,
however,  of  the  principle  at  issue  is  so  great,  that  I.  purpose  in  this  Introduction  to
verify  it  by  an  examination  of  all  the  prominent  forms  of  European  civilization.
Such  an  inquiry  will  lead  to  the  remarkable  conclusion,  that  no  single  fact  has  so
extensively  affected  the  different  nations  as  the  duration,  the  amount,  and  above
all  the  diffusion,  of  their  scepticism.  In  Spain,  the  church,  aided  by  the  In-
quisition, has  always  been  strong  enough  to  punish  sceptical  writers,  and  prevent,
not  indeed  the  existence,  but  the  promulgation  of  sceptical  opinions.1  By  this
means  the  spirit  of  doubt  being  quenched,  knowledge  has  for  several  centuries
remained  almost  stationary  ;  and  civilization,  which  is  the  fruit  of  knowledge,
has  also  been  stationary.  But  in  England  and  France,  which,  as  we  shall  pres-
ently see,  are  the  countries  where  scepticism  first  openly  appeared,  and  where  it
has  been  most  diffused,  the  results  are  altogether  different  ;  and  the  love  of  in-
quiry being  encouraged,  there  has  arisen  that  constantly -progressive  knowledge
to  which  these  two  great  nations  owe  their  prosperity.  In  the  remaining  part

1  On  the  influence  of  the  French  literature,  which,  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  crept
into  Spain  in  spite  of  the  church,  and  diffused  a  considerable  amount  of  scepticism  among
the  most  educated  classes,  compare  Llorente,  Hist,  de  V Inquisition,  vol.  i.  p.  322,  vol.  ii.
P-  543>  vol.  iv.  pp.  98,  99,  102,  148  ;  Doblado's  Letters  from  Spain,  pp.  115, 119, 120, 133,
231,  232  ;  Lord  Holland's  Foreign  Reminiscences,  edit.  1850,  p.  76  ;  Southey's  Hist,  of
Brazil,  vol.  in.  p.  607  ;  and  an  imperfect  statement  of  the-same  fact  in  Alison's  Hist,  of
Europe,  vol.  x.  p.  8.  In  regard  to  the  Spanish  colonies,  compare  Humboldt,  Nouv.  Espagne,
vol.  ii.  p.  818,  with  Ward's  Mexico,  vol.  i.  p.  83.


THE  HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT  191

of  this  volume,  I  shall  trace  the  history  of  this  principle  in  France  and  England,
and  examine  the  different  forms  under  which  it  has  appeared,  and  the  way  in
which  those  forms  have  affected  the  national  interests.  In  the  order  of  the  in-
vestigation, I  shall  give  the  precedence  to  England  ;  because,  for  the  reasons  al-
ready stated,  its  civilization  must  be  deemed  more  normal  *  than  that  of  France
and  therefore,  notwithstanding  its  numerous  deficiencies,  it  approaches  the  natural
type  more  closely  than  its  great  neighbour  has  been  able  to  do.  But  as  the  fullest
details  respecting  English  civilization  will  oe  found  in  the  body  of  the  present
work,  1  intend  in  the  Introduction  to  devote  merely  a  single  chapter  to  it,  and  to
consider  our  national  history  simply  in  reference  to  the  immediate  consequences
of  the  sceptical  movement  ;  reserving  for  a  future  occasion  those  subsidiary
matters  which,  though  less  comprehensive,  are  still  of  great  value.  And  as  the
growth  of  religious  toleration  is  undoubtedly  the  most  important  of  all,  I  will,  in
the  first  place,  state  the  circumstances  under  which  it  appeared  in  England  in
the  sixteenth  century  ;  and  I  will  then  point  out  how  other  events,  which  im-
mediately followed,  were  part  of  the  same  progress,  and  were  indeed  merely  the
same  principles  acting  in  different  directions.

A  careful  study  of  the  history  of  religious  toleration  will  prove  that  in  every
Christian  country  where  it  has  been  adopted,  it  has  been  forced  upon  the  clergy
by  the  authority  of  the  secular  classes.2  At  the  present  day,  it  is  still  unknown
to  those  nations  among  whom  the  ecclesiastical  power  is  stronger  than  the  tem-
poral power  ;  and  as  this,  during  many  centuries,  was  the  general  condition,
it  is  not  wonderful  that  in  the  early  history  of  Europe  we  should  find  scarcely
a  trace  of  so  wise  and  benevolent  an  opinion.  But  at  the  moment  when  Elizabeth
mounted  the  throne  of  England,  our  country  was  about  equally  divided  between
two  hostile  creeds  ;  and  the  queen,  with  remarkable  ability,  contrived  during  some
time  so  to  balance  the  rival  powers  as  to  allow  to  neither  a  decisive  preponder-
ance. This  was  the  first  instance  which  had  been  seen  in  Europe  of  a  govern-
ment successfully  carried  on  without  the  active  participation  of  the  spiritual
authority  ;  and  the  consequence  was  that  for  several  years  the  principle  of  tolera-
tion, though  still  most  imperfectly  understood,  was  pushed  to  an  extent  which
is  truly  surprising  for  so  barbarous  an  age.3  Unhappily,  after  a  time,  various
circumstances,  which  I  shall  relate  in  their  proper  place,  induced  Elizabeth  to
change  a  policy  which  she,  even  with  all  her  wisdom,  perhaps  considered  to  be
a  dangerous  experiment,  and  for  which  the  knowledge  of  the  country  was  as  yet
hardly  ripe.  But  although  she  now  allowed  the  Protestants  to  gratify  their
hatred  against  the  Catholics,  there  was,  in  the  midst  of  the  sanguinary  scenes
which  followed,  one  circumstance  very  worthy  of  remark.  Although  many
persons  were  most  unquestionably  executed  merely  for  their  religion  no  one
ventured  to  state  their  religion  as  the  cause  of  their  execution.4  The  most  bar-

2  Nearly  two  hundred  years  ago,  Sir  William  Temple    observed  that  in  Holland  the
clergy  possessed  less  power  than  in  other  countries  ;    and  that  therefore  there  existed
an  unusual  amount  of  toleration.     Observations  upon  the  United  Provinces,  in  Temple's
Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  157-162.     About  seventy  years  later,  the  same  inference  was  drawn  by
another  acute  observer,  Le  Blanc,  who,  after  mentioning  the  liberality  which  the  differ-
ent sects  displayed  towards  each  other  in  Holland,  adds,  "  La  granderaisond'unehar-
monie  si  parfaite  est  que  tout  s'y  regie  par  les  seculiers  de  chacune  de  ces  religions,
et  qu'on  n'y  souffriroit  pas  des  minis tres,   dont  le  zele  imprudent  pourroit  detruire
cette  heureuse    correspondance."      Le  Blanc,  Lettres  d'un  Francais,    vol.  i.  p.  73.     I
merely  give   these  as  illustrations  of  an  important  principle,  which  I   shall   hereafter
prove.

3  "  In  the  first  eleven  years  of  her  reign,  not  one  Roman  Catholic  was  prosecuted
capitally  for  religion."     NeaVs  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  vol.  i.  p.  444  ;  and  the  same  remark
in  Collier's  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  vii.  p.  252,  edit.  1840.

4  Without  quoting  the  impudent  defence  which  Chief  Justice  Popham  made,  in  1606,
for  the  barbarous  treatment  of  the  Catholics  (Campbell's  Chief  Justices,  vol.  i.  p.  225),  I

[*Read  "  more  simple." — ED.]


192  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

barous  punishments  were  inflicted  upon  them  ;  but  they  were  told  that  they  might
escape  the  punishment  by  renouncing  certain  principles  which  were  said  to  be
injurious  to  the  safety  of  the  state.5  It  is  true  that  many  of  these  principles
were  such  as  no  Catholic  could  abandon  without  at  the  same  time  abandoning  his
religion,  of  which  they  formed  an  essential  part.  But  the  mere  fact  that  the
spirit  of  persecution  was  driven  to  such  a  subterfuge,  showed  that  a  great  pro-
gress had  been  made  by  the  age.  A  most  important  point,  indeed,  was  gained
when  the  bigot  became  a  hypocrite ;  and  when  the  clergy,  though  willing  to  burn
men  for  the  good  of  their  souls,  were  obliged  to  justify  their  cruelty  by  alleging
considerations  of  a  more  temporal,  and,  as  they  considered,  a  less  important
character.6

A  remarkable  evidence  of  the  change  that  was  then  taking  place  is  found  in  the
two  most  important  theological  works  which  appeared  in  England  during  the  reign
of  Elizabeth.  Hooker's  Ecclesiastical  Polity  was  published  at  the  end  of  the  six-
teenth century, ?  and  is  still  considered  one  of  the  greatest  bulwarks  of  our  natioral
church.  If  we  ccmpare  this  work  with  Jewel's  Apology  for  the  Church  of  England,
which  was  written  thirty  years  before  it,8  we  shall  at  once  be  struck  by  the  different
methods  these  eminent  writers  employed.  Both  Hooker  and  Jewel  were  men
of  learning  and  genius.  Both  of  them  were  familiar  with  the  Bible,  the  Fathers,

will  give  the  words  of  the  two  immediate  successors  of  Elizabeth.  James  I.  says  :  "  The
trewth  is,  according  to  my  owne  knowledge,  the  late  queene  of  famous  memory  never
punished  any  Papist  for  religion."  Works  of  King  James,  London,  1616,  folio,  p.  252.
And  Charles  I.  says  :  "  I  am  informed,  neither  Queen  Elizabeth  nor  my  father  did  ever
avow  that  any  priest  in  their  times  was  executed  merely  for  religion."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  ii.
P-  7i3-

5  This  was  the  defence  set  up  in  1583,  in  a  work  called  The  Execution  of  Justice  in  Eng-
land,  and  ascribed  to  Burleigh.     See  Hallam's  Const.  Hist,  vol.  i.  pp.  146,  147  ;  and  Somers
Tracts,  vol.  i.  pp.  189-208  :  "  a  number  of  persons  whom  they  term  as  martyrs,"  p.  195  ;
and  at  p.  202,  the  writer  attacks  those  who  have  "entitled  certain  that  have  suffered  for
treason  to  be  martyrs  for  religion."     In  the  same  way,  the  opponents  of  Catholic  Eman-
cipation in  our  time,  found  themselves  compelled  to  abandon  the  old  theological  ground,
and  to  defend  the  persecution  of  the  Catholics  rather  by  political  arguments  than  by
religious  ones.     Lord  Eldon,  who  was  by  far  the  most  influential  leader  of  the  intolerant
party,  said,  in  a  speech  in  the  House  of  Lords,  in  1810,  that  "  the  enactments  against  the
Catholics  were  meant  to  guard,  not  against  the  abstract  opinions  of  their  religion,  but
against  the  political  dangers  of  a  faith  which    acknowledged  a  foreign  supremacy."
Twiss's  Life  of  Eldon,  vol.  i.  p.  435  ;  see  also  pp.  483,  501,  577-580.     Compare  Alison's
Hist.  vol.  vi.  pp.  379  seq.,  a  summary  of  the  debate  in  1805.

6  Mr.  Sewell  seems  to  have  this  change  in  view  in  his  Christian  Politics,  8vo,  1844 ,  p.  277.
Compare  Coleridge's  note  in  Southey's  Life  of  Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.  270.     An  able  writer  says
of  the  persecutions  which,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  the  Church  of  England  directed
against  her  opponents  :  "  This  is  the  stale  pretence  of  the  clergy  in  all  countries,  after
they  have  solicited  the  government  to  make  penal  laws  against  those  they  call  heretics  or
schismaticks,  and  prompted  the  magistrates  to  a  vigorous  execution,  then  they  lay  all
the  odium  on  the  civil  power  ;    for  whom   they  have  no  excuse   to  allege,  but  that
such  men  suffered,  not  for  religion,  but  for  disobedience  to  the  laws."     Somers  Tracts,
vol.  xii.  p.  534.     See  also  Butler's  Mem.  of  the  Catholics,  vol.  i.  p.   389,  and  vol.  ii.
pp.  44-46.

7  The  first  four  books,  which  are  in  every  point  of  view  the  most  important,  were
published  in  1594.     Walton's  Life  of  Hooker,  in  Wordsworth's  Ecclesiast.  Biog.vol.  iii.  p.
509.     The  sixth  book  is  said  not  to  be  authentic  :  and  doubts  have  been  thrown  upon  the
seventh  and  eighth   books  ;    but  Mr.  Hallam  thinks  thaty  the   are  certainly  genuine.
Literature  of  Europe,  vol  ii.  pp.  24,  25.

8  Jewel's  Apology  was  written  in  1561  or  1562.     See  Wordsworth's  Eccles.  Biog.  vol.  iii.
p.  313.     This  work,  the  Bible,  and  Fox's  Martyrs,  were  ordered,  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,
"  to  be  fixed  in  all  parish  churches,  to  be  read  by  the  people."     Aubrey's  Letters,  vol.  ii.
p.  42.     The  order,  in  regard  to  Jewel's  Defence,  was  repeated  by  James  I.  and  Charles  I.
Butler's  Mem.  of  the  Catholics,  vol.  iv.  p.  413.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          193

and  the  Councils.  Both  of  them  wrote  with  the  avowed  object  of  defending  the
Church  of  England  ;  and  both  of  them  were  well  acquainted  with  the  ordinary
weapons  of  theological  controversy.  But  here  the  resemblance  stops.  The
men  were  very  similar  ;  their  works  are  entirely  different.  During  the  thirty
years  which  had  elapsed,  the  English  intellect  had  made  immense  progress  ;  and
the  arguments  which  in  the  time  of  Jewel  were  found  perfectly  satisfactory,
would  not  have  been  listened  to  in  the  time  of  Hooker.  The  work  of  Jewel  is  full
of  quotations  from  the  Fathers  and  the  Councils,  whose  mere  assertions,  when
they  are  uncontradicted  by  Scripture.he  seems  to  regard  as  positive  proofs.  Hooker,
though  he  shows  much  respect  to  the  Councils,  lays  little  stress  upon  the  Fathers,
and  evidently  considered  that  his  readers  would  not  pay  much  attention  to  their
unsupported  opinions.  Jewel  inculcates  the  importance  of  faith  ;  Hooker
insists  upon  the  exercise  of  reason.9  The  first  employs  all  his  talents  in  col-
lecting the  decisions  of  antiquity,  and  in  deciding  upon  the  meaning  which  they
may  be  supposed  to  bear.  The  other  quotes  the  ancients,  not  so  much  from
respect  for  their  authority,  as  with  the  view  of  illustrating  his  own  arguments.
Thus,  for  instance,  both  Hooker  and  Jewel  assert  the  undoubted  right  of  the
sovereign  to  interfere  in  ecclesiastical  affairs.  Jewel,  however,  fancied  that  he
had  proved  the  right  when  he  had  pointed  out  that  it  was  exercised  by  Moses,  by
Joshua,  by  David,  and  by  Solomon.10  On  the  other  hand,  Hooker  lays  down  that
this  right  exists,  not  because  it  is  ancient,  but  because  it  is  advisable  ;  and  because
it  is  unjust  to  suppose  that  men  who  are  not  ecclesiastics  will  consent  to  be  bound

9  "  Wherefore  the  natural  measure  whereby  to  judge  our  doings  is,  the  sentence  of
Reason  determining  and  setting  down  what  is  good  to  be  done."  Eccl.  Polity,  book  i.  sec.
viii.  in  Hooker's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  99.     He  requires  of  his  opponents,  "  not  to  exact  at  our
hands  for  every  action  the  knowledge  of  some  place  of  Scripture  out  of  which  we  stand
bound  to  deduce  it,  as  by  divers  testimonies  they  seek  to  enforce  ;  but  rather,  as  the  truth
is,  so  to  acknowledge,  that  it  sufficeth  if  such  actions  be  framed  according  to  the  law  of  reason."
Book  ii.  sec.  i.  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  151.     "  For  men  to  be  tied  and  led  by  authority,  as  it  were
with  a  kind  of  captivity  of  judgment,  and,  though  there  be  reason  to  the  contrary,  not
to  listen  unto  it,  but  to  follow,  like  beasts,  the  first  in  the  herd,  they  know  not  nor  care  not
whither  :  this  were  brutish.     Again,  that  authority  of  men  should  prevail  with  men,  either
agamst  or  above  Reason,  is  no  part  of  our  belief.     Companies  of  learned  men,  be  they
never  so  great  and  reverend,  are  to  yield  unto  Reason."     Book  ii.  sec.  vii.  vol.  i.  pp.  182,
183.     In  book  v.  sec.  viii.  vol.  ii.  p.  23,  he  says,  that  even  "  the  voice  of  the  church  "  is
to  be  held  inferior  to  reason.     See  also  a  long  passage  in  book  vii.  sec.  xi.  vol.  iii.  p.  152  ;
and  on  the  application  of  reason  to  the  general  theory  of  religion,  see  vol.  i.  pp.  220-223,
book  iii.  sec.  viii.     Again,  at  p.  226  :   "  Theology,  what  is  it,  but  the  science  of  things
divine  ?     What  science  can  be  attained  unto,  without  the  help  of  natural  discourse  and
Reason  ?  "     And  he  indignantly  asks  those  who  insist  on  the  supremacy  of  faith,  "  May
we  cause  our  faith  without  Reason  to  appear  reasonable  in  the  eyes  of  men  ?  "  vol.  i.
p.  230.

10  After  referring  to  Isaiah,  he  adds :  "  Prater  inquam,  haec  omnia,  ex  historiis  et
optimorum  temporum  exemplis  videmus  pios  principes  procurationem  ecclesiarum  ab
officio  suo  nunquam  putasse  alienam.

"Moses  civilis  magistratus,  ac  ductor  populi  omnem  religionis,  et  sacrorum  rationem,
et  accepit  a  Deo,  et  populo  tradidit,  et  Aaronem  episcopum  de  aureo  vitulo,  et  de  violata
religione,  vehementer  et  graviter  castigavit.  Josue,  etsi  non  aliud  erat,  quam  magistratus
civilis,  tamen  cum  primum  inauguraretur  et  praeficeretur  populo,  accepit  mandata
nominatim  de  religione,  deque  colendo  Deo.

"  David  rex,  cum  omnis  jam  religio,  ab  impio  rege  Saule  prorsus  esset  dissipata,
reduxit  arcam  Dei,  hoc  est,  religionem  restituit :  nee  tantum  adfuit  ut  admonitor  aut
hortator  operis,  sed  etiam  psalmos  et  hymnos  dedit,  et  classes  disposuit,  et  pompam
instituit,  et  quodammodo  praefuit  sacerdotibus.

"  Salomon  rex  aedifiicavit  templum  Domino,  quod  ejus  pater  David  animo  tantum  des-
tinaverat :  at  postremo  orationem  egregiam  habuit  ad  populum  de  religione,  et  cultu  Dei ;
et  Abiatharum  episcopum  postea  summovit,  et  in  ejus  locum  Sadocum  surrogavit."
Apolog.  Eccles.  Anglic,  pp.  161,  162.

13


194  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

by  laws  which  ecclesiastics  alone  have  framed.11  In  the  same  opposite  spirit  do
these  great  writers  conduct  their  defence  of  their  own  church.  Jewel,  like  all  the
authors  of  his  time,  had  exercised  his  memory  more  than  his  reason  ;  and  he  thinks
to  settle  the  whole  dispute  by  crowding  together  texts  from  the  Bible,  with  the
opinions  of  the  commentators  upon  them.12  But  Hooker,  who  lived  in  the  age  of
Shakespeare  and  Bacon,  found  himself  constrained  to  take  views  of  a  far  more
comprehensive  character.  His  defence  rests  neither  upon  tradition  nor  upon
commentators,  nor  even  upon  revelation  ;  but  he  is  content  that  the  pretensions
of  the  hostile  parties  shall  be  decided  by  their  applicability  to  the  great  exigencies
of  society,  and  by  the  ease  with  which  thev  adapt  themselves  to  the  general  pur-
poses of  ordinary  life.13

It  requires  but  little  penetration  to  see  the  immense  importance  of  the  change

11  He  says  that  although  the  clergy  may  be  supposed  more  competent  than  laymen
to  regulate  ecclesiastical  matters,  this  will  practically  avail  them  nothing  :     "It  were
unnatural  not  to  think  the  pastors  and  bishops  of  our  souls  a  great  deal  more  fit  than  men
of  secular  trades  and  callings  ;  howbeit,  when  all  which  the  wisdom  of  all  sorts  can  do  is
done,  for  the  devising  of  laws  in  the  church,  it  is  the  general  consent  of  all  that  giveth
them  the  form  and  vigour  of  laws  ;  without  which  they  could  be  no  more  unto  us  than
the  counsels  of  physicians  to  the  sick."     Ecclesiastical  Polity,  bookviii.  sec.  vi.  vol.  iii.
p.  303.     He  adds,  p.  326  :     "  Till  it  be  proved  that  some  special  law  of  Christ  hath  for
ever  annexed  unto  the  clergy  alone  the  power  to  make  ecclesiastical  laws,  we  are  to  hold
it  a  thing  most  consonant  with  equity  and  reason,  that  no  ecclesiastical  laws  be  made  in  a
Christian  commonwealth,  without  consent  as  well  of  the  laity  as  of  the  clergy,  but  least
of  all  without  consent  of  the  highest  power."

12  "  Quod  si  docemus  sacrosanctum  Dei  evangelium,  et  veteres  episcopos,   atque
ecclesiam  primitivam  nobiscum  facere."     If  this  be  so,  then,  indeed,  "  speramus,  neminem
illorum  "   (his  opponents)  "  ita  negligentem  fore  salutis  suae,  quin  ut  velit  aliquando
cogitationem  suscipere,  ad  utros  potius  se  adjungat."  Apolog.  Eccles.  Anglic,  p.  17.     At
p.  53,  he  indignantly  asks  if  any  one  will  dare  to  impeach  the  Fathers  :  "  Ergo  Origenes,
Ambrosius,    Augustinus,    Chrysostomus,    Gelasius,   Theodoretus   erant  desertores  fidei
catholicae  ?     Ergo  tot  veterum  episcoporum  et  doctorum  virorum  tanta  consensio  nihil
aliud  erat  quam  conspiratio  hcereticorum  ?     Aut  quod  turn  laudabatur  in  illis,  id  nunc
damnatur  in  nobis  ?     Quodque  in  illis  erat  catholicum,  id  nunc  mutatis  tantum  hominum
voluntatibus,  repente  factum  est  schismaticum  ?     Aut  quod  olim  erat  verum,  nunc
statim,  quia  istis  non  placet,  erit  falsum  ?  "     His  work  is  full  of  this  sort  of  eloquent,  but,
as  it  appears  to  our  age,  pointless  declamation.

13  This  large  view  underlies  the  whole  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Polity.     I  can  only  afford
room  for  a  few  extracts,  which  will  be  illustrations  rather  than  proofs  :  the  proof  will  be
obvious  to  every  competent  reader  of  the  work  itself.     "  True  it  is,  the  ancienter  the
better  ceremonies  of  religion  are  ;  howbeit  not  absolutely  true  and  without  exception  ;
but  true  only  so  far  forth  as  those  different  ages  do  agree  in  the  state  of  those  things  for
which,  at  the  first,  those  rites,  orders,  and  ceremonies  were  instituted."  vol.  i.  p.  36.
"  We  count  those  things  perfect,  which  want  nothing  requisite  for  the  end  whereto  they
were  instituted."  vol.  i.  p.  191.     "  Because  when  a  thing  doth  cease  to  be  available  unto
the  end  which  gave  it  being,  the  continuance  of  it  must  then  of  necessity  appear  super-
fluous."     And  even  of  the  laws  of  God,  he  boldly  adds  :  "  Notwithstanding  the  authority
of  their  Maker,  the  mutability  of  that  end  for  which  they  are  made  doth  also  make  them
changeable."  vol.  i.  p.  236.     "  And  therefore  laws,  though  both  ordained  of  God  himself,
and  the  end  for  which  they  were  ordained  continuing,  may  notwithstanding  cease,  if  by
alteration  of  persons  or  times   they  be   found  unsufficient  to  attain  unto    that  end."
vol.  i.  p.  238.     At  p.  240  :  "  I  therefore  conclude,  that  neither  God's  being  Author  of
laws  for  government  of  his  church,  nor  his  committing  them  unto  Scripture,  is  any  reason
sufficient  wherefore  all  churches  should  for  ever  be  bound  to  keep  them  without  change."
See,  too,  vol.  iii.  p.  169,  on  "  the  exigence  of  necessity."     Compare  pp.  182,  183,  and
vol.  i.  p.  323,  vol.  ii.  pp.  273,  424.     Not  a  vestige  of  such  arguments  can  be  found  in
Jewel;  who,  on  the  contrary,  says  (Apologia,  p.  114),  "  Certe  in  religionem  Dei  nihil
gravius  dici  potest,  quam  si  ea  accusetur  novitatis.     Ut  enim  in  Deo  ipso,  ita  in  ejus
cultu  nihil  oportet  esse  novum."


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          195

which  these  two  great  works  represent.  As  long  as  an  opinion  in  theology  was
defended  by  the  old  dogmatic  method,  it  was  impossible  to  assail  it  without
incurring  the  imputation  of  heresy.  But  when  it  was  chiefly  defended  by
human  reasoning,  its  support  was  seriously  weakened.  For  by  this  means  the
element  of  uncertainty  was  let  in.  It  might  be  alleged  that  the  arguments  of
one  sect  are  as  good  as  those  of  another  ;  and  that  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  truth
of  our  principles  until  we  have  heard  what  is  to  be  said  on  the  opposite  side.
According  to  the  old  theological  theory,  it  was  easy  to  justify  the  most  barbarous
persecution.  If  a  man  knew  that  the  only  true  religion  was  the  one  which  he
professed,  and  if  he  also  knew  that  those  who  died  in  a  contrary  opinion  were
doomed  to  everlasting  perdition, — if  he  knew  these  things  beyond  the  remotest
possibility  of  a  doubt,  he  might  fairly  argue  that  it  is  merciful  to  punish  the
body  in  order  to  save  the  soul,  and  secure  to  immortal  beings  their  future  salva-
tion, even  though  he  employed  so  sharp  a  remedy  as  the  halter  or  the  stake.  1*
But  if  this  same  man  is  taught  to  think  that  questions  of  religion  are  to  be
settled  by  reason  as  well  as  by  faith,  he  can  scarcely  avoid  the  reflection
that  the  reason  even  of  the  strongest  minds  is  not  infallible,  'since  it  has
led  the  ablest  men  to  the  most  opposite  conclusions.  When  this  idea  is  once
diffused  among  a  people,  it  cannot  fail  to  influence  their  conduct.  No  one  of
common  sense  and  common  honesty  will  dare  to  levy  upon  another,  on  account
of  his  religion,  the  extreme  penalty  of  the  law,  when  he  knows  it  possible  that
his  own  opinions  may  be  wrong,  and  that  those  of  the  man  he  has  punished  may
be  right.  From  the  moment  when  questions  of  religion  begin  to  evade  the
jurisdiction  of  faith,  and  submit  to  the  jurisdiction  of  reason,  persecution  be-
comes a  crime  of  the  deepest  dye.  Thus  it  was  in  England  in  the  seventeenth
century.  As  theology  became  more  reasonable  it  became  less  confident,  and
therefore  more  merciful.  Seventeen  years  after  the  publication  of  the  great
work  of  Hooker,  two  men  were  publicly  burned  by  the  English  bishops  for
holding  heretical  opinions.15  But  this  was  the  last  gasp  of  expiring  bigotry  ;  and
since  that  memorable  day,  the  soil  of  England  has  never  been  stained  by  the
blood  of  a  man  who  has  suffered  for  his  religious  creed.^

We  have  thus  seen  the  rise  of  that  scepticism  which  in  physics  must  always
be  the  beginning  of  science,  and  in  religion  must  always  be  the  beginning  of
toleration.  There  is,  indeed,  no  doubt  that  in  both  cases  individual  thinkers
may,  by  a  great  effort  of  original  genius,  emancipate  themselves  from  the
operation  of  this  law.  But  in  the  progress  of  nations  no  such  emancipation  is
possible.  As  long  as  men  refer  the  movements  of  the  comets  to  the  immediate
finger  of  God,  and  as  long  as  they  believe  that  an  eclipse  is  one  of  the  modes  by
which  the  Deity  expresses  his  anger,  they  will  never  be  guilty  of  the  blasphemous
presumption  of  attempting  to  predict  such  supernatural  appearances.  Before
they  could  dare  to  investigate  the  causes  of  these  mysterious  phenomena,  it  is
necessary  that  they  should  believe,  or  at  all  events  that  they  should  suspect,  that
the  phenomena  themselves  were  capable  of  being  explained  by  the  human  mind.
In  the  same  way,  until  men  are  content  in  some  degree  to  bring  their  religion
before  the  bar  of  their  own  reason,  they  never  can  understand  how  it  is  that  there

14  Archbishop  Whately  has  made  some  very  good  remarks  on  this.     See  his  Errors  of
Romanism  traced  to  their  Origin  in  Human  Nature,  pp.  237,  238.

15  Their  names  were  Legat  and  Wightman,  and  they  suffered  in  1611  :  see  the  con-
temporary account  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ii.  pp.  400-408.     Compare  Blackstone's  Com-
ment, vol.  iv .  p.  49  ;  Harris's  Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  i.  pp.  143,  144  ;  and  note  in  Burton's
Diary,  vol.  i.  p.  118.     Of  these  martyrs  to  their  opinions,  Mr.  Hallam  says  :  "  The  first
was  burned  by  King,  Bishop  of  London  ;  the  second  by  Neyle,  of  Litchfield."     Const.
Hist.  vol.  i.  pp.  611.  612.

16  It  should  be  mentioned  to  the  honour  of  the  Court  of  Chancery,  that  late  in  the
sixteenth,  and  early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  its  powers  were  exerted  against  the
•execution  of  those  cruel  laws  by  which  the  Church  of  England  was  allowed  to  persecute
men  Tvho  differed  from  its  own  views.     See  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  ii.  pp.  135,  176,
231.


196  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

should  be  a  diversity  of  creeds,  or  how  any  one  can  differ  from  themselves  without
being  guilty  of  the  most  enormous  and  unpardonable  crime.17

If  we  now  continue  to  trace  the  progress  of  opinions  in  England,  we  shall  see
the  full  force  of  these  remarks.  A  general  spirit  of  inquiry,  of  doubt,  and  even  of
insubordination,  began  to  occupy  the  minds  of  men.  In  physics,  it  enabled
them,  almost  at  a  blow,  to  throw  off  the  shackles  of  antiquity,  and  give  birth  to
sciences  founded  not  on  notions  of  old,  but  on  individual  observations  and  in-
dividual experiments.18  In  politics,  it  stimulated  them  to  rise  against  the
government,  and  eventually  bring  their  king  to  the  scaffold.  In  religion,  it
vented  itself  in  a  thousand  sects,  each  of  which  proclaimed,  and  often  exaggerated,
the  efficiency  of  private  judgment.19  The  details  of  this  vast  movement  form
one  of  the  most  interesting  parts  of  the  history  of  England  :  but  without  antici-
pating what  I  must  hereafter  relate,  I  will  at  present  mention  only  one  instance,
which,  from  the  circumstances  attending  it,  is  very  characteristic  of  the  age.
The  celebrated  work  by  Chillingworth  on  the  Religion  of  Protestants  is  generally
admitted  to  be  the  best  defence  which  the  Reformers  have  been  able  to  make
against  the  church  of  Rome.20  It  was  published  in  1637,  21  and  the  position
of  the  author  would  induce  us  to  look  for  the  fullest  display  of  bigotry  that  was
consistent  with  the  spirit  of  his  time.  Chillingworth  had  recently  abandoned  the

17  "To  tax  any  one,  therefore,  with  want  of  reverence,  because  he  pays  no  respect
to  what  we  venerate,  is  either  irrelevant,  or  is  a  mere  confusion.     The  fact,  so  far  as  it  is
true,  is  no  reproach,  but  an  honour  ;  because  to  reverence  all  persons  and  all  things  is
absolutely  wrong  :  reverence  shown  to  that  which  does  not  deserve  it,  is  no  virtue  ;  no,
nor  even  an  amiable  weakness,  but  a  plain  folly  and  sin.     But  if  it  be  meant  that  he  is
wanting  in  proper  reverence,  not  respecting  what  is  really  to  be  respected,  that  is  assum-
ing the  whole  question  at  issue,  because  what  we  call  divine,  he  calls  an  idol ;  and  as,
supposing  that  we  are  in  the  right,  we  are  bound  to  fall  down  and  worship,  so,  supposing
him  to  be  in  the  right,  he  is  no  less  bound  to  pull  it  to  the  ground  and  destroy  it."
Arnold's  Lectures  on  Modern  History,  pp.   210,   211.     Considering  the  ability  of  Dr.
Arnold,  considering  his  great  influence,  and  considering  his  profession,  his  antecedents,
and  the  character  of  the  university  in  which  he  was  speaking,  it  must  be  allowed  that  this
is  a  remarkable  passage,  and  one  well  worthy  the  notice  of  those  who  wish  to  study  the
tendencies  of  the  English  mind  during  the  present  generation.

18  On  the  connexion  between  the  rise  of  the  Baconian  philosophy  and  the  change  in
the  spirit  of  theologians,  compare  Comte,  Philosophie  Positive,  vol.  v.  p.  701,  with  Whately
on  Dangers  to  Christian  Faith,  pp.  148,  149.     It  favoured,  as  Tennemann  (Gesch.  der
Philos.  vol.  x.  p.  14)  says,  the  "  Belebung  der  selbstthatigen  Kraft  des  menschlichen
Geistes  ;  "  and  hence  the  attack  on  the  inductive  philosophy  in  Newman's  Development
of  Christian  Doctrine,  pp.  179-183.     But  Mr.  Newman  does  not  seem  to  be  aware  how
irrevocably  we  are  now  pledged  to  the  movement  which  he  seeks  to  reverse.

19  The  rapid  increase  of  heresy  in  the  middle  of   the    seventeenth  century  is  very
remarkable,  and  it  greatly  aided  civilization  in  England  by  encouraging  habits  of  inde-
pendent thought.     In  Feb.  1646-7,  Boyle  writes  from  London,  "  There  are  few  days
pass  here,  that  may  not  justly  be  accused  of  the  brewing  or  broaching  of  some  new
opinion.     Nay,  some  are  so  studiously  changing  in  that  particular,  they  esteem  an
opinion  as  a  diurnal,  after  a  day  or  two  scarce  worth  the  keeping.     If  any  man  have  lost
his  religion,  let  him  repair  to  London,  and  I'll  warrant  him  he  shall  find  it :  I  had  almost
said  too,  and  if  any  man  has  a  religion,  let  him  but  come  hither  now,  and  he  shall  go
near  to  lose  it."     Birch's  Life  of  Boyle,  in  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  20,  21.     See  also
Bate's  Account  of  the  late  Troubles,  edit.  1685,  part  ii.  p.  219,  on  "  that  unbridled  licen-
tiousness of  here  ticks  which  grew  greater  and  greater  daily."     Compare  to  the  same  effect
Carlyle's  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  289  ;  Hftttam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  608 ;  and  Carwithen's
Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  203  :  "  sectaries  began  to  swarm."

J0  Not  to  quote  the  opinions  of  inferior  men  respecting  Chillingworth,  it  is  enough
to  mention  that  Lord  Mansfield  said  he  was  '"  a  perfect  model  of  argumentation."
Butler's  Reminiscences,  vol.  i.  p.  126.  Compare  a  letter  from  Warburton,  in  Nichols's
Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  iv.  p.  849.

21  Des  Maizeaux,  Life  of  Chillingworth,  p.  141.


,  THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          197

creed  which  he  now  came  forward  to  attack  ;  and  he  therefore  might  be  expected
to  have  that  natural  inclination  to  dogmatize  with  which  apostasy  is  usually  accom-
panied. Besides  this,  he  was  the  godson  and  the  intimate  friend  of  Laud,22
whose  memory  is  still  loathed,  as  that  of  the  meanest,  the  most  cruel,  and  the
most  narrow-minded  man  who  ever  sat  on  the  episcopal  bench.2^  He  was  more-
over a  fellow  of  Oxford,  and  was  a  constant  resident  at  that  ancient  university,
which  has  always  been  esteemed  as  the  refuge  of  superstition,  and  which  has  pre-
served to  our  own  day  its  unenviable  fame.24  If  now  we  turn  to  the  work  that
was  written  under  these  auspices,  we  can  scarcely  believe  that  it  was  produced
in  the  same  generation,  and  in  the  same  country,  where,  only  twenty-six  years
before,  two  men  had  been  publicly  burned  because  they  advocated  opinions
different  to  those  of  the  established  church.  It  is,  indeed,  a  most  remarkable
proof  of  the  prodigious  energy  of  that  great  movement  which  was  now  going  on,
that  its  pressure  should  be  felt  under  circumstances  the  most  hostile  to  it  which
can  possibly  be  conceived  ;  and  that  a  friend  of  Laud,  and  a  fellow  of  Oxford,
should,  in  a  grave  theological  treatise,  lay  down  principles  utterly  subversive
of  that  theological  spirit  which  for  many  centuries  had  enslaved  the  whole  of
Europe.

In  this  great  work,  all  authority  in  matters  of  religion  is  openly  set  at  defiance.
Hooker,  indeed,  had  appealed  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Fathers  to  the  juris-
diction of  reason  ;  he  had,  however,  been  careful  to  add  that  the  reason  of  in-
dividuals ought  to  bow  before  that  of  the  church,  as  we  find  it  expressed  in  great
Councils,  and  in  the  general  voice  of  ecclesiastical  tradition.25  But  Chillingworth
would  hear  of  none  of  these  things.  He  would  admit  of  no  reservations  which
tended  to  limit  the  sacred  right  of  private  judgment.  He  not  only  went  far
beyond  Hooker  in  neglecting  the  Fathers, 2«  but  he  even  ventured  to  despise  the
Councils.  Although  the  sole  object  of  his  work  was  to  decide  on  the  conflicting
claims  of  the  two  greatest  sects  into  which  the  Christian  Church  has  broken,  he
never  quotes  as  authorities  the  Councils  of  that  very  church  respecting  which  the
disputes  were  agitated.2?  His  strong  and  subtle  intellect,  penetrating  the  depths
of  the  subject,  despised  that  sort  of  controversy  which  had  long  busied  the  minds


22  Aubrey's  Letters  and  Lives,  vol.  ii.  p.  285  ;  Des  Maizeaux,  Life  of  Chillingworth,
pp.  2-9.     The  correspondence  between  Laud  and  Chillingworth  is  supposed  to  be  lost.
Des  Maizeaux,  p.  12.     Carwithen  (Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  214)  says,
"  Laud  was  the  godfather  of  Chillingworth."

23  The  character  of  Laud  is  now  well  understood  and  generally  known.      His    odious
cruelties  made  him  so  hated  by  his  contemporaries,  that  after  his  condemnation   many
persons  shut  up  their  shops,  and  refused  to  open  them  till  he  was  executed.     This  is
mentioned  by  Walton,  an  eye-witness.     See  Walton's  Life  of  Sanderson,  in  Wordsworth's
Eccles.  Biog.  vol.  iv.  p.  429.

24  A  modern  writer  suggests,  with  exquisite  simplicity,  that  Chillingworth  derived  his
liberal  principles  from  Oxford  :  "  the  very  same  college  which  nursed  the  high  intellect
and  tolerant  principles  of  Chillingworth."  Bowles's  Life  of  Bishop  Ken,  vol.  i.  p.  xxi.

25  Hooker's  undue  respect  for  the  Councils  of  the  Church  is  noticed  by  Mr.  Hallam,
Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.   213.     Compare  the  hesitating  remarks  in  Coleridge's    Literary
Remains,  vol.  iii.  pp.  35,  36.

26  Reading  the  Fathers  he  contemptuously  calls  travelling  on  a  "  north-west  dis-
covery." Chillingworth' s  Religion  of  Protestants,  p.  366.     Even  to  Augustine,    who    was
probably  the  ablest  of  them,  Chillingworth  pays  no  deference.     See  what  he  says  at
pp.  196,  333,  376  ;  and  as  to  the  authority  of  the  Fathers  in  general,  see  pp.  252,  346.
Chillingworth  observed,  happily  enough,  that  churchmen,  "  account  them  fathers  when
they  are  for  them,  and  children  when  they  are  against  them."  Calamy's  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  253.

27  As  to  the  supposed  authority  of  Councils,  see  Religion  of  Protestants,  pp.  132,  463.
It  affords  curious  evidence  of  the  slow  progress  of  theologians,  to  observe  the  different
spirit  in  which  some  of  our  clergy  consider  these  matters.     See,  for  instance,  Palmer  on
the  Church,  1839,  vol.  ii.  pp.  150-171.     In  no  other  branch  of  inquiry  do  we  find  this
obstinate  determination  to  adhere  to  theories  which  all  thinking  men  have  rejected  for
the  last  two  centuries.


198  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  men.  In  discussing  the  points  upon  which  the  Catholics  and  Protestants  were
at  issue,  he  does  not  inquire  whether  the  doctrines  in  question  met  the  approval
of  the  early  church,  but  he  asks  if  they  are  in  accordance  with  human  reason  ;
and  he  does  not  hesitate  to  say  that,  however  true  they  may  be,  no  man  is  bound
to  believe  them  if  he  finds  that  they  are  repugnant  to  the  dictates  of  his  own
understanding.  Nor  will  he  consent  that  faith  should  supply  the  absence  of
authority.  Even  this  favourite  principle  of  theologians  is  by  Chillingworth  made
to  yield  to  the  supremacy  of  the  human  reason.28  Reason,  he  says,  gives  us
knowledge  ;  while  faith  only  gives  us  belief,  which  is  a  part  of  knowledge,  and  is
therefore  inferior  to  it.  It  is  by  reason,  and  not  by  faith,  that  we  must  discrimi-
nate in  religious  matters  ;  and  it  is  by  reason  alone  that  we  can  distinguish  truth
from  falsehood.  Finally,  he  solemnly  reminds  his  readers  that  in  religious
matters  no  one  ought  to  be  expected  to  draw  strong  conclusions  from  imperfect
premises,  or  to  credit  improbable  statements  upon  scanty  evidence  ;  still  less,
he  says,  was  it  ever  intended  that  men  should  so  prostitute  their  reason  as  to
believe  with  infallible  faith  that  which  they  are  unable  to  prove  with  infallible
arguments.29

No  one  of  ordinary  reflection  can  fail  to  perceive  the  manifest  tendency  of
these  opinions.  But  what  is  more  important  to  observe  is  the  process  through
which,  in  the  march  of  civilization,  the  human  mind  had  been  obliged  to  pass,
before  it  could  reach  such  elevated  views.  The  Reformation,  by  destroying
the  dogma  of  an  infallible  church,  had  of  course  weakened  the  reverence  which
was  paid  to  ecclesiastical  antiquity.  Still,  such  was  the  force  of  old  associations,
that  our  countrymen  long  continued  to  respect  what  they  had  ceased  to  venerate.
Thus  it  was  that  Jewel,  though  recognizing  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Bible,
had,  in  cases  where  it  was  silent  or  ambiguous,  anxiously  appealed  to  the  early
church,  by  whose  decision  he  supposed  all  difficulties  could  be  easily  cleared.  He
therefore  only  used  his  reason  to  ascertain  the  discrepancies  which  existed
between  Scripture  and  tradition  ;  but  when  they  did  not  clash,  he  paid  what  is
now  considered  a  superstitious  deference  to  antiquity.  Thirty  years  after  him
came  Hooker  ;  30  who  made  a  step  in  advance,  and  laying  down  principles  from
which  Jewel  would  have  shrunk  with  fear,  did  much  to  weaken  that  which  it
was  reserved  for  Chillingworth  utterly  to  destroy.  Thus  it  is  that  these  three


28  Indeed,  he  attempts  to  fasten  the  same  doctrine  upon  the  Catholics  ;  which,  if  he
could  have  done,  would  of  course  have  ended  the  controversy.     He  says,  rather  unfairly,
"  Your  church  you  admit,  because  you  think  you  have  reason  to  do  so  ;  so  that  by  you,
as  well  as  Protestants,  all  is  finally  resolved  into  your  own  reason."  Relig.  of  Protest.
P-  134-

29  "  God  desires  only  that  we  believe  the  conclusion  as  much  as  the  premises  deserve  ;
that  the  strength  of  our  faith  be  equal  or  proportionable  to  the  credibility  of  the  motives
to  it."  Relig.  of  Protest,  p.  66.     "  For  my  part,  I  am  certain  that  God  hath  given  us  our
reason  to  discern  between  truth  and  falsehood  ;  and  he  that  makes  not  this  use  of  it,  but
believes  things  he  knows  not  why,  I  say  it  is  by  chance  that  he  believes  the  truth,  and
not  by  choice  ;  and  I  cannot  but  fear  that  God  will  not  accept  of  this  sacrifice  of  fools."
p.  133.     "  God's  spirit,  if  he  please,  may  work  more, — a  certainty  of  adherence  beyond
a  certainty  of  evidence  ;  but  neither  God  doth,  nor  man  may,  require  of  us,  as  our  duty,
to  give  a  greater  assent  to  the  conclusion  than  the  premises  deserve  ;  to  build  an  infallible
faith  upon  motives  that  are  only  highly  credible  and  not  infallible  ;  as  it  were  a  great  and
heavy  building  upon  a  foundation  that  hath  not  strength  proportionate."  p.  149.     "  For
faith  is  not  knowledge  no  more  than  three  is  four,  but  eminently  contained  in  it ;  so  that
he  that  knows,  believes,  and  something  more  ;  but  he  that  believes  many  times  does  not
know — nay,  if  he  doth  barely  and  merely  believe,  he  doth  never  know."  p  412.     See  also
p.  417.

30  On   the  connexion  between   the   Reformation   and   the  views   advocated  in   the
Ecclesiastical  Polity,  compare  Newman's  Development  of  Christian  Doctrine,  p.  47,  with
some  able  remarks  by  Locke,  in  King's  Life  of  Locke,  vol   ii.  pp.  99-101.     Locke,  who
was  anything  but  a  friend  to  the  church,  was  a  great  admirer  of  Hooker,  and  in  one  place
calls  him  "  the  arch -philosopher."  Essay  on  Government,  in  Locke's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  380.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          199

great  men  represent  the  three  distinct  epochs  of  the  three  successive  generations
in  which  they  respectively  lived.  In  Jewel,  reason  is,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  super-
structure of  the  system  ;  but  authority  is  the  basis  upon  which  the  superstructure
is  built.  In  Hooker,  authority  is  only  the  superstructure,  and  reason  is  the
basis.31  But  in  Chillingworth,  whose  writings  were  harbingers  of  the  coming
storm,  authority  entirely  disappears,  and  the  whole  fabric  of  religion  is  made
to  rest  upon  the  way  in  which  the  unaided  reason  of  man  shall  interpret  the
decrees  of  an  omnipotent  God.*

The  immense  success  of  this  great  work  of  Chillingworth  must  have  aided
that  movement  of  which  it  is  itself  an  evidence.32  It  formed  a  decisive  vindica-
tion of  religious  dissent  ;  33  and  thus  justified  the  breaking-up  of  the  Anglican
church,  which  the  same  generation  lived  to  witness.  Its  fundamental  principle
was  adopted  by  the  most  influential  writers  of  the  seventeenth  century, — such
as  Hales,  Owen,  Taylor,  Burnet,  Tillotson,  Locke,  and  even  the  cautious  and
time-serving  Temple  ;  all  of  whom  insisted  upon  the  authority  of  private  judg-
ment, as  forming  a  tribunal  from  which  no  one  had  the  power  of  appeal.  The
inference  to  be  drawn  from  this  seems  obvious.34  If  the  ultimate  test  of  truth
is  individual  judgment,  and  if  no  one  can  affirm  that  the  judgments  of  men,
which  are  often  contradictory,  can  ever  be  infallible,  it  follows  of  necessity  that
there  is  no  decisive  criterion  of  religious  truth.  This  is  a  melancholy,  and,  as
I  firmly  believe,  a  most  inaccurate  conclusion  ;  but  it  is  one  which  every  nation
must  entertain,  before  it  can  achieve  that  great  work  of  toleration,  which,  even
in  our  own  country,  and  in  our  own  time,  is  not  yet  consummated.  It  is  neces-
sary that  men  should  learn  to  doubt,  before  they  begin  to  tolerate  ;  and  that
they  should  recognize  the  fallibility  of  their  own  opinions,  before  they  respect  the
opinions  of  their  opponents.3^  This  great  process  is  far  from  being  yet  completed

31  The  opposition  between  Jewel  and  Hooker  was  so  marked,  that  some  of  the  oppo-
nents of  Hooker  quoted  against  him  Jewel's  Apology.     See  Wordsworth's  Eccl.  Biog.
vol.  iii.  p.  513.     Dr.  Wordsworth  calls  this  "  curious  ;  "  but  it  would  be  much  more
curious  if  it  had  not  happened.     Compare  the  remarks  made  by  the  Bishop  of  Limerick
(Parr's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  470,  Notes  on  the  Spital  Sermon),  who  says,  that  Hooker  "  opened
that  fountain  of  reason,"  etc.  ;  language  which  will  hardly  be  considered  too  strong  by
those  who  have  compared  the  Ecclesiastical  Polity  with  the  theological  works  previously
produced  by  the  English  church.

32  Des  Maizeaux  (Life  of  Chillingworth,  pp.  220,  221)  says  :  "  His  book  was  received
with  a  general  applause  ;  and,  what  perhaps  never  happened  to  any  other  controversial
work  of  that  bulk,  two  editions  of  it  were  published  within  less  than  five  months.  .  .  .
The  quick  sale  of  a  book,  and  especially  of  a  book  of  controversy,  in  folio,  is  a  good  proof
that  the  author  hit  the  taste  of  his  time."     See  also  Biographia  Britannica,  edit.  Kippis,
vol.  iii.  pp.  511,  512.

33  Or,  as  Calamy  cautiously  puts  it,  Chillingworth's  work  "  appeared  to  me  to  go  a
great  way  towards  the  justifying  of  moderate  conformity."  Calamy's  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  234.
Compare  Palmer  on  the  Church,  vol.  i.  pp.  267,  268  ;  and  what  is  probably  an  allusion  to
Chillingworth  in  Doddridge's  Correspond,  and  Diary,  vol.  ii.  p.  81.     See  also  the  opinion
of  Hobbes,  in  Aubrey's  Letters  and  Lives,  vol.  ii.  pp.  288,  629.

34  A  short  but  able  view  of  the  aspect  which  the  English  mind  now  began  to  assume,
will  be  found  in  Stdudlin,  Geschichte  der  theologischen  Wissenschaften,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95  seq.

35  In  Whately's  Dangers  to  Christian  Faith,  pp.  188-198,  there  is  a  perspicuous  state-
ment of  the  arguments  now  commonly  received  against  coercing  men  for  their  religious
opinions.     But  the  most  powerful  of  these  arguments  are  based  entirely  upon  expediency,
which  would  have  insured  their  rejection  in  an  age  of  strong  religious  convictions.       Some,
and  only  some,  of    the  theological  difficulties  respecting  toleration  are  noticed  in  Cole-
ridge's Lit.  Remains,  vol.  i.  pp.  312-315  ;  and  in  another  work  (The  Friend,  vol.  i.  p.  73),
he  mentions,  what  is  the  real  fact,  -"  that  same  indifference  which  makes  toleration  so

[*  The  last  sentence  fails  to  disguise  the  collapse  of  the  proposition.  The  differences
among  the  three  writers  are  only  of  degree  in  the  application  of  reason  on  authoritarian
premisses.  Authority  could  not  "  entirely  disappear  "  from  the  argument  of  a  Protestant,
theologian.; — ED.]


200  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

i  n  any  country  ;  and  the  European  mind,  barely  emerged  from  its  early  credulity,
and  from  an  overweening  confidence  in  its  own  belief,  is  still  in  a  middle,  and,
so  to  say,  a  probationary  stage.  When  that  stage  shall  be  finally  passed,  when
we  shall  have  learned  to  estimate  men  solely  by  their  character  and  their  acts,
and  not  at  all  by  their  theological  dogmas,  we  shall  then  be  able  to  form  our  re-
ligious opinions  by  that  purely  transcendental  process,  of  which  in  every  age
glimpses  have  been  granted  to  a  few  gifted  minds.*  That  this  is  the  direction
in  which  things  are  now  hastening,  must  be  clear  to  every  one  who  has  studied
the  progress  of  modern  civilization.  Within  the  short  space  of  three  centuries,
the  old  theological  spirit  has  been  compelled  not  only  to  descend  from  its  long-
established  supremacy,  but  to  abandon  those  strongholds  to  which,  in  the  face
of  advancing  knowledge,  it  has  vainly  attempted  to  secure  a  retreat.  All  its
most  cherished  pretensions  it  has  been  forced  gradually  to  relinquish.36  And
although  in  England  a  temporary  prominence  has  recently  been  given  to  certain
religious  controversies,  still  the  circumstances  attending  them  show  the  alteration
in  the  character  of  the  age.  Disputes  which,  a  century  ago,  would  have  set
the  whole  kingdom  in  a  flame,  are  now  regarded  with  indifference  by  the  vast
majority  of  educated  men.  The  complications  of  modern  society^  and  the
immense  variety  of  interests  into  which  it  is  divided,  have  done  much  to  distract
the  intellect,  and  to  prevent  it  from  dwelling  upon  subjects  which  a  less-occupied
people  would  deem  of  paramount  importance.  Besides  this,  the  accumulations
of  science  are  far  superior  to  those  of  any  former  age,  and  offer  suggestions  of
such  surpassing  interest,  that  nearly  all  our  greatest  thinkers  devote  to  them
the  whole  of  their  time,  and  refuse  to  busy  themselves  with  matters  of  mere
speculative  belief.  The  consequence  is  that  what  used  to  be  considered  the
most  important  of  all  questions  is  now  abandoned  to  inferior  men,  who  mimic  the
zeal  without  possessing  the  influence  of  those  really  great  divines  whose  works
are  among  the  glories  of  our  early  literature.  These  turbulent  polemics  have,
indeed,  distracted  the  church  by  their  clamour,  but  they  have  not  made  the
slightest  impression  upon  the  great  body  of  English  intellect  ;  and  an  over-
whelming majority  of  the  nation  is  notoriously  opposed  to  that  monastic  and
ascetic  religion  which  it  is  now  vainly  attempted  to  reconstruct.  The  truth  is
that  the  time  for  these  things  has  gone  by.  Theological  interests  have  long
ceased  to  be  supreme  ;  and  the  affairs  of  nations  are  no  longer  regulated  accord-
ing to  ecclesiastical  views.3?  In  England,  where  the  march  has  been  more  rapid

easy  a  virtue  with  us."  See  also  Archdeacon  Hare's  Guesses  at  Truth,  2nd  series,  1848,
p.  278  ;  and  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  Lit,  Hist.  vol.  v.  p.  817  :  "  a  spirit  of  mutual  toleration
and  forbearance  has  appeared  (at  least  one  good  consequence  of  religious  indifference)."

36  It  would  be  idle  to  offer  proofs  of  so  notorious  a  fact ;  but  the  reader  will  be  interested
by  some  striking  remarks  in  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  i.  pp.  228,  229.

37  A  writer  intimately  acquainted  with  the  social  condition  of  the  great  European
countries,   says  :    "  Ecclesiastical  power  is  almost  extinct  as  an  active  element  in  the
political  or  social  affairs  of  nations  or  of  individuals,  in  the  cabinet  or  in  the  family  circle  :
and  a  new  element,  literary  power,  is  taking  its  place  in  the  government  of  the  world."
Laing's  Denmark,  1852,  p.  82.     On  this  natural  tendency  in  regard  to  legislation,  see
Meyer,   Esprit  des  Institut.  Judiciaires,  vol.  i.  p.   267  note  ;   and  a  good  summary  in
Stdudlin,  Gesch.  der  theolog.  Wissenscha/ten,  vol.  ii.  pp.  304,  305.     It  is  not  surprising  to
find  that  many  of  the  clergy  complain  of  a  movement  so  subversive  of  their  own  power.
Compare  Ward's  Ideal  of  a  Christian  Church,  pp.  40,  108-111,  388  ;  Sewell's  Christian
Politics,  pp.  276,  277,  279  ;  Palmer's  Treatise  on  the  Church,  vol.  ii.  p.  361.     It  is  thus
that  everything  is  tending  to  confirm  the  remarkable  prediction  of  Sir  James  Mackintosh,

L*  In  this  surprising  passage,  which  cannot  be  made  to  consist  with  Buckle's  general
doctrine,  the  logical  collapse  must  be  admitted  to  be  complete.  The  following  sentences
point  only  to  a  rejection  of  current  theological  dogmas.  Those  which  precede  promise
an  arrival  at  "  infallible  "  opinions,  reached  on  transcendental  lines.  That  is  to  say,
the  European  mind  is  again  to  reach  "  an  overweening  confidence  in  its  own  belief  " —
an  absolute  reversion  to  the  theological  method,  and  to  the  "  most  cherished  pretension  "
of  the  "  old  theological  spirit." — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          201

than  elsewhere,  this  change  is  very  observable.  In  every  other  department  we
have  had  a  series  of  great  and  powerful  thinkers,  who  have  done  honour  to  their
country,  and  have  won  the  admiration  of  mankind.  But  for  more  than  a  century
we  have  not  produced  a  single  original  work  in  the  whole  field  of  contro-
versial theology.  For  more  than  a  century  the  apathy  on  this  subject  has  been
so  marked,  that  there  has  been  made  no  addition  of  value  to  that  immense  mass
of  divinity  which,  among  thinking  men,  is  in  every  successive  generation  losing
something  of  its  former  interest.38

These  are  only  some  of  the  innumerable  signs,  which  must  be  discerned  by
every  man  who  is  not  blinded  by  the  prejudices  of  an  imperfect  education.  An

that  "  church -power  (unless  some  revolution,  auspicious  to  priestcraft,  should  replunge
Europe  in  ignorance)  will  certainly  not  survive  the  nineteenth  century."  Mem.  of
Mackintosh,  vol.  i.  p.  67.

38  "The  'divines'  in  England  at  the  present  day,  her  bishops,  professors,  and  pre-
bendaries, are  not  theologians.  They  are  logicians,  chemists,  skilled  in  the  mathematics,
historians,  poor  commentators  upon  Greek  poets."  Theodore  Parker's  Critical  and
Miscellaneous  Writings,  1848,  p.  302.  At  p.  33,  the  same  high  authority  says  :  "  But
within  the  present  century,  what  has  been  written  in  the  English  tongue,  in  any  depart-
ment of  theological  scholarship,  which  is  of  value  and  makes  a  mark  on  the  age  ?  The
Bndgewnter  Treatises,  and  the  new  edition  of  Paley, —  we  blush  to  confess  it, — are  the  best
things."  Sir  William  Hamilton  (Discussions  on  Philosophy,  1852,  p.  699)  notices  the
decline  of  "  British  theology,"  though  he  appears  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  it.  The  Rev.
Mr.  Ward  (Ideal  of  a  Christian  Church,  p.  405)  remarks,  that  "  we  cannot  wonder,  how-
ever keenly  we  may  mourn,  at  the  decline  and  fall  of  dogmatic  theology."  See  also
Lord  Jeffrey's  Essays,  vol.  iv.  p.  337  :  "  Warburton,  we  think,  was  the  last  of  our  great
divines.  .  .  .  The  days  of  the  Cudworths  and  Barrows,  the  Hookers  and  Taylors,  are
long  gone  by."  Dr.  Parr  was  the  only  English  theologian  since  Warburton  who  possessed
sufficient  learning  to  retrieve  this  position  ;  but  he  always  refused  to  do  so,  being,
unconsciously  to  himself,  held  back  by  the  spirit  of  his  age.  Thus,  we  find  him  writing
to  Archbishop  Magee,  in  1823  :  "  As  to  myself,  I  long  ago  determined  not  to  take  any
active  part  in  polemical  theology."  Parr's  Works,  vol.  vii.  p.  n.  [Since  Parker
and  Buckle  wrote,  the  movement  has  been  in  the  same;  direction.  The  most
distinguished  prelates  since  their  day  have  been  Bishops  Colenso,  Stubbs,  Lightfoot,
and  Creighton,  and  Archbishops  Thomson  and  Temple.  The  first  was  famous  as  a
mathematician  and  as  a  rationalistic  critic  of  the  Pentateuch  ;  the  next  three  were
eminent  as  scholars  and  historians,  not  as  theologians  ;  the  fifth  as  a  metaphysician  ;  and
the  sixth  is  known  to  readers  chiefly  as  the  author  of  a  paper  in  the  Essays  and  Reviews. —
ED.]

In  the  same  way,  since  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  hardly  any  one  has
carefully  read  the  Fathers,  except  for  mere  historical  and  secular  purposes.  The  first
step  was  taken  about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  custom  of  quoting
them  in  sermons  began  to  be  abandoned.  Burnet's  Own  Time,  vol.  i.  pp.  329,  330  ;
Orme's  Life  of  Owen,  p.  184.  After  this  they  rapidly  fell  into  contempt ;  and  the  Rev.
Mr.  Dowling  (Study  of  Ecclesiast.  History,  p.  195)  asserts  that  "  Waterland,  who  died
in  1740,  was  the  last  of  our  great  patristical  scholars."  To  this  I  may  add  that  nine  years
subsequent  to  the  death  of  Waterland,  the  obvious  decay  of  professional  learning  struck
Warburton,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  so  much,  that  he  wrote  to  Jortin,  some-
what roughly,  "  anything  makes  a  divine  among  our  parsons."  See  his  Letter,  written
in  1749,  in  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  Lit.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  173  ;  and  for  other  evidence  of
the  neglect  by  the  clergy  of  their  ancient  studies,  see  Jones's  Memoirs  of  Home,  Bishop
of  Norwich,  pp.  68,  184  ;  and  the  complaint  of  Dr.  Knowler,  in  1766,  in  Nichols's  Lit.
Anec.  vol.  ii.  p.  130.  Since  then,  attempts  have  been  made  at  Oxford  to  remedy  this
tendency  ;  but  such  attempts,  being  opposed  by  the  general  march  of  affairs,  have  been,
and  must  be,  futile.  Indeed,  so  manifest  is  the  inferiority  of  these  recent  efforts,  that
one  of  the  most  active  cultivators  in  that  field  frankly  admits  that  in  point  of  knowledge
his  own  party  has  effected  nothing  ;  and  he  even  asserts,  with  great  bitterness,  that
"  it  is  melancholy  to  say  it,  but  the  chief,  perhaps  the  only,  English  writer  who  has  any
claim  to  be  considered  an  ecclesiastical  historian,  is  the  infidel  Gibbon."  Newman  on
the  Development  of  Christian  Doctrine,  p.  5.


202  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

mmense  majority  of  the  clergy — some  from  ambitious  feelings,  but  the  greater
part,  I  believe,  from  conscientious  motives — are  striving  to  check  the  progress
of  that  scepticism  which  is  now  gathering  in  upon  us  from  every  quarter.39  It
is  time  that  these  well-intentioned  though  mistaken  men  should  see  the  delusion
under  which  they  labour.  That  by  which  they  are  so  much  alarmed,  is  the
intermediate  step  which  leads  from  superstition  to  toleration.  The  higher  order
of  minds  have  passed  through  this  stage,  and  are  approaching  what  is  prob-
ably the  ultimate  form  of  the  religious  history  of  the  human  race.  But  the
people  at  large,  and  even  some  of  those  who  are  commonly  called  educated  men,
are  only  now  entering  that  earlier  epoch  in  which  scepticism  *o  is  the  leading

eature  of  the  mind.  So  far,  therefore,  from  our  apprehensions  being  excited  by
this  rapidly- increasing  spirit,  we  ought  rather  to  do  everything  in  our  power
to  encourage  that  which,  though  painful  to  some,  is  salutary  to  all  ;  because
by  it  alone  can  religious  bigotry  be  effectually  destroyed.  Nor  ought  we  to  be
surprised  that,  before  this  can  be  done,  a  certain  degree  of  suffering  must  first

ntervene.41  If  one  age  believes  too  much,  it  is  but  a  natural  reaction  that  another

39  As  some  writers,  moved  by  their  wishes  rather  than  by  their  knowledge,  seek  to
deny  this,  it  may  be  well  to  observe  that  the  increase  of  scepticism  since  the  latter  part
of  the  eighteenth  century  is  attested  by  an  immense  mass  of  evidence,  as  will  appear  to
whoever  will  compare  the  following  authorities  :  Whately's  Dangers  to  Christian  Faith,
p.  87  ;  Kay's  Social  Condition  of  the  People,  vol.  ii.  p.  506  ;  Tocqueville,  dela  Democrat  ie,
vol.  iii.  p.  72  ;  /.  H.  Newman  on  Development,  pp.  28,  29  ;  F.  W.  Newman's  Natural
History  of  the  Soul,  p.  197  ;  Parr's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  5,  vol.  iii.  pp.  688,  689  ;  Felkin's  Moral
Statistics,  in  Journal  of  Statist.  Soc.  vol.  i.  p.  541  ;  Watson's  Observations  on  the  Life  of
Wesley,  pp.  155,  194  ;  Matter,  Hist,  du  Gnosticisme,  vol.  ii.  p.  485  ;  Ward's  Ideal  of  a
Christian  Church,  pp.  266,  267,  404  ;  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  pp.  129, 142,  vol.  iii.
p.  509  ;   Priestley's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  pp.  127, 128,446,  vol.  ii.  p.  751  ;  Cappe's  Memoirs,
p.  367  ;  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  of  Eighteenth,  Centurv,  vol.  iv.  p.  671,  vol.  viii.  p.  473  ;  Nichols's
Illust.  of  Lit.  Hist.  vol.  v.  p.  640  ;  Combe's  Notes  on  the  United  States,  vol.  ii.  pp.  171,  172
183.

40  It  has  been  suggested  to  me  by  an  able  friend,  that  there  is  a  class  of  persons  who
will  misunderstand  this  expression  ;   and  that  there  is  another  class  who,  without  mis-
understanding it,  will  intentionally  misrepresent  its  meaning.     Hence,  it  may  be  well
to  state  distinctly  what  I  wish  to  convey  by  the  word  "  scepticism."     By  scepticism  I
merely  mean  hardness  of  belief ;  so  that  an  increased  scepticism  is  an  increased  percep-
tion of  the  difficulty  of  proving  assertions  ;  or,  in  other  words,  it  is  an  increased  applica-
tion, and  an  increased  diffusion,  of  the  rules  of  reasoning,  and  of  the  laws  of  evidence.
This  feeling  of  hesitation  and  of  suspended  judgment  has,  in   every  department  of
thought,  been  the  invariable  preliminary  to  all  the  intellectual  revolutions  through  which
the  human  mind  has  passed  ;  and  without  it  there  could  be  no  progress,  no  change,  no
civilization.     In  physics,  it  is  the  necessary  precursor  of  science  ;  in  politics,  of  liberty  ;
in  theology,  of  toleration.     These  are  the  three  leading  forms  of  scepticism  ;  it  is,  therefore,
clear,  that  in  religion  the  sceptic  steers  a  middle  course  between  atheism  and  orthodoxy,
rejecting  both  extremes,  because  he  sees  that  both  are  incapable  of  proof.     [Atheism
being    strictly   the    same    thing  as     "  agnosticism " — a    negative    attitude     towards
certain  positive  propositions,  and  not  a  substantive  affirmation — the  question  of  affirma-
tive "  proof  "  cannot  arise  in  regard  to  it.     Buckle  himself  had  just  taken  up  (above,
p.  200)  a  position  avowedly  "  incapable  of  proof."     But  the  intermediate  position  here
vaguely  hinted  at  is  necessarily  in  the  same  case. — ED.]

41  What  a  learned  historian  has  said  of  the  effect  which  the  method  of  Socrates  pro-
duced on  a  very  few  Greek  minds,  is  applicable  to  that  state  through  which  a  great  part
of  Europe  is  now  passing  :  "  The  Socratic  dialectics,  clearing  away  from  the  mind  its
mist  of  fancied  knowledge,  and  laying  bare  the  real  ignorance,  produced  an  immediate
effect,  like  the  touch  of  the  torpedo.     The  newly -created  consciousness  of  ignorance
was  alike  unexpected,  painful,  and  humiliating, — a  season  of  doubt  and  discomfort,
yet  combined  with  an  internal  working  and  yearning  after  truth,  never  before  experienced.
Such  intellectual  quickening,  which  could  never  commence  until  the  mind  had  been
disabused  of  its  original  illusion  of  false  knowledge,  was  considered  by  Socrates  not
merely  as  the  index  and  precursor,  but  as  the  indispensable  conditions  of.  future  progress.' '


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          203

age  should  believe  too  little.  Such  are  the  imperfections  of  our  nature,  that  we
are  compelled,  by  the  very  laws  of  its  progress,  to  pass  through  those  crises  of
scepticism  and  of  mental  distress,  which  to  a  vulgar  eye  are  states  of  national
decline  and  national  shame  ;  but  which  are  only  as  the  fire  by  which  the  gold
must  be  purged  before  it  can  leave  its  dross  in  the  pot  of  the  refiner.  To  apply
the  imagery  of  the  great  allegorist,  it  is  necessary  that  the  poor  pilgrim,  laden
with  the  weight  of  accumulated  superstitions,  should  struggle  through  the
Slough  of  Despond  and  the  Valley  of  Death,  before  he  can  reach  that  glorious
city,  glittering  with  gold  and  with  jewels,  of  which  the  first  sight  is  sufficient  re-
compense for  his  toils  and  his  fears.

During  the  whole  of  the  seventeenth  century,  this  double  movement  of
scepticism  and  of  toleration  continued  to  advance  ;  though  its  progress  was  con-
stantly checked  by  the  two  successors  of  Elizabeth,  who  in  everything  reversed
the  enlightened  policy  of  the  great  queen.  These  princes  exhausted  their
strength  in  struggling  against  the  tendencies*  of  an  age  they  were  unable  to
understand  ;  but  happily  the  spirit  which  they  wished  to  quench  had  reached
a  height  that  mocked  their  control.  At  the  same  time,  the  march  of  the  English
mind  was  still  further  aided  by  the  nature  of  those  disputes  which,  during  half  a
century,  divided  the  country.  In  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  the  great  contest  had
been  between  the  church  and  its  opponents  ;  between  those  who  were  orthodox
and  those  who  were  heretical.  But  in  the  reigns  of  James  and  Charles  theology
was  for  the  first  time  merged  in  politics.  It  was  no  longer  a  struggle  of
creeds  and  dogmas ;  but  it  was  a  struggle  between  those  who  favoured
the  crown  and  those  who  supported  the  parliament.  The  minds  of  men,
thus  fixed  upon  matters  of  real  importance,  neglected  those  inferior  pur-
suits that  had  engrossed  the  attention  of  their  fathers.42  When,  at  length,

Grote's  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  viii.  pp.  614,  615,  8vo.  1851.  Compare  Kritik  der  reinen
Vernunft,  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  572,  577  :  "  So  ist  der  Skeptizismus  ein  Ruheplatz
fur  die  menschliche  Vernunft,  da  sie  sich  liber  ihre  dogmatische  Wanderung  besinnen  und
den  Entwurf  von  der  Gegend  machen  kann,  wo  sie  sich  befindet,  um  ihren  Weg  fernerhin
mit  mehrerer  Sicherheit  wahlen  zu  konnen,  aber  nicht  ein  Wohnplatz  zum  bestandigen
Aufenthalte.  ...  So  ist  das  skeptische  Verfahren  zwar  an  sich  selbst  fiir  die  Ver-
nunftfragen  nicht  befriedigend,  aber  doch  voriibend,  um  ihre  Vorsichtigkeit  zu  erwecken
und  auf  griindliche  Mittel  zu  weisen,  die  sie  in  ihren  rechtmassigen  Besitzen  sichern
kb'nnen."

42  Dr.  Arnold,  whose  keen  eye  noted  this  change,  says  (Lectures  on  Modern  History,
p.  232),  "  What  strikes  us  predominantly  is,  that  what  in  Elizabeth's  time  was  a  con-
troversy between  divines,  was  now  a  great  political  contest  between  the  crown  and  the
parliament."  The  ordinary  compilers,  such  as  Sir  A.  Alison  (Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  i.
p.  51),  and  others,  have  entirely  misrepresented  this  movement;  an  error  the  more
singular,  because  the  eminently  political  character  of  the  struggle  was  recognized  by
several  contemporaries.  Even  Cromwell,  notwithstanding  the  difficult  game  he  had
to  play,  distinctly  stated  in  1655  that  the  origin  of  the  war  was  not  religious.  See
Carlyle's  Cromwell,  vol.  iii.  p.  103  ;  and  corroborative  evidence  in  Walker's  History  of
Independency,  part  i.  p.  132.  James  I.  also  saw  that  the  Puritans  were  more  dangerous
to  the  state  than  to  the  church  :  "  do  not  so  far  differ  from  us  in  points  of  religion,  as  in
their  confused  form  of  policy  and  parity  ;  being  ever  discontented  with  the  present
government,  and  impatient  to  suffer  any  superiority  ;  which  maketh  their  sects  insuffer-
able in  any  well -governed  commonwealth,"  Speech  of  James  /.,  in  Part.  Hist.  vol.  i

[*  It  is  important  to  remember  that  the  Puritans  were  no  more  disposed  to  toleration
than  the  Laudians.  Eliot  was  zealous  to  persecute  the  Arminians  and  despoil  the  Catho-
lics. Gardiner,  History  of  England,  1603-1642,  small  ed.  v.  191  ;  vii.  42-43.  As  to  the
earlier  Cartwright,  whose  "  bigotry  was  that  of  a  medieval  inquisitor,"  compare  Green,
Short  History  of  the  English  People,  ed.  1881,  pp.  455-6.  During  the  Civil  War
the  Presbyterian  corporation  of  London  petitioned  Parliament  to  suppress  "  all  sects
without  toleration,"  and  their  clergy  of  course  abetted  them.  "  We  detest  and  abhor
the  much  endeavoured  Toleration,"  they  declared  in  1645.  Toleration  began  with.
Crom-well  in  the  interests  of  his  own  sect*  the  Independents,— ED.}


204  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

public  affairs  had  reached  their  crisis,  the  hard  fate  of  the  king,  which  eventually
advanced  the  interests  of  the  throne,  was  most  injurious  to  those  of  the  church.
There  can  indeed  be  no  doubt  that  the  circumstances  connected  with  the
execution  of  Charles  inflicted  a  blow  upon  the  whole  system  of  ecclesiastical
authority  from  which,  in  this  country,  it  has  never  been  able  to  recover.  The
violent  death  of  the  king  excited  the  sympathies  of  the  people  ;  and  by  thus
strengthening  the  hands  of  the  royalists,  hastened  the  restoration  of  the
monarchy.43  But  the  mere  name  of  that  great  party  which  had  risen  to  power
was  suggestive  of  the  change  that,  in  a  religious  point  of  view,  was  taking  place
in  the  national  mind.  It  was  indeed  no  light  thing  that  England  should  be
ruled  by  men  who  called  themselves  Independents  ;  and  who,  under  that  title,
not  only  beat  back  the  pretensions  of  the  clergy,  but  professed  an  unbounded
contempt  for  all  those  rites  and  dogmas  which  the  clergy  had,  during  many
centuries,  continued  to  amass.44  True  it  is,  that  the  Independents  did  not  always
push  to  their  full  extent  the  consequences  of  their  own  doctrines.45  Still,  it  was

p.  982.  See  also  the  observations  ascribed  to  De  Foe,  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  p.  572  :
"  The  king  and  parliament  fell  out  about  matters  of  civil  right ;  .  .  .  the  first  difference
between  the  king  and  the  English  parliament  did  not  respect  religion,  but  civil  property."

[This  overlooks  the  strife  with  Laud,  which  deepened  the  temper  of  resistance.  Com-
pare Green,  p.  512  ;  Gardiner,  Student's  History  of  England,  pp.  511-519.  It  is  true  that
"revolutions  are  not  caused  by  grievances  felt  only  by  religious  or  high-minded
people  "(Gardiner,  Student's  History,  p.  521)  and  that  "  to  stir  men  to  resistance  there  is
required  a  grievance  which  touches  their  pockets  as  well ;  "  but  the  latter  was  not  the
"first  difference."  And,  as  Dr.  Gardiner  has  summed  up  (History,  1603-1642,  x.  10),
"  For  the  mass  of  Englishmen,  religion  was  their  only  intellectual  food."  They  cer-
tainly did  not  "  neglect  "  religious  questions  as  "  inferior  pursuits." — ED.]

«  See  Clarendon's  Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  716.  Sir  W.  Temple,  in  his  Memoirs,
observes  that  the  throne  of  Charles  II.  was  strengthened  by  "  what  had  passed  in  the
last  reign."  Temple's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  344.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  remarks
of  M.  Lamartine  on  the  execution  of  Louis  XVI.  Hist,  des  Girondins,  vol.  v.  pp.  86-7
"  Sa  mort,  au  contraire,  alienait  de  la  cause  francaise  cette  partie  immense  des  popula-
tions qui  ne  juge  les  evenements  humains  que  par  le  cceur.  La  nature  humaine  est
pathetique  ;  la  republique  1'oublia..  elle  donna  £  la  royaute  quelque  chose  du  martyre,  a
la  liberte  quelque  chose  de  la  vengeance.  Elle  prepara  ainsi  une  reaction  centre  la  cause
republicaine,  et  mit  du  cote  de  la  royaute  la  sensibilite,  I'interet,  les  larmes  d'une  partie
des  peuples."

44  The  energy  with  which  the  House  of  Commons,  in  1646,  repelled  the  pretensions  of
'  the  Assembly  of  Divines,"  is  one  of  many  proofs  of  the  determination  of  the  predomi-
nant party  not  to  allow  ecclesiastical  encroachments.     See  the  remarkable  details  in
Part.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  pp.  439-463  ;  see  also  p.  1305.     As  a  natural  consequence,  the  Inde-
pendents  were  the  first  sect  which,  when  possessed  of  power,  advocated  toleration.
Compare   Orme's  Life  of  Owen,  pp.  63-75,  102-111  ;  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xii.  p.  542  ;
Walker's  Hist,  of  Independency,  part  ii.  pp.  50,  157,  part  iii.  p.  22  ;  Clarendon's  Hist,  of
the  Rebellion,  pp.  610,  640.     Some  writers  ascribe  great  merit  to  Jeremy  Taylor  for  his
advocacy  of  toleration  (Heber's  Life  of  Taylor,  p.  xxvii.  ;  and  Parr's  Works,  vol.  iv.
p.  417) ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  when  he  wrote  the  famous  Liberty  of  Prophesying,   his
enemies  were  in  power  ;  so  that  he  was  pleading  for  his  own  interests.     When,  however,
the  Church  of  England  again  obtained  the  upper  hand,  Taylor  withdrew  the  concessions
which  he  had  made  in  the  season  of  adversity.     See  the  indignant  remarks  of  Coleridge
(Lit.  Remains,  vol.  iii.  p.  250),  who,  though  a  great  admirer  of  Taylor,  expresses  himself
strongly  on  this  dereliction :  see  also  a  recently  published  Letter  to  Percy,  Bishop  of  Dro-
more,  in  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  Lit.  History,  vol.  vii.  p.  464.

45  However,  Bishop  Short  (History  of  the  Church  of  England,  8vo,  1847,  pp.  452,  458)
says,  what  is  undoubtedly  true,  that  the  hostility  of  Cromwell  to  the  church  was  not
theological,  but  political.     The  same  remark  is  made  by  Bishop  Kennet.       Note  in
Burton's  Diary,  vol.  ii.  p  479.     See  also  Vaughan's  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  xcvii.  ;  and  on  the
generally  tolerant  spirit  of  this  great  man,  see  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  14  ;  and  the
evidence  in  Harris's  Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  iii.  pp.  37-47.     But  the  most  distinct  recog-
nition of  the  principle  is  in  a  Letter  from  Cromwell  to  Major -General  Crawford,  recently


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          205

a  great  matter  to  have  those  doctrines  recognized  by  the  constituted  authorities
of  the  state.  Besides  this,  it  is  important  to  remark  that  the  Puritans  were  more
fanatical  than  superstitious.46  They  were  so  ignorant  of  the  real  principles  of
government  as  to  direct  penal  [laws  against  private  vices,  and.  to  suppose  that
immorality  could  be  stemmed  by  legislation.47  But  notwithstanding  this  serious
error,  they  always  resisted  the  aggressions  even  of  their  own  clergy  ;  and  the
destruction  of  the  old  episcopal  hierarchy,  though  perhaps  too  hastily  effected,
must  have  produced  many  beneficial  results.  When  the  great  party  by  whom
these  things  were  accomplished  was  at  length  overthrown,  the  progress  of  events
still  continued  to  tend  in  the  same  direction.  After  the  Restoration,  the  church,
though  reinstated  in  her  ancient  pomp,  had  evidently  lost  her  ancient  power.48
At  the  same  time,  the  new  king,  from  levity,  rather  than  from  reason,  despised  the
disputes  of  theologians,  and  treated  questions  of  religion  with  what  he  considered
a  philosophic  indifference.^  The  courtiers  followed  his  example,  and  thought
they  could  not  err  in  imitating  him,  whom  they  regarded  as  the  Lord's  anointed.
The  results  were  such  as  must  be  familiar  even  to  the  most  superficial  readers
of  English  literature.  That  grave  and  measured  scepticism  by  which  the  In-
dependents had  been  characterized,  lost  all  its  decorum  when  it  was  transplanted
into  the  ungenial  atmosphere  of  a  court.  The  men  by  whom  the  king  was  sur-
rounded were  unequal  to  the  difficulties  of  suspense  ;  and  they  attempted  to
fortify  their  doubts  by  the  blasphemous  expression  of  a  wild  and  desperate
infidelity.  With  scarcely  an  exception,  all  those  writers  who  were  most  favoured
by  Charles,  exhausted  the  devices  of  their  ribald  spirit  in  mocking  a  religion  of
the  nature  of  which  they  were  profoundly  ignorant.  These  impious  buffooneries
would,  by  themselves,  have  left  no  permanent  impression  on  the  age  ;  but  they

printed  in  Carlyle's  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  pp.  201,  202,  8vo,  1846.  In  it  Cromwell  writes,
"  Sir,  the  state,  in  choosing  men  to  serve  it,  takes  no  notice  of  their  opinions  ;  if  they  be
willing  faithfully  to  serve  it — that  satisfies."  See  additional  proof  in  Carwithen's  Hist.
of  the  Church  of  England,  vol.  ii.  pp.  245,  249.

46  No  one  can  understand  the  real  history  of  the  Puritans,  who  does  not  take  this  into
consideration.    In  the  present  Introduction,  it  is  impossible  to  discuss  so  large  a  subject ;
and  I  must  reserve  it  for  the  future  part  of  this  work,  in  which  the  history  of  England
will  be  specially  treated.      In  the  meantime,  I  may  mention  that  the  distinction  between
fanaticism  and  superstition  is  clearly  indicated,  but  not  analyzed,  by  Archbishop  Whately,
in  his  Errors  of  Romanism  traced  to  their  Origin  in  Human  Nature,  p.  49.     This  should
be  compared  with  Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.  81-89,  Edinb.  1826,  on  the
difference  between  enthusiasm  and  superstition  ;  a  difference  which  is  noticed,  but,  as
it  appears  to  me,  misunderstood,  by  Maclaine,  in  his  Additions  to  Mosheim's  Ecclesiast.
Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  38.

47  Compare  Harrington's  Observations  on  the  Statutes,  p.  143,  with  Burton's  Diary  of  thi
Parliaments  of  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  pp.  xcviii.  145,  392,  vol.  ii.  pp.  35,  229.     In  1650,  a  second
conviction  of  fornication  was  made  felony,  without  benefit  of  clergy  :    but  after  the
Restoration,  Charles  II.  and  his  friends  found  this  law  rather  inconvenient ;  so  it  was
repealed.     See  Blackstone's  Commentaries,  vol.  iv.  p.  65.

48  See  Life  of  Ken,  by  a  Layman,   edit.  1854,  vol.  i.  p.  51.     At  p.  129,  the  same  writer
says,  with  sorrow,  "  The  church  recovered  much  of  her  temporal  possessions,  but  not  her
spiritual  rule."     The  power  of  the  bishops  was  abridged  "  by  the  destruction  of  the  court
of  high -commission."     Short's  Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  p.  595.     See  also,  on  the
diminished  influence  of  the  church -of -England  clergy  after  the  Restoration,  Southey's
Life  of  Wesley,  vol.  i.  pp.  278,  279  ;  and  Watson's  Observations  on  the  Life  of  Wesley
pp.  129-131.

49  Buckingham  and  Halifax,  the  two  men  who  were  perhaps  best  acquainted  with
Charles  II.,  both  declared  that  he  was  a  deist.   Compare  Lingard's  Hist,  of  Engl.  vol.  viii.
p.  127,  with  Harris's  Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  v.  p.  55.     His  subsequent  conversion  to
Catholicism  is  exactly  analogous  to  the  increased  devotion  of  Louis  XIV.  during  the  latter
years  of  his  life.     In  both  cases,  superstition  was  the  natural  refuge  of  a  worn-out  and
discontented  libertine,  who  had  exhausted  all  the  resources   of  the  lowest  and  most
grovelling  pleasures.


206  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

deserve  attention,  because  they  were  the  corrupt  and  exaggerated  representatives
of  a  more  general  tendency.  They  were  the  unwholesome  offspring  of  that  spirit
of  disbelief,  and  of  that  daring  revolt  against  authority,  which  characterized
the  most  eminent  Englishmen  during  the  seventeenth  century.  It  was  this
which  caused  Lo*cke  to  be  an  innovator  in  his  philosophy,  and  an  Unitarian
in  his  creed.  It  was  this  which  made  Newton  a  Socinian  ;  which  forced  Milton
to  be  the  great  enemy  of  the  church ;  and  which  not  only  turned  the  poet  into  a
rebel,  but  tainted  with  Arianism  the  Paradise  Lost.  In  a  word,  it  was  the  same
contempt  for  tradition,  and  the  same  resolution  to  spurn  the  yoke,  which,  being
first  carried  into  philosophy  by  Bacon,  was  afterwards  carried  into  politics  by
Cromwell  ;  and  which,  during  that  very  generation,  was  enforced  in  theology
by  Chillingworth,  Owen,  and  Hales  ;  in  metaphysics  by  Hobbes  and  Glanvil  ;
and  in  the  theory  of  government  by  Harrington,  Sydney,  and  Locke.

The  progress  which  the  English  intellect  was  now  making  towards  shaking  off
ancient  superstitions,50  was  still  further  aided  by  the  extraordinary  zeal  dis-
played in  the  cultivation  of  the  physical  sciences.  This,  like  all  great  social
movements,  is  clearly  traceable  to  the  events  by  which  it  was  preceded.  It
was  partly  cause,  and  partly  effect,  of  the  increasing  incredulity  of  the  age.
The  scepticism  of  the  educated  classes  made  them  dissatisfied  with  those  long-
established  opinions  which  only  rested  on  unsupported  authority  ;  and  this  gave

50  One  of  the  most  curious  instances  of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  destruction  of  the  old
notions  respecting  witchcraft.  This  important  revolution  in  our  opinions  was  effected,
so  far  as  the  educated  classes  are  concerned,  between  the  Restoration  and  the  Revolution  :
that  is  to  say,  in  1660  the  majority  of  educated  men  still  believed  in  witchcraft ;  while
in  1688  the  majority  disbelieved  it.  In  1665,  the  old  orthodox  view  was  stated  by
Chief -Baron  Hale,  who,  on  a  trial  of  two  women  for  witchcraft,  said  to  the  jury  :  "  That
there  are  such  creatures  as  witches,  I  make  no  doubt  at  all ;  for,  first,  the  Scriptures  have
affirmed  so  much  ;  secondly,  the  wisdom  of  all  nations  hath  provided  laws  against  such
persons,  which  is  an  argument  of  their  confidence  of  such  a  crime."  Campbell's  Lives  of
the  Chief -Justices,  vol.  i.  pp.  565,  566.  This  reasoning  was  irresistible,  and  the  witches
were  hung  ;  but  the  change  in  public  opinion  began  to  affect  even  the  judges,  and  after
this  melancholy  exhibition  of  the  Chief-Baron  such  scenes  became  gradually  rarer  ;
though  Lord  Campbell  is  mistaken  in  supposing  (p.  563)  that  this  was  "  the  last  capital
conviction  in  England  for  the  crime  of  bewitching."  So  far  from  this,  three  persons  were
executed  at  Exeter  for  witchcraft  in  1682.  See  Hutchinson's  Historical  Essay  concerning
Witchcraft,  1720,  pp.  56,  57.  Hutchinson  says  :  "  I  suppose  these  are  the  last  three  that
have  been  hanged  in  England."  If,  however,  one  may  rely  upon  a  statement  made  by
Dr.  Parr,  two  witches  were  hung  at  Northampton  in  1705  ;  and  in  "  1712,  five  other
witches  suffered  the  same  fate  at  the  same  place."  Parr's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  182,  8vo,
1828.  This  is  the  more  shameful  because,  as  I  shall  hereafter  prove  from  the  literature
of  that  time,  a  disbelief  in  the  existence  of  witches. had  become  almost  universal  among
educated  men  ;  though  the  old  superstition  was  still  defended  on  the  judgment -seat
and  in  the  pulpit.  As  to  the  opinions  of  the  clergy,  compare  Cudworth's  Intellect.  Syst.
vol.  iii.  pp.  345,  348  ;  Vernon  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  pp.  302,  303  ;  Burt's  Letters  from  the
North  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  220,  221  ;  Wesley's  Journals,  pp.  602,  713.  Wesley,  who
had  more  influence  than  all  the  bishops  put  together,  says  :  "  It  is  true,  likewise,  that  the
English  in  general,  and,  indeed,  most  of  the  men  of  learning  in  Europe,  have  given  up  all
accounts  of  witches  and  apparitions  as  mere  old  wives'  fables.  I  am  sorry  for  it.  ...
The  giving  up  witchcraft  is,  in  effect,  giving  up  the  Bible.  .  .  .  But  I  cannot  give  up,
to  all  the  Deists  in  Great  Britain,  the  existence  of  witchcraft,  till  I  give  up  the  credit  of
all  history,  sacred  and  profane."

However  all  was  in  vain.  Every  year  diminished  the  old  belief;  and  in  1736,  a
generation  before  Wesley  had  recorded  these  opinions,  the  laws  against  witchcraft  were
repealed,  and  another  vestige  of  superstition  effaced  from  the  English  statute-book.
See  Harrington  on  the  Statutes,  p.  407  ;  Note  in  Burton's  Diary,  vol.  i.  p.  26  ;  Harris's
Life  of  Hardwicke,  vol.  i.  p.  307.

To  this  it  may  be  interesting  to  add  that  in  Spain  a  witch  was  burned  so  late  as  1781.
Ticknor's  Hist,  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  iii.  p.  238.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          207

rise  to  a  desire  to  ascertain  how  far  such  notions  might  be  verified  or  refuted  by
the  real  condition  of  things.  A  curious  instance  of  the  rapid  progress  of  this
spirit  may  be  found  in  the  works  of  an  author  who  was  one  of  the  most  eminent
among  the  mere  literary  men  of  his  time.  While  the  Civil  War  was  barely
decided,  and  three  years  before  the  execution  of  the  king,  Sir  Thomas  Browne
published  his  celebrated  work,  called  Inquiries  into  Vulgar  and  Common  Errors.51
This  able  and  learned  production  has  the  merit  of  anticipating  some  of  those
results  which  more  modern  inquirers  have  obtained  ;52  but  it  is  chiefly  remarkable
as  being  the  first  systematic  and  deliberate  onslaught  ever  made  in  England  upon
those  superstitious  fancies  which  were  then  prevalent  respecting  the  external
world.  And  what  is  still  more  interesting  is  that  the  circumstances  under  which
it  appeared  made  it  evident  that  while  the  learning  and  genius  of  the  author
belong  to  himself,  the  scepticism  which  he  displayed  respecting  popular  belief
was  forced  on  him  by  the  pressure  of  the  age.

In  or  about  1633,  when  the  throne  was  still  occupied  by  a  superstitious  prince  ;
when  the  Church  of  England  was  at  the  height  of  her  apparent  power  ;  and  when
men  were  incessantly  persecuted  for  their  religious  opinions,  this  same  Sir
Thomas  Browne  wrote  his  Religio  Medici,™  in  which  we  find  all  the  qualities  of
his  later  work,  except  the  scepticism.  Indeed,  in  the  Religio  Medici,  there  is
shown  a  credulity  that  must  have  secured  the  sympathy  of  those  classes  which
were  then  dominant.  Of  all  the  prejudices  which  at  that  time  were  deemed
an  essential  part  of  the  popular  creed,  there  was  not  one  which  Browne  ventured
to  deny.  He  announces  his  belief  in  the  philosopher's  stone  ;  54  in  spirits,  and
tutelary  angels  : 55  and  in  palmistry.56  He  not  only  peremptorily  affirms  the
reality  of  witches,  but  he  says  that  those  who  deny  their  existence  are  not  merely
infidels,  but  atheists.5?  He  carefully  tells  us  that  he  reckons  his  nativity,
not  from  his  birth,  but  from  his  baptism  ;  for  before  he  was  baptized  he  could
not  be  said  to  exist.58  To  these  touches  of  wisdom  he  moreover  adds,  that  the
more  improbable  any  proposition  is,  the  greater  his  willingness  to  assent  to  it  ;
but  that  when  a  thing  is  actually  impossible,  he  is  on  that  very  account  prepared
to  believe  it.59

Such  were  the  opinions  put  forth  by  Sir  Thomas  Browne  in  the  first  of  the  two
great  works  he  presented  to  the  world.  But  in  his  Inquiries  into  Vulgar  Errors,  there
is  displayed  a  spirit  so  entirely  different,  that  if  it  were  not  for  the  most  decisive
evidence"  we  could  hardly  believe  it  to  be  written  by  the  same  man.  The  truth,
however,  is  that  during  the  twelve  years  which  elapsed  between  the  two  works,

51  The  first  edition  was  published  in  1646.     Works  of  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  vol.  ii.
p.  163.

52  See  the  notes  in  Mr.  Wilkin's  edition  of  Browne's  Works,  Lond.  1836,  vol.  ii.  pp.  284,
360,  361.

63  The  precise  date  is  unknown  ;  but  Mr.  Wilkin  supposes  that  it  was  written  "be-
tween the  years  1633  and  1635."     Preface  to  Religio  Medici,  in  Browne's  Works,  vol.  ii.
p.  iv.

64  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  58.
55  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  47.

66  Or,  as  he  calls  it,  "  chiromancy."     Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  89.

67  "  For  my  part,  I  have  ever  believed,  and  do  now  know,  that  there  are  witches.
They  that  doubt  of  these,  do  not  only  deny  them,  but  spirits  ;  and  are  obliquely,  and
upon  consequence,  a  sort,  not  of  infidels,  but  atheists."     Ibid.  vol.  ii.  pp.  43,  44.

"  From  this  I  do  compute  or  calculate  my  nativity."  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  64.
59  Religio  Medici,  sec.  ix.  in  Browne's  Works,  vol.  ii.  pp.  13,  14  ;  unfortunately  too  long
to  extract.  This  is  the  "  credo  quia  impossibile  est,"  originally  one  of  Tertullian's
absurdities,  and  once  quoted  in  the  House  of  Lords  by  the  Duke  of  Argyle  as  "  the
ancient  religious  maxim."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xi.  p.  802.  Compare  the  sarcastic  remark
on  this  maxim  in  the  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding,  book  iv.  ch.  xviii.  Locke's
Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  271.  It  was  the  spirit  embodied  in  this  sentence  which  supplied  Celsus
with  some  formidable  arguments  against  the  Fathers.  Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,
vol.  i.  pp.  227,  228.


208  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

there  was  completed  that  vast  social  and  intellectual  revolution,  of  which  the
overthrow  of  the  church  and  the  execution  of  the  king  were  but  minor  incidents.
We  know  from  the  literature,  from  the  private  correspondence,  and  from  the
public  acts  of  that  time,  how  impossible  it  was,  even  for  the  strongest  minds,  to
escape  the  effects  of  the  general  intoxication.  No  wonder,  then,  that  Browne,
who  certainly  was  inferior  to  several  of  his  contemporaries,  should  have  been
affected  by  a  movement  which  they  were  unable  to  resist.  It  would  have  been
strange  indeed  if  he  alone  had  remained  uninfluenced  by  that  sceptical  spirit,
which,  because  it  had  been  arbitrarily  repressed,  had  now  broken  all  bounds,
and  in  the  reaction  soon  swept  away  those  institutions  which  vainly  attempted
to  stop  its  course.

It  is  in  this  point  of  view  that  a  comparison  of  the  two  works  becomes  highly
interesting,  and,  indeed,  very  important.  In  this,  his  later  production,  we  hear
no  more  about  believing  things  because  they  are  impossible  ;  but  we  are  told  of
"  the  two  great  pillars  of  truth,  experience  and  solid  reason. "60  We  are  also
reminded  that  one  main  cause  of  error  is  "  adherence  unto  authority  ; "  61  that
another  is  "neglect  of  inquiry  ;"  02  ancj;  strange  to  say,  that  a  third  is
"  credulity."  &  All  this  was  not  very  consistent  with  the  old  theological  spirit  ;
and  we  need  not,  therefore,  be  surprised  that  Browne  not  only  exposes  some  of
the  innumerable  blunders  of  the  Fathers,^  but,  after  speaking  of  errors  in
general,  curtly  adds  :  "  Many  others  there  are,  which  we  resign  unto  divinity,
and  perhaps  deserve  not  controversy."  65

The  difference  between  these  two  works  is  no  bad  measure  of  the  rapidity
of  that  vast  movement  which,  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  was
seen  in  every  branch  of  practical  and  speculative  life.  After  the  death  of
Bacon,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  Englishmen  was  certainly  Boyle,  who,  if
compared  with  his  contemporaries,  may  be  said  to  rank  immediately  below
Newton,  though,  of  course,  very  inferior  to  him  as  an  original  thinker.66  With
the  additions  he  made  to  our  knowledge  we  are  not  immediately  concerned  ;
but  it  may  be  mentioned  that  he  was  the  first  who  instituted  exact  experiments
into  the  relation  between  colour  and  heat,^7  and  by  this  means  not  only  ascer-
tained some  very  important  facts,  but  laid  a  foundation  for  that  union  between
optics  and  thermotics  which,  though  not  yet  completed,  now  merely  waits  for
some  great  philosopher  to  strike  out  a  generalization  large  enough  to  cover  both,
and  thus  fuse  the  two  sciences  into  a  single  study.  It  is  also  to  Boyle,  more
than  to  any  other  Englishman,  that  we  owe  the  science  of  hydrostatics,  in  the
state  in  which  we  now  possess  it.68  He  is  the  original  discoverer  of  that  beautiful

60  Inquiries  into  Vulgar  and  Common  Errors,  book  iii.  chap,  xxviii.  in  Browne's  Works  ,
vol.  ii.  p.  534.

61  Ibid,  book  i.  chap.  vii.  vol.  ii.  p.  225.

65   "  A  supinity,  or  neglect  of  inquiry."     Ibid,  book  i.  chap.  v.  vol.  ii.  p.  211.

63  "  A  third  cause  of  common  errors  is  the  credulity  of  men."     Book  i.  chap.  v.  vol.  ii.
p.  208.

64  See  two  amusing  instances  in  vol.  ii.  pp.  267,  438.

Vulgar  and  Common  Errors,  book  vii.  chap,  xi.,  in  Browne's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  326.

66AMonk  (Life  of  Bentley,  vol.  i.  p.  37)  says  that  Boyle's  discoveries  "have  placed
his  name  in  a  rank  second  only  to  that  of  Newton  ;  "  and  this,  I  believe,  is  true,  not-
withstanding the  immense  superiority  of  Newton.

67  Compare  Powell  on  Radiant  Heat  (Brit.  Assoc.  vol.  i.),  p.  287,  with  Lloyd's  Report
on  Physical  Optics,  1834,  p.  338.  For  the  remarks  on  colours,  see  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  ii.
pp.  1-40  ;  and  for  the  account  of  his  experiments,  pp.  41-80  ;  and  a  slight  notice  in
Brewster's  Life  of  Newton,  vol.  i.  pp.  155,  156,  236.  It  is,  I  think,  not  generally  known,
that  Power  is  said  to  be  indebted  to  Boyle  for  originating  some  of  his  experiments  on
colours.  See  a  letter  from  Hooke,  in  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  v.  p.  533.

38  Dr.  Whewell  (Bridgewater  Treatise,  p.  266)  well  observes,  that  Boyle  and  Pascal
are  to  hydrostatics  what  Galileo  is  to  mechanics,  and  Copernicus,  Kepler,  and  Newton
to  astronomy.  See  also  on  Boyle,  as  the  founder  of  hydrostatics,  Thomson's  Hist,  of
the  Royal  Society,  pp.  397,  398  ;  and  his  Hist,  of  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  204.


THE  HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          20$

law,  so  fertile  in  valuable  results,  according  to  which  the  elasticity  of  air  varies
as  its  density.69  And,  in  the  opinion  of  one  of  the  most  eminent  modern
naturalists,  it  was  Boyle  who  opened  up  those  chemical  inquiries  which  went
on  accumulating  until,  a  century  later,  they  supplied  the  means  by  which
Lavoisier  and  his  contemporaries  fixed  the  real  basis  of  chemistry,  and  enabled
it  for  the  first  time  to  take  its  proper  stand  among  those  sciences  that  deal  with
the  external  world.70

The  application  of  these  discoveries  to  the  happiness  of  Man,  and  particularly
to  what  may  be  called  the  material  interests  of  civilization,  will  be  traced  in
another  part  of  this  work  ;  but  what  I  now  wish  to  observe  is  the  way  in  which
such  investigations  harmonized  with  the  movement  I  am  attempting  to
describe.  In  the  whole  of  his  physical  inquiries,  Boyle  constantly  insists  upon
two  fundamental  principles  :  namely,  the  importance  of  individual  experiments,
and  the  comparative  unimportance  of  the  facts  which,  on  these  subjects,  anti-
quity has  handed  down.71  These  are  the  two  great  keys  to  his  method  ;  they  are
the  views  which  he  inherited  from  Bacon,  and  they  are  also  the  views  which  have
been  held  by  every  man  who,  during  the  last  two  centuries,  has  added  anything
of  moment  to  the  stock  of  human  knowledge.  First  to  doubt,72  then  to  inquire,

69  This  was  discovered  by  Boyle  about  1650,  and  confirmed  by  Mariotte  in  1676.
See  WhewelVs  Hist,  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  vol.  ii.  pp.  557,  588  ;  Thomson's  Hist,  of
Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  215  ;  Turner's  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  pp.  41,  200  ;  Brande's  Chemistry,
vol.  i.  p.  363.     This  law  has  been  empirically  verified  by  the  French  Institute,  and  found
to  hold  good  for  a  pressure  even  of  twenty -seven  atmospheres.     See  Challis  on  the
Mathematical  Theory  of  Fluids,  in  Sixth  Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.  p.  226  ;  and  HerscheVs  Nat.
Philos.  p.  231.     Although  Boyle  preceded  Mariotte  by  a  quarter  of  a  century,  the  dis-
covery is  rather  unfairly  called  the  law  of  Boyle  and  Mariotte  ;  while  foreign  writers,
refining  on  this,  frequently  omit  the  name  of  Boyle  altogether,  and  term  it  the  law  of
Mariotte  !     See,  for  instance,  Liebig's  Letters  on  Chemistry,  p.  126  ;  Monteil,  Divers  Etats,
vol.  viii.  p.  122  ;  Kaemtz's  Meteorology,  p.  236  ;  Comte,  Philos.  Pos.  vol.  i.  pp.  5^3>  645*
vol.  ii.  pp.  484,  615  ;  Pouillet,  Elemens  de  Physique,  vol.  i.  p.  339,  vol.  ii.  pp.  58,  183.

70  "  L'un  des  createurs  de  la  physique  experimentale,  1'illustre  Robert  Boyle,  avait
aussi  reconnu,  des  le  milieu  du  dix-septieme  siecle,  une  grande  partie  des  faits  qui  servent
aujourd'hui  de  base  a  cette  chimie  nouvelle."     Cuvier,  Progres  des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  p.  3°'
The  "  aussi  "  refers  to  Rey.     See  also  Cuvier,  Hist,  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  part  ii.  pp.
322,  346-349.     A  still  more  recent  writer  says  that  Boyle  "  stood,  in  fact,  on  the  very
brink  of  the  pneumatic,  chemistry  of  Priestley  ;  he  had  in  his  hand  the  key  to  the  great
discovery  of  Lavoisier."     Johnston  on  Dimorphous  Bodies,  in  Reports  of  Brit.  Assoc.
vol.  vi.  p.  163.     See  further  respecting  Boyle,  Robin  et  Verdeil,  Chimie  Anatomique,
Paris,  1853,  vol.  i.  pp.  576,  577,  579,  vol.  ii.  p.  24  ;  and  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,
vol.  iv.  p.  177.

71  This  disregard  of  ancient  authority  appears  so  constantly  in  his  works,  that  it  is
difficult  to  choose  among  innumerable  passages  which  might  be  quoted.       I  will  select
one  which  strikes  me  as  well  expressed,  and  is  certainly  very  characteristic.     In  his
Free  Inquiry  into  the  vulgarly  received  Notion  of  Nature,  he  says  (Boyle's  Works,  vol.  iv.
P-  359)»,"  For  I  am  wont  to  judge  of  opinions  as  of  coins  :  I  consider  much  less,  in  any
one  that  I  am  to  receive,  whose  inscription  it  bears,  than  what  metal  it  is  made  of.
It  is  indifferent  enough  to  me  whether  it  was  stamped  many  years  or  ages  since,  or  came
but  yesterday  from  the  mint."     In  other  places  he  speaks  of   the  "  schoolmen  "  and
"  gownmen  "  with  a  contempt  not  much  inferior  to  that  expressed  by  Locke  himself.

72  In  his  Considerations  touching  Experimental  Essays,  he  says  (Boyle's  Works,  voL  i.
p.  197),  "  Perhaps  you  will  wonder,  Pyrophilus,  that  in  almost  every  one  of  the  following
essays  I  should  speak  so  doubtingly,  and  use  so  often  perhaps,  it  seems,  it  is  not  im-
probable, and  such  other  expressions  as  argue  a  diffidence  of  the  truth  of  the  opinions
I  incline  to,"  &c.     Indeed,  this  spirit  is  seen  at  every  turn.     Thus,  his  Essay  on  Crystals,
which,  considering  the  then  state  of  knowledge,  is  a  remarkable  production,  is  entitled
"  Doubts  and  Experiments  touching  the  curious  Figures  of  Salts."     Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  488.
It  is   therefore  with   good  reason  that  M.  Humboldt   terms   him   "  the  cautious   and
doubting  Robert  Boyle."     Humboldt's  Cosmos,  vol.  ii.  p.  730.

14


210  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  then  to  discover,  has  been  the  process  universally  followed  by  our  great
teachers.  So  strongly  did  Boyle  feel  this,  that  though  he  was  an  eminently
religious  man,73  he  gave  to  the  most  popular  of  his  scientific  works  the  title  of
The  Sceptical  Chemist  ;  meaning  to  intimate  that  until  men  were  sceptical  con-
cerning the  chemistry  of  their  own  time,  it  would  be  impossible  that  they  should
advance  far  in  the  career  which  lay  before  them.  Nor  can  we  fail  to  observe
that  this  remarkable  work,  in  which  such  havoc  was  made  withhold  notions,  was
published  in  1661,™  the  year  after  the  accession  of  Charles  II.,  in  whose  reign
the  spread  of  incredulity  was  indeed  rapid,  since  it  was  seen  not  only  among
the  intellectual  classes,  but  even  among  the  nobles  and  personal  friends  of  the
king.  It  is  true  that  in  that  rank  of  society  it  assumed  an  offensive  and  degener-
ate form.  But  the  movement  must  have  been  one  of  no  common  energy,  which,
in  so  early  a  stage,  could  thus  penetrate  the  recesses  of  the  palace,  and  excite
the  minds  of  the  courtiers  ;  a  lazy  and  feeble  race,  who  from  the  frivolity  of  their
habits  are  under  ordinary  circumstances  predisposed  to  superstition,  and  pre-
pared to  believe  whatever  the  wisdom  of  their  fathers  has  bequeathed  to  them.
In  everything  this  tendency  was  now  seen.  Everything  marked  a  growing
determination  to  subordinate  old  notions  to  new  inquiries.  At  the  very  moment
when  Boyle  was  prosecuting  his  labours,  Charles  II.  incorporated  the  Royal
Society,  which  was  formed  with  the  avowed  object  of  increasing  knowledge  by
direct  experiment.75  And  it  is  well  worthy  of  remark  that  the  charter  now
first  granted  to  this  celebrated  institution  declares  that  its  object  is  the  extension
of  natural  knowledge,  as  opposed  to  that  which  is  supernatural.76

73  On  the  sincere  Christianity  of  Boyle,  compare  Burnefs  Lives  and  Characters,  edit.
Jebb}  1833,  pp.  351—360  ;  Life  of  Ken,  by  a  Layman,  vol.  i.  pp.  32,  33  ;  WhewelVs  Bridge-
water  Treatise,  p.  273.     He  made  several  attempts  to  reconcile  the  scientific  method
with  the  defence  of  established  religious  opinions.     See  one  of  the  best  instances  of  this,
in  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  v.  pp.  38,  39.

74  The  Sceptical  Chemist  is  in  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  290-371.     It  went  through
two  editions  in  the  author's  lifetime,  an  unusual  success  for  a  book  of  that  kind.     Boyle's
Works,  vol.  i.  p.  375,  vol.  iv.  p.  89,  vol.  v.  p.  345.     I  find,  from  a  letter  written  in  1696
(Fairfax  Correspondence,  vol.  iv.  p.  344),  that  Boyle's  works  were  then  becoming  scarce,
and  that  there  was  an  intention  of  reprinting  the  whole  of  them.       In  regard  to   the
Sceptical  Chemist,  it  was  so  popular  that  it  attracted  the  attention  of  Monconys,  a  French
traveller,  who  visited  London  in  1663,  and  from  whom  we  learn  that  it  was  to  be  bought
for  four  shillings.  "  pour  quatre  chelins."       Voyages  de  Monconys,  vol.  iii.  p.  67,  edit-
1695  ;  a  book  containing  some  very  curious  facts  respecting  London  in  the  reign  of
Charles  II.  ;  but,  so  far  as  I   am  aware,  not  quoted  by  any  English  historian.     In
SprengeVs  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  v.  pp.  78-9,  there  is  a  summary  of  the  views  advo-
cated in  the  Sceptical  Chemist,  respecting  which  Sprengel  says,  "  Ce  fut  cependant  aussi
en  Angleterre  que  s'eleverent  les  premiers  doutes  sur    1'exactitude    des    explications
chimiques."

75  "  From  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  Royal  Society,  the  objects  of  their  atten-
tion were  necessarily  unlimited.     The  physical  sciences,  however,  or  those  which  are
promoted  by  experiment,  were  their  declared  objects  ;  and  experiment  was  the  method
which  they  professed  to  follow  in  accomplishing  their  purpose."     Thomson's  Hist,  of  the
Royal  Society,  p.  6.     When  the  society  was  first  instituted,  experiments  were  so  unusual
that  there  was  a  difficulty  of  finding  the  necessary  workmen  in  London.     See  a  curious
passage  in  Weld's  Hist,  of  the  Royal  Society,  1848,  vol.  ii.  p.  88.

76  Dr  Paris  (Life  of  Sir  H.  Davy,  1831,  vol.  ii.  p.  178)  says,  "  The  charter  of  the  Royal
Society  states,  that  it  was  established  for  the  improvement  of  natural  science.     This
epithet  natural  was  originally  intended  to  imply  a  meaning,  of  which  very  few  persons,
I  believe,  are  aware.     At  the  period  of  the  establishment  of   the  society,  the  arts  of
witchcraft  and  divination  were  very  extensively  encouraged  ;  and  the  word  natural
was  therefore  introduced  in  contradistinction  to  supernatural."     The  charters  granted
by  Charles  II.  are  printed  in  Weld's  History  of  the  Royal  Society,  vol.  ii.  pp.  481-521.
Evelyn  (Diary,  13  Aug.  1662,  vol.  ii.  p.  195)  mentions  that  the  object  of  the  Royal
Society  was  "  natural  knowledge."     See  also  Aubrey's  Letters  and  Lives,  vol.  ii.  p.  358  ;


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT         211

It  is  easy  to  imagine  with  what  terror  and  disgust  these  things  were  viewed  by
those  inordinate  admirers  of  antiquity  who,  solely  occupied  in  venerating  past
ages,  are  unable  either  to  respect  the  present  or  hope  for  the  future.  These  great
obstructors  of  mankind  played,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  the  same  part  as  they
play  in  our  own  day,  rejecting  every  novelty,  and  therefore  opposing  every
improvement.  The  angry  contest  which  arose  between  the  two  parties,  and  the
hostility  directed  against  the  Royal  Society,  as  the  first  institution  in  which  the
idea  of  progress  was  distinctly  embodied,  are  among  the  most  instructive  parts
of  our  history,  and  on  another  occasion  I  shall  relate  them  at  considerable
length.  At  present  it  is  enough  to  say  that  the  reactionary  party,  though  led
by  an  overwhelming  majority  of  the  clergy,  was  entirely  defeated  ;  as  indeed
was  to  be  expected,  seeing  that  their  opponents  had  on  their  side  nearly  all  the
intellect  of  the  country,  and  were  moreover  reinforced  by  such  aid  as  the  court
could  bestow.  The  progress  was,  in  truth,  so  rapid  as  to  carry  away  with  it  some
of  the  ablest  members  even  of  the  ecclesiastical  profession  ;  their  love  of  know-
ledge proving  too  strong  for  the  old  traditions  in  which  they  had  been  bred.  But
these  were  exceptional  cases,  and,  speaking  generally,  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  the
reign  of  Charles  II.  the  antagonism  between  physical  science  and  the  theological
spirit  was  such  as  to  induce  nearly  the  whole  of  the  clergy  to  array  themselves
against  the  science,  and  seek  to  bring  it  into  discredit.  Nor  ought  we  to  be  sur-
prised that  they  should  have  adopted  this  course.  That  inquisitive  and  experi-
mental spirit  which  they  wished  to  check  was  not  only  offensive  to  their  pre-
judices, but  it  was  also  detrimental  to  their  power.  For  in  the  first  place,  the
mere  habit  of  cultivating  physical  science  taught  men  to  require  a  severity  of
proof  which  it  was  soon  found  that  the  clergy  were,  in  their  own  department,
unable  to  supply.  And  in  the  second  place,  the  additions  made  to  physical
knowledge  opened  new  fields  of  thought,  and  thus  tended  still  further  to  divert
attention  from  ecclesiastical  topics.  Both  these  effects  would  of  course  be
limited  to  the  comparatively  few  persons  who  were  interested  in  scientific  in-
quiries :  it  is,  however,  to  be  observed,  that  the  ultimate  results  of  such  inquiries
must  have  been  extended  over  a  far  wider  surface.  This  may  be  called  their
secondary  influence  ;  and  the  way  in  which  it  operated  is  well  worth  our  attention,
because  an  acquaintance  with  it  will  go  far  to  explain  the  reason  of  that  marked
opposition  which  has  always  existed  between  superstition  and  knowledge.

It  is  evident  that  a  nation  perfectly  ignorant  of  physical  laws  will  refer  to
supernatural  causes  all  the  phenomena  by  which  it  is  surrounded.77  But  so
soon  as  natural  science  begins  to  do  its  work,  there  are  introduced  the  elements
of  a  great  change.  Each  successive  discovery,  by  ascertaining  the  law  that
governs  certain  events,  deprives  them  of  that  apparent  mystery  in  which  they

Pulteney's  Hist,  of  Botany,  vol.  ii.  pp.  97,  98  ;  and  on  the  distinction  thus  established
in  the  popular  mind  between  natural  and  supernatural,  compare  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  ii.
P-  455.  vol.  iv.  pp.  288,  359.

77  The  speculative  view  of  this  tendency  has  been  recently  illustrated  in  the  most  com-
prehensive manner  by  M.  Auguste  Comte,  in  his  Philosophic  Positive  ;  and  his  conclusions
in  regard  to  the  earliest  stage  of  the  human  mind  are  confirmed  by  everything  we  know
of  barbarous  nations  ;  and  they  are  also  confirmed,  as  he  has  decisively  proved,  by  the
history  of  physical  science.  In  addition  to  the  facts  he  has  adduced,  I  may  mention  that
the  history  of  geology  supplies  evidence  analogous  to  that  which  he  has  collected  from
other  departments.

A  popular  notion  of  the  working  of  this  belief  in  supernatural  causation  may  be  seen
in  a  circumstance  related  by  Combe.  He  says  that  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century  the  country  west  of  Edinburgh  was  so  unhealthy  "  that  every  spring  the  farmers
and  their  servants  were  seized  with  fever  and  ague."  As  long  as  the  cause  of  this  was
unknown,  "  these  visitations  were  believed  to  be  sent  by  Providence  ;  "  but  after  a  time
the  land  was  drained,  the  ague  disappeared,  and  the  inhabitants  perceived  that  what  they
had  believed  to  be  supernatural  was  perfectly  natural,  and  that  the  cause  was  the  state
of  the  land,  not  the  intervention  of  the  Deity.  Combe's  Constitution  of  Man,  Edinb.  1847,
p.  156.


212  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  formerly  involved.78  The  love  of  the  marvellous  becomes  proportion-
ably  diminished  ;  and  when  any  science  has  made  such  progress  as  to  enable  those
who  are  acquainted  with  it  to  foretell  the  events  with  which  it  deals,  it  is  clear
that  the  whole  of  those  events  are  at  once  withdrawn  from  the  jurisdiction  of
supernatural,  and  brought  under  the  authority  of  natural  powers.79  The  business
of  physical  philosophy  is,  to  explain  external  phenomena  with  a  view  to  their
prediction  ;  and  every  successful  prediction  which  is  recognized  by  the  people,
causes  a  disruption  of  one  of  those  links  which,  as  it  were,  bind  the  imagination  to
the  occult  and  invisible  world.  Hence  it  is  that,  supposing  other  things  equal,
the  superstition  of  a  nation  must  always  bear  an  exact  proportion  to  the  extent
of  its  physical  knowledge.  This  may  be  in  some  degree  verified  by  the  ordinary
experience  of  mankind.  For  if  we  compare  the  different  classes  of  society,  we
shall  find  that  they  are  superstitious  in  proportion  as  the  phenomena  with  which
they  are  brought  in  contact  have  or  have  not  been  explained  by  natural  laws.
The  credulity  of  sailors  is  notorious,  and  every  literature  contains  evidence  of  the
multiplicity  of  their  superstitions,  and  of  the  tenacity  with  which  they  cling  to
them.80  This  is  perfectly  explicable  by  the  principle  I  have  laid  down.  Meteoro-
logy has  not  yet  been  raised  to  a  science  ;  and  the  laws  which  regulate  winds  and
storms  being  in  consequence  still  unknown,  it  naturally  follows  that  the  class
of  men  most  exposed  to  their  dangers  should  be  precisely  the  class  which

78  I  say  apparent  mystery,  because  it  does  not  at  all  lessen  the  real  mystery.     But  this
does  not  affect  the  accuracy  of  my  remark,  inasmuch  as  the  people  at  large  never  enter
into  such  subtleties  as  the  difference  between  Law  and  Cause  ;  a  difference,  indeed,  which
is  so  neglected,  that  it  is  often  lost  sight  of  even  in  scientific  books.     All  that  the  people
know  is,  that  events  which  they  once  believed  to  be  directly  controlled  by  the  Deity,  and
modified  by  Him,  are  not  only  foretold  by  the  human  mind,  but  are  altered  by  human
interference.     The  attempts  which  Paley  and  others  have  made  to  solve  this  mystery  by
rising  from  the  laws  to  the  cause,  are  evidently  futile,  because  to  the  eye  of  reason  the
solution  is  as  incomprehensible  as  the  problem  ;  and  the  arguments  of  the  natural  theo-
logians, in  so  far  as  they  are  arguments,  must  depend  on  reason.     As  Mr.  Newman  truly
says,  "  A  God  uncaused  and  existing  from  eternity,  is  to  the  full  as  incomprehensible
as  a  world  uncaused  and  existing  from  eternity.     We  must  not  reject  the  latter  theory  as
incomprehensible  ;  for  so  is  every  other  possible  theory."      Newman's  Natural  History
of  the  Soul,  1849,  p.  36.     The  truth  of  this  conclusion  is  unintentionally  confirmed  by
the  defence  of  the  old  method,  which  is  set  up  by  Dr.  Whewell  in  his  Bridge-water  Treatise,
pp.  262-5  ;  because  the  remarks  made  by  that  able  writer  refer  to  men  who,  from  their
vast  powers,  were  most  likely  to  rise  to  that  transcendental  view  of  religion  which  is
slowly  but  steadily  gaining  ground  among  us.     Kant,  probably  the  deepest  thinker  of  the
eighteenth  century,  clearly  saw  that  no  arguments  drawn  from  the  external  world  could
prove  the  existence  of  a  First  Cause.     See,  among  other  passages,  two  particularly
remarkable  in  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  478,  481,  on  "  der
physikotheologische  Beweis."

79  This  is  tersely  expressed  by  M.  Lamennais  :  "  Pourquoi  les  corps  gravitent-ils  les
uns  vers  les  autres  ?     Parceque  Dieu  1'a  voulu,  disaient  les  anciens.     Parceque  les  corps
s'attirent,  dit  la  science."  Maury,  Legendes  du  Moyen  Age,  p.  33.     See  to  the  same  effect
Mackay's  Religious  Development,  1850,  vol.  i.  pp.  5,  30,  31,  and  elsewhere.     See  also  a
partial  statement  of  the  antithesis  in  Copleston's  Inquiry  into  Necessity  and  Predestination,
p.  49  ;  an  ingenious  but  overrated  book.

80  I  much  regret  that  I  did  not  collect  proof  of  this  at  an  earlier  period  of  my  reading.
But  having  omitted  taking  the  requisite  notes,  I  can  only  refer,  on  the  superstition  of
sailors,  to  Heber's  Journey  through  India,  vol.  i.  p.  423  ;  Richardson's  Travels  in  the  Sahara,
vol.  i.  p.  ii  ;  Burckhardfs  Travels  in  Arabia,  vol.  ii.  p.  347  ;  Davis' s  Chinese,  vol.  iii.  pp.  16,
17  ;  Travels  of  Ibn  Batuta  in  the  Fourteenth  Century,  p.  43;  Journal  of  Asiat.  Soc.  vol.  i.
p.  9  ;  Works  of  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  vol.  i.  p.  130  ;  Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  iv.  p.  566;
Burnes's  Travels  into  Bokhara,  vol.  iii.  p.  53  ;  Leigh  Hunt's  Autobiography,  1850,  vol.  ii.
p.  255  ;  Cumberland's  Memoirs,  1807,  vol.  i.  pp.  422-425  ;  Walsh's  Brazil,  vol.  i.  pp.  96, 97  ;
Richardson's  Arctic  Expedition,  vol.  i.  p.  93  ;  Holcroft's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  p.  207,  vol.  iii.
p.  197.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          213

is  most  superstitious.81  On  the  other  hand,  soldiers  live  upon  an  element
much  more  obedient  to  man,  'and  they  are  less  liable  than  sailors  to  those  risks
which  defy  the  calculations  of  science.  Soldiers,  therefore,  have  fewer  induce-
ments to  appeal  to  supernatural  interference  ;  and  it  is  universally  observed,
that  as  a  body  they  are  less  superstitious  than  sailors.  If,  again,  we  compare
agriculturists  with  manufacturers,  we  shall  see  the  operation  of  the  same  principle.
To  the  cultivators  of  land,  one  of  the  most  important  circumstances  is  the  weather,
which,  if  it  turn  out  unfavourable,  may  at  once  defeat  all  their  calculations.  But
science  not  having  yet  succeeded  in  discovering  the  laws  of  rain,  men  are  at
present  unable  to  foretell  it  for  any  considerable  period  ;  the  inhabitant  of  the
-country  is  therefore  driven  to  believe  that  it  is  the  result  of  supernatural  agency,
and  we  still  see  the  extraordinary  spectacle  of  prayers  offered  up  in  our  churches
for  dry  weather  or  for  wet  weather  ;  a  superstition  which  to  future  ages  will
appear  as  childish  as  the  feelings  of  pious  awe  with  which  our  fathers  regarded
the  presence  of  a  comet,  or  the  approach  of  an  eclipse.  We  are  now  acquainted
with  the  laws  which  determine  the  movements  of  comets  and  eclipses  ;  and  as  we
are  able  to  predict  their  appearance,  we  have  ceased  to  pray  that  we  may  be
preserved  from  them.82  But  because  our  researches  into  the  phenomena  of
rain  happen  to  have  been  less  successful,83  we  resort  to  the  impious  contrivance

81  Andokides,  when  accused  before  the  dikastery  at  Athens,  said,  "No,  dikasts  ;  the
dangers  of  accusation  and  trial  are  human,  but  the  dangers  encountered  at  sea  are  divine."
Grote's  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  xi.  p.  252.      Thus,  too,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  dangers
of  the  whale-fishery  stimulated  the  superstition  of  the  Anglo-Saxons.      See  Kemble's
Saxons  in  England,  vol.  i.  pp.  390,  391.     Erman,  who  mentions  the  dangerous  navigation
of  the  Lake  of  Baikal,  says,  "  There  is  a  saying  at  Irkutsk,  that  it  is  only  upon  the  Baikal,
in  the  autumn,  that  a  man  learns  to  pray  from  his  heart."     Erman' s  Travels  in  Siberia,
vol.  ii.  p.  1 86.

82  In  Europe,  in  the  tenth  century,  an  entire  army  fled  before  one  of  those  appearances
which  would  now  scarcely  terrify  a  child  :  "  Toute  1'armee  d'Othon  se  dispersa  subite-
ment  a  1' apparition  d'une  eclipse  de  soleil,  qui  la  remplit  de  terreur,  et  qui  fut  regardee
comme  1'annonce  du  malheur  qu'on  attendait  depuis  long -temps."     Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la
Medecine,  vol.  ii.  p.  368.     The  terror  inspired  by  eclipses  was  not  finally  destroyed  before
the  eighteenth  century  ;  and  in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century  they  still  caused
great  fear  both  in  France  and  in  England.     See  Evelyn's  Diary,  vol.  ii.  p.  52,  vol.  iii.
p.  372  ;  Carlyle's  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.  p.  366  ;  Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  iii.  p.  36.     Compare
Voyages  de  Monconys,  vol.  v.  p.  104,  with  Hare's  Guesses  at  Truth,  2nd.  series,  pp.  194, 195.
There  probably  never  has  been  an  ignorant  nation  whose  superstition  has  not  been  excited
by  eclipses.     For  evidence  of  the  universality  of  this  feeling,  see  Symes's  Embassy  to  Ava,
vol.  ii.  p.  296  ;  Raffles'  Hist,  of  Java,  vol.  i.  p.  530  ;  Southey's  Hist,  of  Brazil,  vol.  i.  p.  354,
vol.  ii.  p.  371  ;  Marsden's  Hist,  of  Sumatra,  p.  159  ;  Niebuhr,  Description  de  V Arabic,
p.  105  ;  Moffat's  Southern  Africa,  p.  337  ;  Mungo  Park's  Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  414  ;  Moor-
crofts  Travels  in  the  Himalayan  Provinces,  vol.  ii.  p.  4  ;  Crawfurd's  Hist,  of  the  Indian
Archipelago,  vol.  i.  p.  305  ;  Ellis's  Polynesian  Researches,  vol.  i.  p.  331  ;  Mackay's  Religions
Development,  vol.  i.  p.  425  ;  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  iii.  p.  176,  vol.  vi.  p.  16  ;  Wilson's
Note  in  the  Vishnu  Pur  ana,  p.  140  ;  Wilson's  Theatre  of  the  Hindus,  vol.  i.  part  ii.  p.  90  ;
Montucla,  Hist,  des  Mathematiques,  vol.  i.  p.  444  ;  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xii.  p.  3484  ;
Ward's  View  of  the  Hindoos,  vol.  i.  p.  101  ;  Prescotfs  Hist,  of  Peru,  vol.  i.  p.  123  ;  Kohl's
Russia,  p.  374  ;  Thirlwall's  Hist,  of  Greece,vo\.  iii.  p.  440,  vol.  vi.  p.  216  ;  Murray's  Life
of  Bruce,  p.  103  ;  Turner's  Embassy  to  Tibet,  p.  289  ;  Grote's  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  vii.  p.  432,
vol.  xii.  pp.  205,  557  ;  Journal  Asiatique,  I.  serie,  vol.  iii.  202,  Paris,    1823  ;  Clot-Bey,
de  la  Peste,  Paris,  1840,  p.  224.

In  regard  to  the  feelings  inspired  by  comets,  and  the  influence  of  Bayle  in  remov-
ing  those  superstitions  late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  compare  Tennemann,  Gesch.  der
Philosoph.  vol.  xi.  p.  252;  Le  Vassor,Hist.  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  iii.  p.  415;  Lettres  de  Sevigne,
vol.  iv.  p.  336  ;  Autobiography  of  Sir  S.  D'Ewes,  edit.  Halliwell,  vol.  i.  pp.  122,  123,  136.

83  On  the  peculiar  complications  which  have  retarded  meteorology,  and  thusj>re vented
us  from  accurately  predicting  the  weather,  compare  Forbes  on  Meteorology,  in  Second
Report  of  British  Association,  pp.  249-251  ;    Cuvier,  Progres  des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  pp.  69,


214  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  calling  in  the  aid  of  the  Deity  to  supply  those  deficiences  in  science  which  are  the
result  of  our  own  sloth  ;  and  we  are  not  ashamed,  in  our  public  churches,  to
prostitute  the  rites  of  religion  by  using  them  as  a  cloak  to  conceal  an  ignorance
we  ought  frankly  to  confess.84  The  agriculturist  is  thus  taught  to  ascribe  to
supernatural  agency  the  most  important  phenomena  with  which  he  is  concerned;  85
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  one  of  the  causes  of  those  superstitious
feelings  by  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  are  unfavourably  contrasted  with
those  of  the  town.86  But  the  manufacturer,  and  indeed  nearly  every  one  en-

248  ;  Kaemtz's  Meteorology,  pp.  2-4  ;  Proufs  Bridgewater  Treatise,  pp.  290-295  ;  Somer-
ville's  Physical  Geog.  vol.  ii.  pp.  18,  i'g.  But  all  the  best  authorities  are  agreed  that
this  ignorance  cannot  last  long  ;  and  that  the  constant  advance  which  we  are  now  making
in  physical  science  will  eventually  enable  us  to  explain  even  these  phenomena.  Thus
for  instance  Sir  John  Leslie  says,  "It  cannot  be  disputed,  however,  that  all  the  changes
which  happen  in  the  mass  of  our  atmosphere,  involved,  capricious,  and  irregular  as
they  may  appear,  are  yet  the  necessary  results  of  principles  as  fixed,  and  perhaps  as
simple,  as  those  which  direct  the  revolutions  of  the  solar  system.  Could  we  unravel  the
intricate  maze,  we  might  trace  the  action  of  each  distinct  cause,  and  hence  deduce  the
ultimate  effects  arising  from  their  combined  operation.  With  the  possession  of  such
data,  we  might  safely  predict  the  state  of  the  weather  at  any  future  period,  as  we  now
calculate  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon,  or  foretell  a  conjunction  of  the  planets."  Leslie's
Natural  Philosophy,  p.  405  :  see  also  p.  185,  and  the  remarks  of  Mr.  Snow  Harris  (Brit.
Assoc.  for  1844,  p.  241),  and  of  Mr.  Hamilton  (Journal  of  Geog.  Soc.  vol.  xix.  p.  xci. ).
Thus,  too,  Dr.  Whewell  (Bridgewater  Treatise,  p.  3)  says,  that  "  the  changes  of  winds
and  skies  "  are  produced  by  causes,  of  whose  rules  "  no  philosophical  mind  "  will  doubt
the  fixity.

84  This  connexion  between  ignorance  and  devotion  is  so  clearly  marked,  that  many
nations  have  a  separate  god  for  the  weather,  to  whom  they  say  their  prayers.  In  countries
where  men  stop  short  of  this,  they  ascribe  the  changes  to  witchcraft,  or  to  some  other
supernatural  power.  See  Mariner's  Tonga  Islands,  vol.  ii.  pp.  7,  108  ;Tuckey's  Expedit.
to  the  Zaire,  pp.  214,  215  ;  Ellis's  Hist,  of  Madagascar,  vol.  ii.  p.  354  ;  Asiatic  Researches,
vol.  vi.  pp.  193,  194,  297,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  223,  342  ;  Southey's  Hist,  of  Brazil,  vol.  iii.  p.  187  ;
Davis's  Chinese,  vol.  ii.  p.  154  ;  Beausobre,  Hist,  de  Manichee,  vol.  ii.  p.  394  ;  Cudworth's
Intellect.  Syst.  voL  ii.  p.  539.  The  Hindus  refer  rain  to  supernatural  causes  in  the  Rig
Veda,  which  is  the  oldest  of  their  religious  books  ;  and  they  have  held  similar  notions  ever
since.  Rig  Veda  Sanhita,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxx.  10,  19,  26,  145,  175,  205,  224,  225,  265,  266,  vol.
ii.  pp.  28,  41,  62,  no,  153,  158,  164,  166,  192,  199,  231,  258,  268,  293,  329  ;  Journal  of
Asiat.  Soc.  vol.  iii.  p.  91  ;  Coleman's  Mythol.  of  the  Hindus,  p.  in  ;  Ward's  View  of  the
Hindoos,  vol.  i.  p.  38.  See  further  two  curious  passages  in  the  Dabistan,  vol.  i.  p.  115,
vol.  ii.  p.  337  ;  and  on  the  "  Rain -makers,"  compare  Catlin's  North-American  Indians,
vol.  i.  pp.  134-140,  with  Buchanan's  North -American  Indians,  pp.  258,  260  ;  also  a  pre-
cisely similar  class  in  Africa  (Moffafs  Southern  Africa,  pp.  305-325),  and  in  Arabia
(Niebuhr,  Desc.  de  V Arabic,  pp.  237,  238).

Coming  to  a  state  of  society  nearer  our  own,  we  find  that  in  the  ninth  century  it  was
taken  for  granted  in  Christian  countries  that  wind  and  hail  were  the  work  of  wizards
(Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  vi.  pp.  118,  139)  ;  that  similar  views  passed  on  to  the
sixteenth  century,  and  were  sanctioned  by  Luther  (Maury,  Legendes  Pieuses,  pp.  18,  19)  ;
and  finally,  that  when  Swinburne  was  in  Spain,  only  eighty  years  ago,  he  found  the
clergy  on  the  point  of  putting  an  end  to  the  opera,  because  they  "  attributed  the  want  of
rain  to  the  influence  of  that  ungodly  entertainment."  Swinburne's  Travels  through
Spain  in  1775  and  1776,  vol.  i.  p.  177,  2nd.  edit.  London,  1787.

86  See  some  remarks  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Ward,  which  strike  me  as  rather  incautious,  and
which  certainly  are  dangerous  to  his  own  profession,  as  increasing  the  hostility  between
it  and  science,  in  Ward's  Ideal  of  a  Christian  Church,  p.  278.  What  Coleridge  has  said
is  worth  attending  to  :  see  The  Friend,  vol.  iii.  pp.  222,  223.

86  M.  Kohl,  whose  acuteness  as  a  traveller  is  well  known,  has  found  that  the  agricultural
classes  are  the  "  most  blindly  ignorant  and  prejudiced  "  "of  all.  Kohl's  Russia,  p.  365.
And  Sir  R.  Murchison,  who  has  enjoyed  extensive  means  of  observation,  familiarly
mentions  the  "  credulous  farmers."  Murchison's  Siluria,  p.  61.  [The  words  of  Murchi-


THE  HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          215


gaged  in  the  business  of  cities,  has  employments  the  success  of  which,  being
regulated  by  his  own  abilities,  has  no  connexion  with  those  unexplained  events
that  perplex  the  imagination  of  the  cultivators  of  the  earth.  He  who,  by  his
ingenuity,  works  up  the  raw  material,  is  evidently  less  affected  by  uncontrollable
occurrences  than  he  by  whom  the  raw  material  is  originally  grown.  Whether  it
is  fair,  or  whether  it  is  wet,  he  pursues  his  labours  with  equal  success,  and  learns
to  rely  solely  upon  his  own  energy  and  the  cunning  of  his  own  arm.  As  the
sailor  is  naturally  more  superstitious  than  the  soldier,  because  he  has  to  deal  with
a  more  unstable  element  ;  just  in  the  same  way  is  the  agriculturist  more  super-
stitious than  the  mechanic,  because  he  is  more  frequently  and  more  seriously
affected  by  events  which  the  ignorance  of  some  men  makes  them  call  capricious,
and  the  ignorance  of  other  men  makes  them  call  supernatural.

It  would  be  easy,  by  an  extension  of  these  remarks,  to  show  how  the  progress
of  manufactures,  besides  increasing  the  national  wealth,  has  done  immense
service  to  civilization,  by  inspiring  Man  with  a  confidence  in  his  own  resources  ;87
and  how,  by  giving  rise  to  a  new  class  of  employments,  it  has,  if  I  may  say  so,
shifted  the  scene  in  which  superstition  is  most  likely  to  dwell.  But  to  trace  this
would  carry  me  beyond  my  present  limits  ;  and  the  illustrations  already  given
are  sufficient  to  explain  how  the  theological  spirit  must  have  been  diminished  by
that  love  of  experimental  science  which  forms  one  of  the  principal  features  in
the  reign  of  Charles  11.88

I  have  now  laid  before  the  reader  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  point  of  view  from
which  we  ought  to  estimate  a  period  whose  true  nature  seems  to  me  to  have  been
grievously  misunderstood.  Those  political  writers  who  judge  events  without
regard  to  that  intellectual  development  of  which  they  are  but  a  part,  will  find
much  to  condemn,  and  scarcely  anything  to  approve,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.
By  such  authors  I  shall  be  censured  for  having  travelled  out  of  that  narrow  path
in  which  history  has  been  too  often  confined.  And  yet  I  am  at  a  loss  to  perceive
how  it  is  possible,  except  by  the  adoption  of  such  a  course,  to  understand  a  period
which,  on  a  superficial  view,  is  full  of  the  grossest  inconsistencies.  This  difficulty
will  be  rendered  very  obvious  if  we  compare  for  a  moment  the  nature  of  the
government  of  Charles  with  the  great  things  which,  under  that  government,  were
peaceably  effected.  Never  before  was  there  such  a  want  of  apparent  connexion
between  the  means  and  the  end.  If  we  look  only  at  the  characters  of  the  rulers,
and  at  their  foreign  policy,  we  must  pronounce  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  to  be  the
worst  that  has  ever  been  seen  in  England.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  confine  our
observations  to  the  laws  which  were  passed,  and  to  the  principles  which  were
established,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  confess  that  this  same  reign  forms  one  of  the
brightest  epochs  in  our  national  annals.  Politically  and  morally,  there  were  to
be  found  in  the  government  all  the  elements  of  confusion,  of  weakness,  and  of
crime.  The  king  himself  was  a  mean  and  spiritless  voluptuary,  without  the

son  are  here  strained  from  a  particular  to  a  general  sense. — ED.]  In  Asia,  exactly  the
same  tendency  has  been  noticed  :  see  Marsden's  Hist,  of  Sumatra,  p.  63.  Some  curious
evidence  of  agricul tural  superstitions  respecting  the  weather  may  be  seen  in  Monteil,  Hist,
des  divers  etats,  vol.  iii.  pp.  31,  39.

87  In  this  point  of  view,  the  opposite  tendencies  of  agriculture  and  manufactures  are
judiciously  contrasted  by  Mr.  Porter,  at  the  end  of  his  essay  on  the  Statistics  of  Agricul-
ture, Journal  of  the  Statist.  Soc.  vol.  ii.  pp.  295,  296.

88  Indeed,  there  never  has  been  a  period  in  England  in  which  physical  experiments  were
so  fashionable.     This  is  merely  worth  observing  as  a  symptom  of  the  age,  since  Charles
II.  and  the  nobles  were  not  likely  to  add,  and  did  not  add,  anything  to  our  knowledge  ;
and  their  patronage  of  science,  such  as  it  was,  degraded  it  rather  than  advanced  it.     Still,
the  prevalence  of  the  taste  is  curious  ;  and  in  addition  to  the  picture  drawn  by  Mr.  Ma-
caulay  (History  of  England,  ist  edit.  vol.  i.  pp.  408-412),  I  may  refer  the  reader  to  Mon-
conys'  Voyages,  vol.  iii.  p.  31  ;  Sorbiere's  Voyage  to  England,  pp.  32,  33  ;  Evelyn's  Diary,
vol.  ii.  pp.  199,  286  ;  Pepys'  Diary,  vol.  i.  p.  375,  vol.  ii.  p.  34,  vol.  iii.  p.  85,  vol.  iv.  p.  229  ;
Bur-net's  Own  Time,  vol.  i.  pp.  171,  322,  vol.  ii.  p.  275  ;  Burners  Lives,  p.  144  ;  Campbell's
Chief -Justices,  vol.  i.  p.  582.


216  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

morals  of  a  Christian,  and  almost  without  the  feelings  of  a  man.89  His  ministers,
with  the  exception  of  Clarendon,  whom  he  hated  for  his  virtues,  had  not  one  of  the
attributes  of  statesmen,  and  nearly  all  of  them  were  pensioned  by  the  crown  of
France.90  The  weight  of  taxation  was  increased,91  while  the  security  of  the
kingdom  was  diminished.92  By  the  forced  surrender  of  the  charters  of  the  towns,
our  municipal  rights  were  endangered.93  By  shutting  the  exchequer  our  national
credit  was  destroyed.94  Though  immense  sums  were  spent  in  maintaining  our
naval  and  military  power,  we  were  left  so  defenceless,  that  when  a  war  broke  out,
which  had  long  been  preparing,  we  seemed  suddenly  to  be  taken  by  surprise.
Such  was  the  miserable  incapacity  of  the  government,  that  the  fleets  of  Holland
were  able  not  only  to  ride  triumphant  round  our  coasts,  but  to  sail  up  the  Thames,
attack  our  arsenals,  burn  our  ships,  and  insult  the  metropolis  of  England.95
Yet,  notwithstanding  all  these  things,  it  is  an  undoubted  fact  that  in  this  same
reign  of  Charles  II.  more  steps  were  taken  in  the  right  direction  than  had  been
taken,  in  any  period  of  equal  length,  during  the  twelve  centuries  we  had  occupied
the  soil  of  Britain.  By  the  mere  force  of  that  intellectuarmovement  which  was
unwittingly  supported  by  the  crown,  there  were  effected,  in  the  course  of  a  few
years,  reforms  which  changed  the  face  of  society.96  The  two  great  obstacles  by

89  His  treatment  of  his  young  wife  immediately  after  marriage  is  perhaps  the  worst
thing  recorded  of  this  base  and  contemptible  prince.     Lister's  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  ii.
pp.  145-153.     This  is  matter  of  proof ;  but  Burnet  (Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  522,  and  vol.
ii.p.  267)  whispers  a  horrible  suspicion,  which   I  cannot  believe   to  be  true,  even  of
Charles  II.,  and  which  Harris,  who  has  collected  some  evidence  of  his  astounding  pro-
fligacy, does  not  mention,  though  he  quotes  one  of  the  passages  in  Burnet.     Harris's  Lives
of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  v.  pp.  36-43.     However,  as  Dr.  Parr  says,  in  reference  to  another
accusation  against  him,  "  There  is  little  occasion  to  blacken  the  memory  of  that  wicked
monarch,  Charles  II.,  by  the  aid  of  invidious  conjectures."     Notes  on  James  II.,  in
Parr's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  477.     Compare  Fox's  History  of  James  II.,  p.  71.

90  Even  Clarendon  has  been  charged  with  receiving  bribes  from  Louis  XIV. ;  but  for
this  there  appears  to  be  no  good  authority.     Compare  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.
pp.  66,  67  note,  with  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  iii.  p.  213.

91  Lister's  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  ii.  p.  377  ;  Harris's  Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  iv.
PP-  340-344-

92  Immediately  after  the  Restoration,  the  custom  began  of  appointing  to  naval  com-
mands incompetent  youths  of  birth,  to  the  discouragement  of  those  able  officers  who  had
been  employed  under  Cromwell.     Compare  Burnet' s  Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  290,  with  Pepys'
Diary,  vol.  ii.  p.  413,  vol.  iii.  pp.  68,  72.

93  Harris's  Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  v.  pp.  323-328.     The  court  was  so  bent  on  abro-
gating the  charter  of  the  city  of  London,  that  Saunders  was  made  chief -justice  for  the
express  purpose.     See  Campbell's  Chief-Justices,  vol.  ii.  p.  59.     Roger  North  says  (Lives
of  the  Norths,  vol.  ii.  p.  67),  "  Nothing  was  accounted  at  court  so  meritorious  as  the
procuring  of  charters,   as   the  language   then   was."      Compare  Bulstrode's   Memoirs,
PP-  379.  388.

84  The  panic  caused  by  this  scandalous  robbery  is  described  by  De  Foe  ;  Wilson's  Life
of  De  Foe,  vol.  i.  p.  52.  See  also  Calamy's  Life  of  Himself,  vol.  i.  p.  78  ;  Parker's  Hist,  of
his  Own  Time,  pp.  141-143.  The  amount  stolen  by  the  king  is  estimated  at  i,328,526/.
Sinclair's  Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  i.  p.  315.  According  to  Lord  Campbell,  "  nearly  a
million  and  a  half."  Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  iv.  p.  113.

95  There  is  a  very  curious  account  in  Pepys'  Diary,  vol.  iii.  pp.  242-264,  of  the  terror
felt  by  the  Londoners  on  this  occasion.      Pepys  himself  buried  his  gold  (p.  261,  and
PP-  376-379).  Evelyn  (Diary,  vol.  ii.  p.  287)  says  :  "  The  alarme  was  so  greate,  that  it  put
both  country  and  citty  into  a  paniq,  feare,  and  consternation,  such  as  I  hope  I  shall  never
see  more  ;  every  body  was  flying,  none  knew  why  or  whither."

96  The  most  important  of  these  reforms  were  carried,  as  is  nearly  always  the  case,  in
opposition  to  the  real  wishes  of  the  ruling  classes.     Charles  II.  and  James  II.  often  said
of  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  "  that  a  government  could  not  subsist  with  such  a  law."
Dalrymple's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  104.     Lord-Keeper  Guildford  was  even  opposed  to  the
abolition  of  military  tenures,     "  He  thought,"  says  his  brother,  "  the  taking  away  of  the


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          217

which  the  nation  had  long  been  embarrassed  consisted  of  a  spiritual  tyranny
and  a  territorial  tyranny  :  the  tyranny  of  the  church  and  the  tyranny  of  the
nobles.  An  attempt  was  now  made  to  remedy  these  evils  ;  not  by  palliatives,  but
by  striking  at  the  power  of  the  classes  who  did  the  mischief.  For  now  it  was  that
a  law  was  placed  on  the  statute-book,  taking  away  that  celebrated  writ  which
enabled  the  bishops  or  their  delegates  to  cause  those  men  to  be  burned  whose
religion  was  different  to  their  own.97  Now  it  was  that  the  clergy  were  deprived  of
the  privilege  of  taxing  themselves,  and  were  forced  to  submit  to  an  assessment
made  by  the  ordinary  legislature.98  Now,  too,  there  was  enacted  a  law  forbidding
any  bishop,  or  any  ecclesiastical  court,  to  tender  the  ex-offtciooa,th,  by  which  the
church  had  hitherto  enjoyed  the  power  of  compelling  a  suspected  person  to
criminate  himself.99  In  regard  to  the  nobles,  it  was  also  during  the  reign  of
Charles  II.  that  the  House  of  Lords,  after  a  sharp  struggle,  was  obliged  to  abandon
its  pretensions  to  an  original  jurisdiction  in  civil  suits  ;  and  tljus  lost  for  ever
an  important  resource  for  extending  its  own  influence.100  It  was  in  the  same
reign  that  there  was  settled  the  right  of  the  people  to  be  taxed  entirely  by  their
representatives  ;  the  House  of  Commons  having  ever  since  retained  the  sole  power
of  proposing  money  bills  and  regulating  the  amount  of  imposts,  merely  leaving  to
the  Peers  the  form  of  consenting  to  what  has  been  already  determined.101  These
were  the  attempts  which  were  made  to  bridle  the  clergy  and  the  nobles.  But
there  were  also  effected  other  things  of  equal  importance.  By  the  destruction  of
the  scandalous  prerogatives  of  Purveyance  and  Pre-emption,  a  limit  was  set  to

tenures  a  desperate  wound  to  the  liberties  of  the  people  of  England."  Lives  of  the  Norths,
vol.  ii.  p.  82.  These  are  the  sort  of  men  by  whom  great  nations  are  governed.  A  passage
in  Life  of  James,  by  Himself,  edit.  Clarke,  vol.  ii.  p.  621,  confirms  the  statement  in  Dal-
rymple,  so  far  as  James  is  concerned.  This  should  be  compared  with  a  letter  from  Louis
XIV.,  in  the  Barillon  correspondence.  Appendix  to  Fox's  James  II.,  p.  cxxiv.

9?  Blackstone's  Commentaries,  vol.  iv.  p.  48  ;  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  iii.  p.  431.
This  destruction  of  the  writ  De  Hteretico  comburendo  was  in  1677.  It  is  noticed  in
Palmer's  Treatise  on  the  Church,  vol.  i.  p.  500  :  and  in  Collier's  Ecclesiast.  Hist.  vol.  viii.
p.  478.

98  This  was  in  1664.   See  the  account  of  it  in  Collier's  Ecclesiast.  Hist.  vol.  viii.  pp.  463-
466.     Collier,  who  is    evidently  displeased   by  the    change,   says:  "The  consenting,
therefore,  to  be  taxed  by  the  temporal    Commons,    makes    the    clergy    more   depen-
dent on  a   foreign  body,    takes   away   the  right    of   disposing   of   their   own   money,
and  lays  their  estates  in  some  measure  at  discretion."     See  also,  on  the  injury  this  has
inflicted  on  the  church,  Lathbury's  Hist,  of  Convocation,  pp.  259,  260.     And  Coleridge
(Literary  Remains,  vol.  iv.  pp.  152,  153)  points  this  out  as  characterizing  one  of  the  three
"  grand  evil  epochs  of  our  present  church."     So  marked,  however,  was  the  tendency  of
that  time,  that  this  most  important  measure  was  peaceably  effected  by  an  arrangement
between  Sheldon  and  Clarendon.     See  the  notes  by  Onslow  in  Burnet's  Own  Time,  vol.  i.
p.  340,  vol.  iv.  pp.  508,  509.      Compare  Lord  Camden's  statement  (Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvi.
p.  169)  with  the  speech  of  Lord  Bathurst  (vol.  xxii.  p.  77) ;  and  of  Lord  Temple  on
Tooke's  case  (vol.  xxxv.  p.  1357).      Mr.  Carwithen  (Hist,  of  the  Church   of   England,
vol.  ii.  p.  354,  Oxford,  1849)  grieves  over  "  this  deprivation  of  the  liberties  of  the  English
clergy."

99  13  Car.  II.  c.  12.     Compare  Stephens' s  Life  of  Tooke,  vol.  i.  pp.  169,  170,  with  Black  -
stone's  Commentaries,  vol.  iii.  p.  101.     Mr.  Hallam  (Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  pp.  197,  198)  has
adduced  evidence  of  the  way  in  which  the  clergy  were  accustomed  to  injure  their  oppon-
ents by  the  ex-officio  oath.

100  xhis  was  the  issue  of  the  famous  controversy  respecting  Skinner,  in  1669  ;  and
"  from  this  time,"  says  Mr.  Hallam,  "  the  Lords  have  tacitly  abandoned  all  pretensions
to  an  original  jurisdiction  in  civil  suits."  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.   184.     There  is  an  account
of  this  case  of  Skinner,  which  was  connected  with  the  East -India  Company,  in  Mill's
Hist,  of  India,  vol.  i.  pp.  102,  103.

101  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  pp.   189-192  ;   and  Eccleston's  English  Antiquities,
p.  326.      The  disputes  between  the  two  houses  respecting  taxation  are  noticed  very
briefly  in  Parker's  ffist.  of  his  o,wn  Tim.e,  pp.  135,  136.


2fS  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  power  of  the  sovereign  to  vex  his  refractory  subjects.102  By  the  Habeas
Corpus  Act,  the  liberty  of  every  Englishman  was  made  as  certain  as  law  could
make  it  ;  it  being  guaranteed  to  him  that  if  accused  of  crime,  he,  instead  of
languishing  in  prison,  as  had  often  been  the  case,  should  be  brought  to  a
fair  and  speedy  trial. l°3  By  the  Statute  of  Frauds  and  Perjuries,  a  security
hitherto  unknown  was  conferred  upon  private  property.104  By  the  abolition  of
general  impeachments,  an  end  was  put  to  a  great  engine  of  tyranny,  with  which
powerful  and  unscrupulous  men  had  frequently  ruined  their  political  adversaries.105
By  the  cessation  of  those  laws  which  restricted  the  liberty  of  printing,  there
was  laid  the  foundation  of  that  great  Public  Press,  which,  more  than  any  other
single  cause,  has  diffused  among  the  people  a  knowledge  of  their  own  power,  and
has  thus,  to  an  almost  incredible  extent,  aided  the  progress  of  English  civiliza-
tion.1*^ And,  to  complete  this  noble  picture,  there  were  finally  destroyed  those
feudal  incidents  which  our  Norman  conquerors  had  imposed, — the  military  tenures;
the  court  of  wards  ;  the  fines  for  alienation  ;  the  right  of  forfeiture  for  marriage  by
reason  of  tenure  ;  the  aids,  the  homages,  the  escuages,  the  primer  seisins  ;  and  all
those  mischievous  subtleties,  of  which  the  mere  names  sound  in  modern  ears  as  a
wild  and  barbarous  jargon,  but  which  pressed  upon  our  ancestors  as  real  and  serious
evils.10?

102  The  "  famous  rights  of  purveyance  and  pre-emption  "  were  abolished  by  12  Car.
II.  c.  24.     Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.   n.     Burke,  in  his  magnificent  speech  on
Economical  Reform,  describes  the  abuses  of  the  old  system  of  purveyance.     Burke' s
Works,  vol.  i.  p.  239.   See  also  Kemble's  Saxons  in  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  88  note ;  Harrington
on  the  Statutes,  pp.  183-185,  237  ;  Lingard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  pp.  338,  339  ;  Sin-
clair's Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  i.  p.  232  ;  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  1299.     These  passages  will
give  an  idea  of  the  iniquities  practised  under  this  "right,"  which,  like  most  gross  in-
justices, was  one  of  the  good  old  customs  of  the  British  constitution,  being  at  least  as
ancient  as  Canute.     See  Allen  on  the  Royal  Prerogative,  p.  152.     Indeed,  a  recent  writer
of  considerable  learning  (Spence,  Origin  of  the  Laws  of  Europe,  p.  319)  derives  it  from  the
Roman  law.     A  bill  had  been  brought  in  to  take  it  away  in  1656.     See  Burton's  Crom-
wellian  Diary,  vol.  i.  p.  81.     When  Adam  Smith  wrote,  it  still  existed  in  France  and
Germany.     Wealth  of  Nations,  book  iii.  chap.  ii.  p.  161.

103  On  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  which  became  law  in  1679,  see  Campbell's  Chancellors,
vol.  iii.  pp.  305-347  ;  Mackintosh,  Revolution  of  r6S8,  p.  49  ;  and  Lingard's  Hist,  of  Eng-
land, vol.  viii.  p.  17.     The  peculiarities  of  this  law,  as  compared  with  the  imitations  of
in  other  countries,  are  clearly  stated  in  Meyer,  Esprit  des  Institutions  Judiciaires,  vol.

p.  283.  Mr.  Lister  (Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  ii.  p.  454,  says  :  "  Imprisonment  in  gaols  be-
yond the  seas  was  not  prevented  by  law  till  the  passing  of  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  ir
1679."

104  Blackstone  (Commentaries,  vol.  iv.  p.  439)  calls  this  "  a  great  and  necessary  security
to  private  property  ;  "  and  Lord  Campbell  (Chancellors,  vol.  iii. -p.  423)  terms  it  "  the
most  important  and  most  beneficial  piece  of  juridical  legislation  of  which  we  can  boast."
On  its  effects,  compare  Jones's  valuable  Commentary  on  Isceus  (Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,
vol.  iv.  p.  239),  with  Story's  Conflict  of  Laws,  pp.  521,  522,  627,  884  ;  and  Taylor  on
Statute  Law,  in  Journal  of  Statist.  Soc.  vol.  xvii.  p.  150.

105  Lord  Campbell  (Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  iii.  p.  247)  says  that  the  struggle  in
1667  "  put  an  end  to  general  impeachments."

106  printing  at  first  was  regulated  by  royal  proclamations  ;  then  by  the  Star-chamber  ;
and  afterwards  by  the  Long  Parliament.     The  decrees  of  the  Star-chamber  were  taken
as  the  basis  of  13  and  14  Car.  II.  c.  33  ;  but  this  act  expired  in  1679,  and  was  not  renewed
during] the  reign  of  Charles  II.       Compare  Blackstone' s  Comment,  vol.  iv.  p.  152,  with
Hunt's  Hist,  of  Newspapers,  vol.  i.  p.  154,  and  Fox's  Hist,  of  James  II.  p.  146.

107  The  fullest  account  I  have  seen  in  any  history,  of  this  great  Revolution,  which  swept
away  the  traditions  and  the  language  of  feudalism,  is  that  given  in  Harris's  Lives  of  the
Stuarts,  vol.  iv.  pp.  369-378.     But  Harris,  though  an  industrious  collector,  was  a  man  of
slender  ability,  and  not  at  all  aware  of  the  real  nature  of  a  change,  of  which  the  obvious
and  immediately  practical  results  formed  the  smallest  part,     The  true  point  of  view  is,
that  it  was  a  formal  recognition  by  the  legislature  that  the  Middle  Ages  were  extinct,  and
that  it  was  necessary  to  inaugurate  a  more  modern  and  innovating  policy.     Hereafter


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          219

These  were  the  things  which  were  done  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  ;  and  if  we
consider  the  miserable  incompetence  of  the  king,  the  idle  profligacy  of  his  court,
the  unblushing  venality  of  his  ministers,  the  constant  conspiracies  to  which  the
country  was  exposed  from  within,  and  the  unprecedented  insults  to  which  it  was
subjected  from  without  ;  if  we  moreover  consider  that  to  all  this  there  were
added  two  natural  calamities  of  the  most  grievous  description, — a  Great  Plague,
which  thinned  society  in  all  its  ranks,  and  scattered  confusion  through  the  king-
dom ;  and  a  Great  Fire,  which,  besides  increasing  the  mortality  from  the  pestil-
ence, destroyed  in  a  moment  those  accumulations  of  industry  by  which  industry
itself  is  nourished  ; — if  we  put  all  these  things  together,  how  can  we  reconcile
inconsistencies  apparently  so  gross  ?  How  could  so  wonderful  a  progress  be
made  in  the  face  of  these  unparalleled  disasters  ?  How  could  such  men,  under
such  circumstances,  effect  such  improvements  ?  These. are  questions  which  our
political  compilers  are  unable  to  answer  ;  because  they  look  too  much  at  the
peculiarities  of  individuals,  and  too  little  at  the  temper  of  the  age  in  which  those
individuals  live.  Such  writers  do  not  perceive  that  the  history  of  every  civilized
country  is  the  history  of  its  intellectual  development,  which  kings,  statesmen,
and  legislators  are  more  likely  to  retard  than  to  hasten  ;  because,  however  great
their  power  may  be,  they  are  at  best  the  accidental  and  insufficient  representa-
tives of  the  spirit  of  their  time  ;  and  because,  so  far  from  being  able  to  regulate
the  movements  of  the  national  mind,  they  themselves  form  the  smallest  part  of  it,
and,  in  a  general  view  of  the  progress  of  Man,  are  only  to  be  regarded  as  the  puppets
who  strut  and  fret  their  hour  upon  a  little  stage  ;  while,  beyond  them,  and  on
every  side  of  them,  are  forming  opinions  and  principles  which  they  can  scarcely
perceive,  but  by  which  alone  the  whole  course  of  human  affairs  is  ultimately
governed.*

The  truth  is  that  the  vast  legislative  reforms  for  which  the  reign  of  Charles  II.
is  so  remarkable,  merely  form  a  part  of  that  movement  which,  though  traceable  to
a  much  earlier  period,  had  only  for  three  generations  been  in  undisguised  operation.
These  important  improvements  were  the  result  of  that  bold,  sceptical,  inquiring
and  reforming  spirit  which  had  now  seized  the  three  great  departments  of  Theology,
of  Science,  and  of  Politics.  The  old  principles  of  tradition,  of  authority,  and
of  dogma,  were  gradually  becoming  weaker  ;  and  of  course,  in  the  same  proportion,
there  was  diminished  the  influence  of  the  classes  by  whom  those  principles  were
chiefly  upheld.  As  the  power  of  particular  sections  of  society  thus  declined,  the
power  of  the  people  at  large  increased.  The  real  interests  of  the  nation  began  to
be  perceived,  so  soon  as  the  superstitions  were  dispersed  by  which  those  interests
had  long  been  obscured.  This,  I  believe,  is  the  real  solution  of  what  at  first  seems
a  curious  problem, — namely,  how  it  was  that  such  comprehensive  reforms  should
have  been  accomplished  in  so  bad,  and  in  many  respects  so  infamous,  a  reign.  It
is  no  doubt  true  that  those  reforms  were  essentially  the  result  of  the  intellectual
march  of  the  age  ;  but,  so  far  from  being  made  in  spite  of  the  vices  of  the  sovereign,
they  were  actually  aided  by  them.  With  the  exception  of  the  needy  profligates
who  thronged  his  court,  all  classes  of  men  soon  learned  to  despise  a  king  who  was
a  drunkard,  a  libertine,  and  a  hypocrite  ;  who  had  neither  shame  nor  sensibility  ;

I  shall  have  occasion  to  examine  this  in  detail,  and  show  how  it  was  merely  a  symptom
of  a  revolutionary  movement.  In  the  meantime  the  reader  may  refer  to  the  very  short
notices  in  Dalrymple's  Hist,  of  Feudal  Property,  p.  89  ;  Blackstone's  Comment,  vol.  ii.  pp.
76,  77  ;  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  n  ;  Part.  Hist.  vol.  iv.  pp.  53,  167,  168  ;  Meyer.
Institutions  Judiciaires,  vol.  ii.  p.  58.

[*  Hallam,  who  was  something  of  a  "  political  compiler,"  has  really  thrown  light  on  the
causes  of  the  reformative  legislation  under  Charles  II.  (Const.  Hist.  loth  ed.  ii.  352  sq.).
And  seeing  that  the  laws  in  question  were  made  by  legislators,  it  is  necessary  to  modify
the  antithesis  here  set  up  between  legislators  and  public  opinion.  The  legislators  are
part  of  the  public,  and  no  more  "  puppets  "  than  the  rest,  unless  all  are  puppets  of  each
other.  And  the  development  was  more  economic  and  less  "  intellectual  "  than  Buckle
makes  appear. — ED.]


220  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  who,  in  point  of  honour,  was  unworthy  to  enter  the  presence  of  the  meanest  of
his  subjects.  To  have  the  throne  filled  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  by  such  a  man  as
this,  was  the  surest  way  of  weakening  that  ignorant  and  indiscriminate  loyalty,
to  which  the  people  have  often  sacrificed  their  dearest  rights.  Thus  the  char-
acter of  the  king,  merely  considered  from  this  point  of  view,  was  eminently
favourable  to  the  growth  of  national  liberty.108  But  the  advantage  did  not
stop  there.  The  reckless  debaucheries  of  Charles  made  him  abhor  everything
approaching  to  restraint  ;  and  this  gave  him  a  dislike  to  a  class  whose  profession,
at  least,  presupposes  a  conduct  of  more  then  ordinary  purity.  The  consequence
was  that  he,  not  from  views  of  enlightened  policy,  but  merely  from  a  love  of
vicious  indulgence,  always  had  a  distaste  for  the  clergy  ;  and,  so  far  from  advanc-
ing their  power,  frequently  expressed  for  them  an  open  contempt.10^  His  most
intimate  friends  directed  against  them  those  coarse  and  profligate  jokes  which
are  preserved  in  the  literature  of  the  time  ;  and  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  courtiers,
were  to  be  ranked  among  the  noblest  specimens  of  human  wit.  From  men
of  this  sort  the  church  had  indeed  little  to  apprehend  ;  but  their  language,  and
the  favour  with  which  it  was  received,  are  part  of  the  symptoms  by  which  we
may  study  the  temper  of  that  age.  Many  other  illustrations  will  occur  to  most
readers  ;  I  may,  however,  mention  one,  which  is  interesting  on  account  of  the
eminence  of  the  philosopher  concerned  in  it.  The  most  dangerous  opponent  of
the  clergy  in  the  seventeenth  century  was  certainly  Hobbes,  the  subtlest  dia-
lectician of  his  time  ;  a  writer,  too,  of  singular  clearness,  and,  among  British
metaphysicians,  inferior  only  to  Berkeley.  This  profound  thinker  published
several  speculations  very  unfavourable  to  the  church,  and  directly  opposed  to
principles  which  are  essential  to  ecclesiastical  authority.  As  a  natural  consequence,
he  was  hated  by  the  clergy  ;  his  doctrines  were  declared  to  be  highly  pernicious  ;
and  he  was  accused  of  wishing  to  subvert  the  national  religion,  and  corrupt  the
national  morals.11*'  So  far  did  this  proceed,  that  during  his  life,  and  for  several

108  Mr.  Hallam  has  a  noble  passage  on  the  services  rendered  to  English  civilization  by
the  vices  of  the  English  court :  "  We  are,  however,  much  indebted  to  the  memory  of
Barbara  Duchess  of  Cleveland,  Louisa  Duchess  of  Portsmouth,  and  Mrs.  Eleanor  Gwyn.
We  owe  a  tribute  of  gratitude  to  the  Mays,  the  Killigrews,  the  Chiffinches,  and  the  Gram  -
monts.      They  played   a    serviceable    part    in   ridding   the   kingdom   of   its  besotted
loyalty.     They  saved  our  forefathers  from  the  Star-chamber  and  the  High -commission
court ;  they  laboured  in  their  vocation  against  standing  armies  and  corruption  ;  they
pressed  forward  the  great  ultimate  security  of  English  freedom — the  expulsion  of  the
House  of  Stuart."     Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  50.     fioth  edit.  p.  354.]

109  Burnet  (Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  448)  tells  us  that  in  1667  the  king,  even  at  the  council-
board,  expressed  himself  against  the  bishops,  and  said  that  the  clergy  "  thought  of  nothing
but  to  get  good  benefices,  and  to  keep  a  good  table."      See  also,  on  his  dislike  to  the
bishops,  vol.    ii.   p.   22 ;    and  Pepys'  Diary,  vol.  iv.  p.  2.     In  another  place,  vol.  iv.
p.  42,  Pepys  writes  :  "  And  I  believe   the   hierarchy  will  in  a  little  time  be   shaken,
whether  they  will  or  no  ;  the  king  being  offended  with  them,  and  set  upon  it,  as  I  hear."
Evelyn,  in  a  conversation  with  Pepys,  noticed  with  regret  such  conduct  of  Charles,
"  that  a  bishop  shall  never  be  seen  about  him,  as  the  king  of  France  hath  always."     Pepys,
vol.  iii.  p.  201.     Evelyn,  in  his  benevolent  way,  ascribes  this  to  "  the  negligence  of  the
clergy  ;  "  but  history  teaches  us  that  the  clergy  have  never  neglected  kings,  except  when
the  king  has  first  neglected  them.     Sir  John  Reresby  gives  a  curious  account  of  a  conver-
sation Charles  II.  held  with  him  respecting  "  mitred  heads,"  in  which  the  feeling  of  the
king  is  very  apparent.     Reresby's  Travels  and  Memoirs,  p.  238.     [It  thus  appears  that
a  monarch's  tastes  may  count  for  a  good  deal  in  determining  the  progress  of  a  period,
apart  altogether  from  the  "  intellectual  "  movement  outside. — ED.]

110  On  the  animosity  of  the  clergy  against  Hobbes,  and  on  the  extent  to  which  he  recip-
rocated it,  compare  Aubrey's  Letters  and  Lives,  vol.  ii.  pp.  532,  631  ;  Tennemann,  Gesch.
der  Philos.  vol.  x.  p.  in  ;  with  the  angry  language  of  Burnet  (Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  322),
and  of  Whiston  (Memoirs,  p.  251).     See  also  Wood's  Athena  Oxonienses,  edit.  Bliss,  vol.
iii.  p.  121 1.     Monconys,  who  was  in  London  in  1663,  says  of  Hobbes,  "  II  me  dit  1'aversion
que  tous  les  gens  d'eglise  tant  catholiques  que  protestans  avoient  pour  lui."     Monconys''


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT         221

years  after  his  death,  every  man  who  ventured  to  think  for  himself  was  stigmatized
as  a  Hobbist,  or,  as  it  was  sometimes  called,  a  Hobbian.111  This  marked  hostility
on  the  part  of  the  clergy  was  a  sufficient  recommendation  to  the  favour  of  Charles.
The  king,  even  before  his  accession,  had  imbibed  many  of  his  principles ; 112  and
after  the  Restoration  he  treated  the  author  with  what  was  deemed  a  scandalous
respect.  He  protected  him  from  his  enemies  ;  he  somewhat  ostentatiously  hung
up  his  portrait  in  his  own  private  room  at  Whitehall ; 113  and  he  even  conferred
a  pension  on  this,  the  most  formidable  opponent  who  had  yet  appeared  against  the
spiritual  hierarchy.114

If  we  look  for  a  moment  at  the  ecclesiastical  appointments  of  Charles,  we
shall  find  evidence  of  the  same  tendency.  In  his  reign,  the  highest  dignities
in  the  church  were  invariably  conferred  upon  men  who  were  deficient  either  in
ability  or  in  honesty.  It  would  perhaps  be  an  over-refinement  to  ascribe  to
the  king  a  deliberate  plan  for  lowering  the  reputation  of  the  episcopal  bench ;
but  it  is  certain  that  if  he  had  such  a  plan  he  followed  the  course  most  likely
to  effect  his  purpose.  For  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that,  during  his  life,
the  leading  English  prelates  were,  without  exception,  either  incapable  or  in-
sincere ;  they  were  unable  to  defend  what  they  really  believed,  or  else  they
did  not  believe  what  they  openly  professed.  Never  before  were  the  interests
of  the  Anglican  church  so  feebly  guarded.  The  first  Archbishop  of  Canterbury
appointed  by  Charles  was  Juxon,  whose  deficiencies  were  notorious  ;  and  of
whom  his  friends  could  only  say  that  his  want  of  ability  was  compensated  by
the  goodness  of  his  intentions.115  When  he  died,  the  king  raised  up  as  his  suc-
cessor Sheldon,  whom  he  had  previously  made  Bishop  of  London  ;  and  who
not  only  brought  discredit  on  his  order  by  acts  of  gross  intolerance,116  but  who
was  so  regardless  of  the  common  decencies  of  his  station  that  he  used  to  amuse
his  associates  by  having  exhibitions  in  his  own  house,  imitating  the  way  in
which  the  Presbyterians  delivered  their  sermons.117  After  the  death  of  Sheldon,
Charles  appointed  to  the  archbishopric  Sancroft,  whose  superstitious  fancies
exposed  him  to  the  contempt  even  of  his  own  profession,  and  who  was  as  much
despised  as  Sheldon  had  been  hated.118  In  the  rank  immediately  below  this,

Voyages,  vol.  iii.  p.  43  ;  and  p.  115,  "  M.  Hobbes,  que  je  trouvai  toujours  fort  ennemi  dg*
pretres  catholiques  et  des  protestans."  About  the  same  time,  Sorbiere  was  in  London  ;
and  he  writes  respecting  Hobbes  :  "I  know  not  how  it  comes  to  pass,  the  clergy  are
afraid  of  him,  and  so  are  the  Oxford  mathematicians  and  their  adherents  ;  wherefore  his
majesty  (Charles  II.)  was  pleased  to  make  a  very  good  comparison  when  he  told  me,
he  was  like  a  bear,  whom  they  baited  with  dogs  to  try  him."  Sorbiere' s  Voyage  to
England,  p.  40.

111  This  was  a  common  expression  for  whoever  attacked  established  opinions  late  in  the
seventeenth,  and  even  early  in  the  eighteenth  century.     For  instances  of  it,  see  Baxter's
Life  of  Himself,  folio,  1696,  part  iii.  p.  48  ;  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  v.  pp.  505,  510  ;  Monk's
Life  of  Bentley,  vol.  i.  p.  41  ;  Vernon  Correspond,  vol.  iii.  p.  13  ;  King's  Life  of  Locke,  vol.  i.
p.  191  ;  Brewster's  Life  of  Newton,  vol.  ii.  p.  149.

112  Burnet  says  they  "  made  deep  and  lasting  impressions  on  the  king's  mind."     Own
Time,  vol.  i.  p.  172.

113  A  likeness  by  Cooper.     See  Wood's  Athena  Oxonienses,  edit.  Bliss,  vol.  iii.  p.  1208.

114  Sorbiere' s  Voyage  to  England,  p.  39  ;  Wood's  Athena  Oxonienses,  vol.  iii.  p.  1208.
On  the  popularity  of  the  works  of  Hobbes  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  compare  Pepys'
Diary,  vol.  iv.  p.  164,  with  Lives  of  the  Norths,  vol.  iii.  p.  339-

115  Bishop  Burnet  says  of  him,  at  his  appointment :  "  As  he  was  never  a  great  divine,
so  he  was  now  superannuated."     Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  303.

116  Of  which  his  own  friend,  Bishop  Parker,  gives  a  specimen.     See  Parker's  History
of  his  own  Time,  pp.  31-33.     Compare  Neal's  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  vol.  iv.  p.  429  ;  Wilson's
Mem.  of  De  Foe,  vol.  i.  p.  46.

117  In  1669,  Pepys  was  at  one  of  these  entertainments,  which  took  place  not  only  at
the  house,  but  in  the  presence,  of  the  archbishop.     See  the  scandalous  details  in  Pepys'
Diary,  vol.  iv.  pp.  321-322  ;  or  in  Wilson's  De  Foe,  vol.  i.  pp.  44,  45  •

118  Burnet,  who  knew  Sancroft,  calls  him  "  a  poor-spirited  and  fearful  man  "  (Own


222  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

we  find  the  same  principle  at  work.  The  three  Archbishops  of  York,  during  the
reign  of  Charles  II.,  were  Frewen,  Stearn,  and  Dolben  ;  who  were  so  utterly
devoid  of  ability  that,  notwithstanding  their  elevated  position,  they  are  alto-
gether forgotten,  not  one  reader  out  of  a  thousand  having  ever  heard  their
names.119

Such  appointments  as  these  are  indeed  striking ;  and  what  makes  them
more  so  is  that  they  were  by  no  means  necessary  ;  they  were  not  forced  on
the  king  by  court-intrigue,  nor  was  there  a  lack  of  more  competent  men.  The
truth  seems  to  be  that  Charles  was  unwilling  to  confer  ecclesiastical  promotion
upon  any  one  who  had  ability  enough  to  increase  the  authority  of  the  church,
and  restore  it  to  its  former  pre-eminence.  At  his  accession,  the  two  ablest  of
the  clergy  were  undoubtedly  Jeremy  Taylor  and  Isaac  Barrow.  Both  of  them
were  notorious  for  their  loyalty  ;  both  of  them  were  men  of  unspotted  virtue  ;
and  both  of  them  have  left  a  reputation  which  will  hardly  perish  while  the  Eng-
lish language  is  remembered.  But  Taylor,  though  he  had  married  the  king's
sister,120  was  treated  with  marked  neglect;  and,  being  exiled  to  an  Irish
bishopric,  had  to  pass  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  what,  at  that  time,  was  truly
called  a  barbarous  country.121  As  to  Barrow,  who  in  point  of  genius  was
probably  superior  to  Taylor,122  he  had  the  mortification  of  seeing  the  most
incapable  men  raised  to  the  highest  posts  in  the  church,  while  he  himself  was
unnoticed  ;  and  notwithstanding  that  his  family  had  greatly  suffered  in  the
royal  cause,123  he  received  no  sort  of  preferment  until  five  years  before  his  death,
when  the  king  conferred  on  him  the  mastership  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.124

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  how  all  this  must  have  tended  to  weaken
the  church,  and  accelerate  that  great  movement  for  which  the  reign  of  Charles  II.

Time,  vol.  iii.  p.  354) ;  and  mentions  (vol.  iii.  p.  138)  an  instance  of  his  superstition,
which  will  be  easily  believed  by  whoever  has  read  his  ridiculous  sermons,  which  D'Oyly
has  wickedly  published.  See  Appendix  to  D'Oyly's  Bancroft,  pp.  339-420.  Dr.  Lake
says  that  everybody  was  amazed  when  it  was  known  that  Bancroft  was  to  be  archbishop ;
Lake's  Diary,  3oth  Dec.  1677,  p.  18,  in  vol.  i.  of  the  Camden  Miscellany,  1847,  4to.  His
character,  so  far  as  he  had  one,  is  fairly  drawn  by  Dr.  Birch  :  "  Slow,  timorous,  and
.narrow -spirited,  but  at  the  same  time  a  good,  honest,  and  well-meaning  man."  Birch's
zife  of  Tillotson,  p.  151.  See  also  respecting  him,  Macaulay's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.
p.  616,  vol.  iii.  p.  77,  vol.  iv.  pp.  40-42.

119  Frewen  was  so  obscure  a  man,  that  there  is  no  life  of  him  either  in  Chalmers'  Bio-
graphical Dictionary,  or  in  Rose's  more  recent  but  inferior  work.     The  little  that  is
known  of  Stearn,  or  Sterne,  is  unfavourable.     Compare  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  427,  with
Baxter's  Life  of  Himself,  folio,  1696,  part  ii.  p.  338.     And  of  Dolben  I  have  been  unable
to  collect  anything  of  interest,  except  that  he  had  a  good  library.     See  the  traditionary
account  in  Jones's  Memoirs  of  Bishop  Home,  p.  66.

120  His  wife  was  Joanna  Bridges,  a  bastard  of  Charles  I.     Compare  Notes  and  Queries,
vol.  vii.  p.  305,  with  Heber's  Life  of  Jeremy  Taylor,  in  Taylor's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  xxxiv.
Bishop  Heber,  p.  xxxv.,  adds,  "  But,  notwithstanding  the  splendour  of  such  an  alliance,
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  it  added  materially  to  Taylor's  income."

121  Coleridge   (Lit.  Remains,  vol.  iii.  p.  208)  says  that  this  neglect  of  Jeremy  Taylor
by  Charles  "  is  a  problem  of  which  perhaps  his  virtues  present  the  most  probable  solution."

122  Superior,  certainly,  in  comprehensiveness,  and  in  the  range  of  his  studies  ;  so  that
it  is  aptly  said  by  a  respectable  authority,  that  he  was  at  once  "  the  great  precursor  of
Sir  Isaac  Newton,  and  the  pride  of  the  English  pulpit."     Wordsworth's  Ecclesiast.  Biog.
vol.  iv.  p.  344.     See  also,  respecting  Barrow,  Montucla,  Hist,  des  Mathemat.  vol.  ii.  pp.  88,
89,  359»  360,  504,  505,  vol.  iii.  pp.  436-438.

123  "  His  father  having  suffered  greatly  in  his  estate  by  his  attachment  to  the  royal
cause."     Chalmers'  Biog.  Diet.  vol.  iv.  p.  39.

124  Barrow,  displeased  at  not  receiving  preferment  after  the  Restoration,  wrote  the
lines :

"  Te  magis  optavit  rediturum  Carole  nemo  ;
Et  sensit  nemo  te  rediisse  minus."

Hamilton's  Life  of  Barrow,  in  Barrow's  Works,  Edinb.  1845,  vol.  i.  p.  xxiii.  ')


THE  HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          223

remarkable.123     At    the   same   time,    there  were  many   other   circumstances
,'hich,  in  this  preliminary  sketch,  it  is  impossible  to  notice,  but  which  were
iped  with  the  general  character  of  revolt  against  ancient  authority.     In
subsequent  volume,  this  will  be  placed  in  a  still  clearer  light,  because  I  shall
ive  an  opportunity  of  bringing  forward  evidence  which,  from  the  abundance

its  details,  would  be  unsuited  to  the  present  Introduction.     Enough,  how-

er,  has  been  stated  to  indicate  the  general  march  of  the  English  mind,  and
ipply  the  reader  with  a  clue  by  which  he  may  understand  those  still  more
implicated  events  which,  as  the  seventeenth  century  advanced,  began  to
licken  upon  us.

A  few  years  before  the  death  of  Charles  II.,  the  clergy  made  a  great  effort
i  recover  their  former  power,  by  reviving  those  doctrines  of  Passive  Obedience
id  Divine  Right,  which  are  obviously  favourable  to  the  progress  of  super
tition.12(i  But  as  the  English  intellect  was  now  sufficiently  advanced  to  reject
ich  dogmas,*  this  futile  attempt  only  increased  the  opposition  between  the
iterests  of  the  people  as  a  body,  and  the  interests  of  the  clergy  as  a  class.  Scarcely
this  scheme  been  defeated,  when  the  sudden  death  of  Charles  placed  on
le  throne  a  prince  whose  most  earnest  desire  was  to  restore  the  Catholic  church,

125  Everything  Mr.  Macaulay  has  said  on  the  contempt  into  which  the  clergy  fell  in
ic  reign  of  Charles  II.  is  perfectly  accurate;  and  from  evidence  which  I  have  collected,

1  know  that  this  very  able  writer,  of  whose  immense  research  few  people  are  competent
judges,  has  rather   understated  the   case  than   overstated  it.      On  several  subjects  I
should  venture  to  differ  from  Mr.  Macaulay  ;  but  I  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  my
admiration  of  his   unwearied  diligence,  of  the  consummate  skill  with  which  he  has
arranged  his  materials,  and  of  the  noble  love  of  liberty  which  animates  his  entire  work.
These  are  qualities  which  will  long  survive  the  aspersions  of  his  puny  detractors, —
men  who,  in  point  of  knowledge  and  ability,  are  unworthy  to  loosen  the  shoe-latchet
of  him  they  foolishly  attack.

126  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  pp.  142,  143,  153-156  ;  from  which  it  appears  that
this  movement  began  about  1681.     [Buckle  is  mistaken  in  speaking  of  a  "revival"
of  the  doctrine.     Hallam  notes  (loth  ed.  ii.  462)  that  the  clergy  had  had  the  doctrine
transmitted  to  them  :  "  it  was  the  tenet  of  their  homilies,  their  canons,  their  most  dis-
tinguished divines  and  casuists."     But  Hallam  speaks  of  a  book  propaganda  from  the
date  of  the  Exclusion  Bill  (1679),  whereas  many  sermons  on  the  subject  had  been  pub-
lished long  before  that  date,  and,  in  addition  to  treatises  incidentally  dealing  with  it,
Usher's  Power  communicated  by  God  to  the  Prince  had  been  published  in  1660.     On  the
whole  literature,  see  The  History  of  Passive  Obedience  since  the  Reformation,  Amsterdam,

2  vols.  1689-90. — ED.]     The  clergy,  as  a  body,  are  naturally  favourable  to  this  doctrine  ;
and  the  following  passage,  published  only  twelve  years  ago,  will  give  the  reader  an  idea
of  the  views  that  some  of  them  entertain.     The  Rev.  Mr.  Sewell  (Christian  Politics,  Lond.
1844,  p.  157)  says  that   the  reigning  prince  is  "  a  being  armed  with  supreme  physical
power  by  the  hand  and  permission  of  Providence  ;  as  such,  the  lord  of  our  property,
the  master  of  our  lives,  the  fountain  of  honour,  the  dispenser  of  law,  before  whom  each
subject  must  surrender  his  will  and  conform  his  actions.  .  .  .  Who,  when  he  errs,  errs
as  a  man,  and  not  as  a  king,  and  is  responsible,  not  to  man,  but  to  God."     And  at  p.  in,
the  same  writer  informs  us  that  the  church,  "  with  one  uniform,  unhesitating  voice,
has  proclaimed  the  duty  of  '  passive  obedience.'  "     See  also  on  this  slavish  tenet,  as
upheld  by  the  church,  Wordsworth's  Ecclesiast.  Biog.  vol.  iv.  p.  668  ;  Life  of  Ken,  by
a  Layman,  vol.  ii.  p.  523  ;  Lathbury's  Hist,  of  Convocation,  p.  228  ;  Lathbury's  Nonjurors,
PP-  5o.  135.  197  ;  and  a  letter  from  Nelson,  author  of  the  Fasts  and  Festivals,  in  Nichols's
Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iv.  p.  216.     With  good  reason,  therefore,  did  Fox  tell  the  House  of
Commons,  that  "by  being  a  good  churchman,  a  person  might  become  a  bad  citizen."
Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxix.  p.  1377.

[*  Buckle  has  perhaps  overrated  the  enlightenment  of  the  nation  in  this  regard,
as  apart  from  the  pressure  of  special  fears  and  prejudices.  It  is  on  record  that  when
in  1689  Ludlow  sought  to  resume  life  as  an  English  citizen  he  had  to  fly  afresh  because
of  the  intense  feeling  against  him  as  a  regicide.  See  Macaulay,  History,  ch.  xv.  (ed.
1877,  ii.  130-1)  and  the  note  there  on  the  Toryism  of  Addison  in  this  connexion. — ED.]


224  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  reinstate  among  us  that  mischievous  system  which  openly  boasts  of  sub-
jugating the  reason  of  Man.  This  change  in  affairs  was,  if  we  consider  it  in  its
ultimate  results,  the  most  fortunate  circumstance  which  could  have  happened
to  our  country.  In  spite  of  the  difference  of  their  religion,  the  English  clergy
had  always  displayed  an  affection  towards  James,  whose  reverence  for  the
priesthood  they  greatly  admired  ;  though  they  were  anxious  that  the  warmth
of  his  affections  should  be  lavished  on  the  Church  of  England,  and  not  on  the
Church  of  Rome.  They  were  sensible  of  the  advantages  which  would  accrue
to  their  own  order  if  his  piety  could  be  turned  into  a  new  channel. 12?  They
saw  that  it  was  for  his  interest  to  abandon  his  religion  ;  and  they  thought  that
to  a  man  so  cruel  and  so  vicious,  his  own  interest  would  be  the  sole  considera-
tion.128 The  consequence  was,  that  in  one  of  the  most  critical  moments  of  his
life,  they  made  in  his  favour  a  great  and  successful  effort  ;  and  they  not  only
used  all  their  strength  to  defeat  the  bill  by  which  it  was  proposed  to  exclude
him  from  the  succession,  but  when  the  measure  was  rejected  they  presented
an  address  to  Charles,  congratulating  him  on  the  result.129  When  James  actually
mounted  the  throne,  they  continued  to  display  the  same  spirit.  Whether  they
still  hoped  for  his  conversion,  or  whether,  in  their  eagerness  to  persecute  the
dissenters,  they  overlooked  the  danger  to  their  own  church,  is  uncertain  ;  but
it  is  one  of  the  most  singular  and  unquestionable  facts  in  our  history,  that  for
some  time  there  existed  a  strict  alliance  between  a  Protestant  hierarchy  and  a
Popish  king.130  The  terrible  crimes  which  were  the  result  of  this  compact  are
but  too  notorious.  But  what  is  more  worthy  of  attention  is  the  circumstance
that  caused  the  dissolution  of  this  conspiracy  between  the  crown  and  the  church.
The  ground  of  the  quarrel  was  an  attempt  made  by  the  king  to  effect,  in  some
degree,  a  religious  toleration.  By  the  celebrated  Test  and  Corporation  Acts,
it  had  been  ordered  that  all  persons  who  were  employed  by  government  should
be  compelled,  under  a  heavy  penalty,  to  receive  the  sacrament  according  to
the  rites  of  the  English  church.  The  offence  of  James  was  that  he  now  issued
what  was  called  a  Declaration  of  Indulgence,  in  which  he  announced  his  in-
tention of  suspending  the  execution  of  these  laws.131  From  this  moment,  the
position  of  the  two  great  parties  was  entirely  changed.  The  bishops  clearly
perceived  that  the  statutes  which  it  was  thus  attempted  to  abrogate  were  highly
favourable  to  their  own  power  ;  and  hence,  in  their  opinion,  formed  an  essential

127  The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  in  1678,  was  engaged  in  an  attempt  to  convert
James;  and  in  a  letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  he  notices  the  "happy  conse-
quences "  which  would  result  from  his  success.     See  this  characteristic  letter  in  Clarendon
Corresp.  vol.  ii.  pp.  465,  466.     See  also  the  motives  of  the  bishops,  candidly  but  broadly
stated,  in  Mr.  Wilson's  valuable  work,  Life  of  De  Foe,  vol.  i.  p.  74.

128  In  a  high -church  pamphlet,  published  in  1682,  against  the  Bill  of  Exclusion,  the
cause  of  James  is  advocated  ;  but  the  inconvenience  he  would  suffer  by  remaining  a
Catholic  is  strongly  insisted  upon.     See  the  wily  remarks  in  Sowers  Tracts,  vol.  viii.
pp.  258,  259-

129  Wordsworth's  Ecclesiast.  Biog.  vol.  iv.  p.  665.     On  their  eagerness  against  the
bill,  see  Harris's  Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  v.  p.  181  ;  Burners  Own  Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  246  ;
Somers  Tracts,  vol.  x.  pp.  216,  253  ;  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  iii.  p.  353  ;  Carwithen's
Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  431.

130  At  "the  accession  of  James  II.  "  the  pulpits  throughout  England  resounded  with
thanksgivings  ;  and  a  numerous  set  of  addresses  nattered  his  majesty,  in  the  strongest
expressions,  with  assurances  of  unshaken  loyalty  and  obedience,  without  limitation
or  reserve."     NeaVs  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  vol.  v.  p.  2.     See  also  Calamy's  Life,  vol.  i.
p.  118.

is1  On  the  i8th  March,  1687,  the  king  announced  to  the  Privy  Council  that  he  had
determined  "  to  grant,  by  his  own  authority,  entire  liberty  of  conscience  to  all  his  sub-
jects. On  the  4th  April  appeared  the  memorable  Declaration  of  Indulgence."
Macaulay's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  211  ;  and  see  Life  of  James  II.,  edited  by  Clarke,
vol.  ii.  p.  112.  There  is  a  summary  of  the  Declaration  in  NeaVs  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,
vol.  v.  pp.  30,  31.  As  to  the  second  Declaration,  see  Macaulay,  vol.  ii.  pp.  344,  345  J
Clarendon  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  170.


r

part  of  the


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          225

irt  of  the  constitution  of  a  Christian  country.  They  had  willingly  combined
with  James  while  he  assisted  them  in  persecuting  men  who  worshipped  God
in  a  manner  different  from  themselves.132  So  long  as  this  compact  held  good,
they  were  indifferent  as  to  matters  which  they  considered  to  be  of  minor  im-
portance. They  looked  on  in  silence  while  the  king  was  amassing  the  materials
with  which  he  hoped  to  turn  a  free  government  into  an  absolute  monarchy.133
They  saw  Jeffreys  and  Kirke  torturing  their  fellow-subjects  ;  they  saw  the
gaols  crowded  with  prisoners,  and  the  scaffolds  streaming  with  blood.134  They
were  well  pleased  that  some  of  the  best  and  ablest  men  in  the  kingdom  should
be  barbarously  persecuted  ;  that  Baxter  should  be  thrown  into  prison,  and
that  Howe  should  be  forced  into  exile.  They  witnessed  with  composure  the
most  revolting  cruelties,  because  the  victims  of  them  were  the  opponents  of
the  English  church.  Although  the  minds  of  men  were  filled  with  terror  and
with  loathing,  the  bishops  made  no  complaint.  They  preserved  their  loyalty
unimpaired,  and  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  humble  submission  to  the  Lord's
anointed.135  But  the  moment  James  proposed  to  protect  against  perse-
cution those  who  were  hostile  to  the  church  ;  the  moment  he  announced
his  intention  of  breaking  down  that  monopoly  of  offices  and  of  honours  which
the  bishops  had  long  secured  for  their  own  party  ; — the  moment  this  took  place,
the  hierarchy  became  alive  to  the  dangers  with  which  the  country  was  threatened
from  the  violence  of  so  arbitrary  a  prince.136  The  king  had  laid  his  hand  on  the


132  It  was  in  the  autumn  of  1685  that  the  clergy  and  the  government    persecuted
the  dissenters  with  the  greatest  virulence.     See  Macaulay's  Hist.  vol.  i.  pp.  667,  668.
Compare  Neat's  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  vol.  v.  pp.  4-12,  with  a  letter  from  Lord  Clarendon,
dated  2ist  December,  1685,  in  Clarendon  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  192.     It  is  said  (Burnefs
Own  Time,  vol.  iii.  pp.  175,  176),  that  on  many  occasions  the  church  party  made  use  of
the  ecclesiastical  courts  to  extort  money  from  the  Nonconformists  ;  and  for  confir-
mation of  this  see  Mackintosh's  Revolution  of  1688,  pp.  173,  640.

133  It  appears  from  the  accounts  in  the  War-Office,  that  James,  even  in  the  first  year
of  his  reign,  had  a  standing  army  of  nearly  20,000  men.     Mackintosh's  Revolution,  pp.  3,
77,  688  :  "  A  disciplined  army  of  about  20,000  men  was,  for  the  first  time,  established
during  peace' in  this  island."     As  this  naturally  inspired  great  alarm,  the  king  gave
out  that  the  number  did  not  exced  15,000.     Life  of  James  II.,  edited  by  Clarke,  vol.  ii.
PP-  52,  57-

134  Compare  Burnet,  vol.  iii.  pp.  55-62,  with  Dalrymple's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  part  i.  book  ii.
pp.  198-203.     Ken,  so  far  as  I  remember,  was  the  only  one  who  set  his  face  against
these  atrocities.    He  was  a  very  humane  man,  and  did  what  he  could  to  mitigate  the
sufferings  of  the  prisoners  in  Monmouth's  rebellion  ;  but  it  is  not  mentioned  that  he
attempted  to  stop  the  persecutions  directed  against  the  innocent  Nonconformists,  who
were  barbarously  punished,  not  because  they  rebelled,  but  because  they  dissented.
Life  of  Ken,  by  a  Layman,  vol.  i.  p.  298.

135  "  From  the  conduct  of  the  clergy  in  this  and  the  former  reign,  it  is  quite  clear  that
if  the  king  had  been  a  Protestant,  of  the  profession  of  the  Church  of  England,  or  even
a  quiet,  submissive  Catholic,  without  any  zeal  for  his  religion, — confining  himself  solely
to  matters  of  state,  and  having  a  proper  respect  for  church -property, — he  might  have
plundered  other  Protestants  at  his  pleasure,  and  have  trampled  upon  the  liberties  of
his  country,  without  the  danger  of  resistance."     Wilson's  Life  of  De  Foe,  vol.  i.  p.  136.
Or,  as  Fox  says, ^  Thus,  as  long  as  James  contented  himself  with  absolute  power  in
civil  matters,  and~did  not  make  use  of  his  authority  against  the  church,  everything  went
smooth  and  easy."     Fox's  Hist,  of  James  II.  p.  165.

138  Compare  NeaTs  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  vol.  v.  p.  58,  with  Life  of  James  7/.,^edit.
Clarke,  vol.  ii.  p.  70,  where  it  is  well  said  that  the  clergy  of  the  Church  of  England  "  had
preached  prerogative  and  the  sovereign  power  to  the  highest  pitch,  while  it  was  favour-
able to  them  ;  but  when  they  apprehended  the  least  danger  from  it,  they  cried  out  as
soon  as  the  shoe  pinched,  though  it  was  of  their  own  putting  on."  See  also  pp.  113.  164.
What  their  servility  was  to  the  crown,  while  they  thought  that  the  crown  was  with
them,  may  be  estimated  from  the  statement  of  De  Foe  :  "  I  have  heard  it  publicly
preached,  that  if  the  king  commanded  my  head,  and  sent  his  messengers  to  fetch  it,

15


226  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ark,  and  the  guardians  of  the  temple  flew  to  arms.  How  could  they  tolerate
a  prince  who  would  not  allow  them  to  persecute  their  enemies  ?  How  could
they  support  a  sovereign  who  sought  to  favour  those  who  differed  from  the
national  church  ?  They  soon  determined  on  the  line  of  conduct  it  behoved
them  to  take.  With  an  almost  unanimous  voice,  they  refused  to  obey  the  order
by  which  the  king  commanded  them  to  read  in  their  churches  the  edict  for
religious  toleration.13?  Nor  did  they  stop  there.  So  great  was  their  enmity
against  him  they  had  recently  cherished,  that  they  actually  applied  for  aid  to
those  very  dissenters  whom,  only  a  few  weeks  before,  they  had  hotly  perse-
cuted ;  seeking  by  magnificent  promises  to  win  over  to  their  side  men  they  had
hitherto  hunted  even  to  the  death.138  The  most  eminent  of  the  Nonconformists
were  far  from  being  duped  by  this  sudden  affection.139  But  their  hatred  of
Popery,  and  their  fear  of  the  ulterior  designs  of  the  king,  prevailed  over  every
other  consideration  ;  and  there  arose  that  singular  combination  between  church-
men and  dissenters,  which  has  never  since  been  repeated.  This  coalition,  backed
by  the  general  voice  of  the  people,  soon  overturned  the  throne,  and  gave  rise
to  what  is  justly  deemed  one  of  the  most  important  events  in  the  history  of
England.

Thus  it  was  that  the  proximate  cause  of  that  great  revolution  which  cost
James  his  crown,  was  the  publication  by  the  king  of  an  edict  of  religious  tolera-
tion, and  the  consequent  indignation  of  the  clergy  at  seeing  so  audacious  an
act  performed  by  a  Christian  prince.  It  is  true  that  if  other  things  had  not
conspired,  this  alone  could  never  have  effected  so  great  a  change.  But  it  was
the  immediate  cause  of  it,  because  it  was  the  cause  of  the  schism  between  the
church  and  the  throne,  and  of  the  alliance  between  the  church  and  the  dissenter
This  is  a  fact  never  to  be  forgotten.  We  ought  never  to  forget  that  the  first

I  was  bound  to  submit,  and  stand  while  it  was  cut  off."  Wilson's  Life  of  De  Foe,  vol.  i.
p.  118.

137  D'Oyly  (Life  of  Sancroft,  p.  164)  says,  "  On  the  whole,  it  is  supposed  that  not
more  than  200  out  of  the  whole  body  of  clergy,  estimated  at  10,000,  complied  with  the
king's  requisition."     "  Only  seven  obeyed  in  the  city  of  London,  and  not  above  200
all  England  over."     Burnet's  Own  Time,  vol.  iii.  p.  218.     On  Sunday,  2oth  May,  1688,
Lord  Clarendon  writes  :  "  I  was  at  St.  James's  Church  ;  in  the  evening  I  had  an  account
that  the  Declaration  was  read  only  in  four  churches  in  the  city  and  liberties."   Clarendon
Corresp.  vol.  ii.  pp.  172,  173.    When  this  conduct  became  known,  it  was  observed  that
the  church  "  supported  the  crown  only  so  long  as  she  dictated  to  it  ;  and  became  re-
bellious at  the  moment  when  she  was  forbidden  to  be  intolerant."     Mackintosh's  Revolu-
tion of  1688,  p.  255.

138  The  first  advances  were  made  when  the  Declaration  of  the  king  in  favour  of
"liberty  of  conscience"  was  on  the  point  of  being  issued,  and  immediately  after  the
proceedings  at  Oxford  had  shown  his  determination  to  break  down  the  monopoly  of
offices  possessed  by  the  church.     "  The  clergy  at  the  same  time  prayed  and  entreated
the  dissenters  to  appear  on  their  side,  and  stand  by  the  Establishment,  making  large
promises  of  favour  and  brotherly  affection  if  ever  they  came  into  power."     Neal's  Hist,
of  the  Puritans,  vol.  v.  p.  29.     See  also,  at  pp.  58,  59,  the  conciliating  letter  from  the
Archbishop  of  Canterbury  after  the  Declaration.     "  Such,"  says  Neal,  "  such  was  the
language  of  the  church  in  distress  !  "     Compare  Birch's  Life  of  Tillotson,  p.  153  ;  Ellis's
Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  63;  Ellis' s  Orig.  Letters,  2nd  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  117;  Mackintosh's
Revolution,  p.  286  ;  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  p.  132  ;  Macaulay's  Hist,  fff  England,  vol.  ii.
pp.  218,  219.

139  See  the  indignant  language  of  De  Foe  (Wilson's  Life  of  De  Foe,  vol.  i.  pp.  130,
J31*  !33»  J34)  ;  and  a  Letter  from  a  Dissenter  to  the  Petitioning  Bishops,  in  Somers  Tracts,
vol.  ix.  pp.  117,  1 1 8.     The  writer  says  :  "  Pray,  my  lords,  let  me  ask  you  a  question.
Suppose  the  king,  instead  of  his  Declaration,  had  issued  out  a  proclamation,  command-
ing justices  of  the  peace,  constables,  informers,  and  all  other  persons,  to  be  more  rigorous,
if  possible,  against  dissenters,  and  do  their  utmost  to  the  perfect  quelling  and  destroying
them  ;  and  had  ordered  this  to  be  read  in  your  churches  in  the  time  of  divine  service, —
would  you  have  made  any  scruple  of  that  ?  "


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          227

and  only  time  the  Church  of  England  has  made  war  upon  the  crown,  was  when
the  crown  had  declared  its  intention  of  tolerating,  and  in  some  degree  protecting,
the  rival  religions  of  the  country.14(>  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Declaration
which  was  then  issued  was  illegal,  and  that  it  was  conceived  in  an  insidious
spirit.  But  declarations  equally  illegal,  equally  insidious,  and  much  more
tyrannical,  had  on  other  occasions  been  made  by  the  sovereign,  without  ex-
citing the  anger  of  the  clergy.141  These  are  things  which  it  is  good  for  us  to
ponder.  These  are  lessons  of  inestimable  value  for  those  to  whom  it  is  given,
not  indeed  to  direct,  but  in  some  degree  to  modify,  the  march  of  public  opinion.
As  to  the  people  in  general,  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  exaggerate  the  obliga-
tions which  they  and  all  of  us  owe  to  the  Revolution  of  1688.  But  let  them
take  heed  that  superstition  does  not  mingle  with  their  gratitude.  Let  them
admire  that  majestic  edifice  of  national  liberty,  which  stands  alone  in  Europe
like  a  beacon  in  the  midst  of  the  waters  ;  but  let  them  not  think  that  they  owe
anything  to  men  who,  in  contributing  to  its  erection,  sought  the  gratification
of  their  own  selfishness,  and  the  consolidation  of  that  spiritual  power  which  by
it  they  fondly  hoped  to  secure.

It  is,  indeed,  difficult  to  conceive  the  full  amount  of  the  impetus  given  to
English  civilization  by  the  expulsion  of  the  House  of  Stuart.*  Among  the
most  immediate  results  may  be  mentioned  the  limits  that  were  set  to  the  royal
prerogative  ;  142  the  important  steps  that  were  taken  towards  religious  tolera-
tion ;  143  the  remarkable  and  permanent  improvement  in  the  administration

140  That  this  was  the  immediate  cause,  so  far  as  the  head  of  the  church  party  was
concerned,  is  unblushingly  avowed  by  the  biographer  and  defender  of  the  then  Arch-
bishop of  Canterbury.     "  The  order  published  from  the  king  in  council,  May  4th,  1688,
directing  the  archbishops  and  bishops  to  send  to  the  clergy  in  their  respective  dioceses
the  Declaration  for  Liberty  of  Conscience,  to  be  publicly  read  in  all  the  churches  of  the
kingdom,  made  it  impossible  for  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  to  abstain  any  longer
from  engaging  in  an  open  and  declared  opposition  to  the  counsels  under  which  the  king
was  now  unhappily  acting."     D'Oyly's  Life  of  Sancroft,  p.  151.

141  Some  writers  have  attempted  to  defend  the  clergy,  on  the  ground  that  they  thought
it  illegal  to  publish  a  declaration  of  this  kind.     But  such  a  defence  is  incompatible  with
their  doctrine  of  passive  obedience  ;  and  besides  this,  it  was  contradicted  by  precedents
and  decisions  of  their  own.     Jeremy  Taylor,  in  his  Ductor  Dubitantium,  their  great
work  of  authority,  asserts  that  "  the  unlawful  proclamations  and  edicts  of  a  true  prince
may  be  published  by  the  clergy  in  their  several  charges."     Heber's  Life  of  Taylor,
p.  cclxxxvi.     Heber  adds  :  "  I  wish  I  had  not  found  this  in  Taylor  ;  and  I  thank  Heaven
that  the  principle  was  not  adopted  by  the  English  clergy  in  1687."     But  why  was  it
not  adopted  in  1687  ?     Simply  because  in  1687  the  king  attacked  the  monopoly  enjoyed
by  the  clergy  ;  and  therefore  the  clergy  forgot  their  principle,  that  they  might  smite
their  enemy.     And  what  makes  the  motives  of  this  change  still  more  palpable  is,  that
as  late  as  1681,  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  caused  the  clergy  to  read  a  Declaration
issued  by  Charles  II. ;  and  that  in  a  revised  copy  of  the  Liturgy  he  had  also  added  to
the  rubric  to  the  same  effect.     See  Neat's  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  vol.  v.  p.  56.     Compare
Calamy's  Own  Life,  vol.  i.  pp.  199,  200  ;  Mackintosh's  Revolution,  pp.  242,  243  ;  D'Oyly's
Life  of  Sancroft,  p.  152  ;  King's  Life  of  Locke,  vol.  i.  p.  259 ;  Life  of  James  II.,  edit.
Clarke,  vol.  ii.  p.  156.

142  They  are  summed  up  in  a  popular  pamphlet  ascribed  to  Lord  Somers,  and  printed
in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  x.  pp.  263,  264.     The  diminished  respect  felt  for  the  Crown  after
1688  is  judiciously  noticed  in  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  9.

143  The  Toleration  Act  was  passed  in  1689.     A  copy  of  it  is  given  by  the  historians
of  the  dissenters,  who  call  it  their  Magna  Charta.     See  Bogue  and  Bennett's  History
of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  i.  pp.  187-198.     The  historian  of  the  Catholics  equally  allows  that
the  reign  of  William  III.  is  "the  era  from  which  their  enjoyment  of  religious  toleration
may  be  .dated."     Butler's  Memoirs  of  the  Catholics,  vol.  iii.  pp.  122,  139.     This  is  said

[*  The  historian  appears  to  have  forgotten  here  his  account  (above  pp.  215-219)
of  the  "vast  legislative  reforms"  which  took  place  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  in  virtue
of  the  movement  of  opinion  then  on  foot. — ED.]


228  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  justice  ;  144  the  final  abolition  of  a  censorship  over  the  press  ;  145  and,  what
has  not  excited  sufficient  attention,  the  rapid  growth  of  those  great  monetary
interests  by  which,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  the  prejudices  of  the  superstitious
classes  have  in  no  small  degree  been  counterbalanced.146  These  are  the  main
characteristics  of  the  reign  of  William  III.  ;  a  reign  often  aspersed,  and  little
understood,147  but  of  which  it  may  be  truly  said  that,  taking  its  difficulties  into
due  consideration,  it  is  the  most  successful  and  the  most  splendid  recorded  in
the  history  of  any  country.  But  these  topics  rather  belong  to  the  subsequent
volumes  of  this  work  ;  and  at  present  we  are  only  concerned  in  tracing  the
effects  of  the  Revolution  upon  that  ecclesiastical  power  by  which  it  was  imme-
diately brought  about.

Scarcely  had  the  clergy  succeeded  in  expelling  James,  when  the  greater  number
of  them  repented  of  their  own  act.148  Indeed,  even  before  he  was  driven  from
the  country,  several  things  had  occurred  to  make  them  doubt  the  policy  of  the

by  Mr.  Butler  in  regard,  not  to  the  Protestant  dissenters,  but  to  the  Catholics  ;  so  that
we  have  the  admission  of  both  parties  as  to  the  importance  of  this  epoch.  Even  the
shameful  act  forced  upon  William  in  1700  was,  as  Mr.  Hallam  truly  says,  evaded  in  its
worst  provisions.  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  pp.  332,  333.

144  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  iv.  pp.  102,  355,  and  his  Chief -Justices,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95,
116,  118,  136,  142,  143.     See  also  Harrington's  Observations  on  the.  Statutes,  pp.  23,  102,
558  ;  and  even  Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  236,  vol.  ix.  p.  243  :  an  unwary  con-
cession from  such  an  enemy  to  popular  liberty.

145  This  was  effected  before  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.     See  Campbell's
Chancellors,  vol.  iv.  pp.   121,   122.     Compare  Lord  Cainden  on  Literary  Property,  in
Part.  Hist.  vol.  xvii.  p.  994  ;  Hunt's  Hist,  of  Newspapers,  vol.  i.  pp.  161,  162  ;  Somers
Tracts,  vol.  xiii.  p.  555  ;  and  a  more  detailed  account  in  Macaulay's  Hist,  of  England,
vol.  iv.  pp.  348  seq.  540  seq.  :  though  Mr.  Macaulay,  in  ascribing,  p.  353,  so  much  to
the  influence  of  Blount,  has  not,  I  think,  sufficiently  dwelt  on  the  operation  of  larger
and  more  general  causes.

146  Mr.  Cooke  (Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  ii.  pp.  5,  148)  notices  this  remarkable  rise  of  the
inonied  classes  early  in  the  eighteenth  century;   but  he  merely  observes  that  the  conse-
quence was  to  strengthen  the  Whig  party.     Though  this  is  undoubtedly  true,  the  ultimate
results,  as  I  shall  hereafter  point  out,  were  far  more  important  than  any  political  or
even  economical  consequences.     It  was  not  till  1694  that  the  Bank  of  England  was
established  ;  and  this  great  institution  at  first  met  with  the  warmest  opposition  from
the  admirers  of  old  times,  who  thought  it  must  be  useless  because  their  ancestors  did
without  it.     See  the  curious  details  in  Sinclair's  Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  iii.  pp.  6-9  ;
and  on  the  connexion  between  it  and  the  Whigs,  see  Macaulay's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iv.
p.  502.     There  is  a  short  account  of  its  origin  and  progress  in  Smith's  Wealth  of  Rations.
book  ii.  chap.  ii.  p.  130.     [The  rise  of  the  inonied  classes  had  begun  long  before  the
Revolution.     About  1635  "  there  were  more  merchants  to  be  found  upon  the  Exchange
worth  each  one  thousand  pounds  and  upwards  than  there  were  in  the  former  days,
before  the  year  1600,  to  be  found  worth  one  hundred  pounds  each  "  (Sir  Josiah  Child,
New  Discourse  of  Trade,  4th  ed.  p.  9).     This  was  partly  a  result  of  the  system  of  trade
monopolies,  as  to  which  see  Hallam,  Const.  Hist.   loth  ed.  ii.  n.    But  in  the  reign  of
Charles  I.,  despite  his  misgovernment,  there  was  remarkable  financial  prosperity,  the
result  of  the  long  peace  (Hallam,  ii.  81-82). — ED.]

147  Frequently  misunderstood,  even  by  those  who  praise  it.     Thus,  for  instance,  a
living  writer  informs  us  that,  "  great  as  have  been  the  obligations  which  England  owes,
in  many  different  views,  to  the  Revolution,  it  is  beyond  all  question  the  greatest,  that
it  brought  in  a  sovereign  instructed  in  the  art  of  overcoming  the  ignorant  impatience
of  taxation  which  is  the  invariable  characteristic  of  free  communities  ;  and  thus  gave
it  a  government  capable  of  turning  to  the  best  account  the  activity  and  energy  of  its
inhabitants,  at  the  same  time  that  it  had  the  means  given  it  of  maintaining  their  inde-
pendence."    Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  vii.  p.  5.     This,  I  should  suppose,  is  the  most
eccentric  eulogy  ever  passed  on  William  III.

148  On  their  sudden  repentance,  and  on  the  causes  of  it,  see  .\eal's  Hist,  of  the  Purita-ns.
vol.  v.  p.  71.


.

cour.se  they


me

r,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          229

urse  they  were  pursuing.  During  the  last  few  weeks  that  he  was  allowed  to
reign,  he  had  shown  symptoms  of  increasing  respect  for  the  English  hierarchy,
he  archbishopric  of  York  had  so  long  been  vacant  as  to  cause  a  belief  that  it
intention  of  the  crown  either  to  appoint  to  it  a  Catholic,  or  else  to  seize
revenues.149  But  James,  to  the  delight  of  the  church,  now  filled  up  this
important  office  by  nominating  Lamplugh,  who  was  well  known  to  be  a  stanch
churchman  and  a  zealous  defender  of  episcopal  privileges.  15°  Just  before  this,
the  king  also  rescinded  the  order  by  which  the  Bishop  of  London  had  been  sus-
pended from  the  exercise  of  his  functions.151  To  the  bishops  in  general  he  made
great  promises  of  future  favour  ;  152  some  of  them,  it  was  said,  were  to  be  called
to  his  privy  council  ;  and  in  the  meantime  he  cancelled  that  ecclesiastical
commission  which,  by  limiting  their  power,  had  excited  their  anger.153  Besides
this,  there  occurred  some  other  circumstances  which  the  clergy  now  had  to
consider.  It  was  rumoured,  and  it  was  generally  believed,  that  William  was
no  great  admirer  of  ecclesiastical  establishments  ;  and  that,  being  a  friend  to
toleration,  he  was  more  likely  to  diminish  the  power  than  increase  the  privileges
of  the  English  hierarchy.154  It  was  also  known  that  he  favoured  the  Presby-

14y  Mackintosh's  Revolution  of  1688,  pp.  81,  191.  After  the  death  of  Archbishop
Dolben,  "  the  see  was  kept  vacant  for  more  than  two  years,"  and  Cartwright  hoped  to
obtain  it.  See  Cartwrighfs  Diary,  by  Hunter,  4to,  1843,  p.  45.  In  the  same  way,  we
find  from  a  letter  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  (Clarendon  Corresp.  vol.  i.  p.  409),
that  in  May,  1686,  uneasiness  was  felt  because  the  Irish  bishoprics  were  not  filled  up.
Compare  Burnet,  vol.  iii.  p.  103.  Carwithen  (Hist,  of  the  Ch.  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  492)
says  that  James  had  intended  to  raise  the  Jesuit  Petre  to  the  archbishopric.

1V)  Lamplugh  was  translated  from  the  bishopric  of  Exeter  to  the  archbishopric  of
York  in  November,  1688.  See  the  contemporary  account  in  the  Ellis  Correspondence,
vol.  ii.  p.  303,  and  Ellis' s  Original  Letters,  second  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  151.  He  was  a  most
orthodox  man  ;  and  not  only  hated  the  dissenters  but  showed  his  zeal  by  persecuting
them.  Wilson's  Life  of  De  Foe,  vol.  i.  pp.  94,  95.  Compare  an  anecdote  of  him  in
Baxter's  Life  of  Himself,  folio,  1696,  part  iii.  pp.  178,  179.

151  In  a  letter  dated  London,  agth  September,  1688  (Ellis    Correspondence,  vol.  ii.
p.  224,  and  Ellis' s  Orig.  Letters,  second  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  128),  it  is  stated  that  the  Bishop
of  London's  "  suspension  is  taken  off."     See  also  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  p.  215.     This
is  the  more  observable,  because,  according  to  Johnstone,  there  was  an  intention,  in
December,  1687,  of  depriving  him.     Mackintosh's  Revolution,  pp.  211,  212.

152  This  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  king  again  to  favour  the  bishops  and  the  church
became  a  matter  of  common  remark  in  September,  1688.     See  Ellis  Correspond,  vol.  ii.
pp.  201,  202,  209,  219, 224,  225, 226,  227  ;  Clarendon  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  pp.  188, 192.     Sir
John  Reresby,  who  was  then  in  London,  writes,  in  October,  1688,  that  James  "begins
again  to  court  the  Church  of  England."     Reresby' s  Memoirs,  p.  357.     Indeed,  the  diffi-
culties of  James  were  now  becoming  so  great,  that  he  had  hardly  any  choice.

lr'3  Ellis  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  211  ;  Life  of  James  II.,  edit.  Clarke,  vol.  ii.  p.
189.

154  In  November,  1687,  it  was  said  that  he  wished  the  dissenters  to  have  "  entire
liberty  for  the  full  exercise  of  their  religion,"  and  to  be  freed  "  from  the  severity  of  the
penal  laws."  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  p.  184.  This  is  the  earliest  distinct  notice  I  have
seen  of  William's  desire  to  deprive  the  church  of  the  power  of  punishing  nonconformists  ,
but  after  he  arrived  in  England  his  intentions  became  obvious.  In  January,  1688-9,
the  friends  of  the  church  complained  "  that  the  countenance  he  gave  the  dissenters
gave  too  much  cause  of  jealousy  to  the  Church  of  England."  Clarendon  Correspond.
vol.  ii.  p.  238.  Compare  Neal's  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  vol.  v.  p.  81  ;  Bogue  and  Bennett's
Hist,  of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  ii.  p.  318  ;  Birch's  Life  of  Tillotson,  pp.  156,  157  ;  Somers
Tracts,  vol.  x.  p.  341,  vol.  xi.  p.  108.  Burnet,  in  his  summary  of  the  character  of  William,
observes  that  "  his  indifference  as  to  the  forms  of  church -government,  and  his  being
zealous  for  toleration,  together  with  his  cold  behaviour  towards  the  clergy,  gave  them
generally  very  ill  impressions  of  him."  Own  Time,  vol.  iv.  p.  550.  At  p.  192  the  bishop
says,  "  He  took  no  notice  of  the  clergy,  and  seemed  to  have  little  concern  in  the  matters
of  the  church  or  of  religion,"


230  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

terians,  whom  the  chur.ch  not  unreasonably  regarded  as  her  bitterest  enemies.155
And  when,  in  addition  to  all  this,  William,  on  mere  grounds  of  expediency,
actually  abolished  episcopacy  in  Scotland,  it  became  evident  that,  by  thus
repudiating  the  doctrine  of  divine  right,  he  had  directed  a  great  blow  against
those  opinions  on  which,  in  England,  ecclesiastical  authority  was  based.156

While  these  things  were  agitating  the  public  mind,  the  eyes  of  men  were
naturally  turned  upon  the  bishops,  who,  though  they  had  lost  much  of  their
former  power,  were  still  respected  by  a  large  majority  of  the  people  as  the  guar-
dians of  the  national  religion.  But  at  this  critical  moment  they  were  so  blinded
either  by  their  ambition  or  by  their  prejudices,  that  they  adopted  a  course
which  of  all  others  was  the  most  injurious  to  their  reputation.  They  made  a
sudden  attempt  to  reverse  that  political  movement  of  which  they  were  them-
selves the  principal  originators.  Their  conduct  on  this  occasion  amply  con-
firms that  account  of  their  motives  which  I  have  already  given.  If,  in  aiding
those  preliminary  measures  by  which  the  Revolution  was  effected,  they  had
been  moved  by  a  desire  of  relieving  the  nation  from  despotism,  they  would  have
eagerly  welcomed  that  great  man  at  whose  approach  the  despot  took  to  flight.
This  is  what  the  clergy  would  have  done,  if  they  had  loved  their  country  better
than  they  loved  their  order.  But  they  pursued  a  precisely  opposite  course,
because  they  preferred  the  petty  interests  of  their  own  class  to  the  welfare  of
the  great  body  of  the  people,  and  because  they  would  rather  that  the  country
should  be  oppressed  than  that  the  church  should  be  humbled.  Nearly  the  whole
of  the  bishops  and  clergy  had,  only  a  few  weeks  before,  braved  the  anger  of
their  sovereign  sooner  than  read  in  their  churches  an  edict  for  religious  tolera-
tion, and  seven  of  the  most  influential  of  the  episcopal  order  had,  in  the  same
cause,  willingly  submitted  to  the  risk  of  a  public  trial  before  the  ordinary  tri-
bunals of  the  land.  This  bold  course  they  professed  to  have  adopted,  not  be-
cause they  disliked  toleration,  but  because  they  hated  tyranny.  And  yet  when
William  arrived  in  England,  and  when  James  stole  away  from  the  "kingdom
like  a  thief  in  the  night,  this  same  ecclesiastical  profession  pressed  forward  to
reject  that  great  man,  who,  without  striking  a  blow,  had  by  his  mere  presence
saved  the  country  from  the  slavery  with  which  it  was  threatened.  We  shall
not  easily  find  in  modern  history  another  instance  of  such  gross  inconsistency,
or  rather,  let  us  say,  of  such  selfish  and  reckless  ambition.  For  this  change
of  plan,  far  from  being  concealed,  was  so  openly  displayed,  and  the  causes  of
it  were  so  obvious,  that  the  scandal  was  laid  bare  before  the  whole  country.
Within  the  space  of  a  few  weeks  the  apostasy  was  consummated.  The  first
in  the  field  was  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who,  anxious  to  retain  his  office,
had  promised  to  wait  upon  William.  But  when  he  saw  the  direction  things
were  likely  to  take  he  withdrew  his  promise,  and  would  not  recognize  a  prince

155  Sir  John  Reresby,  who  was  an  attentive  observer  of  what  was  going  on,  says,
"  The  prince,  upon  his  arrival,  seemed  more  inclined  to  the  Presbyterians  than  to  the
members  of  the  church  ;  which  startled  the  clergy."  Reresby's  Memoirs,  p.  375  :  see
also  pp.  399,  405  :  ''  the  church -people  hated  the  Dutch,  and  had  rather  turn  Papists
than  receive  the  Presbyterians  among  them."  Compare  Evelyn's  Diary,  vol.  iii.  p.  281  :
"  the  Presbyterians,  our  new  governors."

ise  Burnet  (Own  Time,  vol.  iv.  p.  50)  says  of  the  clergy  in  1689  :  "  The  king  was  sus-
pected by  them,  by  reason  of  the  favour  showed  to  dissenters  ;  but  chiefly  for  his  abolish-
ing episcopacy  in  Scotland,  and  his  consenting  to  the  setting  up  presbytery  there."
On  this  great  change,  compare  Bogue  and  Bennett's  History  of  Dissenters,  vol.  ii.
PP-  379-384  :  Barry's  Hist,  of  the  Orkney  Islands,  p.  257  ;  NeaVs  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,
vol.  v.  pp.  85,  86  :  and  on  the  indignation  felt  by  the  Anglican  clergy  at  the  abolition
of  episcopacy  in  Scotland,  see  a  contemporary  pamphlet  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  pp.  510,
516,  where  fears  are  expressed  lest  William  should  effect  a  similar  measure  in  England.
The  writer  very  fairly  observes,  p.  522,  "  For  if  we  give  up  the  jus  divinum  of  episcopacy
in  Scotland,  we  must  yield  it  also  as  to  England.  And  then  we  are  wholly  precarious."
See  also  vol.  x.  pp.  341,  503  ;  Lathbury's  Hist,  of  Convocation,  pp.  277,  278  ;  and  Mac-
pherson's  Original  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  509.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          231

who  showed  such  indifference  to  the  sacred  order.157  Indeed,  so  great  was  his
anger,  that  he  sharply  rebuked  his  chaplain  for  presuming  to  pray  for  William
and  Mary,  although  they  had  been  proclaimed  with  the  full  consent  of  the  nation,
and  although  the  crown  had  been  delivered  to  them  by  the  solemn  and  de-
liberate act  of  a  public  convention  of  the  estates  of  the  realm.158  While  such
was  the  conduct  of  the  primate  of  England,  his  brethren  were  not  wanting  to
him  in  this  great  emergency  of  their  common  fate.  The  oath  of  allegiance  was
refused  not  only  by  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  but  also  by  the  Bishop  of
Bath  and  Wells,  by  the  Bishop  of  Chester,  by  the  Bishop  of  Chichester,  by  the
Bishop  of  Ely,  by  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  by  the  Bishop  of  Norwich,  by  the
Bishop  of  Peterborough,  and  by  the  Bishop  of  Worcester.159  As  to  the  inferior
clergy,  our  information  is  less  precise  ;  but  it  is  said  that  about  six  hundred
of  them  imitated  their  superiors  in  declining  to  recognize  for  their  king  him
whom  the  country  had  elected.160  The  other  members  of  this  turbulent  faction
were  unwilling,  by  so  bold  a  measure,  to  incur  that  deprivation  of  their  livings
with  which  William  would  probably  have  visited  them.  They  therefore  pre-
ferred a  safer  and  more  inglorious  opposition,  by  which  they  could  embarrass
the  government  without  injuring  themselves,  and  could  gain  the  reputation
of  orthodoxy  without  incurring  the  pains  of  martyrdom.

The  effect  which  all  this  produced  on  the  temper  of  the  nation  may  be  easily
imagined.  The  question  was  now  narrowed  to  an  issue  which  every  plain  man
could  at  once  understand.  On  the  one  side,  there  was  an  overwhelming  majority
of  the  clergy.161  On  the  other  side,  there  was  all  the  intellect  of  England,  and
all  her  dearest  interests.  The  mere  fact  that  such  an  opposition  could  exist
without  kindling  a  civil  war,  showed  how  the  growing  intelligence  of  the  people
had  weakened  the  authority  of  the  ecclesiastical  profession.  Besides  this,  the
opposition  was  not  only  futile,  but  it  was  also  injurious  to  the  class  that  made
it. 162  For  it  was  now  seen  that  the  clergy  cared  for  the  people  only  as  long  as

157  Burners  Own  Time,  vol.  iii.  p.  340.     Burnet,  who  had  the  best  means  of  informa-
tion, says,  "  Though  he  had  once  agreed  to  it,  yet  would  not  come."     Lord  Clarendon,
in  his  Diary,  3rd  January,  1688-9,  writes  that  the  archbishop  expressed  to  him  on  that
day  his  determination  neither  to  call  on  William  nor  even  to  send  to  him  (Clarendon
Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  240)  ;  and  this  resolution  appears  to  have  been  taken  deliberately  :
"  he  was  careful  not  to  do  it,  for  the  reasons  he  formerly  gave  me."

158  See  the  account  given  by  his  chaplain  Wharton,  in  D'Oyly's  Life  of  Sancroft,  p.  259,
where  it  is  stated  that  the  archbishop  was  very  irate  ("  vehementer  excandescens  " ),
and  told  him,  "  that  he  must  thenceforward  desist  from  offering  prayers  for  the  new
king  and  queen,  or  else  from  performing  the  duties  of  his  chapel."     See  also  Birch's  Life
of  Tillotson,  p.  144.     Thus  too  the  Bishop  of  Norwich  declared  "  that  he  would  not  pray
for  King  William  and  Queen  Mary."     Clarendon  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  263.     The  same
spirit  was  universal  among  the  high -church  clergy  ;  and  when  public  prayers  were
offered  up  for  the  king  and  queen,  they  were  called  by  the  nonjurors  "  the  immoral
prayers,"  and  this  became  a  technical  and  recognized  expression.     Life  of  Ken,  by  a
Layman,  vol.  ii.  pp.  648,  650.

159  Lathbury's  Hist,  of  the  Nonjurors,  p.  45  ;  D'Oyly's  Sancroft,  p.  260.

160  Nairne's  Papers  mention,  in  1693,  "  six  hundred  ministers  who  have  not  taken
the  oaths."     Macpherson's  Orig.  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  459.

161  The  only  friends  William  possessed  among  the  clergy  were  the  low -churchmen,
as  they  were  afterwards  called  ;  and  it  is  supposed  that  they  formed  barely  a  tenth  of
the  entire  body  in  1689  :  "  We  should  probably  overrate  their  numerical  strength,  if
we  were  to  estimate  them  at  a  tenth  part  of  the  priesthood."     Macaulay's  Hist,  of  Eng-
land, vol.  iii.  p.  74.

162  The  earliest  allusion  I  have  seen  to  the  injury  the  clergy  were  inflicting  on  the
church,  by  their  conduct  after  the  arrival  of  William,  is  in  Evelyn's  Diary,  vol.  iii.  p^  273.
— a  curious  passage,  gently  hinting  at  the  "  wonder  of  many,"  at  the  behaviour  of  "  the
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  some  of  the  rest."     With  Evelyn,  who  loved  the  church,
this  was  an  unpleasant  subject ;  but  others  were  less  scrupulous  ;  and  in  parliament,
in  particular,  men  did  not  refrain  from  expressing  what  must  have  been  the  sentiments
of  every  impartial  observer.     In  the  celebrated  debate,  in  January,  1688-9,  when  the


232  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  people  cared  for  them.  The  violence  with  which  these  angry  men  163  set
themselves  against  the  interests  of  the  nation,  clearly  proved  the  selfishness  of
that  zeal  against  James,  of  which  they  had  formerly  made  so  great  a  merit.
They  continued  to  hope  for  his  return,  to  intrigue  for  him,  and  in  some  instances
to  correspond  with  him  ;  although  they  well  knew  that  his  presence  would
cause  a  civil  war,  and  that  he  was  so  generally  hated  that  he  dared  not  show
his  face  in  England  unless  protected  by  the  troops  of  a  foreign  and  hostile
power.164

But  this  was  not  the  whole  of  the  damage  which,  in  those  anxious  times,  the
church  inflicted  upon  herself.  When  the  bishops  refused  to  take  the  oaths  to
the  new  government,  measures  were  adopted  to  remove  them  from  their  sees  ;
and  William  did  not  hesitate  to  eject  by  force  of  law  the  Archbishop  of  Canter-
bury and  five  of  his  brethren.165  The  prelates,  smarting  under  the  insult,  were
goaded  into  measures  of  unusual  activity.  They  loudly  proclaimed  that  the
powers  of  the  church,  which  had  long  been  waning,  were  now  extinct.160  They
denied  the  right  of  the  legislature  to  pass  a  law  against  them.  They  denied  the
right  of  the  sovereign  to  put  that  law  into  execution.167  They  not  only  con-
tinued to  give  themselves  the  title  of  bishops,  but  they  made  arrangements  to
perpetuate  the  schism  which  their  own  violence  had  created.  The  Archbishop
of  Canterbury,  as  he  insisted  upon  being  called,  made  a  formal  renunciation  of
his  imaginary  right  into  the  hands  of  Lloyd,168  who  still  supposed  himself  to

throne  was  declared  vacant,  Pollexfen  said  :  "  Some  of  the  clergy  are  for  one  thing,
some  for  another  ;  I  think  they  scarce  know  what  they  would  have."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  v.
p.  55.  In  February,  Maynard,  one  of  the  most  influential  members,  indignantly  said  :
"  I  think  the  clergy  are  out  of  their  wits  ;  and  I  believe,  if  the  clergy  should  have  their
wills,  few  or  none  of  us  should  be  here  again."  Ibid.  vol.  v.  p.  129.  The  clergy  were
themselves  bitterly  sensible  of  the  general  hostility  ;  and  one  of  them  writes,  in  1694  :
"  The  people  of  England,  who  were  so  excessively  enamoured  of  us  when  the  bishops
were  in  the  Tower  that  they  hardly  forebore  to  worship  us,  are  now,  I  wish  I  could  say
but  cool  and  very  indifferent  towards  us."  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  p.  525.  The  growing
indignation  against  the  clergy,  caused  by  their  obvious  desire  to  sacrifice  the  country
to  the  interests  of  the  church,  is  strikingly  displayed  in  a  letter  from  Sir  Rowland  Gwyne.
written  in  1710,  and  printed  in  Macpherson's  Orig.  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  207.

163  They  are  so  called  by  Burnet  :   "  these  angry  men,  that  had  raised  this  flame  in
the  church."     Own  Time,  vol.  v.  p.  17.

164  Indeed,   the  high -church  party,  in  their  publications,  distinctly  intimated    that
if  James  were  not  recalled,  he  should  be  reinstated  by  a  foreign  army.     Somers  Tracts,
vol.  x.  pp.  377,  405,  457,  462.     Compare  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  138.  Burnet
(Own  Time,  vol.  iv.  pp.  361,  362)  says,  they  were  "confounded"  when  they  heard  of
the  peace  of  1697  ;  and  Calamy  (Life  of  Himself,  vol.  ii.  p.  322)  makes  the  same  remark
on  the  death  of  Louis  XIV. :   "It  very  much  puzzled  the  counsels  of  the  Jacobites,  and
spoiled  their  projects."

i«5  D'Oyly's  Life  of  Sancroft,  p.  266  ;  Wordsworth's  Eccl.  Biog.  iv.  p.  683.

166  Sancroft  on  his  deathbed,  in  1693,  prayed  for  the  "  poor  suffering   church,  which,
by  this  revolution,  is  almost  destroyed."     D'Oyly's  Sancroft,  p.  311  ;  and  Macpher son's
Original  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  280.     See  also  Remarks,  published  in  1693  (Somers  Tracts,
vol.  x.  p.  504),  where  it  is  said  that  William  had,  "  as  far  as  possible  he  could,  dissolved
the  true  old  Church  of  England  :  "  and  that,  "  in  a  moment  of  time,  her  face  was  so  altered
as  scarce  to  be  known  again."

167  "  Ken,  though  deprived,  never  admitted  in  the  secular  power  the  right  of  depriva-
tion ;  and  it  is  well  known  that  he  studiously  retained  his  title."     Bowles's  Life  of  Ken,
vol.  ii.  p.  225.     Thus  too,  Lloyd,  so  late  as  1703,  signs  himself,  "  Wm.  Nor."  (Life  of
Ken,  by  a  Layman,  vol.  ii.  p.  720)  ;  though,  having  been  legally  deprived,  he  was  no  more
Bishop  of  Norwich  than  he  was  Emperor  of  China.    And  Sancroft,  in  the  last  of  his  letters,
published  by  D'Oyly  (Life,  p.  303),  signs  "  W.  C."

168  The  strange  document,  by  which  he  appointed  Dr.   Lloyd  his  vicar -general,  is
printed  in  Latin,  in  D'Oyly' s  Sancroft,  p.  295,  and  in  English,  in  Life  of  Ken,  by  a  Layman^
vol.  ii.  p.  640.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          233

Bishop  of  Norwich,   although  William  had  recently  expelled  him  from  his
The  scheme  of  these  turbulent  priests  was  then  communicated  to  James,
o  willingly  supported   their  plan  for  establishing  a  permanent   feud  in   the
English  church.169     The  result  of  this  conspiracy  between  the  rebellious  prelates
id  the  pretended  king  was  the  appointment  of  a  series  of   men  who  gave  them-
ves  out  as  forming  the  real  episcopacy,  and  who  received  the  homage  of  every
e  who  preferred  the  claims  of  the  church  to  the  authority  of  the  state.170     This
lock  succession  of  imaginary  bishops  continued  for  more  than  a  century  ;  m  and,
by  dividing  the  allegiance  of  churchmen,  lessened  the  power  of  the  church.172     In
several    instances    the    unseemly  spectacle    was  exhibited  of    two   bishops    for
the  same  place  ;  one  nominated  by  the  spiritual  power,  the  other  nominated
by  the  temporal  power.     Those  who  considered  the  church  as  superior  to  the
state,  of  course  attached  themselves  to  the  spurious  bishops  ;  while  the  appoint-
ments of  William  were  acknowledged    by  that  rapidly  increasing  party  who
preferred  secular  advantages  to  ecclesiastical  theories.173

Such  were  some  of  the  events  which,  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,


169  Lathbury's   Hist,  of  the  Nonfurors,   p.    96  ;  Life  of  Ken,   by  a  Layman,   vol.   ii.
pp.  641,  642.

170  The  struggle  between  James  and  William  was  essentially  a  struggle  between  ecclesi-
astical interests  and  secular  interests  ;  and  this  was  seen  as  early  as  1689,  when,  as  we
learn  from  Burnet,  who  was  much  more  a  politician  than  a  priest,  "  the  church  was  as
the  word  given  out  by  the  Jacobite  party,  under  which  they  might  more  safely  shelter
themselves."     Own  Time,  vol.  iv.  p.  57.     See  also,  on  this  identification  of  the  Jacobites
with  the  church,  Birch's  Life  of  Tillotson,  p.  222  ;  and  the  argument  of  Dodwell,  pp.  246,
247,  in  1691.      Dodwell  justly  observed  that  the  successors  of  the  deprived  bishops  were
schismatical,  in  a  spiritual  point  of  view  ;    and  that  "  if  they  should  pretend  to  lay
authority  as  sufficient,  they  would  overthrow  the  being  of  a  church  as  a  society."     The
bishops  appointed  by  William  were  evidently  intruders,  according  to  church  principles  ;
and  as  their  intrusion  could  only  be  justified  according  to  lay  principles,  it  followed  that
the  success  of  the  intrusion  was  the  triumph  of  lay  principles  over  church  ones.     Hence
it  is  that  the  fundamental  idea  of   the  rebellion  of   1688  is  the  elevation  of   the  state
above  the  church  ;  just  as  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  rebellion  of  1642  is  the  elevation
of  the  commons  above  the  crown.

171  According  to  Dr.  D'Oyly  (Life  of  Bancroft,  p.  297),  Dr.  Gordon  "  died  in  London,
November,  1779,  and  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  last  nonjuring  bishop."     In  Shorfs
Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  p.  583,  Lond.  1847,  it  is  also  stated,  that  "  this  schism
continued  till  1779."     But  Mr.  Hallam  (Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  404)  has  pointed  out  a
passage,  in  the  State  Trials,  which  proves  that  another  of  the  bishops,  named  Cartwright,
was  still  living  at  Shrewsbury  in  1793  ;  and  Mr.  Lathbury  (Hist,  of  the  Nonjurors,  Lond.
1845,  p.  412)  says  that  he  died  in  1799.

172  Calamy  (Own  Life,  vol.  i.  pp.  328-330,  vol.  ii.  pp.  338,  357,  358)  gives  an  inter-
esting account  of  these  feuds  within  the  church,  consequent  upon  the  revolution.     Indeed,
their  bitterness  was  such,  that  it  was  necessary  to  coin  names  for  the  two  parties  ;  and,
between  1700  and  1702  we  for  the  first  time  hear  the  expressions,  high -church  and  low-
church.     See  Burners  Own  Time,  vol.  iv.  p.  447,  vol.  v.  p.  70.     Compare  Wilson's  Life
of  De  Foe,  vol.  ii.  p.  26  ;  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  vi.  pp.  162,  498.     On  the  difference  between
them,  as  it  was  understood  in  the  reign  of  Anne,  see  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xii.  p.  532,  and
Macpherson's  Orig.  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  166.     On  the  dawning  schism  in  the  church,  see
the  speech  of  Sir  T.  Littleton,  in  1690,  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  v.  p.  593.     Hence  many  com-
plained that  they  could  not  tell  which  was  the  real  church.     See  curious  evidence  of
this  perplexity  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  pp.  477-481.

173  The  alternative  is  fairly  stated  in  a  letter  written  in  1691  (Life  of  Ken,  by  a  Layman,
vol.  ii.  p.  599)  :  "  If  the  deprived  bishop  be  the  only  lawful  bishop,  then  the  people  and
clergy  of  his  diocese  are  bound  to  own  him,  and  no  other  ;  then  all  the  bishops  who
own  the  authority  of  a  new  archbishop,  and  live  in  communion  with  him,  are  schis-
matics ;  and  the  clergy  who  live  in  communion  with  schismatical  bishops  are  schismatics
themselves  ;    and    the   whole   Church   of  England  now   established    by   law   is  schis-
matical."


234  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

widened  the  breach  that  had  long  existed  between  the  interests  of  the  nation
and  the  interests  of  the  clergy.17*  There  was  also  another  circumstance  which
considerably  increased  this  alienation.  Many  of  the  English  clergy,  though
they  retained  their  affection  for  James,  did  not  choose  to  brave  the  anger  of
the  government,  or  risk  the  loss  of  their  livings.  To  avoid  this,  and  to  recon-
cile their  conscience  with  their  interest,  they  availed  themselves  of  a  supposed
distinction  between  a  king  by  right  and  a  king  in  possession.175  The  conse-
quence was  that  while  with  their  lips  they  took  an  oath  of  allegiance  to  William,
they  in  their  hearts  paid  homage  to  James  ;  and,  while  they  prayed  for  one
king  in  their  churches,  they  were  bound  to  pray  for  another  in  their  closets.1™
By  this  wretched  subterfuge,  a  large  body  of  the  clergy  were  at  once  turned
into  concealed  rebels  ;  and  we  have  it  on  the  authority  of  a  contemporary  bishop,
that  the  prevarication  of  which  these  men  were  notoriously  guilty  was  a  still
further  aid  to  that  scepticism,  the  progress  of  which  he  bitterly  deplores.177

As  the  eighteenth  century  advanced,  the  great  movement  of  liberation  rapidly
proceeded.  One  of  the  most  important  of  the  ecclesiastical  resources  had  for-
merly been  Convocation  ;  in  which  the  clergy,  by  meeting  in  a  body,  were  able
to  discountenance  in  an  imposing  manner  whatever  might  be  hostile  to  the
church  ;  and  had  moreover  an  opportunity,  which  they  sedulously  employed,
of  devising  schemes  favourable  to  the  spiritual  authority.178  But  in  the  pro-

174  Lord    Mahon  (Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  245),  notices  what  he  terms  the  "  un-
natural alienation  between  the  church  and  state  "  consequent  upon  the  Revolution  of
1688  ;  and  on  the  diminished  power  of  the  church  caused  by  the  same  event,  see  Philli-
more's  Mem.  of  Lyttleton,  vol.  i.  p.  352.

175  The  old  absurdity  of  de  facto  and  de  jure ;  as  if  any  man  could  retain  a  right  to  a
throne  which  the  people  would  not  allow  him  to  occupy  !

176  In  1715,  Leslie,  by  far  the  ablest  of  them,  thus  states  their  position  :  "  You  are
now  driven  to  this  dilemma, — swear,  or  swear  not :  if  you  swear,  you  kill  the  soul ;
and  if  you  swear  not,  you  kill  the  body,  in  the  loss  of  your  bread."     Somers  Tracts,
vol.  xiii.  p.  686.     The  result  of  the  dilemma  was  what  might  have  been  expected  ;  and
a  high-church  writer,  in  the  reign  of  William  III.,  boasts  (Somers  Tracts,  vol.  x.  p.  344)
that  the  oaths  taken  by  the  clergy  were  no  protection  to  the  government :  "  not  that
the  government  receives  any  security  from  oaths."    Whiston,  too,  says,  in  his  Memoirs,
p.  30  :  "  Yet  do  I  too  well  remember  that  the  far  greatest  part  of  those  of  the  university
and  clergy  that  then  took  the  oaths  to  the  government,  seemed  to  me  to  take  them
with  a  doubtful  conscience,  if  not  against  its  dictates."      This  was  in  1693  ;  and  in
1710    we  find:  "There  are  now  circumstances  to  make  us  believe  that  the  Jacobite,
clergy  have  the  like  instructions  to  take  any  oaths,  to  get  possession  of  a  pulpit  for  the
service  of  the  cause,  to  bellow  out  the  hereditary  right,  the  pretended  title  of  the  Pre-
tender."     Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xii.  p.  641.      A  knowledge  of  this  fact,  or  at  all  events
a  belief  of  it,  was  soon  diffused  ;  and  eight  years  later  the  celebrated  Lord  Cowper,
then  lord  chancellor,  said  in  the  House  of  Lords  "  that  his  majesty  had  also  the  best
part  of  the  landed,  and  all  the  trading  interest :  that  as  to  the  clergy,  he  would  say  nothing,
— but  that  it  was  notorious  that  the  majority  of  the  populace  had  been  poisoned,  and  that  the
poison  was  not  yet  quite  expelled."   Parl.  Hist.  vol.  vii.  p.  541 ;  also  given,  but  not  quite
verbatim,  in  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  iv.  p.  365.

177  "  The  prevarication  of  too  many  in  so  sacred  a  matter  contributed  not  a  little  to
fortify  the  growing  atheism  of  the  present  age."     Burnets  Own  Time,  vol.  iii.  p.  381.
See  also,  to  the  same  effect,  vol.  iv.  pp.  176,  177  ;  and  a  remarkable  passage  in  Somers
Tracts,   vol.    xii.   p.    573.       I   need    hardly   add    that  it  was   then   usual   to   confuse
scepticism  with  atheism  ;  though  the  two  things  are  not  only  different,  but  incom-
patible.    In  regard  to  the  quibble  respecting  de  facto  and  de  jure,  and  the  use  made  of
it  by  the  clergy,  the  reader  should  compare  Wilson's  Mem.  of  De  Foe,  vol.  i.  pp.  171,  172  ;
Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  p.  531  ;  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  iv.  p.  409  ;  and  a  letter  from
the  Rev.  Francis  Jessop,  written  in  1717,  in  Nichols's  Lit.  Illustrations,  vol.  iv.  pp.  120-123.

178  Among  which  must  be  particularly  mentioned  the  practice  of  censuring  all  books
that  encouraged  free  inquiry.     In  this  respect,  the  clergy  were  extremely  mischievous.
See  Lathbury's  Hist,  of  Convocation,  pp.  124,  286,  338,  351  ;  and  Wilson's  Life  of  De  Foe,
vol.  ii.  p.  170,


gress


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          235


of  the  age,  this  weapon  also  was  taken  from  them.  Within  a  very  few
years  after  the  Revolution,  Convocation  fell  into  general  contempt  ;  179  and
in  1717  this  celebrated  assembly  was  finally  prorogued  by  an  act  of  the  crown,
it  being  justly  considered  that  the  country  had  no  further  occasion  for  its  ser-
vices.180 Since  that  period,  this  great  council  of  the  English  church  has  never
been  allowed  to  meet  for  the  purpose  of  deliberating  on  its  own  affairs,  until
a  few  years  ago,  when,  by  the  connivance  of  a  feeble  government,  it  was  per-
mitted to  reassemble.  So  marked,  however,  has  been  the  change  in  the  temper
of  the  nation,  that  this  once  formidable  body  does  not  now  retain  even  a  sem-
blance of  its  ancient  influence  ;  its  resolutions  are  no  longer  feared,  its  dis-
cussions are  no  longer  studied  ;  and  the  business  of  the  country  continues  to
be  conducted  without  regard  to  those  interests  which  only  a  few  generations
ago  were  considered  by  every  statesman  to  be  of  supreme  importance.181

Indeed,  immediately  after  the  Revolution,  the  tendency  of  things  became
too  obvious  to  be  mistaken,  even  by  the  most  superficial  observers.  The  ablest
men  in  the  country  no  longer  flocked  into  the  church,*  but  preferred  those  secular
professions  in  which  ability  was  more  likely  to  be  rewarded.182  At  the  same
time,  and  as  a  natural  part  of  the  great  movement,  the  clergy  saw  all  the  offices
of  power  and  emolument,  which  they  had  been  used  to  hold,  gradually  falling
out  of  their  hands.  Not  only  in  the  dark  ages,  but  even  so  late  as  the  fifteenth
century,  they  were  still  strong  enough  to  monopolize  the  most  honourable  and

179  In  1704,  Burnet  (Own  Time,  vol.  v.  p.  138)  says  of  Convocation,  "  but  little  oppo-
sition was  made  to  them,  as  very  little  regard  was  had  to  them."     In  1700^  there  was
a  squabble  between  the  upper  and  lower  house  of  Convocation  for  Canterbury  ;  which,
no  doubt,  aided  these  feelings.     See  Life  of  Archbishop  Sharp,  edited  by  Newcome,
vol.  i.  p.  348,  where  this  wretched  feud  is  related  with  great  gravity.

180  Charles  Butler  (Reminiscences,  vol.  ii.  p.  95)  says  that  the  final  prorogation  was  in
1720  ;  but  according  to  all  the  other  authorities  I  have  met  with,  it  was  in  1717.      See
Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  395  ;    Lathbury's  Hist,  of  Convocation,  p.  385  ;    Mahon's
Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  302  ;   Monk's  Life  of  Bentley,  vol.  ii.  p.  350.

181  A  letter  written  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Clayton  in  1727  is  worth  reading,  as  illus-
trating the  feelings  of  the  clergy  on  this  subject.      He  asserts  that  one  of  the  causes
of  the  obvious  degeneracy  of  the  age  is,  that  owing  to  Convocation  not  being  allowed
to  meet,  "  bold  and  impious  books  appear  barefaced  to  the  world  without  any  public
censure."     See  this  letter,  in  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  iv.
pp.  414-416  ;    and  compare  with   it,  Letters  between  Warburton   and   Hurd,  pp.  310
312.

182  On  the  decline  of  ability  in  ecclesiastical  literature,  see  note  38  in  this  chapter.
In  1685,  a  complaint  was  made  that  secular  professions  were  becoming  more  sought  after
than  ecclesiastical  ones.     See  England's  Wants,  sec.  Ivi.  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  ix.  p.  231,
where  the  writer  mournfully  states,  that  in  his  time  "  physic  and  law,  professions  ever
acknowledged  in  all  nations  to  be  inferior  to  divinity,  are  generally  embraced  by  gentle-
men, and  sometimes  by  persons  nobly  descended,  and  preferred  much  above  the  divine's
profession."     This  preference  was,  of  course,  most  displayed  by  young  men  of  intellect  ;
and  a  large  amount  of  energy  being  thus  drawn  off  from  the  church,  gave  rise  to  that
decay  of  spirit  and  of  general  power  which  has  been  already  noticed  ;   and  which  is  also
indicated  by  Coleridge,  in  his  remarks  on  the  "apologizing  theology"  which  succeeded
the  Revolution.     Coleridge's  Lit.  Remains,  vol.  hi.  pp.  51,  52,  116,  ii7>  119-     Compare
Stephen's  Essays  on  Ecclesiast.  Biog.  2nd  edit.  1850,  vol.  ii.  p.  66,  on  "  this  depression  of
theology  ;  "  and  Hare's  Mission  of  the  Comforter,  1850,  p.  264,  on  the  "  intellectually
feebler  age."     Evelyn,  in  1691,  laments  the  diminished  energy  then  beginning  to  be
observed  among  "  young  preachers."     Evelyn's  Diary,  vol.  iii.  p.  309  ;   and,  for  another
notice,  in  1696,  of  this  "  dead  and  lifeless  way  of  preaching,"  see  Life  of  Cudworth,  p.  35,
in  vol.  i.  of  Cudworth 's  Intellect.  Syst.

[*  It  has  been  shown  above  (note  125)  that  the  church  had  fallen  into  discredit  before
the  Revolution.  Complaints  to  that  effect  were  in  fact  made  at  the  date  of  the  Restora-
tion. See:.Bucklejind  his  Critics,  p.  242  sq. — ED.]


236  THE  HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

lucrative  posts  in  the  empire.183  In  the  sixteenth  century  the  tide  began  to  turn
against  them,  and  advanced  with  such  steadiness  that,  since  the  seventeenth
century,  there  has  been  no  instance  of  any  ecclesiastic  being  made  lord  chan-
cellor ;  184  and,  since  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  there  has  been
no  instance  of  one  receiving  any  diplomatic  appointment,  or,  indeed,  holding
any  important  office  in  the  state.185  Nor  has  this  increasing  ascendency  of
laymen  been  confined  to  the  executive  government.  On  the  contrary, we  find  in  both
Houses  of  Parliament  the  same  principle  at  work.  In  the  early  and  barbarous
periods  of  our  history,  one  half  of  the  House  of  Lords  consisted  of  temporal  peers  ;
the  other  half  of  spiritual  ones.18^  By  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,
the  spiritual  peers,  instead  of  forming  one-half  of  the  upper  house,  had  dwindled
away  to  one -eighth  ;  187  and  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  they  have
still  further  shrunk  to  one-fourteenth:188  thus  supplying  a  striking  numerical
instance  of  that  diminution  of  ecclesiastical  power,  which  is  an  essential  requisite
of  modern  civilization.  Precisely  in  the  same  way,  more  than  fifty  years  have
elapsed  since  any  clergyman  has  been  able  to  take  his  seat  as  a  representative
of  the  people  ;  the  House  of  Commons  having,  in  1801,  formally  closed  their
doors  against  a  profession  which,  in  the  olden  time,  would  have  been  gladly
admitted,  even  by  the  proudest  and  most  exclusive  assembly.189  In  the  House
of  Lords  the  bishops  still  retain  their  seats  ;  but  their  precarious  tenure  is  every-
where remarked,  and  the  progress  of  public  opinion  is  constantly  pointing  to  a
period,  which  cannot  now  be  far  distant,  when  the  Peers  will  imitate  the  example
set  by  the  Commons,  and  will  induce  the  legislature  to  relieve  the  upper  house

183  Sharon  Turner,  describing  the  state  of  things  in  England  in  the  fifteenth  century
says,  "  Clergymen  were  secretaries  of  government,  the  privy  seals,  cabinet  counsellors,
treasurers  of  the  crown,  ambassadors,  commissioners  to  open  parliament,  and  to  Scot-
land ;    presidents  of  the  king's  council,  supervisors  of  the  royal  works,  chancellors,
keepers  of  the  records,  the  masters  of  the  rolls,  and  even  the  physicians,  both  to  the  king
and  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  during  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.  and  afterwards."     Turner's
Hist,  of  England,  vol.1  vi.  p.   132.     On  their  enormous  wealth,  see  Eccleston's  English
Antiquities,  p.  146  :    "  In  the  early  part  of  the  fourteenth  century,  it  is  calculated  that
very  nearly  one-half  of  the  soil  of  the  kingdom  was  in  the  hands  of  the  clergy."

184  In  1625,  Williams,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  was  dismissed  from  his  office  of  lord -keeper  ;
and  Lord  Campbell  observes  (Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  ii.  p.  492)  :    "  This  is  the  last
time  that  an  ecclesiastic  has  held  the  great  seal  of  England  ;    and,  notwithstanding  the
admiration  in  some  quarters  of  mediaeval  usages,  I  presume  the  experiment  is  not  likely
to  be  soon  repeated."

185  Monk  (Life  of  Bentley,  vol.  i.  p.  222)  says   that  Dr.  John  Robinson,    Bishop   of
Bristol,  was  "  lord  privy  seal,  and  plenipotentiary  at  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht ;  and  is  the
last  ecclesiastic  in  England  who  has  held  any  of  the  high  offices  of  state."     A  high -church
writer,  in  1712,  complains  of  the  efforts  that  were  being  made  to  "  thrust  the  churchmen
out  of  their  places  of  power  in  the  government."     Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xiii.  p.  211.

186  In  and  after  the  reign  of  Henry  III.  "  the  number  of  archbishops,  bishops,  abbots,
priors,  and  ecclesiastical  persons  was  for  the  most  part  equal  to,  and  very  often  far
exceeded,  the  number  of  the  temporal  lords  and  barons."     Parry's  Parliaments  and
Councils  of  England,  London,  1839,  p.  xvii.     Of  this  Mr.  Parry  gives  several  instances  ;
the  most  remarkable  of  which  is,  that  "in  49  Henry  III.,  120  prelates,  and  only  23
temporal  lords,  were  summoned."     This,  of  course,  was  an  extreme  case.

187  See  an  analysis  of  the  House  of  Lords,  in  1713,  in  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.
pp.  43-45  ;    from  which  it  appears  that  the  total  was  207,  of  whom  26  were  spiritual.
This  includes  the  Catholics.

iss  By  the  returns  in  Dod  for  1854, 1  find  that  the  House  of  Lords  contains  436  members,
of  whom  30  belong  to  the  episcopal  bench.

IBS  For  different  accounts,  and  of  course  different  views,  of  this  final  expulsion  of  the
clergy  from  the  House  of  Commons,  see  Pellew's  Life  of  Sidmouth,  vol.  i.  pp.  419,  420  ;
Stephens' s  Mem.  of  Tooke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  247-260  ;  Holland's  Mem.  of  the  Whig  Party,  vol.  i.
pp.  178-180  ;  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  vii.  p.  148  ;  Twiss's  Life  of  Eldon,  vol.  i,
P.  263  ;  Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  vii.  p.  487.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT         237

of  its  spiritual  members  ;    since  they,  by  their  habits,  their  tastes,  and  their
traditions,  are  evidently  unfitted  for  the  profane  exigencies  of  political  life.190

While  the  fabric  of  superstition  was  thus  tottering  from  internal  decay,  and
while  that  ecclesiastical  authority  which  had  formerly  played  so  great  a  part
was  gradually  yielding  to  the  advance  of  knowledge,  there  suddenly  occurred
an  eveit  which,  though  it  might  naturally  have  been  expected,  evidently  took
by  surprise  even  those  whom  it  most  interested.  I  allude,  of  course,  to  that
great  religious  revolution,  which  was  a  fitting  supplement  to  the  political  revolu-
tion which  preceded  it.  The  dissenters,  who  were  strengthened  by  the  expulsion
of  James,  had  by  no  means  forgotten  those  cruel  punishments  which  the  Church
of  England,  in  the  days  of  her  power,  had  constantly  inflicted  upon  them  ;  and
they  felt  that  the  moment  had  now  come  when  they  could  assume  towards  her
a  bolder  front  than  that  on  which  they  had  hitherto  ventured.191  Besides  this,
they  had  in  the  meantime  received  fresh  causes  of  provocation.  After  the  death
)f  our  great  king  William  III.,  the  throne  was  occupied  by  a  foolish  and  ignorant
man,  whose  love  for  the  clergy  would,  in  a  more  superstitious  age,  have  led
dangerous  results.192  Even  as  it  was,  a  temporary  reaction  took  place,  and
luring  her  reign  the  church  was  treated  with  a  deference  which  William  had
disdained  to  show.193  The  natural  consequence  immediately  followed.  New
measures  of  persecution  were  devised,  and  fresh  laws  were  passed  against  those
Protestants  who  did  not  conform  to  the  doctrines  and  discipline  of  the  English
church.194  But  after  the  death  of  Anne  the  dissenters  quickly  rallied  ;  their

190  That  the  banishment  of  the  clergy  from  the  lower  house  was  the  natural  prelude
to  the  banishment  of  the  bishops  from  the  upper,  was  hinted  at  the  time,  and  with  regret,
by  a  very  keen  observer.     In  the  discussion  "  on  the  Bill  to  prevent  Persons  in  Holy
Orders  from  sitting  in  the  House  of  Commons,"  Lord  Thurlow  "  mentioned  the  tenure
of  the  bishops  at  this  time,  and  said,  if  the  bill  went  to  disfranchise  the  lower  orders  of
the  clergy,  it  might  go  the  length  of  striking  at  the  right  of  the  reverend  bench  opposite
to  seats  in  that  house  ;    though  he  knew  it  had  been  held  that  the  reverend  prelates  sat,
in  the  right  of  their  baronies,  as  temporal  peers."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxv.  p.  1542.

191  It  is  impossible  now  to  ascertain  the  full  extent  to  which  the  Church  of  England,
in  the  seventeenth  century,  persecuted  the  dissenters  ;  but  Jeremy  White  is  said  to  have
had  a  list  of  sixty  thousand  of  these  sufferers  between  1660  and  1688,  of  whom  no  less
than  five  thousand  died  in  prison.     Bogue  and  Bennett's  Hist,  of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  i.
p.  108.     On  the  cruel  spirit  which  the  clergy  displayed  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  compare
Harris's  Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  v.  p.  106  ;   Orme's  Life  of  Owen,  p.  344  ;   Somers  Tracts,
vol.  xii.  p.  534.     Indeed  Harwood  frankly  said  in  the  House  of  Commons,  in  1672,  "  Our
aim  is  to  bring  all  dissenting  men  into  the  Protestant  church,  and  he  that  is  not  willing
to  come  into  the  church  should  not  have  ease."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iv.  p.  530.     On  the  zeal
with  which  this  principle  was  carried  out,  see  an  account,  written  in  1671,  in  Somers
Tracts,  vol.  vii.  pp.  586-615  ;   and  the  statement  of  De  Foe,  in  Wilson's  Life  of  De  Foe,
vol.  ii.  pp.  443,  444.

192  Besides  the  correspondence  which  the  Duchess  of  Marlborough  preserved  for  the
instruction  of  posterity,  we  have  some  materials  for  estimating  the  abilities  of  Anne  in
the  letters  published  in  Dalrymple's  Memoirs.     In  one  of  them  Anne  writes,  soon  after
the  Declaration  for  Liberty  of  Conscience  was  issued,  "  It  is  a  melancholy  prospect  that
all -we  of  the  Church  of  England  have.     All  the  sectaries  may  now  do  what  they  please.
Every  one  has  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion,  on  purpose,  no  doubt,  to  ruin  us,  which
I  think  to  all  impartial  judges  is  very  plain."     Dalrymple's  Memoirs,  appendix  to  book  v.
vol.  ii.  p.  173.

193  See  a  notable  passage  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xii.  p.  558,  which  should  be  compared
with  Wilson's  Life  of  De  Foe,  vol.  iii.  p.  372.

194  Bogue  and  Bennett's  History  of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  i.  pp.  228-230,  237,  260-277  ;
and  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  pp.  396,  397.     Mr.  Hallam  says,  "  It  is  impossible  to
doubt  for  an  instant,  that  if  the  queen's  life  had  preserved  the  Tory  government  for  a  few
years,  every  vestige  of  the  toleration  would  have  been  effaced."     It  appears  from  the
Vernon  Correspond,  vol.  iii.  p.  228,  Lond.  1841,  that  soon  after  the  accession  of  Anne,
there  was  a  proposal  "  to  debar  dissenters  of  their  votes  in  elections  ;  "  and  we  know


238  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

hopes  revived,195  their  numbers  continued  to  increase,  and  in  spite  of  the  opposi-
tion of  the  clergy,  the  laws  against  them  were  repealed.196  As  by  these  means
they  were  placed  more  on  a  level  with  their  opponents,  and  as  their  temper  was
soured  by  the  injuries  they  had  recently  received,  it  was  clear  that  a  great  struggle
between  the  two  parties  was  inevitable.19?  For  by  this  time  the  protracted
tyranny  of  the  English  clergy  had  totally  destroyed  those  feelings  of  respect
which,  even  in  the  midst  of  hostility,  often  linger  in  the  mind  ;  and  by  the
influence  of  which,  if  they  had  still  existed,  the  contest  might  perhaps  have  been
averted.  But  such  motives  of  restraint  were  now  despised  ;  and  the  dissenters,
exasperated  by  incessant  persecution,198  determined  to  avail  themselves  of  the
declining  power  of  the  church.  They  had  resisted  her  when  she  was  strong  ;
it  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  they  would  spare  her  when  she  was  feeble.
Under  two  of  the  most  remarkable  men  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Whitefield,
the  first  of  theological  orators,199  and  Wesley,  the  first  of  theological  statesmen,200

from  Burnet  (Own  Time,  vol.  v.  pp.  108,  136,  137,  218)  that  the  clergy  would  have  been
glad  if  Anne  had  displayed  even  more  zeal  against  them  than  she  really  did.

195  Bogue  and  Bennett's  Hist,  of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  iii.  p.  118.     In  Ivimey's  History  of
the  Baptists,  it  is  said  that  the  death  of  Anne  was  an  "  answer  to  the  dissenters'  prayers."
Southey's  Commonplace  Book,  third  series,  p.  135  ;    see  also  p.  147,   on  the  joy  of  the
dissenters  at  the  death  of  this  troublesome  woman.

196  Two  of  the  worst  of  them,  "  the  act  against  occasional  conformity,  and  that  re-
straining education,  were  repealed  in  the  session  of  1719."     Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.
p.  398.     The  repeal  of  the  act  against  occasional  conformity  was  strenuously  opposed
by  the  Archbishops  of  York  and  of  Canterbury  (Bogue  and  Bennett's  Hist,  of  the  Dissenters,
vol.  iii.  p.  132)  ;    but  their  opposition  was  futile  ;    and  when  the  Bishop  of  London,  in
1726,  wished  to  strain  the  Act  of  Toleration,  he  was  prevented  by  Yorke,  the  attorney -
general.     See  the  pithy  reply  of  Yorke,  in  Harris's  Life  of  Hardwicke,  vol.  i.  pp.  193,  194.

197  At  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  great  attention  was  excited  by  the  way
in  which  the  dissenters  were  beginning  to  organize  themselves  into  societies  and  synods.
See,  in  the  Vernon  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  pp.  128-136,  133,  156,  some  curious  evidence  of
this,  in  letters  written  by  Vernon,  who  was  then  secretary  of  state  ;  and  on  the  apprehen-
sions caused  by  the  increase  of  their  schools,  and  by  their  systematic  interference  in
elections,  see  Life  of  Archbishop  Sharp,  edited  byNewcome,  vol.  i.  pp.  125,  358.     The
church  was  eager  to  put  down  all  dissenters'  schools  ;    and  in  1705,  the  Archbishop  of
York  told  the  House  of  Lords  that  he  "  apprehended  danger  from  the  increase  of  dissenters,
and  particularly  from  the  many  academies  set  up  by  them."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  vi.  pp.  492,
493.     See  also,  on  the  increase  of  their  schools,  pp.  1351,  1352.

198  In  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xii.  p.  684,  it  is  stated  that  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  "  this
hard  usage  had  begotten  in  the  dissenters  the  utmost  animosity  against  the  persecuting
churchmen."     Their  increasing  discontent,  in  the  reign  of  Anne,  was  observed  by  Calamy.
See  Calamy's  Own  Life,  vol.  ii.  pp.  244,  255,  274,  284,  285.

199  If  the  power  of  moving  the  passions  be  the  proper  test  by  which  to  judge  an  orator,
we  may  certainly  pronounce  Whitefield  to  be  the  greatest  since  the  apostles.     His  first
sermon  was  delivered  in  1736  (Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  ii.  pp.  102,  122)  ;  his  field -preaching
began  in  1739  (Southey's  Life  of  Wesley,  vol.  i.  pp.  196,  197)  ;   and  the  eighteen  thousand
sermons  which  he  is  said  to  have  poured  forth  during  his  career  of  thirty -four  years
(Southey's  Wesley,  vol.  ii.  p.  531)  produced  the  most  astonishing  effects  on  all  classes,
educated  and  uneducated.     For  evidence  of  the  excitement  caused  by  this  marvellous
man,  and  of  the  eagerness  with  which  his  discourses  were  read  as  well  as  heard,  see
Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  ii.  pp.  546,  547,  and  his  Illustrations,  vol.  iv.  pp.  302-304  ;  Mem.
of  Franklin,  by  Himself,  vol.  i.  pp.  161-167  ;    Doddridge's  Correspond,  vol.  iv.  p.  55  ;
Stewart's  Philos.  of  the  Mind,  vol.  iii.  pp.  291,  292  ;  Lady  Mary  Montagu's  Letters,  in  her
Works,  1803,  vol.  iv.  p.  162  ;   Correspond,  between  Ladies  Pomfret  and  Hartford,  2nd  edit.
1806,  vol.  i.  pp.  138,  160-162  ;  Marchmont  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  377.

200  Of  whom  Mr.  Macaulay  has  said  (Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  221,  3rd  edit.),  that  his  "  genius
for  government  was  not  inferior  to  that  of  Richelieu;"  and  strongly  as  this  is  expressed,
it  will  hardly  appear  an  exaggeration  to  those  who  have  compared  the  success  of  Wesley
with  his  difficulties.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT


239


there  was  organized  a  great  system  of  religion,  which  bore  the  same  relation  to
the  Church  of  England  that  the  Church  of  England  bore  to  the  Church  of  Rome.
Thus,  after  an  interval  of  two  hundred  years,  a  second  spiritual  Reformation
was  effected  in  our  country.  In  the  eighteenth  century  the  Wesleyans  were  to
the  Bishops  what  in  the  sixteenth  century  the  Reformers  were  to  the  Popes.201
It  is  indeed  true  that  the  dissenters  from  the  Church  of  England,  unlike  the
dissenters  from  the  Church  of  Rome,  soon  lost  that  intellectual  vigour  for  which
at  first  they  were  remarkable.  Since  the  death  of  their  great  leaders,  they  have
not  produced  one  man  of  original  genius  ;  and  since  the  time  of  Adam  Clarke,
they  have  not  had  among  them  even  a  single  scholar  who  has  enjoyed  an  Euro-
pean reputation.  This  mental  penury  is  perhaps  owing,  not  to-any  circumstances
peculiar  to  their  sect,  but  merely  to  that  general  decline  of  the  theological  spirit
by  which  their  adversaries  have  been  weakened  as  well  as  themselves.202  Be  this
as  it  may,  it  is  at  all  events  certain  that  the  injury  they  have  inflicted  on  the
English  church  is  far  greater  than  is  generally  supposed,  and,  I  am  inclined  to
think,  is  hardly  inferior  to  that  which  in  the  sixteenth  century  Protestantism
inflicted  upon  Popery.  Setting  aside  the  actual  loss  in  the  number  of  its  mem-
bers,203 there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  mere  formation  of  a  Protestant  faction,
unopposed  by  the  government,  was  a  dangerous  precedent  ;  and  we  know  from
contemporary  history  that  it  was  so  considered  by  those  who  were  most  inter-
ested in  the  result.204  Besides  this,  the  Wesleyans  displayed  an  organization  so


201  It  was  in  1739  that  Wesley  first  openly  rebelled  against  the  church,  and  refused
to  obey  the  Bishop  of  Bristol,  who  ordered  him  to  quit  his  diocese.     Southey's  Life  of
Wesley,  vol.  i.  pp.  226,  243.     In  the  same  year  he  began  to  preach  in  the  fields.     See  the
remarkable  entry  in  his  Journals,  p.  78,  29th  March,  1739.

202  They  frankly  confess  that  "  indifference  has  been  another  enemy  to  the  increase
of  the  dissenting  cause."     Bogue  and  Bennett's  Hist,  of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  iv.  p.  320.
In  Newman's  Development  of  Christian  Doctrine,  pp.  39-43,  there  are  some  remarks  on
the  diminished  energy  of  Wesleyanism,  which  Mr.  Newman  seems  to  ascribe  to  the  fact
that  the  Wesleyans  have  reached  that  point  in  which  "  order  takes  the  place  of  enthu-
siasm."   p.  43.     This  is  probably  true  ;   but  I  still  think  that  the  larger  cause  has  been
the  more  active  one.

203  Walpole,  in  his  sneering  way,  mentions  the  spread  of  Methodism  in  the  middle
of  the  eighteenth  century  (Walpole' s  Letters,  vol.  ii.  pp.  266,  272) ;    and  Lord  Carlisle,
in   1775,  told   the  House  of  Lords   (Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xviii.   p.  634)   "  that   Methodism
was  daily  gaining  ground,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  towns  ;  "  while,  to  come
down  still  later,  it  appears  from  a  letter  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  Lord  Eldon
(Twiss's  Life  of  Eldon,  vol.  ii.  p.  35)  that  about  1808  it  was  making  proselytes  in  the
army.

These  statements,  though  accurate,  are  somewhat  vague  ;  but  we  have  other  and  more
precise  evidence  respecting  the  rapid  growth  of  religious  dissent.  According  to  a  paper
found  in  one  of  the  chests  of  William  III.,  and  printed  by  Dalrymple  (Memoirs,  vol.  ii.
part  ii.,  appendix  to  chapter  i.  p.  40),  the  proportion  in  England  of  conformists  to  non-
conformists was  as  22*  to  i.  Eighty-four  years  after  the  death  of  William,  the  dissenters,
instead  of  comprising  only  a  twenty-third,  were  estimated  at  "  a  fourth  part  of  the  whole
community."  Letter  from  Watson  to  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  written  in  1786,  in  Life  of
Watson,  Bishop  of  Llandaff,  vol.  i.  p.  246.  Since  then,  the  movement  has  been  uninter-
rupted ;  and  the  returns  recently  published  by  government  disclose  the  startling  fact
that  on  Sunday,  3ist  March  1851,  the  members  of  the  Church  of  England  who  attended
morning  service,  only  exceeded  by  one -half  the  Independents,  Baptists,  and  Methodists
who  attended  at  their  own  places  of  worship.  See  the  Census  Table,  in  Journal  of  Statist.
Soc.  vol.  xviii.  p.  151.  If  this  rate  of  decline  continues,  it  will  be  impossible  for  the
Church  of  England  to  survive  another  century  the  attacks  of  her  enemies.

204  The  treatment  which  the  Wesleyans  received  from  the  clergy,  many  of  whom  were
magistrates,  shows  what  would  have  taken  place  if  such  violence  had  not  been  discouraged
by  the  government.     See  Southey's  Life  of  Wesley,  vol.  i.  pp.  395-406.    Wesley  has  him-
self given  many  details,  which  Southey  did  not  think  proper  to  relate,  of  the  calumnies
and  insults  to  which  he  and  his  followers  were  subjected  by  the  clergy.     See  Wesley's


240  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

superior  to  that  of  their  predecessors  the  Puritans,  that  they  soon  became  a  centre
round  which  the  enemies  of  the  church  could  conveniently  rally.  And,  what  is
perhaps  still  more  important,  the  order,  regularity  and  publicity  by  which  their
proceedings  have  usually  been  marked,  distinguished  them  from  other  sects  ;
and  by  raising  them  as  it  were  to  the  dignity  of  a  rival  establishment,  have  encour-
aged the  diminution  of  that  exclusive  and"  superstitious  respect  which  was  once
paid  to  the  Anglican  hierarchy.205

But  these  things,  interesting  as  they  are,  only  formed  a  single  step  of  that
vast  process  by  which  the  ecclesiastical  power  was  weakened,  and  our  country-
men thus  enabled  to  secure  a  religious  liberty,  imperfect  indeed,  but  far  superior
to  that  possessed  by  any  other  people.  Among  the  innumerable  symptoms  of
this  great  movement  there  were  two  of  peculiar  importance.  These  were,  the
separation  of  theology,  first  from  morals,  and  then  from  politics.  The  separation
from  morals  was  effected  late  in  the  seventeenth  century  ;  the  separation  from
politics  before  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.  And  it  is  a  striking  instance
of  the  decline  of  the  old  ecclesiastical  spirit,  that  both  these  great  changes  were
begun  by  the  clergy  themselves.  Cumberland,  Bishop  of  Peterborough,  was
the  first  who  endeavoured  to  construct  a  system  of  morals  without  the  aid  of
theology.206  Warburton,  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  was  the  first  who  laid  down  that
the  state  must  consider  religion  in  reference,  not  to  revelation,  but  to  expediency  ;
and  that  it  should  favour  any  particular  creed,  not  in  proportion  to  its  truth,

Journals,  pp.  114,  145,  178,  181,  198,  235,  256,  275,  375,  562,  619,  637,  646.  Compare
Watson's  Observations  on  Southey's  Wesley,  pp.  173,  174  ;  and  for  other  evidence  of  the
treatment  of  those  who  differed  from  the  church,  see  Correspondence  and  Diary  of  Dodd-
ridge,  vol.  ii.  p.  17,  vol.  iii.  pp.  108,  131,  132,  144,  145,  156.  Grosley,  who  visited  England
in  1765,  says  of  Whitefield,  "  The  ministers  of  the  established  religion  did  their  utmost
to  baffle  the  new  preacher  ;  they  preached  against  him,  representing  him  to  the  people
as  a  fanatic,  a  visionary,  &c.,  &c.  ;  in  fine,  they  opposed  him  with  so  much  success,  that
they  caused  him  to  be  pelted  with  stones  in  every  place  where  he  opened  his  mouth  to
the  public."  Grosley' s  Tour  to  London,  Lond.  1772,  vol.  i.  p.  356.

205  That  Wesleyanism  encouraged  dissent  by  imparting  to  it  an  orderly  character,
which  in  some  degree  approximated  to  church  discipline,  is  judiciously  observed  in  Bogue
and  Bennett's  History  of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  iii.  pp.  165,  166.     But  these  Vriters  deal  rather
too  harshly  with  Wesley  ;    though  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  a  very  ambitious  man,
and  over-fond  of  power.     At  an  early  period  of  his  career  he  began  to  aim  at  objects
higher  than  those  attempted  by  the  Puritans,  whose  efforts,  particularly  in  the  sixteenth
century,  he  looked  at  somewhat  contemptuously.     Thus,  for  instance,  in  1747,  only  eight
years  after  he  had  revolted  against  the  church,  he  expresses  in  his  Journal  his  wonder
"at  the  weakness  of  those  holy  confessors"   (the  Elizabethan  Puritans),   "many  of
whom  spent  so  much  of  their  time  and  strength  in  disputing  about  surplice  and  hoods,
or  kneeling  at  the  Lord's  Supper  !  "     Journals,  p.  249,  March  i3th,  1747.     Such  warfare
as  this  would  have  ill  satisfied  the  soaring  mind  of  Wesley  ;    and  from  the  spirit  which
pervades  his  voluminous  Journals,  as  well  as  from  the  careful  and  far-seeing  provisions
which  he  made  for  managing  his  sect,  it  is  evident  that  this  great  schismatic  had  larger
views  than  any  of  his  predecessors,  and  that  he  wished  to  organize  a  system  capable  of
rivalling  the  established  church.

206  Mr.  Hallam  (Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  iii.  p.  390)  says  that  Cumberland   "  seems  to  have
been  the  first  Christian  writer  who  sought  to  establish  systematically  the  principles  of
moral  right  independently  of  revelation."     See  also,  on  this  important  change,  WhewelVs
Hist,  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  England,  pp.  12,  54.     The  dangers  always  incurred  by  making
theology  the  basis  of  morals  are  now  pretty  well  understood  ;  but  by  no  writer  have  they
been  pointed  out  more  clearly  than  by  M.  Charles  Comte  ;   see  the  able  exposition  in  his
Traite  de  Legislation,  vol.  i.  pp.  223-247.     There  is  a  short  and  unsatisfactory  account
of  Cumberland's  book  in  Mackintosh's  Ethical  Philosophy,  pp.  134-137.     He  was  a  man
of  considerable  learning,  and  is  noticed  by  M.  Quatremere  as  one  of  the  earliest  students
of  Coptic.     Quatremere  sur  la  Langue  et  la  Litterature  de  I'Egypte,  p.  89.     He  was  made  a
bishop  in  1691,  having  published  the  De  Legibus  in  1672.      Chalmers'  Biog.  Diet.  vol.  xi.
PP.  133,  135-


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT


241


but  solely  with  a  view  to  its  general  utility  2°7  Nor  were  these  mere  barren
principles  which  subsequent  inquirers  were  unable  to  apply.  The  opinions  of
Cumberland,  pushed  to  their  furthest  extent  by  Hume,208  were  shortly  afterwards
applied  to  practical  conduct  by  Paley,209  and  to  speculative  jurisprudence  by
Bentham  and  Mill  ;  21°  while  the  opinions  of  Warburton,  spreading  with  still
greater  rapidity,  have  influenced  our  legislative  policy,  and  are  now  professed,
not  only  by  advanced  thinkers,  but  even  by  those  ordinary  men  who,  if  they  had
lived  fifty  years  earlier,  would  have  shrunk  from  them  with  undissembled  fear.211
Thus  it  was  that,  in  England,  theology  was  finally  *  severed  from  the  two
great  departments  of  ethics  and  of  government.  As,  however,  this  important
change  was  at  first  not  of  a  practical,  but  solely  of  an  intellectual  character,  its

r  ration  was  for  many  years  confined  to  a  small  class,  and  has  not  yet  produced
whole  of  those  results  which  we  have  every  reason  to  anticipate.     But  there

207  This  was  in  his  work  entitled  The  Alliance  between  Church  and  State,  which  first
appeared,  according  to  Hurd  (Life  of  Warburton,  1794,  4to,  p.  13)  in  1736,  and,  as  may

supposed,  caused  great  scandal.  The  history  of  its  influence  I  shall  trace  on  another
ccasion  ;  in  the  meantime  the  reader  should  compare,  respecting  its  tendency,  Palmer
m  the  Church,  vol.  ii.  pp.  313,  322,  323  ;  Parr's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  657,  665,  vol.  vii.  p.  128  ;
Whately's  Dangers  to  Christian  Faith,  p.  190  ;  and  Nichols's  Lit.  A  nee.  vol.  iii.  p.  18.
In  January,  1739-40,  Warburton  writes  toStukeley  (Nichols's  Illustrations,  vol.  ii.  p.  53)  :
"  But  you  know  how  dangerous  new  roads  in  theology  are,  by  the  clamour  of  the  bigots
against  me."  See  also  some  letters  which  passed  between  him  and  the  elder  Pitt,  in  1762,
on  the  subject  of  expediency,  printed  in  Chatham  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  pp.  184  seq.  War-
mrton  writes,  p.  190,  "  My  opinion  is,  and  ever  was,  that  the  state  has  nothing  at  all  to
do  with  errors  in  religion,  nor  the  least  right  so  much  as  to  attempt  to  repress  them."
To  make  such  a  man  a  bishop  was  a  great  feat  for  the  eighteenth  century,  and  would
lave  been  an  impossible  one  for  the  seventeenth.

208  The  relation  between  Cumberland  and  Hume  consists  in  the  entirely  secular  plan
according    to    which   both    investigated    ethics  ;     in    other    respects,     there    is    great
difference    between    their   conclusions:    but    if    the    anti- theological    method    is    ad-
mitted to  be  sound,  it  is  certain  that  the  treatment  of  the  subject  by  Hume  is  more
consequential  from  the  premises,  than  is  that  by  his  predecessor.      It  is  this  which  makes
Hume  a  continuator  of  Cumberland  ;  though  with  the  advantage,  not  only  of  coming  half
a  century  after  him,  but  of  possessing  a  more  comprehensive  mind.     The  ethical  specula-
tions of  Hume  are  in  the  third  book  of  his  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  (Hume's  Philo-
sophical Works,  Edinb.   1826,  vol.  ii.  pp.  219  seq.),  and  in  his  Inquiry  concerning  the
Principles  of  Morals,  ibid.  vol.  iv.  pp.  237-365.

209  The  moral  system  of  Paley,  being  essentially  utilitarian,  completed  the  revolution
in  that  field  of  inquiry  ;    and  as  his  work  was  drawn  up  with  great  ability,  it  exercised
immense  influence  in  an  age  already  prepared  for  its  reception.     His  Moral  and  Political
Philosophy  was  published  in  1785  ;    in  1786  it  became  a  standard  book  at  Cambridge  ;
and  by  1805  it  had  passed  "  through  fifteen  editions."     Meadley's  Memoirs  of  Paley,
pp.   127,  145.     Compare  Whewell's  Hist,  of  Moral  Philosophy,  p.   176.

210  That  the  writings  of  these  two  eminent  men  form  part  of  the  same  scheme,  is  well
known  to  those  who  have  studied  the  history  of  the  school  to  which  they  belong  ;   and
on  the  intellectual  relation  they  bore  to  each  other,  I  cannot  do  better  than  refer  to  a  very
striking  letter  by  James  Mill  himself,  in  Bentham' s  Works,  edit.  Bowring,  vol.  x.  pp.  481.
482.

211  The  repeal  of  the  Test  Act,  the  admission  of  Catholics  into  parliament,  and  the
steadily  increasing  feeling  in  favour  of  the  admission  of  the  Jews,  are  the  leading  symptoms
of  this  great  movement.     On  the  gradual  diffusion  among  us  of  the  doctrine  of  expedi-
ency, which,  on  all  subjects  not  yet  raised  to  sciences,  ought  to  be  the  sole  regulator  of
human  actions,  see  a  remarkable  but  a  mournful  letter,  written  in  1812,  in  the  Life  of
Wilberforce,  vol.  iv.  p.  28.     See  also  the  speech  of  Lord  Eldon  in  1828.  in  Twiss's  Life
of  Eldon,  vol.  ii.  p.  203.

[*  The  laxity  of  the  phrase  "  was  finally  "  has  brought  on  Buckle  a  charge  of  serious
error.  But  the  previous  sentence  gives  his  true  meaning.  He  should  have  written  :
"  Thus  .  .  .  began  to  be  severed  .  .  ." — ED.]

16


242  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  other  circumstances  which  tended  in  the  same  direction,  and  which,  being
known  to  all  men  of  tolerable  education,  produced  effects  more  immediate,
though  perhaps  less  permanent.  To  trace  their  details,  and  point  out  the  con-
nexion between  them,  will  be  the  business  of  part  of  the  future  volumes  of  this
work  :  at-  present  I  can  only  glance  at  the  leading  features.  Of  these  the  most
prominent  were  :  The  great  Arian  controversy,  which,  rashly  instigated  by
Whiston,  Clarke,  and  Waterland,  disseminated  doubts  among  nearly  all  classes  ;  212
the  Bangorian  controversy,  which,  involving  matters  of  ecclesiastical  discipline
hitherto  untouched,  led  to  discussions  dangerous  to  the  power  of  the  church  ; 213
the  great  work  of  Blackburne  on  the  Confessional,  which  at  one  moment  almost
caused  a  schism  in  the  Establishment  itself  ;  214  the  celebrated  dispute  respect-
ing miracles  between  Middleton,  Church,  and  Dodwell,  continued,  with  still
larger  views,  by  Hume,  Campbell,  and  Douglas  ;  215  the  exposure  of  the  gross

212  From  a  curious  passage  in  Mutton's  Life  of  Himself,  p.  27,  we  learn  that  in  1739
the  scepticism  of  the  anti -Trinitarians  had  penetrated  among  the  tradesmen  at  Notting-
ham.    Compare,  respecting  the  spread  of  this  heresy,  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  viii.  p.  375  ;
Priestley's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  pp.  25,  26,  53  ;    Doddridge's  Correspond,  and  Diary,  vol.  ii.
p.  477  note  ;  and  on  Peirce,  who  took  an  active  part,  and  whom  Whiston  boasts  of  having
corrupted,  see  Whiston's  Memoirs,  pp.  143,  144.     Sharp,  who  was  Archbishop  of  York
when  the  controversy  began,  foresaw  its  dangerous  consequences.     Life  of  Sharp,  edited
by  Newcome,  vol.  ii.  pp.  7,  8,  135,  136.     See  further  Maclaine's  note  in  Mosheim's  EC-
clesiast.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  pp.  293,  294  ;    Lathbury's  Hist,  of  Convocation,  pp.  338,  342,  351  ;
and  a  note  in  Butler's  Reminisc.  vol.  i.  pp.  206,  207.

213  Mr.  Butler  (Mem.  of  the  Catholics,  vol.  iii.  pp.  182-184,  347-350)  notices  with  evident
pleasure  the  effect  of  this  famous  controversy  in  weakening  the  Anglican  church.     Com  -
pare  Bogue  and  Bennett's  Hist,  of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  iii.  pp.  135-141.     Whiston  (Memoirs,
p.  244)  says  :    "  And,  indeed,  this  Bangorian  controversy  seemed  for  a  great  while  to
engross  the  attention  of  the  public."     See  more  about  it  in  Lathbury's  Hist,  of  Convoca-
tion, pp.  372-383  ;  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  i.  p.  152,  vol.  ix.  pp.  433,  434,  516  ;  Nichols's
Illustrations,  vol.  i.  p.  840  ;  Bishop  Newton's  Life  of  Himself,  pp.  177,  178.

214  The  Confessional,  a  most  able  attack  on  the  subscription  of  creeds  and  articles,
was  published  in  1766  ;  and  according  to  a  contemporary  observer,  "  it  excited  a  general
spirit  of  inquiry."     Cappe's  Memoirs,  pp.  147,  148.      The  consequence  was  that  in  1772
a  society  was  instituted  by  Blackburne  and  other  clergy  of  the  Church  of  England,  with
the  avowed  object  of  doing  away  with  all  subscriptions  in  religion.      Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.
vol.  i.  p.  570  ;   Illustrations,  vol.  vi.  p.  854.     A  petition  against  the  Articles  was  at  once
drawn  up,  signed  by  200  clergy  (Adolphus's  George  III.  vol.  i.  p.  506),  and  brought  before
the  House  of  Commons.     In  the  animated  debate  which  followed,  Sir  William  Meredith
said  that  "  the  Thirty -nine  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England  were  framed  when  the
spirit  of  free  inquiry,  when  liberal  and  enlarged  notions,  were  yet  in  their  infancy."
Patl.  Hist.  vol.  xvii.  p.  246.     He  added,  p.  247  :    "  Several  of  the  Articles  are  absolutely
unintelligible,  and,  indeed,  contradictory  and  absurd."     Lord  George  Germain  said  :
"  In  my  apprehension,  some  of  the  Articles  are  incomprehensible,  and  some  self -contra-
dictory."   p.  265.     Mr.  Sawbridge  declared  that  the  Articles  are  "  strikingly  absurd  ;  "
Mr.  Salter  that  they  are  "  too  absurd  to  be  defended  ;  "  and  Mr.  Dunning  that  they  are
"  palpably  ridiculous."     p.  294.     For  further  information  on  this  attempt  at  reform,
see  Disney's  Life  of  Jebb,  pp.  31-36  ;    Meadley's  Mem.  of  Paley,  pp.  88-94  ;    Hodgson's
Life  of  Porteus,  pp.  38-40  ;    Memoirs  of  Priestley,  vol.  ii.  p.  582  ;    and  a  characteristic
notice  in  Palmer's  Treatise  on  the  Church,  vol.  i.  pp.  270,  271.

215  Hume  says  that  on  his  return  from  Italy  in  1749  he  found  "  all  England  in  a  ferment
on  account  of  Dr.  Middleton's  Free  Inquiry."     Hume's  Life  of  Himself,  in  his  Works,  vol.  i.
p.  vii.     See  also,  on  the  excitement  caused  by  this  masterly  attack,  Nichols's  Illustra-
tions of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  ii.  p.  176  ;    which  should  be  compared  with  Dodd-
ridge's   Correspond,    vol.    iv.    pp.    536,    537  :    and  on  the    "  miraculous  controversy "
in  general,  see  Porteus's  Life  of  Seeker,   1797,  p.  38  ;   Phillimore's  Mem.  of  Lyttleton,
vol.  i.  p.  161  ;   Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  ii.  pp.  440,  527,  vol.   iii.   pp.   535>   75°,  vol.  v.
pp.  417,    418,  600;  Hull's  Letters,  1778,  vol.  i.  p.  109;    Warburton's   Letters  to  Hurd,
pp.  49,  50.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT


243


absurdities  of  the  Fathers,  which,  already  begun  by  Daille  and  Barbeyrac,
was  followed  up  by  Cave,  Middleton,  and  Jortin  ;  the  important  and  unrefuted
statements  of  Gibbon,  in  his  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  chapters  ;  the  additional
strength  conferred  on  those  chapters  by  the  lame  attacks  of  Davis,  Chelsum,
Whitaker,  and  Watson  ;  216  while,  not  to  mention  inferior  matters,  the  century
was  closed  amid  the  confusion  caused  by  that  decisive  controversy  between
Person  and  Travis,  respecting  the  text  of  the  Heavenly  Witnesses,  which  excited
immense  attention,21?  and  was  immediately  accompanied  by  the  discoveries  of
geologists,  in  which  not  only  was  the  fidelity  of  the  Mosaic  cosmogony  impugned,
but  its  accuracy  was  shown  to  be  impossible.218  These  things,  following  each
other  in  rapid  and  startling  succession,  perplexed  the  faith  of  men,  disturbed
their  easy  credulity,  and  produced  effects  on  the  public  mind  which  can  only
be  estimated  by  those  who  have  studied  the  history  of  that  time  in  its  original
sources.  Indeed,  they  cannot  be  understood,  even  in  their  general  bearings,
except  by  taking  into  consideration  some  other  circumstances  with  which  the
great  progress  was  intimately  connected.

For,  in  the  meantime,  an  immense  change  had  begun,  not  only  among  specu-
lative minds,  but  also  among  the  people  themselves.  The  increase  of  scepticism
stimulated  their  curiosity  ;  and  the  diffusion  of  education  supplied  the  means
of  gratifying  it.  Hence  we  find  that  one  of  the  leading  characteristics  of  the


216  Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall  has  now  been  jealously  scrutinized  by  two  generations  of
eager  and  unscrupulous  opponents  ;    and  I  am  only  expressing  the  general  opinion  of
competent  judges  when  I  say  that  by  each  successive  scrutiny  it  has  gained  fresh  reputa-
tion.    Against  his  celebrated  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  chapters,  all  the  devices  of  contro-
versy have  been  exhausted  ;    but  the  only  result  has  been,  that  while  the  fame  of  the
historian  is  untarnished,  the  attacks  of  his  enemies  are  falling  into  complete  oblivion.
The  work  of  Gibbon  remains  ;  but  who  is  there  who  feels  any  interest  in  what  was  written
against  him  ?

217  On  the  effect  produced  by  these  matchless  letters  of  Person,  see  Harford's  Life  of
Bishop  Burgess,  p.  374  ;  and  as  to  the  previous  agitation  of  the  question  in  England,  see
Calamy's  Own  Life,  vol.  ii.  pp.  442,  443  ;  Monk's  Life  of  Bentley,  vol.  ii.  pp.  16-19,  146,
286-289  ;  Butler's  Reminiscences,  vol.  i.  p.  211.     Compare  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xii.  p.  137,
vol.  xiii.  p.  458.

218  The  sceptical  character  of  geology  was  first  clearly  exhibited  during  the  last  thirty
years  of  the  eighteenth  century.     Previously,  the  geologists  had  for  the  most  part  allied
themselves  with  the  theologians  ;    but  the  increasing  boldness  of  public  opinion  now
enabled  them  to  institute  independent  investigations,  without  regard  to  doctrines  hitherto
received.     In  this  point  of  view,  much  was  effected  by  the  researches  of  Hutton,  whose
work,  says  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  contains  the  first  attempt  "  to  explain  the  former  changes
of  the  earth's  crust  by  reference  exclusively  to  natural  agents."     LyelVs  Principles  of
Geology,  p.  50.      To  establish  this  method  was,  of  course,  to  dissolve  the  alliance  with
the  theologians  ;   but  an  earlier  symptom  of  the  change  was  seen  in  1773,  that  is,  fifteen
years  before  Hutton  wrote  :  see  a  letter  in  Watson's  Life  of  Himself,  vol.  i.  p.  402,  where
it  is  stated  that  the  "  free-thinkers  "  attacked  the  "  Mosaic  account  of  the  world's  age,
especially  since  the  publication  of  Mr.  Brydone's  Travels  through  Sicily  and  Malta"
According  to  Lowndes  (Bibliographer's  Manual,  vol.  i.  p.  279)  Brydone's  book  was  pub-
lished in  1773  ;   and  in  1784  Sir  William  Jones  notices  the  tendency  of  these  inquiries  :
see  his  Discourse  on  the  Gods  of  Greece,  Italy,  and  India,  in  which  he  observes  (Works,
vol.  i.  p.  233)  with  regret,  that  he  lived  in  "  an  age  when  some  intelligent  and  virtuous
persons  are  inclined  to  doubt  the  authenticity  of  the  accounts  delivered  by  Moses  con-
cerning the  primitive  world."     Since  then,  the  progress  of  geology  has  been  so  rapid,  that
the  historical  value  of  the  writings  of  Moses  is  abandoned  by  all  enlightened  men,  even
among  the  clergy  themselves.     I  need  only  refer  to  what  has  been  said  by  two  of  the
most  eminent  of  that  profession,  Dr.  Arnold  and  Mr.  Baden  Powell.     See  the  observations
of  Arnold  in  Newman's  Phases  of  Faith,  p.  in  (compare  pp.  122,  123) ;    and  the  still
more  decisive  remarks  in  Powell's  Sermons  on  Christianity  without  Judaism,  1856,  pp.  38,
39-     For  other  instances,  see  Ly ell's  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States,  1849,  vol.  i.  pp.  219,


244  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

eighteenth  century,  and  one  which  pre-eminently  distinguished  it  from  all  that
preceded,  was  a  craving  after  knowledge  on  the  part  of  those  classes  from  whom
knowledge  had  hitherto  been  shut  out.  It  was  in  that  great  age  that  there  were
first  established  schools  for  the  lower  orders  on  the  only  day  they  had  time  to
attend  them,210  and  newspapers  on  the  only  day  they  had  time  to  read  them.220
It  was  then  that  there  were  first  seen,  in  our  country,  circulating  libraries  ;  221
and  it  was  then,  too,  that  the  art  of  printing,  instead  of  being  almost  confined
to  London,  began  to  be  generally  practised  in  country  towns.222  It  was  also  in
the  eighteenth  century  that  the  earliest  systematic  efforts  were  made  to  popularize
the  sciences,  and  facilitate  the  acquisition  of  their  general  principles,  by  writing

219  It  is  usually  supposed  that  Sunday-schools  were  begun  by  Raikes,  in  1781  ;    but
though  he  appears  to  have  been  the  first  to  organize  them  on  a  suitable  scale,  there  is  no
doubt  that  they  were  established  by  Lindsey,  in  or  immediately  after  1765.     See  Cappe's
Memoirs,  pp.  118,  122  ;    Harford's  Life  of  Burgess,  p.  92  ;    Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iii.
pp.  430,  431,  vol.  ix.  p.  540  ;    Chalmers'  Biog.  Diet.  vol.  xxv.  p.  485  ;   Journ.  of  Stat.  Soc.
vol.  x.  p.  196,  vol.  xiii.  p.  265  ;  Hodgson's  Life  of  Porteus,  p.  92.     It  is  said,  in  Spencer's
Social  Statics,  p.  343,  that  the  clergy  of  the  Church  of  England  were,  as  a  body,  opposed
to  the  establishment  of  Sunday-schools.     (Compare  Watson's  Observations  on  Southey's
Wesley,  p.  149.)     At  all  events,  they  increased  rapidly,  and  by  the  end  of  the  century
had  become  common.     See  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  v.  pp.  678,  679  ;   Nichols's  Illustra-
tions, vol.  i.  p.  460  ;   Life  of  Wilberforce,  vol.  i.  p.  180,  vol.  ii.  p.  296  ;    Wesley's  Journals,
pp.  806,  897.

220  Mr.  Hunt  (Hist,  of  Newspapers,  vol.  i.  p.  273)  makes  no  mention  of  Sunday  news-
papers earlier  than  a  notice  by  Crabbe  in  1785  ;  but  in  1799  Lord  Belgrave  said,  in  the
House  of  Commons,  that  they  first  appeared    "  about    the  year  1780."      Parl.  Hist.
vol.  xxxiv.  p.  1006.     In  1799,  Wilberforce   tried    to   have   a  law  enacted  to  suppress
them.     Life  of  Wilberforce,  vol.  ii.  pp.  338,  424.

221  When  Franklin  came  to  London,  in  1725,  there  was  not  a  single  circulating  library
in  the  metropolis.     See  Franklin's  Life  of  Himself,  vol.  i.  p.  64  ;   and  in  1697,  "  the  only
library  in  London  which  approached  the  nature  of  a  public  library  was  that  of  Sion
College,  belonging  to  the  London  clergy."     Ellis's  Letters  of  Literary  Men,  p.  245-     The
exact  date  of  the  earliest  circulating  library  I  have  not  yet  ascertained  ;   but  according
to  Southey  (The  Doctor,  edit.  Warter,  1848,  p.  271),  the  first  set  up  in  London  was  about
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  by  Samuel  Fancourt.     Hutton  (Life  of  Himself,
p.  279)  says,  "  I  was  the  first  who  opened  a  circulating  library  in  Birmingham,  in  1751."
Other  notices  of  them,  during  the  latter  half  of  the  century,  will  be  found  in  Coleridge's
Biographia  Literaria,  vol.  ii.  p.  329,  edit.  1847  ;  Leigh  Hunt's  Autobiography,  vol.  i.  p.  260  ;
Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iii.  pp.  648,  682  ;  Nichols's  Illustrations,  vol.  i.  p.  424  ;   WhewelVs
Hist,  of  Moral  Philosophy,  p.  190  ;    Sinclair's  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  143.     Indeed,  they
increased  so  rapidly,  that  some  wise  men  proposed  to  tax  them,  "  by  a  license,  at  the
rate  of  25.  6d.  per  100  volumes  per  annum."     Sinclair's  Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  iii.
p.  268.

222  In  1746,  Gent,  the  well-known  printer,  wrote  his  own  life.      In  this  curious  work
he  states  that  in  1714  there  were  "  few  printers  in  England,  except  London,  at  that  time  ;
none  then,  I  am  sure,  at  Chester,  Liverpool,  Whitehaven,  Preston,  Manchester,  Kendal,
and  Leeds,  as  for  the  most  part  now  abound."     Life  of  Thomas  Gent,  pp.  20,  21.     (Com-
pare a  list  of  country  printing-houses,  in  1724,  in  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  i.  p.  289.)
How  this  state  of  things  was  remedied,  is  a  most  important  inquiry  for  the  historian  :  but
in  this  note  I  can  only  give  a  few  illustrations  of  the  condition  of  different  districts.
The  first  printing-office  in  Rochester  was  established  by  Fisher,  who  died  in  1786  (Nichols's
Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iii.  p.  675)  ;   the  first  in  Whitby  was  in  1770  (Illustrations,  vol.  iii.  p.  787)  5
and  Richard  Greene,  who  died  in  1793,  "  was  the  first  who  brought  a  printing-press  to
Lichfield  "  (Ibid.  vol.  vi.  p.  320).     In  the  reign  of  Anne,  there  was  not  a  single  bookseller
in  Birmingham  (Southey's  Commonplace  Book,  ist  series,  1849,  p.  568)  ;    but   in    1749
we  find  a  printer  established  there  (Hull's  Letters,  Lond.  1778,  vol.  i.  p.  92)  ;    and  in
1774  there  was  a  printer  even  in  Falkirk  (Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvii.  p.  1099).      In  other  parts
the  movement  was  slower  ;  and  we  are  told  that  about  1780  "  there  was  scarcely  a  book-
seller in  Cornwall."     Life  of  Samuel  Drew,  by  his  Son,  1834,  pp.  40,  41.


\


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          245

treatises  on  them  in  an  easy  and  untechnical  style  ;  223  while  at  the  same  time
the  invention  of  Encyclopaedias  enabled  their  results  to  be  brought  together,
and  digested  in  a  form  more  accessible  than  any  hitherto  employed.224  Then,
too,  we  first  meet  with  literary  periodical  reviews  ;  by  means  of  which  large
bodies  of  practical  men  acquired  information,  scanty  indeed,  but  every  way
superior  to  their  former  ignorance.225  The  formation  of  societies  for  purchasing
books  now  became  general  ;  226  and,  before  the  close  of  the  century,  we  hear  of
clubs  instituted  by  reading  men  among  the  industrious  classes.227  In  every
department  the  same  eager  curiosity  was  shown.  In  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century  debating  societies  sprung  up  among  tradesmen  ;  228  and  this  was  followed
by  a  still  bolder  innovation,  for,  in  1769,  there  was  held  the  first  public  meeting
ever  assembled  in  England,  the  first  in  which  it  was  attempted  to  enlighten
Englishmen  respecting  their  political  rights.229  About  the  same  time,  the  pro-

223  Desaguliers  and  Hill  were  the  two  first  writers  who  gave  themselves  up  to  popular-
izing physical  truths.  At  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  George  I.,  Desaguliers  was  "  the
first  who  read  lectures  in  London  on  experimental  philosophy."  Southey's  Commonplace
Book,  3rd  series,  1850,  p.  77.  See  also  Penny  Cyclopaedia,  vol.  viii.  p.  430  ;  and,  on  his
elementary  works,  compare  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  vi.  p.  81.  As  to  Hill,  he  is  said  to
have  set  the  example  of  publishing  popular  scientific  works  in  numbers  ;  a  plan  so  well
suited  to  that  inquisitive  age,  that,  if  we  believe  Horace  Walpole,  he  "  earned  fifteen
guineas  a  week."  Letter  to  Henry  Zouch,  January  3rd,  1761,  in  Walpole' s  Letters,  vol.  iv.
p.  117,  edit.  1840.

In  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  demand  for  books  on  the  natural  sciences
rapidly  increased  (see,  among  many  other  instances  which  might  be  quoted,  a  note
in  Pulteney's  Hist,  of  Botany,  vol.  ii.  p.  180)  ;  and,  early  in  the  reign  of  George  III.,
Priestley  began  to  write  popularly  on  physical  subjects.  (Memoirs  of  Priestley,  vol.  i.
pp.  288,  289.)  Goldsmith  did  something  in  the  same  direction  (Prior's  Life  of  Goldsmith,
vol.  i.  pp.  414,  469.  vol.  ii.  p.  198)  ;  and  Pennant,  whose  earliest  work  appeared  in  1766,
was  "  the  first  who  treated  the  natural  history  of  Britain  in  a  popular  and  interesting
style."  Swainson  on  the  Study  of  Natural  History,  p.  50.  In  the  reign  of  George  II.,
publishers  began  to  encourage  elementary  works  on  chemistry.  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.
vol.  ix.  p.  763.

221  In  1704,  1708,  and  1710,  Harris  published  his  Dictionary  of  Arts  and  Sciences  ;   and
from  this,  according  to  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  ix.  pp.  770,  771,  has  "  originated  all  the
other  dictionaries  and  cyclopaedias  that  have  since  appeared."     Compare  vol.  v.  p.  659  ;•
and  Bogue  and  Bennett's  Hist,  of  the  Dissenters,  vol.  iv.  p.  500.

223  Late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  an  attempt  was  first  made  in  England  to  establish
literary  journals.  Hallam's  Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  iii.  p.  539  ;  and  Dibdin's  Bibliomania,
1842,  p.  16.  Reviews,  as  we  now  understand  the  word,  meaning  a  critical  publication,
were  unknown  before  the  accession  of  George  II.  ;  but  about  the  middle  of  his  reign,
they  began  to  increase.  Compare  Wright's  England  under  the  House  of  Hanover,  1848,
vol.  i.  p.  304,  with  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iii.  pp.  507,  508.  At  an  earlier  period  the
functions  of  reviews  were  performed,  as  Monk  says,  by  pamphlets.  Monk's  Life  of
Bentley,  vol.  i.  p.  112.

226  As  we  find  from  many  casual  notices  of  book-clubs  and  book -societies.     See,  for
example,  Doddridge's  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  pp.  57,  119  ;    Jesse's  Life  of  Selwyn,  vol.  ii.
p.  23  ;   Nichols's  Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  v.  pp.  184,  824,  825  :    Wake-
field's  Life  of  Himself,  vol.  i.  p.  528  ;    Memoirs  of  Sir  J.  E.  Smith,  vol.  i.  p.  8  ;    Life  of
Roscoe,  by  his  Son,  vol.  i.  p.  228  (though  this  last  was  perhaps  a  circulating  library).

227  "  Numerous  associations  or  clubs,  composed  principally  of  reading  men  of  the
lower  ranks."     Life  of  Dr.  Currie,  by  his  Son,  vol.  i.  p.  175.

228  Of  which  the  most  remarkable  was  that  called  the  Robin -Hood  Society  ;  respecting
which  the  reader  should  compare  Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  vi.  p.  373  ;
Grosley's  London,  vol.  i.  p.  150  ;    Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvii.  p.  301  ;    Southey's  Commonplace
Book,  4th  series,  p.  339  ;   Forster's  Life  of  Goldsmith,  vol.  i.  p.  310  ;   Prior's  Life  of  Gold-
smith, vol.  i.  pp.  419,  420  ;  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  p.  75  ;  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iii.  p.  154.

229  "  From  the  summer  of  1769  is  to  be  dated  the  first  establishment  of  public  meetings  •
in  England."     Albemarle's  Mem.  of  Rockingham   vol.  ii.  p.  93.     "  Public  meetings,  .  .  .


246  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ceedings  in  our  courts  of  law  began  to  be  studied  by  the  people,  and  communi-
cated to  them  through  the  medium  of  the  daily  press.230  Shortly  before  this,
political  newspapers  arose,231  and  a  sharp  struggle  broke  out  between  them  and
the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  touching  the  right  of  publishing  the  debates  ;  the
end  of  which  was  that  both  houses,  though  aided  by  the  crown,  were  totally
defeated  ;  and  for  the  first  time  the  people  were  able  to  study  the  proceedings
of  the  national  legislature,  and  thus  gain  some  acquaintance  with  the  national
affairs.232  Scarcely  was  this  triumph  completed  when  fresh  stimulus  was  given
by  the  promulgation  of  that  great  political  doctrine  of  personal  representation,233
which  must  eventually  carry  all  before  it  ;  and  the  germ  of  which  may  be  traced

through  which  the  people  might  declare  their  newly -acquired  consciousness  of  power,
.  cannot  be  distinctly  traced  higher  than  the  year  1769  ;   but  they  were  now  (i.e.  in
1770)  of  daily  occurrence."     Cooke's  Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.  p.  187.     See  also  Hallam's
Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p  420.

230  The  most  interesting  trials  were  first  noticed  in  newspapers  towards  the  end  of
the  reign  of  George  II.     Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  v.  p.  52,  vol.  vi.  p.  54.

231  In  1696,  the  only  newspapers  were  weekly  ;   and  the  first  daily  paper  appeared  in
the  reign  of  Anne.     Compare  Simmonds's  Essay  on  Newspapers,  in  Journal  of  Statist.
Society,  vol.  iv.  p.  113,  with  Hunt's  Hist,  of  Newspapers,  vol.  i.  pp.  167,  175,  vol.  ii.  p.  90  ;
and  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iv.  p.  80.     In  1710,  they,  instead  of  merely  communicating
news,  as  heretofore,  began  to  take  part  in  "  the  discussion  of  political  topics  "  (Hallam's
Const.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  443)  ;   and,  as  this  change  had  been  preceded  a  very  few  years
by  the  introduction  of  cheap  political  pamphlets  (see  a  curious  passage  in  Wilson's  Life
of  De  Foe,  vol.  ii.  p.  29),  it  became  evident  that  a  great  movement  was  at  hand  in  regard
to  the  diffusion  of  such  inquiries.     Within  twenty  years  after  the  death  of  Anne,  the
revolution  was.  completed  ;   and  the  press,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  world,
was  made  an  exponent  of  public  opinion.     The  earliest  notice  of  this  new  power,  which
I  have  met  with,  in  parliament,  is  in  a  speech  delivered  by  Danvers,  in  1738  ;   which  is
worth  quoting,  both  because  it  marks  an  epoch,  and  because  it  is  characteristic  of  that
troublesome  class  to  which  the  man  belonged.     "  But  I  believe,"  says  this  distinguished
legislator, — "  but  I  believe,  the  people  of  Great  Britain  are  governed  by  a  power  that
never  was  heard  of,  as  a  supreme  authority,  in  any  age  or  country  before.     This  power,
sir,  does  not  consist  in  the  absolute  will  of  the  prince,  in  the  direction  of  parliament,  in
the  strength  of  an  army,  in  the  influence  of  the  clergy  ;    neither,  sir,  is  it  a  petticoat
government :   but,  sir,  it  is  the  government  of  the  press.     The  stuff  which  our  weekly
newspapers  are  filled  with,  is  received  with  greater  reverence  than  acts  of  parliament ;
and  the  sentiments  of  one  of  these  scribblers  have  more  weight  with  the  multitude  than
the  opinion  of  the  best  politician  in  the  kingdom."     Part.  Hist.  vol.  x.  p.  448.

232  This  great  contest  was  brought  to  a  close  in  1771  and  1772  ;  when,  as  Lord  Camp-
bell says,  "  the  right  of  publishing  parliamentary  debates  was  substantially  established."
Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  v.  p.  511,  vol.  vi.  p.  90.     For  further  information  respecting
this  important  victory,  see  Cooke's  Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.  pp.  179-184  ;   Almon's  Corres-
pond, of  Wilkes,  1805,  vol.  v.  p.  63  ;    Stephens' s  Mem.  of  Tooke,  vol.  i.  pp.  329-351  ;
Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  v.  p.  290  ;   and,  on  its  connexion  with  Junius's  Letters,
see  Forster's  Life  of  Goldsmith,  vol.  ii.  pp.  183,  184.

George  III.,  always  consistent  and  always  wrong,  strenuously  opposed  this  extension
of  the  popular  rights.  In  1771,  he  wrote  to  Lord  North  :  "  It  is  highly  necessary  that
this  strange  and  lawless  method  of  publishing  debates  in  the  papers  should  be  put  a  stop
to.  But  is  not  the  House  of  Lords  the  best  court  to  bring  such  miscreants  before  ;  as
it  can  fine,  as  well  as  imprison,  and  has  broader  shoulders  to  support  the  odium  of  so
salutary  a  measure  ?  "  App.  to  Mahon,  vol.  v.  p.  xlviii.  ;  and  note  in  Walpole's  George  III.
vol.  iv.  p.  280,  where  the  words,  "  in  the  papers,"  are  omitted  ;  but  I  copy  the  letter,  as
printed  by  Lord  Mahon.  In  other  respects,  both  versions  are  the  same  ;  so  that  we  now
know  the  idea  George  III.  had  of  what  constituted  a  miscreant.

233  Lord  John  Russell,  in  his  work  on  the  History  of  the  English  Constitution,  says  :
"  Dr.  Jebb,  and  after  him  Mr.  Cartwright,  broached  the  theory  of  personal  representa-
tion ;  "  but  this  appears  to  be  a  mistake,  since  the  theory  is  said  to  have  been  first  put
forward  by  Cartwright,  in  1776.     Compare  Russell  on  the  Constitution,  1821,  pp.  240,  241,
with  Life  and  Corresp.  of  Cartwright,  1826,  vol.  i.  pp.  91,  92.     A  letter  in  the  Life  of  Dr.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          247

ite  in  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  true  idea  of  personal  independence

3gan  to  take  root  and  flourish.234  Finally,  it  was  reserved  for  the  eighteenth
itury  to  set  the  first  example  of  calling  on  the  people  to  adjudicate  upon  those
lemn  questions  of  religion  in  which  hitherto  they  had  never  been  consulted,

Ithough  it  is  now  universally  admitted  that  to  their  growing  intelligence  these,

id  all  other  matters,  must  ultimately  be  referred.235

In  connexion  with  all  this  there  was  a  corresponding  change  in  the  very  form
and  make  of  our  literature.  The  harsh  and  pedantic  method  which  our  great
writers  had  long  been  accustomed  to  employ,  was  ill  suited  to  an  impetuous  and
inquisitive  generation,  thirsting  after  knowledge,  and  therefore  intolerant  of
obscurities  formerly  unheeded.  Hence  it  was  that,  early  in  the  eighteenth
century,  the  powerful  but  cumbrous  language,  and  the  long,  involved  sentences,
so  natural  to  our  ancient  authors,  were,  notwithstanding  their  beauty,  suddenly
discarded,  and  were  succeeded  by  a  lighter  and  simpler  style,  which,  being  more
rapidly  understood,  was  better  suited  to  the  exigencies  of  the  age.236

trie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  307-314,  shows  the  interest  which  even  sober  and  practical  men  were
inning  to  feel  in  the  doctrine  before  the  end  of  the  century.
J4  On  this  I  have  a  philological  remark  of  some  interest, — namely,  that  there  is  reason
to  believe  that  "  the  word  '  independence,'  in  its  modern  acceptation,"  does  not  occur
in  our  language  before  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century.     See  Hare's  Guesses  at
Truth,  2nd  series,  1848,  p.  262.      A  similar  change,  though  at  a  later  period,  took  place  in
France.     See  the  observations  on  the  word  '  individualisme,'  in  Tocqueville,  Democratic
en  Amerique,  vol.  iv.  p.  156  ;  and  in  the  later  work  by  the  same  author,  V  A  ncien  Regime,
Paris,  1856,  pp.  148,  149.

238  Archbishop  Whately  (Dangers  to  Christian  Faith,  pp.  76,  77)  says  :  "  Neither  the
attacks  on  our  religion,  nor  the  evidences  in  its  support,  were  to  any  great  extent  brought
forward  in  a  popular  form,  till  near  the  close  of  the  last  century.  On  both  sides,  the
learned  (or  those  who  professed  to  be  such)  seem  to  have  agreed  in  this, — that  the  mass
of  the  people  were  to  acquiesce  in  the  decision  of  their  superiors,  and  neither  should,
nor  could,  exercise  their  own  minds  on  the  question."  This  is  well  put,  and  quite  true  ;
and  should  be  compared  with  the  complaint  in  Wake  field's  Life  of  Himself,  vol.  ii.  p.  21  ;
Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  viii.  p.  144  ;  and  Hodgson's  Life  of
Bishop  Porteus,  pp.  73,  74,  122,  125,  126.  See  also  a  speech  by  Mansfield,  in  1781  (Part.
Hist.  vol.  xxii.  p.  265 ),  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  put  down  the  "  Theological  Society."
The  whole  debate  is  worth  reading  ;  not  on  account  of  its  merits,  but  because  it  supplies
evidence  of  the  prevailing  spirit.  [Whately  and  Buckle  have  overlooked  the  popular
propaganda  of  Peter  Annet,  whose  first  pamphlet  on  "  Judging  for  Ourselves  "  (i739)»
consists  of  "  Two  Lectures  delivered  at  Plaisterers'  Hall."  He  published  a  number  of
other  popular  free-thinking  treatises,  and  in  1761,  on  his  issuing  nine  numbers  of  The  Free
Inquirer,  he  was  sentenced  to  the  pillory  and  to  imprisonment.  Woolston's  Discourses
on  Miracles,  too  (1726-28),  had  a  great  vogue,  though  Voltaire  is  probably  over  the  mark
in  stating  that  30,000  copies  were  sold.  But  the  great  mass  of  deistic  literature  was
certainly  read  by  many  besides  "  the  learned."  Chubb  in  particular  was  not  at  all  a
learned  man  ;  and  he  had  a  large  following. — ED.]

236  Coleridge  (Lit.  Remains,  vol.  i.  pp.  230  seq.)  has  made  some  interesting  remarks
on  the  vicissitudes  of  English  style  ;  and  he  justly  observes,  p.  238,  that,  "  after  the
Revolution,  the  spirit  of  the  nation  became  much  more  commercial  than  it  had  been
before  ;  a  learned  body,  or  clerisy,  as  such,  gradually  disappeared  ;  and  literature  in
general  began  to  be  addressed  to  the  common,  miscellaneous  public."  He  goes  on  to
lament  this  change  ;  though  in  that  I  disagree  with  him.  See  also  The  Friend,  vol.  i,
p.  19.  where  he  contrasts  the  modern  style  with  "  the  stately  march  and  difficult  evolu-
tions "  of  the  great  writers  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Compare,  on  this  alteration,
the  preface  to  Nader  Shah,  in  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  v.  p.  544-  See  also,  in  Harfortfs
Life  of  Burgess,  pp.  40,  41,  a  curious  letter  from  Monboddo,  the  last  of  our  really  great
pedants,  mourning  over  this  characteristic  of  modern  composition.  He  terms  it  con-
temptuously a  "  short  cut  of  a  style  ;  "  and  wishes  to  return  to  "  the  true  ancient  taste,
with  plenty  of  "  parentheses  "  !
The  truth  is  that  this  movement  was  merely  part  of  that  tendency  to  approximate  the


248  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  extension  of  knowledge  being  thus  accompanied  by  an  increased  sim-
plicity in  the  manner  of  its  communication,  naturally  gave  rise  to  a  greater
independence  in  literary  men,  and  a  greater  boldness  in  literary  inquiries.  As
long  as  books,  either  from  the  difficulty  of  their  style,  or  from  the  general  incuri-
osity of  the  people,  found  but  few  readers,  it  was  evident  that  authors  must  rely
upon  the  patronage  of  public  bodies,  or  of  rich  and  titled  individuals.  And  as
men  are  always  inclined  to  flatter  those  upon  whom  they  are  dependent,  it  too
often  happened  that  even  our  greatest  writers  prostituted  their  abilities,  by
fawning  upon  the  prejudices  of  their  patrons.  The  consequence  was  that
literature,  so  far  from  disturbing  ancient  superstitions,  and  stirring  up  the  mind
to  new  inquiries,  frequently  assumed  a  timid  and  subservient  air,  natural  to  its
subordinate  position.  But  now  all  this  was  changed.  Those  servile  and  shame-
ful dedications  ;  237  that  mean  and  crouching  spirit  ;  that  incessant  homage  to
mere  rank  and  birth  ;  that  constant  confusion  between  power  and  right  ;  that
ignorant  admiration  for  everything  which  is  old,  and  that  still  more  ignorant
contempt  for  everything  which  is  new  ; — all  these  features  became  gradually
fainter  ;  and  authors,  relying  upon  the  patronage  of  the  people,  began  to  advocate
the  claims  of  their  new  allies  with  a  boldness  upon  which  they  could  not  have
ventured  in  any  previous  age.238

different  classes  of  society,  which  was  first  clearly  seen  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and
which  influenced  not  only  the  style  of  authors,  but  also  their  social  habits.  Hume  ob-
serves that  in  the  "  last  age  "  learned  men  had  separated  themselves  too  much  from  the
world  ;  but  that  in  his  time  they  were  becoming  more  "  conversible."  Essay  V,,  in
Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  539,  540.  That  "  philosophers  "  were  growing
men  of  the  world,  is  also  noticed  in  a  curious  passage  in  Alciphron,  dial,  i.,  in  Berkeley's
Works,  vol.  i.  p.  312  ;  and,  respecting  the  general  social  amalgamation,  see  a  letter  to
the  Countess  of  Bute,  in  i753»  U1  Works  of  Lady  Mary  Montagu,  edit.  1803,  vol.  iv.  pp.  194,
195.  As  to  the  influence  of  Addison,  who  led  the  way  in  establishing  the  easy,  and
therefore  democratic  style,  and  who,  more  than  any  single  writer,  made  literature
popular,  compare  Aikin's  Life  of  Addison,  vol.  ii.  p.  65,  with  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,
vol.  ii.  p.  7-  Subsequently  a  reaction  was  attempted  by  Johnson,  Gibbon,  and  Parr  ;
but  this,  being  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  age,  was  short-lived.

237  And  the  servility  was,  for  the  most  part,  well  paid  ;    indeed,  rewarded  for  more
than  it  was  worth.     During  the  sixteenth,  seventeenth,  and  early  part  of  the  eighteenth
century,  a  sum  of  money  was  invariably  presented  to  the  author  in  return  for  his  dedica-
tion.    Of  course,  the  grosser  the  flattery,  the  larger  the  sum.     On  the  relation  thus
established  between  authors  and  men  of  rank,  and  on  the  eagerness  with  which  even
eminent  writers  looked  to  their  patrons  for  gratuities,  varying  from  405.  to  ioo/.,   see
Drake's  Shakespeare  and  his  Times,  1817,  4to,  vol.  ii.  p.  225  ;  Monk's  Life  of  Bentley,  vol.  i.
pp.  194,  309  ;   Whiston's  Memoirs,  p.  203  ;  Nichols's  Illustrations,  vol.  ii.  p.  709  ;  Harris's
Life  of  Hardwicke,  vol.  iii.  p.  35  ;   Bunbury's  Life  of  Hanmer,  p.  81.     Compare  a  note  in
Burton's  Diary,  vol.  iii.  p.  52  ;   and  as  to  the  importance  of  fixing  on  a  proper  person  to
whom  to  dedicate,  see  Ellis' s  Letters  of  Lit.  Men,  pp.  231-234  ;    and  the  matter-of-fact
remark  in  Bishop  Newton's  Life,  p.  14  ;   also  Hughes' s  Letters,  edit.  1773,  vol.  iii.  p.  xxxi.
appendix.

About  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  the  turning-point  of  this  deplorable
condition  ;  and  Watson,  for  instance,  in  1769,  laid  it  down  as  a  rule,  "  never  to  dedicate
to  those  from  whom  I  expected  favours."  Watson's  Life  of  Himself,  vol.  i.  p.  54.  So,
too,  Warburton,  in  1758,  boasts  that  his  dedication  was  not,  as  usual,  "  occupied  by
trifles  or  falsehoods."  See  his  letter,  in  Chatham  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  315.  Nearly  at
the  same  period,  the  same  change  was  effected  in  France,  where  D'Alembert  set  the
example  of  ridiculing  the  old  custom.  See  Brougham's  Men  of  Letters,  vol.  ii.  pp.  439,
440  ;  Correspond,  de  Madame  Dudeffand,  vol.  ii.  p.  148  ;  and  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xl.
p.  41,  vol.  Ixi.  p.  285.

238  When  Le  Blanc  visited  England,  in  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  George  II.,  the  custom
of  authors  relying  upon  the  patronage  of  individuals  was  beginning  to  die  away,  and  the
plan  of  publishing  by  subscription  had  become  general.     See  the  interesting  details  in
Le  Blanc,  Lettres  d'un  Francais,  vol.  i.  pp.  305-308  ;   and,  for  the  former  state  of  things,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          249

From  all  these  things  there  resulted  consequences  of  vast  importance.  From
this"  simplification,  independence,  and  diffusion  239  of  knowledge,  it  necessarily
happened  that  the  issue  of  those  great  disputes  to  which  I  have  alluded  became,
in  the  eighteenth  century,  more  generally  known  than  would  have  been  possible
in  any  preceding  century.  It  was  now  known  that  theological  and  political
questions  were  being  constantly  agitated,  in  which  genius  and  learning  were  on
one  side,  and  orthodoxy  and  tradition  on  the  other.  It  became  known  that  the
points  which  were  mooted  were  not  only  as  to  the  credibility  of  particular  facts,
but  also  as  to  the  truth  of  general  principles,  with  which  the  interests  and  happi-
ness of  Man  were  intimately  concerned.  Disputes  which  had  hitherto  been
confined  to  a  very  small  part  of  society  began  to  spread  far  and  wide,  and  suggest
doubts  that  served  as  materials  for  national  thought.  The  consequence  was
that  the  spirit  of  inquiry  became  every  year  more  active  and  more  general  ;
the  desire  for  reform  constantly  increased  :  and  if  affairs  had  been  allowed  to
run  on  in  their  natural  course,  the  eighteenth  century  could  not  have  passed  away
without  decisive  and  salutaiy  changes  both  in  the  church  and  the  state.  But
soon  after  the  middle  of  this  period  there  unfortunately  arose  a  series  of  political
combinations  which  disturbed  the  march  of  events,  and  eventually  produced  a
crisis  so  full  of  danger  that,  among  any  other  people,  it  would  certainly  have
ended  either  in  a  loss  of  liberty  or  in  a  dissolution  of  government.  This  disastrous
reaction,  from  the  effects  of  which  England  has,  perhaps,  barely  recovered,  has
never  been  studied  with  anything  like  the  care  its  importance  demands  ;  indeed,
it  is  so  little  understood  that  no  historian  has  traced  the  opposition  between  it
and  that  great  intellectual  movement  of  which  I  have  just  sketched  an  outline.
On  this  account,  as  also  with  the  view  of  giving  more  completeness  to  the  present
chapter,  I  intend  to  examine  its  most  important  epochs,  and  point  out,  so  far
as  I  am  able,  the  way  in  which  they  are  connected  with  each  other.  According
to  the  scheme  of  this  Introduction,  such  an  inquiry  must  of  course  be  very
cursory,  as  its  sole  object  is  to  lay  a  foundation  for  those  general  principles,
without  which  history  is  a  mere  assemblage  of  empirical  observations,  uncon-
nected, and  therefore  unimportant.  It  must  likewise  be  remembered  that  as
the  circumstances  about  to  be  considered  were  not  social,  but  political,  we  are
the  more  liable  to  err  in  our  conclusions  respecting  them  ;  and  this  partly  because
the  materials  for  the  history  of  a  people  are  more  extensive,  more  indirect,  and
therefore  less  liable  to  be  garbled,  than  are  those  for  the  history  of  a  government  ;
and  partly  because  the  conduct  of  small  bodies  of  men,  such  as  ministers  and
kings,  is  always  more  capricious,  that  is  to  say,  less  regulated  by  known  laws,
than  is  the  conduct  of  those  large  bodies  collectively  called  society,  or  a  nation.240

see  vol.  ii.  pp.  148-153.  Burke,  who  came  to  London  in  1750,  observes  with  surprise
that  "  writers  of  the  first  talents  are  left  to  the  capricious  patronage  of  the  public.  Not-
withstanding discouragement,  literature  is  cultivated  to  a  high  degree."  Prior's  Life  of
Burke,  p.  21.  This  increasing  independence  also  appears  from  the  fact  that  in  1762  we
find  the  first  instance  of  a  popular  writer  attacking  public  men  by  name  ;  authors  having
previously  confined  themselves  *'  to  the  initials  only  of  the  great  men  whom  they  assailed."
Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  v.  p.  19.  The  feud  between  literature  and  rank  may  be
further  illustrated  by  an  entry  in  Holcroft's  diary  for  1798,  Mem.  of  Holcroft,  vol.  iii.
p.  28.

239  In  England,  the  marked  increase  in  the  number  of  books  took  place  during  the
latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  particularly  after  1756.     See  some  valuable
evidence  in  Journal  of  the  Statistical  Society,  vcl.  iii.  pp.  383,  384.      To  this  I  may  add
that  between  1753  and  1792  the  circulation    of  newspapers  was  more  than  doubled.
Hunfs  Hist,  of  Newspapers,  vol.  i.  p.  252.

240  The  apparent  caprice  and  irregularity  in  small  numbers  arise  from  the  perturba-
tions produced  by  the  operation  of  minor  and  usually  unknown  laws.     In  large  numbers,
these  perturbations  have  a  tendency  to  balance  each  other  ;    and  this  I  take  to  be  the
sole  foundation  of  the.  accuracy  obtained  by  striking  an  average.     If  we  could  refer  all
phenomena  to  their  laws,  we  should  never  use  averages.      Of  course  the  expression
capricious  is,  strictly  speaking,  inaccurate,  and  is  merely  a  measure  of  our  ignorance.


250  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

With  this  precautionary  remark,  I  will  now  endeavour  to  trace  what,  in  a  mere
political  point  of  view,  is  the  reactionary  and  retrogressive  period  of  English
history.

It  must  be  considered  as  a  most  fortunate  circumstance  that,  after  the  death
of  Anne,241  the  throne  should  be  occupied  for  nearly  fifty  years  by  two  princes,
aliens  in  manners  and  in  country,  of  whom  one  spoke  our  language  but  indiffer-
ently, and  the  other  knew  it  not  at  all.242  The  immediate  predecessors  of
George  III.  were  indeed  of  so  sluggish  a  disposition,  and  were  so  profoundly
ignorant  of  the  people  they  undertook  to  govern,243  that,  notwithstanding  their
arbitrary  temper,  there  was  no  danger  of  their  organizing  a  party  to  extend  the
boundaries  of  the  royal  prerogative.244  And  as  they  were  foreigners,  they  never
had  sufficient  sympathy  with  the  English  church  to  induce  them  to  aid  the
clergy  in  their  natural  desire  to  recover  their  former  power.245  Besides  this,
the  fractious  and  disloyal  conduct  of  many  of  the  hierarchy  must  have  tended
to  alienate  the  regard  of  the  sovereign,  as  it  had  already  cost  them  the  affection
of  the  people.2^

2*1  The  temporary  political  reaction  under  Anne  is  well  related  by  Lord  Cowper,  in
his  Hist,  of  Parties,  printed  in  appendix  to  Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  iv.
pp.  411,  412.  This  able  work  of  Lord  Campbell's,  though  rather  inaccurate  for  the
earlier  period,  is  particularly  valuable  for  the  history  of  the  eighteenth  century.

2^2  See  Reminiscences  of  the  Courts  of  George  I.  and  George  II.  by  Horace  Walpole,
pp.  Iv.  xciv.  ;  and  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.  pp.  100,  235.  The  fault  of  George  II.
was  in  his  bad  pronunciation  of  English  ;  but  George  I.  was  not  even  able  to  pronounce
it  badly,  and  could  only  converse  with  his  minister,  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  in  Latin.  The
French  court  saw  this  state  of  things  with  great  pleasure  ;  and  in  December,  1714,  Madame
de  Maintenon  wrote  to  the  Princess  des  Ursins  (Lettres  inediies  de  Maintenon,  vol.  iii.
p.  157) :  "On  dit  que  le  nouveau  roi  d'Angleterre  se  degoute  de  ses  sujets,  et  que  ses
sujets  sont  degoutes  de  lui.  Dieu  veuille  remettre  le  tout  en  meilleur  ordre  !  "  On  the
effect  this  produced  on  the  language  spoken  at  the  English  court,  compare  Le  Blanc,
Lettres  d'un  Francais,  vol.  i.  p.  159.

2«  in  1715,  Leslie  writes  respecting  George  I.  that  he  is  "  a  stranger  to  you,  and
altogether  ignorant  of  your  language,  your  laws,  customs,  and  constitution."  Somers
Tracts,  vol.  xiii.  p.  703.

244  Great  light  has  been  thrown  upon  the  character  of  George  II.  by  the  recent  publica-
tion of  Lord  Hervey's  Memoirs  ;    a   curious  work,  which  fully  confirms  what  we  know
from  other  sources  respecting  the  king's  ignorance  of  English  politics.     Indeed,  that
prince  cared  tor  nothing  but  soldiers  and  women ;  and  his  highest  ambition  was  to  com-
bine the  reputation  of  a  great  general  with  that  of  a  successful  libertine.     Besides  the
testimony  of  Lord  Hervey,  it  is  certain,  from  other  authorities,  that  George  II.  was  des-
pised as  well  as  disliked,  and  was  spoken  of  contemptuously  by  observers  of  his  character,
and  even  by  his  own  ministers.     See  the  Marchmont  Papers,  vol.  i.  pp.  29,  181,  187.

In  reference  to  the  decline  of  the  royal  authority  it  is  important  to  observe  that  since
the  accession  of  George  I.  none  of  our  sovereigns  have  been  allowed  to  be  present  at  state
deliberations.  See  Bancroft's  American  Revolution,  vol.  ii.  p.  47,  and  Campbell's  Chan-
cellors, vol.  iii.  p.  191.

245  See  the  remarks  said  to  be  written  by  Bishop  Atterbury,  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xiii.
p.  534,  contrasting  the  affection  Anne  felt  for  the  church  with  the  coldness  of  George  I.
The  whole  of  the  pamphlet  (pp.  521-541 )  ought  to  be  read.     It  affords  a  curious  picture
of  a  baffled  churchman.

246  The  ill-feeling  which  the  Church  of  England  generally  bore  against  the  government
of  the  two  first  Georges  was  openly  displayed,  and  was  so  pertinacious  as  to  form  a  leading
fact  in  the  history  of  England.      In  1722,  Bishop  Atterbury  was  arrested  because  he
was  known  to  be  engaged  in  a  treasonable  conspiracy  with  the  Pretender.     As  soon  as
he  was  seized,  the  church  offered  up  prayers  for  him.     "  Under  the  pretence,"  says  Lord
Mahon, — "  under  the  pretence  of  his  being  afflicted  with  the  gout,  he  was  publicly  prayed
for  in  most  of  the  churches  of  London  and  Westminster."     Mahorfs  Hist,  of  England,
vol.  ii.  p.  38.     See  also  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  vii.  p.  988,  and  vol.  viii.  p.  347.

At  Oxford,  where  the  clergy  have  Jxjug  been  in  the  ascendant,  they  made  such  efforts


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          251

These  circumstances,  though  in  themselves  they  may  be  considered  trifling,
re  in  reality  of  great  importance,  because  they  secured  to  the  nation  the
>gress  of  that  spirit  of  inquiry  which,  if  there  had  been  a  coalition  between
crown  and  the  church,  it  would  have  been  attempted  to  stifle.     Even  as  it
/as,   some  attempts  were  occasionally  made  ;     but   they  were  comparatively
peaking  rare,  and  they  lacked  the  vigour  which  they  would  have  possessed  if
there  had  been  an  intimate  alliance  between  the  temporal  and  spiritual  authori-
ties.    Indeed,  the  state  of  affairs  was  so  favourable  that  the  old  Tory  faction,
pressed  by  the  people  and  abandoned  by  the  crown,  was  unable  for  more  than
forty  years  to  take  any  share  in  the  government.247     At  the  same  time,  consider-
able progress,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  was  made  in  legislation  ;   and  our  statute-
book  during  that  period  contains  ample  evidence  of  the  decline  of  the  powerful
party  by  which  England  had  once  been  entirely  ruled.

But  by  the  death  of  George  II.  the  political  aspect  was  suddenly  changed,  and
the  wishes  of  the  sovereign  became  once  more  antagonistic  to  the  interests  of
the  people.  What  made  this  the  more  dangerous  was  that,  to  a  superficial
observer,  the  accession  of  George  III.  was  one  of  the  most  fortunate  events  that
could  have  occurred.  The  new  king  was  born  in  England,  spoke  English  as  his
mother  tongue,248  and  was  said  to  look  upon  Hanover  as  a  foreign  country,  whose
interests  were  to  be  considered  of  subordinate  importance.249  At  the  same  time,
the  last  hopes  of  the  House  of  Stuart  were  now  destroyed  ;  260  the  Pretender

to  instil  their  principles  as  to  call  down  the  indignation  of  the  elder  Pitt,  who,  in  a  speech
in  Parliament  in  1754,  denounced  that  university,  which  he  said  had  for  many  years
"  been  raising  a  succession  of  treason — there  never  was  such  a  seminary  !  "  Walpole's
Mem.  of  George  II.  vol.  i.  p.  413.  Compare  the  Bedford  Correspondence,  vol.  i.  pp.  594,
595,  with  Harris's  Life  of  Hardwicke,  vol.  ii.  p.  383  ;  and  on  the  temper  of  the  clergy
generally  after  the  death  of  Anne,  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  vii.  pp.  541,  542  ;  Bowleses  Life  of  Ken,
vol.  ii.  pp.  1 88,  189  ;  Monk's  Life  of  Bentley.  vol.  i.  pp.  370,  426.

The  immediate  consequence  of  this  was  verv  remarkable.  For  the  government  and
the  dissenters,  being  both  opposed  by  the  church,  naturally  combined  together :  the
dissenters  using  all  their  influence  against  the  Pretender,  and  the  government  protecting
them  against  ecclesiastical  prosecutions.  See  evidence  of  this  in  Doddridge's  Correspond,
and  Diary,  vol.  i.  p.  30,  vol.  ii.  p.  321,  vol.  iii.  pp.  no,  125,  vol.  iv.  pp.  428,  436,  437  ;
Hutton's  Life  of  Himself,  pp.  159,  160  ;  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxviii.  pp.  ii,  393,  vol.  xxix.
pp.  1434,  1463  ;  Memoirs  of  Priestley,  vol.  ii.  p.  506  ;  Life  of  Wakefield,  vol.  i.  p.  220.

247  "  jhe  year  1762  forms  an  era  in  the  history  of  the  two  factions,  since  it  witnessed
the  destruction  of  that  monopoly  of  honours  and  emoluments  which  the  Whigs  had  held
for  forty-five,  years."  Cooke's  Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  ii.  p.  406.  Compare  Albemarle's  Mem-
oirs of  Rockingham.  vol.  ii.  p.  92.  Lord  Bolingbroke  clearly  foresaw  what  would  happen
in  consequence  of  the  accession  of  George  I.  Immediately  after  the  death  of  Anne,  he
wrote  to  the  Bishop  of  Rochester  :  "  But  the  grief  of  my  soul  is  this,  I  see  plainly  that
the  Tory  party  is  gone."  Macpherson's  Original  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  651.

?48  Grosley,  who  visited  England  only  five  years  after  the  accession  of  George  III.,
mentions  the  great  effect  produced  upon  the  English  when  they  heard  the  king  pronounce
their  language  without  "  a  foreign  accent."  Grosley's  Tour  to  London,  vol.  ii.  p.  106.
It  is  well  known  that  the  king  in  his  first  speech  boasted  of  being  a  Briton  ;  but  what  is
perhaps  less  generally  known  is  that  the  honour  was  on  the  side  of  the  country  :  "  What
a  lustre,"  said  the  House  of  Lords  in  their  address  to  him, — "  what  a  lustre  does  it  cast
upon  the  name  of  Briton,  when  you,  sir,  are  pleased  to  esteem  it  amongst  your  glories  !  "
Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xv.  p.  986.

249  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxix.  p.  955  ;    Walpole's  Mem.  of  George  III.  vol.  i.  pp.  4,  no.

250  The  accession  of  George  III.  is  generally  fixed  on  as  the  period  when  English  Jaco-
binism became  extinct.     See  Butler's  Reminiscences,  vol.  ii.  p.  92.     At  the  first  court
held  by  the  new  king,  it  was  observed,  says  Horace  Walpole,  that  "  the  Earl  of  Litchfield,
Sir  Walter  Bagot,  and  the  principal  Jacobites,  went  to  court."     Walpole's  Mem.  of
George  III.  vol.  i.  p.  14.     Only  three  years  earlier,  the  Jacobites  had  been  active  ;   and
in  1757.  Rigby  writes  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford  :  "  Fox's  election  at  Windsor  is  very  doubt-
ful.    There  is  a  Jacobite  subscription  of  5,ooo/.  raised  against  him,  with  Sir  James
Dashwood's  name  at  the-head  of  it."     Bedford,  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.^6i.


252  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

himself  was  languishing  in  Italy,  where  he  shortly  after  died  ;  and  his  son,  a  slave
to  vices  which  seemed  hereditary  in  that  family,  was  consuming  his  life  in  an
unpitied  and  ignominious  obscurity.251

And  yet  these  circumstances,  which  appeared  so  favourable,  did  of  necessity
involve  the  most  disastrous  consequences.  The  fear  of  a  disputed  succession
being  removed,  the  sovereign  was  emboldened  to  a  course  on  which  he  otherwise
would  not  have  ventured.252  All  those  monstrous  doctrines  respecting  the
rights  of  kings,  which  the  Revolution  was  supposed  to  have  destroyed,  were
suddenly  revived.253  The  clergy,  abandoning  the  now  hopeless  cause  of  the
Pretender,  displayed  the  same  zeal  for  the  House  of  Hanover  which  they  had
formerly  displayed  for  the  House  of  Stuart.  The  pulpits  resounded  with  praises
of  the  new  king,  of  his  domestic  virtues,  of  his  piety,  but  above  all  of  his  dutiful
attachment  to  the  English  church.  The  result  was  the  establishment  of  an
alliance  between  the  two  parties  more  intimate  than  any  that  had  been  seen
in  England  since  the  time  of  Charles  I.254  Under  their  auspices,  the  old  Tory
faction  rapidly  rallied,  and  were  soon  able  to  dispossess  their  rivals  in  the  manage-
ment of  the  government.  This  reactionary  movement  was  greatly  aided  by  the
personal  character  of  George  III.  ;  for  he,  being  despotic  as  well  as  superstitious,
was  equally  anxious  to  extend  the  prerogative  and  strengthen  the  church.
Every  liberal  sentiment,  everything  approaching  to  reform,  nay,  even  the  mere
mention  of  inquiry,  was  an  abomination  in  the  eyes  of  that  narrow  and  ignorant
prince.  Without  knowledge,  without  taste,  without  even  a  glimpse  of  one  of
the  sciences,  or  a  feeling  for  one  of  the  fine  arts,  education  had  done  nothing  to
enlarge  a  mind  which  nature  had  more'  than  usually  contracted.255  Totally
ignorant  of  the  history  and  resources  of  foreign  countries,  and  barely  knowing
their  geographical  position,  his  information  was  scarcely  more  extensive  respect-
ing the  people  over  whom  he  was  called  to  rule.  In  that  immense  mass  of

251  Charles  Stuart  was  so  stupidly  ignorant,  that  at  the  age  of  twenty -five  he  could
hardly  write,  and  was  altogether  unable  to  spell.     Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iii.
pp.  165,  166,  and  appendix,  p.  ix.     After  the  death  of  his  father,  in  1766,  this  abject
creature,  who  called  himself  king  of  England,  went  to  Rome,  and  took  to  drinking.
Ibid.  vol.  iii.  pp.  351-353-     In  i779»  Swinburne  saw  him  at  Florence,  where  he  used  to
appear  every  night  at  the  opera,  perfectly  drunk.     Swinburne's  Courts  of  Europe,  vol.  i.
PP-  253-255  ;  and  in  1787,  only  the  year  before  he  died,  he  continued  the  same  degrading
practice.   See  a  letter  from  Sir  J.  E.  Smith,  written  from  Naples  in  March,  1787,  in  Smith's
Correspond,  vol.  i. 'p.  208.     Another  letter,  written  as  early  as  1761  (Grenville  Papers,
vol.  i.  p    366),  describes  "  the  young  Pretender  always  drunk."     [There  is  no  ground,
however,  for  charging  drunkenness  on  all  the  Stuarts  before  him. — ED.]

252  On  the  connexion  between  the  decline  of  the  Stuart  interest  and  the  increased  power
of  the  crown  under  George  III.,  compare  Thoughts  on  the  Present  Discontents,  in  Burke's
Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  127,  128,  with  Watson's  Life  of  Himself,  vol.  i.  p.  136  ;    and  for  an
intimation  that  this  result  was  expected,  see  Grosley's  London,  vol.  il.  p.  252.

53  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  v.  p.  245  :  "  The  divine  indefeasible  right  of  kings
became  the  favourite  theme— in  total  forgetfulness  of  its  incompatibility  with  the  parlia-
mentary title  of  the  reigning  monarch."  Horace  Walpole  (Mem.  of  George  III.  vol.  i.
p.  16)  says,  that  in  1760  •"  prerogative  became  a  fashionable  word."

"*  The  respect  George  III.  always  displayed  for  church -ceremonies,  formed  of  itself
a  marked  contrast  with  the  indifference  of  his  immediate  predecessors  ;  and  the  change
was  gratefully  noticed.  Compare  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  v.  pp.  54,  55,  with  the
extract  from  Archbishop  Seeker,  in  Bancroft's  American  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  440.  For
other  evidence  of  the  admiration  both  parties  felt  and  openly  expressed  for  each  other,
see  an  address  from  the  bishop  and  clergy  of  St.  Asaph  (Parr's  Works,  vol.  vii.  p.  352),
and  a  letter  from  the  king  to  Pitt  (Russell's  Memorials  of  Fox,  vol.  iii.  p.  251),  which
should  be  compared  with  Priestley's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  pp.  137,  138.

The  education  of  George  III.  had  been  shamefully  neglected  ;  and  when  he  arrived
it  manhood  he  never  attempted  to  repair  its  deficiencies,  "but  remained  during  his  long
life  m  a^state  of  pitiable  ignorance.  Compare  Brougham's  Statesmen,  vol.  i.  pp.  -13-15  ;
Walpole' s  Mem.  of  George  III.  vol.  i.  p.  55  ;  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iv.  pp.  54,  207.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT         253

evidence  now  extant,  and  which  consists  of  every  description  of  private  correspon-
dence, records  of  private  conversation  and  of  public  acts,  there  is  not  to  be  found
the  slightest  proof  that  he.knew  any  one  of  those  numerous  things  which  the
governor  of  a  country  ought  to  know  ;  or,  indeed,  that  he  was  acquainted  with
a  single  duty  of  his  position,  except  that  mere  mechanical  routine  of  ordinary
business,  which  might  have  been  effected  by  the  lowest  clerk  in  the  meanest
office  in  his  kingdom.

The  course  of  proceeding  which  such  a  king  as  this  was  likely  to  follow  could
be  easily  foreseen.  He  gathered  round  his  throne  that  great  party,  who,  clinging
to  the  traditions  of  the  past,  have  always  made  it  their  boast  to  check  the  progress
of  their  age.  During  the  sixty  years  of  his  reign,  he,  with  the  sole  exception  of
.Pitt,  never  willingly  admitted  to  his  councils  a  single  man  of  great  ability  ;  286
not  one  whose  name  is  associated  with  any  measure  of  value  either  in  domestic
or  in  foreign  policy.  Even  Pitt  only  maintained  his  position  in  the  state  by
forgetting  the  lessons  of  his  illustrious  father,  and  abandoning  those  liberal
principles  in  which  he  had  been  educated,  and  with  which  he  entered  public  life.
Because  George  III.  hated  the  idea  of  reform,  Pitt  not  only  relinquished  what
he  had  before  declared  to  be  absolutely  necessary,25?  but  did  not  hesitate  to  perse-
cute to  the  death  the  party  with  whom  he  had  once  associated  in  order  to  obtain
it.258  Because  George  III.  looked  upon  slavery  as  one  of  those  good  old  customs
which  the  wisdom  of  his  ancestors  had  consecrated,  Pitt  did  not  dare  to  use  his
power  for  procuring  its  abolition,  but  left  to  his  successors  the  glory  of  destroying
that  infamous  trade,  on  the  preservation  of  which  his  royal  master  had  set
his  heart.259  Because  George  III.  detested  the  French,  of  whom  he  knew  as

25(5  See  some  good  remarks  by  Lord  John  Russell  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Bedford
Correspondence,  vol.  iii.  p.  Ixii.

257  In  a  motion  for  reform  in  Parliament  in  1782,  he  declared  that  it  was  "  essentially
necessary."  See  his  speech,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxii.  p.  1418.  In  1784  he  mentioned  "  the
necessity  of  a  parliamentary  reform."  Vol.  xxiv.  p.  349  ;  see  also  pp.  998,  999.  Com-
pare Disney's  Life  of  Jebb,  p.  209.  Nor  is  it  true,  as  some  have  said,  that  he  afterwards
abandoned  the  cause  of  reform  because  the  times  were  unfavourable  to  it.  On  the  con-
trary, he,  in  a  speech  delivered  in  iSoo,  said  (Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxv.  p.  47)  :  "Upon  this
subject,  sir,  I  think  it  right  to  state  the  inmost  thoughts  of  my  mind  ;  I  think  it  right
to  declare  my  most  decided  opinion,  that,  even  if  the  times  were  proper  for  experiments,
any,  even  the  slightest,  change  in  such  a  constitution  must  be  considered  as  an  evil."  It  is
remarkable  that,  even  as  early  as  1783,  Paley  appears  to  have  suspected  the  sincerity  of
Pitt's  professions  in  favour  of  reform.  See  Meadley's  Memoirs  of  Paley,  p.  121.

259  In  1794  Grey  taunted  him  with  this  in  the  House  of  Commons  :  "  William  Pitt,  the
reformer  of  that  day,  was  William  Pitt,  the  prosecutor,  ay  and  persecutor  too,  of  reformers
now."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxi.  p.  532  ;  compare  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  659.  So  too  Lord  Campbell
(Chief -Justices,  vol.  ii.  p.  544)  :  "  He  afterwards  tried  to  hang  a  few  of  his  brother  re-
formers who  continued  steady  in  the  cause."  See  further,  on  this  damning  fact  in  the
career  of  Pitt,  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  vii.  p.  105  ;  Brougham's  Statesmen,  vol.  ii.  p.  21  ;
Belsham's  History,  vol.  ix.  pp.  79,  242  ;  Life  of  Cartwright,  vol.  i.  p.  198  ;  and  even  a
letter  from  the  mild  and  benevolent  Roscoe,  in  Life  of  Roscoe,  by  his  Son,  vol.  i.  p.  113.

259  Such  was  the  king's  zeal  in  favour  of  the  slave-trade,  that  in  1770  "  he  issued  an
instruction  under  his  own  hand  commanding  the  governor  (of  Virginia),  upon  pain  of
the  highest  displeasure,  to  assent  to  no  law  by  which  the  importation  of  slaves  should
be  in  any  respect  prohibited  or  obstructed."  Bancroft's  American  Revolution,  vol.  iii,
p.  456  :  so  that,  as  Mr.  Bancroft  indignantly  observes,  p.  469,  while  the  courts  of  law
had  decided  "  that  as  soon  as  any  slave  set  his  foot  on  English  soil  he  becomes  free,
the  king  of  England  stood  in  the  path  of  humanity,  and  made  himself  the  pillar  of  the
colonial  slave-trade."  The  shuffling  conduct  of  Pitt  in  this  matter  makes  it  hard  for
any  honest  man  to  forgive  him.  Compare  Brougham's  Statesmen,  vol.  ii.  pp.  14,  103-105  ;
Russell's  Mem.  of  Fox,  vol.  iii.  pp.  131,  278,  279  ;  Belsham's  Hist,  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  x.
PP-  34.  35  ;  Life  of  Watefield,  vol.  i.  p.  197  ;  Porter's  Progress  of  the  Nation,  vol.  iii.
p.  426  ;  Holland's  Mem.  of  the  Whig  Party,  vol.  ii.  p.  157  ;  and  the  striking  remarks  of
Francis,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxii.  p.  949.


254  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

much  as  he  knew  of  the  inhabitants  of  Kamtchatka  or  of  Tibet,  Pitt,  contrary
to  his  own  judgment,  engaged  in  a  war  with  France  by  which  England  was
seriously  imperilled,  and  the  English  people  burdened  with  a  debt  that  their
remotest  posterity  will  be  unable  to  pay.260  But  notwithstanding  all  this,
when  Pitt,  only  a  few  years  before  his  death,  showed  a  determination  to  concede
to  the  Irish  some  small  share  of  their  undoubted  rights,  the  king  dismissed  him
from  office  ;  and  the  king's  friends,  as  they  were  called,261  expressed  their  indigna-
tion at  the  presumption  of  a  minister  who  could  oppose  the  wishes  of  so  benign
and  gracious  a  master.262  And  when,  unhappily  for  his  own  fame,  this  great  man
determined  to  return  to  power,  he  could  only  recover  office  by  conceding  that
very  point  for  which  he  had  relinquished  it  :  thus  setting  the  mischievous
example  of  the  minister  of  a  free  country  sacrificing  his  own  judgment  to  the
personal  prejudices  of  the  reigning  sovereign.

As  it  was  hardly  possible  to  find  other  ministers,  who  to  equal  abilities  would
add  equal  subservience,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  highest  offices  were  con-
stantly filled  by  men  of  notorious  incapacity.263  Indeed,  the  king  seemed  to
have  an  instinctive  antipathy  to  everything  great  and  noble.  During  the  reign
of  George  II.,  the  elder  Pitt  had  won  for  himself  a  reputation  which  covered  the
world,  and  had  carried  to  an  unprecedented  height  the  glories  of  the  English
name.264  He,  however,  as  the  avowed  friend  of  popular  rights,  strenuously
opposed  the  despotic  principles  of  the  court  ;  and  for  this  reason  he  was  hated
by  George  III.  with  a  hatred  that  seemed  barely  compatible  with  a  sane  mind.2r>r>

260  That  Pitt  wished  to  remain  at  peace,  and  was  hurried  into  the  war  with  France  by
the  influence  of  the  court,  is  admitted  by  the.  best -informed  writers,  men  in  other  respects
of  different  opinions.     See,  for  instance,  Brougham's  Statesmen,  vol.  ii.  p.  9  ;    Rogers's
Introduction  to  Burke's  Works,  p.  Ixxxiv.  ;   Nicholls's  Recollections,  vol.  ii.  pp.  155,  200.

261  The  mere  existence  of  such  a  party,  with  such  a  name,  shows  how,  in  a  political
point  of  view,  England  was  receding  during  this  period  from  the  maxims  established  at
the  Revolution.     Respecting  this  active  faction,  compare  the  indignant  remarks  of  Burke
(Works,  vol.  i.  p.  133)  with  Albemarle's  Rockingham,  vol.  i.  pp.  5,  307  :   Buckingham's
Mem.  of  George  III.  vol.  i.  p.  284,  vol.  ii.  p.  154  ;  Russell's  Mem.  of  For,  vol.  i.  pp.  61,  120,
vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  77  :  Bedford  Correspond,  vol.  hi.  p.  xlv.  ;   Parr's  Works,  vol.  viii.  p.  513  ;
Butler's  Reminiscences,  vol.  i.  p.  74  ;    Burke's    Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  352  ;    Walpole's
George  III.  vol.  iv.  p.  315  :   The  Grenville  Papers,  vol.  ii.  pp.- 33,  34,  vol.  iii.  p.  57,  vol.  iv.
PP-  79.  152.  219,  303  ;   Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvi.  pp.  841,   973,  vol.  xviii.  pp-  1005,   1246,
vol.  xix.  pp.  435,  856,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  650,  1173.

2*12  See  an  extraordinary  passage  in  Pellew's  Life  of  Sidmouth,  vol.  i.  p.  334.

263  This  decline  in  the  abilities  of  official  men  was  noticed  by  Burke,  in  1770,  as  a
necessary  consequence  of  the  new  system.     Compare  Thoughts  on  the  Present  Discontents
(Burke' s  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  149)  with  his  striking  summary  (Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvi.  p.  879)
of  the  degeneracy  during  the  first  nine  years  of  George  III.     "  Thus  situated,  the  question
at  last  was  not,  who  could  do  the  public  business  best,  but  who  would  undertake  to  do  it
at  all.     Men  of  talents  and  integrity  would  not  accept  of  employments  where  they  were
neither  allowed  to  exercise  their  judgment  nor  display  the  rectitude  of  their  hearts."
In  1780,  when  the  evil  had  become  still  more  obvious,  the  same  great  observer  denounced
it  in  his  celebrated  address  to  his  Bristol  constituents.     "  At  present,"  he  says,  "  it  is
the  plan  of  the  court  to  make  its  servants  insignificant."     Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  257.
See  further  Parr's  Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.  256,  260,  261.

264  The  military  success  of  his  administration  is  related  in  very  strong  language,  but
not  unfairly,  in  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iv.  pp.  108,  185,  186,  and  see  the  admirable
summary  in  Brougham's  Statesmen,  vol.  i.  pp.  33,  34  ;   and  for  evidence  of  the  fear  with
which  he  inspired  the  enemies  of  England,  compare  Mahon,  vol.  v.  p.  165  note  ;  Bedford
Correspond,  vol.  iii.  pp.  87,  246,  247  ;   Walpole's  Letters  to  Mann,  vol.  i.  p/304,  edit.  1843  ;
Walpole's  Mem.  of  George  III.  vol.  ii.  p.  232  ;    and  the  reluctant  admission  in  Gforgel,
Memoires,  vol.  i.  pp.  79,  80.

265  Lord  Brougham  (Sketches  of  Statesmen,  vol.  i.  pp.  22,  33)  has  published  striking
evidence  of  what  he  calls  "  the  truly  savage  feelings  "  with  which  George  III.  regarded
Lord  Chatham  (compare  Russell's  Mem.  of  Fox,  vol.  i.  p.  129).     Indeed,  the  sentiments


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT         255

Fox  was  one  of  the  greatest  statesmen  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  was  better
acquainted  than  any  other  with  the  character  and  resources  of  those  foreign
itions  with  which  our  own  interests  were  intimately  connected.266  To  this  rare
and  important  knowledge  he  added  a  sweetness  and  an  amenity  of  temper  which
extorted  the  praises  even  of  his  political  opponents.26?  But  he  too  was  the
steady  supporter  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  ;  and  he  too  was  so  detested  by-
George  III.  that  the  king,  with  his  own  hand,  struck  his  name  out  of  the  list  of
privy  councillors,268  and  declared  that  he  would  rather  abdicate  the  throne
than  admit  him  to  a  share  in  the  government.269

While  this  unfavourable  change  was  taking  place  in  the  sovereign  and  ministers
of  the  country,  a  change  equally  unfavourable  was  being  effected  in  the  second
branch  of  the  imperial  legislature.  Until  the  reign  of  George  III.,  the  House  of
Lords  was  decidedly  superior  to  the  House  of  Commons  in  the  liberality  and
general  accomplishments  of  its  members.  It  is  true  that  in  both  houses  there
revailed  a  spirit  which  must  be  called  narrow  and  superstitious,  if  tried  by  the
larger  standard  of  the  present  age.  But  among  the  peers  such  feelings  were
tempered  by  an  education  that  raised  them  far  above  those  country  gentlemen
id  ignorant  fox-hunting  squires  of  whom  the  lower  house  was  then  chiefly
)mposed.  From  this  superiority  in  their  knowledge,  there  naturally  followed
larger  and  more  liberal  turn  of  thought  than  was  possessed  by  those  who  were
called  the  representatives  of  the  people.  The  result  was  that  the  old  Tory  spirit,
becoming  gradually  weaker  in  the  upper  house,  took  refuge  in  the  lower  ;  where,
for  about  sixty  years  after  the  Revolution,  the  high-church  party  and  the  friends
of  the  Stuarts  formed  a  dangerous  faction.270  Thus,  for  instance,  the  two  men
who  rendered  the  most  eminent  services  to  the  Hanoverian  dynasty,  and  there-
fore to  the  liberties  of  England,  were  undoubtedly  Somers  and  Walpole.  Both
of  them  were  remarkable  for  their  principles  of  toleration,  and  both  of  them
owed  their  safety  to  the  interference  of  the  House  of  Lords.  Somers,  early  in
the  eighteenth  century,  was  protected  by  the  peers  from  the  scandalous  prosecu-

of  the  king  were  even  displayed  in  the  arrangements  at  the  funeral  of  the  great  minister.
Note  in  Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  ii.  p.  568  ;  and  for  other  evidence  of  ill-will,
see  two  notes  from  the  kin§  to  Lord  North,  in  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vi.  appendix,
pp.  lii.  liv.  ;  The  Grenville  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  386  ;  Bancroft's  American  Revolution,  vol.  i.
p.  438.

266  Lord  Brougham  (Sketches  of  Statesmen,  vol.  i.  p.  219)  says  :   "  It  may  be  questioned
if  any  politician,  in  any  age,  ever  knew  so  thoroughly  the  various  interests  and  the  exact
position  of  all  the  countries  with  which  his  own  had  dealings  to  conduct  or  relations  to
maintain."     See  also  Parr's  Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  14,  15  ;    Russell's  Mem.  of  Fox,  vol.  i.
pp.  320,  321,  vol.  ii.  pp.  91,  243  ;  Bisset's  Life  of  Burke,  vol.  i.  p.  338.

267  Burke,  even  after  the  French  revolution,  said,  that  Fox  "  was  of  the  most  artless,
candid,  open,  and  benevolent  disposition,  disinterested  in  the  extreme  ;    of  a  temper
mild  and  placable  even  to  a  fault,  without  one  drop  of  gall  in  his  whole  constitution."
Speech  on  the  Army  Estimates  in  1790,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxviii.  p.  356.     For  further
evidence,  compare  Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  vii.  p.  171  ;  Holland's  Mem.  of  the  Whig
Party,  vol.  i.  pp.  3,  273  ;   Trotter's  Mem.  of  Fox,  pp.  xi.  xii.,  24,  178,  415.

268  Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  vi.  p.  692.     A  singular  circumstance  connected
with  this  wanton  outrage  is  related  in  the  Mem.  of  Holcroft,  vol.  iii.  p.  60.

269  Compare  Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  iv.  pp.  107,  108,  with  Russell's  Mem.
of  Fox,  vol.  i.  pp.  191,  287,  288,  vol.  ii.  p.  44.     Dutens,  who  had  much  intercourse  with
English  politicians,  heard  of  the  threat  of  abdication  in  1784.     Dutens'  Memoires,  vol.  iii.
p.  104.      Lord  Holland  says  that  during  the  fatal  illness  of  Fox  "  the  king  had  watched
the  progress  of  Mr.  Fox's  disorder.     He  could  hardly  suppress  his  indecent  exultation
at  his  death."     Holland's  Mem.  of  the  Whig  Party,  vol.  ii.  p.  49.

270  In  1725,  the  Duke  of  Wharton,  in  a  letter  to  the  Pretender,  after  mentioning  some
proceedings  in  the  Commons,  adds,  "  In  the  House  of  Lords  our  number  is  so  small  that
any  behaviour  there  will  be  immaterial."     Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  appendix,
p.  xxiii.     See  also,  respecting  the  greater  strength  of  the  Tories  in  the  House  of  Commons,
Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xi.  p.  242,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  524,  531 ;  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  iv.  p.  158  ;
Campbell's  Chief-Justices,  vol.  ii.  p.  156.


256  THE  HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

tion  instituted  against  him  by  the  other  house  of  parliament.2'1  Forty  years
after  this,  the  Commons,  who  wished  to  hunt  Walpole  to  the  death,  carried  up
a  bill  encouraging  witnesses  to  appear  against  him  by  remitting  to  them  the
penalties  to  which  they  might  be  liable.272  This  barbarous  measure  had  been
passed  through  the  lower  house  without  the  least  difficulty  ;  but  in  the  Lords
it  was  rejected  by  a  preponderance  of  nearly  two  to  one.273  In  the  same  way
the  Schism  Act,  by  which  the  friends  of  the  church  subjected  the  dissenters  to  a
cruel  persecution,274  was  hurried  through  the  Commons  by  a  large  and  eager
majority.275  In  the  Lords,  however,  the  votes  were  nearly  balanced  ;  and
although  the  bill  was  passed,  amendments  were  added  by  which  the  violence
of  its  provisions  was  in  some  degree  softened.276

This  superiority  of  the  upper  house  over  the  lower  was,  on  the  whole,  steadily
maintained  during  the  reign  of  George  II.  ;  277  the  ministers  not  being  anxious
to  strengthen  the  high-church  party  in  the  Lords,  and  the  king  himself  so  rarely
suggesting  fresh  creations  as  to  cause  a  belief  that  he  particularly  disliked  in-
creasing their  numbers.278

It  was  reserved  for  George  III.,  by  an  unsparing  use  of  his  prerogative,  entirely
to  change  the  character  of  the  upper  house,  and  thus  lay  the  foundation  for  that
disrepute  into  which  since  then  the  peers  have  been  constantly  falling.  The
creations  he  made  were  numerous  beyond  all  precedent  ;  their  object  evidently
being  to  neutralize  the  liberal  spirit  hitherto  prevailing,  and  thus  turn  the  House
of  Lords  into  an  engine  for  resisting  the  popular  wishes,  and  stopping  the  progress
of  reform.279  How  completely  this  plan  succeeded  is  well  known  to  the  readers
of  our  history  ;  indeed,  it  was  sure  to  be  successful,  considering  the  character
of  the  men  who  were  promoted.  They  consisted  almost  entirely  of  two  classes  :
of  country  gentlemen,  remarkable  for  nothing  but  their  wealth,  and  the  number
of  votes  their  wealth  enabled  them  to  control  ;  28°  and  of  mere  lawyers,  who  had

271  Compare  Vernon  Correspond,  vol.  iii.  p.  149,  with  Burners  Own  Time,  vol.  iv.  p.  504.
Burnet  says,  "  All  the  Jacobites  joined  to  support  the  pretensions  of  the  Commons."
The  Commons  complained  that  the  Lords  had  shown  "  such  an  indulgence  to  the  person
accused  as  is  not  to  be  paralleled  in  any  parliamentary  proceedings."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  v.
p.  1294.     See  also  their  angry  remonstrance,  pp.  1314,  1315.

272  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  122.

273  "Content,  47;    non-content,  92."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xii.  p.  711.     Mr.  Phillimore
(Mem.  of  Lyttleton,  vol.  i.  p.  213)  ascribes  this  to  the  exertions  of  Lord  Hardwicke  ;
but  the  state  of  parties  in  the  upper  house  is  sufficient  explanation  ;   and  even  in  1735  it
was  said  that  "  the  Lords  were  betwixt  the  devil  and  the  deep  sea,"  the  devil  being
Walpole.     Marchmont  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  59.     Compare  Bishop  Newton's  Life  of  Himself,
p.  60.

274  See  an  account  of  some  of  its  provisions  in  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.  pp.  80,
Si.     The  object  of  the  bill  is  frankly  stated  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  vi.  p.  1349,  where  we  are
informed  that,  "  as  the  farther  discouragement  and  even  min  of  the  dissenters  was  thought
necessary  for  accomplishing  this  scheme,  it  was  begun  with  the  famous  Schism  Bill."

275  By  237  to  126.     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  vi.  p.  1351.

27«  Mahons  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  83  ;  Bunbury's  Correspond,  of  Hanmer,  p.  48.
The  bill  was  carried  in  the  Lords  by  77  against  72.

277  "  If  we  scrutinize  the  votes  of  the  peers  from  the  period  of  the  revolution  to  the
death  of  George  II.,  we  shall  find  a  very  great  majority  of  the  old  English  nobility  to  have
been  the  advocates  of  Whig  principles."  Cooke's  Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.  p.  363.

78  Compare  Harris's  Life  of  Hardwicke,  vol.  iii.  p.  519,  with  the  conversation  between
Sir  Robert  Walpole  and  Lord  Hervey,  in  Hervey's  Mem.  of  George  II.  vol.  ii.  p.  251,
edit.  1 8.j  8.

270  Cooke's  Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.  pp.  363,  364,  365,  463  ;   Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xviii.  p.  1418,
1.  xxiv.  p.  493,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  1069,  vol.  xxix.  pp.  1334,  1494,  vol.  xxxiii.  pp.  90,  602,

10  This  was  too  notorious  to  be  denied  :  and  in  the  House  of  Commons,  in  1800,
Nicholls  taunted  the  government  with  "  holding  out  a  peerage,  or  elevation  to  a  higher
rank  in  the  peerage,  to  every  man  who  could  procure  a  nomination  to  a  certain  number


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          257

risen  to  judicial  appointments  partly  from  their  professional  learning,  but  chiefly
from  the  zeal  with  which  they  repressed  the  popular  liberties,  and  favoured  the
royal  prerogative.281

That  this  is  no  exaggerated  description  may  be  ascertained  by  any  one  who
will  consult  the  lists  of  the  new  peers  made  by  George  III.  Here  and  there  we
find  an  eminent  man,  whose  public  services  were  so  notorious  that  it  was  impos-
sible to  avoid  rewarding  them  ;  but  putting  aside  those  who  were  in  a  manner
forced  upon  the  sovereign,  it  would  be  idle  to  deny  that  the  remainder,  and  of
mrse  the  overwhelming  majority,  were  marked  by  a  narrowness  and  illiberality
)f  sentiment,  which,  more  than  anything  else,  brought  the  whole  order  into
mtempt.282  No  great  thinkers  ;  no  great  writers  ;  no  great  orators  ;  no  great
statesmen  ;  none  of  the  true  nobility  of  the  land, — were  to  be  found  among  these
mrious  nobles  created  by  George  III.  Nor  were  the  material  interests  of  the
country  better  represented  in  this  strange  composition.  Among  the  most  im-
>rtant  men  in  England,  those  engaged  in  banking  and  commerce  held  a  high
)lace  :  since  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  their  influence  had  rapidly
icreased  ;  while  their  intelligence,  their  clear,  methodical  habits,  and  their
meral  knowledge  of  affairs,  made  them  everyway  superior  to  those  classes  from
the  upper  house  was  now  recruited.  But  in  the  reign  of  George  III.
:laims  of  this  sort  were  little  heeded  ;  and  we  are  assured  by  Burke,  whose
tuthority  on  such  a  subject  no  one  will  dispute,  that  there  never  had  been  a  time
in  which  so  few  persons  connected  with  commerce  were  raised  to  the  peerage.283

It  would  be  endless  to  collect  all  the  symptoms  which  mark  the  political
degeneracy  of  England  during  this  period  ;  a  degeneracy  the  more  striking,
because  it  was  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  time,*  and  because  it  took  place  in
spite  of  a  great  progress,  both  social  and  intellectual.  How  that  progress  eventu-
ally stopped  the  political  reaction,  and  even  forced  it  to  retrace  its  own  steps,
will  appear  in  another  part  of  this  work  ;  but  there  is  one  circumstance  which  I
cannot  refrain  from  noticing  at  some  length,  since  it  affords  a  most  interesting

of  seats  in  parliament."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxv.  p.  762.  So  too  Sheridan,  in  1792,  said
(vol.  xxix.  p.  1333),  "  In  this  country  peerages  had  been  bartered  for  election  interest."

281  On  this  great  influx  of  lawyers  into  the  House  of  Lords,  most  of  whom  zealously
advocated  arbitrary  principles,  see  Belsham's  Hist,  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  vii.  pp.  266,  267  ;
Adolpkus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  iii.  p.  363  ;   Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxv.  p.  1523.

282  It  was  foretold  at  the  time  that  the  effect  of  the  numerous  creations  made  during
Pitt's  power  would  be  to  lower  the  House  of  Lords.   Compare  Butler's  Reminiscences,  vol.  i.
p.  76,  with  Erskine's  speech,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxix.  p.  1330  ;  and  see  Sheridan's  speech,
vol.  xxxiii.  p.  1197.     But  their  language,  indignant  as  it  is,  was  restrained  by  a  desire  of
not  wholly  breaking  with  the  court.     Other  men,  who  were  more  independent  in  their
position,  and  cared  nothing  for  the  chance  of  future  office,  expressed  themselves  in  terms
such  as  had  never  before  been  heard  within  the  walls  of  Parliament.     Rolle,  for  instance,
declared  that  "  there  had  been  persons  created  peers  during  the  present  minister's  power,
who  were  not  fit  to  be  his  grooms."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxvii.  p.  1198.     Out  of  doors,  the
feeling  of  contempt  was  equally  strong  ;  see  Life  of  Cartwright,  vol.  i.  p.  278  ;  and  see  the
remark  even  of  the  courtly  Sir  W.  Jones  on  the  increasing  disregard  for  learning  shown
by  "  the  nobles  of  our  days."     Preface  to  Persian  Grammar,  in  Jones's  Works,  vol.  ii.
p.  125.

283  In  his  Thoughts  on  French  Affairs,  written  in  1791,  he  says,  "  At  no  period  in  the
history  of  England  have  so  few  peers  been  taken  out  of  trade,  or  from  families  newly
created  by  commerce."     Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  566.     Indeed,  according  to  Sir  Nathaniel
Wraxall  (Posthumous  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  pp.  66,  67,  Lond.  1836),  the  only  instance  when
George  III.  broke  this  rule  was  when  Smith  the  banker  was  made  Lord  Carrington.
Wraxall  is  an  indifferent  authority,  and  there  may  be  other  cases  ;   but  they  were  cer-
tainly very  few,  and  I  cannot  call  any  to  mind.

[*  Buckle  is  apt  to  make  "  the  spirit  of  the  time  "  alternately  that  of  a  majority  and
that  of  a  minority.  It  simplifies  matters  to  realize  that  in  every  age  there  are  more
"  spirits  "  than  one.— ED.]

17


25a  THE  HISTORY  OF  CIVILIZATION

illustration  of  the  tendency  of  public  affairs,  while  at  the  same  time  it  exhibits
the  character  of  one  of  the  gieatest  men,  and,  Bacon  alone  excepted,  the  greatest
thinker,  who  has  ever  devoted  himself  to  the  practice  of  English  politics.

The  slightest  sketch  of  the  reign  of  George  III.  would  indeed  be  miserably
imperfect,  if  it  were  to  omit  the  name  of  Edmund  Burke.  The  studies  of  this
extraordinary  man  not  only  covered  the  whole  field  of  political  inquiry,284  but
extended  to  an  immense  variety  of  subjects,  which,  though  apparently  uncon-
nected with  politics,  do  in  reality  bear  upon  them  as  important  adjuncts  ;  since,
to  a  philosophic  mind,  every  branch  of  knowledge  iglhts  up  even  those  that  seem
most  remote  from  it.  The  eulogy  passed  upon  him  by  one  who  was  no  mean
judge  of  men,285  might  be  justified,  and  more  than  justified,  by  passages  from
his  works,  as  well  as  by  the  opinions  of  the  most  eminent  of  his  contemporaries.286
Thus  it  is,  that  while  his  insight  into  the  philosophy  of  jurisprudence  has  gained
the  applause  of  lawyers,28'  his  acquaintance  with  the  whole  range  and  theory
of  the  fine  arts  has  won  the  admiration  of  artists  ;  288  a  striking  combination  of
two  pursuits,  often,  though  erroneously,  held  to  be  incompatible  with  each  other.
At  the  same  time,  and  notwithstanding  the  occupations  of  political  life,  we  know,
on  good  authority,  that  he  had  paid  great  attention  to  the  history  and  filiation
of  languages  ;  ^  a  vast  subject,  which  within  the  last  thirty  years  has  become
an  important  resource  for  the  study  of  the  human  mind,  but  the  very  idea  of
which  had,  in  its  large  sense,  only  begun  to  dawn  upon  a  few  solitary  thinkers.

284  Nicholls,  who  knew  him,  says,  "  The  political  knowledge  of  Mr.  Burke  might  be
considered  almost  as  an  encyclopaedia  ;  every  man  who  approached  him  received  instruc-
tion from  his  stores."  Nicholls's  Recollections,  vol.  i.  p.  20.

ass  "  xhe  excursions  of  his  genius  are  immense.  His  imperial  fancy  has  laid  all  nature
under  tribute,  and  has  collected  riches  from  every  scene  of  the  creation,  and  every  walk
of  art."  Works  of  Robert  Hall,  London,  1846,  p.  196.  So  too  Wilberforce  says  of  him,
"  He  had  come  late  into  Parliament,  and  had  had  time  to  lay  in  vast  stores  of  know-
ledge. The  field  from  which  he  drew  his  illustrations  was  magnificent.  Like  the  fabled
object  of  the  fairy's  favours,  whenever  he  opened  his  mouth  pearls  and  diamonds  dropped
from  him."  Life  of  Wilberforce,  vol.  i.  p.  159.

286  Lord  Thurlow  is  said  to  have  declared,  what  I  suppose  is  now  the  general  opinion
of  competent  judges,  that  the  fame  of  Burke  would  survive  that  of  Pitt  and  Fox.  Butler's
Reminiscences,  vol.  i.  p.  169.  But  the  noblest  eulogy  on  Burke  was  pronounced  by  a  man
far  greater  than  Thurlow.  In  1790,  Fox  stated  in  the  House  of  Commons,  "  that  if  he
were  to  put  all  the  political  information  which  he  had  learnt  from  books,  all  which  he
had  gained  from  science,  and  all  which  any  knowledge  of  the  world  and  its  affairs  had
taught  him,  into  one  scale,  and  the  improvement  which  he  had  derived  from  his  right
hon.  friend's  instruction  and  conversation  were  placed  in  the  other,  he  should  be  at  a
loss  to  decide  to  which  to  give  the  preference."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxviii.  p.  363.

J  Lord  Campbell  (Lives  of  the  Chief -Justices,  vol.  ii.  p.  443)  says,  "  Burke,  a  philoso-
phic statesman,  deeply  imbued  with  the  scientific  principles  of  jurisprudence."  See  also
on  his  knowledge  of  law,  Butler's  Reminiscences,  vol.  i.  p.  131  ;  and  Bissefs  Life  of  Burke,
vol.  i.  p.  230.

38  Barry,  in  his  celebrated  Letter  to  the  Dilettanti  Society,  regrets  that  Burke  should

have  been  diverted  from  the  study  of  the  fine  arts  into  the  pursuit  of  politics,  because

he  had  one  of  those  "  minds  of  an  admirable  expansion  and  catholicity,  so  as  to  embrace

the  whole  concerns  of  art,  ancient  as  well  as  modern,  domestic  as  well  as  foreign."   Barry's

Vorks,  vol.  ii.  p.  538,  4to,  1809.     In  the  Annual  Register  for  1798,  p.  329, 2nd  edit.,  it  is

ted  that  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  "  deemed  Burke  the  best  judge  of  pictures  that  he  ever

knew.       See  further,  Works  of  Sir  J.  Reynolds,  Lond.  1846,  vol.  i.  p.  185 ;  and  Bissefs

if  Burke,  vol.  11.  p.  257.     A  somewhat  curious  conversation  between  Burke  and

»  o?  T  a  P°int  °f  art' is  Preserve<1  in  Holcroft's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  pp.  276,  277-
.  ..  :r  f™111  Wmstanley,  the  Camden  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  in  Bissefs

e  of  Burke,  vol.  u.  pp.  390,  39I,  and  in  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  p.  427.     Winstanley
It  would  have  been  exceedingly  difficult  to  have  met  with  a  person  who  knew
the  philosophy,  the  history,  and  filiation  of  languages,  or  of  the  principles  of
etymological  deduction,  than  Mr.  Burke  "


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          259

And,  what  is  even  more  remarkable,  when  Adam  Smith  came  to  London  full  of
those  discoveries  which  have  immortalized  his  name,  he  found  to  his  amazement
that  Burke  had  anticipated  conclusions  the  maturing  of  which  cost  Smith  him-
self many  years  of  anxious  and  unremitting  labour.290

To  these  great  inquiries,  which  touch  the  basis  of  social  philosophy,  Burke
added  a  considerable  acquaintance  with  physical  science,  and  even  with  the
practice  and  routine  of  mechanical  trades.  All  this  was  so  digested  and  worked
into  his  mind  that  it  was  ready  on  every  occasion  ;  not,  like  the  knowledge  of
ordinary  politicians,  broken  and  wasted  in  fragments,  but  blended  into  a  com-
plete whole,  fused  by  a  genius  that  gave  life  even  to  the  dullest  pursuits.  This,
indeed,  was  the  characteristic  of  Burke,  that  in  his  hands  nothing  was  barren.
Such  was  the  strength  and  exuberance  of  his  intellect  that  it  bore  fruit  in  all
directions,  and  could  confer  dignity  upon  the  meanest  subjects,  by  showing  their
connexion  with  general  principles,  and  the  part  they  have  to  play  in  the  great
scheme  of  human  affairs.

But  what  has  always  appeared  to  me  still  more  remarkable  in  the  character
of  Burke  is  the  singular  sobriety  with  which  he  employed  his  extraordinary
acquirements.  During  the  best  part  of  his  life,  his  political  principles,  so  far
from  being  speculative,  were  altogether  practical.  This  is  particularly  striking,
because  he  had  every  temptation  to  adopt  an  opposite  course.  He  possessed
materials  for  generalization  far  more  ample  than  any  politician  of  his  time,  and
he  had  a  mind  eminently  prone  to  take  large  views.  On  many  occasions,  and
indeed  whenever  an  opportunity  occurred,  he  showed  his  capacity  as  an  original
and  speculative  thinker.  But  the  moment  he  set  foot  on  political  ground,  he
changed  his  method.  In  questions  connected  with  the  accumulation  and  distri-
bution of  wealth,  he  saw  that  it  was  possible,  by  proceeding  from  a  few  simple
principles,  to  construct  a  deductive  science  available  for  the  commercial  and
financial  interests  of  the  country.  Further  than  this  he  refused  to  advance,
because  he  knew  that,  with  this  single  exception,  every  department  of  politics
was  purely  empirical,  and  was  likely  long  to  remain  so.  Hence  it  was  that  he
recognized  in  all  its  bearings  that  great  doctrine  which  even  in  our  own  days
is  too  often  forgotten,  that  the  aim  of  the  legislator  should  be,  not  truth,  but
expediency.*  Looking  at  the  actual  state  of  knowledge,  he  was  forced  to  admit
that  all  political  principles  have  been  raised  by  hasty  induction  from  limited
facts  ;  and  that'therefore  it  is  the  part  of  a  wise  man,  when  he  adds  to  the  facts,
to  revise  the  induction,  and,  instead  of  sacrificing  practice  to  principles,  modify
the  principles  that  he  may  change  the  practice.  Or,  to  put  this  in  another  way,
he  lays  it  down  that  political  principles  are  at  best  but  the  product  of  human
reason  ;  while  political  practice  has  to  do  with  human  nature  and  human  passions,
of  which  reason  forms  but  a  part  ;  291  and  that,  on  this  account,  the  proper
business  of  a  statesman  is  to  contrive  the  means  by  which  certain  ends  may  be

290  Adam  Smith    told  Burke,   "after  they  had  conversed  on  subjects  of  political
economy,  that  he  was  the  only  man  who,  without  communication,  thought  on  these  topics
exactly  as  he  did."     Bissefs  Life  of  Burke,  vol.  ii.  p.  429  ;  and  see  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,
p.  58  ;  and  on  his  knowledge  of  political  economy,  Brougham's  Sketches  of  Statesmen,
vol.  i.  p.  205.

291  "  Politics  ought  to  be  adjusted,  not  to  human  reasonings,  but  to  human  nature ;  of
which  the  reason  is  but  a  part,  and  by  no  means  the  greatest  part."     Observations  on  a
late  State  of  the  Nation,  in  Burke 's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  113.     [This  very  sentence  is  precisely
an  appeal  to  the  reason — a  process  of  reasoning.     The  dichotomy  here  is  again  falla-
cious.— ED.]      Hence  the  distinction  he  had  constantly  in  view  between  the  generaliza-
tions of  philosophy,  which  ought  to  be  impregnable,  and  those  of  politics,  which  must

[*  This  is  somewhat  crudely  put.  There  is  no  real  antithesis ;  and  Buckle  has  above
taught  that,  in  the  matter  of  the  repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws,  all  that  was  required  to  work
the  reform  was  the  dissemination  of  the  relevant  knowledge.  Where  Burke's  preaching
of  the  principle  of  expediency  was  valid  was  in  opposition  to  the  insistence  on  theoretic
"rights"  at  the  point  of  the  sword — as  in  America — in  disregard  of  the  practical
dilemma. — ED.]


26o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

effected,  leaving  it  to  the  general  voice  of  the  country  to  determine  what  those
ends  shall  be.  and  shaping  his  own  conduct,  not  according  to  his  own  principles,
but  according  to  the  wishes  of  the  people  for  whom  he  legislates,  and  whom  he
is  bound  to  obey.292

It  is  these  views,  and  the  extraordinary  ability  with  which  they  were  advocated,
which  make  the  appearance  of  Burke  a  memorable  epoch  in  our  political  hi  story. 293
We  had,  no  doubt,  other  statesmen  before  him  who  denied  the  validity  of  general
principles  in  politics  ;  but  their  denial  was  only  the  happy  guess  of  ignorance,
and  they  rejected  theories  which  they  had  never  taken  the  pains  to  study.
Burke  rejected  them  because  he  knew  them.  It  was  his  rare  merit  that,  not-
withstanding every  inducement  to  rely  upon  his  own  generalizations,  he  resisted
the  temptation  ;  that,  though  rich  in  all  the  varieties  of  political  knowledge,  he
made  his  opinions  subservient  to  the  march  of  events  ;  that  he  recognized  as  the
object  of  government,  not  the  preservation  of  particular  institutions,  nor  the
propagation  of  particular  tenets,  but  the  happiness  of  the  people  at  large  ;  and,
above  all,  that  he  insisted  upon  an  obedience  to  the  popular  wishes  which  no
statesman  before  him  had  paid,  and  which  too  many  statesmen  since  him  have
forgotten.  Our  country,  indeed,  is  still  full  of  those  vulgar  politicians  against
whom  Burke  raised  his  voice  ;  feeble  and  shallow  men,  who,  having  spent  their
little  force  in  resisting  the  progress  of  reform,  find  themselves  at  length  compelled

be  fluctuating  ;  and  hence  in  his  noble  work,  Thoughts  on  the  Cause  of  the  present  Dis-
contents, he  says  (vol.  i.  p.  136),  "  No  lines  can  be  laid  down  for  civil  or  political  wisdom.
They  are  a  matter  incapable  of  exact  definition."  See  also  p.  151,  on  which  he  grounds
his  defence  of  the  spirit  of  party  ;  it  being  evident  that  if  truth  were  the  prime  object
of  the  political  art,  the  idea  of  party,  as  such,  would  be  indefensible.  Compare  with  this
the  difference  between  "  la  verite  en  soi  "  and  "  la  verite  sociale,"  as  expounded  by  M.
Rey  in  his  Science  Sociale,  vol.  ii.  p.  322,  Paris,  1842.

292  in  1780  he  plainly  told  the  House  of  Commons  that  "  the  people  are  the  masters.
They  have  only  to  express  their  wants  at  large  and  in  gross.  We  are  the  expert  artists  ;
we  are  the  skilful  workmen,  to  shape  their  desires  into  perfect  form,  and  to  fit  the  utensil
to  the  use.  They  are  the  sufferers,  they  tell  the  symptoms  of  the  complaint ;  but  we
know  the  exact  seat  of  the  disease,  and  how  to  apply  the  remedy  according  to  the  rules
of  art.  How  shocking  would  it  be  to  see  us  pervert  our  skill  into  a  sinister  and  servile
dexterity,  for  the  purpose  of  evading  our  duty,  and  defrauding  our  employers,  who  are  our
natural  lords,  of  the  object  of  their  just  expectations  !  "  Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  254.
In  1777,  in  his  Letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol  (Works,  vol.  i.  p.  216),  "  In  effect,  to  follow,
not  to  force,  the  public  inclination  ;  to  give  a  direction,  a  form,  a  technical  dress,  and  a
specific  sanction,  to  the  general  sense  of  the  community, — is  the  true  end  of  legislature."
In  his  Letter  on  the  Duration  of  Parliament  (vol.  ii.  p.  430),  "  It  would  be  dreadful,  indeed,
if  there  was  any  power  in  the  nation  capable  of  resisting  its  unanimous  desire,  or  even
the  desire  of  any  very  great  and  decided  majority  of  the  people.  The  people  may  be
deceived  in  their  choice  of  an  object.  But  I  can  scarcely  conceive  any  choice  they  can  make
to  be  so  very  mischievous,  as  the  existence  of  any  human  force  capable  of  resisting  it."  So,
too,  he  says  (vol.  i.  pp.  125,  214),  that  when  government  and  the  people  differ,  govern-
ment is  generally  in  the  wrong  :  compare  pp.  217,  218,  276,  vol.  ii.  p.  440.  And  to  give
only  one  more  instance,  but  a  very  decisive  one,  he,  in  1772,  when  speaking  on  a  Bill
respecting  the  Importation  and  Exportation  of  Corn,  said,  "  On  this  occasion  I  give  way
to  the  present  Bill,  not  because  I  approve  of  the  measure  in  itself,  but  because  I  think  it
prudent  to  yield  to  the  spirit  of  the  times.  The  people  will  have  it  so  ;  and  it  is  not  for  their
representatives  to  say  nay.  I  cannot,  however,  help  entering  my  protest  against  the
general  principles  of  policy  on  which  it  is  supported,  because  I  think  them  extremely
dangerous."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvii.  p.  480.

fV93  The  effect  which  Burke's  profound  views  produced  in  the  House  of  Commons,  where,
however,  few  men  were  able  to  understand  them  in  their  full  extent,  is  described  by  Dr.
Hay,  who  was  present  at  one  of  his  great  speeches  ;  which,  he  says,  "  seemed  a  kind  of
new  political  philosophy."  Burke's  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  103.  Compare  a  letter  from
Lee,  written  in  the  same  year,  1766,  in  Forster's  Life  of  Goldsmith,  vol.  ii.  pp.  38,  39  ;  and
n  Bunbury's  Correspond,  of  Hanmer,  p.  458.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          261

yield  ;  and  then,  so  soon  as  they  have  exhausted  the  artifices  of  their  petty
lemes,  and  by  their  tardy  and  ungraceful  concessions  have  sown  the  seed
)f  future  disaffection,  turn  upon  the  age  by  which  they  have  been  baffled  ;  they
lourn  over  the  degeneracy  of  mankind  ;  they  lament  the  decay  of  public  spirit  ;
id  they  weep  for  the  fate  of  a  people,  who  have  been  so  regardless  of  the  wisdom
>f  their  ancestors  as  to  tamper  with  a  constitution  already  hoary  with  the  pre-
ription  of  centuries.

Those  who  have  studied  the  reign  of  George  III.  will  easily  understand  the
imense  advantage  of  having  a  man  like  Burke  to  oppose  these  miserable  delu-
ms  ;  delusions  which  have  been  fatal  to  many  countries,  and  have  more  than
ice  almost  ruined  our  own.294  They  will  also  understand  that,  in  the  opinion
)f  the  king,  this  great  statesman  was  at  best  but  an  eloquent  declaimer,  to  be
issed  in  the  same  category  with  Fox  and  Chatham  ;  all  three  ingenious  men,
>ut  unsafe,  unsteady,  quite  unfit  for  weighty  concerns,  and  by  no  means  calcu-
lated for  so  exalted  an  honour  as  admission  into  the  royal  councils.  In  point  of
fact,  during  the  thirty  years  Burke  was  engaged  in  public  life,  he  never  once  held
an  office  in  the  cabinet  ;  295  and  the  only  occasions  on  which  he  occupied  even  a
subordinate  post,  were  in  those  very  short  intervals  when  the  fluctuations  of
politics  compelled  the  appointment  of  a  liberal  ministry.

Indeed,  the  part  taken  by  Burke  in  public  affairs  must  have  been  very  galling
to  a  king  who  thought  everything  good  that  was  old,  and  everything  right  that
was  established.296  For,  so  far  was  this  remarkable  man  in  advance  of  his  con-
temporaries, that  there  are  few  of  the  great  measures  of  the  present  generation
which  he  did  not  anticipate  and  zealously  defend.  Not  only  did  he  attack  the
absurd  laws  against  forestalling  and  regrating,29?  but,  by  advocating  the  freedom
of  trade,  he  struck  at  the  root  of  all  similar  prohibitions.298  He  supported  those

294  Burke  was  never  weary  of  attacking  the  common  argument  that,  because  a  country
has  long  nourished  under  some  particular  custom,  therefore  the  custom  must  be  good.     See
an  admirable  instance  of  this  in  his  speech,  on  the  power  of  the  attorney -general  to
file  informations  ex  officio  ;  where  he  likens  such  reasoners  to  the  father  of  Scriblerus,
who  "  venerated  the  rust  and  canker  which  exalted  a  brazen  pot -lid  into  the  shield  of  a
hero."     He  adds  :  "  But,  sir,  we  are  told,  that  the  time  during  which  this  power  existed,
is  the  time  during  which  monarchy  most  nourished  ;  and  what,  then,  can  no  two  things
subsist  together  but  as  cause  and  effect  ?     May  not  a  man  have  enjoyed  better  health
during  the  time  that  he  walked  with  an  oaken  stick,  than  afterwards,  when  he  changed
it  for  a  cane,  without  supposing,  like  the  Druids,  that  there  are  occult  virtues  in  oak,  and
that  the  stick  and  the  health  were  cause  and  effect  ?  "     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvi.  pp.  1190
1191.

295  This,  as  Mr.  Cooke  truly  says,  "  is  an  instance  of  aristocratic  prejudice ;  but  it  is
certain  that  a  hint  from  George  III.  would  have  remedied  the  shameful  neglect."   Cookers
Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.  pp.  277,    278.      [This  is  not  quite  certain.      See   Mr.    Morley's
Burke  ("Men  of  Letters"  Series),  pp.  140-1,  as  to  the  difficulties  created  by  Burke's
temper. — ED.]

296  It  is  easy  to  imagine  how  George  III.  must  have  been  offended  by  such  sentiments
as  these  :  "  I  am  not  of  the  opinion  of  those  gentlemen  who  are  against  disturbing  the
public  repose  ;  I  like  a  clamour  whenever  there  is  an  abuse.     The  fire -bell  at  midnight
disturbs  your  sleep,  but  it  keeps  you  from  being  burnt  in  your  bed.     The  hue  and  cry
alarms  the  county,  but  preserves  all  the  property  of  the  province."     Burke's  speech  on
Prosecutions  for  Libels,  in  1771,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvii.  p.  54.

297  He  moved  their  repeal.     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxvi.  p.   1169.     Even  Lord  Chatham
issued,  in  1766,  a  proclamation  against  forestallers  and  regraters,  very  much  to  the  ad-
miration of  Lord  Mahon,  who  says,  "  Lord  Chatham  acted  with  characteristic  energy."
Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  v.  p.  166.     More  than  thirty  years  later,  and  after  Burke's
death,  Lord  Kenyon,  then  chief-justice,  eulogized  these  preposterous  laws.     Holland's
Mem.  of  the  Whig  Party,  vol.  i.  p.  167.     Compare  Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  vii.
p.  406  ;  and  Cockburn's  Memorials  of  his  Time,  Edinb.  1856,  p.  73.

298  "  That  liberality  in  the  commercial  system  which,  I  trust,  will  one  day  be  adopted."
Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  223.     And,  in  his  letter  to  Burgh  (Ibid.  vol.fcii.j>.  409 )»  "  But


262  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

just  claims  of  the  Catholics  2"  which,  during  his  lifetime,  were  obstinately  re-
fused ;  but  which  were  conceded,  many  years  after  his  death,  as  the  only  means
of  preserving  the  integrity  of  the  empire.  He  supported  the  petition  of  the
Dissenters,  that  they  might  be  relieved  from  the  restrictions  to  which,  for  the
benefit  of  the  Church  of  England,  they  were  subjected.300  Into  other  depart-
ments of  politics  he  carried  the  same  spirit.  He  opposed  the  cruel  laws  against
insolvents,301  by  which,  in  the  time  of  George  III.,  our  statute-book  was  still
defaced  ;  and  he  vainly  attempted  to  soften  the  penal  code,302  the  increasing
severity  of  which  was  one  of  the  worst  features  of  that  bad  reign.303  He  wished
to  abolish  the  old  plan  of  enlisting  soldiers  for  life  ;  304  a  barbarous  and  impolitic
practice,  as  the  English  legislature  began  to  perceive  several  years  later.30^  He
attacked  the  slave-trade  ;  3°6  which,  being  an  ancient  usage,  the  king  wished  to
preserve,  as  part  of  the  British  constitution.307  He  refuted,308  but,  owing  to  the
prejudices  of  the  age,  was  unable  to  subvert,  the  dangerous  power  exercised  by
the  judges,  who,  in  criminal  prosecutions  for  libel,  confined  the  jury  to  the  mere
question  of  publication  ;  thus  taking  the  real  issue  into  their  own  hands,  and
making  themselves  the  arbiters  of  the  fate  of  those  who  were  so  unfortunate  as
to  be  placed  at  their  bar.309  And,  what  many  will  think  not  the  least  of  his

that  to  which  I  attached  myself  the  most  particularly,  was  to  fix  the  principle  of  a  free
trade  in  all  the  ports  of  these  islands,  as  founded  in  justice,  and  beneficial  to  the  whole  ;
but  principally  to  this,  the  seat  of  the  supreme  power."

299  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  p.  467  ;  Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  263,  271,  537-561,  vol.  ii.
pp.  431-447.     He  refutes  (vol.  i.  p.  548)  the  notion  that  the  coronation -oath  was  intended
to  bind  the  crown  in  its  legislative  capacity.     Compare  Mem.  of  Mackintosh,  vol.  i.
pp.  170,  171,  with  Butler's  Reminiscences,  vol.  i.  p.  134.

300  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvii.  pp.  435,  436,  vol.  xx.  p.  306.     See  also  Burke's  Correspondence,
vol.  ii.  pp.  17,  18  ;  and  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  p.  143.

301  Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  261,  262,  part  of  his  speech  at  Bristol.

302  Prior>s  Life  Of  Burke,  p.  317..    See  also  his  admirable  remarks,  in  Works,  vol.  ii.
p.  417  ;  and  his  speech,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxviii.  p.  146.

303  On  this  increasing  cruelty  of  the  English  laws,  compare  Parr's  Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  150,
259,  with  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxii.  p.  271,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  1222,  vol.  xxvi.  p.  1057,  vol.  xxviii.
p.  143  ;  and,  in  regard  to  the  execution  of  them,  see  Life  of  Romilly,  by  Himself,  vol.  i.
p.  65  ;  and  Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  ix.  p.  620.

304  In  one  short  speech  (Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xx.  pp.  150,  151),  he  has  almost  exhausted  the
arguments  against  enlistment  for  life.

305  In  1806,  that  is  nine  years  after  the  death  of  Burke,  parliament  first  authorized
enlistment  for  a  term  of  years.     See  an  account  of  the  debates  in  Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,
vol.  vii.  pp.  380-391.     Compare  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  v.
p.  475  ;  and  Holland's  Mem.  of  the  Whig  Party,  vol.  ii.  p.  116.

36  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  p.  316  ;  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxvii.  p.  502,  vol.  xxviii.  pp.  69,  96  ;
and  Life  of  Wilberforce,  vol.  i.  pp.  152,  171,  contain  evidence  of  his  animosity  against
the  slave-trade,  and  a  more  than  sufficient  answer  to  the  ill-natured,  and,  what  is  worse,
the  ignorant  remark  about  Burke,  in  the  Duke  of  Buckingham's  Mem.  of  George  III.  vol.  i.
P-  350.

307  On  the  respect  which  George  III.  felt  for  the  slave  trade,  see  note  259  to  this  chap-
ter. I  might  also  have  quoted  the  testimony  of  Lord  Brougham  :  "  The  court  was  de-
cidedly against  abolition.  George  III.  always  regarded  the  question  with  abhorrence,
as  savouring  of  innovation."  Brougham's  Statesmen,  vol.  ii.  p.  104.  Compare  Combe's
North  America,  vol.  i.  p.  332.

°8  Burke's  Works,  vol.  ii.  pp.  490-496  ;  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvii.  pp.  44-55,  a  very  able
speech,  delivered  in  1771.  Compare  a  letter  to  Dowdeswell,  in  Burke's  Correspond.
vol.  i.  PP.  251,  252.

309  The  arguments  of  Burke  anticipated,  by  more  than  twenty  years,  Fox's  celebrated

Jill,  which  was  not  passed  till  1792  ;  although  in  1752  juries  had  begun,  in  spite

e  judges,  to  return  general  verdicts  on  the  merits.     See  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  v.

pp.  238,  243,  341-345,  vol.  vi.  p.  210;  and  Meyer,  Institutions  Judiciaires,  vol.  ii.  pp.  204,

205,  Paris,  1823.


.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          263

erits,  he  was  the  first  in  that  long  line  of  financial  reformers  to  whom  we  are
deeply  indebted.310  Notwithstanding  the  difficulties  thrown  in  his  way,  he
carried  through  parliament  a  series  of  bills  by  which  several  useless  places  were
entirely  abolished,  and,  in  the  single  office  of  paymaster-general,  a  saving  effected
to  the  country  of  25,ooo/.  a  year.311

These  things  alone  are  sufficient  to  explain  the  animosity  of  a  prince  whose
boast  it  was  that  he  would  bequeath  the  government  to  his  successor  in  the
same  state  as  that  in  which  he  had  received  it.  There  was,  however,  another
circumstance  by  which  the  royal  feelings  were  still  further  wounded.  The
determination  of  the  king  to  oppress  the  Americans  was  so  notorious  that  when
the  war  actually  broke  out  it  was  called  "  the  king's  war  ;  "  and  those  who
opposed  it  were  regarded  as  the  personal  enemies  of  their  sovereign.312  In  this,
however,  as  in  all  other  questions,  the  conduct  of  Burke  was  governed,  not  by
traditions  and  principles  such  as  George  III.  cherished,  but  by  large  views  of
general  expediency.  Burke,  in  forming  his  opinions  respecting  this  disgraceful
contest,  refused  to  be  guided  by  arguments  respecting  the  right  of  either  party.313
He  would  not  enter  into  any  discussion  as  to  whether  a  mother-country  has  the
right  to  tax  her  colonies,  or  whether  the  colonies  have  a  right  to  tax  themselves.
Such  points  he  left  to  be  mooted  by  those  politicians  who,  pretending  to  be  guided
by  principles,  are  in  reality  subjugated  by  prejudice.314  For  his  own  part,  he
was  content  to  compare  the  cost  with  the  gain.  It  was  enough  for  Burke  that,
considering  the  power  of  our  American  colonies,  considering  their  distance  from
us,  and  considering  the  probability  of  their  being  aided  by  France,  it  was  not
advisable  to  exercise  the  power  ;  and  it  was  therefore  idle  to  talk  of  the  right.

310  Mr.  Farr,  in  his  valuable  essay  on  the  statistics  of  the  civil  service  (in  Journal  of
Statist.  Soc.  vol.  xii.  pp.  103-125),  calls  Burke  "  one  of  the  first  and  ablest  financial  re-
formers in  parliament."  p.  104.     The  truth,  however,  is,  that  he  was  not  only  one  of  the
first,  but  the  first.     He  was  the  first  man  who  laid  before  parliament  a  general  and  system-
atic scheme  for  diminishing  the  expenses  of  government ;  and  his  preliminary  speech  on
that  occasion  is  one  of  the  finest  of  all  his  compositions.     [Buckle  should  have  noted  that
Burke  was  avowedly  following  the  lead  given  in  France  by  M.  Necker. — ED.]

311  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  pp.  206,  234.     See  also,  on  the  retrenchments  he  effected,
Sinclair's  Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  ii.  pp.  84,  85  ;  Burke's  Correspond,  vol.  iii.  p.  14  ;  and
Bissefs  Life  of  Burke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  57-60.

312  In  1778,  Lord  Rockingham  said,  in  the  House  of  Lords,  "  Instead  of  calling  the
war,  the  war  of  parliament,  or  of  the  people,  it  was  called  the  king's  war,  his  majesty's
favourite  war."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xix.  p.  857.     Compare  Cooke's  Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.
p.  235,  with  the  pungent  remarks  in  Walpole's  George  III.  vol.  iv.  p.  114.     Nicholls
(Recollections,  vol.  i.  p.  35)  says  :  "  The  war  was  considered  as  the  war  of  the  king  per-
sonally.    Those  who  supported  it  were  called  the  king's  friends  ;  while  those  who  wished
the  country  to  pause,  and  reconsider  the  propriety  of  persevering  in  the  contest,  were
branded  as  disloyal."

313  "  I  am  not  here  going  into  the  distinction  of  rights,  nor  attempting  to  mark  their
boundaries.     I  do  not  enter  into  these  metaphysical  distinctions  ;  I  hate  the  very  sound
of  them."     Speech  on  American  taxation  in  1774,  in  Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  173.     In
1775  (vol.  i.  p.  192)  :  "  But  my  consideration  is  narrow,  confined,  and  wholly  limited  to
the  policy  of  the  question."     At  p.  183  :  we  should  act  in  regard  to  America  not  "  ac-
cording to  abstract  ideas  of  right,  by  no  means  according  to  mere  general  theories  of
government  ;  the  resort  to  which  appears  to  me,  in  our  present  situation,  no  better  than
arrant  trifling."     In  one  of  his  earliest  political  pamphlets,  written  in  1769,  he  says  that
the  arguments  of  the  opponents  of  America  "  are  conclusive  ;  conclusive  as  to  right ;  but
the  very  reverse  as  to  policy  and  practice;"  vol.  i  p.  112.     Compare  a  letter, written  in
1775,  in  Burke's  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  12.

314  In  1766,  George  III.  writes  to  Lord  Rockingham  (Albemarle's  Rockingham,  vol.  i.
pp.  271,  272)  :  "  Talbot  is  as  right  as  I  can  desire,  in  the  Stamp  Act ;  strong  for  out-
declaring  our  right,  but  willing  to  repeal."     In  other  words,  willing  to  offend  the  Ameri-
cans by  a  speculative  assertion  of  an  abstract  right,  but  careful  to  forego  the  advantage
which  that  right  might  produce.


264  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Hence  he  opposed  the  taxation  of  America,  not  because  it  was  unprecedented,
but  because  it  was  inexpedient.  As  a  natural  consequence,  he  likewise  opposed
the  Boston-Port  Bill,  and  that  shameful  bill  to  forbid  all  intercourse  with
America,  which  was  not  inaptly  called  the  starvation  plan  ;  violent  measures
by  which  the  king  hoped  to  curb  the  colonies,  and  break  the  spirit  of  those  noble
men,  whom  he  hated  even  more  than  he  feared.315

It  is  certainly  no  faint  characteristic  of  those  times  that  a  man  like  Burke,
who  dedicated  to  politics  abilities  equal  to  far  nobler  things,  should  during
thirty  years  have  received  from  his  prince  neither  favour  nor  reward.  But
George  III.  was  a  king  whose  delight  it  was  to  raise  the  humble  and  exalt  the
meek.  His  reign,  indeed,  was  the  golden  age  of  successful  mediocrity  ;  an  age  in
which  little  men  were  favoured,  and  great  men  depressed  ;  when  Addington  was
cherished  as  a  statesman,  and  Beattie  pensioned  as  a  philosopher  ;  and  when,
in  all  the  walks  of  public  life,  the  first  conditions  of  promotion  were,  to  fawn  upon
ancient  prejudices,  and  support  established  abuses.

This  neglect  of  the  most  eminent  of  English  politicians  is  highly  instructive  ;
but  the  circumstances  which  followed,  though  extremely  painful,  have  a  still
deeper  interest,  and  are  well  worth  the  attention  of  those  whose  habits  of  mind
lead  them  to  study  the  intellectual  peculiarities  of  great  men.

For,  at  this  distance  of  time,  when  his  nearest  relations  are  no  more,  it  would
be  affectation  to  deny  that  Burke,  during  the  last  few  years  of  his  life,  fell  into
a  state  of  complete  hallucination.  When  the  French  Revolution  broke  out,  his
mind,  already  fainting  under  the  weight  of  incessant  labour,  could  not  support
the  contemplation  of  an  event  so  unprecedented,  so  appalling,  and  threatening
results  of  such  frightful  magnitude.  And  when  the  crimes  of  that  great  revolu-
tion, instead  of  diminishing,  continued  to  increase,  then  it  was  that  the  feelings
of  Burke  finally  mastered  his  reason  ;  the  balance  tottered  ;  the  proportions  of
that  gigantic  intellect  were  disturbed.  From  this  moment,  his  sympathy  with
present  suffering  was  so  intense,  that  he  lost  all  memory  of  the  tyranny  by  which
the  sufferings  were  provoked.  His  mind,  once  so  steady,  so  little  swayed  by
prejudice  and'  passion,  reeled  under  the  pressure  of  events  which  turned  the
brains  of  thousands.316  And  whoever  will  compare  the  spirit  of  his  latest  works
with  the  dates  of  their  publication,  will  see  how  this  melancholy  change  was
aggravated  by  that  bitter  bereavement  from  which  he  never  rallied,  and  which
alone  was  sufficient  to  prostrate  the  understanding  of  one  in  whom  the  severity
of  the  reason  was  so  tempered,  so  nicely  poised,  by  the  warmth  of  the  affections.
Never,  indeed,  can  there  be  forgotten  those  touching,  those  exquisite  allusions
to  the  death  of  that  only  son  who  was  the  joy  of  his  soul  and  the  pride  of  his

315  The  intense  hatred  with  which  George  III.  regarded  the  Americans  was  so  natural
to  such  a  mind  as  his,  that  one  can  hardly  blame  his  constant  exhibition  of  it  during  the
time  that  the  struggle  was  actually  impending.  But  what  is  truly  disgraceful  is  that
after  the  war  was  over  he  displayed  this  rancour  on  an  occasion  when,  of  nil  others,  he
was  bound  to  suppress  it.  In  1786,  Jefferson  and  Adams  were  in  England  officially,  and
as  a  matter  of  courtesy  to  the  king  made  their  appearance  at  court.  So  regardless,
however,  was  George  III.  of  the  common  decencies  of  his  station,  that  he  treated  these
eminent  men  with  marked  incivility,  although  they  were  then  paying  their  respects  to
him  in  his  own  palace.  See  Tucker's  Life  of  Jefferson,  vol.  i.  p.  220  ;  and  Mem.  and
Corresp.  of  Jefferson,  vol.  i.  p.  54.

16  All  great  revolutions  have  a  direct  tendency  to  increase  insanity,  as  long  as  they
last,  and  probably  for  some  time  afterwards  ;  but  in  this  as  in  other  respects  the  French
revolution  stands  alone  in  the  number  of  its  victims.  On  the  horrible  but  curious  sub-
ject of  madness  caused  by  the  excitement  of  the  events  which  occurred  in  France  late  in
the  eighteenth  century,  compare  Prichard  on  Insanity  in  relation  to  Jurisprudence,  1842,
p.  90  ;  his  Treatise  on  Insanity,  1835,  pp.  161,  183,  230,  339  ;  Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,
vol.  i.  pp.  43,  53,  54,  66,  21 1,  447,  vol.  ii.  pp.  193,  726  ;  Feucktersleben's  Medical  Psycho-
W*  P-  254  ;  Georget,  de  la  Folie,  p.  156  ;  Pinel,  Traite  sur  V Alienation  Mentale,  pp.  30,
108, 109, 177, 178, 185,  207,  215,  257,  349.  392,  457,48i  ;  Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  iii.


,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          265


.eart,  and  to  whom  he  fondly  hoped  to  bequeath  the  inheritance  of  his  imperish-
able name.  Never  can  we  forget  that  image  of  desolation,  under  which  the  noble
old  man  figured  his  immeasurable  grief.  "  I  live  in  an  inverted  order.  They
who  ought  to  have  succeeded  me,  have  gone  before  me.  They  who  should  have
been  to  me  as  posterity,  are  in  the  place  of  ancestors.  .  .  .  The  storm  has  gone
over  me,  and  I  lie  like  one  of  those  old  oaks  which  the  late  hurricane  has  scattered
about  me.  I  am  stripped  of  all  my  honours  ;  I  am  torn  up  by  the  roots,  and  lie
prostrate  on  the  earth."31'

It  would  perhaps  be  displaying  a  morbid  curiosity,  to  attempt  to  raise  the
veil,  and  trace  the  decay  of  so  mighty  a  mind.318  Indeed,  in  all  such  cases,  most
of  the  evidence  perishes  ;  for  those  who  have  the  best  opportunities  of  witnessing
the  infirmities  of  a  great  man,  are  not  those  who  most  love  to  relate  them.  But
it  is  certain  that  the  change  was  first  clearly  seen  immediately  after  the  break-
ing out  of  the  French  Revolution  ;  that  it  was  aggravated  by  the  death  of  his
son  ;  and  that  it  became  progressively  worse  till  death  closed  the  scene.319  In
his  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution  ;  in  his  Remarks  on  the  Policy  of  the  Allies  ;
in  his  Letter  to  Elliot ;  in  his  Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord ;  and  in  his  Letters  on  a  Regicide
Peace,  we  may  note  the  consecutive  steps  of  an  increasing,  and  at  length  an
uncontrollable  violence.  To  the  single  principle  of  hatred  of  the  French  Revo-
lution, he  sacrificed  his  oldest  associations  and  his  dearest  friends.  Fox,  as  is
well  known,  always  looked  up  to  Burke  as  to  a  master,  from  whose  lips  he  had
gathered  the  lessons  of  political  wisdom.320  Burke,  on  his  side,  fully  recognized
the  vast  abilities  of  his  friend,  and  loved  him  for  that  affectionate  disposition,
and  for  those  winning  manners,  which,  it  has  often  been  said,  none  who  saw
them  could  ever  resist.  But  now,  without  the  slightest  pretence  of  a  personal
quarrel,  this  long  intimacy 321  was  rudely  severed.  Because  Fox  would  not
abandon  that  love  of  popular  liberty  which  they  had  long  cherished  in  common,
Burke  publicly,  and  in  his  place  in  parliament,  declared  that  their  friendship
was  at  an  end  ;  for  that  he  would  never  more  hold  communion  with  a  man  who
lent  his  support  to  the  French  people.322  At  the  same  time,  and  indeed  the  very
evening  on  which  this  occurred,  Burke,  who  had  hitherto  been  remarkable  for
the  courtesy  of  his  manners,323  deliberately  insulted  another  of  his  friends,  who
was  taking  him  home  in  his  carriage  ;  and,  in  a  state  of  frantic  excitement,  in-

»"  Burke* s  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  268.

318  The  earliest  unmistakeable  instances  of  thoie  violent  outbreaks  which  showed  the
presence  of  disease,  were  in  the  debates  on  the  regency  bill,  in  February,  1789,  when  Sir
Richard  Hill,  with  brutal  candour,  hinted  at  Burke's  madness,  even  in  his  presence.
Part.  Hist.  vol.  xxvii.  p.  1249.     Compare  a  letter  Irom  Sir  William  Young,  in  Bucking-
ham's Mem.  of  George  III.  1853,  vol.  ii.  p.  73  :  "  Burke  finished  his  wild  speech  in  a  manner
next  to  madness."     This  was  in  December,  1788  ;  and,  from  that  time  until  his  death,
it  became  every  year  more  evident  that  his  intellect  was  disordered.     See  a  melancholy
description  of  him  in  a  letter  written  by  Dr.  Currie  in  1792    (Life  of  Currie,  vol.  ii.
p.  150)  ;  and,  above  all,  see  his  own  incoherent  letter,  in  1796,  in  his  Correspond,  with
Laurence,  p.  67.

319  His  son  died  in  August,  1794  (Burke's  Correspond,  vol.  iv.  p.  224);  and  his  most
violent  works  were  written  between  that  period  and  his  own  death,  in  July,  1797-

320  "  xhis  disciple,  as  he  was  proud  to 'acknowledge  himself."     Brougham's  Statesmen,
vol.  i.  p.  218.      In  1791,  Fox  said  that  Burke  "  had  taught  him  everything  he  knew  in
politics."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxix.  p.  379.     See  also  Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  iv.
pp.  472,  610  ;  and  a  letter  from  Fox  to  Parr,  in  Parr's  Works,  vol.  vii.  p.  287.

321  It  had  begun  in  1766,  when  Fox  was  only  seventeen.     Russell's  Mem.  of  Fox,  vol.  i.
p.  26.

322  On  this  painful  rupture,  compare  with  the  Parliamentary  History,  Holland's  Mem.
of  the  Whig  Party,  vol.  i.  pp.  10,  ii  ;  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  pp.  375-379  ;  Tomline's  Life
of  Pitt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  385-395.     The  complete  change  in  Burke's  feelings  towards  his  old
friend  also  appears  in  a  very  intemperate  letter,  written  to  Dr.  Laurence  in  1797.  Burke's
Correspond,  with  Laurence,  p.  152.     Compare  Parr's  Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  67-80,  84-90,  109.

323  Which  used  to  be  contrasted  with  the  bluntness  of  Johnson;  these  eminent  men
being  the  two  best  talkers  of  their  time.     See  Bisset's  Life  of  Burke,  vol.  i.  p.  127.


266  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

sisted  on  being  immediately  set  down,  in  the  middle  of  the  night  in  a  pouring
rain,  because  he  could  not,  he  said,  remain  seated  by  a  "  friend  to  the  revolutionary
doctrines  of  the  French."  324

Nor  is  it  true,  as  some  have  supposed,  that  this  mania  of  hostility  was  solely
directed  against  the  criminal  part  of  the  French  people.  It  would  be  difficult,
in  that  or  in  any  other  age,  to  find  two  men  of  more  active,  or  indeed  enthusiastic
benevolence,  than  Condorcet  and  La  Fayette.  Besides  this,  Condorcet  was
one  of  the  most  profound  thinkers  of  his  time,  and  will  be  remembered  as  long
as  genius  is  honoured  among  us.325  La  Fayette  was  no  doubt  inferior  to  Condorcet
in  point  of  ability  ;  but  he  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Washington,  on  whose  con-
duct he  modelled  his  own,326  and  by  whose  side  he  had  fought  for  the  liberties
of  America  ;  his  integrity  was,  and  still  is,  unsullied  ;  and  his  character  had  a
chivalrous  and  noble  turn,  which  Burke,  in  his  better  days,  would  have  been  the
first  to  admire.327  Both,  however,  were  natives  of  that  hated  country  whose
liberties  they  vainly  attempted  to  achieve.  On  this  account,  Burke  declared
Condorcet  to  be  guilty  of  "  impious  sophistry  ;  "  328  to  be  a  "fanatic  atheist,
and  furious  democratic  republican  ;  "  329  and  to  be  capable  of  "  the  lowest  as
well  as  the  highest  and  most  determined  villanies."  33°  As  to  La  Fayette,  when
an  attempt  was  made  to  mitigate  the  cruel  treatment  he  was  receiving  from  the
Prussian  government,  Burke  not  only  opposed  the  motion  made  for  that  purpose
in  the  House  of  Commons,  but  took  the  opportunity  of  grossly  insulting  the
unfortunate  captive,  who  was  then  languishing  in  a  dungeon.331  So  dead  had  he
become  on  this  subject,  even  to  the  common  instincts  of  our  nature,  that,  in  his
place  in  parliament,  he  could  find  no  better  way  of  speaking  of  this  injured  and

324  Rogers's  Introduction  to  Burke's  Works,  p.  xliv.  ;  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  p.  384.

323  There  is  an  interesting  account  of  the  melancholy  death  of  this  remarkable  man,
in  Lamartine,  Hist,  des  Girondins,  vol.  viii.  pp.  76-80  ;  and  a  contemporary  relation  in
Musset-Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseau,  vol.  ii.  pp.  42-47.

326  This  is  the  honourable  testimony  of  a  political  opponent ;  who  says  that  after  the
dissolution  of  the  Assembly  "  La  Fayette  se  conforma  a  la  conduite  de  Washington,
qu'il  avait  pris  pour  modele."     Cassagnac,  Revolution  Francaise,  vol.  iii.  pp.  370,  371.
Compare  the  grudging  admission  of  his  enemy  Bouille,  Mem.  de  Bouille,  vol.  i.  p.  125  ;
and  for  proofs  of  the  affectionate  intimacy  between  Washington  and  La  Fayette,  see
Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  i.  pp.  16,  21,  29,  44,  55,  83,  92,  in,  165,  197,  204,  395,  vol.  ii.
p.  123.

327  The  Duke  of  Bedford,  no  bad  judge  of  character,  said  in  1794  that  La  Fayette's
"  whole  life  was  an  illustration  of  truth,  disinterestedness,  and  honour."     Parl.  Hist.
vol.  xxxi.  p.  664.     So,  too,  the  continuator  of  Sismondi  (Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxx.
P-  355  )>  "  La  Fayette,  le  chevalier  de  la  liberte  d'Amerique;"  and  Lamartine  (Hist,  des
Girondins,  vol.  iii.  p.  200),  "  Martyr  de  la  liberte  apres  en  avoir  ete  le  heros."     Segur,
who  was  intimately  acquainted  with  him,  gives  some  account  of  his  noble  character,  as  it
appeared  when  he  was  a  boy  of  nineteen.     Mem  de  Segur,  vol.  i.  pp.  106,  107.     Forty
years  later,  Lady  Morgan  met  him  in  France  ;  and  what  she  relates  shows  how  little  he
had  changed,  and  how  simple  his  tastes  and  the  habits  of  his  mind  still  were.     Morgan's
France,  vol.  ii.  pp.  285-312.     Other  notices,  from  personal  knowledge,  will  be  found  in
Life  of  Roscoe,  vol.  ii.  p.  178  ;  and  in  Trotter's  Mem.  of  Fox,  pp.  319  seq.

328  "  The  impious  sophistry  of  Condorcet."     Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord,  in  Burke's  Works,
vol.  ii.  p.  273-

59  Thoughts  on  French  Affairs,  in  Burke 's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  574.

330  "  Condorcet  (though  no  marquis,  as  he  styled  himself  before  the  Revolution)  is  a
man  of  another  sort  of  .birth,  fashion,  and  occupation  from  Brissot ;  but  in  every  prin-
ciple and  every  disposition,  to  the  lowest  as  well  as  the  highest  and  most  determined
villanies,  fully  his  equal."  Thoughts  on  French  Affairs,  in  Burke' s  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  579.
"  Groaning  under  the  most  oppressive  cruelty  in  the  dungeons  of  Magdeburg."
Belsham's  Hist,  of  Great  Brit.  vol.  ix.  p.  151.  See  the  afflicting  details  of  his  sufferings,
in  Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  i.  p.  479,  vol.  ii.  pp.  75,  77,  78,  80,  91,  92  ;  and  on  the  noble
equanimity  with  which  he  bore  them,  see  De  Stai;l,  Rev.  Fran^aise,  Paris,  1820,  vol.  ii.
p.  103.


„


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          267


igh-souled  man,  than  by  calling  him  a  ruffian  :  "  I  would  not,"  says  Burke, —
"  I  would  not  debase  my  humanity  by  supporting  an  application  in  behalf  of
such  a  horrid  ruffian."  332

As  to  France  itself,  it  is  "  Cannibal  Castle  ;  "  333  it  is  "  the  republic  of  assas-
sins ;  "  334  it  is  "  a  hell  ;  "  335  its  government  is  composed  of  "  the  dirtiest,  lowest,
most  fraudulent,  most  knavish,  of  chicaners  ;  "  336  its  National  Assembly  are
"  miscreants  ;  "  337  its  people  are  "  an  allied  army  of  Amazonian  and  male  canni
bal  Parisians  ;  "  338  they  are  "  a  nation  of  murderers  ;  "  339  they  are  "  the  basest
of  mankind  ;  "  34°  they  are  "  murderous  atheists  ;  "  341  they  are  "  a  gang  of  rob-
bers ;  "342  they  are  "  the  prostitute  outcasts  of  mankind  ;  "  343  they  are  "  a
desperate  gang  of  plunderers,  murderers,  tyrants,  and  atheists."  344  To  make
the  slightest  concessions  to  such  a  country  in  order  to  preserve  peace,  is  offering
victims  "  on  the  altars  of  blasphemed  regicide  ;  "  345  even  to  enter  into  negotia-
tions is  "  exposing  our  lazar  sores  at  the  door  of  every  proud  servitor  of  the
French  republic,  where  the  court -dogs  will  not  deign  to  lick  them."  346  When
our  ambassador  was  actually  in  Paris,  he  "  had  the  honour  of  passing  his  morn-
ings in  respectful  attendance  at  the  office  of  a  regicide  pettifogger  ;  "  347  and  we
were  taunted  with  having  sent  a  "  peer  of  the  realm  to  the  scum  of  the  earth."  348
France  has  no  longer  a  place  in  Europe  ;  it  is  expunged  from  the  map  ;  its  very
name  should  be  forgotten.349  Why,  then,  need  men  travel  in  it  ?  Why  need
our  children  learn  its  language  ?  and  why  are  we  to  endanger  the  morals  of  our
ambassadors,  who  can  hardly  fail  to  return  from  such  a  land  with  their  principles
corrupted,  and  with  a  wish  to  conspire  against  their  own  country.350

332  It  is  hardly  credible  that  such  language  should  have  been  applied  to  a  man  like
La  Fayette  ;  but  I  have  copied  it  from  the  Parliamentary  History,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  51,  and
from  Adolphus,  vol.  v.  p.  593.     The  only  difference  is,  that  in  Adolphus  the  expression
is  "  I  would  not  debase  my  humanity,"  but  in  the  Parl.  Hist.,  "  I  would  not  debauch  my
humanity."     But  both  authorities  are  agreed  as  to  the  term  "  horrid  ruffian  "  being  used
by  Burke.     Compare  Burke' s  Correspondence  with  Laurence,  pp.  91,  99.

333  Burke' s  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  319.     In  every  instance  I  quote  the  precise  words  em-
ployed by  Burke.

334  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  279.

333  Burke's  speech,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxi.  p.  379.

33<5  Burke's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  335.

337  Burke's  Corresp.  vol.  iii.  p.  140.  338  Burke's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  322.

339  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxx.  p.  115.  340  ibid.  p.  II2.

3"  Ibid.  p.  188.  3«  ibid.  p.  435.

343  Ibid.  p.  646  ;  the  concluding  sentence  of  one  of  Burke's  speeches  in  1793-

:U4  Ibid.  vol.  xxxi.  p.  426.  345  Burke's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  320.

3*6    Ibid.  p.   286.  347    Ibid.  p.   322.  348    Ibid.    p.   318.

349  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxviii.  p.  353,  vol.  xxx.  p.  390  ;  Adolphus,  vol.  iv.  p.  467.

sso  in  the  Letters  on  a  Regicide  Peace,  published  the  year  before  he  died,  he  sa)rs,  "  These
ambassadors  may  easily  return  as  good  courtiers  as  they  went :  but  can  they  ever  return
from  that  degrading  residence  loyal  and  faithful  subjects  ;  or  with  any  true  affection  to
their  master,  or  true  attachment  to  the  constitution,  religion,  or  laws  of  their  country  ?
There  is  great  danger  that  they  who  enter  smiling  into  this  Tryphonian  cave,  will  come
out  of  it  sad  and  serious  conspirators ;  and  such  will  continue  as  long  as  they  live."  Burke's
Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  282.  He  adds  in  the  same  work,  p.  381,  "  Is  it  for  this  benefit  we  open
'  the  usual  relations  of  peace  and  amity  '  ?  Is  it  for  this  our  youth  of  both  sexes  are  to
form  themselves  by  travel  ?  Is  it  for  this  that  with  expense  and  pains  we  form  their
lisping  infant  accents  to  the  language  of  France  ?  .  .  .  Let  it  be  remembered  that  no
young  man  can  go  to  any  part  of  Europe  without  taking  this  place  of  pestilential  con-
tagion in  his  way  ;  and,  whilst  the  less  active  part  of  the  community  will  be  debauched
by  this  travel,  whilst  children  are  poisoned  at  these  schools,  our  trade  will  put  the  finish-
ing hand  to  our  ruin.  No  factory  will  be  settled  in  France  that  will  not  become  a  club  of
complete  French  Jacobins.  The  minds  of  young  men  of  that  description  will  receive  a
taint  in  their  religion,  their  morals,  and  their  politics,  which  they  will  in  a  short  time
communicate  to  the  whole  kingdom."


268  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

This  is  sad,  indeed,  from  such  a  man  as  Burke  once  wcs;  lut  what  remains
shows  still  more  clearly  how  the  associations  and  composition  of  his  mind  had
been  altered.  He  who,  with  humanity  not  less  than  with  wisdc  m,  had  strenu-
ously laboured  to  prevent  the  American  war,  devoted  ihe  last  few  years  of  his
life  to  kindle  a  new  war,  compared  to  which  that  with  America  was  a  light  and
trivial  episode.  In  his  calmer  moments,  no  one  would  have  more  willingly
recognized  that  the  opinions  prevalent  in  any  country  are  the  inevitable  results
of  the  circumstances  in  which  that  country  had  been  placed.  But  now  he
sought  to  alter  those  opinions  by  force.  From  the  beginning  of  the  French
Revolution,  he  insisted  upon  the  right,  and  indeed  upon  the  necessity,  of  com-
pelling France  to  change  her  principles  ;  351  and,  at  a  later  period,  he  blamed  the
allied  sovereigns  for  not  dictating  to  a  great  people  the  government  they  ought
to  adopt.352  Such  was  the  havoc  circumstances  had  made  in  his  well-ordered
intellect,  that  to  this  one  principle  he  sacrificed  every  consideration  of  justice,  of
mercy,  and  of  expediency.  As  if  war,  even  in  its  mildest  form,  were  not  sufficiently
hateful,  he  sought  to  give  to  it  that  character  of  a  crusade  353  which  increasing
knowledge  had  long  since  banished  ;  and  loudly  proclaiming  that  the  contest  was
religious  rather  than  temporal,  he  revived  old  prejudices  in  order  to  cause  fresh
crimes.354  He  also  declared  that  the  war  should  be  carried  on  for  revenge  as
well  as  for  defence,  and  that  we  must  never  lay  down  our  arms  until  we  had
utterly  destroyed  the  men  by  whom  the  Revolution  was  brought  about.355
And,  as  if  these  things  were  not  enough,  he  insisted  that  this,  the  most  awful  of
all  wars,  being  begun,  was  not  to  be  hurried  over  ;  although  it  was  to  be  carried
on  for  revenge  as  well  as  for  religion,  and  the  resources  of  civilized  men  were  to
be  quickened  by  the  ferocious  passions  of  crusaders,  still  it  was  not  to  be  soon


It  was  to  be  a  war  to  force  a  great  people  to  change  their  government.  It  was
to  be  a  war  carried  on  for  the  purpose  of  punishment.  It  was  also  to  be  a  re-
ligious war.  Finally,  it  was  to  be  a  long  war.  Was  there  ever  any  other  man  who

351  In  Observations  on  the  Conduct  of  the  Minority,  1793,  he  says,  that  during  four  years
he  had  wished  for  "  a  general  war  against  jacobins  and  jacobinism."  Burke's  Works,
vol.  i.  p.  6n.

"  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  united  sovereigns  very  much  injured  their  cause  by
admitting  that  they  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  interior  arrangements  of  France."  Heads
for  Consideration  on  the  Present  State  of  Affairs,  written  in  November,  1792,  in  Burke 's
Works,  vol.  i.  p.  583.  And  that  he  knew  that  this  was  not  merely  a  question  of  destroying
a  faction,  appears  from  the  observable  circumstance  that  even  in  January,  1791,  he  wrote
to  Trevor  respecting  war,  "  France  is  weak  indeed,  divided  and  deranged  ;  but  God  knows,
v/hen  the  things  came  to  be  tried,  whether  the  invaders  would  not  find  that  their  enter-
prize  was  not  to  support  a  party,  but  to  conquer  a  kingdom"  Burke' s  Correspond,  vol.  iii.
p.  184.

53  As  Lord  J.  Russell  truly  calls  it,  Mem.  of  Fox,  vol.  iii.  p.  34.  See  also  Schlosser's
Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  ii.  p.  93,  vol.  v.  p.  109,  vol.  vi.  p.  291  ;  Nicholas  Recollections,
vol.  i.  p.  300  ;  Parr's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  242.

"  We  cannot,  if  we  would,  delude  ourselves  about  the  true  state  of  this  dreadful
contest.  It  is  a  religious  war"  Remarks  on  the  Policy  of  the  Allies,  in  Burke' s  Works,
vol.  i.  p.  600.

355  See  the  long  list  of  proscriptions  in  Burke' s  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  604.     And  the  principle

of  revenge  is  again  advocated  in  a  letter  written  in  1793,  in  Burke' s   Correspond,  vol.  iv.

p.  183.     And  in  1794,  he  told  the  House  of  Commons  that  "  the  war  must  no  longer  be

med  to  the  vain  attempt  of  raising  a  barrier  to  the  lawless  and  savage  power  of

France  ;  but  must  be  directed  to  the  only  rational  end  it  can  pursue  ;  namely,  the  entire

3MUCti0n  °f  the  desPerate  horde  which  gave  it  birth."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxL  p.  427.

Letters  on  a  Regicide  Peace,  in  Burke' s  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  291.     In  this  horrible  sen-
ice,  perhaps^the  most  horrible  ever  penned  by  an  English  politician,  the  italics  are  not
my  own  ;  they  are  in  the  text.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          269

ashed  to  afflict  the  human  race  with  such  extensive,  searching,  and  protracted
ilamities  ?  Such  cruel,  such  reckless,  and  yet  such  deliberate  opinions,  if  they
sued  from  a  sane  mind,  would  immortalize  even  the  most  obscure  states-
ian,  because  they  would  load  his  name  with  imperishable  infamy.  For  where
in  we  find,  even  among  the  most  ignorant  or  most  sanguinary  politicians,  senti-
icnts  like  these  ?  Yet  they  proceed  from  one  who,  a  very  few  years  before,
fas  the  most  eminent  political  philosopher  England  has  ever  possessed.  To  us
it  is  only  given  to  mourn  over  so  noble  a  wreck.  More  than  this  no  one  should
lo.  We  may  contemplate  with  reverence  the  mighty  ruin  ;  but  the  mysteries
)f  its  decay  let  no  man  presume  to  invade,  unless,  to  use  the  language  of  the
greatest  of  "our  masters,  he  can  tell  how  to  minister  to  a  diseased  mind,  pluck
the  sorrows  which  are  rooted  in  the  memory,  and  raze  out  the  troubles  that  are
written  in  the  brain.

It  is  a  relief  to  turn  from  so  painful  a  subject,  even  though  we  descend  to  the
>etty,  huckstering  politics  of  the  English  court.  And  truly,  the  history  of  the
treatment  experienced  by  the  most  illustrious  of  our  politicians  is  highly  charac-
istic  of  the  prince  under  whom  he  lived.  While  Burke  was  consuming  his
life  in  great  public  services,  labouring  to  reform  our  finances,  improve  our  laws,
ind  enlighten  our  commercial  policy,  —  while  he  was  occupied  with  these  things,
the  king  regarded  him  with  coldness  and  aversion.357  But  when  the  great
statesman  degenerated  into  an  angry  brawler  ;  when,  irritated  by  disease,  he
made  it  the  sole  aim  of  his  declining  years  to  kindle  a  deadly  war  between  the
two  first  countries  of  Europe,  and  declared  that  to  this  barbarous  object  he  would
sacrifice  all  other  questions  of  policy,  however  important  they  might  be  ;  358  —
then  it  was  that  a  perception  of  his  vast  abilities  began  to  dawn  upon  the  mind
of  the  king.  Before  this,  no  one  had  been  bold  enough  to  circulate  in  the  palace
even  a  whisper  of  his  merits.  Now,  however,  in  the  successive,  and  eventually
the  rapid  decline  of  his  powers,  he  had  fallen  almost  to  the  level  of  the  royal
intellect  ;  and  now  he  was  first  warmed  by  the  beams  of  the  royal  favour.  Now
he  was  a  man  after  the  king's  own  heart.3^  Less  than  two  years  before  his
death  there  were  settled  upon  him,  at  the  express  desire  of  George  III.,  two  con-
siderable pensions  ;  36°  and  the  king  even  wished  to  raise  him  to  the  peerage,  in
order  that  the  house  of  Lords  might  benefit  by  the  services  of  so  great  a  coun-


This  digression  respecting  the  character  of  Burke  has  been  longer  than  I  had
anticipated  ;  but  it  will  not,  I  hope,  be  considered  unimportant  ;  for,  in  addition

357  "  I  know,"  said  Burke,  in  one  of  those  magnificent  speeches  which  mark  the  zenith
of  his  intellect,  —  "  I  know  the  map  of  England  as  well  as  the  noble  lord,  or  as  any  other
person  ;  and  I  know  that  the  way  I  take  is  not  the  road  to  preferment."  Part.  Hist.
vol.  xvii.  p.  1269.

338  See,  among  many  other  instances,  an  extraordinary  passage  on  "  Jacobinism  "  in
his  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  449,  which  should  be  compared  with  a  letter  he  wrote  in  1792,  respect-
ing a  proposed  coalition  ministry.  Correspond,  vol.  iii.  pp.  519,  520  :  "  But  my  advice  was,
that  as  a  foundation  of  the  whole,  the  political  principle  must  be  settled  as  the  preliminary,
namely,  '  a  total  hostility  to  the  French  system,  at  home  and  abroad.'  "

359  The  earliest  evidence  I  have  met  with  of  the  heart  of  George  III.  beginning  to  open
towards  Burke  is  in  August,  1791  ;  see,  in  Burke'  s  Correspondence,  vol.  iii.  p.  278,  an
exquisitely  absurd  account  of  his  reception  at  the  levee.      Burke  must  have  been  fallen
indeed,  before  he  could  write  such  a  letter.

360  "  Said  to  have  originated  in  the  express  wish  of  the  king."     Prior's  Life  of  Burke,
p.  489.     Mr.  Prior  estimates  these  pensions  at  3700*.  a-year  ;  but  if  we  may  rely  on  Mr.
Nicholls,  the  sum  was  even  greater  :  "  Mr.  Burke  was  rewarded  with  two  pensions,  esti-
mated to  be  worth  40,000*."     Nicholls's  Recollections,  vol.  i.  p.  136.     Burke  was  sixty-
five  ;  and  a  pension  of  37oo/.  a-year  would  not  be  worth  40,000*.,  as  the  tables  were  then
calculated.     The  statement  of  Mr.  Prior  is,  however,  confirmed  by  Wansey,  in  1794.   See
Nichols's  Lit.  A  nee.  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  iii.  p.  81.

361  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  p.  460  ;  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iii.  p.  81  ;  Bisset's  Life  of
Burke,  vol.  ii.  p.  414.


270  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

to  the  intrinsic  interest  of  the  subject,  it  illustrates  the  feelings  of  George  III.
towards  great  men,  and  it  shows  what  the  opinions  were  which  in  his  reign  it
was  thought  necessary  to  hold.  In  the  sequel  of  this  work  I  shall  trace  the  effect
of  such  opinions  upon  the  interests  of  the  country,  considered  as  a  whole  ;  but  for
the  object  of  the  present  Introduction  it  will  be  sufficient  to  point  out  the  con-
nexion in  one  or  two  more  of  those  prominent  instances  the  character  of  which
is  too  notorious  to  admit  of  discussion.

Of  these  leading  and  conspicuous  events  the  American  war  was  the  earliest,
and  for  several  years  it  almost  entirely  absorbed  the  attention  of  English  poli-
ticians. In  the  reign  of  George  II.  a  proposal  had  been  made  to  increase  the
revenue  by  taxing  the  colonies  ;  which,  as  the  Americans  were  totally  unrepre-
sented in  parliament,  was  simply  a  proposition  to  tax  an  entire  people  without
even  the  form  of  asking  their  consent.  This  scheme  of  public  robbery  was  rejected
by  that  able  and  moderate  man  who  was  then  at  the  head  of  affairs  ;  and  the
suggestion,  being  generally  deemed  impracticable,  fell  to  the  ground,  and  seems
indeed  hardly  to  have  excited  attention.3^  But  what  was  deemed  by  the
government  of  George  II.  to  be  a  dangerous  stretch  of  arbitrary  power,  was
eagerly  welcomed  by  the  government  of  George  III.  For  the  new  king,  having
the  most  exalted  notion  of  his  own  authority,  and  being,  from  his  miserable
education,  entirely  ignorant  of  public  affairs,  thought  that  to  tax  the  Americans
for  the  benefit  of  the  English  would  be  a  masterpiece  of  policy.  When,  therefore,
the  old  idea  was  revived,  it  met  with  his  cordial  acquiescence  ;  and  when  the
Americans  showed  their  intention  of  resisting  this  monstrous  injustice,  he  was
only  the  more  confirmed  in  his  opinion  that  it  was  necessary  to  curb  their  unruly
will.  Nor  need  we  be  surprised  at  the  rapidity  with  which  such  angry  feelings
broke  out.  Indeed,  looking  on  the  one  hand  at  the  despotic  principles  which,
for  the  first  time  since  the  Revolution,  were  now  revived  at  the  English  court,  and
looking  on  the  other  hand  at  the  independent  spirit  of  the  colonists, — it  was
impossible  to  avoid  a  struggle  between  the  two  parties  ;  and  the  only  questions
were  as  to  what  form  the  contest  would  take,  and  towards  which  side  victory  was
most  likely  to  incline.^3

On  the  part  of  the  English  government,  no  time  was  lost.  Five  years  after  the
accession  of  George  III.,  a  bill  was  brought  into  parliament  to  tax  the  Americans ;  a«*
and  so  complete  had  been  the  change  in  political  affairs,  that  not  the  least
difficulty  was  found  in  passing  a  measure  which,  in  the  reign  of  George  II.,  no
minister  had  dared  to  propose.  Formerly,  such  a  proposal,  if  made,  would  cer-
tainly have  been  rejected  ;  now  the  most  powerful  parties  in  the  state  were
united  in  its  favour.  The  king,  on  every  occasion,  paid  a  court  to  the  clergy,  to
which,  since  the  death  of  Anne,  they  had  been  unaccustomed ;  he  was  therefore
sure  of  their  support,  and  they  zealously  aided  him  in  every  attempt  to  oppress

362  "  It  had  been  proposed  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  to  raise  the  revenue  by  imposing
taxes  on- America  ;  but  that  minister,  who  could  foresee  beyond  the  benefit  of  the  actual
moment,  declared  it  must  be  a  bolder  man  than  himself  who  should  venture  on  such  an
expedient."  Walpole's  George  III.  vol.  ii.  p.  70.  Compare  Phillimore's  Mem.  of  Lyttleton,
vol.  n.  p.  662  ;  Bancroft's  American  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  96  ;  Belsham's  Hist,  of  Great
Britain,  vol.  v.  p.  102.

13  That  some  sort  of  rupture  was  unavoidable,  must,  I  think,  be  admitted  ;  but  we  are

not  bound  to  believe  the  assertion  of  Horace  Walpole,  who  says  (Mem.' of  George  II.  vol.  i.

P-  397)   that  in  1754  he  predicted  the  American  rebellion.      Walpole,  though  a  keen

observer  of  the  surface  of  society,  was  not  the  man  to  take  a  view  of  this  kind  ;  unless,  as

s  hardly  probable,  he  heard  an  opinion  to  that  effect  expressed  by  his  father.     Sir

rt  Walpole  may  have  said  something  respecting  the  increasing  love  of  liberty  in  the

lonies  ;  but  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  foresee  how  that  love  would  be  fostered  by

ie  arbitrary  proceedings  of  the  government  of  George  III.

T,he  general  proposition  was  introduced  in  1764  ;  the  bill  itself  early  in  1765.     See

>n  s  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  v.  pp.  82,  85  ;  and  Grenville  Papers,  vol.  ii.  pp.  373,  374-

un  the  complete  change  of  policy  which  this  indicated,  see  Brougham's  Polit.  Philos.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          271

the  colonies.365  The  aristocracy,  a  few  leading  Whigs  alone  excepted,  were  on
the  same  side,  and  looked  to  the  taxation  of  America  as  the  means  of  lessening
Lheir  own  contributions.306  As  to  George  III.,  his  feelings  on  the  subject  were
lotorious  ;  367  and  the  more  liberal  party  not  having  yet  recovered  from  the  loss
>f  power  consequent  on  the  death  of  George  II.,  there  was  little  fear  of  difficulties
rom  the  cabinet  ;  it  being  well  known  that  the  throne  was  occupied  by  a  prince
rhose  first  object  was  to  keep  ministers  in  strict  dependence  on  himself,  and
rho,  whenever  it  was  practicable,  called  into  office  such  weak  and  flexible  men
would  yield  unhesitating  submission  to  his  wishes.368

Everything  being  thus  prepared,  there  followed  those  events  which  were  to
expected  from  such  a  combination.  Without  stopping  to  relate  details  which
ire  known  to  every  reader,  it  may  be  briefly  mentioned  that  in  this  new  state
>f  things  the  wise  and  forbearing  policy  of  the  preceding  reign  was  set  at  naught,
nd  the  national  councils  guided  by  rash  and  ignorant  men,  who  soon  brought
the  greatest  disasters  upon  the  country,  and  within  a  few  years  actually  dismem-
jred  the  empire.  In  order  to  enforce  the  monstrous  claim  of  taxing  a  whole
)eople  without  their  consent,  there  was  waged  against  America  a  war  ill-con-
lucted,  unsuccessful,  and,  what  is  far  worse,  accompanied  by  cruelties  disgrace-

363  The  correspondence  of  that  time  contains  ample  proof  of  the  bitterness  of  the  clergy
against  the  Americans.  Even  in  1777,  Burke  wrote  to  Fox  :  "  The  Tories  do  universally
think  their  power  and  consequence  involved  in  the  success  of  this  American  business.
The  clergy  are  astonishingly  warm  in  it ;  and  what  the  Tories  are  when  embodied  and
united  with  their  natural  head,  the  crown,  and  animated  by  their  clergy,  no  man  knows
better  than  yourself."  Burke's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  390.  Compare  Bishop  Newton's  Life  of
Himself,  pp.  134,  157.

366  "  The  overbearing  aristocracy  desired  some  reduction  of  the  land-tax,  at  the  ex-
pense of  America."     Bancroft's  Hist,  of  the  American  Revolution,  vol.  ii.  p.  414.     The
merchants,  on  the  other  hand,  were  opposed  to  these  violent  proceedings.     See,  on  this
contrast  between  the  landed  and  commercial  interests,  a  letter  from  Lord  Shelburne,  in
1774,  and  another  from  Lord  Camden,  in  1 775,  in  Chatham  Correspond,  vol.  iv.  pp.  341,  401.
See  also  the  speeches  of  Trecothick  and  Vyner,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvi.  p.  507,  vol.   xviii.
p.  1361.

367  It  was  believed  at  the  time,  and  it  is  not  improbable,  that  the  king  himself  suggested .
the  taxation  of  America,  to  which  Grenville  at  first  objected.     Compare  WraxalVs  Mem.
of  his  own  Time,  vol.  ii.  pp.  in,  112,  with  Nicholls's  Recollections,  vol.  i.  pp.  205,  386.  This
may  have  been  merely  a  rumour  ;  but  it  is  quite  consistent  with  everything  we  know  of  the
character  of  George  III.,  and  there  can  at  all  events  be  no  doubt  as  to  his  feelings  re-
specting the  general  question.  It  is  certain  that  he  over-persuaded  Lord  North  to  engage
in  the  contest  with  America,  and  induced  that  minister  to  go  to  war,  and  to  continue
it  even  after  success  had  become  hopeless.     See  Bancrofts  American  Revolution,  vol.  iii.
pp.  307,  308  ;  Russell's  Mem.  of  Fox,  vol.  i.  pp.  247,  254  ;  and  the  Bedford  Correspond,  vol.
iii.  p.  Ii.  See  also,  in  regard  to  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  the  Grenville  Papers,  vol.  iii.
P-  373  ;  a  curious  passage,  with  which  Lord  Mahon,  the  last  edition  of  whose  history-was
published  in  the  same  year  (1853),  appears  to  have  been  unacquainted.     Mahon's  Hist,
of  England,  vol.  v.  p.  139.     In  America,  the  sentiments  of  the  king  were  well  known.     In
i775»  Jefferson  writes  from  Philadelphia  :  "  We  are  told,  and  everything  proves  it  true,
that  he  is  the  bitterest  enemy  we  have."  Jefferson's  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  153.     And  in
1782  Franklin  writes  to  Livingston,  "  The  king  hates  us  most  cordially."     Life  of  Frank-
lin, vol.  ii.  p.  126.

368  "A  court,"  as  Lord  Albemarle  observes, — "  a  court  that  required  ministers  to  be,
not  the  public  servants  of  the  state,  but  the  private  domestics  of  the  sovereign."     Albe-
marie1  s  Mem.  of  Rockingham,  vol.  i.  p.  248.     Compare  Bancroft's  American  Revolution,
vol.  ii.  p.  109.     In  the  same  way,  Burke,  in  1767,  writes  :  "  His  majesty  never  was  in
better  spirits.     He  has  got  a  ministry  weak  and  dependant ;  and,  what  is  better,  willing
to  continue  so."     Burke's  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  133.     Ten  years  later,  Lord  Chatham
openly  taunted  the  king  with  this  disgraceful  peculiarity  :  "  Thus  to  pliable  men,  not  cap-
able men,  was  the  government  of  this  once  glorious  empire  intrusted,"  Chatham's  Speech
in  1777,  in  Adolphus,  vol.  ii.  pp.  499,  500.


272  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ful  to  a  civilized  nation.^9  To  this  may  be  added,  that  an  immense  trade  was
nearly  annihilated  ;  every  branch  of  commerce  was  thrown  into  confusion  ;  37°
we  were  disgraced  in  the  eyes  of  Europe  ; 37t  we  incurred  an  expense  of
140,000,0001.  ;372  and  we  lost  by  far  the  most  valuable  colonies  any  nation  has
ever  possessed.

Such  were  the  first  fruits  of  the  policy  of  George  III.  But  the  mischief  did  not
stop  there.  The  opinions  which  it  was  necessary  to  advocate  in  order  to  justify
this  barbarous  war,  recoiled  upon  ourselves.  In  order  to  defend  the  attempt  to
destroy  the  liberties  of  America,  principles  were  laid  down  which,  if  carried  into
effect,  would  have  subverted  the  liberties  of  England.  Not  only  in  the  courts
but  in  both  houses  of  parliament,  from  the  episcopal  bench,  and  irom  the  pulpits
of  the  church -party,  there  were  promulgated  doctrines  of  the  most  dangerous

kind, doctrines  unsuited  to  a  limited  monarchy,  and,  indeed,  incompatible  with

it.  The  extent  to  which  this  reaction  proceeded  is  known  to  very  few  readers,
because  the  evidence  of  it  is  chiefly  to  be  found  in  the  parliamentary  debates,
and  in  the  theological  literature,  particularly  the  sermons,  of  that  time,
none  of  which  are  now  much  studied.  But,  "not  to  anticipate  matters  be
longing  to  another  part  of  this  work,  it  is  enough  to  say  that  the  danger  was
so  imminent  as  to  make  the  ablest  defenders  of  popular  liberty  believe  that  every
thing  was  at  stake  ;  and  that  if  the  Americans  were  vanquished,  the  next  step
would  be  to  attack  the  liberties  of  England,  and  endeavour  to  extend  to  the
mother-country  the  same  arbitrary  government  which  by  that  time  would  have
been  established  in  the  colonies.373

369  For  some  evidence  of  the  ferocity  with  which  this  war  was  conducted  by  the  Eng-
lish, see  Tucker's  Life  of  Jefferson,  vol.  i.  pp.  138,  139,  160  ;  Jefferson's  Mem.  and  Corres-
pond, vol.  i.  pp.  352,  429,  vol.  ii.  pp.   336,   337;  Almon's  Correspond,  of  Wilkes,  vol.  v.
pp.  229-232,  edit.  1805  ;   Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  ii.  pp.  362,  391.     These
horrible  cruelties  were  frequently  mentioned   in   parliament,   but  without  producing
the  least  effect  on  the  king  or  his  ministers.     See  Part.  Hist.  vol.  xix.  pp.  371,  403,  423,
424,432,  438,  440,  477,  487,  488,  489,  567,  578,  579,  695,  972,  1393,  1394.  vol.  xx.p.  43.
Among  the  expenses  of  the  war  which  government  laid  before  parliament,  one  of  the  items
was  for  "  five  gross  of  scalping  knives."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xix.  pp.  971,  972.     See  further,
Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  i.  pp.  23,  25,  99.

370  In  Manchester,  "  in  consequence  of  the  American  troubles  nine  in  ten  of  the  artizans
in  that  town  had  been  discharged  from  employment."     This  was  stated  in  1766,  by  no
less  an  authority  than  Con  way.     Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  v,  p.  135.     As  the  struggle
became  more  obstinate  the  evil  was  more  marked,  and  ample  evidence  of  the  enormous
injury  inflicted  on  England  will  be  found  by  comparing    Franklin's    Correspondence,
vol.   i.  p.  352  ;  Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.   ii.  p.    261 ;   Burke1 's   Works,  vol.  i.
p.  in  ;    Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xviii.  pp.  734,  951,  963,  964,  vol.  xix.  pp.  259,  341,  710,  711  1072.
Walpole's  Mem.  of  George  III.  vol.  ii.  p.  218.

371  Even  Mr.  Adolphus,  in  his  Tory  history,  says,  that  in  1782  "  the  cause  of  Great
Britain  seemed  degraded  to  the  lowest  state  ;  ill  success  and  the  prevalent  opinion  of  mis-
management rendered  the  espousal  of  it  among  the  selfish  powers  of  the  continent  almost
disreputable."  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  iii.  pp.  391,  392.     For  proof  of  the  opinions  held
in  foreign  countries  respecting  this,  I  cannot  do  better  than  refer  to  Mem.  de  Segur,
vol.  iii.  pp.  184,  185  ;  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  ix.  p.  377  ;  Soulavie,  Mem.   de  Louis  XVI.
vol.  iv.  pp.  363,  364  ;  Koch,  Tableau  des  Revolutions,  vol.  ii.  pp.   190-194  ;  M em.  of
Mallet  du  Pan,  vol.  i.  p.  37.

372  Sir  John  Sinclair,  in  his  Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  ii.  p.  114,  says  139,171, 876*.

373  Dr.  Jebb,  an  able  observer,  thought  that  the  American  war  "  must  be  decisive  of
the  liberties  of  both  countries."     Disney's  Life  of  Jebb,  p.  92.     So,  too,  Lord  Chatham
wrote  in  1777,  "  poor  England  will  have  fallen  upon  her  own  sword."     The  Grenville
Papers,  vol.  iv.  p.  573.     In  the  same  year,  Burke  said  of  the  attempt  made  to  rule  the
colonies  by  military  force,  "  that  the  establishment  of  such  a  power  in  America  will  utterly
ruin  our  finances  (though  its  certain  effect),  is  the  smallest  part  of  our  concern.     It  will  be-
come an  apt,  powerful,  and  certain  engine  for  the  destruction  of  our  freedom  here."
Burke's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  399.     Compare  vol.  i.  pp.  189,  210  ;  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvi.  pp.  104,


1THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  INTELLECT  273
Whether  or  not  these  fears  were  exaggerated  is  a  question  of  considerable
fficulty  ;  but  after  a  careful  study  of  that  time,  and  a  study  too  from  sources  not
much  used  by  historians,  I  feel  satisfied  that  they  who  are  best  acquainted  with
the  period  will  be  the  most  willing  to  admit  that,  though  the  danger  may  have
been  overrated,  it  was  far  more  serious  than  men  are  now  inclined  to  believe.
At  all  events,  it  is  certain  that  the  general  aspect  of  political  affairs  was  calculated
to  excite  great  alarm.  It  is  certain  that,  during  many  years,  the  authority  of  the
crown  continued  to  increase,  until  it  reached  a  height  of  which  no  example  had
been  seen  in  England  for  several  generations.  It  is  certain  that  the  Church  of
England  exerted  all  her  influence  in  favour  of  those  despotic  principles  which  the
king  wished  to  enforce.  It  is  also  certain  that,  by  the  constant  creation  of  new
peers,  all  holding  the  same  views,  the  character  of  the  House  of  Lords  was  under-
going a  slow  but  decisive  change  ;  and  that,  whenever  a  favourable  opportunity
arose,  high  judicial  appointments  and  high  ecclesiastical  appointments  were  con
ferred  upon  men  notorious  for  their  leaning  towards  the  royal  prerogative.  These
are  facts  which  cannot  be  denied  ;  and  putting  them  together,  there  remains,  I
think,  no  doubt  that  the  American  war  was  a  great  crisis  in  the  history  of  Eng-
land, and  that  if  the  colonists  had  been  defeated,  our  liberties  would  have  been  for
a  time  in  considerable  jeopardy.  From  that  risk  we  were  saved  by  the  Americans,
who  with  heroic  spirit  resisted  the  royal  armies,  defeated  them  at  every  point,  and
at  length,  separating  themselves  from  the  mother-country,  began  that  wonderful
career  which  in  less  than  eighty  years  has  raised  them  to  an  unexampled  pros-
perity, and  which  to  us  ought  to  be  deeply  interesting,  as  showing  what  may  be
effected  by  the  unaided  resources  of  a  free  people.

Seven  years  after  this  great  contest  had  been  brought  to  a  successful  close,  and
the  Americans,  happily  for  the  interests  of  mankind,  had  finally  secured  their
independence,  another  nation  rose  up  and  turned  against  its  rulers.  The  history
of  the  causes  of  the  French  Revolution  will  be  found  in  another  part  of  this  volume  ;
at  present  we  have  only  to  glance  at  the  effects  it  produced  upon  the  policy  of  the
English  government.  In  France,  as  is  well  known,  the  movement  was  extremely
rapid  ;  the  old  institutions,  which  were  so  corrupted  as  to  be  utterly  unfit  for  use,
were  quickly  destroyed  ;  and  the  people,  frenzied  by  centuries  of  oppression,
practised  the  most  revolting  cruelties,  saddening  the  hour  of  their  triumph  by
crimes  that  disgraced  the  noble  cause  for  which  they  struggled.

All  this,  frightful  as  it  was,  did  nevertheless  form  a  part  of  the  natural  course  of
affairs  ;  it  was  the  old  story  of  tyranny  exciting  revenge,  and  revenge  blinding
men  to  every  consequence  except  the  pleasure  of  glutting  their  own  passions.  If,
under  these  circumstances,  France  had  been  left  to  herself,  the  Revolution,  like
all  other  revolutions,  would  soon  have  subsided,  and  a  form  of  government  have
arisen  suited  to  the  actual  condition  of  things.  What  the  form  would  have  been,
it  is  impossible  now  to  say  ;  that,  however,  was  a  question  with  which  no  foreign
country  had  the  slightest  concern.  Whether  it  should  be  an  oligarchy,  or  a  des
potic  monarchy,  or  a  republic,  it  was  for  France  to  decide  ;  but  it  was  evidently  not
the  business  of  any  other  nation  to  decide  for  her.  Still  less  was  it  likely  that,
on  so  delicate  a  point,  France  would  submit  to  dictation  from  a  country  which  had
always  been  her  rival,  and  which  not  unfrequently  had  been  her  bitter  and  suc-
cessful enemy.

But  these  considerations,  obvious  as  they  are,  were  lost  upon  George  III.,  and
upon  those  classes  which  were  then  in  the  ascendant.  The  fact  that  a  great
people  had  risen  against  their  oppressors,  disquieted  the  consciences  of  men  in
high  places.  The  same  evil  passions,  and  indeed  the  same  evil  language,  which
a  few  years  before  were  directed  against  the  Americans,  were  now  turned  against
the  French  ;  and  it  was  but  too  clear  that  the  same  results  would  follow.374  In


107,  651,  652,  vol.  xix.  pp.  n,  1056,  vol.  xx.  p.  119,  vol.  xxi.  p.  907.  Hence  it  was  that
Fox  wished  the  Americans  to  be  victorious  (Russell's  Mem.  of  Fox,  vol.  i.  p.  143) ;  for
which  some  writers  have  actually  accused  him  of  want  of  patriotism  !

374  In  1792,  and  therefore  before  the  war  broke  out,  Lord  Lansdowne,  one  of  the  ex-
tremely few  peers  who  escaped  from  the  prevailing  corruption,  said,  "  The  present  instance

18


274  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

defiance  of  every  maxim  of  sound  policy,  the  English  ambassador  was  recalled
from  France  simply  because  that  country  chose  to  do  away  with  the  monarchy,
and  substitute  a  republic  in  its  place.  This  was  the  first  decisive  step  towards
an  open  rupture,  and  it  was  taken,  not  because  France  had  injured  England,
but  because  France  had  changed  her  government.375  A  few  months  later,  the
French,  copying  the  example  of  the  English  in  the  preceding  century,3™  brought
their  king  to  a  public  trial,  sentenced  him  to  die,  and  struck  off  his  head  in  the
midst  of  his  own  capital.  It  must  be  allowed  that  this  act  was  needless,  that  it
was  cruel,  and  that  it  was  grossly  impolitic.  But  it  is  palpably  evident  that  they
who  consented  to  the  execution  were  responsible  only  to  God  and  their  country  ;
and  that  any  notice  of  it  from  abroad  which  bore  the  appearance  of  a  threat,  would
rouse  the  spirit  of  France,  would  unite  all  parties  into  one,  and  would  induce  the
nation  to  adopt  as  its  own  a  crime  of  which  it  might  otherwise  have  repented,
but  which  it  could  not  now  abjure  without  incurring  the  shame  of  having  yielded
to  the  dictation  of  a  foreign  power.

In  England,  however,  as  soon  as  the  fate  of  the  king  was  known,  the  government,
without  waiting  for  explanation,  and  without  asking  for  any  guarantee  as  to  the
future,  treated  the  death  of  Louis  as  an  offence  against  itself,  and  imperiously
ordered  the  French  resident  to  quit  the  country  : 377  thus  wantonly  originating  a  war
which  lasted  twenty  years,  cost  the  lives  of  millions,  plunged  all  Europe  into  con-
fusion, and  more  than  any  other  circumstance  stopped  the  march  of  civilization,
by  postponing  for  a  whole  generation  those  reforms  which,  late  in  the  eighteenth
century,  the  progress  of  affairs  rendered  indispensable.

The  European  results  of  this,  the  most  hateful,  the  most  unjust,  and  the  most
atrocious  war  England  has  ever  waged  against  any  country,  will  be  hereafter  con-
sidered : 378  at  present  1  confine  myself  to  a  short  summary  of  its  leading  effects  on
English  society.

What  distinguishes  this  sanguinary  contest  from  all  preceding  ones, and  what  gives
to  it  its  worst  feature,  is,  that  it  was  eminently  a  war  of  opinions, —  a  war  which
we  carried  on,  not  with  a  view  to  territorial  acquisitions,  but  with  the  object  of
repressing  that  desire  for  reforms  of  every  kind  which  had  now  become  the  marked

recalled  to  his  memory  the  proceedings  of  this  country  previous  to  the  American  war.  The
same  abusive  and  degrading  terms  were  applied  to  the  Americans  that  were  now  used  to
the  National  Convention, — the  same  consequences  might  follow:'  Parl.  Hist,  vol.  xxx.
P-  155-

375  Compare  Belsham's  Hist,  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  viii.  p.  490,  with  Tomline's  Life  of
Pitt,  vol.  ii.  p.  548.     The  letter  to  Lord  Gower,  the  English  minister  in  Paris,  is  printed
in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxx.  pp.  143,  144.     Its  date  is  i7th  August,  1792.

376  Just  before  the  Revolution,  Robert  de  Saint-Vincent  pertinently  remarked,  by
way  of  caution,  that  the  English  "  have  dethroned  seven  of  their  kings,  and  beheaded
the  eighth."      Mem.  of  Mallet  du  Pan,  vol.  i.  p.  146  ;  and  we  are  told  in  Alison's  Europe
(vol.  ii.  pp.  199,  296,  315),  that  in  1792  Louis  "  anticipated  the  fate  of  Charles  I."     Com-
pare Williams' s  Letters  from  France,  2nd  edit.  1796,  vol.  iv.  p.  2.

377  Belsham  (Hist,  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  viii.  p.  525 )  supposes,  and  probably  with  reason,
that  the  English  government  was  bent  upon  war  even  before  the  death  of  Louis  ;  but  it
appears ( Toml ine's  Pitt,  vol.  ii.  p.  599)  that  it  was  not  until  the  24th  of  January,  1793,  that
Chauvelin  was  actually  ordered  to  leave  England,  and  that  this  was  in  consequence  of
"  the  British  ministers  having  received  information  of  the  execution  of  the  king  of
France."     Compare  Belsham,  vol.  viii.  p.  530.     The  common  opinion,  therefore,  seems
correct,  that  the  proximate  cause  of  hostilities  was  the  execution  of  Louis.     See  Alison's
Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  522,  vol.  v.  p.  249.  vol.  vi.  p.  656  ;  and  Newmarch,  in  Journal  of  Statistical
Society,  vol.  xviii.  p.   108.

378  Lord  Brougham  (Sketches  of  Statesmen,  vol.  i.  p.  79)  rightly  says  of  this  war,  that
'  the  youngest  man  living  will  not  survive  the  fatal  effects  of  this  flagrant  political

crime."  So  eager,  however,  was  George  III.  in  its  favour,  that  when  Wilberforce  separ-
ated himself  from  Pitt  on  account  of  the  war,  and  moved  an  amendment  on  the  subject
m  the  House  of  Commons,  the  king  showed  his  spite  by  refusing  to  take  any  notice  of
Wilberforce  the  next  time  he  appeared  at  court.  Life  of  Wilberforce,  vol.  ii.  pp.  10,  72.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT          275

characteristic  of  the  leading  countries  of  Europe.379  As  soon,  therefore,  as  hos
tilities  began,  the  English  government  had  a  twofold  duty  to  perform  :  it  had  to
destroy  a  republic  abroad,  and  it  had  to  prevent  improvement  at  home.  The
first  of  these  duties  it  fulfilled  by  squandering  the  blood  and  the  treasure  of  Eng-
land, till  it  had  thrown  nearly  every  family  into  mourning,  and  reduced  the
country  to  the  verge  of  national  bankruptcy.  The  other  duty  it  attempted  to
execute  by  enacting  a  series  of  laws  intended  to  put  an  end  to  the  free  discussion
of  political  questions,  and  stifle  that  spirit  of  inquiry  which  was  every  year  be-
coming more  active.  These  laws  were  so  comprehensive,  and  so  well  calculated
to  effect  their  purpose,  that  if  the  energy  of  the  nation  had  not  prevented  their
being  properly  enforced,  they  would  either  have  destroyed  every  vestige  of  popular
liberty,  or  else  have  provoked  a  general  rebellion.  Indeed,  during  several  years
the  danger  was  so  imminent  that,  in  the  opinion  of  some  high  authorities,  nothing
could  have  averted  it  but  the  bold  spirit  with  which  our  English  juries,  by  their
hostile  verdicts,  resisted  the  proceedings  of  government,  and  refused  to  sanction
laws  which  the  crown  had  proposed,  and  to  which  a  timid  and  servile  legislature
had  willingly  consented.380

We  may  form  some  idea  of  the  magnitude  of  the  crisis  by  considering  the  steps
which  were  actually  taken  against  the  two  most  important  of  all  our  institutions,
namely,  the  freedom  of  the  public  press,  and  the  right  of  assembling  in  meetings
for  the  purpose  of  public  discussion.  These  are.  in  a  political  point  of  view,  the
two  most  striking  peculiarities  which  distinguish  us  from  every  other  European
people.  As  long  as  they  are  preserved  intact,  and  as  long  as  they  are  fearlessly  and
frequently  employed,  there  will  always  be  ample  protection  against  those  en-
croachments on  the  part  of  government  which  cannot  be  too  jealously  watched
and  to  which  even  the  freest  country  is  liable.  To  this  may  be  added,  "that  these
institutions  possess  other  advantages  of  the  highest  order.  By  encouraging  political
discussion,  they  increase  the  amount  of  intellect  brought  to  bear  upon  the
political  business  of  the  country.  They  also  increase  the  total  strength  of  the
nation,  by  causing  large  classes  of  men  to  exercise  faculties  which  would  otherwise
lie  dormant,  but  which  by  these  means  are  quickened  into  activity,  and  become
available  for  other  purposes  of  social  interest.

But  in  the  period  we  are  now  considering,  it  was  deemed  advisable  that  the
influence  of  the  people  should  be  lessened  ;  it  was  therefore  thought  improper  that
they  should  strengthen  their  abilities  by  exercising  them.  To  relate  the  details
of  that  bitter  war  which,  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the  English  government
carried  on  against  every  kind  of  free  discussion,  would  lead  me  far  beyond  the
limits  of  this  Introduction  ;  and  I  can  only  hastily  refer  to  the  vindictive  prose-
cutions, and,  whenever  a  verdict  was  obtained,  "the  vindictive  punishments,  of

379  In  1793  and  subsequently,  it  was  stated  both  by  the  opposition,  and  also  by  the
supporters  of  government,  that  the  war  with  France  was  directed  against  doctrines  and
opinions,  and  that  one  of  its  main  objects  was  to  discourage  the  progress  of  democratic
institutions.     See,  among  many' other  instances,  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxx.  pp.  413,  417,  1077,
1199,  1200,  1283,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  466,  592,  649,  680,  1036,  1047,  vol.  xxxiii.  pp.  603,  604  ;
Nicholas  Recollections,  vol.  ii.  pp.  156,  157.

380  Lord  Campbell  (Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  vi.  p.  449)  says  that  if  the  laws  passed
in  1794  had  been  enforced,  "  the  only  chance  of  escaping  servitude  would  have  been
civil  war."     Compare  Brougham's  Statesmen,  vol.  i.  p.  237,  vol.  ii.  pp.  63,  64,  on  our
"  escape  from  proscription  and  from  arbitrary  power  .  .  .  during  the  almost  hopeless
struggle  from  1793  to  1801."     Both  these  writers  pay  great  and  deserved  honour  to  the
successful  efforts  of  Erskine  with  juries.      Indeed  the  spirit  of  our  jurors  was  so  deter-
mined that  in  1794,  at  Tooke's  trial,  they  only  consulted  eight  minutes  before  bringing
in  a  verdict  of  acquittal.     Stephens' s  Mem.  of  Home  Tooke,  vol.  ii.  p.  147  ;  see  also,  on
this  crisis,  Life  of  Cartwright,  vol.  i.  p.  210.     The  people  sympathized  throughout  with
the  victims  ;  and  while  the  trial  of  Hardy  was  pending,  the  attorney -general,  Scott,
was  always  mobbed  when  he  left  the  court,  and  on  one  occasion  his  life  was  in  danger.
Twiss's  Life  of  Eldon,  vol.  i.  pp.  185,  186.     Compare  Holcroft's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  pp.  i8o>
181.


276  THE  HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

men  like  Adams,  Bonney,  Crossfield,  Frost,  Gerald,  Hardy,  Holt,  Kodson,  Hoi-
croft,  Joyce,  Kidd,  Lambert,  Margarot,  Martin,  Muir,  Palmer,  Perry,  Skirving,
Stannard,  Thelwall,  Tooke,  Wakefield,  Wardell,  Winterbotham  :  ail  of  whom
were  indicted,  and  many  of  whom  were  fined,  imprisoned,  or  transported,  because
they  expressed  their  sentiments  with  freedom,  and  because  they  used  language
such  as  in  our  time  is  employed  with  perfect  impunity,  by  speakers  at  public
meetings,  and  by  writers  in  the  public  press.

As,  however,  juries  in  several  cases  refused  to  convict  men  who  were  prosecuted
for  these  offences,  it  was  determined  to  recur  to  measures  still  more  decisive.
In  1795,  a  law  was  passed  by  which  it  was  manifestly  intended  to  put  an  end
for  ever  to  all  popular  discussions  either  on  political  or  religious  matters.  For
by  it  every  public  meeting  was  forbidden,  unless  notice  of  it  were  inserted  in  a
newspaper  five  days  beforehand  ; 381  such  notice  to  contain  a  statement  of  the
objects  of  the  meeting,  and  of  the  time  and  place  where  it  was  to  assemble.  And,
to  bring  the  whole  arrangement  completely  under  the  supervision  of  government,
it  was  ordered  that  not  only  should  the  notice,  thus  published,  be  signed  by
householders,  but  that  the  original  manuscripts  should  be  preserved,  for  the  in-
formation of  the  justices  of  the  peace,  who  might  require  a  copy  of  it  ;  a  significant
threat,  which,  in  those  days,  was  easily  understood.382  It  was  also  enacted  that,
even  after  these  precautions  had  been  taken,  any  single  justice  might  compel  the
meeting  to  disperse,  if,  in  his  opinion,  the  language  held  by  the  speakers  was
calculated  to  bring  the  sovereign  or  the  government  into  contempt  ;  while,  at  the
same  time,  he  was  authorized  to  arrest  those  whom  he  considered  to  be  the
offenders.383  The  power  of  dissolving  a  public  meeting,  and  of  seizing  its  leaders,
was  thus  conferred  upon  a  common  magistrate,  and  conferred  too  without  the
slightest  provision  against  its  abuse.  In  other  words,  the  right  of  putting  an
end  to  all  public  discussions  on  the  most  important  subjects,  was  lodged  in  the
hands  of  a  man  appointed  by  the  crown,  and  removable  by  the  crown  at  its  own
pleasure.  To  this  it  was  added,  that  if  the  meeting  should  consist  of  twelve,  or
upwards  of  twelve  persons,  and  should  remain  together  for  one  hour  after  being
ordered  to  separate, — in  such  case,  the  penalty  of  death  was  to  be  inflicted,  even
if  only  twelve  disobeyed  this  the  arbitrary  command  of  a  single  and  irresponsible
magistrate.38*

In  1799,  another  law  was  passed,  lorbidding  any  open  field,  or  place  of  any  kind,
to  be  used  for  lecturing.,  or  for  debating,  unless  a  specific  licence  for  such  place  had
been  obtained  from  the  magistrates.  It  was  likewise  enacted,  that  all  circulating
libraries,  and  all  reading-rooms,  should  be  subject  to  the  same  provision  ;  no
person,  without  leave  from  the  constituted  authorities,  being  permitted  to  lend  on
hire  in  his  own  house,  newspapers,  pamphlets,  or  even  books  of  any  kind.385
Before  shops  of  this  sort  could  be  opened,  a  licence  must  first  be  obtained  from

asi  «  Five  days  at  ieast.»  statm  3g  Qeorge  ///.  c.  8.  §  i.  This  applied  to  meetings
"  holden  for  the  purpose  or  on  the  pretext  of  considering  of  or  preparing  any  petition,
complaint,  remonstrance,  or  declaration,  or  other  address  to  the  king,  or  to  both  houses,
or  either  house,  of  parliament,  for  alteration  of  matters  established  in  church  or  state,  or
for  the  purpose  or  on  the  pretext  of  deliberating  upon  any  grievance  in  church  or  state."
The  only  exceptions  allowed  were  in  the  case  of  meetings  called  by  magistrates,
officials,  and  the  majority  of  the  grand  jury.

12  The  inserter  of  the  notice  in  the  newspaper  "  shall  cause  such  notice  and  authority
to  be  carefully  preserved,  .  and  cause  a  true  copy  thereof  (if  required)  to  be  delivered
to  any  justice  of  the  peace  for  the  county,  city,  town,  or  place  where  such  person  shall
reside,  or  where  such  newspaper  shall  be  printed,  and  who  shall  require  the  same."
36  Geo.  III.  c.8,  §  i.

83  C.  8,  §§  6  and  7,  referring  to  "  meetings  on  notice  ;  "  and  to  persons  holding  lan-
gU3afec™hich  Sha11  even  "  tend  to  incite."  These  two  sections  are  very  remarkable.

It  shall  be  adjudged,"  says  the  act,  "  felony  without  benefit  of  clergy  ;  and  the
Senders  therein  shall  be  adjudged  felons,  and  shall  suffer  death  as  in  case  of  felony  with-
out benefit  of  clergy."     36  George  III.  c.  8,  §  6.
385  Stat.  39  George  III.  c.  79,  §  15.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT


277


two  justices  of  the  peace  ;  which,  however,  was  to  be  renewed  at  least  once  a
year,  and  might  be  revoked  at  any  intermediate  period.386  If  a  man  lent  books
without  the  permission  of  the  magistrates,  or  if  he  allowed  lectures  or  debates,
"  on  any  subject  whatever,"  to  be  held  under  his  roof,  then,  for  such  grievous
crime,  he  was  to  be  fined  lool.  a  day  ;  and  every  person  who  aided  him,  either  by
presiding  over  the  discussion,  or  by  supplying  a  book,  was  for  each  offence  to  be
fined  2O/.  The  proprietor  of  so  pernicious  an  establishment  was  not  only  to
suffer  from  these  ruinous  fines,  but  was  declared  liable  to  still  further  punish-
ment as  the  keeper  of  a  disorderly  house.387

To  modern  ears  it  sounds  somewhat  strange  that  the  owner  of  a  public  reading-
room  should  not  only  incur  extravagant  fines,  but  should  also  be  punished  as
the  keeper  of  a  disorderly  house  ;  and  that  all  this  should  happen  to  him  simply
because  he  opened  his  shop  without  asking  permission  from  the  local  magistrates.
Strange  however  as  this  appears,  it  was  at  all  events  consistent,  since  it  formed
part  of  a  regular  plan  for  bringing,  not  only  the  actions  of  men,  but  even  their
opinions,  under  the  direct  control  of  the  executive  government.  Thus  it  was  that
the  laws,  now  for  the  first  time  passed,  against  newspapers,  were  so  stringent,  and
the  prosecution  of  authors  so  unrelenting,  that  there  was  an  evident  intention  to
ruin  every  public  writer  who  expressed  independent  sentiments.38^  These
measures,  and  others  of  a  similar  character,  which  will  hereafter  be  noticed,
excited  such  alarm  that  in  the  opinion  of  some  of  the  ablest  observers  the  state
of  public  affairs  was  becoming  desperate,  perhaps  irretrievable.  The  extreme
despondency  with  which,  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the  best  friends  of  liberty
looked  to  the  future,  is  very  observable,  and  forms  a  striking  feature  in  their
private  correspondence.389  And  although  comparatively^few  men  ventured  to


386  The  licence  "  shall  be  in  force  for  the  space  of  one  year  and  no  longer,  or  for  any  less
space  of  time  therein  to  be  specified  ;  and  which  licence  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  justices
of  the  peace,"  etc., "  to  revoke  and  declare  void,  and  no  longer  in  force,  by  any  order  of
such  justices;  .  .  .  and  thereupon  such  licence  shall  cease  and  determine,  and  be  thence-
forth utterly  void  and  of  no  effect."     39  George  III.  c.  79,  §  18.

387  Such  things  are  so  incredible,  that  I  must  again  quote  the  words  of  the  Act :  "  Every
house,  room,  or  place,  which  shall  be  opened  or  used  as  a  place  of  meeting  for  the  purpose
of  reading  books,  pamphlets,  newspapers,  or  other  publications,  and  to  which  any  person
shall  be  admitted  by  payment  of  money  "  (if  not  regularly  licenced  by  the  authorities),
..."  shall  be  deemed  a  disorderly  house  ;  "  "  and  the  person  opening  it  shall  "  be  other-
wise punished  as  the  law  directs  in  case  of  disorderly  houses."  39  George  III.  c.  79,  §  15.
The  germ  of  this  law  may  be  found  in  36  George  III.  c.  8,  §§  12,  13,  14,  15,  16.      Nowhere
are  the  weakest  parts  of  the  human  mind  more  clearly  seen  than  in  the  history  of  legis-
lation.

398  See  the  particulars  in  Hunt's  Hist,  of  Newspapers,  vol.  i.  pp.  281-4.  Mr.  Hunt
says,  p.  284  :  "  In  addition  to  all  these  laws,  directed  solely  towards  the  press,  other
statutes  were  made  to  bear  upon  it,  for  the  purpose  of  repressing  the  free  expression  of
popular  opinion."  In  1793,  Dr.  Currie  writes  :  ''The  prosecutions  that  are  commenced
by  government  all  over  England  against  printers,  publishers,  etc.,  would  astonish  you;
and  most  of  these  are  for  offences  committed  many  months  ago.  The  printer  of  the
Manchester  Herald  has  had  seven  different  indictments  preferred  against  him  for  para-
graphs in  his  paper  ,  and  six  different  indictments  for  selling  or  disposing  of  six  different
copies  of  Paine, — all  previous  to  the  trial  of  Paine.  The  man  was  opulent,  supposed  worth
2o,ooo/  ;  but  these  different  actions  will  ruin  him,  as  they  were  intended  to  do."  Currie 's
Life,  vol.  i.  pp.  185,  186.  See  also  a  letter  from  Roscoe  to  Lord  Lansdowne,  in  Life  of
Roscoe,  vol.  i.  p.  124  ;  and  Mem.  of  Holcroft,  vol.  ii.  pp.  151,  152  :  "  Printers  and  book-
sellers all  over  the  kingdom  were  hunted  out  for  prosecution."  See  further,  Life  of  Cart
wright,  vol.  i.  pp.  199,  200  ;  Adolphus's  Hist,  of  George  III.  vol.  y.  pp.  525,  526  ;  Mem.  of
Wake  field,  vol.  ii.  p.  69.

339  in  1793,  Dr.  Currie,  after  mentioning  the  attempts  made  by  government  to  destroy
the  liberty  of  the  press,  adds  :  "  For  mylpart,  I  foresee  troubles,  and  conceive  the  nation
was  never  in  such  a  dangerous  crisis."  Currie's  Mem.  vol.  i.  p.  186.  In  1795,  Fox  writes
(Russell's  Mem,  of  Fox,  vol.  iii.  pp.  124.  135) ;  "  There  appears  to  me  to  be  no  choice  at


278  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

express  such  sentiments  in  public,  Fox,  whose  fearless  temper  made  him  heedless
of  risk,  openly  stated  what  would  have  checked  the  government  if  anything
could  have  done  so.  For  this  eminent  statesman,  who  had  been  minister  more
than  once,  and  was  afterwards  minister  again,  did  not  hesitate  to  say,  from  his
place  in  parliament  in  1795,  that  if  these  and  other  shameful  laws  which  were
proposed  should  be  actually  passed,  forcible  resistance  to  the  government  would
be  merely  a  question  of  prudence  ;  and  that  the  people,  if  they  felt  themselves
equil  to  the  conflict,  would  be  justified  in  withstanding  the  arbitrary  measures
by  which  their  rulers  sought  to  extinguish  their  liberties.-™0

Nothing,  however,  could  stop  the  government  in  its  headlong  career.  The
ministers,  secure  of  a  majority  in  both  houses  of  parliament,  were  able  to  carry
their  measures  in  defiance  of  the  people,  who  opposed  them  by  every  mode  short  of
actual  violence.391  And  as  the  object  of  these  new  laws  was  to  check  the  spirit
of  inquiry,  and  prevent  reforms  which  the  progress  of  society  rendered  indispens-
able, there  were  also  brought  into  play  other  means  subservient  to  the  same  end.
It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  for  some  years  England  was  ruled  by  a  system
of  absolute  terror.392  The  ministers  of  the  day,  turning  a  struggle  of  party  into
\  war  of  proscription,  filled  the  prisons  with  their  political  opponents,  and  allowed

present  but  between  an  absolute  surrender  of  the  liberties  of  the  people  and  a  vigorous
exertion,  attended,  I  admit,  with  considerable  hazard,  at  a  time  like  the  present.  My
view  of  things  is,  I  own,  very  gloomy  ;  and  I  am  convinced  that,  in  a  very  few  years,  this
government  will  become  completely  absolute,  or  that  confusion  will  arise  of  a  nature  al-
most as  much  to  be  deprecated  as  despotism  itself."  In  the  same  year,  Dr.  Raine
writes  (Parr's  Works,  vol.  vii.  p.  533)  :  "  The  mischievous  conduct  of  men  in  power  has
Ijng  made  this  country  an  uneasy  dwelling  for  the  moderate  and  peaceful  man  ;  their
present  proceedings  render  our  situation  alarming,  and  our  prospects  dreadful."  See
also  p.  530.  In  1796,  the  Bishop  of  Llandaff  writes  (Life  of  Watson,  vol.  ii.  pp.  36,  37)  :
"  The  malady  which  attacks  the  constitution  (influence  of  the  crown)  is  without  remedy  ;
violent  applications  might  be  used  ;  their  success  would  be  doubtful,  and  I,  for  one,  never
wish  to  see  them  tried."  Compare  vol.  i.  p.  222.  And,  in  1799,  Priestley  dreaded  a
revolution  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  thought  there  was  "  no  longer  any  hope  of  a  peaceable
and  gradual  reform."  Mem.  of  Priestley,  vol.  i.  pp.  198,  199.

390  In  this  memorable  declaration,  Fox  said,  that  "  he  had  a  right  to  hope  and  expect
that  these  bills,  which  positively  repealed  the  Bill  of  Rights,  and  cut  up  the  whole  of  the
constitution  by  the  roots,  by  changing  our  limited  monarchy  into  an  absolute  despotism,
would  not  be  enacted  by  parliament  against  the  declared  sense  of  a  great  majority  of  the
people.     If,  however,  ministers  were  determined  by  means  of  the  corrupt  influence  they
possessed  in  the  two  houses  of  parliament,  to  pass  the  bills  in  direct  opposition  to  the
declared  sense  of  a  great  majority  of  the  nation,  and  they  should  be  put  in  force  with  all
their  rigorous  provisions,  if  his  opinion  were  asked  by  the  people  as  to  their  obedience,  he
should  tell  them,  that  it  was  no  longer  a  question  of  moral  obligation  and  duty,  but  of
prudence.     It  would,  indeed,  be  a  case  of  extremity  alone  which  could  justify  resistance  ;
and  the  only  question  would  be,  whether  that  resistance  was  prudent."     Parl.  Hist.  vol.
xxxii.  p.  383.     On  this,  Windham  remarked,  and  Fox  did  not  deny,  that   "  the  meaning
obviously  was,  that  the  right  hon.  gentleman  would  advise  the  people,  whenever  they
were  strong  enough,  to  resist  the  execution  of  the  law  ;  "  and  to  this  both  Sheridan  and
Grey  immediately  assented.  Pp.  385-387.

391  "  Never  had  there  appeared,  in  the  memory  of  the  oldest  man,  so  firm  and  decided  a
plurality  of  adversaries  to  the  ministerial  measures,  as  on  this  occasion  (i.e.  in  1795) ;  the
interest  of  the  public  seemed  so  deeply  at  stake,  that  individuals,  not  only  of  the  decent,
but  of  the  most  vulgar  professions,  gave  up  a  considerable  portion  of  their   time  and
occupations  in  attending  the  numerous  meetings  that  were  called  in  every  part  of  the
kingdom,  to  the  professed  intent  of  counteracting  this  attempt  of  the  ministry."     Note
in  Parl.  History,  vol.  xxxii.  p.  381.     It  was  at  this  period  that  Fox  made  the  declaration
which  I  have  quoted  in  the  previous  note.  I

392  It  was  called  at  the  time  the  *'  Reign  of  Terror  ; '    and  so  indeed  it  was  for  every
opponent  of  government.     See  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  vi.  p.  4^1  ;  Mem.  of  Wake  field
vol.  ii,  p.  67  ;  and  Trotter's  Mem-  oj  Fo\,  p,  jo,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT


279


them,  when  in  confinement,  to  be  treated  with  shameful  severity.393  Tf  a  man
was  known  to  be  a  reformer,  he  was  constantly  in  danger  of  being  arrested  ;  and
if  he  escaped  that,  he  was  watched  at  every  turn,  and  his  private  letters  were
opened  as  they  passed  through  the  post-office.394  In  such  cases,  no  scruples  were
allowed.  Even  the  confidence  of  domestic  life  was  violated.  No  opponent  of
government  was  safe  under  his  own  roof,  against  the  tales  of  eaves-droppers  and
the  gossip  of  servants.  Discord  was  introduced  into  the  bosom  of  families,  and
schisms  caused  between  parents  and  their  children.395  Not  only  were  the  mo~t
strenuous  attempts  made  to  silence  the  press,  but  the  booksellers  were  so  con.
stantly  prosecuted,  that  they  did  not  dare  to  publish  a  work  if  its  author  were
obnoxious  to  the  court.396  Indeed,  whoever  opposed  the  government  was  pro
claimed  an  enemy  to  his  country .39?  Political  associations  and  public  meetings
were  strictly  forbidden.  Every  popular  leader  was  in  personal  danger  ;  and  every
popular  assemblage  was  dispersed,  either  by  threats  or  by  military  execution;
That  hateful  machinery,  familiar  to  the  worst  days  of  the  seventeenth  century,  was
put  into  motion.  Spies  were  paid  ;  witnesses  were  suborned  ;  juries  were
packed.398  The  coffee-houses,  the  inns,  and  the  clubs,  were  filled  with  emis-
saries of  the  government,  who  reported  the  most  hasty  expressions  of  common
conversation.399  If  by  these  means  no  sort  of  evidence  could  be  collected  there


393  "  xhe  iniquitous  system  of  secret  imprisonment,  under  which  Pitt  and  Dundas  had
now  filled  all  the  gaols  with  parliamentary  reformers  ;  men  who  were  cast  into  dungeons
without  any  public  accusation,  and  from  whom  the  habeas -corpus  suspension  act  had
taken  every  hope  of  redress."     Cooke's  Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.  p.  447.     On  the  cruelty
with  which  these  political  opponents  of  government  were  treated  when  in  prison,  see
Stephens' 's  Mem.  of  Tooke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  121,  125,  423  ;  Part.  Hist.  vol.  xxxiv.  pp.  112,  113,
126,   129,   170,   515,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  742,  743  ;  Cloncurry's  Recollections,  pp.  46,  86,  87,
140,   225.

394  Life  of  Currie,  vol.  li.  p.  160  ;  Stephens' s  Mem.  of  Tooke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  118,  119.

395  In  1793,  Roscoe  writes  :  "  Every  man  is  called  on  to  be  a  spy  upon  his  brother."
Life  of  Roscoe,  vol.  i.  p.  127.     Compare  Fox's  statement  (Part.  Hist.  vol.  xxx.  p.  21),  that
what  government  had  done  was,  "  to  erect  every  man,  not  merely  into  an  inquisitor,  but
into  a  judge,  a  spy,  an  informer, — to  set  father  against  father,  brother  against  brother  ;
and  in  this  way  you  expect  to  maintain  the  tranquillity  of  the  country."     See  also  vol.
xxx.  p.  1529  ;  and  a  remarkable  passage  in  Coleridge's  Biog.  Lit.  (vol.  i.  p.  192),  on  the
extent  of  "  secret  defamation,"  in  and  after  1793.     For  further  evidence  of  this  horrible
state  of  society,  see  Mem.  of  Holcroft,  vol.  ii.  pp.  150,  151  ;  Stephens' s  Mem.  of  Home  Tooke,
vol.  ii.  pp.  115,  116.

396  There  was  even  considerable  difficulty  in  finding  a  printer  for  Tooke's  great  philo-
logical work,  The  Diversions  of  Parley.     See  Stephens' s  Mem.  of  Tooke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  345-348.
In  1798,  Fox  wrote  to  Cartwright  (Life  of  Cartwright,  vol.  i.  p.  248):  "The  decision
against  Wakefield's  publisher  appears  to  me  decisive  against  the  liberty  of  the  press  ;
and  indeed,  after  it,  one  can  hardly  conceive  how  any  prudent  tradesman  can  venture
to  publish  anything  that  can  in  any  way  be  disagreeable  to  the  ministers."

397  Those  who  opposed  the  slave-trade  were  called  jacobins,  and  "  enemies  to  the
ministers  ;  "  and  the  celebrated   Dr.    Currie  was  pronounced  to  be  a  jacobin,  and  an
"  enemy  to  his  country,"  because  he  remonstrated  against  the  shameful  manner  in  which
the  English  government,  in  1800,  allowed  the  French  prisoners  to  be  treated.     Life  of
Curne,  vol.  i.  pp.  330,  332  ;  Life  of  Wilberforce,  vol.  i.  pp.  342-344.  vol.  ii.  pp.  18, 133  ;  Parl.
Hist.  vol.  xxx.  p.  654,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  467,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  1387,  vol.  xxxiv,  pp.  1119,  1485.

398  Life  of  Cartwright,  vol.  i.  p.  709  ;  HunPs  Hist,  of  Newspapers,  vol.  ii.  p.  104  ;  Bel-
sham's  Hist.  vol.  ix.  p.  227  ;  Adolphus's  Hist.  vol.  vi.  p.  264  :  Annual  Register  for  1795,  pp.
156, 1 60  ;  Stephens' s  Mem.  of  Tooke,  vol.  ii.  p.  118  :  Life  of  Currie,  vol.  i.  p.  172  ;  Campbell's
Chancellors,  vol.  vi.  p.  316,  vol.  vii.  p.  316  ;    Life  of  Wilberforce,  vol.  iv.  pp.  369,  377
Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxi.  pp.543,  667,  668,  1067,  vol.  xxxii.  pp.  296,  302,  366,  367,  374,  664,
vol.  xxxv.  pp.  1538,  1540  ;  Holcroft's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  IQO.

399  In  addition  to  the  passages  referred  to  in  the  preceding  note,  compare  Hutton's  Life
of  Himself,  p.  200,  with  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  vi.  p.  441,  vol.  vii.  p.  104,  and  Adol-
phus's  Hist,  of  George  If  I,  vol.  vj.  p.  45.     ID  1798,  Caldwell  wrote  to  Sir  Jarnes.Smith


28o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

was  another  resource,  which  was  unsparingly  used.  For,  the  habeas-corpus  act
being  constantly  suspended,  the  crown  had  the  power  of  imprisoning,  without
inquiry  and  without  limitation,  any  person  offensive  to  the  ministry,  but  of
whose  crime  no  proof  was  attempted  to  be  brought.400

Such  was  the  way  in  which,  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  rulers  of
Fagland  under  pretence  of  protecting  the  institutions  of  the  country,  oppressed
the  people,  for  whose  benefit  alone  those  institutions  ought  to  exist.  Nor  was
even  this  the  whole  of  the  injury  they  actually  inflicted.  Their  attempts  to  stop
the  progress  of  opinions  were  intimately  connected  with  that  monstrous  system
of  foreign  policy,  by  which  there  has  been  entailed  upon  us  a  debt  of  unexampled
magnitude.  To  pay  the  interest  of  this,  and  to  meet  the  current  expenses  of  a
profuse  and  reckless  administration,  taxes  were  laid  upon  nearly  every  product  of
industry  and  of  nature.  In  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  these  taxes  fell  upon  the
great  body  of  the  people,401  who  were  thus  placed  in  a  position  of  singular  hard-
ship. For  the  upper  classes  not  only  refused  to  the  rest  of  the  nation  the  re-
forms which  were  urgently  required,  but  compelled  the  country  to  pay  for  the
precautions  which,  in  consequence  of  the  refusal,  it  was  thought  necessary  to  take.
Thus  it  was  that  the  government  diminished  the  liberties  of  the  people,  and
wasted  the  fruit  of  their  industry,  in  order  to  protect  that  very  people  against
opinions  which  the  growth  of  their  knowledge  had  irresistibly  forced  upon  them.

It  is  not  surprising  that,  in  the  face  of  these  circumstances,  some  of  the  ablest
observers  should  have  despaired  of  the  liberties  of  England,  and  should  have
believed  that,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  a  despotic  government  would  be  firmly
established.  Even  we,  who,  looking  at  these  things  half  a  century  after  they
occurred,  are  able  to  take  a  calmer  view,  and  who  moreover  possess  the  advan-
tages of  a  larger  knowledge  and  a  riper  experience,  must  nevertheless  allow  that,
so  far  as  political  events  were  concerned,  the  danger  was  more  imminent  than
at  any  moment  since  the  reign  of  Charles  I.  But  what  was  forgotten  then,  and
what 'is  too  often  forgotten  now,  is  that  political  events  form  only  one  of  the  many
parts  which  compose  the  history  of  a  great  country.  In  the  period  we  have  been
considering,  the  political  movement  was  no  doubt  more  threatening  than  it  had
been  for  several  generations.  On  the  other  hand,  the  intellectual  movement
was,  as  we  have  seen,  highly  favourable,  and  its  influence  was  rapidly  spreading.
Hence  it  was  that,  while  the  government  of  the  country  tended  in  one  direction,
the  knowledge  of  the  country  tended  in  another  ;  and  while  political  events  kept
us  back,  intellectual  events  urged  us  forward.*  In  this  way,  the  despotic  prin-

(Correspondence  of  Sir  /.  E.  Smith,  vol.  ii.  p.  143) :  "  The  power  of  the  crown  is  become
irresistible.  The  new  scheme  of  inquisition  into  every  man's  private  circumstances  is
beyond  any  attempt  I  have  ever  heard  of  under  Louis  XIV."

400  in  1794,  Fox  said,  in  his  speech  on  the  habeas-corpus  suspension  bill :  "  Every  man
who  talked  freely,  every  man  who  detested,  as  he  did  from  his  heart,  this  war,  might  be
and  would  be  in  the  hands  and  at  the  mercy  of  ministers.      Living  under  such  a  govern-
ment, and  being  subject  to  insurrection,  comparing  the  two  evils,  he  confessed  he  thought
the  evil  they  were  pretending  to  remedy  was  less  than  the  one  they  were  going  to  inflict
by  the  remedy  itself."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xxxi.  p.  509.     In  1800,  Lord  Holland  stated,  in
the  House  of  Lords,  that  "  of  the  seven  years  of  the  war,  the  habeas-corpus  act  had  been
suspended  five ;  and,  of  the  multitudes  who  had  been  imprisoned  in  virtue  of  that  sus-
pension, few  had  been  brought  to  trial,  and  only  one  convicted."  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  1486.  See  also
vol.  xxxv.  pp.  609,  610.     On  the  effect  of  the  suspension  of  the  habeas-corpus  act  upon
literature,  see  Life  of  Currit,  vol.  i.  p.  506.

401  See  decisive  evidence  of  this,  in  Porter's  Progress  of  the  Nation,  vol.  ii.  pp.  283-285  ;
and,  on  the  enormous  increase  of  expense  and  taxation,  see  Pellew's  JAfe  of  Sidmouth,  vol.
i.  p.  358,  vol.  ii.  p.  47.

[*  The  pressures  which  finally  brought  about  the  Reform  Bill  were  simply  "  political
events  "  of  a  different  order  from  those  which  spelt  retrogression.  And  while  the  political
retrogression  lasted,  the  "  intellectual "  life  was  undoubtedly  retrograde  also.  Every
political  movement,  in  short,  has  its  intellectual  aspect ;  and  vice  versa.  The  dichotomy
irf  t\e  text  is  therefore  inexact.— ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT


281


ciples  that  were  enforced  were  in  some  degree  neutralized  ;  and  although  it  was
impossible  to  prevent  them  from  causing  great  suffering,  still  the  effect  of  that
suffering  was  to  increase  the  determination  of  the  people  to  reform  a  system  under
which  such  evils  could  be  inflicted.  For  while  they  felt  the  evils,  the  knowledge
which  they  had  obtained  made  them  see  the  remedy.  They  saw  that  the  men
who  were  at  the  head  of  affairs  were  despotic  ;  but  they  saw  too  that  the  system
must  be  wrong  which  could  secure  to  such  men  such  authority.  This  confirmed
their  dissatisfaction,  and  justified  their  resolution  to  effect  some  fresh  arrange-
ment, which  should  allow  their  voices  to  be  heard  in  the  councils  of  the  state.402
And  that  resolution,  I  need  hardly  add,  grew  stronger  and  stronger,  until  it
eventually  produced  those  great  legislative  reforms  which  have  already  signalized
the  present  century,  have  given  a  new  tone  to  the  character  of  public  men,  and
changed  the  structure  of  the  English  parliament.

It  is  thus  that,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  increase  and
diffusion  of  knowledge  were,  in  England,  directly  antagonistic  to  the  political
events  which  occurred  during  the  same  period.  The  extent  and  the  nature  of  that
antagonism  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  as  clearly  as  the  complexity  of  the
subject  and  the  limits  of  this  Introduction  enable  me  to  do.  We  have  seen  that,
looking  at  our  country  as  a  whole,  the  obvious  tendency  of  affairs  was  to  abridge
the  authority  of  the  church,  the  nobles,  and  the  crown,  and  thus  give  greater  play
to  the  power  of  the  people.  Looking,  however,  at  the  country,  not  as  a  whole,
but  looking  merely  at  its  political  history,  we  find  that  the  personal  peculiarities
of  George  III.,  and  the  circumstances  under  which  he  came  to  the  throne,  enabled
him  to  stop  the  great  progress,  and  eventually  cause  a  dangerous  reaction.
Happily  for  the  fortunes  of  England,  thoac  principles  of  liberty  which  he  and  his
supporters  wished  to  destroy,  had  before  his  reign  become  so  powerful  and  so
widely  diffused,  that  they  not  only  resisted  this  political  reaction,  but  seemed
to  gain  fresh  strength  from  the  contest.  That  the  struggle  was  arduous,  and  at
one  time  extremely  critical,  it  is  impossible  to  deny.  Such,  however,  is  the
force  of  liberal  opinions,  when  they  have  once  taken  root  in  the  popular  mind,  that
notwithstanding  the  ordeal  to  which  they  were  exposed,  and  notwithstanding  the
punishments  inflicted  on  their  advocates,  it  was  found  impossible  to  stifle  them  ;
it  was  found  impossible  even  to  prevent  their  increase.  Doctrines  subversive  of
every  principle  of  freedom  were  persoaally  favoured  by  the  sovereign,  openly
avowed  by  the  government,  and  zealously  defended  by  the  most  powerful  classes;
and  laws  in  accordance  with  these  doctrines  were  placed  on  our  statute-book,  and
enforced  in  our  courts.  All,  however,  was  in  vain.  In  a  few  years  that  gen-
eration began  to  pass  away  ;  a  better  one  succeeded  in  its  place  ;  and  the  system
of  tyranny  fell  to  the  ground.  And  thus  it  is  that  in  all  countries  which  are  even
tolerably  free,  every  system  must  fall,  if  it  opposes  the  march  of  opinions,  and  gives
shelter  to  maxims  and  institutions  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  the  age.  In  this  sort
of  contest,  the  ultimate  result  is  never  doubtful.  For  the  vigour  of  an  arbitrary
government  depends  merely  on  a  few  individuals,  who,  whatever  their  abilities
may  be,  are  liable,  after  their  death,  to  be  replaced  by  timid  and  incompetent
successors.  But  the  vigour  of  public  opinion  is  not  exposed  to  these  casualties  ;
it  is  unaffected  by  the  laws  of  mortality  ;  it  does  not  flourish  to-day  and  decline
to-morrow  ;  and  so  far  from  depending  on  the  lives  of  individual  men,  it  is  governed
by  large  general  causes,  which  from  their  very  comprehensiveness  are  in  short
periods  scarcely  seen,  but  on  a  comparison  of  long  periods  are  found  to  outweigh
all  other  considerations,  and  reduce  to  insignificance  those  little  stratagems  by
which  princes  and  statesmen  think  to  disturb  the  order  of  events,  and  mould  to
their  will  the  destinies  of  a  great  and  civilized  people.

402  A  careful  observer  of  what  was  going  on  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  expresses
what,  early  in  the  nineteenth  century,  was  becoming  the  conviction  of  most  men  of  plain
sound  understanding,  who  had  no  interest  in  the  existing  corruption  :  "  Immoderate
taxation,  the  result  of  the  unnecessary  wars  of  the  reign  of  George  III.,  is  the  cause  of
our  embarrassments  ;  and  that  immoderate  taxation  has  been  occasioned  by  the  House
of  Commons  being  composed  of  men  not  interested  to  protect  the  property_of  the  people,"
Nic\olls's  Recollections,  vol.  i.  p.  213,


282  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

These  are  broad  and  general  truths,  which  will  hardly  be  questioned  by  any
man  who,  \\ith  a  competent  knowledge  of  history,  has  reflected  much  on  the
nature  and  conditions  of  modern  society.  But  during  the  period  we  have  been
considering,  they  were  utterly  neglected  by  our  political  rulers,  who  not  only
thought  themselves  able  to  check  the  growth  of  opinions,  but  entirely  mistook  the
very  end  and  object  of  government.  In  those  days  it  was  believed  that  govern-
ment is  made  for  the  minority,  to  whose  wishes  the  majority  are  bound
humbly  to  submit.  It  was  believed  that  the  power  of  making  laws  must
always  be  lodged  in  the  hands  of  a  few  privileged  classes  ;  that  the  nation
at  large  has  no  concern  with  those  laws,  except  to  obey  them  ;  403  and  that
t  is  the  duty  of  a  wise  government  to  secure  the  obedience  of  the  people  by  pre-
venting them  from  being  enlightened  by  the  spread  of  knowledge.404  We  may
surely  deem  it  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  these  notions,  and  the  schemes
of  legislation  founded  upon  them,  should,  within  half  a  century,  have  died  away
so  completely,  that  they  are  no  longer  advocated,  even  by  men  of  the  most
ordinary  abilities.  What  is  still  more  remarkable  is,  that  this  great  change
should  have  been  effected,  not  by  any  external  events,  nor  by  a  sudden  insur-
rection of  the  people,  but  by  the  unaided  action  of  moral  force, — the  silent  though
overwhelming  pressure  of  public  opinion.  This  has  always  seemed  to  me  a  decisive
proof  of  the  natural,  and,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  healthy  march  of  English  civilization.
It  is  a  proof  of  an  elasticity  and  yet  a  sobriety  of  spirit,  such  as  no  other  nation
has  ever  displayed.  No  other  nation  could  ha've  escaped  from  such  a  crisis,  ex-
cept by  passing  through  a  revolution,  of  which  the  cost  might  well  have  exceeded
the  gain.  The  truth  however  is  that  in  England  the  course  of  affairs,  which
I  have  endeavoured  to  trace  since  the  sixteenth  century,  had  diffused  among  the
people  a  knowledge  of  their  own  resources,  and  a  skill  and  independence  in  the
use  of  them,  imperfect  indeed,  but  still  far  superior  to  that  possessed  by  any  other
of  the  great  European  countries.  Besides  this,  other  circumstances,  which  will
be  hereafter  related, «*  had,  so  early  as  the  eleventh  century,  begun  to  affect  our
national  character,  and  had  assisted  in  imparting  to  it  that  sturdy  boldness,  and
at  the  same  time  those  habits  of  foresight  and  of  cautious  reserve,  to  which  the
English  mind  owes  its  leading  peculiarities.  With  us,  therefore,  the  love  of  liberty
has  been  tempered  by  a  spirit  of  prudence,  which  has  softened  its  violence  with-
out impairing  its  strength.  It  is  this  which,  more  than  once,  has  taught  our
countrymen  to  bear  even  considerable  oppression  rather  than  run  the  risk  of
rising  against  their  oppressors.  It  has  taught  them  to  stay  their  hands  ;  it  has
taught  them  to  husband  their  force  until  they  can  use  it  with  irresistible  effect.
To  this  great  and  valuable  habit  we  owe  the  safety  of  England  late  in  the  eigh-
teenth century.  It  the  people  had  risen,  they  would  have  staked  their  all  ;  and
what  the  result  of  that  desperate  game  would  have  been,  no  man  can  say.  Hap-
pily for  them,  and  for  their  posterity,  they  were  content  to  wait  yet  a  little  ;  they
were  willing  to  bide  their  time,  and  watch  the  issue  of  things.  Of  this  noble
conduct  their  descendants  reap  the  reward.  After  the  lapse  of  a  few  years,  the
political  crisis  began  to  subside,  and  the  people  re-entered  on  their  former  rights.
For  although  their  rights  had  been  in  abeyance  they  were  not  destroyed,  simply
because  the  spirit  still  existed  by  which  they  were  originally  won.  Nor  can  any
one  doubt  that,  if  those  evil  days  had  been  prolonged,  that  same  spirit  which  had
animated  their  fathers  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I.  would  have  again  broken  forth,

4°3  Bishop  Horsley,  the  great  champion  of  the  existing  state  of  things,  said  in  the  House
of  Lords,  in  1795,  that  he  "  did  not  know  what  the  mass  of  the  people  in  any  country  had
to  do  with  the  laws,  but  to  obey  them."  CookSs  Hist,  of  Party,  vol.  iii.  p.  435.  Compare
Godwin  on  Population,  p.  569.

}4  Lord  Cockburn  (Life  of  Jeffrey,  1852  vol.  i.  pp.  67,  68)  says  :  "  If  there  was  any
principle  that  was  reverenced  as  indisputable  by  almost  the  whole  adherents  of  the  party
in  power  sixty,  or  even  fifty,  or  perhaps  even  forty  years  ago.  it  was  that  the  ignorance
of  the  people  was  necessary  for  their  obedience  to  the  law."  One  argument  was  "  that
to  extend  instruction  would  be  to  multiply  the  crime  of  forgery :  "  Porter's  Progress  of
the  Nation,  vol.  iii.  p.  205.

*05  See  chapters  ix.  and  x,,  on  the  history  of  the  protective  spirit,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH    INTELLECT


283


and  society  have  been  convulsed  by  a  revolution,  the  bare  idea  of  which  is  fright-
ful to  contemplate.  In  the  meantime,  all  this  was  avoided  ;  and  although
popular  tumults  did  arise  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  and  although  the
measures  of  government  caused  a  disaffection  of  the  most  serious  kind,  406  still  the
people,  taken  as  a  whole,  remained  firm,  and  patiently  reserved  their  force  till
a  better  time,  when,  for  their  benefit,  a  new  party  was  organized  in  the  state,  by
whom  their  interests  were  successfully  advocated  even  within  the  walls  of  parlia-
ment.*

This  great  and  salutary  reaction  began  early  in  the  present  century  ;  but  the  cir-
cumstances which  accompanied  it  are  so  extremely  complicated,  and  have  been  so
little  studied, that  I  cannot  pretend  in  this  Introduction  to  offer  even  a  sketch  of  them.
It  is  sufficient  to  say,  what  must  be  generally  known,  that  for  nearly  fifty  years
ihe  movement  has  continued  with  unabated  speed.  Everything  which  has  been
done  has  increased  the  influence  of  the  people.  Blow  after  blow  has  been  directed
against  those  classes  which  were  once  the  sole  depositaries  of  power.  The
Reform  Bill,  the  Emancipation  of  the  Catholics,  and  the  Repeal  of  the  Corn-laws,
are  admitted  to  be  the  three  greatest  political  achievements  of  the  present  gen-
eration. Each  of  these  vast  measures  has  depressed  a  powerful  party.  The
extension  of  the  suffrage  has  lessened  the  influence  of  hereditary  rank,  and  has
broken  up  that  great  oligarchy  of  landowners,  by  which  the  House  of  Commons
had  long  been  ruled.  The  abolition  of  Protection  has  still  further  enfeebled  the
territorial  aristocracy;  while  those  superstitious  feelings  by  which  the  ecclesi-
astical order  is  mainly  upheld,  received  a  severe  shock,  first" by  the  repeal  of  the
Test  and  Corporation  Acts,  and  afterwards  by  the  admission  of  Catholics  into  the
legislature  ;  steps  which  are  with  reason  regarded  as  supplying  precedents  of
mischievous  import  for  the  interests  of  the  Established  Church/10?  These
measures,  and  others  which  are  now  obviously  inevitable,  have  taken,  and  will
continue  to  take,  power  from  particular  sections  of  society,  in  order  to  confer
it  upon  the  people  at  large.  Indeed,  the  rapid  progress  of  democratic  opinions
is  a  fact  which  no  one  in  the  present  day  ventures  to  deny.  Timid  and  ignorant
men  are  alarmed  at  the  movement  ;  but  that  there  is  such  a  movement  is  notorious
to  all  the  world.  No  one  now  dares  to  talk  of  bridling  the  people,  or  of  resisting
their  united  wishes.  The  utmost  that  is  said  is  that  efforts  should  be  made  to
inform  them  as  to  their  real  interests,  and  enlighten  public  opinion  ;  but  every
one  allows  that,  so  soon  as  public  opinion  is  formed,  it  can  no  longer  be  withstood.
On  this  point  all  are  agreed  ;  and  this  new  power,  which  is  gradually  superseding
every  other,  is  now  obeyed  by  those  very  statesmen  who.  had  they  lived  sixty

406  Sir  A.  Alison  notices  in  his  History  (vol.  iv.  p.  213)  "  how  widely  the  spirit  of  dis-
content was  diffused  "  in  1796  ;  and  the  only  wonder  is,  that  the  people  were  able  to  keep
it  in  bounds.     That,  however,  is  a  question  which  writers  of  his  stamp  never  consider.

407  Bishop  Burgess,  in  a  letter  to  Lord  Melbourne,  bitterly  complained  that  Catholic
emancipation  was  "  the  extinction  of  the  purely  Protestant  character  of   the    British
legislature."     Harford's  Life  of  Burgess,  p.  506  :  see  also  pp.  238.  239,  369,  370.     There
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  bishop  rightly  estimated  the  danger  to  his  own  party  ;  and  as
to  the  Corporation  and  Test  Acts,  which,  says  another  bishop  (Tomline's  Life  of  Pitt,  vol.
ii.  p.  604),  "  were  justly  regarded  as  the  firmest  bulwarks  of  the  British  constitution,"
the  feeling  was  so  strong,  that  at  an  episcopal  meeting  in  1787  there  were  only  two
members  who  were  willing  to  repeal  these  persecuting  laws.     See  Bishop  Watson's  Life
of  Himself,  vol.  i.  p.  262.      Lord  Eldon,  who  to  the  last  stood  up  for  the  church,  pro-
nounced the  bill  for  repealing  these  acts  to  be  "  a  revolutionary  bill."  Twiss's  Life  of
Eldon,  vol.  ii.  p.  202.

[*  The  account  here  given  of  the  people  as  "husbanding  their  force  till  they  could
use  it  with  irresistible  effect "  is  somewhat  fanciful.  Political  force  is  not  thus  storable  :
and  it  was  not  even  the  same  "  people  "  who  ultimately  benefited  by  a  democratic
revival.  New  conditions  gradually  arose,  in  which  such  a  revival  was  possible ;  but
the  greater  part  of  one  generation  had  to  pass  away  under  the  bad  conditions.  Nor
are  we  entitled  to  assert  that  if  the  stress  of  the  tyranny  "  had  been  prolonged,"
there  would  have  been  a  frightful  revolution, — ED.]


284  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

years  ago,  would  have  been  the  first  to  deny  its  authority,  ridicule  its  pretensions,
and,  if  po'ssibe,  extinguish  its  liberty.

Such  is  the  great  gap  which  separates  the  public  men  of  our  time  from  those
who  nourished  under  that  bad  system  which  George  III.  sought  to  perpetuate.
And  it  is  evident  that  this  vast  progress  was  brought  about  rather  by  destroying
the  system  than  by  improving  the  men.  It  is  also  evident  that  the  system
perished  because  it  was  unsuited  to  the  age — in  other  words,  because  a  progressive
people  will  never  tolerate  an  unprogressive  government.  But  it  is  a  mere  matter
of  history  that  our  legislators,  even  to  the  last  moment,  were  so  terrified  by  the
idea  of  innovation  that  they  refused  every  reform,  until  the  voice  of  the  people
rose  high  enough  to  awe  them  into  submission,  and  forced  them  to  grant  what,
without  such  pressure,  they  would  by  no  means  have  conceded.

These  things  ought  to  serve  as  a  lesson  to  our  political  rulers.  They  ought  also
to  moderate  the  presumption  of  legislators,  and  teach  them  that  their  best
measures  are  but  temporary  expedients  which  it  will  be  the  business  of  a  later
and  riper  age  to  efface.  It  would  be  well  if  such  considerations  were  to  check  the
confidence  and  silence  the  loquacity  of  those  superficial  men  who,  raised  to
temporary  power,  think  themselves  bound  to  guarantee  certain  institutions,  and
uphold  certain  opinions.  They  ought  clearly  to  understand  that  it  does  not  lie
within  their  function  thus  to  anticipate  the  march  of  affairs,  and  provide  for  dis-
tant contingencies.  In  trifling  matters,  indeed,  this  may  be  done  without'
danger  ;  though,  as  the  constant  changes  in  the  laws  of  every  country  abundantly
prove,  it  is  also  done  without  benefit.  But  in  reference  lo  those  large  and  funda-
mental measures  which  bear  upon  the  destiny  of  a  people,  such  anticipation  is
worse  than  useless, — it  is  highly  injurious.  In  the  present  state  of  knowledge,
politics,  so  far  from  being  a  science,  is  one  of  the  most  backward  of  all  the  arts  ;
and  the  only  safe  course  for  the  legislator  is  to  look  upon  his  craft  as  consisting
in  the  adaptation  of  temporary  contrivances  to  temporary  emergencies.408  His
business  is  to  follow  the  age,  and  not  at  all  to  attempt  to  lead  it.  He  should  be
satisfied  with  studying  what  is  passing  around  him  ;  and  should  modify  his
schemes,  not  according  to  the  notions  hes  ha  inherited  from  his  fathers,  but  accord-
ing to  the  actual  exigencies  of  his  own  time.  For  he  may  rely  upon  it  that  the
movements  of  society  have  now  become  so  rapid  that  the  wants  of  one  genera-
tion are  no  measure  of  the  wants  of  another  ;  and  that  men,  urged  by  a  sense  of
their  own  progress,  are  growing  weary  of  idle  talk  about  the  wisdom  of  their
ancestors,  and  are  fast  discarding  those  trite  and  sleepy  maxims  which  have
hitherto  imposed  upon  them,  but  by  which  they  will  not  consent  to  be  much
longer  troubled.

408  Sir  C.  Lewis,  though  in  his  learned  work  he  over-estimates  the  resources  possessed
by  politicians,  does  nevertheless  allow  that  they  are  rarely  able  to  anticipate  the  manner
in  which  their  measures  will  work.  Lewis  on  the  Methods  of  Observation  and  Reasoning
in  Politics,  1852,  vol.  ii.  pp.  360-362.  A  writer  of  repute,  M.  Flassan,  says  (Hist,  de
la  Diplomatic,  vol.  i.  p.  19) :  "  On  doit  etre  tres  indulgent  sur  les  erreurs  de  la  politique,  a
cause  de  la  facilite  qu'il  y  a  a  en  commettre  ;  erreurs  auxquelles  la  sagesse  meme  quelque-
fois  entrafne."  The  first  part  of  this  sentence  is  true  enough  ;  but  it  conveys  a  truth
which  ought  to  repress  that  love  of  interfering  with  the  natural  march  of  affairs  which
still  characterizes  politicians,  even  in  the  freest  countries.  [As  has  been  already  noted,
Buckle's  resort  to  the  term  "  natural "  is  pre-scientific  apriorism.  Strictly  interpreted,  his
advice  would  veto  the  making  of  any  laws,  and  leave  society  to  the  free  play  of  animal
forces  and  passions,  which  are  so  obviously  "  natural."  As  he  cannot  have  meant  this,
he  must  be  held  to  have  counted  those  interferences  "  natural  "  of  which  he  approved.
Obviously,  however,  if  crime  and  rapine  be  natural,  mistaken  legislation  is  equally  so.
There  is,  in  short,  no  refuge  for  social  science  in  such  a  question -begging  formula.  The
only  common  test  for  collective  as  for  individual  action  is  the  test  of  total  utility,  which
in  turn  is  differently  estimated  by  different  minds.  Hence  the  perpetual  mutation  of
politics.— ED.}


CHAPTER  VIII

OUTLINE  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  FRENCH  INTELLECT  FROM  THE  MIDDLE  OF
THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY  TO  THE  ACCESSION  TO   POWER  OF  Louis  XIV

.THE  consideration  of  these  great  changes  in  the  English  mind  has  led  me  into
a  digression,  which,  so  far  from  being  foreign  to  the  design  of  this  Introduction,
is  absolutely  necessary  fora  right  understanding  of  it.*  In  this,  as  in  many  other
respects,  there  is  a  marked  analogy  between  investigations  concerning  the
structure  of  society  and  investigations  concerning  the  human  body.  Thus
it  has  been  found  that  the  best  way  of  arriving  at  a  theory  of  disease  is  by  begin-
ning with  the  theory  of  health  ;  and  that  the  foundation  of  all  sound  pathology
must  be  first  sought  in  an  observation,  not  of  the  abnormal,  but  of  the  normal
functions  of  life.f  Just  in  the  same  way,  it  will  I  believe  be  found  that  the
best  method  of  arriving  at  great  social  truths  is  by  first  investigating  those
cases  in  which  society  has  developed  itself  according  to  its  own  laws,  and  in
which  the  governing  powers  have  least  opposed  themselves  to  the  spirit  of  their
times.1  It  is  on  this  account  that,  in  order  to  understand  the  position  of  France,

1  The  question  as  to  whether  the  study  of  normal  phenomena  should  or  should  not
precede  the  study  of  abnormal  ones,  is  of  the  greatest  importance  ;  and  a  neglect  of  it
has  introduced  confusion  into  every  work  I  have  seen  on  general  or  comparative  history.
For,  this  preliminary  being  unsettled,  there  has  been  no  recognized  principle  of  arrange-
ment ;  and  historians,  instead  of  following  a  scientific  method  suited  to  the  actual
exigencies  of  our  knowledge,  have  adopted  an  empirical  method  suited  to  their  own
exigencies ;  and  have  given  priority  to  different  countries,  sometimes  according  to
their  size,  sometimes  according  to  their  antiquity,  sometimes  according  to  their
geographical  position,  sometimes  according  to  their  wealth,  sometimes  according
to  their  religion,  sometimes  according  to  the  brilliancy  of  their  literature,  and  some-
times according  to  the  facilities  which  the  historian  himself  possessed  for  collecting
materials.  All  these  are  factitious  considerations  ;  and,  in  a  philosophic  view,  it  is
evident  that  precedence  should  be  given  to  countries  by  the  historian  solely  in  reference
to  the  ease  with  which  their  history  can  be  generalized  ;  following  in  this  respect  the
scientific  plan  of  proceeding  from  the  simple  to  the  complex.  [On  this,  see  above,  pp.  132,
133,  149,  notes. — ED.]  This  leads  us  to  the  conclusion,  that  in  the  study  of  Man,  as  in
the  study  of  Nature,  the  question  of  priority  resolves  itself  into  a  question  of  aberration  ;
and  that  the  more  aberrant  any  people  have  been,  that  is  to  say,  the  more  they  have

[*  It  need  hardly  be  remarked  that  this  is  a  "bull."  That  which  is  absolutely
necessary  to  an  exposition  is  not  a  digression. — ED.]

[t  As  the  perception  of  normality  implies  that  of  abnormality,  there  can  be  no  such
severance  as  is  here  contended  for.  The  normality  of  the  sociological  case  of  England
has  in  point  of  fact  been  ostensibly  demonstrated  above  only  in  contrast  with  the  alleged
abnormality  of  France.  But  seeing  that  in  the  terms  of  the  case  the  alleged  normal
type  is  only  one  instance  among  many  abnormal,  the  analogy  cannot  from  any  point
of  view  hold  good. — ED.]


286  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

I  have  begun  by  examining  the  position  of  England.  In  order  to  understand
the  way  in  which  the  diseases  of  the  first  country  were  aggravated  by  the
quackery  of  ignorant  rulers,  it  was  necessary  to  understand  the  way  in  which
the  health  of  the  second  country  was  preserved  by  being  subjected  to  smaller
interference,  and  allowed  with  greater  liberty  to  continue  its  natural  march.
With  the  light,  therefore,  which  we  have  acquired  by  a  study  of  the  normal
condition  of  the  English  mind,  we  can  with  the  greater  ease  now  apply  our
principles  to  that  abnormal  condition  of  French  society,  by  the  operations  of
which,  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  some  of  the  dearest  interests  of
civilization  were  imperilled.

In  France,  a  long  train  of   events,  which  I  shall  hereafter  relate,  had  from
an  early  period   given    to  the  clergy  a  share  of  power  larger  than  that  which

been  interfered  with,  the  lower  they  must  be  placed  in  an  arrangement  of  the  history
of  various  countries.  Coleridge  (Lit.  Remains,  vol.  i.  p.  326,  and  elsewhere  in  his  works)
seems  to  suppose  that  the  order  should  be  the  reverse  of  what  I  have  stated,  and  that
the  laws  both  of  mind  and  body  can  be  generalized  from  pathological  data.  Without  wish-
ing to  express  myself  too  positively  in  opposition  to  so  profound  a  thinker  as  Coleridge,
I  cannot  help  saying  that  this  is  contradicted  by  an  immense  amount  of  evidence,
and,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  is  supported  by  none.  It  is  contradicted  by  the  fact  that
those  branches  of  inquiry  which  deal  with  phenomena  little  affected  by  foreign  causes
have  been  raised  to  sciences  sooner  than  those  which  deal  with  phenomena  greatly
affected  by  foreign  causes.  The  organic  world,  for  example,  is  more  perturbed  by  the
inorganic  world,  than  the  inorganic  world  is  perturbed  by  it.  Hence  we  find  that  the
inorganic  sciences  have  always  been  cultivated  before  the  organic  ones,  and  at  the  present
moment  are  far  more  advanced  than  they.  In  the  same  way,  human  physiology  is
older  than  human  pathology  ;  and  while  the  physiology  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  has
been  successfully  prosecuted  since  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  pathology
of  the  vegetable  kingdom  can  scarcely  be  said  to  exist,  since  none  of  its  laws  have  been
generalized,  and  no  systematic  researches,  on  a  large  scale,  have  yet  been  made  into
the  morbid  anatomy  of  plants.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  different  ages  and  different
sciences  bear  unconscious  testimony  to  the  uselessness  of  paying  much  attention  to
the  abnormal,  until  considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  the  study  of  the  normal ;
and  this  conclusion  might  be  confirmed  by  innumerable  authorities,  who,  differing
from  Coleridge,  hold  that  physiology  is  the  basis  of  pathology,  and  that  the  laws  of
disease  are  to  be  raised,  not  from  the  phenomena  presented  in  disease,  but  from  those
presented  in  health  ;  in  other  words,  that  pathology  should  be  investigated  deductively
rather  than  inductively,  and  that  morbid  anatomy  and  clinical  observations  may  verify
the  conclusions  of  science,  but  can  never  supply  the  means  of  creating  the  science  itself.
On  this  extremely  interesting  question,  compare  Geoffroy  Saint  Hilaire,  Hist,  des  Anom-
alies de  V Organisation,  vol.  ii.  pp.  9,  10,  127  ;  Bowman's  Surgery,  in  Encydop.  of  the
Medical  Sciences,  p.  824;  Bichat,  Anatomic  Generate,  vol.  i.  p.  20;  Cullerfs  Works,
vol.  i.  p.  424  ;  Comte,  Philos.  Positive,  vol.  hi.  pp.  334,  335  ;  Robin  et  Verdeil,  Chimie
Anatomique,  vol.  i.  p.  68;  Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,  vol.  i.  p.  in  ;  Georget,  de  la
Folie,  pp.  2,  391,  392  ;  Brodie's  Pathology  and  Surgery,  p.  3  ;  Blainville,  Physiologic
Comparee,  vol.  i.  p.  20;  Feuchtersleberis  Medical  Psychology,  p.  200  ;  Lawrence's  Lectures
on  Man,  1844,  p.  45  ;  Simon's  Pathology,  p.  5.

Another  confirmation  of  the  accuracy  of  this  view  is,  that  pathological  investigations
of  the  nervous  system,  numerous  as  they  have  been,  have  effected  scarcely  anything  ;
the  reason  evidently  being  that  the  preliminary  knowledge  of  the  normal  state  is  not
sufficiently  advanced.  See  Noble  on  the  Brain,  pp.  76-92,  337,  338  ;  Henry  on  the  Nervous
System,  in  Third  Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.  p.  78  ;  Holland's  Medical  Notes,  p.  608  ;  Jones
and  Sieveking's  Patholog.  Anat.  p.  211.  [On  Buckle's  view,  the  "laws  of  disease"
would  consist  in  the  notation  of  any  departure  from  an  accepted  healthy  norm.  But
abnormality  is  not  disease,  and  health  is  compatible  with  much  variety  of  structure,
nutrition,  and  functioning.  The  deduction  he  prescribes  would  thus  be  invalid.  It
would  be  more  accurate  to  say  that  the  "  laws  of  health  "  have  been  reached  through
the  phenomena  of  disease.  Plant  pathology  is  necessarily  backward  precisely  because
his  deductive  plan  cannot  be  applied  to  it.— ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          287

they  possessed  in  England.*  The  results  of  this  were  for  a  time  decidedly
beneficial,  inasmuch  as  the  church  restrained  the  lawlessness  of  a  barbarous
age,  and  secured  a  refuge  for  the  weak  and  oppressed.  But  as  the  French  ad-
vanced in  knowledge,  the  spiritual  authority,  which  had  done  so  much  to  curb
their  passions,  began  to  press  heavily  upon  their  genius,  and  impede  its  move-
ments. That  same  ecclesiastical  power  which  to  an  ignorant  age  is  an  unmixed
benefit,  is  to  a  more  enlightened  age  a  serious  evil.  The  proof  of  this  was  soon
apparent.  For  when  the  Reformation  broke  out,  the  church  had  in  England
been  so  weakened  that  it  fell  almost  at  the  first  assault  ;  its  revenues  were
seized  by  the  crown,2  and  its  offices,  after  being  greatly  diminished  both  in
authority  and  in  wealth,  were  bestowed  upon  new  men,  who,  from  the  uncer-
tainty of  their  tenure,  and  the  novelty  of  their  doctrines,  lacked  that  long-
established  prescription  by  which  the  claims  of  the  profession  are  mainly  sup-
ported. This,  as  we  have  already  seen,  was  the  beginning  of  an  uninterrupted
progress,  in  which,  at  every  successive  step,  the  ecclesiastical  spirit  lost  some
of  its  influence.  In  France,  on  the  other  hand,  the  clergy  were  so  powerful,
that  they  were  able  to  withstand  the  Reformation, f  and  thus  preserve  for  them-
selves those  exclusive  privileges  which  their  English  brethren  vainly  attempted
to  retain.

This  was  the  beginning  of  that  second  marked  divergence  between  French
and  English  civilization,3  which  had  its  origin,  indeed,  at  a  much  earlier  period,
but  which  now  first  produced  conspicuous  results.  Both  countries  had  in
their  infancy  been  greatly  benefited  by  the  church,  which  always  showed  itself
ready  to  protect  the  people  against  the  oppressions  of  the  crown  and  the  nobles.4

2  A  circumstance  which  Harris  relates  with  evident  delight,  and  goes  out  of  his  way
to  mention.     Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  hi.  p.  300.     On  the  amount  of  loss  the  church
thus  sustained,  see  Sinclair's  Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  i.  pp.  181-184,  and  Eccleston's
English  Antiquities,  p.  228.     [It  is  not  the  fact  that  the  church  "  had  been  weakened."
The  Lollard  movement  had  come  to  nothing  ;  the  nation  was  orthodox  ;  and  Henry  VIII.
in  his  youth  "  cherished  churchmen  more  than  any  king  in  England  had  ever  done."
"  England  had  for  above  three  hundred  years  been  the  tamest  part  of  Christendom
to  the  papal  authority."     (Burnet,  History  of  the  Reformation,  Nares'  ed.  i.  17,  18.   Com-
pare Froude,  Hist,  of  England,  ed.  1872,  i.  173).     As  Shaftesbury  put  it  later  :  "  For
religion  we  were  highly  famed  above  all  nations,  by  being  the  most  subject  to  our
ecclesiastics  at  home,  and  the  best  tributaries  and  servants  to  the  Holy  See  abroad."
(Characteristics,  ed.  1900,  ii.  249).     It  was  in  fact  the  "  abnormal  "  power  of  the  Tudor
kings,  built  up  after  the  dissolution  of  the  feudal  nobility  in  the  Wars  of  the  Roses,
that  made  possible  the  action  of  Henry  VIII.,  and  even  that  was  resisted  in  a  widespread
rebellion. — ED.]

3  The  first  divergence  arose  from  the  influence  of  the  protective  spirit,  as  I  shall  en-
deavour to  explain  in  the  next  chapter.

4  On  the  obligations  Europe  is  under  to  the  Catholic  clergy,  see  some  liberal  and
very  just  remarks  in  Kemble's  Saxons  in  England,  vol.  ii.  pp.  374,  375  ;  and  in  Guizofs
Civilisation  en  France.      See  also  Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  iii.  pp.  199-206,
255-257,  vol.  v.  p.  138,  vol.  vi.  pp.  406,  407  ;  Palgrave's  Anglo-Saxon  Commonwealth,
vol.  i.  p.  655  ;  Lingard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  44  ;  Klimrath,  Travaux  sur  I' Hist.
du  Droit,  vol.  i.  p.  394  ;  Carwitheri's  Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  157.

[*  This  is  doubtful.  The  Chancellor  du  Prat  declared  in  1517  that  under  the  Prag-
matic Sanction  of  Charles  VII.,  which  greatly  restricted  the  power  of  the  church,  France
was  isolated  among  the  Christian  powers,  and  regarded  as  heretical.  Vie  d'Antoine
du  Prat,  par  le  Marquis  du  Prat,  1857,  p.  152. — ED.]

[f  This  is  again  misleading.  The  clergy  in  England  were  beaten  down  by  the  power
of  the  crown,  the  weakened  nobility  being  unable  to  sustain  them.  In  France  they
had  the  crown  with  them.  A  similar  combination  would  certainly  have  sustained  the
church  in  England.  As  to  the  swerving  of  Francis  I.  from  his  first  leaning  to  a  refor-
mation, cp.  Herbert's  Hist,  of  England  under  Henry  VIII. ,  ed.  1870,  pp.  528,  720,  and
Lutteroth,  La  Reform,  en  France  pend.  sa  prcm.  periode,  1859,  pp.  14-17. — ED.]


288  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

But  in  both  countries,  as  society  advanced,  there  arose  a  capacity  for  self-
protection  ;  and  early  in  the  sixteenth,  or  probably  even  in  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury, it  became  urgently  necessary  to  diminish  that  spiritual  authority,  which,
by  prejudging  the  opinions  of  men,  has  impeded  the  march  of  their  knowledge.5
It  is  on  this  account  that  Protestantism,  so  far  from  being,  as  its  enemies  have
called  it,  an  aberration  arising  from  accidental  causes,  was  essentially  a  normal
movement,  and  was  the  legitimate  expression  of  the  wants  of  the  European
intellect.  Indeed,  the  Reformation  owed  its  success,  not  to  a  desire  of  purifying
the  church,  but  to  a  desire  of  lightening  its  pressure  ;  and  it  may  be  broadly
stated  that  it  was  adopted  in  every  civilized  country  except  in  those  where
preceding  events  had  increased  the  influence  of  the  ecclesiastical  order,  either
among  the  people  or  among  their  rulers.  This  was,  unhappily,  the  case  with
France,  where  the  clergy  not  only  triumphed  over  the  Protestants,  but  appeared
for  a  time  to  have  gained  fresh  authority  by  the  defeat  of  such  dangerous
enemies.6

The  consequence  of  all  this  was  that  in-  France  everything  assumed  a  more
theological  aspect  than  in  England.  In  our  country,  the  ecclesiastical  spirit
had  by  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  become  so  feeble  that  even  *  in-
telligent foreigners  were  struck  by  the  peculiarity.7  The  same  nation  which
during  the  Crusades  had  sacrificed  innumerable  lives  in  the  hope  of  planting
the  Christian  standard  in  the  heart  of  Asia,8  was  now  almost  indifferent  to  the

5  The  way  in  which  this  acted  is  concisely  stated  by  Tennemann  :  "  Wenn  sich  nun
auch  ein  freierer  Geist  der  Forschung  regte,  so  fand  er  sich  gleich  durch  zwei  Grundsatze,
welche  aus  jenem  Supremat  der  Theologie  flossen,  beengt  und  gehemmt.     Der  erste
war  :  die  menschliche  Vernunft  kann  nicht  iiber  die  Offenbarung  hinausgehen.  .  .  .  Der
zweite  :  die  Vernunft  kann  nichts  als  wahr  erkennen,  was  dem  Inhalte  der  Offenbarung
widerspricht,  und  nichts  fur  falsch  erkennen,  was  derselben  angemessen  ist, — folgte
aus  dem  ersten."     Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  viii.  part  i.  p.  8.

6  As  to  the  influence  of  the  Reformation  generally,  in  increasing  the  power  of  the
Catholic  clergy,  see  M.  Ranke's  important  work  on  the  History  of  the  Popes  ;  and  as
to  the  result  in  France,  see  Monteil,  Hist,  des  divers  etats,  vol.  v.  pp.  233-235.      Corero,
who  was  ambassador  in  France  in  1569,  writes,  "  II  papa  puo  dire  a  mio  giudizio,  d'
aver  in  quest!  romori  piuttosto  guadagnato  che  perduto,  percioche  tanta  era  la  licenza
del  vivere,  secondo  che  ho  inteso,  prima  che  quel  regno  si  dividesse  in  due  parti,  era
tanta  poca  la  devozione  che  avevano  in  Roma  e  in  quei  che  vi  abitavano,  che  il  papa
era  piu  considerato  come  principe  grande  in  Italia,  che  come  capo  della  chiesa  e  pas  tore
universale.   Ma  scoperti  che  si  furono  gli  ugonotti,  cominciarono  i  cattolici  a  riverire  il
suo  nome,  e  riconoscerlo  per  vero  vicario  di  Cristo,  confirmandosi  tanto  piu  in  opinione
di  doverlo  tener  per  tale,  quanto  piu  lo  sentivano  sprezzare  e  negare  da  essi  ugonotti."
Relations  des  Ambassadeurs  Venitiens,  vol.  ii.  p.  162.     This  interesting  passage  is  one
of  many  proofs  that  the  immediate  advantages  derived  from  the  Reformation  have
been  overrated  ;  though  the  remote  advantages  were  undoubtedly  immense.

7  The  indifference  of  the  English  to  theological  disputes,  and  the  facility  with  which
they  changed  their  religion,  caused  many  foreigners  to  censure  their  fickleness.    See,
for  instance,  Essais  de  Montaigne,  livre  ii.  chap.  xii.  p.  365.     Perlin,  who  travelled  in
England  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  says,  "The  people  are  reprobates,  and
thorough  enemies  to  good  manners  and  letters  ;  for  they  don't  know  whether  they
belong  to  God  or  the  devil,  which  St.  Paul  has  reprehended  in  many  people,  saying
Be  not  transported  with  divers  sorts  of  winds,  but  be  constant  and  steady  to  your  belief."
Antiquarian  Repertory,  vol.  iv.  p.  511,  4to,  1809.     See  also  the  remarks  of  Michele  in
1557,  and  of  Crespet  in  1590  ;  Ellis' s  Original  Letters,  2nd  series,  vol.  ii.  p.  239;  Hallam's
Constitutional  History,  vol.  i.  p.  102  ;  Southey's  Commonplace  Book,  3rd  series,  p.  408.

8  An  historian  of  the  thirteenth  century  strikingly  expresses  the  theological  feelings
of  the  English  Crusaders,  and  the  complete  subordination  of  the  political  ones:  "  In-
dignum  quippe  judicabant  animarum  suarurn  salutem  omittere,  et  obsequium  co?lestis

[*  The  "even"  is  scarcely  appropriate.     A   French  Catholic  would  denounce  the
English  situation  as  a  matter  of  course. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          289

religion  even  of  its  own  sovereign.  Henry  VIII.,  by  his  sole  will,  regulated
the  national  creed,  and  fixed  the  formularies  of  the  church,  which,  if  the  people
had  been  in  earnest,  he  could  not  possibly  have  done  ;  for  he  had  no  means
of  compelling  submission  ;  he  had  no  standing  army  ;  and  even  his  personal
guards  were  so  scanty  that  at  any  moment  they  could  have  been  destroyed
by  a  rising  of  the  warlike  apprentices  of  London.9  After  his  death  there  came
Edward,  who,  as  a  Protestant  king,  undid  the  work  of  his  father  ;  and  a  few
years  later  there  came  Mary,  who,  as  a  Popish  queen,  undid  the  work  of  her
brother ;  while  she  in  her  turn  was  succeeded  by  Elizabeth,  under  whom
another  great  alteration  was  effected  in  the  established  faith.10  Such  was  the
indifference  of  the  people,  that  these  vast  changes  were  accomplished  without
any  serious  risk.11  In  France,  on  the  other  hand,  at  the  mere  name  of  religion,
thousands  of  men  were  ready  for  the  field.  In  England,  our  civil  wars  have  all
been  secular  *  ;  they  have  been  waged,  either  for  a  change  of  dynasty,  or  for
an  increase  of  liberty.  But  those  far  more  horrible  wars  by  which  in  the  six-
teenth century  France  was  desolated,  were  conducted  in  the  name  of  Chris-
tianity, and  even  the  political  struggles  of  the  great  families  were  merged  in
a  deadly  contest  between  Catholics  and  Protestants.12

The  effect  this  difference  produced  on  the  intellect  of  the  two  countries  is  very
obvious.  The  English,  concentrating  their  abilities  upon  great  secular  matters,
had  by  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century  produced  a  literature  which  never
can  perish.  But  the  French,  down  to  that  period,  had  not  put  forth  a  single
work  the  destruction  of  which  would  now  be  a  loss  to  Europe,  f  What  makes

Regis,  clientelae  regis  alicujus  terreni  postponere ;  constituerunt  igitur  terminum,
videlicet  festum  nativitatis  beati  Johannis  Baptistap."  Matthai  Paris  Historia  Major,
p.  671.  It  is  said,  that  the  first  tax  ever  imposed  in  England  on  personal  property
was  in  1166,  and  was  for  the  purpose  of  crusading.  Sinclair's  Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  i;
p.  88  :  "  It  would  not  probably  have  been  easily  submitted  to,  had  it  not  been  appro
priated  for  so  popular  a  purpose."

9  Henry  VIII.  had  at  one   time   fifty  horse -guards,  but  they  being  expensive    were
soon  given  up  ;  and  his  only  protection  consisted  of   "  the  yeomen  of  the  guard,  fifty
in  number,  and  the  common  servants  of  the  king's  household."     Hallam's  Const.  Hist.
vol.  i.  p.  46.    These  "  yeomen  of  the  guard  were  raised  by  Henry  VII:  in  1485-"    Grose's
Military  Antiquities,  vol.  i.  p.  167.     Compare  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vii.  p.  54  '>
and  Lingard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  298.

10  Locke,  in  his  First  Letter  on  Toleration,  has  made  some  pungent,  and,  I  should
suppose,  very  offensive  observations  on  these  rapid  changes.     Locke's  Works,  vol.  v.  p.  27.

11  But  although  Mary  easily  effected  a  change  of    religion,  the  an ti -ecclesiastical
spirit  was  far  too  strong  to  allow  her  to  restore  to  the  church  its  property.     "  In  Mary's
reign,  accordingly,  her  parliament,  so  obsequious  in  all  matters  of  religion,  adhered  with
a  firm  grasp  to  the  possession  of  church -lands."    Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  77.     See
also  Short's  Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  p.  213  ;  Lingard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iv:
PP-  339.»  34O  5  Butler's  Mem.  of  the  Catholics,  vol.  i.  p.  253  ;  and  Carwithen's  Hist,  of  the
Church  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  346.     [For  "  the  anti-ecclesiastical  spirit"  we  should  here
read  simply  the  spirit  of  self-interest.     Parliament  represented  especially  the  class  which
had  acquired  the  church-lands. — ED.]

12  "  Quand  eclata  la  guerre  des  opinions  religieuses,  les  antiques  rivalites  des  barons
transformerent  en  haine  du  preche  ou  de  la  messe."     Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme

[*  See  above,  pp.  203-4  notes.  In  the  rebellion  against  the  confiscations  of  Henry
VIII:,  40,000  men  took  the  field. — ED.]

[f  This  surprising  assertion,  which  dismisses  as  insignificant  the  works  of  Froissart,
Commynes,  Villon,  Du    Bellay,  Marot,    Rabelais,  Brantome,    and    Montaigne,  is    ex
plicitly  contradicted  below  as  regards  Montaigne.     As  Buckle  has  above  (p.  152)  defined
literature  so  as  to  make  light  of  belles  lettres,  it  is  difficult  to  divine  what  he  had  in  view
in  English  literature  before  1600.     Hooker  must  be  his  main  ground,  since  he  nowhere
mentions  Pecock's  Repressor,  or  More's  Utopia  ;  and   Hooker  is  subsequent  to  Mon
taigne,  having  only  in  1594  published  the  first  four  books  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Polity.—
ED.]

19


29o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

this  contrast  the  more  remarkable  is  that  in  France  the  civilization,  such  as  it
was,  had  a  longer  standing;  the  material  resources  of  the  country  had  been  earlier
developed  ;  its  geographical  position  made  it  the  centre  of  European  thought  ;  13
and  it  had  possessed  a  literature  at  a  time  when  our  ancestors  were  a  mere  tribe
of  wild  and  ignorant  barbarians.

The  simple  fact  is  that  this  is  one  of  those  innumerable  instances  which  teach
us  that  no  country  can  rise  to  eminence  so  long  as  the  ecclesiastical  power  pos-
sesses much  authority.*  For  the  predominance  of  the  spiritual  classes  is  neces-
sarily accompanied  by  a  corresponding  predominance  of  the  topics  in  which  those
classes  delight.  Whenever  the  ecclesiastical  profession  is  very  influential,
ecclesiastical  literature  will  be  very  abundant,  and  what  is  called  profane  litera-
ture will  be  very  scanty.  Hence  it  occurred  that  the  minds  of  the  French,
being  almost  entirely  occupied  with  religious  disputes,  had  no  leisure  for  those
great  inquiries  into  which  we  in  England  were  beginning  to  enter  ;  u  and  there
was,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  an  interval  of  a  whole  generation  between  the  pro-
gress of  the  French  and  English  intellects,  simply  because  there  was  about  the
same  interval  between  the  progress  of  their  scepticism.  The  theological  litera
ture,  indeed,  rapidly  increased  ;  15  but  it  was  not  until  the  seventeenth  century
that  France  produced  that  great  secular  literature,  the  counterpart  of  which
was  to  be  found  in  England  before  the  sixteenth  century  had  come  to  a  close.

Such  was,  in  France,  the  natural  consequence  of  the  power  of  the  church
being  prolonged  beyond  the  period  which  the  exigencies  of  society  required.
But  while  this  was  the  intellectual  result,  the  moral  and  physical  results  were
still  more  serious.  While  the  minds  of  men  were  thus  heated  by  religious  strife,
it  would  have  been  idle  to  expect  any  of  those  maxims  of  charity  to  which
theological  faction  is  always  a  stranger.  While  the  Protestants  were  murdering
the  Catholics,16  and  the  Catholics  murdering  the  Protestants,  it  was  hardly
likely  that  either  sect  should  feel  tolerance  for  the  opinions  of  its  enemy.17

et  de  la  Ligue,  vol.  iv.  p.  32.  Compare  Duplessis  Mornay,  Mem.  el  Correspond,  vol.  ii.
pp.  422,  563  ;  and  Boullier,  Maison  Militaire  des  Rots  de  France,  p.  25,  "  des  querelles
d'autant  plus  vives,  qu'elles  avoient  la  religion  pour  base."

13  The  intellectual  advantages  of    France,  arising  from  its  position  between  Italy,
Germany,  and  England,  arc  very  fairly  stated  by  M.  Lerminier  (Philosophic  du  Droit,
vol.  i.  p.  9).

14  Just  in  the  same  way,  the  religious  disputes  in  Alexandria  injured  the  interests
of  knowledge.     See  the  instructive  remarks  of  M.  Matter  (Hist,  de  VEcole  d"  Alexandrie,
vol.  ii.  p.  131).

15  Monteil,  Hist,  des  divers  Etats,  vol.  vi.  p.  136.     Indeed,  the  theological  spirit  seized
the  theatre,  arid  the  different  sectarians  ridiculed  each  other's  principles  on  the  stage.
See  a  curious  passage  at  p.  182  of  the  same  learned  work.

16  The  crimes  of  the  French  Protestants,  though  hardly  noticed  in  Felice's  History
of  the  Protestants  of  France,  pp.  138-143,  were  as  revolting  as  those  of  the  Catholics,  and
quite  as  numerous  relatively  to  the  numbers  and  power  of  the  two  parties.     Compare
Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  516,  517,  with  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Re  forme,
vol.  ii.  p.  173,  vol.  vi.  p.  54;  and  Smedley,  Hist,  of  the  Reformed  Religion  in  France,
vol.  i.  pp.  199,  200,  237.

17  In    1569  Corero  writes  :    "  Ritrovai  quel  regno,  certo,  posto  in  grandissima  con-
fusione;  perche,  stante  quella  divisione  di  religione   (convertita   quasi  in  due  fazioni
e  inimicizie  particolari).  era  causa  ch'  ognuno,  senza  che  amicizia  o  parentela  potesse
aver  luoco,  stava  con  1'  orecchie  attente  ;   e  pieno  di  sospetto  ascoltava  da  che  parte
nasceva  qualche  romore."     Relat.  des  Ambassad.  Veniiiens,  vol.  ii.  p.    106.      He  em-
phatically adds,  "Temevano  gl'    ugonotti,  temevano   Ii   cattolici,  temeva  il  prencipe,
temevano  Ii  sudciiti."     See  also,  on  this  horrible  state  of  opinions,  Sismondi,  Hist,  dts
Francais,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  21.  22,  118-120,  296,  430.    On  both  sides,  the  grossest  calumnies
were  propagated  and  believed  ;  and  one  of  the  charges  brought  against  Catherine  de

[*  This  is  another  oversight.     The  cases  of  Spain   and  Italy  are  sufficient  to  the
contrary.— ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          291

During  the  sixteenth  century  treaties  were  occasionally  made  between  the
two  parties  ;  but  they  were  only  made  to  be  immediately  broken  ;  18  and,  with
the  single  exception  of  1'Hopital,  the  bare  idea  of  toleration  does  not  seem  to
have  entered  the  head  of  any  statesman  of  the  age.  It  was  recommended  by
him  ;  19  but  neither  his  splendid  abilities  nor  his  unblemished  integrity  could
make  head  against  the  prevailing  prejudices,  and  he  eventually  retired  into
private  life  without  effecting  any  of  his  noble  schemes.20

Indeed,  in  the  leading  events  of  this  period  of  French  history,  the  predomin-
ance of  the  theological  spirit  was  painfully  shown.  It  was  shown  in  the  universal
determination  to  subordinate  political  acts  to  religious  opinions.2*  It  was  shown
in  the  conspiracy  of  Amboise,  and  in  the  conference  of  Poissy  ;  and  still  more
was  it  shown  in  those  revolting  crimes  so  natural  to  superstition,  the  massacres
of  Vassy  and  of  St.  Bartholomew,  the  murder  of  Guise  by  Poltrot,  and  of
Henry  III.  by  Clement.  These  were  the  legitimate  results  of  the  spirit  of  re-
ligious bigotry.*  They  were  the  results  of  that  accursed  spirit,  which,  whenever
it  has  had  the  power,  has  punished  even  to  the  death  those  who  dared  to  differ
from  it  ;  and  which,  now  that  the  power  has  passed  away,  still  continues  to
dogmatize  on  the  most  mysterious  subjects,  tamper  with  the  most  sacred  prin-
ciples of  the  human  heart,  and  darken  with  its  miserable  superstitions  those
sublime  questions  that  no  one  should  rudely  touch,  because  they  are  for  each
according  to  the  measure  of  his  own  soul,  because  they  lie  in  that  unknown
tract  which  separates  the  Finite  from  the  Infinite,  and  because  they  are  as  a
secret  and  individual  covenant  between  Man  and  his  God.

How  long  these  sad  days 22  would,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,  have

Medici  was  that  she  caused  the  Cesarean  operation  to  be  performed  on  the  wives  of
Protestants,  in  order  that  no  new  heretics  might  be  born.  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,
vol.  vii.  p.  294.

18  Mably,  Observations  sur  VHist.  de  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  149.     In  the  reign  of  Charles  IX.
alone,  there  were  no  less  than  five  of  these  religious  wars,  each  of  which  was  concluded
by  a  treaty.     See  Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplomatie  Francaise,  vol.  ii.  p   69.

19  For  which  1'Hopital  was  accused  of  atheism  :  ''  Homo  doctus,  sed  verus  atheus."
Diet.  Philos.  article  Atheisme,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxxvii.  pp.  181,  182.

20  I  have  not  been  able  to  meet  with  any  good  life  of  this  great  man  :  that  by  Charles
Butler  is  very  superficial,  and  so  is  that  by  Bernardi,  in  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.  pp.  412-424.
My  own  information  respecting  1'Hopital  is  from  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xviii.
pp.  431-436;  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  ii.  pp.   135-137,  168-170;  De  Thou,
Hist.  Univ.  vol.  iii.  pp.  519-523,  vol.  iv.  pp.  2-8,  152-159,  vol.  v.  pp.  180-182,  520,  521,
535,  vol.  vi.  pp.  703,  704  ;  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,  vol.  i.  p.  234.     Duvernet  (Hist,
de  la  Sorbonne,  vol.  i.  pp.  215-218)  is  unsatisfactory,  though  fully  recognizing  his  merit.
[A  short  Vie  de  VHopital  had  been  published  by  Villeinain,  and  appears  in  the  revised
ed.  of  his  Etudes   dhistoire  moderne,  1846.      It  shows,  among  other  things,  that  other
statesmen  besides  1'Hopital  longed  for  toleration.     See  pp.  363-8,  428. — ED.]

21  "  Ce  fut  alors  que  la  nation  ne  prit  conseil  que  de  son  fanatisme.     Les  esprits,  de
jour  en  jour  plus  echauffes,  ne  virent  plus  d'autre  objet  que  celui  de  la  religion,  et  par
piete  se  firent  les  injures  les  plus  atroces."     Mahly.  Observations  sin  rHist.  de  France,
vol.  iii.  p.  145.

'2  The  igth  and  2oth  volumes  of  Sismondi' s  Histoire  des  Francais  contain  painful
evidence  of  the  internal  condition  of  France  before  the  accession  of  Henry  IV.  Indeed,
as  Sismondi  says  (vol.  xx.  pp.  11-16),  it  seemed  at  one  time  as  if  the  only  prospect  was
a  relapse  into  feudalism.  See  also  Monteil,  Hist,  des  divers  FJats,  vol.  v.  pp.  242-249  :
"  plus  de  trois  cent  mille  maisons  detruites."  De  Thou,  in  the  memoirs  of  his  own  life,
says,  "  Les  loix  furent  meprisees,  et  1'honneur  de  la  France  fut  presque  aneanti  .  .  .  et
sous  le  voile  de  la  religion,  on  ne  respiroit  que  la  haine,  la  vengeance,  le  massacre  et
1'incendie."  Mem.  de  la  Vie,  in  Histoire  Univ.  vol.  i.  p.  120  ;  and  the  same  writer,  in

[*  It  is  relevant  here  to  remember  that  Henry  VIII.  brought  to  the  block  More,  Fisher,
and  Pole,  twelve  nobles  of  the  higher  ranks,  eighteen  lords  and  knights,  thirteen  abbots
and  priors,  seventy -seven  monks  and  priests,  "and  many  more  of  both  religions,"
Heylyn,  Hist,  of  the  Reformation,  ed.  1849,  i.  31,— ED,]


2Q2  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

been  prolonged  in  France,  is  a  question  which  we  now  perhaps  have  no  means
of  answering  ;  though  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  progress  even  of  empirical
knowledge  must,  according  to  the  process  already  pointed  out,  have  eventually
sufficed  to  rescue  so  great  a  country  from  her  degraded  position.  Fortunately,
however,  there  now  took  place  what  we  must  be  content  to  call  an  accident,
but  which  was  the  beginning  of  a  most  important  change.  In  the  year  1589,
Henry  IV.  ascended  the  throne  of  France.  This  great  prince,  who  was  far
superior  to  any  of  the  French  sovereigns  of  the  sixteenth  century,23  made  small
account  of  those  theological  disputes  which  his  predecessors  had  thought  to  be
of  paramount  importance.  Before  him,  the  kings  of  France,  animated  by  the
piety  natural  to  the  guardians  of  the  church,  had  exerted  all  their  authority
to  uphold  the  interests  of  the  sacred  profession.  Francis  I.  said  that  if  his
right  hand  were  a  heretic,  he  would  cut  it  off.24  Henry  II.,  whose  zeal  was  still
greater,25  ordered  the  judges  to  proceed  against  the  Protestants,  and  publicly
declared  that  he  would  "  make  the  extirpation  of  the  heretics  his  principal
business."  ^  Charles  IX.,  on  the  celebrated  day  of  St.  Bartholomew,  attempted
to  relieve  the  church  by  destroying  them  at  a  single  blow.  Henry  III.  promised
to  "  oppose  heresy  even  at  the  risk  of  his  life  ;  "  for  he  said  "  he  could  not  find
a  prouder  grave  than  amidst  the  ruins  of  heresy."27

his  great  history,  gives  almost  innumerable  instances  of  the  crimes  and  persecutions
constantly  occurring.  See,  for  some  of  the  most  striking  cases,  vol.  ii.  p.  383.  vol.  iv.
PP-  378,  380,  387,  495,  496,  539»  vol.  v.  pp.  189,  518,  561,  647,  vol.  vi.  pp.  421,  422,
424,  426,  427,  430,  469.  Compare  Duplessis,  Mem.  et  Correspond,,  vol.  ii.  pp.  41,  42,  322,
335.  611,  612,  vol.  iii.  pp.  344»  445,  vol.  iv.  pp.  112-114  ;  Benoist,  Hist,  de  I' Edit  de  Nantes,
vol.  i.  pp.  307,  308  ;  Duvernet,  Hist,  de  la  Sorbonne,  vol.  i.  p.  217.

23  This,  indeed,  is  not  saying  much  ;  and  far  higher  praise  might  be  justly  bestowed.
As  to  his  domestic  policy,  there  can  be  only  one  opinion  ;  and  M.  Flassan  speaks  in
the  most  favourable  terms  of  his  management  of  foreign  affairs.    Flassan,  Hist,  de  la
Diplomatic  Franf.  vol.  ii.  pp.  191,  192,  294-297,  vol.  iii.  p.  243.     And  see,  to  the  same
effect,  the  testimony  of  M.  Capefigue,  an  unfriendly  judge.     Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  vii.
p.  xiv.,  vol.  viii.  p.  156.     Fontenay  Mareuil,  who  was  a  contemporary  of  Henry  IV.,
though  he  wrote  many  years  after  the  king  was  murdered,  says,  "  Ce  grand  roy,  qui
estoit  en  plus  de  consideration  dans  le  monde  que  pas  un  de  ses  predecesseurs  n'avoit
este  depuis  Charlesmagne."     Mem.  de  Fontenay,  vol.  i.  p.  46.     Duplessis  Mornay  calls
him  "  le  plus  grand  roy  que  la  chrestiente  ait  porte  depuis  cinq  cens  ans  ;  "  and  Sully
pronounces  him  to  be  "  le  plus  grand  de  nos  rois."     Duplessis  Mornay,  Mem.  et  Corre-
spond, vol.  xi.  pp.  30,  77,  131.     Sully,  (Economies  Roy  ales,  vol.  vii.  p.  15.     Compare
vol.  vi.  pp.  397,  398,  vol.  ix.  pp.  35,  242,  with  some  sensible  remarks  in  Mem.  de  Genlis,
Paris,  1825,  vol.  ix.  p.  299.

24  So  it  is  generally  related  :  but  there  is  a  slightly  different  version  of  this  orthodox
declaration  in  Smedley's  Hist,  of   the  Reformation  in  France,  vol.  i.  p.  30.      Compare
Madame"  s  note  in  Mosheim's  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  24,  with  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franf ais,
vol.  xvi.  pp.  453,  454,  and  Relat.  des  Ambassad.  Venitiens,  vol.  i.  p.  50,  vol.  ii.  p.  48.     It
was  also  Francis  I.  who  advised  Charles  V.  to  expel  all  the  Mohammedans  from  Spain.
Llorente,  Hist,  de  r  Inquisition,  vol.  i.  p.  429.

25  The  historian  of  the  French  Protestants  says,  in  1548,  "  le  nouveau  roi  Henri  II
fut  encore  plus  rigoureux  que  son  pere."     Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  i.  p.  12.

26  M.  Ranke  (Civil  Wars  in  France,  vol.  i.  pp.  240,  241)  says,  that  he  issued  a  circular
"  addressed  to  the  parliaments  and  to  the  judicial  tribunals,  in  which  they  were  urged
to  proceed  against  the  Lutherans  with  the  greatest  severity,  and  the  judges  informed
that  they  would  be  held  responsible,  should  they  neglect  these  orders ;  and  in  which
he  declared  plainly,  that  as  soon  as  the  peace  with  Spain  was  concluded,  he  was  deter-
mined to  make  the  extirpation  of  the  heretics  his  principal  business."    See  also,  on
Henry  II.,  in  connexion  with  the  Protestants,  Mably,  Observ.  sur  I'Hist.  de  France,  vol.  iii.
PP-  133,  134  ;  De  Thou,  Hist.,  Univ.  vol.  i.  pp.  334,  335,  387,  vol.  ii.  p.  640,  vol.  iii.  pp.  365,
366  ^Felice's  Hist,  of  the  French  Protestants,  p.  58.

'  He  said  this  to  the  Estates  of  Blois  in  1588.     Ranke's  Civil  Wars  in  France,  vol.  ii.
p.  202.     Compare  his  edict,  in  1585,  in  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  iv.  pp.  244,  245


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          293

These  were  the  opinions  expressed  in  the  sixteenth^century  by  the  heads
of  the  oldest  monarchy  in  Europe.28  But  with  such  feelings  the  powerful
intellect  of  Henry  IV.  had  not  the  slightest  sympathy.  To  suit  the  shifting
politics  of  his  age,  he  had  already  changed  his"  religion  twice  ;  and  he  did  not
hesitate  to  change  it  a  third  time  29  when  he  found  that  by  doing  so  he  could
ensure  tranquillity  to  his  country.  As  he  had  displayed  such  indifference  about
his  own  creed,  he  could  not  with  decency  show  much  bigotry  about  the  creed
of  his  subjects.30  We  find,  accordingly,  that  he  was  the  author  of  the  first
public  act  of  toleration  which  any  government  promulgated  in  France  since
Christianity  had  been  the  religion  of  the  country.  Only  five  years  after  he  had
solemnly  abjured  Protestantism,  he  published  the  celebrated  Edict  of  Nantes,31
by  which,  for  the  first  time,  a  Catholic  government  granted  to  heretics  a  fair
share  of  civil  and  religious  rights.  This  was  unquestionably  the  most  im-
portant event  that  had  yet  occurred  in  the  history  of  French  civilization.32
If  it  is  considered  by  itself,  it  is  merely  an  evidence  of  the  enlightened  prin-
ciples of  the  king  ;  but  when  we  look  at  its  general  success,  and  at  the  cessation
of  religious  war  which  followed  it,  we  cannot  fail  to  perceive  that  it  was  part  of
a  vast  movement,  in  which  the  people  themselves  participated.  Those  who
recognize  the  truth  of  the  principles  I  have  laboured  to  establish,  will  expect
that  this  great  step  towards  religious  liberty  was  accompanied  *  by  that  spirit
of  scepticism,  in  the  absence  of  which  toleration  has  always  been  unknown.
And  that  this  was  actually  the  case,  may  be  easily  proved  by  an  examination
of  the  transitionary  state  which  France  began  to  enter  towards  the  end  of  the
sixteenth  century.

The  writings  of  Rabelais  are  often  considered  to  afford  the  first  instance  of
religious  scepticism  in  the  French  language.33  But,  after  a  tolerably  intimate


and  his  speech  in  vol.  v.  p.  122  ;  and  see  Benoist,  Hist,  de  I' Edit  de  Nantes,  vol.  i.  p.  328  ;
Duplessis  Mornay,  Mem-  et  Corresp.  vol.  i.  p.  no  ;  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  i.  p.  250,
vol.  viii.  p.  651,  vol.  x.  pp.  294,  589,  674,  675.

28  With   what   zeal    these    opinions    were    enforced,    appears,    besides    many   other
authorities,  from  Marino  Cavalli,  who   writes  in  1546,   "  Li  maestri  di  Sorbona  hanno
autorita  estrema  di  castigare  li  eretici,  il  che  fanno  con  il  fuoco,  brustolandoli  vivi  a
poco  a  poco."     Relat.  des  Ambassad.   Venitiens,  vol.  i.  p.  262  ;  and  see  vol.  ii.  p.  24.

29  Indeed,  Clement  VIII.  was  afterwards  apprehensive  of  a  fourth  apostasy :  "  Er
meinte  noch  immer,  Heinrich  IV.  werde  zuletzt  vielleicht  wieder  zum  Protestantismus
zuriickkehren,  wie  er  es  schon  einmal  gethan."  Ranke,  die  Pdpste,  vol.  ii.  p.  246.      M.
Ranke,  from  his  great  knowledge  of  Italian  manuscripts,  has  thrown  more  light  on  these
transactions  than  the  French  historians  have  been  able  to  do.

30  On  his  conversion,  the  character  of  which  was  as  obvious  then  as  it  is  now,  compare
Duplessis  Mornay,  Mem.  et  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  257,  with  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,
vol.  ii.  p.  126.     See  also  HowelVs  Letters,  book  i.  p.  42  ;  and  a  letter  from  Sir  H.  Wotton
i*1  X593>  printed  in  Reliquicz  Wottonianz,  p.  711.     See  also  Ranke,  Civil  Wars  in  France,
vol.  ii.  pp.  257,  355  ;  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  vi.  pp.  305,  358.

31  The  Edict  of  Nantes  was  in  1598 ;  the  abjuration  in  1593.     Sismondi,  Hist,  des
Francais,  vol.  xxi.  pp,  202,  486.     But  in  1590  it  was  intimated  to  the  pope  as  probable,
if  not  certain,  that  Henry  would  "  in  den  Schooss  der  katholischen  Kirche  zuriickkehren."
Ranke,  die  Papste,  vol.  ii.  p.  210.

32  Of  this  edict,  Sismondi  says,  "  Aucune  epoque  dans  1'histoire  de  France  ne  marque
mieux  peut-etre  la  fin  d'un  monde  ancien,  le  commencement  d'un  monde  nouveau."
Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxi.  p.  489.

33  On   Rabelais,  as   the  supposed  founder  of  French  scepticism,   compare   Lavidlee,
Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  ii.  p.  306  ;  Stephen's  Lectures  on  the  History  of  France,  vol.  ii.
p.  242  ;  Sismondi,  Hist,   des   Franfais,   vol.   xvi.   p.   376.     [Religious   scepticism   of   a
seminal  kind  is  seen  in  French  literature  long  before  Rabelais.     Compare  Lanson,  H-ist.
de  la  litt.  franfaise,  ed.  1898,  p.  129,  as  to  the  Roman  de  la  Rose  in  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury.    But  even  in  the  sixteenth  century  the  Cymbalum  Mundi  of  Boiiaventure  Des-

[*  "  Preceded  "  is  the  expression  below,  p.  299. — ED.]


294  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

acquaintance  with  the  works  of  this  remarkable  man,  I  have  found  nothing
to  justify  such  an  opinion.  He  certainly  treats  the  clergy  with  great  disrespect,
and  takes  every  opportunity  of  covering  them  with  ridicule.3*  His  attacks,
however,  are  always  made  upon  their  personal  vices,  and  not  upon  that  narrow
and  intolerant  spirit  to  which  those  vices  were  chiefly  to  be  ascribed.  In  not
a  single  instance  does  he  show  anything  like  consistent  *  scepticism  ;  35  nor
does  he  appear  to  be  aware  that  the  disgraceful  lives  of  the  French  clergy  were
but  the  inevitable  consequence  of  a  system  which,  corrupt  as  it  was,  still  pos-
sessed every  appearance  of  strength  and  vitality.  Indeed,  the  immense  popu-
larity which  he  enjoyed  is  almost  of  itself  a  decisive  consideration;  since  no
one  who  is  well  informed  as  to  the  condition  of  the  French  early  in  the  sixteenth
century  will  believe  it  possible  that  a  people  so  sunk  in  superstition,  should
delight  in  a  writer  by  whom  superstition  is  constantly  attacked. t

But  the  extension  of  experience,  and  the  consequent  increase  of  knowledge,

periers  (1538),  a  work  of  the  hardiest  scepticism,  overlooked  by  Buckle,  is  nearly  con-
temporary with  the  earlier  books  of  Rabelais.  Desperiers  is  described  by  Charles  Nodier
as  one  of  the  three  great  French  writers  of  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the
compeer  of  Rabelais  and  Marot. — ED.]

34  Particularly  the  monks.     See,  among  numerous  other  instances,  vol.  i.   pp.  278,
282,  vol.  ii.  pp.  284,  285,  of  (Euvres  de  Rabelais,  edit.  Amsterdam,   1725.     However,
the  high  dignitaries  of  the  church  are  not  spared  ;  for  he  says  that  Gargantua  "  ?e  mor-
voit  en  archidiacre,"  vol.  i.  p.  132  ;  and  on  two  occasions  (vol.  iii.  p.  65,  vol.  iv.  pp.  199,
200)  he  makes  a  very  indecent  allusion  to  the  pope.     In  vol.  i.  pp.  260,  261,  he  satirically
notices  the  way  in  which  the  services  of  the  church  were  performed  :  "  Dont  luy  dist  le
moyne  :  Je  ne  dors  jamais  a  mon  aise,  sinon  quand  je  suis  au  sermon,  ou  quand  je  prie
Dieu."

35  His  joke  on  the  strength  of  Samson  ((Euvres  de  Rabelais,  vol.  ii.  pp.  29,  30),  and
his  ridicule  of  one  of  the  Mosaic  laws  (vol.  iii.  p.  34),  are  so  unconnected  with  other  parts
of  his  work  as  to  have  no   appearance  of  belonging  to  a  general  scheme.     The  com-
mentators, who  find  a  hidden  meaning  in  every  author  they  annotate,  have  represented
Rabelais  as  aiming  at  the  highest  objects,  and  seeking  to  effect  the  most  extensive  social
and  religious  reforms.     This  I  greatly  doubt,  at  all  events  I  have  seen  no  proof  of  it ;
and  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  Rabelais  owes  a  large  share  of  his  reputation  to  the
obscurity  of  his  language.     On  the  other  side  of  the  question,  and  in  favour  of  his  com-
prehensiveness, see  a  bold  passage  in  Coleridge's  Lit.  Remains,  vol.  i.  pp.  138,  139.

[*  By  "  consistent  "  appears  to  be  meant  "  thoroughgoing." — ED.]
[t  A  notable  petitio  principii.  The  admirers  of  Desperiers  were  presumably  more
sceptical  than  any  one  at  the  same  time  in  England.  The  measure  of  freethought  in
Rabelais  is  naturally  relative  to  the  culture -stage.  "  Rabelais  n'est  pas  profond  :  il
faut  oser  le  dire."  (Lanson,  p.  250).  But  what  is  vital  in  him,  from  the  point  of  view
proper  to  Buckle,  is  his  intense  secularity,  his  irrepressible  naturalism  of  spirit,  and  his
virtual  disregard  of  the  theological  point  of  view.  If  he  did  not  "  constantly  attack  "
superstition,  he  deeply  undermined  it.  His  writing  expresses  "un  appetit  de  savoir
qui  ne  se  contient  dans  aucune  borne."  (Id.  p.  253).  And  it  is  quite  clear  that  he  was
in  the  full  current  of  whatever  scepticism  there  was  in  his  day.  A  tolerably  practical
proof  of  this  is  the  fact  that  from  the  very  first  issue  of  his  Pantagruel  the  Sorbonne
was  on  his  track  (Stapfer,  Rabelais,  sa  personne,  son  genie,  son  ceuvre,  1889,  pp.  30,  38)  ;
and  that  though  he  was  careful  to  prune  his  writings  at  many  points,  and  obtained  a
"privilege  royal"  for  his  fourth  book  (1545),  he  was  repeatedly  menaced  with  prose-
cution. In  1552  his  privilege  was  absolutely  annulled,  so  that  he  was  forced  to  resign
his  two  cures  (Id.  pp.  63-67,  74,  78,  79).  Finally,  he  was  one  of  the  first  anatnuists
of  his  day,  being  "  non  seulement  un  des  premiers— sinon  le  premier,— qui  aient  fait  des
demonstrations  sur  le  cadavre,  mais  encore  qui  aient  vante  I'utilite  des  dissections"
(Le  Double,  Rabelais  anatomiste  et  physiologist,  1889,  pp.  12,  425  ;  and  pref.  by  Prof.
Duval,  p.  xiii.).  Rabelais,  in  fine,  exhibited  as  much  scepticism  as  at  that  time  any
man  could  without  risking  his  life,  as  did  Desperiers.  Already  in  1535  he  was  ridiculing
astrology,  as  Montaigne  did  fifty  years  later.  And  see  Buckle's  admission  below,
ch.  xiii.  note  22. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          295

were  preparing  the  way  for  a  great  change  in  the  French  intellect.  The  process,
which  had  just  taken  place  in  England,  was  now  beginning  to  take  place  in
France;  and  in  both  countries  the  order  of  events  was  precisely  the  same.
The  spirit  of  doubt,  hitherto  confined  to  an  occasional  solitary  thinker,  gradually
assumed,  a  bolder  form  :  first  it  found  a  vent  in  the  national  literature,  and
then  it  influenced  the  conduct  oi  practical  statesmen.  That  there  was,  in  France,
an  intimate  connexion  between  scepticism  and  toleration,  is  proved  not  only
by  those  general  arguments  which  make  us  infer  that  such  connexion  must
always  exist,  but  also  by  the  circumstance,  that  only  a  few  years  before  the
promulgation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes,  there  appeared  the  first  systematic  sceptic
who  wrote  in  the  French  language.*  The  Essays  of  Montaigne  were  published
in  I588,36  and  form  an  epoch,  not  only  in  the  literature  but  also  in  the  civiliza-
tion of  France.  Putting  aside  personal  peculiarities,  which  have  less  weight
than  is  commonly  supposed,  it  will  be  found  that  the  difference  between  Rabelais
and  Montaigne  is  a  measure  of  the  difference  between  1545  37  and  1588,  and
that  it,  in  some  degree,  corresponds  with  the  relation  I  have  indicated  between
Jewel  and  Hooker,  and  between  Hooker  and  Chillingworth.  For  the  law
which  governs  all  these  relations,  is  the  law  of  a  progressive  scepticism.  What
Rabelais  was  to  the  supporters  of  theology,  that  was  Montaigne  to  the  theology
itself. f  The  writings  of  Rabelais  were  only  directed  against  the  clergy;  but
the  writings  of  Montaigne  were  directed  against  the  system  of  which  the'  clergy
were  the  offspring.38  Under  the  guise  of  a  mere  man  of  the  world,  expressing
natural  thoughts  in  common  language  Montaigne  concealed  a  spirit  of  lofty

36  The  two  first  books  in  1580;  the  third  in  1588,  with  additions  to    the  first  two.
See  Niceron,  Mem.  pour  servir  a  VHist.  des  Homines  illustres,  vol.  xvi.  p.  210,  Paris,  1731.

37  The  first  impression  of  the  Pantagruel  of  Rabelais  has  no  date  on  the  title-page  ;
but  it  is  known  that  the  third  book  was  first  printed  in  1545,  and  the  fourth  book  in  1546.
See  Brunei,  Manuel  du  Libraire,  vol.  iv.  pp.  4-6,  Paris,  1843.     The  statement  in  Biog.
Univ.  vol.  xxxvi.  pp.  482,  483,  is  rather  confused.     [It  is  now  agreed  that  the  first  books
probably  appeared  in  1533  and  1535.     See  the  details  in  Stapfer,  pp.  26-51. — ED.]

38  Mr.  Hallam  (Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  p.  29)  says,  that  his  scepticism  ''is  not  dis-
played in  religion."     But  if  we  use  the  word  "religion  "  in  its  ordinary  sense,  as  con-
nected with  dogma,  it   is   evident  from  Montaigne's   language  that  he  was  a  sceptic,
and  an  unflinching  one  too.     Indeed,  he  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  all  religious  opinions
are  the  result  of  custom  :  "  Comme  de  vray  nous  n'avons  aultre  mire  de  la  verite  et  de
la  raison,  que  1'exemple  et  idee  des  opinions  et  usances  du  pai's  ou  nous  sommes:  Id
est  tousiours  la  par/aide  religion,  la  parfaicte  police,  parfaict  et  accomply  usage  de  toutes
choses."     Essais  de  Montaigne,  p.  121,  livre  i.  chap.  xxx.     As  a  natural  consequence,
he  lays  down  that  religious  error  is  not  criminal,  p.  53  ;  compare  p.  28.     See  also  how
he  notices  the  usurpations  of  the  theological  spirit,  pp.  116,  508,  528.     The  fact  seems
to  be  that  Montaigne,  while  recognizing  abstractedly  the  existence  of  religious  truths,
doubted  our  capacity  for  knowing  them  ;  that  is  to  say,  he  doubted  if  out  of  the  immense
number  of  religious  opinions  there  were  any  means  of  ascertaining  which  were  accurate.
His  observations  on  miracles  (pp.  541,  653,  654,  675)  illustrate  the  character  of  his  mind
and  what  he  says  on  prophetic  visions  is  quoted  and  confirmed  by  Pinel,  in  his  profound
work  Alienation  Mentale,  p.  256.     Compare  Maury,  Legendes  Pieuses,  p.  268,  note.

[*  Montaigne  is  not  properly  to  be  described  as  systematic  and  Desperiers,  who
preceded  him,  was  more  hardy  in  his  criticisms. — ED.]

[f  The  scepticism  of  Montaigne  was  really  a  product  of  the  wars  of  religion,  and  of
the  demoralization  they  wrought.  This  fact  has  only  recently  been  brought  out  by
M.  Champion  in  his  valuable  Introduction  aux  Essats  de  Montaigne,  1900.  In  his  youth
Montaigne  was  a  somewhat  extreme  zealot.  That  there  was  much  scepticism  around
him  is  proved  by  the  vogue  of  the  apologetic  work  of  De  Mornay,  De  la  verite  de  la  re-
ligion Chrestienne,  1581.  The  Colloquium  Heptaplomeres  of  Bodin  (1588)  was  so  bold
that  it  had  to  remain  in  manuscript.  And  Montaigne  seems  to  have  been  much  in-
fluenced by  Estienne's  Latin  translation  of  the  Hypotyposes  of  Sextus  Empiricus.  Cp.
Miss  Lowndes,  Michel  de  Montaigne,  1898,  p.  131,  and  Owen,  French  Skeptics,  p.  444. — ED.]


296  THE  HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  audacious  inquiry .39  Although  he  lacked  that  comprehensiveness  which
is  the  highest  form  of  genius,  he  possessed  other  qualities  essential  to  a  great
mind.  He  was  very  cautious,  and  yet  he  was  very  bold.  He  was  cautious,
since  he  would  not  believe  strange  things  because  they  had  been  handed  down
by  his  forefathers  ;  and  he  was  bold,  since  he  was  undaunted  by  the  reproaches
with  which  the  ignorant,  who  love  to  dogmatize,  always  cover  those  whose
knowledge  makes  them  ready  to  doubt.40  These  peculiarities  would,  in  any
age,  have  made  Montaigne  a  "useful  man  :  in  the  sixteenth  century  they  made
him  an  important  one.  At  the  same  time,  his  easy  and  amusing  style41  in
creased  the  circulation  of  his  works,  and  thus  contributed  to  popularize  those
opinions  which  he  ventured  to  recommend  for  general  adoption.

This,  then,  is  the  first  open  declaration  of  that  scepticism  which  towards  the
end  of'  the  sixteenth  century  publicly  appeared  in  France.42  During  nearly
three  generations,  it  continued  its  course  with  a  constantly  increasing  activity,
and  developed  itself  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  which  took  place  in  England.
It  will  not  be  necessary  to  follow  all  the  steps  of  this  great  process  ;  but  I  will
endeavour  to  trace  those  which,  by  their  prominence,  seem  to  be  the  most  im-
portant.

A  few  years  after  the  appearance  of  the  Essays  of  Montaigne,  there  was  pub-
lished in  France  a  work,  which,  though  now  little  read,  possessed  in  the  seven-
teenth century  a  reputation  of  the  highest  order.  This  was  the  celebrated
Treatise  on  Wisdom,  by  Charron,  in  which  we  find  for  the  first  time  an  attempt
made  in  a  modern  language  to  construct  a  .system  of  morals  without  the  aid
of  theology.43  What  rendered  this  book  in  some  respects  even  more  formid-
able than  Montaigne's,  was  the  air  of  gravity  with  which  it  was  written.  Charron
was  evidently  deeply  impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  task  he  had  under-
taken, and  he  is  honourably  distinguished  from  his  contemporaries  by  a  re-
markable purity  both  of  language  and  of  sentiment.  His  work  is  almost  the
only  one  of  that  age  in  which  nothing  can  be  found  to  offend  the  chastest  ears.
Although  he  borrowed  from  Montaigne  innumerable  illustrations,44  he  has  care-

39  His  friend,  the  celebrated  De  Thou,  calls  him  "  homme  franc,  ennemi  de  toute
contrainte."     Memoires,  in  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  i.  p.  59  :  see  also  vol.  xi.  p.  590.
And  M.  Lamartine  classes  him  with  Montesquieu,  as  "ces  deux  grands  republicans
de  la  pensee  francaise."     Hist,  des  Girondins,  vol.  i.  p.  174.

40  He  says  (Essais,  p.  97),  "  Ce  n'est  pas  a  1'adventure  sans  raison  que  nous  attribuons
a  simplesse  et  ignorance  la  facilite  de  croire  et  de  se  laisser  persuader."     Compare  two
striking  passages,  pp.  199  and  685.     Nothing  of  this  sort  had  ever  appeared  before  in
the  French  language.     [To  the  last,  however,  Montaigne  made  non-committal  declara-
tions.    In  a  passage  added  late  to  the  essays  (i.  54)  he  describes  himself  as  of  the  order
of  metis,  belonging  to  neither  camp. — ED.]

41  Dugald  Stewart,  whose  turn  of  mind  was  very  different  from  that  of  Montaigne,
calls  him  "  this  most  amusing  author."     Stewart's  Philos.  of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.  p.  468.
But  Rousseau,  in  every  respect  a  more  competent  judge,  enthusiastically  praises  "  la
naivete,  la  grace  et  1'energie  de  son  style  inimitable."     Musset  Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseau,
vol.  i.  p.  185.     Compare  Lettres  de  Sevigne,  vol.  iii.  p.  491,  edit.  Paris,  1843,  and  Lettres
de  Dudeffand  a  Walpole,  vol.  i.  p.  94.

42  "  Mais  celui  qui  a  repandu  et  popularise  en  France  le  scepticisme,  c'est  Montaigne."
Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philos.  II.  serie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  288,  289.     "  Die  erste  Regung  des  skep-
tischen  Geistes  nnden  wir  in  den  Versuchen  des  Michael  von  Montaigne."     Tennemann,
Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  ix.  p.  443.     On  the  immense  influence  of  Montaigne,  compare
Tennemann,  vol.  ix.  p.  458 :  Monteil,  Divers  Etats,  vol.  v.  pp.  263-265  ;  Sorel,  Biblio-
theque Franfoise,  pp.  80-91  ;  Le  Long,  Bibliotheque  Historique,  vol.  iv.  p.  527.

43  Compare  the  remarks  on  Charron  in  Tennemann,  Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  vol.  i.
p.  527,  with  two  insidious  passages  in  Charron,  De  la  Sagesse,  vol.  i.  pp.  4,  366.

44  The  obligations  of  Charron  to  Montaigne  were  very  considerable,  but  are  stated
too  strongly   by   many   writers.     Sorel,   Bibliotheque   Franfoise,    p.    93  ;  and  Hallam's
Literature  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  pp.  362,  509.     On  the  most  important  subjects,  Charron
was  a  bolder  and  deeper  thinker  than  Montaigne  ;  though  he  is  now  so  little  read,  that


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT  297

fully  omitted  those  indecencies  into  which  that  otherwise  charming  writer  was
often  betrayed.  Besides  this,  there  is  about  the  work  of  Charron  a  systematic
completeness  which  never  fails  to  attract  attention.  In  originality  he  was
in  some  respects  inferior  to  Montaigne  ;  but  he  had  the  advantage  of  coming
after  him,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  rose  to  an  elevation  which  to
Montaigne  would  have  been  inaccessible.  Taking  his  stand,  as  it  were,  on  the
summit  of  knowledge,  he  boldly  attempts  to  enumerate  the  elements  of  wisdom,
and  the  conditions  under  which  those  elements  will  work.  In  the  scheme  which
he  thus  constructs,  he  entirely  omits  theological  dogmas  ;  45  and  he  treats  with
undissembled  scorn  many  of  those  conclusions  which  the  people  had  hitherto
universally  received.  He  reminds  his  countrymen  that  their  religion  is  the
accidental  result  of  their  birth  and  education,  and  that  if  they  had  been  born
in  a  Mohammedan  country,  they  would  have  been  as  firm  believers  in  Moham-
medanism as  they  then  were  in  Christianity.48  From  this  consideration  he
insists  on  the  absurdity  of  their  troubling  themselves  about  the  va.riety  of  creeds,
seeing  that  such  variety  is  the  result  of  circumstances  over  which  they  have
no  control.  Also  it  is  to  be  observed  that  each  of  these  different  religions  de-
clares itself  to  be  the  true  one  ;  4?  and  all  of  them  are  equally  based  upon  super-
natural pretensions,  such  as  mysteries,  miracles,  prophets,  and  the  like.48  It
is  because  men  forget  these  things  that  they  are  the  slaves  of  that  confidence
which  is  the  great  obstacle  to  all  real  knowledge,  and  which  can  only  be  removed
by  taking  such  a  large  and  comprehensive  view  as  will  show  us  how  all  nations
cling  with  equal  zeal  to  the  tenets  in  which  they  have  been  educated.49  And
says  Charron,  if  we  look  a  little  deeper  we  shall  see  that  each  of  the  great  re
ligions  is  built  upon  that  which  preceded  it.  Thus  the  religion  of  the  Jews
is  founded  upon  that  of  the  Egyptians  ;  Christianity  is  the  result  of  Judaism  ;
and  from  these  two  last  there  has  naturally  sprung  Mohammedanism.50  We,

the  only  tolerably  complete  account  I  have  seen  of  his  system  is  in  Tennemann,  Gesch.
der  Philosophic,  vol.  ix.  pp.  458-487.  [Charron  was  greatly  stimulated  in  his  intel-
lectual progress  by  Montaigne.  See  Owen,  Skeptics  of  the  French  Renaissance,
pp.  571-4. — ED.]  Buhle  (Geschichte  der  neuern  Philosophic,  vol.  ii.  pp.  918-925)  and
Cousin  (Hist,  de  la  Philos,  II.  serie,  vol.  ii.  p.  289)  are  short  and  unsatisfactory.  Even
Dr.  Parr,  who  was  extensively  read  in  this  sort  of  literature,  appears  only  to  have  known
Charron  through  Bayle  (see  notes  on  the  Spital  Sermon,  in  Parr's  Works,  vol.  ii.  pp.  520,
521)  ;  while  Dugald  Stewart,  with  suspicious  tautology,  quotes,  in  three  different  places,
the  same  passage  from  Charron.  Stewart's  Philosophy  of  the  Mind,  vol.  ii.  p.  233,  vol.  iii.
PP-  365»  393-  Singularly  enough,  Talleyrand  was  a  great  admirer  of  De  la  Sagesse,  and
presented  his  favourite  copy  of  it  to  Madame  de  Genlis !  See  her  own  account,  in  Mem .
de  Genlis,  vol.  iv.  pp.  352,  353.

45  See  his  definition,  or  rather  description,  of  wisdom,  in  Charron,  De  la  Sagesse,  vol.  i.
p.  295,  vol.  ii.  pp.  113,  115.

46  De  la  Sagesse,  vol.  i.  pp.  63,  351.

47  "Chacune  se  prefere  aux  autres,  et  se  confie  d'etre  la  meilleure  et  plus  vraie  que
les  autres,  et  s'entre-reprochent  aussi  les  unes  aux  autres  quelque  chose,  et  par -la  s'entre-
condamnent  et  rejettent."     De  la  Sagesse,  vol.  i.  p.  348  ;  see  also  vol.  i.  pp.  144,  304,
305,  306,  vol.  ii.  p.  116.     Expressions  almost  identical  are  used  by  M.  Charles  Comte,
Traite  de  Legislation,  vol.  i.  p.  233.

48  "  Toutes  trouvent  et  fournissent  miracles,  prodiges,  oracles,  mysteres  sacres,  saints
prophetes,  fetes,  certains  articles  de  foy  et  creance  necessaires  au  salut."    De  la  Sagesse,
vol.  i.  p.  346.

49  Hence  he  opposes  proselytism,  and  takes  up  the  philosophic  ground  that  religious
opinions,  being  governed  by  undeviating  laws,  owe  their  variations  to  variations  in
their  antecedents,  and  are  always,  if  left  to  themselves,  suited  to  the  existing  state  of
things  :  "  Et  de  ces  conclusions,  nous  apprendrons  a  n'  epouser  rien,  ne  jurer  a  rien,
n' admirer  rien,  ne  se  troubler  de  rien,  mais  quoi  qu'il  advienne,  que  Ton  crie,  tempete,
se  resoudre  a  ce  point,  que  c'est  le  cours  du  monde,  c'est  nature  qui  fait  des  siennes"    De
la  Sagesse,  vol.  i.  p.  311.

50  "Mais  comme  elles  naissent  1'une  apres  1'autre,  la  plus  jeune  batit  toujours  sur
son  ainee  et  prochaine  precedente,  laquelle   elle   n'improuve,  ni  ne  condamne  de  fond


298  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

therefore,  adds  this  great  writer,  should  rise  above  the  pretensions  of  hostile
sects  and,  without  being  terrified  by  the  fear  of  future  punishment,  or  allured
by  the  hope  of  future  happiness,  we  should  be  content  with  such  practical  re-
ligion  as  consists  in  performing  the  duties  of  life  ;  and,  uncontrolled  by  the
dogmas  of  any  particular  creed,  we  should  strive  to  make  the  soul  retire  inward
upon  itself,  and  by  the  efforts  of  its  own  contemplation,  adnrre  the  ineffable
grandeur  of  the  Being  of  beings,  the  supreme  cause  of  all  created  things.51

Such  were  the  sentiments  which,  in  the  year  1601,  were  for  the  first  time  laid
before  the  French  people  in  their  own  mother-tongue.52  The  sceptical  and
secular  spirit,  of  which  they  were  the  representatives,  continued  to  increase  ;
and,  as  the  seventeenth  century  advanced,  the  decline  of  fanaticism,  so  far
from  being  confined  to  a  few  isolated  thinkers,  gradually  became  common,
even  among  ordinary  politicians.53  The  clergy,  sensible  of  the  danger,  wished
the  government  to  check  the  progress  of  inquiry  ;  54  and  the  pope  himself,  in
a  formal  remonstrance  with  Henry,  urged  him  to  remedy  the  evil  by  prose-
cuting the  heretics,  from  whom  he  thought  all  the  mischief  had  originally
proceeded.55  But  this  the  king  steadily  refused.  He  saw  the  immense  advan-

en  comble,  autrement  elle  ne  seroit  pas  ouiie,  et  ne  pourroit  prendre  pied  ;  mais  seule-
ment  1'accuse  ou  d' imperfection,  ou  de  son  terme  fini,  et  qu'  a  cette  occasion  elle  vient
pour  lui  succeder  et  la  parfaire,  et  ainsi  la  ruine  peu-a-peu,  et  s'enrichit  de  ses  depouilles,
comme  la  Judai'que  a  fait  a  la  Gentille  et  Egyptienne,  la  Chretienne  a  la  Judaiique.  la
Mahorm-.tane  a  la  Judai'que  et  Chretienne  ensemble  :  mais  les  vieilles  condamnent  bien
tout-a-fait  et  entierement  les  jeunes,  et  les  tiennent  pour  ennemies  capables."  De  la
Sagesse,  vol.  i.  p.  349.  This,  I  believe,  is  the  first  instance  in  any  modern  language
of  the  doctrine  of  religious  development ;  a  doctrine  which,  since  Charron,  has  been
steadily  advancing,  particularly  among  men  whose  knowledge  is  extensive  enough  to
enable  them  to  compare  the  different  religions  which  have  prevailed  at  different  times.
In  this,  as  in  other  subjects,  they  who  are  unable  to  compare  suppose  that  everything
is  isolated,  simply  because  to  them  the  continuity  is  invisible.  As  to  the  Alexandrian
doctrine  of  development,  found  particularly  in  Clement  and  Origen,  see  Neander's  Hist,
of  the  Church,  vol.  ii.  pp.  234-257  ;  and  in  particular  pp.  241,  246.

51  De  la  Sagesse,  vol.  i.  pp.  356,  365  ;  two  magnificent  passages.  But  the  whole
chapter  ought  to  be  read,  livre  ii.  chap.  v.  In  it  there  is  an  occasional  ambiguity.
Tennemann,  however,  in  the  most  important  point,  understands  Charron  as  I  do,  in
regard  to  the  doctrine  of  future  punishments.  Geschichte  der  Philosophie,  vol.  ix.  p.  473.

62  The  first  edition  of  La  Sagesse  was  published  at  Bourdeaux  in  1601.  Niceron,
Hommes  illustres,  vol.  xvi.  p.  224  ;  Hallam's  Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  p.  509  ;  Biog.  Univ.
vol.  viii.  p.  250.  Two  editions  were  subsequently  published  in  Paris,  in  1604  and  1607.
Brunei,  Manuel  du  Libraire,  vol.  i.  p.  639.

53  Sismondi  (Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxii.  p.  86)  and  Lavallee  (Hist,  des  Francais,
vol.  iii.  p.  84)  have  noticed  the  diminution  of  religious  zeal  early  in  the  seventeenth
century  ;  and  some  curious  evidence  will  also  be  found  in  the  correspondence  of  Duplessis
Mornay.  See,  for  instance,  a  letter  he  wrote  to  Diodati,  in  1609:  "A  beaucoup
aujourd'hui  il  fault  commencer  par  la,  qu'il  y  a  une  religion,  premier  que  de  leur  dire
quelle."  Duplessis,  Mem.  et  Corresp.  vol.  x.  p.  415.  This  middle  or  secular  party
received  the  name  of  "  Politiques,"  and  began  to  be  powerful  in  1592  or  1593.  Benoist
(Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  i.  p.  113),  under  the  year  1593,  contemptuously  says  :
"  II  s'eleva  une  foule  de  conciliateurs  de  religion  ;  "  see  also  pp.  201,  273.  In  1590,
and  in  1594,  the  "  Politiques"  are  noticed  by  De  Thou  (Hist.  Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  171,  vol.  xii.
p.  134) ;  and  on  the  increase,  in  1593,  of  "le  tiers  parti  politique  et  negociateur,"  see
Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  vi.  p.  235.  See  also,  respecting  "  les  politiques,"
a  letter  from  the  Spanish  ambassador  to  his  own  court,  in  1615,  in  Capefigue's  Richelieu,
vol.  i.  p.  93  ;  and  for  the  rise  in  Paris,  in  1592,  of  a  "  politisch  und  kirchlich  gemassigte
Gesinnung,"  see  Ranke,  die  Pdpste,  vol.  ii.  p.  243.

14  The  Sorbonne  went  so  far  as  to  condemn  Charron's  great  work,  but  could  not
succeed  in  having  it  prohibited.  Compare  Duvernet,  Hist,  de  la  Sorbonne,  vol.  ii.  p.  139,
with  Bayle,  article  Charron,  note  F.

55  In  the  appendix  to  Ranke  (Die  Romischen  Pdpste,  vol.  iii.  pp.  141,  142),  there  will


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT  299

tages  that  would  arise  if  he  could  weaken  the  ecclesiastical  power  by  balancing
the  two  sects  against  each  other  ;  56  and  therefore,  though  he  was  a  Catholic,
his  policy  rather  leaned  in  favour  of  the  Protestants,  as  being  the  weaker  party.57
He  granted  sums  of  money  towards  the  support  of  their  ministers  and  the  repair
of  their  churches  ;  58  he  banished  the  Jesuits,  who  were  their  most  dangerous
enemies  ;  59  and  he  always  had  with  him  two  representatives  of  the  reformed
church,  whose  business  it  was  to  inform  him  of  any  infraction  of  those  edicts
which  he  had  issued  in  favour  of  their  religion.60

Thus  it  was  that  in  France  as  well  as  in  England  toleration  was  preceded
by  scepticism  ;  and  thus  it  was,  that  out  of  this  scepticism  there  arose  the  humane
and  enlightened  measures  of  Henry  IV.  The  great  prince  by  whom  these  things
were  effected,  unhappily  fell  a  victim  to  that  fanatical  spirit  which  he  had  done
much  to  curb  ;  61  but  the  circumstances  which  occurred  after  his  death  showed
how  great  an  impetus  had  been  given  to  the  age.

On  the  murder  of  Henry  IV.,  in  1610,  the  government  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  queen,  who  administered  it  during  the  minority  of  her  son,  Louis  XIII.
And  it  is  a  remarkable  evidence  of  the  direction  which  the  mind  was  now  taking,
that  she,  though  a  weak  and  bigoted  woman,62  refrained  from  those  persecutions
which,  only  one  generation  before,  had  been  considered  a  necessary  proof  of

be  found  the  instructions  which  were  given  to  the  nuncio,  in  1603,  when  he  was  sent  to
the  French  court;  and  which  should  be  compared  with  a  letter,  written  in  1604,  in
Sully,  (Economies  Roy  ales,  vol.  v.  p.  122,  edit.  1820.

56  "  Sein  Sinn  war  im  Allgemeinen,  ohne  Zweifel,  das  Gleichgewicht  zwischen  ihnen
zu  erhalten."     Ranke,  die  Pdpste,  vol.  ii.   pp.  430,  431.     "  Henri  IV,  1'expression  de
rindifferentisme  religieux,  se  posa   comme  une  transaction  entre  ces  deux  systemes."
Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  vi.  p.  358.    "  Henry  IV.  endeavoured  to  adjust  the
balance  evenly."     Smedley's  Hist,  of  the  Reformed  Religion  in  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  19.     See
also  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  i.  p.  136.     Hence,  of  course,  neither  party
was  quite  satisfied.     Mably^s  Observations,  vol.  iii.  p.  220  ;  Mezeray,  Histoire  de  France,
vol.  iii.  p.  959.

57  Compare   Capefigue,   Hist,   de   la  Reforme,  vol.  viii.   p.    61,  with  Bazin,   Hist,  dc
Louis  XIII,'  vol.  i.  pp.  32,  33.      See  also,  on  his  inclination  towards   the   Protestants,
Mem.  de  FonUnay   Mareuil,    vol.  i.  p.  91.      Fontenay,   p.  94,  mentions,  as  a  singular
instance,  that  "  il  se  vist  de  son  temps  des  huguenots  avoir  des  abbayes."

58  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,  vol.  iv.  p.  134,  vol.  vi.  p.  233  ;  Duplessis  Mornay,  Mem.
ft  Corresp.  vol.  xi.  p.  242  ;  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  68,  205.     These
grants  were  annual,  and  were  apportioned  by  the  Protestants  themselves.     See  their
own  account,  in  Quick's  Synodicon  in  Gallia,  vol.  i.  pp.  198,  222,  246,  247,  249,  275-277.

59  Henry  IV.  banished  the  Jesuits  in  1594  ;  but  they  were  allowed,  later  in  his  reign,
to  make  fresh  settlements  in  France.     Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplomatic,  vol.  vi.  p.  485  ;
Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  p.  106  ;    Monteil,  Divers  Etats,  vol.  v.  p.  192  note
De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  xiv.  p.  298.     Compare  the  notices  of  them  in  Sully,  (Economies,
vol.  ii.  p.  234,  vol.  iv.  pp.  200,  235,  245.     But  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  they  owed  their
recall  to  the  dread  entertained  of  their  intrigues  (Gregoire,  Hist,  des  Confesseurs,  p.  316)  ;
and  Henry  evidently  disliked  as  well  as  feared  them.      See    two   letters  fom  him  in
Duplessis,  Mem.  et  Corresp.  vol.  vi.  pp.   129,  151.      It  would  appear  from  the  Mem.
de  Richelieu,  vol.  v.  p.  350,  Paris,  1823,  that  the  king  never  restored  to  them  their  former
authority  in  regard  to  education.

60  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  pp.  142,  143  ;  Le  Vassor,  vol.  i.  p.  156  ;  Sismondi,
vol.  xxii.  p.  116  ;  Ditplessis  Mornay,  vol.  i.  p.  389;  Sully,  (Economies,  vol.  yii.  pp.  105,
432,  442.

l!1  When  Ravaillac  was  examined,  he  said  "  qu'il  y  avait  ete  excite  par  1'interet  de
la  religion,  et  par  une  impulsion  irresistible."  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  p.  38.
This  work  contains  the  fullest  account  I  have  met  with  of  Ravaillac  ;  of  whom  there
is,  moreover,  a  description  in  Les  Historiettes  de  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  vol.  i.  p.  85,  Paris,
1840,  a  very  curious  book.

62  Le  Vassor  (Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  p.  279)  calls  her  "  superstitieuse  au  dernier
point ;  "  and,  in  vol.  v.  p.  481,  "  femme  credule  et  superstitieuse."  See  also  vol.  iii.
p.  250,  vol.  vi.  p.  628  ;  and  Gregoire,  Hist,  des  Confesseurs,  p.  65.


300  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

religious  sincerity.  That  indeed  must  have  been  a  movement  of  no  common
energy,  which  could  force  toleration,  early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  upon
a  princess  of  the  house  of  Medici,  an  ignorant  and  superstitious  Catholic,  who
had  been  educated  in  the  midst  of  her  priests,  and  had  been  accustomed  to  look
for  their  applause  as  the  highest  object  of  earthly  ambition.

Yet  this  was  what  actually  occurred.  The  queen  continued  the  ministers  of
Henry  IV.,  and  announced  that  in  everything  she  would  follow  his  example.63
Her  first  public  act  was  a  declaration  that  the  Edict  of  Nantes  should  be  in-
violably preserved  ;  for,  she  says,  "  experience  has  taught  our  predecessors
that  violence,  so  far  from  inducing  men  to  return  to  the  Catholic  church,  prevents
them  from  doing  so."64  Indeed,  so  anxious  was  she  upon  this  point,  that  when
Louis  in  1614  attained  his  nominal  majority,  the  first  act  of  his  government  was
another  confirmation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes.65  And  in  1615  she  caused  the
king,  who  still  remained  under  her  tutelage,66  to  issue  a  declaration  by  which
all  preceding  measures  in  favour  of  the  Protestants  were  publicly  confirmed.6?
In  the  Same  spirit,  she  in  1611  wished  to  raise  to  the  presidency  of  parliament
the  celebrated  De  Thou  ;  and  it  was  only  by  making  a  formal  announcement  of  his
heresy  that  the  pope  succeeded  in  frustrating  what  he  considered  an  impious
design.68

The  turn  which  things  were  now  taking  caused  no  little  alarm  to  the  friends  of
the  hierarchy.  The  most  zealous  churchmen  loudly  censured  the  policy  of  the
queen  ;  and  a  great  historian  has  observed  that  when,  during  the  reign  of  Louis
XIII.,  such  alarm  was  caused  in  Europe  by  the  active  encroachments  of  the
ecclesiastical  power,  France  was  the  first  country  that  ventured  to  oppose  them.60
The  nuncio  openly  complained  to  the  queen  of  her  conduct  in  favouring  heretics  ;
and  he  anxiously  desired  that  those  Protestant  works  should  he  suppressed,  by
which  the  consciences  of  true  believers  were  greatly  scandalized.1"'0  But  these

63  "  Elle  annonca  qu'elle  vouloit  suivre  en  tout  1'exemple  du  feu  roi.  .  .  .  Le  minis  tere
de  Henri  IV,  que  la  reine  continuoit."  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  206,
210  ;  and  see  two  letters  from  her,  in  Duplessis  Mornay,  Mem.  et  Corresp.  vol.  xi.  p.  282,
vol.  xii.  p.  428.     Sully  had  feared  that  the  death  of  Henry  IV.  would  cause  a  change  of
policy  ;  "  que  Ton  s'alloit  jetter  dans  des  desseins  tous  contraires  aux  regies,  ordres  et
maximes  du  feu  roy."  (Economies  Royales,  vol.  viii.  p.  401.    [See,  however,  note  95,  below.
—En.]

64  See  the  declaration  in  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  pp.  74,  75  ;  and  notices  of
it  in  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  58  .  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  27  ;  Benoist,  Hist,  de
I' Edit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  7  ;  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  p.  58.     But  none  of
these  writers,  nor  Sismondi  (vol.  xxii.  p.  212),  appears  to  be  aware  that  the  issuing  of  this
declaration  was  determined  on,  in  council,  as  early  as  the  i7th  of  May  ;  that  is,  only  three
days  after  the  death  of  Henry  IV.  This  is  mentioned  by  Pontchar train,  who  was  then  one
of  the  ministers.     See  Mem.  de  Pontchartrain,  edit.  Petitot,  1822,  vol.  i.  p.   409  ;  a  book
little  known,  but  well  worthy  of  being  read.

65  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  p.  262  ;  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit.  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.
p.  140  ;  Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  i.  p.  257  ;  Le  Vassor,  vol.  i.  p.  604.

"  Laissant  neanmoins  1' administration  du  royaume  a  la  reine  sa  mere."  Mem.  de
Bassompierre,  vol.  ii.  p.  52.  Compare  Sully,  (Economies,  vol.  ix.  p.  177.  She  possessed
complete  authority  over  the  king  till  1617.  See  Memoires  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  p.  24  ;
"  avoit  ete  tenu  fort  has  par  la  reine  sa  mere."  See  also  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII.
vol.  ii.  pp.  640,  677,  716,  764.
67  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  pp.  381,  382.

«  In  1611,  "  le  pape  le  rejeta  formellement  comme  heretique."  Bazin,  vol.  i.  p.  174.
This  is  glossed  over  by  Pontchartrain  (Memoires,  vol.  i.  p.  450)  ;  but  the  statement  of
M.  Bazin  is  confirmed  in  the  preface  to  De  Thou,  Histoire  Universelle,  vol.  i.  p.  xvi.

"  Der  erste  Einhalt  den  die  kirchliche  Restauration  erfuhr,  geschah  in  Frankreich."
Ranke,  die  Romischen  Papste,  vol.  iii.  p.  160.

0  This  desire  was  expressed  several  times,  but  in  vain  :  "  Gern  batten  die  Nuntien
Werke  wie  von  Thou  und  Richer  verboten,  aber  es  war  ihnen  nicht  moglich."  Ranke,  die
Papste,  vol.  m.  p.  181,  Anhang.  Compare  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  ii.  p.  68  :  Mem.  de
Pontchartrain,  vol.  i.  p.  428.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          301

and  similar  representations  were  no  longer  listened  to  with  the  respect  they
would  formerly  have  received  ;  and  the  affairs  of  the  country  continued  to  be
administered  with  those  purely  temporal  views,  on  which  the  measures  of
Henry  IV.  had  been  avowedly  based.71

Such  was  now  the  policy  of  the  government  of  France  ;  a  government  which,
not  many  years  before,  had  considered  it  the  great  duty  of  a  sovereign  to  punish
heretics  and  extirpate  heresy.  That  this  continued  improvement  was  merely  the
result  of  the  general  intellectual  development  is  evident  not  only  from  its  success
but  also  from  the  character  of  the  queen-regent  and  the  king.  No  one  who  has
read  the  contemporary  memoirs  can  deny  that  Mary  de  Medici  and  Louis  XIII.
were  as  superstitious  as  any  of  their  predecessors  ;  and  it  is  therefore  evident
that  this  disregard  of  theological  prejudices  was  due,  not  to  their  own  personal
merits,  but  to  the  advancing  knowledge  of  the  country,  and  to  the  pressure  of  an
age  which,  in  the  rapidity  of  its  progress,  hurried  along  those  who  believed  them
selves  to  be  its  rulers.

But  these  considerations,  weighty  as  they  are,*  will  only  slightly  diminish  the
merit  of  that  remarkable  man  who  now  appeared  on  the  stage  of  public  affairs.
During  the  last  eighteen  years  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIII.,  France  was  entirely
governed  by  Richelieu,72  one  of  that  extremely  small  class  of  statesmen  to  whom
it  is  given  to  impress  their  own  character  on  the  destiny  of  their  country.  This
great  ruler  has,  in  his  knowledge  of  the  political  art,  probably  never  been  sur-
passed, except  by  that  prodigy  of  genius  who  in  our  time  troubled  the  fortunes  of
Europe.  But  in  one  important  point  of  view  Richelieu  was  superior  to  Napoleon.
The  life  of  Napoleon  was  a  constant  effort  to  oppress  the  liberties  of  mankind ;
and  his  unrivalled  capacity  exhausted  its  resources  in  struggling  against  the
tendencies  of  a  great  age.  Richelieu,  too,  was  a  despot  ;  but  his  despotism  took
a  nobler  turn.  He  displayed,  what  Napoleon  never  possessed,  a  just  appreciation
of  the  spirit  of  his  own  time.f  In  one  great  point,  indeed,  he  failed.  His  attempts
to  destroy  the  power  of  the  French  nobility  were  altogether  futile  ;73  for,  owing
to  a  long  course  of  events,  the  authority  of  that  insolent  class  was  so  deeply  rooted
in  the  popular  mind  that  the  labours  of  another  century  were  required  to  efface
its  ancient  influence.  But  though  Richelieu  could  not  diminish  the  social  and
moral  weight  of  the  French  nobles,  he  curtailed  their  political  privileges  ;  and
he  chastised  their  crimes  with  a  severity  which,  for  a  time  at  least,  repressed

71  This  decline  of  the  ecclesiastical  power  is  noticed  by  many  writers  of  the  time  ;
but  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  to  the  very  curious  remonstrance  of  the  French    clergy  in
1605,  in  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  xiv.  pp.  446,  447.

72  As  M.  Monteil  says  (Hist,  des  Francais  des  divers  Etats,  vol.  vii.  p.  114),  "  Richelieu
tint  le  sceptre  ;  Louis  XIII  porta  la  couronne."     And  Campion  (Memoires,  p.  37)  calls
him  "  plutot  le  maitre  que  le  ministre  ;  "  and  adds,  pp.  218,  219,  that  he  "  avoit  gouverne
dix-huit  ans  la  France  avec  un  pouvoir  absolu  et  une  gloire  sans  pareille."     Compare
Mem.  du  Cardinal  de  Retz,  vol.  i.  p.  63.

73  The  common  opinion,  put  forth  in  Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  i.  pp.  101-104,  and
in  many  other  books,  is  that  Richelieu  did  destroy  their  influence  ;  but  this  error  arises
from  confusing  political  influence  with  social  influence.     What  is  termed  the  political
power  of  a  class  is  merely  the  symptom  and  manifestation  of  its  real  power  ;  and  it  is
no  use  to  attack  the  first  unless  you  can  also  weaken  the  second.     The  real  power  of  the
nobles  was  social,  and  that  neither  Richelieu  nor  Louis  XIV.  could  impair  ;  and  it  remained
intact  until  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  the  intellect  of  France  rebelled
against  it,  overthrew  it,  and  finally  effected  the  French  Revolution.

[*  This  section  of  the  chapter  appears  to  have  been  written  some  time  after  the  pre
ceding,  of  which  the  last  sentence  is  incompatible  with  this.  See  above,  pp.  124,  149,
155,  notes,  as  to  Buckle's  variation  of  tone. — ED.]

[f  Seeing  that  Napoleon  was  overthrown'  byf  the  conservative  forces  of  Europe,  not
by  the  progressive,  the  formula  in  the  text  needs  modifying.  By  the  "  spirit  of  the
time  "  is  presumably  meant  that  of  democracy,  which  however  Napoleon  to  some  extent
exploited. — ED.]


302  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

their  former  licence.74  So  little,  however,  can  even  the  ablest  statesman  effect,
unless  he  is  seconded  by  the  general  temper  of  the  age  in  which  he  lives,  that
these  checks,  rude  as  they  were,  produced  no  permanent  result.  After  his  death
the  French  nobles,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  quickly  rallied,  and  in  the  wars  of
the  Fronde,  debased  that  great  struggle  into  a  mere  contest  of  rival  families.
Nor  was  it  until  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  that  France  was  finally
relieved  from  the  overweening  influence  of  that  powerful  class,  whose  selfish-
ness had  long  retarded  the  progress  of  civilization,  by  retaining  the  people
in  a  thraldom  from  the  remote  effects  of  which  they  have  not  yet  fully
recovered.

Although  in  this  respect  Richelieu  failed  in  achieving  his  designs,  he  in  other
matters  met  with  signal  success.  This  was  owing  to  the  fact  that  his  large
and  comprehensive  views  harmonized  with  that  sceptical  tendency  of  which  I
have  just  given  some  account.  For  this  remarkable  man,  though  he  was  a
bishop  and  a  cardinal,  never  for  a  moment  allowed  the  claims  of  his  profession  to
make  him  forego  the  superior  claims  of  his  country.  He  knew,  what  is  too  often
forgotten,  that  the  governor  of  a  people  should  measure  affairs  solely  by  a  political
standard,  and  should  pay  no  regard  to  the  pretensions  of  any  sect,  or  the  pro-
pagation of  any  opinions,  except  in  reference  to  the  present  and  practical  wel-
fare of  men.  The  consequence  was  that  during  his  administration  there
was  seen  the  marvellous  spectacle  of  supreme  authority  wielded  by  a  priest  who
took  no  pains  to  increase  the  power  of  the  spiritual  classes.  Indeed,  so  far  from
this,  he  often  treated  them  with  what  was  then  considered  unexampled  rigour.
The  royal  confessors,  on  account  of  the  importance  of  their  functions,  had
always  been  regarded  with  a  certain  veneration  ;  they  were  supposed  to  be
men  of  unspotted  piety  ;  they  had  hitherto  possessed  immense  influence,  and
even  the  most  powerful  statesmen  had  thought  it  advisable  to  show  them  the
deference  due  to  their  exalted  position.75  Richelieu,  however,  was  too  familiar
with  the  arts  of  his  profession  to  feel  much  respect  for  these  keepers  of  the  con-
sciences of  kings.  Caussin,  the  confessor  of  Louis  XIII.,  had,  it  seems,  followed
the  example  of  his  predecessors,  and  endeavoured  to  instil  his  own  views  of
policy  into  the  mind  of  the  royal  penitent.76  But  Richelieu,  so  soon  as  he  heard
of  this,  dismissed  him  from  office,  and  sent  him  into  exile ;  for,  he  contemptuously
says,  "  the  little  father  Caussin  "  should  not  interfere  in  matters  of  government,
since  he  is  one  of  those  "  who  have  always  been  brought  up  in  the  innocence  of

74  Richelieu  appears  to  have  formed  the  design  of  humbling  the  nobles  at  least  as  early
as  1624.  See  a  characteristic  passage  in  his  Memoir es,  vol  ii.  p.  340.  In  Swinburne's
Courts  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  pp.  63-65,  there  is  a  curious  traditional  anecdote,  which,  though
probably  false,  shows  at  all  events  the  fear  and  hatred  with  which  the  French  nobles
regarded  the  memory  of  Richelieu  more  than  a  century  after  his  death.

73  On  their  influence,  see  Gregoire,  Histoire  des  Confesseurs  ;  and  compare  the  remarks
of  Mr.  Grote,  a  great  writer,  whose  mind  is  always  ready  with  historical  analogies.  Grote's
Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  vi.  p.  393,  2nd  edit.  1851.  Many  of  the  French  kings  had  a  strong
natural  affection  for  monks  ;  but  the  most  singular  instance  I  have  found  of  this  sort  of
love  is  mentioned  by  no  less  a  man  than  De  Thou,  respecting  Henry  III.  De  Thou
(Hist.  Univ.  vol.  x.  pp.  666,  667)  says  of  that  prince:  "Soit  temperament,  soit  education,  la
presence  d'un  moine  faisait  toujours  plaisir  a  Henri ;  et  je  lui  ai  moi-meme  souvent  en-
tendu  dire,  que  leur  vue  produisoit  le  meme  effet  sur  son  ame,  que  le  chatouillement  le
plus  delicat  sur  le  corps."

76  One  of  his  suggestions  was,  "  sur  les  dangers  que  couroit  le  catholicisme  en  Alle-
magne,  par  ses  liaisons  avec  les  puissances  protestantes."  Gregoire,  Hist,  des  Confesseurs,
p.  342.  The  fullest  account  of  Caussin  is  in  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ix.  pp.
287-299  ;  to  which,  however,  Gregoire  never  refers.  As  I  shall  have  frequent  occasion  to
quote  Le  Vassor,  I  may  observe  that  he  is  far  more  accurate  than  is  generally  supposed,
and  that  he  has  been  very  unfairly  treated  by  the  majority  of  French  writers,  among  whom
he  is  unpopular  on  account  of  his  constant  attacks  on  Louis  XIV.  Sismondi  (Hist,  des
Franfais,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  188,  189)  speaks  highly  of  his  Hist,  of  Louis  XIII.  ;  and  so  far  as
my  own  reading  extends  I  can  confirm  his  favourable  opinion,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          303

a  religious  life."77  Caussin  was  succeeded  by  the  celebrated  Sirmond  ;  but
Richelieu  would  not  allow  the  new  confessor  to  begin  his  duties,  until  he  had
solemnly  promised  never  to  interfere  in  state  affairs.78

On  another  occasion  of  much  more  importance,  Richelieu  displayed  a  similar
spirit.  The  French  clergy  were  then  possessed  of  enormous  wealth  ;  and  as
they  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  taxing  themselves,  they  were  careful  not  to  make
what  they  considered  unnecessary  contributions  towards  defraying  the  expenses
of  the  state.  They  had  cheerfully  advanced  money  to  carry  on  war  against  the
Protestants,  because  they  believed  it  to  be  their  duty  to  assist  in  the  extirpation
of  heresy.79  But  they  saw  no  reason  why  their  revenues  should  be  wasted  in
effecting  mere  temporal  benefits  ;  they  considered  themselves  as  the  guardians  of
funds  set  apart  for  spiritual  purposes,  and  they  thought  it  impious  that  wealth
consecrated  by  the  piety  of  their  ancestors  should  fall  into  the  profane  hands  of
secular  statesmen.  Richelieu,  who  looked  on  these  scruples  as  the  artifices  of
interested  men,  had  taken  a  very  different  view  of  the  relation  which  the  clergy
bore  to  the  country.80  So  far  from  thinking  that  the  interests  of  the  church
were  superior  to  those  of  the  state,  he  laid  it  down  as  a  maxim  of  policy,  that
"  the  reputation  of  the  state  was  the  first  consideration."81  With  such  fearlessness
did  he  carry  out  this  principle,  that  having  convoked  at  Mantes  a  great  assembly
of  the  clergy,  he  compelled  them  to  aid  the  government  by  an  extraordinary
supply  of  6,000,000  francs  ;  and  finding  that  some  of  the  highest  dignitaries  had
expressed  their  discontent  at  so  unusual  a  step,  he  laid  hands  on  them  also,  and,
to  the  amazement  of  the  church,  sent  into  exile  not  only  four  of  the  bishops,  but
likewise  the  two  archbishops  of  Toulouse  and  of  Sens.82

If  these  things  had  been  done  fifty  years  earlier,  they  would  most  assuredly
have  proved  fatal  to  the  minister  who  dared  to  attempt  them.  But  Richelieu,

77  "  Le  petit  pere  Caussin."  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  x.  p.  206  ;  and  at  p.  217,  he  is
classed  among  the  "  personnes  qui  avoient  toujours  ete  nourries  dans  1'innocence  d'une
vie  religieuse  :  "  see  also  p.  215,  on  his  "  simplicite  et  ignorance."     Respectiog  Richelieu's
treatment  of  Caussin,  see  Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  pp.  173-175  ;   Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.
i.  p.  49  ;  Des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  ii.  p.  182.

78  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  332  ;  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  Historiettes,
vol.  iii.  p.  78  note.     Le  Vassor  (Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  x.  part  ii.  p.  761)  says,  that
Sirmond  "  se  soutint  a  la  cour  sous  le  ministere  de  Richelieu,  parce  qu'il  ne  se  meloit  point
des  affaires  d'etat."     According  to  the  same  writer  (vol.  viii.  p.  156),  Richelieu  thought  at
one  time  of  depriving  the  Jesuits  of  their  post  of  confessor  to  the  king.

79  Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  iii.  p.  87  ;  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  iv.
p.  208  ;  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  p.  144  ;  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,
vol.  ii.  pp.  337,  338.     Benoist  says  :"  Le  clerge  de  France,  ignorant  etcorrompu,  croyoit
tout  son  devoir  compris  dans  1'extirpation  des  heretiques  ;  et  meme  il  offroit  de  grandes
sommes,  a  condition  qu'on  les  employ  at  a  cette  guerre."

80  In  which  he  is  fully  borne  out  by  the  high  authority  of  Vattel,  whose  words  I  shall
quote,  for  the  sake  of  those  politicians  who  still  cleave  to  the  superannuated  theory  of
the  sacredness  of  church -property.   "  Loin  que  1'exemption  appartienne  aux  biens  d'eglise
parce  qu'ils  sont  consacres  a  Dieu,  c'est  an  contraire  par  cette  raison  meme,  qu'ils  doivent
etre  pris  les  premiers  pour  le  salut  de  1'etat ;  car  il  n'y  a  rien  de  plus  agreable  au  Pere
commun  des  hommes,  que  de  garantir  une  nation  de  sa  ruine.     Dieu  n'ayant  besoin  de
rien,  lui  consacrer  des  biens,  c'est  les  destiner  &  des  usages  qui  lui  soient  agreables.     De
plus,  les  biens  de  1'eglise,  de  1'aveu  du  clerge  lui-meme,  sont  en  grande  partie  destines  aux
pauvres.     Quand  1'etat  est  dans  le  besoin,  il  estsans  doute  le  premier  pauvre,  et  le  plus
digne  de  secours."     Vattel,  le  Droit  des  Gens,  vol.  i.  pp.  176,  177.

81  "  Que  la  reputation  de  1'etat  est  preferable  a  toutes  choses."     Mem.  de  Richelieu,
vol.  ii.  p.  482.     This  was  in  1625,  and  by  way  of  refuting  the  legate.

82  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxiii.  pp.  477,  478  ;  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.
iv.  pp.  325,  326.     The  Cardinal  de  Retz,  who  knew  Richelieu  personally,  says  :  "  M.  le
Cardinal  de  Richelieu  avoit  donne  une  atteinte  cruelle  a  la  dignite  et  &  la  liberte  du  clerge
dans  1'assemblee  de  Mante,  et  il  avoit  exile,  avec  des  circonstances  atroces,  six  de  ses
prelats  les  plus  considerables,"     Mem,  de  Retz,  vol.  i.  p.  50,


304  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

in  these  and  similar  measures,  was  aided  by  the  spirit  of  an  age  which  was  be-
ginning to  despise  its  ancient  masters.  For  this  general  tendency  was  now
becoming  apparent  not  only  in  literature  and  in  politics,  but  even  in  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  ordinary  tribunals.  The  nuncio  indignantly  complained  of
the  hostility  displayed  against  ecclesiastics  by  the  French  judges  ;  and  he  said
that,  among  other  shameful  things,  some  clergymen  had  been  hung,  without
being  first  deprived  of  their  spiritual  character.83  On  other  occasions,  the
increasing  contempt  showed  itself  in  a  way  well  suited  to  the  coarseness  of  the
prevailing  manners.  Sourdis,  the  Archbishop  of  Bourdeaux,  was  twice  igno-
miniously  beaten ;  once  by  the  Duked'Epernon,  and  afterwards  by  the  Marechal
de  Vitry.84  Nor  did  Richelieu,  who  usually  treated  the  nobles  with  such  severity,
seem  anxious  to  punish  this  gross  outrage.  Indeed,  the  archbishop  not  only
received  no  sympathy  but,  a  few  years  later,  was  peremptorily  ordered  by
Richelieu  to  retire  to  his  own  dioces.e  ;  such,  however,  was  his  alarm  at  the  state
of  affairs,  that  he  fled  to  Carpentras,  and  put  himself  under  the  protection  of
the  pope.85  This  happened  in  1641  ;  and  nine  years  earlier  the  church  had  in-
curred a  still  greater  scandal.  For  in  1632,  serious  disturbances  having  arisen  in
Languedoc,  Richelieu  did  not  fear  to  meet  the  difficulty  by  depriving  some  of
the  bishops,  and  seizing  the  temporalities  of  the  others.86

The  indignation  of  the  clergy  may  be  easily  imagined.  Such  repeated  in-
juries, even  if  they  had  proceeded  from  a  layman,  would  have  been  hard  to
endure  ;  but  they  were  rendered  doubly  bitter  by  being  the  work  of  one  of  them-
selves— one  who  had  been  nurtured  in  the  profession  against  which  he  turned.
This  it  was  which  aggravated  the  offence,  because  it  seemed  to  be  adding  treach-
ery to  insult.  It  was  not  a  war  from  without,  but  it  was  a  treason  from  within.
It  was  a  bishop  who  humbled  the  episcopacy,  and  a  cardinal  who  affronted  the
church.87  Such,  however,  was  the  general  temper  of  men,  that  the  clergy  did  not

83  "DieNuntien  finden  kein  Ende  der  Beschwerden  die  siemachenzu  miissen  glauben,
vorziiglich  liber  die  Beschrankungen  welche  die  geistliche  Jurisdiction  erfahre.  .  .  .
Zuweilen  werde  ein  Geistlicher  hingerichtet  ohne  erst  degradirt  zu  seyn."     Ranke,  die
Pdpste,  vol.  iii.  p.  157  :  a  summary,  in  1641,  of  the  complaints  of  the  then  nuncio,  and  of
those  of  his  predecessors.     Le  Vassor  (Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  v.  pp.  51  seq.)  has  given
some  curious  details  respecting  the  animosity  between  the  clergy  and  the  secular  tribunals
of  France  in  1624.

84  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  301  ;  Mem.  de  Bassompierre,  vol.  iii.  pp.
3°2,  353.     Bazin,  who  notices  this  disgraceful  affair,  simply  says  (Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,
vol.  iii.  p.  453) :  "  Le  Marechal  de  Vitry,  suivant  Pexample  qui  lui  en  avoit  donne  le
due  d'Epernon,  s'emporta  jusqu'a  le  frapper  de  son  baton."     In  regard  to  Epernon,  the
best  account  is  in  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  where  it  is  stated  (vol.  viii.  p.  194)  that  the  duke,  just
before  flogging  the  archbishop,  "  disoit  au  peuple,  '  Rangez-vous,  vous  verrez  comme
j'etrillerai  votre  archeveque.'  "     This  was  stated  by  a  witness,  who  heard  the  duke  utter
the  words.     Compare,  for  further  information,  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  x.
part  ii.  p.  97,  with  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  iii.  p.  116.     Des  Reaux,  who,  in
his  own  way,  was  somewhat  of  a  philosopher,  contentedly  says  :    '  Cet  archeveque  se
pouvoit  vanter  d'etre  le  prelat  du  monde  qui  avoit  etc  le  plus  battu."     His  brother
was  Cardinal  Sourdis  ;  a  man  of  some  little  reputation  in  his  own  time,  and  concerning
whom  a  curious  anecdote  is  related  in  Mem.  de  Conrart,  pp.  231-234.

85  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  470.      Le  Vassor  (Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,
vol.  x.  part  ii.  p.  149)  says  :  "  II  s'enfuit  done  honteusement  a  Carpentras  sous  la  pro-
tection du  pape."

"  Les  eveques  furent  punis  par  la  saisie  de  leur  temporel ;  Alby,  Nimes,  Uzes,
urent  privees  de  leurs  prelats."  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  Paris,  1844,  vol.  ii.  p.  24.  The
Protestants  were  greatly  delighted  at  the  punishment  of  the  bishops  of  Alby  and  Nimes,
which  "les  ministres  regardoient  comme  une  vengeance  divine."  Benoist,  Hist,  de
'Edit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  528,  529.

*7  In  a  short  account  of  Richelieu,  which  was  published  immediately  after  his  death,
the  writer  indignantly  says  that  "  being  a  cardinal,  he  afflicted  the  church."  Somers
Tracts,  vol.  v.  p.  540.  Compare  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  iv.  p,  322.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT


305


venture  to  strike  an  open  blow  ;  but  by  means  of  their  partisans  they  scattered
the  most  odious  libels  against  the  great  minister.  They  said  that  he  was  un-
chaste, that  he  was  guilty  of  open  debauchery,  and  that  he  held  incestuous  com-
merce with  his  own  niece.88  They  declared  that  he  had  no  religion  ;  that  he  was
only  a  Catholic  in  name  ;  that  he  was  the  pontiff  of  the  Huguenots  ;  that  he  was
the  patriarch  of  atheists  ;89  and,  what  was  worse  than  all,  they  even  accused  him
of  wishing  to  establish  a  schism  in  the  French  church.90  Happily  the  time  was
now  passing  away  in  which  the  national  mind  could  be  moved  by  such  artifices
as  these.  Still,  the  charges  are  worth  recording,  because  they  illustrate  the
tendency  of  public  affairs,  and  the  bitterness  with  which  the  spiritual  classes  saw
the  reins  of  power  falling  from  their  hands.  Indeed,  all  this  was  so  manifest,
that  in  the  last  civil  war  raised  against  Richelieu,  only  two  years  before  his  death,
the  insurgents  stated  in  their  proclamation  that  one  of  their  objects  was  to  revive
the  respect  with  which  the  clergy  and  nobles  had  formerly  been  treated.91

The  more  we  study  the  career  of  Richelieu,  the  more  prominent  does  this
antagonism  become.  Everything  proves  that  he  was  conscious  of  a  great
struggle  going  on  between  the  old  ecclesiastical  scheme  of  government,  and  the
new  secular  scheme  ;  and  that  he  was  determined  to  put  down  the  old  plan  and
uphold  the  new  one.  For  not  only  in  his  domestic  administration  but  also  in
his  foreign  policy  do  we  find  the  same  unprecedented  disregard  of  theological
interests.  The  House  of  Austria,  particularly  its  Spanish  branch,  had  long  been
respected  by  all  pious  men  as  the  faithful  ally  of  the  church  :  it  was  looked  upon
as  the  scourge  of  heresy  ;  and  its  proceedings  against  the  heretics  had  won  for
it  a  great  name  in  ecclesiastical  history.92  When,  therefore,  the  French  govern-
ment, in  the  reign  of  Charles  IX.,  made  a  deliberate  attempt  to  destroy  the  Pro-
testants, France  naturally  established  an  intimate  connexion  with  Spain  as  well
as  with  Rome  ;93  and  these  three  great  powers  were  firmly  united,  not  by  a  com-
munity of  temporal  interests,  but  by  the  force  of  a  religious  compact.  This
theological  confederacy  was  afterwards  broken  up  by  the  personal  character  of
Henry  IV.,94  and  by  the  growing  indifference  of  the  age  ;  but  during  the  minority
of  Louis  XIII.  the  queen-regent  had  in  some  degree  renewed  it,  and  had  at-
tempted to  revive  the  superstitious  prejudices  upon  which  it  was  based.95  In
all  her  feelings,  she  was  a  zealous  Catholic  ;  she  was  warmly  attached  to  Spain  ;
and  she  succeeded  in  marrying  her  son,  the  young  king,  to  a  Spanish  princess,
and  her  daughter  to  a  Spanish  prince.96

98  This  scandalous  charge  in  regard  to  his  niece  was  a  favourite  one  with  the  clergy  ;
and  among  many  other  instances,  the  accusation  was  brought  by  the  Cardinal  de  Valencay
in  the  grossest  manner.  See  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  Histonettes,  vol.  iii.  p.  201.

89  "  De  la  ces  petits  ecrits  qui  le  denongaient  comme  le  '  pontife  des  huguenots '  on
'  le  patriarche  des  athees.'  "     Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  312.

90  Compare  Des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  ii.  p.  233,  with  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,
vol.  viii.  part  ii.  pp.  177,  178,  vol.  ix.  p.  277-

91  See  the  manifesto  in  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxiii.  pp.  452,  453-

92  Late  in  the  sixteenth  century,  "  fils  aine  de  1'eglise  "  was  the  recognized  and  well-
merited  title  of  the  kings  of  Spain.     De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  280.     Compare
Duplessis  Mornay,  Mem.  et  Correspond,  vol.  xi.  p.  21.     And  on  the  opinions  which  the
Catholics,  early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  generally  held  respecting  Spain,  see  Mem.
de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  i.  p.  189  ;  Mem.  de  Bassompierre,  vol.  i.  p.  424.

93  As  to  the  connexion  between  this  foreign  policy  and  the  massacre  of  Saint  Bartholo-
mew, see  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  iii.  pp.  253,  268,  260.

94  On  the  policy,  and  still  more  on  the  feelings,  of  Henry  IV.  towards  the  House  of
Austria,  see  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,  vol.  ii.  p.  291,  vol.  iii.  pp.  162,  166,  vol.  iv.  pp.  289,
290,  321,  343,  344,  364,  vol.  v.  p.  123,  vol.  vi.  p.  293,  vol.  vii.  p.  303.  vol.  viii.  pp.  195.  202,
348.

95  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  pp.  26,  369  ;  Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  pp.  16,  17  ;  Le
Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  p.  268,  vol.  vi.  p.  349  ;  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,
vol.  xxii.  p.  227.     Her  husband,  Henry  IV.,  said  that  she  had  "  the  soul  of  a  Spaniard."
Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  viii.  p.  150.

96  This  was,  in  her  opinion,  a  master  stroke  of  policy  :  "  Entetee  du  double  mariage

20


306  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  might  have  been  expected  that  when  Richelieu,  a  great  dignitary  of  the
Romish  church,  was  placed  at  the  head  of  affairs,  he  would  have  re-established  a
connexion  so  eagerly  desired  by  the  profession  to  which  he  belonged.97  But  his
conduct  was  not  regulated  by  such  views  as  these.  His  object  was  not  to  favour
the  opinions  of  a  sect,  but  to  promote  the  interests  of  a  nation.  His  treaties,
his  diplomacy,  and  the  schemes  of  his  foreign  alliances,  were  all  directed,  not
against  the  enemies  of  the  church,  but  against  the  enemies  of  France.  By
erecting  this  new  standard  of  action,  Richelieu  took  a  great  step  towards  secular-
izing the  whole  system  of  European.  politics.  For  he  thus  made  the  theoretical
interests  of  men  subordinate  to  their  practical  interests.  Before  his  time  the
rulers  of  France,  in  order  to  punish  their  Protestant  subjects,  had  not  hesitated
to  demand  the  aid  of  the  Catholic  troops  of  Spain  ;  and  in  so  doing,  they  merely
acted  upon  the  old  opinion  that  it  was  the  chief  duty  of  a  government  to  suppress
heresy.  This  pernicious  doctrine  was  first  openly  repudiated  by  Richelieu.
As  early  as  1617,  and  before  he  had  established  his  power,  he.  in  an  instruction
to  one  of  the  foreign  ministers  which  is  still  extant,  laid  it  down  as  a  principle
that  in  matters  of  state  no  Catholic  ought  to  prefer  a  Spaniard  to  a  French

.  Protestant.98  To  us,  indeed,  in  the  progress  of  society,  such  preference  of  the
claims  of  our  country  to  those  of  our  creed  has  become  a  matter  of  course  ;  but
in  those  days  it  was  a  startling  novelty."  Richelieu,  however,  did  not  fear  to
push  the  paradox  even  to  its  remotest  consequences.  The  Catholic  church
justly  considered  that  its  interests  were  bound  up  with  those  of  the  House  of
Austria  ;100  but  Richelieu,  directly  he  was  called  to  the  council,  determined  to
humble  that  house  in  both  its  branches.101  To  effect  this,  he  openly  supported
the  bitterest  enemies  of  his  own  religion.  He  aided  the  Lutherans  against  the
Emperor  of  Germany  ;  he  aided  the  Calvinists  against  the  King  of  Spain.  During
the  eighteen  years  he  was  supreme,  he  steadily  pursued  the  same  undeviating

policy.1^     When  Philip  attempted  to  oppress  the  Dutch  Protestants,  Richelieu

avec  1'Espagne  qu'elle  avoit  menage  avec  tant  d'application,  et  qu'elle  regardoit  comme
le  plus  ferme  appui  de  son  autorite."  Le  Vassor,Hist.  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  pp.  453,  454.

17  So  late  as  1656,  the  French  clergy  wished  "  to  hasten  a  peace  with  Spain,  and  to
curb  the  heretics  in  France."  Letter  from  Pell  to  Thurloe,  written  in  1656,  and  printed
in  Vaughan's  Protectorate  of  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  436,  8vo,  1839.  During  the  minority
of  Louis  XIII.,  we  hear  of  "  les  zelez  catholiques,  et  ceux  qui  desiroient,  a  quelque  prix
que  ce  fust,  1'  union  des  deux  roys,  et  des  deux  couronnes  de  France  et  d'Espagne,  comme
le  seul  moyen  propre,  selon  leur  ad  vis,  pour  1'extirpation  des  heresies  dans  la  chrestiente."
Sully,  (Econ.  Royalts,  vol.  ix.  p.  181  :  compare  vol.  vii.  p.  248,  on  "  les  zelez  catholiques
espagnolisez  de  France."

93  See  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  387-389,  where  the  importance  of  this

ocument  is  noticed,  and  it  is  said  that  Richelieu  had  drawn  it  up  "  avec  beaucoup  de

soin."     The  language  of  it  is  very  peremptory  :  "  Que  nul  catholique  n'est  si  aveugle

S^T*  Cn  mat*re  d'etat  ™  Espagnol  meilleur  qu'un  francais  huguenot."

w      ren  in  the  reign  of  Henry  IV.  the  French  Protestants  were  not  considered  to  be
frenchmen  .-  "  The  intolerant  dogmas  of  Roman  Catholicism  did  not  recognize  them  as
ichmen.     They  were  looked  upon  as  foreigners,  or  rather  as  enemies  ;  and  were
™^£  ^  SUCh'"     Fdic^  Hist'  °f  thf  Protestants  of  France,  p.  216.

ismondi  says,  under  the  year  1610,  "  Toute  1'eglise  catholique  croyoit  son  sort

i5  "  ^  mais<*i  d'Autriche."     Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.  p.  180.

dominante  mt  1'abaissement  de  la  maison  d'Autriche."     Flassan,  Hist.


iii-  P-  81.   And,  on  the  early  formation  of  this  scheme,  see

de  la  Rochefoucauld,  voL  i.  p.  35O.  De  Retz  says  'that  before  Richelieu  no  one
MI  thought  of  such  a  step:  "Celui  d'attaquer  "la  formidable  maison  d'Autriche
:ete  imagine  de  personne."  Mem.  deRctz,  vol.  i.  p.  45.  This  is  rather  too  strongly
K  KT^Wh°le  P^graph  is  curious,  as  written  bv  a  man  who  possessed  great
'fr  6t2  ""doubtedly  did,  and  who,  though  hating  Richelieu,  could  not

testinM»y  to  Ws  immense  services.


Pro*    »  r6mischei1  K*«*e  trug  Richelieu  kein  Bedenken,  mit  den

tanten  selbst  unverhohlen  in  Bund  zu  treten."     Ranke,  die  Papste,  vol.  ii.  p.  510.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT


307


made  common  cause  with  them  ;  at  first  advancing  them  large  sums  of  money,
and  afterwards  inducing  the  French  king  to  sign  a  treaty  of  intimate  alliance
with  those  who,  in  the  opinion  of  the  church,  he  ought  rather  to  have  chastized
as  rebellious  heretics.103  In  the  same  way,  when  that  great  war  broke  out  in
which  the  emperor  attempted  to  subjugate  to  the  true  faith  the  consciences  of
German  Protestants,  Richelieu  stood  forward  as  their  protector  ;  he  endeavoured
from  the  beginning  to  save  their  leader  the  Palatine  ;104  and,  failing  in  that,
he  concluded  in  their  favour  an  alliance  with  Gustavus  Adolphus,  105  the  ablest
military  commander  the  Reformers  had  then  produced.  Nor  did  he  stop  there.
After  the  death  of  Gustavus,  he,  seeing  that  the  Protestants  were  thus  deprived
of  their  great  leader,  made  still  more  vigorous  efforts  in  their  favour.106  He
intrigued  for  them  in  foreign  courts  ;  he  opened  negotiations  in  their  behalf  ;
and  eventually  he  organized  for  their  protection  a  public  confederacy,  in  which
ecclesiastical  considerations  were  set  at  defiance.  This  league,  which  formed
important  precedent  in  the  international  polity  of  Europe,  was  not  only
mtracted  by  Richelieu  with  the  two  most  powerful  enemies  of  his  own  church,
but  it  was,  from  its  tenor,  what  Sismondi  emphatically  calls  a  "  Protestant  con
federation," — a  Protestant  confederation,  he  says,  between  France,  England,  and
Holland.10?

These  things  alone  would  have  made  the  administration  of  Richelieu  a  great
epoch  in  the  history  of  European  civilization.  For  his  government  affords  the
first  example  of  an  eminent  Catholic  statesman  systematically  disregarding
ecclesiastical  interests,  and  showing  that  disregard  in  the  whole  scheme  of
his  foreign  as  well  as  of  his  domestic  policy.  Some  instances,  indeed,
approaching  to  this  may  be  found  at  an  earlier  period  among  the  petty
rulers  of  Italian  states ;  but,  even  there,  such  attempts  had  never  been


Compare,  in  Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  ii.  pp.  28,  29,  the  reproach  which  the  nuncio
Spada  addressed  to  Richelieu  for  treating  with  the  Protestants,  "  de  la  paix  qui  se  traittoit
avec  les  huguenots."  See  also  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  v.  pp.  236,  354»-356,
567  ;  and  a  good  passage  in  Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  iii.  p.  90, — an  able  little  work,
ind  perhaps  the  best  small  history  ever  published  of  a  great  country.

103  De  Retz  mentions  a  curious  illustration  of  the  feelings  of  the  ecclesiastical  party
jspecting  this  treaty.  He  says  that  the  Bishop  of  Beauvais,  who,  the  year  after  the

jath  of  Richelieu,  was  for  a  moment  at  the  head  of  affairs,  began  his  administration  by
iving  to  the  Dutch  their  choice,  either  to  abandon  their  religion,  or  else  forfeit  their

liance  with  France  :  "  Et  il  demanda  des  le  premier  jour  aux  Hollandois  qu'ils  se  con-
/ertissent  a  la  religion  catholique,  s'ils  vouloient  demeurer  dans  1' alliance  de  France."

fern,  du  Cardinal  de  Retz,  vol.  i.  p.  39.  This,  I  suppose,  is  the  original  authority  for  the
statement  in  the  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xiv.  p.  440  ;  though,  as  is  too  often  the  case  in  that
>therwise  valuable  work,  the  writer  has  omitted  to  indicate  the  source  of  his  information.

104  In  1626,  he  attempted  to  form  a  league  "  en  faveur  du  Palatin."      Sismondi,  Hist,
es   Franfais,  vol.  xxii.  p.  576.     Sismondi  seems  not  quite  certain  as  to  the  sincerity  of
is  proposal ;  but  as  to  this  there  can,  I  think,  be  little  doubt ;  for  it  appears  from  his  own
lemoirs  that  even  in  1624  he  had   in  view  the  recovery  of  the  Palatinate.     Mem.  de
lichelieu,  vol.  ii.  p.  405  ;  and  again  in  1625,  p.  468.

105  Sismondi,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  173  ;  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  415  ;  Le  Vassor,  Hist.
Louis  XIII,  vol.  vi.  pp.  12,  600  ;  and  at  p.  489  :  "Le  roi  de  Suede  qui  comptoit  unique-

icnt  sur  le  cardinal."

106  Compare  Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  pp.  74.  75,  vol.  ii.  pp.  92,  93,  with  Mem.  de
^ontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  ii.  p.  198  ;  and  HowelVs  Letters,  p.  247.     The  different  views  which

:curred  to  his  fertile  mind  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  Gustavus,  are  strikingly  summed
in  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  vii.  pp.  272-277.  On  his  subsequent  pecuniary  advances,
vol.  ix.  p.  395.

7  In  1633,  "  les  ambassadeurs  de  France,  d'Angleterre  et  de  Hollande  mirent  a  profit
repos  de  Fhiver  pour  resserrer  la  confederation  protestante."  Sismondi,  Hist,  des
rrancais,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  221.  Compare,  in  Whitelocke's  Swedish  Embassy,  vol.  i.  p.  275,
"ic  remark  made  twenty  years  later  by  Christina,  daughter  of  Gustavus,  on  the  union
"  papists."


3o8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

successful  ;  they  had  never  been  continued  for  any  length  of  time,  nor
had  they  been  carried  out  on  a  scale  large  enough  to  raise  them  to  the
dignity  of  international  precedents.  The  peculiar  glory  of  Richelieu  is  that
his  foreign  policy  was,  not  occasionally  but  invariably,  governed  by  temporal
considerations  ;  nor  do  I  believe  that,  during  the  long  tenure  of  his  power,  there
is  to  be  found  the  least  proof  of  his  regard  for  those  theological  interests  the  pro-
motion of  which  had  long  been  looked  upon  as  a  matter  of  paramount  importance.
By  thus  steadily  subordinating  the  church  to  the  state  ;  by  enforcing  the  principle
of  this  subordination  on  a  large  scale,  with  great  ability,  and  with  unvarying
success,  he  laid  the  foundation  of  that  purely  secular  polity  the  consolidation  of
which  has,  since  his  death,  been  the  aim  of  all  the  best  European  diplomatists.
The  result  was  a  most  salutary  change,  which  had  been  for  some  time  preparing,
but  which,  under  him,  was  first  completed.  For,  by  the  introduction  of  this
system,  an  end  was  put  to  religious  wars  ;  and  the  chances  of  peace  were  increased
by  thus  removing  one  of  the  causes  to  which  the  interruption  of  peace  had  often
been  owing.108  At  the  same  time  there  was  prepared  the  way  for  that  final
separation  of  theology  from  politics  which  it  will  be  the  business  of  future  gener-
ations fully  to  achieve.  How  great  a  step  had  been  taken  in  this  direction,  ap-
pears from  the  facility  with  which  the  operations  of  Richelieu  were  continued  by
men  every  way  his  inferiors.  Less  than  two  years  after  his  death,  there  was
assembled  the  Congress  of  Westphalia  ;109  the  members  of  which  concluded  that
celebrated  peace  which  is  remarkable  as  being  the  first  comprehensive  attempt
to  adjust  the  conflicting  interests  of  the  leading  European  countries.110  In  this
important  treaty,  ecclesiastical  interests  were  altogether  disregarded  ;ln  and

108  This  change  may  be  illustrated  by  comparing  the  work  of  Grotius  with  that  of
Vattel.     These  two  eminent  men  are  still  respected  as  the  most  authoritative  expounders
of  international  law  ;  but  there  is  this  important  difference  between  them,  that  Vattel
wrote  more  than  a  century  after  Grotius,  and  when  the  secular  principles  enforced  by
Richelieu  had  penetrated  the  minds  even  of  common  politicians.     Therefore  Vattel
says  (Le  Droit  des  Gens,  vol.  i.  pp.  379,  380)  :  "  On  demande  s'il  est  permis  de  faire  alliance
avec  une  nation  qui  ne  professe  pas  la  meme  religion  ?     Si  les  traites  faits  avec  les  en-
nemis  de  la  foi  sont  valides  ?     Grotius  a  traite  la  question  assez  au  long.     Cette  discus-
sion pouvait  etre  necessaire  dans  un  temps  ou  la  fureur  des  partis  obscurcissait  encore
des  principes  qu'elle  avait  long-temps  fait  oublier,  osons  croire  qu'elle  serait  superfine
dans  notre  siecle.     La  loi  naturelle  seule  regit  les  traites  des  nations  ;  la  difference  de
religion  y  est  absolument  etrangere."     See  also  p.  318,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  151.     On  the  other
hand,  Grotius  opposes  alliances  between  nations  of  different  religion,  and  says,  that
nothing  can  justify  them  except  "  une  extreme   necessite.    .  .  .  Car  il  faut  chercher
premierement  le  regne  celeste,  c'est  a  dire  penser  avant  toutes  choses  a  la  propagation  de
1'evangile."     And  he  further  recommends  that  princes  should  follow  the  advice  given  on
this  subject  by  Foulques,  Archbishop  of  Rheims  !    Grotius,  le  Droit  de  la  Guerre  et  de  la
Paix,  livre  ii.  chap.  xv.  sec.  xi.  vol.  i.  pp.  485,  486,  edit.  Barbeyrac,  Amsterdam,  1724,
4to ;  a  passage  the  more  instructive,  because  Grotius  was  a  man  of  great  genius  and
great  humanity.  On  religious  wars  as  naturally  recognized  in  barbarous  times,  see  the
curious  and  important  work,  Institutes  of  Timour,  pp.  141,  333,  335.

109  "  LeCongresdeWestphalie  s'ouvritleioavrili643."      Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Franfais,
vol.  iii.  p.  156.      Its  two  great  divisions  at  Munster  and  Osnabruck  were  formed  in  March
1644.  Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplomatic,  vol.  hi.  p.  no.     Richelieu  died  in  December,  1642
Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxviii.  p.  28.

110  "  Les  regnes  de  Charles-Quint  et  de  Henri  IV  font  epoque  pour  certaines  parties
du  droit  international ;  mais  le  point  de  depart  le  plus  saillant,  c'est  la  paix  de  West-
phalie."     Eschbach,  Introduc.  d  V Etude  du  Droit,  Paris,  1846,  p.  92.    Compare  the  remarks
on  Mafcly,  in  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxvi.  p.  7,  andSismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  179  :
"  base  au  droit  public  de  1'Europe."

m  Compare  the  indignation  of  the  pope  at  this  treaty  (Vattel,  le  Droit  des  Gens,  vol.  ii.
p.  28),  with  Ranke's  Papste,  vol.  ii.  p.  576  :  "  Das  religiose  Element  ist  zuriickgetreten  ;
die  politischen  Rucksichten  beherrschen  die  Welt :  "  a  summary  of  the  general  state  of
affairs.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT


309


the  contracting  parties,  instead  of,  as  heretofore,  depriving  each  other  of  their
possessions,  took  the  bolder  course  of  indemnifying  themselves  at  the  expense
of  the  church,  and  did  not  hesitate  to  seize  her  revenues,  and  secularize  several
of  her  bishoprics.112  From  this  grievous  insult,  which  became  a  precedent  in  the
public  law  of  Europe,  the  spiritual  power  has  never  recovered  :  and  it  is  remarked
by  a  very  competent  authority  that  since  that  period  diplomatists  have  in
their  official  acts  neglected  religious  interests,  and  have  preferred  the  advocacy
of  matters  relating  to  the  commerce  and  colonies  of  their  respective  countries.113
The  truth  of  this  observation  is  confirmed  by  the  interesting  fact  that  the  Thirty
Years'  War,  to  which  this  same  treaty  put  an  end,  is  the  last  great  religious  war
which  has  ever  been  waged  ;114  no  civilized  people,  during  two  centuries,  having
thought  it  worth  while  to  peril  their  own  safety  in  order  to  disturb  the  belief  of
their  neighbours.  This,  indeed,  is  but  a  part  of  that  vast  secular  movement  by
which  superstition  has  been  weakened,  and  the  civilization  of  Europe  secured.
Without,  however,  discussing  that  subject,  I  will  now  endeavour  to  show  how
the  policy  of  Richelieu,  in  regard  to  the  French  Protestant  church,  corresponded
with  his  policy  in  regard  to  the  French  Catholic  church  ;  so  that  in  both  depart-
ments this  great  statesman,  aided  by  that  progress  of  knowledge  for  which  his
age  was  remarkable,  was  able  to  struggle  with  prejudices  from  which  men,  slowly
and  with  infinite  difficulty,  were  attempting  to  emerge.

The  treatment  of  the  French  Protestants  by  Richelieu  is  undoubtedly  one
of  the  most  honourable  parts  of  his  system  ;  and  in  it,  as  in  other  liberal  measures,
he  was  assisted  by  the  course  of  preceding  events.  His  administration,  taken  in
connexion  with  that  of  Henry  IV.  and  the  queen-regent,  presents  the  noble
spectacle  of  a  toleration  far  more  complete  than  any  which  had  then  been  seen
in  Catholic  Europe.  While  in  other  Christian  countries  men  were  being  in-
cessantly persecuted,  simply  because  they  held  opinions  different  from  those
professed  by  the  established  clergy,  France  refused  to  follow  the  general  example,
and  protected  those  heretics  whom  the  Church  was  eager  to  punish.  Indeed,
not  only  were  they  protected  but,  when  they  possessed  abilities,  they  were  openly
rewarded.  In  addition  to  their  appointments  to  civil  offices,  many  of  them  were
advanced  to  high  military  posts  ;  and  Europe  beheld  with  astonishment  the
armies  of  the  king  of  France  led  by  heretical  generals.  Rohan,  Lesdiguieres,
Chatillon,  La  Force,  Bernard  de  Weimar,  were  among  the  most  celebrated  of
the  military  leaders  employed  by  Louis  XIII.  ;  and  all  of  them  were  Protestants,
as  also  were  some  younger,  but  distinguished,  officers,  such  as  Gassion,  Rantzau,
Schomberg,  and  Turenne.  For  now,  nothing  was  beyond  the  reach  of  men  who,
half  a  century  earlier  would  on  account  of  their  heresies  have  been  persecuted
to  the  death.  Shortly  before  the  accession  of  Louis  XIII.,  Lesdiguidres,  the  ablest
general  among  the  French  Protestants,  was  made  marshal  of  France.115  Four-


112  "  La  France  ofytint  par  ce  traite,  en  indemnite,  la  souverainete  des  trois  eveches,
Metz,  Toul  et  Verdun,  ainsi  que  celle  d' Alsace.     La  satisfaction  ou  indemnite  des  autres
parties  interessees  fut  convenue,  en  grande  partie,  aux  depens  de  1'eglise,  et  moyennant  la
secularisation  de  plusieurs  eveches  et  benefices  ecclesiastiques."     Koch,   Tableau  des
Revolutions,  vol.  i.  p.  328.

113  Dr.  Vaughan  (Protectorate  of  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  civ.)  says  :      "  It  is  a  leading  fact
also  in  the   history  of  modern  Europe   that,  from  the  peace  of  Westphalia  in  1648,
religion,  as  the  great  object  of  negotiation,  began  everywhere  to  give  place  to  questions
relating  to  colonies  and  commerce."      Charles  Butler  observed  that  this  treaty  "  con-
siderably lessened  the  influence  of  religion  on  politics."     Butler's  Reminiscences,  vol.  i.
p.  181.

114  The  fact  of  the  Thirty  Years'  War  being  a  religious  contest,  formed  the  basis  of  one
of  the  charges  which  the  church -party  brought  against  Richelieu  ;   and  an  author  who
wrote  in  1634  "  montroit  bien  au  long  que  1'alliance  du  roy  de  France  avec  les  protestants
etoit  contraire  aux  interets  de  la  religion  catholique  ;  parce  que  la  guerre  des  Provinces
Unies  et  celle  d'Allemagne  etoient  des  guerres  de  religion."     Benoist,  Hist,  de  I' Edit  de
Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  536.

115  According  to  a  contemporary,  he  received  this  appointment  without  having  asked


3io  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

teen  years  later,  the  same  high  dignity  was  conferred  upon  two  other
Protestants,  Chatillon  and  La  Force  ;  the  former  of  whom  is  said  to  have  been
the  most  influential  of  the  schismatics.116  Both  these  appointments  were  in
1622  ;117  and,  in  1634,  still  greater  scandal  was  caused  by  the  elevation  of  Sully,
who,  notwithstanding  his  notorious  heresy,  also  received  the  staff  of  marshal  of
France.118  This  was  the  work  of  Richelieu,  and  it  gave  serious  offence  to  the
friends  of  the  church  ;  but  the  great  statesman  paid  so  little  attention  to  their
clamour  that,  after  the  civil  war  was  concluded,  he  took  another  step  equally
obnoxious.  The  Duke  de  Rohan  was  the  most  active  of  all  the  enemies  of  the
established  church,  and  was  looked  up  to  by  the  Protestants  as  the  main  support
of  their  party.  He  had  taken  up  arms  in  their  favour,  and,  declining  to  abandon
his  religion,  had  by  the  fate  of  war  been  driven  from  France.  But  Richelieu,
who  was  acquainted  with  his  ability,  cared  little  about  his  opinions.  He  there-
fore recalled  him  from  exile,  employed  him  in  a  negotiation  with  Switzerland,  and
sent  him  on  foreign  service,  as  commander  of  one  of  the  armies  of  the  king  of
France.11**

Such  were  the  tendencies  which  characterized  this  new  state  of  things.  It
is  hardly  necessary  to  observe  how  beneficial  this  great  change  must  have  been  ;
since  by  it  men  were  encouraged  to  look  to  their  country  as  the  first  consideration,
and,  discarding  their  old  disputes,  Catholic  soldiers  were  taught  to  obey  heretical
generals,  and  follow  their  standards  to  victory.  In  addition  to  this,  the  mere
social  amalgamation,  arising  from  the  professors  of  different  creeds  mixing  iti
the  same  camp,  and  fighting  under  the  same  banner,  must  have  still  further  aided
to  disarm  the  mind,  partly  by  merging  theological  feuds  in  a  common  and
yet  a  temporal  object,  and  partly  by  showing  to  each  sect  that  their  religious
opponents  were  not  entirely  bereft  of  human  virtue  ;  that  they  still  retained
some  of  the  qualities  of  men  ;  and  that  it  was  even  possible  to  combine  the  errors
of  heresy  with  all  the  capabilities  of  a  good  and  competent  citizen.120

But  while  the  hateful  animosities  by  which  France  had  long  been  distracted
were  under  the  policy  of  Richelieu  gradually  subsiding,  it  is  singular  to  observe
that,  though  the  prejudices  of  the  Catholics  obviously  diminished,  those  of  the
Protestants  seemed  for  a  time  to  retain  all  their  activity.  It  is,  indeed,  a  striking
proof  of  the  perversity  and  pertinacity  of  such  feelings,  that  it  was  precisely  in
the  country,  and  at  the  period,  when  the  Protestants  were  best  treated,  that  they
displayed  most  turbulence.  And,  in  this,  as  in  all  such  cases,  the  cause  principally
at  work  was  the  influence  of  that  class  to  which  circumstances  I  will  now  ex-
plain had  secured  a  temporary  ascendency.

For  the  diminution  of  the  theological  spirit  had  effected  in  the  Protestants  a
remarkable  but  a  very  natural  result.  The  increasing  toleration  of  the  French

oc  it :  "  sans  etre  a  la  cour  ni  1' avoir  demande."  Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  i.  p.  70.
In  1622,  even  the  lieutenants  of  Lesdiguieres  were  Protestants  :  "  ses  lieutenants,  qui
estant  tous  huguenots."  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  538.  These  memoirs  are  very  valuable  in  regard
to  political  and  military  matters  ;  their  author  having  played  a  conspicuous  part  in  the
transactions  which  he  describes.

lie  «  ii  n'y  avoit  personne  dans  le  parti  huguenot  si  considerable  que  lui."  Tallemant
des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  v.  p.  204.

17  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xv.  p.  247  ;  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  400.
3  Additions  to  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,  vol.  viii.  p.  496  ;  Smedley's  Hist,  of  the  Re-
formed Religion  in  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  204.

19  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  ii.  p.  57  ;  Mem.  de  Rohan,  vol.  i.  pp.  66,  69  ;  Mem.  de
Bassompierre,  vol.  iii.  pp.  324,  348  ;  Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  p.  86  ;  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de
Lotus  XIII,  vol.  vii.  p.  157,  vol.  viii.  p.  284.     This  great  rise  in  the  fortunes  of  Rohan

)k  place  at  different  times  between  1632  and  1635.

20  Late  in  the  sixteenth  century,  Duplessis  Mornay  had  to  state,  what  was  then  con-

1  by  the  majority  of  men  an  incredible  paradox,  "  que  ce  n'estoit  pas  chose  incom-

i  estre  bon  huguenot  et  bon   Francoys  tout  ensemble."     Duplessis,  Mem.  et

respond,  vol.  i.  p.  146.     Compare  p.  213,  vol.  ii.  pp.  45,  46,  77,  677,  vol.  vii.  p.  294,

ra.  xi.  pp.  31,  68  ;  interesting  passages  for  the  history  of  opinions  in  France.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          311

government  had  laid  open  to  their  leaders  prizes  which  before  they  could  never
have  obtained.  As  long  as  all  offices  were  refused  to  the  Protestant  nobles,  it
was  natural  that  they  should  cling  with  the  greater  zeal  to  their  own  party,  by
whom  alone  their  virtues  were  acknowledged.  But  when  the  principle  was
once  recognized,  that  the  state  would  reward  men  for  their  abilities,  without
regard  to  their  religion,  there  was  introduced  into  every  sect  a  new  element  of
discord.  The  leaders  of  the  Reformers  could  not  fail  to  feel  some  gratitude,  or,
at  all  events,  some  interest  for  the  government  which  employed  them  ;  and  the
influence  of  temporal  considerations  being  thus  strengthened,  the  influence  of
religious  ties  must  have  been  weakened.  It  is  impossible  that  opposite  feelings
should  be  paramount,  at  the  same  moment,  in  the  same  mind.  The  further  men
extend  their  view,  the  less  they  care  for  each  of  the  details  of  which  the  view  is
composed.  Patriotism  is  a  corrective  of  superstition ;  and  the  more  we  feel  for
our  country,  the  less  we  feel  for  our  sect.  Thus  it  is,  that  in  the  progress  of
civilization  the  scope  of  the  intellect  is  widened  ;  its  horizon  is  enlarged  ;  its  sym-
pathies are  multiplied  ;  and,  as  the  range  of  its  excursions  is  increased,  the  tenacity
of  its  grasp  is  slackened,  until  at  length  it  begins  to  perceive  that  the  infinite
variety  of  circumstances  necessarily  causes  an  infinite  variety  of  opinions  ;
that  a  creed  which  is  good  and  natural  for  one  man  may  be  bad  and  unnatural
for  another  ;  and  that,  so  far  from  interfering  with  the  march  of  religious  con-
victions, we  should  be  content  to  look  into  ourselves,  search  our  own  hearts,
purge  our  own  souls,  soften  the  evil  of  our  own  passions,  and  extirpate  that
insolent  and  intolerant  spirit  which  is  at  once  the  cause  and  the  effect  of  all
theological  controversy.

It  was  in  this  direction   that  a  prodigious  step  was  taken  by  the  French,  in  the
first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century.     Unfortunately,  however,  the  advantages
which  arose  were  accompanied  by  serious  drawbacks.     From  the  introduction
of  temporal  considerations  among  the  Protestant  leaders,   there  occurred  two
jsults  of  considerable  importance.     The  first  result  was,   that  many  of  the
>rotestants  changed  their  religion.     Before  the  Edict  of  Nantes,  they  had  been
mstantly  persecuted,  and  had  as  constantly  increased.121  But  under  the  tolerant
>licy  of  Henry  IV.  and  Louis  XIII.,  they  continued  to  diminish.122     Indeed,  this
ras  the  natural  consequence  of  the  growth  of  that  secular  spirit  which  in  every
>untry  has  assuaged  religious  animosities.      For  by  the  action   of   that  spirit
le  influence  of  social  and  political  views  began  to  outweigh  those  theological  views
which  the  minds  of  men  had  long  been  confined.     As  these  temporal  ties  in-
reased  in  strength,  there  was   of   course  generated  among  the  rival  factions  an
icreased  tendency  to  assimilate  ;  while,  as  the  Catholics  were  not  only  much  more
lumerous   but   in    every   respect    more  influential  than  their  opponents,  they
iped  the  benefit  of  this  movement,  and  gradually  drew  over  to  their  side  many
)f  their  former  enemies.     That  this  absorption  of  the  smaller  sect  into  the  larger
due  to  the  cause  I  have  mentioned,  is  rendered  still  more  evident  by  the  in-
jresting  fact  that  the  change  began  among  the  heads  of  the  party  ;  and  that  it
ras  not  the  inferior  Protestants  who  first  abandoned  their  leaders,  but  it  was
ither  the  leaders  who  deserted  their  followers.     1  his  was  because  the  leaders
sing  more  educated  than  the  great  body  of  the  people,  were  more  susceptibb
the  sceptical  movement,  and  therefore   set   the   example   of   an   indifference

121  See  Benoist,  H^st.  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  i.  pp.  10,  14,  18  ;  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.
l.  iii.  pp.  181,  242,  357,  358,  543,  558,  vol.  iv.  p.  155  ;  Relat.  des  Ambassadeurs  Venitiens,
l.  i.  pp.  412,  536,  vol.  ii.  pp.  66,  74  ;  Ranke's  Civil  Wars  in  France,  vol.  i.  pp.  279,  280,

/ol.  ii.  p.  94.

122  Compare  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  173,  with  Ranke,  die  Romischen  Pdpste,
\.  ii.  pp.  477-479.     In  spite  of  the  increase  of  population,  the  Protestants  diminished

ibsolutely,  as  well  as  relatively  to  the  Catholics.  In  1598  they  had  760  churches  ;
1619  only  700.  Smedley's  Hist,  of  the  Reformed  Religion  in  France,  vol.  iii.  pp.  46,  145.
Thou,  in  the  preface  to  his  History  (vol.  i.  p.  320),  observes,  that  the  Protestants
md  increased  during  the  wars  carried  on  against  them,  but  "  diminuoient  en  nombre  et
n  credit  pendant  la  paix."


3i2  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

to  disputes  which  still  engrossed  the  popular  mind.  As  soon  as  this  indifference
had  reached  a  certain  point,  the  attractions  offered  by  the  conciliating  policy
of  Louis  XIII.  became  irresistible  ;  and  the  Protestant  nobles  in  particular,
being  most  exposed  to  political  temptations,  began  to  alienate  themselves
from  their  own  party,  in  order  to  form  an  alliance  with  a  court  which  showed
itself  ready  to  reward  their  merits.

It  is  of  course  impossible  to  fix  the  exact  period  at  which  this  important
change  took  place.123  But  we  may  say  with  certainty  that  very  early  in  the
reign  of  Louis  XIII.  many  of  the  Protestant  nobles  cared  nothing  for  their
religion,  while  the  remainder  of  them  ceased  to  feel  that  interest  in  it  which  they
had  formerly  expressed.  Indeed,  some  of  the  most  eminent  of  them  openly
abandoned  their  creed,  and  joined  that  very  church  which  they  had  been  taught
to  abhor  as  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  whore  of  Babylon.  The  Duke  de  Lesdi-
guieres,  the  greatest  of  all  the  Protestant  generals,124  became  a  Catholic,  and
as  a  reward  for  his  conversion  was  made  constable  of  France.125  The  Duke  de
la  Tremouille  adopted  the  same  course  ;126  as  also  did  the  Duke  de  la  Meille-
raye.127  the  Duke  de  Bouillon,128  and  a  few  years  later  the  Marquis  de  Mont-
ausier.129  These  illustrious  nobles  were  among  the  most  powerful  of  the  members
of  the  Reformed  communion;  but  they  quitted  it  without  compunction,  sacri-
ficing their  old  associations  in  favour  of  the  opinions  professed  by  the  state.
Among  the  other  men  of  high  rank  who  still  remained  nominally  connected  with
the  French  Protestants,  we  find  a  similar  spirit.  We  find  them  lukewarm  re-
specting matters  for  which,  if  they  had  been  born  fifty  years  earlier,  they  would
have  laid  down  their  lives.  The  Marechal  de  Bouillon,  who  professed  himself
to  be  a  Protestant,  was  unwilling  to  change  his  religion  ;  but  he  so  comported  him-
self as  to  show  that  he  considered  its  interests  as  subordinate  to  political  consider-
ations.130 A  similar  remark  has  been  made  by  the  French  historians  concerning

las  M.  Ranke  has  noticed  how  the  French  Protestant  nobles  fell  off  from  their  party  :
but  he  does  not  seem  aware  of  the  remote  causes  of  what  he  deems  a  sudden  apostasy  ;
"  In  dem  namlichen  Momente  trat  nun  auch  die  grosse  Wendung  der  Dinge  in  Frankreich
ein.  Fragen  wir,  woher  im  Jahr  1621  die  Verluste  des  Protestantismus  hauptsachlich
kamen,  so  war  es  die  Entzweiung  derselben,  der  Abfall  des  Adels."  Ranke,  die  Pdpete,
vol.  ii.  p.  476.  Compare  a  curious  passage  in  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.
p.  33,  from  which  it  appears  that  in  1611  the  French  Protestants  were  breaking  into
three  parties,  one  of  which  consisted  of  "  les  seigneurs  d'eminente  qualite."

124  "  Le  plus  illustre  guerrier  du  parti  protestant."     Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,
vol.  xxii.  p.  505.     In  the  contemporary  despatches  of  the  Spanish  ambassador,  he  is
called  "  1'un  des  huguenots  les  plus  marquans,  homme  d'un  grand  poids,  et  d'un  grand
credit."     Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  60.     His  principal  influence  was  in  Dauphine.
Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  i.  p.  236.

125  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  293  ;  and  a  dry  remark  on  his  "  conversion  "  in  Mem.  de
Richelieu,  vol.  ii.  p.  215,  which  may  be  compared  with  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xviii.  p.  132,
and  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  pp.  195-197.     Rohan  (Mem.  vol.  i.  p.  228)  plainly
says,  "  le  due  de  Lesdiguieres,  ayant  harde  sa  religion  pour  la  charge  de  connetable  de
France."     See  also  p.  91,  and  Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  p.  37.

126  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  67  ;  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,
vol.  v.  pp.  809,  810,  865.-

!27  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  iii.  p.  43.  La  Meilleraye  was  also  a  duke  ;
and  what  is  far  more  in  his  favour,  he  was  a  friend  of  Descartes.  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxviii.
pp.  152,  153.

128  Sismondi  (Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  27)  says,  "  il  abjura  en  1637  ;  "  but
according  to  Benoist^(Hw*.  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  550)  it  was  in  1635.

»  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  iii.  p.  245.  Des  Reaux,  who  saw  these
changes  constantly  happening,  simply  observes,  "  notre  marquis,  voyant  que  sa  religion
etoit  un  obstacle  &  son  dessein,  en  change."

"  Mettoit  la  politique  avant  la  religion."  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.
p.  264.  This  was  Henry  Bouillon,  whom  some  writers  have  confused  with  Frederick
Bouillon.  Both  of  them  were  dukes  ;  but  Henry,  who  was  the  father,  and  who  did


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT  313

the  Duke  de  Sully  and  the  Marquis  de  Chatillon,  both  of  whom,  though  they  were
members  of  the  Reformed  church,  displayed  a  marked  indifference  to  those  theo-
logical interests  which  had  formerly  been  objects  of  supreme  importance.131  The
result  was  that  when  in  1621  the  Protestants  began  their  civil  war  against
the  government,  it  was  found  that  of  all  their  great  leaders  two  only,  Rohan  and
his  brother  Soubise,  were  prepared  to  risk  their  lives  in  support  of  their  religion.132

Thus  it  was  that  the  first  great  consequence  of  the  tolerating  policy  of  the
French  government  was  to  deprive  the  Protestants  of  the  support  of  their  former
leaders,  and  in  several  instances  even  to  turn  their  sympathies  on  the  side  of
the  Catholic  church.  But  the  other  consequence,  to  which  I  have  alluded,  was
one  of  far  greater  moment.  The  growing  indifference  of  the  higher  classes  of
Protestants  threw  the  management  of  their  party  into  the  hands  of  the  clergy.
The  post  which  was  deserted  by  the  secular  leaders  was  naturally  seized  by  the
spiritual  leaders.  And  as,  in  every  sect,  the  clergy  as  a  body  have  always  been
remarkable  for  their  intolerance  of  opinions  different  to  their  own,  it  followed  that
this  change  infused  into  the  now  mutilated  ranks  of  the  Protestants  an  acrimony
not  inferior  to  that  of  the  worst  times  of  the  sixteenth  century.133  Hence  it  was
that  by  a  singular  but  perfectly  natural  combination,  the  Protestants,  who  pro-
fessed to  take  their  stand  on  the  right  of  private  judgment,  became  early  in  the
seventeenth  century  more  intolerant  than  the  Catholics,  who  based  their  religion
on  the  dictates  of  an  infallible  church.

This  is  one  of  the  many  instances  which  show  how  superficial  is  the  opinion  of
those  speculative  writers  who  believe  that  the  Protestant  religion  is  necessarily
more  liberal  than  the  Catholic.  If  those  who  adopt  this  view  had  taken  the  pains
to  study  the  history  of  Europe  in  its  original  sources,  they  would  have  learned
that  the  liberality  of  every  sect  depends,  not  at  all  on  its  avowed  tenets,  but  on
the  circumstances  in  which  it  is  placed,  and  on  the  amount  of  authority  possessed

not  actually  change  his  religion,  was  the  marshal.  The  following  notices  of  him  will
more  than  confirm  the  remark  made  by  Sismondi :  Mem.  de  Bassompierre,  vol.  i.  p.  455  ;
Smedley's  Reformed  Religion  in  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  99  ;  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  107  ;
Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  pp.  420,  467,  664,  vol.  iv.  p.  519  ;  Mem.  de  Richelieu,
vol.  i.  p.  104,  vol.  ii.  p.  259  ;  Mem.  de  Duplessis  Mornay,  vol.  xi.  p.  450,  vol.  xii.  pp.  .79,
182,  263,  287,  345,  361,  412,  505.

131  Benoist,  Hist,  de  I' Edit  de  Nantes,  vol.  i.  p.  pp.  121,  298,  vol.  ii.  pp.  5,  180,  267,
341  ;  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  267  ;  Felice's  Hist,  of  the  Protestants  of  France,  p.  206.
Sully  advised  Henry  IV.,  on  mere  political  considerations,  to  become  a  Catholic  ;  and
there  were  strong,  but  I  believe  unfounded  rumours,  that  he  himself  intended  taking  the
same  course.     See  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,  vol.  ii.  p.  81,  vol.  vii.  pp.  362,  363.

132  "  There  were,  among  all  the  leaders,  but  the  Duke  de  Rohan  and  his  brother  the
Duke  de  Soubise,  who  showed  themselves  disposed  to  throw  their  whole  fortunes  into  the
new  wars  of  religion."     Felice's  Hist,  of  the  Protestants  of  France,  p.  241.     For  this,  M.
Felice,  as  usual,  quotes  no  authority  ;  but  Rohan  himself  says  :  "  C'est  ce  qui  s'est  passe
en  cette  seconde  guerre  (1626),  oii  Rohan  et  Soubise  ont  eu  pour  contraires  tous  les  grands
de  la  religion  de  France."     Mem.  de  Rohan,  vol.  i.  p.  278.     Rohan'claims  great  merit  for
his  religious  sincerity,  though,  from  a  passage  in  Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  i.  p.  418,
and  another  in  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  173,  one  may  be  allowed  to
doubt  if  he  were  so  single-minded  as  is  commonly  supposed.

133  Sismondi  notices  this  remarkable  change,  though  he  places  it  a  few  years  earlier  than
the  contemporary  writers  do  :  "  Depuis  que  les  grands  seigneurs  s'etoient  eloignes  des
eglises,  c'etoient  les  ministres  qui  etoient  devenus^les  chefs,  les  representans  et  les  dema-
gogues des  huguenots  ;  et  ils  apportoient  dans  leurs  deliberations  cette  aprete  et  cette
inflexibilite  theologiques  qui  semblent  caracteriser  les  pretres  de  toutes  les  religions,  et
qui  donnent  a  leurs  haines  une  amertume  plus  offensante."  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,
vol.  xxii.  p.  87.     Compare  p.  478.     In  1621,  "  Rohan  lui-meme  voyait  continuellement
ses  operations  con trariees  par  le  conseil -general  des  eglises."  Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Francais,
vol.  iii.  p.  88.  .  In  the  same  year,  M.  Capefigue  (Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  271)  says,  "  Le  parti
modere  cessa  d' avoir  action  sur  le  preche  ;  la  direction  des  forces  huguenotes  etait  passee
dans  les  mains  des  ardents,  conduits  par  les  ministres."


3i4  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

by  its  priesthood.  The  Protestant  religion  is  for  the  most  part  more  tolerant
than  the  Catholic,  simply  because  the  events  which  have  given  rise  to  Protes-
tantism have  at  the  same  time  increased  the  play  of  the  intellect,  and  therefore
lessened  the  power  of  the  clergy.  But  whoever  has  read  the  works  of  the.  great
Calvinist  divines,  and,  above  all,  whoever  has  studied  their  history,  must  know
that  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  the  desire  of  persecuting  their
opponents  burnt  as  hotly  among  them  as  it  did  among  any  of  the  Catholics
even  in  the  worst  days  of  the  papal  dominion.  This  is  a  mere  matter  of  fact,  of
which  any  one  may  satisfy  himself,  by  consulting  the  original  documents  of  those
times.  And  even  now,  there  is  more  superstition,  more  bigotry,  and  less  of
the  charity  of  real  religion,  among  the  lower  order  of  Scotch  Protestants,  than
there  is  among  the  lower  order  of  French  Catholics.  Yet,  for  one  intolerant
passage  in  Protestant  theology,  it  would  be  easv  to  point  out  twenty  in  Catholic
theology.*  The  truth  however  is  that  the  actions  of  men  are  governed,  not
by  dogmas,  and  text -books,  and  rubrics,  but  by  the  opinions  and  habits  of  their
contemporaries,  by  the  general  spirit  of  their  age,  and  by  the  character  of  those
classes  who  are  in  the  ascendant.  This  seems  to  be  the  origin  of  that  difference
between  religious  theory  and  religious  practice,  of  which  theologians  greatly
complain  as  a  stumbling-block  and  an  evil.  For,  religious  theories  being  pre-
served in  books,  in  a  doctrinal  and  dogmatic  form,  remain  a  perpetual  witness,
and,  therefore,  cannot  be  changed  without  incurring  the  obvious  charge  of  in-
consistency, or  of  heresy.  But  the  practical  part  of  every  religion,  its  moral,
political,  and  social  workings,  embrace  such  an  immense  variety  of  interests,  and
have  to  do  with  such  complicated  and  shifting  agencies,  that  it  is  hopeless  to  fix
them  by  formularies  :  they,  even  in  the  most  rigid  systems,  are  left,  in  a  great
measure,  to  private  discretion  ;  and,  being  almost  entirely  unwritten,  they  lack
those  precautions  by  which  the  permanence  of  dogmas  is  effectually  secured.134
Hence  it  is  that  while  the  religious  doctrines  professed  by  a  people  in  their
national  creed  are  no  criterion  of  their  civilization,  their  religious  practice  is,
on  the  other  hand,  so  pliant,  and  so  capable  of  adaptation  to  social  wants,  that
it  forms  one  of  the  best  standards  by  which  the  spirit  of  any  age  can  be  measured.
It  is  on  account  of  these  things  that  we  ought  not  to  be  surprised  that,  during
many  years,  the  French  Protestants,  who  affected  to  appeal  to  the  right  of
private  judgment,  were  more  intolerant  of  the  exercise  of  that  judgment  by  their
adversaries  than  were  the  Catholics  ;  although  the  Catholics,  by  recognizing  an
infallible  church,  ought  in  consistency  to  be  superstitious,  and  may  be  said  to
inherit  intolerance  as  their  natural  birthright.135  Thus  while  the  Catholics  were

14  The  church  of  Rome  has  always  seen  this,  and  on  that  account  has  been,  and  still  is,
very  pliant  in  regard  to  morals,  and  very  inflexible  in  regard  to  dogmas  ;  a  striking  proof
of  the  great  sagacity  with  which  her  affairs  are  administered.  In  Blanco  White's  Evidence
against  Catholicism,  p.48,  and  in  Parr's  Works,  vol.vii.pp.454,455,  there  is  an  unfavourable
and  indeed  an  unjust  notice  of  this  peculiarity,  which,  though  strongly  marked  in  the
Romish  church,  is  by  no  means  confined  to  it,  but  is  found  in  every  religious  sect  which  is
regularly  organized.  Locke,  in  his  Letters  on  Toleration,  observes  that  the  clergy  are
naturally  more  eager  against  error  than  against  vice  (Works,  vol.  v.  pp.  6,  7,  241) ;  and
their  preference  of  dogmas  to  moral  truths  is  also  mentioned  by  M.  C.  Comte,  Traite  de
Legislat.  vol.  i.  p.  245  ;  and  is  alluded  to  by  Kant  in  his  comparison  of  "  ein  moraiischer
Katechismus  "  with  a  "  Religionskatechismus."  Die  Metaphysik  der  Sitten  (Ethische
Mefhodenlehre),  in  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  v.  p.  321.  Compare  Temple's  Observations  upon
the  United  Provinces,  in  Works  of  Sir  W.  Temple,  vol.  i.  p.  154,  with  the  strict  adhesion  to
formularies  noticed  in  Ward's  Ideal  Church,  p.  358  :  and  analogous  cases  in  Mill's  Hist,
of  India,  vol.  i.  pp.  399,  400,  and  in  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  iii.  p.  87  ;  also
Combe's  Notes  on  the  United  States,  vol.  iii.  pp.  256,  257.

'  Blanco  White  (Evidence  against  Catholicism,  p.  vi.)  harshly  says,  "  sincere  Roman
olics  cannot  conscientiously  be  tolerant."  But  he  is  certainly  mistaken  ;  for  the

[*The  Protestant  theology  of  Scotland  in  the  seventeenth  century  abounded  in  in-
lerant  teaching,  as  is  shown  by  Buckle  hereinafter.     And  see  below,  p.  318.— ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT


315


theoretically  more  bigoted  than  the  Protestants,  the  Protestants  became  practi-
cally more  bigoted  than  the  Catholics.  The  Protestants  continued  to  insist  upon
that  right  of  private  judgment  in  religion,  which  the  Catholics  continued  to
deny.  Yet  such  was  the  force  of  circumstances  that  each  sect,  in  its  practice,
contradicted  its  own  dogma,  and  acted  as  if  it  had  embraced  the  dogma  of  its
opponents.  The  cause  of  this  change  was  very  simple.  Among  the  French,  the
theological  spirit,  as  we  have  already  seen,  was  decaying  ;  and  the  decline  of  the
influence  of  the  clergy  was,  as  invariably  happens,  accompanied  by  an  increase
of  toleration.  But,  among  the  French  Protestants,  this  partial  diminution  oi
the  theological  spirit  had  produced  different  consequences,  because  it  had
brought  about  a  change  of  leaders,  which  threw  the  ccmmand  into  the  hands  of
the  clergy,  and,  by  increasing  their  power,  provoked  a  reaction,  and  revived  those
very  feelings  to  the  decay  of  which  the  reaction  owed  its  origin.  This  seems  to
explain  how  it  is  that  a  religion  which  is  not  protected  by  the  government (
usually  displays  greater  energy  and  greater  vitality  than  one  which  is  so  pro-
tected. In  the  progress  of  society,  the  theological  spirit  first  declines  among  the
most  educated  classes  ;  and  then  it  is  that  the  government  can  step  in,  as  it
does  in  England,  and,  controlling  the  clergy,  make  the  church  a  creature  of  the
state  ;  thus  weakening  the  ecclesiastical  element  by  tempering  it  with  secular
considerations.  But  when  the  state  refuses  to  do  this,  the  reins  of  power,  as
they  fall  from  the  hands  of  the  upper  classes,  are  seized  by  the  clergy,  and  there
arises  a  state  of  things  of  which  the  French  Protestants  in  the  seventeenth
century,  and  the  Irish  Catholics  in  our  own  time,  form  the  best  illustration.  In  such
cases  it  will  always  happen  that  the  religion  which  is  tolerated  by  the  govern-
ment though  not  fully  recognized  by  it,  will  the  longest*  retain  its  vitality  ;
because  its  priesthood,  neglected  by  the  state,  must  cling  the  closer  to  the  people,
in  whom  alone  is  the  source  of  their  power.1^  On  the  other  hand,  in  a  religion
which  is  favoured  and  richly  endowed  by  the  state,  the  union  between  the  priest-
hood and  inferior  laity  will  be  less  intimate  ;  the  clergy  will  look  to  the  govern-
ment as  well  as  to  the  people  :  and  the  interference  of  political  views,  of  consider-
ations of  temporal  expediency,  and  if  it  may  be  added  without  irreverence,  the
hopes  of  promotion,  will  secularize  the  ecclesiastical  spirit,137  and,  according  to
the  process  I  have  already  traced,  will  thus  hasten  the  march  of  toleration.

These  generalizations,  which  account  for  a  great  part  of  the  present  superstition
of  the  Irish  Catholics, will  also  account  for  the  former  superstition  of  the  French  Pro-
testants. In  both  cases,  the  government,  disdaining  the  supervision  of  an  heretical
religion,  allowed  supreme  authority  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  priesthood,
who  stimulated  the  bigotry  of  men,  and  encouraged  them  in  a  hatred  of  their
opponents.  What  the  results  of  this  are  in  Ireland,  is  best  known  to  those  of  our
statesmen  who,  with  unusual  candour,  have  declared  Ireland  to  be  their  greatest
difficulty.  What  the  results  were  in  France,  we  will  now  endeavour  to  ascer-
tain.


question  is  one,  not  of  sincerity,  but  of  consistency.  A  sincere  Roman  Catholic  may  be,
and  often  is,  conscientiously  tolerant ;  a  consistent  Roman  Catholic,  never.  [See  above,
p.  106  note,  as  to  this  distinction. — ED.]

136  \ye  aiso  see  this  very  dearly  in  England,  where  the  dissenting  clergy  have  much  more
influence  among  their  hearers  than  the  clergy  of  the  Establishment  have  among  theirs.
This  has  often  been  noticed  by  impartial  observers,  and  we  are  now  possessed  of  statistical
proof  that   "  the   great  body  of  Protestant  dissenters  are  more  assiduous  "  in  attending
religious  worship  than  churchmen  are.  See  a  valuable  essay  by  Mr.  Mann  On  the  Statistical
Position  of  Religious  Bodies  in  England  and  Wales,  in  Journal  of  Statist.  Soc.  vol.  xviii.
p.  152.

137  Respecting  the  working  of  this  in  England,  there  are  some  shrewd  remarks  made  by
Le  Blanc  in  his  Lettres  d'un  Fran  fats,  vol.  i.  pp.  267,  268  ;  which  may  be  compared  with
Lord  Holland's  Mem.  of  the  Whig  Party,  vol.  ii.  p.  253,  where  it  is  suggested,  that  in  the
case  of  complete  emancipation  of  the  Catholics,  "  eligibility  to  worldly  honours  and  pro-
fits would  somewhat  abate  the  fever  of  religious  zeal."     On  this,  there  are  observations
worth  attending  to  in  Lord  Cloncurry's  Recollections,  Dublin,  1849,  pp.  342,  343.


3i6  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  conciliating  spirit  of  the  French  government  having  drawn  over  to  its
side  some  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  French  Protestants,  and  having  disarmed
the  hostility  of  others,  the  leadership  of  the  party  fell,  as  we  have  already  seen,
into  the  hands  of  those  inferior  men  who  displayed  in  their  new  position  the
intolerance  characteristic  of  their  order.  Without  pretending  to  write  a  history
of  the  odious  feuds  that  now  arose,  I  will  lay  before  the  reader  some  evidence
of  their  increasing  bitterness  ;  and  I  will  point  out  a  few  of  the  steps  by  which  the
angry  feelings  of  religious  controversy  became  so  inflamed  that  at  length  they
kindled  a  civil  war,  which  nothing  but  the  improved  temper  of  the  Catholics
prevented  from  being  as  sanguinary  as  were  the  horrible  struggles  of  the  six-
teenth century.  For  when  the  French  Protestants  became  governed  by  men
whose  professional  habits  made  them  consider  heresy  to  be  the  greatest  of  crimes,
there  naturally  sprung  up  a  missionary  and  proselytizing  spirit,  which  induced
them  to  interfere  with  the  religion  of  the  Catholics,"  and,  under  the  old  pretence
of  turning  them  from  the  error  of  their  ways,  revived  those  animosities  which
the  progress  of  knowledge  tended  to  appease.  And  as,  under  such  guidance,
these  feelings  quickly  increased,  the  Protestants  soon  learnt  to  despise  that  great
Edict  of  Nantes  by  which  their  liberties  were  secured  ;  and  they  embarked  in  a
dangerous  contest,  in  which  their  object  was,  not  to  protect  their  own  religion>
but  to  weaken  the  religion  of  that  very  party  to  whom  they  owed  a  toleration',
which  had  been  reluctantly  conceded  by  the  prejudices  of  the  age.

It  was  stipulated  in  the  Edict  of  Nantes  that  the  Protestants  should  enjoy  the
full  exercise  of  their  religion  ;  and  this  right  they  continued  to  possess  until  the
reign  of  Louis  XIV.  To  this  there  were  added  several  other  privileges,  such  as
no  Catholic  government,  except  that  of  France,  would  then  have  granted  to  its
heretical  subjects.  But  these  things  did  not  satisfy  the  desires  of  the  Protestant
clergy.  They  were  not  content  to  exercise  their  own  religion,  unless  they  could
also  trouble  the  religion  of  others.  Their  first  step  was  to  call  upon  the  govern-
ment to  limit  the  performance  of  those  rites  which  the  French  Catholics  had  long
revered  as  emblems  of  the  national  iaith.  For  this  purpose,  directly  after  the
death  of  Henry  IV.  they  held  a  great  assembly  at  Saumur,  in  which  they  formally
demanded  that  no  Catholic  processions  should  be  allowed  in  any  town,  place,  or
castle,  occupied  by  the  Protestants.13®  As  the  government  did  not  seem  in-
clined to  countenance  this  monstrous  pretension,  these  intolerant  sectaries  took
the  law  into  their  own  hands.  They  not  only  attacked  the  Catholic  processions
wherever  they  met  them,  but  they  subjected  the  priests  to  personal  insults,  and
even  endeavoured  to  prevent  them  from  administering  the  sacrament  to  the  sick.
If  a  Catholic  clergyman  was  engaged  in  burying  the  dead,  the  Protestants  were
sure  to  be  present,  interrupting  the  funeral,  turning  the  ceremonies  into  ridicule,
and  attempting,  by  their  clamour,  to  deaden  the  voice  of  the  minister,  so  that
the  service  performed  in  the  church  should  not  be  heard.139  Nor  did  they  always
confine  themselves  even  to  such  demonstrations  as  these.  For,  certain  towns
having  been,  perhaps  imprudently,  placed  under  their  control,  they  exercised
their  authority  in  them  with  the  niost  wanton  insolence.  At  La  Rochelle  which
for  importance  was  the  second  city  in  the  kingdom,  they  would  not  permit  the
Catholics  to  have  even  a  single  church  in  which  to  celebrate  what  for  centuries  had

138  "  Les  processions  catholiques  seraient  interdites  dans  toutes  les  places,  villes  et
chateaux  occupes  par  ceux  de  la  religion."  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  39.

39  Of  these  facts  we  have  the  most  unequivocal  proof ;  for  they  were  not  only  stated
by  the  Catholics  in  1623,  but  they  are  recorded,  without  being  denied,  by  the  Protestant
historian  Benoist :  "  On  y  accusoit  les  Reformez  d'injurier  les  pretres,  quand  ils  les
voyoient  passer ;  d'empecher  les  processions  des  Catholiques ;  Padministration  des
sacremens  aux  malades  ;  1'enterrement  des  morts  avec  les  ceremonies  accoutumees  ;  .  .  .
que  les  Reformez  s'etoient  emparez  des  cloches  en  quelques  lieux,  et  en  d'autres  se  ser-
voient  de  celles  des  Catholiques  pour  avertir  de  1'heure  du  preche  ;  qu'ils  affectoient  de
faire  du  bruit  autour  des  eglises  pendant  le  service  ;  qu'ils  tournoient  en  derision  les
ceremonies  de  1'eglise  romaine."  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  433,  434  :
see  also  pp.  149,  150.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          317

been  the  sole  religion  of  France,  and  was  still  the  religion  of  an  enormous  majority
of  Frenchmen.140  This,  however,  only  formed  part  of  a  system  by  which  the
Protestant  clergy  hoped  to  trample  on  the  rights  of  their  fellow-subjects.  In  1619
they  ordered  in  their  general  assembly  at  Loudun  that  in  none  of  the  Protestant
towns  should  there  be  a  sermon  preached  by  a  Jesuit,  or  indeed  by  any  eccle-
siastical person  commissioned  by  a  bishop.141  In  another  assembly,  they  for-
bade any  Protestant  even  to  be  present  at  a  baptism,  or  at  a  marriage,  or  at  a
funeral,  if  the  ceremony  was  performed  by  a  Catholic  priest.142  And,  as  if  to  cut
off  all  hope  of  reconciliation,  they  not  only  vehemently  opposed  those  inter-
marriages between  the  two  parties,  by  which,  in  every  Christian  country,  religious
animosities  have  been  softened,  but  they  publicly  declared  that  they  would
withhold  the  sacrament  from  any  parents  whose  children  were  married  into  a
Catholic  family.143  Not,  however,  to  accumulate  unnecessary  evidence,  there
is  one  other  circumstance  worth  relating,  as  a  proof  of  the  spirit  with  which  these
and  similar  regulations  were  enforced.  When  Louis  XIII.,  in  1620,  visited  Pau,
he  was  not  only  treated  with  indignity  as  being  an  heretical  prince,  but  he  found
that  the  Protestants  had  not  left  him  a  single  church,  not  one  place,  in  which  the
king  of  France,  in  his  own  territory,  could  perform  those  devotions  which  he
believed  necessary  for  his  future  salvation.144

This  was  the  way  in  which  the  French  Protestants,  influenced  by  their  new
leaders,  treated  the  first  Catholic  government  which  abstained  from  persecuting
them  ;  the  first  which  not  only  allowed  them  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion,
but  even  advanced  many  of  them  to  offices  of  trust  and  of  honour.145  All  this,
however,  was  only  of  a  piece  with  the  rest  of  their  conduct.  They,  who  in
numbers  and  in  intellect  formed  a  miserable  minority  of  the  French  nation,
claimed  a  power  which  the  majority  had  abandoned,  and  refused  to  concede  to
others  the  toleration  they  themselves  enjoyed.  Several  persons,  who  had  joined
their  party,  now  quitted  it,  and  returned  to  the  Catholic  church  ;  but  for  exer-
cising this  undoubted  right  they  were  insulted  by  the  Protestant  clergy  in  the
grossest  manner,  with  every  term  of  opprobrium  and  abuse.146  For  those  who
resisted  their  authority,  no  treatment  was  considered  too  severe.  In  1612,
Ferrier,  a  man  of  some  reputation  in  his  own  day,  having  disobeyed  their  in-
junctions, was  ordered  to  appear  before  one  of  their  synods.  The  gist  of  his
offence  was,  that  he  had  spoken  contemptuously  of  ecclesiastical  assemblies  ;
and  to  this  there  were  of  course  added  those  accusations  against  his  moral  con  -
duct,  with  which  theologians  often  attempt  to  blacken  the  character  of  their
opponents.14?  Readers  of  ecclesiastical  history  are  too  familiar  with  such
charges  to  attach  any  importance  to  them  ;  but  as,  in  this  case,  the  accused  was

140  "  On  pouvait  dire  que  La  Rochelle  etait  la  capitale,  le  saint  temple  du  calvinisme  ;
car  on  ne  voyait  la  aucune  eglise,  aucune  ceremonie  papiste."  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.
i.  p.  342.

141  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  ii.  p.  100.     For  other  and  similar  evidence,  see  Duplessis
Mornay,Memoires,vol.xi.p.244  ;  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,  vol.  vii.  p.  164  ;  Benoist,  Hist,
de  I'Edit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  70,  233,  279.

142  Quick's  Synodicon  in  Gallia,  vol.  ii.  p.  196.

143  For  a  striking  instance  of  the  actual  enforcement  of  this  intolerant  regulation,  see
Quick's  Synodicon  in  Gallia,  vol.  ii.  p.  344.

144  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  p.  124  ;  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  ii.  pp.  109,  no  ;
Felice's  Hist,  of  the  Protestants  of  France,  p.  238.

145  In  1625,  Howell  writes  that  the  Protestants  had  put  up  an  inscription  on  the  gates
of  Montauban,  "  Roy  sans  foy,  ville  sans  peur."     Howell's  Letters,  p.  187.

146  Sometimes  they  were  called  dogs  returning  to  the  vomit  of  popery  ;  sometimes  they
were   swine  wallowing  in  the  mire  of  idolatry.      Quick's  Synodicon  in  Gallia,  vol.  i.
PP-  385*  398.

147  It  is  observable,  that  on  the  first  occasion  (Quick's  Synodicon,  vol.  i.  p.  362)  nothing
is  said  of  Ferrier's  immorality  ;  and  on  the  next  occasion  (p.  449)  the  syncd  complainr,
among  other  things,  that  "  he  hath  most  licentiously  inveighed  against,  and  satirically
lampooned,  the  ecclesiastical  assemblies."


3i8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

tried  by  men  who  were  at  once  his  prosecutors,  his  enemies,  and  his  judges,  the
result  was  easy  to  anticipate.  In  1613  Ferrier  was  excommunicated,  and  the
excommunication  was  publicly  proclaimed  in  the  church  of  Nimes.  In  this
sentence,  which  is  still  extant,  he  is  declared  by  the  clergy  to  be  "a  scandalous
man,  a  person  incorrigible,  impenitent,  and  ungovernable."  We,  therefore,  they
add,  "  in  the  name  and  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  conduct  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  with  authority  from  the  church,  have  cast,  and  do  now  cast  and
throw  him  out  of  the  society  of  the  faithful,  that  he  may  be  delivered  up  unto
Satan."1*®

That  he  may  be  delivered  up  unto  Satan  !  This  was  the  penalty  which  a
handful  of  clergymen,  in  a  corner  of  France,  thought  they  could  inflict  on  a  man
who  dared  to  despise  their  authority.  In  our  time  such  an  anathema  would  only
excite  derision  ;149  but,  early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  the  open  promulgation
of  it  was  enough  to  ruin  any  private  person  against  whom  it  might  be  directed .
And  they  whose  studies  have  enabled  them  to  take  the  measure  of  the  ecclesi-
astical spirit  will  easily  believe  that  in  that  age  the  threat  did  not  remain  a
dead  letter.  The  people,  inflamed  by  their  clergy,  rose  against  Ferrier,  attacked
his  family,  destroyed  his  property,  sacked  and  gutted  his  houses,  and  demanded
with  loud  cries  that  the  "  traitor  Judas  "  should  be  given  up  to  them.  The  un-
happy man  with  the  greatest  difficulty  effected  his  escape  ;  but  though  he  saved
his  life  by  flying  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  for  ever  his
native  town,  as  he  dared  not  return  to  a  place  where  he  had  provoked  so  active
and  so  implacable  a  party.150

Into  other  matters,  and  even  into  those  connected  with  the  ordinary  functions
of  government,  the  Protestants  carried  the  same  spirit.  Although  they  formed
so  small  a  section  of  the  people,  they  attempted  to  control  the  administration
of  the  crown,  and,  by  the  use  of  threats,  turn  all  its  acts  to  their  own  favour.  They
would  not  allow  the  state  to  determine  what  ecclesiastical  councils  it  should
recognize  ;  they  would  not  even  permit  the  king  to  choose  his  own  wife.  In  1615,
without  the  least  pretence  of  complaint,  they  assembled  in  large  numbers  at
Grenoble  and  at  Nimes.151  The  deputies  of  Grenoble  insisted  that  government
should  refuse  to  acknowledge  the  Council  of  Trent  ;152  and  both  assemblies  ordered
that  the  Protestants  should  prevent  the  marriage  of  Louis  XIII.  with  a  Spanish
princess.153  They  laid  similar  claims  to  interfere  with  the  disposal  of  civil  and

148  See  this  frightful  and  impious  document,  in  Quick's  Synodicon,  vol.  i.  pp.  448-450

149  The  notion  of  theologians  respecting  excommunication  may  be  seen  in  Mr.  Palmer's
entertaining  book,  Treatise  on  the  Church,  vol.  i.  pp.  64-67,  vol.  ii.  pp.   299,   300  ;  but
the  opinions  of  this  engaging  writer  should  be  contrasted  with  the  indignant  language  of
Vattel,  Le  Droit  des  Gens,  vol.  i.  pp.  177,  178.     In  England,  the  terrors  of  excommuni-
cation fell  into  contempt  towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.     See  Life  of  Arch-
bishop Sharpe,  edited  by  Newcome,  vol.  i.  p.  216  :  compare  p.  363  ;  and  see  the  mournful
remarks  of  Dr.  Mosheim,  in  his  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  79  ;  and  Sir  Philip  Warwick's
Memoirs,  pp.  175,   176.

150  On  the  treatment  of  Ferrier,  which  excited  great  attention  as  indicating  the  extreme
lengths  to  which  the  Protestants  were  prepared  to  go,  see  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  i77  ;
Mem.  de  Pontchartrain,  vol.  ii.  pp.  5,  6,  12,  29,  32  ;  Mem.  de  Duplessis  Mornay,  vol.  xii.
PP-  3i7»  333»  34L  350,  389*  399.  430  ;  Felice's  Hist,  of  the  Protestants  of  France,  p.  235
Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xiv.  p.  440  ;  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  v.  pp.  48-54.     Mr.
Smedley,  who  refers  to  none  of  these  authorities,  except  two  passages  in  Duplessis,  has
given  a  garbled  account  of  this  riot.     See  his  History  of  the  Reformed  Religion  in  France,
vol.  iii.  pp.  119,  120.

51  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  123.

152  Capefigue,  vol.  i.  p.  123 ;  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII.,  vol.  i.  p.  364 ;  Benoist,  Hist,
de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  183  ;  Mem.  de  Rohan,  vol.  i.  p.  130.

53  Capefigue' s  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  124  ;  Mem.  de  Pontchar train,  vol.  ii.  p.  100  ;  Le
Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  pp.  333,  334.  The  consequence  was  that  the  king
was  obliged  to  send  a  powerful  escort  to  protect  his  bride  against  his  Protestant  subjects.
Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  274.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          319

military  offices.  Shortly  after  the  death  of  Henry  IV.,  they,  in  an  assembly  at
Saumur,  insisted  that  Sully  should  be  restored  to  some  posts  from  which,  in  their
opinion,  he  had  been  unjustly  removed.154  In  1619,  another  of  their  assemblies  at
Louclun  declared,  that  as  one  of  the  Protestant  councillors  of  the  parliament  of  Paris
had  become  a  Catholic,  he  must  be  dismissed  ;  and  they  demanded  that  for  the
same  reason  the  government  of  Lectoure  should  be  taken  from  Fontrailles,  he
also  having  adopted  the  not  infrequent  example  of  abandoning  his  sect  in  order
to  adopt  a  creed  sanctioned  by  the  state.155

By  way  of  aiding  all  this,  and  with  the  view  of  exasperating  still  further  religious
animosities,  the  principal  Protestant  clergy  put  forth  a  series  of  works  which  foi
bitterness  of  feeling  have  hardly  ever  been  equalled,  and  which  it  would  certainly
be  impossible  to  surpass.  The  intense  hatred  with  which  they  regarded  their
Catholic  countrymen  can  be  fully  estimated  only  by  those  who  have  looked  into
the  pamphlets  written  by  the  French  Protestants  during  the  first  half  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  or  who  have  read  the  laboured  and  formal  treatises  of  such  men
as  Chamier,  Drelincourt,  Moulin,  Thomson,  and  Vignier.  Without,  however,
pausing  on  these,  it  will  perhaps  be  thought  sufficient  if  for  the  sake  of  brevity
I  follow  the  mere  outline  of  political  events.  Great  numbers  of  the  Protestants
had  joined  in  the  rebellion  which  in  1615  was  raised  by  Conde  ;156  and,  although
they  were  then  easily  defeated,  they  seemed  bent  on  trying  the  issue  of  a  fresh
struggle.  In  Beam,  where  they  were  unusually  numerous,157  they,  even  during
the  reign  of  Henry  IV.,  had  refused  to  tolerate  the  Catholic  religion  ;  "  their
fanatical  clergy,"  says  the  historian  of  France,  "  declaring  that  it  would  be  a  crime
to  permit  the  idolatry  of  the  mass."158  This  charitable  maxim  they  for  many
years  actively  enforced,  seizing  the  property  of  the  Catholic  clergy,  and  employing
it.  in  support  of  their  own  churches  ;159  so  that,  while  in  one  part  of  the  dominions
of  the  king  of  France  the  Protestants  were  allowed  to  exercise  their  religion,
they  in  another  part  of  his  dominions  prevented  the  Catholics  from  exercising
theirs.  It  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  any  government  would  surfer  such  an
anomaly  as  this  ;  and  in  1618  it  was  ordered  that  the  Protestants  should  restore
the  plunder,  and  reinstate  the  Catholics  in  their  former  possessions.  But  the
reformed  clergy,  alarmed  at  so  sacrilegious  a  proposal,  appointed  a  public  fast,
and  inspiriting  the  people  to  resistance,  forced  the  royal  commissioner  to  fly  from
Pau,  where  he  had  arrived  in  the  hope  of  effecting  a  peaceful  adjustment  of  the
claims  of  the  rival  parties.1^

The  rebellion  thus  raised  by  the  zeal  of  the  Protestants  was  soon  put  down  ;

154  Capefigne's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  38  ;  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  dt  Nantts,  vol.  ii.  pp.  28,
,  63.

155  Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  i.  p.  450;  Mem.  de  Bassompierre,  vol.  ii.  p.  161.
a  similar  instance,  in  the  case  of  Berger,  in  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.

).  136,  whom  the  Protestants  sought  to  deprive  because  "  il  avoit  quitte  leur  religion."

156  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  i.  p.  381.     Sismondi  (Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.
349)  says  that  they  had  no  good  reason  for  this  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  their  privileges,
far  from  being  diminished  since  the  Edict  of  Nantes,  had  been  confirmed  and  extended.

157  M.  Felice  (Hist,  of  the  Protestants  of  France,  p.  237)  says  of  Lower  Navarre  and
Jearn,  in  1617  :  "  Three-fourths  of  the  population,  some  say  nine -tenths,  belonged  to  the
^formed  communion."     This  is  perhaps  over-estimated,  but  we  know,  from  De  Thou,
hat  they  formed  a  majority  in  Beam  in  1566  :     "  Les  Protestans  y  fussent  en  plus  grand

lombre  que  les  Catholiques."     De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  v.  p.  187.

158  "  Les  ministres  fanatiques  declaroient  qu'ils  ne  pouvaient  sans  crime  souffrir  dans
ce  pays  regenere  1'idolatrie  de  la  messe."     Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.  p.  415.

159  Notice  sur  les  Memoires  de  Rohan,  vol.  i.  p.  26.     Compare  the  account  given  by
•'ontchartrain,  who  was  one  of  the  ministers  of  Louis  XIII.,  Mem.   de  Pontchartrain,

3!.  ii.  pp.  248,  264  ;  and  see  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  443.

160  Bazin,  Hist,  de  France  sous  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  pp.  62-64.     The  pith  of  the  question
fas,  that  ",1'edit  de  Nantes  ayant  donne  pouvoir,  tant  aux  catholiques  qu'aux  huguenots,

rentrer  partout  dans  leurs  biens,  les  ecclesiastiques  de  Beam  demanderent  aussy tost
les  leurs."     Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  i.  p.  392.


320  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

but  according  to  the  confession  of  Rohan,  one  of  the  ablest  of  their  leaders,
it  was  the  beginning  of  all  their  misfortunes.161  The  sword  had  now  been  drawn  ;
and  the  only  question  to  be  decided  was  whether  France  should  be  governed
according  to  the  principles  of  toleration  recently  established,  or  according  to
the  maxims  of  a  despotic  sect,  which,  while  professing  to  advocate  the  right
of  private  judgment,  was  acting  in  a  way  that  rendered  all  private  judgment
impossible.

Scarcely  was  the  war  in  Beam  brought  to  an  end,  when  the  Protestants  deter-
mined on  making  a  great  effort  in  the  west  of  France.162  The  seat  of  this  new
struggle  was  Rochelle,  which  was  one  of  the  strongest  fortresses  in  Europe,  and
was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  Protestants.163  who  had  grown  wealthy,  partly
by  their  own  industry,  and  partly  by  following  the  occupation  of  public  pirates.164
In  this  city,  which  they  believed  to  be  impregnable,165  they,  in  December,  1620,  held
a  Great  Assembly,  to  which  their  spiritual  chiefs  flocked  from  all  parts  of  France.
It  was  soon  evident  that  their  party  was  now  governed  by  men  who  were  bent
on  the  most  violent  measures.  Their  great  secular  leaders  were,  as  we  have
already  seen,  gradually  falling  off  ;  and  by  this  time  there  only  remained  two
of  much  ability,  Rohan  and  Mornay,  both  of  whom  saw  the  inexpediency  of
their  proceedings,  and  desired  that  the  assembly  should  peaceably  separate.166
But  the  authority  of  the  clergy  was  irresistible  ;  and  by  their  prayers  and
exhortations  they  easily  gained  over  the  ordinary  citizens,  who  were  then  a
gross  and  uneducated  body.10?  Under  their  influence  the  assembly  adopted  a
course  which  rendered  civil  war  inevitable.  Their  first  act  was  an  edict  by

161  "  L' affaire  de  Beam,  source  de  tous  nos  maux."     Mem.  de  Rohan,  vol.  i.  p.  156  :
see  also  p.  183.     And  the  Protestant  Le  Vassor  says  (Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  iii.  p.  634) :
"  L' affaire  du  Beam  et  1'assemblee  qui  se  convoqua  ensuite  a  la  Rochelle,  sont  la  source
veritable    des    malheurs  des  eglises  reformees  de  France   sous  le  regne  dont   j'ecris
1'histoire."

162  On  the  connexion  between  the  proceedings  of  Beam  and  those  of  Rochelle,  com-
pare Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  p.  33,  with  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  ii.  p.  113,  and  Mem.
de  Rohan,  vol.  i.  p.  448.

163  Their  first  church  was  established  in  1556  (Ranke's  Civil  Wars  in  France,  vol.  i.
p.  360) ;  but  by  the  reign  of  Charles  IX.  the  majority  of  the  inhabitants  were  Protestants.
See  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  iv.  p.  263,  vol.  v.  p.  379,  ad  ann.  1562  and  1567.

164  Or,   as  M.   Capefigue  courteously  puts  it,    "  les   Rochelois  ne  respectaient  pas
toujours  les  pavilions  amis."     Capefigue' s  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  332.     A  delicate  circum-
locution, unknown  to  Mezeray,  who  says  (Hist,  de  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  426)  in  1587,  "  et
les  Rochelois,  qui  par  le  moyen  du  commerce  et  de  la  piraterie,"  etc.

165  "  Ceste  place,  que   les   huguenots    tenoient   quasy  pour  imprenable."     Mem.   de
Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  i.  p.  512.     "Cette  orgueilleuse  cite,  qui  se  croyoit  imprenable."
Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  p.  45.     Howell,  who  visited  Rochelle  in  1620  and  1622,  was
greatly  struck  by  its  strength.     Hornet? s  Letters,  pp.  46,  47,  108.     At  p.  204,  he  calls  it,
in  his  barbarous  style,  "  the  chiefest  propugnacle  of  the  Protestants  there."     For  a
description  of  the  defences  of  Rochelle,  see  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  vi.  pp.  615-617;
and  some  details  worth  consulting  in  Mezeray,  Hist,  de  France,  vol.  ii.  pp.  977-980.

86  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  p.  139  ;  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.
pp.  480,  481.  Rohan  himself  says  (Mem.  vol.  i.  p.  446) :  "  je  m'efforfai  de  la  separer."
In  a  remarkable  letter,  which  Mornay  wrote  ten  years  before  this,  he  shows  his  appre-
hensions of  the  evil  that  would  result  from  the  increasing  violence  of  his  party  ;  and
he  advises,  "  que  nostre  zele  soit  tempere  de  prudence."  Mem.  et  Correspond,  vol.  xi.  p.  122  ;
and  as  to  the  divisions  this  caused  among  the  Protestants,  see  pp.  154,  510,  vol.  xii.
pp.  82,  255  ;  and  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,  vol.  ix.  pp.  350,  435.

"  Les  seigneurs  du  parti,  et  surtout  le  sage  Duplessis  Mornay,  firent  ce  qu'ils  purent
pour  engager  les  reformes  a  ne  pas  provoquer  I'autorite  royale  pour  des  causes  qui  ne
pouvoient  justifier  une  guerre  civile  ;  mais  le  pouvoir  dans  le  parti  avoit  passe  presque
absolument  aux  bourgeois  des  villes  et  aux  ministres  qui  se  livroient  aveuglement  a
leur  f  anatisme,  et  a  leur  orgeuil,  et  qui  etoient  d'autant  plus  applaudis,  qu'ils  montroient
plus  de  violence."  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.  p.  478.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          321

which  they  at  once  confiscated  all  the  property  belonging  to  Catholic  churches.169
They  then  caused  a  great  seal  to  be  struck  ;  under  the  authority  of  which  they
ordered  that  the  people  should  be  armed,  and  taxes  collected  from  them  for
the  purpose  of  defending  their  religion.169  Finally,  they  drew  up  the  regulations,
and  organized  the  establishment,  of  what  they  called  the  Reformed  Churches
of  France  and  of  Beam ;  and,  with  a  view  to  facilitate  the  exercise  of  their
spiritual  jurisdiction,  they  parcelled  out  France  into  eight  circles,  to  each  of
which  there  was  allotted  a  separate  general ;  who,  however,  was  to  be  accom-
panied by  a  clergyman,  since  the  administration,  in  all  its  parts,  was  held  respon-
sible to  that  ecclesiastical  assembly  which  called  it  into  existence. 17°

Such  were  the  forms  and  pomp  of  authority  assumed  by  the  spiritual  leaders
of  the  French  Protestants;  men  by  nature  destined  to  obscurity,  and  whose
abilities  were  so  despicable  that,  notwithstanding  their  temporary  importance,
they  have  left  no  name  in  history.  These  insignificant  priests,  who  at  the
best  were  only  fit  to  mount  the  pulpit  of  a  country  village,  now  arrogated  to  them-
selves the  right  of  ordering  the  affairs  of  France,  imposing  taxes  upon  French-
me'n,  confiscating  property,  raising  troops,  levying  war  ;  and  all  this  for  the
sake  of  propagating  a  creed,  which  was  scouted  by  the  country  at  large  as  a  foul
and  mischievous  heresy.

In  the  face  of  these  inordinate  pretensions,  it  was  evident  that  the  French
government  had  no  choice  except  to  abdicate  its  functions,  or  else  take  arms
in  its  own  defence.171  Whatever  may  be  the  popular  notion  respecting  the
necessary  intolerance  of  the  Catholics,  it  is  an  indisputable  fact  that  early  in
the  seventeenth  century,  they  displayed  in  France  a  spirit  of  forbearance,  and
a  Christian  charity,  to  which  the  Protestants  could  make  no  pretence.  During
the  twenty-two  years  which  elapsed  between  the  Edict  of  Nantes  and  the
Assembly  of  Rochelle,  the  government,  notwithstanding  repeated  provocations,
never  attacked  the  Protestants  ; 172  nor  did  they  make  any  attempt  to  destroy
the  privileges  of  a  sect  which  they  were  bound  to  consider  heretical,  and  the
extirpation  of  which  had  been  deemed  by  their  fathers  to  be  one  of  the  first
duties  of  a  Christian  statesman.

The  war  that  now  broke  out  lasted  seven  years,  and  was  uninterrupted,  except
by  the  short  peace,  first  of  Montpelier,  and  afterwards  of  Rochelle  ;  neither
of  which,  however,  was  very  strictly  preserved.  But  the  difference  in  the  views
and  intentions  of  the  two  parties  corresponded  to  the  difference  between  the
classes  which  governed  them.  The  Protestants,  being  influenced  mainly  by
the  clergy,  made  their  object  religious  domination.  The  Catholics,  being  led
by  statesmen,  aimed  at  temporal  advantages.  Thus  it  was  that  circumstances
had  in  France  so  completely  obliterated  the  original  tendency  of  these  two
great  sects  that,  by  a  singular  metamorphosis,  the  secular  principle  was  now
represented  by  the  Catholics,  and  the  theological  principle  by  the  Protestants.

168  "  On  confisqua  les  biens  des  eglises  catholiques."     Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Francais
1.  iii.  p.  85  ;  and  see  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  258.

169  "  Us  donnent  des  commissions  d'armer  et  de  faire  des  impositions  sur  le  peuple,
et  ce  sous  leur  grand  sceau,  qui  etoit  une  Religion  appuyee  sur  une  croix,  ayant  en  la
main  un  livre  de  1'evangile,  foulant  aux  pieds  un  vieux  squelette,  qu'ils  disoient  etre
1'eglise  romaiae."     Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  ii.  p.  120.     M.  Capefigue  (Richelieu,  vol.  i.
p.  259)  says  that  this  seal  still  exists  ;  but  it  is  not  even  alluded  to  by  a  late  writer  (Felice,
Hist,  of  the  Protestants  of  France,  p.  240),  who  systematically  suppresses  every  fact

K favourable  to  his  own  party.
L7°  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  iv.  p.  157 ;   Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.
145  ;  Benoist,  Hist,  de  I' Edit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  353-355  ;  Capefigue's  Richelieu,
1.  i.  p.  258.
171  Even  Mosheim,  who  as  a    Protestant  was  naturally  prejudiced  in  favour  of  the
iguenots,  says,  that  they  had  established  "  imperium  in  imperio  ;  "  and  he  ascribes
to  the  violence  of  their  rulers  the  war  of  1621.     Mosheim's  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  pp.  237,  238.
172  Compare  Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  ii.  p.  88,  with  Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplo-
Francaise,  vol.  ii.  p.  351

21


322  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  authority  of  the  clergy,  and  therefore  the  interests  of  superstition,  were
upheld  by  that  very  party  which  owed  its  origin  to  the  diminution  of  both  :
they  were,  on  the  other  hand,  attacked  by  a  party  whose  success  had  hitherto
depended  on  the  increase  of  both.  If  the  Catholics  triumphed,  the  ecclesiastical
power  would  be  weakened  ;  if  the  Protestants  triumphed,  it  would  be
strengthened.  Of  this  fact,  so  far  as  the  Protestants  are  concerned,  I  have
just  given  ample  proof,  collected  from  their  proceedings.,  and  from  the  language
of  their  own  synods.  And  that  the  opposite  or  secular  principle  predominated
among  the  Catholics  is  evident,  not  only  from  their  undeviating  policy  in  the
reigns  of  Henry  IV.  and  Louis  XIIL,  but  also  from  another  circumstance  worthy
of  note.  For  their  motives  were  so  obvious,  and  gave  such  scandal  to  the
church,  that  the  pope,  as  the  great  protector  of  religion,  thought  himself  bound
to  reprehend  that  disregard  of  theological  interests  which  they  displayed,  and
which  he  considered  to  be  a  crying  and  unpardonable  offence.  In  1622,  only
one  year  after  the  struggle  between  the  Protestants  and  Catholics  had  begun,
he  strongly  remonstrated  with  the  French  government  upon  the  notorious
indecency  of  which  they  were  guilty,  in  carrying  on  war  against  heretics,  not
for  the  purpose  of  suppressing  the  heresy,  but  merely  with  a  view  of  procuring
for  the  state  those  temporal  advantages  which,  in  the  opinion  of  all  pious  men,
ought  to  be  regarded  as  of  subordinate  importance.1?3

If  at  this  juncture  the  Protestants  had  carried  the  day,  the  loss  to  France
would  have  been  immense,  perhaps  irreparable.  For  no  one  who  is  acquainted
with  the  temper  and  character  of  the  French  Calvinists  can  doubt  that  if  they
had  obtained  possession  of  the  government  they  would  have  revived  those
religious  persecutions  which,  so  far  as  their  power  extended,  they  had  already
attempted  to  enforce.  Not  only  in  their  writings,  but  even  in  the  edicts  of  their
assemblies,  we  find  ample  proof  of  that  meddling  and  intolerant  spirit  which
in  every  age  has  characterized  ecclesiastical  legislation.  Indeed,  such  a  spirit
is  the  legitimate  consequence  of  the  fundamental  assumption  from  which  theo-
logical lawgivers  usually  start.  The  clergy  are  taught  to  consider  that  their
paramount  duty  is  to  preserve  the  purity  of  the  faith,  and  guard  it  against  the
invasions  of  heresy.  Whenever,  therefore,  they  rise  to  power,  it  almost  invari-
ably happens  that  they  carry  into  politics  the  habits  they  have  contracted
in  their  profession ;  and  having  long  been  accustomed  to  consider  religious
error  as  criminal,  they  now  naturally  attempt  to  make  it  penal.  And  as  all
the  European  countries  have  in  the  period  of  their  ignorance  been  once  ruled
by  the  clergy,  just  so  do  we  find  in  the  law-books  of  every  land  those  traces  of
their  power  which  the  progress  of  knowledge  is  gsadually  effacing.  We  find
the  professors"  of  the  dominant  creed  enacting  laws  against  the  professors  of
other  creeds ;  laws  sometimes  to  burn  them,  sometimes  to  exile  them,  some-
times to  take  away  their  civil  rights,  sometimes  only  to  take  away  their  political
rights.  These  are  the  different  gradations  through  which  persecution  passes  ;
and  by  observing  which  we  may  measure,  in  any  country,  the  energy  of  the
ecclesiastical  spirit.  At  the  same  time,  the  theory  by  which  such  measures
are  supported  generally  gives  rise  to  other  measures  of  a  somewhat  different
though  of  an  analogous  character.  For,  by  extending  the  authority  of  law  to
opinions  as  well  as  to  acts,  the  basis  of  legislation  becomes  dangerously  en-
larged ;  the  individuality  and  independence  ot  each  man  are  invaded  ;  and
encouragement  is  given  to  the  enactment  of  intrusive  and  vexatious  regulations,
which  are  supposed  to  perform  for  morals  the  service  that  the  other  class  of
laws  performs  for  religion.  Under  pretence  of  favouring  the  practice  of  virtue

173  See  the  paper  of  instructions  from  Pope  Gregory  XV.,  in  the  appendix  to  Ranke,
die  Rom.  Papste,  vol.  iii.  pp.  173,  I74  .  «  Die  Hauptsache  aber  ist  was  er  dem  Konige
von  Frankreich  vorstellen  soil  :'i,  dass  er  ja  nicht  den  Verdacht  auf  sich  laden  werde
als  verfolge  er  die  Protestanten  bloss  aus  Staats-interesse."  Bazin  (Hist,  de  Louis  XIII.,
vol.  u.  p.  320)  says,  that  Richelieu  attacked  the  Huguenots  "  sans  aucune  idee  de  perse-
cution religieuse."  See,  to  the  same  effect,  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  274  :  and
the  candid  admissions  of  the  Protestant  Le  Vassor,  in  his  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  v.  p.  1 1 .


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          323

and  maintaining  the  purity  of  society,  men  are  troubled  in  their  most  ordinary
pursuits,  in  the  commonest  occurrences  of  life,  in  their  amusements,  nay,  even
in  the  very  dress  they  may  be  inclined  to  wear.  That  this  is  what  has  actually
been  done,  must  be  known  to  whoever  has  looked  into  the  writings  of  the  fathers,
into  the  canons  of  Christian  councils,  into  the  different  systems  of  ecclesiastical
law,  or  into  the  sermons  of  the  earlier  clergy.  Indeed,  all  this  is  so  natural,
that  regulations  conceived  in  the  same  spirit  were  drawn  up  for  the  govern-
ment of  Geneva  by  the  Calvinist  clergy,  and  for  the  government  of  England
by  Archbishop  Cranmer  and  his  coadjutors  ;  while  a  tendency  precisely
identical  may  be  observed  in  the  legislation  of  the  Puritans,  and,  to  give  a
still  later  instance,  in  that  of  the  Methodists.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising
that  in  France  the  Protestant  clergy,  having  great  power  among  their  own
party,  should  enforce  a  similar  discipline.  Thus,  to  mention  only  a  few  examples,
they  forbade  any  one  to  go  to  the  theatre,  or  even  to  witness  the  performance  of
private  theatricals.1?4  They  looked  upon  dancing  as  an  ungodly  amusement,
and  therefore  they  not  only  strictly  prohibited  it,  but  they  ordered  that  all
dancing-masters  should  be  admonished  by  the  spiritual  power,  and  desired  to
abandon  so  unchristian  a  profession.  If  however  the  admonition  failed  in
effecting  its  purpose,  the  dancing-masters,  thus  remaining  obdurate,  were  to
be  excommunicated.175  With  the  same  pious  care  did  the  clergy  superintend
other  matters  equally  important.  In  one  of  their  synods,  they  ordered  that
all  persons  should  abstain  from  wearing  gay  apparel,  and  should  arrange  their
hair  with  becoming  modesty.176  In  another  synod,  they  forbade  women  to
paint  ;  and  they  declared,  that  if  after  this  injunction  any  woman  persisted
in  painting  she  should  not  be  allowed  to  receive  the  sacrament.*77  To  their
own  clergy,  as  the  instructors  and  shepherds  of  the  flock,  there  was  paid  an
attention  still  more  scrupulous.  The  ministers  of  the  word  were  permitted  to
teach  Hebrew,  because  Hebrew  is  a  sacred  dialect,  uncontaminated  by  profane
writers.  But  the  Greek  language,  which  contains  all  the  philosophy  and  nearly
all  the  wisdom  of  antiquity,  was  to  be  discouraged,  its  study  laid  aside,  its  pro-
fessorship suppressed.178  And  in  order  that  the  mind  might  not  be  distracted
from  spiritual  things,  the  study  of  chemistry  was  likewise  forbidden;  such  a
mere  earthly  pursuit  being  incompatible  with  the  habits  of  the  sacred  pro-
fession.179 Lest,  however,  in  spite  of  these  precautions,  knowledge  should
still  creep  in  among  the  Protestants,  other  measures  were  taken  to  prevent  even
its  earliest  approach.  The  clergy,  entirely  forgetting  that  right  of  private
judgment  upon  which  their  sect  was  founded,  became  so  anxious  to  protect
the  unwary  from  error  that  they  forbade  any  person  to  print  or  publish  a  work
without  the  sanction  of  the  church,  in  other  words,  without  the  sanction  of  the
clergy  themselves.1^  When  by  these  means  they  had  destroyed  the  possi-
bility of  free  inquiry,  and,  so  far  as  they  were  able,  had  put  a  stop  to  the  ac-
quisition of  all  real  knowledge,  they  proceeded  to  guard  against  another  circum-
stance to  which  their  measures  had  given  rise.  For  several  of  the  Protestants,

174  Quick's  Synodicon  in  Gallta,  vol.  i.  p.  Ivii.

175  Ibid.  vol.  i.  pp.  Ivii.  17,  131,  vol.  ii.  p.  174.

176  "  And  both  sexes  are  required  to  keep  modesty  in  their  hair,"  etc.     Ibid.  vol.  i.
p.  119.

177  Quick's  Synodicon,  vol.  i.  p.  165.

178  The  synod  of  Alez,  in  1620,  says,  "  A  minister  may  at  the  same  time  be  professor
in  divinity  and  of  the  Hebrew  tongue.     But  it  is  not  seemly  for  him  to  profess  the  Greek
also,  because  the  most  of  his  employment  will  be  taken  up  in  the  exposition  of  Pagan
and  profane  authors,  unless  he  be  discharged  from  the  ministry."     Quick's  Synodicon,
vol.  ii.  p.   57.     Three  years  later,  the  synod  of  Charenton  suppressed  altogether  the
Greek  professorships,  "  as  being  superfluous  and  of  small  profit."     Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  115.

179  The  synod  of  St.  Maixant,  in  1609,  orders  that  "  colloquies  and  synods  shall  have
a  watchful  eye  over  those  ministers  who  study  chemistry,  and  grievously  reprove  and
censure  them."     Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  314.

80  Ibid.  vol.  i.  pp.  140,  194,  vol.  ii.  p.  no.


324


THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION


seeing  that  under  such  a  system  it  was  impossible  to  educate  their  families
with  advantage,  sent  their  children  to  some  of  those  celebrated  Catholic  col-
leges, where  alone  a  sound  education  could  then  be  obtained.  But  the  clergy,
so  soon  as  they  heard  of  this  practice,  put  an  end  to  it  by  excommunicating
the  offending  parents ;  181  and  to  this  there  was  added  an  order  forbidding
them  to  admit  into  their  own  private  houses  any  tutor  who  professed  the
Catholic  religion.182  Such  was  the  way  in  which  the  French  Protestants  were
watched  over  and  protected  by  their"  spiritual  masters.  Even  the  minutest
matters  were  not  beneath  the  notice  of  these  great  legislators.  They  ordered
that  no  person  should  go  to  a  ball  or  masquerade  ; 183  nor  ought  any  Christian
to  look  at  the  tricks  of  conjurors,  or  at  the  famous  game  of  goblets,  or  at  the
puppet-show ;  neither  was  he  to  be  present  at  morris -dances ;  for  all  such
amusements  should  be  suppressed  by  the  magistrates,  because  they  excite
curiosity,  cause  expense,  waste  time.184  Another  thing  to  be  attended  to  is
the  names  that  are  bestowed  in  baptism.  A  child  may  have  two  Christian
names,  though  one  is  preferable.185  Great  care,  however,  is  to  be  observed  in  their
selection.  They  ought  to  be  taken  from  the  Bible,  but  they  ought  not  to  be
Baptist  or  Angel  ;  neither  should  any  infant  receive  a  name  which  has  been
formerly  used  by  the  Pagans.18^  When  the  children  are  grown  up,  there  are
other  regulations  to  which  they  must  be  subject.  The  clergy  declared  that
the  faithful  must  by  no  means  let  their  hair  grow  long,  lest  by  so  doing  they
indulge  in  the  luxury  of  "  lascivious  curls."  187  They  are  to  make  their  garments
in  such  a  manner  as  to  avoid  "  the  new-fangled  fashions  of  the  world  :  "  they
are  to  have  no  tassels  to  their  dress:  their  gloves  must  be  without  silk  and
ribbons  :  they  are  to  abstain  from  fardingales  :  they  are  to  beware  of  wide
sleeves.188

Those  readers  who  have  not  studied  the  history  of  ecclesiastical  legislation
will  perhaps  be  surprised  to  find  that  men  of  gravity,  men  who  had  reached
the  years  of  discretion,  and  were  assembled  together  in  solemn  council,  should
evince  such  a  prying  and  puerile  spirit  ;  that  they  should  display  such  miserable
and  childish  imbecility.  But  whoever  will  take  a  wider  survey  of  human
affairs  will  be  inclined  to  blame  not  so  much  the  legislators  as  the  system  of
which  the  legislators  formed  a  part.  For  as  to  the  men  themselves,  they  merely
acted  after  their  kind.  They  only  followed  the  traditions  in  which  they  were
bred.  By  virtue  of  their  professio'n,  they  had  been  accustomed  to  hold  certain

181  Quick's  Synodicon,  vol.  i.  pp.  Iv.  235,  419,  vol.  ii.  pp.  201,  509,  515.     Compare
Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  473.

182  Quick's  Synodicon,  vol.  ii.  p.  81.

183  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  174.

is*  "  All  Christian  magistrates  are  advised  not  in  the  least  to  suffer  them,  because
t  feeds  foolish  curiosity,  puts  upon  unnecessary  expenses,  and  wastes  time."  Ibid.
vol.  i.  p.  194.

185  This  was  a  very  knotty  question  for  the  theologians  ;  but  it  was  at  length  decided
n  the  affirmative  by  the  synod  of  Saumur  :  "  On  the  i3th  article  of  the  same  chapter,
the  deputies  of  Poictou  demanded,  whether  two  names  might  be  given  a  child  at  bap-
tism ?     To  which  it  was  replied :  The  thing  was  indifferent ;  however,  parents  were
advised  to  observe  herein  Christian  simplicity."     Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  178.

186  Ibid.  vol.  i.  pp.  xlvi.  25

187  I  quote  the  language  of  the  synod  of  Castres,  in  1626.     Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  174.

88  Quick's  Synodicon,  vol.  i.  p.  165,  vol.  ii.  pp.  7,  174,  574,  583.  In  the  same  way,
the  Spanish  clergy,  early  in  the  present  century,  attempted  to  regulate  the  dress  of
women.  See  Doblado's  Letters  from  Spain,  pp.  202-205  :  a  good  illustration  of  the  identity
of  the  ecclesiastical  spirit,  whether  it  be  Catholic  or  Protestant.  [The  Protestant  attitude
in  question,  which  derives  proximately  from  Calvinism,  is  probably  older  in  France
than  the  regulations  cited.  Similar  laws  were  passed  by  the  Scotch  clergy  fifty  years
before.  See  the  Acts  and  Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemblies,  Bannatyne  Club  ed.
Part  I.  p.  335.  But  all  the  movements  of  religious  reform  before  the  Reformation  had
shown  similar  tendencies. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          325

views,  and  when  they  rose  to  power  it  was  natural  that  they  should  carry
those  views  into  effect  ;  thus  transplanting  into  the  law-book  the  maxims  they
had  already  preached  in  the  pulpit.  Whenever,  therefore,  we  read  of  meddling,
inquisitive,  and  vexatious  regulations  imposed  by  ecclesiastical  authority,  we
should  remember  that  they  are  but  the  legitimate  result  of  the  ecclesiastical
spirit  ;  and  that  the  way  to  remedy  such  grievances,  or  to  prevent  their  occur-
rence, is  not  by  vainly  labouring  to  change  the  tendencies  of  that  class  from
whence  they  proceed,  but  rather  by  confining  the  class  within  its  proper  limits.,
by  jealously  guarding  against  its  earliest  encroachments,  by  taking  every  oppor-
tunity of  lessening  its  influence,  and  finally,  when  the  progress  of  society  will
justify  so  great  a  step,  by  depriving  it  of  that  political  and  legislative  power
which,  though  gradually  falling  from  its  hands,  it  ?s  even  in  the  most  civilized
countries  still  allowed  in  some  degree  to  retain.

But,  setting  aside  these  general  considerations,  it  will  at  all  events  be
admitted  that  I  have  collected  sufficient  evidence  to  indicate  what  would  have
happened  to  France  if  the  Protestants  had  obtained  the  upper  hand.  After
the  facts  which  I  have  brought  forward,  no  one  can  possibly  doubt  that  if  such
a  misfortune  had  occurred,  the  liberal,  and  considering  the  age,  the  enlightened
policy  of  Henry  IV.  and  Louis  XIII.  would  have  been  destroyed,  in  order  to
make  way  for  that  gloomy  and  austere  system  which,  in  every  age  and  in  every
country,  has  been  found  to  be  the  natural  fruit  of  ecclesiastical  power.  To
put,  therefore,  the  question  in  its  proper  form,  instead  of  saying  that  there  was
a  war  between  hostile  creeds,  we  should  rather  say  that  there  was  a  war
between  rival  classes.  It  was  a  contest,  not  so  much  between  the  Catholic
religion  and  the  Protestant  religion,  as  between  Catholic  laymen  and  Protestant
clergy.  It  was  a  struggle  between  temporal  interests  and  theological  interests,
— between  the  spirit  of  the  present  and  the  spirit  of  the  past.  And  the  point
now  at  issue  was,  whether  France  should  be  governed  by  the  civil  power  or  by
the  spiritual  power, — whether  she  should  be  ruled  according  to  the  large  views
of  secular  statesmen,  or  according  to  the  narrow  notions  of  a  factious  and  in-
tolerant priesthood.

The  Protestants  having  the  great  advantage  of  being  the  aggressive  party,
and  being  moreover  inflamed  by  a  religious  zeal  unknown  to  their  opponents,
might  under  ordinary  circumstances  have  succeeded  in  their  hazardous  at-
tempt ;  or,  at  all  events,  they  might  have  protracted  the  struggle  for  an  in-
definite period.  But,  fortunately  for  France,  in  1624,  only  three  years  after
the  war  began,  Richelieu  assumed  the  direction  of  the  government.  He  had
for  some  years  been  the  secret  adviser  of  the  queen-mother,  into  whose  mind
he  had  always  inculcated  the  necessity  of  complete  toleration.189  When  placed
at  the  head  of  affairs,  he  pursued  the  same  policy,  and  attempted  in  every  way
to  conciliate  the  Protestants.  The  clergy  of  his  own  party  were  constantly
urging  him  to  exterminate  the  heretics,  whose  presence  they  thought  polluted
France.19^  But  Richelieu,  having  only  secular  objects,  refused  to  embitter
the  contest  by  turning  it  into  a  religious  war.  He  was  determined  to  chastize
the  rebellion,  but  he  would  not  punish  the  heresy.  Even  while  the  war  was
raging,  he  would  not  revoke  those  edicts  of  toleration,  by  which  the  full  liberty
of  religious  worship  was  granted  to  the  Protestants.  And  when  they,  in  1626,
wed  signs  of  compunction,  or  at  all  events  of  fear,  he  publicly  confirmed


89  On  his  influence  over  her  in  and  after  1616,  see  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII.,
ii.  p.  508  ;  Mem.  de  Pontchartrain,  vol.  ii.  p.  240  ;  Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  i.  p.  23  ^
.d  compare,  in  Mem.  de  Richelieu,  vol.  ii.  pp.  198-200,  the  curious  arguments  which  he*
put  in  her  mouth  respecting  the  impolicy  of  making  war  on  the  Protestants.

)0  In  1625,  the  Archbishop  of  Lyons  wrote  to  Richelieu,  urging  him  "assieger  la
Rochelle,  et  chatier  ou,  pour  mieux  dire,  exterminer  les  huguenots,  toute  autre  affaire
cessante."  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  p.  276.  See  also,  on  the  anxiety  of  the
clergy  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIII.  to  destroy  the  Protestants,  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de
Nantes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  155,  166,  232,  245,  338,  378,  379,  427;  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Fran(cus:
vol.  xxii.  p.  485.


326  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  Edict  of  Nantes,191  and  he  granted  them  peace  ;  although,  as  he  says,  he
knew  that  by  doing  so  he  should  fall  under  the  suspicion  of  those  "  who  so  greatly
affected  the  name  of  zealous  Catholics."  192  A  few  months  afterwards  war
again  broke  out  ;  and  then  it  was  that  Richelieu  determined  on  that  celebrated
siege  of  Rochelle,  which,  if  brought  to  a  successful  issue,  was  sure  to  be  a  decisive
blow  against  the  French  Protestants.  That  he  was  moved  to  this  hazardous
undertaking  solely  by  secular  considerations  is  evident  not  only  from  the
general  spirit  of  his  preceding  policy,  but  also  from  his  subsequent  conduct.
With  the  details  of  this  famous  siege  history  is  not  concerned,  as  such  matters
have  no  value  except  to  military  readers.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  in  1628
Rochelle  was  taken  ;  and  the  Protestants,  who  had  been  induced  by  their
clergy  193  to  continue  to  resist  long  after  relief  was  hopeless,  and  who  in  conse-
quence had  suffered  the  most  dreadful  hardships,  were  obliged  to  surrender
at  discretion.194  The  privileges  of  the  town  were  revoked,  and  its  magistrates
removed  ;  but  the  great  minister  by  whom  these  things  were  effected  still
abstained  from  that  religious  persecution  to  which  he  was  urged.195  He  granted
to  the  Protestants  the  toleration  which  he  had  offered  at  an  earlier  period,  and
he  formally  conceded  the  free  exercise  of  their  public  worship.19*5  But  such
was  their  infatuation  that  because  he  likewise  restored  the  exercise  of  the
Catholic  religion,  and  thus  gave  to  the  conquerors  the  same  liberty  that  he  had
granted  to  the  conquered,  the  Protestants  murmured  at  the  indulgence  ;  they
could  not  bear  the  idea  that  their  eyes  should  be  offended  by  the  performance
of  Popish  rites.197  And  their  indignation  waxed  so  high  that  the  next  year
they  in  another  part  of  France  again  rose  in  arms.  As  however  they  were
now  stripped  of  their  principal  resources,  they  were  easily  defeated  ;  and,  their
existence  as  a  political  faction  being  destroyed,  they  were,  in  reference  to  their
religion,  treated  by  Richelieu  in  the  same  manner  as  before.198  To  the  Protestants
generally  he  confirmed  the  privilege  of  preaching  and  of  performing  the  other
ceremonies  of  their  creed.199  To  their  leader,  Rohan,  he  granted  an  amnesty,

191  He  confirmed  it  in  March,  1626  ;  Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplomatic  Francaise,  vol.  ii.
p.  399  ;  and  also  in  the  preceding  January.     See  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.
appendix,  pp.  77,  81.

192  "Ceux  qui  affectent  autant  le  nom  de  zeles  catholiques."     Mem.  de  Richelieu,
vol.  iii.  p.  16  ;  and  at  p.  2,  he,  in  the  same  year  (1626),  says,  that  he  was  opposed  by
those  who  had  "  un  trop  ardent  et  precipite  desir  de  ruiner  les  huguenots."

193  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  66.

194  On  the  sufferings  of  the  inhabitants,  see  extract  from  the  Dupuis  MS.,  in  Capefigue^s
Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  351.     Fontenay  Mareuil,  who  was  an  eye-witness,  says,  that  the
besieged,  in  some  instances,  ate  their  own  children  ;  and  that  the  burial-grounds  were
guarded,  to  prevent  the  corpses  from  being  dug  up  and  turned  into  food.     Mem.  de
Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  ii.  p.  119.

I  195  And  in  which  he  would  most  assuredly  have  been  supported  by  Louis  XIII. ;  of
whom  an  intelligent  writer  says  :  "  II  etoit  plein  de  piete  et  de  zele  pour  le  service  de
Dieu  et  pour  la  grandeur  de  1'eglise ;  et  sa  plus  sensible  joie,  en  prenant  La  Rochelle
et  les  autres  places  qu'il  prit,  fut  de  penser  qu'il  chasseroit  de  son  royaume  les  heretiques,
et  qu'il  le  purgeroit  par  cette  voie  des  differentes  religions  qui  gatent  et  infectent  1'eglise
de  Dieu."  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  i.  p.  425,  edit.  Petitot,  1824.

196  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  p.  423  ;  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxiii.
p.  77  ;  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  357  ;  Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  ii.  p.  122.

197  "  Les  huguenots  murmuraient  de  voir  le  retablissement  de  1'eglise  romaine  au
sein  de  leur  ville."     Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  359.

198  "Des  qu'il  ne  s'agit  plus  d'un  parti  politique,  il  conceda,  comme  a  la  Rochelle,
la  liberte  de  conscience  et  la  faculte  de  preche."     Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  381.
Compare  Smedley's  Hist,  of  the  Reformed  Religion  in  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  201,  with  Memoires
de  Richelieu,  vol.  iv.  p.  484.

p  *  9  The  Edict  of  Nismes,  in  1629,  an  important  document,  will  be  found  in  Quick's
Synodicon,  vol.  i.  pp.  xcvi.-ciii.,  and  in  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  appendix,
pp.  92-98  ;  and  a  commentary  on  it  in  Bazin,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  iii.  pp.  36-38.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT


327


and,  a  few  years  afterwards,  employed  him  in  important  public  services.  After
this,  the  hopes  of  the  party  were  destroyed  ;  they  never  again  rose  in  arms,
nor  do  we  find  any  mention  of  them  until  a  much  later  period,  when  they  were
barbarously  persecuted  by  Louis  XIV.200  But  from  all  such  intolerance  Richelieu
sedulously "  abstained  ;  and  having  now  cleared  the  land  from  rebellion,  he
embarked  in  that  vast  scheme  of  foreign  policy  of  which  I  have  already  given
some  account,  and  in  which  he  clearly  showed  that  his  proceedings  against  the
Protestants  had  not  been  caused  by  hatred  of  their  religious  tenets.  For  the
same  party  which  he  attacked  at  home  he  supported  abroad.  He  put  down
the  French  Protestants,  because  they  were  a  turbulent  faction  that  troubled  the

tate,  and  wished  to  suppress  the  exercise  of  all  opinions  unfavourable  to  them-

slves.     But   so   far  from  carrying  on  a  crusade  against  their  religion,  he,  as  I

lave  already  observed,  encouraged  it  in  other  countries;  and,  though  a  bishop
of  the  Catholic  church,  he  did  not  hesitate,  by  treaties,  by  money,  and  by  force
of  arms,  to  support  the  Protestants  against  the  House  of  Austria,  maintain  the
Lutherans  against  the  Emperor  of  Germany,  and  uphold  the  Calvinists  against
the  King  of  Spain.

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  draw  a  slight,  though,  I  trust,  a  clear  outline
of  the  events  which  took  place  in  France  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIIL,  and
particularly  during  that  part  of  it  which  included  the  administration  of  Richelieu.
But  such  occurrences,  important  as  they  are,  only  formed  a  single  phase  of  that
larger  development  which  was  now  displaying  itself  in  nearly  every  branch  of
the  national  intellect.  They  were  the  mere  political  expression  of  that  bold
and  sceptical  spirit  which  cried  havoc  to  the  prejudices  and  superstitions  of

icn.  For  the  government  of  Richelieu  was  successful  as  well  as  progressive  ;
and  no  government  can  unite  these  two  qualities  unless  its  measures  harmonize
with  the  feelings  and  temper  of  the  age.  Such  an  administration,  though  it
facilitates  progress,  is  not  the  cause  of  it,  but  is  rather  its  measure  and  symptom.
The  cause  of  the  progress  lies  far  deeper,  and  is  governed  by  the  general  ten-
dency of  the  time.  And  as  the  different  tendencies  observable  in  successive
generations  depend  on  the  difference  in  their  knowledge,  it  is  evident  that  we
can  only  understand  the  working  of  the  tendencies  by  taking  a  wide  view  of
the  amount  and  character  of  the  knowledge.  To  comprehend,  therefore,  the
real  nature  of  the  great  advance  made  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIIL,  it  becomes
necessary  that  I  should  lay  before  the  reader  some  evidence  respecting  those
higher  and  more  important  facts  which  historians  are  apt  to  neglect,  but  without
which  the  study  of  the  past  is  an  idle  and  trivial  pursuit,  and  history  itself  a
barren  field,  which,  bearing  no  fruit,  is  unworthy  of  the  labour  that  is  wasted
on  the  cultivation  of  so  ungrateful  a  soil.

It  is,  indeed,  a  very  observable  fact  that  while  Richelieu,  with  such  extra
ordinary  boldness,  was  secularizing  the  whole  system  of  French  politics,  and
by  his  disregard  of  ancient  interests  was  setting  at  naught  the  most  ancient

traditions,  a  course  precisely  similar  was  being  pursued,  in  a  still  higher  depart
ment,  by  a  man  greater  than  he  ;  by  one  who,  if  I  may  express  my  own  opinion,
is  the  most  profound  among  the  many  eminent  thinkers  France  has  produced.
I  speak  of  Rene  Descartes,  of  whom  the  least  that  can  be  said  is  that  he  effected
a  revolution  more  decisive  than  has  ever  been  brought  about  by  any  other  single

mind.  With  his  mere  physical  discoveries  we  are  not  now  concerned,  because
in  this  Introduction  I  do  not  pretend  to  trace  the  progress  of  science,  except
in  those  epochs  which  indicate  a  new  turn  in  the  habits  of  national  thought.
But  I  may  remind  the  reader  that  he  was  the  first  who  successfully  applied

algebra   to    geometry ; 201    that   he   pointed    out    the   important    law    of    the


M.  Bazin,  unfortunately  for  the  reputation  of  this  otherwise  valuable  work,  never  quotes
his  authorities.

200  In  1633,  their  own   historian  says  :  "  les  Reformez  ne  faisoient  plus   de  party."
Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  532.     Compare  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer's  account
of  France  in  1648,  in  Bunbury's  Correspond,  of  Hanmer,  p.  309,  Lond.  1838.

201  Thomas  (Eloge,  in  CEuvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  p.  32)  says,  "  cet  instrument,  c'est


328  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

sjnes  ;  202  that  in  an  age  in  which  optical  instruments  were  extremely  imperfect  he
discovered  the  changes  to  which  light  is  subjected  in  the  eye  by  the  crystalline
lens  ;  203  that  he  directed  attention  to  the  consequences  resulting  from  the
weight  of  the  atmosphere  ;  204  and  that  he  moreover  detected  the  causes  of

Descartes  qui  1'a  cree  ;  c'est  1' application  de  1'algebre  a  la  geometric."  And  this,  in  the
highest  sense,  is  strictly  true  ;  for  although  Vieta  and  two  or  three  others  in  the  sixteenth
century  had  anticipated  this  step,  we  owe  entirely  to  Descartes  the  magnificent  dis-
covery of  the  possibility  of  applying  algebra  to  the  geometry  of  curves,  he  being  un-
doubtedly the  first  who  expressed  them  by  algebraic  equations.  See  Montuda,  Hist,
des  Mathemat.  vol.  i.  pp.  704,  705,  vol.  ii.  p.  120,  vol.  iii.  p.  64.

202  The  statements  of  Huygens  and  of  Isaac  Vossius  to  the  effect  that  Descartes  had
seen  the  papers  of  Snell  before  publishing  his  discovery,  are  unsupported  by  any  direct
evidence  ;  at  least  none  of  the  historians  of  science,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  have  brought
forward  any.  So  strong,  however,  is  the  disposition  of  mankind  at  large  to  depreciate
great  men,  and  so  general  is  the  desire  to  convict  them  of  plagiarism,  that  tb's  charge,
improbable  in  itself,  and  only  resting  on  the  testimony  of  two  envious  rivals,  has  been
not  only  revived  by  modern  writers,  but  has  been,  even  in  our  own  time,  spoken  of  as
a  well-established  and  notorious  fact  !  The  flimsy  basis  of  this  accusation  is  clearly
exposed  by  M.  Bordas  Demoulin,  in  his  valuable  work  Le  Cartesianisme,  Paris,  1843,
vol.  ii.  pp.  9-12  ;  while,  on  the  other  side  of  the  question,  I  refer  with  regret  to  Sir  D.
Brewster  on  the  Progress  of  Optics,  Second  Report  of  British  Association,  pp.  309,  310  ;
and  to  WhewelVs  Hist,  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  vol.  ii.  pp.  379,  502,  503.

2°3  See  the  interesting  remarks  of  Sprengel  (Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  iv.  pp.  271,  272),
and  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  iv.  pp.  371  seq.  What  makes  this  the  more  observable
is  that  the  study  of  the  crystalline  lens  was  neglected  long  after  the  death  of  Descartes,
and  no  attempt  made  for  more  than  a  hundred  years  to  complete  his  views  by  ascer-
taining its  intimate  structure.  Indeed,  it  is  said  (Thomson's  Animal  Chemistry,  p.  512)
that  the  crystalline  lens  and  the  two  humours  were  first  analyzed  in  1802.  Compare
Simon's  Animal  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  pp.  419-421  ;  Henle,  Traite  d 'Anatomic,  vol.  i.  p.  357  ;
Lepelletier,  Physiologic  Medicate,  vol.  iii.  p.  160  ;  Mayors  Human  Physiol.  p.  279  ;  Blain-
ville,  Physiol.  comparee,  vol.  iii.  pp.  325-328  ;  none  of  whom  refer  to  any  analysis  earlier
than  the  nineteenth  century.  I  notice  this  partly  as  a  contribution  to  the  history  of
our  knowledge,  and  partly  as  proving  how  slow  men  have  been  in  following  Descartes,
and  in  completing  his  views  ;  for,  as  M.  Blainville  justly  observes,  the  chemical  laws
of  the  lens  must  be  understood  before  we  can  exhaustively  generalize  the  optical  laws
of  its  refraction  ;  so  that,  in  fact,  the  researches  of  Berzelius  on  the  eye  are  complemental
to  those  of  Descartes.  The  theory  of  the  limitation  of  the  crystalline  lens  according
to  the  descending  scale  of  the  animal  kingdom,  and  the  connexion  between  its  develop-
ment and  a  general  increase  of  sensuous  perception,  seem  to  have  been  little  studied  :
but  Dr.  Grant  (Comparative  Anatomy,  p.  252)  thinks  that  the  lens  exists  in  some  of  the
rotifera  ;  while  in  regard  to  its  origin,  I  find  a  curious  statement  in  Mailer's  Physiology,
vol.  i.  p.  450,  that  after  its  removal  in  mammals  it  has  been  reproduced  by  its  matrix,
the  capsule.  (If  this  can  be  relied  on,  it  will  tell  against  the  suggestion  of  Schwann,
who  supposes,  in  his  Microscopical  Researches,  1847,  pp.  87,  88,  that  its  mode  of  life
is  vegetable,  and  that  it  is  not  "  a  secretion  of  its  capsule.")  As  to  its  probable  exist-
ence in  the  hydrozoa,  see  Rymer  Jones's  Animal  Kingdom,  1855,  p.  96,  "  regarded  either
as  a  crystalline  lens,  or  an  otolithe  ;  "  and  as  to  its  embryonic  development,  see  Burdach,
Traite  de  Physiologic,  vol.  iii.  pp.  435-438.  [Concerning  this  note,  Buckle  wrote  to  Mrs.
Gray  while  the  pages  were  passing  through  the  press  :  "  In  regard  to  the  note  on  the
crystalline  lens,  I  confess  that  I  think  you  are  right,  and  therefore  I  am  wrong.  My
mind,  and  hence  my  reading,  is  too  discursive,  and,  what  is  worse,  the  discursiveness
is  too  ostentatiously  displayed,  as  I  clearly  perceive  now  that  the  volume  is  printed."
(Mr.  Huth's  Life  of  Buckle,  i.  139-40.)— ED.]

204  Torricelli  first  weighed  the  air,  in  1643.  Branded  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  360;  Leslie's
Natural  Philosophy,  p.  419  :  but  there  is  a  letter  from  Descartes,  written  as  early  as
1631,  "  ou  il  explique  le  phenomene  de  la  suspension  du  mercure  dans  un  tuyau  ferme
par  en  haut,  en  1'attribuant  au  poids  de  la  colonne  d'air  elevee  jusqu'au  dela  des  nues."
Bordas  Demoulin,  le  Cartesianisme,  vol.  i.  p.  311.  And  Montucla  (Hist,  des  Mathemat.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT  329

the  rainbow,205  that  singular  phenomenon,  with  which,  in  the  eyes  of  the  vulgar,
some  theological  superstitions  are  still  connected.2^  At  the"  same  time,  and
as  if  to  combine  the  most  varied  forms  of  excellence,  he  is  not  only  allowed  to
be  the  first  geometrician  of  the  age,207  but,  by  the  clearness  and  admirable  pre-
cision of  his  style,  he  became  one  of  the  founders  of  French  prose.2°8  And
although  he  was  constantly  engaged  in  those  lofty  inquiries  into  the  nature  of
the  human  mind,  which  can  never  be  studied  without  wonder,  I  had  almost
said  can  never  be  read  without  awe,  he  combined  with  them  a  long  course  of
laborious  experiment  upon  the  animal  frame,  which  raised  him  to  the  highest
rank  among  the  anatomists  of  his  time.^  The  great  discovery  made  by  Harvey
of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  was  neglected  by  most  of  his  contemporaries  ;  21<>

vol.  ii.  p.  205)  says  of  Descartes,  "  nous  avons  des  preuves  que  ce  philosophe  reconnut
avant  Torricelli  la  pesanteur  de  Fair."  Descartes  himself  says  that  he  suggested  the
subsequent  experiment  of  Pascal.  CEuvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  x.  pp.  344,  351.

205  Dr.  Whewell,  who  has  treated  Descartes  with  marked  injustice,  does  nevertheless
allow  that  he  is  "  the  genuine  author  of  the  explanation  of  the  rainbow."     Hist,  of  the
Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  ii.  pp.  380,  384.     See  also  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  189  ;  Thomson's
Hist,  of  the  Royal  Society,  p.  364  ;  Hallam's  Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  iii.  p.  205  ;  CEuvres  de
Descartes,  vol.  i.  pp.  47,  48,  vol.  v.  pp.  265-284.     On  the  theory  of  the  rainbow  as  known
in  the  present  century,  see  Kaemtz,  Course  of  Meteorology,  pp.  440-445  ;  and  Forbes  on
Meteorology,  pp.  125-130,  in  Report  of  British  Association  for  1840.     Compare  Leslie's
Natural  Philosophy,  p.  531  ;  Pouillet,  Siemens  de  Physique,  vol.  ii.  p.  788.

206  The  Hebrew  notion  of  the  rainbow  is  well  known  ;  and  for  the  ideas  of  other  nations
on  this  subject,  see  Prichard's  Physical  History  of  Mankind,  vol.  v.  pp.  154,  176  ;  Kames's
Sketches  of  the  History  of  Man,  vol.  iv.  p.  252,  Edinb.  1788  :  and  Burdach's  Physiologic,
vol.  v.  pp.  546,  547,  Paris,  1839.

207  Thomas  calls  him  "  le  plus  grand  geometre  de  son  siecle."     CEuvres  de  Descartes,
vol.  i.  p.  89.     Sir  W.  Hamilton  (Discussions  on  Philosophy,  p.  271)  says,  "  the  greatest
mathematician  of  the  age  ;  "  and  Montucla  can  find  no  one  but  Plato  to  compare  with
him  :  "  On  ne  sauroit  donner  une  idee  plus  juste  de  ce  qu'a  etc  Fepoque  de  Descartes
dans  la  geometric  moderne,  qu'en  la  comparant  a  celle  de  Platon  dans  la  geometric
ancienne.  .  .  .  De  memeenfin  que  Platon  prepara  par  sa  decouverte  celles  des  Archimede,
des  Apollonius,  etc.,  on  peut  dire  que  Descartes  a  jette  les  fondemens  de  celles  qui  illus-
trent  aujourd'hui  les  Newton,  les  Leibnitz,  etc."     Montucla,  Hist,  des  Mathemat.  vol.  ii.

p.    112.

208  "  Descartes  joint  encore  a  ses  autres  titres,  celui  d' avoir  ete  un  des  createurs  de
notre  langue."     Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  154.     Sir  James  Mackintosh  (Dissert,  on  Ethical
Philos.  p.  1 86)  has  also  noticed  the  influence  of  Descartes  in  forming  the  style  of  French
writers  ;  and  I  think  that  M.  Cousin  has  somewhere  made  a  similar  remark.

209  Thomas  says,  "  Descartes  cut  aussi  la  gloire  d'etre  un  des  premiers  anatomistes
de  son  siecle."     CEuvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  p.  55  ;  see  also  p.  101.     In  1639,  Descartes
writes  to  Mersenne  (CEuvres,  vol.  viii.  p.  100)  that  he  had  been  engaged  "  depuis  onze
ans  "  in  studying  comparative  anatomy  by  dissection.     Compare  p.   174,  and  vol.   i.
pp.  175-184.

210  Dr.  Whewell  (Hist,  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  p.  440)  says,  "  It  was  for  the
most  part  readily  accepted  by  his  countrymen  ;  but  that  abroad  it  had  to  encounter
considerable  opposition."     For  this  no  authority  is  quoted ;  and  yet  one  would  be  glad
to  know  who  told  Dr.  Whewell  that  the  discovery  was  readily  accepted.     So  far  from
meeting  in  England  with  ready  acceptance,  it  was  during  many  years  almost  universally
denied.     Aubrey  was  assured  by  Harvey  that  in  consequence  of  his  book  on  the  Circu-

ition  of  the  Blood  he  lost  much  of  his  practice,  was  believed  to  be  crackbrained,  and
ras  opposed  by  "  all  the  physicians."  Aubrey's  Letters  and  Lives,  vol.  ii.  p.  383.  Dr.
/lllis  (Life  of  Harvey,  p.  xli.,  in  Harvey's  Works,  edit.  Sydenham  Society,  1874)  says,

Harvey's  views  were  at  first  rejected  almost  universally."  Dr.  Elliotson  (Human
^hysiology,  p.  194)  says,  "  His  immediate  reward  was  general  ridicule  and  abuse,  and

great  diminution  of  his  practice."     Broussais  (Examen  des  Doctrines  Medicales,vo\.  i.

vii.)  says,  "  Harvey  passa  pour  fou  quand  il  annonca  la  decouverte  de  la  circulation."
anally,  Sir  William  Temple,  who  belongs  to  the  generation  subsequent  to  Harvey  and


33o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

but  it  was  at  once  recognized  by  Descartes,  who  made  it  the  basis  of  the  physio-
logical part  of  his  work  on  Man.211  He  likewise  adopted  the  discovery  of  the
lacteals  by  Aselli,212  which,  like  every  great  truth  yet  laid  before  the  world,
was  at  its  first  appearance  not  only  disbelieved  but  covered  with  ridicule.213
These  things  might  have  been  sufficient  to  rescue  even  the  physical  labours
of  Descartes  from  the  attacks  constantly  made  on  them  by  men  who  either
have  not  studied  his  works,  or  else,  having  studied  them,  are  unable  to  under-
stand their  merit.  But  the  glory  of  Descartes,  and  the  influence  he  exercised
over  his  age,  do  not  depend  even  on  such  claims  as  these.  Putting  them  aside,
he  is  the  author  of  what  is  emphatically  called  Modern  Philosophy.21*  He  is
the  originator  of  that  great  system  and  method  of  metaphysics,  which,  notwith-
standing its  errors,  has  the  undoubted  merit  of  having  given  a  wonderful  impulse
to  the  European  mind,  and  communicated  to  it  an  activity  which  has  been
made  available  for  other  purposes  of  a  different  character.  Besides  this,  and
superior  to  it,  there  is  another  obligation  which  we  are  under  to  the  memory
of  Descartes.  He  deserves  the  gratitude  of  posterity,  not  so  much  on  account
of  what  he  built  up,  as  on  account  of  what  he  pulled  down.  His  life  was  one
great  and  successful  warfare  against  the  prejudices  and  traditions  of  men.  He
was  great  as  a  creator,  but  he  was  far  greater  as  a  destroyer.  In  this  respect
he  was  the  true  successor  of  Luther,  to  whose  labours  his  own  were  the  fitting
supplement.  He  completed  what  the  great  German  reformer  had  left  undone.215
He  bore  to  the  old  systems  of  philosophy  precisely  the  same  relation  that  Luther
bore  to  the  old  systems  of  religion.  He  was  the  great  reformer  and  liberator
of  the  European  intellect.  To  prefer,  therefore,  even  the  most  successful  dis-
coverers of  physical  laws  to  this  great  innovator  and  disturber  of  tradition,
is  just  as  if  we  should  prefer  knowledge  to  freedom,  and  believe  that  science
is  better  than  liberty.  We  must,  indeed,  always  be  grateful  to  those  eminent
thinkers  to  whose  labours  we  are  indebted  for  that  vast  body  of  physical  truths
which  we  now  possess.  But  let  us  reserve  the  full  measure  of  our  homage  for
those  far  greater  men  who  have  not  hesitated  to  attack  and  destroy  the  most

who  indeed  was  not  born  until  some  years  after  the  discovery  was  made,  mentions
it  in  his  works  in  such  a  manner  as  to  show  that  even  then  it  was  not  universally  received
by  educated  men.  See  two  curious  passages,  which  have  escaped  the  notice  of  the
historians  of  physiology,  in  Works  of  Sir  W.  Temple,  vol.  iii.  pp.  293,  469,  8vo,  1814.

211  "  Taken  by  Descartes  as  the  basis  of  his  physiology,   in  his  work  on  Man."
Whewell's  Hist,  of  the  Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  p.  441.     "  Rene  Descartes  se  declara  un
des  premiers  en  faveur  de  la  doctrine  de  la  circulation."     Renouard,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,
vol.  ii.  p.  163.     See  also  Bordas  Demoulin,  le  Cartesianisme,  vol.  ii.  p.  324  ;  and  (Euvres
de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  pp.  68,  179,  vol.  iv.  pp.  42,  449,  vol.  ix.  pp.  159,  332.     Compare
Willis's  Life  of  Harvey,  p.  xlv.,  in  Harvey's  Works.

212  "  Les  veines  blanches,  dites  lactees,  qu'Asellius  a  decouvertes  depuis  peu  dans
le  mesentere."     De  la  Formation  du  Foetus,  sec.  49,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  iv.  p.  483.

213  Even  Harvey  denied  it  to  the  last.     Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Med.  vol.  iv.  pp.  203,  204.
Compare  Harvey's  Works,  edit.  Sydenham  Soc.  pp.  605,  614.

214  M.  Cousin  (Hist,  de  la  Philos.  II.  serie,  vol.  i.  p.  39)  says  of  Descartes,  "  son  premier
ouvrage  ecrit  en  francais  est  de  1637.     C'est  done  de  1637  que  date  la   philosophic
moderne."     See  the  same  work,  I.  serie,  vol.  iii.  p.  77;  and  compare  Stewart's  Philos.
of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.  pp.  14,  529,  with  Eloge  de  Parent,  in  (Euvres  de  Fontenelle,  Paris,
1766,  vol.  v.  p.  444,  and  vol.  vi.  p.  318  :  "  Cartesien,  ou,  si  Ton  veut,  philosophic
moderne."

215  "  Descartes  avait  etabli  dans  le  domaine  de  la  pensee  1'independance  absolue  de
la  raison  ;  il  avait  declare  a  la  scolastique  et  a  la  theologie  que  1'esprit  de  I'homme  ne
pouvait  plus  relever  que  de  1'evidence  qu'il  aurait  obtenue  par  lui-meme.     Ce  que  Luther
avait  commence  dans  la  religion,  le  genie  francais  si  actif  et  si  prompt  1'importait  dans
la  philosophic,  et  Ton  peut  dire  a  la  double  gloire  de  1'Allemagne  et  de  la  France  que
Descartes  est  le  fils  aine  de  Luther."     Lerminier,  Philos.  du  Droit,  vol.  ii.  p.  141.     See
also,  on  the  philosophy  of  Descartes  as  a  product  of  the  Reformation,  Ward's  Ideal  of
a  Christian  Church,  p.  498.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          331

inveterate  prejudices  ;  men  who,  by  removing  the  pressure  of  tradition,  have
purified  the  very  source  and  fountain  of  our  knowledge,  and  secured  its  future
progress  by  casting  off  obstacles  in  the  presence  of  which  progress  was  im-
possible.2^

It  will  not  be  expected,  perhaps  it  will  hardly  be  desired,  that  I  should  enter
into  a  complete  detail  of  the  philosophy  of  Descartes  ;  a  philosophy  which
in  England  at  least  is  rarely  studied,  and  therefore  is  often  attacked.  But
it  will  be  necessary  to  give  such  an  account  of  it  as  will  show  its  analogy  with
the  anti-theological  policy  of  Richelieu,  and  will  thus  enable  us  to  see  the  full
extent  of  that  vast  movement  which  took  place  in  France  before  the  accession
of  Louis  XIV.  By  this  means  we  shall  be  able  to  understand  how  the  daring
innovations  of  the  great  minister  were  so  successful,  since  they  were  accom-
panied and  reinforced  by  corresponding  innovations  in  the  national  intellect ;
thus  affording  an  additional  instance  of  the  way  in  which  the  political  history
of  every  country  is  to  be  explained  by  the  history  of  its  intellectual  progress.

In  1637,  when  Richelieu  was  at  the  height  of  "his  power,  Descartes  published
that  great  work  which  he  had  long  been  meditating,  and  which  was  the  first
open  announcement  of  the  new  tendencies  of  the  French  mind.*  To  this  work
he  gave  the  name  of  a  "  Method  ;  "  and,  assuredly,  the  method  is  the  most
alien  to  what  is  commonly  called  theology  that  can  possibly  be  conceived.  Indeed,
so  far  from  being  theological,  it  is  essentially  and  exclusively  psychological.
The  theological  method  rests  on  ancient  records,  on  tradition,  on  the  voice  of
antiquity.  The  method  of  Descartes  rests  solely  on  the  consciousness  each
man  has  of  the  operations  of  his  own  mind.  And  lest  any  one  should  mistake
the  meaning  of  this,  he  in  subsequent  works  developed  it  at  great  length,  and
with  unrivalled  clearness.  For  his  main  object  was  to  popularize  the  views
which  he  put  forward.  Therefore,  says  Descartes,  "  I  write  in  French  rather
than  in  Latin,  because  I  trust  that  they  who  only  employ  their  simple  and  native
reason  will  estimate  my  opinions  more  fairly  than  they  who  only  believe  in
ancient  books."217  So  strongly  does  he  insist  upon  this,  that  almost  at  the
beginning  of  his  first  work  he  cautions  his  readers  against  the  common  error
of  looking  to  antiquity  for  knowledge  ;  and  he  reminds  them  that  "when  men
are  too  curious  to  know  the  practices  of  past  ages,  they  generally  remain  very
ignorant  of  their  own."  218

Indeed,  so  far  from  following  the  old  plan  of  searching  for  truth  in  the  records
of  the  past,  the  great  essential  of  this  new  philosophy  is  to  wean  ourselves  from
all  such  associations,  and,  beginning  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  by  the  work
of  destruction,  first  pull  down,  in  order  that  afterwards  we  may  build  up.219
When  T,  says  Descartes,  set  forth  in  the  pursuit  of  truth,  I  found  that  the  best
way  was  to  reject  everything  I  had  hitherto  received,  and  pluck  out  all  my  old
opinions,  in  order  that  I  might  lay  the  foundation  of  them  afresh:  believing
that  by  this  means  I  should  more  easily  accomplish  the  great  scheme  of  life
than  by  building  on  an  old  basis,  and  supporting  myself  by  principles  which

216  For,  as  Turgot  finely  says,  "  ce  n'est  pas  1'erreur  qui  s' oppose  aux  progres  de  la
verite.     Ce  sont  la  mollesse,  1'entetement,   1'esprit  de  routine,   tout  ce  qui  porte   a
'inaction."     Pensees,  in  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  ii.  p.  '343.

217  "  Et  si  j'ecris  en  francais,  qui  est  la  langue  de  mon  pays,  plutot  qu'en  latin,  qui
est  celle  de  mes  precepteurs,  c'est  a  cause  que  j'espere  que  ceux  qui  ne  se  servent  que
de  leur  raison  naturelle  toute  pure,  jugeront  mieux  de  mes  opinions  que  ceux  qui  ne
croient  qu'aux  livres  anciens."     Discours  de  la  Methode,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.
pp.  210,  211.

218  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  127.

219  ««  £r  fing  also  vom  Zweifel  an,  und  ging  durch  denselben  zur  Gewissheit  liber.' '
Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  x.  p.  218.     Compare  Second  Discours  en  Sorbonne,
in  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol  ii.  p.  89.

*  [The  panegyric  on  Charron  above  (pp.  296-8)  would  seem  to  have  been  inserted
after  this  section  had  been  written. — ED.]


332  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

I  had  learned  in  my  youth,  without  examining  if  they  were  really  true.22o  "  I
therefore  will  occupy  myself  freely  and  earnestly  in  effecting  a  general  destruction
of  all  my  old  opinions."221  For,  if  we  would  know  all  the  truths  that  can  be
known,  we  must  in  the  first  place  free  ourselves  from  our  prejudices,  and  make
a  point  of  rejecting  those  things  which  we  have  received,  until  we  have  sub-
jected them  to  a  new  examination.222  We  therefore  must  derive  our  opinions,
not  from  tradition,  but  from  ourselves.  We  must  not  pass  judgment  upon
any  subject  which  we  do  not  clearly  and  distinctly  understand  ;  for  even  if
such  a  judgment  is  correct,  it  can  only  be  so  by  accident,  not  having  solid  ground
on  which  to  support  itself.223  But  so  far  are  we  from  this  state  of  indifference
that  our  memory  is  full  of  prejudices  :  224  we  pay  attention  to  words  rather  than
to  things  ;  225  and,  being  thus  slaves  to  form,  there  are  too  many  of  us  who
"  believe  themselves  religious,  when,  in  fact,  they  are  bigoted  and  superstitious  ;
who  think  themselves  perfect  because  they  go  much  to  church,  because  they
often  repeat  prayers,  because  they  wear  short  hair,  because  they  fast,  because
they  give  alms.  These  are  the  men  who  imagine  themselves  such  friends  of
God  that  nothing  they  do  displeases  Him ;  men  who,  under  pretence  of  zeal,
gratify  their  passions  by  committing  the  greatest  crimes,  such  as  betraying
towns,  killing  princes,  exterminating  nations  :  and  all  this  they  do  to  those
who  will  not  change  their  opinions."  226

These  were  the  words  of  wisdom  which  this  great  teacher  addressed  to  his
countrymen  only  a  few  years  after  they  had  brought  to  a  close  the  last  religious
war  that  has  ever  been  waged  in  France.  The  similarity  of  these  views  to  those
which  about  the  same  time  were  put  forth  by  Chillingworth,  must  strike  every
reader,  but  ought  not  to  excite  surprise  ;  for  they  were  but  the  natural  products
of  a  state  of  society  in  which  the  right  of  private  judgment,  and  the  independence
of  the  human  reason,  were  first  solidly  established.  If  we  examine  this  matter
a  little  closer,  we  shall  find  still  further  proof  of  the  analogy  between  France
and  England.  So  identical  are  the  steps  of  the  progress,  that  the  relation  which
Montaigne  bears  to  Descartes  is  just  the  same  as  that  which  Hooker  bears  to
Chillingworth  ;  the  same  in  reference  to  the  difference  of  time,  and  also  in  refer-
ence to  the  difference  of  opinions.  The  mind  of  Hooker  was  essentially  sceptical ;
but  his  genius  was  so  restrained  by  the  prejudices  of  his  age,  that,  unable  to
discern  the  supreme  authority  of  private  judgment,  he  hampered  it  by  appeals
to  councils  and  to  the  general  voice  of  ecclesiastical  antiquity:  impediments
which  Chillingworth,  thirty  years  later,  effectually  removed.  In  precisely  the
same  way,  Montaigne,  like  Hooker,  was  sceptical;  but  like  him  he  lived  at  a
period  when  the  spirit  of  doubt  was  yet  young,  and  when  the  mind  still  trembled
before  the  authority  of  the  church.  It  is  therefore  no  wonder  that  even  Mon-
taigne, who  did  so  much  for  his  age,  should  have  hesitated  respecting  the  capacity

220  Disc,  de  la  Methode,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  p.  136.

221  "Je  m'appliquerai  serieusement  et  avec  liberte  a  detruire  generalement  tcutes
mes  anciennes  opinions."     Meditations,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  p.  236.

222  Principes  de  la  Philosophic,  part  i.  sec.  75,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  117,
118  ;  and  compare  vol.  ii.  p.  417,  where  he  gives  a  striking  illustration  of  this  view.

223  Meditations,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  pp.  303,  304.

224  "Nous  avons  rempli  notre  memoire  de  beaucoup  de  prejuges."     Principes  de
la  Philos.  part  i.  sec.  47,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  iii.  p.  91.

225  (Euvres,  vol.  iii.  p.  117.

226  "Ce  qu'on   peut  particulierement   remarquer  en  ceux  qui,  croyant  etre  devots,
sont  seulement  bigots  et  superstitieux,  c'est  a  dire  qui,  sous  ombre  qu'ils  vont  souvent
a  Teglise,  qu'ils  recitent  force  prieres,  qu'ils  portent  les  cheveux  courts,  qu'ils  jeunent,
qu'ils  donnent  1'aumone,  pensent  etre  entierement  parfaits,  et  s'imaginent  qu'ils  sont
si  grands  amis  de  Dieu,  qu'ils  ne  sauroient  rien  faire  qui  lui  deplaise,  et  que  tout  ce  que
leur  dicte  leur  passion  est  un  bon  zele,  bien  qu'elle  leur  dicte  quelquefois  les  plus  grands
crimes  qui  puissent  etre  commis  par  des  hommes,  comme  de  trahir  des  villes,  de  tuer
des  princes,  d'exterminer  des  peuples  entiers,  pour  cela  seul  qu'ils  ne  suivent  pas  leurs
opinions."     Les  Passions  de  V Ante,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  iv.  pp.  194,  195.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          333

of  men  to  work  out  for  themselves  great  truths  ;  and  that,  pausing  in  the  course
that  lay  before  him,  his  scepticism  should  often  have  assumed  the  form  of  a
distrust  of  the  human  faculties.227  Such  shortcomings,  and  such  imperfections,
are  merely  an  evidence  of  the  slow  growth  of  society,  and  of  the  impossibility
for  even  the  greatest  thinkers  to  outstrip  their  contemporaries  beyond  a  certain
point.  But  with  the  advance  of  knowledge  this  deficiency  was  at  length
supplied ;  and,  as  the  generation  after  Hooker  brought  forth  Chillingworth,
just  so  did  the  generation  after  Montaigne  bring  forth  Descartes.  Both  Chilling-
worth  and  Descartes  were  eminently  sceptical  ;  but  their  scepticism  was  directed,
not  against  the  human  intellect,  but  against  those  appeals  to  authority  and
tradition  without  which  it  had  hitherto  been  supposed  that  the  intellect  could
not  safety  proceed.  That  this  was  the  case  with  Chillingworth  we  have  already
seen.  That  it  was  likewise  the  case  with  Descartes,  is  if  possible,  still  more
apparent  ;  for  that  profound  thinker  believed,  not  only  that  the  mind,  by  its
own  efforts,  could  root  out  its  most  ancient  opinions,  but  that  it  could  without
resh  aid  build  up  a  new  and  solid  system" in  place  of  the  one  which  it  had  thrown
down.22®

It  is  this  extraordinary  confidence  in  the  power  of  the  human  intellect  which
eminently  characterizes  Descartes,  and  has  given  to  his  philosophy  that  peculiar
sublimity  which  distinguishes  it  from  all  other  systems.  So  far  from  thinking
that  a  knowledge  of  the  external  world  is  essential  to  the  discovery  of  truth,
he  laid  it  down  as  a  fundamental  principle  that  we  must  begin  by  ignoring  such
knowledge  ;  229  that  the  first  step  is  to  separate  ourselves  from  the  delusions
of  nature,  and  reject  the  evidence  presented  to  our  senses.230  For,  says  Des-
cartes, nothing  is  certain  but  thought  ;  nor  are  there  any  truths  except  those
which  necessarily  follow  from  the  operation  of  our  own  consciousness.  We


227  As  is  particularly  evident  in  his  long  chapter,  headed  "Apologie  de  Raimond
Seboncl."     Essais  de  Montaigne,  livre  ii.  chap.  xii.  Paris,  1843,  pp.  270-382  ;  and  see
Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  ix.  p.  455.     [The  "Apologie"  appears  to  have  been
written  while  Montaigne  was  in  the  stage  of   recoiling  from  Catholic  ferocity  without
being   willing    to  accept    either    Protestant  or  atheistic  denials  of    Catholic  doctrine.
See  edit,  note  above,  p.   295. — ED.]

228  He  very  clearly  separates  himself  from  men  like  Montaigne  :  "  Non  que  j'imitasse
pour  cela  les  sceptiques,  qui  ne  doutent  que  pour  douter,  et  affectent  d'etre  toujours
irresolus;  car,  au  contraire,  tout  mon  dessein  ne  tendoit  qu'a  m' assurer,  et  a  rejeter  la
terre  mouvante  et  le  sable  pour  trouver  le  roc  ou  1'argile."     Discours  de  la  Methode,  in
(Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  pp.  153,  154.

229^According  to  the  view  of  Descartes,  it  was  to  be  ignored,  not  denied.  There  is
no  instance  to  be  found  in  his  works  of  a  denial  of  the  existence  of  the  external  world  ;
nor  does  the  passage  quoted  from  him  by  Mr.  Jobert  (New  System  of  Philos.  vol.  ii.
pp.  161,  162,  Lond.  1849)  at  all  justify  the  interpretation  of  that  ingenious  writer,  who
confuses  certainty  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word  with  certainty  in  the  Cartesian
sense.  A  similar  error  is  made  by  those  who  suppose  that  his  "  Je  pense,  done  je  suis  "
is  an  enthymeme  ;  and  having  taken  this  for  granted,  they  turn  on  the  great  philosopher,
and  accuse  him  of  begging  the  question !  Such  critics  overlook  the  difference  between
a  logical  process  and  a  psychological  one  ;  and  therefore  they  do  not  see  that  this  famous
sentence  was  the  description  of  a  mental  fact,  and  not  the  statement  of  a  mutilated
syllogism.  The  student  of  the  philosophy  of  Descartes  must  always  distinguish  between
these  two  processes,  and  remember  that  each  process  has  an  order  of  proof  peculiar  to
itself  ;  or  at  all  events  he  must  remember  that  such  was  the  opinion  of  Descartes.  Com-
pare, on  the  Cartesian  enthymeme,  Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philos.  I  serie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  512,  513,
with  a  note  in  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,  Kant's  Werke,  vol.  ii.  pp.  323»  324-  [The
mistaken  objection  to  Descartes,  which  Buckle  here  so  justly  repels,  has  probably  arisen
f  rom  the  early  vogue  of  the  Latin  translation,  where  the  expression  "  cogito,  ergo  sum  "
does  not  properly  convey  Descartes's  meaning. — ED.]

230  Meditations,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  pp.  220,  226  ;  and  again  in  the  Ob  jcctwns
et  Reponses,  (Euvres,  vol.  ii.  pp.  245,  246.


334  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

have  no  knowledge  of  our  soul  except  as  a  thinking  substance  ;  231  and  it  were
easier  for  us  to  believe  that  the  soul  should  cease  to  exist,  than  that  it  should
cease  to  think.232  And,  as  to  man  himself,  what  is  he  but  the  incarnation  of
thought  ?  For  that  which  constitutes  the  man  is  not  his  bones,  nor  his  flesh,
nor  his  blood.  These  are  the  accidents,  the  incumbrances,  the  impediments
of  his  nature.  But  the  man  himself  is  the  thought.  The  invisible  me,  the  ulti-
mate fact  of  existence,  the  mystery  of  life,  is  this  :  "I  am  a  thing  that  thinks."
This,  therefore,  is  the  beginning  and  the  basis  of  our  knowledge.  The  thought
of  each  man  is  the  last  element  to  which  analysis  can  carry  us  ;  it  is  the  supreme
judge  of  every  doubt ;  it  is  the  starting-point  for  all  wisdom.233

Taking  our  stand  on  this  ground,  we  rise,  says  Descartes,  to  the  perception
of  the  existence  of  the  Deity.  For  our  belief  in  His  existence  is  an  irrefragable
proof  that  He  exists.  Otherwise,  whence  does  the  belief  arise  ?  Since  nothing
can  come  out  of  nothing,  and  since  no  effect  can  be  without  a  cause,  it  follows
that  the  idea  we  have  of  God  must  have  an  origin ;  and  this  origin,  whatever
name  we  give  it,  is  no  other  than  God.234  Thus  the  ultimate  proof  of  His  exist-
ence is  our  idea  of  it.  Instead,  therefore,  of  saying  that  we  know  ourselves
because  we  believe  in  God,  we  should  rather  say  that  we  believe  in  God  because
we  know  ourselves.235  This  is  the  order  and  precedence  of  things.  The  thought
of  each  man  is  sufficient  to  prove  His  existence,  and  it  is  the  only  proof  we  can
ever  possess.  Such,  therefore,  is  the  dignity  and  supremacy  of  the  human
intellect  that  even  this,  the  highest  of  aU  matters,  flows  from  it,  as  from  its
sole  source.236  Hence  our  religion  should  not  be  acquired  by  the  teaching
of  others,  but  should  be  worked  out  by  ourselves  ;  it  is  not  to  be  borrowed  from
antiquity,  but  it  is  to  be  discovered  by  each  man's  mind  ;  it  is  not  traditional,
but  personal.  It  is  because  this  great  truth  has  been  neglected,  that  impiety
has  arisen.  If  each  man  were  to  content  himself  with  that  idea  of  God  which
is  suggested  by  his  own  mind,  he  would  attain  to  a  true  knowledge  of  the  Divine
Nature.  But  when,  instead  of  confining  himself  to  this,  he  mixes  up  with  it
the  notions  of  others,  his  ideas  become  perplexed  ;  they  contradict  themselves  ;
and,  the  composition  being  thus  confused,  he  often  ends  by  denying  the  exist-
ence, not  indeed  of  God,  but  of  such  a  God  as  that  in  whom  he  has  been  taught
to  believe.23?

"  Au  lieu  que,  lorsque  nous  tachons  a  connoitre  plus  distinctement  notre  nature,
nous  pouvons  voir  que  notre  ame,  en  tant  qu'elle  est  une  substance  distincte  du  corps,
ne  nous  est  connue  que  par  cela  seul  qu'elle  pense."  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  iv.  p.  432.
Compare  vol.  iii.  p.  96,  Principes  de  la  Philosophie,  part  i.  sec.  53.

232  "  En  sorte  qu'il  me  seroit  bien  plus  aise  de  croire  que  Tame  cesseroit  d'etre  quand
on  dit  qu'elle  cesse  de  penser,  que  non  pas  de  concevoir  qu'elle  soit  sans  pensee."  (Euvres
de  Descartes,  vol.  viii.  p.  574.  That  "  the  soul  always  thinks,"  is  a  conclusion  also  arrived
at  by  Berkeley  by  a  different  process.  See  his  subtle  argument,  Principles  of  Human
Knowledge,  part  i.  sec.  98,  in  Berkeley's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  123  ;  and  for  a  curious  application
:  this  to  the  theory  of  dreaming,  see  Burdock,  Physiologie  comme  Science  d1  Observation,
vol.  v.  pp.  205,  230.

33  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  pp.  251,  252,  279,  293,  vol.  ii.  pp.  252,  283.

Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  419 ;  and  at  p.  420    "  Or  de  tout  cela  on  conclut  tres  mamfestement
;u  existe."     See  also  pp.  159-162,  280,  290,  291.     But  the  simplest  statement
;  in  a  letter  to  Mersenne  (vol.  viii.  p.  529) ;  "  J'ai  tire  la  preuve  de  1'existence  de  Dieu
de  1'idee  que  je  trouve  en  moi  d'un  etre  souverainement  parfait."

'  Ainsi,  quoique,  de  ce  que  je  suis,  je  conclue  avec  certitude  que  Dieu  est,  je  ne
puis  reciproquement  affirmer,  de  ce  que  Dieu  est,  que  j'existe."  Regies  pour  la  Direction
aer  Esprit,  m  (Euvres,  vol.  xi.  p.  274.  See  also  Principes  de  la  Philosophie,  part  i.  sec.  7,
vol.  m.  p.  66.

*»  On  this  famous  argument,  which  it  is  said  was  also  broached  by  Anselm,  see  King's

C     MI      V°L  "*  P<  I33. ;  tbe  BeQedictine  Hist.  Lit.  de  la  France,  vol.  ix.  pp.  4i7,

4i»^   M  s  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.   i.    p.  239  ;   and  Cudworth's  Intellect.  Syst.  vol.  iii.

!.t  certes  jamais  les  homines  ne  pourroient  s'eloigner  de  la  vraie  connoissance


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT  335

The  mischief  which  these  principles  must  have  done  to  the  old  theology  is
very  obvious.238  Not  only  were  they  fatal,  in  the  minds  of  those  who  received
them,  to  many  of  the  common  dogmas — such,  for  instance,  as  that  of  tran-
substantiation,239 — but  they  were  likewise  directly  opposed  to  other  opinions,
equally  indefensible,  and  far  more  dangerous.  For  Descartes,  by  founding
a  philosophy  which  rejected  all  authority  except  that  of  the  human  reason,240
was  of  course  led  to  abandon  the  study  of  final  causes,241 — an  old  and  natural
superstition  by  which,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  the  German  philosophers  were
long  impeded,  and  which  still  hangs,  though  Somewhat  loosely,  about  the  minds
of  men.242  At  the  same  time,  by  superseding  the  geometry  of  the  ancients,  he
aided  in  weakening  that  inordinate  respect  with  which  antiquity  was  then  re-
garded. In  another  matter,  still  more  important,  he  displayed  the  same  spirit,
and  met  with  the  same  success.  With  such  energy  did  he  attack  the  influence,
or  rather  the  tyranny  of  Aristotle,  that  although  the  opinions  of  that  philosopher

de  cette  nature  divine,  s'ils  vouloient  seulement  porter  leur  attention  sur  1'idee  qu'ils
ont  de  1'etre  souverainement  parfait.  Mais  ceux  qui  melent  quelques  autres  idees  avec
celle-la  composent  par  ce  moyen  un  dieu  chimerique,  en  la  nature  duquel  il  y  a  des  choses
qui  se  contrarient ;  et,  apres  1' avoir  ainsi  compose,  ce  n'est  pas  merveille  s'ils  nient  qu'un
tel  dieu,  qui  leur  est  represente  par  une  fausse  idee,  existe."  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.
pp.  423,  424.

238  This  is  delicately  but  clearly  indicated  in  an  able  letter  from  Arnaud,  printed  in
(Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1-36  :  see  in  particular  pp.  31,  34.     And  Duclos  bluntly
says:  "Si  depuis  la  revolution  que  Descartes  a  commencee,  les  theologiens  se  sont
eloignes  des  philosophes,  c'est  que  ceux-ci  ont  paru  ne  pas  respecter  infiniment  les  theo-
logiens.    Une  philosophic  qui   prenoit   pour   base   le  doute  et   Fexamen  devoit   les
effaroucher."     Duclos,  Memoires,  vol.  i.  p.  109.

239  On  the  relation  of  the  Cartesian  philosophy  to  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation,
compare  Palmer's  Treatise  on  the  Church,  vol.  ii.  pp.  169,  170,  with  Hallam's  Lit.  of  Europe.
vol.  ii.  p.  453 ;  and  the  remark  ascribed  to  Hobbes,  in  Aubrey's  Letters  and  Lives,  vol.  ii
p.  626.     But  Hobbes,  if  he  really  made  this  observation,  had  no  right  to  expect  Des
cartes  to  become  a  martyr.

240  "LLe  caractere  de  la  philosophic  du  moyen  age  est  la  soumission  a  une  autorite
autre  que  la  raison.     La  philosophic  moderne  ne  reconnait  que  1'autorite  de  la  raison.
C'est  le  cartesianisme  qui  a  opere  cette  revolution  decisive."     Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philos.
II.  serie,  vol.  i.  pp.  258,  259.

241  "  Nous  rejetterons  entierement  de   notre  philosophic    la    recherche    des    causes
finales."     Principes  de  la  Philos.  part  i.  sec.  28,  in  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  iii.  p.  81.
See  also  part  iii.  sec.  3,  p.  182  ;  and  his  reply  to  Gassendi,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  ii.  pp.  280,  281.
Compare  Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philosophie,  IL  serie,  vol.  ii.  p.  71,  with  Sprengel,  Hist,  de
la  Medecine,  vol.  v.  p.  203.

242  Dr.  Whewell,  for  instance,  says,  that  we  must  reject  final  causes  in  the  inorganic
sciences,  but  must  recognize  them  in  the  organic  ones  :  which,  in  other  words,  simply
means,  that  we  know  less  of  the  organic  world  than  of  the  inorganic,  and  that  because
we  know  less,  we  are  to  believe  more  ;  for  here,  as  everywhere  else,  the  smaller  the  science
the  greater  the  superstition.     WhewelTs  Philos.  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  8vo,  1847,  vol.  i.
pp.  620,  627,  628;  and   his   Hist,  of   the  Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  iii.    pp.    430,  431.      If
the  question  were  to  be  decided  by  authority,  it  would  be  enough  to  appeal  to  Bacon
and  Descartes,  the  two  greatest  writers  on  the  philosophy  of  method  in  the  seventeenth
century,  and  to  Auguste  Comte,  who  is  admitted  by  the  few  persons  who  have  mastered
his  Philosophie  Positive,  to  be  the  greatest  in  our  own  time.     These  profound  and  com-
prehensive thinkers  have  all  rejected  the  study  of  final  causes,  which,  as  they  have  clearly
seen,  is  a  theological  invasion  of  scientific  rights.     On  the  injury  which  this  study  has
wrought,  and  on  the  check  it  has  given  to  the  advance  of  our  knowledge,  see  Robin  et  Ver
deil,  Chimie  Anat.  Paris,  1853,  vol.  i.  pp.  489,  493,  494,  vol.  ii.  p.  555  ;  Renouard,  Hist.
de  la  Medecine,  vol.  i.  pp.  232,  237  ;  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  ii.  p.  220  ;  Geoffroy
Saint  Hilaire,  Hist,  des  Anomalies  de  V Organisation,  vol.  iii.  pp.  435,  436  ;  Herder,  Ideen
sur  Gesch.  dcr  Menschheit,  vol.  iii.  p.  270;  Lawrence's  Lectures  on  Man,  p.   36;  and
Burdach,  Traite  de  Physiologic,  vol.  i.  p.  190.


336  THE  HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  intimately  interwoven  with  the  Christian  theology,243  his  authority  was
entirely  overthrown  by  Descartes;  and  with  it  there  perished  those  scholastic
prejudices,  for  which  Aristotle,  indeed,  was  not  responsible,  but  which,  under
the  shelter  of  his  mighty  name,  had,  during  several  centuries,  perplexed  the
understandings  of  men,  and  retarded  the  progress  of  their  knowledge.244

These  were  the  principal  services  rendered  to  civilization  by  one  of  the  greatest
men  Europe  has  ever  produced.  The  analogy  between  him  and  Richelieu  is
very  striking,  and  is  as  complete  as  their  relative  positions  would  allow.  The
same  disregard  of  ancient  notions,  the  same  contempt  for  theological  interests,
the  same  indifference  to  tradition,  the  same  determination  to  prefer  the  present
to  the  past :  in  a  word,  the  same  essentially  modern  spirit,  is  seen  alike  in  the
writings  of  Descartes  and  in  the  actions  of  Richelieu.  What  the  first  was  to
philosophy,  that  was  the  other  to  politics.  But,  while  acknowledging  the  merits
of  these  eminent  men,  it  behoves  us  to  remember  that  their  success  was  the
result  not  only  of  their  own  abilities  but  likewise  of  the  general  temper  of  their
time.  The  nature  of  their  labours  depended  on  themselves  ;  the  way  in  which
their  labours  were  received  depended  on  their  contemporaries.  Had  they
lived  in  a  more  superstitious  age,  their  views  would  have  been  disregarded,  or.
if  noticed,  would  have  been  execrated  as  impious  novelties.  In  the  fifteenth,
or  early  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  genius  of  Descartes  and  of  Richelieii  would
have  lacked  the  materials  necessary  to  their  work  ;  their  comprehensive  minds
would  in  that  state  ol  society  have  found  no  play  ;  they  would  have  awakened
no  sympathies  ;  their  bread  would  have  been  cast  upon  those  waters  which
return  it  not  again.  And  it  would  have  been  well  for  them  if,  in  such  a  case,
indifference  were  the  only  penalty  with  which  they  would  be  visited.  It  would
have  been  well  if  they  had  not  paid  the  forfeit  incurred  by  many  of  those  illus-
trious thinkers  who  have  vainly  attempted  to  stem  the  torrent  of  human  credulity.
It  would  have  been  well  if  the  church  had  not  risen  in  her  wrath, — if  Richelieu
had  not  been  executed  as  a  traitor,  and  Descartes  burned  as  a  heretic.

Indeed,  the  mere  fact  that  two  such  men,  occupying  so  conspicuous  a  place
before  the  public  eye,  and  enforcing  views  so  obnoxious  to  the  interests  of  super-
stition, should  have  lived  without  serious  danger,  and  then  have  died  peaceably
in  their  beds, — the  mere  fact  that  this  should  have  happened,  is  a  decisive  proof
of  the  progress  which,  during  fifty  years,  had  been  made  by  the  French  nation.
With  such  rapidity  were  the  prejudices  of  that  great  people  dying  away,  that
opinions  utterly  subversive  of  theological  traditions,  and  fatal  to  the  whole  scheme


243  "  Auf  das  innigste  verbunden  mit  der  Theologie,  nicht  allein  in  den  katholischen,
sondern  selbst  auch  in  den  protestantischen  Landern."     Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.
vol.  ix.  p.  516.     Descartes,  in  a  letter  to  Mersenne  (CEuvres,  vol.  vi.  p.  73),  writes,  in
1629,  "  La  theologie,  laquelle  on  a  tellement  assujettie  a  Aristote,  qu'il  est  impossible,
d'expliquer  une  autre  philosophic  qu'il  ne  semble  d'abord  qu'elle  soit  centre  la  foi."
Compare  vol.  vii.  p.  344,  vol.  viii.  pp.  281,  497.

244  Dr.   Brown   (Philosophy  of  the  Mind,  Edinburgh,    1838,  p.   172)  calls  Descartes
"  that  illustrious  rebel,  who,  in  overthrowing  the  authority  of  Aristotle,"  etc.     See  also
Duvernet,  Hist,  de  la  Sorbonne,  vol.  ii.  p.  192  :  Cuvier,  Hist,  des  Sciences,  part  ii.  p.  532  ;
and  Locke's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  48.     This,  I  need  hardly  say,  refers  to  the  habit  of  appealing
to  Aristotle  as  if  he  were  infallible,  and  is  very  different  from  that  respect  which  is  natur-
ally felt  for  a  man  who  was  probably  the  greatest  of  all  the  ancient  thinkers.     The
difference  between  the  Aristotelian  and  Cartesian  systems  is  touched  on  rather  hastily
in  Cudworth's  Intellect.  Syst.  vol.  i.  pp.  170,  171.     [The  praise  here  given   to  Descartes
as  the  "  overthrower  "  of  conventional  Aristotelianism  is  somewhat  misleading.      The
same  credit  has  been  claimed  for  Bacon  before   him,  but  impartial  Baconians  admit
that  "  the  Aristotelian  philosophy  had   been  effectually   overturned  without  Bacon's
aid"  (Shedding,  Evenings  with  a  Reviewer,  1881,  i.  298,  citing  Herschel).     It  is  true  that
Aristotle  was  still    officially  paramount  in  France  when  Descartes  began  his  work,
but  the  process  of  discredit  had  previously  been  carried  far  by  many,  including  Telesio
and  Bruno. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          337

of  ecclesiastical  power,  were  with  impunity  advocated  by  Descartes,*  and  put
in  practice  by  Richelieu.  It  was  now  clearly  seen  that  the  two  foremost  men
of  their  time  could,  with  little  or  no  risk,  openly  propagate  ideas  which,  half
a  century  before,  it  would  have  been  accounted  dangerous  even  for  the  most
obscure  man  to  whisper  in  the  privacy  of  his  own  chamber.

Nor  are  the  causes  of  this  impunity  difficult  to  understand.  They  are  to  be
found  in  the  diffusion  of  that  sceptical  spirit  by  which,  in  France  as  well  as  in
England,  toleration  was  preceded.  For,  without  entering  into  details  which
would  be  too  long  for  the  limits  of  this  Introduction,  it  is  enough  to  say  that
French  literature  generally  was  at  this  period  distinguished  by  a  freedom  and
a  boldness  of  inquiry,  of  which,  England  alone  excepted,  no  example  had  then
been  seen  in  Europe.  The  generation  which  had  listened  to  the  teachings  of
Montaigne  and  of  Charron  was  now  succeeded  by  another  generation,  the  dis-
ciples, indeed,  of  those  eminent  men,  but  disciples  who  far  outstripped  their
masters.  The  result  was  that  during  the  thirty  or  forty  years  which  preceded
the  power  of  Louis  XIV.,245  there  was  not  to  be  found  a  single  Frenchman  of
note  who  did  not  share  in  the  general  feeling, — not  one  who  did  not  attack  some
ancient  dogma,  or  sap  the  foundation  of  some  old  opinion.  This  fearless  temper
was  the  characteristic  of  the  ablest  writers  of  that  time  ;  246  but  what  is  still
more  observable  is  that  the  movement  spread  with  such  rapidity  as  to  include
in  its  action  even  those  parts  of  society  which  are  invariably  the  last  to  be
affected  by  it.  That  spirit  of  doubt  which  is  the  necessary  precursor  of  all
inquiry,  and  therefore  of  all  solid  improvement,  owes  its  origin  to  the  most
thinking  and  intellectual  parts  of  society,  and  is  naturally  opposed  by  the  other
parts  :  opposed  by  the  nobles,  because  it  is  dangerous  to  their  interests  ;  opposed
by  the  uneducated,  because  it  attacks  their  prejudices.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons
why  neither  the  highest  nor  the  lowest  ranks  are  fit  to  conduct  the  government
of  a  civilized  country  ;  since  both  of  them,  notwithstanding  individual  excep-
tions, are  in  the  aggregate  averse  to  those  reforms  which  the  exigencies  of  an
advancing  nation  constantly  require.  But  in  France,  before  the  middle  of  the
seventeenth  century,  even  these  classes  began  to  participate  in  the  great  pro
gress  ;  so  that  not  only  among  thoughtful  men  but  likewise  among  the  ignorant
and  the  frivolous,  there  was  seen  that  inquisitive  and  incredulous  disposition
which,  whatever  may  be  said  against  it,  has  at  least  this  peculiarity,  that  in
its  absence  there  is  no  instance  to  be  found  of  the  establishment  of  those  prin-
ciples of  toleration  and  of  liberty,  which  have  only  been  recognized  with  infinite
difficulty,  and  after  many  a  hard-fought  battle"  against  prejudices  whose  in-
veterate tenacity  might  almost  cause  them  to  be  deemed  a  part  of  the  original
constitution  of  the  human  mind.247

245  That  is,  in  1661,  when  Louis  XIV.  first  assumed  the  government.

246  M.  Barante  (Tableau  de  la  Litterature  Francaise,  pp.  26,  27)  notices  "  cette  hide-
pendance  dans  les  idees,  ce  jugement  audacieux  de  toutes  choses,  qu'on  remarque  dans
Corneille,  dans  Mezeray,  dans  Balzac,  dans  Saint-Real,  dans  Lamothe-Levayer."     To
these  may  be  added  Naude,  Patin,  and  probably  Gassendi.     Compare  Hallam's  Literat.
of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  pp.  364,  365,  with  Mackintosh's  Ethical  Philos.  p.  116,  and  Lettres  de
Patin,  vol.  i.  p.  297,  vol.  ii.  pp.  33,  186,  191,  242,  342,  490,  508,  vol.  iii.  p.  87.

247  The  increase  of  incredulity  was  so  remarkable,  as  to  give  rise  to  a  ridiculous  asser-
tion, "  qu'il  y  avoit  plus  de  50,000  Athees  dans  Paris  vers  1'an  1623."     Baillet,  Jugemens
des  Savans,  Paris,  1722,  4to,  vol.  i.  p.  185.     Baillet  has  no  difficulty  in  rejecting  this
preposterous  statement  (which  is  also  noticed  in  Coleridge's  Literary  Remains,  vol.  i.

•

[*  It  should  be  noted  that  Descartes  always  sought  anxiously  to  propitiate  the  Church.
See  the  Discours  (CEuvres  Choisies,  ed.  Gamier,  pp.  6,  17,  19,  21,  60,  etc.,  and  compare
Bouillier,  Hist,  de  la  Philos.  Cartesienne,  1854,  i,  40-47,  185-6,  and  Lange,  Geschichte
des  Mater  ialismus,  2te  Aufl.  i.  202,  221).  Bossuet  thought  his  precautions  excessive  ;  but
the  Jesuits  sought  to  have  the  Discours  condemned,  and  in  the  next  generation  Car-
tesian professors  and  cures  were  persecuted  and  exiled,  or  obliged  to  recant.  (Ram-
baud,  Hist,  de  la  Civ.  Francaise,  edit.  1897,  ii.  336).  In  1663,  Descartes'  works  were  put
upon  the  Index. — ED.]

22


338  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  is  no  wonder  if,  under  these  circumstances,  the  speculations  of  Descartes
and  the  actions  of  Richelieu  should  have  met  with  great  success.  The  system
of  Descartes  exercised  immense  influence,  and  soon  pervaded  nearly  every  branch
of  knowledge.248  The  policy  of  Richelieu  was  so  firmly  established  that  it  was
continued  without  the  slightest  difficulty  by  his  immediate  successor :  nor
was  any  attempt  made  to  reverse  it  until  that  forcible  and  artificial  reaction
which,  under  Louis  XIV.,  was  fatal,  for  a  time,  to  every  sort  of  civil  and  religious
liberty.  The  history  of  that  reaction,  and  the  way  in  which,  by  a  counter-
reaction,  the  French  Revolution  was  prepared,  will  be  related  in  the  subsequent
chapters  of  this  volume  ;  at  present  we  will  resume  the  thread  of  those  events
which  took  place  in  France  before  Louis  XIV.  assumed  the  government.

A  few  months  after  the  death  of  Richelieu,  Louis  XIII.  also  died,  and  the  crown
was  inherited  by  Louis  XIV.,  who  was  then  a  child,  and  who  for  many  years
had  no  influence  in  public  affairs.  During  his  minority,  the  government  was
administered  avowedly  by  his  mother,  but  in  reality  by  Mazarin  ;  a  man  who,
though  in  every  point  inferior  to  Richelieu,  had  imbibed  something  of  his  spirit,
and  who,  so  far  as  he  was  able,  adopted  the  policy  of  that  great  statesman,  to
whom  he  owed  his  promotion.249  He,  influenced  partly  by  the  example  of  his
predecessor,  partly  by  his  own  character,  and  partly  by  the  spirit  of  his  age,
showed  no  desire  to  persecute  the  Protestants,  or  to  disturb  them  in  any  of  the
rights  they  then  exercised.250  His  first  act  was  to  confirm  the  Edict  of  Nantes  ;  25i
and  towards  the  close  of  his  life  he  even  allowed  the  Protestants  again  to  hold
those  synods  which  their  own  violence  had  been  the  means  of  interrupting.252
Between  the  death  of  Richelieu  and  the  accession  to  power  of  Louis  XIV.,  there
elapsed  a  period  of  nearly  twenty  years,  during  which  Mazarin,  with  the  excep-
tion of  a  few  intervals,  was  at  the  head  of  the  state  ;  and  in  the  whole  of  that
time  I  have  found  no  instance  of  any  Frenchman  being  punished  for  his  re-

p.  305  ;  where,  however,  there  is  apparently  a  confusion  between  two  different  periods)  ;
but  the  spread  of  scepticism  among  the  upper  ranks  and  courtiers,  during  the  reign  of
Louis  XIII.  and  the  minority  of  Louis  XIV.,  is  attested  by  a  great  variety  of  evidence.
See  Mem.  de  Madame  de  Motteville,  vol.  iii.  p.  52  ;  Mem.  de  Retz,  vol.  i.  p.  266  ;  Conrart,
Mem.  p.  235  note ;  Des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  vii.  p.  143  ;  Mem.  de  Brienne,  vol.  ii.
p.  107  note.

248  Volumes  might  be  written  on  the  influence  of  Descartes,  which  was  seen  not  only
in  subjects  immediately  connected  with  his  philosophy,  but  even  in  those  apparently
remote  from  it.     Compare  Broussais,  Examen  des  Doctrines  Medicates,  vol.  ii.  pp.  55  seq.  ;
Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  iii.  p.  153  ;  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  iv.  p.  238  ;  Cuvier,
Hist,  des  Sciences,  part  ii.  pp.  327,  332,  352,  363 ;  Stdudlin,  Geschichte  der  theclogischen
Wissenschaften,  vol.  i.  p.  263  ;  Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  x.  pp.  285  seq.  ;  Huetius
de  Rebus  ad  eum  pertinentibus,  pp.  35,  295,  296,  385-389  ;  Mosheim's  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  ii.
p.   258;  Dacier,  Rapport  Historique,  p.   334;  Leslie's  Nat.  Philos.  p.   121;  Eloges,  in
(Euvres  de  Fontenelle,  Paris,  1766,  vol.  v.  pp.  94, 106,  137,  197,  234,  392,  vol.  vi.  pp.  157,
318,  449;  Thomson's  Hist,  of  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  195;  Querard,  France  Lit.  vol.  iii.
P-  273-

249  On  the  connexion  between  Richelieu  and  Mazarin,  see  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Fran  cats,
vol.  xxiii.  pp.  400,  530  ;  and  a  curious  though  perhaps  apocryphal  anecdote  in   Talle-
mant  des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  231,  232.     In  1636  there  was  noticed  "  1'etroite
union"  between  Richelieu  and  Mazarin.     Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  viii.
part  ii.  p.  187.

250  "  Mazarin    n'avoit   ni   fanatisme    ni    esprit    persecuteur."     Sismondi,    Hist,    des
Francais,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  531.     That  he  did  not  persecute  the  Protestants  is  grudgingly
confessed  in  Felice's  Hist,  of  the  Protestants  of  France,  p.  292.     See  also  Smedley's  Re-
formed Religion  in  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  222.

251  He  confirmed  it  in  July,  1643.     See  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  iii.
appendix,  p.  3  ;  and  Quick's  Synodicon  in  Gallia,  vol.  i.  p.  ciii.

252  In  1659,  there  was  assembled  the  Synod  of  Loudun,  the  moderator  of  which  said,
"It  is  now  fifteen  years  since  we  had  a  national  synod."     Quick's  Synodicon  in  Gallia,
vol.  ii.  p.  517.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          339

igion.*     Indeed,   the  new  government,  so  far  from  protecting  the  church  by
•epressing  heresy,   displayed   that  indifference  to  ecclesiastical  interests  which
was  now  becoming  a  settled  maxim  of  French  policy.     Richelieu,  as  we  have
Iready  seen,  had  taken  the  bold  step  of  placing  Protestants  at  the  head  of  the
)yal  armies  ;  and  this  he  had  clone  upon  the  simple  principle  that  one  of  the
irst  duties  of  a.  statesman  is  to  employ  for  the  benefit  of  the  country  the  ablest
men  he  can  find,  without  regard  to  their  theological,  opinions,  with  which,  as
well  knew.no  government  had  any  concern.    But  Louis  XIII.,  whose  personal
feelings  were  always  opposed  to  the  enlightened  measures  of  his  great  minister,
was  offended  by  this  magnanimous  disregard  of  ancient  prejudices  ;  his  piety
/as  shocked  at  the  idea  of  Catholic  soldiers  being  commanded  by  heretics  ;
nd,  as  we  are  assured  by  a  well-informed  contemporary,  he  determined  to  put
m  end  to  this  scandal  to  the   church,  and  for   the  future  allow  no   Protestant
to  receive  the  staff  of  marshal  of  France.253     Whether  the  king,  if  he  had  lived,
/ould  have  carried  his  point,  is  doubtful  ;  254    but  what  is  certain  is  that   only
)ur  months  after  his  death,  this  appointment  of  marshal  was  bestowed  upon
Turenne,  the  most  able  of  all  the  Protestant  generals.255     And  in  the  very  next
rear,  Gassion,  another  Protestant,  was  raised  to  the  same  dignity  ;  thus  afford  -
ig  the  strange  spectacle  of  the  highest  military  power  in  a  great  Catholic  country
/lelded  by  two  men  against  whose  religion  the  church  was  never  weary  of  direct-
ing her  anathemas.256     In  a  similar  spirit,  Mazarin,  on  mere  grounds  of  political
cpediency,  concluded  an  intimate  alliance  with  Cromwell;  an  usurper  who,
the  opinion  of  the  theologians,  was  doomed  to  perdition,  since  he  was  soiled
)y  the  triple  crime  of  rebellion,  of  heresy,  and  of  regicide.257     Finally,  one  of
the  last  acts  of  this  pupil  of  Richelieu's  2K8  was  to  sign  the  celebrated  treaty  of
the  Pyrenees,   by  which  ecclesiastical  interests  were  seriously  weakened,   and


233  Brienne  records  the  determination  of  the  king,  "  que  cette  dignite  ne  seroit  plus
;ordee  a  des  protestans."     Sismondi,  Histoire  des  Francais,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  65.

234  He  was  so  uneasy  about  the  sin  he  had  committed,  that  just  before  his  death  he
itreated  the  Protestant  marshals  to  change  their  creed  :  "  II  ne  voulut  pas  mourir

avoir  exhorte  de  sa  propre  bouche  les  marechaux  de  la  Force  et  de  Chatillon  a  se
Catholiques."     Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  ii.  p.  612.     The  same  circum-
stance is  mentioned  by  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII,  vol.  x.  part  ii.  p.  785.

255  Louis  XIII.  died  in  May,  1643,  and  Turenne  was  made  marshal  in  the  September
jllowing.     Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  iii.  pp.  148,  151.

256  Sismondi  (Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  65)  makes  the  appointment  of  Gassion
1644  ;  according  to  Montglat  (Memoires,  vol.  i.  p.  437)  it  was  at  the  end  of  1643.
jre  are  some  singular  anecdotes  of  Gassion  in  Les  Historiettes  de  Tallemant  des  Reaux,

)1.  v.  pp.  167-180  ;  and  an  account  of  his  death  in  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  ii.  p.  290,
>m  which  it  appears  that  he  remained  a  Protestant  to  the  last.

257  The  Pope  especially  was  offended  by  this  alliance  (Ranke,  die  Pdpste,  vol.  iii.  p.  158,
ipared  with  Vaughan's  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  343,  vol.  ii.  p.  124);  and,  judging  from
!  language  of  Clarendon,  the  orthodox  party  in  England  was  irritated  by  it.    Clarendon's

list,  of  the  Rebellion,  pp.  699,  700.     Contemporary  notices  of  this  union  between   the

ardinal  and  the  regicide  will  be  found  in  Mem.  de  Retz,  vol.  i.  p.  349  ;  Mem.  de  Mont-

t,  vol.  ii.  p.  478,  vol.  iii.  p.  23  ;  Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  ii.  pp.  183,  302,  426  ;  Marchand,

Hot.  Historique,  vol.  ii.  p.  56  ;  Mem.  of  Sir  Philip  Warwick,  p.  377  ;  Harris's  Lives  of

Stuarts,  vol.  iii.  p.  393.

238  De  Retz  (Memoires,  vol.  i.  p.  59),  who  knew  Richelieu,  calls  Mazarin  "son  dis-
:iple."     And  at  p.  65  he  adds,  "  comme  il  marchoit  sur  les  pas  du  cardinal  de  Richelieu,
i  avoit  acheve  de  detruire  toutes  les  anciennes  maximes  de  1'etat."     Compare  Mem.
Motteville,  vol.  ii.  p.  18  ;  and  Mem.  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  vol.  i.  p.  444.

[*  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  1665,  four  years  after  the  death  of  Mazarin,  Claude  le
Petit  was  burned  at  the  stake  in  the  Place  de  Greve  for  blasphemy  against  the  Virgin,
the  Avertissement  to  Bibliophile  Jacob's  ed.  of  Paris  ridicule  et  burlesque  au  ijieme
iecle. — ED.]


34o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

great  injury  inflicted  on  him  who  was  still  considered  to  be  the  head  of  the
church.*®

But  the  circumstance  for  which  the  administration  of  Mazarin  is  most  re-
markable, is  the  breaking  out  of  that  great  civil  war  called  the  Fronde,  in  which
the  people  attempted  to  carry  into  politics  the  insubordinate  spirit  which  had
already  displayed  itself  in  literature  and  in  religion.  Here  we  cannot  fail  to
note  the  similarity  between  this  struggle  and  that  which,  at  the  same  time,
was  taking  place  in  England.  It  would,  indeed,  be  far  from  accurate  to  say
that  the  two  events  were  the  counterpart  of  each  other  ;  but  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  analogy  between  them  is  very  striking.  In  both  countries,  the
civil  war  was  the  first  popular  expression  of  what  had  hitherto  been  rather  a
speculative,  and,  so  to  say,  a  literary  scepticism.  In  both  countries,  incredulity
was  followed  by  rebellion,*  and  the  abasement  of  the  clergy  preceded  the
humiliation  of  the  crown  ;  for  Richelieu  was  to  the  French  church  what  Eliza
beth  had  been  to  the  English  church.  In  both  countries  there  now  first  arose
that  great  product  of  civilization,  a  free  press,  which  showed  its  liberty  by  pour-
ing forth  those  fearless  and  innumerable  works  which  mark  the  activity  of  the
age  260  in  both  countries,  the  struggle  was  between  retrogression  and  progress  ;
between  those  who  clung  to  tradition,  and  those  who  longed  for  innovation  ;
while  in  both  the  contest  assumed  the  external  form  of  a  war  between  king
and  parliament,  the  king  being  the  organ  of  the  past,  the  parliament  the  repre-
sentative of  the  present.  And,  not  to  mention  inferior  similarities,  there  was
one  other  point  of  vast  importance  in  which  these  two  great  events  coincide.
This  is,  that  both  of  them  were  eminently  secular,  and  arose  from  the  desire
not  of  propagating  religious  opinions,  but  of  securing  civil  liberty.  The  tem-
poral character  of  the  English  rebellion  I  have  already  noticed,  and,  indeed,  it
must  be  obvious  to  whoever  has  studied  the  evidence  in  its  original  sources.
Tn  France,  not  only  do  we  find  the  same  result,  but  we  can  even  mark  the  stages

259  On  the  open  affront  to  the  Pope  by  this  treaty,  see  Ranke,  die  Pdpste,  vol.  iii.
p.  159  :  "  An  dem  pyrenaischen  Frieden  nahm  er  auch  nicht  einmal  mehr  einen  schein-
baren  Antheil :  man  vermied  es  seine  Abgeordneten  zuzulassen  :  kaum  wurde  seiner
noch  darin  gedacht."     The  consequences  and  the  meaning  of  all  this  are  well  noticed
by  M.  Ranke.

260  "  La  presse  jouissait  d'une  entiere  liberte  pendant  les  troubles  de  la  Fronde,  et  le
public  prenait  un  tel  interet  aux  debats  politiques,  que  les  pamphlets  se  debitaient
quelquefois  au  nombre  de  huit  et  dix  mille  exemplaires."     Sainte-Aulaire,  Hist,  de  la
Fronde,  vol.  i.  p.  299.     Tallemant  des  Reaux,  who  wrote  immediately  after  the  Fronde,
says  (Historiettes,  vol.  iv.  p.  74),   "Durant  la  Fronde,  qu'on  imprimoit  tout."     And
Omer  Talon,  with  the   indignation  natural  to  a    magistrate,    mentions    that  in    1649
"  toutes  sortes  de  libelles  et  de  diffamations  se  publioient  hautement  par  la  ville  sans
permission  du  magistral."     Mem.  d'Omer  Talon,  vol.  ii.  p.  466.     For  further  evidence
of  the  great  importance  of  the  press  in  France  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,
see  Mem.  de  Lenet,  vol.  i.  p.  162  ;  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  iii.  pp.  288,  289  ;  Lettres  de
Patin,  vol.  i.  p.  432,  vol.  ii.  p.  517  ;  Monteil,  Hist,  des  divers  Etats,  vol.  vii.  p.  175.

In  England,  the  Long  Parliament  succeeded  to  the  licensing  authority  of  the  Star-chamber
(Blackstone's  Commentaries,  vol.  iv.  p.  152) ;  but  it  is  evident  from  the  literature  of  that
time  that  for  a  considerable  period  the  power  was  in  reality  in  abeyance.  Both  parties
attacked  each  other  freely  through  the  press  ;  and  it  is  said,  that  between  the  breaking
out  of  the  civil  war  and  the  restoration,  there  were  published  from  30,000  to  50,000
pamphlets.  Morgan's  Phoenix  Britannicus,  1731,  4 to,  pp.  iii.  557  ;  Carlyle's  Cromwell,
vol.  i.  p.  4  ;  Southey's  Commonplace  Book,  third  series,  p.  449.  See  also,  on  this  great
movement  of  the  press,  Bates' s  Account  of  the  late  Troubles,  part  i.  p.  78  ;  Bulstrode's
Memoirs,  p.  4  ;  Howell's  Letters,  p.  354  ;  Hunt's  Hist,  of  Newspapers,  vol.  i.  p.  45  ;
Clarendon's  Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  81  ;  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iv.  pp.  86,  102.

r  [*  It  seems  impossible  to  make  good  this  account  of  the  process.  "Incredulity"
was  scarcely  more  concerned  in  the  rebellions  in  question  than  in  those  of  previous
centuries. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          341

of  the  progress.  In  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  immediately  after
the  death  of  Henry  III.,  the  French  civil  wars  were  caused  by  religious  disputes,
and  were  carried  on  with  the  fervour  of  a  crusade.  Early  in  the  seventeenth
century  hostilities  again  broke  out  ;  but  though  the  efforts  of  the  government
were  directed  against  the  Protestants,  this  was  not  because  they  were  heretics,
but  because  they  were  rebels  :  the  object  being,  not  to  punish  an  opinion,  but
to  control  a  faction.  This  was  the  first  great  stage  in  the  history  of  toleration  ;
and  it  was  accomplished,  as  we  have  already  seen,  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIII.
That  generation  passing  away,  there  arose  in  the  next  age  the  wars  of  the
Fronde  ;  and  in  this,  which  may  be  called  the  second  stage  of  the  French  in-
tellect, the  alteration  was  still  more  remarkable.  For  in  the  meantime  the
principles  of  the  great  sceptical  thinkers,  from  Montaigne  to  Descartes,  had
produced  their  natural  fruit,  and,  becoming  diffused  among  the  educated  classes,
had  influenced,  as  they  always  will  do,  not  only  those  by  whom  they  were  re>
ceived,  but  also  those  by  whom  they  were  rejected.  Indeed,  a  mere  knowledge
of  the  fact  that  the  most  eminent  men  have  thrown  doubt  on  the  popular
opinions  of  an  age,  can  never  fail  in  some  degree  to  disturb  the  convictions
even  of  those  by  whom  the  doubts  are  ridiculed.261  In  such  cases,  none  are
entirely  safe  :  the  firmest  belief  is  apt  to  become  slightly  unsettled ;  those  who
outwardly  preserve  the  appearance  of  orthodoxy,  often  unconsciously  waver;
they  cannot  entirely  resist  the  influence  of  superior  minds,  nor  can  they  always
avoid  an  unwelcome  suspicion  that  when  ability  is  on  one  side,  and  ignorance
on  the  other,  it  is  barely  possible  that  the  ability  may  be  right,  and  the  ignorance
may  be  wrong.

Thus  it  fell  out  in  France.  In  that  country,  as  in  every  other,  when  theo-
logical convictions  diminished,  theological  animosities  subsided.  Formerly
religion  had  been  the  cause  of  war,  and  had  also  been  the  pretext  under  which
it  was  conducted.  Then  there  came  a  time  when  it  ceased  to  be  the  cause ;
but  so  slow  is  the  progress  of  society,  that  it  was  still  found  necessary  to  set  it
up  as  the  pretext.262  Finally,  there  came  the  great  days  of  the  Fronde,  in  which
it  was  neither  cause  nor  pretext  ;  ^  and  in  which  there  was  seen,  for  the  first
time  in  France,  an  arduous  struggle  by  human  beings  avowedly  for  human
purposes  ;  a  war  waged  by  men  who  sought,  not  to  enforce  their  opinions,  but
to  increase  their  liberty.  "  And,  as  if  to  make  this  change  .still  more  striking,
the  most  eminent  leader  of  the  insurgents  was  the  Cardinal  de  Retz;  a  man
)f  vast  ability,  but  whose  contempt  for  his  profession  was  notorious,264  and  of

261  Dugald  Stewart  (Philos.  of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.  p.  357)  says,  "  Nothing  can  be  more
just  than  the  observation  of  Fontenelle,  that  '  the  number  of  those  who  believe  in  a
system  already  established  in    the  world,  does  not  in  the   least  add  to   its  credibility  ;
but  that  the  number  of  those  who  doubt  of  it,  has  a  tendency  to  diminish  it.'  "     Com-
pare with  this  Newman  on  Development,  Lond.  1845,  p.  31;  and  the  remark  of  Hylas
in  Berkeley's  Works,  edit.  1843,  vol.  i.  pp.  151,  152,  first  dialogue.

262  Compare  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  293,  with  a  remarkable  passage  in  Mem.
de  Rohan,  vol.  i.  p.  317  ;  where  Rohan  contrasts  the  religious  wars  he  was  engaged  in
during  the  administration  of  Richelieu,  with  those  very  different  wars  which  had  been
waged  in  France  a  little  earlier.

263  "  L'esprit  religieux  ne  s'etait  mele  en  aucune  maniere  aux  querelles  de  la  Fronde,"
Capefigue,  vol.  ii.  p.  434.     Lenet,  who  had  great  influence  with  what  was  called  the
party  of  the  princes,  says  that  he  always  avoided  any  attempt  "  a  faire  aboutir  notre
parti  a  une  guerre  de  religion."     Mem.  de  Lenet,  vol.  i.  p.  319.     Even  the  people  said
that  it  was  unimportant  whether  or  not  a  man  died  a  Protestant  ;  but  that  if  he  were
a  partizan  of  Mazarin,  he  was  sure  to  be  damned  :  "Us  disoient  qu'etant  mazarin,  il
falloit  qu'il  fut  damne."     Lenet,  vol.  i.  p.  434.

264  Indeed,  he  does  not  conceal  this  even  in  his  memoirs.     He  says  (Mem.  vol.  i.  p.  3),
he  had  "1'ame  peut-etre  la  moins  ecclesiastique  qui  fut  dans  1'univers."     At  p.   13,
"  le  chagrin  que  ma  profession  ne  laissoit  pas  de  nourrir  toujours  dans  le  fonds  de  mon
ame."     At  p.  21,  "  je  hai'ssois  ma  profession  plus  que  jamais."     At  p,  48,  "  le  clerge,
qui  donne  toujours  1'exemple  de  la  servitude,  la  prechoit  aux  autres  sous  le  titre  d'obeis-


342  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

whom  a  great  historian  has  said,  "  he  is  the  first  bishop  in  France  who  carried  on
a  civil  war  without  making  religion  the  pretence."  265

We  have  thus  seen  that  during  the  seventy  years  which  succeeded  the  acces-
sion of  Henry  IV.,  the  French  intellect  developed  itself  in  a  manner  remarkably
similar  to  that  which  took  place  in  England.  We  have  seen  that  in  both  coun-
tries the  mind,  according  to  the  natural  conditions  of  its  growth,  first  doubted
what  it  had  long  believed,  and  then  tolerated  what  it  had  long  hated.  That
this  was  by  no  means  an  accidental  or  capricious  combination  is  evident,  not
only  from  general  arguments,  and  from  the  analogy  of  the  two  countries,  but
also  from  another  circumstance  of  great  interest.  This  is,  that  the  order  of
events,  and  as  it  were  their  relative  proportions,  were  the  same,  not  only  in
reference  to  the  increase  of  toleration,  but  also  in  reference  to  the  increase  of
literature  and  science.  In  both  countries,  the  progress  of  knowledge  bore  the
same  ratio  to  the  decline  of  ecclesiastical  influence,  although  they  manifested
that  ratio  at  different  periods.  We  had  begun  to  throw  off  our  superstitions
somewhat  earlier  than  the  French  were  able  to  do  ;  and  thus,  being  the  first
in  the  field,  we  anticipated  that  great  people  in  producing  a  secular  literature.
Whoever  will  take  the  pains  to  compare  the  growth  of  the  French  and  English
minds,  will  see  that,  in  all  the  most  important  departments,  we  were  the  first,
I  do  not  say  in  merit,  but  in  the  order  of  time.  In  prose,  in  poetry,  and  in  every
branch  of  intellectual  excellence,  it  will  be  found,  on  comparison,  that  we  were
before  the  French  nearly  a  whole  generation ;  and  that,  chronologically,  the
same  proportion  was  preserved  as  that  between  Bacon  and  Descartes,  Hooker
and  Pascal,266  Shakespeare  and  Corneille,  Massinger  and  Racine,  Ben  Jonson
and  Moliere,  Harvey  and  Pecquet.  These  eminent  men  were  all  justly  celebrated
in  their  respective  countries;  and  it  would  perhaps  be  invidious  to  institute
a  comparison  between  them.  But  what  we  have  here  to  observe  is  that  among
those  who  cultivated  the  same  department,  the  greatest  Englishman,  in  every
instance,  preceded  the.  greatest  Frenchman  by  many  years.  This  difference,
running  as  it  does  through  all  the  leading  topics,  is  far  too  regular  to  be  con-
sidered accidental.  And  as  few  Englishmen  of  the  present  day  will  be  so  pre-
sumptuous as  to  suppose  that  we  possess  any  native  and  inherent  superiority
over  the  French,  it  is  evident  that  there  must  be  some  marked  peculiarity  in
which  the  two  countries  differed,  and  which  has  produced  this  difference,  not
in  their  knowledge,  but  in  the  time  at  which  their  knowledge  appeared.  Nor
does  the  discovery  of  this  peculiarity  require  much  penetration.  For,  not-
withstanding that  the  French  were  more  tardy  than  the  English,  still,  when
the  development  had  fairly  begun,  the  antecedents  of  its  success  were  among
both  people  precisely  the  same.  It  is  therefore  clear,  according  to  the  com-
monest principles  of  inductive  reasoning,  that  the  lateness  of  the  development
must  be  owing  to  the  lateness  of  the  antecedent.  It  is  clear  that  the  French

sance."  See  also  the  remark  of  his  great  friend  Joly  (Mem.  de  Joly.  p.  209,  edit.  Petitot,
1825) ;  and  the  account  given  by  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  who  knew  De  Retz  well,  and
had  travelled  with  him,  H {storiettes,  vol.  vii.  pp.  18-30.  The  same  tendency  is  illustrated,
though  in  a  much  smaller  degree,  by  a  conversation  which  Charles  II.,  when  in  exile,
held  with  De  Retz,  and  which  is  preserved  in  Clarendon's  Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  806,
and  is  worth  consulting  merely  as  an  instance  of  the  purely  secular  view  that  De  Retz
always  took  of  political  affairs.

265  "  Get  homme  singulier  est  le  premier  eveque  en  France   qui  ait  fait  une   guerre
civile  sans  avoir  la  religion  pour  pretexte."     Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,
vol.  xix.  p.  261.

266  Hooker  and  Pascal  may  properly  be  classed  together,  as  the  two  most  sublime  theo-
logical writers  either  country  has  produced  ;  for  Bossuet  is  as  inferior  to  Pascal  as  Jeremy
Taylor  is  inferior  to  Hooker.     [The  passage  in  the  text  would  seem  to  have  been  penned
before  the  sections  above  which'deal  with  Montaigne  and  Charron.     It  will  not  bear
examination.     We  may  just  as  well  frame  a  counter  order  of  Bodin -Montaigne -Hooker,
Charron -Bacon,  Descartes -Hobb^s -Locke,   to  say  nothing  of  Rabelais.     The  dramatic
sequence  is  wholly  beside  the  case. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT          343

knew  less  because  they  believed  more.2**?  It  is  clear  that  their  progress  was
checked  by  the  prevalence  of  those  feelings  which  are  fatal  to  all  knowledge,*
because,  looking  on  antiquity  as  the  sole  receptacle  of  wisdom,  they  degrade
the  present  in  order  that  they  may  exaggerate  the  past  :  feelings  which  destroy
the  prospects  of  man,  stifle  his  hopes,  damp  his  curiosity,  chill  his  energies,
impair  his  judgment,  and,  under  pretence  of  humbling  the  pride  of  his  reason,
seek  to  throw  him  back  into  that  more  than  midnight  darkness  from  which  his
reason  alone  has  enabled  him  to  emerge.

The  analogy  thus  existing  between    France    and    England   is   indeed  very
striking,  and,  so  far  as  we  have  yet  considered  it,  seems  complete  in  all  its  parts.
To  sum  up  the  similarities  in  a  few  words,  it  may  be  said  that  both  countries
followed  the  same  order  of  development  in  their  scepticism,  in  their  knowledge,
in  their  literature,  and  in  their  toleration.     In  both   countries  there  broke  out
a  civil  war  at  the  same  time,  for  the  same  object,  and,  in  many  respects,  under
the  same  circumstances.     In   both,  the  insurgents,  at   first   triumphant,  were
afterwards  defeated  f;  and   the  rebellion  being  put  down,  the  governments  of
the  two  nations  were  fully  restored  almost  at  the  same  moment  :  in  1660  by
Charles  II.  ;  in  1661  by  Louis  XIV.^s     But  there  the  similarity  stopped.     At
this  point  there  began  a  marked  divergence  between  the  two  countries  ;  269  which
continued  to  increase  for  more  than  a  century,  until  it  ended  in  England  by
the  consolidation  of  the  national  prosperity,  in  France  by  a  revolution  more
sanguinary,  more  complete,  and  more  destructive,  than  any  the  world  has  ever
seen.     This  difference  between  the  fortunes  of  such  great  and  civilized  nations
is  so  remarkable,  that  a  knowledge  of  its  causes  becomes  essential  to  a  right
understanding  of  European  history,   and  will  be  found  to  throw  considerable
light  on  other  events  not  immediately  connected  with  it.     Besides  this,  such
an  inquiry,  independently  of  its  scientific  interest,  will  have  a  high  practical
value.     It  will  show,  what  men  seem  only  recently  to  have  begun  to  under-
stand,  that  in  politics,  no  certain  principles   having  yet  been  discovered,  the
first  conditions  of  success  are  compromise,  barter,  expediency,  and  concession.
It  will  show  the  utter  helplessness  even  of  the  ablest  rulers,  when  they  try  to
meet  new  emergencies  by  old  maxims.     It  will  show  the  intimate  connexion
between    knowledge  and    liberty;    between    an    increasing    civilization    and    an
advancing  democracy.      It  will  show  that  for  a  progressive    nation   there  is
required   a  progressive  polity  ;  that,    within   certain  limits,  innovation  is   the
sole  ground  of  security  ;  that  no  institution  can  withstand  the  flux  and  move-

267  One  of  the  most  remarkable  men  they  have  ever  possessed  notices  this  connexion,
which  he  expresses  conversely,  but  with  equal  truth  :  "  moins  on  sait,  moins  on  doute  ;
moins  on  a  decouvert,  moins  on  voit  ce  qui  reste  £  decouvrir.  .  .  .  Quand  les  hommes
sont  ignorans,  il  est  aise  de  tout  savoir."     Discours  en  Sorbonne,  in  (Euvres  de  Turgot,
vol.  ii.  pp.  65,  70.

268  Mazarin,  until  his  death  in  1661,  exercised  complete  authority  over  Louis.     See
Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xix.  pp.  318,  319;  and  Lavallee,  Hist,
des  Franfais,  vol.  iii.  p.  195  :  so  that,  as  Montglat  says  (Mem.  vol.  iii.  p.  m),  "  On  doit
appeler  ce  temps -la  le  commencement  du  regne  de  Louis  XIV."     The  pompous  manner
in  which,  directly  after  the  death  of  Mazarin,  the  king  assumed  the  government,  is  related
by  Brienne,  who  was  present.     Mem.  de  Brienne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  154-158.

269  By  this  I  mean,  that  the  divergence  now  first  became  clear  to  every  observer  ;
but  the  origin  of  the  divergence  dates  from  a  much  earlier  period,  as  we  shall  see  in  the
next  chapter.

[*  Above,  note  210,  Buckle  had  pointed  out  that  whereas  the  discovery  of  Harvey
was  long  rejected  in  England,  Descartes  took  it  up  at  once.  He  also  pointed  out  that
both  Montaigne  and  Descartes  had  a  great  French  influence.  The  formula  "  knew  less
because  they  believed  more  "  thus  fails  to  consist  with  the  previous  narrative.  Much
of  the  scientific  impetus  in  England  after  the  Restoration  came  from  the  writings  of
Descartes. — ED.]

[f  This  account  of  the  English  rebellion  is  a  slip  of  the  pen.  The  proper  statement
would  be  that  the  cause  of  the  rebels  ultimately  failed.— ED.]


344  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ments  of  society,  unless  it  not  only  repairs  its  structure,  but  also  widens  its
entrance  ;  and  that,  even  in  a  material  point  of  view,  no  country  can  long  remain
either  prosperous  or  safe,  in  which  the  people  are  not  gradually  extending  their
power,  enlarging  their  privileges,  and,  so  to  say,  incorporating  themselves  with
the  functions  of  the  state.

The  tranquillity  of  England,  and  her  freedom  from  civil  war,  are  to  be  ascribed
to  the  recognition  of  these  great  truths  ;  27°  while  the  neglect  of  them  has  entailed
upon  other  countries  the  most  woeful  calamities.  On  this  account,  therefore,
if  on  no  other,  it  becomes  interesting^to  ascertain  how  it  was  that  the  two  nations
we  have  been  comparing  should,  in  regard  to  these  truths,  have  adopted  views
diametrically  opposite,  although  in  other  matters  their  opinions,  as  we  have
already  seen,  were  very  similar.  Or,  to  state  the  question  in  other  words,  we
have  to  inquire  how  it  was  that  the  French,  after  pursuing  precisely  the  same
course  as  the  English,  in  their  knowledge,  in  their  scepticism,  and  in  their  tolera-
tion, should  have  stopped  short  in  their  politics  ;  how  it  was  that  their  minds,
which  had  effected  such  great  things,  should  nevertheless  have  been  so  un-
prepared for  liberty  that  in  spite  of  the  heroic  efforts  of  the  Fronde  they  not
only  fell  under  the  despotism  of  Louis  XIV.  but  never  even  cared  to  resist  it ;
and,  at  length,  becoming  slaves  in  their  souls  as  well  as  in  their  bodies,  they
grew  proud  of  a  condition  which  the  meanest  Englishman  would  have  spurned
as  an  intolerable  bondage.*

The  cause  of  this  difference  is  to  be  sought  in  the  existence  of  that  spirit  of
protection  which  is  so  dangerous  and  yet  so  plausible,  that  it  forms  the  most
serious  obstacle  with  which  advancing  civilization  has  to  contend.  This,  which
may  truly  be  called  an  evil  spirit,  has  always  been  far  stronger  in  France  than  in
England.'  Indeed,  among  the  French  it  continues,  even  to  the  present  day,
to  produce  the  most  mischievous  results.  It  is,  as  I  shall  hereafter  point  out,
intimately  connected  with  that  love  of  centralization  which  appears  in  the
machinery  of  their  government,  and  in  the  spirit  of  their  literature.  It  is  this
which  induces  them  to  retain  restrictions  by  which  their  trade  has  long  been
troubled,  and  to  preserve  monopolies  which,  in  our  country,  a  freer  system  has
effectually  destroyed.  It  is  this  which  causes  them  to  interfere  with  the  natural
relation  between  .  producers  and  consumers ;  to  force  into  existence  manu-
factures which  otherwise  would  never  arise,  and  which  for  that  very  reason
are  not  required  ;  to  disturb  the  ordinary  march  of  industry,  and,  under  pre-
tence of  protecting  their  native  labourers,  diminish  the  produce  of  labour  by
diverting  it  from  those  profitable  channels  into  which  its  own  instincts  always
compel  it  to  flow.

When  the  protective  principle  is  carried  into  trade,  these  are  its  inevitable
results.  When  it  is  carried  into  politics,  there  is  formed  what  is  called  a  paternal
government,  in  which  supreme  power  is  vested  in  the  sovereign,  or  in  a  few
privileged  classes.  When  it  is  carried  into  theology,  it  produces  a  powerful
church  and  a  numerous  clergy,  who  are  supposed  to  be  the  necessary  guardians
of  religion,  and  every  opposition  to  whom  is  resented  as  an  insult  to  the  public
morals.  These  are  the  marks  by  which  protection  may  be  recognized  ;  and,
from  a  very  early  period,  they  have  displayed  themselves  in  France  much  more
clearly  than  in  England.  Without  pretending  to  discover  their  precise  origin,
I  will,  in  the  next  chapter,  endeavour  to  trace  them  back  to  a  time  sufficiently
remote  to  explain  some  of  the  discrepancies  which,  in  this  respect,  existed
between  the  two  countries.

270  That  is  to  say,  their  practical  recognition  ;  theoretically,  they  are  still  denied  by
innumerable  politicians,  who,  nevertheless,  assist  in  carrying  them  into  effect,  fondly
hoping  that  each  innovation  will  be  the  last,  and  enticing  men  into  reform  under  the
pretext  that  by  each  change  they  are  returning  to  the  spirit  of  the  ancient  British  con-
stitution.

[*  An  extravagant  assertion.  There  were  many  Englishmen  ready  to  accept  tyranny
under  James  II.,  as  Buckle  has  already  shown.—  ED.}


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    FRENCH    INTELLECT


345


Note  to  p.  336.  Descartes  died  in  Sweden  on  a  visit  to  Christina ;  so  that,  strictly
speaking,  there  is  an  error  in  the  text.  But  this  does  not  affect  the  argument ;  because
the  works  of  Descartes  being  eagerly  read  in  France,  and  not  being  prohibited,  we  must
suppose  that  his  person  would  have  been  safe,  had  he  remained  in  his  own  country.  To
burn  a  heretic  is  a  more  decisive  step  than  to  suppress  a  book  ;  and  as  the  French  clergy
were  not  strong  enough  to  effect  the  latter,  it  is  hardly  likely  that  they  could  have  accom-
plished the  former.  [See  edit,  note  on  p.  337  as  to  the  matter  of  prohibition.  Buckle
does  not  here  note  that  Descartes  lived  long  out  of  France — "  heureusement  pour  sa
tranquillite,"  says  M.  Rambaud.  (In  his  letter  to  Mrs.  Gray  (Life,  i.  139),  who  put
the  point  to  him,  Buckle  hesitates  on  the  subject ;  but  Voltaire  had  explicitly  written
(Siecle  de  Louis  XIV  :  Catalogue  des  Ecrivains)  that  Descartes  "  passa  presque  toute
sa  vie  hors  de  France  pour  philosopher  en  liberte."  In  Holland,  despite  his  precautions,
Descartes  was  much  talked  against  by  clerical  fanatics,  till  at  length  he  had  to  with-
draw. (See  details  in  Kuno  Fischer's  Descartes  and  his  School,  Eng.  tr.  1890,  B.  i.  c.  6).
The  immunity  of  his  works  in  France  was  probably  in  large  measure  due  to  the  policy
of  Richelieu  and  Mazarin. — ED.]


CHAPTER   IX

HISTORY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT,  AND  COMPARISON  OF  IT  IN  FRANCE  AND

ENGLAND

WHEN,  towards  the  end  of  the  fifth  century,  the  Roman  empire  was  broken
up,  there  followed,  as  is  well  known,  a  long  period  of  ignorance  and  of  crime,
in  which  even  the  ablest  minds  were  immersed  in  the  grossest  superstitions.
During  these,  which  are  rightly  called  the  Dark  Ages,  the  clergy  were  supreme  :
they  ruled  the  consciences  of  the  most  despotic  sovereigns,  and  they  were  re-
spected as  men  of  vast  learning,  because  they  alone  vvere  able  to  read  and  write  ;
because  they  were  the  sole  depositaries  of  those  idle  conceits  of  which  European
science  then  consisted  ;  and  because  they  preserved  the  legends  of  the  saints
and  the  lives  of  the  fathers,  from  which,  as  it  was  believed,  the  teachings  of
divine  wisdom  might  easily  be  gathered.

Such  was  the  degradation  of  the  European  intellect  for  about  five  hundred
years,  during  which  the  credulity  of  men  reached  a  height  unparalleled  in  the
annals  of  ignorance.  But  at  length  the  human  reason,  that  divine  spark  which
even  the  most  corrupt  society  is  unable  to  extinguish,  began  to  display  its  power,*
and  disperse  the  mists  by  which  it  was  surrounded.  Various  circumstances,
which  it  would  be  tedious  here  to  discuss,  caused  this  dispersion  to  take  place
at  different  times  in  different  countries.  However,  speaking  generally,  we  may
say  that  it  occurred  in  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries,  and  that  by  the  twelfth
century  there  was  no  nation  now  called  civilized  upon  whom  the  light  had  not
begun  to  dawn.f

It  is  from  this  point  that  the  first  great  divergence  between  the  European
nations  took  its  rise.  Before  this  time  their  superstition  was  so  great  and  uni-
versal that  it  would  avail  little  to  measure  the  degree  of  their  relative  darkness.
Indeed,  so  low  had  they  fallen  that  during  the  earlier  period  the  authority
of  the  clergy  was  in  many  respects  an  advantage,  as  forming  a  barrier  between
the  people  and  their  rulers,  and  as  supplying  the  sole  instance  of  a  class  that
even  made  an  approach  to  intellectual  pursuits.  But,  when  the  great  move-
ment took  place,  when  the  human  reason  began  to  rebel,  the  position  of  the
clergy  was  suddenly  changed. J  They  had  been  friendly  to  reasoning  as  long

[*  It  is  scarcely  sufficient,  on  Buckle's  principles,  thus  to  allege  a  vital  process  without
hinting  at  its  causation.  This,  however,  cannot  be  adequately  done  in  a  footnote ;
and  it  must  suffice  to  specify  (i)  the  preservation  of  some  Greek  scholarship  in  the  Chris-
tian monasteries  of  Ireland,  making  possible  a  southward  movement  of  letters  in  the
eighth  and  ninth  centuries;  (2)  the  contacts  of  Christendom  with  Greek-derived
Saracen  culture  on  the  side  of  Spain  and  Sicily;  (3)  the  germination  of  the  remains
of  Greek  and  Roman  arts  and  culture  in  the  free  cities  of  the  Italian  coast  and  others,
after  the  control  of  the  Byzantine  empire  had  fallen  away,  and  the  Italian  cities  vvere
allowed  by  the  Teutonic  emperors  to  wall  and  defend  themselves  against  Saracens  and
Huns. — ED.]

[f  This  opinion,  it  will  be  observed,  in  part  cancels  that  discussed  above,  p.  119.— ED.]
[  J  We  should  clearly  read  "  began  to  change."     There  can  have  been  no  "  sudden
change  "  in  the  position  of  the  entire  body  of  clergy. — ED.]


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  347

as  the  reasoning  was  on  their  side.1  While  they  were  the  only  guardians  of
knowledge,  they  were  eager  to  promote  its  interests.  Now,  however,  it  was
falling  from  their  hands  :  it  was  becoming  possessed  by  laymen  :  it  was  growing
dangerous  :  it  must  be  reduced  to  its  proper  dimensions.  Then  it  was  that
there  first  became  general  *  the  inquisitions,  the  imprisonments,  the  torturings,
the  burnings,  and  all  the  other  contrivances  by  which  the  church  vainly  attempted
to  stem  the  tide  that  had  turned  against  her. 2  From  that  moment  there  has
been  an  unceasing  struggle  between  these  two  great  parties — the  advocates
of  inquiry  and  the  advocates  of  belief  ;  a  struggle  which,  however  it  may  be
disguised,  and  under  whatever  forms  it  may  appear,  is  at  bottom  always  the
same,  and  represents  the  opposite  interests  of  reason  and  faith,  of  scepticism
and  credulity,  of  progress  and  reaction,  of  those  who  hope  for  the  future,  and
of  those  who  cling  to  the  past.

This,  then,  is  the  great  starting-point  of  modern  civilization.  From  the
moment  that  reason  began,  however  faintly,  to  assert  its  supremacy,  the  im-
provement of  every  people  has  depended  upon  their  obedience  to  its  dictates,
and  upon  the  success  with  which  they  have  reduced  to  its  standard  the  whole
of  their  actions.  To  understand,  therefore,  the  original  divergence  of  France
and  England,  we  must  seek  it  in  the  circumstances  that  took  place  when  this,
which  may  be  called  the  great  rebellion  of  the  intellect,  was  first  clearly  seen.

If  now,  with  a  view  to  such  inquiry,  we  examine  the  history  of  Europe,  we
shall  find  that  just  at  this  period  there  sprung  up  the  feudal  system  ;  a  vast
scheme  of  polity,  which,  clumsy  and  imperfect^as  it  was,  supplied  many  of  the


1  "  Toute  influence  qu'on  accordait  a  la  science  ne  pouvait,  dans  les  premiers  temps,
qu'etre  favorable  au  clerge."     Meyer,  Institut.  Judic.  vol.  i.  p.  498.

2  Early  in  the  eleventh  century  the  clergy  first  began  systematically  to  repress  inde-
pendent inquiries  by  punishing  men  who  attempted  to  think  for  themselves.     Compare
Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  iv.  pp.  145,  146  ;  Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  vi.
PP-  365,  366  ;  Prescotfs  Hist,  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  i.  p.  261  note.     Before
this,  such  a  policy,  as  Sismondi  justly  observes,  was  not  required  :  "  Pendant  plusieurs
siecles,  1'eglise  n'avoit  ete  troublee  par  aucune  heresie  ;  1'ignorance  etoit  trop  complete,
la  soumission  trop  servile,  la  foi  trop  aveugle,  pour  que  les  questions  qui  avoient  si  long-
temps  exerce  la  subtilite  des  Grecs  fussent  seulement  comprises  par  les  Latins."     As
knowledge  advanced,  the  opposition  between  inquiry  and  belief  became  more  marked  :
the  church  redoubled  her  efforts,  and  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  the  popes  first
formally  called  on  the  secular  power  to  punish  heretics ;  and  the  earliest  constitution
addressed  "  inquisitoribus  ha3retica3  pravitatis  "  is  one  by  Alexander  IV.     Meyer,  Insl.
Jud.  vol.  ii.  pp.  554,  556.     See  also,  on  this  movement,  Llorente,  Hist,  de  V Inquisition,
vol.  i.  p.  125,  vol.  iv.  p.  284.     In  1222  a  synod  assembled  at  Oxford  caused  an  apostate
to  be  burned  ;  and  this,  says  Lingard  (Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  148),  "is,  I  believe,
the  first  instance  of  capital  punishment  in  England  on  the  ground  of  religion."     Compare
Wright's  Biog.  Brit.  Lit.  vol.  ii.  p.  444.     [The  statement  of  Sismondi  is  an  oversight.     In
the  ninth  century  there  figured  the  heresies  of  ( i )  Claudius,  Bishop  of  Turin,  who  opposed
image -worship,  saint -worship,  and  the  Papal  claims,  and  called  a  council  of   bishops
which  condemned  him  "an  assembly  of  asses";  (2)  Agobard,  Bishop  of  Lyons,  a  still
more  rationalistic  type,  who  went  so  far  as  to  dispute  the  verbal  inspiration  of  the  sacred
books  ;  (3)  the  monk  Gottschalk,  whose  offence  was  to  teach  a  rigid  predestinarianism  ;
and  (4)  the  greatest  thinker  of  the  Middle  Ages,  John  Scotus  (otherwise  Erigena),  who,
on  being  requested  by  Archbishop  Hincmar  to  refute  the  errors  of  Gottschalk,  set  forth
far  more  formidable  heresies  of  his  own.     (As  to  all  four,  see  Poole,  Illustrations  of  Medieval
Thought,  1884.)    Even  in  the  eighth  century,  the  Irishman  Virgilius,  Bishop  of  Salzburg,
affirmed  the  (heretical)  doctrine  of  an  antipodes  (Poole,  p.  23) ;  and  in  the  tenth  century,
though  there  were  no  notable  heretics,  Atto,  Bishop  of  Verceil,  is  found  complaining
that  some  people  from  the  Italian  border  had  introduced|heresies. — ED.]

[*  This  phrase  again  must  be  modified.     We  should  read  "  began  to  become  general,"
—ED.]


348  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

wants  of  the  rude  people  among  whom  it  arose.3  The  connexion  between  it
and  the  decline  of  the  ecclesiastical  spirit  is  very  obvious^  For  the  feudal
system  was  the  first  great  secular  plan  that  had  been  seen  in  Europe  since  the
formation  of  the  civil  law  :  it  was  the  first  comprehensive  attempt  which  had
been  made,  during  more  than  four  hundred  years,  to  organize  society  accord-
ing to  temporal,  not  according  to  spiritual  circumstances,  the  basis  of  the  whole
arrangement  being  merely  the  possession  of  land,  and  the  performance  of  certain
military  and  pecuniary  services.4

This  was,  no  doubt,  a  great  step  in  European  civilization,  because  it  set  the
first  example  of  a  large  public  polity  in  which  the  spiritual  classes  as  such  had
no  recognized  place  ;  5  and  hence  there  followed  that  struggle  between  feudality
and  the  church  which  has  been  observed  by  several  writers,  but  the  origin  of
which  has  been  strangely  overlooked.  What,  however,  we  have  now  to  notice
is  that  by  the  establishment  of  the  feudal  system  the  spirit  of  protection,  far
from  being  destroyed,  was  probably  not  even  weakened,  but  only  assumed  a
new  form.  Instead  of  being  spiritual,  it  became  temporal.  Instead  of  men
looking  up  to  the  church,  they  looked  up  to  the  nobles.  For,  as  a  necessary
consequence  of  this  vast  movement,  or  rather  as  a  part  of  it,  the  great  possessors
of  land  were  now  being  organized  into  an  hereditary  aristocracy.6  In  the  tenth

3  Sir  F.  Palgrave  (English  Commonwealth,  vol.  ii.  p.  ccvi.)  says,  "  It  is  generally  ad-
mitted, by  the  best  authorities,  that  from  about  the  eleventh  century  benefices  acquired
the  name  of  fiefs  or  feuds  ;  "  and  Robertson  (State  of  Europe,  note  viii.  in  Works,  p.  393)
supposes  that  the  word  feudum  does  not  occur  before  1008.     But  according  to  M.  Guizot
(Civilisation  en  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  238),  "il  apparait,  pour  la  premiere  fois,  dans  une
charte  de  Charles  le  Gros  en  884."     This  is  a  question  more  curious  than  important ;
since  whatever  the  origin  of  the  word  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  thing  did  not  and
could  not  exist  before  the  tenth  century  at  the  earliest :   inasmuch  as  the  extreme  dis-
organization of  society  rendered  so  coercive  an  institution  impossible.     M.  Guizot,  in
another  work  (Essais  sur  I' Hist,  de  France,  p.  239)  rightly  says,  "  Au  Xe  siecle  seulement,
les  rapports  et  les  pouvoirs  sociaux  acquirent  quelque  fixite."     See  also  his  Civilisation
en  Europe,  p.  90.     [It  is  well  to  realize,  however,  that  the  feudal  system  did  not  "  spring
up,"  but  represents  the  final  stage  of  a  process  which  began  under  the  Prankish  con-
querors of  Gaul.     For  a  good  view  of  the  process,  embodying  the  results  of  Guizot,
Hallam,  and  Stubbs,  see  Professor  Abdy's  Lectures  on  Feudalism,  1890,  lect.  v.-vii.
Comp.  the  editor's  Introduction  to  English  Politics,  p.  193  ;  and  Buckle's  own  extracts
(in  the  Miscel.  Works,  abr.  ed.  ii    394,)  from  Lockharfs  Life  of  Scott. — ED.]

4  "  La  terre  est  tout  dans  ce  systeme.  .  .  .  Le  systeme  feodal  est  comme  une  religion
de  la  terre."     Origines  du  Droit,  in  (Euvres  de  Michelet,  vol.  ii.  p.  302.     "  Le  caractere
de  la  feodalite,  c'etait  la  predominance  de  la  realite  sur  la  personnalite,  de  la  terre  sur
1'homme."     Eschbach,  Etude  du  Droit,  p.  256.

5  According  to  the  social  and  political  arrangements  from  the  fourth  to  the  tenth
century,  the  clergy  were  so  eminently  a  class  apart,  that  they  were  freed  from  "  burdens
of  the  state,"  and  were  not  obliged  to  engage  in  military  services  unless  they  thought
proper  to  do  so.     See  Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  iii.  p.  195,  vol.  v.  pp.  133,  140  ;
and  Petrie's  Ecclesiast.  Arckit.  p.  382.     But  under  the  feudal  system,  this  immunity
was  lost ;  and  in  regard  to  performing  services  no  separation  of  classes  was  admitted.
"  After  the  feudal  polity  became  established,  we  do  not  find  that  there  was  any  dis-
pensation for  ecclesiastical  fiefs."     Hallam 's  Supplemental  Notes,  p.  120  ;  and  for  further
proof  of  the  loss  of  the  old  privileges,  compare  Grose's  Military  Antiquities,  vol.  i.  pp.  5.
64  ;  Meyer,  Instit.  Judic.  vol.  i.  p.  357  5  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iv.  p.  462  ;  and
Matty's  Observations,  vol.  i.  pp.  43  ^,  435  :  So  that,  as  this  writer  says,  p.  215,  "  Chaque
seigneur  laic  avait  gagne  personnellement  a  la  revolution  qui  forma  le  gouvernement
feodal ;  mais  les  eveques  et  les  abbes,  en  devenant  souverains  clans  leurs  terres,  per-
dirent  au  contraire  beaucoup  de  leur  ponvoir  et  de  leur  dignite."

The  great  change  of  turning  life -possessions  of  land  into  hereditary  possessions
began  late  in  the  ninth  century,  being  initiated  in  France  by  a  capitulary  of  Charles
the  Bald,  in  877.  See  Allen  on  the  Prerogative,  p.  210  ;  Spence's  Origin  of  the  Laws
of  Europe,  pp.  282,  301  ;  Meyer,  Instit.  Judiciaires,  vol.  i.  p.  206,


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  349

century  we  find  the  first  surnames  :  7  by  the  eleventh  century  most  of  the
great  offices  had  become  hereditary  in  the  'leading  families : »  and"  in  the  twelfth
century  armorial  bearings  were  invented,  as  well  as  other  heraldic  devices
which  long  nourished  the  conceit  of  the  nobles,  and  were  valued  by  their  de-
scendants as  marks  of  that  superiority  of  birth  to  which,  during  many  ages,
all  other  superiority  was  considered  subordinate.9

Such  was  the  beginning  of  the  European  aristocracy,  in  the  sense  in  which
that  word  is  commonly  used.  With  the  consolidation  of  its  power,  feudality
was  made,  in  reference  to  the  organization  of  society,  the  successor  of  the
church  ;  10  and  the  nobles,  becoming  hereditary,  gradually  displaced  in  govern-
ment, and  in  the  general  functions  of  authority,  the  clergy  among  whom  the
opposite  principle  of  celibacy  was  now  firmly  established.11  It  is  therefore
evident  that  an  inquiry  into  the  origin  of  the  modern  protective  spirit  does
in  a  great  measure  resolve  itself  into  an  inquiry  into  the  origin  of  the  aristocratic
power  ;  since  that  power  was  the  exponent,  and  as  it  were  the  cover,  under
which  the  spirit  displayed  itself.  This,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  is  likewise
connected  with  the  great  religious  rebellion  of  the  sixteenth  century  :  the  success
of  which  mainly  depended  on  the  weakness  of  the  protective  principle  that
opposed  it.  But,  reserving  this  for  future  consideration,  I  will  now  endeavour
to  trace  a  few  of  the  circumstances  which  gave  the  aristocracy  more  power  in
France  than  in  England,  aiul  thus  accustomed  the  French  *  to  a  closer  and
more  constant  obedience,  and  infused  into  them  a  more  reverential  spirit  than
that  which  was  usual  in  our  country.

Soon  after  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century,  and  therefore  while  the  aris-
tocracy was  in  the  process  of  formation,  England  was  conquered  by  the  Duke


7  That  surnames  first  arose  in  the  tenth  century  is  stated  by  the  most  competent
authorities.     See  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  iii.  pp.  452-455  ;  Hallam's  Middle
Ages,  vol.  i.  p.  138  ;  Monteil,  Hist,  des  divers  Etats,  vol.  iii.  p.  268  ;  Petrie's  Ecdesiast.
Archit.  pp.  277,  342.     Koch  (Tableau  des  Revolutions,  vol.  i.  p.  138)  erroneously  says,
"  c'est  pareillement  aux  croisades  que  1'Europe  doit  1'usage  des  surnoms  de  famille  "  ;
a  double,  mistake,  both  as  to  the  date  and  the  cause,  since  the  introduction  of  surnames,
being  part  of  a  large  social  movement,  can  under  no  circumstances  be  ascribed  to  a
single  event.     [The  crusades  were  a  large  social  movement,  and  not  a  "  single  event ;  "
and  it  is  clear  that  they  would  greatly  promote  among  those  who  shared  in  them  the
use  of  family  surnames. — ED.]

8  On  this  process  from  the  end  of  the  ninth  to  the  twelfth  century,  compare  Hallam's
Supplemental  Notes,  pp.  97,  98  ;  Dalrymple's  Hist,  of  Feudal  Property,  p.  21  ;  Klimrath,
Hist,  du  Droit,  vol.  i.  p.  74.

9  As  to  the  origin  of  armorial  bearings,  which  cannot  be  traced  higher  than  the  twelfth
century,  see  Hallam's  Middle  Ages,  vol.  i.  pp.  138,  139  ;  Ledwich,  Antiquities  of  Ireland,
pp.  231,  232  ;  Origines  du  Droit,  in  (Euvres  de  Michelet,  vol.  ii.  p.  382.

10  For,  as  Lerminier  says  (Philos.  du  Droit,  vol.  i.  p.  17),  "  la  loi  feodale  n'est  autre
chose  que  la  terre  elevee  a  la  souverainete."     On  the  decline  of  the  church  in  conse-
quence of  the  increased  feudal  and  secular  spirit,  see  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  iii.
p.  440,  vol.  iv.  p.  88.     In  our  country,  one  fact  may  be  mentioned  illustrative  of  the
earliest  encroachments  of   laymen  :    namely,  that   before  the  twelfth  century  we  find
no  instance  in  England  of  the  great  seal  being  intrusted  "  to  the  keeping  of  a  layman."
Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  i.  p.  61.

11  Celibacy,  on  account  of  its  supposed  ascetic  tendency,  was  advocated,  and  in  some
countries  was  enforced,  at  an  early  period  ;  but  the  first  general  and  decisive  movement
in  its  iavour  was  in  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century,  before  which  time  it  was  a  specu-
lative doctrine,  constantly  disobeyed.     See  Neander's  Hist  of  the  Church,  vol.  vi.  pp.  52,
61,  62,  72,  93,  94  note,  vol.  vii.  pp.  127-131  ;  MosheiwCs  Eccles.  Hist  vol.  i.  pp.  2^8,  249  ;
Erdeston's  English  Antiq.  p.  95

[*  I.e.  the  non -aristocratic  French.     Buckle's  use  ol  the  expression  '  the  French  "  is
often  unduly  lax. — ED


350  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  Normandy,  who  naturally  introduced  the  polity  existing  in  his  own  country  .^
But  in  his  hands  it  underwent  a  modification  suitable  to  the  new  circumstances
in  which  he  was  placed.  He,  being  in  a  foreign  country,  the  general  of  a  suc-
cessful army  composed  partly  of  mercenaries,13  was  able  to  dispense  with  some
of  those  feudal  usages  which  were  customary  in  France.  The  great  Norman
lords,  thrown  as  strangers  into  the  midst  of  a  hostile  population,  were  glad  to
accept  estates  from  the  crown  on  almost  any  terms  that  would  guarantee  their
own  security.  Of  this,  William  naturally  availed  himself.  For,  by  granting
baronies  on  conditions  favourable  to  the  crown,  he  prevented  the  barons 14
from  possessing  that  power  which  they  exercised  in  France,  and  which,  but
or  this,  they  would  have  exercised  in  England.  The  result  was.  that  the  most
powerful  of  our  nobles  became  amenable  to  the  law,  or  at  all  events  to  the
authority  of  the  king.15  Indeed,  to  such  an  extent  was  this  carried,  that  William,
shortly  before  his  death,  obliged  all  the  landowners  to  render  their  fealty  to
him  ;  "thus  entirely  neglecting  that  peculiarity  of  feudalism,  according  to  which
each  vassal  was  separatelv  dependent  on  his  own  lord.1''

But  in  France  the  course  of  affairs  was  very  different.  In  that  country
the  great  nobles  held  their  lands  not  so  much  by  grant  as  by  prescription.17  A
character  of  antiquity  was  thus  thrown  over  their  rights  ;  which,  when  added
to  the  weakness  of  the  crown,  enabled  them  to  exercise  on  their  own  estates
all  the  functions  of  independent  sovereigns.18  Even  when  they  received  their
first  great  check  under  Philip  Augustus,19  they  in  his  reign,  and  indeed  long
after,  wielded  a  power  quite  unknown  in  England.  Thus,  to  give  only  two
instances  :  the  right  of  coining  money,  which  has  always  been  regarded  as  an
attribute  of  sovereignty,  was  never  allowed  in  England,  even  to  the  greatest
nobles.20  But  in  France  it  was  exercised  by  many  persons  independently  of

12  Where  it  was  particularly  flourishing  :  "la  feodalite  fut  organisee  en  Normandie
ptus  fortement  et  plus  systematiquement  que  partout  ailleurs  en  France."     Klimrath,
Travaux  sur  VHist.  du  Droit,  vol.  i.  p.  130.     The  "  coutume  de  Normandie  "  was,  at  a
much  later  period,  only  to  be  found  in  the  old  "  grand  coutumier."     Klimrath,  vol.  ii.
p.  1 60.     On   the  peculiar   tenacity  with  which   the  Normans   clung    to  it,  see  Lettres
d'Aguesseau,  vol.   ii.   pp.   225,   226:    "accoutumes  a  respecter  leur  coutume  comme
1'evangile."

13  Mills's  Hist,  of  Chivalry,  vol.  i.  p.  387  :  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  390,
vol.  iv.  p.   76.     Mercenary  troops  were  also  employed  by  his  immediate  successors.
Grose's  Military  Antiq.  vol.  i.  p.  55.

14  On  the  different  meanings  attached  to  the  word  "  baron,"  compare  Klimrath,  Hist,
du  Droit,  vol.  ii.  p.  40,  with  Meyer,  Instit.  Judiciaires,  vol.  i.  p.  105.     But  M.  Guizot
says,  what  seems  most  likely,  "  il  est  probable  que  ce  nom  fut  commun  originairement
atous  les  vassaux  immediats  de  la  couronne,  lies  au  roi  per  servitium  militare,  par  le  ser-
vice de  chevalier."     Essais,  p.  265.

15  Meyer,  Instit.  Judic.  vol.  i.  p.  242  ;     Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  220.
The  same  policy  of  reducing  the  nobles  was  followed  up  by  Henry  II.,  who  destroyed
the  baronial  castles.     Turner,  vol.  iv.  p.  223.     Compare  Lingard,  vol.  i.  pp.  315,  371.

16  "  Deinde  coepit  homagia  hominum  totius  Angliae,  et  juramentum  fidelitatis  cujus-
cumque  essent  feodi  vel  tenementi."     Matthczi  Westmonast.  Flores  Histonarum,  vol.  ii.
p.  9.

17  See  some  good  remarks  on  this  difference  between  the  French  and  English  nobles,
in  Hallam's  Middle  Ages,  vol.  ii.  pp.  99,  100.     Mably  (Observations,  vol.  i.  p.  60)  says  :
*'  En  effet,  on  negligea,  sur  la  fin  de  la  premiere  race,  de  conserver  les  titres  primordiaux
de  ses  possessions."     As  to  the  old  customary  French  law  of  prescription,  see  Giraud,
Precis  de  VAncien  Droit,  pp.  79,  80.

18  Mably,  Observations  sur  I  Hist,  de  France,  vol.  i.  pp.  70,  162,  178.

19  On  the  policy  of  Philip  Augustus  in  regard  to  the  nobles,  see  Mably,  Observations,
vol.  i.  p.  246  ;  Lerminier,  Philos.  du  Droit,  vol.  i.  p.  265  ;  Boulainvilliers,  Hist,  de  VAncien
Gouvernement,  vol.  iii.  pp.  147-150  ;  Guizot,  Civilisation  en  France,  vol.  iv.  pp.  134,  135
Courson,  Hist,  des  Peuples  Bretons,  Paris,  1846,  vol.  ii.  p.  350.

"  No  subjects  ever  enjoyed  the  right  of  coining  silver  in  England  without  the  roya  1
stamp  and  superintendence ;  a  remarkable  proof  of  the  restraint  in  which  the  feudal


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  351

the  crown,  and  was  not  abrogated  until  the  sixteenth  century.21  A  similar
remark  holds  good  of  what  was  called  the  right  of  private  war  ;  by  virtue  of  which
the  nobles  were  allowed  to  attack  each  other,  and  disturb  the  peace  of  the
country  with  the  prosecution  of  their  private  feuds.  In  England  the  aris-
tocracy were  never  strong  enough  to  have  this  admitted  as  a  right,22  though
they  too  often  exercised  it  as  a  practice.  But  in  France  it  became  a  part  of  the
established  law  ;  it  was  incorporated  into  the  text -books  of  feudalism ;  and  it
is  distinctly  recognized  by  Louis  IX.  and  Philip  the  Fair,  —  two  kings  of  con-
siderable energy,  who  did  everything  in  their  power  to  curtail  the  enormous
authority  of  the  nobles.23

Out  of  this  difference  between  the  aristocratic  power  of  France  and  England
there  followed  many  consequences  of  great  importance.  In  our  country  the
nobles,  being  too  feeble  to  contend  with  the  crown,  were  compelled,  in  self-
defence,  to  ally  themselves  with  the  people.24  About  a  hundred  years  after  the
Conquest,  the  Normans  and  Saxons  amalgamated ;  and  both  parties  united
against  the  king,  in  order  to  uphold  their  common  rights.25  The  Magna  Charta,
which  John  was  forced  to  yield,  contained  concessions  to  the  aristocracy  ;  but
its  most  important  stipulations  were  those  in  favour  of  "  all  classes  of  freemen."  26

aristocracy  was  always  held  in  this  country."  Hallam's  Middle  Ages,  vol.  i.  p.  154-
[As  Hallam  notes,  money  was  coined  in  the  anarchic  period  of  Stephen  by  both  nobles
and  bishops.  Cp.  Slubbs,  Const.  Hist.  4th  ed.  i.  354. — ED.]

21  Brougham's  Polit.  Philos.  1849,  vol.  i.  p.  446.     In  addition  to  the  evidence  there
given  on  the  right  of  coinage,  see  Mably's  Observations,  vol.  i.  p.  424,  vol.  ii.  pp.  296,  297  ;
and  Turner's  Normandy,  vol.  ii.  p.  261.

22  Hallam' s  Supplemental  Notes,  pp.  304,  305.

23  "  Saint-Louis  consacra  le  droit  de  guerre.  .  .  .  Philippe  le  Bel,  qui  voulut  1'abolir,
finit  par  le  retablir."     Montlosier,  Monarchic  Francaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  127,  202  :    see  also
pp.  434,  435,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  435,  436.     Mably  (Observations,  vol.  ii.  p.  338)  mentions
"  lettres -paten tes  de  Philippe -de -Valois  du  8  fevrier  1330,  pour  permettre  dans  le  duche
d'Aquitaine  les  guerres  privees,"  etc. ;  and  he  adds,  "le  9  avri!  1353  le  roi  Jean  renouvelle
1'ordonnance  de  S.  Louis,  nominee  la  quarantaine  du  roi,  touchant  les  guerres  privees."
[The  right  of  private  war  survived  in  Germany  till  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.
(See  Hallam,  Middle  Ages,  ch.  v.  nth  ed.  ii.  94-96)  ;  and  the  practice  survived  later.
Cp.  Menzel,   Geschichte  der  Deutschen,  cap.   364  ;    and  Kohlrausch,  Hist,   of  Germany,
caps.  xv.  xvi. — ED.]

24  Sir  Francis  Palgrave  (in  his  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  English  Commonwealth,  vol.  i.
PP-  51-55)  has  attempted  to  estimate  the  results  produced  by  the  Norman  Conquest ;
but  he  omits  to  notice  this,  which  was  the  most  important  consequence  of  all.

25  On  this  political  union  between  Norman  barons  and  Saxon  citizens,  of  which  the
first  clear  indication  is  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  compare  Campbell's  Chan-
cellors, vol.  i.  p.  113,  with  Brougham's  Polit.  Philos.  vol.  i.  p.  339,  vol.  iii.  p.  222.

In  regard  to  the  general  question  of  the  amalgamation  of  races,  we  have  three  distinct
kinds  of  evidence  :

ist,  Towards  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  a  new  language  began  to  be  formed  by
blending  Norman  with  Saxon ;  and  English  literature,  properly  so  called,  dates  from
the  commencement  of  the  thirteenth  century.  Compare  Madden' s  Preface  to  Layamon,
1847,  vol.  i.  pp.  xx.  xxi.,  with  Turner's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  viii.  pp.  214,  217*  436,  437.

2nd,  We  have  the  specific  statement  of  a  writer  in  the  reign  of  Henry  II.,  that  "sic
permixtae  sunt  nationes  ut  vix  discerni  possit  hodie,  de  liberis  loquor,  quis  Anglicus,
quis  Normannus  sit  genere."  Note  in  Hallam' s  Middle  Ages,  vol.  ii.  p.  106.

3rd,  Before  the  thirteenth  century  had  passed  away,  the  difference  of  dress,  which
in  that  state  of  society  would  survive  many  other  differences,  was  no  longer  observed,
and  the  distinctive  peculiarities  of  Norman  and  Saxon  attire  had  disappeared.  See
Strutt's  View  of  the  Dress  and  Habits  of  the  People  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  67,  edit.  Planche,
1842,  4to.

26  "  An  equal  distribution  of  civil  rights  to  all  classes  of  freemen  forms  the  peculiar
beauty  of  the  charter."     Hallam' s  Middle  Ages,  vol.  ii.  p.   108.     This  is  very  finely
noticed  iu  one  of  Lord  Chatham's  great  speeches.     Parl.  Hist.  vol.  xvi.  p.  662.


352  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Within  half  a  century  fresh  contests  broke  out  ;  the  barons  were  again  associated
with  the  people,  and  again  there  followed  the  same  results, — the  extension  of
popular  privileges  being  each  time  the  condition  and  the  consequence  of  this
singular  alliance.  In  the  same  way,  when  the  Earl  of  Leicester  raised  a  re-
bellion against  Henry  III.,  he  found  his  own  party  too  weak  to  make  head  against
the  crown.  He  therefore  applied  to  the  people  :  27  and  it  is  to  him  that  our
House  of  Commons  owes  its  origin  ;  since  he,  in  1264,  set  the  first  example  of
issuing  writs  to  cities  and  boroughs  ;  thus  calling  upon  citizens  and  burgesses
to  take  their  place  in  what  had  hitherto  been  a  parliament  composed  entirely
of  priests  and  nobles.28

The  English  aristocracy  being  thus  forced,  by  their  own  weakness,  to  rely
on  the  people,29  it  naturally  followed  that  the  people  imbibed  that  tone  of
independence,  and  that  lofty  bearing,  of  which  our  civil  and  political  insti-
tutions are  the  consequence,  rather  than  the  cause.*  It  is  to  this,  and  not  to
any  fanciful  peculiarity  of  race,  that  we  owe  the  sturdy  and  enterprising  spirit
for  which  the  inhabitants  of  this  island  have  long  been  remarkable.  It  is  this
which  has  enabled  us  to  baffle  all  the  arts  of  oppression,  and  to  maintain  for
centuries  liberties  which  no  other  nation  has  ever  possessed.  And  it  is  this
which  has  fostered  and  upheld  those  great  municipal  privileges  which,  what-
ever be  their  faults,  have  at  least  the  invaluable  merit  of  accustoming  free
men  to  the  exercise  of  power,  giving  to  citizens  the  management  of  their  own

27  Compare  Meyer,  Instit.  Judic,  vol.  ii.  p.  39,  with  Lingard's  England,  vol.  ii.  p    127,
and  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  vi.  p.  92.

28  "  He  is  to  be  honoured  as  the  founder  of  a  representative  system  of  government
in  this  country."     Campbell's  Chief -Justices,  vol.  i.  p.  61.     Some  writers  (see,  for  in-
stance, Dalrymple's  Hist,  of  Feudal  Property,  p.  332)  suppose  that  burgesses  were  sum-
moned before  the  reign  of  Henry  III. :  but  this  assertion  is  not  only  unsupported  by
evidence,  but  is  in  itself  improbable  ;  because  at  an  earlier  period  the  citizens,  though
rapidly  increasing  in  power,  were  hardly  important  enough  to  warrant  such  a  step  being
taken.     The  best  authorities  are  now  agreed  to  refer  the  origin  of  the  House  of  Commons
to  the  period  mentioned  in  the  text.     See  Hallam's  Supplement.  Notes,  pp.  335-339  ;
Spencers  Origin  of  the  Laws  of  Europe,  p.  512  ;  Campbell's  Chancellors,  vol.  i.  p.  155  ;
Lingard's  England,  vol.~ii.  p.  138  ;  Guizofs  Essais,  p.  319.     The  notion  of  tracing  this
to  the  wittenagemot  is  as  absurd  as  finding  the  origin  of  juries  in  the  system  of  com-
purgators  ;  both  of  which  were  favourite  errors  in  the  seventeenth,  and  even  in  the
eighteenth  century.      In  regard  to  the  wittenagemot  this  idea  still  lingers  among  anti-
quaries ;   but  in  regard  to  compurgators  even  they  have  abandoned  their  old  ground,
and  it  is  now  well  understood  that  trial  by  jury  did  not  exist  till  long  after  the  Conquest.
Compare  Palgrave's  English  Commonwealth,  part  i.  pp.   243  seq.,  with  Meyer,  Instit.
Judic.  vol.  ii.  pp.  152-173.     There  are  few  things  in  our  history  so  irrational  as  the
admiration  expressed  by  a  certain  class  of  writers  for  the  institutions  of  our  barbarous
Anglo-Saxon  ancestors.         [It  may  be  added  that  Simon  de  Montfort  in  all  likelihood
took  his  idea  from  the  prior  practice  of  Frederick  II.  in  Sicily,  which  in  turn  was  motived
by  the  practice  of  the  Italian  cities.     Compare  Gregorio,  Consider -azioni  sopra  la  storia
di  Sicilia,  ed.  2a,  vol.  ii.  cap.  5;    Von  Raumer,  Geschichte   der  Hohenstaufen,  1857-8,
iii.  249  ;    and  Von  Reumont,  The  Carafas   of    Maddaloni,    Eng.    tr.    1854,    p.  61.     See
also  the  remark  of  Adam  Smith  on  the  subject,  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  iii.  ch.  3. — ED.]

29  Montlosier,  with  the  fine  spirit  of  a  French  noble,  taunts  the  English  aristocracy
with  this  :  "  En  France  la  noblesse,  attaquee  sans  cesse,  s'est  defendue  sans  cesse.  Elle
a  subi  1'oppression  ;  elle  ne  1'a  point  acceptee.  En  Angleterre,  elle  a  couru  des  la  pre-
miere commotion,  se  refugier  dans  les  rangs  des  bourgeois,  et  sous  leur  protection.  Elle
a  abdique  ainsi  son  existence.''  Montlosier,  Monarchic  Francaise,  vol.  iii.  p.  162.  Compare
an  instructive  passage  in  De  StaH,  Consid.  sur  la  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  421.

[*  In  the  terms  of  the  preceding  exposition,  both  alike  are  consequences  of  the  balance
of  political  forces.  It  should  be  added  that  the  primary  difference  of  race  (not,  of  course,
of  "  race  character,"  which  Buckle  here  rightly  dismisses,  though  he  later  seems  to
assert  it)  determined  the  specific  assertion  of  popular  liberties.  Cp.  Abdy,  Lectures  on
Feudalism,  pp.  334-5. — ED.]


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  353

city,  and  perpetuating  the  idea  of  independence,  by  preserving  it  in  a  living
type,  and  by  enlisting  in  its  support  the  interests  and  affections  of  individual
men.

But  the  habits  of  self-government  which  under  these  circumstances  were
cultivated  in  England,  were  under  opposite  circumstances  neglected  in  France.
The  great  French  lords,  being  too  powerful  to  need  the  people,  were  unwilling
to  seek  their  alliance.30  The  result  was  that  amid  a  great  variety  of  forms
and  names,  society  was  in  reality  only  divided  into  two  classes — the  upper
and  the  lower,  the  protectors  and  the  protected.  And,  looking  at  the  ferocity  of
the  prevailing  manners,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  in  France,  under  the
feudal  system,  every  man  was  either  a  tyrant  or  a  slave.  Indeed,  in  most  in-
stances the  two  characters  were  combined  in  the  same  person.  For  the  practice
of  subinfeudation,  which  in  our  country  was  actively  checked,  became  in  France
almost  universal.31  By  this,  the  great  lords  having  granted  lands  on  condition
of  fealty  and  other  services  to  certain  persons,  these  last  subgranted  them ;
that  is,  made  them  over  on  similar  conditions  to  other  persons,  who  had  like-
wise the  power  of  bestowing  them  on  a  fourth  party,  and  so  on  in  an  endless
series  ;  32  thus  forming  a  long  chain  of  dependence,  and,  as  it  were,  organizing
submission  into  a  system.33  In  England,  on  the  other  hand,  such  arrange-
ments were  so  unsuited  to  the  general  state  of  affairs  that  it  is  doubtful  if  they
were  ever  carried  on  to  any  extent  ;  and,  at  all  events,  it  is  certain  that  in  the
reign  of  Edward  I.  they  were  finally  stopped  by  the  statute  known  to  lawyers
as  Quia  emptores.3*

Thus  early  was  there  a  great  social  divergence  between  France  and  England.
The  consequences  of  this  were  still  more  obvious  when,  in  the  fourteenth  cen-
tury, the  feudal  system  rapidly  decayed  in  both  countries.  For  in  England,
the  principle  of  protection  being  feeble,  men  were  in  some  degree  accustomed
to  self-government  ;  and  they  were  able  to  hold  fast  by  those  great  institutions
which  would  have  been  ill-adapted  to  the  more  obedient  habits  of  the  French
people.  Our  municipal  privileges,  the  rights  of  our  yeomanry,  and  the  security
of  our  copyholders,  were  from  the  fourteenth  to  the  seventeenth  centuries
the  three  most  important  guarantees  for  the  liberties  of  England.35  In  France

30  See  some  good  remarks  in  Mdbly,  Observations  sur  I' Hist,  de  France,  vol.  iii.  pp.  114,
US-

31  Hattairis  Middle  Ages,  vol.  i.  p.   in.

32  "Originally   there  was  no  limit   to  subinfeudation."     Brougham's  Polit.  Phiios.
vol.  i.  p.  279.

33  A  living  French  historian  boasts  that,  in  his  own  country,  "  toute  la  societe  feodale
formait  ainsi  une  echelle  de  clientelle  et  de  patronage."     Cassagnac,  Revolution  Fran-
faise,  vol.  i.  p.  459.

3*  This  is  18  Edw.  I.  c.  i  ;  respecting  which,  see  Blackstone's  Comment,  vol.  ii.  p.  91,
vol.  iv.  p.  425  ;  Reeve's  Hist,  of  English  Law,  vol.  ii.  p.  223  ;  Dalrymple's  Hist,  of  Feudal
Property,  pp.  102,  243,  340.  ["Unsuited  to  the  general  state  of  affairs"  is  a  merely
verbal  explanation.  The  objective  fact  was  that  from  the  Conquest  onwards  the  kings
strove  to  make  sub-tenants  king's  liegemen,  in  their  own  interest.  Henry  I.  accelerated
the  process  in  driving  out  the  rebel  nobles ;  and  after  the  anarchic  period  of  Stephen,
Henry  II.  resumed  it.  Cp.  Stubbs,  Const.  Hist.  4th  ed.  i.  290,  298,  333-5,  357.  361,  631.
-ED.]

35  The  history  of  the  decay  of  that  once  most  important  class,  the  English  yeomanry,
is  an  interesting  subject,  and  one  for  which  I  have  collected  considerable  materials  ;
at  present  I  will  only  say  that  its  decline  was  first  distinctly  perceptible  in  the  latter
half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  was  consummated  by  the  rapidly  -  increasing
power  of  the  commercial  and  manufacturing  classes  early  in  the  eighteenth  century.
After  losing  their  influence,  their  numbers  naturally  diminished,  and  they  made  way
for  other  bodies  of  men  whose  habits  of  mind  were  less  prejudiced,  and  therefore  better
suited  to  that  new  state  which  society  assumed  in  the  last  age.  I  mention  this,  because
some  writers  regret  the  almost  total  destruction  of  the  yeoman  freeholders,  overlooking
the  fact  that  they  are  disappearing,  not  in  consequence  of  any  violent  revolution  or

23


354  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

such  guarantees  were  impossible.  The  real  division  being  between  those  who
were  noble  and  those  who  were  not  noble,  no  room  was  left  for  the  establish-
ment of  intervening  classes  ;  but  all  were  compelled  to  fall  into  one  of  these
two  great  ranks.ac  The  French  have  never  had  anything  answering  to  our
yeomanry  ;  nor  were  copyholders  recognized  by  their  laws.  And,  although
they  attempted  to  introduce  into  their  country  municipal  institutions,  all  such
efforts  were  futile  ;  for,  while  they  copied  the  forms  of  liberty  they  lacked
that  bold  and  sturdy  spirit  by  which  alone  liberty  can  be  secured.  They  had,
indeed,  its  image  and  superscription;  but  they  wanted  the  sacred  fire*  that
warms  the  image  into  life.  Everything  else  they  possessed.  The  show  and
appliances  of  freedom  were  there.  Charters  were  granted  to  their  towns,  and
privileges  conceded  to  their  magistrates.  All,  however,  was  useless.  For  it
is  not  by  the  wax  and  parchment,  of  lawyers  that  the  independence  of  men  can
be  preserved.  Such  things  are  the  mere  externals  ;  they  set  off  liberty  to
advantage  ;  they  are  as  its  dress  and  paraphernalia,  its  holiday-suit  in  times
of  peace  and  quiet.  But  when  the  evil  days  set  in,  when  the  invasions  of
despotism  have  begun,  liberty  will  be  retained,  not  by  those  who  can  show  the
oldest  deeds  and  the  largest  charters,  but  by  those  who  have  been  most  inured
to  habits  of  independence,  most  accustomed  to  think  and  act  for  themselves,
and  most  regardless  of  that  insidious  protection  which  the  upper  classes  have
always  been  so  ready  to  bestow  that  in  many  countries  they  have  now  left
nothing  worth  the  trouble  to  protect.

And  so  it  was  in  France.  The  towns,  with  few  exceptions,  fell  at  the  first
shock  ;  and  the  citizens  lost  those  municipal  privileges  which,  not  being  grafted
on  the  national  character,  it  was  found  impossible  to  preserve.  In  the  same
way,  in  our  country,  power  naturally,  and  by  the  mere  force  of  the  democratic
movement,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  House  of  Commons  ;  whose  authority  has
ever  since,  notwithstanding  occasional  checks,  continued  to  increase  at  the
expense  of  the  more  aristocratic  parts  of  the  legislature.  The  only  institution
answering  to  this  in  France  was  the  States-General  ;  which,  however,  had  so
little  influence  that  in  the  opinion  of  native  historians  it  was  hardly  to  be
called  an  institution  at  all.37  Indeed,  the  French  were  by  this  time  so  accus-

stretch  of  arbitrary  power,  but  simply  by  the  general  march  of  affairs  ;  society  doing
away  with  what  it  no  longer  requires.  Compare  Kay's  Social  Condition  of  the  People,
vol.  i.  pp.  43,  602,  with  a  letter  from  Wordsworth  in  Bunbury's  Correspond,  of  Hanmer,
p.  440  ;  a  note  in  Mill's  Polit.  Econ.  vol.  i.  pp.  311,  312  ;  another  in  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.
vol.  v.  p.  323  ;  and  Sinclair's  Correspond,  vol  i.  p.  229.

3«  This  is  stated  as  an  admitted  fact  by  French  writers  living  in  different  periods  and
holding  different  opinions  ;  but  all  agreed  as  to  there  being  only  two  divisions  :  "  comme
en  France  on  est  toujours  ou  noble,  ou  roturier,  et  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  de  milieu."  Mem.
de  Rivarol,  p.  7.  "  La  grande  distinction  des  nobles  et  des  roturiers."  Giraud,  Precis
de  VAncien  Droit,  p.  10.  Indeed,  according  to  the  Coutumes,  the  nobles  and  roturiers
attained  their  majority  at  different  ages.  Klimrath,  Hist,  du  Droit,  vol.  ii.  p.  249  (errone-
ously stated  in  Story's  Conflict  of  Laws,  pp.  56,  79,  114).  See  further  respecting  this
capital  distinction,  Mem.  de  Duplessis  Mornay,  vol.  ii.  p.  230  ("  agreable  a  la  noblesse
et  au  peuple  ") ;  GEuvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  viii.  pp.  222,  232,  237  ;  Bunbury's  Correspond,
of  Hanmer,  p.  256  ;  Mably,  Observations,  vol.  iii.  p.  263 ;  and  Merrier  sur  Rousseau,
vol.  i.  p.  38  :  "  On  etoit  roturier,  vilain,  homme  de  n6ant,  canaille,  des  qu'on  ne  s'appelloit
plus  marquis,  baron,  comte,  chevalier,  etc."

37  '!  Les  etats-generaux  sont  portes  dans  la  liste  de  nos  institutions.  Je  ne  sais  cepend-
ant  s'il  est  permis  de  donner  ce  nom  a  des  rassemblemens  aussi  irreguliers."  Montlosier,

^  [*  This  virtual  assertion  of  an  occult  cause,  repeated  below  in  the  phrase  as  to
"national  character,"^  is  inconsistent  with  the  objective  explanation  given  on  p.  352.
There  was  plenty  of  "  sacred  fire "  among  the  villeins  of  Normandy  and  the  peasants
of  Brittany  in  the  eleventh  century ;  but  the  nobles  were  too  strong  for  them.  Comp.
Duruy,  Hist,  de  France,  ed.  1880,  i.  288  sq.  (ch.  xxi.) ;  Thierry,  Conq.  de  VAnglctwe,  liv
ji, ;  and  Morin,  Orients  de  la,  DemQcraiie,  &  £d,  1865,  pp.  303-335.— Ep.}


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  355

tomed  to  the  idea  of  protection,*  and  to  the  subordination  which  that  idea
involves,  that  they  were  little  inclined  to  uphold  an  establishment  which,  in
their  constitution,  was  the  sole  representative  of  the  popular  element.  The
result  was  that  by  the  fourteenth  century  the  liberties  of  Englishmen  were
secured  ;  38  and  since  then  their  only  concern  has  been  to  increase  what  they
have  already  obtained.  But  in  that  same  century,  in  France,  the  protective
spirit  assumed  a  new  form  ;  the  power  of  the  aristocracy  was  in  a  great  mea.sure
succeeded  by  the  power  of  the  crown  ;  and  there  began  that  tendency  to  cen-
tralization which,  having  been  pushed  still  further,  first  under  Louis  XIV.,  and
afterwards  under  Napoleon,  has  become  the  bane  of  the  French  people.39  For
by  it  the  feudal  ideas  of  superiority  and  submission  have  long  survived  that
barbarous  age  to  which  alone  they  were  suited.  Indeed,  by  their  transmigration,
they  seemed  to  have  gained  fresh  strength.  In  France 'everything  is  referred
to  one  common  centre,  in  which  all  civil  functions  are  absorbed.  All  improve-
ments of  any  importance,  all  schemes  for  bettering  even  the  material  condition
of  the  people,  must  receive  the  sanction  of  government;  the  local  authorities
not  being  considered  equal  to  such  arduous  tasks.  In  order  that  inferior  magis-
trates may  not  abuse  their  power,  no  power  is  conferred  upon  them.  The
exercise  of  independent  jurisdiction  is  almost  unknown.  Everything  that  is
done  must  be  done  at  headquarters.40  The  government  is  believed  to  see  every-
thing, know  everything,  and  provide  for  everything.  To  enforce  this  mon-
strous monopoly  there  has  been  contrived  a  machinery  well  worthy  of  the

Monarchie  Francaise,  vol.  i.  p.  266.     "  En  France,  les  etats-generaux,  au  moment  meme
de  leur  plus  grand  eclat,  c'est  a  dire  dans  le  cours  du  xive  siecle,  n'ont  guere  ete  que
des  accidents,  un  pouvoir  national  et  souvent  invoque,  mais  non  un  etablissement  con-
stitutionnel."     Guizot,  Essais,  p.  253.     See  also  Mably,  Observations,  vol.  iii.  p.   147
and  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xiv.  p.  642.

38  This  is  frankly  admitted  by  one  of  the  most  candid  and  enlightened  of  all  the  foreign
writers  on  our  history,  Guizot,  Essais,  p.  297  :  "  En  1307,  les  droits  qui  devaient  enfanter

Angleterre  un  gouvernement  libre  etaient  defiuitivemerit  reconnus."  [The  words
"  devaient  enfanter  "  do  not  constitute  such  an  admission  as  is  alleged  ;  but  even  an
admission  "  by  a  friendly  foreign  writer  is  not  a  proof.  After  the  date  given,  popular
id  parliamentary  liberties  were  repeatedly  and  deeply  depressed.  The  House  of
Commons  itself  "  was  comparatively  an  aristocratic  body,"  and  in  the  French  wars  the
English  nobles  learned  to  look  down  on  the  labouring  class.  (Gardiner,  Introd.  to  the
Itudy  of  Eng.  History,  1881,  p.  91.  "  Never  before  and  never  again  for  more  than  two
mndred  years  were' the  Commons  so  strong  as  they  were  under  Henry  IV."  (Stubbs,
mst.  Hist.  4th  ed.  iii.  73).  In  the  minority  of  Henry  VI.  "the  Parliament  was  fast
lying  down  into  a  mere  representation  of  the  baronage  and  the  great  landowners."
(Green,  Short  History,  ch.  vi.  ed.  1881,  p.  265.)  The  risings  of  peasants  both  in  that
and  the  reign  of  Richard  II.  tell  little  of  secured  liberties.  Richard  and  his  nobles
itally  refused  to  free  their  bondsmen. — ED.]

39  See  an  account  of  the  policy  of  Philip  the  Fair,  in  Mably,  Observations,  vol.  ii.
25-44  ;  in  Boulainvilliers,  Ancien  Gouvernement,  vol.  i.  pp.  292,  314,  vol.  ii.  pp.  37,  38  ;

id  in  Guizot,  Civilisation  en  France,  vol.  iv.  pp.  170-192.  M.  Guizot  says,  perhaps
strongly,  that  his  reign  was  "  la  metamorphose  de  la  royaute  en  despotisme."  On
ie  connexion  of  this  with  the  centralizing  movement,  see  Tocqueville's  Democratic,
/ol.  i.  p.  307  :  "  Le  gout  de  la  centralisation  et  la  manie  reglementaire  remontent,  en
"ranee,  a  1'epoque  ou  les  legistes  sont  entres  dans  le  gouvernement ;  ce  quizious  reporte
temps  de  Philippe  le  Bel."  Tennemann  also  notices  that  in  his  reign  the  "  Rechts-
theorie  "  began  to  exercise  influence  ;  but  this  learned  writer  takes  a  purely  meta-
physical view,  and  has  therefore  misunderstood  the  more  general  social  tendency.  Gesch.
der  Philos.  vol.  viii.  p.  823.

40  As  several  writers  on  law  notice  this  system  with  a  lenient  eye  (Origines  du  Droit
Francais,  in  CEuvres  de  Michelet.  vol.  ii.  p.  321  ;  and  Eschbach,  Etude  du  Droit,  p.  129.

[*  The  full  explanation  is  that  "  the  French  "  in  the  eleventh  century  learned  to  look
to  the  king  as  their  efficient  and  willing  protector  against  a  tyrannous  nobility.  Cp.
Duruy,  Hist,  de  Fiance,  i.  291,  295.— ED.]


356  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

design.  The  entire  country  is  covered  by  an  immense  array  of  officials;41
who*",  in  the  regularity  of  their  hierarchy,  and  in  the  order  of  their  descending
series,  form  an  admirable  emblem  of  that  feudal  principle  which,  ceasing  to  be
territorial,  has  now  become  personal.  In  fact,  the  whole  business  of  the  state
is  conducted  on  the  supposition,  that  no  man  either  knows  his  own  interest,  or
is  fit  to  take  care  of  himself.  So  paternal  are  the  feelings  of  government,  so
eager  for  the  welfare  of  its  subjects,  that  it  has  drawn  within  its  jurisdiction
the  most  rare  as  well  as  the  most  ordinary  actions  of  life.  In  order  that  the
French  may  not  make  imprudent  wills,  it  has  limited  the  right  of  bequest  ;  and,
for  fear  that  they  should  bequeath  their  property  wrongly,  it  prevents  them
from  bequeathing  the  greater  part  of  it  at  all.*  In  order  that  society  may  be
protected  by  its  police,  it  has  directed  that  no  one  shall  travel  without  a  pass-
port. And  when  men  are  actually  travelling,  they  are  met  at  every  turn  by
the  same  interfering  spirit,  which,  under  pretence  of  protecting  their  persons,
shackles  their  liberty.  Into  another  matter,  far  more  serious,  the  French  have
carried  the  same  principle.  Such  is  their  anxiety  to  protect  society  against
criminals,  that  when  an  offender  is  placed  at  the  bar  of  one  of  their  courts,
there  is  exhibited  a  spectacle  which  it  is  no  idle  boast  to  say  we  in  England
could  not  tolerate  for  a.  single  hour.  There  is  seen  a  great  public  magistrate,
by  whom  the  prisoner  is  about  to  be  tried,  examining  him  in  order  to  ascertain  f
his  supposed  guilt,  re-examining  him,  cross-examining  him,  performing  the
duties,  not  of  a  judge,  but  of  a  prosecutor,  and  bringing  to  bear  against  the
unhappy  man  all  the  authority  of  his  judicial  position,  all  his  professional
subtlety,  all  his  experience,  all  the  dexterity  of  his  practised  understanding.
This  is,  perhaps,  the  most  alarming  of  the  many  instances  in  which  the  ten-
dencies of  the  French  intellect  are  shown ;  because  it  supplies  a  machinery

"le  systeme  energique  de  la  centralisation"),  it  may  be  well  to  state  how  it  actually
works.

Mr.  Bulwer,  writing  twenty  years  ago,  says  :  "  Not  only  cannot  a  commune  determine
its  own  expenses  without  the  consent  of  the  minister  or  one  of  his  deputed  functionaries,
it  cannot  even  erect  a  building,  the  cost  of  which  shall  have  been  sanctioned,  without
the  plan  being  adopted  by  a  board  of  public  works  attached  to  the  central  authority,
and  having  the  supervision  and  direction  of  every  public  building  throughout  the  king-
dom." Bulwer' s  Monarchy  of  the  Middle  Classes,  1836,  vol.  ii.  p.  262.

M.  Tocqueville,  writing  in  the  present  year  (1856),  says,  "  Sous  1'ancien  regime,  comme
de,  nos  jours,  il  n'y  avait  ville,  bourg,  village,  ni  si  petit  hameau  en  France,  hopital,  fabrique,
couvent  ni  college,  qui  put  avoir  une  volonte  independante  dans  se?  affaires  particuiieres,
ni  adrninistrer  a  sa  volonte  ses  propres  biens.  Alors,  comme  aujourd'hui,  1' administration
tenait  done  tous  les  Frar^ais  en  tutelle,  et  si  1'insolence  du  mot  ne  s'etait  pas  encore
produite,  on  avait  du  moins  deja  la  chose."  Tocqueville,  VAncien  Regime,  1856,  pp.  79,  80.

41  The  number  of  civil  functionaries  in  France,  who  are  paid  by  the  government  to
trouble  the  people,  passes  all  belief,  being  estimated,  at  different  periods  during  the
present  century,  at  from  138,000  to  upwards  of  800,000.  Tocqueville,  de  la  Democratic,
vol.  i.  p.  220  ;  Alison's  Europe,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  127,  140  ;  Kay's  Condition  of  the  People,
vol.  i.  p.  272  ;  Laing's  Notes,  2nd  series,  p.  185.  Mr.  Laing,  writing  in  1850,  says  :
"  In  France,  at  the  expulsion  of  Louis -Philippe,  the  civil  functionaries  were  stated  to
amount  to  807,030  individuals."

[*  The  right  of  bequest  is  often  limited  in  England  by  entails;  and  the  provision
that  wife  and  children  shall  share  in  the  property  of  the  husband  and  father,  is
common  to  Scotland  and  Holland  as  well  as  to  other  countries  which  derived  their
law  from  the  Pandects.  "In  fact,  the  right  of  free  bequest  is  of  comparatively  late
growth  in  the  development  of  society."  (Sidgwick,  The  Elements  of  Politics,  1891,  p.
95).  'The  power  of  diverting  property  from  the  family  ...  is  not  older  than  the
later  portion  of  the  Middle  Ages."  (Maine,  Ancient  Law,  p.  224.)

[f  "  Ascertain,"  that  is,  in  the  sense  of  demonstrate.  There  has  been  a  previous
investigation  by  the  juge  d' instruction.  Reforms  are  being  gradually  introduced  in  the
procedure. — ED.]


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  357

ready  for  the  purposes  of  absolute  power  ;  because  it  brings  the  administration
of  justice  into  disrepute,  by  associating  with  it  an  idea  of  unfairness  ;  and  be-
cause it  injures  that  calm  and  equable  temper  which  it  is  impossible  fully  to
maintain  under  a  system  that  makes  a  magistrate  an  advocate,  and  turns  the
judge  into  a  partizan.  But  this,  mischievous  as  it  is,  only  forms  part  of  a  far
larger  scheme.  For,  to  the  method  by  which  criminals  are  discovered,  there
is  added  an  analogous  method,  by  which  crime  is  prevented.  With  this  view,
the  people,  even  in  their  ordinary  amusements,  are  watched  and  carefully  super-
intended. Lest  they  should  harm  each  other  by  some  sudden  indiscretion,
precautions  are  taken  similar  to  those  with  which  a  father  might  surround  his
children.  In  their  fairs,  at  their  theatres,  their  concerts,  and  their  other  places
of  public  resort,  there  are  always  present  soldiers,  who  are  sent  to  see  that  no
mischief  is  done,  that  there  is  no  unnecessary  crowding,  that  no  one  uses  harsh
language,  that  no  one  quarrels  with  his  neighbour.*  Nor  does  the  vigilance
of  government  stop  there.  Even  the  education  of  children  is  brought  under
the  control  of  the  state,  instead  of  being  regulated  by  the  judgment  of  masters
or  parents.42  And  the  whole  plan  is  executed  with  such  energy  that,  as  the

Drench  while  men  are  never  let  alone,  just  so  while  children  they  are  never  left
alone.43  At  the  same  time,  it  being  reasonably  supposed  that  adults  thus  kept
in  pupilage  cannot  be  proper  judges  of  their  own  food,  the  government  has
provided  for  this  also.  Its  prying  eye  follows  the  butcher  to  the  shambles,
and  the  baker  to  the  oven.  By  its  paternal  hand,  meat  is  examined  lest  it
should  be  bad,  and  bread  is  weighed  lest  it  should  be  light. f  In  short,  without

mltiplying  instances  with  which  most  readers  must  be  familiar,  it  is  enough
to  say  that,  in  France,  as  in  every  country  where  the  protective  principle  is
active,  the  government  has  established  a  monopoly  of  the  worst  kind  ;  a
monopoly  which  comes  home  to  the  business  and  bosoms  of  men,  follows  them
in  their  daily  avocations,  troubles  them  with  its  petty,  meddling  spirit,  and,
what  is  worse  than  all,  diminishes  their  responsibility  to  themselves ;  thus
depriving  them  of  what  is  the  only  real  education  that  most  minds  receive. —
the  constant  necessity  of  providing  for  future  contingencies,  and  the  habit  of
grappling  with  the  difficulties  of  life.

The  consequence  of  all  this  has  been  that  the  French,  though  a  great  and
splendid  people, — a  people  full  oi  mettle,  high-spirited,  abounding  in  knowledge,
and  perhaps  less  oppressed  by  superstition  than  any  other  in  Europe, — have
always  been  found  unfit  to  exercise  political  power.}  Even  when  they  have  pos-

42  "  The  government  in  France  possesses  control  over  all  the  education  of  the  country,
fith  the  exception  of  the  colleges  for  the  education  of  the  clergy,  which  are  termed

seminaries,  and  their  subordinate  institutions."    Report  on  the  State  of  Superior  Education
in  France  in  1843,  in  Journal  of  Statist.  Soc.  vol.  vi.  p.  304.     On  the  steps  taken  during
ic  power  of  Napoleon,  see  Alison's  Europe,  vol.  viii.  p.  203  :  "  Nearly  the  whole  educa-
>n  of  the  empire  was  brought  effectually  under  the  direction  and  appointment  of
wernment."     [In  1870,  England  saw  fit  to  enter  on  the  same  course. — ED.]

43  "Much  attention  is  paid  to  the  surveillance  of  pupils;  it  being  a  fundamental
rinciple  of  French  education,  that  children  should  never  be  left  alone."     Report  on

General  Education  in  France  in  1842,  in  Journal  of  Statist.  Soc.  vol.  v.  p.  20.

[*  It  cannot  now  be  said  that  French  gendarmes  interfere  more  with  ordinary  life
lan  do  English  policemen   (cp.  Bodley,  France,  one-vol.  ed.,  p.  103) ;  and   in  recent
years  the  Parisian  authorities  have  sent  their  officials  to  London  to  take  lessons  in  the
julation  oi  street  traffic. — ED.]
[f  Here  again  "  we"  have  decided  that  the  French  plan  is  right.     Meat  and  fish  are
»-day  "examined"  in  England  by  inspectors;  and  there  are  demands  for  the  weighing
)f  bread. — ED.]

The  phrase  "  have  always  been  found  unfit "  is  inappropriate.  In  terms  of  the  whole
:eding  evolution,  and  of  the  military  position  of  France,  "  the  French  "  had  much
;ater  difficulty  than  the  English  in  attaining  to  a  constitutional  system.  They  have
low  maintained  one  for  a  generation,  and  seem  likely  to  preserve  it.  Buckle's  prediction
that  they  must  fail  for  "  at  least  some  generations  "  is  thus  falsified. — ED.]


358  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

sessed  it,  they  have  never  been  able  to  combine  permanence  with  liberty.  One
of  these  two  elements  has  always  been  wanting.  They  have  had  free  govern-
ments, which  have  not  been  stable.  They  have  had  stable  governments,  which
have  not  been  free.  Owing  to  their  fearless  temper,  they  have  rebelled,  and  no
doubt  will  continue  to  rebel,  against  so  evil  a  condition.41  But  it  does  not  need
the  tongue  of  a  prophet  to  tell  that,  for  at  least  some  generations,  all  such  cf torts
must  be  unsuccessful.  For  men  can  never  be  free  unless  they  are  educated  to
freedom.  And  this  is  not  the  education  which  is  to  be  found  in  schools,  or  gaiiu-d
from  books  ;  but  it  is  that  which  consists  in  self-discipline,  in  self-reliance,  and
in  self-government.  These,  in  England,  are  matters  of  hereditary  descent  —
traditional  habits,  which  we  imbibe  in  our  youth,  and  which  regulate  us  in  the
conduct  of  life.*  The  old  associations  of  the  French  all  point  in  another  direction.
At  the  slightest  difficulty,  they  call  on  the  government  for  support.  What  with
us  is  competition,  with  them  is  monopoly.  That  which  we  effect  by  privat-
companies,  they  effect  by  public  boards.  They  cannot  cut  a  canal,  or  lay  down
a  railroad,  without  appealing  to  the  government  for  aid.  With  them,  the  people
look  to  the  rulers;  with  us,  the  rulers  look  to  the  people.  With  them,  1  In-
executive  is  the  centre  from  which  society  radiates;48  with  us,  society  is  tin-
instigator,  and  the  executive  the  organ.  The  difference  in  the  result  has  cor-
responded with  the  difference  in  the  process.  We  have  been  made  lit  !or
political  power  by  the  long  exercise  of  civil  rights  ;  they,  neglecting  the  exercise,
think  they  can  at  once  begin  with  the  power.j  We  have  always  shown  a  deter
mination  to  uphold  our  liberties,  and,  when  the  times  are  fitting,  to  increase
them  ;  and  this  we  have  done  with  a  decency  and  a  gravity  natural  to  men  to
whom  such  subjects  have  long  been  familiar.  But  the  French,  always  treated  as
children,  are  in  political  matters  children  still.  And  as  they  have  handled  the
most  weighty  concerns  in  that  gay  and  volatile  spirit  which"  adorns  their  lighter
literature,  it  is  no  wonder  that  they  have  failed  in  matters  where  the  first  con-
dition of  success  is,  that  men  should  have  been  long  accustomed  to  rely  upon
their  own  energies,  and  that  before  they  try  their  skill  in  a  political  stru;- ;•.']<•
their  resources  should  have  been  sharpened  by  that  preliminary  discipline:
which  a  contest  with  the  difficulties  of  civil  life  can  never  fail  to  impart.

These  are  among  the  considerations  by  which  we  must  be  guided,  in  estimating
the  probable  destinies  of  the  great  countries  of  Europe.  But  what  we  arc-  now
rather  concerned  with  is,  to  notice  how  the  opposite  tendencies  of  France  and
England  long  continued  to  be  displayed  in  the  condition  and  treatment  of  their
aristocracy  ;  and  how  from  this  there  naturally  followed  some  striking  differences
between  the  war  conducted  by  the  Fronde  and  that  waged  by  the  Long  1'a.r-
liament.

44  A  distinguished  French  author  says  :  "  La  France  souffre  du  mal  du  sieele  ;  elle
en  est  plus  malade  qu'aucun  autre  pays  ;  ce  mal  c'est  la  haine  de  1'autoritc."  Cualine,
Russie,  vol.  ii.  p.  136.  Compare  Rey,  Science  Sociale,  vol.  ii.  p.  86  note.

15  His  to  the  activity  of  this  protective  and  centralizing  spirit  that  we  must  ascribe
what  a  very  great  authority  noticed  thirty  years  ago  as  "  le  defaut  de  spontam'-ite,  <|iii
caracterise  les  institutions  de  la  France  moderne."  Meyer,  Instil.  Judic.  vol.  iv.  p.  5.i<>.
It  is  also  this  which,  in  literature  and  in  science,  makes  them  favour  the  establishment
of  academies ;  and  it  is  probably  to  the  same  principle  that  their  jurists  owe  their  love
of  codification.  All  these  are  manifestations  of  an  unwillingness  to  rely  on  the  general
march  of  affairs,  and  show  an  undue  con  tempt  for  the  unaided  conclusions  of  private  men.
[Codification  has  often  been  craved,  and  would  be  widely  welcomed,  in  England.— ED.]

[*  At  the  very  time  at  which  Buckle  wrote,  the  French  suffrage  was  wider  than  the
English,  as  it  is  to-day.  While  he  thus  extolled  British  liberty,  the  agricultural  labourers
were  without  the  franchise,  and  the  town  franchise  was  closely  limited.  He  was  thinking
solely  of  the  middle  classes.— ED.]

[t  The  proposition  here  is  in  effect  a  "  bull."  In  the  terms  of  the  case,  to  "  begin  with
the  power  "  is  to  begin  the  "  exercise."  To  learn  to  swim  it  is  necessary  to  go  into  the
water.  The  subsequent  remarks  as  to  "  preliminary  discipline  "  merely  repeat  the
confusion.— ED.]


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  359

When,  in  the  fourteenth  century,  the  authority  of  the  French  kings  began
rapidly  to  increase,  the  political  influence  of  the  nobility  was  of  course  cor-
respondingly diminished.  What,  however,  proves  the  extent  to  which  their
power  hail  taken  root,  is  the  undoubted  fact  that,  notwithstanding  this  to  them
unfavourable  circumstance,  the  people  were  never  able  to  emancipate  themselves
from  their  control.4*  The  relation  the  nobles  bore  to  the  throne  became  entirely
changed  ;  that  which  they  bore  to  the  people  remained  almost  the  same.  In
Kn^land,  slavery,  or  villenage,  as  it  is  mildly  termed,  quickly  diminished,  and
was  extinct  by  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century.47  In  France,  it  lingered  on
two  hundred  years  later,  and  was  only  destroyed  in  that  great  Revolution  by
uhich  the  possessors  of  ill-gotten  power  were  called  to  so  sharp  an  account. is
Thus.  too.  until  the  last  seventy  years,  the  nobles  were  in  France  exempt  from
those  oirerous  taxes  which  oppressed  the  people.  The  taille  and  corvee  were
heavy  and  grievous  exactions,  but  they  fell  solely  on  men  of  ignoble  birth  ;49

4(i  Mably  (Observations,  vol.  iii.  pp.  154,  155,  352-362)  has  collected  some  striking
evidence  of  the  tyranny  of  the  French  nobles  in  the  sixteenth  century  ;  and  as  to  the
wanton  cruelty  with  which  they  exercised  then  power  in  the  seventeenth  century,  see
Des  RSau.i,  Historicttes,  vol.  vii.  p.  155,  vol.  viii.  p.  79,  vol.  ix.  pp.  40,  61,  62,  vol.  x.
pp.  j.s;s-j.«)7.  In  the  eighteenth  century  matters  were  somewhat  better;  but  still  the
subordination  was  excessive,  and  the  people  were  poor,  ill-treated  and  miserable.  Com-
pare (Euvres  de  Turgpt,  vol.  iv.  p.  139  ;  Letter  from  the  Earl  of  Cork,  dated  Lyons,  1754,
in  Burtons  Diary,  vol.  iv.  p.  80  ;  the  statement  of  Fox,  in  Par/.  Hist.  vol.  xxxi.  p.  406  ;
Jefferson's  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  45  ;  and  Smith's  Tour  on  the  Continent,  edit.  i793t
vol.  iii.  pp.  201,  202.

47  Mr.  Eccleston  (English  Antiq.  p.  138)  says,  that  in  1450  "villenage  had  almost
passed  away  ;  "  and  according  to  Mr.  Thornton  (Over -Population,  p.  182),  "  Sir  Thomas
Smith,  who  wrote  about  the  year  1550,  declares  that  he  had  never  met  with  any  personal
or  domestic  slaves  .  and  that  the  villains,  or  predial  slaves,  still  to  be  found,  were  so
few,  as  to  be  scarcely  worth  mentioning."  Mr.  Hallam  can  find  no  "  unequivocal  testi-
numv  to  the  existence  of  villenage  "  later  than  1574.  Middle  Ages,  vol.  ii.  p.  312  :  see,
to  the  same  effect,  Harrington  on  the  Statutes,  pp.  308,  309.  If,  however,  my  memory
does  not  deceive  me,  I  have  met  with  evidence  of  it  in  the  reign  of  James  I.,  but  I
cannot  recall  the  passage.  [Predial  slavery  existed  in  Scotland  at  that  period,  in  the
case  of  the  colliers  and  s.ilt -workers  (Burton,  History  of  Scotland,  viii.  7-8) ;  and  not
till  1790,  after  France  had  set  the  example,  was  it  abolished.  See  Cockbur n's  Memorials,
ed.  1856,  p.  79.  Such  facts  ought  to  have  been  known  to  Buckle. — ED.)

<a  M.  Cassagtiac  (Causes  de  la  Revolution,  vol.  iii.  p.  n)  says  :  "Chose  surprenante,  il
y  avait  encore,  au  4  aout  1789,  un  million  cinq  cent  mille  serfs  de  corps  ;  "  'and  M.  Ciuaiul
[prfcis  ..I?  I  Ancien  Droit,  Paris,  1852,  p.  3),  "  jusqu' a  la  revolution  une  division  tond.i-
mentale  partageait  les  personnes  en  personnes  libres  et  personnes  sujettes  a  condition
servile."  A  few  years  before  the  Revolution  this  shameful  distinction  was  abolished
by  1  ouis  XVI.  in  hib  own  domains.  Compare  Eschback,  Etude  du  Droit,  pp.  27'»  272,
with  Du  Mf.tnil,  Mem.  sur  le  Prince  Le  Brun,  p.  94.  I  notice  this  particularly,  because
M.  Monteil,  a  learned  and  generally  accurate  ^writer,  supposes  that  the  abolition  took
place  i  .11  her  than  it  really  did.  Hist,  des  divers  Etats,  vol.  vi.  p.  101.

49  Ca<Sii:;ntic.  tic  hi  Revolution,  vol.  i.  pp.  122,  173  ;  Giraud,  Ancien  Droit,  p.  ii  ;
Soulavie,  Mem.  de  Louis  XVI.  vol.  vi.  p.  156  ;  Mem.  au  Rni  sur  les  Municipality,  in
(Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  vii.  p.  423  ;  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  i.  p.  200.

Fur! her  information  respecting  the  amount  and  nature  of  these  vexatious  impositions
will  be  tound  in  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  xiii.  p.  24,  vol.  xiv.  p.  118  ;  Saint  A ulair e,  Hist,
de  la  Fronde,  vol.  i.  p.  125  ;  Tocqueville,  Ancien  Rtgime,  pp.  135,  191,  420,  440  ;  Sully,
(Economies  Royales,  vol.  ii.  p.  412,  vol.  iii.  p.  226,  vol.  iv.  p.  199,  vol.  v.  pp.  339,  410,
vol.  vi  p.  94  ;  Relat.  des  Ambassad.  Venit.  vol  i.  p.  96  ;  Mably,  Observations,  vol  iii.
PP-  355.  35^  ;  Boulainvilliers,  Ancien  Gouvernement,  vol.  iii.  p.  109  ;  Le  Va&sor,  Hist,  de
Louis  XIII,  vol.  ii.  p.  29  ;  Mem.  d'Omei  Talon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  103.  369  J  Mem.  de  Montglat,
vol.  i.  p.  82  ;  Tocqueville,  Regne  de  Louis  XV,  vol.  i.  pp.  87,  33««  (Euvres  de  Turgot,
vol.  i.  p.  372,  vol.  iv.  pp.  58,59, 74, 75,242,  278,  vol.  v.pp.  226,  242,  vol.  vi.p.  144*  vol.  viii.
pp.  152,  280.


360  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

for  the  French  aristocracy,  being  a  high  and  chivalrous  race,  would  have  deemed
it  an  insult  to  their  illustrious  descent  if  they  had  been  taxed  to  the  same  amount
as  those  whom  they  despised  as  their  inferiors.50  Indeed,  everything  tended  to
nurture  this  general  contempt.  Everything  was  contrived  to  humble  one  class
and  exalt  the  other.  For  the  nobles  there  were  reserved  the  best  appointments
in  the  church,  and  also  the  most  important  military  posts.51  The  privilege  of
entering  the  army  as  officers  was  confined  to  them  ;52  and  they  alone  possessed
a  prescriptive  right  to  belong  to  the  cavalry  .^  At  the  same  time,  and  to  avoid
the  least  chance  of  confusion,  an  equal  vigilance  was  displayed  in  the  most
trifling  matters,  and  care  was  taken  to  prevent  any  similarity  even  in  the  amuse-
ments of  the  two  classes.  To  such  a  pitch  was  this  brought  that  in  many  parts
of  France,  the  right  of  having  an  aviary  or  a  dovecote  depended  entirely  on  a
man's  rank  ;  and  no  Frenchman,  whatever  his  wealth  might  be,  could  keep
pigeons,  unless  he  were  a  noble  ;  it  being  considered  that  these  recreations  were
too  elevated  for  persons  of  plebeian  origin.54

Circumstances  like  these  are  valuable  as  evidence  of  the  state  of  society  to
which  they  belong  ;  and  their  importance  will  become  peculiarly  obvious  when
we  compare  them  with  the  opposite  condition  of  England.

For  in  England,  neither  these  nor  any  similar  distinctions  have  ever  been  known.
The  spirit  of  which  our  yeomanry,  copyholders,  and  free  burgesses  were  the
representatives,  proved  far  too  strong  for  those  protective  and  monopolizing
principles,  of  which  the  aristocracy  are  the  guardians  in  politics,  and  the  clergy
in  religion.  And  it  is  to  the  successful  opposition  made  by  these  feelings  of
individual  independence,  that  we  owe  our  two  greatest  national  acts — our
Reformation  *  in  the  sixteenth,  and  our  Rebellion  in  the  seventeenth  century.
Before,  however,  tracing  the  steps  taken  in  these  matters,  there  is  one  other
point  of  view  to  which  I  wish  to  call  attention,  as  a  further  illustration  of  the
early  and  radical  difference  between  France  and  England.

In  the  eleventh  century  there  arose  the  celebrated  institution  of   chivalry,55

50  So  deeply  rooted  were  these  feelings  that  even  in  1789,  the  very  year  the  Revolution
broke  out,  it  was  deemed  a  great  concession  that  the  nobles  "  will  consent,  indeed,  to
equal  taxation."     See  a  letter  from  Jefferson  to  Jay,  dated  Paris,  May  gih,  1789,  in
Jefferson's  Corresp.  vol.  ii.  pp.  462,  463.     Compare  Mercier  sur  Rousseau,  vol.  i.  p.  136.

51  "  Les  nobles,  qui  avaient  le  privilege  exclusif  des  grandes  dignites  et  des  gros
benefices."     Mem.  de  Rivarol,  p.  97  :   see  also  Mem.  de  Bouille,  vol.  i.  p.  56  ;   Lemontey,
Etablissement  Monarchique,  p.  337  ;  Daniel,  Hist,  de  la  Milice  Franfoise,  vol.  ii.  p.  556  ;
Campan,  Mem.  sur  Marie  Antoinette,  vol.  i.  pp.  238,  239.

52  "  L'ancien  regime  n'avait  admis  que  des  nobles  pour  officiers."     Mem.  de  Roland,
vol.  i.  p.  398.      Segur  mentions  that  early  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XVI.  "  les  nobles  seuls
avaient  le  droit  d'entrer  au  service  comme  sous-lieutenans."     Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  i.
p.  65.     Compare  pp.  117,  265-271,  with  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  iii.  p.  74,  and  De  Stael,
Consid.  sur  la  Rev.  vol.  i.  p.  123.

53  Thus,  De  Thou  says  of  Henry  III.,  "  il  remet  sous  1'ancien  pied  la  cavalerie  ordinaire,
qui  n'etoit  composee  que  de  la  noblesse."     Hist.  Univ.  vol.  ix.  pp.  262,  203  ;    and  see
vol.  x.  pp.  504,  505,  vol.  xiii.  p.  22  ;    and  an  imperfect  statement  of  the  same  fact  in
Boullier,  Hist,  des  divers  Corps  de  la  Maison  Militaire  des  Rois  de  France,  Paris,  1818,
p.  58,  a  superficial  work  on  an  uninteresting  subject.

*  M.  Tocqueville  (L'Ancien  Regime,  p.  448)  mentions,  among  other  regulations  still  in
force  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  that  "  en  Dauphine,  en  Bretagne,  en  Normandie,  il
est  prohibe  a  tout  roturier  d' avoir  des  colombiers,  fnios  et  voliere  ;  il  n'y  a  que  les  nobles
qui  puissent  avoir  des  pigeons."

"  Des  la  fin  du  onzieme  siecle,  a  1'epoque  meme  ou  commencerent  les  croisades,  on

[*  The  Reformation,  in  the  sense  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  England,
was  certainly  not  made  by  the  people.  It  was  the  work  first  of  the  king  and  those  to
whom  he  gave  the  church  lands,  later  of  the  nobility  carrying  out  the  same  policy.
Buckle  appears  to  be  thinking  of  the  ecclesiastical  policy  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  when
he  alludes  to  "  the  Reformation." — ED.]


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  361

which  was  to  manners  what  feudalism  was  to  politics.  This  connexion  is  clear,
not  only  from  the  testimony  of  contemporaries,  but  also  from  two  general
considerations.  In  the  first  place,  chivalry  was  so  highly  aristocratic,  that  no
one  could  even  receive  knighthood  unless  he  were  of  noble  birth  ;56  and  the  pre-
liminary education  which  was  held  to  be  necessary  was  carried  on  either  in
schools  appointed  by  the  nobles,  or  else  in  their  own  baronial  castles.57  In  the
second  place,  it  was  essentially  a  protective,  and  not  at  all  a  reforming  institution.
It  was  contrived  with  a  view  to  remedy  certain  oppressions,  as  they  successively
arose  ;  opposed  in  this  respect  to  the  reforming  spirit,  wrhich,  being  remedial
rather  than  palliative,  strikes  at  the  root  of  an  evil  by  humbling  the  class  from
which  the  evil  proceeds,  passing  over  individual  cases  in  order  to  direct  its  attention
to  general  causes.  But  chivalry,  so  far  from  doing  this,  was  in  fact  a  fusion  of  the
aristocratic  and  the  ecclesiastical  forms  of  the  protective  spirit.53  For,  by  intro-
ducing among  the  nobles  the  principle  of  knighthood,  which,  being  personal,
could  never  be  bequeathed,  it  presented  a  point  at  which  the  ecclesiastical
doctrine  of  celibacy  could  coalesce  with  the  aristocratic  doctrine  of  hereditary
descent.59  Out  of  this  coalition  sprung  results  of  great  moment.  It  is  to  this
that  Europe  owes  those  orders,  half  aristocratic,  half  religious,6*)  the  Knights
Templars,  the  Knights  of  St.  James,  the  Knights  of  St.  John,  the  Knights  of
St.  Michael  :  establishments  which  inflicted  the  greatest  evils  on  society  :  and
whose  members,  combining  analogous  vices,  enlivened  the  superstition  of  monks
with  the  debauchery  of  soldiers.  As  a  natural  consequence,  an  immense  number
of  noble  knights  were  solemnly  pledged  to  "  defend  the  church  ;  "  an  ominous
expression,  the  meaning  of  which  is  too  well  known  to  the  readers  of  ecclesiastical
history.61  Thus  it  was  that  chivalry,  uniting  the  hostile  principles  of  celibacy

trouve  la  chevalerie  etablie."  Koch,  Tab.  des  Revolutions,  vol.  i.  p.  143  :  see  also  Sainte-
Palaye,  Mem.  sur  la  Chevalerie,  vol.  i.  pp.  42,  68.  M.  Guizot  (Civilis.  en  France,  vol.  iii.
pp.  349-354)  has  attempted  to  trace  it  back  to  an  earlier  period  ;  but  he  appears  to  have
failed,  though  of  course  its  germs  may  be  easily  found.  According  to  some  writers  it
originated  in  northern  Europe  ;  according  to  others  in  Arabia  !  Mallets  Northern  Anti-
quities, p.  202  ;  Journal  of  Asiat.  Soc.  vol.  ii.  p.  n.

56  "  L'ordre  de  chevalerie  n'etoit  accorde  qu'aux  homines  d'un  sang  noble."     Sismondi,
Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  iv.  p.  204.     Compare  Daniel,  Hist,  de  la  Milice,  vol.  i.  p.  97,  and
Mills'  Hist,  of  Chivalry,  vol.  i.  p.  20.

57  "  In  some  places  there  were  schools  appointed  by  the  nobles  of  the  country,  but
most  frequently  their  own  castles  served."     Mills'  Hist,  of  Chivalry,  vol.  i.  p.  31  ;    and
see  Sainte-Palaye,  Mem.  sur  VAnc.  Chevalerie,  vol.  i.  pp.  30,  56,  57,  on  this  education.

5<?  This  combination  of  knighthood  and  religious  rites  is  often  ascribed  to  the  crusades  ;
but  there  is  good  evidence  that  it  took  place  a  little  earlier,  and  must  be  referred  to  the
latter  half  of  the  eleventh  century.  Compare  Mills'  Hist,  of  Chivalry,  vol.  i.  pp.  10,  n  ;
Daniel,  Hist,  de  la  Milice,  vol.  i.  pp.  101,  102,  108  ;  Boulainvilliers,  Ancien  Gouv.  vol.  i.
p.  236.  Sainte-Palaye  (Mem.  sur  la  Chevalerie,  vol.  i.  pp.  119-123),  who  has  collected
some  illustrations  of  the  relation  between  chivalry  and  the  church,  says,  p.  IIQ,  "  enfin
la  chevalerie  etoit  regardee  comme  une  ordination,  un  sacerdoce."  The  superior
clergy  possessed  the  right  of  conferring  knighthood,  and  William  Rufus  was  actually
knighted  by  Archbishop  Lanfranc  :  "  Archiepiscopus  Lanfrancus,  eo  quod  eum  nutrierat,
et  militem  fecerat."  Will.  Malmes.  lib.  iv.,  in  Scriptores  pest  Bedam,  p.  67.  Compare
Fosbroke's  British  Monachism,  1843,  p.  101,  on  knighting  by  abbots.

59  The  influence  of  this  on  the  nobles  is  rather  exaggerated  by  Mr.  Mill?  ;  who,  on  the
other  hand,  has  not  noticed  how  the  unhereditary  element  was  favourable  to  the  ecclesias-
tical spirit.     Mills'  Hist,  of  Chivalry,  vol.  i.  pp.  15,  389,  vol.  ii.  p.  169  ;  a  work  interesting
as  an  assemblage  of  facts,  but  almost  useless  as  a  philosophic  estimate.

60  "  In  their  origin  all  the  military  orders,  and  most  of  the  xeligious  ones,  were  entirely
aristocratic."     Mills'  Hist,  of  Chivalry,  vol.  i.  p.  336.

61  Mills'  Hist,  of  Chivalry,  vol.  i.  pp.  148,  333.     About  the  year  1127,  St.  Bernard
wrote  a  discourse  in  favour  of  the  Knights  Templars,  in  which  "  he  extols  this  order  as  a
combination  of  monasticism  and  knighthood.  .  .  .  He  describes  the  design  of  it  as
being  to  give  the  military  order  and  knighthood  a  serious  Christian  direction,  and  to  convert


362  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  noble  birth,  became  the  incarnation  of  the  spirit  of  the  two  classes  to  which
those  principles  belonged.  Whatever  benefit,  therefore,  this  institution  may
have  conferred  upon  manners,62  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  actively  contri-
buted to  keep  men  in  a  state  of  pupilage,  and  stopped  the  march  of  society  by
prolonging  the  term  of  its  infancy.63

On  this  account  it  is  evident  that,  whether  we  look  at  the  immediate  or  at  the
remote  tendency  of  chivalry,  its  strength  and  duration  become  a  measure  of
the  predominance  of  the  protective  spirit.  If,  with  this  view,  we  compare
France  and  England,  we  shall  find  fresh  proof  of  the  early  divergence  of  those
countries.  Tournaments,  the  first  open  expression  of  chivalry,  are  of  French
origin.64  The  greatest  and,  indeed,  the  only  two  great  describers  of  chivalry
are  Joinville  and  Froissart,  both  of  whom  were  Frenchmen.  Bayard,  that
famous  chevalier,  who  is  always  considered  as  the  last  representative  of  chivalry,
was  a  Frenchman,  and  was  killed  when  fighting  for  Francis  I.  Nor  was  it  until
nearly  forty  years  after  his  death  that  tournaments  were  finally  abolished  in
France,  the"  last  one  having  been  held  in  I5<5o.65

But  in  England,  the  protective  spirit  being  much  less  active  than  in  France,
we  should  expect  to  find  that  chivalry,  as  its  offspring,  had  less  influence.  And
such  was  really  the  case.  The  honours  that  were  paid  to  knights,  and  the  social
distinctions  by  which  they  were  separated  from  the  other  classes,  were  never  so
threat  in  our  country  as  in  France.66  As  men  became  more  free,  the  little  respect

war  into  something  that  God  might  approve."  Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  vii.
p.  358.  To  this  may  be  added  that  early  in  the  thirteenth  century  a  chivalric  association
was  formed,  and  afterwards  merged  in  the  Dominican  order,  called  the  Militia  of  Christ :
"  un  nouvel  ordre  de  chevalerie  destine  a  poursuivre  les  heretiques,  sur  le  modele  de
celui  des  Templiers,  et  sous  le  nom  de  Milice  de  Christ."  Llorente,  Hist,  de  r Inquisition,
vol.  i.  pp.  52,  133,  203.

62  Several  writers  ascribe  to  chivalry  the  merit  of  softening  manners,  and  of  increasing
the  influence  of  women.     Sainte-Palaye,  Mem.  sur  la  Chevalerie,  vol.  i.  pp.  220-223,  282,
284,  vol.  iii.  pp.  vi.  vii.  159-161  ;   Helvetius  de  VEsprit,  vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  51  ;    Schlegel's
Lectures,  vol.  i.  p.  209.     That  there  was  such  a  tendency  is,  I  think,  indisputable  ;   but
it  has  been  greatly  exaggerated,  and  an  author  of  considerable  reading  on  these  subjects
says,  "  The  rigid  treatment  shown  to  prisoners  of  war  in  ancient  times  strongly  marks
the  ferocity  and  uncultivated  manners  of  our  ancestors,  and  that  even  to  ladies  of  high
rank  ;  notwithstanding  the  homage  said  to  have  been  paid  to  the  fair  sex  in  those  days
of  chivalry."     Grose's  Military  Antiquities,  vol.  ii.  p.  114.     Compare  Manning  on  the
Law  of  Nations,  1839,  pp.  145,  146.

63  Mr.  Hallam  (Middle  Ages,  vol.  ii.  p.  464)  says,  "  A  third  reproach  may  be  made
to  the  character  of  knighthood,  that  it  widened  the  separation  between  the  different
classes  of  society,  and  confirmed  that  aristocratical  spirit  of  high  birth,  by  which  the
large  mass  of  mankind  were  kept  in  unjust  degradation."

64  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  iv.  pp.  370,  371,  377  ;   Turner's  Hist,  of  England,
vol.  iv.  p.  478  ;  Foncemagne  de  VOrigine  des  Armoiries,  in  Mem.  de  I' Academic  des  Inscrip-
tions, vol.  xx.  p.  580.     Koch  also  says  (Tableau  des  Revolutions,  vol.  i.  p.  139),  "  c'est  de
la  France  que  1'usage  des  tournois  se  repandit  chez  les  autres  nations  de  1'Europe."
They  were  first  introduced  into  England  in  the  reign  of  Stephen.     Lingard's  England,
vol.  ii.  p.  27.

65  Mr.  Hallam  (Middle  Ages,  vol.  ii.  p.  470)  says  they  were  "  entirely  discontinued  in
France  "  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  Henry  II.  :    but  according  to  Mills'  Hist,  of
Chivalry,  vol.  ii.  p.  226,  they  lasted  the  next  year  ;  when  another  fatal  accident  occurred,
and  "  tournaments  ceased  for  ever."     Compare  Sainte-Palaye  sur  la  Chevalerie,  vol.  ii.
PP-  39»  40.

66  Mr.  Hallam  (Middle  Ages,  vol.  ii.  p.  467)  observes,  that  the  knight,  as  compared
with  other  classes,  "  was  addressed  by  titles  of  more  respect.     There  was  not,  however,
so  much  distinction  in  England  as  in  France."     The  great  honour  paid  to  knights  in  France
is  noticed  by  Daniel  (Milice  Francaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  128,  129)  ;    and  Herder  (Ideen  r.ur
Geschichte,  vol.  iv.  pp.  266,  267)  says,  that  in  France  chivalry  flourished  more  than  in
any  other  country.     The  same  remark  is  made  by  Sismondi  (Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  iv.


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  363

they  had  for  such  matters  still  further  diminished.  In  the  thirteenth  century,
and  indeed  in  the  very  reign  in  which  burgesses  were  first  returned  to  parliament,
the  leading  symbol  o"f  chivalry  fell  into  such  disrepute  that  a  law  was  passed
obliging  certain  persons  to  accept  that  rank  of  knighthood  which  in  other  nations
was  one  of  the  highest  objects  of  ambition.07  In  the  fourteenth  century  this
was  followed  by  another  blow,  which  deprived  knighthood  of  its  exclusively
military  character  ;  the  custom  having  grown  up  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  of
conferring  it  on  the  judges  in  the  courts  of  law,  thus  turning  a  warlike  title  into  a
civil  honour. 6*  Finally,  before  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  spirit  of
chivalry,  in  France  still  at  its  height,  was  in  our  country  extinct,  and  this  mis-
chievous institution  had  become  a  subject  for  ridicule  even  among  the  people
themselves.69  To  these  circumstances  we  may  add  two  others  which  seem
worthy  of  observation.  The  first  is  that  the  French,  notwithstanding  their
many  admirable  qualities,  have  always  been  more  remarkable  for  personal
vanity  than  the  English  ;70  a  peculiarity  partly  referrible  to  those  chivalric

p.  198).  [Green,  nevertheless,  decides  that  it  "  told  most  fatally  on  our  manners,  our
literature,  our  national  spirit."  (Short  History,  ed.  1881,  ch.  iv.  p.  176.)  And  see  below,
ch.  xv.  note  14,  as  to  "  the  brutal  crimes  of  our  wretched  and  ignorant  ancestors  "  in  respect
of  the  English  treatment  of  Scotland  in  the  reign  of  Edward  I. — ED.]

67  The  Statutum  de  Militibus,  in  1307,  was  perhaps  the  first  recognition  of  this.     Com-
pare Blackstone's  Comment,  vol.  ii.  p.  69  ;  Harrington  on  the  Statutes,  pp.  192,  193.     But
we  have  positive  evidence  that  compulsory  knighthood  existed  in  the  reign  of  Henry  III.  ;
or  at  least  that  those  who  refused  it  were  obliged  to  pay  a  fine.     .See  Hallam's  Const.
Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  421,  and  Lyttelton's  Hist,  of  Henry  II. ,  vol.  ii.  pp.  238,  239,  2nd  edit.  4to,
1767.     Lord  Lyttelton,  evidently  puzzled,  says,  "  Indeed  it  seems  a  deviation  from  the
original  principle  of  this  institution.     For  one  cannot  but  think  it  a  very  great  incon-
sistency, that  a  dignity,  which  was  deemed  an  accession  of  honour  to  kings  themselves,
should  be  forced  upon  any."     [Compulsory  "knighthood"  is  not  a  proof  that  in  the
thirteenth  century  "  chivalry "'  had  fallen  into  disrepute,     It  was  late  in  that  century
that  Edward  I.  introduced  the  tournament  into  England,  "  where  it  had  been  rigidly
prohibited  by  his  predecessors  and  forbidden  by  the  Church."  (Green,  Short  History,  p.i/7-
-En.J

68  In  Mills"  Hrat.  of  Chivalry,  vol.  ii.  p.  154,  it  is  said,  that  "  the  judges  of  the  courts
of  law  "  were  first  knighted  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.

69  Mr.  Mills  (Hist,  of  Chivalry,  vol.  ii.  pp.  99,  zoo)  has  printed  a  curious  extract  from
a  lamentation  over  the  destruction  of  chivalry,  written  in  the  reign  of  Edward  IV.  ;  but
he  has  overlooked  a  still  more  singular  instance.     This  is  a  popular  ballad,  written  in
the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and  called  the  Turnament  of  Tottenham,  in  which
the  follies  of  chivalry  are  admirably  ridiculed.     See  Warton's  Hist,  of  English  Poetry,
edit.  iS^o,  voL  iii.  pp.  98-101  ;    and  Percy's  Reliques  of  Ancient  Poetry,  edit.  1845,
pp.  92-95.     According  to  Turner   (Hist,   of   England,   vol.  vi.  p.  363),    "  the   ancient
books  of  chivalry  were  laid  aside  "  about  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.

70  This  is  not  a  mere  popular  opinion,  but  rests  upon  A  large  amount  of  evidence,
supplied  by  competent  and  impartial  observers.     Addison,  who  was  a  lenient  as  well  as
an  able  judge,  and  who  had  lived  much  among  the  French,  calls  them  "  the  vainest
nation  irt  the  world."     Letter  to  Bishop  Hou°h,  in  Aikin's  Life  of  Addison,  vol.  i.  p.  90.
Napoleon  says,  "  vanity  is  the  ruling  principle  of  the  French."     Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,
vol.  vi.  p.  25      Dumont  (Souvenirs  sur  Mirabeau,  p.  in)  declares,  that  "  le  trait  le  plus
dominant  dans  le  caroctere  irancais,  c'est  1' amour  propre  ;  "   and  Segur  (Souvenirs,
vol.  i.  pp.  73,  74),  "  car  en  France  1' amour  propre,  ou,  si  on  le  veut,  la  vanite,  est  de  toutes
ies  passions  la  plus  irritable."     It  is  moreover  stated,  that  phrenological  observations
prove  that  the  French  are  vainer  than  the  English.     Combe's  Elements  of  Phrenology,
6th  edit.  Edinb.  1845,  p.  90  ;    and  a  partial  recognition  of  the  same  fact  in  Broussais,
Cours  de  Phrenologie,  p.  297.     For  other  instances  of  writers  who  have  noticed  the  vanity
of  the  French  see  Tocqueville,  VAncien  Regime,  p.  148  ;   Barante,  Lit.  Franf.  au  XVIII,
Siccle,  p.  80  ;    Mem.  de  Brissot,  vol.  i.  p.  272  ;   Mezeray,  Hist,  de  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  933  ;
Lemontev,  Etablissement  Monarchique,  p.  418  ;    Voltaire,  Lettres  inedites,  vol.  ii.  p.  282  ;
Tocqueville,  Regne  de  Lotm  XV  vol.  ii.  p.  358  ;  De  Stael  sur  la  Revolution,   vol.  i.  p.26o


364  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

traditions  which  even  their  occasional  republics  have  been  unable  to  destroy,
and  which  makes  them  attach  undue  importance  to  external  distinctions,  by
which  I  mean,  not  only  dress  and  manners,  but  also  medals,  ribbons,  stars,
crosses,  and  the  like,  which  we,  a  prouder  people,  have  never  held  in  such  high
estimation.  The  other  circumstance  is,  that  duelling  has  from  the  beginning
been  more  popular  in  France  than  in  England  ;  and  as  this  is  a  custom  which
we  owe  to  chivalry,  the  difference  in  this  respect  between  the  two  countries
supplies  another  link  in  that  long  chain  of  evidence  by  which  we  must  estimate
their  national  tendencies.71

The  old  associations,  of  which  these  facts  are  but  the  external  expression,
now  continued  to  act  with  increasing  vigour.  In  France,  the  protective  spirit,
carried  into  religion,  was  strong  enough  to  resist  the  Reformation,*  and  preserve
to  the  clergy  the  forms,  at  least,  of  their  ancient  supremacy.  In  England,

vol.  ii.  p.  258.  [It  must  be  remembered  that  the  term  "  vanity  "  may  stand  for  a  number
of  different  qualities  when  used  by  different  writers.  The  terms  "  amour-propre  "  and
"  vanite  "  are  by  some  of  the  phrenologists  used  to  signify  opposed  tendencies,  as  Buckle
used  "  pride  "  and  "  vanity."  Combe's  statement  in  his  Elements  is  supported  by  no
evidence  ;  and  in  his  fuller  System  cf  Phrenology  he  does  not  advance  it.  In  any  case
his  analysis  does  not  help  Buckle,  for  he  asserts  that  the  organ  of  Love  of  Approbation
( =  "  vanity  ")  "  is  uniformly  large  in  bashful  individuals  "  and  that  it  is  large  in  the  skull
of  Robert  the  Bruce.  It  i?  clear  that  the  psychology  of  the  whole  subject  is  here  in  a
most  elementary  state.  Broussais  finally  does  not  support  Buckle,  for  ia  the  passage
cited  he  expressly  says  :  "  Reste  A  verifier  si  sur  la  plus  grande  masse  des  cranes  cet
organe  est  plus  prononce  en  France  qu'en  Angleterre  ....  1'education,  les  habitudes,
1'exemple,  donnent  la  preponderance,  tantot  a  un  organe,  tantot  a  un  autre." — ED.]

71  The  relation  between  chivalry  and  duelling  has  been  noticed  by  several  writers  ;
and  in  France,  where  the  chivalric  spirit  was  not  completely  destroyed  until  the  Revolu-
tion, we  find  occasional  traces  of  this  connexion  even  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XVI.  Sec,
for  instance,  in  Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  i.  p.  86,  a  curious  letter  in  regard  to  chivalry  and
duelling  in  1778.  In  England  there  is,  I  believe,  no  evidence  of  even  a  single  private
duel  being  fought  earlier  than  the  sixteenth  century,  and  there  were  not  many  till  the
latter  half  of  Elizabeth's  reign  ;  but  in  France  the  custom  arose  early  in  the  fifteenth
century,  and  in  the  sixteenth  it  became  usual  for  the  seconds  to  fight  as  well  as  the  princi-
pals. Compare  Montlosier,  Monavc.  Franf.  vol.  ii.  p.  436,  with  Monteil,  Hist,  des  divers
Eiats,  vol.  vi.  p.  48.  From  that  time  the  love  of  the  French  for  duelling  became  quite
a  passion  until  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  the  Revolution,  or  rather  the
circumstances  which  led  to  the  Revolution,  caused  its  comparative  cessation.  Some
idea  may  be  formed  of  the  enormous  extent  of  this  practice  formerly  in  France,  by  com-
paring the  following  passages  ;  which  I  have  the  more  pleasure  in  bringing  together,
as  no  one  has  written  even  a  tolerable  history  of  duelling,  notwithstanding  the  great
part  it  once  played  in  European  society.  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  ix.  pp.  592, 593,  vol.  xv.
p.  57  ;  Daniel,  Milice  Francoise,  vol.  ii.  p.  582  ;  Sully,  (Economies,  vol.  i.  p.  301,  vol.  iii.
p.  406,  vol.  vi.  p.  122,  vol.  viii.  p.  41.  vol.  ix.  p.  408  ;  Carew's  State  of  France  under
Henry  IV.,  in  Birch's  Historical  Negotiations,  p.  467  ;  Ben  Jonson's  Works,  edit.  Gifford,
vol.  vi.  p.  69  ;  Dulaure,  Hist,  de  Paris  (1825,  3rd.  edit.),  vol.  iv.  p.  567,  vol.  v.  pp.  300,  301 ;
Le  Clerc,  Bibliotheque  Univ.  vol.  xx.  p.  242  ;  Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  iii.  p.  536  ;  Capefigue,
Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  viii.  p.  98  ;  Capefigue's  Richelieu,  vol.  i.  p.  63  ;  Des  Reaux,
Historiettes,  vol.  x.  p.  13  ;  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  ii.  p.  191,  vol.  vii.  p.  215,  vol.  ix.  p.  351  ;
Mem.  of  the  Baroness  d'Oberkirch,  vol.  i.  p.  71,  edit.  Lend.  1852  ;  Lettres  inedites  d' Agues-
seau,  vol.  i.  p.  211  ;  Lettres  de  Dudeffand  a  Walpole,  vol.  iii.  p.  249,  vol.  iv.  pp.  27,  28,
152  ;  Boullier,  Maison  Militaire  des  Rois  de  France,  pp.  87,  88  ;  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  v.
pp.  402,  403,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  411,  vol.  xliv.  pp.  127,  401,  vol.  xlviii.  p.  522,  vol.  xlix.  p.  130.
[Voltaire  writes  :  "  Ce  n'est  pas  trop  dire,  que  dans  Je  cours  de  vingt  annees,  dont  dix
avaient  6te  troublces  par  guerre,  il  etait  mort  plus  de  gentilshommes  francais  de  la  main
des  Francais  m  ernes  que  de  celle  des  ennemis."  Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,  ch.  ii.  near  end. — Eu.]

[*  In  England  it  was  actually  "  the  protective  spirit,"  represented  by  the  king,  that
did  the  destructive  work  for  the  Reformation. — Er>.]


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  365

the  piide  of  men,  and  their  habits  of  self-reliance,  enabled  them  to  mature
into  a  system  what  is  called  the  right  of  private  judgment,  by  which  some  of
the  most  cherished  traditions  were  eradicated  ;  and  this,  as  we  have  already
seen,  being  quickly  succeeded,  first  by  scepticism,  and  then  by  toleration,
prepared  the  way  for  that  subordination  of  the  church  to  the  state,  for  which
we  are  pre-eminent,  and  without  a  rival,  among  the  nations  of  Europe.*  The
very  same  tendency,  acting  in  politics,  displayed  analogous  results.  Our  ances-
tors found  no  difficulty  in  humbling  the  nobles,  and  reducing  them  to  comparative
insignificance.  The  wars  of  the  Roses,  by  breaking  up  the  leading  families  into
two  hostile  factions,  aided  this  movement  ;72  and,  after  the  reign  of  Edward  IV.,
there  is  no  instance  of  any  Englishman,  even  of  the  highest  rank,  venturing  to
carry  on  those  private  wars,  by  which,  in  other  countries,  the  great  lords  still
disturbed  the  peace  of  society.73  When  the  civil  contests  subsided,  the  same
spirit  displayed  itself  in  the  policy  of  Henry  VII.  and  Henry  VIII.  For  those
princes,  despots  as  thev  were,  mainly  oppressed  the  highest  classes  ;  and  even
Henry  VIII.,  notwithstanding  his  barbarous  cruelties,  was  loved  by  the  people,
to  whom  his  reign  was,  on  the  whole,  decidedly  beneficial.  Then  there  came  the
Reformation  ;  which,  being  an  uprising  of  the  human  mind.t  was  essentially  a
rebellious  movement,  and  thus  increasing  the  insubordination  of  men,  sowed,
in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  seeds  of  those  great  political  revolutions  which
in  the  seventeenth  century  broke  out  in  nearly  every  part  of  Europe.  The  con-
nexion between  these  two  revolutionary  epochs  is  a  subject  full  of  interest  ;  but
for  the  purpose  of  the  present  chapter  it  will  be  sufficient  to  notice  such  events,
during  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  as  explain  the  sympathy  between
the  ecclesiastical  and  aristocratic  classes,  and  prove  how  the  same  circumstances
that  were  fatal  to  the  one,  also  prepared  the  way  for  the  downfall  of  the  other.

When  Elizabeth  ascended  the  throne  of  England,  a  large  majority  of  the
nobility  were  opposed  to  the  Protestant  religion.  This  we  know  from  the  most
decisive  evidence  ;  and,  even  if  we  had  no  such  evidence,  a  general  acquaintance
with  human  nature  would  induce  us  to  suspect  that  such  was  the  case.  For
the  aristocracy,  by  the  very  conditions  of  their  existence,  must  as  a  body  always
be  averse  to  innovation.  And  this  not  only  because  by  a  change  they  have
much  to  lose  and  little  to  gain,  but  because  some  of  their  most  pleasurable
emotions  are  connected  with  the  past  rather  than  with  the  present.  In  the
collision  of  actual  life,  their  vanity  is  sometimes  offended  by  the  assumptions
of  inferior  men  ;  it  is  frequently  wounded  by  the  successful  competition  of  able
men.  These  are  mortifications  to  which,  in  the  progress  of  society,  their  liability
is  constantly  increasing.  But  the  moment  they  turn  to  the  past,  they  see  in
those  good  old  times  which  are  now  gone  by,  many  sources  of  consolation.  There
they  find  a  period  in  which  their  glory  is  without  a  rival.  When  they  look  at
their  pedigrees,  their  quarterings,  their  escutcheons  ;  when  they  think  of  the  purity
of  their  blood,  and  the  antiquity  of  their  ancestors, — they  experience  a  comfort

72  On  the  effect  of  the  wars  of  the  Roses  upon  the  nobles,  compare  Hallam's  Cons/.
Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  10  ;  Ltngard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  340  ;  Ecclestorfs  English  Antiq.
pp.  224,  320  :    and  on  their  immense  pecuniary,  or  rather  territorial,  lossrs,  Sinclair's
Hist,  of  the  Revenue,  vol.  i.  p.  155.

73  "  The  last  instance  of  a  pitched  battle  between  two  powerful  noblemen  in  England
occurs  in  the  reign  of  Edward  IV."     Allen  on  the  Prerogative,  p.  123.

[*  The  idea  here  is  that  "pride"  and  habits  of  self-reliance  broke  down  the  Catholic
tradition  by  means  of  a  systematic  use  of  private  judgment,  all  this  before  "  scepticism  "
came  into  play.  Yet  elsewhere  (ch.  vii.)  Buckle  has  declared  scepticism  (  =  doubt)  to  be
a  necessary  prelude  to  any  change  of  belief.  In  reality,  as  already  noted,  the  English
Reformation  was  primarily  a  political  process,  begun  by  the  crown ;  and  the  element  of
intellectual  critici?m  which  entered  later  came  from  outside,  deriving  by  way  of  Geneva
from  France,  and  otherwise  from  Luther  and  Zwingli.  Calvin,  educated  under  the
"  protective  spirit,''  developed  a  faculty  of  dissolving  tradition  which  no  English  theo-
logian of  the  same  period  rivalled. — ED.]

[j  See  edit,  note,  p.  287 . — ED.]


366  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

which  ought  amply  to  atone  for  any  present  inconvenience.  The  tendency  of
this  is  very  obvious,  and  has  shown  itself  in  the  history  of  every  aristocracy  the
world  has  yet  seen.  Men  who  have  worked  themselves  to  so  extravagant  a  pitch
as  to  believe  that  it  is  any  honour  to  have  had  one  ancestor  who  cameVver
with  the  Normans,  and  another  ancestor  who  was  present  at  the  first  invasion
of  Ireland. — men  who  have  reached  this  ecstasy  of  the  fancy  are  not  disposed  to
stop  there,  but,  by  a  process  with  which  most  minds  are  familiar,  they  generalize
their  view  ;  and,  even  on  matters  not  immediately  connected  with  their  fame,
they  acquire  a  habit  of  associating  grandeur  with  antiquity,  and  of  measuring
value  by  age  ;  thus  transferring  to  the  past  an  admiration  which  otherwise  they
might  reserve  for  the  present.

The  connexion  between  these  feelings  and  those  which  animate  the  clergy  is
very  evident.  What  the  nobles  are  to  politics,  that  are  the  priests  to  religion.
Both  classes,  constantly  appealing  to  the  voice  of  antiquity,  rely  much  on  tradition,
and  make  great  account  of  upholding  established  customs.  Both  take  for  granted
that  what  is  old  is  better  tha.n  what  is  new  ;  and  that  in  former  times  there  were
means  of  discovering  truths  respecting  government  and  theology  which  we,  in
these  degenerate  ages,  no  longer  possess.  And  it  may  be  added  that  the  simi-
larity of  their  functions  follows  from  the  similarity  of  their  principles.  Both  are
eminently  protective,  stationary,  or,  as  they  are  sometimes  called,  conservative.
It  is  believed  that  the  aristocracy  guard  the  state  against  revolution,  and  that
the  clergy  keep  the  church  from  error.  The  first  are  the  enemies  of  reformers  ;
the  others  are  the  scourge  of  heretics.

It  does  not  enter  into  the  province  of  this  Introduction  to  examine  how  far
these  principles  are  reasonable,  or  to  inquire  into  the  propriety  of  notions  which
suppose  that,  on  certain  subjects  of  immense  importance,  men  are  to  remain
stationary,  while  on  all  other  subjects  they  are  constantly  advancing.  But
what  I  now  rather  wish  to  point  out  is  the  manner  in  which,  in  the  reign  of
Elizabeth,  the  two  great  conservative  and.  protective  classes  were  weakened  by
that  vast  movement,  the  Reformation,  which,  though  completed  in  the  sixteenth
century,  had  been  prepared  by  a  long  chain  of  intellectual  antecedents.

Whatever  the  prejudices  of  some  may  suggest,  it  will  be  admitted  by  all  unbiased
judges  that  the  Protestant  Reformation  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  an  open
rebellion.*  Indeed,  the  mere  mention  of  private  judgment,  on  which  it  was
avowedly  based,  is  enough  to  substantiate  this  fact.  To  establish  the  right  of
private  judgment  was  to  appeal  from  the  church  to  individuals  ;  it  was  to
i  ncrease  the  play  of  each  man's  intellect  ;  it  was  to  test  the  opinions  of  the  priest-
hood by  the  opinions  of  laymen  ;  it  Avas,  in  fact,  a  rising  of  the  scholars  against
their  teachers,  of  the  ruled  against  their  rulers.  And  although  the  Reformed
clergy,  so  soon  as  they  had  organized  themselves  into  a  hierarchy,  did  undoubtedly
abandon  the  great  principle  with  which  they  started,  and  attempt  to  impose
articles  and  canons  of  their  own  contrivance,  still,  this  ought  not  to  blind  us  to
the  merits  of  the  Reformation  itself.  The  tyranny  of  the  Church  of  England,
during  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  and  still  more  during  the  reigns  of  her  two  succes-
sors, was  but  the  natural  consequence  of  that  corruption  which  power  always
begets  in  those  who  wield  it,  and  does  not  lessen  the  importance  of  the  move-
ment by  which  the  power  was  originally  obtained.  For  men  could  not  forget
that,  tried  by  the  old  theological  theory,  the  Church  of  England  was  a  schismatic
establishment,  and  could  only  defend  itself  from  the  charge  of  heresy  by  appealing
to  that  private  judgment  to  the  exercise  of  which  it  owed  its  existence,  but  of
the  rights  of  which  its  own  proceedings  were  a  constant  infraction.  It  was
evident  that  if,  in  religious  matters,  private  judgment  were  supreme,  it  became
a  high  spiritual  crime  to  issue  any  articles,  or  to  take  any  measure,  by  which  that
judgment  could  be  tied  up  ;  while  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  right  of  private

[*  The  historical  process  here  in  view  appears  to  be,  not  the  overthrow  of  the  Catholic
ecclesiastical  system  by  Henry  VIII.  and  the  nobles  who  surrounded  his  son,  but  the
later  erection  of  a  system  of  Protestant  theology.  This,  however,  was  largely  the  out-
come of  the  work  of  the  Protestants  of  France  and  Germany.  Cp.  Green,  Short  History,
ed.  1881,  pp.  342,  399,  455.— En.j


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  367

judgment  were  not  supreme,  the  Cliurch  of  England  was  guilty  of  apostasy,
inasmuch  as  its  founders  did,  by  virtue  of  the  interpretation  which  their  own
private  judgment  made  of  the  Bible,  abandon  tenets  which  they  had  hitherto
held,  stigmatize  those  tenets  as  idolatrous,  and  openly  renounce  their  allegiance
to  what  had  for  centuries  been  venerated  as  the  catholic  and  apostolic  church.

This  was  a  simple  alternative,  which  might  indeed  be  kept  out  of  sight,  but
could  not  be  refined  away,  and  most  assuredly  has  never  been  forgotten.  The
memory  of  the  great  truth  it  conveys  was  preserved  by  the  writings  and  teachings
of  the  Puritans,  and  by  those  habits  of  thought  natural  to  an  inquisitive  age.
And  when  the  fulness  of  time  had  come,  it  did  not  fail  to  bear  its  fruit.  It  con-
tinued slowly  to  fructify  ;  and  before  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century
its  seed  had  quickened  into  a  life,  the  energy  of  which  nothing  could  withstand.
That  same  right  of  private  judgment  which  the  early  Reformers  had  loudly
proclaimed,  was  now  pushed  to  an  extent  fatal  to  those  who  opposed  it.  This
it  was  which,  carried  into  politics,  overturned  the  government  ;  and,  carried  into
religion,  upset  the  church.74  For  rebellion  and  heresy  are  but  different  forms
of  the  same  disregard  of  tradition,  the  same  bold  and  independent  spirit.*  Both
are  of  the  nature  of  a  protest  made  by  modern  ideas  against  old  associations.
They  are  as  a  struggle  between  the  feelings  of  the  present  and  the  memory  of  the
past.  Without  the  exercise  of  private  judgment,  such  a  contest  could  never
take  place  ;  the  mere  conception  of  it  could  not  enter  the  minds  of  men,  nor
would  they  even  dream  of  controlling,  by  their  individual  energy,  those  abuses
to  which  all  great  societies  are  liable.  It  is  therefore  in  the  highest  degree
natural  that  the  exercise  of  this  judgment  should  be  opposed  by  those  two  power-
ful classes  which,  from  their  position,  their  interests,  and  the  habits  of  their  mind,
are  more  prone  than  any  other  to  cherish  antiquity,  cleave  to  superannuated
customs,  and  uphold  institutions  which,  to  use  their  favourite  language,  have
been  consecrated  by  the  wisdom  of  their  fathers.

From  this  point  of  view  we  are  able  to  see  with  great  clearness  the  intimate
connexion  which,  at  the  accession  of  Elizabeth,  existed  between  the  English
nobles  and  the  Catholic  clergy.  Notwithstanding  many  exceptions,  an  immense
majority  of  both  classes  opposed  the  Reformation,  because  it  was  based  on  that
right  of  "private  judgment,  of  which  they,  as  the  protectors  of  old  opinions,  were
the  natural  antagonists.  All  this  can  excite  no  surprise  ;  it  was  in  the  order
of  things,  and  strictly  accordant  with  the  spirit  of  those  two  great  sections  of
society.  Fortunately,  however,  for  our  country,  the  throne  was  now  occupied
by  a  sovereign  who  was  equal  to  the  emergency,  and  who,  instead  of  yielding
to  the  two  classes,  availed  herself  of  the  temper  of  the  age  to  humble  them.  The
manner  in  which  this  was  effected  by  Elizabeth,  in  respect,  first  to  the  Catholic
clergy,  and  afterwards  to  the  Protestant  clergy,75  forms  one  of  the  most  interesting
parts  of  our  history  ;  and  in  an  account  of  the  reign  of  the  great  queen,  I  hope

74  Clarendon  (Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  80),  in  a  very  angry  spirit,  but  with  perfect
truth,  notices  (under  the  year  1640)  the  connexion  between  "  a  proud  and  venomous
dislike  against  the  discipline  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  so  by  degrees  (as  the  progress
is  very  natural)  an  equal  irreverence  to  the  government  of  the  state  too."     The  Spanish
government,  perhaps,  more  than  any  other  in  Europe,  has  understood  this  relation  :  and
even  so  late  as  1789,  an  edict  of  Charles  IV.  declared.  "  qu'il  y  a  crime  d'heresie  dans
tout  ce  qui  tend,  ou  contribue,  &  propager  les  idees  revolutionnahres."     Llorente,  Hist,
de  V Inquisition,  vol.  ii.  p.  130.

75  The  general  character  of  her  policy  towards  the  Protestant  English  bishops  is
summed  up  very  fairly  by  Collier  ;    though  he,  as  a  professional  writer,  is  naturally
displeased  with  her  disregard  for  the  heads  of  the  church.     Collier's  Eccles.  Hist,  of  Great
Britain,  vol.  vii.  pp  257,  258,  edit.  Barham,  1840.

[*  Under  Henry  VIII.  and  the  Protector  Somerset  there  was  rebellion  on  behalf  of  the
Catholic  Church,  and  the  Scottish  rebellions  of  1715  and  1745  were  produced  by  the  spirit
of  tradition.  And  in  1549  the  "  right  of  private  judgment "  of  English  Catholics  was
put  down^by  means  of  German  and  Italian  mercenaries,  See  Heylyn,  History  of  the
Reformation,  ed.  1849,  t.  159. — ED.]


368


THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION


to  examine  it  at  considerable  length.  At  present,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  glance
at  her  policy  towards  the  nobles,— that  other  class  with  which  the  priesthood,
by  their  interests,  opinions,  and  associations,  have  always  much  in  common.

"  Elizabeth,  at  her  accession  to  the  throne,  finding  that  the  ancient  families
adhered  to  the  ancient  religion,  naturally  called  to  her  councils  advisers  who
were  more  likely  to  uphold  the  novelties  on  which  the  age  was  bent.  She  selected
men  who,  being  little  burdened  by  past  associations,  were  more  inclined  to
favour  present  interests.  The  two  Bacons,  the  two  Cecils,  Knollys,  Sadler,
Smith,  Throgmorton,  Walsingham,  were  the  most  eminent  statesmen  and
diplomatists  in  her  reign  ;  but  all  of  them  were  commoners  ;  only  one  did  she
raise  to  the  peerage  ;  and  they  were  certainly  nowise  remarkable,  either  for  the
rank  of  their  immediate  connexions,  or  for  the  celebrity  of  their  remote  ancestors.
They,  however,  were  recommended  to  Elizabeth  by  their  great  abilities,  and  by
their  'determination  to  uphold  a  religion  which  the  ancient  aristocracy  naturally
opposed.  And  it  is  observable  that,  among  the  accusations  which  the  Catholics
brought  against  the  queen,  they  taunted  her,  not  only  with  forsaking  the  old
religion,  but  also  with  neglecting  the  old  nobility.76

Nor  does  it  require  much  acquaintance  with  the  history  of  the  time  to  see  the
iustice  of  this  charge.  Whatever  explanation  we  may  choose  to  give  of  the  fact,
it  cannot  be  denied  that,  during  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  there  was  an  open  and
constant  opposition  between  the  nobles  and  the  executive  government.  The
rebellion  of  1569  was  essentially  an  aristocratic  movement  ;  it  was  a  rising  of
the  great  families  of  the  north  against  what  they  considered  the  upstart  and  ple-
beian administration  of  the  queen.77  The  bitterest  enemy  of  Elizabeth  was

76  One  of  the  charges  which,  in  1588.  Sixtus  V.  publicly  brought  against  Elizabeth
was,  that '"  she  hath  rejected  and  excluded  the  ancient  nobility,  and  promoted  to  honour
obscure  people."     Butler's  Mem.  of  the  Catholics,  vol.  ii.  p.  4.     Persons  also  reproaches
her  with  her  low-born  ministers,  and  says  that  she  was  influenced  "  by  five  persons  in
particular — all  of  them  sprung  from  the  earth, — Bacon,  Cecil,  Dudley,  Hatton,  and
Walsingham."     Butler,  vol.  ii.  p.  31.     Cardinal  Allen  taunted  her  with  "  disgracing  the
ancient  nobility,  erecting  base  and  unworthy  persons  to  all  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical
dignities."     Dodd's  Church  History,  edit.  Tierney,  1840,  vol.  iii.  appendix  no.  xii.  p.  xlvi.
The  same  influential  writer,  in  his  Admonition,  said  that  she  had  injured  England  "  by
great  contempt  and  abasing  of  the  ancient  nobility,  repelling  them  trom  due  government,
offices,  and  places  of  honour."     Allen's  Admonition  to  the  Nobility  and  People  of  England
and  Ireland,  1.588  (reprinted  London,  1842),  p.  xv.     Compare  the  account  of  the  Bull
of  1588,  in  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  x.  p.  175  :    "  On  accusoit  Elisabeth  d'avoir  au
prejudice  de  la  noblesse  angloisc  eleve  aux  dignit.es,  tant  civiles  qu'ecclesiastiques,  des
hommes  nouveaux,  sans  naissance,  et  indignes  de  les  posseder."

77  To  the  philosophic  historian  this  rebellion,  though  not  sufficiently  appreciated  by
ordinary  writers,  is  a  very  important  study,  because  it  is  the  last  attempt  ever  made
by  the  great  English  families  to  establish  their  authority  by  force  of  arms.     Mr.  Wright
says,  that  probably  all  those  who  took  a  leading  part  in  it  "  were  allied  by  blood  or  inter-
marriage with  the  two  families  of  the  Percies  and  Neviles."     Wright's  Elizabeth,  1838,
vol.  i.  p.  xxxiv.  ;   a  valuable  work.     See  also,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  730,  a  list  of  some
of  those  who,  in  1571,  were  attainted  on  account  of  this  rebellion,  and  who  are  said  to  be
"  all  of  the  best  families  in  the  north  of  England."

But  the  most  complete  evidence  we  have  respecting  this  struggle  consists  of  the  col-
lection of  original  documents  published  in  1840  by  Sir  C.  Sharpe,  under  the  title  of
Memorials  of  the  Rebellion  of  1569.  They  show  very  clearly  the  real  nature  of  the  out-
break. On  1 7th  November,  1569,  Sir  George  Bowes  writes  that  the  complaint  of
the  insurgents  was  that "  there  was  certaine  counsellors  cropen  "  (t>.crept)"  inaboutethe
prince,  which  had  excluded  the  nobility  from  the  prince,"  &c.,  Memorials,  p.  42  ;  and
the  editor's  note  says  that  this  is  one  of  the  charges  made  in  all  the  proclamations  by  the
earls.  Perhaps  the  mo?t  curious  proof  of  how  notorious  the  policy  of  Elizabeth  had  be-
come is  contained  in  a  friendly  letter  from  Sussex  to  Cecil,  dated  5th  January,  1569
(Memorials,  p.  137),  one  paragraph  of  which  begins,  "  Of  late  years  few  young  noblemen
have  been  employed  in  service."


HISTORY    OF    THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT  369

certainly  Mary  of  Scotland  ;  and  the  interests  of  Mary  were  publicly  defended
by  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  the  Earl  of  Northumberland,  the  Earl  of  Westmoreland,
and  the  Earl  of  Arundel  :  while  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  her  cause  was
secretly  favoured  by  the  Marquis  of  Northampton,  the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  the
Earl  of  Derby,  the  Earl  of  Cumberland,  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  and  the  Earl
of  Sussex.™

The  existence  of  this  anta.gonism  of  interests  could  not  escape  the  sagacity  of
the  English  government.  Cecil,  who  was  the  most  powerful  of  the  ministers  of
Elizabeth,  and  who  was  at  the  head  of  affairs  for  forty  years,  made  it  part  of  his
business  to  study  the  genealogies  and  material  resources  of  the  great  families  ;
and  this  he  did,  not  out  of  idle  curiosity,  but  in  order  to  increase  his  control  over
them,  or,  as  a  great  historian  says,  to  let.  them  know  "  that  his  eye  was  upon
them."  79  The  queen  herself,  though  too  fond  of  power,  was  by  no  means  of  a
cruel  disposition  ;  but  she  seemed  to  delight  in  humbling  the  nobles.  On  them
her  hand  fell  heavily  ;  and  there  is  hardly  to  be  found  a  single  instance  of  her
pardoning  their  offences,  while  she  punished  several  of  them  for  acts  which
would  now  be  considered  no  offences  at  all.  She  was  always  unwilling  to  admit
them  to  authority  ;  and  it  is  unquestionably  true  that,  taking  them  as  a  class,
they  were  during  her  long  and  prosperous  reign  treated  with  unusual  disrespect.
Indeed,  so  clearly  marked  was  her  policy,  that  when  the  ducal  order  became
extinct,  she  refused  to  renew  it  ;  and  a  whole  generation  passed  away  to  whom
the  name  of  duke  was  a  mere  matter  of  history,  a  point  to  be  mooted  by  anti-
quaries, but  with  which  the  business  of  practical  life  had  no  concern.80  Whatever
mav  be  her  other  faults,  she  was  on  this  subject  always  consistent.  Although
she  evinced  the  greatest  anxiety  to  surround  the  throne  with  men  of  ability,
she  cared  little  for  those  conventional  distinctions  by  which  the  minds  of  ordinary
sovereigns  are  greatly  moved.  She  made  no  account  of  dignity  of  rank  ;  she
did  not  even  care  for  purity  of  blood.  She  valued  men  neither  for  the  splendour
of  their  ancestry,  nor  for  the  length  of  their  pedigrees,  nor  for  the  grandeur  of
their  titles.  Such  questions  she  left  for  her  degenerate  successors,  to  the  size
of  whose  understandings  they  were  admirably  fitted.  Our  great  queen  regulated
her  conduct  by  another  standard.  Her  large  and  powerful  intellect,  cultivated
to  its  highest  point  by  reflection  and  study,  taught  her  the  true  measure  of  affairs,
and  enabled  her  to  see  that  to  make  a  government  nourish  its  councillors  must
be  men  of  ability  and  of  virtue  ;  *  but  that  if  these  two  conditions  are  fulfilled,
the  nobles  may  be  left  to  repose  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  leisure,  unoppressed
by  those  cares  of  the  state  for  which,  with  a  few  brilliant  exceptions,  they  are
naturally  disqualified  by  the  number  of  their  prejudices  and  by  the  frivolity  of
their  pursuits.

After  the  death  of  Elizabeth  an  attempt  was  made,  first  by  James,  and  then
by  Charles,  to  revive  the  power  of  the  two  great  protective  classes,  the  nobles
and  the  clergy.  But  so  admirably  had  the  policy  of  Elizabeth  been  supported
by  the  general  temper  of  the  age,  that  it  was  found  impossible  for  the  Stuarts
to  execute  their  mischievous  plans.  The  exercise  of  private  judgment,  both  in

78  Hallam,  i.  p.  130  ;   Lingard>  v.  pp.  97,  102  ;    Turner,  xii.  pp.  245,  247.

79  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p. 241  ;  an  interesting  passage.     Turner  (Hist,  of  England,
vol.  xii.  p.  237)  says  that  Cecil  *  knew  the  tendency  of  the  .great  lords  to  combine  against
the  crown,  that  they  might  reinstate  the  peerage  in  the  power  from  which  the  house-  of
Tudor  had  depressed  it."

80  In  1572  the  order  of  dukes  became  extinct :    and  was  not  revived  till  fifty  years,
afterwards,  when  James  I.    made  the  miserable  Villiers  duke  of  Buckingham..    Black -
stone's  Commentaries,  vol.  i.  p.  397.     This  evidently  attracted  attention  ;  for  Ben  Jonson,
in  one  of  his  comedies  in  1616,  mentions  "  the  received  heresy  that  England  bears  no
dukes."     Jonson' s  Works,  edit.  Gifford,  1816,  vol.  v.  p.  47,  where  Gifford,  not  being
aware  of  the  extinction  in  1572,  has  made  an  unsatisfactory  note.

[*  Compare,  however,  Bishop  Creighton,  Queen  Elizabeth,  1899,  p.  65,  and  Motley,
History  of  the  United  Netherlands,  1867,  i.  501  seq.,  as  to  the  character  and  policy  of  her
favourite  Dudley  ;  and  note  in  the  same,  connexion  those  of  Essex. — ED.]

24.


370  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

religion  and  in  politics,  had  become  so  habitual,  that  these  princes  were  unable
tc  subjugate  it  to  their  will.  And  as  Charles  I.,  with  inconceivable  blindness,  and
with  an  obstinacy  even  greater  than  that  of  his  father,  persisted  in  adopting  in
their  worst  forms  the  superannuated  theories  of  protection,*  and  attempted  to
enforce  a  scheme  of  government  which  men  from  their  increasing  independence
were  determined  to  reject,  there  inevitably  arose  that  memorable  collision  which
is  well  termed  The  Great  Rebellion  of  England.81  The  analogy  between  this
and  the  Protestant  Reformation  I  have  already  noticed  ;  but  what  we  have
now  to  consider,  and  what,  in  the  next  chapter,  I  will  endeavour  to  trace,  is  the
nature  of  the  difference  between  our  Rebellion  and  those  contemporary  wars
of  the  Fronde,  to  which  it  was  in  some  respects  very  similar.


81  Clarendon  (Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  216)  truly  calls  it  "  the  most  prodigious  and  the
boldest  rebellion  that  any  age  or  country  ever  brought  forth."  See  also  some  striking
remarks  in  Warwick's  Memoirs,  p.  207.

[*  The  real  cause  of  the  beginning  of  the  troubles  in  Scotland,  which  began  the
Rebellion,  is  now  known  to  have  been  Charles'  plan  to  resume  the  tithes,  that  is,  to  force
the  nobles  to  disgorge  their  plunder — a  course  the  reverse  of  friendly  to  them.  See
Sir  James  Balfour's  Annalcs  of  Scotland  (  =Histor.  Works,  1825),  ii.  128;  Sir  Roger
Manley's  History  of  the  Rebellions,  1691,  p.  7  ;  Laing,  History  of  Scotland,  2nd  ed.  1804,
iii.  91  ;  Burton,  History  of  Scotland,  vi.  75  ;  Gardiner,  History  of  England,  1603-1642
vol.  vii.  ch.  72.  All  the  while,  as  Buckle  shows  hereinafter,  the  Presbyterian  clergy  were
practising  a  "  protection  "  which  left  the  tyrannies  of  Laud  far  in  the  rear. — ED.]


CHAPTER  X

THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE  EXPLAINS  THE  FAILURE
OF  THE  FRONDE.  COMPARISON  BETWEEN  THE  FRONDE  AND  THE  CONTEM-
PORARY ENGLISH  REBELLION.

THE  object  of  the  last  chapter  was  to  inquire  into  the  origin  of  the  protective
spirit.  From  the  evidence  there  collected,  it  appears  that  this  spirit  was  first
organized  into  a  distinct  secular  form  at  the  close  of  the  dark  ages  ;  but  that,
owing  to  circumstances  which  then  arose,  it  was,  from  the  beginning,  much
less  powerful  in  England  than  in  France.  It  has  likewise  appeared  that  in
our  country  it  continued  to  lose  ground  ;  while  in  France,  it  early  in  the  four-
teenth century  assumed  a  new  shape,  and  gave  rise  to  a  centralizing  move-
ment, manifested  not  only  in  the  civil  and  political  institutions,  but  also  in
the  social  and  literary  habits  of  the  French  nation.  Thus  far  we  seem  to  have
cleared  the  way  for  a  proper  understanding  of  the  history  of  the  two  countries  ;
and  1  now  purpose  to  follow  this  up  a  little  further,  and  point  out  how  this  differ-
ence explains  the  discrepancy  between  the  civil  wars  of  England  and  those
which  at  the  same  time  broke  out  in  France.

Among  the  obvious  circumstances  connected  with  the  Great  English  Re-
bellion, the  most  remarkable  is,  that  it  was  a  war  of  classes  as  well  as  of  factions.
From  the  beginning  of  the  contest,  the  yeomanry  and  traders  adhered  to  the
parliament  ;  1  the  nobles  and  the  clergy  rallied  round  the  throne. 2  And  the
name  given  to  the  two  parties,  of  Roundheads 3  and  Cavaliers,*  proves  that
the  true  nature  of  this  opposition  was  generally  known.  It  proves  that  men
were  aware  that  a  question  was  at  issue  upon  which  England  was  divided,  not
so  much  by  the  particular  interests  of  individuals,  as  by  the  general  interests
of  the  classes  to  which  those  individuals  belonged.

1  "  From  the  beginning  it  may  be  said  that  the  yeomanry  and  trading  classes  of  towns
were  generally  hostile  to  the  king's  side,  even  in  those  counties  which  were  in  his  military
occupation  ;  except  in  a  few,  such  as  Cornwall,  Worcester,  Salop,  and  most  of  Wales,
where  the  prevailing  sentiment  was  chiefly  royalist."     Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.
p.  578.     See  also  Lingard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vi.  p.  304  ;  and  Alison's  Hist,  of  Europe,
vol.  i.  p.  49.

2  On  this  division  of  classes,  which,  notwithstanding  a  few  exceptions,  is  undoubtedly
true  as  a  general  fact,  compare  Memoirs  of  Sir  P.  Warwick,  p.  217  ;  Carlyle's  Cromwell,
vol.  iii.  p.  307;  Clarendon's  Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,pp.  294,  297,345,  346,  401,  476;  May's
Hist,  of  the  Long  Parliament,  book  i.  pp.  22,  64,  book  ii.  p.  63,  book  iii.  p.  78  ;  Hutchin-
son's  Memoirs,  p.  100  ;  Ludlow's  Memoirs,  vol«  i.  p.  104,  vol.  iii.  p.  258;  Bulstrode's
Memoirs,  p.  86.

3  Lord  Clarendon  says,  in  his  grand  style,  "  the  rabble  contemned  and  despised  under
the  name  of  roundheads."     Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  136.     This  was  in  1641,  when  the
title  appears  to  have  been  first  bestowed.     See  Fairfax  Corresp.  vol.  ii.  pp.  185,  320.

4  Just  before  the  battle  of  Edgehill,  in  1642,  Charles  said  to  his  troops,  "  You  are
called  cavaliers  in  a  reproachful  signification."     See  the  king's  speech,  in  Somers  Tracts,
vol.  iv.  p.  478.     Directly  after   the  battle  he  accused  his  opponents  of   "rendering  all
persons  of  honour  odious  to  the  common  people  under  the  style  of  cavaliers."     May's
Hist,  of  the  Long  Parliament,  book  ii.  p.  25.


372  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Bat  in  the  history  of  the  French  rebellion  there  is  no  trace  of  so  large  a  division.
The  objects  of  the  war  were  in  both  countries  precisely  the  same  ;  the  machinery
bv  which  those  objects  were  obtained  was  very  different.  The  Fronde  was
like  our  Rebellion,  insomuch  that  it  was  a  struggle  of  the  parliament  against
the  crown  ;  an  attempt  to  secure  liberty,  and  raise  up  a.  barrier  against  the
despotism  of  Government.5  So  far,  and  so  long,  as  we  merely  take  a  view  of
political  objects,  the  parallel  is  complete.  But  the  social  and  intellectual  ante-
cedents of  the  French  being  very  different  from  those  of  the  English,  it  neces-
sarily followed  that  the  shape  which  the  rebellion  took  should  likewise  be  differ-
ent, even  though  the  motives  were  the  same.  If  we  examine  this  divergence
a  little  nearer,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  connected  with  the  circumstance  I  have
already  noticed, — namely  that  in  England  a  war  for  liberty  was  accompanied
bv  a  war  of  classes,  while  in  France  there  was  no  war  of  classes  at  all.  From
this  it  resulted,  that  in  France  the  rebellion,  being  merely  political,  and  not,
as  with  us,  also  social,  took  less  hold  of  the  public  mind  :  it  was  unaccompanied
bv  those  feelings  of  insubordination,  in  the  absence  of  which  freedom  has  always
been  impossible  ;  and,  striking  no  root  into  the  national  character,  it  could
not  save  the  country  from  that  servile  state  into  which,  a  few  years  later,  it,
under  the  government  of  Louis  XIV.,  rapidly  fell.*

That  our  Great  Rebellion  was  in  its  external  form  a  war  of  classes,  is  one
of  those  palpable  facts  which  lie  on  the  surface  of  history.  At  first,  the  parlia-
ment 6  did  indeed  attempt  to  draw  over  to  their  side  some  of  the  nobles  ;  and


5  M.  Saint-Aula?re  (Hist,  de  la  Fronde,  vol.  i.  p.  v.)  says,  that  the  object  of  the  Fron-
deurs  was,  "  limiter  1'autorite  royale,  consacrer  les  principes  de  la  liber te  civile  et  en
confier  la  garde  aux  compagnies  souveraines  ;  "  and  at  p.  vi.  he  calls  the  declaration
of  1648,  "  une  veritable  charte  constitutionnelle."     See  also,  at  vol.  i.  p.  128,  the  con-
cluding paragraph  of  the  speech  of  Omer  Talon.     Joly,  who  was  much  displeased  at
this  tendency,  complains  that  in  1648,  "  le  peuple  tomboit  imperceptiblement  dans  le
sentiment  dangereux,  qu'il  est  naturel  et  permis  de  se  defendre  et  de  s'armer  centre
la  violence  des  superieurs."     Mem.  de  Joly,  p.  15.    [The  remark  of  Joly  is  sardonic,  not
serious.    He  was  condemning  the  policy  of  the  Court. — ED.]    Of  the  immediate  objects
proposed  by  the  Fronde,  one  was  to  diminish  the  taille,  and  another  was  to  obtain  a
law  that  no  one  should  be  kept  in  prison  more  than  twenty -four  hours,  "  sans  etre
remis  entre  les  mains  du  parlement  pour  lui  faire  son  proces  s'il  se  trouvoit  criminel,
ou  I'elargir  s'iletoit  innocent."     Mem.  de  Montglut,  vol.  ii.  p.  135  ;  Mem.  de  Motteville,
vol.  ii.  p.  398  ;  Mem.  de  Retz,  vol.  i.  p.  265  ;  Mem.  d'Omer  Talon,  vol.  ii.  "pp.  224,  225,
240,  328.

6  I  use  the  word  "  parliament "  in  the  sense  given  to  it  by  writers  of  that  time,  and
not  in  the  legal  sense.

[*  It  is  possible  to  make  the  explanation  more  concrete,  i.  The  power  of  the  crown
in  France  had  been  greatly  strengthened  under  Richelieu,  where  in  England  it  was
weak.  2.  The  Paris  Parlement,  as  is  implied  in  Buckle's  previous  expositions,  had  had
no  such  preparation  for  affairs  as  the  English.  3.  In  France  there  was  a  union  of  incon-
gruous forces — those  of  the  noblesse,  fighting  for  their  feudal  interests  and  for  fighting's
sake,  and  those  of  the  Parisian  bourgeoisie,  fighting  for  relief  from  arbitrary  taxation.
4.  In  France  the  royal  cause  had  on  its  side  military  genius,  in  the  person  of  Conde.
Had  a  leader  of  such  capacity  been  found  on  the  royalist  side  in  England,  the  popular
cause  would  certainly  have  been  destroyed.  It  was  the  faculty  of  Cromwell  that  re-
trieved it,  when  its  prospects  were  very  bad.  5.  The  English  rising  was  not  merely
more  homogeneous  as  to  class  elements :  it  was  united  by  sectarian  feeling,  which  fused
the  whole  with  fanaticism.  All  the  pent-up  Puritan  feeling  of  many  years  against  the
party  and  policy  of  Laud  went  to  inspire  the  Parliamentary  cause  ;  so  that  on  one  side
were  Presbyterians,  Independents,  and  other  dissenters,  and  on  the  other  side  Church-
men. Thus  the  English  rising  resembled  in  spirit  the  movements  of  French  fanaticism
in  the  previous  century  and  under  Richelieu.  The  Fronde,  in  comparison,  was  a  farce,
religious  fanaticism  having  now  been  discounted,  as  Buckle  has  already  shown. — ED.]


THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE     373

in  this  they  for  a  time  succeeded.  But  as  the  struggle  advanced,  the  futility
of  this  policy  became  evident.  In  the  natural  order  of  the  great  movement
the  nobles  grew  more  loyal  ;  7  the  parliament  grew  more  democratic.8  And
when  it  was  clearly  seen  that  both  parties  were  determined  either  to  conquer
or  to  die,  this  antagonism  of  classes  was  too  clearly  marked  to  be  misunder-
stood ;  the  perception  which  each  had  of  its  own  interests  being  sharpened
by  the  magnitude  of  the  stake  for  which  they  contended.

"For,  without  burdening  this  Introduction  with  what  may  be  read  in  our
common  histories,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  remind  the  reader  of"  a  few  of  the  con-
spicuous events  of  that  time.  Just  before  the  war  began,  the  Earl  of  Essex
was  appointed  general  of  the  parliamentary  forces,  with  the  Earl  of  Bedford
as  his  lieutenant.  A  commission  to  raise  troops  was  likewise  given  to  the  Earl
of  Manchester,9  the  only  man  of  high  rank  against  whom  Charles  had  displayed
open  enmity.10  Notwithstanding  these  marks  of  confidence,  the  nobles,  in
whom  parliament  was  at  first  disposed  to  trust,  could  not  avoid  showing  the
old  leaven  of  their  order.11  The  Earl  of  Essex  so  conducted  himself  as  to  in-
spire the  popular  party  with  the  greatest  apprehensions  of  his  treachery ;  12
and  when  the  defence  of  London  was  intrusted  to  Waller  he  so  obstinately
refused  to  enter  the  name  of  that  able  officer  in  the  commission,  that  the  Com-
mons were  obliged  to  insert  it  by  virtue  of  their  own  authority,  and  in  spite  of
their  own  general.13  The  Earl  of  Bedford,  though  he  had  received  a  military

7  In  May,   1642,   there  remained  at  Westminster  forty-two  peers,  Hallam's  Const.
Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  559  ;  but  they  gradually  abandoned  the  popular  cause  ;  and,  according
to  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  1282,  so  dwindled,  that  eventually  "  seldom  more  than  five
or  six  "  were  present.

8  These  increasing   democratic   tendencies   are   most   clearly  indicated  in   Walker's
curious  work,  The  History  of  Independency.     See,  among  other  passages,  book  i.  p.  59.
And  Clarendon,  under  the  year  1644,  says  (Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  514) :  "  That  violent
party,  which  had  at  first  cozened  the  rest  into  the  war,  and  afterwards  obstructed  all
the  approaches  towards  peace,  found  now  that  they  had  finished  as  much  of  their  work
as  the  tools  which  they  had  wrought  with  could  be  applied  to,  and  what  remained  to
be  done  must  be  despatched  by  new  workmen."     What  these  new  workmen  were,  he
afterwards  explains,  p.  641,  to  be  *'  the  most  inferior  people  preferred  to  all  places  of
trust  and  profit."     Book  xi.  under  the  year  1648.     Compare  some  good  remarks  by
Mr.  Bell,  in  Fairfax  Correspond,  vol.  iii.  pp.  115,  116.

9  This  was  after  the  appointments  of  Essex  and  Bedford,  and  was  in  1643.     Ludlow's
Mem.  vol.  i.  p.  58  ;  Carlyle's  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  189.

10  "  When  the  king  attempted  to  arrest  the  five  members,  Manchester,  at  that  time
Lord  Kymbolton,  was  the  only  peer  whom  he  impeached.     This  circumstance  endeared
Kymbolton  to  the  party  ;  his  own  safety  bound  him  more  closely  to  its  interests."
Lingard's  England,  vol.  vi.  p.  337.     Compare  Clarendon,  p.  375  ;  Ludlow,  vol.  i.  p.  20.
It  is  also  said  that  Lord  Essex  joined  the  popular  party  from  personal  pique  against
the  king.     Fairfax  Corresp.  vol.  iii.  p.  37.

11  Mr.  Carlyle    has    made    some  very  characteristic  but  very  just  observations  on
the  "  high  Essexes  and  Manchesters  of  limited  notions  and  large  estates."     Carlyle' s
Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  215.

12  Ludlow' s  Memoirs,  vol.  iii.  p.  no  ;  Hutchinson's  Memoirs,  pp.  230,  231  ;  Harris's
Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  iii.  p.  106  ;  Bulstrode's  Memoirs,  pp.  112,  113,  119  ;  Clarendon's
Rebellion,  pp.  486,  514  ;  or,  as  Lord  North  puts  it,  "  for  General  Essex  began  now  to
appear  to  the  private  cabalists  somewhat  wresty."     North's  Narrative  of  Passages  re-
lating to  the  Long  Parliament,  published  in  1670,  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  vi.  p.  578.     At
p.  584   the  same  elegant  writer  says  of  Essex,  "  being  the  first  person  and  last  of  the
nobility  employed  by  the  parliament  in  military  affairs,  which  soon  brought  him  to
the  period  of  his  life.     And  may  he  be  an  example  to  all  future  ages,  to  deter  all  persons
of  like  dignity  from  being  instrumental  in  setting  up  a  democratical  power,  whose  interest
it  is  to  keep  down  all  persons  of  his  condition."     The  "  Letter  of  Admonition  "  addressed
to  him  by  parliament  in  1644  is  printed  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  274.

13  Lingard's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vi.  p.  318.     See  also,  on  the  hostility  between


374  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

command,  did  not.  hesitate  to  abandon  those  who  conferred  it.  This  apostate
noble  fled  from  Westminster  to  Oxford  ;  but  finding  that  the  king,  who  never
forgave  his  enemies,  did  not  receive  him  with  the  favour  he  expected,  he  returned
to  London  ;  where,  though  he  was  allowed  to  remain  in  safety,  it  could  not  be
supposed  that  he  should  again  experience  the  confidence  of  parliament.14

Such  examples  as  these  were  not  likely  to  lessen  the  distrust  which  both
parties  felt  for  each  other.  It  soon  became  evident  that  a  war  of  classes  was
unavoidable,  and  that  the  rebellion  of  the  parliament  against  the  king  must
be  reinforced  by  a  rebellion  of  the  people  against  the  nobles.15  To  this  the
popular  party,  whatever  may  have  been  their  first  intention,  now  willingly
agreed.  In  1645  they  enacted  a  law,  by  which  not  only  the  Earl  of  Essex  and
the  Earl  of  Manchester  lost  their  command,  but  all  members  of  either  house
were  made  incapable  of  military  service.16  And,  only  a  week  after  the  execution
of  the  king,  they  formally  took  away  the  legislative  power  of  the  peers  ;  putting
at  the  same  time  on  record  their  memorable  opinion,  that  the  House  of  Lords
is  "  useless,  dangerous,  and  ought  to  be  abolished."  17

But  we  may  find  proofs  still  more  convincing  of  the  true  character  of  the
English  rebellion,  if  we  consider  who  those  were  by  whom  it  was  accomplished.
This  will  show  us  the  democratic  nature  of  a  movement  which  lawyers  and
antiquaries  have  vainly  attempted  to  shelter  under  the  form  of  constitutional
precedent.  Our  great 'rebellion  was  the  work,  not  of  men  who  looked  behind,
but  of  men  who  looked  before.  To  attempt  to  trace  it  to  personal  and  tem-
porary causes  ;  to  ascribe  this  unparalleled  outbreak  to  a  dispute  respecting
ship-money,  or  to  a  quarrel  about  the  privileges  of  parliament,  can  only  suit
the  habits  of  those  historians  who  see  no  further  than  the  preamble  of  a  statute
or  the  decision  of  a  judge.  Such  writers  forget  that  the  trial  of  Hampden,
and  the  impeachment  of  the  five  members,  could  have  produced  no  effect  on
the  country  unless  the  people  had  already  been  prepared,  and  unless  the  spirit
of  inquiry  and  of  insubordination  had  so  increased  the  discontents  of  men,  as
to  put  them  in  a  state  where,  the  train  being  laid,  the  slightest  spark  sufficed
to  kindle  a  conflagration.

The  truth  is,  that  the  rebellion  was  an  outbreak  of  the  democratic  spirit.
It  was  the  political  form  of  a  movement,  of  which  the  Reformation  was  the

Essex  and  Waller,  Walker's  Hist,  of  Independency,  part  i.  pp.  28,  29  ;  and  ParL  Hist.
vol.  iii.  p.  177.  Sir  Philip  Warwick  (Memoirs,  p.  254)  contemptuously  calls  Waller
"  favourite-generall  of  the  city  of  London."

14  Compare  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  pp.  569,  570,  with  Bulstrode's  Memoirs,  p.  96,
and  Lord  Bedford's  letter,  in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  pp.  189,  190.     This  shuffling  letter  con-
firms the  unfavourable  account  of  the  writer  which  is  given  in  Clarendon's  Rebellion,
p.  422.

15  Dr.  Bates,  who  had  been  physician  to  Cromwell,  intimates  that  this  was  foreseen
from  the  beginning.     He  says  that  the  popular  party  offered  command  to  some  of  the
nobles,  "  not  that  they  had  any  respect  for  the  lords,  whom  shortly  they  intended  to
turn  out  and  to  level  with  the  commoners,  but  that  they  might  poison  them  with  their
own  venom,  and  rise  to  greater  authority  by  drawing  more  over  to  their  side."    Bates's
Account  of  the  late  Troubles  in  England,  part  i.  p.  76.      Lord  North  too  supposes   that
almost  immediately  after  the  war  began,  it  was  determined  to  dissolve  the  House  of
Lords.   See  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  vi.  p.  582.    Beyond  this,  I  am  not  aware  of  any  direct
early  evidence  ;    except   that  in  1644  Cromwell  is  alleged  to  have  stated  that  "  there
would  never  be  a  good  time  in  England  till  we  had  done  with  lords."     Carlyle's  Cromwell,
vol.  i.  p.  217  ;  and,  what  is  evidently  the  same  circumstance,  in  Holies' s  Memoirs,  p.  18.

16  This  was  the  "  Self-denying  Ordinance,"  which  was  introduced  in  December,  1644  :
but,  owing  to  the  resistance  of  the  peers,  was  not  carried  until  the  subsequent  April.
Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  pp.  326-337,  340-343,  354,  355.     See  also  Mem.  of  Lord  Holies,  p.  30  ;
Mem.  of  Sir  P.  Warwick,  p.  283.

17  On  this  great  epoch  in  the  history  of  England,  see  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  1284;
Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  643  ;  Campbell's  Chief -Justices,  vol.  i.  p.  424  ;  Ludlow's
Mem.  vol.  i.  p.  246  ;  Warwick's  Mem.  pp.  182,  336,  352.


THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE     375

religious  form.  As  the  Reformation  was  aided,*  not  by  men  in  high  ecclesiastical
offices,  not  by  great  cardinals  or  wealthy  bishops,  but  by  men  filling  the  lowest
and  most  subordinate  posts,  just  so  was  the  English  rebellion  a  movement  from
below,  an  uprising  from  the  foundations,  or,  as  some  will  have  it,  the  dregs  of
society.t  The  few  persons  of  high  rank  who  adhered  to  the  popular  cause  were
quickly  discarded,  and  the  ease  and  rapidity  with  which  they  fell  off  was  a  clear
indication  of  the  turn  that  things  were  taking.  Directly  the  arrny  was  freed
from  its  noble  leaders,  and  supplied  with  officers  drawn  from  the  lower  classes,
the  fortune  of  war  changed,  the  royalists  were  everywhere  defeated,  and  the
king  made  prisoner  by  his  own  subjects.  Between  his  capture  and  execution,
the  two  most  important  political  events  were  his  abduction  by  Joyce,  and  the
forcible  expulsion  from  the  House  of  Commons  of  those  members  who  were
thought  likely  to  interfere  in  his  favour.  Both  these  decisive  steps  were  taken,
and  indeed  only  could  have  been  taken,  by  men  of  great  personal  influence,
and  of  a  bold  and  resolute  spirit.  Joyce,  who  carried  off  the  king,  and  who
was  highly  respected  in  the  army,  had  however  been  recently  a  common  working
tailor  ;  18  while  Colonel  Pride,  whose  name  is  preserved  in  history  as  having
purged  the  House  of  Commons  of  the  malignants,  was  about  on  a  level  with
Joyce,  since  his  original  occupation  was  that  of  a  drayman.19  The  tailor  and
the  drayman  were  in  that  age  strong  enough  to  direct  the  course  of  public
affairs,  and  to  win  for  themselves  a  conspicuous  position  in  the  state.  After
the  execution  of  Charles  the  same  tendency  was  displayed.  The  old  monarchy
being  destroyed,  that  small  but  active  party  known  as  the  fifth -monarchy  men
increased  in  importance,  and  for  a  time  exercised  considerable  influence.  Their
three  principal  and  most  distinguished  members  were  Venner,  Tuffnel,  and
Okey.  Venner,  who  was  the  leader,  was  a  wine-cooper  ;  20  Tuffnel,  who  was
second  in  command,  was  a  carpenter  ;  21  and  Okey,  though  he  became  a  colonel,
had  filled  the  menial  office  of  stoker  in  an  Islington  brewery.22

Nor  are  these  to  be  regarded  as  exceptional  cases.  In  that  period  promotion
depended  solely  on  merit  ;  and  if  a  man  had  ability  he  was  sure  to  rise,  no

18  "  Cornet  Joyce,  who  was  one  of  the  agitators  in  the  army,  a  tailor,  a  fellow  who
had  two  or  three  years  before  served  in  a  very  inferior  employment  in  Mr.  Hollis's  house."
Clarendon's  Rebellion,  p.  612.     "  A  shrewd  tailor -man."     D' Israeli's  Commentaries  on
the  Reign  of  Charles  /.,  1851,  vol.  ii.  p.  466.

19  Ludlow  (Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  139)  ;  Noble  (Memoirs  of  the  House  of  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.
p.  470) ;  and  Winstanley  (Loyal  Martyrology,  edit.  1665,  p.  108),  mentions  that  Pride
had  been  a  drayman.     It  is  said  that  Cromwell,  in  ridicule  of  the  old  distinctions,  con-
ferred knighthood  on  him  "  with  a  faggot."     Orme's  Life  of  Owen,  p.   164  ;  Harris's
Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  iii.  p.  478.

20  "  The  fifth -monarchy,  headed  mainly  by  one  Venner,  a  wine-cooper."     Carlyle's
Cromwell,  vol.  iii.  pr   282.     "  Venner,  a  wine-cooper."     Lister's  Life  and  Corresp.  of
Clarendon,  vol.  ii.  p.  62.

21  "  The  second  to  Venner  was  one  Tuffnel,  a  carpenter  living  in  Gray's  Inn  Lane.
Winstanley' s  Martyrology,  p.  163.

"  He  was  stoaker  in  a  brew-house  at  Islington,  and  next  a  most  poor  chandler
near  Lion-Key  in  Thames  Street."  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  1605.  See  also  Winstanley's
Martyrology,  p.  122.

[*  The  use  of  the  word  "  aided  "  points  to  a  flaw  in  the  analogy.  As  already  noted,
the  destructive  work  of  the  Reformation  was  done  by  the  crown  and  the  nobility,  new
and  old,  only  slightly  responded  to  by  the  common  people  for  over  a  generation.  Until
the  beginnings  of  Puritanism  under  Elizabeth,  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  "  the  democratic
spirit." — ED.]

[f  This  must  be  pronounced  an  extravagant  statement.  The  emergence  of  men
of  the  working  classes  as  officers  in  the  army  does  not  mean  that  the  rebellion  was  a
working-class  movement.  Joyce  and  Pride  were  not,  as  stated  below,  "strong  enough
to  direct  the  course  of  public  affairs."  They  were  only  officers  of  the  army,  obeying
orders.  See  Buckle's  own  correction,  below,  at  note  52. — ED.]


3?6  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

matter  what  his  birth  or  former  avocations  might  have  been.  Cromwell  him-
self was  a  brewer  ;  23  and  Colonel  Jones,  his  brother-in-law,  had  been  servant
to  a  private  gentleman.24  Deane  was  the  servant  of  a  tradesman  ;  but  he
becarne  an  admiral,  and  was  made  one  of  the  commissioners  of  the  navy.25
Colonel  GofTe  had  been  apprentice  to  a  drysalter  ;  ^  Major-General  Whalley
had  been  apprentice  to  a  draper.2?  Skippon,  a  common  soldier  who  had  received
no  education,28  was  appointed  commander  of  the  London  militia  ;  he  was  raised
to  the  office  of  sergeant -major -general  of  the  army  ;  he  was  declared  commander  -
in-chief  in  Ireland  ;  and  he  became  one  of  the  fourteen  members  of  Cromwell's
council.29  Two  of  the  lieutenants  of  the  Tower  were  Berkstead  and  Tichborne.
Berkstead  was  a  pedlar,  or  at  all  events  a  hawker  of  small  wares  ;  30  and  Tich-
borne, who  was  a  linendraper,  not  only  received  the  lieutenancy  of  the  Tower,
but  became  a  colonel,  and  a  member  of  the  committee  of  state  in  1655,  and  of
the  council  oi  state  in  i659.31  Other  trades  were  equally  successful  ;  the  highest
prizes  being  open  to  all  men,  provided  they  displayed  the  requisite  capacity.
Colonel  Harvey  was  a  silk -mercer  ;  32  so  was  Colonel  Rowe  ;  33  so  also  was
Colonel  Venn.34  Salway  had  been  apprentice  to  a  grocer,  but,  being  an  able
man,  he  rose  to  the  rank  of  major  in  the  army  ;  he  received  the  king's  remem-
brancer's office  ;  and  in  1659  he  was  appointed  by  parliament  a  member  of  the

23  Some  of  the  clumsy  eulogists  of  Cromwell  wish  to  suppress  the  fact  of  his  being
a  brewer ;  but  that  he  really  practised  that  useful  trade  is  attested  by  a  variety  of  evi-
dence, and  is  distinctly  stated  by  his  own  physician,  Dr.  Bates.  Bates's  Troubles  in
England,  vol.  ii.  p.  238.  See  also  Walker's  Hist,  of  Independency,  part  i.  p.  32,  part  ii.
p.  25,  part  iii.  p.  37  ;  Noble's  House  of  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  pp.  328-331.  Other  passages,
which  I  cannot  now  call  to  mind,  will  occur  to  those  who  have  studied  the  literature
of  the  time.

2*  "  John  Jones,  at  first  a  serving -man,  then  a  colonel  of  the  Long  Parliament,  .  .  .
married  the  Protector's  sister."  Part.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  1600.  "  A  serving-man  ;  .  .  .
in  process  of  time  married  one  of  Cromwell's  sisters."  Winstanley's  Martyrology,  p.  125.

25  "  Richard  Deane,  Esq.,  is  said  to  have  been  a  servant  to  one  Button,  a  toyman
in  Ipswich,  and  to  have  himself  been  the  son  of  a  person  in  the  same  employment ;  .  .  .
was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  of  the  navy  with  Popham  and  Blake,  and  in
April  (1649)  he  became  an  admiral  and  general  at  sea."     Noble's  Lives  of  the  Regicides,
vol.  i.  pp.  172,  173.     Winstanley  (Martyrol.  p.  121)  also  says  that  Deane  was  "  servant
in  Ipswich."

26  "  Apprentice  to  one  Vaughan  a  dry-salter."     Noble's  House  of  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.
p.  507  :  and  see  his  Regicides,  vol.  i.  p.  255.

27  "  Bound   apprentice    to   a   woollen -draper."     Winstanley's    Martyr,   p.    108.     He
afterwards  set  up  in  the  same  trade  for  himself ;  but  with  little  success,  for  Dr.  Bates
(Troubles  in  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  222)  calls  him  "  a  broken  clothier."

"Altogether  illiterate."  Clarendon's  Rebellion,  p.  152.  Two  extraordinary
speeches  by  him  are  preserved  in  Burton's  Diary,  vol.  i.  pp.  24,  25,  48-50.

29  Holies' s  Mem.  p.  82  ;  Ludlow's  Mem.  vol.  ii.  p.  39  ;  and  a  letter  from  Fairfax  in
Gary's  Memorials  of  the  Civil  War,  1842,  vol.  i.  p.  413.

30  "  Berkstead,  who  heretofore  sold  needles,  bodkins,  and  thimbles,  and  would  have
run  on  an  errand  anywhere  for  a  little  money ;  but  who  now  by  Cromwell  was  preferred
to  the  honourable  charge  of  lieutenant  of    the  Tower  of    London."     Bates 's  Account
of  the  Troubles,  part  ii.  p.  222.

31  Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  ii.  pp.  272,  273.     Lord  Holies  (Memoirs,  p.  174)  also  men-
tions that  he  was  "  a  linen-draper."

"  Edward  Harvy,  late  a  poor  silk -man,  now  colonel,  and  hath  got  the  Bishop  of
London's  house  and  manner  of  Fulham."  Walker's  Independency,  part  i.  p.  170.  "  One
Harvey,  a  decayed  silk -man."  Clarendon's  Rebellion,  p.  418.

M  Owen  Rowe,  "  put  to  the  trade  of  a  silk  -mercer,  .  .  .  went  into  the  parliament  army,
and  became  a  colonel."     Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  ii.  p.  150.

"  A  silkman  in  London  ;  .  .  .  went  into  the  army,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  colonel."
Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  ii.  p.  283.  "  A  broken  silk -man  in  Cheap-side."  Winstanley's
Martyrol.  p.  130.


THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE     377

council  of  state.35  Around  that  council-board  were  also  gathered  Bond  the
draper,36  and  Cawley  the  brewer  ;  37  while  by  their  side  we  find  John  Berners,
who  is  said  to  have  been  a  private  servant,38  and  Cornelius  Holland,  who  is  known
to  have  been  a  servant,  and  who  was,  indeed,  formerly  a  link-boy.39  Among
others  who  were  now  favoured  and  promoted  to  offices  of  trust,"  were  Packe
the  woollen -draper,40  Puryt  he  weaver,41  and  Pemble  the  tailor.42  The  parliament
which  was  summoned  in  1653  1S  sti11  remembered  as  Barebone's  parliament,
being  so  called  after  one  of  its  most  active  members,  whose  name  was  Barebone,
and  who  was  a  leather -seller  in  Fleet  Street.43  Thus  too,  Downing,  though
a  poor  charity -boy,44  became  teller  of  the  exchequer,  and  representative  of
England  at  the  Hague.45  To  these  we  may  add,  that  Colonel  Horton  had  been
a  gentleman's  servant  ;  46  Colonel  Berry  had  been  a  woodmonger  ;  47  Colonel
Cooper  a  haberdasher  ;  48  Major  Rolfe  a  shoemaker  ;  49  Colonel  Fox  a  tinker  ;  «>
and  Colonel  Hewson  a  cobbler.51

Such  were  the  leaders  of  the  English  rebellion,  or  to  speak  more  properly,

35  Walker's  Independency,  part  i.  p.  143  ;  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  1608  ;  Ludlow's  Mem.
vol.  ii.  pp.  241,  259  ;  Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  ii.  pp.  158,  162.

36  He  was  "a  woollen-draper  at  Dorchester,"  and  was  "one  of  the  council  of  state
in  1649  and  1651."     Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  i.  p.  99  :  see  also  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  1594.

37  "  A  brewer  in  Chichester  ;  ...  in  1650-1  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  council  of
state."     Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  i.  p.  136.     "  William  Cawley,  a  brewer  of  Chichester."
Winstanley's  Martyr ol.  p.  138.

38  John  Berners,  "  supposed  to  have  been  originally  a  serving -man,"  was  "  one  of
the  council  of  state  in  1659."     Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  i.  p.  90.

39  "  Holland   the   linke-boy."     Walker's   Independency,   part  iii.    p.    37.     "  He   was
originally  nothing  more  than  a  servant  to  Sir  Henry  Vane  ;  .  .  .  upon  the  establishment
of  the  Commonwealth,  he  was  made  one  of  the  council  of  state  in  1649,  and  again  in
1650."     Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  i.  pp.  357,  358.

40  Noble's  Mem.  of  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.  p.  502.

41  Walker's  Hist,  of  Independency,  part  i.  p.  167.

42  Ellis' s  Original  Letters  illustrative  of  English  History,  third  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  219,
Lond.  1846.

43  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  1407  ;  Rose's  Biog.  Diet.  vol.  iii.  p.   172  ;  Clarendon's  Re-
bellion, p.  794.

44  "  A  poor  child  bred  upon  charity."     Harris's  Stuarts,  vol.  v.  p.  281.     "  A  man
of  an  obscure  birth,  and  more  obscure  education."     Clarendon's  Life  of  Himself,  p.  1116.

45  See  Vaughan's  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  pp.  227,  228,  vol.  ii.  pp.  299,  302,  433  ;  Lister's
Life  and  Corresp.  of  Clarendon,  vol.  ii.  p.  231,  vol.  iii.  p.  134.     The  common  opinion  is
that  he  was  the  son  of  a  clergyman  at  Hackney  ;  but  if  so,  he  was  probably  illegitimate,
considering  the  way  he  was  brought  up.     However,  his  Hackney  origin  is  very  doubtful,
and  no  one   appears  to  know  who   his   father  was.     See   Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  iii.
pp.  69,  213.

46  Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  i.  p.  362.     Cromwell  had  a  great  regard  for  this  remarkable
man,  who  not  only  distinguished  himself  as  a  soldier,  but,  judging  from  a  letter  of  his
recently  published,  appears  to  have  repaired  the  deficiencies  of  his  early  education.
See  Fairfax  Correspond,  vol.  iv.  pp.  22-25,  108.     There  never  has  been  a  period  in  the
history  of  England  in  which  so  many  men  of  natural  ability  were  employed  in  the  public
service  as  during  the  Commonwealth.

47  Noble's  House  of  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.  p.  507.

48  Noble's  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.  p.  518  ;  Bates' s  Troubles,  vol.  iii.  p.  222.

49  Bates' s  Late  Troubles,  vol.  i.  p.  87  ;  Ludlow's  Mem.  vol.  i.  p.  220.

50  Walker's  Hist,  of  Independency,  part  ii.  p.  87.

51  Ludlow,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  Colonel  Hewson,  says  that  he  "  had  been
a  shoemaker."     Ludlow's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  139.     But  this  is  the  amiable  partiality
of  a  friend  ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  gallant  colonel  was  neither  more  nor  less
than  a  cobbler.     See   Walker's  Independency,   part  ii.  p.   39  ;  Winstanley's  Martyroh
p.  123  ;  Bates's  Late  Troubles,  vol.  ii.  p.  222  ;    Noble's  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.  pp.  251,  345,
470.J


378  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

such  were  the  instruments  by  which  the  rebellion  was  consummated.52  If  we
now  turn  to  France  we  shall'dearly  see  the  difference  between  the  feelings  and
temper  of  the  two  nations.  In  that  country  the  old  protective  spirit  still  re-
tained its  activity  ;  and  the  people,  being  kept  in  a  state  of  pupilage,  had  not
acquired  those  habits  of  self-command  and  self-reliance  by  which  alone  great
things  can  be  effected.  They  had  been  so  long  accustomed  to  look  with  timid
reverence  to  the  upper  classes  that  even  when  they  rose  in  arms  they  could  not
throw  off  the  ideas  of  submission  which  were  quickly  discarded  by  our  ancestors.
The  influence  of  the  higher  ranks  was,  in  England,  constantly  diminishing  ;
in  France,  it  was  scarcely  impaired.  Hence  it  happened  that,  although  the
English  and  French  rebellions  were  contemporary,  and,  in  their  origin,  aimed
at  precisely  the  same  objects,  they  were  distinguished  by  one  most  important
difference. "  This  was,  that  the  English  rebels  were  headed  by  popular  leaders  ;
the  French  rebels  by  noble  leaders.  The  bold  and  sturdy  habits  which  had
long  been  cultivated  in  England  enabled  the  middle  and  lower  classes  to  supply
their  own  chiefs  out  of  their  own  ranks.  In  France  such  chiefs  were  not  to
be  found  ;  simply  because,  owing  to  the  protective  spirit,  such  habits  had  not
been  cultivated.  *  While,  therefore,  in  our  island  the  functions  of  civil  govern-
ment, and  of  war,  were  conducted  with  conspicuous  ability  and  complete
success  by  butchers,  by  bakers,  by  brewers,  by  cobblers,  and  by  tinkers,  the
struggle  which  at  the  same  moment  was  going  on  in  France  presented  an
appearance  totally  different.  In  that  country  the  rebellion  was  headed  by
men  of  a  far  higher  standing  ;  men,  indeed,  of  the  longest  and  most  illustrious
lineage.  There,  to  be  sure,  was  a  display  of  unexampled  splendour  ;  a  galaxy
of  rank,  a  noble  assemblage  of  aristocratic  insurgents  and  titled  demagogues.
There  was  the  Prince  de  Conde,  the  Prince  de  Conti,  the  Prince  de  Marsillac,
the  Duke  de  Bouillon,  the  Duke  de  Beaufort,  the  Duke  de  Longueville,  the  Duke
de  Chevreuse,  the  Duke  de  Nemours,  the  Duke  de  Luynes,  the  Duke  de  Brissac,
the  Duke  d'Elbceuf,  the  Duke  de  Candale,  the  Duke  de  la  Tremouille,  the  Mar-
quis de  la  Boulaye,  the  Marquis  de  Laigues,  the  Marquis  de  Noirmoutier,  the
Marquis  de  Vitry,  the  Marquis  de  Fosseuse,  the  Marquis  de  Sillery,  the  Marquis
d'Estissac,  the  Marquis  d'Hocquincourt,  the  Count  de  Rantzau,  the  Count  de
Montresor.

These  were  the  leaders  of  the  Fronde  ;  53  and  the  mere  announcement  of
their  names  indicates  the  difference  between  the  French  and  English  rebellions.
And  in  consequence  of  this  difference  there  followed  sonve  results  which  are
well  worth  the  attention  of  those  writers  who,  in  their  ignorance  of  the  progress
of  human  affairs,  seek  to  uphold  that  aristocratic  power,  which,  fortunately
for  the  interests  of  mankind,  has  long  been  waning  ;  and  which  during  the
last  seventy  years  has  in  the  most  civilized  countries  received  such  severe
and  repeated  shocks  that  its  ultimate  fate  is  hardly  a  matter  respecting  which
much  doubt  can  now  be  entertained.

52  Walker,  who  relates  what  he  himself  witnessed,  says  that  about  1649  the  army
was  commanded  by  "  colonels  and  superior  officers,  who  lord  it  in  their  gilt  coaches,
rich  apparel,  costly  f eastings  ;  though  some  of  them  led  dray-horses,  wore  leather-
pelts,  and  were  never  able  to  name  their  own  fathers  or  mothers."  Hist,  of  Independ.
part  ii.  p.  244.  The  Mercurius  Rusticus,  1647,  says,  "  Chelmsford  was  governed  by  a
tinker,  two  cobblers,  two  tailors,  two  pedlars."  Southey's  Commonplace  Book,  third
series,  1850,  p.  430.  And,  at  p.  434,  another  work,  in  1647,  makes  a  similar  statement
in  regard  to  Cambridge  ;  while  Lord  Holies  assures  us,  that  "  most  of  the  colonels  and
officers  (were)  mean  tradesmen,  brewers,  taylors,  goldsmiths,  shoemakers,  and  the
like."  Holies' s  Memoirs,  p.  149.  When  Whitelocke  was  in  Sweden,  in  1653,  the  prater
of  one  of  the  towns  abused  the  parliament,  saying,  "  that  they  had  killed  their  king,
and  were  a  company  of  taylors  and  cobblers."  Whitelocke's  Swedish  Embassy,  vol.  i.
p.  205.  See  also  a  note  in  Carwithen's  Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  156.

63  Even  De  Retz,  who  vainly  attempted  to  organize  a  popular  party,  found  that  it
was  impossible  to  take  any  step  without  the  nobles  ;  and  notwithstanding  his  demo-
cratic tendencies  he  in  1648  thought  it  advisable  "  tacher  d' engager  dans  les  interets
publics  les  personnes  de  qualite."  Mem.  de  Joly,  p.  31.


THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE     37$

l~  The  English  rebellion  was  headed  by  men  whose  tastes,  habits,  and  associa-
tions, being  altogether  popular,  formed  a  bond  of  sympathy  between  them  and
the  people,  and  preserved  the  union  of  the  whole  party.  In  France  the  sym-
pathy was  very  weak,  and  therefore  the  union  was  very  precarious.  What  sort
of  sympathy  could  there  be  between  the  mechanic  and  the  peasant,  toiling  for
their  daily  bread,  and  the  rich  and  dissolute  noble,  whose  life  was  passed  in
those  idle  and  frivolous  pursuits  which  debased  his  mind,  and  made  his  order
a  byword  and  a  reproach  among  the  nations  ?  To  talk  of  sympathy  existing
between  the  two  classes  is  a  manifest  absurdity,  and  most  assuredly  would  have
been  deemed  an  insult  by  those  high-born  men  who  treated  their  inferiors  with
habitual  and  insolent  contempt.  It  is  true  that,  from  causes  which  have  been
already  stated,  the  people  did,  unhappily  for  themselves,  look  up  to  those  above
them  with  the  greatest  veneration  ; 5*  but  every  page  of  French  history  proves
how  unworthily  this  feeling  was  reciprocated,  and  in  how  complete  a  thraldom
the  lower  classes  were  kept.  While,  therefore,  the  French,  from  their  long-
established  habits  of  dependence,  were  become  incapable  of  conducting  their
own  rebellion,  and  on  that  account  were  obliged  to  place  themselves  under
the  command  of  their  nobles,  this  very  necessity  confirmed  the  servility  which
caused  it,  and  thus  stunting  the  growth  of  freedom,  prevented  the  nation
from  effecting  by  their  civil  wars  those  great  things  which  we  in  England
were  able  to  bring  about  by  ours.

Indeed,  it  is  only  necessary  to  read  the  French  literature  of  the  seventeenth
century  to  see  the  incompatibility  of  the  two  classes,  and  the  utter  hopelessness
of  fusing  into  one  party  the  popular  and  aristocratic  spirit.  While  the  object
of  the  people  was  to  free  themselves  from  the  yoke,  the  object  of  the  nobles  was
merely  to  find  new  sources  of  excitement,55  and  minister  to  that  personal  vanity
for  which,  as  a  body,  they  have  always  been  notorious.  As  this  is  a  depart-
ment of  history  that  has  been  little  studied,  it  will  be  interesting  to  collect  a
few  instances  which  will  illustrate  the  temper  of  the  French  aristocracy,  and
will  show  what  sort  of  honours  and  what  manner  of  distinctions  those  were
which  this  powerful  class  was  most  anxious  to  obtain.

That  the  objects  chiefly  coveted  were  of  a  very  trifling  description  will  be
anticipated  by  whoever  has  studied  the  effect  which,  in  an  immense  majority
of  minds,  hereditary  distinctions  produce  upon  personal  character.  How  per-
nicious such  distinctions  are  may  be  clearly  seen  in  the  history  of  all  the
European  aristocracies  :  and  in  the  notorious  fact  that  none  of  them  have
preserved  even  a  mediocrity  of  talent,  except  in  countries  where  they  are  fre-
quently invigorated  by  the  infusion  of  plebeian  blood,  and  their  order  strength-
ened by  the  accession  of  those  masculine  energies  which  are  natural  to  men
who  make  their  own  position,  but  cannot  be  looked  for  in  men  whose  position
is  made  for  them.  For  when  the  notion  is  once  firmly  implanted  in  the  mirid
that  the  source  of  honour  is  from  without,  rather  than  from  within,  it  must
invariably  happen  that  the  possession  of  external  distinction  will  be  preferred

54  Mably  (Observations  sur  VHist.  de  France,  vol.  i.  p.  357)  frankly  says,  "  L'exemple
d'un  grand  a  toujours  ete  plus  contagieux  chez  les  Francais  que  partout  ailleurs."    See
also  vol.  ii.  p.  267  :  "  Jamais  1'exemple  des  grands  n'a  ete  aussi  contagieux  ailleurs  qu'en
France  ;  on  dirait  qu'ils  ont  le  malheureux  privilege  de  tout  justifier."     Rivarol,  though
his  opinions  on   other   points  were  entirely  opposed  to  those  of  Mably,  says  that  in
France  "  la  noblesse  est  aux  yeux  du  peuple  une  espece  de  religion,  dont  les  gentilshommes
sont  les  pretres."     Mem.  de  Rivarol,  p.  94.     Happily,  the  French  Revolution,  or  rather
the  circumstances  which  caused  the  French  Revolution,  have  utterly  destroyed  this
ignominious  homage.

55  The  Duke  de  la   Rochefoucauld  candidly  admits  that  in  1649  the  nobles  raised
a  civil  war,  "  avec  d'autant  plus  de  chaleur  que  c'etait  une  nouveaute."     Mem.  de
Rochefoucauld,  vol.  i.  p.  406.     Thus  too  Lemontey  (Etablissement  de  Louis  XIV.,  p.  368)  :
"  La  vieille  noblesse,  qui  ne  savait  que  combattre,  faisait  la  guerre  par  gout,  par  besoin,  par
vanite,  par  ennui."     Compare,  in  Mem.  d'Omer  Talon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  467,  468,  a  summary
of  the  reasons  which  in  1649  induced  the  nobles  to  go  to  war  ;  and  on  the  way  in  which
their  frivolity  debased  the  Fronde  see  Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Fran  cats,  vol.  iii.  pp.  169,  170'.


38o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

to  the  sense  of  internal  power.  In  such  cases,  the  majesty  of  the  human  intellect,
and  the  dignity  of  human  knowledge,  are  considered  subordinate  to  those  mock
and  spurious  gradations  by  which  weak  men  measure  the  degrees  of  their  own
littleness.  Hence  it  is  that  the  real  precedence  of  things  becomes  altogether
reversed  ;  that  which  is  trifling  is  valued  more  than  that  which  is  great  ;  -and
the  mind  is  enervated  by  conforming  to  a  false  standard  of  merit,  which  its  own
prejudices  have  raised.  On  this  account,  they  are  evidently  in  the  wrong  who
reproach  the  nobles  with  their  pride,  as  if  it  were  a  characteristic  of  their  order.
The  truth  is,  that  if  pride  were  once  established  among  them,  their  extinction
would  rapidly  follow.  To  talk  of  the  pride  of  hereditary  rank  is  a  contra-
diction in  terms.  Pride  depends  on  the  consciousness  of  self-applause  ;  vanity
is  fed  by  the  applause  of  others.*  Pride  is  a  reserved  and  lofty  passion,  which
disdains  those  external  distinctions  that  vanity  eagerly  grasps.  The  proud
man  sees  in  his  own  mind  the  source  of  his  own  dignity  ;  which,  as  he  well
knows,  can  be  neither  increased  nor  diminished  by  any  acts  except  those  which
proceed  solely  from  himself.  The  vain  man,  restless,  insatiable,  and  always
craving  after  the  admiration  of  his  contemporaries,  must  naturally  make  great
account  of  those  external  marks,  those  visible  tokens,  which,  whether  they  be
decorations  or  titles,  strike  directly  on  the  senses,  and  thus  captivate  the  vulgar,
to  whose  understandings  they  are  immediately  obvious.  This  therefore  being
the  great  distinction,  that  pride  looks  within, "while  vanity  looks  without,  it  is
clear  that  when  a  man  values  himself  for  a  rank  which  he  inherited  by  chance,
without  exertion  and  without  merit,  it  is  a  proof  not  of  pride  but  of  vanity,
and  of  vanity  of  the  most  despicable  kind.  It  is  a  proof  that  such  a  man  has
no  sense  of  real  dignity,  no  idea  of  what  that  is  in  which  alone  all  greatness
consists.  What  marvel  if,  to  minds  of  this  sort,  the  most  insignificant  trifles
should  swell  into  matters  of  the  highest  importance  ?  What  marvel  if  such
empty  understandings  should  be  busied  with  ribbons,  and  stars,  and  crosses;
if  this  noble  should  yearn  after  the  Garter,  and  that  noble  pine  for  the  Golden
Fleece ;  if  one  man  should  long  to  carry  a  wand  in  the  precincts  of  the  court,  and
another  man  to  fill  an  office  in  the  royal  household  ;  while  the  ambition  of  a
third  is  to  make  his  daughter  a  maid -of -honour,  or  to  raise  his  wife  to  be  mis-
tress of  the  robes  ?  -

[*  Buckle  here  follows  a  definition  of  Blair's  (cited  by  Combe,  System  of  Phrenology,
5th  ed.  i.  365) ;  and  he  takes  for  granted  the  completeness  of  a  dichotomy  that  has
not  been  made  out.  The  love  of  applause  and  the  consciousness  of  self-applause  may
go  together  ;  and  the  latter  may  centre  round  any  personal  attribute,  such  as  hereditary
rank,  without  involving  a  craving  for  applause.  Yet  again,  a  love  of  applause  may
subsist  without  involving  what  is  ordinarily  understood  by  vanity.  The  latter  term
almost  invariably  carries  some  of  the  force  of  "  conceit,"  and  this  again  implies  "  the
consciousness  of  self-applause  "  which  Buckle  calls  pride.  "  Pride,"  in  turn,  so  often
connotes  the  ideas  of  satisfaction  in  one's  caste  or  race  or  family,  that  it  will  not  avail
to  call  "  pride  of  rank  "  a  contradiction  in  terms.  In  effect,  Buckle  is  simply  contending
for  a  rectification  of  the  standards  of  self-satisfaction  ;  and  it  now  appears  that  no  good
sociological  use  can  be  made  of  the  theorem  of  the  "  vanity  of  the  French  and  pride  of  the
English"  (Table  of  Contents  for  ch.  ix.,  and  above,  pp.  352,  363),  which  he  adopted  from
Chenevix  (An  Essay  upon  National  Character,  1832,  i.  ch.  ii.  p.  53).  The  idea  had
already  been  turned  by  Montesquieu  to  entirely  different  account  in  the  Esprit  des  Lois.
It  is  there  laid  down  (liv.  xix.  ch.  9)  that  "  la  paresse  est  1'effet  de  1'orgueil ;  le  travail
est  une  suite  de  la  vanite  :  1'orgueil  d'un  Espagnol  le  portera  a  ne  pas  travailler  :  la
vanit6  d'^un  Francais  le  portera  a  savoir  travailler  mieux  que  les  autres."  Here
"  vanity  "  proceeds  upon  the  desire  to  satisfy  self-esteem,  not  upon  the  desire  for  the
applause  of  others  ;  while  "  pride  "  is  something  quite  different  from  the  complex  of
qualities  conceived  by  Buckle,  which  (above,  p.  365)  leads  to  the  insistence  on  the  right
of  private  judgment.  The  terminology  being  thus  chaotic,  there  is  no  durable  pro-
position to  discuss  ;  and  sociology  must  revert  to  the  vera  causa  of  institutions  and
national  experience  for  the  explanation  of  so-called  national  characteristics,  not  vice
versa.  Whole  peoples  cannot  be  congenitally  "  proud  "  and  "  vain  "  in  any  of  the
senses  under  notice.  See  Buckle's  own  avowal  above,  p.  352.— ED.]


THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE     381

We,  seeing  these  things,  ought  not  to  be  surprised  that  the  French  nobles,
in  the  seventeenth  century,  displayed  in  their  intrigues  and  disputes  a  frivolity
which,  though  redeemed  by  occasional  exceptions,  is  the  natural  characteristic
of  every  hereditary  aristocracy.  A  few  examples  of  this  will  suffice  to  give  the
reader  some  idea  of  the  tastes  and  temper  of  that  powerful  class  which,  during
several  centuries,  retarded  the  progress  of  French  civilization.

Of  all  the  questions  on  which  the  French  nobles  were  divided,  the  most  im-
portant was  that  touching  the  right  of  sitting  in  the  royal  presence.  This  was
considered  to  be  a  matter  of  such  gravity  that  in  comparison  with  it  a  mere
struggle  for  liberty  faded  into  insignificance.  And  what  made  it  still  more
exciting  to  the  minds  of  the  nobles  was  the  extreme  difficulty  with  which  this
great  social  problem  was  beset.  According  to  the  ancient  etiquette  of  the
French  court,  if  a  man  were  a  duke,  his  wife  might  sit  in  the  presence  of  the
queen  ;  but  if  his  rank  were  inferior,  even  if  he  were  a  marquis,  no  such  liberty
could  be  allowed.56  So  far,  the  rule  was  very  simple,  and,  to  the  duchesses
themselves,  highly  agreeable.  But  the  marquises,  the  counts,  and  the  other
illustrious  nobles,  were  uneasy  at  this  invidious  distinction,  and  exerted  all
their  energies  to  procure  for  their  own  wives  the  same  honour.  This  the  dukes
strenuously  resisted  ;  but,  owing  to  circumstances  which  unfortunately  are
not  fully  understood,  an  innovation  was  made  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIII.,  and
the  privilege  of  sitting  in  the  same  room  with  the  queen  was  conceded  to  the
female  members  of  the  Bouillon  family.57  In  consequence  of  this  evil  precedent,
the  question  became  seriously  complicated,  since  other  members  of  the  aris-
tocracy considered  that  the  purity  of  their  descent  gave  them  claims  nowise
inferior  to  those  of  the  house  of  Bouillon,  whose  antiquity,  they  said,  had  been
grossly  exaggerated.  The  contest  which  ensued  had  the  effect  of  breaking  up
the  nobles  into  two  hostile  parties,  one  of  which  sought  to  preserve  that  ex-
clusive privilege  in  which  the  other  wished  to  participate.  To  reconcile  these
rival  pretensions  various  expedients  were  suggested ;  but  all  were  in  vain,
and  the  court,  during  the  administration  of  Mazarin,  being  pressed  by  the  fear
of  a  rebellion,  showed  symptoms  of  giving  way,  and  of  yielding  to  the  inferior
nobles  the  point  they  so"  ardently  desired.  In  1648  and  1649,  the  queen-regent,
acting  under  the  advice  of  her  council,  formally  conceded  the  right  of  sitting
in  the  royal  presence  to  the  three  most  distinguished  members  of  the  lower
aristocracy,  namely,  the  Countess  de  Fleix,  Madame  de  Pons,  and  the  Princess
de  Marsillac."'8  Scarcely  had  this  decision  been  promulgated,  when  the  princes

56  Hence  the  duchesses  were  called  "  femmes  assises  ;  "  those  of  lower^rank  "  non
assises."     Mem.  de  Fontenay  Mareuil,  vol.  i.  p.  in.     The  Count  de  Segur  tells  us  that
"  les  duchesses  jouissaient  de  la  prerogative  d'etre  assises  sur  un  tabouret  chez  la  reine."
Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  i.  p.  79.     The  importance  attached  to  this  is  amusingly  illustrated
in  Mem.  de  Saint-Simon,  vol.  iii.  pp.  215-218,  Paris,  1842  ;  which  should  be  compared
with  De  Tocqueville,  Regne  de  Louis  XV.,  vol.  ii.  p.  116,  and  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  x.  p.  383.

57  "  Survint  incontinent  une  autre  difficulte  a  la  cour  sur  le  sujet  des  tabourets,  que
doivent  avoir  les  dames  dans  la  chambre  de  la  reine  ;  car  encore  que  cela  ne  s'accorde
regulierement  qu'aux  duchesses,  neanmoins  le  feu  roi  Louis  XIII  1'avoit  accorde  aux
filles  de  la  maison  de  Bouillon,"  etc.     Mem.  d'Omer  Talon,  vol.  iii.  p.  5.     See  also,  on
this  encroachment  on  the  rights  of  the  duchesses  under  Louis  XIII.,  the  case  of  Seguier,
in  Duclos,  Memoir es  Secrets,  vol.  i.  pp.  360,  361.     The  consequences  of  the  innovation
were  very  serious  ;  and  Tallemant  des  Reaux  (Historiettes,  vol.  viii.  pp.  223,  224)  men-
tions a  distinguished  lady,  of  whom  he  says,  "  Pour  satisfaire  son  ambition,  il  lui  falloit
un  tabouret :  elle  cabale  pour  epouser  le  vieux  Bouillon  La  Marck  veuf  pour  la  seconde
fois."     In  this  she  failed  ;  but,  determined  not  to  be  baffled,  "  elle  ne  se  rebute  point,
et  voulant  a  toute  force  avoir  un  tabouret,  elle  epouse  le  fils  aine  du  due  de  Villars  ;
c'est  un  ridicule  de  corps  et  d' esprit,  car  il  est  bossu  et  quasi  imbecile,  et  gueux  par-
dessus  cela."     This  melancholy  event  happened  in  1649.

58  As  to  the  Countess  de  Fleix  and  Madame  de  Pons,  see  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  iii.
pp.  1 1 6,  369.     According  to  the  same  high  authority  (vol.  iii.  p.  367),  the  inferiority
of  the  Princess  de  Marsillac  consisted  in  the  painful  fact,  that  her  husband  was  merely


382  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  the  blood  and  the  peers  of  the  realm  were  thrown  into  the  greatest  agitation.59
They  immediately  summoned  to  the  capital  those  members  of  their  own  order
who"  wore  interested  in  repelling  this  daring  aggression,  and,  forming  themselves
into  an  assembly,  they  at  once  adopted  measures  to  vindicate  their  ancient
rights.60  On  the"  other"  hand,  the  inferior  nobles,  flushed  by  their  recent  success,
insisted  that  the  concession  just  made  should  be  raised  into  a  precedent  ;  and
that,  as  the  honour  of  being  seated  in  the  presence  of  majesty  had  been  con-
ceded to  the  house  of  Foix,  in  the  person  of  the  Countess  de"  Fleix,  it  should
likewise  be  granted  to  all  those  who  could  prove  that  their  ancestry  was  equally
illustrious.61  The  greatest  confusion  now  arose  ;  and  both  sides  urgently
insisting  on  their  own  claims,  there  was  for  many  months  imminent  danger
lest  the  question  should  be  decided  by  an  appeal  to  the  sword.62  But  as  the
higher  nobles,  though  less  numerous  than  their  opponents,  were  more  powerful,
the  dispute  was  finally  settled  in  their  favour.  The  queen  sent  to  their  assembly
a  formal  message,  which  was  conveyed  by  four  of  the  marshals  of  France,  and
in  which  she  promised  to  revoke  those  privileges,  the  concession  of  which  had
given  such  offence  to  the  most  illustrious  members  of  the  French  aristocracy.
At  the  same  time,  the  marshals  not  only  pledged  themselves  as  responsible  for
the  promise  of  the  queen,  but  undertook  to  sign  an  agreement  that  they  would
personally  superintend  its  execution.63  The  nobles,  however,  who  felt  that  they
had  been  aggrieved  in  their  most  tender  point,  were  not  yet  satisfied,  and  to
appease  them  it  was  necessary  that  the  atonement  should  be  as  public  as  the
injury.  It  was  found  necessary,  before  they  would  peaceably  disperse,  that
government  should  issue  a  document,  signed  by  the  queen-regent,  and  bv  the
four  secretaries  of  state,61  in  which  the  favours  granted  to  the  unprivileged
nobility  were  withdrawn,  and  the  much-cherished  honour  of  sitting  in  the  royal
presence  was  taken  away  from  the  Princess  de  Marsillac,  from  Madame  de  Pons,
and  from  the  Countess  de  Fleix.65

These  were  the  subjects  which  occupied  the  minds,  and  wasted  the  energies,
of  the  French  nobles,  while  their  country  was  distracted  by  civil  war,  and  while
questions  were  at  issue  of  the  greatest  importance, — questions  concerning  the
liberty  of  the  nation  and  the  reconstruction  of  the  government.66  It  is  hardly

the  son  of  a  duke,  and  the  duke  himself  was  still  alive,  "  il  n'etoit  que  gentilhomme,
et  son  pere  le  due  de  la  Rochefoucauld  n'etoit  pas  mort."

69  The  long  account  of  these  proceedings  in  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  iii.  pp.  367-393
shows  the  importance  attached  to  them  by  contemporary  opinion.

60  In  October,  1649,  "  la  noblesse  s'assembla  a  Paris  sur  le  fait  des  tabourets."    Mem
de  Lenet,  vol.  i.  p.  184.

61  "Tous  ceux  done  qui  par  leurs  aieux  avoient  dans  leurs  maisons  de  la  grandeur,
par  des  alliances  des  femmes  descendues  de  ceux   qui  etoient  autrefois  maitres  et
souverains  des  provinces  de  France,  demanderent  la  meme  prerogative  que  celle  qui
venoit  d'etre  accordee  au  sang  de  Foix."     Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  iii.  p.  117.     Another
contemporary  says  :  "  Cette  pretention  emut  toutes  les  maisons  de  la  cour  sur  cette
difference  et  inegalite."     Mem.  d'Omer  Talon,  vol.  iii.  p.  6  ;  and  vol.  ii.  p.  437  :  "  le
marquis  de  Noirmoutier  et  celui  de  Vitry  demandoient  le  tabouret  pour  leurs  femmes."

w  Indeed,  at  one  moment,  it  was  determined  that  a  counter -demonstration  should
be  made  on  the  part  of  the  inferior  nobles  ;  a  proceeding  which,  if  adopted,  must  have
caused  civil  war  :  "  Nous  resolumes  une  contre-assemblee  de  noblesse  pour  soutenir
le  tabouret  de  la  maison  de  Rohan."  De  Retz,  Mtmoires,  vol.  i.  p.  284.

«3  Mem  de  Motteville,  vol.  iii.  p.  389.

84  "  Sign6  d'elle,  et  de  quatre  secretaires  d'etat."     Ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  391.

65  The  best  accounts  of  this  great  struggle  will  be  found  in  the  Memoirs  of  Madame
de  Motteville  and  in  those  of  Omer  Talon;  two  writers  of  very  different  minds,  but
both  of  them  deeply  impressed  with  the  magnitude  of  the  contest.

56  Saint  Aulaire  (Hist,  de  la  Fronde,  vol.  i.  p.  317)  says  that  in  this  same  year  (1649)
"  1'esprit  de  discussion  fermentait  dans  toutes  les  tetes,  et  chacun  a  cette  epoque
soumettait  les  actes  de  1'autorite  a  un  examen  raisonne."  Thus,  too,  in  Mem.  de  Mont-
glat,  under  1649,  "  on  ne  parlait  publiquement  dans  Paris  que  de  republique  et  de  liberte,"


THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE     383

necessary  to  point  out  how  unfit  such  men  must  have  been  to  head  the  people
in  their  arduous  struggle,  and  how  immense  was  the  difference  between  them
and  the  leaders  of  the  great  English  Rebellion.  The  causes  of  the  failure  of
the  Fronde  are  indeed  obvious,  when  we  consider  that  its  chiefs  are  drawn
from  that  very  class  respecting  whose  tastes  and  feelings  some  evidence  has
just  been  given.67  How  that  evidence  might  be  almost  indefinitely  extended
is  well  known  to  readers  of  the  French  memoirs  of  the  seventeenth  century, —
a  class  of  works  which,  being  mostly  written  either  by  the  nobles  or  their  ad-
herents, supplies  the  best  materials  from  which  an  opinion  may  be  formed.
In  looking  into  these  authorities,  where  such  matters  are  related  with  a  becoming
sense  of  their  importance,  we  find  the  greatest  difficulties  and  disputes  arising
as  to  who  was  to  have  an  arm-chair  at  court  ;  68  who  was  to  be  invited  to  the
royal  dinners,  and  who  was  to  be  excluded  from  them  ;  69  who  was  to  be  kissed
by  the  queen,  and  who  was  not  to  be  kissed  by  her  ;  70  who  should  have  the
first  seat  in  church  ;  71  what  the  proper  proportion  was  between  the  rank  of
different  persons,  and  the  length  of  the  cloth  on  which  they  were  allowed  to
stand  ;  72  what  was  the  dignity  a  noble  must  have  attained  in  order  to  justify
his  entering  the  Louvre  in  a  coach  ;  73  who  was  to  have  precedence  at  corona-
tions ;  74  whether  all  dukes  were  equal,  or  whether,  as  some  thought,  the  Duke
de  Bouillon,  having  once  possessed  the  sovereignty  of  Sedan,  was  superior  to

vol.  ii.  p.  1 86.  In  1648,  "  effusa  est  contemptio  super  principes."  Mem.  d'Omer  Talon,
vol.  ii.  p.  271.

67  That  the  failure  of  the  Fronde  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  the  inconstancy  of  the  people
is  admitted  by  De  Retz,  by  far  the  ablest  observer  of  his  time  :  "  Vous  vous  etonnerez
peut-etre  de  ce  que  je  dis  plus  sur,  a  cause  de  1'instabilite  du  peuple  :  mais  il  faut  avouer
que  celui  de  Paris  se  fixe  plus  aisement  qu'aucun  autre  ;    et  M.  de  Villeroi,  qui  a  ete
le  plus  habile  homme  de  son  siecle,  et  qui  en  a  parfaitement  connu  le  naturel  dans  tout
le  cours  de  la  ligue,  ou  il  le  gouverna  sous  M.  du  Maine,  a  ete  de  ce  sentiment.     Ce  que
j'en  eprouvois  moi-meme  me  le  persuadoit."     Mem.  de  Retz,  vol.  i.  p.  348  ;  a  remark-
able passage,  and  forming  a  striking  contrast  to  the  declamation  of  those  ignorant
writers  who  are  always  reproaching  the  people  with  their  fickleness.

68  This  knotty  point  was  decided  in  favour  of  the  Duke  of  York,  to  whom,  in  1649,
"  la  reine  fit  de  grands  honneurs,  et  lui  donna  une  chaise  a  bras."     Mem.  de  Motteville,
vol.  iii.  p.  275.     In  the  chamber  of  the  king  the  matter  seems  to  have  been  differently
arranged  ;  for  Omer  Talon  (Mem.  vol.  ii.  p.  332)  tells  us  that  "  le  due  d'Orleans  n'avoit
point  de  fauteuil,  mais  un  simple  siege  pliant,  a  cause  que  nous  etions  dans  la  chambre
du  roi."     In  the  subsequent  year,  the  scene  not  being  in  the  king's  room,  the  same
writer  describes  "M.  le  due  d'Orleans  assis  dans  un  fauteuil."     Ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  95.
Compare  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de  Louis  XIII.,  vol.  viii.  p.  310.     Voltaire  (Diet.  Philos.  art.
Ceremonies)  says  :  "  Le  fauteuil  &  bras,  la  chaise  a  dos,  le  tabouret,  la  main  droite  et
la  main  gauche,  ont  ete  pendant  plusieurs  siecles  d'importants  objets  de  politique,  et
d'illustres  sujets  de  querelles."     CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  486.     The  etiquette
of  the  "  fauteuil  "  and  "  chaise  "  is  explained  in  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  x.  p.  287.

69  See  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vo.  iii.  pp.  309,  310.

70  See  a  list  of  those  it  was  proper  for  the  queen  to  kiss,  in  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  iii.
p.  318-

71  Mem.  d'Omer  Talon,  vol.  i.  pp.    217-219.     The  Prince  de  Conde  hotly  asserted
that  at  a  Te  Deum  "  il  ne  pouvait  etre  assis  en  autre  place  que  dans  la  premiere  chaire."
This  was  in  1642.

72  For  a  quarrel  respecting  the  "  drap  de  pied,"  see  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  ii.  p.  249.

73  A  very  serious  dispute  was  caused  by  the  claim  of  the  Prince  de  Marsillac,  for
"permission    d'entrer   dans    le    Louvre   en    carrosse."     Mem.    de   Motteville,    vol.    iii.
PP-  367,  389-

74  Mem.  de  Pontchartrain,  vol.  i.  pp.  422,  423,  at  the  coronation  of  Louis  XIII.   Other
instances  of  difficulties  caused  by  questions  of  precedence  will  be  found  in  Mem.  d'Omer
Talon,  vol.  iii.  pp.  23,  24,  437  ;  and  even  in  the  grave  work  of  Sully,  (Economies  Royales,
vol.  vii.  p.  126,  vol.  viii.  p.  395  ;  which  should  be  compared  with  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.
vol.  ix.  pp/86,  87.


384  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  Duke  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  who  had  never  possessed  any  sovereignty  at
all  ;  75  whether  the  Duke  de  Beaufort  ought  or  ought  not  to  enter  the  council
chamber  before  the  Duke  de  Nemours,  and  whether,  being  there,  he  ought  to
sit  above  him.76  These  were  the  great  questions  of  the  day :  while,  as  if  to
exhaust  every  form  of  absurdity,  the  most  serious  misunderstandings  arose
as  to  who  should  have  the  honour  of  giving  the  king  his  napkin  as  he  ate  his
meals,77  and  who  was  to  enjoy  the  inestimable  privilege  of  helping  on  the  queen
with  her  shift.78

It  may  perhaps  be  thought  that  I  owe  some  apology  to  the  reader  for  ob-
truding upon  his  notice  these  miserable  disputes  respecting  matters  which,
however  despicable  they  now  appear,  were  once  valued  by  men  not  wholly
devoid  of  understanding.  But  it  should  be  remembered  that  their  occurrence
and,  above  all,  the  importance  formerly  attached  to  them,  is  part  of  the  history
of  the  French  mind  ;  and  they  are  therefore  to  be  estimated,  not  according
to  their  intrinsic  dignity,  but  according  to  the  information  they  supply  respect-
ing a  state  of  things  which  has  now  passed  away.  Events  of  this  sort,  though
neglected  by  ordinary  historians,  are  among  the  staff  and  staple  of  history.
Not  only  do  they  assist  in  bringing  before  our  minds  the  age  to  which  they  refer,
but  in  a  philosophic  point  of  view  they  are  highly  important.  They  are  part
of  the  materials  from  which  we  may  generalize  the  laws  of  that  great  protective
spirit  which  in  different  periods  assumes  different  shapes  ;  but  which,  what-
ever its  form  may  be,  always  owes  its  power  to  the  feeling  of  veneration  as
opposed  to  the  feeling  of  independence.  How  natural  this  power  is,  in  certain
stages  of  society,  becomes  evident  if  we  examine  the  basis  on  which  veneration
is  itself  supported.  The  origin  of  veneration  is  wonder  and  fear.  These  two
passions,  either  alone  or  combined,  are  the  ordinary  source  of  veneration  ;  and
the  way  in  which  they  arise  is  obvious.  We  wonder  because  we  are  ignorant,
and  we  fear  because  we  are  weak.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  in  former  times,
when  men  were  more  ignorant  and  more  weak  than  they  now  are,  they  should
likewise  have  been  more  given  to  veneration,  more  inclined  to  those  habits  of
reverence  which,  if  carried  into  religion,  cause  superstition,  and  if  carried  into
politics,  cause  despotism.  In  the  ordinary  march  of  society,  these  evils  are

73  Mem.  de  Lenet,  vol.  i.  pp.  378,  379.  Lenet,  who  was  a  great  admirer  of  the  nobles,
relates  all  this  without  the  faintest  perception  of  its  absurdity.  I  ought  not  to  omit
a  terrible  dispute,  in  1652,  respecting  the  recognition  of  the  claims  of  the  Duke  de  Rohan
(Mem.  de  Conrart,  pp.  151,  152)  ;  nor  another  dispute,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  IV.,  as  to
whether  a  duke  ought  to  sign  his  name  before  a  marshal,  or  whether  the  marshal  should
sign  first.  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  1 1.

76  This  difficulty,  in  1652,  caused  a  violent  quarrel  between  the  two  dukes,  and  ended
in  a  duel,  in  which  the  Duke  de  Nemours  was  killed,  as  is  mentioned  by  most  of  the
contemporary  writers.     See  Mem.  de  Montglat,  vol.  ii.  p.  357  ;  Mem.  de  la  Rochefoucauld,
vol.  ii.  p.  172  ;  Mem.  de  Conrart,  pp.  172-175  ;  Mem.  de  Retz,  vol.  ii.  p.  203  ;  Mem.
d'Omer  Talon,  vol.  iii.  p.  437.

77  Pontchar  train,  one  of  the  ministers  of  state,  writes,  under  the  year  1620  :  "  En  ce
meme^temps  s'etoit  mu  un  tres  grand  differend  entre  M.  le  prince  de  Conde  et  M.  le
comte  de  Soissons,  sur  le  sujet  de  la  serviette  que  chacun  d'eux  pretendoit  devoir  pre-
senter au  roi  quand  ils  se  rencontreroient  tous  deux  pres  sa  majeste."     Mem.  de  Pont-
chartrain,  vol.  ii.  p.  295.     Le  Vassor,  who  gives  a  fuller  account  (Regne  de  Louis  XIII.,
vol.  iii.  pp.  536,  537),  says  :  "  Chacun  des  deux  princes  du  sang  fort  echauffez  a  qui  feroit
une  fonction  de  maitre  d'hotel,  tiroit  la  serviette  de  son  cote,  et  la  contestation  aug-
mentoit  d'une  maniere  dont  les  suites  pouvoient  devenir  facheuses."     But  the  king
interposing,  "  ils  furent  done  obligez  de  ceder  :  mais  ce  ne  fut  pas  sans  se  dire  1'un  a
1'autre  des  paroles  hautes  et  menacantes."

78  According  to  some  authorities,  a  man  ought  to  be  a  duke  before  his  wife  could  be
allowed  to  meddle  with  the  queen's  shift ;  according  to  other  authorities,  the  lady-
in-waiting,  whoever  she  might  be,  had  the  right,  unless  a  princess  happened  to  be  present.
On  these  alternatives,  and  on  the  difficulties  caused  by  them,  compare  Mem.  de  Saint-
Simon,  1842,  vol.  vii.  p.  125,  with  MJm.  de  Motteville,  vol.  ii.  pp.  28,  276,  277.


THE  ENERGY  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  IN  FRANCE     385

remedied  by  that  progress  of  knowledge  which  at  once  lessens  our  ignorance
and  increases  our  resources  :  in  other  words,  which  diminishes  our  proneness  to
wonder  and  to  fear,  and  thus  weakening  our  feelings  of  veneration,  strengthens
in  the  same  proportion  our  feelings  of  independence.  But  in  France  this
natural  tendency  was,  as  we  have  already  seen,  counteracted  by  an  opposite
tendency  ;  so  that  while  on  the  one  hand  the  protective  spirit  was  enfeebled
by  t'he  advance  of  knowledge,  it  was  on  the  other  hand  invigorated  by  those
social  and  political  circumstances  which  I  have  attempted  to  trace  ;  and  by
virtue  of  which,  each  class  exercising  great  power  over  the  one  below  it,  the
subordination  and  subserviency  of  the  whole  were  completely  maintained.
Hence  the  mind  became  accustomed  to  look  upwards,  and  to  rely  not  on  its
own  resources  but  on  the  resources  of  others.  Hence  that  pliant  and  sub-
missive disposition,  for  which  the  French,  until  the  eighteenth  century,  were
always  remarkable.  Hence,  too,  that  inordinate  respect  for  the  opinions  of
others,  on  which  vanity,  as  one  of  their  national  characteristics,  is  founded.79
For  the  feelings  of  vanity  and  of  veneration  have  evidently  this  in  common,
that  they  induce  each  man  to  measure  his  actions  by  a  standard  external  to
himself  ;  while  the  opposite  feelings  of  pride  and  of  independence  would  make
him  prefer  that  internal  standard  which  his  own  mind  alone  can  supply.  The
result  of  all  this  was  that  when  in  the  middle  of  .the  seventeenth  century  the
intellectual  movement  stimulated  the  French  to  rebellion,  its  effect  was  neu-
tralized by  that  social  tendency  which,  even  in  the  midst  of  the  struggle,  kept
alive  the  habits  of  their  old  subservience.  Thus  it  was  that,  while  the  war
went  on,  there  still  remained  a  constant  inclination  on  the  part  of  the  people
to  look  up  to  the  nobles,  on  the  part  of  the  nobles  to  look  up  to  the  crown.  Both
classes  relied  upon  what  they  saw  immediately  above  them.  The  people  be-
lieved that  without  the  nobles  there  was  no  safety  ;  the  nobles  believed  that
without  the  crown  there  was  no  honour.  In  the  case  of  the  nobles,  this  opinion
can  hardly  be  blamed  ;  for  as  their  distinctions  proceed  from  the  crown,  they
have  a  direct  interest  in  upholding  the  ancient  notion  that  the  sovereign  is  the
fountain  of  honour.  They  have  a  direct  interest  in  that  preposterous  doctrine
according  to  which,  the  true  source  of  honour  being  overlooked,  our  attention
is  directed  to  an  imaginary  source,  by  whose  operation  it  is  believed  that  in
a  moment,  and  at  the  mere  will  of  a  prince,  the  highest  honours  may  be  con-
ferred upon  the  meanest  men.  This,  indeed,  is  but  part  of  the  old  scheme  to
create  distinctions  for  which  nature  has  given  no  warrant  ;  to  substitute  a
superiority  which  is  conventional  for  that  which  is  real  ;  and  thus  try  to  raise
little  minds  above  the  level  of  great  ones.  The  utter  failure,  and,  as  society
advances,  the  eventual  cessation  of  all  such  attempts,  is  certain  ;  but  it  is  evident
that  as  long  as  the  attempts  are  made,  they  who  profit  by  them  must  be  inclined
to  value  those  from  whom  they  proceed.  Unless  counteracting  circumstances
interpose,  there  must  be  between  the  two  parties  that  sympathy  which  is  caused
by  the  memory  of  past  favours,  and  the  hope  of  future  ones.  In  France,  this
natural  feeling  being  strengthened  by  that  protective  spirit  which  induced  men
to  cling  to  those  above  them,  it  is  not  strange  that  the  nobles,  even  in  the  midst
of  their  turbulence,  should  seek  the  slightest  favours  of  the  crown  with  an  eager-
ness of  which  some  examples  have  just  been  given.  They  had  been  so  long
accustomed  to  look  up  to  the  sovereign  as  the  source  of  their  own  dignity,  that
they  believed  there  was  some  hidden  dignity  even  in  his  commonest  actions  ;
so  that  to  their  minds  it  was  a  matter  of  the  greatest  importance  which  of  them
should  hand  him  his  napkin,  which  of  them  should  hold  his  basin,  and  which


79  Also  connected  with  the  institution  of  chivalry,  both  being  cognate  symptoms  of
the  same  spirit.  [If  "  vanity  "  be  a  fixed  national  characteristic,  and  "  respect  for
:he  opinions  of  others  "  its  natural  sequence,  it  is  quite  unintelligible  how  the  nation  in
question  could  ever  come  to  be  revolutionary.  Once  more,  this  must  be  pronounced
a  spurious  theory  of  causation.  Boldness  and  independence  have  been  above  credited
to  "  the  French  "  before  Louis  XIV.  :  below,  they  are  credited  to  them  after  his  death.
The  theorem  of  "  vanity  "  is  thus  beside  the  case. — ED.]


386  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  them  should  put  on  his  shirt.80  It  is  not,  however,  for  the  sake  of  casting
ridicule  upon  these  idle  and  frivolous  men  that  I  have  collected  evidence  respect-
ing the  disputes  with  which  they  were  engrossed.  So  far  from  this,  they  are
rather  to  be  pitied  than  blamed  :  they  acted  according  to  their  instincts  ;  they
even  exerted  such  slender  abilities  as  nature  had  given  to  them.  But  we  may
well  feel  for  that  great  country  whose  interests  depended  on  their  care.  And
it  is  solely  in  reference  to  the  fate  of  the  French  people  that  the  historian  need
trouble  himself  with  the  history  of  the  French  nobles.  At  the  same  time,  evi-
dence of  this  sort,  by  disclosing  the  tendencies  of  the  old  nobility,  displays  in
one  of  its  most  active  forms  that  protective  and  aristocratic  spirit  of  which
they  know  little  who  only  know  it  in  its  present  reduced  and  waning  condition.
Such  facts  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  symptoms  of  a  cruel  disease,  by  which
Europe  is  indeed  still  afflicted,  but  which  we  now  see  only  in  a  very  mitigated
form,  and  of  whose  native  virulence  no  one  can  have  an  idea  unless  he  has
studied  it  in  those  early  stages  when,  raging  uncontrolled,  it  obtained  such  a
mastery  as  to  check  the  growth  of  liberty,  stop  the  progress  of  nations,  and
dwarf  the  energies  of  the  human  mind.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  trace  at  greater  length  the  way  in  which  France
and  England  diverged  from  each  other,  or  to  point  out  what  I  hope  will  hence-
forth be  considered  the  obvious  difference  between  the  civil  wars  in  the  two
countries.  It  is  evident  that  the  low-born  and  plebeian  leaders  of  our  rebellion
could  have  no  sympathy  with  those  matters  which  perplexed  the  understanding
of  the  great  French  nobles.  Men  like  Cromwell  and  his  coadjutors  were  not
much  versed  in  the  mysteries  of  genealogy,  or  in  the  subtleties  of  heraldic  lore.
They  had  paid  small  attention  to  the  etiquette  of  courts  ;  they  had  not  even
studied  the  rules  of  precedence.  All  this  was  foreign  to  their  design.  On  the
other  hand,  what  they  did  was  done  thoroughly.  They  knew  that  they  had
a  great  work  to  perform  ;  and  they  performed  it  well.si  They  had  risen  in
arms  against  a  corrupt  and  despotic  government,  and  they  would  not  stay
their  hands  until  they  had  pulled  down  those  who  were  in  high  places  ;  until
they  had  not  only  removed  the  evil,  but  had  likewise  chastized  those  bad  men
by  whom  the  evil  was  committed.  And  although  in  this  their  glorious  under-
taking they  did  undoubtedly  display  some  of  the  infirmities  to  which  even  the
highest  minds  are  subject,  we  at  least  ought  never  to  speak  of  them  but  with
that  unfeigned  respect  which  is  due  to  those  who  taught  the  first  great  lesson
to  the  kings  of  Europe,  and  who,  in  language  not  to  be  mistaken,  proclaimed
to  them  that  the  impunity  which  they  had  long  enjoyed  was  now  come  to  an
end,  and  that  against  their  transgressions  the  people  possessed  a  remedy,  sharper
and  more  decisive  than  any  they  had  hitherto  ventured  to  use.


?0  Even  just  before  the  French  Revolution  these  feelings  still  existed.  See,  for
instance,  the  extraordinary  details  in  Campan,  Mem.  sur  Marie  Antoinette,  vol.  i.  pp.  98,
99  •  which  should  be  compared  with  an  extract  from  Prudhomme's  Miroir  de  Paris,  in
Southey's  Commonplace  Book,  third  series,  1850,  p.  251,  no.  165.

31  Ludlow  thus  expresses  the  sentiments  which  induced  him  to  make  war  upon  the
crown  :  "  The  question  in  dispute  between  the  king's  party  and  us  being,  as  I  appre-
hended, whether  the  king  should  govern  as  a  god  by  his  will,  and  the  nation  be  governed
by  force  like  beasts  ?  or  whether  the  people  should  be  governed  by  laws  made  by  them-
selves, and  live  under  a  government  derived  from  their  own  consent  ?  being  fully  per-
suaded, that  an  accommodation  with  the  king  was  unsafe  to  the  people  of  England,
and  unjust  and  wicked  in  the  nature  of  it."  Ludlow's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  p.  230.  Compare
Whitelocke's  spirited  speech  to  Christina,  in  Journal  of  the  Swedish  Embassy,  vol.  i.
p.  238  ;  and  see  pp.  390,  391. '


CHAPTER  XI

THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT  CARRIED  BY  Louis  XIV.  INTO  LITERATURE.  EXAMINA-
TION OF  THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THIS  ALLIANCE  BETWEEN  THE  INTELLECTUAL
CLASSES  AND  THE  GOVERNING  CLASSES.


THE  reader  will  now  be  able  to  understand  how  it  was  that  the  protective  system,
and  the  notions  of  subordination  connected  with  it,  gained  in  France  a  strength
unknown  in  England,  and  caused  an  essential  divergence  between  the  two
countries.  To  complete  the  comparison,  it  seems  necessary  to  examine  how
this  same  spirit  influenced  the  purely  intellectual  history  of  France,  as  well  as
its  social  and  political  history.  For  the  ideas  of  dependence  upon  which  the
protective  scheme  is  based,  encouraged  a  belief  that  the  subordination  which
existed  in  politics  and  in  society  ought  also  to  exist  in  literature  ;  and  that  the
paternal,  inquisitive,  and  centralizing  system  which  regulated  the  material
interests  of  the  country,  should  likewise  regulate  the  interests  of  its  knowledge.
When,  therefore,  the  Fronde  was  finally  overthrown,  everything  was  prepared
for  that  singular  intellectual  polity  which  during  fifty  years  characterized  the
reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  which  was  to  French  literature  what  feudalism  was
to  French  politics.  In  both  cases,  homage  was  paid  by  one  party,  and  pro-
tection and  favour  accorded  by  the  other.  Every  man  of  letters  became  a
vassal  of  the  French  crown.  Every  book  was  written  with  a  view  to  the  royal
favour  ;  and  to  obtain  the  patronage  of  the  king  was  considered  the  most
decisive  proof  of  intellectual  eminence.  The  effects  produced  by  this  system
will  be  examined  in  the  present  chapter.  The  apparent  cause  of  the  system
was  the  personal  character  of  Louis  XIV.  ;  but  the  real  and  overruling  causes
were  those  circumstances  which  I  have  already  pointed  out,  and  which  estab-
lished in  the  French  mind  associations  that  remained  undisturbed  until  the
eighteenth  century.  To  invigorate  those  associations,  and  to  carry  them  into
every  department  of  life,  was  the  great  aim  of  Louis  XIV.  ;  and  in  that  he  was
completely  successful.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  history  of  his  reign  becomes
highly  instructive,  because  we  see  in  it  the  most  remarkable  instance  of  despotism
which  has  ever  occurred  ;  a  despotism  of  the  largest  and  most  comprehensive
kind  ;  a  despotism  of  fifty  years  over  one  of  the  most  civilized  people  in  Europe,
who  not  only  bore  the  yoke  without  repining,  but  submitted  with  cheerfulness,
-  id  even  with  gratitude,  to  him  by  whom  it  was  imposed.1

1  On  the  disgraceful  subserviency  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  letters,  see  Capefigue's
Louis  XIV.,  vol.  i.  pp.  41,  42,  116  ;  and  on  the  feeling  of  the  people,  Le  Vassor,  who
wrote  late  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  bitterly  says,  "  mais  les  Francais,  accoutumes
a  1'esclavage,  ne  sentent  plus  la  pesanteur  de  leurs  chaines."  Le  Vassor,  Hist,  de
Louis  XIII.,  vol.  vi.  p.  670.'^  Foreigners  were  equally  amazed  at  the  general,  and  still
more  at  the  willing,  servility^"  Lord  Shaftesbury,  in  a  letter  dated  February,  1704-5,
passes  a  glowing  eulogy  upon  liberty  ;  but  he  adds,  that  in  France,  "  you  wiU  hardly
find  this  argument  understood  ;  for  whatever  flashes  may  now  and  then  appear,  I  never
yet  knew  one  single  Frenchman  a  free  man."  Forster's  Original  Letters  of  Locke,  Sidney,
Shaftesbury,  1830,  p.  205.  In  the  same  year  De  Foe  makes  a  similar  remark  in


388  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

What  makes  this  the  more  strange  is  that  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  must  be
utterly  condemned  if  it  is  tried  even  by  the  lowest  standard  of  morals,  of  honour,
or  of  interest.  A  coarse  and  unbridled  profligacy,  followed  by  the  meanest
and  most  grovelling  superstition,  characterized  his  private  life  ;  while  in  his
public  career  he  displayed  an  arrogance  and  a  systematic  perfidy  which  event-
ually roused  the  anger  of  all  Europe,  and  brought  upon  France  sharp  and  signal
retribution.  As  to  his  domestic  policy,  he  formed  a  strict  alliance  with  the
church  ;  and  although  he  resisted  the  authority  of  the  Pope,  he  willingly  left
his  subjects  to  be  oppressed  by  the  tyranny  of  the  clergy.2  To  them  he  aban-
doned everything  except  the  exercise  of  his  own  prerogative.3  Led  on  by  them,
he,  from  the  moment  he  assumed  the  government,  began  to  encroach  upon
those  religious  liberties  of  which  Henry  IV.  had  laid  the  foundation,  and  which
down  to  this  period  had  been  preserved  intact.4  It  was  at  the  instigation  of
the  clergy  that  he  revoked  the  Edict  of  Nantes,  by  which  the  principle  of
toleration  had  for  nearly  a  century  been  incorporated  with  the  law  of  the  land.5
It  was  at  their  instigation  that,  just  before  this  outrage  upon  the  most  sacred
rights  of  his  subjects,  he,  in  order  to  terrify  the  Protestants  into  'conversion,
suddenly  let  loose  upon  them  whole  troops  of  dissolute  soldiers,  who  were  allowed
to  practise  the  most  revolting  cruelties.  The  frightful  barbarities  which  fol-
lowed are  related  by  authentic  writers; 6  and  of  the  effect  produced  on  the

regard  to  the  French  nobles,  Wilson's  Life  of  De  Foe,  vol.  ii.  p.  209  ;  and,  in  1699,  Addison
writes  from  Blois  a  letter  which  strikingly  illustrates  the  degradation  of  the  French.
Aikin's  Life  of  Addison,  vol.  i.  p.  80.  Compare  Burnefs  Own  Time,  vol.  iv.  pi  365,  on
"  the  gross  excess  of  flattery  to  which  the  French  have  run,  beyond  the  examples  of
former  ages,  in  honour  of  their  king."

2  The  terms  of  this  compact  between  the  crown  and  the  church  are  fairly  stated  by
M.    Ranke  :  "  Wir  sehen,   die   beiden   Gewalten   unterstiitzten   einander.     Der    Konig
ward  von  den  Einwirkungen  der  weltlichen,  der  Clerus  von  der  unbedingten  Autoritat
der  geistlichen  Gewalt  des  Papstthums  freigesprochen."     Die  Pdpste,  vol.  iii.  p.  168.

3  This  part  of  his  character  is  skilfully  drawn  by  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxv.

P-  43-

4  Flassan  supposes  that  the  first  persecuting  laws  were  in  1679  :  "  Des  1'annee  1679
les  concessions  faites  aux  protestans  avaient  ete  graduellement  restreintes."     Diplo-
matie  Francaise,  vol.  iv.  p.  92.     But  the  fact  is,  that  these  laws  began  in  1662,  the  year
after  the  death  of  Mazarin.     See  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxv.  p.  167  ;  Benoist,
Edit  de  Nantes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  460-462,  481.     In  1667,  a  letter  from  Thynne  to  Lord
Clarendon  (Lister's  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  iii.  p.  446)  mentions  "  the  horrid  persecutions
the  reformed  religion  undergoes  in  France  ;  "  and  Locke,  who  travelled  in  France  in
1675  and  1676,  states  in  his  Journal  (King's  Life  of  Locke,  vol.  i.  p.  no)  that  the  Pro-
testants were  losing  "  every  day  some  privilege  or  other."

5  An  account  of  the  revocation  will  be  found  in  all  the  French  historians  ;  but  I  do
not  remember  that  any  of  them  have  noticed  that  there  was  a  rumour  of  it  in  Paris
twenty  years  before  it  occurred.     In  March,   1665,   Patin  writes,  "  On  dit  que,  pour
miner  les  huguenots,  le  roi  veut  supprimer  les  chambres  de  1'edit,  et  abolir  1'edit  de
Nantes."     Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  iii.  p.  516.

6  Compare  Burnefs  Own  Time,  vol.  iii.  pp.  73-76,  with  Siecle  de  Louis  XIV.,  in  (Euvres
de  Voltaire,  vol.  xx.  pp.  377,  378.     Voltaire  says  that  the  Protestants  who  persisted  in
their  religion  "  etaient  livres  aux  soldats,  qui  eurent  toute  licence,  excepte  celle  de  tuer.
II  y  eut  pourtant  plusieurs  personnes  si  cruellement  maltraitees  qu'elles  en  moururent."
And  Burnet,  who  was  in  France  in  1685,  says  "  all   men  set  their  thoughts   on  work
to  invent  new  methods  of  cruelty."      What  some  of  those  methods  were  I  shall  now
relate  ;  because  the  evidence,  however  painful  it  may  be,  is  necessary  to  enable  us  to
understand  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.     It  is  necessary  that  the  veil  should  be  rent ;  and
that  the  squeamish  delicacy  which  would  hide  such  facts  should  give  way  before  the
obligation  which  the  historian  is  under  of  holding  up  to  public  opprobrium,  and  branding
with  public  infamy,  the  church  by  which  the  measures  were  instigated,  the  sovereign
by  whom  they  were  enforced,  and  the  age  in  which  they  were  permitted.

The  two  original  sources  for  our  knowledge  of  these  events  are  Quick's  Synodicon  in


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     389

material  interests  of  the  nation,  some  idea  may  be  formed  from  the  fact  that
these  religious  persecutions  cost  France  half  a  million  of  her  most  industrious
inhabitants,  who  fled  to  different  parts,  taking  with  them  those  habits  of  labour,

Gallia,  1692,  folio  ;  and  Benoist,  Histoire  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  1695,  4to.  From  these
works  I  extract  the  following  accounts  of  what  happened  in  France  in  1685.  "  After-
wards they  fall  upon  the  persons  of  the  Protestants  ;  and  there  was  no  wickedness,
though  never  so  horrid,  which  they  did  not  put  in  practice,  that  they  might  enforce
them  to  change  their  religion.  .  .  .  They  bound  them  as  criminals  are  when  they  be  put
to  the  rack  ;  and  in  that  posture,  putting  a  funnel  into  their  mouths,  they  poured  wine
down  their  throats  till  its 'fumes  had  deprived  them  of  their  reason,  and  they  had  in
that  condition  made  them  consent  to  become  Catholics.  Some  they  stripped  stark
naked,  and  after  they  had  offered  them  a  thousand  indignities,  they  stuck  them  with
pins  from  head  to  foot ;  they  cut  them  with  pen -knives,  tear  them  by  the  noses  with
red-hot  pincers,  and  dragged  them  about  the  rooms  till  they  promised  to  become  Roman
Catholics,  or  that  the  doleful  outcries  of  these  poor  tormented  creatures,  calling  upon
God  for  mercy,  constrained  them  to  let  them  go.  ...  In  some  places  they  tied  fathers
and  husbands  to  the  bed -posts,  and  ravished  their  wives  and  daughters  before  their
eyes.  .  .  .  From  others  they  pluck  off  the  nails  of  their  hands  and  toes,  which  must  needs
cause  an  intolerable  pain.  They  burnt  the  feet  of  others.  They  blew  up  men  and  women
with  bellows  till  they  were  ready  to  burst  in  pieces.  If  these  horrid  usages  could
not  prevail  upon  them  to  violate  their  consciences,  and  abandon  their  religion,  they
did  then  imprison  them  in  close  and  noisome  dungeons,  in  which  they  exercised  all  kinds
of  inhumanities  upon  them."  Quick's  Synodicon,  vol.  i.  pp.  cxxx.  cxxxi.  "  Cependant
les  troupes  exergoient  partout  des  cruautez  inouies.  Tout  leur  etoit  permis,  pourveu
qu'ils  ne  fissent  pas  mourir.  Us  faisoient  danser  quelquefois  leurs  hotes,  jusqu'£  ce
qu'ils  tombassent  en  defaillance.  Us  bernoient  les  autres  jusqu'a  ce  qu'ils  n'en  pouvoient
plus. ...  II  yen  eut  quelques-uns  a  qui  on  versa  de  1'eau  bouillante  dans  la  bouche. . . .
II  y  en  eut  plusieurs  a  qui  on  donna  des  coups  de  baton  sous  les  pieds,  pour  eprouver
si  ce  supplice  est  aussi  cruel  que  les  relations  le  publient.  On  arrachoit  a  d' autres  le
poil  de  la  barbe.  .  .  .  D'autres  bruloient  a  la  chandelle  le  poil  des  bras  et  des  jambes
de  leurs  hotes.  D'autres  faisoient  briiler  de  la  poudre,  si  pres  du  visage  de  ceux  qui
leur  resistoient,  qu'elle  leur  grilloit  toute  la  peau.  Us  mettoient  a  d'autres  des  charbons
allumez  dans  les  mains,  et  les  contraignoient  de  les  tenir  fermees,  jusqu'a  ce  que  les
charbons  fussent  eteints.  .  .  .  On  brula  les  pieds  &  plusieurs,  tenant  les  uns  long-terns
devant  un  grand  feu  ;  appliquant  aux  autres  une  pelle  ardente  sous  les  pieds  ;  liant
les  pieds  des  autres  dans  des  bottines  pleines  de  graisse,  qu'on  faisoit  fondre  et  chauffer
peu  a  peu  devant  un  brasier  ardent."  Benoist,  Hist,  de  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  v.  pp.  887-
889.  One  of  the  Protestants,  named  Ryau,  they  "  lierent  fort  etroitement ;  lui  sevrerent
les  doigts  des  mains ;  lui  ficherent  des  epingles  sous  les  ongles  ;  lui  firent  bruler  de  la
poudre  dans  les  oreilles  ;  lui  percerent  les  cuisses  en  plusieurs  lieux,  et  verserent  du
vinaigre  et  du  sel  dans  ses  blessures.  Par  ce  tourment  Us  epuiserent  sa  patience  en  deux
jours  ;  et  le  forcerent  a  changer  de  religion"  p.  890.  "  Les  dragons  etoient  les  memes
en  tous  lieux.  Us  battoient,  ils  etourdissoient,  ils  bruloient  en  Bourgogne  comme  en
Poitou,  en  Champagne  comme  en  Guyenne,  en  Normandie  comme  en  Languedoc.  Mais
ils  n'avoient  pour  les  femmes  ni  plus  de  respect,  ni  plus  de  pitie  que  pour  les  hommes.
Au  contraire,  ils  abusoient  de  la  tendre  pudeur  qui  est  une  des  proprietez  de  leur  sexe  ;
et  ils  s'en  prevaloient  pour  leur  faire  de  plus  sensibles  outrages.  On  leur  levoit  quel-
quefois leurs  juppes  par  dessus  la  tete,  et  on  leur  jettoit  des  seaux  d'eau  sur  le  corps.
II  y  en  eut  plusieurs  que  les  soldats  mirent  en  chemise,  et  qu'ils  forcerent  de  danser  avec
eux  dans  cet  etat.  .  .  .  Deux  filles  de  Calais,  nominees  le  Noble,  furent  mises  toutes
nue's  sur  le  pave,  et  furent  ainsi  exposees  a  la  mocquerie  et  aux  outrages  des  passans.  .  .  .
Des  dragons  ayant  lie  la  dame  de  Vezengai  a  la  quenouille  de  son  lit,  lui  crachoient  dans
la  bouche  quand  elle  1'ouvroit  pour  parler  ou  pour  soupirer."  pp.  891,  892.  At  p.  917
are  other  details,  far  more  horrible,  respecting  the  treatment  of  women,  and  which
indignation  rather  than  shame  prevents  me  from  transcribing.  Indeed,  the  shame  can
only  light  on  the  church  and  the  government  under  whose  united  authority  such  scan-
dalous outrages  could  be  openly  perpetrated,  merely  for  the  sake  of  compelling  men
to  change  their  religious  opinions.


300  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  that  knowledge  and  experience  in  their  respective  trades,  which  had  hitherto
been  employed  in  enriching  their  own  country.7  These  things  are  notorious,  they
are  incontestable,  and  they  lie  on  the  surface  of  history.  Yet,  in  the  face  of
them,  there  are  still  found  men  who  hold  up  for  admiration  the  age  of  Louis  XIV.
Although  it  is  well  known  that  in  his  reign  every  vestige  of  liberty  was  destroyed  ;
that  the  people  were  weighed  down  by  an  insufferable  taxation  ;  that  their
children  were  torn  from  them  by  tens  of  thousands  to  swell  the  royal  armies  ;
that  the  resources  of  the  country  were  squandered  to  an  unprecedented  extent  ;
that  a  despotism  of  the  worst  kind  was  firmly  established  ; — although  all  this
is  universally  admitted,  yet  there  are  writers,  even  in  our  own  day,  who  are  so
infatuated  with  the  glories  of  literature  as  to  balance  them  against  the  most
enormous  crimes,  and  who  will  forgive  every  injury  inflicted  by  a  prince  during
whose  life  there  were  produced  the  Letters  of  Pascal,  the  Orations  of  Bossuct,
the  Comedies  of  Moliere,  and  the  Tragedies  of  Racine.

This  method  of  estimating  the  merits  of  a  sovereign  is  indeed  so  rapidly
dying  away,  that  I  shall  not  spend  any  words  in  refuting  it.  But  it  is  con-
nected with  a  more  widely  diffused  error  respecting  the  influence  of  royal  pat-
ronage upon  national  literature.  This  is  a  delusion  which  men  of  letters  have
themselves  been  the  first  to  propagate.  From  the  language  too  many  of  them
are  in  the  habit  of  employing,  we  might  be  led  to  believe  that  there  is  some
magical  power  in  the  smiles  of  a  king  which  stimulates  the  intellect  of  the  for-
tunate individual  whose  heart  they  are  permitted  to  gladden.  Nor  must  this
be  despised  as  one  of  those  harmless  prejudices  that  still  linger  round  the  person
of  the  sovereign.  It  is  not  only  founded  on  a  misconception  of  the  nature  of
things,  but  it  is  in  its  practical  consequences  very  injurious.  It  is  injurious
to  the  independent  spirit  which  literature  should  always  possess  ;  and  it  is
injurious  to  princes  themselves,  because  it  strengthens  that  vanity  of  which
they  generally  have  too  large  a  share.  Indeed,  if  we  consider  the  position  they
now  occupy  in  the  most  civilized  countries,  we  shall  at  once  see  the  absurdity
of  an  opinion  which,  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge,  is  unfit  to  be  held  by
educated  men.

From  the  moment  that  there  was  finally  abandoned  the  theological  fiction
of  the  divine  right  of  kings,  it  necessarily  followed  that  the  respect  felt  for  them
should  suffer  a  corresponding  diminution.8  The  superstitious  reverence  with
which  they  were  formerly  regarded  is  extinct,'  and  at  the  present  day  we  are
no  longer  awed  by  that  divinity  with  which  their  persons  were  once  supposed
to  be  hedged.9  The  standard,  therefore,  by  which  we  should  measure  them
is  obvious.  We  should  applaud  their  conduct  in  proportion  as  they  contribute
towards  the  happiness  of  the  nation  over  which  they  are  entrusted  with  power  ;

7  M.  Blanqui  (Hist,  de  I'Economie  Politique,  vol.  ii.  p.  10)  says,  that  the  revocation  of
the  Edict  of  Nantes  cost  France  "  cinq  cent  mille  de  ses  enfants  les  plus  industrieux,"
who  carried  into  other  countries  "  les  habitudes  d'ordre  et  de  travail  dont  ils  etaient
imbus."     See  also  Siecle  de  Louis  XIV.,  chap,  xxxvi.,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xx.
pp.   380,  381.     Several  of  them  emigrated  to  North  America.     Compare  Godwin  on
Population,  pp.  388,  389,  with  Benoist,  VEdit  de  Nantes,  vol.  v.  pp.  973,  974,  and  Lyell's
Second  Visit  to  the  United  States,  edit.  1849,  vol.  ii.  p.  159.     See  also,  on  the  effects  of  the
Revocation,  Lettres  inedites  de  Voltaire,  vol.  ii.  p.  473.

8  On  the^  diminished  respect  for  kings,  caused  by  the  abandonment  of  divine  right,
see  Spencer's  Social  Statics,  pp.  423,  424  ;  and  oh  the  influence  of  the  clergy  in  propa-
gating the  old  doctrine,  see  Allen's  learned  work  on  the  Royal  Prerogative,  edit.  1849,  p.  156.
See  also  some  striking  remarks  by  Locke,  in  King's  Life  of  Locke,  vol.  ii.  p.  90.

"  Qu'est  devenu,  en  effet,  le  droit  divin,  cette  pensee,  autrefois  acceptee  par  les
masses,  que  les  rois  etaient  les  representants  de  Dieu  sur  la  terre,  que  la  racine  de  leur
pouvoir  etait  dans  le  del  ?  Elle  s'est  evanouie  devant  cette  autre  pensee,  qu'aucun
image,  aucun  mysticisme  n'obscurcit ;  devant  cette  pensee  si  naturelle  et  brillant  d'une
clarte  si  nette  et  si  vive,  que  la  souveraine  puissance,  sur  la  terre,  appartient  au  peuple
entier,  et  non  a  une  fraction,  et  moins  encore  a  un  seul  homme."  Rey,  Science  Sociale,
vol.  iii.  p.  308.  Compare  Manning  on  the  Law  of  Nations,  p.  101  ;  Laing's  Sweden,
p.  408 ;  Laing's  Denmark,  p.  196  ;  Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  391.


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     391

but  we  ought  to  remember  that,  from  the  manner  in  which  they  are  educated,
and  from  the  childish  homage  always  paid  to  them,  their  information  must
be  very  inaccurate,  and  their  prejudices  very  numerous.10  On  this  account,
so  far  from  expecting  that  they  should  be  judicious  patrons  of  literature,  or
should  in  any  way  head  their  age,  we  ought  to  be  satisfied  if  they  do  not  obsti-
nately oppose  the  spirit  of  their  time,  and  if  they  do  not  attempt  to  stop  the
march  of  society.  For  unless  the  sovereign,  in  spite  of  the  intellectual  dis-
advantages of  his  position,  is  a  man  of  very  enlarged  mind,  it  must  usually
happen  that  he  will  reward,  not  those  who  are  most  able,  but  those  who  are
most  compliant  ;  and  that  while  he  refuses  his  patronage  to  a  profound  and
independent  thinker,  he  will  grant  it  to  an  author  who  cherishes  ancient  pre-
judices and  defends  ancient  abuses.  In  this  way,  the  practice  of  conferring
on  men  of  letters  either  honorary  or  pecuniary  rewards  is  agreeable,  no  doubt,
to  those  who  receive  them  ;  but  has  a  manifest  tendency  to  weaken  the  boldness
and  energy  of  their  sentiments,  and  therefore  to  impair  the  value  of  their  works.
This  might  be  made  evident  by  publishing  a  list  of  those  literary  pensions  which
have  been  granted  by  European  princes.  If  this  were  done,  the  mischief  pro-
duced by  these  and  similar  rewards  would  be  clearly  seen.  After  a  careful
study  of  the  history  of  literature,  I  think  myself  authorized  to  say  that  for
one  instance  in  which  a  sovereign  has  recompensed  a  man  who  is  before  his
age,  there  are  at  least  twenty  instances  of  his  recompensing  one  who  is  behind
his  age.  The  result  is  that  in  every  country  where  royal  patronage  has  been
long  and  generally  bestowed,  the  spirit  of  literature,  instead  of  being  progressive,
has  become  reactionary.  An  alliance  has  been  struck  up  between  those  who  give
and  those  who  receive.  By  a  system  of  bounties,  there  has  been  artificially
engendered  a  greedy  and  necessitous  class  ;  who,  eager  for  pensions,  and  offices,
and  titles,  have  made  the  pursuit  of  truth  subordinate  to  the  desire  of  gain,
and  have  infused  into  their  writings  the  prejudices  of  the  court  to  which  they
cling.  Hence  it  is  that  the  marks  of  favour  have  become  the  badge  of  ser-
vitude. Hence  it  is  that  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  by  far  the  noblest  of  all
occupations,  an  occupation  which  of  all  others  raises  the  dignity  of  man,  has
been  debased  to  the  level  of  a  common  profession,*  where  the  chances  of  success
are  measured  by  the  number  of  rewards,  and  where  the  highest  honours  are  in
the  gift  of  whoever  happens  to  be  the  minister  or  sovereign  of  the  day.

This  tendency  forms  of  itself  a  decisive  objection  to  the  views  of  those  who
wish  to  entrust  the  executive  government  with  the  means  of  rewarding  literary
men.  But  there  is  also  another  objection,  in  some  respects  still  more  serious.
Every  nation  which  is  allowed  to  pursue  its  course  uncontrolled,  will  easily
satisfy  the  wants  of  its  own  intellect,  and  will  produce  such  a  literature  as  is
best  suited  to  its  actual  condition.  And  it  is  evidently  for  the  interest  of  all
classes  that  the  production  shall  not  be  greater  than  the  want  ;  that  the  supply
shall  not  exceed  the  demand.  It  is  moreover  necessary  to  the  well-being  of
society  that  a  healthy  proportion  should  be  kept  up  between  the  intellectual
classes  and  the  practical  classes.  It  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  certain
ratio  between  those  who  are  most  inclined  to  think  and  those  who  are  most
inclined  to  act.  If  we  were  all  authors,  our  material  interests  would  suffer  ;
if  we  were  all  men  of  business,  our  mental  pleasures  would  be  abridged.  In

10  In  this,  as  in  all  instances,  the  language  of  respect  long  survives  the  feeling  to  which
the  language  owed  its  origin.  Lord  Brougham  (Political  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  42,  Lond.
1849)  observes,  that  "all  their  titles  are  derived  from  a  divine  original — all  refer  to
them  as  representing  the  Deity  on  earth.  They  are  called  '  Grace,'  '  Majesty.'  They
are  termed  '  The  Lord's  anointed,'  '  The  Vicegerent  of  God  upon  earth  ;  '  with  many  other
names  which  are  either  nonsensical  cr  blasphemous,  but  which  are  outdone  in  absurdity
by  the  kings  of  the  East."  True  enough  ;  but  if  Lord  Brougham  had  written  thus
three  centuries  ago,  he  would  have  had  his  ears  cut  off  for  his  pains.

[*  In  the  sequel,  it  will  be  seen,  Buckle  really  proposes  that  the  business  of  spreading
knowledge  should  be  "  debased  to  the  level  of  a  common  profession,"  inasmuch  as  he
insists  that  it  should  be  solely  a  matter  of  commercial  demand  and  supply. — ED.]


392  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  first  case,  we  should  be  famished  philosophers  ;  in  the  other  case,  we  should
be  wealthy  fools.      Now  it  is  obvious  that,  according  to  the  commonest  prin-
ciples of  human  action,  the  relative  numbers  of  these  two  classes  will  be  adjusted
without  effort  by  the  natural,  or,  as  we  call  it,  the  spontaneous  movement  of
society.     But  if  a  government  takes  upon  itself  to  pension  literary  men,  it  dis-
turbs this  movement  ;  it  troubles  the  harmony  of  things.     This  is  the  unavoid*
able  result  of  that  spirit  of  interference,  or,  as  it  is  termed,  protection,  by  which
every  country  has  been  greatly  injured.     If,  for  instance,  a  fund  were  set  apart
by  the  state  for  rewarding  butchers  and  tailors,  it  is  certain  that  the  number
of  those  useful  men  would  be  needlessly  augmented.     If  another  fund  is  appro-
priated for  the  literary  classes,  it  is  as  certain  that  men  of  letters  will  increase
more  rapidly  than  the  exigencies  of  the  country  require.      In  both  cases,   an
artificial  stimulus  will  produce  an  unhealthy  action.*     Surely,  food  and  clothes
are  as  necessary  for  the  body  as  literature  is  for  the  mind.     Why,  then,  should
we  call  upon  government  to  encourage  those  who   write  our  books   any  more
than  to  encourage  those  who  kill  our  mutton  and  mend  our  garments  ?     The
truth  is  that  the  intellectual  march  of  society  is  in  this  respect  exactly  analogous
to  its  physical  march.      In  some  instances  a  forced   supply  may  indeed   create
an  unnatural  want.     But  this  is  an  artificial  state  of  things,  which  indicates
a  diseased  action.     In  a  healthy  condition,  it  is  not  the  supply  which  causes
the  want,  but  it  is  the  want  which  gives  rise  to  the  supply.     To  suppose,  there-
fore, that  an  increase  of  authors  would  necessarily  be  followed  by  a  diffusion
of  knowledge,  is  as  if  we  were  to  suppose  that  an  increase  of  butchers  must  be
followed  by  a  diffusion  of  food.     This  is  not  the  way  in  which  things  are  ordered.
Men  must  have  appetite  before  they  will  eat  ;  they  must  have  money  before
they  can  buy ;   they  must  be  inquisitive  before  they  will  read.     The  two  great
principles  which  move  the  world  are  the  love  of  wealth  and  the  love  of  know-
ledge.    These  two  principles  respectively  represent  and  govern  the  two  most
important  classes  into  which  every  civilized  country  is  divided.     What  a  govern-
ment gives  to  one  of  these  classes,  it  must  take  from  the  other.     What  it  gives
to  literature,  it  must  take  from  wealth. f     This  can  never  be  done  to  any  great

[*  The  argument  which  follows  is  one  of  the  most  overstrained  in  Buckle's  work.
From  the  sound  proposition  that  kings  individually  are  likely  to  "  protect  "  injudiciously,
he  proceeds  without  notice  to  the  argument  (loosely  adapted  from  Adam  Smith)  that
all  evocative  action  by  the  State  in  regard  to  the  mental  life  is  injurious.  As  the  chapter
proceeds,  he  will  be  found  to  misstate  the  evidence  in  the  interests  of  his  thesis,  which
he  reached  in  the  main  deductively,  the  induction  in  the  following  pages  being  quite
inadequate  to  the  argument.  As  the  word  literature  ordinarily  connotes  rather  belles
lettres  than  scientific  and  scholarly  research,  the  preliminary  argument  is  fallaciously
plausible;  but  by  Buckle's  own  definition  all  knowledge  is  conveyed  by  "literature."
In  terms  of  his  argument  as  to  butchers  and  tailors,  the  State  acted  perniciously  in  ever
founding  universities  and  schools  ;  and  the  desire  for  knowledge  evoked  by  hearing
that  knowledge  is  somewhere  to  be  had  is  "  an  unnatural  want."  The  assertion  that
"  every  nation  "  left  alone  "  will  easily  satisfy  the  wants  of  its  own  intellect  "  is  either
an  argument  in  a  circle  or  a  quite  false  allegation  to  the  effect  that  nobody  ever  wants
more  instruction  than  conies  in  his  way.  It  is  not  even  true  as  regards  belles  lettres :
it  is  doubly  untrue  as  regards  knowledge  in  general.  Buckle's  minor  premiss  as  to  the
paralysing  effect  of  the  protective  policy  of  Louis  XIV.  is  an  expansion  of  the  proposition
of  Barante  (Tableau  Lift,  du  i8e  Siecle  (1819),  ed.  8ieme,  pp.  36-37)  that  all  the  great
men  of  the  reign  of  Louis  had  been  born  and  educated  before  his  government  was  in
force,  and  that  "  cette  premiere  generation  d'hommes  une  fois  epuisee,  elle  ne  se  re-
nouvela  pas."  Even  this  statement,  though  broadly  true,  errs  from  want  of  circum-
spection ;  and  Buckle  added  to  its  inaccuracy,  as  we  shall  see,  in  developing  it  into  an
attack  on  all  endowment  of  research. — ED.]

[f  As  this  argument  obviously  applies  to  all  taxation  whatever,  and  to  all  public
expenditure  whatever,  its  limitation  to  the  present  issue  amounts  to  a  sophism.  Louis
expended  on  his  wars  a  thousand  times  what  he  spent  on  men  of  letters.  But  the
military  expenditure  of  all  governments  is  to  their  expenditure  on  "  literature  "  as
100  or  1000  to  i.  Then  "  the  most  ruinous  consequences  "  must  be  always  present.— ED.]


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     393

extent  without  entailing  the  most  ruinous  consequences.  For,  the  natural
proportions  of  society  being  destroyed,  society  itself  will  be  thrown  into  con-
fusion. While  men  of  letters  are  protected,  men  of  industry  will  be  depressed.
The  lower  classes  can  count  for  little  in  the  eyes  of  those  to  whom  literature  is
the  first  consideration.  The  idea  of  the  liberty  of  the  people  will  be  discouraged  ;
their  persons  will  be  oppressed  ;  their  labour  will  be  taxed.  The  arts  necessary
to  life  will  be  despised,  in  order  that  those  which  embellish  life  may  be  favoured.
The  many  will  be  ruined,  that  the  few  may  be  pleased.  While  everything  is
splendid  above,  all  will  be  rotten  below.  Fine  pictures,  noble  palaces,  touching
dramas, — these  may  for  a  time  be  produced  in  profusion,  but  it  will  be  at  the
cost  of  the  heart  and  strength  of  the  nation.  Even  the  class  for  whom  the
sacrifice  has  been  made,  will  soon  decay.  Poets  may  continue  to  sing  the  praises
of  the  prince  who  has  bought  them  with  his  gold.*  It  is,  however,  certain  that
men  who  begin  by  losing  their  independence  will  end  by  losing  their  energy.
Their  intellect  must  be  robust  indeed,  if  it  does  not  wither  in  the  sickly  atmo-
sphere of  a  court.  Their  attention  being  concentrated  on  their  master,  they
insensibly  contract  those  habits  of  servility  which  are  suited  to  their  position  ;
and,  as  the  range  of  their  sympathies  is  diminished,  the  use  and  action  of  their
genius  become  impaired.  To  them  submission  is  a  custom,  and  servitude  a
pleasure.  In  their  hands,  literature  soon  loses  its  boldness,  tradition  is  appealed
to  as  the  ground  of  truth,  and  the  spirit  of  inquiry  is  extinguished.  Then  it
is  that  there  comes  one  of  those  sad  moments  in  which,  no  outlet  being  left
for  public  opinion,  the  minds  of  men  are  unable  to  find  a  vent  ;  their  discontents,
having  no  voice,  slowly  rankle  into  a  deadly  hatred  ;  their  passions  accumulate
in  silence,  until  at  length,  losing  all  patience,  they  are  goaded  into  one  of  those
terrible  revolutions,  by  which  they  humble  the  pride  of  their  rulers,  and  carry
retribution  even  into  the  heart  of  the  palace.

The  truth  of  this  picture  is  well  known  to  those  who  have  studied  the  history
of  Louis  XIV.,  and  the  connexion  between  it  and  the  French  Revolution.  That
prince  adopted,  during  his  long  reign,  the  mischievous  practice  of  rewarding
literary  men  with  large  sums  of  money,  and  of  conferring  on  them  numerous
marks  of  personal  favour.  As  this  was  done  for  more  than  half  a  century,  and  as
the  wealth  which  he  thus  unscrupulously  employed  was  of  course  taken  from  his
other  subjects,  we  can  find  no  better  illustration  of  the  results  which  such  patron-
age is  likely  to  produce.  He,  indeed,  has  the  merit  of  organizing  into  a  system
that  protection  of  literature  which  some  are  so  anxious  to  restore.  What  the
effect  of  this  was  upon  the  general  interests  of  knowledge  we  shall  presently  see.
lut  its  effect  upon  authors  themselves  should  be  particularly  attended  to  by
those  men  of  letters  who,  with  little  regard  to  their  own  dignity,  are  constantly
reproaching  the  English  government  for  neglecting  the  profession  of  which  they
themselves  are  members.  In  no  age  have  literary  men  been  rewarded  with  such
profuseness  as  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  ;  and  in  no  age  have  they  been  so  mean-

>irited,  so  servile,  so  utterly  unfit  to  fulfil  their  great  vocation  as  the  apostles  of
knowledge  and  the  missionaries  of  truth.  The  history  of  the  most  celebrated
tuthors  of  that  time  proves  that,  notwithstanding  their  acquirements  and  the
>ower  of  their  minds,  they  were  unable  to  resist  the  surrounding  corruption.  To
?ain  the  favour  of  the  king,  they  sacrificed  that  independent  spirit  which  should

ive  been  dearer  to  them  than  life.  They  gave  away  the  inheritance  of  genius  ;
they  sold  their  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage. f  What  happened  then,  would
mdcr  the  same  circumstances  happen  now.  A  few  eminent  thinkers  may  be  able


[*  Buckle  has  here  left  his  own  definition  (above,  p.  151)  entirely  out  of  sight.     He
nv  makes  "  literature  "  mean  merely  belles  lettres,  whereas  his  argument  above  applies
all  production  of  food  for  the  mind. — ED.]

[f  The  details  which  follow  disprove  this  assertion.     Among  the  men  who,  on  Buckle's
showing,  did  not  sell  their  birthright,  were  Corneille,  Racine,  Moliere,  Boileau,  La
?ontaine,  Malebranche,  La  Rochefoucauld,  La  Bruyere.     And  we  shall  see  that  he  entirely
lored  the  names  of  many  other  distinguished  writers  who  were  not  corrupted  by  the
protection  "  around  them. — ED.]


394  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

for  a  certain  time  to  resist  the  pressure  of  their  age.  But,  looking  at  mankind
generally,  society  can  have  no  hold  on  any  class  except  through  the  medium  of
their  interests.  It  behoves,  therefore,  every  people  to  take  heed  that  the  in-
terests of  literary  men  are  on  their  side  rather  than  on  the  side  of  their  rulers.
For  literature  is  the  representative  of  intellect,  which  is  progressive  ;  govern-
ment is  the  representative  of  order,  which  is  stationary.  As  long  as  these  two
great  powers  are  separate,  they  will  correct  and  react  upon  each  other,  and  the
people  may  hold  the  balance.  If,  however,  these  powers  coalesce,  if  the  govern-
ment can  corrupt  the  intellect,  and  if  the  intellect  will  yield  to  the  government,
the  inevitable  result  must  be  despotism  in  politics,  and  servility  in  literature.
This  was  the  history  of  France  under  Louis  XIV.  ;  and  this,  we  may  rest  assured,
will  be  the  history  of  every  country  that  shall  be  tempted  to  follow  so  attractive
but  so  fatal  an  example.

The  reputation  of  Louis  XIV.  originated  in  the  gratitude  of  men  of  letters  ;
but  it  is  now  supported  by  a  popular  notion  that  the  celebrated  literature  of  his
age  is  mainly  to  be  ascribed  to  his  fostering  care.  If,  however,  we  examine  this
opinion,  we  shall  find  that,  like  many  of  the  traditions  of  which  history  is  lull,  it
is  entirely  devoid  of  truth.  We  shall  find  two  leading  circumstances,  which  will
prove  that  the  literary  splendour  of  his  reign  was  not  the  result  of  his  efforts,  but
was  the  work  of  that  great  generation  which  preceded  him  ;  and  that  the  in-
tellect of  France,  so  far  from  being  benefited  by  his  munificence,  was  hampered
by  his  protection.

I.  The  first  circumstance  is  that  the  immense  impulse  which,  during  the  ad-
ministrations of  Richelieu  and  of  Mazarin,  had  been  given  to  the  highest  branches
of  knowledge,  was  suddenly  stopped.*  In  1661  Louis  XIV.  assumed  the  govern-
ment ;  n  and  from  that  moment  until  his  death  in  1715  the  history  of  France,
so  far  as  great  discoveries  are  concerned,  is  a  blank  in  the  annals  of  Europe.  If,
putting  aside  all  preconceived  notions  respecting  the  supposed  glory  of  that  age,
we  examine  the  matter  fairly,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  every  department  there  was
a  manifest  dearth  of  original  thinkers.  There  was  much  that  was  elegant,  much
that  was  attractive.  The  senses  of  men  were  soothed  and  flattered  by  the
creations  of  art,  by  paintings,  by  palaces,  by  poems  ;  but  scarcely  anything  of
moment  was  added  to  the  sum  of  human  knowledge.  If  we  take  the  mathe-
matics, and  those  mixed  sciences  to  which  they  are  applicable,  it  will  be  universally
admitted  that  their  most  successful  cultivators  in  France  during  the  seven-
teenth century  were  Descartes,  Pascal,  Fermat,  Gassendi,  and  Mersenne.  But,
so  far  from  Louis  XIV.  having  any  share  in  the  honour  due  to  them,  these  eminent
men  were  engaged  in  their  investigations  while  the  king  was  still  in  his  cradle,
and  completed  them  before  he  assumed  the  government,  and  therefore  before  his
system  of  protection  came  into  play.  Descartes  died  in  i65o,12  when  the  king
was  twelve  years  old.  Pascal,  wiiose  name,  like  that  of  Descartes,  is  commonly
associated  with  the  age  of  Louis  XIV.,  had  gained  a  European  reputation  while
Louis,  occupied  in  the  nursery  with  his  toys,  was  not  aware  that  any  such  man
existed.  His  treatise  on  conic  sections  was  written  in  1639  ;  13  his  decisive  ex-


11  "La  premiere  periode  du  gouvernement  de  Louis  XIV  commence  done  en   1661."
Capefigue's  Louis  XIV.,  vol.  i.  p.  4.

12  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  157.

13  In  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  50,  he  is  said  to  have  composed  it  "  a  1'age  de  seize  ans  ;  "
and  at  p.  46,  to  have  been  born  in  1623.


[*  It  is  not  clear  whether  this  stimulus  is  here  asserted  to  have  been  given  by  t
administrations.  If  yes,  the  argument  is  a  contradiction.  If  not,  the  alleged  sudden
stoppage  is  unintelligible.  "  Great  discoveries  "  cannot  be  counted  on  as  certainties
under  any  system  whatever  :  they  did  not  continue  to  be  made  in  England  after  Newton
and  Harvey  ;  and  if,  as  is  shown  below,  the  great  group  of  French  discoverers  of  the  pre-
ceding reign  were  dead  when  Louis  XIV.  applied  his  policy,  that  policy  is  not  reasonably
to  be  treated  as  the  sole  cause  of  the  dearth.— ED.]


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE    395

periments  on  the  weight  of  air  were  made  in  1648  ;  14  and  his  researches  on  the
cycloid,  the  last  great  inquiry  he  ever  undertook,  were  in  1658, 15  when  Louis,
still  under  the  tutelage  of  Mazarin,  had  no  sort  offauthority.  Fermat  was  one
of  the  most  profound  thinkers  of  the  Seventeenth  century,  particularly  as  a
geometrician,  in  which  respect  he  was  second  only  to  Descartes.16  The  most
important  steps  he  took  are  those  concerning  the  geometry  of  infinites,  applied
to  the  ordinates  and  tangents  of  curves  ;  which,  however,  he  completed  in  or
before  i636.17  As  to  Gassendi  and  Mersenne,  it  is  enough  to  say  that  Gassendi
died  in  i655,18  six  years  before  Louis  was  at  the  head  of  affairs  ;  while  Mersenne
died  in  i648,19  when  the  great  king  was  ten  years  old.

These  were  the  men  who  flourished  in  France  just  before  the  system  of
Louis  XIV.  came  into  operation.  Shortly  after  their  death  the  patronage  of  the
king  began  to  tell  upon  the  national  intellect  ;  and  during  the  next  fifty  years
no  addition  of  importance  was  made  to  either  branch  of  the  mathematics,  or,
with  the  single  exception  of  acoustics,20  to  any  of  the  sciences  to  which  the  mathe-
matics are  applied.21  The  further  the  seventeenth  century  advanced,  the
more  evident  did  the  decline  become,  and  the  more  clearly  can  we  trace  the  con-
nexion between  the  waning  powers  of  the  French  and  that  protective  spirit  which
enfeebled  the  energies  it  wished  to  strengthen.  Louis  had  heard  that  astronomy
is  a  noble  study  ;  he  was  therefore  anxious,  by  encouraging  its  cultivation  in
France,  to  add  to  the  glories  of  his  own  name.22  With  this  view,  he  rewarded  its

14  Leslie's  Natural  Philosophy,  p.  201  ;  Bordas  Demoulin,  Le  Cartcsianisme,  vol.  i.  p.  310.
Sir  John  Herschel  (Disc,  on  Nat.  Philos.  pp.  229,  230)  calls  this  "  one  of  the  first,  if  not  the
very  first,"  crucial  instance  recorded  in  physics  ;    and  he  thinks  that  it  "  tended,  more
powerfully  than  anything  which  had  previously  been  done  in  science,  to  confirm  in  the
minds  of  men  that  disposition  to  experimental  verification  which  had  scarcely  yet  taken
full  and  secure  root."     In  this  point  of  view,  the  addition  it  actually  made  to  knowledge
is  the  smallest  part  of  its  merit.

15  Montucla  (Hist,  des  Mathematiques,  vol.  ii.  p.  61)  says,  "  vers  1658  ;  "   and  at  p.  65,
'  il  se  mit,  vers  le  commencement  de  1658,  a  considerer  plus  profondement  les  proprietes

de  cette  courbe."

1(5  Montucla  (Hist,  des  Mathemat.  vol.  ii.  p.  136)  enthusiastically  declares  that,  "  si
Descartes  cut  rnanque  a  1'esprit  humain,  Fermat  1'eut  remplace  en  geometric."  Simson,
the  celebrated  restorer  of  Greek  geometry,  said  that  Fermat  was  the  only  modern  who
understood  porisms.  See  Trail's  Account  of  Simson,  1812,  4to,  pp.  18,  41.  On  the
connexion  between  his  views  and  the  subsequent  discovery  of  the  differential  calculus,
see  Brewster's  Life  of  Newton,  vol.  ii.  pp.  7-8  ;  and  compare  Comte,  Philosophic  Positive,
vol.  i.  pp.  228,  229,  726,  727.

17  See  extracts  from  two  letters  written  by  Fermat  to  Roberval,  in  1636,  in  Montucla,
Hist,  des  Mathematiques,  vol.  ii.  pp.  136,  137  ;  respecting  which  there  is  no  notice  in  the
meagre  article  on  Fermat,  in  Hutton's  Mathematical  Dictionary,  vol.  i.  p.  510,  4to,  1815.
It  is  a  disgrace  to  English  mathematicians  that  this  unsatisfactory  work  of  Button's
should  still  remain  the  best  they  have  produced  on  the  history  of  their  own  science.     The
same  disregard  of  dates  is  shown  in  the  hasty  remarks  on  Fermat  by  Playfair.     See
Play  fair's  Dissertation  on  the  Progress  of  Mathematical  Science,  Encyclop.  Brit.  vol.  i.  p.  440,
7th  edition.     [Considering  the  alleged  freedom  of  English  science  from  "  protection,"  the
"  disgrace  "  in  question  must  on  Buckle's  view  be  a  species  of  miracle  ! — ED.]

18  Hutton's  Mathemat.  Diet.  vol.  i.  p.  572.  19  Ibid.  vol.   ii.  p.  46.

20  Of  which  Sauveur  may  be  considered  the  creator.     Compare  Eloge  de  Sauveur,  in
(Euvres  de  Fontenelle,  Paris,  1766,  vol.  v.  p.  435,  with  WhewelVs  Hist,  of  the  Indue.  Sciences,
vol.  ii.  p.  334  ;  Comte,  Philos.  Pos.  vol.  ii.  pp.  627,  628.

21  In  the  report  presented  to  Napoleon  by  the  French  Institute,  it  is  said  of  the  reign
of  Louis  XIV.,  "  les  sciences  exactes  et  les  sciences  physiques  peu  cultivees  en  France  dans
un  siecle  qui  paroissoit  ne  trouver  de  charmes  que  dans  la  litterature."     Dacier,  Rapport
Historique,  p.  24.     Or,  as  Lacretelle  expresses  it  (Dix-huitieme  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  10),  "  La
France,  apres  avoir  fourni  Descartes  et  Pascal,  cut  pendant  quelque  temps  a  envier  aux
nations  etrangeres  la  gloire  de  produire  des  genies  createurs  dans  les  sciences."

22  A  writer  late  in  the  seventeenth  century  says,  with  some  simplicity,  "  the  present


396  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

professors  with  unexampled  profusion  ;  he  built  the  splendid  Observatory  of
Paris  ;  he  invited  to  his  court  the  most  eminent  foreign  astronomers,  Cassini
from  Italy,  Romer  from  Denmark,  Huygens  from  Holland.  But,  as  to  native
ability,  France  did  not  produce  a  single  man  who  made  even  one  of  those  various
discoveries  which  mark  the  epochs  of  astronomical  science.  In  other  countries
vast  progress  was  made  ;  and  Newton  in  particular,  by  his  immense  generaliza-
tions, reformed  nearly  every  branch  of  physics,  and  remodelled  astronomy  *  by
carrying  the  laws  of  gravitation  to  the  extremity  of  the  solar  system.  On  the
other  hand,  France  had  fallen  into  such  a  torpor,  that  these  wonderful  discoveries
which  changed  the  face  of  knowledge  were  entirely  neglected,  there  being  no
instance  of  any  French  astronomer  adopting  them  until  1732,  that  is,  forty-five
years  after  they  had  been  published  by  their  immortal  author.23  Even  in  matters
of  detail,  the  most  valuable  improvement  made  by  French  astronomers  during
the  power  of  Louis  XIV.  was  not  original.  They  laid  claim  to  the  invention  of
the  micrometer  ;  an  admirable  resource,  which,  as  they  supposed,  was  first  con-
trived by  Picard  and  Auzout.24  The  truth  however  is  that  here  again  they
were  anticipated  by  the  activity  of  a  freer  and  less  protected  people,  since  the
micrometer  was  invented  by  Gascoigne  in  or  just  before  1639,  when  the  Fnglish
monarch,  so  far  from  having  leisure  to  patronize  science,  was  about  to  embark  in
that  struggle  which,  ten  years  later,  cost  him  his  crown  and  his  life.25

The  absence  in  France,  during  this  period,  not  only  of  great  discoveries,  but
also  of  mere  practical  ingenuity,  is  certainly  very  striking. -f  In  investigations

king  of  France  is  reputed  an  encourager  of  choice  and  able  men,  in  all  faculties,  who  can
attribute  to  his  greatness."     Aubrey 's  Letters,  vol.  ii.  p.  624.

23  The  Principia  of  Newton  appeared  in  1687  ;  and  Maupertuis,  in  1732,  "  was  the
first  astronomer  of  France  who  undertook  a  critical  defence  of  the  theory  of  gravitation."
Grant's  Hist,  of  Physical  Astronomy,  pp.  31,  43.  In  1738,  Voltaire  writes,  "  La  France
est  jusqu'a  present  le  seul  pays  ou  les  theories  de  Newton  en  physique,  et  de  Boerhaave  en
medecine,  soient  combattues.  Nous  n'avons  pas  encore  de  bons  elements  de  physique  ;
nous  avons  pour  toute  astronomic  le  livre  de  Bion,  qui  n'est  qu'un  ramas  informe  de
quelques  memoires  de  1'academie."  Correspond,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ivii.  p.  340.
On  the  tardy  reception  of  Newton's  discoveries  in  France,  compare  Eloge  de  Lacaille,  in
(Euvres  de  Bailly,  Paris,  1790,  vol.  i.  pp.  175,  176.  All  this  is  the  more  remarkable,  be-
cause several  of  the  conclusions  at  which  Newton  had  arrived  were  divulged  before  they
were  embodied  in  the  Principia  ;  and  it  appears  from  Brewster's  Life  of  Newton  (vol.  i.
pp.  25,  26,  290),  that  his  speculations  concerning  gravity  began  in  1666,  or  perhaps  in  the
autumn  of  1665.

24  "  L'abbe  Picard  fut  en  societe  avec  Auzout,  1'inventeur  du  micrometre."     Biog.
Univ.  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  253.     See  also  Preface  de  VHist.  de  VAcad.  des  Sciences,  in  (Euvres
de  Fontenelle,  Paris,  vol.  x.  p.  20.

25  The  best  account  I  have  seen  of  the  invention  of  the  micrometer  is  in  Mr.  Grant's
recent  work,  History  of  Physical  Astronomy,  pp.  428,  450-453,  where  it  is  proved  that
Gascoigne  invented  it  in  1639,  or  possibly  a  year  or  two  earlier.     Compare  Humboldt's
Cosmos,  vol.  iii.  p.  52  ;  who  also  ascribes  it  to  Gascoigne,  but  erroneously  dates  it  in  1640.
Montucla  (Hist,  des  Mathemat.  vol.  ii.  pp.  570,  571)  admits  the  priority  of  Gascoigne  ;  but
underrates  his  merit,  being  apparently  unacquainted  with  the  evidence  which  Mr.  Grant
subsequently  adduced.

[*As  Newton  was  "  protected  "  from  first  to  last  by  public  endowments  or  salaried
posts,  the  main  argument  is  by  this  time  at  an  end.  The  alleged  "  torpor  "  of  France
was  in  reality  a  result  of  an  excessive  expenditure  of  French  energy  on  war,  and  the  theo-
logical reaction  fostered  by  the  king.  In  the  eighteenth  century  things  went  the  opposite
way,  Newton  having  soon  no  English  successors,  while  "  the  French  "  did  all  the  new
astronomical  work.  In  this  case  the  thesis  of  "  protection  "  cannot  be  made  even  to  seem
to  meet  the  case. — ED.]

[t  This  ignores  the  vast  amount  of  practical  ingenuity  lavished  in  Louis's  reign  on
fortifications.  And  Buckle  here  strangely  omits  to  mention  the  steam  engines  invented
by  Papin  and  De  Caus,  though  towards  the  end  of  his  book  he  alludes  to  both  inven-
tions.— ED.]


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     397

squiring  minute  accuracy,  the  necessary  tools,  if  at  all  complicated,  were  made
by  foreigners,  the  native  workmen  being  too  unskilled  to  construct  them  ;  and  Dr.
Lister,  who  was  a  very  competent  judge,26  and  who  was  in  Paris  at  the  end  of  the
seventeenth  century,  supplies  evidence  that  the  best  mathematical  instruments
sold  in  that  city  were  made,  not  by  a  Frenchman,  but  by  Butterfield,  an  English-
man residing  there.27  Nor  did  they  succeed  better  in  matters  of  immediate  and
jbvious  utility.  The  improvements  effected  in  manufactures  were  few  and  in-
significant, and  were  calculated,  not  for  the  comfort  of  the  people,  but  for  the
luxury  of  the  idle  classes.28  What  was  really  valuable  was  neglected  ;  no  great
invention  was  made  ;  and  by  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  scarcely  any-
thing had  been  done  in  machinery,  or  in  those  other  contrivances  which,  by
economizing  national  labour,  increase  national  wealth.29

While  such  was  the  state,  not  only  of  mathematical  and  astronomical  science,
but  also  of  mechanical  and  inventive  arts,  corresponding  symptoms  of  declining
power  were  seen  in  other  departments.  In  physiology,  in  anatomy,  and  in  medi-
cine, we  look  in  vain  for  any  men  equal  to  those  by  whom  France  had  once  been
honoured.  The  greatest  discovery  of  this  kind  ever  made  by  a  Frenchman  was
that  of  the  receptacle  of  the  chyle  ;  a  discovery  which,  in  the  opinion  of  a  high
authority,  is  not  inferior  to  that  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  by  Harvey.30
This  important  step  in  our  knowledge  is  constantly  assigned  to  the  age  of
Louis  XIV.,  as  if  it  were  one  of  the  results  of  his  gracious  bounty  ;  but  it  would
be  difficult  to  tell  what  Louis  had  to  do  with  it,  since  the  discovery  was  made  by
Pecquet  in  1647, 31  when  the  great  king  was  nine  years  old.  After  Pecquet,  the
most  eminent  of  the  French  anatomists  in  the  seventeenth  century  was  Riolan  ;
and  his  name  we  also  find  among  the  illustrious  men  who  adorned  the  reign  of


26  For  a  short  account  of  this  able  man,  see  Lankester's  Mem.  of  Ray,  p.  17.

27  Notwithstanding  the  strong  prejudice  then  existing  against  Englishmen,  Butter-
field  was  employed  by  "  the  king  and  all  the  princes."     Lister's  Account  of  Paris  at  the
close  of  the  seventeenth  century,  edited  by  Dr.  Henning,  p,  85.     Fontenelle  mentions  "  M.
Hubin,"  as  one  of  the  most  celebrated  makers  in  Paris  in   1687  (Eloge  d'Amoltons,  in
(Euvres  de  Fontenelle,  Paris,  1766,  vol.  v.  p.  113)  ;  but  has  forgotten  to  state  that  he  too
was  an  Englishman.     "  Lutetiae  sedem  posuerat  ante  aliquod  tempus  Anglus  quidam
nomine  Hubinus,  vir  ingeniosus,  atque  hujusmodi  machinationum  peritus  opifex  et  in-
dustrius.   Hominem  adii,"  &c.   Huetii  Commentarius  de  Rebus  ad  eum  pertinentibus,  p.  346.
Thus,  again,  in  regard  to  time -keepers,  the  vast  superiority  of  the  English  makers,  late  in
the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  was  equally  incontestable.      Compare  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.
pp.  242,  243,  with  Brewster's  Life  of  Newton,  vol.  ii.  p.  262  ;   and  as  to  the  middle  of  the
reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  see  Eloge  de  Sebastien,  in  (Euvres  de  Fontenelle,  vol.  vi.  pp.  332,  333.

28  "  Les  manufactures  etaient  plutot  dirigees  vers  le  brillant  que  vers  Futile.      On
s'efforca,  par  un  arret  du  mois  de  mars  1700,  d'extirper,  ou  du  moins  de  reduire  beaucoup
les  fabriques  de  has  au  metier.     Malgre  cette  fausse  direction,  les  objets  d'un  luxe  tres-
recherche  faisaient  des  progres  bien  lents.     En  1687,  apres  la  mort  de  Colbert,  la  cour
soldait  encore  1'industrie  des  barbares,  et  faisait  fabriquer   et    broder  ses  plus  beaux
habits  a  Constantinople."     Lemontey,  Etablissement  de  Louis  XIV.,  p.  364.     Lacretelle
(Dixhuitieme  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  5)  says,  that  during  the  last  thirty  years  of   the  reign  of
Louis  XIV.  "  les  manufactures  tombaient."

29  Cuvier  (Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  199)  thus  describes  the  condition  of  France  only
seven  years  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  :    "  Nos  forges  etaient  alors  presque  dans
1'enfance  ;  et  nous  ne  faisions  point  d'acier  :  tout  celui  qu'exigeaient  les  differents  metiers
nous  venait  de  1'etranger.  .  .  .  Nous  ne  faisions  point  non  plus  alors  de  fer-blanc,  et  il
ne  nous  venait  que  de  rAllemagne."

30  "  Certainement  la  decouverte  de  Pecquet  ne  brille  pas  moins  dans  1'histoire  de  notre
art  que  la  verite  demontree  pour  la  premiere  fois  par  Harvey."     Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la
Medecine,  vol.  iv.  p.  208.

31  Henle  (Anatomie  Generate,  vol.  ii.  p.  106)  says,  that  the  discovery  was  made  in  1649  ;
but  the  historians  of  medicine  assign  it  to  1647.     Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  iv.
pp.  207,  405  ;  Renouard,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine.  vol.  ii.  p.  i73*


398  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Louis  XIV.  But  the  principal  works  of  Kiolan  were  written  before  Louis  XIV.
was  born  ;  his  last  work  was  published  in  1652  ;  and  he  himself  died  in  i657.32
Then  there  came  a  pause,  and  during  three  generations  the  French  did  nothing
for  these  great  subjects  ;  they  wrote  no  work  upon  them  which  is  now  read,*  they
made  no  discoveries,  and  they  seemed  to  have  lost  all  heart,  until  that  revival
of  knowledge  which,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  took  place  in  France  about  the
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.  In  the  practical  parts  of  medicine,  in  its
speculative  parts,  and  in  the  arts  connected  with  surgery,  the  same  law  prevails.
The  French,  in  these  as  in  other  matters,  had  formerly  produced  men  of  great
eminence,  who  had  won  for  themselves  a  European  reputation,  and  whose
works  are  still  remembered.  Thus,  only  to  mention  two  or  three  instances,  they
had  a  long  line  of  illustrious  physicians,  among  whom  Fern  el  and  Joubert  were
the  earliest  ;  33  they  had,  in  surgery,  Ambroise  Pare,  who  not  only  introduced
important  practical  improvements34  but  has  the  still  rarer  merit  of  bring
one  of  the  founders  of  comparative  osteology;  35  and  they  had  Baillou,  who,  late
in  the  sixteenth  and  early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  advanced  pathology,  by
connecting  it  with  the  study  of  morbid  anatomy.36  Under  Louis  XIV.  all  this
was  changed.  Under  him,  surgery  was  neglected,  though  in  other  countries  its
progress  was  rapid.37  The  English,  by  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  had
taken  considerable  steps  in  medicine ;  its  therapeutical  branch  being  reformed


32  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxviii.  pp.  123,  124.

33  Some  of  the  great  steps  taken  by  Joubert  are  concisely  stated  in  Broussais,  Examen
des  Doctrines  Medicales,  vol.  i.  pp.  293,  294,  vol.  hi.  p.  361.     Compare  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la
Medecine,  vol.  iii.  p.  210.     Fernel,  though  enthusiastically  praised  by  Patin,  was  probably
hardly  equal  to  Joubert.     Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  iii.  pp.  59,  199,  648.     At  p.  106,  Patin
calls  Fernel  "  le  premier  medecin  de  son  temps,  et  peut-etre  le  plus  grand  qui  sera  jamais."

34  See  a  summary  of  them  in  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  iii.  pp.  405,  406,  vol.
vii.  pp.  14,  15.     Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  (Lectures  on  Surgery,  p.  21)  says,  "Few  greater
benefits  have  been  conferred  on  mankind  than  that  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  Ambrose
Parey — the  application  of  a  ligature  to  a  bleeding  artery."

35  "  C'etait  la  une  vue  tres  ingenieuse  et  tres  juste  qu' Ambroise  Pare  donnait  pour  la
premiere  fois.     C'etait  un  commencement  d'osteologie  comparee."     Cuvier,  Hist,   des
Sciences,  part  ii.  p.  42.     To  this  I  may  add,  that  he  is  the  first  French  writer  on  medical
jurisprudence.     See  Paris  and  Fonblanque's  Medical  Jurisprudence,  1823,  vol.  i.  p.  xviii.

36  "  L'un  des  premiers  auteurs  a  qui  1'on  doit  des  observations  cadaveriques  sur  les
maladies,  est  le  fameux  Baillou."     Broussais,  Examen  des  Doctrines  Medicales,  vol.  ii.
p.  218.     See  also  vol.  iii.  p.  362  ;   and  Rcnouard,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  ii.  p.  89.     The
value  of  his  services  is  recognized  in  a  recent  able  work,  Phillips  on  Scrofula,  1846,  p.  16.

37  "  The  most  celebrated  surgeon  of  the  sixteenth  century  was  Ambroise  Pare.  .  .  .
From  the  time  of  Pare  until  the  commencement  of  the  eighteenth  century,  surgery  was
but  little  cultivated  in  France.     Mauriceau,  Saviard,  and  Belloste  were  the  only  French
surgeons  of  note  who  could  be  contrasted  with  so  many  eminent  men  of  other  nations.
During  the  eighteenth  century  France  produced  two  surgeons  of  extraordinary  genius ;
these  are  Petit  and  Desault."     Bowman's  Surgery,  in  Encydop.  of  Medical  Sciences,  1847,
4to,  pp.  829,  830.     [Rambaud  (Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  Francaise,  6a  edit.  ii.  469)
names  four  distinguished  French  surgeons  of   the  period:  Dionis  (d.  1718,  author  of
several  works  on  surgery),  Saviard  (1656-1702),  who  published  a  number  of  observations  ;
Boulot  or  Beaulieu   (1651-1714),   a  successful  lithotomist ;  Belloste   (1654-1730),  who
published  Le  Chirurgien  d'Hopital ;    and  Felix  and  Marechal,  distinguished  court  sur-
geons.    Voltaire  also  gives  praise  to  Mery,  who  is  named  in  note  41. — ED.]

[*  The  phrase  "  no  work  which  is  now  read  "  is  a  false  test.  No  anatomist  of  that  age
is  "  now  read,"  save  by  the  special  students  of  medical  history.  And  Buckle  here  ignores
Vieussens,  who  published  a  Neurographia  Universalis  of  great  repute  in  1685,  and  Du
Verney  (1648-1730),  who  made  a'special  study  of  the  maladies  of  the  bones  and  of  the
structure  of  the  ear.  Buckle's  disparagement  of  him  below,  note  41,  is  beside  the  case. —
ED.]


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     399

chiefly  by  Sydenham,*  its  physiological  branch  by -Glisson.aa  But  the  age  of
Louis  XIV.  cannot  boast  of  a  single  medical  writer  who  can  be  compared  to
these  ;  not  even  one  whose  name  is  now  known  as  having  made  any  specific
addition  to  our  knowledge.  In  Paris,  the  practice  of  medicine  was  notoriously
inferior  to  that  in  the  capitals  of  Germany,  Italy,  and  England  ;  while  in  the
French  provinces  the  ignorance  even  of  the  best  physicians  was  scandalous.39
Indeed  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  during  the  whole  of  this  long  period,
the  French  in  these  matters  effected  comparatively  nothing  ;  they  made  no  con-
tributions to  clinical  literature,40  and  scarcely  any  to  therapeutics,  to  pathology,
to  physiology,  or  to  anatomy.41

In  what  are  called  the  natural  sciences,  we  also  find  the  French  now  brought
to  a  stand.  In  zoology,  they  had  formerly  possessed  remarkable  men,  among
whom  Belon  and  Rondelet  were  the  most  conspicuous  ;  42  but  under  Louis  XIV.
they  did  not  produce  one  original  observer  in  this  great  field  of  inquiry.43  In
chemistry,  again,  Rey  had  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIII.  struck  out  views  of  such
vast  importance  that  he  anticipated  some  of  those  generalizations  which  formed
the  glory  of  the  French  intellect  in  the  eighteenth  century.44  During  the  corrupt
and  frivolous  age  of  Louis  XIV.  all  this  was  forgotten  ;  the  labours  of  Rey  were
neglected  ;  and  so  complete  was  the  indifference  that  even  the  celebrated  ex-


38  It  is  unnecessary  to  adduce  evidence  respecting  the  services  rendered  by  Sydenham,
as  they  are  universally  admitted  ;    but  what  perhaps  is  less  generally  known  is  that
Glisson  anticipated  those  important  views  concerning  irritability,  which  were  afterwards
developed  by  Haller  and  Gorter.     Compare  Renouard,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  ii.  p.  192  ;
Elliotson's  Human  Physiol.  p.  471  ;  Bordas  Demoulin,  Cartesianisme,  vol.  i.  p.   170.      In
Wagner's  Physiol.  1841,  p.  655,  the  theory  is  too  exclusively  ascribed  to  Haller.

39  Of  this  we  have  numerous  complaints  from  foreigners  who  visited  France.     I  will
quote  the  testimony  of  one  celebrated  man.     In  1699,  Addison  writes  from  Blois  :    "I
made  use  of  one  of  the  physicians  of  this  place,  who  are  as  cheap  as  our  English  farriers,
and  generally  as  ignorant."     Aikin's  Life  of  Addison,  vol.  i.  p.  74.

40  Indeed,  France  was  the  last  great  country  in  Europe  in  which  a  chair  of  clinical
medicine  was  established.      See  Renouard,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  ii.    p.   312  ;    and
Bouillaud,  Philos.  Medicale,  p.  114.     [As  medical  chairs  are  in  all  countries  instituted  as
a  rule  by  the  "  protective  "  action  of  the  State,  Buckle  is  here  in  effect  simply  complain-
ing that  French  protection  at  that  period  was  misdirected. — ED.]

41  M.  Bouillaud,  in  his  account  of  the  state  of  medicine  in  the  seventeenth  century,  does
not  mention  a  single  Frenchman  during  this  period.     See  Bouillaud,  Philosophic  Medi-
cale, pp.  13  seq.     During  many  years  of  the  power  of  Louis  XIV.,  the  French  academy
only  possessed  one  anatomist ;   and  of  him  few  students  of  physiology  have  ever  heard  :
"  M.  du  Verney  fut  assez  long-temps  le  seul  anatomiste  de  1' academic,  et  ce  ne  fut  qu'en
1684  qu'on  lui  joignit  M.  Mery."     Eloge  de  Du  Verney,  in  (Euvres  de  Fontenelle,  vol.  vi.
p.  392.     [Membership  of  the  academy  is  from  Buckle's  own  point  of  view  no  test.— ED.]

42  Cuvier,  Hist,  des  Sciences,  part  ii.  pp.  64-73,  76-80.

43  After  Belon,  nothing  was  done  in  France  for  the  natural  history  of  animals  until
1734,  when  there  appeared  the  first  volume  of  Reaumur's  great  work.     See  Swainson  on
the  Study  of  Nat.  Hist.  pp.  24,  43.      [This  will  not  hold  good.      Claude  Perrault,  who
published  his  Memoires\surVHistoireNaturellem  1671-76,  is  to-day  reckoned  one  of  the
founders  of  comparative  anatomy. — ED.]

44  On  this  remarkable  man,  who  was  the  first  philosophic  chemist  Europe  produced,
and  who,  so  early  as  1630,  anticipated  some  of  the  generalizations  made  a  hundred  and
fifty  years  later  by  Lavoisier,  see  Liebig's  Letters  on  Chemistry,  pp.  46,  47  ;    Thomson's
Hist,  of  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95,  96  ;  Humboldfs  Cosmos,  vol.  ii.  p.  729  ;  Cuvier,  Progres
des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  p.  30.

[*  It  is  but  fair  to  remember  that  when  Sydenham  in  1679  was  selling  quinine  in  France
at  400  pistoles  the  dose,  Louis  XIV.  bought  his  secret  and  made  it  public.  (Rambaud,
Hist,  de  la  Civ.  Franpaist,  6<?  ed.  ii.  462,  note.)  Buckle's  argument  comes  out  ill  beside
such  an  episode. — ED.]


4oo  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

periments  of  Boyle  remained  unknown  in  France  for  more  than  forty  years  after
they  were  published.45

Connected  with  zoology,  and,  to  a  philosophic  mind,  inseparable  from  it,  is
botany  ;  which,  occupying  a  middle  place  between  the  animal  and  mineral  world,
indicates  their  relation  to  each  other,  and  at  different  points  touches  the  confines
of  both.  It  also  throws  great  light  on  the  functions  of  nutrition,46  and  on  the
laws  of  development  ;  while,  from  the  marked  analogy  between  animals  and
vegetables,  we  have  every  reason  to  hope  that  its  further  progress,  assisted  by
that  of  electricity,  will  prepare  the  way  for  a  comprehensive  theory  of  life,  to
which  the  resources  of  our  knowledge  are  still  unequal,  but  towards  which  the
movements  of  modern  science  are  manifestly  tending.  On  these  grounds,  far
more  than  for  the  sake  of  practical  advantages,  botany  will  always  attract  the
attention  of  thinking  men,  who,  neglecting  views  of  immediate  utility,  look  to
large  and  ultimate  results,  and  only  value  particular  facts  in  so  far  as  they
facilitate  the  discovery  of  general  truths.  The  first  step  in  this  noble  study  was
taken  towards  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  when  authors,  instead  of
copying  what  previous  writers  had  said,  began  to  observe  nature  for  themselves.4?
The  next  step  was,  to  add  experiment  to  observation  ;  but  it  required  another
hundred  years  before  this  could  be  done  with  accuracy  ;  because  the  microscope,
which  is  essential  to  such  inquiries,  was  only  invented  about  1620,  and  the  labour
of  a  whole  generation  was  needed  to  make  it  available  for  minute  investigations.48
So  soon  however  as  this  resource  was  sufficiently  matured  to  be  applied  to  plants,
the  march  of  botany  became  rapid,  at  least  as  far  as  details  are  concerned  ;  for
it  was  not  until  the  eighteenth  century  that  the  facts  were  actually  generalized.
But,  in  the  preliminary  work  of  accumulating  the  facts,  great  energy  was  shown  ;

45  Cuvier  (Progres  des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  p.  30)  says  of  Rey,  "  son  ecrit  etait  tombe  dans
1'oubli  le  plus  profond  ;  "    and,  in  another  work,  the  same  great  authority  writes  (Hist,
des  Sciences,  part  ii.  p.  333)  :   "  II  y  avait  plus  de  quarante  ans  que  Becker  avait  presente
sa  nouvelle  theorie,  developpee  par  Stahl ;  il  y  avait  encore  plus  long-temps  que  les  ex-
periences de  Boyle  sur  ia  chimie  pneumatique  avaient  ete  publiees,  et  cependant  rien  de
tout    cela    n'entrait   encore   dans  1'enseignement  general   de  la  chimie,    du    moins    en
France."     [But  Lemery  (1645-1715),  praised  by  both   Fontenelle  and  Voltaire  for  his
rationalism  of  method,  produced  hydrogen  and  burned  it  in  his  experiments.     Rambaud,
ii.  454. — ED.]

46  The  highest  present  generalizations  of  the  laws  of  nutrition  are  those  by  M.  Chevreul  ;
which  are  thus  summed  up  by  MM.  Robin  et  Verdeil  in  their  admirable  work,  Chimie
Anatomique,  vol.  i.  p.  203,  Paris,  1853  :    "  En  passant  des  plantes  aux  animaux,  nous
voyons  que  plus  1'organisation  de  ces  derniers  est  compliquee,  plus  les  aliments  dont  ils
se  nourrissent  sont  complexes  et  analogues  par  leurs  principes  immediats  aux  principes
des  organes  qu'ils  doivent  entretenir.

"  En  definitive,  on  voit  que  les  vegetaux  se  nourrissent  d'eau,  d'acide  carbonique,
d'autres  gaz  et  de  matieres  organiques  a  1'etat  d'engrais,  ou  en  d'autres  termes  alterees,
c'est-a-dire  ramenees  a  1'etat  de  principes  plus  simples,  plus  solubles.  Au  contraire,  les
animaux  plus  eleves  dans  1'echelle  organique  ont  besoin  de  matieres  bien  plus  complexes
quant  aux  principes  immediats  qui  les  composent,  et  plus  variees  dans  leurs  proprietes."

47  Brunfels  in  1530,  and  Fuchs  in  1542,  were  the  two  first  writers  who  observed  the
vegetable  kingdom  for  themselves,  instead  of  copying  what  the  ancients  had  said.     Com-
pare WhewelVs  Hist,  of  the  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  pp.  305,  306,  with  Pulteney's  Hist,  of  Botany,
vol.  i.  p.  38.

48  The  microscope  was  exhibited  in  London,  by  Drebbel,  about  1620  ;  and  this  appears
to  be  the  earliest  unquestionable  notice  of  its  use,  though  some  writers  assert  that  it  was
invented  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  or  even  in  1590.     Compare  the
different  statements,  in  Pouillet,  Elemens  de  Physique,  vol.  ii.  p.  357  ;  Humboldfs  Cosmos,
vol.  ii.  pp.  699,  700  ;   Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  iv.  p.  337  ;   Winckler,  Gesch.  der
Botanik,  p.  136  ;  Queketfs  Treatise  on  the  Microscope,  1848,  p.  2  ;  Cuvier,  Hist,  des  Sciences,
part  ii.  p.  470  ;  Hallam's  Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  iii.  p.  202  ;   Leslie's  Nat.  Philos.  p.  52.     On
the  subsequent  improvement  of  the  microscope  during  the  seventeenth  century,  seq
Brewster's  Life  of  Newton,  vol.  i.  pp.  29,  242,  243.


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     401

and,  for  reasons  stated  in  an  earlier  part  of  the  Introduction,  this  like  other
studies  relating  to  the  external  world  advanced  with  peculiar  speed  during  the
reign  of  Charles  II.  The  tracheae  of  plants  were  discovered  by  Henshaw  in  i66i;49
and  their  cellular  tissue  by  Hooke  in  1667. 5°  These  were  considerable  approaches
towards  establishing  the  analogy  between  plants  and  animals  ;  and  within  a
few  years  Grew  effected  still  more  of  the  same  kind.  He  made  such  minute  and
extensive  dissections  as  to  raise  the  anatomy  of  vegetables  to  a  separate  study,
and  prove  that  their  organization  is  scarcely  less  complicated  than  that  possessed
by  animals.51  His  first  work  was  written  in  1670  ;  52  and  in  1676  another  Eng-
lishman, Millington,  ascertained  the  existence  of  a  distinction  of  sexes  ;  53  thus
supplying  further  evidence  of  the  harmony  between  the  animal  and  vegetable
kingdoms,  and  of  the  unity  of  idea  which  regulates  their  composition.

This  is  what  was  effected  in  England  during  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  ;  and  we
now  ask  what  was  done  in  France,  during  the  same  period,  under  the  munificent
patronage  of  Louis  XIV.  The  answer  is,  nothing  :  no  discovery,  no  idea,  which
forms  an  epoch  in  this  important  department  of  natural  science.  The  son  of  the
celebrated  Sir  Thomas  Browne  visited  Paris  in  the  hope  of  making  some  additions
to  his  knowledge  of  botany,  which  he  thought  he  could  not  fail  to  do  in  a  country
where  science  was  held  in  such  honour,  its  professors  so  caressed  by  the  court,  and
its  researches  so  bountifully  encouraged.  To  his  surprise,  he  in  1665  found  in
that  great  city  no  one  capable  of  teaching  his  favourite  pursuit,  and  even  the
public  lectures  on  it  miserably  meagre  and  unsatisfactory.5*  Neither  then,  nor
at  a  much  later  period  did  the  French  possess  a  good  popular  treatise  on  botany  :
still  less  did  they  make  any  improvement  in  it.  Indeed,  so  completely  was  the
philosophy  of  the  subject  misunderstood,  that  Tournefort,  the  only  French
botanist  of  repute  in  the  reign  of  Louis,  actually  rejected  that  discovery  of  the

49  See  Balfour's  Botany,  p.  15.     In  Pulteney's  Progress  of  Botany  in  England,  this
beautiful  discovery  is,  if  I  rightly  remember,  not  even  alluded  to  ;   but  it  appears,  from
a  letter  written  in  1672,  that  it  was  then  becoming  generally  known,  and  had  been  con-
firmed by  Grew  and  Malpighi.     Ray's  Correspond,  edit.  1848,  p.  98.     Compare  Richard,
Elements  de  Botanique,  p.  46  ;    where,  however,  M.  Richard  erroneously  supposes  that
Grew  did  not  know  of  the  tracheae  till  1682.

50  Compare  Cuvier,  Hist,  des  Sciences,  part  ii.  p.  471,  with  Thomson's  Vegetable  Chem-
istry, p.  950.

51  Dr.  Thomson  (Vegetable  Chemistry,  p.  950)  says  :    "  But   the  person   to  whom  we
are  indebted  for  the  first  attempt  to  ascertain  the  structure  of  plants  by  dissection  and
microscopical  observations  was  Dr.  Nathaniel  Grew."      The  character  of  Grew's  inquiries,
as  "  viewing  the  internal,  as  well  as  external  parts  of  plants,"  is  also  noticed  in  Ray's
Correspond,  p.  188  ;  and  M.  Winckler  (Gesch.  der  Botanik,  p.  382)  ascribes  to  him  and
Malpighi  the  "  neuen  Aufschwung  "  taken  by  vegetable  physiology  late  in  the  seven,
teenth  century.     See  also,  on  Grew,  Lindley's  Botany,  vol.  i.  p.  93  ;   and  Third  Report  of
Brit.  Assoc.  p.  27.

52  The  first  book  of  his  Anatomy  of  Plants  was  laid  before  the  Royal  Society  in  1670,
and  printed  in  1671.     Hallam's  Lit,  of  Europe,  vol.  iii.  p.  580  ;  and  Thomson's  Hist,  of  the
Royal  Society,  p.  44.

53  "  The  presence  of  sexual  organs  in  plants  was  first  shown  in  1676,  by  Sir  Thomas
Millington  ;  and  it  was  afterwards  confirmed  by  Grew,  Malpighi,  and  Ray,"     Bal/our's
Botany,  p,  236,      See  also  Pulteney's  Progress  of  Botany,  vol.  i.  pp.  336,  337  ;  and  Lindley's
Botany,  vol.  ii.  p,  217  ;   and,  as  to  Ray,  who  was  rather  slow  in  admitting  the  discovery,
see  Lankester's  Mem,  of  Ray,  p.  100.     Before  this,  the  sexual  system  of  vegetables  had
been  empirically  known  to  several  of  the  ancients,  but  never  raised  to  a  scientific  truth.
Compare  Richard,  Elements  de  Botanique,  pp.  353,  427,  428,  with  Matter,  Hist,  de  VEcole
d' Alexandrie,  voL  ii.  p.  9.

54  In  July,  1665,  he  writes  from  Paris  to  his  father,  "  The  lecture  of  plants  here  is  only
the  naming  of  them,  their  degrees  in  heat  and  cold,  and  sometimes  their  use  in  physick  ;
scarce  a  word  more  than  may  be  seen  in  every  herball."     Browne's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  108.
[As  Louis  had  assumed  power  only  in  1661,  this  backwardness  is,  in  the  terms  of  the  argu-
ment, not  to  be  ascribed  to  his  protective  policy. — ED.]

26


402  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

sexes  of  plants,  which  had  been  made  before  he  began  to  write,  and  which  after-
wards became  the  corner-stone  of  the  Linnean  system.55  This  showed  his  in-
capacity for  those  large  views  respecting  the  unity  of  the  organic  world  which
alone  give  to  botany  a  scientific  value  ;  and  we  find,  accordingly,  that  he  did
nothing  for  the  physiology  of  plants,  and  that  his  only  merit  was  as  a  collector
and  classifier  of  them.56  And  even  in  his  classification  he  was  guided,  not  by  a
comprehensive  comparison  of  their  various  parts,  but  by  considerations  drawn
from  the  mere  appearance  of  the  flower  :  57  thus  depriving  botany  of  its  real
grandeur,  degrading  it  into  an  arrangement  of  beautiful  objects,  and  supplying
another  instance  of  the  way  in  which  the  Frenchmen  of  that  generation  im-
poverished what  they  sought  to  enrich,  and  .dwarfed  every  topic,  until  they  suited
the  intellect  and  pleased  the  eye  of  that  ignorant  and  luxurious  court  to  whose
favour  they  looked  for  reward,  and  whose  applause  it  was  the  business  of  their  life
to  gain.

The  truth  is  that  in  these  as  in  all  matters  of  real  importance,  in  questions
requiring  independent  thought,  and  in  questions  of  practical  utility,  the  age  of
Louis  XIV.  was  an  age  of  decay  :  it  was  an  age  of  misery,  of  intolerance,  and
oppression  ;  *  it  was  an  age  of  bondage,  of  ignominy,  of  incompetence.  This
would  long  since  have  been  universally  admitted,  if  those  who  have  written  the
history  of  that  period  had  taken  the  trouble  to  study  subjects  without  which  no
history  can  be  understood  ;  or,  I  should  rather  say,  without  which  no  his-
tory can  exist.  If  this  had  been  done,  the  reputation  of  Louis  XIV.  would  at
once  have  shrunk  to  its  natural  size.  Even  at  the  risk  of  exposing  myself  to  the
charge  of  unduly  estimating  my  own  labours,  I  cannot  avoid  saying  that  the
facts  which  I  have  just  pointed  out  have  never  before  been  collected,  but  have
remained  isolated  in  the  text -books  and  repertories  of  the  sciences  to  which  they
belong.  Yet  without  them  it  is  impossible  to  study  the  age  of  Louis  XIV.  It
is  impossible  to  estimate  the  character  of  any  period  except  by  tracing  its  devel-
opment ;  in  other  words,  by  measuring  the  extent  of  its  knowledge.  Therefore
it  is  that  to  write  the  history  of  a  country  without  regard  to  its  intellectual  pro-
gress, is  as  if  an  astronomer  should  compose  a  planetary  system  without  regard  to
the  sun,  by  whose  light  alone  the  planets  can  be  seen,  and  by  whose  attraction
they  are  held  in  their  course,  and  compelled  to  run  in  the  path  of  their  appointed
orbits.  For  the  great  luminary,  even  as  it  shines  in  the  heaven,  is  not  a  more
noble  or  a  more  powerful  object  than  is  the  intellect  of  man  in  this  nether  world.
It  is  to  the  human  intellect,  and  to  that  alone,  that  every  country  owes  its  know-
ledge. And  what  is  it  but  the  progress  and  diffusion  j  of  knowledge  which  has  given

55  Cuvier,  mentioning  the  inferiority  of  Tournefort's  views  to  those  of  his  predecessors,
gives  as  an  instance,  "  puisqu'il  a  rejete  les  sexes  des  plantes."      Hist,  des  Sciences,  part  ii.
p.  496.     Hence  he  held  that  the  farina  was  excrementitious.     Pulteney's  Progress  of
Botany,  vol.  i.  p.  340.

56  This  is  admitted  even  by  his  eulogist  Duvau.     Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xlvi.  p.  363.     [But
Claude  Perrault,  who  studied  the  movements  of  the  sap,  did  do  something  for  plant
physiology,  and  is  here  ignored. — ED.]

57  On  the  method  of  Tournefort,  which  was  that  of  a  corrollist,  compare  Richard,  Ele-
ments de  Botanique,  p.  547  ;   Jussieu's  Botany,  edit.  Wilson,  1849,  p.  516  ;   Ray's  Corres-
pond, pp.  381,  382  ;  Lankester's  Mem.  of  Ray,  p.  49  ;   Winckler,  Gesch.  der  Botanik,  p.  142.
Cuvier  (Hist,  des  Sciences,  part  ii.  p.  496),  with  quiet  irony,  says  of  it,  "  vous  voyez,
messieurs,  que  cette  methode  a  le  merite  d'une  grande  clarte  ;   qu'elle  est  fondee  sur  la
forme  de  la  fleur,  et  par  consequent  sur  des  considerations  agreables  a  saisir.  ...     Ce
qui  en  fit  le  succes,  c'est  que  Tournefort  joignit  a  son  ouvrage  une  figure  de  fleur  et  de  fruit
appartenant  a  chacun  de  ses  genres."      Even  in  this  he  appears  to  have  been  careless,
and  is  said  to  have  described  "  a  great  many  plants  he  never  examined  nor  saw."     Letter
from  Dr.  Sherard,  in  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  i.  p.  356.

[*  This  is  of  course  perfectly  true,  and  here  the  argument  as  to  evocative  protection
is  once  more  beside  the  case. — ED.]

[f  That  very  diffusion  which,  it  is  argued  above,  governments  ought  never  to  try  to
promote. — ED.]


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     403

us  our  arts,  our  sciences,  our  manufactures,  our  laws,  our  opinions,  our  manners,  our
comforts,  our  luxuries,  our  civilization  ;  in  short,  everything  that  raises  us  above
the  savages,  who  by  their  ignorance  are  degraded  to  the  level  of  the  brutes  with
which  they  herd  ?  Surely,  then,  the  time  has  now  arrived  when  they  who
undertake  to  write  the  history  of  a  great  nation  should  occupy  themselves  with
those  matters  by  which  alone  the  destiny  of  men  is  regulated,  and  should  abandon
the  petty  and  insignificant  details  by  which  we  have  too  long  been  wearied  ;
details  respecting  the  lives  of  kings,  the  intrigues  of  ministers,  the  vices  and  the
gossip  of  courts.

It  is  precisely  these  higher  considerations  which  furnish  the  key  to  the  history
of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  In  that  time,  as  in  all  others,  the  misery  of  the
people  and  the  degradation  of  the  country  followed  *  the  decline  of  the  national
intellect  ;  while  this  last  was,  in  its  turn,  the  result  of  the  protective  spirit, —
that  mischievous  spirit  which  weakens  whatever  it  touches.  If  in  the  long
course  and  compass  of  history  there  is  one  thing  more  clear  than  another,  it  is,
that  whenever  a  government  undertakes  to  protect  intellectual  pursuits,  it  will
almost  always  protect  them  in  the  wrong  place,f  and  reward  the  wrong  men.
Nor  is  it  surprising  that  this  should  be  the  case.  What  can  kings  and  ministers
know  about  those  immense  branches  of  knowledge,  to  cultivate  which  with
success  is  often  the  business  of  an  entire  life  ?  How  can  they,  constantly
occupied  with  their  lofty  pursuits,  have  leisure  for  such  inferior  matters  ?  Is  it
to  be  supposed  that  such  acquirements  will  be  found  among  statesmen,  who  arc
always  engaged  in  the  most  weighty  concerns  ;  sometimes  writing  despatches,
sometimes  making  speeches,  sometimes  organizing  a  party  in  the  parliament,
sometimes  baffling  an  intrigue  in  the  privy-chamber  ?  Or  if  the  sovereign
should  graciously  bestow  his  patronage  according  to  his  own  judgment,  are  we
to  expect  that  mere  philosophy  and  science  should  be  familiar  to  high  and
mighty  princes,  who  have  their  own  peculiar  and  arduous  studies,  a.nd  who  have
to  learn  the  mysteries  of  heraldry,  the  nature  and  dignities  of  rank,  the  com
parative  value  of  the  different  orders,  decorations,  and  titles,  the  laws  of  pre-
cedence, the  prerogatives  of  noble  birth,  the  names  and  powers  of  ribbons,
stars,  and  garters,  the  various  modes  of  conferring  an  honour  or  installing  into
an  office,  the  adjustment  of  ceremonies,  the  subtleties  of  etiquette,  and  all
those  other  courtly  accomplishments  necessary  to  the  exalted  functions  which
they  perform  ?  t

The  mere  statement  of  such  questions  proves  the  absurdity  of  the  principle
which  they  involve.  For,  unless  we  believe  that  kings  are  omniscient  as  well
as  immaculate,  it  is  evident  that  in  the  bestowal  of  rewards  they  must  be  guided
either  by  personal  caprice  or  by  the  testimony  of  competent  judges.  And  since
no  one  is  a  competent  judge  of  scientific  excellence  unless  he  is  himself  scientific,
we  are  driven  to  this  monstrous  alternative,  that  the  rewards  of  intellectual  labour
must  be  conferred  injudiciously,  or  else  they  must  be  given  according  to  the  ver-
dict of  that  very  class  by  whom  they  are  received.  In  the  first  case,  the  reward
will  be  ridiculous  ;  in  the  latter  case,  it  will  be  disgraceful.  In  the  former  case,
weak  men  will  be  benefited  by  wealth  which  is  taken  from  industry  to  be  lavished
on  idleness.  But  in  the  latter  case,  those  men  of  real  genius,  those  great  and
illustrious  thinkers,  who  are  the  masters  and  teachers  of  the  human  race,  are  to
be  tricked  out  witlv  trumpery  titles  ;  and  after  scrambling  in  miserable  rivalry
for  the  sordid  favours  of  a  court,  they  are  then  to  be  turned  into  beggars  of  the
state,  who  not  only  clamour  for  their  share  of  the  spoil,  but  even  regulate  the
proportions  into  which  the  shares  are  to  be  divided.  J

[*  Read  "  accompanied." — ED.]

[f  As  it  is  here  implied  that  there  is  a  right  place,  the  original  argument  is  in  effect
surrendered. — ED.]

[J  This  declamation  fails  to  save  the  argument.  Newton  received  a  "  trumpery  title,"
and  science  has  of  late  been  abundantly  endowed  under  the  supervision  of  men  of  science,
without  any  scrambling  and  beggary.  Buckle  must  have  forgotten  the  case  of  Newton
when  he  thus  wrote  ;  also  that  of  Galileo,  who  was  protected  by  the  Grand  Duke  of
Tuscany,  and  so  enabled  to  give  his  mind  freely  to  scientific  discovery.  On  Buckle's
view,  the  apparition  of  Galileo  in  tyranny-ridden  Italy  is  inexplicable-— ED.]


404  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Under  such  a  system,  the  natural  results  are,  first,  the  impoverishment  and
servility  of  genius  ;  then  the  decay  of  knowledge  ;  then  the  decline  of  the  country.
Three  times  in  the  history  of  the  world  has  this  experiment  been  tried.  In  the
ages  of  Augustus,  of  Leo  X.,  and  of  Louis  XIV.,  the  same  method  was  adopted,
and  the  same  result  ensued.  In  each  of  these  ages  there  was  much  apparent
splendour,  immediately  succeeded  by  sudden  ruin.  In  each  instance  the  bril-
liancy survived  the  independence ;  and  in  each  instance  the  national  spirit  sank
under  that  pernicious  alliance  between  government  and  literature,  by  virtue  of
which  the  political  classes  become  very  powerful,  and  the  intellectual  classes  very
weak,  simply  because  they  who  dispense  the  patronage  will  of  course  receive  the
homage  ;  and  if  on  the  one  hand  government  is  always  ready  to  reward  literature,
so  on  the  other  hand  will  literature  be  always  ready  to  succumb  to  government.

Of  these  three  ages,  that  of  Louis  XIV.  was  incomparably  the  worst  ;  and
nothing  but  the  amazing  energy  of  the  French  people  could  have  enabled  them  to
rally  as  they  afterwards  did  from  the  effects  of  so  enfeebling  a  system.  But
though  they  rallied,  the  effort  cost  them  dear.  The  struggle,  as  we  shall  pre-
sently see,  lasted  two  generations,  and  was  only  ended  by  that  frightful  Revolu-
tion which  formed  its  natural  climax.  What  the  real  history  of  that  struggle  was,
I  shall  endeavour  to  ascertain  towards  the  conclusion  of  this  volume.  Without,
however,  anticipating  the  course  of  affairs,  we  will  now  proceed  to  what  I  have
already  mentioned  as  the  second  great  characteristic  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.

II.  The  second  intellectual  characteristic  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  is  in
importance  hardly  inferior  to  the  first.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  national
intellect,  stunted  by  the  protection  of  the  court,  was  so  diverted  from  the  noblest
branches  of  knowledge  that  in  none  of  them  did  it  produce  anything  worthy  of
being  recorded.  As  a  natural  consequence,  the  minds  of  men,  driven  from  the
higher  departments,  took  refuge  in  the  lower,  and  concentrated  themselves  upon
those  inferior  subjects  where  the  discovery  of  truth  is  not  the  main  object,  but
where  beauty  of  form  and  expression  are  the  things  chiefly  pursued.*  Thus  the
first  consequence  of  the  patronage  of  Louis  XIV.  was  to  diminish  the  field  for
genius,  and  to  sacrifice  science  to  art.  The  second  consequence  was  that  even
in  art  itself  there  was  soon  seen  a  marked  decay.  For  a  short  time,  the  stimulus
produced  its  effect  ;  but  was  followed  by  that  collapse  which  is  its  natural  result.
So  essentially  vicious  is  the  whole  system  of  patronage  and  reward,  that  after  the
death  of  those  writers  and  artists  whose  works  form  the  only  redeeming  point
in  the  reign  of  Louis,  there  was  found  no  one  capable  of  even  imitating  their  ex-
cellencies. The  poets,  dramatists,  painters,  musicians,  sculptors,  architects,
were  with  hardly  an  exception  not  only  born  but  educated  under  that  freer
policy  which  existed  before  his  time.  When  they  began  their  labours  they
benefited  by  a  munificence  which  encouraged  the  activity  of  their  genius.  But
in  a  few  years,  that  generation  having  died  off,  the  hollowness  of  the  whole
system  was  clearly  exposed.  More  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  before  the  death
of  Louis  XIV.  most  of  these  eminent  men  had  ceased  to  live  ;  and  then  it  was
seen  to  how  miserable  a  plight  the  country  was  reduced  under  the  boasted  pat-
ronage of  the  great  king.  At  the  moment  when  Louis  XIV.  died  there  was
scarcely  a  writer  or  an  artist  in  France  who  enjoyed  a  European  reputation.
This  is  a  circumstance  well  worth  our  notice.  If  we  compare  the  different  classes
of  literature,  we  shall  find  that  sacred  oratory,  being  the  least  influenced  by  the
king,  was  able  the  longest  to  bear  up  against  his  system.  Massillon  belongs
partly  to  the  subsequent  reign  ;  but  even  of  the  other  great  divines,  Bossuet  and
Bourdaloue  both  lived  to  1704,58  Mascaron  to  I7O3,59  and  Flechier  to  1710.6°  As,

58  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  v.  pp.  236,  358.  &  Ibid,  xxvii.  p.  351.  «>  Ibid.  xv.  p.  35.

[*  Here  once  more  the  argument  collapses.  It  is  now  asserted  that  certain  branches
of  thought  failed  because  others  were  fostered.  And  this  comes  near  the  truth.  As  it  is
put  by  Rambaud,  the  "  inferiorite  relative  des  sciences  francaises"  under  Louis  XIV.,
"  comparees  aux  lettres  et  a  1'art  franfais,  tient  a  ce  qu'elles  exigent  une  organisation  du
travail  et  une  liberalite  de  la  part  des  pouvoirs  publics,  qui  firent  alors  defaut"  (Hist,  tic  la
Civ,  Francaise,  ii.  471-2).— ED.]


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     4^

however,  the  king,  particularly  in  his  latter  years,  was  very  fearful  of  meddling
with  the  church,  it  is  in  profane  matters  that  we  can  best  trace  the  workings  oi
his  policy,  because  it  is  there  that  his  interference  was  most  active.  With  a
view  to  this,  the  simplest  plan  will  be  to  look  in  the  first  place  into  the  history
of  the  fine  arts,  and  after  ascertaining  who  the  greatest  artists  were,  observe
the  year  in  which  they  died,  remembering  that  the  government  of  Louis  XIV.
began  in  1661,  and  ended  in  1715.

If  now  we  examine  this  period  of  fifty -four  years,  we  shall  be  struck  by  the
remarkable  fact  that  everything  which  is  celebrated  was  effected  in  the  first
half  of  it  ;  while  more  than  twenty  years  before  its  close  the  most  eminent  mas-
ters all  died  without  leaving  any  successors.  The  six  greatest  painters  in  the
reign  of  Louis  XIV.  were  Poussin,  Lesueur,  Claude  Lorraine,  Le  Brun,  and  the
two  Mignards.  Of  these,  Le  Brun  died  in  1690  ;  6i  the  elder  Mignard  in  1668  ;  62
the  younger  in  1695  >  63  Claude  Lorraine  in  1682  ;  64  Lesueur  in  1655  '•  65  and
Poussin,  perhaps  the  most  distinguished  of  all  the  French  school,  died  in  I665.66
The  two  greatest  architects  were  Claude  Perrault  and  Francis  Mansart  ;  but
Perrault  died  in  i688,67  Mansart  in  1666;  68  and  Blondel,  the  next  in  fame,  died
in  i686.69  The  greatest  of  all  the  sculptors  was  Puget,  who  died  in  i6"94.70
Lulli,  the  founder  of  French  music,  died  in  i687.71  Quinault,  the  greatest  poet
of  French  music,  died  in  i688.72  Under  these  eminent  men,  the  fine  arts,  in  the
reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  reached  their  zenith  ;  and  during  the  last  thirty  years  of  his
life  their  decline  was  portentously  rapid.  This  was  the  case  not  only  in  archi-
tecture and  music  but  even  in  painting,  which,  being  more  subservient  than  they
are  to  personal  vanity,  is  more  likely  to  flourish  under  a  rich  and  despotic  govern-
ment. The  genius,  however,  of  painters  fell  so  low  that  long  before  the  death  of
Louis  XIV.  France  ceased  to  possess  one  of  any  merit  ;  and  when  his  successor
came  to  the  throne,  this  beautiful  art  was,  in  that  great  country,  almost  extinct.73

01  Ibid,  xxiii.  p.  496.

62  Ibid.  xxix.  p.  17.  ^  Ibid.  xxix.  p.  19.

64  "  His  best  pictures  were  painted  from  about  1640  to  1660  ;    he  died  in  1682."
Wornum's  Epochs  of  Painting,  Lond.  1847,  p.  399.     Voltaire  (Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,  in
(Euvres,  vol.  xix.  p.  205 )  says  that  he  died  in  1678.

65  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  327  ;   Works  of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  vol.  ii.  pp.  454,  455.

66  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxv.  p.  579.     Poussin  was  Barry's  "  favourite  "  painter.     Letter
from  Barry,  in  Burke's  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  88.     Compare  Otter's  Life  of  Clarke,  vol.  ii.
p.  55.     Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  (Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  97,  351,  376)  appears  to  have  preferred
him  to  any  of  the  French  school ;   and  in  the  report  presented  to  Napoleon  by  the  Insti-
tute, he  is  the  only  French  painter  mentioned  by  the  side  of  the  Greek  and  Italian  artists.
Dacier,  Rapport  Historique,  p.  23.

67  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  411  ;  Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xix.
p.  158.

68  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxvi.  p.  503.  69  Ibid.  vol.  iv.  p.  593.

70  Ibid.  vol.  xxxvi.  p.    300.      Respecting  him,  see   Lady   Morgan's   France,   vol.    ii.

PP-  30,  31-

71  M.  Capefigue  (Louis  XIV,  vol.  ii.  p.  79)  says,  "  Lulli  mourut  en  1689  ;  "  but  1687
is  the  date  assigned  in  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxv.  p.  425  ;   in  Chalmers's  Biog.  Diet.  vol.  xx.
p.  483  ;  in  Rose's  Biog.  Diet.   vol.  ix.  p.   350  ;     and  in  Monteil,  Divers  Etats,  vol.  vii.
p.  63.     In  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xix.  p.  200,  he  is  called  "  le  pere  de  la  vraie  musique
en  France."     He  was  admired  by  Louis  XIV.     Lettres  de  Sevigne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  162,  163.

72  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  423.     Voltaire  ((Euvres,  vol.  xix.  p.  162)  says,  "  personne
n'a  jamais  egale  Quinault ;  "   and  Mr.  Hallam  (Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  iii.  p.  507),  "  the  un-
rivalled poet  of  French  music."     See  also  Lettres  de  Dude  ff  and  a  Walpole,  vol.  ii.  p.  432.

73  "  When  Louis  XV.  ascended  the  throne,  painting  in  France  was  in  the  lowest  state
of  degradation."     Lady  Morgan's  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  31.     Lacretelle  (Dix-huitieme  Siecle,
vol.  ii.  p.  n)  says,  "  Les  beaux  arts  degenererent  plus  sensiblement  que  les  lettres  pen-
dant la  seconde  partie  du  siecle  de  Louis  XIV.  ...  II  est  certain  que  les  vingt-cinq
dernieres  annees  du  regne  de  Louis  XIV  n'offrirent  que  des  productions  tres-inferieures,"
&c.     Thus  too  Harrington  (Observations  on  the  Statutes,  p.  377 )»  "  It  is  very  remarkable


406  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

These  are  startling  facts  ;  not  matters  of  opinion,  which  may  be  disputed,  but
stubborn  dates,  supported  by  irrefragable  testimony.  And  if  we  examine  in  the
same  manner  the  literature  of  the  age  of  Louis  XIV.,  we  shall  arrive  at  similar
conclusions.  If  we  ascertain  the  dates  of  those  masterpieces  which  adorn  his
reign,  we  shall  find  that,  during  the  last  five -and -twenty  years  of  his  life,  when
his  patronage  had  been  the  longest  in  operation,  it  was  entirely  barren  of  results  ;
in  other  words,  that  when  the  French  had  been  most  habituated  to  his  protection,
they  were  least  able  to  effect  great  things.*  Louis  XIV.  died  in  1715.  Racine
produced  Phedre  in  1677  ;  Andromaque  in  1667  ;  Athalie  in  i69i.74  Moliere
published  the  Misanthrope  in  1666  ;  Tartuffe  in  1667  ;  the  Avare  in  1668 .75  The
Lutnn  of  Boileau  was  written  in  1674  ;  his  best  Satires  in  i666.76  The  last  Fables
of  La  Fontaine  appeared  in  1678,  and  his  last  Tales  in  i67i.77  The  Inquiry
respecting  Truth,  by  Malebranche,  was  published  in  1674  ;  78  the  Caracteres  of
La  Bruyere  in  1687  ;  79  the  Maximes  of  Rochefoucauld  in  i665.80  The  Pro-
vincial Letters  of  Pascal  were  written  in  1656,  and  he  himself  died  in  i662.81  As
to  Corneille,  his  great  tragedies  were  composed,  some  while  Louis  was  still  a  boy,
and  the  others  before  the  king  was  born.82  Such  were  the  dates  of  the  master-
pieces of  the  age  of  Louis  XIV.  The  authors  of  these  immortal  works  all  ceased
to  write,  and  nearly  all  ceased  to  live,  before  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century  ;
and  we  may  fairly  ask  the  admirers  of  Louis  XIV.  who  those  men  were  that  suc-
ceeded them.  Where  have  their  names  been  registered  ?  f  Where  are  their

that  the  French  school  hath  not  produced  any  very  capital  painters  since  the  expensive
establishment  by  Louis  XIV.  of  the  academies  at  Rome  and  Paris."  [The  argument
requires  that  the  decline  should  be  shown  to  be  due  to  the  process  of  protection.  Of
this  proof  is  not  given.  The  probable  cause  was  lack  of  economic  demand,  such  de-
mand being  always  a  condition  precedent  of  great  developments  of  art :  e.g.  classic
Greece  ;  renaissance  Italy  ;  and  Holland  in  the  seventeenth  century. — ED.]

74  B-iog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxvi.  pp.  499,  502  ;  Hallam's  Lit.  vol.  iii.  p.  493.

75  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxix.  pp.  306,  308.

76  Rose's  Biog.  Diet.  vol.  iv.  p.  376  ;  and  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  v.  pp.  7-8,  where  it  is  said  that
"  ses  meilleures  satires  "  were  those  published  in  1666.

77  Ibid.  vol.  xxiii.  p.  127.

78  Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  x.  p.  322.

79  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  vi.  p.  175.

80  Brunei,  Manuel  du  Libraire,  vol.  iv.  p.  105,  Paris,  1843  ;  and  note  in  Lettres  de  Patin,
vol.  i.  p.  421.

81  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxiii.  pp.  64-71  ;  Palissot,  Mem.  pour  VHist.  de  Lit.  vol.  ii.  pp.  239,
241.

82  Polyeucte,  which  is  probably  his  greatest  work,  appeared  in  1640  ;   Medee  in  1635  ;
The  Cid  in  1636  ;  Horace  and  Cinna  both  in  1639.     Biog.  Univ.  vol.  ix.  pp.  609-613.

t*  Above,  p.  393,  it  was  asserted  that  "  the  most  celebrated  authors  of  that  time  "
were  "  unable  to  resist  the  surrounding  corruption."  This  is  now  tacitly  given  up. — ED.]

[f  They  are  registered  in  the  natural  places,  the  biographical  dictionaries,  also  in  the
Catalogue  des  Ecrivains  at  the  end  of  Voltaire's  Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,  and  to  some  extent
in  Perraulfs  Les  Hommes  Illustres  qui  ont  paru  en  France,  pendant  le  xvii.  siecle  (1701)-
The  following  were  neither  obscure  hirelings  nor  men  corrupted  by  the  atmosphere  of
protection,  from  which  several  of  them  found  reason  to  fly  : — Bossuet  (discussed  by
Buckle  in  a  later  chapter  on  his  merits,  but  mentioned  above  merely  for  "  sacred  oratory,"
though  one  of  the  classics  of  French  prose,  1627-1714)  ;  Fenelon,  another  (1651-1715)  ;
Fontenelle  (1657-1757),  one  of  the  leading  writers  of  his  age,  whose  Dialogues  des  Morts
and  Pluralite  des  Mondes  appeared  in  1685-6  ;  Regnard,  whose  Le  Joueur  is  dated  1696  ;
Le  Sage,  whose  Tur caret  appeared  in  1709,  and  his  Diable  Boiteux  in  1707;  Saint -Evremond
(1613-1703),  who  perforce  kept  out  of  the  court  atmosphere,  being  exiled;  Bayle,  whose
g.reat  Dictionnaire  dates  from  1697,  and  who, living  in  Holland,  did  not  "  sell  his  birth-
right" ;  Huet  (1630-1721),  who  wrote  with  power  on  many  subjects,  and  who,  as  it
happened,  anticipated  Buckle  in  writing  that  "  une  des  principals  causes  de  la  deca-
dence des  lettres  est  a  mori  avis  le  trop  grand  soin  que  Ton  a  pris  de  les  faire  fleurir  "


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT    CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE     407

works  to  be  found  ?  Who  is  there  that  now  reads  the  books  of  those  obscure
hirelings,  who  for  so  many  years  thronged  the  court  of  the  great  king  ?  Who  has
heard  anything  of  Campistron,  La  Chapelle,  Genest,  Ducerceau,  Dancourt,  Dan-
chet,  Vergier,  Catrou,  Chaulieu,  Legendre,  Valincour,  Lamotte,  and  the  other
ignoble  compilers,  who  long  remained  the  brightest  ornaments  of  France  ?  Was
this,  then,  the  consequence  of  the  royal  bounty  ?  Was  this  the  fruit  of  the  royal
itronage  ?  If  the  system  of  reward  and  protection  is  really  advantageous  to
iterature  and  to  art,  how  is  it  that  it  should  have  produced  the  meanest  results
rhen  it  had  been  the  longest  in  operation  ?  *  If  the  favour  of  kings  is,  as  their
itterers  tell  us,  of  such  importance,  how  comes  it  that  the  more  the  favour  was
[isplayed,  the  more  the  effects  were  contemptible  ?

Nor  was  this  almost  inconceivable  penury  compensated  by  superiority  in  any
>ther  department.      The  simple  fact  is  that  Louis  XIV.  survived  the  entire  in-
tellect of  the  French  nation,  f  except  that  small  part  of  it  which  grew  up  in
opposition  to  his  principles,  and  afterwards  shook  the  throne  of  his  successor.83
jveral  years  before  his  death,  and  when  his  protective  system  had  been  in  full
force  for  nearly  half  a  century,  there  was  not  to  be  found  in  the  whole  of  France  a
statesman  who  could  develop  the  resources  of  the  country,  or  a  general  who  could
lefend  it  against  its  enemies.     Both  in  the  civil  service  and  in  the  military  ser-
vice, everything  had  fallen  into  disorder.     At  home  there  was  nothing  but  con-
fusion ;  abroad  there  was  nothing  but  disaster.     The  spirit  of  France  succumbed,
md  was  laid  prostrate.     The  men  of  letters,  pensioned  and  decorated  by  the
>urt,  had  degenerated  into  a  fawning  and  hypocritical  race,  who,  to  meet  the
rishes  of  their  masters,  opposed  all  improvement,  and  exerted  themselves  in
ipport  of  every  old  abuse.      The  end  of  all  this  was  a  corruption,  a  servility,  and
loss  of  power  more  complete  than  has  ever  been  witnessed  in  any  of  the  great
)untries  of  Europe.     There  was  no  popular  liberty  ;    there  were  no  great  men  ;
there  was  no  science  ;    there  was  no  literature  ;    there  were  no  arts.     Within,
there  was  a  discontented  people,  a  rapacious  government,  and  a  beggared  ex-
chequer. J     Without,    there  were  foreign  armies,   which  pressed   upon  all   the

83  Voltaire  (Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xx.  pp.  319-322)  reluctantly  confesses
the  decline  of  the  French  intellect  in  the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Louis  ;  and  Flassan

(Huetiana,  1722,  p.  171)  ;  Du  Bos  (1670-1742),  whose  aesthetic  Reflexions  (1719)  were
pronounced  by  Voltaire  "tle  livre  le  plus  utile  qu'on  ait  jamais  ecrit  sur  ces  matieres  chez
aucune  des  nations  de  1'Europej"  ;  Nicholas  Freret  (1688-1749),  (praised  by  Buckle
below),  one  of  the  greatest  critical  ^scholars  of  modern  times,  who  had  already  begun  to
prove  his  powers  in  1714  ;]  and  Richard  Simon  (1638-1712),  the  greatest  Biblical  critic
of  his  period.  It  is  relevant  also'to  name  such  mighty  scholars  as  Tillemont  (1637-1698 )  ;
Montfaucon  (1655-1741);  Ren'audot  (1646-1720);  Fleury  (1640-1723);  D'Herbelot
(1625-1695),  "  protected  "  by  Louis  in  a  special  degree  ;  Ducange  (1610-1688),  who,  says

/bltaire,  "  fut  un  des  ceux  que  Louis  XIV.  recompensa  "  ;  and  the  names  of  such  men
Basnage  (1653-1723)  and  Beausobre  (1659-1738),  who  lived  out  of  France,  are  part  of
the  evidence  that  many  scholars  are  proof  to  corruption. — ED.]

[*  As  it  has  been  above  complained  that  the  system  of  protection  has  never  ceased  in
France,  and  Louis  XV.  certainly  did  not  abandon  the  practice  of  rewards,  this  question
answers  itself.  The  intellectual  revival  after  Louis  XIV.  with  continued  "  protection,"
ought  on  the  lines  of  Buckle's  argument  to  have  been  impossible. — ED.]

[f  When  Louis  XIV.  died,  Voltaire  was  21  years  old  ;  Montesquieu,  26  ;  Freret,  27  ;
Le  Sage,  47  ;  Fontenelle  about  60,  but  with  forty  years  of  life  before  him  ;  Astruc,  the
great  innovator  in  Biblical  criticism,  31.  Of  the  innovators  of  the  next  age,  Diderot  was
then  2  years  old,  Rousseau  3.  Helve tius  was  born  in  1715  ;  D'Alembert  not  till  1717.
The  sentence  in  the  text  is  thus  in  every  way  inapplicable. — ED.]

[%  We  now  reach  the  true  explanation.     Louis  XIV.  had  exhausted  the  resources  of

France  in  his  policy  of  aggrandisement,  increasing  five-fold  the  military  force  of  the

nation.     Against  this  total  misdirection  of  energy  nothing  could  avail,  though  had  the

sciences  been  "  protected  "  instead  of  belles  lettres,  the  result  would  probably  have  varied

ro  tanto.     The  revival  in  the  next  reign  was  made  possible  by  the  release  of  total  energy

ifter  the  collapse  of  the  imperialism  of  Louis  XIV.  and  Louis  XV.— ED.]


4o8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

frontiers,  and  which  nothing  but  their  mutual  jealousies,  and  a  change  in  the
English  cabinet,  prevented  (rom  dismembering  the  monarchy  of  France.*14

Such  was  the  forlorn  position  of  that  noble  country  towards  the  close  of  the
reign  of  Louis  XIV.85     The  misfortunes  which  embittered  the  declining  years  of

(Diplomat.  Franc,  vol.  iv.  p.  400)  calls  it  "  remarquable."     See  also  Bar  ante,  Litterature
Francaise,  p.  28  ;   Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxvi.  p.  217.

84  "  Oppressed  by  defeats  abroad,  and  by  famine  and  misery  at  home,  Louis  was  laid  at
the  mercy  of  his  enemies  ;    and  was  only  saved  by  a  party  revolution  in  the  English
ministry."   Arnold's  Lectures  on  Modern  History,  p.  137.  Compare  Fragments  sur  I'Histoire,
Article  xxiii.  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxvii.   p.   345,  with  De  Tocqueville,  Regne  de
Louis  XV,  vol.  i.  p.  86.

85  For  evidence  of  the  depression  and,  indeed,  utter  exhaustion  of  France  during  the
latter  years  of  Louis  XIV.,  compare  Duclos,  Memoires,  vol.  i.  pp.  11-18,  with  Marmontel,
Hist.  delaRegence,  Paris,  1826,  pp.  79-97.     The  Lettres  incdites  de  Madame  de  Maintenon
(vol.  i.  pp.  263,  284,  358,  389,  393,  408,  414,  422,  426,  447,  457,  463,  vol.  ii.  pp.  19,  23,  33,
46,  56,  and  numerous  other  passages)  fully  confirm  this,  and,  moreover,  prove  that  in
Paris,  early  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the  resources,  even  of  the  wealthy  classes,  were
beginning  to  fail ;  while  both  public  and  private  credit  were  so  shaken  that  it  was  hardly
possible  to  obtain  money  on  any  terms.     In  1710,  she,  the  wife  of  Louis  XIV.,  complains
of  her  inability  to  borrow  500  livres  :  "  Tout  mon  credit  echoue  souvent  aupres  de  M.
Desmaretz  pour  une  somme  de  cinq  cents  livres."     Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  33.     In  1709,  she
writes  (vol.  i.  p.  447)  :   "  Le  jeu  devient  insipide,  parce  qu'il  n'y  a  presque  plus  d'argent."
See  also  vol.  ii.  p.  112  ;  and  in  February,  1711  (p.  151)  :  "  Ce  n'est  pas  1'abondance  mais
1' avarice  qui  fait  jouer  nos  courtisans  ;  on  met  le  tout  pour  le  tout  pour  avoir  quelque
argent,  et  les  tables  de  lansquenet  ont  plus  1'air  d'un  triste  commerce  que  d'un  divertis-
sement."

In  regard  to  the  people  generally,  the  French  writers  supply  us  with  little  information,
because  in  that  age  they  were  too  much  occupied  with  their  great  king  and  their  showy
literature  to  pay  attention  to  mere  popular  interests.  But  I  have  collected  from  other
sources  some  information  which  I  will  now  put  together,  and  which  I  recommend  to  the
notice  of  the  next  French  author  who  undertakes  to  compose  a  history  of  Louis  XIV.

Locke,  who  was  travelling  in  France  in  1676  and  1677,  writes  in  his  journal,  "The
rent  of  lands  in  France  fallen  one -half  in  these  few  years,  by  reason  of  the  poverty  of  the
people."  King's  Life  of  Locke,  vol.  i.  p.  129.  About  the  same  time,  Sir  William  Temple
says  (Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  268),  "  The  French  peasantry  are  wholly  dispirited  by  labour  and
want."  In  1691,  another  observer,  proceeding  from  Calais,  writes,  "  From  hence,
travelling  to  Paris,  there  was  opportunity  enough  to  observe  what  a  prodigious  state  of
poverty  the  ambition  and  absoluteness  of  a  tyrant  can  reduce  an  opulent  and  fertile
country  to.  There  were  visible  all  the  marks  and  signs  of  a  growing  misfortune  ;  all  the
dismal  indications  of  an  overwhelming  calamity.  The  fields  were  uncultivated,  the
villages  unpeopled,  the  houses  dropping  to  decay."  Burton's  Diary,  note  by  Rutt,  vol.  iv.
p.  79.  In  a  tract  published  in  1689,  the  author  says  (Somers  Tracts,  vol.  x.  p.  264),
"  I  have  known  in  France  poor  people  sell  their  beds,  and  lie  upon  straw  ;  sell  their
pots,  kettles,  and  all  their  necessary  household  goods,  to  content  the  unmerciful  collectors
of  the  king's  taxes."  Dr.  Lister,  who  visited  Paris  in  1698,  says,  "  Such  is  the  vast
multitude  of  poor  wretches  in  all  parts  of  this  city,  that  whether  a  person  is  in  a  carriage
or  on  foot,  in  the  street,  or  even  in  a  shop,  he  is  alike  unable  to  transact  business,  on
account  of  the  importunities  of  mendicants."  Lister's  Account  of  Paris,  p.  46.  Compare
a  Letter  from  Prior,  in  Ellis' s  Letters  of  Literary  Men,  p.  213.  In  1708,  Addison,  who
from  personal  observation  was  well  acquainted  with  France,  writes  :  "  We  think  here  as
you  do  in  the  country,  that  France  is  on  her  last  legs."  Aikin's  Life  of  Addison,  vol.  i.
p.  233.  Finally,  in  1718 — that  is,  three  years  after  the  death  of  Louis — Lady  Mary  Mon-
tagu gives  the  following  account  of  the  result  of  his  reign,  in  a  letter  to  Lady  Rich,  dated
Paris,  loth  October,  1718  :  "  I  think  nothing  so  terrible  as  objects  of  misery,  except  one
had  the  godlike  attribute  of  being  able  to  redress  them  ;  and  all  the  country  villages  of
France  show  nothing  else.  While  the  post-horses  are  changed,  the  whole  town  comes  out
to  beg,  with  such  miserable  starved  faces,  and  thin,  tattered  clothes,  they  need  no  other
eloquence  to  persuade  one  of  the  wretchedness  of  their  condition."  Works  of  Lady  Mary
Wortley  Montagu,  vol.  hi.  p.  74,  edit.  1803.


THE    PROTECTIVE    SPIRIT   CARRIED    INTO    LITERATURE:    409

the  king  were  indeed  so  serious  that  they  could  not  fail  to  excite  our  sympathy
if  we  did  not  know  that  they  were  the  result  of  his  own  turbulent  ambition,  of  his
insufferable  arrogance,  but,  above  all,  of  a  grasping  and  restless  vanity,  which,
making  him  eager  to  concentrate  on  his  single  person  all  the  glory  of  France,
gave  rise  to  that  insidious  policy  which,  with  gifts,  with  honours,  and  with  honied
words,  began  by  gaining  the  admiration  of  the  intellectual  classes,  then  made
them  courtly  and  time-serving,  and  ended  by  destroying  all  their  boldness,
stifling  every  effort  of  original  thought,  and  thus  postponing  for  an  indefinite
period  the  progress  of  national  civilization.


CHAPTER  XII.

DEATH  OF  Louis  XIV.     REACTION  AGAINST  THE  PROTECTIVE  SPIRIT,  AND
PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION.

AT  length  Louis  XIV.  died.  When  it  was  positively  known  that  the  old  king
had  ceased  to  breathe,  the  people  went  almost  mad  with  joy.1  The  tyranny
which  had  weighed  them  down  was  removed  ;  and  there  at  once  followed  a
reaction  which,  for  sudden  violence,  has  no  parallel  in  modern  history.2  The
great  majority  indemnified  themselves  for  their  forced  hypocrisy  by  indulging
in  the  grossest  licentiousness.  But  among  the  generation  then  forming  there
were  some  high-spirited  youths  who  had  far  higher  views,  and  whose  notions
of  liberty  were  not  confined  to  the  licence  of  the  gaming  house  and  the  brothel.
Devoted  to  the  great  idea  of  restoring  to  France  that  freedom  of  utterance  which
it  had  lost,  they  naturally  turned  their  eyes  towards  the  only  country  where  the
freedom  was  practised.  Their  determination  to  search  for  liberty  in  the  place
where  alone  it  could  be  found,  gave  rise  to  that  junction  of  the  French  and
English  intellects  which,  looking  at  the  immense  chain  of  its  effects,  is  by  far  the
most  important  fact  in  the  history  of  the  eighteenth  century.

During  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  the  French,  puffed  up  by  national  vanity,
despised  the  barbarism  of  a  people  who  were  so  uncivilized  as  to  be  always
turning  on  their  rulers,  and  who,  within  the  space  of  forty  years,  had  executed
one  king,  and  deposed  another.3  They  could  not  believe  that  such  a  restless

1  "  L'annonce  de  la  mort  du  grand  roi  ne  produisit  chez  le  peuple  francais  qu'une
explosion  de  joie."     Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  220.     "  Le  jour  des
obseques  de  Louis  XIV,  on  etablit  des  guinguettes  sur  le  chemin  de  Saint-Denis.     Vol-
taire, que  la  curiosite  avoit  mene  aux  funerailles  du  souverain,  vit  dans  ces  guinguettes
le  peuple  ivre  de  vin  et  de  joie  de  la  mort  de  Louis  XIV."     Duvernet,  Vie  de  Voltaire,
p.  29  ;   see  also  Condorcet,  Vie  de  Voltaire,  p.  118  ;   De  Tocqueville,  Regne  de  Louis  XV,
vol.  i.  p.  18  ;   Duclos,  Memoires,  vol.  i.  p.  221  ;   Lemontey,  Etablissement  de  Louis  XIV,
pp.  311,  388.

2  "  Kaum  hatte  er  aber  die  Augen  geschlossen,  als  alles  umschlug.     Der  reprimirte
Geist  warf  sich  in  eine  ziigellose  Bewegung."     Ranke,  die  Papste,  vol.  iii.  p.  192.

3  The  shock  which  these  events  gave  to  the  delicacy  of  the  French  mind  was  very
serious.     The  learned  Saumaise  declared  that  the  English  are  "  more  savage  than  their
own  mastiffs."     Carlyle's  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  444.     Another  writer  said  that  we  were
"  barbares  revoltes  ;  "  and  "  les  barbares  sujets  du  roi."     Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  ii.
pp.  105,  362.     Patin  likened  us  to  the  Turks  ;   and  said  that  having  executed  one  king,
we  should  probably  hang  the  next.     Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  i.  p.  261,  vol.  ii.  p.  518,  vol.  iii.
p.  148.     Compare  Mem.  de  Campion,  p.  213.     After  we  had  sent  away  James  II.,  the
indignation  of  the  French  rose  still  higher,  and  even  the  amiable  Madame  Sevigne,  having
occasion  to  mention  Mary  the  wife  of  William  III.,  could  find  no  better  name  for  her
than  Tullia  :    "  la  joie  est  universelle  de  la  deroute  de  ce  prince,  dont  la  femme  est  une
Tullie."     Lettres  de   Sevigne,  vol.  v.  p.  179.     Another  influential  French  lady  mentions
41  la  ferocite  des  Anglais."     Lettres  inedites  de  Maintenon,  vol.  i.  p.  303  ;    and  elsewhere
(p.  109),  "  je  hais  les  Anglais    comme   le    peuple.  .  .  .  Veritablement  je  ne  les  puis
soufifrir."

I  will  only  give  two  more  illustrations  of  the  wide  diffusion  of  such  feelings.     In  1679


EARLY    CAUSES    OF    THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION        411

horde  possessed  anything  worthy  the  attention  of  enlightened  men.  Our  laws,
our  literature,  and  our  manners,  were  perfectly  unknown  to  them  ;  and  I  doubt
if  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  there  were,  either  in  literature  or  in
science,  five  persons  in  France  acquainted  with  the  English  language.4  But  a
long  experience  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  induced  the  French  to  reconsider  many
of  their  opinions.  It  induced  them  to  suspect  that  despotism  may  have  its
disadvantages,  and  that  a  government  composed  of  princes  and  bishops  is  not
necessarily  the  best  for  a  civilized  country.  They  began  to  look,  first  with
complacency,  and  then  with  respect,  upon  that  strange  and  outlandish  people
who,  though  only  separated  from  themselves  by  a  narrow  sea,  appeared  to  be
of  an  altogether  different  kind  :  and  who,  having  punished  their  oppressors,
had  carried  their  liberties  and  their  prosperity  to  a  height  of  which  the  world
had  seen  no  example.  These  feelings,  which,  before  the  Revolution  broke  out,
were  entertained  by  the  whole  of  the  educated  classes  in  France,  were  in  the
beginning  confined  to  those  men  whose  intellects  placed  them  at  the  head  of
their  age.  During  the  two  generations  which  elapsed  between  the  death  of
Louis  XIV.  and  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution,  there  was  hardly  a  Frenchman
of  eminence  who  did  not  either  visit  England  or  learn  English  ;  while  many  of
them  did  both.  Buffon,  Brissot,  Broussonnet,  Condamine,  Delisle,  Elie  de
Beaumont,  Gournay,  Helvetius,  Jussieu,  Lalande,  Lafayette,  Larcher,  L'Heritier,
Montesquieu,  Maupertuis,  Morellet,  Mirabeau,  Nollet,  Raynal,  the  celebrated
Roland  and  his  still  more  celebrated  wife,  Rousseau,  Segur,  Suard,  Voltaire, —
all  these  remarkable  persons  flocked  to  London,  as  also  did  others  of  inferior
ability,  but  of  considerable  influence,  such  as  Brequiny,  Bordes,  Calonne,  Coyer,
Cormatin,  Dufay,  Dumarest,  Dezallier,  Favier,  Girod,  Grosley,  Godin,  D'Han-
carville,  Hunauld,  Jars,  Le  Blanc,  Ledru,  Lescallier,  Linguet,  Lesuire,  Lemonnier,
Levesque  de  Pouilly,  Montgolfier,  Morand.Patu,  Poissonier,  Reveillon,  Septchenes,
Silhouette,  Siret,  Soulavie,  Soules,  and  Valmont  de  Brienne.

Nearly  all  of  these  carefully  studied  our  language,  and  most  of  them  seized
the  spirit  of  our  literature.  Voltaire  in  particular  devoted  himself  with  his
usual  ardour  to  the  new  pursuit,  and  acquired  in  England  a  knowledge  of  those
doctrines,  the  promulgation  of  which  afterwards  won  for  him  so  great  a  reputation.6

an  attempt  was  made  to  bring  bark  into  discredit  as  a  "  remede  anglais  "  (Sprengel,  Hist,
de  la  Medecine,  vol.  v.  p.  430)  ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  one  of  the
arguments  in  Paris  against  coffee  was  that  the  English  liked  it.  Monteil,  Divers  Etats,
vol.  vii.  p.  216.

4  "  Au  temps  de  Boileau,  personne  en  France  n'apprenait  1'Anglais."     (Euvres  de
Voltaire,  vol.  xxxviii.  p.  337,  and  see  vol.  xix.  p.  159.     "  Parmi  nos  grands  ecrivains  du
xviie  siecle,  il  n'en  est  aucun,  je  crois,  ou  1'on  puisse  reconnaitre  un  souvenir,  une  impres-
sion de  1'esprit  anglais."     Villemain,  Lit.  au  XVIIIs  Siecle,  vol.  iii.  p.  324.     Compare
Barante,  XVIIIe  Siecle,  p.  47,  and  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  v.  p.  135,  vol.  xvii.  p.  2.

The  French,  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  principally  knew  us  from  the  accounts
given  by  two  of  their  countrymen,  Monconys  and  Sorbiere  ;  both  of  whom  published
"their  travels  in  England,  but  neither  of  whom  was  acquainted  with  the  English  language.
For  proof  of  this,  see  Monconys,  Voyages,  vol.  iii.  pp.  34,  69,  70,  96  ;  and  Sorbiere,  Voyage,
pp.  45,  70.

When  Prior  arrived  at  the  court  of  Louis  XIV.  as  plenipotentiary,  no  one  in  Paris
was  aware  that  he  had  written  poetry  (Lettres  sur  les  Anglais,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,
vol.  xxvi.  p.  130)  ;  and  when  Addison,  being  in  Paris,  presented  Boileau  with  a  copy  of
the  Musce  Anglicance,  the  Frenchman  learnt  for  the  first  time  that  we  had  any  good
poets  :  "  first  conceived  an  opinion  of  the  English  genius  for  poetry."  Tickell's  state-
ment, in  Aikin's  Life  of  Addison,  vol.  i.  p.  65.  Finally,  it  is  said  that  Milton's  Paradise
Lost  was  not  even  known  by  report  in  France  until  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  though
the  poem  was  published  in  1667,  and  the  king  died  in  1715  ;  "  Nous  n'avions  jamais
entendu  parler  de>ce  poeme  en  France,  avant  que  1'auteur  de  la  Henriade  nous  en  eut
donne  une  idee  dans  le  neuvieme  chapitre  de  son  Essai  sur  la  poesie  epique."  Diet.
Philos.  article  Epopee,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxxix.  p.  175  ;  see  also  vol.  Ixvi.  p.  249.

5  "  Le  vrai  roi  du  xviii6  siecle,  c'est  Voltaire  ;   mais  Voltaire  a  son  tour  est  un  ecolier


4i2  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

He  was  the  first  who  popularized  in  France  the  philosophy  of  Newton,  where  it
rapidly  superseded  that  of  Descartes.6  He  recommended  to  his  countrymen
the  writings  of  Locke  ;7  which  soon  gained  immense  popularity,  and  which
supplied  materials  to  Condillac  for  his  system  of  metaphysics,8  and  to  Rousseau
for  his  theory  of  education.9  Besides  this,  Voltaire  was  the  first  Frenchman
who  studied  Shakespeare  ;  to  whose  works  he  was  greatly  indebted,  though  he
afterwards  wished  to  lessen  what  he  considered  the  exorbitant  respect  paid  to
them  in  France.10  Indeed,  so  intimate  was  his  knowledge  of  the  English  lan-
guage u  that  we  can  trace  his  obligations  to  Butler,12  one  of  the  most  difficult  of
our  poets,  and  to  Tillotson,13  one  of  the  dullest  of  our  theologians.  He  was
acquainted  with  the  speculations  of  Berkeley,14  the  most  subtle  metaphysician
who  has  ever  written  in  English  ;  and  he  had  read  the  works,  not  only  of  Shaftes-
bury,15  but  even  of  Chubb,  16  Garth,1?  Mandeville,18  and  Woolston.^  Mon-
tesquieu imbibed  in  our  country  many  of  his  principles  ;  he  studied  our  language  ;
and  he  always  expressed  admiration  for  England,  not  only  in  his  writings  but

de  1'Angleterre.  Avant  que  Voltaire  eut  connu  1'Angleterre,  soit  par  ses  voyages,  soit
par  ses  amities,  il  n'etait  pas  Voltaire,  et  le  xviii6  siecle  se  cherchait  encore."  Cousin,
Hist,  de  la  Philos.  I.  serie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  38,  39.  Compare  Damiron,  Hist,  de  la  Philos.  en
France,  Paris,  1828,  vol.  i.  p.  34.

6  "J'avais  ete  le  premier  qui  eut  ose  developper  a  ma  nation    les  decouvertes  de
Newton,  en  langage  intelligible."     (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  i.  p.  315  ;   see  also  vol.  xix.
p.  87,  vol.  xxvi.  p.  71  ;    WhewelVs  Hist,  of  Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  ii.  p.  206  ;    Weld's  Hist,
of  the  Royal  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  441.     After  this,  the  Cartesian  physics  lost  ground  every
day  ;   and  in  Grimm's  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  148,  there  is  a  letter,  dated  Paris,  1757,
which  says,  "  II  n'y  a  guere  plus  ici  de  partisans  de  Descartes  que  M.  de  Mairan."     Com-
pare Observations  et  Pensees,  in  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  iii.  p.  298.

7  Which  he  was  never  weary  of  praising  ;  so  that,  as  M.  Cousin  says  (Hist,  de  la  Philos.
II.  serie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  311,  312),  "  Locke  est  le  vrai  maitre  de  Voltaire."     Locke  was  one
of  the  authors  he  put  into  the  hands  of  Madame  du  Chatelet.     Condor cet,  Vie  de  Voltaire,
p.  296.

8  Mor ell's  Hist,  of  Philos.  1846,  vol.  i.  p.  134  ;  Hamilton's  Discuss,  p.  3.

9  "  Rousseau  tira  des  ouvrages  de  Locke  une  grande  partie  de  ses  idees  sur  la  politique
et  1'education  ;    Condillac  toute  sa  philosophic."     Villemain,  Lit.  au  XVIII6  Siecle,
vol.  i.  p.  83.     See  also,  on  the  obligations  of  Rousseau  to  Locke,  Grimm,  Correspond.
vol.  v.  p.  97  ;    Musset  Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseau,  vol.  i.  p.  38,  vol.  ii.  p.  394  ;    Mem.  de
Morellet,  vol.  i.  p.  113  ;   Romilly's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  pp.  211,  212.

10  In  1768,  Voltaire  ((Euvres,  vol.  Ixvi.  p.  249)  writes  to  Horace  Walpole,  "  Je  suis
le  premier  qui  ait  fait  connaitre  Shakespeare  aux  Francais."    See  also  his  Lettres  inedites,
vol.  ii.  p.  500  ;   Villemain,  Lit.  au  XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  iii.  p.  325  ;  and  Grimm,  Correspond.
vol.  xii.  pp.  124,  125,  133.

11  There  are  extant  many  English  letters  written  by  Voltaire,  which,  though  of  course
containing  several  errors,  also  contain  abundant  evidence  of  the  spirit  with  which  he
seized  our  idiomatic  expressions.     In  addition  to  his  Lettres  inedites,  published  at  Paris
in  the  present  year  (1856),  see  Chatham  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  pp.  131-133  ;  and  Phillimore's
Mem.  of  Lyttelton,  vol.  i.  pp.  323-325,  vol.  ii.  pp.  555,  556,  558-

12  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  332  ;   Voltaire,  Lettres  inedites,  vol.  ii.  p.  258  ;   and  the
account  of  Hudibras,  with  translations  from  it,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xxvi.  pp.  132-137  ;   also
a  conversation  between  Voltaire  and  Townley,  in  Nichols's  Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth
Century,  vol.  iii.  p.  722.

13  Compare  Mackintosh's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  p.  341,  with  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxxix.
p.  259,  vol.  xlvii.  p.  85.

14  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxxviii.  pp.  216-218,  vol.  xlvi.  p.  282,  vol.  xlvii.  p.  439,
vol.  Ivii.  p.  178.

15  Ibid.  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  353,  vol.  Ivii.  p.  66  ;    Correspond,  inedite  de  Dudeffand,  vol.  ii.
p.  230.

16  (Euvres,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  294,  vol.  Ivii.  p.  121.

17  Ibid.  vol.  xxxvii.  pp.  407,  441-  18  Ibid.  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  46.

19  Ibid.  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  288,  vol.  xli.  pp.  212-217  ;  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  Ii.  pp.  199,  200.


EARLY    CAUSES    OF    THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION        413

also  in  his  private  conversation.20  Buffon  learnt  English,  and  his  first  appear-
ance as  an  author  was  as  the  translator  of  Newton  and  of  Hales.21  Diderot,
following  in  the  same  course,  was  an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  the  novels  of  Rich-
ardson ; 22  he  took  the  idea  of  several  of  his  plays  from  the  English  dramatists,
particularly  from  Lillo  ;  he  borrowed  many  of  his  arguments  from  Shaftesbury
and  Collins,  and  his  earliest  publication  was  a  translation  of  Stanyan's  History
of  Greece.2^  Helvetius,  who  visited  London,  was  never  weary  of  praising  the
people  ;  many  of  the  views  in  his  great  work  on  the  Mind  are  drawn  from
Mandeville  ;  and  he  constantly  refers  to  the  authority  of  Locke,  whose  principles
hardly  any  Frenchman  would  at  an  earlier  period  have  dared  to  recommend.24
The  works  of  Bacon,  previously  little  known,  were  now  translated  into  French  ;
and  his  classification  of  the  human  faculties  was  made  the  basis  of  that  celebrated
Encyclopaedia  which  is  justly  regarded  as  one  of  the  greatest  productions  of  the
eighteenth  century.25  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  by  Adam  Smith,  was
during  thirty-four  years  translated  three  different  times,  by  three  different
French  authors.26  And  such  was  the  general  eagerness,  that  directly  the  Wealth
of  Nations,  by  the  same  great  writer,  appeared,  Morellet,  who  was  then  high  in
reputation,  began  to  turn  it  into  French  ;  and  was  only  prevented  from  printing
his  translation  by  the  circumstance  that  before  it  could  be  completed  another
version  of  it  was  published  in  a  French  periodical.27  Coyer,  who  is  still  remem-
bered for  his  Life  of  Sobieski,  visited  England  ;  and  after  returning  to  his  own
country,  showed  the  direction  of  his  studies  by  rendering  into  French  the  Com-
mentaries of  Blackstone.28  Le  Blanc  travelled  in  England,  wrote  a  work  ex-
pressly upon  the  English,  and  translated  into  French  the  Political  Discourses  of
Hume.29  Holbach  was  certainly  one  of  the  most  active  leaders  of  the  liberal
party  in  Paris  ;  but  a  large  part  of  his  very  numerous  writings  consists  solely
in  translations  of  English  authors.30  Indeed  it  may  be  broadly  stated  that
while  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  find,
even  among  the  most  educated  Frenchmen,  a  single  person  acquainted  with
English,  it  would  in  the  eighteenth  century  have  been  nearly  as  difficult  to

20  Lerminier,  Philos.  du  Droit,  vol.  i.  p.  291  ;   Klimrath,  Hist,  du  Droit,  vol.  ii.  p.  502  ;
Harris's  Life  of  Hardwicke,  vol.  ii.  p.  398,  vol.  iii.  pp.  432-434  ;   Mem.  de  Diderot,  vol.  ii.
pp.  193,  194  ;   Lacretelle,  XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  24.

21  Villemain,  Lit.  au  XV IIP  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  182  ;   Biog.  Univ.  vol.  vi.  p.  235  ;   Le
Blanc,  Lettres,  vol.  i.  p.  93,  vol.  ii.  pp.  159,  160.

22  "  Admirateur  passionne  du  romancier  anglais."     Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  581.
Compare  Diderot,  Corresp.  vol.  i.  p.  352,  vol.  ii.  pp.  44,  52,  53  ;    Mercier  sur  Rousseau,
vol.  i.  p.  44.

23  Villemain,  Lit.  vol.  ii.  p.  115  ;    Schlosser's  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  i.  pp.  34,  42  ;
Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  xi.  p.  314  ;    Biog.   Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  314  :    Grimm,
Correspond,  vol.  xv.  p.  81.     Stanyan's  History  of  Greece  was  once  famous,  and,  even  so
late  as  1804,  I  find  Dr.  Parr  recommending  it.     Parr's  Works,  vol.  vii.  p.  422.     Diderot
told  Sir  Samuel  Romilly  that  he  had  collected  materials  for  a  history  of  the  trial  of
Charles  I.     Life  of  Romilly,  vol.  i.  p.  46.

24  Diderot,  Mem.  vol.  ii.  p.  286  ;    Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philos.  II.  serie,  vol.  ii.  p.  331  ;
Helvetius  de  V Esprit,  vol.  i.  pp.  31,  38,  46,  65,  114,  169,  193,  266,  268,  vol.  ii.  pp.  144,  163,
165,  195,  212  ;  Letters  addressed  to  Hume,  Edinb.  1849,  pp.  9-10.

25  This  is  the  arrangement  of  our  knowledge  under  the  heads  of  Memory,  Reason,
and  Imagination,  which  D'Alembert  took  from  Bacon.     Compare  WhewelVs  Philos.  of
the  Sciences,  vol.  ii.  p.  306  ;    Cuvier,  Hist,  des  Sciences,  part  ii.  p.  276  ;   Georgel,  Mem.
vol.  ii.  p.  241  ;   Bordas  Demoulin,  Cartesianisme,  vol.  i.  p.  18.

26  Querard,  France  Lit.  ix.  193.  27  Mem.  de  Morellet,  i.  236,  237.

28  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  Ixv.  161,  190,  212  ;   Biog.  Univ.  x.  158,  159.

29  Burton's  Life  of  Hume,  vol.  i.  pp.  365,  366,  406.

30  See  the  list,  in  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xx.  pp.  463-466  ;    and  compare  Mem.  de  Diderot,
vol.  iii.  p.  49,  from  which  it  seems  that  Holbach  was  indebted  to  Toland,  though  Diderot
speaks  rather  doubtingly.     In  Almorfs  Mem.  of  Wilkes,  1805,  vol.  iv.  pp.  176,  i77»  there
is  an  English  letter,  tolerably  well  written,  from  Holbach  to  Wilkes.


4i4  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

find  in  the  same  class  one  who  was  ignorant  of  it.  Men  of  all  tastes,  and  of  the
most  opposite  pursuits,  were  on  this  point  united  as  by  a  common  bond.  Poets,
geometricians,  historians,  naturalists,  all  seemed  to  agree  as  to  the  necessity  of
studying  a  literature  on  which  no  one  before  had  wasted  a  thought.  In  the
course  of  general  reading,  I  have  met  with  proofs  that  the  English  language  was
known,  not  only  to  those  eminent  Frenchmen  whom  I  have  already  mentioned,
but  also  to  mathematicians,  as  D'Alembert,31  Darquier,32  Du  Val  le  Roy,33
Jurain,34  Lachapelle,35  Lalande,36  Le  Cozic,37  Montucla,38  Pezenas,39  Prony,4o
Romme,41  and  Roger  Martin  ;42  to  anatomists,  physiologists,  and  writers  on
medicine,  as  Barthez,43  Bichat,44  Bordeu,45  Barbeu  Dubourg,46  Bosquillon,47
Bourru,48  Begue  de  Presle,49  Cabanis,50  Demours,5!  Duplanil,52  Fouquet,53
Goulin,54  Lavirotte,55  Lassus,56  Petit  Radel,57  Pinel,58  Roux,59  Sauvages,6o  and
Sue  ;61  to  naturalists,  as  Alyon,62  Bremond,63  Brisson,64  Broussonnet,65  Dalibard,66
Haiiy,67  Latapie,68  Richard,®9  Rigaud,™  and  Rome  de  Lisle  ;71  to  historians,
philologists,  and  antiquaries,  as  Barthelemy,72  Butel  Dumont,73  De  Brosses,74
Foucher,7*  Freret,™  Larcher,  77  Le  Coq  de  Villeray,78  Millot,79  Target  Velly,81
Volney,82  and  Wailly  ;  83  to  poets  and  dramatists,  as  Cheron,84  Colardeau,85
Delille,86  Desforges,87  Ducis,88  Florian,  89  Laborde,90  Lefevre  de  Beauvray,91
Mercier,92  Patu,93  Pompignan,94  Quetant,95  Roucher,^  and  Saint -Ange  ;97  to

31  Musset  Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseau,  ii.  10,  175  ;   (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  liv.  207.

32  Biog.  Univ.  x.  556.  33  Ibid.  xii.  418.

34  Querard,  France  Lit.  iv.  34,  272.  35  Ibid.  iv.  361.

36  Biog.  Univ.  xxiii.  226.  37  Montucla,  Hist,  des  Mathem.  ii.  170

38  Montucla,  ii.  120,  iv.  662,  665,  670.  39  Biog.  Univ.  iii.  253,  xxxiii.  564.

40  Querard,  France  Lit.  vii.  353.  41  Biog.  Univ.  xxxviii.  530.

42  Biog.   Univ.  xxxviii.  411.  43  Ibid.  iii.  450.

44  Bichat  sur  la  Vie,  244.  45  Querard,  i.  416.

46  Biog.  Univ.  iii.  345.  47  Querard,  i.  260,  425,  ii.  354.

48  Querard,  i.  476.  49  Biog.  Univ.  iv.  55,  56.

50  Notice  sur  Cabanis,  p.  viii.  in  his  Physique  et  Moral.

si  Biog.  Univ.  xi.  65,  66.  52  Ibid.  xii.  276.

s3  Ibid.  xv.  359.  s*  ibid,  xviii.  187.

65  Querard,  iv.  641,  vi.  9,  398.  56  Cuvier,  Eloges,  i.  354.

57  Querard  vii.  95.  58  Cuvier,  Eloges,  iii.  382.

59  Biog.  Univ.  xxxix.  174.  60  Le  Blanc,  Lettres,  i.  93.

61  Querard,  ix.  286.  62  Robin  et  Verdeil,  Chim.  Anat.  ii.  416;

63  Biog.  Univ.  v.  530,  531.  64  Cuvier,  Eloges,  i.  196.

65  Biog.  Univ.  vi.  47.  66  Querard,  ii.  372.

67  Haiiy,  Mineralogie,  ii.  247,  267,  295,  327,  529,  609,  iii.  75>  293,  307,  447,  575,  iv.  45,
280,  292,  362.

68  Querard,  iv.  598.  69  Ibid.  viii.  22.

70  Swainson,  Disc,  on  Nat.  Hist.  52  ;  Cuvier,  Regne  Animal,  iii.  415.

71  De  Lisle,  Cristallographie,  1772,  xviii.  xx.  xxiii.  xxv.  xxvii.  78,  206,  254.

72  Albemarle' 's  Rockingham,  ii.  156  ;    Campbell's  Chancellors,  v.  365.

?3  Biog.  Univ.  vi.  386.  ?*  Letters  to  Hume,  Edin.  1849,  276,  278.

75  Biog.  Univ.  xv.  332.  76  Brewster's  Life  of  Newton,  ii.  302.

77  Palissot,  Mem.  ii.  56.  78  Biog.  Univ.  ix.  549.

79  Biog.  Univ.  xxix.  51,  53.  so  ibid,  xliv.  534.

81  Ibid,  xlviii.  93.

32  Volney,  Syrie  et  Egypte,  ii.  100,  157  ;  Querard,  x.  271,  273.

53  Biog.  Univ.  1.  42.  84  ibid.  viii.  340,  341.

35  Mem.  de  Genlis,  i.  276.  86  palissot,  Mem.  i.  243.
87  Biog.  Univ.  ix.  281,  xi.  172,  173.  88  Querard,  ii.  626,  627.
89  Querard,  iii.  141.  90  ibid.  iv.  342.

91  Ibid.v.  83.  92  ibid.  vi.  62.

93  Garrick  Correspond.  4to,  1832,  ii.  385,  395,  416.

94  Biog.  Univ.  xxxv.  314.  95  QuSrard,  vii.  399.
w  Biog.  Univ.  xxxix,  93.                                 97  ibid,  xxxix.  530,


EARLY  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION    415

miscellaneous  writers,  as  Bassinet,98  Baudeau,"Beaulaton,10<>Benoist,101Bergier,102
Blavet,103  Bouchaud,104  Bougainville,105  Brute, 1Q6  Castera,107  Chantreau,108
Charpentier,109  Chastellux,110  Contant  d'Orville,111  De  Bissy,112  Demeunier,113
Desfontaines,114  Devienne,115  Dubocage,116  Dupre,117  Duresnel,118  Eidous,119
Estienne,120  Favier,121  Flavigny,122  Fontanelle,123  Fontenay,124  Framery,125
Fresnais,126  Freville,127  Frossard,128  Galtier,129  Garsault,13<>  Goddard,131  Goudar,132
Guenee,133  Guillemard,134  Guyard,135  Jault,136  Imbert,137  Joncourt,138  Keralio,130
Laboreau,140  Lacombe,141  Lafargue,142  La  Montague,143  Lanjuinais,144  Lasalle,145
Lasteyrie,14^  Le  Breton,147  Lecuy,148  Leonard  des  Malpeines,149  Letourneur,150
Linguet,151  Lottin,152  Luneau,153  Maillet  Duclairon,154  Mandrillon,155  Marsy,156
Moet,157  Monod,158  Mosneron,159  Nagot.iso  Peyron,^1  Prevost,1^  Puisieux,163
Rivoire,1^4  Robinet,1^  Roger,1**?  Roubaud,167  Salaville,^8  Sauseuil,^9  Secondat,170
Septchenes,171  Simon,172  Soules,173  Suard,174  Tannevot,175  Thurot,1™  Toussaint,177


98  Querard,  L  209.  "  Biog.  Univ.  iii.  533.

100  Biog.  Univ.  iii.  631.  101  Cuvier,  Regne  Animal,  iii.  334.

102  Querard,  i.  284,  vii.  287.  103  Mem.  de  Morellet,  i.  237.

104  Biog.  Univ.  v.  264.  105  Dutens,  Mem.  iii.  32.

106  Biog.  Univ.  vi.  165.

107  Murray's  Life  of  Bruce,  121  ;   Biog.  Univ.  vi.  79.

108  Biog.  Univ.  viii.  46.  109  Ibid.  viii.  246.
110  Ibid.  viii.  266.                                               m  Ibid.  ix.  497.

112  Ibid.  xlv.  394.

113  Lettres  de  Dude ff and  a  Walpole,  iii.  184.

114  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  Ivi.  527.  115  Biog.  Univ.  xi.  264.

116  Querard,  ii.  598.  117  Biog.  Univ.  xii.  313,  314.

118  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  ii.  154  ;   Palissot,  Mem.  ii.  311.

119  Biog.  Univ.  iv.  547,  xii.  595.  12°  Ibid.  xiii.  399.

121  Querard,  iii.  79.  122  Biog.  Univ.  xv.  29.

123  Biog.  Univ.  xv.  203.  124  Ibid.  218.  125  Querard,  i.  525.

!26  Biog.  Univ.  xvi.  48.  izr  ibid.  Ii.  508.

128  Smith's  Tour  on  the  Continent  in  1786,  i.  143.

129  Biog.  Univ.  xvi.  388.  iso  ibid.  xvi.  502.
131  Sinclair's  Correspond,  i.  157.  122  Querard,  iii.  418.

133  Biog.  Univ.  xix.  13.  13*  Querard,  i.  10,  iii.  536.

135  Querard,  iii.  469.  136  Biog.  Univ.  xxi.  419.

137  Biog.  Univ.  xxi.  200.  i38  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  xxxviii.  244.

139  Palissot,  Mem.  i.  425.  14°  Biog.  Univ.  -xxiii.  34.

141  Biog.   Univ.  xxiii.  56.  142  Ibid,  xxiii.  in.

143  Querard,  iv.  503.  144  Biog.  Univ.  xxiii.  373.

145  Querard,  iv.  579.  i46  Sinclair's  Correspond,  ii.  139.

147  Mem.  and  Correspond,  of  Sir  J.  E.  Smith,  i.  163.

148  Biog.  des  Hommes  Vivants,  iv.  164.         149  Querard,  v.  177.

150  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  iv.  583  ;    Longchamp  et  Wagniere,  Mem.  i.  395.

151  Querard,  v.  316.  1^2  Biog.  Univ.  xxv.  87.

153  Biog.  Univ.  xxv.  432.  154  Ibid.  xxvi.  244.  155  Ibid.  xxvi.  468.

ise  ibid,  xxvii.  269.  157  Ibid.  xxix.  208.

158  Lettres  de  Dudeffand  a  Walpole,  i.  222.       159  Querard,  vi.  330.
i60  Biog.  Univ.  xxx.  539.  161  Ibid,  xxxiii.  553.

162  Lettres  de  Dudeffand  a  Walpole,  i.  22,  iii.  307,  iv.  207.

163  Biog.  Univ.  xxxvi.  305,  306.  164  Ibid,  xxxviii.  174.
165  Peignot,  Diet,  des  Livres,  ii.  233.  166  Querard,  viii.   in.

167  Biog.  Univ.  xxxix.  84.  168  Biog.  des  Hommes  Vivants,  v.  294.

169  Querard,  viii.  474.  17°  Biog.   Univ.  xii.  426.

171  Biog.  Univ.  xlii.  45,  46.  172  Ibid.  xlii.  389.  "3  ibid,  xliii.  181.

174  Garrick  Correspond,  ii.  604  ;    Mem.  de  Genlis,  vi.  205.

175  Biog.  Univ.  xliv.  512.  176  Life  of  Roscoe,  by  his  Son,  i.  200.
i77  Biog.  Univ.  xlvi.  398,  399.


,416  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Tressan,178  Trochereau,179  Turpin,18<>  Ussieux,18*  Vaugeois,182  Verlac,1^  and
Virloys.184  Indeed,  Le  Blanc,  who  wrote  shortly  before  the  middle  of  the
eighteenth  century,  says  :  "  We  have  placed  English  in  the  rank  of  the  learned
languages  ;  our  women  study  it,  and  have  abandoned  Italian  in  order  to  study
the  language  of  this  philosophic  people  ;  nor  is  there  to  be  found  among  us  any

i  one  who  does  not  desire  to  learn  it."185

Such  was  the  eagerness  with  which  the  French  imbibed  the  literature  of  a
people  whom  but  a  few  years  before  they  had  heartily  despised.  The  truth  is,

.  that  in  this  new  state  of  things  they  had  no  alternative.  For  where  but  in
England  was  a  literature  to  be  found  that  could  satisfy  those  bold  and  inquisitive

i  thinkers  who  arose  in  France  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  ?     In  their  own

•  country  there  had  no  doubt  been  great  displays  of  eloquence,  of  fine  dramas,
.  and  of  poetry  which,  though  never  reaching  the  highest  point  of  excellence,  is

•  of  finished  and  admirable  beauty.     But  it  is  an  unquestionable  fact,  and  one
melancholy  to  contemplate,  that  during  the  sixty  years  which  succeeded  the

•  death  of  Descartes,  France  had  not  possessed  a  single  man  who  dared  to  think
for  himself.*     Metaphysicians,  moralists,  historians,  all  had  become  tainted  by
the  servility  of  that  bad  age.     During  two  generations,  no  Frenchman  had  been

;  allowed  to  discuss  with  freedom  any  question  either  of  politics  or  of  religion.
The  consequence  was  that  the  largest  intellects,  excluded  from  their  legitimate
field,  lost  their  energy  ;  the  national  spirit  died  away  ;  the  very  materials  and

:  nutriment  of  thought  seemed  to  be  wanting.  No  wonder,  then,  if  the  great
Frenchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century  sought  that  aliment  abroad  which  they
were  unable  to  find  at  home.  No  wonder  if  they  turned  from  their  own  land,

;  and  gazed  with  admiration  at  the  only  people  who,  pushing  their  inquiries  into

.  the  highest  departments,  had  shown  the  same  fearlessness  in  politics  as  in  religion  ;

.  a  people  who,  having  punished  their  kings  and  controlled  their  clergy,  were

:  storing  the  treasures  of  their  experience  in  that  noble  literature  which  never  can
perish,  and  ot  which  it  may  be  said  in  sober  truth,  that  it  has  stimulated  the  intel-
lect of  the  most  distant  races,  and  that,  planted  in  America  and  in  India,  it  has

.already  fertilized  the  two  extremities  of  the  world.

There  are,  in  fact,  few  things  in  history  so  instructive  as  the  extent  to  which
France  was  influenced  by  this  new  pursuit.  Even  those  who  took  part  in  actually

'  consummating  the  Revolution  were  moved  by  the  prevailing  spirit.  The  English
language  was  familiar  to  Carra,186  Dumouriez,18?  Lafayette,18®  and  Lanthenas.18»

178  Ibid.  xlvi.  497.

179  Querard,  iv.  45,  ix.  558.  18°  Biog.  Univ.  xlvii.  98.
181  Biog.  Univ.  xlvii.  232.  182  Mem.  de  Brissot,  i.  78.
183  Biog.  Univ.  xlviii.  217,  218.  184  Ibid.  xlix.  223.

185  "  Nous  avons  mis  depuis  peu  leur  langue  au  rang  des  langues  savantes  ;  les  femmes
meme  1'apprennent,  et  ont  renonce  a  1'Italien  pour  etudier  celle  de  ce  peuple  philosophe.
II  n'est  point  dans  la  province  d'Armande  et  de  Belise  qui  ne  veuille  savoir  1'Anglois."
Le  Blanc,  Lettres,  vol.  ii.  p.  465.     Compare  Grimm,  Corresp.  vol.  xiv.  p.  484  ;  and  Nichols's
Lit.  Anec.  vol.  iii.  pp.  460,  461.

186  Williams'" s  Letters  from  France,  vol.  iii.  p.  68,  2nd  edit.  1796  ;  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  vii.
p.  192.

187  Adolphus's  Biog.  Mem.  1799,  v°l-  i-  P-  352-

188  Lady  Morgan's  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  304  ;    Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  i.  pp.  41,  49,  7o  ;
vol.  ii.  pp.  26,  74,  83,  89.

89  Querard,  France  Litteraire,  vol.  iv.  p.  540.

[*  It  is  hardly  reasonable  to  assert  that  such  men  as  Malebranche,  Fenelon,  Huet,
Bossuet,  Fontenelle,  Du  Bos,  and  Simon  did  not  dare  to  think  for  themselves.  In
England  in  the  same  period  the  leading  names  were  Hobbes  and  Locke  ;  and  of  these
the  latter  is  often  accused  of  intellectual  timidity.  The  innovating  courses  of  Blount
and  Toland  provoked  abundant  resentment,  as  did  the  new  departures  of  the  later  free-
thinkers. "  To  discuss  with  freedom,"  in  the  sense  of  being  free  to  publish  anything,
was  only  relatively  easier  in  England  than  in  France. — ED.]


EARLY  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Camille  Desmoulins  had  cultivated  his  mind  from  the  same  source.190  Marat
travelled  in  Scotland  as  well  as  in  England,  and  was  so  profoundly  versed  in  our
language  that  he  wrote  two  works  in  it  ;  one  of  which,  called  The  Chains  of
Slavery,  was  afterwards  translated  into  French.191  Mirabeau  is  declared  by  a
high  authority  to  have  owed  part  of  his  power  to  a  careful  study  of  the  English
constitution  ;192  he  translated  not  only  Watson's  History  of  Philip  II.,  but  also
some  parts  of  Milton  ;193  and  it  is  said  that  when  he  was  in  the  National  Assembly,
he  delivered  as  his  own  passages  from  the  speeches  of  Burke.194  Mounier  was
well  acquainted  with  our  language,  and  with  our  political  institutions  both  in
theory  and  in  practice  ;195  and  in  a  work  which  exercised  considerable  influence
he  proposed  for  his  own  country  the  establishment  of  two  chambers,  to  form
that  balance  of  power  of  which  England  supplied  the  example.196  The  same
idea,  derived  from  the  same  source,  was  advocated  by  Le  Brun,  who  was  a  friend
of  Mounier's,  and  who,  like  him,  had  paid  attention  to  the  literature  and  govern-
ment of  the  English  people.197  Brissot  knew  English  ;  he  had  studied  in  London
the  working  of  the  English  institutions,  and  he  himself  mentions  that  in  his
treatise  on  criminal  law  he  was  mainly  guided  by  the  course  of  English  legisla-
tion.198 Condorcet  also  proposed  as  a  model  our  system  of  criminal  jurispru-
dence,199 which,  bad  as  it  was,  certainly  surpassed  that  possessed  by  France.
Madame  Roland,  whose  position  as  well  as  ability  made  her  one  of  the  leaders
of  the  democratic  party,  was  an  ardent  student  of  the  language  and  literature  of  the
English  people.200  She  too,  moved  by  the  universal  curiosity,  came  to  our  country  ;
and,  as  if  to  show  that  persons  of  every  shade  and  of  every  rank  were  actuated
by  the  same  spirit,  the  Duke  of  Orleans  likewise  visited  England  ;  nor  did  his
visit  fail  to  produce  its  natural  results.  "  It  was,"  says  a  celebrated  writer,
"  in  the  society  of  London  that  he  acquired  a  taste  for  liberty  ;  and  it  was  on  his
return  from  there  that  he  brought  into  France  a  love  of  popular  agitation,  a
contempt  for  his  own  rank,  and  a  familiarity  with  those  beneath  him."201
This  language,  strong  as  it  is,  will  not  appear  exaggerated  to  any  one  who  has

190  The  last  authors  he  read,  shortly  before  his  execution,  were  Young  and  Hervey.
Lamartine,  Hist,  des  Girondins,  vol.  viii.  p.  45.     In  1769  Madame  Riccoboni  writes  from
Paris  that  Young's  Night  Thoughts  had  become  very  popular  there  ;  and  she  justly  adds,
"  c'est  une  preuve  sans  replique  du  changement  de  1' esprit  francais."     Garrick  Cor-
respondence, vol.  ii.  p.  566,  4to,  1832.

191  Lamartine,  Hist,  des  Girondins,  vol.  iv.  p.  119  ;    Mem.  de  Brissot,  vol.  i.  pp.  336.
337,  vol.  ii.  p.  3.

192  "  Une  des  superiorites  secondaires,  une  des  superiorites  d'etude  qui  appartenaient
a  Mirabeau,  c'etait  la  profonde  connaissance,  la  vive  intelligence  de  la  constitution
anglaise,  de  ses  ressorts  publics  et  de  ses  ressorts  caches."      Villemain,  Lit.  au  XVIII*
Siecle,  vol.  iv.  p.  153.

193  Particularly  the  democratic  passages,  "  un  corps  de  doctrine  de  tous  ses  ecrits
republicains."     Dumont,  Souvenirs  sur  Mirabeau,  p.  119.    As  to  his  translation  of  Watson,
see  Alison's  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  452.     He  also  intended  to  translate  Sinclair's  History  of  the

svenue.     Correspond,  of  Sir  J.  Sinclair,  vol.  ii.  p.  119.
)4  Prior's  Life  of  Burke,  p.  546,  3rd  edit.  1839.

195  "  II  etudiait  leur  langue,  la  theorie  et  plus  encore  la  pratique  de  leur  institutions."
tiog.  Univ.  vol.  xxx.  p.  310.

196  Continuation  de  Sismondi,   Hist,   des   Francais,    vol.   xxx.   p.   434.      Montlosier
(Monarchic  Francaise,  vol.  ii.  p.  340)  says  that  this  idea  was  borrowed  from  England  ;
jut  he  does  not  mention  who  suggested  it.

197  Du  Mesnil,  Mem.  sur  Le  Brun,  pp.  10,  14,  29,  82,  180,  182.

198  Mem.  de  Brissot,  vol.  i.  pp.  63,  64,  vol.  ii.  pp.  25,  40,  188,  206,  260,  313.

199  Dupont  de  Nemours  (Mem.  sur  Turgot,  p.  117)  says  of  criminal  jurisprudence,
M.  de  Condorcet  proposait  en  modele  celle  des  Anglais."

200  Mem.  de  Roland,  vol.  i.  pp.  27,  55,  89,  136,  vol.  ii.  pp.  99,  135,  253.

201  "  Le  due  d'Orleans  puisa  ainsi  le  gout  de  la  liberte  dans  la  vie  de  Londres.     II  en
ipporta  en  France  les  habitudes  d'insolence  centre  la  cour,  1'appetit  des  agitations

mlaires,  le  mepris  pour  son  propre  rang,  la  familiarite  avec  la  foule,"  &c.     Lamartine,
Hst.  des  Girondins,  vol.  ii.  p.  102.

27


4i8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

carefully  studied  ^the  history  of  the  eighteenth  century.  It  is  no  doubt  certain
that  the  French  Revolution  was  essentially  a  reaction  against  that  protective
and  interfering  spirit  which  reached  its  zenith  under  Louis  XIV.,  but  which,
centuries  bsfore  his  reign,  had  exercised  a  most  injurious  influence  over  the
national  prosperity.  While,  however,  this  must  be  fully  conceded,  it  is  equally
certain  that  the  impetus  to  which  the  reaction  owed  its  strength  proceeded
from  England  ;  and  that  it  was  English  literature  which  taught  the  lessons  of
political  liberty,  first  to  France,  and  through  France  to  the  rest  of  Europe.202
On  this  account,  and  not  at  all  from  mere  literary  curiosity,  I  have  traced  with
some  minuteness  that  union  between  the  French  and  English  minds  which,
though  often  noticed,  has  never  been  examined  with  the  care  its  importance
deserves.  The  circumstances  which  reinforced  this  vast  movement  will  be  related
towards  the  end  of  the  volume  ;  at  present  I  will  confine  myself  to  its  first
great  consequence,  namely,  the  establishment  of  a  complete  schism  between  the
literary  men  of  France  and  the  classes  who  exclusively  governed  the  country.

Those  eminent]Frenchmen  who  now  turned  their  attention  to  England  found
in  its  literature,  m  the  structure  of  its  society,  and  in  its  government,  many
peculiarities  of  which  their  own  country  furnished  no  example.  They  heard
political  and  religious  questions  of  the  greatest  moment  debated  with  a  boldness
unknown  in  any  other  part  of  Europe.  They  heard  Dissenters  and  Churchmen,
Whigs  and  Tories,  handling  the  most  dangerous  topics,  and  treating  them  with
unlimited  freedom.  They  heard  public  disputes  respecting  matters  which  no
one  in  France  dared  to  discuss  ;  mysteries  of  state  and  mysteries  of  creed  unfolded
and  rudely  exposed  to  the  popular  gaze.  And  what  to  Frenchmen  of  that  age
must  have  been  equally  amazing,  they  not  only  found  a  public  press  possessing
some  degree  of  freedom,  but  they  found  that  within  the  very  walls  of  parliament
the  administration  of  the  crown  was  assailed  with  complete  impunity,  the  charac-
ter of  its  chosen  servants  constantly  aspersed,  and,  strange  to  say,  even  the
management  of  its  revenue  effectually  controlled.203

Tne  successors  of  the  age  of  Louis  XIV.,  seeing  these  things,  and  seeing  more-
over that  the  civilization  of  the  country  increased  as  the  authority  of  the  upper
classes  and  of  the  crown  diminished,  were  unable  to  restrain  then"  wonder  at  so
novel  and  exciting  a  spectacle.  "  The  English  nation,"  says  Voltaire,  "  is  the
only  one  on  the  earth  which,  by  resisting  its  kings,  has  succeeded  in  lessening
their  power."204  "  How  I  love  the  boldness  of  the  English  !  how  I  love  men  who
say  what  they  think  !  "205  The  English,  says  Le  Blanc,  are  willing  to  have  a
king,  provided  they  are  not  obliged  to  obey  him.206  The  immediate  object  of

202  M.  Lerminier  (Philos.  du  Droit,  vol.  i.  p.  19)  says  of  England,  "  cette  ile  celebre
donne  a  1'Europe  1'enseignement  de  la  liberte  politique  ;  elle  en  fut  1'ecole  au  dix-huitieme
siecle  pour  tout  ce  que  1'Europe  cut  de  penseurs."     See  also  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis
XVI,  vol.  iii.  p.  161  ;    Mem.  de  Marmontel,  vol.  iv.  pp.  38,  39  ;    Stdudlin,  Gesch.  der
theolog.  Wissenschaften,  vol.  ii.  p.  291.

203  Hume,  who  was  acquainted  with  several  eminent  Frenchmen  who  visited  England,
says  (Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  8),  "  nothing  is  more  apt  to  surprise  a  foreigner
than  the  extreme  liberty  which  we  enjoy  in  this  country,  of  communicating  whatever
we  please  to  the  public,  and  of  openly  censuring  every  measure  entered  into  by  the  king
or  his  ministers.  "

204  "La  nation  anglaise  est  la  seule  de  la  terre  qui  soit  parvenue  a  r6gler  le  pouvoir
des  rois  en  leur  resistant."     Lettre  VIII  sur  les  Anglais,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxvi.
P-  37-

205  "  Que  j'aime  la  hardiesse  anglaise  !  que  j'aime  les  gens  qui  disent  ce  qu'ils  pensent!  "
Letter  from  Voltaire  in  Correspond,  de  Dudeffand,  vol.  ii.  p.  263.  For  other  instances  of
his  admiration  of  England,  see  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xl.  pp.  105-109  ;  vol.  Ii.  pp.  137,
390  ;    vol.  liv.  pp.  298,  392  ;    vol.  Ivi.  pp.  162,  163,  195,  196,  270  ;    vol.  Ivii.  p.  500  ;
vol.  Iviii.  pp.  128,  267  ;   vol.  lix.  pp.  265,  361  ;   vol.  Ix.  p.  501  ;   vol.  Ixi.  pp.  43,  73»  129,
140,  474,  475  ;  vol.  Ixii.  pp.  343,  379,  392  ;  vol.  Ixiii.  pp.  128,  146,  190,  196,  226,  237,
415  ;   vol.  Ixiv.  pp.  36,  96,  269  ;   vol.  Ixvi.  pp.  93,  159  ;   vol.  Ixvii.  pp.  353,  484.

206  "  Us  veulent  un  roi,  aux  conditions,  pour  ainsi  dire,  de  ne  lui  point  obeir."     Le
Blanc,  Lettres  d'un  Francois,  vol.  i.  p.  210.


EARLY  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION    419

their  government,  says  Montesquieu,  is  political  liberty  ;207  they  possess  more
freedom  than  any  republic  ;208  and  their  system  is  in  fact  a  republic  disguised  as
a  monarchy.209  Grosley,  struck  with  amazement,  exclaims,  "  Property  is  in
England  a  thing  sacred,  which  the  laws  protect  from  all  encroachment,  not  only
from  engineers,  inspectors,  and  other  people  of  that  stamp,  but  even  from  the
king  himself."210  Mably,  in  the  most  celebrated  of  all  his  works,  says,  "  The
Hanoverians  are  only  able  to  reign  in  England  because  the  people  are  free,  and
believe  they  have  a  right  to  dispose  of  the  crown.  But  if  the  kings  were  to  claim
the  same  power  as  the  Stuarts,  if  they  were  to  believe  that  the  crown  belonged
to  them  by  divine  right,  they  would  be  condemning  themselves,  and  confessing
that  they  were  occupying  a  place  which  is  not  their  own."211  In  England,  says
Helvetius,  the  people  are  respected  ;  every  citizen  can  take  some  part  in  the
management  of  affairs  ;  and  authors  are  allowed  to  enlighten  the  public  respect-
ing its  own  interests.212  And  Brissot,  who  had  made  these  matters  his  especial
study,  cries  out,  "  Admirable  constitution  !  which  can  only  be  disparaged  either
by  men  who  know  it  not,  or  else  by  those  whose  tongues  are  bridled  by  slavery."213

Such  were  the  opinions  of  some  of  the  most  celebrated  Frenchmen  of  that
time  ;  and  it  would  be  easy  to  fill  a  volume  with  similar  extracts.  But  what  I
now  rather  wish  to  do  is  to  point  out  the  first  great  consequence  of  this  new
and  sudden  admiration  *  for  a  country  which,  in  the  preceding  age,  had  been
held  in  profound  contempt.  The  events  which  followed  are  indeed  of  an  import-
ance impossible  to  exaggerate  ;  since  they  brought  about  that  rupture  between
the  intellectual  and  governing  classes  of  which  the  Revolution  itself  was  but  a
temporary  episode.

The  great  Frenchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century  being  stimulated  by  the
example  of  England  into  a  love  of  progress,  naturally  came  into  collision  with
the  governing  classes,  among  whom  the  old  stationary  spirit  still  prevailed.
This  opposition  was  a  wholesome  reaction  against  that  disgraceful  servility  for
which,  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  literary  men  had  been  remarkable  ;  and  if
the  contest  which  ensued  had  been  conducted  with  anything  approaching  to
moderation,  the  ultimate  result  would  have  been  highly  beneficial  ;  since  it
would  have  secured  that  divergence  between  the  speculative  and  practical
classes  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,  is  essential  to  maintain  the  balance  of
civilization,  and  to  prevent  either  side  from  acquiring  a  dangerous  predominance.
But  unfortunately  the  nobles  and  clergy  had  been  so  long  accustomed  to  power
that  they  could  not  brook  the  slightest  contradiction  from  those  great  writers,
whom  they  ignorantly  despised  as  their  inferiors.  Hence  it  was  that  when  the
most  illustrious  Frenchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century  attempted  to  infuse  into
the  literature  of  their  country  a  spirit  of  inquiry  similar  to  that  which  existed  in

207  "  II  y  a  aussi  une  nation  dans  le  monde  qui  a  pour  objet  direct  de  sa  constitution
la  liberte  politique."     Esprit  des  Lois,  livre  xi.  chap.  v.  in  (Euvres  de  Montesquieu,  p.  264.
Conversely  De  Stae'l  (Consid.  sur  la  Rev.  vol.  iii.  p.  261 ),  "  la  liberte  politique  est  le  moyen
supreme."

208  "  L' Angle terre  est  a  present  le  plus  libre  pays  qui  soit  au  monde,  je  n'en  excepte
aucune  republique."     Notes  sur  I'Angleterre,  in  (Euvres  de  Montesquieu,  p.  632.

209  "  Une  nation  ou  la  republique  se  cache  sous  la  forme  de  la  monarchic."     Esprit
des  Lois,  livre  v.  chap.  xix.  in  (Euvres  de  Montesquieu,  p.  225  ;   also  quoted  in  Bancroft's
American  Revolution,  vol.  ii.  p.  36.

210  Grosley' s  Tour  to  London,  vol.  i.  pp.  16,  17.

211  Mably,  Observ.  sur  VHist.  de  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  185.

212  Helvetius  de  V Esprit,  vol.  i.  pp.  102,  199  :  "  un  pays  ou  le  peuple  est  respect6  comme
Angleterre  ;  .  .  .  un  pays  ou  chaque  citoyen  a  part  au  maniement  des  affaires

inerales,  ou  tout  homme  d' esprit  peut  eclairer  le  public  sur  ses  veritables  interets."

213  Mem.  de  Brissot,  vol.  ii.  p.  25.

[*  Buckle  has  unfortunately  not  traced  the  process  chronologically  ;  but  it  is  broadly
jar  that  what  he  calls  a  "  new  and  sudden  admiration  "  was  gradually  developed
irough  a  period  of  sixty  years.  Voltaire  was  in  England  from  1726  to  1729  :  Mon-
squieu  from  1729  to  1731.  It  was  many  years  before  the  influence  was  general. — ED.]


422


THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION


body  of  literary  men,  was  at  first  discouraged  by  the  government,  and  afterwards
entirely  prohibited.220  On  other  occasions,  the  same  tendency  was  shown  in
matters  so  trifling  that  nothing  but  the  gravity  of  their  ultimate  results  prevents
them  from  being  ridiculous.  In  1770,  Imbert  translated  Clarke's  Letters  on
Spain  ;  one  of  the  best  works  then  existing  on  that  country.  This  book,  how-
ever, was  suppressed  as  soon  as  it  appeared  ;  and  the  only  reason  assigned  for
such  a  stretch  of  power  is  that  it  contained  some  remarks  respecting  the  passion
of  Charles  III.  for  hunting,  which  were  considered  disrespectful  to  the  French
crown,  because  Louis  XV.  was  himself  a  great  hunter.221  Several  years  before
this,  La  Bletterie,  who  was  favourably  known  in  France  by  his  works,  was  elected
a  member  of  the  French  Academy.  But  he,  it  seems,  was  a  Jansenist,  and  had
moreover  ventured  to  assert  that  the  Emperor  Julian,  notwithstanding  his
apostasy,  was  not  entirely  devoid  of  good  qualities.  Such  offences  could  not  be
overlooked  in  so  pure  an  age  ;  and  the  king  obliged  the  academy  to  exclude  La
Bletterie  from  their  society.222  That  the  punishment  extended  no  further  was
an  instance  of  remarkable  leniency  ;  for  Freret,  an  eminent  critic  and  scholar,223
was  confined  in  the  Bastille  because  he  stated,  in  one  of  his  memoirs,  that  the
earliest  Frankish  chiefs  had  received  their  titles  from  the  Romans.224  The  same
penalty  was  inflicted  four  different  times  upon  Lenglet  du  Fresnoy.225  In  the
case  of  this  amiable  and  accomplished  man,  there  seems  to  have  been  hardly  the
shadow  of  a  pretext  for  the  cruelty  with  which  he  was  treated  ;  though  on  one
occasion  the  alleged  offence  was  that  he  had  published  a  supplement  to  the
History  of  De  Thou.226

Indeed  we  have  only  to  open  the  biographies  and  correspondence  of  that  time
to  find  instances  crowding  upon  us  from  all  quarters.  Rousseau  was  threatened
with  imprisonment,  was  driven  from  France,  and  his  works  were  publicly
burned.227  The  celebrated  treatise  of  Helvetius  on  the  Mind  was  suppressed

220  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  i.  pp.  90-95,  vol.  ii.  p.  309  ;   Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  316  ;
Brougham's  Men  of  Letters,  vol.  ii.  p.  439.

221  Boucher  de  la  Richarderie,  Bibliotheque  des  Voyages,  vol.  iii.  pp.  390—393,  Paris,  1808  :
"  La  distribution  en  France  de  la  traduction  de  ce  voyage  fut  arretce  pendant  quelque
temps  par  des  ordres  superieurs  du  gouvernement.  .  .  .  II  y  a  tout  lieu  de  croire  que  les
ministres  de  France  crurent,  ou  feignirent  de  croire,  que  le  passage  en  question  pouvoit
donner  lieu  a  des  applications  sur  le  gout  effrene  de  Louis  XV  pour  la  chasse,  et  inspirerent
aisement  cette  prevention  a  un  prince  tres-sensible,  comme  on  sait,  aux  censures  les  plus
indirectes  de  sa  passion  pour  ce  genre  d' amusement."     See  also  the  account  of  Imbert,
the  translator,  in  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxi.  p.  200.

222  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  vi.  pp.  161,  162  ;   the  crime  being,  "  qu'un  janseniste  avait
ose  imprimer  que  Julien,  apostat  execrable  aux  yeux  d'un  bon  chretien,  n'etait  pourtant
pas  un  homme  sans  quelques  bonnes  qualites  a  en  juger  mondainement."

223  M.  Bunsen  (Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  14)  refers  to  Freret's  "  acute  treatise  on  the  Babylonian
year  ;  "  and  Turgot,  in  his  Etymologic,  says  (CEuvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  iii.  p.  83),  "  1'illustre
Freret,  un  des  savans  qui  ont  su  le  mieux  appliquer  la  philosophic  a  1'erudition."

224  This  was  at  the  very  outset  of  his  career  :    "  En  1715,  1' homme  qui  devait  illustrer
1'erudition  frangaise  au  xviii6  siecle,  Freret,   etait  mis  a  la  Bastille  pour  avoir  avarice,
dans  un  memoire  sur  1'origine  des  Fran?ais,  que  les  Francs  ne  formaient  pas  une  nation  a
part,  et  que  leurs  premiers  chefs  avaient  recu  de  1'empire  remain  le  titre  de  patrices"
Villemain,  Lit.  au  XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  30  :  see  also  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  ii.  p.  510.

225  He  was  imprisoned  in  the  Bastille,  for  the  first  time,  in  1725  ;  then  in  1743,  in  1750,
and  finally  in  1751.     Biographic  Universelle,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  85.

226  in  1743,  Voltaire  writes  :   "  On  vient  de  mettre  a  la  Bastille  1'abbe  Lenglet,  pour
avoir  public  des  memoires  deja  tres  connus,  qui  servent  de  supplement  a  Fhistoire  de
notre  celebre  De  Thou.     L'infatigable  et  malheureux  Lenglet  rendait  un  signale  service
aux  bons  citoyens,  et  aux  amateurs  des  recherches  historiques.     II  meritait  des  recom-
penses ;  on  1'emprisonne  cruellement  a  1'age  de  soixante-huit  ans."     CEuvres  de  Voltaire,
vol.  i.  pp.  400,  401,  vol.  Iviii.  pp.  207,  208.*  If,

227  Mussel  Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseau,  vol.  i.  pp.  68,  99,  296,  377,  vol.  ii.  pp.  in,  385.
390  ;    Mercier  sur  Rousseau,  vol.  i.  p.  14,  vol.  ii.  pp.  179,  314.


EARLY  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION    423

by  an  order  from  the  royal  council  ;  it  was  burned  by  the  common  hangman,  and
the  author  was  compelled  to  write  two  letters  retracting  his  opinions.228     Some  of
the  geological   views  of  Buffon   having    offended   the  clergy,   that   illustrious
naturalist  was  obliged  to  publish  a  formal  recantation  of  doctrines  which  are  now
known  to  be  perfectly  accurate.229     The  learned  Observations  on  the  History  of
France,  by  Mably,  were  suppressed  as  soon  as  they  appeared  ;  23<>  for  what  reason
it  would  be  hard  to  say,  since  M.  Guizot,  certainly  no  friend  either  to  anarchy
or  to  irreligion,  has  thought  it  worth  while  to  republish  them,  and  thus  stamp
them  with  the  authority  of  his  own  great  name.     The  History  of  the  Indies,  by
Raynal,  was  condemned  to  the  flames,  and  the  author  ordered  to  be  arrested.231
Lanjuinais,  in  his  well-known  work  on  Joseph  II.,  advocated  not  only  religious
toleration,  but  even  the  abolition  of  slavery  ;    his  book,  therefore,  was  declared
to  be  "  seditious  ;  "  it  was  pronounced  "  destructive  of  all  subordination,"  and
was  sentenced  to  be  burned.232     The  Analysis  of  Bayle,  by  Marsy,  was  suppressed,
and  the  author  was  imprisoned.233     The  History  of  the  Jesuits,  by  Linguet,  was
delivered  to  the  flames  ;    eight  years  later,  his  Journal   was  suppressed  ;    and
three  years  after  that,  as  he  still  persisted  in  writing,  his  Political  Annals  were
suppressed,  and  he  himself  was  thrown  into  the  Bastille.234     Delisle  de  Sales  was
sentenced  to  perpetual  exile,  and  confiscation  of  all  his  property,  on  account  of
his  work  on  the  Philosophy  of  Nature.235     The  treatise  by  Mey,  on  French  law,
was  suppressed  ;  236  that  by  Boncerf,  on  feudal  law,  was  burned.237     The  Memoirs
of  Beaumarchais  were  likewise  burned  ;  238  the  Eloge  on  Fenelon  by  La  Harpe
was  merely  suppressed.239     Duvernet  having  written  a  History  of  the  Sorbonne,
which  was  still  unpublished,  was  seized  and  thrown  into  the  Bastille,  while  the
manuscript  was  yet  in  his  own  possession.240     The  celebrated  work  of  De  Lolme
on  the  English  constitution  was  suppressed  by  edict  directly  it  appeared.241     The
fate  of  being  suppressed,  or  prohibited,  also  awaited  the  Letters  of  Gervaise,  in
1724  ;  242  the  Dissertations  of  Courayer,  in  1727  ;  243  the  Letters  of  Montgon,  in
1732  ;  244  the  History  of  Tamerlane,  by  Mar  gat,  also  in  1732  ;  245  the  Essay  on
Taste,  by  Cartaud,  in  1736  ;  246  the  Life  of  Domat,  by  Prevost  de  la  Jannes,  in
1742  ;  247  the  History  of  Louis  XL,  by  Duclos,  in  1745  :  248  the  Letters  of  Bargeton,

228  Grimm,  Corresp.  vol.  ii.  p.  349  ;  Walpole' s  Letters,  1840,  vol.  iii.  p.  418.

229  LyelVs  Principles  of  Geology,  pp.  39,  40  ;   Mem.  of  Mallet  du  Pan,  vol.  i.  p.  125.

230  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  ii.  p.  214  ;  Williams's  Letters  from  France,  vol.  ii.
p.  86,  3rd  edit.  1796.

231  Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  i.  p.  253  ;    Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  ii.  p.  34  note  ;    Lettres  de
Dudeffand  d  Walpole,  vol.  ii.  p.  365.     On  Raynal's  flight,  compare  a  letter  from  Mar-
seilles, written  in  1786,  and  printed  in  Mem.  and  Correspond,  of  Sir  J.  E.  Smith,  vol.  i.
p.  194.

232  See  the  proceedings  of  the  avocat-general,  in  Peignot,  Livres  condamnes,  vol.  i.
pp.  230,  231  ;   and  in  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  iii.  pp.  93-97.

233  Querard,  France  Lit.  vol.  v.  p.  565.

234  Peignot,  Livres  condamnes,  vol.  i.  pp.  241,  242.

235  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  561  ;   CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ixix.  pp.  374»  375  ;   Lettres
inedites  de  Voltaire,  vol.  ii.  p.  528  ;   Duvernet,  Vie  de  Voltaire,  pp.   202,  203.     According
to  some  of  these  authorities,  parliament  afterwards  revoked  this  sentence  ;  but  there  is
no  doubt  that  the  sentence  was  passed,  and  De  Sales  imprisoned,  if  not  banished.

236  Peignot,  Livres  condamnes,  vol.  i.  pp.  314,  315.

237  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ixix.  p.  204  ;  Lettres  de  Dudeffand  d  Walpole,  vol.  iii.  p.  260.

238  "  Quatre  memoires  .  .  .  condamnes  a  etre  laceres  et  brules  par  la  main  du  bour-
reau."     Peignot,  vol.  i.  p.  24.

239  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiii.  p.  187.  24°  Duvernet,  Hist,  de  la  Sorbonne,  vol.  i.  p.  vi.

241  "  Supprimee  par  arret  du  conseil  "  in  1771,  which  was  the  year  of  its  publication.
Compare  Cassagnac's  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  33  ;  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  634.

242  Querard,  France  Lit.  vol.  iii.  p.  337-  243  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  x.  p.  97-
244  Peignot,  vol.  i.  p.  328.  245  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  289.

246  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  vii.  p   227.  247  Lettres  d'Aguesseau,  vol.  ii.  pp.  320,  321.

248  Cassagnac,'jCauses  de  la  Rev.  vol.  i.  p.  32.


422  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

body  of  literary  men,  was  at  first  discouraged  by  the  government,  and  afterwards
entirely  prohibited.220  On  other  occasions,  the  same  tendency  was  shown  in
matters  so  trifling  that  nothing  but  the  gravity  of  their  ultimate  results  prevents
them  from  being  ridiculous.  In  1770,  Imbert  translated  Clarke's  Letters  on
Spain  ;  one  of  the  best  works  then  existing  on  that  country.  This  book,  how-
ever, was  suppressed  as  soon  as  it  appeared  ;  and  the  only  reason  assigned  for
such  a  stretch  of  power  is  that  it  contained  some  remarks  respecting  the  passion
of  Charles  III.  for  hunting,  which  were  considered  disrespectful  to  the  French
crown,  because  Louis  XV.  was  himself  a  great  hunter.221  Several  years  before
this,  La  Bletterie,  who  was  favourably  known  in  France  by  his  works,  was  elected
a  member  of  the  French  Academy.  But  he,  it  seems,  was  a  Jansenist,  and  had
moreover  ventured  to  assert  that  the  Emperor  Julian,  notwithstanding  his
apostasy,  was  not  entirely  devoid  of  good  qualities.  Such  offences  could  not  be
overlooked  in  so  pure  an  age  ;  and  the  king  obliged  the  academy  to  exclude  La
Bletterie  from  their  society.222  That  the  punishment  extended  no  further  was
an  instance  of  remarkable  leniency  ;  for  Freret ,  an  eminent  critic  and  scholar,223
was  confined  in  the  Bastille  because  he  stated,  in  one  of  his  memoirs,  that  the
earliest  Frankish  chiefs  had  received  their  titles  from  the  Romans.224  The  same
penalty  was  inflicted  four  different  times  upon  Lenglet  du  Fresnoy.225  In  the
case  of  this  amiable  and  accomplished  man,  there  seems  to  have  been  hardly  the
shadow  of  a  pretext  for  the  cruelty  with  which  he  was  treated  ;  though  on  one
occasion  the  alleged  offence  was  that  he  had  published  a  supplement  to  the
History  of  De  Thou.226

Indeed  we  have  only  to  open  the  biographies  and  correspondence  of  that  time
to  find  instances  crowding  upon  us  from  all  quarters.  Rousseau  was  threatened
with  imprisonment,  was  driven  from  France,  and  his  works  were  publicly
burned.227  The  celebrated  treatise  of  Helvetius  on  the  Mind  was  suppressed

220  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  i.  pp.  90-95,  vol.  ii.  p.  399  ;   Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  316  ;
Brougham's  Men  of  Letters,  vol.  ii.  p.  439.

221  Boucher  de  la  Richarderie,  Bibliotheque  des  Voyages,  vol.  iii.  pp.  390-393,  Paris,  1808  :
"  La  distribution  en  France  de  la  traduction  de  ce  voyage  fut  arretce  pendant  quelque
temps  par  des  ordres  superieurs  du  gouvernement.  .  .  .  II  y  a  tout  lieu  de  croire  que  les
ministres  de  France  crurent,  ou  feignirent  de  croire,  que  le  passage  en  question  pouvoit
donner  lieu  a  des  applications  sur  le  gout  effrene  de  Louis  XV  pour  la  chasse,  et  inspirerent
aisement  cette  prevention  a  un  prince  tres-sensible,  comme  on  sait,  aux  censures  les  plus
indirectes  de  sa  passion  pour  ce  genre  d'amusement."     See  also  the  account  of  Imbert,
the  translator,  in  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxi.  p.  200.

222  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  vi.  pp.  161,  162  ;   the  crime  being,  "  qu'un  janseniste  avait
ose  imprimer  que  Julien,  apostat  execrable  aux  yeux  d'un  bon  chretien,  n'etait  pourtant
pas  un  homme  sans  quelques  bonnes  qualites  a  en  juger  mondainement."

223  M.  Bunsen  (Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  14)  refers  to  Freret's  "  acute  treatise  on  the  Babylonian
year  ;  "  and  Turgot,  in  his  Etymologic,  says  (OEuvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  iii.  p.  83),  "  1'illustre
Freret,  un  des  savans  qui  ont  su  le  mieux  appliquer  la  philosophic  a  1' erudition."

224  This  was  at  the  very  outset  of  his  career  :   "  En  1715,  1' homme  qui  devait  illustrer
1'erudition  francaise  au  xviii6  siecle,  Freret,   etait  mis  a  la  Bastille  pour  avoir  avance,
dans  un  memoire  sur  l'origine  des  Francais,  que  les  Francs  ne  formaient  pas  une  nation  a
part,  et  que  leurs  premiers  chefs  avaient  recu  de  1' empire  remain  le  titre  de  patrices"
Villemain,  Lit.  au  XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  30  :  see  also  Nichols's  Lit.  Anec.  vol.  ii.  p.  510.

225  He  was  imprisoned  in  the  Bastille,  for  the  first  time,  in  1725  ;  then  in  i743>  in  i75°»
and  finally  in  1751.     Biographic  Universelle,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  85.

226  in  J743,  Voltaire  writes  :   "  On  vient  de  mettre  a  la  Bastille  1'abbe  Lenglet,  pour
avoir  public  des  memoires  deja  tres  connus,  qui  servent  de  supplement  a  1'histoire  de
notre  celebre  De  Thou.     L'infatigable  et  malheureux  Lenglet  rendait  un  signale  service
aux  bons  citoyens,  et  aux  amateurs  des  recherches  historiques.     II  meritait  des  recom-
penses ;  on  1'emprisonne  cruellement  a  1'age  de  soixante-huit  ans."     (Euvres  de  Voltaire,
vol.  i.  pp.  400,  401,  vol.  Iviii.  pp.  207,  208.*  if.

22?  Mussel  Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseau,  vol.  i.  pp.  68,  99,  296,  377,  vol.  ii.  pp.  in,  385.
390  ;    Mercier  sur  Rousseau,  vol.  i.  p.  14,  vol.  ii.  pp.  179,  314.


EARLY    CAUSES    OF    THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION        423

by  an  order  from  the  royal  council  ;  it  was  burned  by  the  common  hangman,  arid

the  author  was  compelled  to  write  two  letters  retracting  his  opinions.228     Some  of

the  geological   views  of  Buffon  having    offended   the  clergy,   that   illustrious

naturalist  was  obliged  to  publish  a  formal  recantation  of  doctrines  which  are  now

known  to  be  perfectly  accurate.229     The  learned  Observations  on  the  History  of

France,  by  Mably,  were  suppressed  as  soon  as  they  appeared  ;  23°  for  what  reason

it  would  be  hard  to  say,  since  M.  Guizot,  certainly  no  friend  either  to  anarchy

or  to  irreligion,  has  thought  it  worth  while  to  republish  them,  and  thus  stamp

them  with  the  authority  of  his  own  great  name.     The  History  of  the  Indies,  by

Raynal,  was  condemned  to  the  flames,  and  the  author  ordered  to  be  arrested.231

Lanjuinais,  in  his  well-known  work  on  Joseph  II.,  advocated  not  only  religious

toleration,  but  even  the  abolition  of  slavery  ;    his  book,  therefore,  was  declared

to  be  "  seditious  ;  "  it  was  pronounced  "  destructive  of  all  subordination,"  and

was  sentenced  to  be  burned.232     The  Analysis  of  Bayle,  by  Marsy,  was  suppressed,

and  the  author  was  imprisoned.233     The  History  of  the  Jesuits,  by  Linguet,  was

delivered  to  the  flames  ;    eight  years  later,  his  Journal  was  suppressed  ;    and

three  years  after  that,  as  he  still  persisted  in  writing,  his  Political  Annals  were

suppressed,  and  he  himself  was  thrown  into  the  Bastille.234     Delisle  de  Sales  was

sentenced  to  perpetual  exile,  and  confiscation  of  all  his  property,  on  account  of

his  work  on  the  Philosophy  of  Nature.235     The  treatise  by  Mey,  on  French  law,

was  suppressed  ;  236  that  by  Boncerf,  on  feudal  law,  was  burned.237     The  Memoirs

of  Beaumarchais  were  likewise  burned  ;  238  the  Eloge  on  Fenelon  by  La  Harpe

was  merely  suppressed.239     Duvernet  having  written  a  History  of  the  Sorbonne,

which  was  still  unpublished,  was  seized  and  thrown  into  the  Bastille,  while  the

manuscript  was  yet  in  his  own  possession.240     The  celebrated  work  of  De  Lolme

on  the  English  constitution  was  suppressed  by  edict  directly  it  appeared.241     The

fate  of  being  suppressed,  or  prohibited,  also  awaited  the  Letters  of  Gervaise,  in

1724  ;  242  the  Dissertations  of  Courayer,  in  1727  ;  243  the  Letters  of  Montgon,  in

I732  ;  244  the  History  of  Tamerlane,  by  Margat,  also  in  1732  ;  245  the  Essay  on

Taste,  by  Cartaud,  in  1736  ;  246  the  Life  of  Domat,  by  Prevost  de  la  Jannes,  in

1742  ;  247  the  History  of  Louis  XL,  by  Duclos,  in  1745  ;  248  the  Letters  of  Bargeton,

228  Grimm,  Corresp.  vol.  ii.  p.  349  ;  Walpole's  Letters,  1840,  vol.  iii.  p.  418.

229  LyelVs  Principles  of  Geology,  pp.  39,  40  ;  Mem.  of  Mallet  du  Pan,  vol.  i.  p.  125.

230  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  ii.  p.  214  ;  Williams' s  Letters  from  France,  vol.  ii.
p.  86,  3rd  edit.  1796.

231  Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  i.  p.  253  ;    Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  ii.  p.  34  note  ;    Lettres  de
Dudeffand  a  Walpole,  vol.  ii.  p.  365.     On  Raynal's  flight,  compare  a  letter  from  Mar-
seilles, written  in  1786,  and  printed  in  Mem.  and  Correspond,  of  Sir  J.  E.  Smith,  vol.  i.
p.  194.

232  See  the  proceedings  of  the  avocat -general,  in  Peignot,  Livres  condamnes,  vol.  i.
pp.  230,  231  ;   and  in  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  iii.  pp.  93~97-

233  Querard,  France  Lit.  vol.  v.  p.  565-

234  Peignot,  Livres  condamnes,  vol.  i.  pp.  241,  242.

235  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  561  ;   (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ixix.  pp.  374»  375  ;   Lettres
inedites  de  Voltaire,  vol.  ii.  p.  528  ;   Duvernet,  Vie  de  Voltaire,  pp.  202,  203.     According
to  some  of  these  authorities,  parliament  afterwards  revoked  this  sentence  ;  but  there  is
no  doubt  that  the  sentence  was  passed,  and  De  Sales  imprisoned,  if  not  banished.

236  Peignot,  Livres  condamnes,  vol.  i.  pp.  314,  315.

237  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ixix.  p.  204  ;  Lettres  de  Dudeffand  d  Walpole,  vol.  ill.  p.  260.

238  "  Quatre  memoires  .  .  .  condamnes  a  etre  laceres  et  brules  par  la  main  du  bour-
reau."     Peignot,  vol.  i.  p.  24.

239  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiii.  p.  187.  24°  Duvernet,  Hist,  de  la  Sorbonne,  vol.  i.  p.  vi.

241  "  Supprimee  par  arret  du  conseil  "  in  1771,  which  was  the  year  of  its  publication.
Compare  Cassagnac's  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  33  5  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  634.

242  Querard,  France  Lit.  vol.  iii.  p.  337-  243  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  x.  p.  97-
244  Peignot,  vol.  i.  p.  328.  245  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  289.

246  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  vii.  p   227.  247  Lettres  d'Aguesseau,  vol.  ii.  pp.  320,  3*1-

248  Cassagnac,'jCauses  de  la  Rev.  vol.  i.  p.  32.


424  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

in  1750  ;  249  the  Memoirs  on  Troyes,  by  Grosley,  in  the  same  year  ;  25°  the  History
of  Clement  XI.,  by  Reboulet,  in  1752  ;  251  the  School  of  Man,  by  Genard,  also  in
1752  ;  252  the  Therapeutics  of  Garlon,  in  1756  ;  253  the  celebrated  thesis  of  Louis,  on
Generation,  in  1754  ;  254  the  Treatise  on  Presidial  Jurisdiction,  by  Jousse,  in
I755  .  255  the  Ericie  of  Fontenelle,  in  1768  ;  ^  the  Thoughts  of  Jamin,  in  1769  ;  25?
the  History  of  Siam,  by  Turpin,  and  the  Eloge  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  by  Thomas,
both  in  1770  ;  258  the  works  on  finance  by  Darigrand  in  1764,  and  by  Le  Trosne
in  1779  ;  259  the  Essay  on  Military  Tactics,  by  Guibert,  in  1772  ;  the  Letters  of
Boucquet,  in  the  same  year  ;  26°  and  the  Memoirs  of  Terrai,  by  Coquereau,  in
j  776.261  Such  wanton  destruction  of  property  was,  however,  mercy  itself
compared  to  the  treatment  experienced  by  other  literary  men  in  France.  Des-
forges,  for  example,  having  written  against  the  arrest  of  the  Pretender  to  the
English  throne,  was,  solely  on  that  account,  buried  in  a  dungeon  eight  feet  square
and  confined  there  for  three  years.262  This  happened  in  1749  ;  and  in  1770,
Audra,  professor  at  the  college  of  Toulouse,  and  a  man  of  some  reputation,
published  the  first  volume  of  his  Abridgment  of  General  History.  Beyond  this
the  work  never  proceeded  ;  it  was  at  once  condemned  by  the  archbishop  of  the
diocese,  and  the  author  was  deprived  of  his  office.  Audra,  held  up  to  public
opprobrium,  the  whole  of  his  labours  rendered  useless,  and  the  prospects  of  his
life  suddenly  blighted,  was  unable  to  survive  the  shock.  He  was  struck  with
apoplexy,  and  within  twenty-four  hours  was  lying  a  corpse  in  his  own  house.263

It  will  probably  be  allowed  that  I  have  collected  sufficient  evidence  to  sub-
stantiate my  assertion  respecting  the  persecutions  directed  against  every  descrip-
tion of  literature  ;  but  the  carelessness  with  which  the  antecedents  of  the  French
Revolution  have  been  studied  has  given  rise  to  such  erroneous  opinions  on  this
subject  that  I  am  anxious  to  add  a  few  more  instances,  so  as  to  put  beyond  the
possibility  of  doubt  the  nature  of  the  provocations  habitually  received  by  the
most  eminent  Frenchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century.

Among  the  many  celebrated  authors  who,  though  inferior  to  Voltaire,  Montes-
quieu, Buffon,  and  Rousseau,  were  second  only  to  them,  three  of  the  most  remark-
able were  Diderot,  Marmontel,  and  Morellet.  The  first  two  are  known  to  every
reader  ;  while  Morellet,  though  comparatively  forgotten,  had  in  his  own  time
considerable  influence,  and  had  moreover  the  distinguished  merit  of  being  the
first  who  popularised  in  France  those  great  truths  which  had  been  recently
discovered,  in  political  economy  by  Adam  Smith,  and  in  jurisprudence  by
Beccaria.

A  certain  M.  Cury  wrote  a  satire  upon  the  Duke  d'Aumont,  which  he  showed
to  his  friend  Marmontel,  who,  struck  by  its  power,  repeated  it  to  a  small  circle  of
his  acquaintance.  The  duke,  hearing  of  this,  was  full  of  indignation,  and  insisted
upon  the  name  of  the  author  being  given  up.  This,  of  course,  was  impossible
without  a  gross  breach  of  confidence  ;  but  Marmontel,  to  do  everything  in  his
power,  wrote  to  the  duke,  stating,  what  was  really  the  fact,  that  the  lines  in
question  had  not  been  printed,  that  there  was  no  intention  of  making  them
public,  and  that  they  had  only  been  communicated  to  a  few  of  his  own  particular
friends.  It  might  have  been  supposed  that  this  would  have  satisfied  even  a

249  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  iii.  p.  375.

250  Querard,  vol.  iii.  p.  489.  251  ibid.  vol.  vii.  pp.  483,  484.
252  ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  302.  253  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  261.

254  On  the  importance  of  this  remarkable  thesis,  and  on  its  prohibition,  see  Saint
Hilaire,  Anomalies  de  V Organisation,  vol.  i.  p.  355.

255  Querard,  vol.  iv.  p.  255.  256  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xv.  p.  203.

257  Ibid.  vol.  xxi.  p.  sgr.  258  Ibid.  vol.  xlv.  p.  462,  vol.  xlvii.  p.  98.

59  Peignot,  vol.  i.  pp.  90,  91,  vol.  ii.  p.  164.

50  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  170,  vol.  ii.  p.  57.  ™  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  214.

262  "  ii  resta  trois  ans  dans  la  cage  ;  c'est  un  caveau  creuse  dans  le  roc,  de  huit  pieds
en  carre,  ou  le  prisonnier  ne  recoit  le  jour  que  par  les  crevasses  des  marches  de  1'e^lise."
Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xi.  p.  171.

2*«  Peignot,  Livres  condamnes,  vol.  i.  pp.  14,  15.


EARLY  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION    425

French  noble  ;  but  Marmontel,  still  doubting  the  result,  sought  an  audience
>f  the  minister,  in  the  hope  of  procuring  the  protection  of  the  crown.  All,
lowever,  was  in  vain.  It  will  hardly  be  believed  that  Marmontel,  who  was  then
it  the  height  of  his  reputation,  was  seized  in  the  middle  of  Paris,  and  because  he
jfused  to  betray  his  friend,  was  thrown  into  the  Bastille.  Nay,  so  implacable
fere  his  persecutors  that  after  his  liberation  from  prison,  they,  in  the  hope  of
educing  him  to  beggary,  deprived  him  of  the  right  of  publishing  the  Mercure,
ipon  which  nearly  the  whole  of  his  income  depended.264

To  the  Abbe  Morellet  a  somewhat  similar  circumstance  occurred.  A  miserable
;ribbler  named  Palissot  had  written  a  comedy  ridiculing  some  of  the  ablest
frenchmen  then  living.  To  this  Morellet  replied  by  a  pleasant  little  satire,  in
dch  he  made  a  very  harmless  allusion  to  the  Princess  de  Robeck,  one  of
Jalissot's  patrons.  She,  amazed  at  such  presumption,  complained  to  the  minister,
10  immediately  ordered  the  abbe  to  be  confined  in  the  Bastille,  where  he
imained  for  some  months,  although  he  had  not  only  been  guilty  of  no  scandal,
it  had  not  even  mentioned  the  name  of  the  princess.265

The  treatment  of  Diderot  was  still  more  severe.  This  remarkable  man  owed
influence  chiefly  to  his  immense  correspondence,  and  to  the  brilliancy  of  a
iversation  for  which,  even  in  Paris,  he  was  unrivalled,  and  which  he  used  to
lisplay  with  considerable  effect  at  those  celebrated  dinners  where,  during  a
quarter  of  a  century,  Holbach  assembled  the  most  illustrious  thinkers  in  France.266
ides  this,  he  is  the  author  of  several  works  of  interest,  most  of  which  are  well
lown  to  students  of  French  literature.26?  His  independent  spirit,  and  the
reputation  he  obtained,  earned  for  him  a  share  in  the  general  persecution.  The
first  work  he  wrote  was  ordered  to  be  publicly  burned  by  the  common  hangman.268
This,  indeed,  was  the  fate  of  nearly  all  the  best  literary  productions  of  that  time  ;
and  Diderot  might  esteem  himself  fortunate  in  merely  losing  his  property,
provided  he  saved  himself  from  imprisonment.  But  a  few  years  later  he  wrote
another  work,  in  which  he  said  that  people  who  are  born  blind  have  some  ideas
lifferent  from  those  who  are  possessed  of  their  eyesight.  This  assertion  is  by  no


264  Memoires  de  Marmontel,  vol.  ii.  pp.  143-176  ;   and  see  vol.  iii.  pp.  30-46,  95,  for  the
?atment  he  afterwards  received  from  the  Sorbonne,  because  he  advocated  religious
leration.     See  also  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  liv.  p.  2^8  ;   and  Letters  of  Eminent  Persons

Iressed  to  Hume,  pp.  207,  212,  213.

265  Mem.  de  Morellet,  vol.  i.  pp.  86-89  ;    Melanges  par  Morellet,  vol.  ii.  pp.  3-12  ;
luvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  liv.  pp.  106,  in,  114,  122,  183.

266  Marmontel  (Mem.  vol.  ii.  p.  313)  says,  "  qui  n'a  connu  Diderot  que  dans  ses  ecrits
ne  1'a  point  connu  :  "  meaning  that  his  works  were  inferior  to  his  talk.     His  conversational
powers  are  noticed  by  Segur,  who  disliked  him,  and  by  Georgel,  who  hated  him.     Segur,
Souvenirs,  vol.  iii.  p.  34  ;   Georgel,  Mem.  vol.  ii.  p.  246.     Compare  Forster's  Life  of  Gold-
smith, vol.  i.  p.  69  ;  Musset  Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseav,  vol.  i.  p.  95,  vol.  ii.  p.  227  ;  Memoires
""Epinay,  vol.  ii.  pp.  73,  74,  88  ;    Grimm,  Corresp.  vol.  xv.  pp.  79-90  ;    Morellet,  Mem.

i.  p.  28  ;   Villemain,  Lit.  au  XVIIP  Siecle,  vol.  i.  p.  82.

As  to  Holbach's  dinners,  on  which  Madame  de  Genlis  wrote  a  well-known  libel,  see
Mosser's  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  i.  p.  166  ;  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xx.  p.  462  ;  Jesse's  Selwyn,
ii.  p.  9  ;   Walpole's  Letters  to  Mann,  vol.  iv.  p.  283  ;  Gibbon's  Miscellaneous  Works,
73-

It  is  also  stated  by  the  editor  of  his  correspondence,  that  he  wrote  a  great  deal  for
ithors,  which  they  published  under  their  name.     Mem.  et  Corresp.  de  Diderot,  vol.  iii.
102.

268  This  was  the  Pensees  Philosophiques,  in  1746,  his  first  original  work  ;   the  previous
les  being  translations   from   English.     Biog.  Univ.  xi.    314.     Duvernet  (Vie  de  Vol-
ire,  p.  240)  says  that  he  was  imprisoned  for  writing  it,  but  this  I  believe  is  a  mistake  ;
least  I  do  not  remember  to  have  met  with  the  statement  elsewhere,  and  Duvernet  is
niently  careless.      [From  Delort's  Histoire  de  la  Detention  des  Philosophes  et  des
de   lettres  d  la  Bastille  et  a    Vincennes,  1829,  »•  208-216,    it   appears  that   the
riting  of  the  Pensees  was  part  of  the  case  against  Diderot  when  he  was  imprisoned
1749.— ED.]


426  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

means  improbable,269  and  it  contains  nothing  by  which  any  one  need  be  startled.
The  men,  however,  who  then  governed  France  discovered  in  it  some  hidden
danger.  Whether  they  suspected  that  the  mention  of  blindness  was  an  allusion
to  themselves,  or  whether  they  were  merely  instigated  by  the  perversity  of  their
temper,  is  uncertain  ;  at  all  events,  the  unfortunate  Diderot,  for  having  hazarded
this  opinion,  was  arrested,  and  without  even  the  form  of  a  trial,  was  confined  in
the  dungeon  of  Vincennes.270  The  natural  results  followed.  The  works  of
Diderot  rose  in  popularity  ;  271  and  he,  burning  with  hatred  against  his  persecutors,
redoubled  his  efforts  to  overthrow  those  institutions  under  shelter  of  which
such  monstrous  tyranny  could  be  safely  practised.

It  seems  hardly  necessary  to  say  more  respecting  the  incredible  folly  with  which
the  rulers  of  France,  by  turning  every  able  man  into  a  personal  enemy,272  at
length  arrayed  against  the  government  all  the  intellect  of  the  country,  and  made
the  Revolution  a  matter  not  of  choice  but  of  necessity.  I  will,  however,  as  a
fitting  sequel  to  the  preceding  facts,  give  one  instance  of  the  way  in  which,  to
gratify  the  caprice  of  the  higher  classes,  even  the  most  private  affections  of
domestic  life  could  be  publicly  outraged.  In  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century,  there  was  an  actress  on  the  French  stage  of  the  name  of  Chantilly.  She,
though  beloved  by  Maurice  de  Saxe,  preferred  a  more  honourable  attachment,
and  married  Favart,  the  well-known  writer  of  songs  and  of  comic  operas.  Maurice,
amazed  at  her  boldness,  applied  for  aid  to  the  French  crown.  That  he  should  have
made  such  an  application  is  sufficiently  strange  ;  but  the  result  of  it  is  hardly  to  be
paralleled  except  in  some  Eastern  despotism.  The  government  of  France,  on
hearing  the  circumstance,  had  the  inconceivable  baseness  to  issue  -an  order
directing  Favart  to  abandon  his  wife,  and  intrust  her  to  the  charge  of  Maurice,  to
whose  embraces  she  was  compelled  to  submit.273

269  Dugald  Stewart,  who  has  collected  some  important  evidence  on  this  subject,  has
confirmed  several  of  the  views  put  forward  by  Diderot.     Philos.  of  the  Mind,  vol.  iii.
pp.  401  seq.  ;   comp.  pp.  57,  407,  435.     Since  then  still  greater  attention  has  been  paid
to  the  education  of  the  blind,  and  it  has  been  remarked  that  "  it  is  an  exceedingly  difficult
task  to  teach  them  to  think  accurately."     M'Alister's  Essay  on  the  Blind,  in  Jour,  of  Stat.
Soc.  vol.  i.  p.  378  :  see  also  Dr.  Fowler,  in  Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1847,  Transac.  of  Sec.
pp.  92,  93,  and  for  1848,  p.  88.     These  passages  unconsciously  testify  to  the  sagacity  of
Diderot ;    and  they  also  testify  to  the  stupid  ignorance  of  a  government  which  sought
to  put  an  end  to  such  inquiries  by  punishing  their  author.     [Diderot's  propositions  were
concerning  "la  morale'"    of  the  blind  and  deaf. — ED.]

270  Mem.  et  Corresp.  de  Diderot,  vol.  i.  pp.  26-29  ;  Musset  Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseau,  vol.  i.
p.  47,  vol.  ii.  p.  276  ;  Letter  to  d'Argental,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Iviii.  p.  454  ;  I.acre-
telle,  Dix-huitieme  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  54.     [There  was  an  interrogatoire  after  Diderot  had
been  imprisoned.    In  that,  other  works  of  his  are  specified. — ED.]

271  A  happy  arrangement,  by  which  curiosity  baffles  despotism.     In  1767*  an  acute
observer  wrote,  "  II  n'y  a  plus  de  livres  qu'on  imprime  plusieurs  fois  que  les  livres  con-
damnes.     II  faut  aujourd'hui  qu'un  libraire  prie  les  magistrats  de  bruler  son  livre  pour
le  faire  vendre."    Grimm,  Corresp.  vol.  v.  p.  498.  To  the  same  effect,  Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  i.
pp.  15,  1 6  ;   Mem.  de  Georgel,  vol.  ii.  p.  256.

272  "  Quel  est  aujourd'hui  parmi  nous  rhomme  des  lettres  de  quelque  merite  qui  n'ait
eprouve  plus  ou  moins  les  fureurs  de  la  calomnie  et  de  la  persecution  ?  "  etc.     Grimm,
Corresp.  vol.  v.  p.  451.     This  was  written  in  1767,  and  during  more  than  forty  years
previously  we  find  similar  expressions  ;   the  earliest  I  have  met  with  being  in  a  letter  to
Thiriot,  in  1723,  in  which  Voltaire  says  ((Euvres,  vol.  Ivi.  p.  94),  "la  severite  devient  plus
grande  de  jour  en  jour  dans  1'inquisition  de  la  librairie."     For  other  instances,  see  his
letter  to  De  Formont,  pp.  423-425,  also  vol.  Ivii.  pp.  144,  351,  vol.  Iviii.  p.  222  ;  his  Lettres
inedites,  vol.  i.  p.  547  ;    Mem.  de  Diderot,  vol.  ii.  p.  215  ;   Letters  of  Eminent  Persons  to
Hume,  pp.  14,  15.

273  Part  of  this  is  related,  rather  inaccurately,  in  Schlosser's  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  iii.
p.  483.  The  fullest  account  is  in  Grimm,  Corresp.  Lit.  vol.  viii.  pp.  231-233  :  "  Le  grand
Maurice,  irrite  d'une  resistance  qu'il  n'avait  jamais  eprouvee  nulle  part,  cut  la  faiblesse
de  demander  une  lettre  de  cachet  pour  enlever  a  un  mari  sa  femme,  et  pour  la  contraindre
d'etre  sa  concubine  ;  et,  chose  remarquable,  cette  lettre  de  cachet  fut  accordee  et  executee.


I  EARLY    CAUSES    OF    THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION        427

These  are  among  the  insufferable  provocations  by  which  the  blood  of  men  is
made  to  boil  in  their  veins.  Who  can  wonder  that  the  greatest  and  noblest  minds
in  France  were  filled  with  loathing  at  the  government  by  whom  such  things  were
ione  ?  If  we,  notwithstanding  the  distance  of  time  and  country,  are  moved  to
indignation  by  the  mere  mention  of  them,  what  must  have  been  felt  by  those
before  whose  eyes  they  actually  occurred  ?  And  when  to  the  horror  they
naturally  inspired  there  was  added  that  apprehension  of  being  the  next  victim
which  every  one  might  personally  feel  ;  when,  moreover,  we  remember  that  the
authors  of  these  persecutions  had  none  of  the  abilities  by  which  even  vice  itself
is  sometimes  ennobled  ; — when  we  thus  contrast  the  poverty  of  their  understand-
ings with  the  greatness  of  their  crimes,  we,  instead  of  being  astonished  that  there
was  a  revolution,  by  which  all  the  machinery  of  the  state  was  swept  away,  should
rather  be  amazed  at  that  unexampled  patience  by  which  alone  the  Revolution
was  so  long  deferred.

To  me  indeed  it  has  always  appeared  that  the  delay  of  the  Revolution  is  one
of  the  most  striking  proofs  history  affords  of  the  force  of  established  habits,  and
of  the  tenacity  with  which  the  human  mind  clings  to  old  associations.  For  if
ever  there  existed  a  government  inherently  and  radically  bad,  it  was  the  govern-
ment of  France  in  the  eighteenth  century.  If  ever  there  existed  a  state  of  society
likely,  by  its  crying  and  accumulated  evils,  to  madden  men  to  desperation,
France  was  in  that  state.  The  people,  despised  and  enslaved,  were  sunk  in  abject
poverty,  and  were  curbed  by  laws  of  stringent  cruelty,  enforced  with  merciless
barbarism.  A  supreme  and  irresponsible  control  was  exercised  over  the  whole
country  by  the  clergy,  the  nobles,  and  the  crown.  The  intellect  of  France  was
placed  under  the  ban  of  a  ruthless  proscription,  its  literature  prohibited  and
burned,  its  authors  plundered  and  imprisoned.  Nor  was  there  the  least  symptom
that  these  evils  were  likely  to  be  remedied.  The  upper  classes,  whose  arrogance
was  increased  by  the  long  tenure  of  their  power,  only  thought  of  present  enjoy-
ment :  they  took  no  heed  of  the  future  ;  they  saw  not  that  day  of  reckoning,  the
bitterness  of  which  they  were  soon  to  experience.  The  people  remained  in
slavery  until  the  Revolution  actually  occurred  ;  while  as  to  the  literature,  nearly
every  year  witnessed  some  new  effort  to  deprive  it  of  that  share  of  liberty  which
it  still  retained.  Having  in  1764  issued  a  decree  forbidding  any  work  to  be
published  in  which  questions  of  government  were  discussed  ;  274  having  in  1767
made  it  a  capital  offence  to  write  a  book  likely  to  excite  the  public  mind  ;  275
and  having  moreover  denounced  the  same  penalty  of  death  against  any  one  who
attacked  religion,2™  as  also  against  any  one  who  spoke  of  matters  of  finance  ;  277

Les  deux  epoux  plierent  sous  le  joug  de  la  necessite,  et  la  petite  Chantilly  fut  a  la  fois
femme  de  Favart  et  maitresse  de  Maurice  de  Saxe."

274  "  L'Averdy  was  no  sooner  named  controller  of  finance  than  he  published  a  decree,
in  1764  (arret  du  conseil), — which,  according  to  the  state  of  the  then  existing  constitution,
had  the  force  of  a  law, — by  which  every  man  was  forbidden  to  print,  or  cause  to  be  printed,
anything  whatever  upon  administrative  affairs,  or  government  regulations  in  general,
under  the  penalty  of  a  breach  of  the  police -laws  ;    by  which  the  man  was  liable  to  be
punished  without  defence,  and  not  as  was  the  case  before  the  law-courts,  where  he  might
defend  himself,  and  could  only  be  judged  according  to  law."     Schlosser's  Eighteenth
Century,  vol.  ii.  p.  166  :   see  also  Mem.  de  Morellet,  vol.  i.  p.  141,  vol.  ii.  p.  75,  "  un  arret
du  conseil,  qui  defendait  d'imprimer  sur  les  matieres  d' administration."

275  "  L'ordonnance  de  1767,  rendue  sous  le  ministere  du  chancelier  Maupeou,  portait
la  peine  de  mort  contre  tout  auteur  d'ecrits  tendant  a  emouvoir  les  esprits."     Cassagnac,
Causes  de  la  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  313.

276  In  April,  1757,  D'Alembert  writes  from  Paris,  "  on  vient  de  publier  une  declaration
qui  inflige  la  peine  de  mort  a  tous  ceux  qui  auront  publie  des  ecrits  tendants  a  attaquer  la
religion."     (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  liv.  p.  34.     This,  I  suppose,  is  the  same  edict  as  that
mentioned  by  M.  Amedee  Renee,  in  his  continuation  of  Sismondi,  Histoire  des  Franfais,
vol.  xxx.  p.  247.

277  "  II  avait  etc  defendu,  sous  peine  de  mort,  aux  ecrivains  de  parler  de  finances."
Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  iii.  p.  490.


428  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

— having  taken  these  steps,  the  rulers  of  France,  very  shortly  before  their  final
fall,  contemplated  another  measure  still  more  comprehensive.  It  is,  indeed,  a
singular  fact  that  only  nine  years  before  the  Revolution,  and  when  no  power
on  earth  could  have  saved  the  institutions  of  the  country,  the  government  was  so
ignorant  of  the  real  state  of  affairs,  and  so  confident  that  it  could  quell  the  spirit
which  its  own  despotism  had  raised,  that  a  proposal  was  made  by  an  officer  of  the
crown  to  do  away  with  all  the  publishers,  and  not  allow  any  books  to  be  printed
except  those  which  issued  from  a  press  paid,  appointed,  and  controlled  by  the
executive  magistrate.278  This  monstrous  proposition,  if  carried  into  effect,
would  of  course  have  invested  the  king  with  all  the  influence  which  literature
can  command  ;  it  would  have  been  as  fatal  to  the  national  intellect  as  the  other
measures  were  to  national  liberty  ;  and  it  would  have  consummated  the  ruin  of
France,  either  by  reducing  its  greatest  men  to  complete  silence,  or  else  by  de-
grading them  into  mere  advocates  of  those  opinions  which  the  government  might
wish  to  propagate.

For  these  are  by  no  means  to  be  considered  as  trifling  matters,  merely  interest-
ing to  men  of  letters.  In  France,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  literature  was  the
last  resource  of  liberty.  In  England,  if  our  great  authors  should  prostitute  their
abilities  by  inculcating  servile  opinions,  the  danger  would  no  doubt  be  consider-
able, because  other  parts  of  society  might  find  it  difficult  to  escape  the  contagion.
Still,  before  the  corruption  had  spread,  there  would  be  time  to  stop  its  course,  so
long  as  we  possessed  those  free  political  institutions,  by  the  mere  mention  of
which  the  generous  imagination  of  a  bold  people  is  easily  fired.  And  although
such  institutions  are  the  consequence,  not  the  cause,  of  liberty,  they  do  un-
questionably react  upon  it,  and  from  the  force  of  habit  they  could  for  a  while
survive  that  from  which  they  originally  sprung.  So  long  as  a  country  retains  its
political  freedom,  there  will  always  remain  associations  by  which,  even  in  the
midst  of  mental  degradation,  and  out  of  the  depths  of  the  lowest  superstition,  the
minds  of  men  may  be  recalled  to  better  things.  But  in  France  such  associations
had  no  existence.  In  France  everything  was  for  the  governors,  and  nothing  for
the  governed.  There  was  neither  free  press,  nor  free  parliament,  nor  free  debates.
There  were  no  public  meetings  ;  there  was  no  popular  suffrage  ;  there  was  no
discussion  on  the  hustings  ;  there  was  no  habeas -corpus  act  ;  there  was  no  trial
by  jury.  The  voice  of  liberty,  thus  silenced  in  every  department  of  the  state,
could  only  be  heard  in  the  appeals  of  those  great  men  who  by  their  writings
inspirited  the  people  to  resistance.  This  is  the  point  of  view  from  which  we
ought  to  estimate  the  character  of  those  who  are  often  accused  of  having  wantonly
disturbed  the  ancient  fabric.279  They,  as  well  as  the  people  at  large,  were  cruelly
oppressed  by  the  crown,  the  nobles,  and  the  church  ;  and  they  used  their  abilities
to  retaliate  the  injury.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  was  the  best  course  open
to  them.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  rebellion  is  the  last  remedy  against
tyranny,  and  that  a  despotic  system  should  be  encountered  by  a  revolutionary
literature.  The  upper  classes  were  to  blame,  because  they  struck  the  first  blow  ;
but  we  must  by  no  means  censure  those  great  men  who,  having  defended  them-
selves from  aggression,  eventually  succeeded  in  smiting  the  government  by  whom
the  aggression  was  originally  made.

Without,  however,  stopping  to  vindicate  their  conduct,  we  have  now  to  con-
sider what  is  much  more  important,  namely,  the  origin  of  that  crusade  against
Christianity  in  which,  unhappily  for  France,  they  were  compelled  to  embark,
and  the  occurrence  of  which  forms  the  third  great  antecedent  of  the  French

278  This  was  the  suggestion  of  the  avocat-general  in  1780.     See  the  proposal,  in  his  own
words,  in  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  xi.  pp.  143,  144.     On  the  important  functions  of  the
avocats  generaux  in  the  eighteenth  century,  see  a  note  in  Leitres  d'Aguesseau,  vol.  i.  p.  264.

279  And  we  should  also  remember  what  the  circumstances  were  under  which  the  accusa-
tion was  first  heard  in  France  :    "  Les  reproches  d'avoir  tout  detruit,  adresses  aux  philo-
sophes  du  dix-huitieme]siecle,  ont  commence  le  jour  ou  il  s'est  trouve  en  France  un
gouvernement  qui  a  voulu  retablir  les  abus  dont  les  ecrivains  de  cette  epoque  avaient
accelere  la  destruction."     Comte,  Traite  de  Legislation,  vol.  i.  p.  72.


EARLY    CAUSES    OF    THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION        429

Revolution.  A  knowledge  of  the  causes  of  this  hostility  against  Christianity  is
essential  to  a  right  understanding  of  the  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century,
and  it  will  throw  some  light  on  the  general  theory  of  ecclesiastical  power.

It  is  a  circumstance  well  worthy  of  remark  that  the  revolutionary  literature
which  eventually  overturned  all  the  institutions  of  France  was  at  first  directed
against  those  which  were  religious,  rather  than  against  those  which  were  political.
The  great  writers  who  rose  into  notice  soon  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.
exerted  themselves  against  spiritual  despotism  ;  while  the  overthrow  of  secular
despotism  was  left  to  their  immediate  successors.280  This  is  not  the  course  which
would  be  pursued  in  a  healthy  state  of  society  ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  to
this  peculiarity  the  crimes  and  the  lawless  violence  of  the  French  Revolution  are
in  no  small  degree  to  be  ascribed.  It  is  evident  that  in  the  legitimate  progress
of  a  nation,  political  innovations  should  keep  pace  with  religious  innovations,
so  that  the  people  may  increase  their  liberty  while  they  diminish  their  superstition.
In  France,  on  the  contrary,  during  nearly  forty  years,  the  church  was  attacked,
and  the  government  was  spared.  The  consequence  was  that  the  order  and
balance  of  the  country  were  destroyed  ;  the  minds  of  men  became  habituated  to
the  most  daring  speculations,  while  their  acts  were  controlled  by  the  most
oppressive  despotism  ;  and  they  felt  themselves  possessed  of  capacities  which
their  rulers  would  not  allow  them  to  employ.  When,  therefore,  the  French
Revolution  broke  out,  it  was  not  a  mere  rising  of  ignorant  slaves  against  educated
masters,  but  it  was  a  rising  of  men  in  whom  the  despair  caused  by  slavery  was
quickened  by  the  resources  of  advancing  knowledge  ;  men  who  were  in  that
frightful  condition  when  the  progress  of  intellect  outstrips  the  progress  of  liberty,
and  when  a  desire  is  felt,  not  only  to  remove  a  tyranny,  but  also  to  avenge  an
insult.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  to  this  we  must  ascribe  some  of  the  most  hideous
peculiarities  of  the  French  Revolution.  It  therefore  becomes  a  matter  of  great
interest  to  inquire  how  it  was,  that  while  in  England  political  freedom  and  religious
scepticism  have  accompanied  and  aided  each  other,  there  should  on  the  other
hand  have  taken  place  in  France  a  vast  movement  in  which,  during  nearly  forty
years,  the  ablest  men  neglected  the  freedom,  while  they  encouraged  the  scep-
ticism, and  diminished  the  power  of  the  church,  without  increasing  the  liberties
of  the  people.

The  first  reason  of  this  appears  to  be  the  nature  of  those  ideas  out  of  which
the  French  had  long  constructed  the  traditions  of  their  glory.  A  train  of  circum-
stances which,  when  treating  of  the  protective  spirit,  I  attempted  to  indicate,
had  secured  to  the  French  kings  an  authority  which,  by  making  all  classes
Subordinate  to  the  crown,  flattered  the  popular  vanity.281  Hence  it  was,  that
in  France  the  feelings  of  loyalty  worked  into  the  national  mind  deeper  than  in


280  The  nature  of  this  change,  and  the  circumstances  under  which  it  happened,  will  be
examined  in  the  last  chapter  of  the  present  volume  ;  but  that  the  revolutionary  movement,
while  headed  by  Voltaire  and  his  coadjutors,   was  directed  against  the  church,   and
not  against  the  state,  is  noticed  by  many  writers  ;    some  of  whom  have  also  observed,
that  soon  after  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XV.  the  ground  began  to  be  shifted,  and
a  disposition  was  first  shown  to  attack  political  abuses.     On  this  remarkable    fact,
indicated  by  several  authors,  but  explained  by  none,  compare  Lacretelle,  XVIIIe   Siecle,
vol.  ii.  p.  305  ;  Barruel,  Mem.  pour  VHist.  du  Jacobinisme,  vol.  i.  p.  xviii.,  vol.  ii.  p.  113  ;
Tocqueville,  V  Ancien  Regime,  p.  241  ;   Alison's  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  165,  vol.  xiv.  p.  286  ;
Mem.  de  Rivarol,  p.  35  ;  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  iv.  p.  397  ;  Lamartine,  Hist,
des  Girondins,  vol.  i.  p.  183  ;  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ix.  p.  307,  vol.  Ixvi.  p.  34.

281  See  some  striking  remarks  in  M.  Tocqueville's  great  work,  De  la  Democratie,  vol.  i.
p.  5  ;   which  should  be  compared  with  the  observation  of  Horace  Walpole,  who  was  well
acquainted  with  French  society,  and  who  says,  happily  enough,  that  the  French  "  love
themselves  in  their  kings."     Walpole' s  Mem.  of  George  III.  vol.  ii.  p.  240.     [This  is
obviously  true  of  all  monarchic  peoples,  and  is  apparent  in  Buckle's  own  praise  of  Eliza-
beth.— ED.]


430


THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION


any  other  country  of  Europe,  Spain  alone  excepted.282  The  difference  between
this  spirit  and  that  observable  in  England  has  been  already  noticed,  and  may  be
still  further  illustrated  by  the  different  ways  in  which  the  two  nations  have  dealt
with  the  posthumous  reputation  of  their  sovereigns.  With  the  exception  of
Alfred,  who  is  sometimes  called  the  Great,283  we  in  England  have  not  sufficiently
loved  any  of  our  princes  to  bestow  upon  them  titles  expressive  of  personal
admiration.  But  the  French  have  decorated  their  kings  with  every  variety  of
panegyric.  Thus,  to  take  only  a  single  name,  one  king  is  Louis  the  Mild,  another
is  Louis  the  Saint,  another  is  Louis  the  Just,  another  is  Louis  the  Great,  and  the
most  hopelessly  vicious  of  all  was  called  Louis  the  Beloved.*

These  are  facts  which,  insignificant  as  they  seem,  form  most  important  materials
for  real  history,  since  they  are  unequivocal  symptoms  of  the  state  of  the  country
in  which  they  exist.28*  Their  relation  to  the  subject  before  us  is  obvious.  For
by  them,  and  by  the  circumstances  from  which  they  sprung,  an  intimate  and
hereditary  association  was  engendered  in  the  minds  of  Frenchmen,  between
the  glory  of  their  nation  and  the  personal  reputation  of  their  sovereign.  The
consequence  was,  that  the  political  conduct  of  the  rulers  of  France  was  protected
against  censure  by  a  fence  far  more  impassable  than  any  that  could  be  erected

232  Not  only  the  political  history  of  Spain,  but  also  its  literature,  contains  melancholy
evidence  of  the  extraordinary  loyalty  of  the  Spaniards,  and  of  the  injurious  results
produced  by  it.  See,  on  this,  some  useful  reflections  in  Ticknor's  Hist,  of  Spanish
Literature,  vol.  i.  pp.  95,  96,  133,  vol.  iii.  pp.  191-193.

283  Our  admiration  of  Alfred  is  greatly  increased  by  the  fact  that  we  know  very  little
about  him..     The  principal  authority  referred  to  for  his  reign  is  Asser,  whose  work,  there
is  reason  to  believe,  is  not  genuine.     See  the  arguments  in  Wright's  Biog.  Brit.  Lit.  vol.  i.
pp.  408-412.     It  moreover  appears  that  some  of  the  institutions  popularly  ascribed  to
him,  existed  before  his  time.     Kemble's  Saxons  in  England,  vol.  i.  pp.  247,  248.

284  The  French  writers,  under  the  old  regime,  constantly  boast  that  loyalty  was  the
characteristic  of  their  nation,  and  taunt  the  English  with  their  opposite  and  insubordinate
spirit.     "  II  n'est  pas  ici  question  des  Frangais,  qui  se  sont  toujours  distingues  des  autres
nations  par  leur  amour  pour  leurs  rois."     Le  Blanc,  Lettres  d'un  Francois,  vol.  iii.  p.  523.
"  The  English  do  not  love  their  sovereigns  as  much  as  could  be  desired."     Sorbiere's
Voyage  to  England,  p.  58.     "  Le  respect  de  la  majeste  royale,  caractere  distinctif  des
Frangais."     Mem.  de  Montbarey,  vol.  ii.  p.  54.     "  L' amour  et  la  fidelite  que  les  Frangais
ont  naturellement  pour  leurs  princes."     Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  ii.  p.  3.     "Les  Frangais
qui  aiment  leurs  princes."     De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  iii.  p.  381  ;  and  see  vol.  xi.  p.  729.
For  further  evidence,  see  Sully,  (Economies,  vol.  iv.  p.  346  ;  Monteil,  Divers  Etats,  vol.  vii.
p.  105  ;  Segur,  Memoires,  vol.  i.  p.  32  ;  Lamartine,  Hist,  des  Girondins,  vol.  iv.  p.  58.

Now,  contrast  with  all  this  the  sentiments  contained  in  one  of  the  most  celebrated
histories  in  the  English  language  :  "  There  is  not  any  one  thing  more  certain  and  more
evident,  than  that  princes  are  made  for  the  people,  and  not  the  people  for  them  ;  and
perhaps  there  is  no  nation  under  heaven  that  is  more  entirely  possessed  with  this  notion
of  princes  than  the  English  nation  is  in  this  age  ;  so  that  they  will  soon  be  uneasy  to  a
prince  who  does  not  govern  himself  by  this  maxim,  and  in  time  grow  very  unkind  to  him."
Burners  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  vi.  p.  223.  This  manly  and  wholesome  passage
was  written  while  the  French  were  licking  the  dust  from  the  feet  of  Louis  XIV.  [And
Burke  wrote  :  "  We  fear  God :  we  look  up  with  awe  to  kings,"  while  "  the  French  "  were
pulling  down  their  monarchy. — ED.]  .  L

[*  Buckle  has  forgotten  Edward  the  Confessor, who  was  also  a  Saint,  and  "  Richard  Lion-
Heart  "  and  "  Good  Queen  Bess."  In  our  own  day  we  have  "  Albert  the  Good."  It  is
also  to  be  remembered  that  "  Louis  the  Just  "  was  never  a  popular  sobriquet,  but  was
a  title  obscurely  given  to  Louis  XIII.  because  he  was  born  under  the  sign  of  the  Balances.
Voltaire  mentions  this  (Siecle,  ch.  ii. )  as  a  little  known  and  absurd  fact.  Louis  XV.,  in
turn,  was  called  Le  Bien-Aime  on  the  occasion  of  his  being  nationally  prayed  for  in  a
dangerous  illness.  He  was  not  generally  or  popularly  so  named,  and  was  indeed  often
spoken  of  with  contempt  as  early  as  1740.  Cp.  Rocquain,  L' Esprit  revolutionnaire  avant
la  Revolution,  1878,  p.  108. — ED.]


EARLY  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION   431

by  the  most  stringent  laws.*  It  was  protected  by  those  prejudices  which  each
generation  bequeathed  to  its  successor.  It  was  protected  by  that  halo  which
time  had  thrown  round  the  oldest  monarchy  in  Europe.285  And,  above  all,  it  was
protected  by  that  miserable  national  vanity  which  made  men  submit  to  taxation
and  to  slavery  in  order  that  foreign  princes  might  be  dazzled  by  the  splendour
of  their  sovereign,  and  foreign  countries  intimidated  by  the  greatness  of  his
victories.

The  upshot  of  all  this  was  that  when,  early  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the
intellect  of  France  began  to  be  roused  into  action,  the  idea  of  attacking  the  abuses
of  the  monarchy  never  occurred  even  to  the  boldest  thinker.  But  under  the
protection  of  the  crown  there  had  grown  up  another  institution,  about  which
less  delicacy  was  felt.  The  clergy,  who  for  so  long  a  period  had  been  allowed  to
oppress  the  consciences  of  men,  were  not  sheltered  by  those  national  associations
which  surrounded  the  person  of  the  sovereign  ;  nor  had  any  of  them,  with  the
single  exception  of  Bossuet,  done  much  to  increase  the  general  reputation  of
France.  Indeed  the  French  church,  though  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  it
possessed  immense  authority,  had  always  exercised  it  in  subordination  to  the
crown,  at  whose  bidding  it  had  not  feared  to  oppose  even  the  pope  himself.286
It  was  therefore  natural  that  in  France  the  ecclesiastical  power  should  be
attacked  before  the  temporal  power  ;  because,  while  it  was  as  despotic,  it  was
less  influential,  and  because  it  was  unprotected  by  those  popular  traditions
which  form  the  principal  support  of  every  ancient  institution.

These  considerations  are  sufficient  to  explain  why  it  was  that,  in  this  respect,
the  French  and  English  intellects  adopted  courses  so  entirely  different.  In
England,  the  minds  of  men,  being  less  hampered  with  the  prejudices  of  an  indis-
criminate loyalty,  have  been  able  at  each  successive  step  in  the  great  progress
to  direct  their  doubts  and  inquiries  on  politics  as  well  as  on  religion  ;  and  thus
establishing  their  freedom,  as  they  diminished  their  superstition,  they  have
maintained  the  balance  of  the  national  intellect  without  allowing  to  either  of
its  divisions  an  excessive  preponderance.  But  in  France  the  admiration  for
royalty  had  become  so  great  that  this  balance  was  disturbed  ;  the  inquiries  of
men,  not  daring  to  settle  on  politics,  were  fixed  on  religion,  and  gave  rise  to  the
singular  phenomenon  of  a  rich  and  powerful  literature  in  which  unanimous
hostility  to  the  church  was  unaccompanied  by  a  single  voice  against  the  enormous
abuses  of  the  state.  There  was  likewise  another  circumstance  which  increased
this  peculiar  tendency.  During  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  the  personal  character
of  the  hierarchy  had  done  much  to  secure  their  dominion.  All  the  leaders  of
the  church  were  men  of  virtue,  and  many  were  men  of  ability.  Their  conduct,
tyrannical  as  it  was,  seems  to  have  been  conscientious  ;  and  the  evils  which  it
produced  are  merely  to  be  ascribed  to  the  gross  impolicy  of  intrusting  ecclesiastics
with  power.  But  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  a  great  change  took  place.  The
clergy,  from  causes  which  it  would  be  tedious  to  investigate,  became  extremely
dissolute,  and  often  very  ignorant.  This  made  their  tyranny  more  oppressive,

285  "  La  race  des  rois  la  plus  ancienne."     Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  ix.  p.  281.     "  Nos  rois,
issus  de  la  plus  grande  race  du  monde,  et  devant  qui  les  Cesars,  et  la  plus  grande  partie
des  princes  qui  jadis  ont  commande  tant  de  nations,  ne  sont  que  des  roturiers."     Mem.
de  Motteville,  vol.  ii.  p.  417.     And  a  Venetian  ambassador,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  says,
that  France  "  e  regno  piu  antico  d'  ogn'  altro  che  sia  in  essere  al  presente."     Relat.  des
Ambassad.  vol.  i.  p.  470.     Compare  Boullier,  Maison  Militaire  des  Rois  de  France,  p.  360.

286  Capcfigue's  Louis  XIV.  vol.  i.  pp.  204,  301  ;   Koch,  Tableau  des  Revolutions,  vol.  ii.
p.  16.    M.  Ranke  (Die  Pdpste,  vol.  ii.  p.  257)  ascribes  this  to  the  circumstances  attending
the  apostasy  of  Henry  IV. ;   but  the  cause  lies  much  deeper,  being  connected  with  that
triumph  of  the  secular  interests  over  the  spiritual,  of  which  the  policy  of  Henry  IV.  was
itself  a  consequence.

[*  In  point  of  fact  there  appeared  in  1717  an  audacious  libel  on  the  Regent,  entitled
Les  Philip  piques,  and  Voltaire,  who  was  falsely  suspected  of  writing  it,  was  im-
prisoned as  above  mentioned. — ED.]


432  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

because  to  submit  to  it  was  more  disgraceful.  The  great  abilities  and  unblemished
morals  of  men  like  Bossuet,  Fenelon,  Bourdaloue,  Fleechier,  and  Mascaron
diminished  in  some  degree  the  ignominy  which  is  always  connected  with  blind
obedience.  But  when  they  were  succeeded  by  such  bishops  and  cardinals  as
Dubois,  Lafiteau,  Tencin,  and  others  who  nourished  under  the  regency,  it  became
difficult  to  respect  the  heads  of  the  church,  tainted  as  they  were  with  open  and
notorious  depravity.287  At  the  same  time  that  there  occurred  this  unfavourable
change  among  the  ecclesiastical  rulers,  there  also  occurred  that  immense  reaction
of  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  trace  the  early  workings.  It  was  therefore  at
the  very  moment  when  the  spirit  of  inquiry  became  stronger,  that  the  character
of  the  clergy  became  more  contemptible.288  The  great  writers  who  were  now
rising  in  France  were  moved  to  indignation  when  they  saw  that  those  who  usurped
unlimited  power  over  consciences  had  themselves  no  consciences  at  all.  It  is
evident  that  every  argument  which  they  borrowed  from  England  against
ecclesiastical  power  would  gain  additional  force  when  directed  against  men  whose
personal  unfitness  was  universally  acknowledged.289

Such  was  the  position  of  the  rival  parties  when,  almost  immediately  after
the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  there  began  that  great  struggle  between  authority  and
reason  which  is  still  unfinished,  although  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  its
result  is  no  longer  doubtful.  On  the  one  side  there  was  a  compact  and  numerous
priesthood,  supported  by  the  prescription  of  centuries  and  by  the  authority  of
the  crown.  On  the  other  side  there  was  a  small  body  of  men,  without  rank,
without  wealth,  and  as  yet  without  reputation,  but  animated  by  a  love  of  liberty
and  by  a  just  confidence  in  their  own  abilities.  Unfortunately,  they  at  the  very
outset  committed  a  serious  error.  In  attacking  the  clergy,  they  lost  their  respect
for  religion.  In  their  determination  to  weaken  ecclesiastical  power,  they  at-
tempted to  undermine  the  foundations  of  Christianity.*  This  is  deeply  to  be
regretted  for  their  own  sake,  as  well  as  for  its  ultimate  effects  in  France  ;  but  it
must  not  be  imputed  to  them  as  a  crime,  since  it  was  forced  on  them  by  the
exigencies  of  their  position.  They  saw  the  frightful  evils  which  their  country
was  suffering  from  the  institution  of  priesthood  as  it  then  existed  ;  and  yet  they

287  Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  iii.  p.  408  ;  Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplomatic,  vol.  v,
p.  3  ;  Tocqueville,  Regne  de  Louis  XV.,  vol.  i.  pp.  35,  347  ;  Duclos,  Memoires,  vol.  ii.  pp.  42,
43,  154,  155,  223,  224.      What  was  if  possible  still  more  scandalous,  was  that  in  1723
the  assembly  of  the  clergy  elected  as  their  president,  unanimously  ("  d'une  voix  un-
anime  "),  the  infamous  Dubois,  the  most  notoriously  immoral  man  of  his  time.     Duclos,
Mem.  vol.  ii.  p.  262.

288  On  this  decline  of  the  French  clergy,  see  Villemain,  XVIIIs  Siecle,  vol.  iii.  pp.  178,
179  ;  Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philos.  II.  serie,  vol.  i.  p.  301.     Tocqueville  (Regne  de  Louis  XV.
vol.  i.  pp.  35-38,  365)  says,  "  le  clerge  prechait  une  morale  qu'il  compromettait  par  sa
conduite  ;  "  a  noticeable  remark,  when  made  by  an  opponent  of  the  sceptical  philosophy,
like  the  elder  M.  Tocqueville.     Among  this  profligate  crew,  Massillon  stood  alone  ;    he
being  the  last  French  bishop  who  was  remarkable  for  virtue  as  well  as  for  ability.

289  Voltaire  says  of  the  English,  "  quand  ils  apprennent  qii'en  France  de  jeunes  gens
connus  par  leurs  debauches,  et  eleves  a  la  prelature  par  des  intrigues  de  femmes,  font
publiquement  ramour,  s'egaient  a  composer  des  chansons  tendres,  donnent  tous  les  jours
des  soupers  delicats  et  longs,  et  de  la  vont  implorer  les  lumieres  du  Saint-Esprit,  et  se
nomment  hardiment  les  successeurs  des  apotres  ;  ils  remercient  Dieu  d'etre  protestants."
Lettres  sur  les  Anglais,  in  CEuvres,  vol.  xxvi.  p.  29.

[*  Buckle  appears  here  to  have  forgotten  that  in  the  model  society  of  England  a  general
attack  on  the  foundations  of  Christianity  had  been  going  on  almost  continuously  for  a
generation — from  Collins  to  Dodwell :  1713  to  1743 — before  anything  similarly  outspoken
appeared  in  France.  There  were  very  few  freethinking  publications  in  France  before
1750;  and  French  Deism  was  latterly  a  development  from  English,  though  Voltaire  was
a  deist  before  he  came  to  England.  And  although  he  made  a  hostile  allusion  to  priests  in
his  (Edipe  (1718),  his  first  writings  on  religious  subjects  (e.g.  the  Epitre  a  Uranie,  written
in  1722)  were  directed  not  against  priests  but  against  Christian  dogmas. — ED.]


EARLY  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION    433

were  told  that  the  preservation  of  that  institution  in  its  actual  form  was  essential
to  the  very  being  of  Christianity.     They  had  always  been  taught  that  the  interests
of  the  clergy  were  identical  with  the  interests  of  religion  ;  how  then  could  they
avoid  including  both  clergy  and  religion  in  the  same  hostility  ?     The  alternative
was  cruel  ;  but  it  was  one  from  which,  in  common  honesty,  they  had  no  escape.
We,  judging  these  things  by  another  standard,  possess  a  measure  which  they
could  not  possibly  have.     We  should  not  now  commit  such  an  error,  because
we  know  that  there  is  no  connexion  between  any  one  particular  form  of  priest-
hood and  the  interests  of  Christianity.     We  know  that  the  clergy  are  made  for
the  people,  and  not  the  people  for  the  clergy.     We  know  that  all  questions  of
church-government  are  matters  not  of   religion  but  of   policy,  and    should  be
settled    not  according  to  traditional  dogmas    but  according  to  large  views  of
general  expediency.     It  is  because  these  propositions  are  now  admitted  by  all
enlightened   men  that  in  our  country  the  truths  of  religion  are  rarely  attacked
except  by  superficial  thinkers.     If,  for  instance,  we  were  to  find  that  the  existence
of  our  bishops,  with  their  privileges  and  their  wealth,  is  unfavourable  to  the
progress  of  society,  we  should  not  on  that  account  feel  enmity  against  Christi-
anity ;  because  we  should  remember  that  episcopacy  is  its  accident  and  not  its
essential,  and  that  we  could  do  away  with  the  institution   and  yet  retain  the
religion.     In  the  same  way,  if  we  should  ever  find,  what  was  formerly  found  in
France,  that  the  clergy  were  tyrannical,  this  would  excite  in  us  an  opposition,
not  to  Christianity,  but  merely  to  the  external  form  which  Christianity  assumed.
So  long  as  our  clergy  confine  themselves  to  the  beneficent  duties  of  their  calling,
to  the  alleviation  of  pain  and  distress,  either  bodily  or  mental,  so  long  will  we
respect  them  as  the  ministers  of  peace  and  of  charity.     But  if  they  should  ever
again  entrench  on  the  rights  of  the  laity, — if  they  should  ever  again  interfere
with  an  authoritative  voice  in  the  government  of  the  State, — it  will  then  be  for
the  people  to  inquire  whether  the  time  has  not  come  to  effect  a  revision  of  the
ecclesiastical  constitution  of  the  country.     This,   therefore,  is  the  manner  in
which  we  now  view  these  things.     What  we  think  of  the  clergy  will  depend  upon
themselves,  but  will  have  no  connexion  with  what  we  think   of  Christianity.
We  look  on  the  clergy  as  a  body  of  men  who,  notwithstanding  their  disposition
to  intolerance,  and  notwithstanding  a  certain  narrowness  incidental  to  their
profession,  do  undoubtedly  form  part  of  a  vast  and  noble  institution,  by  which
the  manners  of  men  have  been  softened,  their  sufferings  assuaged,  their  dis-
tresses relieved.     As  long  as  this  institution  performs  its  functions,  we  are  well
content  to  let  it  stand.     If  however  it  should  be  out  of  repair,  or  if  it  should  be
found  inadequate  to  the  shifting  circumstances  of  an  advancing  society,  we  retain
both  the  power  and  the  right  of  remedying  its  faults  ;  we  may,  if  need  be,  remove
some  of  its  parts  ;  but  we  would  not,  we  dare  not,  tamper  with  those  great  re-
ligious truths  which  are  altogether  independent  of  it  ;  truths  which  comfort  the
mind  of  man,  raise  him  above  the  instincts  of  the  hour,  and  infuse  into  him
those  lofty  aspirations  which,  revealing  to  him  his  own  immortality,  are  the
measure  and  the  symptom  of  a  future  life.*

Unfortunately,  this  was  not  the  way  in  which  these  matters  were  considered
in  France.  The  government  of  that  country,  by  investing  the  clergy  with  great
immunities,  by  treating  them  as  if  there  were  something  sacred  about  their  per-
sons, and  by  punishing  as  heresy  the  attacks  which  were  made  on  them,  had
established  in  the  national  mind  an  indissoluble  connexion  between  their  inter-
ests and  the  interests  of  Christianity.  The  consequence  was  that  when  the
struggle  began,  the  ministers  of  religion,  and  religion  itself,  were  both  assailed
with  equal  zeal.  The  ridicule,  and  even  the  abuse,  heaped  on  the  clergy,  will
surprise  no  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  provocation  that  had  been  received.
And  although,  in  the  indiscriminate  onslaught  which  soon  followed,  Christianity
was  for  a  time  subjected  to  a  fate  which  ought  to  have  been  reserved  for  those
who  called  themselves  her  ministers,  this,  while  it  moves  us  to  regret,  ought  by
no  means  to  excite  our  astonishment.  The  destruction  of  Christianity  in  France

[*  See  note  above,  p.  200. — ED.]

28


434  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

was  the  necessary  result  of  those  opinions  which  bound  up  the  destiny  of  the
national  priesthood  with  the  destiny  of  the  national  religion.  If  both  were
connected  by  the  same  origin,  both  should  fall  in  the  same  ruin.  If  that  which
is  the  tree  of  life  were  in  reality^so  corrupt  that^it  could  only^bear  poisonous
fruits,  then  it  availed  little  to  lop 'off  the  boughs  and  cut  down  the  branches  ;  but
it  were  better,  by  one  mighty  effort,  to  root  it  up  from  the  ground,  and  secure
the  health  of  society  by  stopping  the  very  source  of  the  contagion.

These  are  reflections  which  must  make  us  pause  before  we  censure  the  deistical
writers  of  the  eighteenth  century.  So  perverted,  however,  are  the  reasonings  to
which  some  minds  are  accustomed,  that  those  who  judge  them  most  uncharit-
ably are  precisely  those  whose  conduct  forms  their  best  excuse.  Such  are  the
men  who,  by  putting  forth  the  most  extravagant  claims  in  favour  of  the  clergy,
are  seeking  to  establish  the  principle  by  the  operation  of  which  the  clergy  were
destroyed.  Their  scheme  for  restoring  the  old  system  of  ecclesiastical  authority
depends  on  the  supposition  of  its  divine  origin  ;  a  supposition  which,  if  insepar-
able from  Christianity,  will  at  once  justify  the  infidelity  which  they  hotly  attack.
The  increase  of  the  power  of  the  clergy  is  incompatible  with  the  interests  of
civilization.  If,  therefore,  any  religion  adopts  as  its  creed  the  necessity  of  such
an  increase,  it  becomes  the  bounden  duty  of  every  friend  to  humanity  to  do  his
utmost  either  to  destroy  the  creed  or,  failing  in  that,  to  overturn  the  religion.
If  pretensions  of  this  sort  are  an  essential  part  of  Christianity,  it  behoves  us  at
once  to  make  our  choice  ;  since  the  only  option  can  be  between  abjuring  our
faith  and  sacrificing  our  liberty.  Fortunately  we  are  not  driven  to  so  hard  a
strait  ;  and  we  know  that  these  claims  are  as  false  in  theory  as  they  would  be
pernicious  in  practice.  It  is  indeed  certain  that  if  they  were  put  into  execution,
the  clergy,  though  they  might  enjoy  a  momentary  triumph,  would  have  con-
summated their  own  ruin,  by  preparing  the  way  among  us  for  scenes  as  disas-
trous as  those  which  occurred  in  France.

The  truth  is  that  what  is  most  blamed  in  the  great  French  writers  was  the
natural  consequence  of  the  development  of  their  age.  Never  was  there  a  more
striking  illustration  of  the  social  law  already  noticed,  that  if  government  will
allow  religious  scepticism  to  run  its  course,  it  will  issue  in  great  things,  and  will
hasten  the  march  of  civilization  ;  but  that  if  an  attempt  is  made  to  put  it  down
with  a  strong  hand  it  may  no  doubt  be  repressed  for  a  time,  but  eventually
will  rise  with  such  force  as  to  endanger  the  foundation  of  society.  In  England
we  adopted  the  first  of  these  courses  ;  in  France  they  adopted  the  second.  In
England  men  were  allowed  to  exercise  their  own  judgment  on  the  most  sacred
subjects ;  and,  as  soon  as  the  diminution  of  their  credulity  had  made  them  set
bounds  to  the  power  of  the  clergy,  toleration  immediately  followed,  and  the
national  prosperity  has  never  been  disturbed.*  In  France,  the  authority  of  the
clergy  was  increased  by  a  superstitious  king  ;  faith  usurped  the  place  of  reason,
not  a  whisper  of  doubt  was  allowed  to  be  heard,  and  the  spirit  of  inquiry  was
stifled,  until  the  country  fell  to  the  brink  of  ruin.  If  Louis  XIV.  had  not  inter-
fered with  the  natural  progress,  France,  like  England,  would  have  continued  to
advance.  After  his  death,  it  was,  indeed,  too  late  to  save  the  clergy,  against
whom  all  the  intellect  of  the  nation  was  soon  arrayed.  But  the  force  of  the
storm  might  still  have  been  broken,  if  the  government  of  Louis  XV.  had  con-
ciliated what  it  was  impossible  to  resist  ;  and,  instead  of  madly  attempting  to
restrain  opinions  by  laws,  had  altered  the  laws  to  suit  the  opinions.  If  the  rulers
of  France,  instead  of  exerting  themselves  to  silence  the  national  literature,  had
yielded  to  its  suggestions,  and  had  receded  before  the  pressure  of  advancing
knowledge,  the  fatal  collision  would  have  been  avoided  ;  because  the  passions
which  caused  the  collision  would  have  been  appeased.  In  such  case,  the  Church
would  have  fallen  somewhat  earlier ;  but  the  State  itself  would  have  been  saved.
In  such  case,  France  would,  in  all  probability,  have  secured  her  liberties,  without

t*  Buckle  appears  to  have  forgotten  his  own  demonstration  (above,  pp.  251-283)
that  the  "  national  prosperity"  in  England  was  very  much  disturbed  in  the  period  of
the  reaction  against  the  French  Revolution. — ED.]


""  EARLY    CAUSES    OF    THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION        435

increasing  her  crimes  ;  and  that  great  country,  which,  from  her  position  and
resources,  ought  to  be  the  pattern  of  European  civilization,  might  have  escaped
the  ordeal  of  those  terrible  atrocities  through  which  she  was  compelled  to  pass,
and  from  the  effects  of  which  she  has  not  yet  recovered.

It  must,  I  think,  be  admitted  that  during  at  all  events  the  first  half  of  the
reign  of  Louis  XV.,  it  was  possible,  by  timely  concessions,  still  to  preserve  the
political  institutions  of  France.  Reforms  there  must  have  been  ;  and  reforms
too  of  a  large  and  uncompromising  character.  So  far  however  as  I  am  able
to  understand  the  real  history  of  that  period,  I  make  no  doubt  that  if  these  had
been  granted  in  a  frank  and  ungrudging  spirit,  everything  could  have  been
retained  necessary  for  the  only  two  objects  at  which  government  ought  to  aim,
namely,  the  preservation  of  order  and  the  prevention  of  crime.  But,  by  the
middle  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XV.,  or,  at  all  events,  immediately  afterwards,  the
state  of  affairs  began  to  alter  ;  and,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  the  spirit  of
France  became  so  democratic,  that  it  was  impossible  even  to  delay  a  revolution,
which,  in  the  preceding  generation,  might  have  been  altogether  averted.  This
remarkable  change  is  connected  with  that  other  change  already  noticed,  by
virtue  of  which  the  French  intellect  began,  about  the  same  period,  to  direct  its
hostility  against  the  State,  rather  than,  as  heretofore,  against  the  Church.*  As
soon  as  this,  which  may  be  called  the  second  epoch  of  the  eighteenth  century,
had  been  fairly  entered,  the  movement  became  irresistible.  Event  after  event
followed  each  other  in  rapid  succession  ;  each  one  linked  to  its  antecedent,  and
the  whole  forming  a  tendency  impossible  to  withstand.  It  was  in  vain  that  the
government,  yielding  some  points  of  real  importance,  adopted  measures  by
which  the  Church  was  controlled,  the  power  of  the  clergy  diminished,  and  even
the  order  of  the  Jesuits  suppressed.  It  was  in  vain  that  the  crown  now  called
to  its  councils,  for  the  first  time,  men  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  reform  ;  men  like
Turgot  and  Necker,  whose  wise  and  liberal  proposals  would  in  calmer  days  have
stilled  the  agitation  of  the  popular  mind.  It  was  in  vain  that  promises  were
made  to  equalize  the  taxes,  to  redress  some  of  the  most  crying  grievances,  to
repeal  some  of  the  most  obnoxious  laws.  It  was  even  in  vain  that  the  states-
general  were  summoned,  and  that  thus,  after  the  lapse  of  a  hundred  and  seventy
years,  the  people  were  again  admitted  to  take  part  in  the  management  of  their
own  affairs.  All  these  things  were  in  vain,  because  the  time  for  treaty  had  gone
by,  and  the  time  for  battle  had  come.  The  most  liberal  concessions  that  could
possibly  have  been  devised  would  have  failed  to  avert  that  deadly  struggle
which  the  course  of  preceding  events  made  inevitable.!  For  the  measure  of  that
age  was  now  full.  The  upper  classes,  intoxicated  by  the  long  possession  of  power,
had  provoked  the  crisis  ;  and  it  was  needful  that  they  should  abide  the  issue.
There  was  no  time  for  mercy  ;  there  was  no  pause,  no  compassion,  no  sympathy.
The  only  question  that  remained  was,  to  see  whether  they  who  had  raised  the
storm  could  ride  the  whirlwind  ;  or  whether  it  was  not  rather  likely  that  they
should  be  the  first  victims  of  that  frightful  hurricane  in  which,  for  a  moment,
laws,  religion,  morals,  all  perished,  the  lowest  vestiges  of  humanity  were  effaced,

[*  There  was  no  such  change  of  direction  as  is  here  implied.  The  polemic  against  the
reigning  religion  increased  in  quantity  step  for  step  with  the  development  of  the  political
discussion,  the  bulk  of  the  former  being  dated  after  1750.  The  error  in  the  text,  which
is  frequently  repeated  in  a  later  chapter,  seems  to  have  been  set  up  by  a  misreading  of
some  writer's  generalization  to  the  effect  that  whereas  the  opposition  to  the  government
in  the  early  years  of  Louis  XV.  was  religious,  it  afterwards  became  political.  (See  this
well  brought  out  by  Rocquain,  L' esprit  revolutionnaire  avant  la  Revolution,  1878.)  But
the  opposition  in  question  was  quite  a  different  thing  from  the  opposition  to  religion  by
freethinkers,  which  spread  side  by  side  with  the  political  development.  Not  till
:77i  did  it  slacken  (Rocquain,  p.  297). — ED.]

[f  It  is  not  clear  how  such  a  proposition  can  be  proved,  if  by  "  crisis  "  and  "  hurri-
me  "  are  meant  the  Reign  of  Terror.     That  was  the  result  not  of  liberal  concessions,
5ut  of  the  attempt  to  work  by  violence  a  counter-revolution.     But  for  such  resistance
there  need  have  been  no  panic  and  no  bloodshed. — ED.]


436  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  the  civilization  of  France  not  only  submerged,  but,  as  it  then  appeared,
irretrievably  ruined.

To  ascertain  the  successive  changes  of  this,  the  second  epoch  of  the  eighteenth
century,  is  an  undertaking  full  of  difficulty  ;  not  only  on  account  of  the  rapidity
with  which  the  events  occurred,  but  also  on  account  of  their  extreme  complica-
tion, and  of  the  way  in  which  they  acted  and  reacted  upon  each  other.  The
materials,  however,  for  such  an  inquiry  are  very  numerous  ;  and,  as  they  consist
of  evidence  supplied  by  all  classes  and  all  interests,  it  has  appeared  to  me  possible
to  reconstruct  the  history  of  that  time  according  to  the  only  manner  in  which
history  deserves  to  be  studied  ;  that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  order  of  its  social
and  intellectual  development.  In  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  present  volume,
I  shall  therefore  attempt  to  trace  the  antecedents  of  the  French  Revolution
during  that  remarkable  period  in  which  the  hostility  of  men,  slackening  in
regard  to  the  abuses  of  the  Church,  was  for  the  first  time  turned  against  the
abuses  of  the  State.  But  before  entering  into  this,  which  may  be  distinguished
as  the  political  epoch  of  the  eighteenth  century,  it  will  be  necessary,  according
to  the  plan  which  I  have  sketched,  to  examine  the  changes  that  occurred  in  the
method  of  writing  history,  and  to  indicate  the  way  in  which  those  changes  were
affected  by  the  tendencies  of  the  earlier,  or,  as  it  may  be  termed,  the  ecclesiastical
epoch.  In  this  manner,  we  shall  the  more  easily  understand  the  activity  of
that  prodigious  movement  which  led  to  the  French  Revolution  ;  because  we
shall  see  that  it  not  only  affected  the  opinions  of  men  in  regard  to  what  was
passing  under  their  eyes,  but  that  it  also  biased  their  speculative  views  in  regard
to  the  events  of  preceding  ages  ;  and  thus  gave  rise  to  that  new  school  of  histori-
cal literature,  the  formation  of  which  is  by  no  means  the  least  of  the  many  benefits
which  we  owe  to  the  great  thinkers  of  the  eighteenth  century.


CHAPTER  XIII

STATE  OF  HISTORICAL  LITERATURE  IN  FRANCE  FROM  THE  END  OF  THE  SIX-
TEENTH  TO   THE    END    OF   THE    EIGHTEENTH    CENTURY

IT  may  be  easily  supposed  that  those  vast  movements  in  the  intellect  of  France
which  I  have  just  traced  could  not  fail  to  produce  a  great  change  in  the  method
of  writing  history.  That  bold  spirit  with  which  men  were  beginning  to  estimate
the  transactions  of  their  own  time  was  sure  to  influence  their  opinions  respecting
those  of  a  former  age.  In  this  as  in  every  branch  of  knowledge  the  first  innova-
tion consisted  in  recognizing  the  necessity  of  doubting  what  had  hitherto  been
believed  ;  and  this  feeling,  when  once  established,  went  on  increasing,  destroying
at  each  step  some  of  those  monstrous  absurdities  by  which,  as  we  have  seen,
even  the  best  histories  were  disfigured.  The  germs  of  the  reform  may  be  dis-
cerned in  the  fourteenth  century,  though  the  reform  itself  did  not  begin  until
late  in  the  sixteenth  century.  During  the  seventeenth  century  it  advanced
somewhat  slowly  ;  but  in  the  eighteenth  century  it  received  a  sudden  accession
of  strength,  and  in  France  in  particular  it  was  hastened  by  that  fearless  and
inquisitive  spirit  which  characterized  the  age,  and  which,  purging  history  of
innumerable  follies,  raised  its  standard,  and  conferred  on  it  a  dignity  hitherto
unknown.  The  rise  of  historical  scepticism,  and  the  extent  to  which  it  spread
do  indeed  form  such  curious  features  in  the  annals  of  the  European  intellect  as
to  make  it  surprising  that  no  one  should  have  attempted  to  examine  a  movement
to  which  a  great  department  of  modern  literature  owes  its  most  valuable  peculi-
arities. In  the  present  chapter  I  hope  to  supply  this  deficiency  so  far  as  France
is  concerned  ;  and  I  shall  endeavour  to  mark  the  different  steps  by  which  the
progress  was  effected,  in  order  that,  by  knowing  the  circumstances  most  favour-
able to  the  study  of  history,  we  may  with  the  greater  ease  inquire  into  the  proba-
bility of  its  future  improvement.

There  is,  in  reference  to  this  subject,  a  preliminary  consideration  well  worthy
of  notice.  This  is,  that  men  seem  always  to  have  begun  to  doubt  in  matters  of
religion  before  they  ventured  to  do  so  in  matters  of  history.  It  might  have
been  expected  that  the  reproaches,  and,  in  a  superstitious  age,  the  dangers,  to
which  heresy  is  exposed,  would  have  intimidated  inquirers,  and  would  have
Induced  them  to  prefer  the  safer  path  of  directing  their  scepticism  upon  questions
of  literary  speculation.  Such,  however,  is  by  no  means  the  course  which  the
human  mind  .has  adopted.  In  an  early  stage  of  society,  when  the  clergy  had
universal  influence,  a  belief  in  the  unpardonable  criminality  of  religious  error  is
so  deeply  rooted,  that  it  engrosses  the  attention  of  all  ;  it  forces  every  one  who
thinks  to  concentrate  upon  theology  his  reflections  and  his  doubts,  and  it  leaves
no  leisure  for  topics  which  are  conceived  to  be  of  inferior  importance.1  Hence,

1  See  some  very  just  remarks  in  WhewelVs  Philos.  of  the  Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  ii.  p.  143-
In  Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  iv.  pp.  41,  128,  there  are  two  curious  illustrations
of  the  universal  interest  which  theological  discussions  once  inspired  in  Europe  ;  and  on
the  former  subservience  of  philosophy  to  theology,  compare  Hamilton's  Discussions  on
Philosophy,  p.  197.  But  no  one  has  treated  this  subject  so  ably  as  M.  Auguste  Comte,
in  his  great  work,  Philosophie  Positive.  The  service  which  the  metaphysicians  rendered
to  the  Church  by  their  development  of  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  (Blanco  White's
Evidence  against  Catholicism,  pp.  256-258)  is  a  striking  instance  of  this  subordination  of
the  intellect  to  ecclesiastical  dogmas.

437


438  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

during  many  centuries,  the  subtlest  intellects  of  Europe  exhausted  their  strength
on  the  rites  and  dogmas  of  Christianity  ;  and  while  upon  these  matters  they
often  showed  the  greatest  ability,  they  upon  other  subjects,  and  especially
upon  history,  displayed  that  infantine  credulity  of  which  I  have  already  given
several  examples.

But  when,  in  the  progress  of  society,  its  theological  element  begins  to  decay,
the  ardour  with  which  religious  disputes  were  once  conducted  becomes  sensibly
weakened.  The  most  advanced  intellects  are  the  first  to  feel  the  growing  in-
difference, and  therefore  they  are  also  the  first  to  scrutinize  real  events  with
that  inquisitive  eye  which  their  predecessors  had  reserved  for  religious  specula-
tions. This  is  a  great  turning-point  in  the  history  of  every  civilized  nation.
From  this  moment  theological  heresies  become  less  frequent,2  and  literary
heresies  become  more  common.  From  this  moment  the  spirit  of  inquiry  and  of
doubt  fastens  itself  upon  every  department  of  knowledge,  and  begins  that  great
career  of  conquest  in  which  by  every  succeeding  discovery  the  power  and  dignity
of  man  are  increased,  while  at  the  same  time  most  of  his  opinions  are  disturbed,
and  many  of  them  are  destroyed  ;  until,  in  the  march  of  this  vast  but  noiseless
revolution,  the  stream  of  tradition  is  as  it  were  interrupted,  the  influence  of
ancient  authority  is  subverted,  and  the  human  mind,  waxing  in  strength,  learns
to  rely  upon  its  own  resources,  and  to  throw  off  incumbrances  by  which  the
freedom  of  its  movements  had  long  been  impaired.

The  application  of  these  remarks  to  the  history  of  France  will  enable  us  to
explain  some  interesting  phenomena  in  the  literature  of  that  country.  During
the  whole  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  I  may  say  till  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,
France,  though  fertile  in  annalists  and  chroniclers,  had  not  produced  a  single
historian,  because  she  had  not  produced  a  single  man  who  presumed  to  doubt
what  was  generally  believed.*  Indeed,  until  the  publication  of  Du  Haillan's
history  of  the  kings  of  France,  no  one  had  even  attempted  a  critical  digest  of
the  materials  which  were  known  to  be  extant.  This  work  appeared  in  1576  ;  3
and  the  author,  at  the  conclusion  of  his  labours,  could  not  disguise  the  pride
which  he  felt  at  having  accomplished  so  great  an  undertaking.  In  his  dedication
to  the  king  he  says,  "  I  am,  sire,  the  first  of  all  the  French  who  have  written  the
history  of  France,  and,  in  a  polite  language,  shown  the  grandeur  and  dignity  of
our  kings  ;  for  before  there  was  nothing  but  the  old  rubbish  of  chronicles  which
spoke  of  them."  He  adds  in  the  preface  :  "  Only  I  will  say,  without  presumption

2  M.  Tocqueville  says,  what  I  am  inclined  to  think  is  true,  that  an  increasing  spirit  of
equality  lessens  the  disposition  to  form  new  religious  creeds.     Democratic  en  Amerique,
vol.  iv.  pp.  1 6,  17.     At  all  events,  it  is  certain  that  increasing  knowledge  has  this  effect  ;
for  those  great  men  whose  turn  of  mind  would  formerly  have  made  them  heretics,  are
now  content  to  confine  their  innovations  to  other  fields  of  thought.     If  St.  Augustin  had
lived  in  the  seventeenth  century,  he  would  have  reformed  or  created  the  physical  sciences.
If  Sir  Isaac  Newton  had  lived  in  the  fourth  century,  he  would  have  organized  a  new  sect,
and  have  troubled  the  church  with  his  originality.     [As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  growth  of
the  spirit  of  equality  did  evoke  a  multitude  of  new  sects  in  Holland  and  England  in  the
seventeenth  century.     See  above,  ch.  vii.  at  note  19,  the  allusion  to  "  a  thousand  sects."
—ED.]

3  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xix.  pp.  315,  316  ;  where  it  is  said,  "  1'ouvrage  de  Du  Haillan  est
remarquable,  en  ce  que  c'est  le  premier  corps  d'histoire  de  France  qui  ait  paru  dans  notre
langue."     See  also  Dacier,  Rapport  sur  les  Progres  de  VHistoire,  p.  170  ;  and  Des  Reaux,
Historiettes,  vol.  x.  p.  185.

[*  This  too  sweeping  statement  does  injustice  to  the  immense  labours  of  Joseph  Scaliger
on  the  chronological  side  of  history,  and  to  such  historical  researches  as  those  of  Francis
Hotman  (Franco -Gallia,  1573)  and  Etienne  Pasquier  (Recherches  de  la  France,  1560
and  thereafter),  concerning  whom  see  Prof.  Flint,  History  of  the  Philosophy  of  History,
l893>  PP-  187-190.  Compare  also  the  closing  sentence  of  par.  2  in  ch.  ix.  above,  and
note  2  thereafter,  where  assertions  are  made  that  do  not  quadrate  with  the  present
generalization. — ED.]


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  439

and  boasting,  that  I  have  done  a  thing  which  had  not  been  done  before,  or  seen
by  any  of  our  nation,  and  have  given  to  the  history  of  France  a  dress  it  never
appeared  in  before."  4  Nor  were  these  the  idle  boasts  of  an  obscure  man.  His
work  went  through  numerous  editions  ;  was  translated  into  Latin,  and  was  re-
printed in  foreign  countries.  He  himself  was  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  glories
of  the  French  nation,  and  was  rewarded  by  the  favour  of  the  king,  who  conferred
on  him  the  office  of  secretary  of  finance.5  From  his  work  we  may,  therefore,
gain  some  notion  of  what  was  then  the  received  standard  of  historical  literature  ;
and  with  this  view,  it  is  natural  to  inquire  what  the  materials  were  which  he
chiefly  employed.  About  sixty  years  earlier,  an  Italian  named  Paulus  Emilius
had  published  a  gossiping  compilation  on  "  the  Actions  of  the  French."  6  This
book,  which  is  full  of  extravagant  fables,  was  taken  by  Du  Haillan  as  the  basis
of  his  famous  history  of  the  kings  of  France  ;  and  from  it  he  unhesitatingly  copies
those  idle  stories  which  Emilius  loved  to  relate.  This  will  give  us  some  idea  of
the  credulity  of  a  writer  who  was  reckoned  by  his  contemporaries  to  be,  beyond
all  comparison,  the  greatest  historian  France  had  produced.  But  this  is  not  all.
Du  Haillan,  not  content  with  borrowing  from  his  predecessor  everything  that
was  most  incredible,  gratifies  his  passion  for  the  marvellous  by  some  circum-
stances of  his  own  invention.  He  begins  his  history  with  a  long  account  of  a
council  which,  he  says,  was  held  by  the  celebrated  Pharamond,  in  order  to
determine  whether  the  French  should  be  governed  by  a  monarchy  or  by  an
aristocracy.  It  is,  indeed,  doubtful  if  any  such  person  as  Pharamond  ever
existed  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  if  he  did  exist,  all  the  materials  had  long  perished
from  which  an  opinion  could  be  formed  respecting  him.7  But  Du  Haillan,
regardless  of  these  little  difficulties,  gives  us  the  fullest  information  touching
the  great  chieftain  ;  and,  as  if  determined  to  tax  to  the  utmost  the  credulity  of
his  readers,  mentions,  as  members  of  the  council  of  Pharamond,  two  persons,
Charamond  and  Quadrek,  whose  very  names  are  invented  by  the  historian.8

Such  was  the  state  of  historical  literature  in  France  early  in  the  reign  of
Henry  III.  A  great  change  was,  however,  at  hand.  The  remarkable  intellectual
progress  made  by  the  French  towards  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century  was,  as
I  have  shown,  preceded  by  that  scepticism  which  appears  to  be  its  necessary

4  Bayle,  article  Haillan,  note  L.

5  Mercure  Franpois,  in  Bayle,  article  Haillan,  note  D.

6  De  Rebus  gestis  Francorum,  which  appeared  about  1516.     Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xiii.  p.  119
Compare,  respecting  the  author,  Mezeray,  Hist,  de  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  363,  with  Audigier,
I'Origine  des  Franfois,  vol.  ii.  p.  118,  who  complains  of  his  opinion  about  Clovis,  "  quoy
qu'il  fasse  profession  de  relever  la  gloire  des  Francois."     Even  the  superficial  Boulain-
villiers  (Hist,  de  VAncien  Gouvernement,  vol.  ii.  p.   166)  contemptuously  notices  "  les
retoriciens  posterieurs,  tels  que  Paul  Emile."

7  Compare  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franfais,  vol.  i.  pp.  176,  177,  with  Montlosier,  Monar-
chie  Franfaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  43,  44.     Philippe  de  Comines,  though  superior  to  Sismondi  and
Montlosier  in  point  of  ability,  lived  in  the  middle  ages,  and  therefore  had  no  idea  of
doubting,  but  simply  says,  "  Pharamond  fut  esleu  roy,  1'an  420,  et  regna  dix  ans."  Mem.
de  Comines,  livre  viii.  chap,  xxvii.  vol.  iii.  p.  232.     But  De  Thou,  coming  a  hundred  years
after  Comines,  evidently  suspected  that  it  was  not  all  quite  right,  and  therefore  puts  it
on  the  authority  of  others.     "  Pharamond,  qui  selon  nos  historiens  a  porte  le  premier  la
couronne  des  Francois."     De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  x.  p.  530.     See  a  singular  passage  on
Pharamond  in  Mem.  de  Duplessis  Mornay,  vol.  ii.  p.  405.

8Sorel  (La  Bibliotheque  Franfoise,  Paris,  1667, 'p.  373)  says  of  Du  Haillan,  "  On  lui
peut  reprocher  d' avoir  donne  un  commencement  fabuleux  a  son  histoire,  qui  est  entiere-
ment  de  son  invention,  ayant  fait  tenir  un  conseil  entre  Pharamond  et  ses  plus  fidelles
conseillers,  pour  scauoir  si  ayant  la  puissance  en  main  il  deuoit  reduire  les  Francois  au
gouvernement  aristocratique  ou  monarchique,  et  faisant  faire  une  harangue  &  chacun
d'eux  pour  soustenir  son  opinion.  On  y  voit  les  noms  de  Charamond  et  de  Quadrek,
personnages  imaginaires."  Sorel,  who  had  a  glimmering  notion  that  this  was  not  exactly
the  way  to  write  history,  adds,  "  C'est  une  chose  fort  surprenante.JJ  On  est  fort  peu  asseure
si  Pharamond  fut  jamais  au  monde,  et  quoy  qu'on  scachejqu'il  y  ait  este,  c'est  une
terrible  hardiesse  d'en  raconter  des'choses  qui  n'ont  aucun  a'ppuy."


440  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

precursor.  The  spirit  of  doubt,  which  had  begun  with  religion,  was  communi-
cated to  literature.  The  impulse  was  immediately  felt  in  every  department  of
knowledge  ;  and  now  it  was  that  history  first  emerged  from  a  debasement  in  which
it  had  for  centuries  been  sunk.  On  this  subject,  a  mere  statement  of  dates  may
be  of  service  to  those  persons  who,  from  a  dislike  to  general  reasoning,  would
otherwise  deny  the  connexion  which  I  wish  to  establish.  In  1588  was  published
the  first  sceptical  book  ever  written  in  the  French  language.9  In  1598  the
French  government,  for  the  first  time,  ventured  upon  a  great  public  act  of  re-
ligious toleration.  In  1604  De  Thou  published  that  celebrated  work  which  is
allowed  by  all  critics  to  be  the  first  great  history  composed  by  a  Frenchman.10
And  at  the  very  moment  when  these  things  were  passing,  another  eminent
Frenchman,  the  illustrious  Sully,11  was  collecting  the  materials  for  his  historical
work,  which,  though  hardly  equal  to  that  of  De  Thou,  comes  immediately  after
it  in  ability,  in  importance,  and  in  reputation.  Nor  can  we  fail  to  remark  that
both  these  great  historians,  who  left  all  their  predecessors  immeasurably  behind
them,  were  the  confidential  ministers  and  intimate  friends  of  Henry  IV.,  the
first  king  of  France  whose  memory  is  stained  by  the  imputation  of  heresy,  and  the
first  who  dared  to  change  his  religion,  not  in  consequence  of  any  theological
arguments,  but  on  the  broad  and  notorious  ground  of  political  expediency.12

But  it  was  not  merely  over  such  eminent  historians  as  these  that  the  sceptical
spirit  displayed  its  influence.  The  movement  was  now  becoming  sufficiently
active  to  leave  its  marks  in  the  writings  of  far  inferior  men.  There  were  two
particulars  in  which  the  credulity  of  the  earlier  historians  was  very  striking.
These  consisted  in  the  uncritical  manner  in  which,  by  blindly  copying  their  pre-
decessors, they  confused  the  dates  of  different  events  ;  and  in  the  readiness  with
which  they  believed  the  most  improbable  statements,  upon  imperfect  evidence,
and  often  upon  no  evidence  at  all.  It  is  surely  a  singular  proof  of  that  intel-
lectual progress  which  I  am  endeavouring  to  trace,  that  within  a  very  few  years
both  these  sources  of  error  were  removed.  In  1597  Serres  was  appointed
historiographer  of  France  ;  and  in  the  same  year  he  published  his  history  of
that  country.13  In  this  work  he  insists  upon  the  necessity  of  carefully  recording
the  date  of  each  event  ;  and  the  example,  which  he  first  set,  has  since  his  time
been  generally  followed.14  The  importance  of  this  change  will  be  willingly

9  "  Die  erste  Regung  des  skeptischen  Geistes  finden  wir  in  den  Versuchen  des  Michael
von  Montaigne."     Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  ix.  p.  443.     [As  has  been  above
noted  (pp.  293-4)  this  generalization  overlooks  the  work  of  Bonaventure  Desperiers.
-ED.]

10  The  first  volume  appeared  in  1604.     See  Le  Long,  Bibliotheque  Historique  de  la
Prance,  vol.  ii.  p.  375  ;  and  preface  to  De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  i.  p.  iv.

11  Sismondi  has  scarcely  done  justice  to  Sully  ;  but  the  reader  will  find  a  fuller  account
of  him  in  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Reforme,  vol.  viii.  pp.  101-117  ;  and  a  still  better  one  in
Blanqui,  Histoire  de  VEconomie  Politique,  vol.  i.  pp.  347-361.

12  According  to  D'Aubigne,  the  king  on  his  conversion  said,  "  Je  ferai  voir  a  tout  le
monde  que  je  n'ai  este  persuade  par  autre  theologie  que  la  necessite  de  1'estat."  Smedley's
Reformed  Religion  in  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  362.     That  Henry  felt  this  is  certain  ;  and  that
he  expressed  it  to  his  friends  is  probable  ;  but  he  had  a  difficult  game  to  play  with  the
Catholic  church  ;  and  in  one  of  his  edicts  we  find  "  une  grande  joye  de  son  retour  a  1'eglise,
dont  il  attribuoit  la  cause  a  la  grace  du  Tout-Puissant,  et  aux  prieres  de  ses  fideles  sujets."
De  Thou,  Hist.  Univ.  vol.  xii.  pp.  105,  106.     Compare,  at  pp.  468,  469,  the  message  he
sent  to  the  pope.

13  Marchand,  Dictionnaire  Historique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  205,  209,  La  Haye,  1758,  folio.  This
curious  and  learned  work,  which  is  much  less  read  than  it  deserves,  contains  the  only
good  account  of  Serres  I  have  been  able  to  meet  with  ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  197-213.

14  "  On  ne  prenoit  presque  aucun  soin  de  marquer  les  dates  des  evenemens  dans  les
ouvrages  historiques.  .  .  .  De  Serres  reconnut  ce  defaut ;  et  pour  y  remedier,  il  rechercha
avec  beaucoup  de  soin  les  dates  des  evenemens  qu'il  avoit  a  employer,  et  les  marqua
dans  son  histoire  le  plus  exactement  qu'il  lui  fut  possible.     Cet  exemple  a  etc  imite  depuis
par  la  plupart  de  ceux  qui  1'ont  suivi ;  etVest  a  lui  qu'on  est  redevable  de  1'avantage


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  441

acknowledged  by  those  who  are  aware  of  the  confusion  into  which  history  has
been  thrown,  by  the  earlier  writers  having  neglected  what  now  seems  so  obvious
a  precaution.  Scarcely  had  this  innovation  been  established,  when  it  was  fol-
lowed, in  the  same  country,  by  another  of  still  greater  moment.  This  was  the
appearance,  in  1621,  of  a  history  of  France,  by  Scipio  Dupleix,  in  which  for  the
first  time  the  evidence  for  historical  facts  was  published  with  the  facts  them-
selves.15 It  is  needless  to  insist  upon  the  utility  of  a  step  which,  more  than  any
other,  has  taught  historians  to  be  industrious  in  collecting  their  authorities,  and
careful  in  scrutinizing  them.1^  To  this  may  be  added,  that  Dupleix  was  also  the
first  Frenchman  who  ventured  to  publish  a  system  of  philosophy  in  his  own
language.17  It  is  true  that  the  system  itself  is  intrinsically  of  little  value  ;  18
but  at  the  time  it  appeared  it  was  an  unprecedented  and,  on  that  account,  a
profane  attempt  to  unfold  the  mysteries  of  philosophy  in  the  vulgar  speech,
and  in  this  point  of  view  supplies  evidence  of  the  increasing  diffusion  of  a  spirit
bolder  and  more  inquisitive  than  any  formerly  known.  It  is  not  therefore
surprising  that  almost  at  the  same  moment  there  should  be  made,  in  the  same
country,  the  first  systematic  attempt  at  historical  scepticism.  The  system  of
philosophy  by  Dupleix  appeared  in  1602  ;  and  in  1599,  La  Popeliniere  pub-
lished at  Paris  what  he  calls  the  History  of  Histories,  in  which  he  criticizes  his-
torians themselves,  and  examines  their  works  with  that  sceptical  spirit  to  which
his  own  age  was  deeply  indebted.19  This  able  man  was  also  the  author  of  a  Sketch
of  the  New  History  of  the  French  ;  containing  a  formal  refutation  of  that  fable,
so  dear  to  the  early  historians,  according  to  which  the  monarchy  of  France  was
founded  by  Francus,  who  arrived  in  Gaul  after  the  conclusion  of  the  siege  of
Troy.2<>

qu'on  tire  d'une  pratique  si  necessaire  et  si  utile."     Marchand,  Diet.  Historique,  vol.  ii.
p.  206.

15  "  II  est  le  premier  historien  qui  ait  cite  en  marge  ses  autorites  ;  precaution  absolu-
ment  necessaire  quand  on  n'ecrit  pas  1'histoire  de  son  temps,  a  moins  qu'on  ne  s'en  tienne
aux  faits  connus."     (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xix.  p.  95.     And  the  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xii.
p.  277,  says,  "  On  doit  lui  faire  honneur  d' avoir  cite  en  marge  les  auteurs  dont  il  s'est
servi ;  precaution  indispensable,  que  Ton  connaissait  peu  avant  lui,  et  que  les  historiens
modernes  negligent  trop  aujourd'hui."     Bassompierre,  who  had  a  quarrel  with  Dupleix,
has  given  some  curious  details  respecting  him  and  his  History  ;  but  they  are  of  course
not  to  be  relied  on.     Mem.  de  Bassompierre,  vol.  iii.  pp.  356,  357.     Patin  speaks  favour-
ably of  his  history  of  Henry  IV.     Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  i.  p.  17  ;  but  compare  Sully,
(Economies  Royales,  vol.  ix.  pp.  121,  249.

16  The  ancients,  as  is  well  known,  rarely  took  this  trouble.     Mure's  Hist,  of  Greek
Literature,  vol.  iv.  pp.  197,  306,  307.     But  what  is  much  more  curious  is  that  even  in
scientific  works  there  was  an  equal  looseness  ;  and  Cuvier  says   that   in  the  sixteenth
century   "  on  se  bornait  a  dire,  d'une  maniere  generate,  Aristote  a  dit  telle  chose,  sans
indiquer  ni  le  passage  ni  le  livre  dans  lequel  la  citation  se  trouvait."     Cuvier,  Hist,  des
Sciences,  part  ii.  p.  63  ;  and  at  p.  88,  "  suivant  1'usage  de  son  temps,  Gessner  n'indique
pas  avec  precision  les  endroits  d'ou  il  a  tire  ses  citations  "  ;  see  also  p.  214.

17  "  Le  premier  ouvrage  de  philosophic  public  dans  cette  langue."     Biog.  Univ.  vol.
xii.  p.  277-

18  So  it  seemed  to  me,  when  I  turned  over  its  leaves  a  few  years  ago.     However,  Patin
says,  "  sa  philosophic  frangoise  n'est  pas  mauvaise."     Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  iii.  p.  357.
On  the  dialectic  powers  of  Dupleix,  see  a  favourable  judgment  in  Hamilton's  Discuss,  on
Philos.  p.  119.

19  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxv.  p.  402.     Sorel  (Bibliotheque  Francoise,  p.  165),  who  is  evi-
dently displeased  at  the  unprecedented  boldness  of  La  Popeliniere,  says,  "  il  dit  ses  senti-
mens  en  bref  des  historiens  de  toutes  les  nations,  et  de  plusieurs  langues,  et  particuliere  -
ment  des  historiens  francois,  dont  il  parle  avec  beaucoup  d'asseurance."

"  II  refute  1'opinion,  alors  fort  accreditee,  de  1'arrivee  dans  les  Gaules  de  Francus
et  des  Troyens."  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxv.  p.  402.  Compare  Le  Long,  Bibliotheque  His-
torique  de  la  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  39.  Patin  says  that  De  Thou  was  much  indebted  to  him  :
"  M.  de  Thou  a  pris  hardiment  de  la  Popeliniere."  Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  i.  p.  222.  There
is  a  notice  of  Popeliniere,  in  connexion  with  Richer,  in  Mem,  de  Richelieu,  vol.  v.  p.  349,


442


THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION


It  would  be  useless  to  collect  all  the  instances  in  which  this  advancing  spirit
of  scepticism  now  began  to  purge  history  of  its  falsehoods.  I  will  only  mention
two  or  three  more  of  those  which  have  occurred  in  my  reading.  In  1614,
De  Rubis  published  at  Lyons  a  work  on  the  European  monarchies  ;  in  which
he  not  only  attacks  the  long-established  belief  respecting  the  descent  from
Francus,  but  boldly  asserts  that  the  Franks  owe  their  name  to  their  ancient
liberties.21  In  1620,  Gomberville,  in  a  dissertation  on  history,  refutes  many
of  those  idle  stories  respecting  the  antiquity  of  the  French  which  had  been
universally  received  until  his  time.22  And  in  1630  Berthault  published  at
Paris  the  "  French  Florus,"  in  which  he  completely  upsets  the  old  method  ;
since  he  lays  it  down  as  a  fundamental  principle  that  the  origin  of  the  French
must  only  be  sought  for  in  those  countries  where  they  were  found  by  the
Romans.23

All  these,  and  similar  productions,  were  however  entirely  eclipsed  by
Mezeray's  History  of  France  ;  the  first  volume  of  which  was  published  in  1643,
and  the  last  in  165 i.24  It  is  perhaps  hardly  fair  to  his  predecessors  to  call
him  the  first  general  historian  of  France  ;  25  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  his
work  is  greatly  superior  to  any  that  had  yet  been  seen.  The  style  of  Mezeray
is  admirably  clear  and  vigorous,  rising  at  times  to  considerable  eloqiience.
Besides  this,  he  has  two  other  merits  much  more  important.  These  arc,  an
indisposition  to  believe  strange  things  merely  because  they  have  hitherto  been
believed  ;  and  an  inclination  to  take  the  side  of  the  people  rather  than  that
of  their  rulers.26  Of  these  principles,  the  first  was  too  common  among  the
ablest  Frenchmen  of  that  time  to  excite  much  attention.27  But  the  other  prin-
ciple enabled  Mezeray  to  advance  an  important  step  before  all  his  contem-
poraries. He  was  the  first  Frenchman  who,  in  a  great  historical  work,  threw
off  that  superstitious  reverence  for  royalty  which  had  long  troubled  the  minds
of  his  countrymen,  and  which  indeed  continued  to  haunt  them  for  another
century.  As  a  necessary  consequence,  he  was  also  the  first  who  saw  that  a
history,  to  be  of  real  value,  must  be  a  history  not  only  of  kings  but  of  nations.

21  "  II  refute  les  fables  qu'on  avancoit  sur  1'origine  des  Francois,  appuyees  sur  le
temoignage  du  faux  Berose.     II  dit  que  leur   nom   vient  de  leur  ancienne  franchise."
Le  Long,  Bibliotheque  Historique,  vol.  ii.  p.  750.

22  Compare  Sorel,  Bibliotheque  Francoise,  p.  298,  with  Du  Fresnoy,  Methode  pour
etudier  VHistoire,  vol.  x.  p.  4,  Paris,  1772.     There  is  an  account  of  Gomberville  in  Les
Historiettes  de  Tallemant  des  Reaux,  vol.  viii.  pp.  15-19  ;    a  singularly  curious  book,
which  is  for  the  seventeenth    century  what  Brantome  is  for  the  sixteenth.      I  ought
to  have  mentioned  earlier  the  inimitable  ridicule  with  which  Rabelais  treats  the  habit
historians  had  of  tracing  the  genealogies  of  their  heroes  back  to  Noah.     (Euvres  de
Rabelais,  vol.  i.  pp.  1-3,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  10-17;    see  also,  at  vol.  v.  pp.  171,  172,    his
defence  of  the  antiquity  of  Chinon.

23  "  L'auteur  croit  qu'il  ne  faut  pas  la  chercher  ailleurs  que  dans  le  pays  ou  ils  ont
ete  connus  des  Romains,  c'est-a-dire  entre  1'Elbe  et  le  Rhin."     Le  Long,  Bibliotheque
Historique,  vol.  ii.  p.  56.     This  work  of  Berthault's  was   for  many  years   a  text -book
in  the  French  colleges.     Biog,   Univ.  vol.  iv.  p.  347.

24  The  first  volume  in  1643  ;   the  second  in  1646  ;   and  the  last  in  1651.     Biog.  Univ.
vol.  xxviii.  p.  510.

25  "  The  French  have  now  their  first  general  historian,  Mezeray."     Hallarn's  Literature
of  Europe,  vol.  iii.  p.  228  ;    and  see  Stephen's  Lectures  on  the  History  of  France,  1851,
vol.  i.  p.  10.

26  Bayle  says  that  Mezeray  is    "  de  tous  les  historiens  celui  qui  favorise  le  plus  les
peuples  centre  la  cour."     Le  Long,  Bibliotheque  Historique,  vol.  iii.  p.  Ixxxvi.

27  Though  it  did  not  prevent  him  from  believing  that  sudden  tempests,  and  unusual
appearances  in  the  heavens,  were  aberrations    due  to  supernatural  interference,  and,
as  such,  were  the  prognosticates  of  political  change.     Mezeray,  Hist,  de  France,  vol.  i.
pp.  202,  228,  238,  241,  317,  792,  vol.  ii.  pp.  485,  573,  1120,  vol.  iii.  pp.  31,  167,  894  ;
instructive  passages,  as  proving  that  even  in  powerful  minds  the  scientific  and  secular
method  was  still  feeble.


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  443

A  steady  perception  of  this  principle  led  him  to  incorporate  into  his  book
matters  which,  before  his  time,  no  one  cared  to  study.  He  communicates
all  the  information  he  could  collect  respecting  the  taxes  which  the  people  had
paid  ;  the  sufferings  they  had  undergone  from  the  griping  hands  of  their  gover-
nors ;  their  manners,  their  comforts,  even  the  state  of  the  towns  which  they
inhabited  ;  in  a  word,  what  affected  the  interests  of  the  French  people,  as  well
as  what  affected  the  interests  of  the  French  monarchy.28  These  were  the  subjects
which  Mezeray  preferred  to  insignificant  details  respecting  the  pomp  of  courts
and  the  lives  of  kings.  These  were  the  large  and  comprehensive  matters  on
which  he  loved  to  dwell,  and  on  which  he  expatiated  ;  not  indeed  with  so
much  fulness  as  we  could  desire,  but  still  with  a  spirit  and  an  accuracy  which
entitle  him  to  the  honour  of  being  the  greatest  historian  France  produced
before  the  eighteenth  century.

This  was  in  many  respects  the  most  important  change  which  had  yet  been
effected  in  the  manner  of  writing  history.  If  the  plan  begun  by  Mezeray  had
'been  completed  by  his  successors,  we  should  possess  materials  the  absence  of
which  no  modern  researches  can  possibly  compensate.  Some  things,  indeed,
we  should  in  that  case  have  lost.  We  should  know  less  than  we  now  know
of  courts  and  of  camps.  We  should  have  heard  less  of  the  peerless  beauty
of  French  queens,  and  of  the  dignified  presence  of  French  kings.  We  might
even  have  missed  some  of  the  links  of  that  evidence  by  which  the  genealogies
of  princes  and  nobles  are  ascertained,  and  the  study  of  which  delights  the
curiosity  of  antiquarians  and  heralds.  But  on  the  other  hand  we  should  have
been  able  to  examine  the  state  of  the  French  people  during  the  latter  half  of  the
seventeenth  century  ;  while,  as  things  now  stand,  our  knowledge  of  them  in
that  most  important  period  is  inferior  in  accuracy  and  in  extent  to  the  know-
ledge we  possess  of  some  of  the  most  barbarous  tribes  of  the  earth.29  If  the
example  of  Mezeray  had  been  followed,  with  such  additional  resources  as  the
progress  of  affairs  would  have  supplied,  we  should  not  only  have  the  means  of
minutely  tracing  the  growth  of  a  great  and  civilized  nation,  but  we  should
have  materials  that  would  suggest  or  verify  those  original  principles  the  dis-
covery of  which  constitutes  the  real  use  of  history.

But  this  was  not  to  be.  Unhappily  for  the  interests  of  knowledge,  the  march
of  French  civilization  was  at  this  period  suddenly  checked.  Soon  after  the
middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  that  lamentable  change  took  place  in  France
which  gave  a  new  turn  to  the  destinies  of  the  nation.  The  reaction  which  the
spirit  of  inquiry  underwent,  and  the  social  and  intellectual  circumstances  which,
by  bringing  the  Fronde  to  a  premature  close,  prepared  the  way  for  Louis  XIV.,
have  been  described  in  a  former  part  of  this  volume,  where  I  have  attempted
to  indicate  the  general  effects  of  the  disastrous  movement.  It  now  remains
for  me  to  point  out  how  this  retrogressive  tendency  opposed  obstacles  to  the
improvement  of  historical  literature,  and  prevented  authors,  not  only  from
relating  with  honesty  what  was  passing  around  them,  but  also  from  under-
standing events  which  had  occurred  before  their  time.

The  most  superficial  students  of  French  literature  must  be  struck  by  the
dearth  of  historians  during  that  long  period  in  which  Louis  XIV.  held  the  reins

28  What  he  did  on  these  subjects  is  most  remarkable,  considering  that  some  of  the
best  materials  were  unknown,  and  in  manuscript,  and  that  even  De  Thou  gives  scarcely
any  information  respecting  them  ;    so  that  Mezeray  had  no  model.     See,  among  other
passages  which  have  struck  me  in  the  first  volume,  pp.  145-147,  204,  353,  356,  362-365,
53o»  53*.  58i,  812,  946,  1039.     Compare  his  indignant  expressions  at  vol.  ii.  p.  721.

29  Those  who  have  studied  the  French  memoirs  of  the  seventeenth  century,  know
how  little  can  be  found  in  them  respecting  the  condition  of  the  people  ;  while  the  fullest
private  correspondence,  such  as  the  letters  of  Sevigne  and  De   Maintenon,  is  equally
unsatisfactory.     The  greater  part  of  the  evidence  now  extant  has  been  collected  by
M.  Monteil,  in  his  valuable  work,  Histoire  des  divers  Stats  ;    but  whoever  will  put  all
this  together  must  admit  that  we  are  better  informed  as  to  the  condition  of  many  savage
tribes  than  we  are  concerning  the  lower  classes  of  France  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.


444  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  government.30  To  this,  the  personal  peculiarities  of  the  king  greatly  con-
tributed. His  education  had  been  shamefully  neglected  ;  and  as  he  never
had  the  energy  to  repair  its  deficiencies,  he  all  his  life  remained  ignorant  of  many
things  with  which  even  princes  are  usually  familiar.31  Of  the  course  of  past
events  he  knew  literally  nothing,  and  he  took  no  interest  in  any  history  except
the  history  of  his  own  exploits.  Among  a  free  people,  this  indifference  on  the
part  of  the  sovereign  could  never  have  produced  injurious  results  ;  indeed,  as  we
have  already  seen,  the  absence  of  royal  patronage  is  in  a  highly  civilized  country
the  most  favourable  condition  of  literature.  But  at  the  accession  of  Louis  XIV.
the  liberties  of  the  French  were  still  too  young,  and  the  habits  of  independent
thought  too  recent,  to  enable  them  to  bear  up  against  that  combination  of  the
crown  and  the  church  which  was  directed  against  them.*  The  French,  becoming
every  day  more  servile,  at  length  sunk  so  low  that,  by  the  end  of  the  seventeenth
century,  they  seemed  to  have  lost  even  the  wish  of  resistance.  The  king,  meeting
no  opposition,  endeavoured  to  exercise  over  the  intellect  of  the  country  an
authority  equal  to  that  with  which  he  conducted  its  government.32  In  all
the  great  questions  of  religion  and  of  politics,  the  spirit  of  inquiry  was  stifled,
and  no  man  was  allowed  to  express  an  opinion  unfavourable  to  the  existing
state  of  things.  As  the  king  was  willing  to  endow  literature,  he  naturally
thought  that  he  had  a  right  to  its  services.  Authors  who  were  fed  by  his  hand
were  not  to  raise  their  voices  against  his  policy.  They  received  his  wages,
and  they  were  bound  to  do  the  bidding  of  him  who  paid  them.  When  Louis
assumed  the  government,  Mezeray  was  still  living  ;  though  I  need  hardly  say
that  his  great  work  was  published  before  this  system  of  protection  and  patronage
came  into  play.  The  treatment  to  which  he,  the  great  historian  of  France,
was  now  subjected,  was  a  specimen  of  the  new  arrangement.  He  received
from  the  crown  a  pension  of  four  thousand  francs  ;  but  when  he  in  1668  pub-
lished an  abridgment  of  his  History,33  it  was  intimated  to  him,  that  some  remarks
upon  the  tendency  of  taxation  were  likely  to  cause  offence  in  high  quarters.

30  This  is  noticed  in  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxvii.  pp.  181,  182  ;    also  in
Villemain,  Litter  ature  Franfaise,  vol.  ii.  pp.  29,  30.     Compare  D'Argenson,  Reflexions
sur  les  Historiens  Francois,  in  Memoir es  de  I  Academic  des  Inscriptions,     vol.  xxviii.
p.  627,  with  Boulainvilliers,  Ancien  Gouvernement  de  la  France,  vol.  i.  p.  174.

31  "  Le  jeune  Louis  XIV  n'avait  recu  aucune  education  intellectuelle."     Capefigue's
Richelieu,  Mazarin  et  la  Fronde,  vol.  ii.  p.  245.     On  the  education  of  Louis  XIV.  which
was  as  shamefully  neglected  as  that  of  our  George  III.,  seeLettres  inedites  de  Maintenon,
vol.    ii.  p.  369  ;    Duclos,  Mem.  Secrets,  vol.  i.  pp.  167,  168  ;    Mem.  de  Brienne,  vol.  i.

PP-  391-393-

32  On  his  political  maxims,  see  Lemontey,  Etablissement  de  Louis  XIV.,  pp.  325-327,
407,  408.      The  eloquent  remarks  made  by  M.  Ranke  upon  an  Italian  despotism  are
admirably  applicable  to  his  whole  system  :    "  Sonderbare  Gestalt  menschlichen  Dinge  !
Die  Krafte  des  Landes  bringen  den  Hof  hervor,  der  Mittelpunkt  des  Hofes  ist  der  Fiirst,
das  letzte  Product  des  gesammten  Lebens  ist  zuletzt  das  Selbstgefiihl  des  Fiirsten."
Die  Pdpste,  vol.  ii.  p.  266.

33  His  Abrege  Chronologique  was  published  in  1668,  in  three  volumes  quarto.     Biog.
Univ.  vol.  xxviii.  p.  510.     Le  Long  (Bibliotheque  Historique,  vol.  iii.  p.  Ixxxv.)  says,
that  it  was  only  allowed  to  be  published  in  consequence  of  a  "  privilege  "  which  Mezeray
had  formerly  obtained.     But  there  seems  to  have  been  some  difficulty,  of  which  these
writers  are  not  aware  :    for  Patin,  in  a  letter  dated  Paris,  23  December,  1664,  speaks
of  it  as  being  then  in  the  press  :    "  on  imprime  ici  en  grand -in -quarto  un   Abrege    de
1'Histoire  de  France,  par  M.  Mezeray."     Lettres  de  Patin,  vol.  iii.  p.  503  ;  compare  p.  665.
It  long  remained  an  established  school-book  :    see  D'Argenson's  Essay,  in  Mem.    de
VAcademie,  vol.  xxviii.  p.  635  ;    and  Works  of  Sir  William  Temple,  vol.  iii.  p.  70.

[*  It  will  be  observed  that  Buckle  here  lapses  into  a  denial  of  his  own  previous
argument,  though,  half  conscious  of  his  inconsistency,  he  tries  to  save  his  case.  He
distinctly  ascribes  the  backwardness  of  history  in  France  under  Louis  XIV.  to  the
neglect  of  the  king,  and  calls  the  withdrawal  of  Mezeray's  pension  a  "punishment." — ED.]


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  445

k.s,  however,  it  was  soon  found  that  Mezeray  was  too  honest  and  too  fearless
to  retract  what  he  had  written,  it  was  determined  to  have  recourse  to  intimida-
:ion,  and  half  of  his  pension  was  taken  from  him.34  But  as  this  did  not  produce
•  oroper  effect,  another  order  was  issued,  which  deprived  him  of  the  remaining

If  ;    and  thus  early,  in  this  bad  reign,  there  was  set  an  example  of  punishing

man  for  writing  with  honesty  upon  a  subject  in  which,  of  all  others,  honesty

the  first  essential.35

Such  conduct  as  this  showed  what  historians  were  to  expect  from  the  govern -

lent  of  Louis  XIV.     Several  years  later,  the  king  took  another  opportunity

)f  displaying  the  same  spirit.       Fenelon  had  been  appointed  preceptor  to  the

grandson  of  Louis,  whose  early  vices  his  firmness  and  judgment  did  much    to

repress.36     But  a  single  circumstance  was  thought  sufficient  to  outweigh  the

imense  service  which  Fenelon  thus  rendered  to  the  royal  family,  and,  if  his
)upil  had  come  to  the  throne,  would  have  rendered  prospectively  to  the  whole

France.  His  celebrated  romance,  Telemachus,  was  published  in  1699,  as  it
ippears,  without  his  consent.37  The  king-  suspected  that  under  the  guise  of

fiction  Fenelon  intended  to  reflect  on  the  conduct  of  government.     It  was

vain  that  the  author  denied  so  dangerous  an  imputation.     The  indignation

)f  the  king  was  not  to  be  appeased.     He  banished  Fenelon  from  the  court  ;

id  would  never  again  admit  to  his  presence  a  man  whom  he  suspected  of   even

sinuating  a  criticism  upon  the  measures  adopted  by  the  administration  of  the


If  the  king  could  on  mere  suspicion  thus  treat  a  great  writer,  who  had  the
ink  of  an  archbishop  and  the  reputation  of  a  saint,  it  was  not  likely  that  he
rould  deal  more  tenderly  with  inferior  men.  In  1681,  the  Abbe  Primi,  an
Italian,  then  residing  at  Paris,  was  induced  to  write  a  history  of  Louis  XIV.
"~ie  king,  delighted  with  the  idea  of  perpetuating  his  own  fame,  conferred
Jveral  rewards  upon  the  author  ;  and  arrangements  were  made  that  the  work
should  be  composed  in  Italian,  and  immediately  translated  into  French.  But
when  the  history  appeared  there  were  found  in  it  some  circumstances  which  it  was
thought  ought  not  to  have  been  disclosed.  On  this  account,  Louis  caused  the
>ook  to  be  suppressed,  the  papers  of  the  author  to  be  seized,  and  the  author
limself  to  be  thrown  into  the  Bastille.39

Those    indeed    were    dangerous   times   for  independent   men  ;     times   when
-  writer  on  politics  or  religion  was  safe,  unless  he  followed  the  fashion  of  the

34  Barrier  e,  Essai  sur  les  Mceurs  du  Dix-septieme  Siecle,  prefixed  to  Mem.  de  Brienne,
al.  i.  pp.  129,  130,  where  reference  is  made  to  his  original  correspondence  with  Colbert.

lis  treatment  of  Mezeray  is  noticed,  but  imperfectly,  in  Boulainvilliers,  Hist,  de  VAncien
mvernement,  vol  i.  p.  196  ;    in  Lemontey,  Etablissement  de  Louis,    p.    331  ;    and    in
^alissot,  Mem.  pour  VHist.  de  Lit.  vol.  ii.  p.  161.

35  In  1685  was  published  at  Paris  what  was  called  an  improved  edition  of  Mezeray's
listory  ;    that  is,  an  edition  from  which  the  honest  remarks  were  expunged.      See

Long,  Bibliotheque  Historique,  vol  ii.  p.  53,  vol.  iv.  p.  381  ;    and  Brunei,  Manuel
Libraire,  vol.  iii.  p.  383,  Paris,  1843.     Hampden,  who  know  Mezeray,  has  recorded
interesting  interview  he  had  with  him  in  Paris,  when  the  great  historian  lamented
ic  loss  of  the  liberties  of  France.     See  Calamy's  Life  of  Himself,  vol.  i.  pp.  392,  393-

36  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxvi.  pp.  240,  241.

37  "  Par  I'inndelite  d'un  domestique  charge  de  transcrire  le  manuscrit."     Biog.  Univ.
ol.  xiv.  p.  289  ;    and  see  Peignot,  Diet,  des  Limes  condamnes,  vol.  i.  pp.  i34»  X35'     It
ras  suppressed  in  France,  and  appeared  in  Holland  in  the  same  year,  1699.     Lettres

Sevigne,  vol.  vi.  pp.  434,  435  note.

38  "Louis  XlVpritle  Telemaque  pour  une  personnalite.  .  .  .     Comme  il  (Fenelon)
ivait  deplu  au  roi,  il  mourut  dans  1'exil."     Lerminier,  Philos.  du  Droit,  vol.  ii.  pp.  219,
520  ;   and  see  Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,  chap,  xxxii.,  in  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xx.  p.  307.

39  These  circumstances  are  related  in  a  letter  from  Lord  Preston,  dated  Paris,  22  July,
1682,  and  printed  in  Dalrymple's  Memoirs,  pp.   141.   142,  appendix  to  vol.  i.       The

:ount  given  by  M.    Peignot  (Livres  condamnes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  52,  53)  is  incomplete,  he
evidently  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  Lord  Preston's  letter.


446  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

day,  and  defended  the  opinions  of  the  court  and  the  church.  The  king,  who
had  an  insatiable  thirst  for  what  he  called  glory,40  laboured  to  degrade  con-
temporary historians  into  mere  chroniclers  of  his  own  achievements.  He
ordered  Racine  and  Boileau  to  write  an  account  of  his  reign  ;  he  settled  a  pension
upon  them,  and  he  promised  to  supply  them  with  the  necessary  materials.41
But  even  Racine  and  Boileau,  poets  though  they  were,  knew  that  they  would
fail  in  satisfying  his  morbid  vanity  ;  they  therefore  received  the  pension,  but
omitted  to  compose  the  work  for  which  the  pension  was  conferred.  So  notorious
was  the  unwillingness  of  able  men  to  meddle  with  history,  that  it  was  thought
advisable  to  beat  up  literary  recruits  from  foreign  countries.  The  case  of  the
Abbe  Primi  has  just  been  mentioned  ;  he  was  an  Italian,  and  only  one  year
later  a  similar  offer  was  made  to  an  Englishman.  In  1683,  Burnet  visited
France,  and  was  given  to  understand  that  he  might  receive  a  pension,  and  that
he  might  even  enjoy  the  honour  of  conversing  with  Louis  himself,  provided  he
would  write  a  history  of  the  royal  affairs  ;  such  history,  it  was  carefully  added,
being  on  the  "  side  "  of  the  French  king.42

Under  such  circumstances  as  these,  it  is  no  wonder  that  history,  so  far  as
its  great  essentials  are  concerned,  should  have  rapidly  declined  during  the  power
of  Louis  XIV.  It  became,  as  some  think,  more  elegant  ;  but  it  certainly  became
more  feeble.  The  language  in  which  it  was  composed  was  worked  with  great
care,  the  periods  neatly  arranged,  the  epithets  soft  and  harmonious.  For
that  was  a  polite  and  obsequious  age,  full  of  reverence,  of  duty,  and  of  admira-
tion. In  history,  as  it  was  then  written,  every  king  was  a  hero,  and  every  bishop
was  a  saint.  All  unpleasant  truths  were  suppressed  ;  nothing  harsh  or  unkind
was  to  be  told.  These  docile  and  submissive  sentiments  being  expressed  in
an  easy  and  flowing  style,  gave  to  history  that  air  of  refinement,  that  gentle,
unobtrusive  gait,  which  made  it  popular  with  the  classes  that  it  flattered.  But
even  so,  while  its  form  was  polished,  its  life  was  extinct.  All  its  independence
was  gone,  all  its  honesty,  all  its  boldness.  The  noblest  and  the  most  difficult
department  of  knowledge,  the  study  of  the  movements  of  the  human  race,  was
abandoned  to  every  timid  and  creeping  intellect  that  cared  to  cultivate  it.
There  were  Boulainvilliers,  and  Daniel,  and  Maimbourg,  and  Varillas,  and
Vertot,  and  numerous  others,  who  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  were  believed  to
be  historians  ;  but  whose  histories  have  scarcely  any  merit,  except  that  of
enabling  us  to  appreciate  the  period  in  which  such  productions  were  admired,
and  the  system  of  which  they  were  the  representatives.

c** To  give  a  complete  view  of  the  decline  of  historical  literature  in  France,  from
the  time  of  Mezeray  until  early  in  the  eighteenth  century,  would  require  a  sum-
mary of  every  history  which  was  written  ;  for  all  of  them  were  pervaded  by  the
same  spirit.  But,  as  this  would  occupy  much  too  large  a  space,  it  will  probably
be  thought  sufficient  if  I  confine  myself  to  such  illustrations  as  will  bring  the
tendency  of  the  age  most  clearly  before  the  reader  ;  and  for  this  purpose  I  will
notice  the  works  of  two  historians  I  have  not  yet  mentioned  ;  one  of  whom
was  celebrated  as  an  antiquary,  the  other  as  a  theologian.  Both  possessed


40  An  able  writer  has  well  called  him  "  glorieux  plutot  qu'appreciateur  de  la  vraie
gloire."     Flassan,  Histoire  de  la  Diplomatic  Franfaise,  vol.  iv.  p.  399.

41  In  1677,  Madame  de  Sevigne  writes  from  Paris  respecting  the  king  :    "  Vous  savez
bien  qu'il  a  donne  deux  mille  ecus  de  pension  a  Racine  et  a  Despreaux,  en  leur  com-
mandant de  travailler  a  son  histoire,  dont  il  aura  soin  de  donner  des  Memoires."   Lettres
de  Sevigne,  vol.  iii.  p.  362.       Compare  Eloge  de  Valincourt,  in  (Euvres  de    Fontenelle,
vol.  vi.  p.  383  ;    and  Hughes' s  Letters,  edit.   1773,  vol.  ii.  pp.  74,  75.

42  Burnet  relates  this  with  delightful  simplicity :    "  Others  more  probably  thought
that  the  king,  hearing  I  was  a  writer  of  history,  had  a  mind  to  engage  me  to  write  on
his  side.     I  was  told  a  pension  would  be  offered  me.     But  I  made  no  steps  towards  it ;
for  though  I  was  offered  an  audience  of  the  king,  I  excused  it,  since  I  could  not  have
the  honour  to  be  presented  to  that  king  by  the  minister  of  England."     Burnett  Own
Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  385.


.


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  447


nsiderable  learning,  and  one  was  a  man  of  undoubted  genius  ;  their  works
are,  therefore,  worth  attention,  as  symptoms  of  the  state  of  the  French  intellect
late  in  the  seventeenth  century.*  The  name  of  the  antiquary  was  Audigier  ;
the  name  of  the  theologian  was  Bossuet  :  and  from  them  we  may  learn  some-
thing respecting  the  way  in  which,  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  it  was  usual
to  contemplate  the  transactions  of  past  ages.

The  celebrated  work  of  Audigier,  on  the  Origin  of  the  French,  was  published
at  Paris  in  i6/6.43  It  would  be  unjust  to  deny  that  the  author  was  a  man  of
great  and  careful  reading.  But  his  credulity,  his  prejudices,  his  reverence
for  antiquity,  and  his  dutiful  admiration  for  everything  established  by  the
church  and  the  court,  warped  his  judgment  to  an  extent  which  in  our  time
seems  incredible  ;  and,  as  there  are  probably  few  persons  in  England  who  have
read  his  once  famous  book,  I  will  give  an  outline  of  its  leading  views.

In  this  great  history  we  are  told  that  3,464  years  after  the  creation  of  the
world,  and  590  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  was  the  exact  period  at  which
Sigovese,  nephew  to  the  king  of  the  Celts,  was  first  sent  into  Germany.44  Those
who  accompanied  him  were  necessarily  travellers  ;  and  as,  in  the  German
language,  wandeln  means  to  go,  we  have  here  the  origin  of  the  Vandals.45  But
the  antiquity  of  the  Vandals  is  far  surpassed  by  that  of  the  French.  Jupiter,
Pluto,  and  Neptune,  who  are  sometimes  supposed  to  be  gods,  were  in  reality
kings  of  Gaul.46  And,  if  we  look  back  a  little  further,  it  becomes  certain  that
Gallus,  the  founder  of  Gaul,  was  no  other  than  Noah  himself  ;  for  in  those  days
the  same  man  frequently  had  two  names.47  As  to  the  subsequent  history
of  the  French,  it  was  fully  equal  to  the  dignity  of  their  origin.  Alexander  the
Great,  even  in  all  the  pride  of  his  victories,  never  dared  to  attack  the  Scythians,
who  were  a  colony  sent  from  France.48  It  is  from  these  great  occupiers  of
France  that  there  have  proceeded  all  the  gods  of  Europe,  all  the  fine  arts,  and
all  the  sciences.49  The  English  themselves  are  merely  a  colony  of  the  French,
as  must  be  evident  to  whoever  considers  the  similarity  of  the  words  Angles
and  Anjou  ;  50  and  to  this  fortunate  descent  the  natives  of  the  British  islands

43  During  many  years  it  enjoyed  great  reputation  ;    and  there  is  no  history  written
in  that  period  respecting  which  Le  Long  gives  so  many  details.     See  his  Bibliotheque
Historique  de  la  France,  vol.  ii.  pp.  13,  14.     Compare  La  Bibliotheque  de  Leber,  vol.  ii.
p.  no,  Paris,  1839.

44  Audigier,  VOrigine  des  Francois,  Paris,  1676,  vol.  i.  p.  5.     See  also  p.  45,  where
he  congratulates  himself  on  being  the  first  to  clear  up  the  history  of  Sigovese.

45  Audigier,  vol.  i.  p.   7.     Other  antiquaries  have  adopted  the  same  preposterous
etymology.     See  a  note  in  Kemble's  Saxons  in  England,  vol.  i.  p.  41.

46  "Or  le  plus  ancien  Jupiter,  le  plus  ancien  Neptune,  et  le  plus  ancien  Pluton,  sont
ceux  de  Gaule  ;    ils  la  diviserent  les  premiers  eu  Celtique,  Aquitaine  et  Belgique,  et
obtinrent  chacuii  une  de  ces  parties  en  partage.     Jupiter,  qu'on  fait  regner  au  ciel,
cut  la  Celtique.  .  .  .  Neptune,  qu'on  fait  regner  sur  les  eaux,  et  sur  les  mers,  cut  1'Aqui-
tainc,  qui  ii'est  appellee  de  la  sorte  qu'a  cause  de  1'abondance  de  ses  eaux,  et  de  la  situa-
tion sur  1' ocean."      Audigier,  VOrigine  des  Francois,  vol.  i.  pp.  223,  224.

47  See  his  argument,  vol.  i.  pp.  216,  217,  beginning,  "  le  nom  de  Noe,  que  porterent
les  Galates,  est  Gallus  "  ;  and  compare  vol.  ii.  p.  109,  where  he  expresses  surprise  that  so
little  should  have  been  done  by  previous  writers  towards  establishing  this  obvious  origin
of  the  French.

48  Audigier,  vol.  i.  pp.  196,  197,  255,  256.

"  Voila  done  les  anciennes  divinitez  d' Europe,  originaires  de  Gaule,  aussi  bien  que
les  beaux  arts  et  les  hautes  sciences."     Audigier,  vol.  i.  p.  234.

50  Ibid,  vol.  i.  pp.  73,  74.  He  sums  up,  "  e'en  est  assez  pour  relever  1'Anjou,  a  qui
cette  gloire  appartient  legitimement."

[*  It  has  to  be  noted  that  while  he  justly  criticises  Bossuet's  work  on  Universal  History,
Buckle  below  incidentally  admits  the  power  of  the  Histoire  des  Variations,  which  belongs
to  the  historical  department.  He  omits,  however,  to  mention  Huefs  Histoire  du  Com-
merce et  de  la  Navigation  des  Anciens  (1716)  and  De  VOrigine  des  Romans  (1670),  both
works  of  sociological  value. — ED.]


448  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

are  indebted  for  such  bravery  and  politeness  as  they  still  possess.51  Several
other  points  are  cleared  up  by  this  great  critic  with  equal  facility.  The  Salian
Franks  were  so  called  from  the  rapidity  of  their  flight  ;  52  the  Bretons  were
evidently  Saxons  ;  ™  and  even  the  Scotch,  about  whose  independence  so  much
has  been  said,  were  vassals  to  the  kings  of  France.54  Indeed,  it  is  impossible
to  exaggerate  the  dignity  of  the  crown  of  France  ;  it  is  difficult  even  to  conceive
its  splendour.  Some  have  supposed  that  the  emperors  are  superior  to  the
kings  of  France,  but  this  is  the  mistake  of  ignorant  men  ;  for  an  emperor  means
a  mere  military  ruler,  while  the  title  of  king  includes  all  the  functions  of  supreme
power.55  To  put  the  question,  therefore,  on  its  real  footing,  the  great  king
Louis  XIV.  is  an  emperor,  as  have  been  all  his  predecessors,  the  illustrious
rulers  of  France,  for  fifteen  centuries.5^  And  it  is  an  undoubted  fact  that
Antichrist,  about  whom  so  much  anxiety  is  felt,  will  never  be  allowed  to  appear
in  the  world  until  the  French  empire  has  been  destroyed.  This,  says  Audigier,
it  would  be  idle  to  deny  ;  for  it  is  asserted  by  many  of  the  saints,  and  it  is  dis-
tinctly foreshadowed  by  St.  Paul,  in  his  second  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.57

Strange  as  all  this  appears,  there  was  nothing  in  it  to  revolt  the  enlightened
age  of  Louis  XIV.  Indeed  the  French,  dazzled  by  the  brilliancy  of  their  prince,
must  have  felt  great  interest  in  learning  how  superior  he  was  to  all  other  poten-
tates, and  how  he  had  not  only  been  preceded  by  a  long  line  of  emperors,  but
was  in  fact  an  emperor  himself.  They  must  have  been  struck  with  awe  at  the
information  communicated  by  Audigier  respecting  the  arrival  of  Antichrist,
and  the  connexion  between  that  important  event  and  the  fate  of  the  French
monarchy.  They  must  have  listened  with  pious  wonder  to  the  illustration  of
these  matters  from  the  writings  of  the  fathers,  and  from  the  epistle  to  the
Thessalonians.  All  this  they  would  easily  receive  ;  because  to  worship  the
king,  and  venerate  the  church,  were  the  two  cardinal  maxims  of  that  age.  To
obey,  and  to  believe,  were  the  fundamental  ideas  of  a  period  in  which  the  fine
arts  did  for  a  time  flourish, — in  which  the  perception  of  beauty,  though  too
fastidious,  was  undoubtedly  keen, — in  which  taste  and  the  imagination,  in  its
lower  departments,  were  zealously  cultivated, — but  in  which,  on  the  other
hand,  originality  and  independence  of  thought  were  extinguished,  the  greatest
and  the  largest  topics  were  forbidden  to  be  discussed,  the  sciences  were  almost
deserted,  reforms  and  innovations  were  hated,  new  opinions  were  despised,
and  their  authors  punished,  until  at  length,  the  exuberance  of  genius  being
tamed  into  sterility,  the  national  intellect  was  reduced  to  that  dull  and  mono-
tonous level  which  characterizes  the  last  twenty  years  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.

In  no  instance  can  we  find  a  better  example  of  this  reactionary  movement
than  in  the  case  of  Bossuet,  Bishop  of  Meaux.  The  success,  and  indeed  the  mere
existence,  of  his  work  on  Universal  History  becomes  from  this  point  of  view
highly  instructive.  Considered  by  itself,  the  book  is  a  painful  exhibition  of  a
great  genius  cramped  by  a  superstitious  age.  But  considered  in  reference  to  the
time  in  which  it  appeared,  it  is  invaluable  as  a  symptom  of  the  French  intellect  ;
since  it  proves  that  towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  one  of  the  most
eminent  men,  in  one  of  the  first  countries  of  Europe,  could  willingly  submit  to  a
prostration  of  judgment,  and  could  display  a  blind  credulity,  of  which  in  our  day
even  the  feeblest  minds  would  be  ashamed  ;  and  that  this,  so  far  from  causing
scandal,  or  bringing  a  rebuke  on  the  head  of  the  author,  was  received  with  universal
and  unqualified  applause.  Bossuet  was  a  great  orator,  a  consummate  dialec-
tician, and  an  accomplished  master  of  those  vague  sublimities  by  which  most

51  Vol.  i.  pp.  265,  266.  52  Vol.  i.  p.  149.

53  Vol.  ii.  pp.  179,  1 80.  54  Vol.  ii.  p.  269.

55  Vol.  ii.  p.   124.  56  Vol.  ii.  pp.  451-454.

57  "  A  quoy  nous  pourrions  joindre  un  autre  monument  fort  authentique,  c'est  le
resultat  de  certains  peres,  et  de  certains  docteurs  de  1'eglise,  qui  tiennent  que  1'Ante-
christ  ne  viendra  point  au  monde  qu'apres  la  dissection,  c'est-a-dire  apres  la  dissipation
de  nostre  empire.  Leur  fondement  est  dans  la  seconde  epistre  de  saint  Paul  aux  Thessa-
louiciens."  Audigier,  vol.  ii.  p.  462.


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  449

men  are  easily  affected.  All  these  qualities  the  a  few  years  laterj.employed  in  the
production  of  what  is  probably  the  most  formidable  work  ever, directed  against
Protestantism.5^  But  when  he,  leaving  these  matters,  entered  the  vast  field  of
history,  he  could  think  of  no  better  way  of  treating  his  new  subject  than  by
following  the  arbitrary  rules  peculiar  to  his  own  profession.59  His  work  is  an
audacious  attempt  to  degrade  history  to  a  mere  handmaid  of  theology.60  As  if,
on  such  matters,  doubt  were  synonymous  with  crime,  he  without  the  slightest
hesitation  takes  everything  for  granted  which  the  church  had  been  accustomed
to  believe.  This  enables  him  to  speak  with  perfect  confidence  respecting  events
which  are  lost  in  the  remotest  antiquity.  He  knows  the  exact  number  of  years
which  have  elapsed  since  the  moment  when  Cain  murdered  his  brother  ;  when
the  deluge  overwhelmed  the  world  ;  and  when  Abraham  was  summoned  to  his
mission.61  The  dates  of  these  and  similar  occurrences  he  fixes  with  a  precision
which  might  almost  make  us  believe  that  they  had  taken  place  in  his  own  time,
if  not  under  his  own  eyes.62  It  is  true  that  the  Hebrew  books  on  which  he
willingly  relied  supply  no  evidence  of  the  slightest  value  concerning  the  chro-
nology even  of  their  own  people  ;  while  the  information ^.they  contain  respecting
other  countries  is  notoriously  meagre  and  unsatisfactory.63  But  so  narrow  were
the  views  of  Bossuet  upon  history,  that  with  all  this  he  in  his  own  opinion  had
no  concern.  The  text  of  the  Vulgate  declared  that  these  things  had  happened
at  a  particular  time  ;  and  a  number  of  holy  men,  calling  themselves  the  council
of  the  church,  had  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  pronounced  the  Vulgate
to  be  authentic,  and  had  taken  upon  themselves  to  place  it  above  all  other
versions.64  This  theological  opinion  was  accepted  by  Bossuet  as  an  historical


58  This  is  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Hallam  respecting  Bossuet's  History  of  the  Variations  of
Protestant  Churches.     Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  486  ;    compare  Lerminier,  Philos.  du  Droit,
vol.  ii  p.  86.  Attempts  have  been  made  by  Protestant  theologians  to  retort  against  the
Catholics  the  arguments  of  Bossuet,  on  the  ground  that  religious  variations  are  a  necessary
consequence  of  the  honest  pursuit  of  religious  truth.    See  Blanco  White's  Evidence  against
Catholicism,  pp.  109-112;  and  his  Letters  from  Spain  by  Doblado,  p.  127.     With  this  I
fully  agree ;  but  it  would  be  easy  to  show  that  the  argument  is  fatal  to  all  ecclesiastical  sys-
tems with  strictly  defined  creeds,  and  therefore  strikes  as  heavily  against  the  Protestant
churches  as  against  the  Catholic.     Beausobre,  in  his  acute  and  learned  work  on  Manich-
aeism,  seems  to  have  felt  this  ;  and  he  makes  the  dangerous  admission,  '*  que  si  1'argument
de  M.  de  Meaux  vaut  quelque  chose  contre  la  Reformation,  il  a  la  meme  force  centre  le
Christianisme."     Hist,  de  Manichee,  vol.  i.  p.  526.    On  Bossuet  as  a  controversialist,  see
Stdudlin,  Geschichte  der  theologischen  Wissenschaften,  vol.  ii.  pp.  43-45;  and  for  a  con-
temporary opinion  of  his  great  work,  see  a  characteristic  passage  in  Lettres  de  Sevigne
vol.  v.  p.  409.

59  His  method  is  fairly  stated  by  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxv.  p.  427-

60  See  on  this  attempt  of  Bossuet's,  some  good  remarks  in  Stdudlin,  Geschichte  der
theologischen  Wissenschaften,  vol.  ii.  p.  198  :  "  Kirche  und  Christenthum  sind  fur  diesen
Bischoff  der  Mittelpunct  der  ganzen  Geschichte.  Aus  diesem  Gesichtspuncte  betrachtet
er  nichtnur  die  Patriarchen  und    Propheten,  das  Judenthum  und  die  alten  Weissagun-
gen,  sondernauch  die  Reicheder  Welt."

61  Bossuet,  Discours  sur  VHistoire  Universelle,  pp.  10,  ii,  16,  17  ;  see  also,  at  p.    90,
a  curious  specimen  of  his  chronological  calculations.

62  He  says  that  if  the  ordinarily  received  dates  of  the  Pentateuch  and  the  Prophets  are
not  true,  then  the  miracles  must  fall,  and  the  writings  themselves  are  not  inspired.
Hist.  Univ.  p.  360.     It  would  be  hard  to  find,  even  in  the  works  of  Bossuet,  a  more  rash
assertion  than  this.

63  Indeed  the  Jews  have  no  consecutive  chronology  before  Solomon.     See  Bunsen's
Egypt,  vol.  i.  pp.  viii.  xxv.  170,  178,  185,  vol.  ii.  p.  399.

64  Doing  this,  as  they  did  everything  else,  on  account  not  of  reason  but  of   dogma  ;
for,  as  a  learned  writer  says,  "  1'Eglise  a  bien  distingue  certains  livres  en  apocryphes
et  en  orthodoxes  ;  elle  s'est  prononcee  d'une  maniere  formefte  sur  le  choix  des  ouvrages
canoniques  ;  neanmoins  sa  critique  n'a  jamais  ete  fondee  /sur  un  examen  raisonne,  mais

29


450  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

law  ;  and  thus  the  decision  of  a  handful  of  cardinals  and  bishops,  in  a  super-
stitious and  uncritical  age,  is  the  sole  authority  for  that  early  chronology,  the
precision  of  which  is,  to  an  uninformed  reader,  a  matter  of  great  admiration.65

In  the  same  way,  because  Bossuet  had  been  taught  that  the  Jews  are  the  chosen
people  of  God,  he,  under  the  title  of  Universal  History,  almost  confines  his  atten-
tion to  them,  and  treats  this  obstinate  and  ignorant  race  as  if  they  formed  the
pivot  upon  which  the  affairs  of  the  universe  had  been  made  to  turn.66  His  idea
of  an  universal  history  excludes  those  nations  who  were  the  first  to  reach  civiliza-
tion, and  to  some  of  whom  the  Hebrews  owed  the  scanty  knowledge  which  they
subsequently  acquired.67  He  says  little  of  the  Persians,  and  less  of  the  Egyp-
tians ;  nor  does  he  even  mention  that  far  greater  people  between  the  Indus  and
the  Ganges,  whose  philosophy  formed  one  of  the  elements  of  the  school  of  Alexan-
dria,* whose  subtle  speculations  anticipated  all  the  efforts  of  European  meta-
physics, and  whose  sublime  inquiries,  conducted  in  their  own  exquisite  language,
date  from  a  period  when  the  Jews,  stained  with  every  variety  of  crime,
were  a  plundering  and  vagabond  tribe,  wandering  on  the  face  of  the  earth,
raising  their  hand  against  every  man,  and  every  man  raising  his  hand  against
them.

When  he  enters  the  more  modern  period,  he  allows  himself  to  be  governed
by  the  same  theological  prejudices.  So  contracted  is  his  view,  that  he  considers
the  whole  history  of  the  church  as  the  history  of  providential  interference  ;  and
he  takes  no  notice  of  the  manner  in  which,  contrary  to  the  original  scheme,  it  has
been  affected  by  foreign  events.68  Thus,  for  example,  the  most  important  fact
relating  to  the  early  changes  in  Christianity  is  the  extent  to  which  its  doctrines


seulement  sur  la  question  de  savoir  si  tel  ou  tel  ecrit  etait  d'accord  avec  les  doguies  qu'elle
enseignait."  Maury,  Legendes  Pieuses,  p.  224.

65  Theologians  have  always  been  remarkable  for  the  exactness  of  their  knowledge  on
subjects  respecting  which  nothing  is  known  ;  but  none  of  them  has  surpassed  the  learned
Dr.  Stukeley.  In  1730,  this  eminent  divine  writes  :  "  But  according  to  the  calculations
I  have  made  of  this  matter,  I  find  God  Almighty  ordered  Noah  to  get  the  creatures  into
the  ark  on  Sunday,  the  1 2th  of  October,  the  very  day  of  the  autumnal  equinox  that  year  ;
and  on  this  present  day,  on  the  Sunday  se'nnight  following  (the  igth  of  October),  that
terrible  catastrophe  began,  the  moon  being  past  her  third  quarter."  Nichols's  Illustra-
tions of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  ii.  p.  792.

ee  "  Premierement,  ces  empires  ont  pour  la  plupart  une  liaison  necessaire  avec  1'histoire
du  peuple  de  Dieu.  Dieu  s'est  servi  des  Assyriens  et  des  Babyloniens  pour  chatier  ce
peuple  ;  des  Perses  pour  le  retablir  ;  d'Alexandre  et  de  ses  premiers  successeurs  pour  le
proteger  ;  d'Antiochus  1'Illustre  et  de  ses  successeurs  pour  1'exercer  ;  des  Remains  pour
soutenir  sa  liberte  centre  les  rois  de  Syrie,  qui  ne  songeaient  qu'a  le  detruire."  Bossuet,
Hist.  Univ.  p.  382.  Well  may  M.  Lerminier  say  (Philos.  du  Droit,  vol.  ii.  p.  87),  that
Bossuet  "  a  sacrifie  toutes  les  nations  au  peuple  juif."

67  On  the  extraordinary  and  prolonged  ignorance  of  the  Jews,  even  to  the  time  of  the
Apostles,  see  Mackay's  Progress  of  the  Intellect,  vol.  i.  pp.  13  seq.  ;  a  work  of  profound
learning.

68  The  original  scheme  of  Christianity,  as  stated  by  its  Great  Author  (Matthew  x.    6,
and  xv.  24),  was  merely  to  convert  the  Jews  ;  and  if  the  doctrines  of  Christ  had  never
extended  beyond  that  ignorant  people,  they  could  not  have  received  those  modifications
which  philosophy  imposed  upon  them.  The  whole  of  this  subject  is  admirably  discussed
in  Mackay's  Progress  of  the  Intellect  in  Religious  Development,  vol.  ii.  pp.  382  seq.  ;  and  on
the  "  universalism  "  first  clearly  announced  "  by  the  Hellenist  Stephen,"  see  p.  484.
Neander  makes  a  noticeable  attempt  to  evade  the  difficulty  caused  by  the  changes  in
Christianity  from  "  various  outward  causes  "  ;  see  his  History  of  the  Church,  vol.  iii.
p.  125.

[*  For  this  view  there  is  no  good  foundation.  Any  resemblances  between  Brah-
manism  and  the  Alexandrian  philosophy  are  presumably  due  to  common  derivations
from  Mesopotamia. — ED.]


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  451

have  been  influenced  by  the  African  form  of  the  Platonic  philosophy.69  But  this
Bossuet  never  mentions  ;  nor  does  he  even  hint  that  any  such  thing  had  occurred.
It  suited  his  views  to  look  upon  the  church  as  a  perpetual  miracle,  and  he,  there-
fore, omits  the  most  important  event  in  its  early  history.70  To  descend  a  little
later  :  every  one  acquainted  with  the  progress  of  civilization  will  allow,  that  no
small  share  of  it  is  due  to  those  gleams  of  light  which,  in  the  midst  of  surrounding
darkness,  shot  from  the  great  centres  of  Cordova  and  Bagdad.  These,  however,
were  the  work  of  Mohammedanism  ;  and  as  Bossuet  had  been  taught  that
Mohammedanism  is  a  pestilential  heresy,  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  believe
that  Christian  nations  had  derived  anything  from  so  corrupt  a  source.  The
consequence  is,  that  he  says  nothing  of  that  great  religion  the  noise  of  which  has
tilled  the  world  ;  71  and  having  occasion  to  mention  its  founder,  he  treats  him  with
scorn,  as  an  impudent  impostor,  whose  pretensions  it  is  hardly  fitting  to  notice.72
The  great  apostle,  who  diffused  among  millions  of  idolaters  the  sublime  verity
of  one  God,  is  spoken  of  by  Bossuet  with  supreme  contempt  ;  because  JBossuet,
with  the  true  spirit  of  his  profession,  could  see  nothing  to  admire  in  those  whose
opinions  differed  from  his  own.73  But  when  he  has  occasion  to  mention  some
obscure  member  of  that  class  to  which  he  himself  belonged,  then  it  is  that  he
scatters  his  praises  with  boundless  profusion.  In  his  scheme  of  universal  history,
Mohammed  is  not  worthy  to  play  a  part.  He  is  passed  by  ;  but  the  truly  great
man,  the  man  to  whom  the  human  race  is  really  indebted,  is — Martin,  Bishop  of
Tours.  He  it  is,  says  Bossuet,  whose  unrivalled  actions  filled  the  universe  with
his  fame,  both  during  his  lifetime  and  after  his  death.74  It  is  true  that  not  one

[KJit;9  Neander  (Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  ii.  p.  42)  even  thinks  that  Cerinthus,  whose  views
are  remarkable  as  being  the  point  where  Gnosticism  and  Judaism  touch  each  other,
borrowed  his  system  from  Alexandria.  But  this,  though  not  unlikely,  seems  only  to  rest
on  the  authority  of  Theodoret.  On  the  influence  of  the  Platonism  of  Alexandria  in
developing  the  idea  of  the  Logos,  see  Neander,  vol.  ii.  pp.  304,  306-314.  Compare  Sharpens
Hist,  of  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  152  seq.

70  And  having  to  mention  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  who  was  more  deeply  versed  in  the
philosophy  of  Alexandria  than  were  any  of  the  other  fathers,  Bossuet  merely  says,  p.  98,
"  a  peu  pres  dans  le  meme  temps,  le  saint  pretre  Clement  Alexandrin  deterra  les  antiquites
du  paganisme  pour  le  confondre."

71  About  the  time  that  Bossuet  wrote,  a  very  learned  writer  calculated  that  the  area
of  the  countries  which  professed  Mohammedanism  exceeded  by  one  fifth    those  where
Christianity  was  believed.     See  Brerewood's  Inquiries  touching  the  Diversity  of  Languages
and  Religions,  Lond.  1674,  PP-  !44»  I45-     The  estimate  of  Southey  (Vindicice  Anglicana,
London,  1826,  p.  48)  is  very  vague  ;  but  it  is  much  easier  to  judge  of  the  extent  of  Moham-
medan countries  than  of  the  extent  of  their  population.     On  this  latter  point  we  have  the
most  conflicting  statements.     In  the  nineteenth  century  there  are,  according  to  Sharon
Turner  (Hist,  of  England,  vol.  hi.  p.  485,  edit.  1839),  eighty   million    Mohammedans;
according  to  Dr.  Elliotsori  (Human  Physiology,  p.  1055,  edit.  1840),  more  than  a  hundred
and  twenty-two  million  ;  while,  according  to  Mr.  Wilkin  (note  in  Sir  Thomas  Browne's
Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  37,  edit.  1835),  there  are  a  hundred  and  eighty-eight  million.

72  "  Le  faux  prophete  douna  ses  victoires  pour  toute  marque  de  sa  mission."     Bossuet,
p.  125.

73  The  greatest  Mohammedan  writers  have  always  expressed  ideas  regarding  the  Deity
more  lofty  than  those  possessed  by  the  majority  of  Christians.     The  Koran  contains  noble
passages  on  the  oneness  of  God  ;  and  for  the  views  of  their  ordinary  theologians  I  may
refer  to  an  interesting  Mohammedan  sermon,  in  Transactions  of  the  Bombay  Society,  vol.
i.  pp.  146-158.     See  also,  in  vol.  iii.  pp.  398-448,  an  Essay  by  Vans  Kennedy  ;  and  com-
pare a  remarkable  passage,  considering  the  quarter  from  which  it  comes,  in  A  utobiography
of  the  Emperor  Jehangueir,  p.  44.     Those  who  are  so  thoughtless  as  to  believe  that  Mo-
hammed was  a  hypocrite,  had  better  study  the  admirable  remarks  of  M.  Comte  (Philos.
Pos.  vol.  v.  pp.  76,  77),  who  truly  says,  "  qu'un  homme  vraiment  superieur  n'a  jamais  pu
exercer  aucune  grande  action  sur  ses  semblables  sans  etre  d'abord  lui-meme  intimement
convaincu."

74  "  Saint  Martin  fut  fait  eveque  de  Tours,  et  remplit  tout  1'univers  du  bruit  de  sa


452  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

educated  man  in  fifty  has  ever  heard  the  name  of  Martin,  Bishop  of  Tours.  But
Martin  performed  miracles,  and  the  church  had  made  him  a  saint  ;  his  claims,
therefore,  to  the  attention  of  historians  must  be  far  superior  to  the  claims  of  one
who,  like  Mohammed,  was  without  these  advantages.  Thus  it  is  that,  in  the
opinion  of  the  only  eminent  writer  on  history  during  the  power  of  Louis  XIV.,
the  greatest  man  Asia  has  ever  produced,  and  one  of  the  greatest  the  world  has
ever  seen,  is  considered  in  every  way  inferior  to  a  mean  and  ignorant  monk,
whose  most  important  achievement  was  the  erection  of  a  monastery,  and  who
spent  the  best  part  of  his  life  in  useless  solitude,  trembling  before  the  superstitious
fancies  of  his  weak  and  ignoble  nature.75

Such  was  the  narrow  spirit  with  which  the  great  facts  of  history  were  contem-
plated by  a  writer  who,  when  he  was  confined  to  his  own  department,  displayed
the  most  towering  genius.  This  contracted  view  was  the  inevitable  consequence
of  his  attempt  to  explain  the  complicated  movements  of  the  human  race  by
principles  which  he  had  generalized  from  his  own  inferior  studies.76  Nor  need
any  one  be  offended  that,  from  a  scientific  point  of  view,  I  assign  to  the  pursuits
of  Bossuet  a  rank  lower  than  that  in  which  they  are  sometimes  placed.  It  is  cer-
tain that  religious  dogmas  do  in  many  cases  influence  the  affairs  of  men.  But
it  is  equally  certain  that  as  civilization  advances  such  influence  decreases,  and
that  even  when  the  power  of  those  dogmas  was  at  its  height,  there  were  many
other  motives  by  which  the  actions  of  mankind  were  also  governed.  And  since
the  study  of  history  is  the  study  of  the  aggregate  of  these  motives,  it  is  evident
that  history  must  be  superior  to  theology  ;  just  as  the  whole  is  superior  to  a
part.  A  neglect  of  this  simple  consideration  has,  with  a  few  eminent  exceptions,
led  all  ecclesiastical  authors  into  serious  errors.  It  has  induced  in  them  a  dis-
position to  disregard  the  immense  variety  of  external  events,  and  to  suppose  that
the  course  of  affairs  is  regulated  by  some  principles  which  theology  alone  can
detect.  This  indeed  is  only  the  result  of  a  general  law  of  the  mind,  by  which
those  who  have  any  favourite  profession  are  apt  to  exaggerate  its  capacity  ;
to  explain  events  by  its  maxims,  and,  as  it  were,  to  refract  through  its  medium
the  occurrences  of  life.77  Among  theologians,  however,  such  prejudices  are  more
dangerous  than  in  any  other  profession,  because  among  them  alone  are  they
fortified  by  that  bold  assumption  of  supernatural  authority  on  which  many  of
the  clergy  willingly  rely.

These  professional  prejudices,  when  supported  by  theological  dogmas,  in  a
reign  like  that  of  Louis  XIV.,78  are  sufficient  to  account  for  the  peculiarities

saintete  et  de  ses  miracles,  durant  sa  vie,  et  apres  sa  mort."  Bossuet,  Hist.  Univ.
p.  in.

75  The  Benedictines  have  written  the  life  of  Martin  in  their  Hist.  Lit.  de  la  France,  vol.  i.
part  ii.  pp.  413-417,  Paris,  1733,  4to.     They  say  that  he  erected  the  first  monastery  in
Gaul :  "  Martin,  toujours  passionne  pour  la  solitude,  erigea  un  monastere  qui  fut  le
premier  que  Ton  cut  encore  vu  dans  les  Gaules,"  p.  414.     At  p.  415,  they  make  the  un-
necessary admission  that  the  saint  "  n'avoit  point  etudie  les  sciences  profanes."     I  may
add  that  the  miracles  of  Martin  are  related  by  Fleury,  who  evidently  believes  that  they
were  really  performed.     Fleury,  Hist.  Ecclesiastique,  livre  xvi.  no.  31,  vol.  iv.  pp.  215-217,
Paris,  1758,  i2mo.     Neander,  having  the  advantage  of  living  a  hundred  years  later
than  Fleury,  is  content  to  say,  "  the  veneration  of  his  period    denominated    him    a
worker  of  miracles."     Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  iv.  p.  494.     There  is  a  characteristic  anec-
dote of  him,  from  Sulpitius  Severus,  in  Mosheim's  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  123.

76  At  pp.  479,  480,  Bossuet  gives  a  sort  of  summary  of  his  historical  principles  ;  and  if
they  are  true,  history  is  evidently  impossible  to  be  written.     On  this  account,  though  fully
recognizing  the  genius  of  Bossuet,  I  cannot  agree  with  the  remarks  made  upon  him  by
M.  Comte,  Philos.  Pos.  vol.  iv.  p.  280,  vol.  vi.  pp.  316,  317.

77  And  then,  as  M.  Charles  Comte  well  says,  they  call  this  prejudice  their  moral  sense,
or  their  moral  instinct.     Comte,  Traite  de  Legislation,  vol.  i.  p.  116.

78  The  connexion  between  the  opinions  of  Bossuet  and  the  despotism  of  Louis  XIV.
is  touched  on  by  Montlosier,  who,  however,  has  probably  laid  too  much  stress  on  the
influence  which  the  civil  law  exercised  over  both.     Montlosier,  Monarchic  Francaise,  vol.
ii.  p.  90.


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  453

which  mark  the  historical  work  of  Bossuet.  Besides  this,  in  his  case,  the  general
tendency  was  aggravated  by  personal  characteristics.  His  mind  was  remarkable
for  a  haughtiness  which  we  find  constantly  breaking  out  into  a  general  contempt
for  mankind.79  At  the  same  time  his  amazing  eloquence,  and  the  effects  which
it  never  failed  to  produce,  seemed  to  justify  the  overweening  confidence  that  he
felt  in  his  own  powers.  There  is  indeed  in  some  of  his  greatest  efforts  so  much
of  the  fire  and  majesty  of  genius,  that  we  are  reminded  of  those  lofty  and  burning
words  with  which  the  prophets  of  antiquity  thrilled  their  hearers.  Bossuet,  thus
standing,  as  he  supposed,  on  an  eminence  which  raised  him  above  the  ordinary
weaknesses  of  men,  loved  to  taunt  them  with  their  follies,  and  to  deride  every
aspiration  of  their  genius.  Everything  like  intellectual  boldness  seemed  to  gall
his  own  superiority.80  It  was  this  boundless  arrogance  with  which  he  was  filled
which  gives  to  his  works  some  of  their  most  marked  peculiarities.  It  was  this
that  made  him  strain  every  nerve  to  abase  and  vilify  those  prodigious  resources
of  the  human  understanding  which  are  often  despised  by  men  who  are  ignorant
of  them  ;  but  which  in  reality  are  so  great  that  no  one  has  yet  arisen  able  to  scan
them  in  the  whole  of  their  gigantic  dimensions.  It  was  this  same  contempt  for
the  human  intellect  that  made  him  deny  its  capacity  to  work  out  for  itself  the
epochs  through  which  it  has  passed,  and  consequently  made  him  recur  to  the
dogma  of  supernatural  interference.  It  was  this,  again,  that  in  those  magnificent
orations  which  are  among  the  greatest  wonders  of  modern  art,  caused  him  to
exhaust  the  language  of  eulogy,  not  upon  intellectual  eminence,  but  upon  mere
military  achievements,  upon  great  conquerors,  those  pests  and  destroyers  of  men,
who  pass  their  lives  in  discovering  new  ways  of  slaying  their  enemies,  and  in
devising  new  means  of  aggravating  the  miseries  of  the  world.  And,  to  descend
still  lower,  it  was  this  same  contempt  for  the  dearest  interests  of  mankind  which
made  him  look  with  reverence  upon  a  king  who  considered  all  those  interests
as  nothing  ;  but  who  had  the  merit  of  enslaving  the  mind  of  France,  and  of
increasing  the  power  of  that  body  of  men  among  whom  Bossuet  himself  was  the
most  distinguished.

In  the  absence  of  sufficient  evidence  respecting  the  general  state  of  the  French
at  the  end  of  the  seventeeth  century,  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  to  what  extent
such  notions  as  these  had  penetrated  the  popular  mind.  But,  looking  at  the
manner  in  which  government  had  broken  the  spirit  of  the  country,  I  should  be
inclined  to  suppose  that  the  opinions  of  Bossuet  were  very  acceptable  to  his  own
generation.  This  however  is  a  question  rather  of  curiosity  than  of  importance  ;
for  only  a  few  years  later  there  appeared  the  first  symptoms  of  that  unprecedented
movement  which  not  merely  destroyed  the  political  institutions  of  France  but
effected  a  greater  and  more  permanent  revolution  in  every  department  of  the
national  intellect.  At  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  in  literature  as  well  as  in  politics,
in  religion,  and  in  morals,  everything  was  ripe  for  reaction.  The  materials
still  existing  are  so  ample  that  it  would  be  possible  to  trace  with  considerable
minuteness  the  steps  of  this  great  process  ;  but  it  will  I  think  be  more  agreeable
to  the  general  scheme  of  this  Introduction  if  I  pass  over  some  of  the  intermediate
links,  and  confine  myself  to  those  salient  instances  in  which  the  spirit  of  the  age
is  most  strikingly  portrayed.

There  is  indeed  something  extraordinary  in  the  change  which,  in  France,  one
generation  was  able  to  effect  in  the  method  of  writing  history.  The  best  way,
perhaps,  to  form  an  idea  of  this,  will  be  to  compare  the  works  of  Voltaire  with
those  of  Bossuet  ;  because  these  great  authors  were  probably  the  most  able,  and

79  He  belonged  to  a  class  of  historians   described  by  a  celebrated  writer  in  a  single
sentence  :  "  dans  leurs  ecrits  1'auteur  parait  souvent  grand,  mais  1'humanite  est  toujours
petite."     Tocqueville,  Democratic,  vol.  iv.  p.  139.

80  Hardly  any  one  acquainted  with  the  writings  and  the  history  of  Bossuet  will  require
evidence  of  his  singular  arrogance.     But  the  reader  may  consult  Sismondi,  Hist,  des
Franf.  vol.  xxvi.  p.  247  ;  and  on  his  treatment  of  Fenelon,  which  was  the  most  shameful
transaction  of  his  life,  compare  Burnefs  Own  Time,  vol.  iv.  p.  384,  with  Capefigue's  Louis
XIV,  vol.  ii.  p.  58  ;  where  there  is  printed  one  of  the  many  epigrams  to  which  the  conduct
of  Bossuet  gave  rise.


454  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  certainly  the  most  influential,  Frenchmen  during  the  period  they  respectively
represented.  The  first  great  improvement  which  we  find  in  Voltaire,  as  com-
pared with  Bossuet,  is  an  increased  perception  of  the  dignity  of  the  human
intellect.  In  addition  to  the  circumstances  already  noticed,  we  must  remember
that  the  reading  of  Bossuet  lay  in  a  direction  which  prevented  him  from  feeling
this.  He  had  not  studied  those  branches  of  knowledge  where  great  things  had
been  achieved  ;  but  he  was  very  conversant  with  the  writings  of  the  saints  and
fathers,  whose  speculations  are  by  no  means  calculated  to  give  us  a  high  opinion
of  the  resources  of  their  own  understanding.  Thus  accustomed  to  contemplate
the  workings  of  the  mind  in  what  is  on  the  whole  the  most  puerile  literature
Europe  has  ever  produced,  the  contempt  which  Bossuet  felt  for  mankind  went
on  increasing  imtil  it  reached  that  inordinate  degree  which  in  his  later  works
is  painfully  conspicuous.  But  Voltaire,  who  paid  no  attention  to  such  things
as  these,  passed  his  long  life  in  the  constant  accumulation  of  real  and  avail-
able knowledge.  His  mind  was  essentially  modern.  Despising  unsupported
authority,  and  heedless  of  tradition,  he  devoted  himself  to  subjects  in  which  the
triumph  of  the  human  reason  is  too  apparent  to  be  mistaken.  The  more  his
knowledge  advanced,  the  more  he  admired  those  vast  powers  by  which  the  know-
ledge had  been  created.  Hence  his  admiration  for  the  intellect  of  man,  so  far
from  diminishing,  grew  with  his  growth  ;  and,  just  in  the  same  proportion,  there
was  strengthened  his  love  of  humanity,  and  his  dislike  to  the  prejudices  which
had  long  obscured  its  history.  That  this,  in  the  march  of  his  mind,  was  the
course  it  actually  followed,  will  be  evident  to  any  one  who  considers  the  different
spirit  of  his  works,  in  reference  to  the  different  periods  of  life  in  which  they  were
produced.

The  first  historical  work  of  Voltaire  was  a  life  of  Charles  XII.,  in  i/aS.81  At
this  time  his  knowledge  was  still  scanty,  and  he  was  still  influenced  by  the  servile
traditions  of  the  preceding  generation.  It  is  not  therefore  wonderful  that  he
should  express  the  greatest  respect  for  Charles,  who,  among  the  admirers  of
military  fame,  will  always  preserve  a  certain  reputation  ;  though  his  only  merits
are  that  he  ravaged  many  countries  and  killed  many  men.  But  we  find  little
sympathy  with  his  unfortunate  subjects,  the  accumulations  of  whose  industry
supported  the  royal  armies  ;  82  nor  is  there  much  pity  for  those  nations  who  were
oppressed  by  this  great  robber  in  the  immense  line  of  his  conquests  from  Sweden
to  Turkey.  Indeed,  the  admiration  of  Voltaire  for  Charles  is  unbounded.  He
calls  him  the  most  extraordinary  man  the  world  had  ever  seen  ; 83  he  declares
him  to  be  a  prince  full  of  honour  ; 84  and  while  he  scarcely  blames  his  infamous
murder  of  Patkul, 85  he  relates  with  evident  emotion  how  the  royal  lunatic,  at

81  He  says  that  he  wrote  it  in  1728.     CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxii.  p.  5  ;  but,  according
to  M.  Lepan  (Vie  de  Voltaire,  p.  382),  "  il  parut  en  1731."     Both  statements  may  be
accurate,  as  Voltaire  frequently  kept  his  works  for  some  time  in  manuscript.

82  Sir  A.  Alison,  who  certainly  cannot  be  accused  of  want  of  respect  for  military  con-
querors, says  of  Sweden,  "  the  attempt  which  Charles  XII.  made  to  engage  her  in  long
and  arduous  wars,  so  completely  drained  the  resources  of  the  country,  that  they  did  not
recover  the  loss  for  half  a  century."     Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  x.  p.  504.     See  also,  on  the
effects  produced  by  the  conscriptions  of  Charles  XII.,  Laing's  Sweden,  p.  59  ;  Koch,
Tableau  des  Revolutions,  vol.  ii.  p.  63  ;  and  above  all,  a  curious  passage  in  Duclos,  Mem.
Secrets,  vol.  i.  p.  448.     Several  of  the  soldiers  of  Charles  XII.,  who  were  taken  prisoners,
were  sent  into  Siberia,  where  Bell  fell  in  with  them  early  in  the  eighteenth  century.     Bell's
Travels  in  Asia,  edit.  Edinb.  1788,  vol.  i.  pp.  223,  224.

83  "  Charles  XII,  1'homme  le  plus  extraordinaire  peut-etre  qui  ait  jamais  ete  sur  la
terre,  qui  a  reuni  en  lui  toutes  les  grandes  qualites  de  ses  a'ieux,  et  qui  n'a  eu  d'autre  defaut
ni  d'autre  malheur  que  de  les  avoir  toutes  outrees."     Hist,  de  Charles  XII,  livre  i.,    in
CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxii.  p.  30.

84  "  Plein  d'honneur."     Ibid,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xxii.  p.  63.

85  Which  Burke,  not  without  justice,  compares  to  the  murder  of  Monaldeschi  by
Christina;     Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  412.     See  some  remarks  on  the  murder  of  Patkul
in  Vattel,  Droit  des  Gens,  vol.  i.  p.  230  ;  and  an  account  of  it  from  Swedish  authorities,  ii


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  455

the  head  of  forty  servants,  resisted  an  entire  army.86  In  the  same  way  he  says
that  after  the  battle  of  Narva  all  the  attempts  of  Charles  were  unable  to  prevent
medals  from  being  struck  at  Stockholm  in  celebration  of  that  event  ; 87  although
Voltaire  well  knew  that  a  man  of  such  extravagant  vanity  must  have  been  pleased
by  so  durable  a  homage,  and  although  it  is  quite  certain  that  if  he  had  not  been
pleased  the  medals  would  never  have  been  struck  :  for  who  would  venture,
without  an  object,  to  offend  in  his  own  capital  one  of  the  most  arbitrary  and
revengeful  of  princes  ?

So  far,  it  might  appear  that  little  had  been  gained  in  the  method  of  writing
history.88  But,  even  thus  early,  we  find  one  vast  improvement.  In  Voltaire's
life  of  Charles  XII.,  faulty  as  it  is,  there  are  none  of  those  assumptions  of  super-
natural interference  in  which  Bossuet  delighted,  and  which  were  natural  to  the
reign  of  Louis  XIV.  The  absence  of  this  marks  the  first  great  stage  in  the  French
school  of  history  in  the  eighteenth  century  ;  and  we  find  the  same  peculiarity  in
all  the  subsequent  historians,  none  of  whom  recurred  to  a  method  which,  though
suitable  for  the  purposes  of  theologians,  is  fatal  to  all  independent  inquiries,
since  it  not  only  prescribes  the  course  the  inquirer  is  bound  to  take,  but  actually
sets  up  a  limit  beyond  which  he  is  forbidden  to  proceed.

That  Voltaire  should  have  infringed  upon  this  ancient  method  only  thirteen
years  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  that  he  should  have  done  this  in  a  popular
work,  abounding  with  such  dangerous  adventures  as  are  always  found  to  tempt
the  mind  to  an  opposite  course,  is  a  step  of  no  common  merit,  and  becomes  still
more  worthy  of  remark  if  taken  in  connexion  with  another  fact  of  considerable
interest.  This  is,  that  the  life  of  Charles  XII.  represents  the  first  epoch  not  only
in  the  eighteenth  century,  but  also  in  the  intellect  of  Voltaire  himself.89  After  it

Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  879-881.  For  Voltaire's  version,  see  his  CEuvres,  vol.  xxii.
pp.  136,  137  ;  which  may  be  contrasted  with  Crichton  and  Wheaton's  History  of  Scan-
dinavia, Edinb.  1838,  vol.  ii.  p.  127.

86  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  250-260.     It  may  interest  some  persons  to  hear
that  the  litter  in  which  this  madman  "  was  borne  from  the  battle  of  Pultava  "  is  still
preserved  at  Moscow.     KohVs  Russia,  p.  220.     It  was  also  seen  by  M.  Custine.     Custine's
Russie,  vol.  iii.  p.  263.

87  "  Sa  modestie  ne  put  empecher  qu'on  ne  frappat  a  Stockholm  plusieurs  medailles
pour  perpetuer  la  memoire  de  ces  evenements."     Charles  XII,  livre  ii.  in  CEuvres,  vol.
xxii.  p.  70.

88  Even  some  of  its  geographical  details  are  said  to  be  inaccurate.     Compare  Villemain,
Litterature  au  XVIIP  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  33,  with  Kohl's  Russia,  p.  505.     However,  as
M.  Villemain  says,  this  must  always  be  the  case  when  writers  who  only  know  a  country
from  maps,  attempt  to  enter  into  details  respecting  military  geography.     In  regard  to
style,  it  cannot  be  too  highly  praised  ;  and  a  well-known  critic,  Lacretelle,  calls  it  "  le
rnodele  le  plus  accompli  de  narration  qui  existe  dans  notre  langue."      Lacretelle,  Dix-
huitieme  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  42.     In  1843  it  was  still  used  as  a  text-book  in  the  French  royal
colleges.     See  Report  on  Education  in  France,  in  Journal  of  Stat.  Soc.  vol.  vi.  p.  308.
Further  information  respecting  this  work  may  be  found  in  Longchamp  et  Wagniere,  Mem.
sur  Voltaire,  vol.  ii.  p.  494  ;     and  in  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  viii.  p.  224,  vol.  x.  p.  304.

89  It  is  evident  from  Voltaire's  correspondence  that  he  afterwards  became  somewhat
ashamed  of  the  praises  he  had  bestowed  on  Charles  XII.      In  1735  he  writes  to  De  For-
mont,  "  si  Charles  XII  n'avait  pas  ete  excessivement  grand,  malheureux,  et  fou,  je  me
serais  bien  donne  de  garde  de  parler  de  lui."     CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ivi.  p.  462.     In
1758,  advancing  still  further,  he  says  of  Charles,    "  voila,  monsieur,  ce  que  les  hommes  de
tous  les  temps  et  de  tous  les  pays  appellent  un  heros  ;  mais  c'est  le  vulgaire  de  tous  les
temps  et  de  tous  les  pays  qui  donne  ce  nom  a  la  soif  du  carnage."     Ibid.  vol.  Ix.  p.  411.
In  1759  he  writes  that  he  was  then  engaged  on  the  history  of  Peter  the  Great  :  "  mais
je  doute  que  cela  soit  aussi  amusant  que  la  vie  de  Charles  XII  ;  car  ce  Pierre  n'etait  qu'un
sage  extraordinaire,  et  Charles  un  fou  extraordinaire,  qui  se  battait,  comme  Don  Quichotte,
centre  des  moulins  a  vent ;  "  vol.  Ixi.  p.  23  ;  see  also  p.  350.     These  passages  prove  the
constant  progress  Voltaire  was  making  in  his  conception  of  what  history  ought  to  be*
and  what  its  uses  were.


456  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

was  published,  this  great  man  turned  awhile  from  history,  and  directed  his  atten-
tion to  some  of  the  noblest  subjects  :  to  mathematics,  to  physics,  to  jurispru-
dence, to  the  discoveries  of  Newton,  and  to  the  speculations  of  Locke.  In  these
things  he  perceived  those  capabilities  of  the  human  mind  which  his  own  country
had  formerly  witnessed,  but  of  which,  during  the  authority  of  Louis  XIV.,  the
memory  had  been  almost  lost.  Then  it  was  that,  with  extended  knowledge
and  sharpened  intellect,  he  returned  to  the  great  field  of  history.9**  The  manner
in  which  he  now  treated  his  old  subject  showed  the  change  that  had  come  over
him.  In  1752,  appeared  his  celebrated  work  on  Louis  XIV.,91  the  very  title  of
which  is  suggestive  of  the  process  through  which  his  mind  had  passed.  His
former  history  was  an  account  of  a  king  ;  this  is  an  account  of  an  age.  To  the
production  of  his  youth  he  gave  the  title  of  a  History  of  Charles  XII.  ;  this  he
called  the  Age  of  Louis  XIV.  Before,  he  had  detailed  the  peculiarities  of  a
prince  ;  now,  he  considered  the  movements  of  a  people.  Indeed,  in  the  intro-
duction to  the  work  he  announces  his  intention  to  describe,  "  not  the  actions  of
a  single  man,  but  the  character  of  men."92  Nor,  in  this  point  of  view,  is  the
execution  inferior  to  the  design.  While  he  is  contented  with  giving  a  summary  of
military  achievements,  on  which  Bossuet  hung  with  delight,  he  enters  at  great
length  into  those  really  important  matters  which,  before  his  time,  found  no  place
in  the  history  of  France.  He  has  one  chapter  on  commerce  and  internal  govern-
ment ; 93  another  chapter  on  finances  ;  94  another  on  the  history  of  science  ; 95
and  three  chapters  on  the  progress  of  the  fine  arts.96  And  though  Voltaire  did
not  attach  much  value  to  theological  disputes,  still  he  knew  that  they  have  often
played  a  great  part  in  the  affairs  of  men  ;  he  therefore  gives  several  distinct
chapters  to  a  relation  of  ecclesiastical  matters  during  the  reign  of  Louis.97  It  is
hardly  necessary  to  observe  the  immense  superiority  which  a  scheme  like  this
possessed,  not  only  over  the  narrow  views  of  Bossuet  but  even  over  his  own
earlier  history.  Still  it  cannot  be  denied  that  we  find  in  it  prejudices  from  which
it  was  difficult  for  a  Frenchman  educated  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  to  be  entirely
free.  Not  only  does  Voltaire  dwell  at"  needless  length  upon  those  amusements
and  debaucheries  of  Louis,  with  which  history  can  have  little  concern,  but  he
displays  an  evident  disposition  to  favour  the* king  himself,  and  to  protect  his  name
from  the  infamy  with  which  it  ought  to  be  covered.98

90  In  1741,  he  mentions  his  increasing  love  of  history.     Corresp.  in  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,
vol.  li.  p.  96.

91  Lord  Brougham,  in  his  life  of  Voltaire,  says  that  it  appeared  in  1751.     Lives  of  Men
of  Letters,  vol.  i.  p.  106.     But  1752  is  the  date  given  in  Biog.   Univ.  vol.  xlix.  p.  478  ;  in
Querard,  France  Lit.  vol.  x.  p.  355  ;  and  in  Lepan,  Vie  de  Voltaire,  p.  382.

92  "  On  veut  essayer  de  peindre  &  la  posterite,  non  les  actions  d'un  seul  homme,  mais
1'esprit  des  hommes  dans  le  siecle  le  plus  eclaire  qui  fut  jamais."     Siecle  de  Louis  XIV,
in  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xix.  p.  213.     And  in  his  correspondence  respecting  his  work
on  Louis  XIV.,  he  carefully  makes  the  same  distinction.     See  vol.  Ivi.  pp.  453,  488,  489,
500,  vol.  Ivii.  pp.  337,  342-344.  vol.  lix.  p.  103.

93  Chap,  xxix.,  in  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xx.  pp.  234-267.

94  Chap,  xxx.,  in  CEuvres,  vol.  xx.  pp.  267-291.     This  chapter  is  praised  in  Sinclair's
Hist,  of  the  Public  Revenue,  vol.  iii.  appendix,  p.  77  ;  an  indifferent  work,  but  the  best  we
have  on  the  important  subject  to  which  it  refers.

93  Chap,  xxxi.,  in  CEuvres,  vol.  xx.  pp.  291-299  ;  necessarily  a  very  short  chapter,
because  of  the  paucity  of  materials.
9(3  Chapters  xxxii,  to  xxxiv,,  in  CEuvres,  vol.  xx.  pp.  299-338.

97  CEuvres,  vol.  xx.  pp.  338-464,

98  This  disposition  to  favour  Louis  XIV.  is  noticed  by  Condorcet,  who  says  it  was  the
only  early  prejudice  which  Voltaire  was  unable  to  shake  off  :  "  c'est  le  seul  prejuge  de  sa
jeunesse  qu'il  ait  conserve,"     Condorcet,  Vie  de  Voltaire,  in  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  i.
p.  286.     See  also,  on  this  defect,  Grimm  et  Diderot,  Corresp.  Lit.  vol.    ii.   p.   182;  Lemon?
tey,  Etablissement  Monarchique,  pp.  451,  452  ;  Mem.  de  Brissot,  vol.  ii.  pp.  88,  89.     It  is
interesting  to    observe  that  Voltaire's  earlier  opinions  were  still  more  favourable  to
Louis  XIV.  than  those  which  he  afterwards  expressed  in  his  history.     See  a  letter  which
h.*»  wrote  in  1740  to  Lord  Hajrvey,  print;  I    \  CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Iviii.  pp.  57-63.


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  457

But  the  next  work  of  Voltaire  showed  that  this  was  a  mere  personal  feeling,
and  did  not  affect  his  general  views  as  to  the  part  which  the  acts  of  princes  ought
to  occupy  in  history.  Four  years  after  the  appearance  of  the  Age  of  Louis  XIV.,
he  published  his  important  treatise  on  the  Morals,  Manners,  and  Character  of
Nations."  This  is  not  only  one  of  the  greatest  books  which  appeared  during  the

ighteenth  century,  but  it  still  remains  the  best  on  the  subject  to  which  it  refers.

lie  mere  reading  it  displays  is  immense  ;100  what,  however,  is  far  more  admirable
is  the  skill  with  which  the  author  connects  the  various  facts,  and  makes  them
illustrate  each  other,  sometimes  by  a  single  remark,  sometimes  only  by  the  order
and  position  in  which  they  are  placed.  Indeed,  considered  solely  as  a  work  of
art,  it  would  be  difficult  to  praise  it  too  highly  ;  while,  as  a  symptom  of  the  times,
it  is  important  to  observe  that  it  contains  no  traces  of  that  adulation  of  royalty
which  characterized  Voltaire  in  the  period  of  his  youth,  and  which  is  found  in  all
the  best  writers  during  the  power  of  Louis  XIV.  In  the  whole  of  this  long  and
important  work,  the  great  historian  takes  little  notice  of  the  intrigues  of  courts,
or  of  the  changes  of  ministers,  or  of  the  fate  of  kings  ;  but  he  endeavours  to  dis-

>ver  and  develop  the  different  epochs  through  which  Man  has  successively
5ed.     "  I  wish,"  he  says,  "  to  write  a  history,  not  of  wars,  but  of  society  ;

id  to  ascertain  how  men  lived  in  the  interior  of  their  families,  and  what  were  the

rts  which  they  commonly  cultivated."  101  For,  he  adds,  "  my  object  is  the
listory  of  the  human  mind,  and  not  a  mere  detail  of  petty  facts  ;  nor  am  I  con-
cerned with  the  history  of  great  lords  who  made  war  upon  French  kings  ;  but
I  want  to  know  what  were  the  steps  by  which  men  passed  from  barbarism  to
civilization."  102

i-  It  was  in  this  way  that  Voltaire  taught  historians  to  concentrate  their  attention
on  matters  of  real  importance,  and  to  neglect  those  idle  details  with  which  history
had  formerly  been  filled.  But  what  proves  this  to  be  a  movement  arising  as
much  from  the  spirit  of  the  age  as  from  the  individual  author,  is  that  we  find
precisely  the  same  tendency  in  the  works  of  Montesquieu  and  Turgot,  who  were
certainly  the  two  most  eminent  of  the  contemporaries  of  Voltaire  ;  and  both  of
whom  followed  a  method  similar  to  his,  in  so  far  as,  omitting  descriptions  of

99  Mr.  Burton,  in  his  interesting  work,  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Hume,  vol.  ii.  p.  129,
says  it  was  "  first  published  in  1756  ;  "  and  the  same  date  is  given  by  Querard  (France
Litter  air  e,  vol.  x.  p.  359),  who  is  a  very  accurate  bibliography    ;  so  that  Condorcet  (Vie
de  Voltaire,  p.  199)  and  Lord  Brougham  (Men  of  Letters,  vo*.  i.  p.  98)  are  probably  in  error
in  assigning  it  to  1757.   In  regard  to  its  title,  I  translate  •'  Moeurs  "  as  "  morals  and  man-
ners ;  "  for  M.  Tocqueville  uses  *'  mceurs  "  as  equivalent  to  the  Latin  word  *'  mores."  Toe-
queville,  Democratie  en  Amerique,  vol.  iii.  pp.  50,  84.

100  Superficial  writers  are  so  much  in  the  habit  of  calling  Voltaire  superficial,  that  it
may  be  well  to  observe  that  his  accuracy  has  been  praised,  not  only  by  his  own  country-
men, but  by  several  English  authors  of  admitted  learning.     For  three  remarkable  instances
of  this,  from  men  whom  no  one  will  accuse  of  leaning  towards  his  other  opinions,  see
notes  to  Charles  V.,  in  Robertson's  Works,  pp.  431,  432  ;  Harrington's  Observations  on  the
Statutes,  p.  293  ;  and  Wartorfs  Hist,  of  English  Poetry,  vol.  i.  p.  xvi.     Even  Sir  W.  Jones,
in  his  preface  to  the  Life  of  Nader  Shah,  says,  that  Voltaire  is  "  the  best  historian  "  the
French  have  produced.     Works  of  Sir  William  Jones,  vol.  v.  p.  542  ;  and  compare  the
preface  to  his  Persian  Grammar,  in  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  123.

101  "  Je  voudrais  decouvrir  quelle  etait  alors  la  societe  des  hommes,  comment  on  vivait
dans  1'interieur  des  families,  quels  arts  etaient  cultives,  plutot  que  de  repeter  tant    de
malheurs  et  tant  de  combats,  funestes  objets  de  1'histoire  et  lieux  communs  de  la  mechan-
cete  humaine."     Essai  sur  les  Mceurs,  chap.  Ixxxi.,  in  CEuvres,  vol.  xvi.  p.  381.

102  "  L'objet  etait  1'histoire  de  1'esprit  humain,  et  non  pas  le  detail  des  faits  presque
toujours  defigures  ;  il  ne  s'agissait  pas  de  rechercher,  par  exemple,  de  quelle  famille
etait  le  seigneur  de  Puiset,  ou  le  seigneur  de  Montlheri,  qui  firent  la  guerre  a  des  rois  de
France  ;  mais  de  voir  par  quels  degres  on  est  parvenu  de  la  rusticite  barbare  de  ces  temps
a  la  politesse  du  notre."     Supplement  to  Essai  sur  les  Mceurs,  in  CEuvres,  vol.  xviii.
P-  435-     Compare  Fragments  sur  rHistoire,  yo}.  xxvji-  P?  214,  with  two  letters  in  vol.  Ix.
PP- 153»  i54»  vol.  Ixv.  p.  370.


458  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

kings,  courts,  and  battles,  they  confined  themselves  to  points  which  illustrate
the  character  of  mankind  and  the  general  march  of  civilization.  And  such  was
the  popularity  of  this  change  in  the  old  routine,  that  its  influence  was  felt  by
other  historians  of  inferior,  but  still  of  considerable,  ability.  In  1755,  Mallet,  l03
published  his  interesting,  and,  at  the  time  it  was  written,  most  valuable  work,
on  the  history  of  Denmark  ; 104  in  which  he  professes  himself  a  pupil  of  the  new
school.  "  For  why,"  he  says,  "  should  history  be  only  a  recital  of  battles,  sieges,
intrigues,  and  negotiations  ?  And  why  should  it  contain  merely  a  heap  of  petty
facts  and  dates,  rather  than  a  great  picture  of  the  opinions,  customs,  and  even
inclinations  of  a  people  ?  " 105  Thus  too,  in  1765,  Mably  published  the  first  part
of  his  celebrated  work  on  the  history  of  France  ; 106  in  the  preface  to  which  he
complains  that  historians  "  have  neglected  the  origin  of  laws  and  customs  in
favour  of  sieges  and  battles."107  In  the  same  spirit,  Velly  and  Villaret,  in  their
voluminous  history  of  France,  express  regret  that  historians  should  usually  relate
what  happens  to  the  sovereign  in  preference  to  what  happens  to  the  people,
and  should  omit  the  manners  and  characteristics  of  a  nation,  in  order  to  study
the  acts  of  a  single  man.108  Duclos,  again,  announces  that  his  history  is  not  of
war,  nor  of  politics,  but  of  men  and  manners ;  109  while,  strange  to  say,  even  the
courtly  Renault  declares  that  his  object  was  to  describe  laws  and  manners,  which
he  calls  the  soul  of  history,  or  rather  history  itself.110

Thus  it  was  that  historians  began  to  shift,  as  it  were,  the  scene  of  their  labours,
and  to  study  subjects  connected  with  those  popular  interests  on  which  the  great
writers  under  Louis  XIV.  disdained  to  waste  a  thought.*  I  need  hardly  observe
how  agreeable  such  views  were  to  the  general  spirit  of  the  eighteenth  century,
and  how  well  they  harmonized  with  the  temper  of  men  who  were  striving  to  lay
aside  their  former  prejudices,  and  despise  what  had  once  been  universally  admired.

103  Mallet,  though  born  in  Geneva,  was  a  Frenchman  in  the  habits  of  his  mind  :  he
wrote  in  French,  and  is  classed  among  French  historians  in  the  report  presented    to
Napoleon  by  the  Institut.     Dacier,  Rapport  sur  Us  Progres  de  VHistoire,  p.  173.

104  Go  the,  in  his  Autobiography,  mentions  his  obligations  to  this  work,  which,  I  sus-
pect, exercised  considerable  influence  over  the  early  associations  of  his  mind  :  "  Ich  hatte
die  Fabeln  der  Edda  schon  langst  aus  der  Vorrede  zu  Mallet's  Danischer  Geschichte
kennen  gelernt,  und  mich  derselben  sogleich  bemachtigt ;  sie  gehorten  unter  diejenigen
Mahrchen,  die  ich,  von  einer  Gesellschaft  aufgefordert,  am  liebsten  erzahlte."     Wahrheit
u.  Dichtung,  in  Goethe's  Werke,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  169.     Percy,  a  very  fair  judge,  thought
highly  of  Mallet's  history,  part  of  which  indeed  he  translated.     See  a  letter  from  him,  in
Nichols's  Illustrations  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  vii.  p.  719.

105  Mallet's  Northern  Antiquities,  edit.  Blackell,  1847,  p.  78.

106  The  first  two  volumes  were  published  in  1765  ;  the  other  two  in  1790.     Biog.  Univ.
vol.  xxvi.  pp.  9,  12.

107  Mably,  Observ.  sur  I' Hist,  de  France,  vol.  i.  p.  ii.  ;  and  compare  vol.  iii.  p.  289  :
but  this  latter  passage  was  written  several  years  later.

108  "  Bornes  a  nous  apprendre  les  victoires  ou  les  defaites  du  souverain,  ils  ne  nous
disent  rien  ou  presque  rien  des  peuples  qu'il  a  rendus  heureux  ou  malheureux.     On  ne
trouve  dans  leurs  ecrits  que  longues  descriptions  de  sieges  et  de  batailles  ;  nulle  mention
des  moeurs  et  de  1'esprit  de  la  nation.     Elle  y  est  presque  toujours  sacrifice  a  un  seul
hoinme."    Histoire  de  France  par  Velly,  Paris,  1770,  4to,  vol.  i.  p.  6  ;  and  see,  to  the
same  effect,  the  Continuation  by  Villaret,  vol.  v.  p.  vi.

109  «  si  1'histoire  que   j'ecris  n'est  ni  militaire,  ni  politique,  ni  economique,  du  moins
dans  le  sens  que  je  concois  pour  ces  differentes  parties,  on  me  demandera  quelle  est  done
celle  que  je  me  propose  d'ecrire.     C'est  1'histoire  des  hommes  et  des  moeurs."     Duclos,
Louis  XIV  et  Louis  XV,  vol.  i.  p.  xxv.

no  "  je  voulois  connoitre  nos  loix,  nos  moeurs,  et  tout  ce  qui  est  Tame  de  1'histoire,  ou
plutot  1'histoire  meme."  Henault,  Nouvel  Abrege  chronologique  de  V Histoire  de  France,
edit.  Paris,  1775,  vol.  i.  p.  i.

[*  Above,  Buckle  has  shown  that  Mezeray  gave  much  thought  to  the  popular
interest. — ED.]


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE


459


All  this  was  but  part  of  that  vast  movement  which  prepared  the  way  for  the
Revolution,  by  unsettling  ancient  opinions,  by  encouraging  a  certain  mobility
and  restlessness  of  mind,  and  above  all  by  the  disrespect  it  showed  for  those
powerful  individuals,  hitherto  regarded  as  gods  rather  than  as  men,  but  who  now,
for  the  first  time,  were  neglected  by  the  greatest  and  most  popular  historians,
who  passed  over  even  their  prominent  actions,  in  order  to  dwell  upon  the  welfare
of  nations,  and  the  interests  of  the  people  at  large.

To  return,  however,  to  what  was  actually  effected  by  Voltaire,  there  is  no  doubt
that  in  his  case  this  tendency  of  the  time  was  strengthened  by  a  natural  com-
prehensiveness of  mind,  which  predisposed  him  to  large  views,  and  made  him
dissatisfied  with  that  narrow  range  to  which  history  had  been  hitherto  confined.111
Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  other  qualities  of  Voltaire,  it  must  be  allowed
that  in  his  intellect  everything  was  on  a  great  scale.112  Always  prepared  for
thought,  and  always  ready  to  generalize,  he  was  averse  to  the  study  of  individual
actions,  unless  they  could  be  made  available  for  the  establishment  of  some  broad
and  permanent  principle.  Hence  his  habit  of  looking  at  history  with  a  view  to
the  stages  through  which  the  country  had  passed,  rather  than  with  a  view  to  the
character  of  the  men  by  whom  the  country  had  been  governed.  The  same  ten-
dency appears  in  his  lighter  works  ;  and  it  has  been  well  observed  113  that  even
in  his  dramas  he  endeavours  to  portray  not  so  much  the  passions  of  individuals
as  the  spirit  of  epochs.  In  Mahomet,  his  subject  is  a  great  religion;  in  Alzire,  the
conquest  of  America  ;  in  Brutus,  the  formation  of  the  Roman  power  ;  in  the
Death  of  Casar,  the  rise  of  the  empire  upon  the  ruins  of  that  power.11*

By  this  determination  to  look  upon  the  course  of  events  as  a  great  and  connected
whole,  Voltaire  was  led  to  several  results  which  have  been  complacently  adopted
by  many  authors  who,  even  while  using  them,  revile  him  from  whom  they  were
taken.  He  was  the  first  historian  who,  rejecting  the  ordinary  method  of  investiga-
tion, endeavoured  by  large  general  views  to  explain  the  origin  of  feudality  ;
and  by  indicating  some  of  the  causes  of  its  decline  in  the  fourteenth  century115
he  laid  the  foundation  for  a  philosophic  estimate  of  that  important  institution.116


111  In  1763,  he  writes  to  D'Argental  :  "  il  y  a  environ  douze  batailles  dont  je  n'ai  point
parle,  Dieu  merci,  parceque  j'ecris   1'histoire   de  1'esprit  humain,  et  non  une  gazette."
CEuvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ixiii.  p.  51.     See  also  his  letter  to  Tabareau  (Lettres  inedites  de
Voltaire,  vol.  ii.  p.  585)  :   "  Personne  ne  lit  les  details  des  combats  et  des  sieges  ;  rien
n'est  plus  ennuyeux  que  la  droite  et  la  gauche,  les  bastions  et  la  contrescarpe."

112  M.  Lamartine  characterizes  him  as  "  ce  genie  non  pas  le  plus  haut,  mais  le  plus  vaste
de  la  France."     Hist,  des  Girondins,  vol.  i.  p.  180.

113  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xlix.  p.  493.     His  Orphelin  de  la  Chine  is  taken  from    Chinese
sources  :  see  Davis' s  China,  vol.  ii.  p.  258.

114  The  surprising  versatility  of  Voltaire's  mind  is  shown  by  the  fact,  unparalleled  in
literature,  that  he  was  equally  great  as  a  dramatic  writer  and  as  an  historian.     Mr.
Forster,  in  his  admirable  Life  of  Goldsmith,  1854,  says  (vol.  i.  p.  119),  "  Gray's  high  opinion
of  Voltaire's  tragedies  is  shared  by  one  of  our  greatest  authorities  on  such  a  matter  now
living,  Sir  Edward  Bulwer  Lytton,  whom  I  have  often  heard  maintain    the    marked
superiority  of  Voltaire  over  all  his  countrymen  in  the  knowledge  of  dramatic  art,  and  the
power  of  producing  theatrical  effects."     Compare  Correspondence  of  Gray  and  Mason,  edit.
Mitford,  1855,  p.  44.

113  Essai  sur  les  Moeurs,  chap.  Ixxxv.,  in  CEuvres,  vol.  xvi.  p.  412,  and  elsewhere.

116  During  the  eighteenth  century,  and,  I  may  say,  until  the  publication  in  1818  of
Hallam's  Middle  Ages,  there  was  in  the  English  language  no  comprehensive  account  of  the
feudal  system  ;  unless  perhaps  we  except  that  given  by  Robertson,  who  in  this  as  in
many  other  matters  of  history  was  a  pupil  of  Voltaire.  Not  only  Dalrymple,  and  writers
of  his  kind,  but  even  Blackstone,  took  so  narrow  a  view  of  this  great  institution  that  they
were  unable  to  connect  it  with  the  general  state  of  society  to  which  it  belonged.  Some  of
our  historians  gravely  traced  it  back  to  Moses,  in  whose  laws  they  found  the  origin  of
allodial  lands.  See  a  charming  passage  in  Barry's  History  of  the  Orkney  Islands,  p.  219.
On  the  spirit  of  feudality,  there  are  some  remarks  well  worth  reading  in  Comte's  Philns.
Posit,  vol.  v.  pp.  393-413.


460  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

He  was  the  author  of  a  profound  remark,  afterwards  adopted  by  Constant,  to  the
effect  that  licentious  religious  ceremonies  have  no  connexion  with  licentious
national  morals.117  Another  observation  of  his,  which  has  been  only  partly  used
by  writers  on  ecclesiastical  history,  is  pregnant  with  instruction.  He  says
that  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  bishops  of  Rome  acquired  an  authority  so  superior
to  that  of  the  Eastern  patriarchs  was  the  greater  sublety  of  the  Greek  mind.
Nearly  all  the  heresies  proceeded  from  the  East  ;  and,  with  the  exception  of
Honorius  I.,  not  a  single  pope  adopted  a  system  condemned  by  the  church.  This
gave  to  the  papal  power  an  unity  and  consolidation  which  the  patriarchal  power
was  unable  to  reach  ;  and  thus  the  Holy  See  owes  part  of  its  authority  to  the
early  dulness  of  the  European  fancy.118

It  would  be  impossible  to  relate  all  the  original  remarks  of  Voltaire  which,
when  he  made  them,  were  attacked  as  dangerous  paradoxes,  and  are  now  valued
as  sober  truths.  He  was  the  first  historian  who  recommended  universal  freedom
of  trade  ;  and,  although  he  expresses  himself  with  great  caution,119  still  the  mere
announcement  of  the  idea  in  a  popular  history  forms  an  epoch  in  the  progress
of  the  French  mind.  He  is  the  originator  of  that  important  distinction  between
the  increase  of  population  and  the  increase  of  food,  to  which  political  economy
has  been  greatly  indebted  ;120  a  principle  adopted  several  years  later  by  Town-

117  Constant,  in  his  work  on  Roman  polytheism,  says,  "  des  rites  indecens    peuvent
etre  pratiques  par  un  peuple  religieux  avec  une  grande  purete  de  coeur.     Mais  quand
1'incredulite  atteint  ces  peuples,  ces  rites  sont  pour  lui  la  cause  et  le  pretexte  de  la   plus
revoltante  corruption."     This  passage  is  quoted  by  Mr.  Milman,  who  calls  it  "  extremely
profound  and  just."     Mil-marts  History  of  Christianity,  1840,  vol.  i.  D.  28.     And  so  it  is —
extremely  profound  and  just.     But  it  happens  that  precisely  the  same  remark  was  made
by  Voltaire,  just  about  the  time  that  Constant  was  born.     Speaking  of  the  worship  of
Priapus,  he  says  (Essai  sur  les  Mceurs,  chap,  cxliii.,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xvii.  p.  341 ),
"  nos  idees  de  bienseance  nous  portent  a  croire  qu'une  ceremonie  qui  nous  parait  si
infame  n'a  etc  inventee  que  par  la  debauche  ;  mais  il  n'est  guere  croyable  que  la  depra-
vation des  moaurs  ait  jamais  chez  aucun  peuple  etabli  des  ceremonies  religieuses.     II  est
probable,  au  contraire,  que  cette  coutume  fut  d'abord  introduite  dans  les  temps  de
simplicite,  et  qu'on  ne  pensa  d'abord  qu'a  honorer  la  Divinite  dans  le  symbole  de  la  vie
qu'elle  nous  a  donnee.     Une  telle  ceremonie  a  du  inspirer  la  licence  a  la  jeunesse,  et
paraitre  ridicule  aux  esprits  sages,  dans  les  temps  plus  raffines,  plus  corrompus,  et  plus
eclaires."     Compare  the  remarks  on  the  indecency  of  the  Spartan  customs,  in  Thirlwall's
Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  pp.  326,  327.

118  Essai  sur  les  Mceurs,  chaps,  xiv.  and  xxxi.,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xv.  pp.  391,  514.  Neander
observes  that  in  the  Greek  church  there  were  more    heresies  than  in  the  Latin  church
because  the  Greeks  thought  more  ;  but  he  has  failed  to  perceive  how  this    favoured    the
authority  of  the  popes.     Neander's  History  of  the  Church,  vol.  ii.  pp.  198,  199,  vol.  iii.  pp.
191,  492,  vol.  iv.  p.  90,  vol.  vi.  p.  293,  vol.  viii.p.  257.      [The  main  cause  of  the  authority
of  the  Popes  was  that  no  emperor  reigned  at  Rome. — ED.]

119  In  his  account  of  the  trade  of  Archangel,  he  says,  "  les  Anglais  obtinrent  le  privilege
d'y  commercer  sans  payer  aucun  droit ;  et  c'est  ainsi  que  toutes  les  nations  devraient
peut-etre  negocier  ensemble."     Hist,  de  Russie,  part  i.  chap,  i.,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xxiii.
p.  35.     Remarkable  words  to  have  been  written  by  a  Frenchman,  born  at  the  end  of  the
seventeenth  century  ;  and  yet  they  have,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  escaped  the  attention  of  all
the  historians  of  political  economy.     Indeed,  on  this  as  on  most  matters  sufficient  justice
has  not  been  done  to  Voltaire,  whose  opinions  were  more  accurate  than  those  of  Quesnay
and  his  followers.     However,  Mr.  M'Culloch,  in  noticing  one  of  the  economical  errors  of
Voltaire,  honestly  admits  that  his  "  opinions  on  such  subjects  are,  for  the  most   part,
very  correct."     M'Culloch's  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  p.  530.     For  proof  of  his
sympathy  with  Turgot's  efforts  to  establish  free  trade,  compare  Lettres  inedites  de  Voltaire,
vol.  ii.  pp.  367,  403,  423,  with  Longchamp,  Mem.  sur  Voltaire,  vol.  i.  pp.  376,  378.

"  The  idea  of  the  different  ratios  by  which  population  and  food    increase  was
originally  thrown  out  by  Voltaire  ;  and  was  picked  up  and  expanded  into  many  a  goodly
volume  by  our  English  political  economists  in  the   present   century."      Laing's  Notes
second  series,  p.  42.


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  461

send,  and  then  used  by  Malthus  as  the  basis  of  his  celebrated  work.12*  He  has,
moreover,  the  merit  of  being  the  first  who  dispelled  the  childish  admiration
with  which  the  Middle  Ages  had  been  hitherto  regarded,  and  which  they  owed
to  those  dull  and  learned  writers  who  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries
were  the  principal  investigators  of  the  early  history  of  Europe.  These  industrious
compilers  had  collected  extensive  materials,  which  Voltaire  turned  to  good  ac-
count, and  by  their  aid  overthrew  the  conclusions  at  which  the  authors  had  them-
selves arrived.  In  his  works,  the  Middle  Ages  are  for  the  first  time  represented
as  what  they  really  were, — a  period  of  ignorance,  ferocity,  and  licentiousness  ;
a  period  when  injuries  were  unredressed,  crime  unpunished,  and  superstition
unrebuked.  It  may  be  said  with  some  show  of  justice  that  Voltaire,  in  the
picture  he  drew,  fell  into  the  opposite  extreme,  and  did  not  sufficiently  recognize
the  merit  of  those  truly  great  men  who,  at  long  intervals,  stood  here  and  there,
like  solitary  beacons,  whose  light  only  made  the  surrounding  darkness  more
visible.  Still,  after  every  allowance  for  that  exaggeration  which  a  reaction  of
opinions  always  causes,  it  is  certain  that  his  view  of  the  Middle  Ages  is  not  only
far  more  accurate  than  that  of  any  preceding  writer,  but  conveys  a  much  juster
idea  of  the  time  than  can  be  found  in  those  subsequent  compilations  which  we
owe  to  the  industry  of  modern  antiquaries  ;  a  simple  and  plodding  race,  who
admire  the  past  because  they  are  ignorant  of  the  present,  and  who,  spending
their  lives  amid  the  dust  of  forgotten  manuscripts,  think  themselves  able,  with
the  resources  of  their  little  learning,  to  speculate  on  the  affairs  of  men,  to  trace
the  history  of  different  periods,  and  even  to  assign  to  each  the  praise  it  ought  to
receive.

With  such  writers  as  these  Voltaire  was  always  at  war  ;  and  no  one  has  done
so  much  to  lessen  the  influence  they  once  exercised  over  even  the  highest  branches
of  knowledge.  There  was  also  another  class  of  dictators  whose  authority  this
great  man  was  equally  successful  in  reducing,  namely,  the  old  class  of  classical
scholars  and  commentators,  who,  from  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  till  early  in
the  eighteenth  century,  were  the  chief  dispensers  of  fame,  and  were  respected  as
being  by  far  the  most  distinguished  men  Europe  had  ever  produced.  The  first
great  assaults  made  upon  them  were  late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  when  two
controversies  sprung  up,  of  which  I  shall  hereafter  give  an  account, — one  in
France,  and  one  in  England, — by  both  of  which  their  power  was  considerably
damaged.  But  their  two  most  formidable  opponents  were  undoubtedly  Locke
and  Voltaire.  The  immense  services  rendered  by  Locke  in  lessening  the  reputa-
tion of  the  old  classical  school  will  be  examined  in  another  part  of  this  work  ;
at  present  we  are  only  concerned  with  the  steps  taken  by  Voltaire.

The  authority  wielded  by  the  great  classical  scholars  rested  not  only  on  their
abilities,  which  are  undeniable,  but  also  on  the  supposed  dignity  of  their  pursuits.
It  was  generally  believed  that  ancient  history  possessed  some  inherent  superiority
over  modern  history  ;  and  this  being  taken  for  granted,  the  inference  naturally
followed  that  the  cultivators  of  the  one  were  more  praiseworthy  than  the  culti-
vators of  the  other  ;  and  that  a  Frenchman,  for  instance,  who  should  write  the

121  It  is  often  said  that  Malthus  was  indebted  to  Townsend's  writings  for  his  views  on
population  ;  but  this  obligation  has  been  too  strongly  stated,  as  indeed  is  always  the
case  when  charges  of  plagiarism  are  brought  against  great  works.  Still,  Townsend  is  to  be
considered  as  the  precursor  of  Malthus  ;  and  if  the  reader  is  interested  in  tracing  the
paternity  of  ideas,  he  will  find  some  interesting  economical  remarks  in  Townsend's  Journey
through  Spain,  vol.  i.  pp.  379,  383,  vol.  ii.  pp.  85,  337,  387-393  ;  which  must  be  compared
with  M'CulloMs  Literature  of  Political  Economy,  pp.  259,  281-3.  Voltaire,  having  pre-
ceded these  authors,  has  of  course  fallen  into  errors  which  they  avoided  ;  but  nothing  can
be  better  than  the  way  in  which  he  opposes  the  ignorant  belief  of  his  own  time,  that  every-
thing should  be  done  to  increase  population.  "  Le  point  principal  ii'est  pas  d' avoir  du
superflu  en  homines,  mais  de  rendre  ce  que  nous  en  avons  le  moins  malheureux  qu'il
est  possible,"  is  the  summing-up  of  his  able  remarks,  in  Diet.  Philos.,  article  Population,
sect.  2,  in  CEuvres,  vol.  xli.  p.  466.  Godwin,  in  his  notice  of  the  history  of  these  opinions,
is  evidently  ignorant  of  what  was  done  by  Voltaire.  Sinclair's  Corresp.  vol.  i.  p.  396.


462  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

history  of  some  Greek  republic,  displayed  a  nobler  turn  of  mind  than  if  he  had
written  the  history  of  his  own  country.  This  singular  prejudice  had  for  cen-
turies been  a  traditional  notion  which  "men  accepted  because  they  had  received
it  from  their  fathers,  and  which  it  would  have  been  almost  an  impiety  to  dispute.
The  result  was  that  the  few  really  able  writers  on  history  devoted  themselves
chiefly  to  that  of  the  ancients  ;  or,  if  they  published  an  account  of  modern  times,
they  handled  their  theme  not  according  to  modern  ideas  but  according  to  ideas
gathered  from  their  more  favourite  pursuit.  This  confusion  of  the  standard  of
one  age  with  the  standard  of  another  caused  a  double  evil.  Historians,  by
adopting  this  plan,  injured  the  originality  of  their  own  minds  ;  and,  what  was
far  worse,  they  set  a  bad  example  to  the  literature  of  their  country.  For  every
great  nation  has  a  mode  of  expression  and  of  thought  peculiar  to  itself,  and  with
which  its  sympathies  are  intimately  connected.  To  introduce  any  foreign
model,  however  admirable  it  may  be,  is  to  violate  this  connexion,  and  to  impair
the  value  of  literature  by  limiting  the  scope  of  its  action.  By  such  a  course  the
taste  may  possibly  be  refined,  but  the  vigour  will  certainly  be  weakened.  Indeed
the  refinement  of  the  taste  may  well  be  doubted  when  we  see  what  has  taken
place  in  our  country,  where  our  great  scholars  have  corrupted  the  English  language
by  a  jargon  so  uncouth  that  a  plain  man  can  hardly  discern  the  real  lack  of  ideas
which  their  barbarous  and  mottled  dialect  strives  to  hide.122  At  all  events,  it  is
certain  that  every  people  worthy  of  being  called  a  nation  possess  in  their  own
language  ample  resources  for  expressing  the  highest  ideas  they  are  able  to  form  ;
and  although  in  matters  of  science  it  may  be  convenient  to  coin  such  words  as
are  more  easily  understood  in  foreign  countries,  it  is  a  grave  offence  to  depart  on
other  subjects  from  the  vernacular  speech  ;  and  it  is  a  still  graver  one  to  intro-
duce notions  and  standards  for  action,  suited  perhaps  to  former  times,  but  which
the  march  of  society  has  left  far  behind,  and  with  which  we  have  no  real  sym-
pathy, though  they  may  excite  that  sickly  and  Artificial  interest  which  the  classica
prejudices  of  early  education  still  contrive  to  create.

It  was  against  these  evils  that  Voltaire  entered  the  field.  The  wit  and  the
ridicule  with  which  he  attacked  the  dreaming  scholars  of  his  own  time  can  only
be  appreciated  by  those  who  have  studied  his  works.  Not,  as  some  have  sup-
posed, that  he  used  these  weapons  as  a  substitute  for  argument,  still  less  that  he
fell  into  the  error  of  making  ridicule  a  test  for  truth.  No  one  could  reason  more
closely  than  Voltaire,  when  reasoning  suited  his  purpose.  But  he  had  to  deal
with '  men  impervious  to  argument  ;  men  whose  inordinate  reverence  for
antiquity  had  only  left  them  two  ideas,  namely,  that  everything  old  is  right,  and
that  everything  new  is  wrong.  To  argue  against  these  opinions  would  be  idle
indeed  ;  the  only  other  resource  was  to  make  them  ridiculous  and  weaken  their
influence  by  holding  up  their  authors  to  contempt.  This  was  one  of  the  tasks
Voltaire  set  himself  to  perform  ;  and  he  did  it  well.123  He  therefore  used  ridi-

122  With  the  single  exception  of  Person,  not  one  of  the  great  English  scholars  has  shown
an  appreciation  of  the  beauties  of  his  native  language  ;  and  many  of  them,  such  as  Parr
(in  all  his  works)  and  Bentley  (in  his  mad  edition  of  Milton),  have  done  everything  in
their  power  to  corrupt  it.     And  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  principal  reason  why
well-educated  women  write  and  converse  in  a  purer  style  than  well-educated  men,  is
because  they  have  not  formed  their  taste  according  to  those  ancient  classical  standards
which,  admirable  as  they  are  in  themselves,  should  never  be  introduced  into  a  state  of
society  unfitted  for  them.       To  this  may  be  added,  that  Cobbett,  the  most  racy  and
idiomatic  of  all  our  writers,  and  Erskine,  by  far  the  greatest  of  our  forensic  orators,  knew
little  or  nothing  of  any  ancient  language  ;  and  the  same  observation  applies  to  Shakes-
peare.    On  the  supposed  connexion  between  the  improvement  of  taste  and  the  study  of
classical  models,  there  are  some  remarks  worth  attending  to  in  Rey's  Theorie  et  Pratique
de  la  Science  Socials,  vol.  i.  pp.  98-101.

123  "  We  can  best  judge  from  the  Jesuitical  rage  with  which  he  was  persecuted,  how
admirably  he  had  delineated  the  weaknesses  and  presumption  of  the  interpreters  of  the
ancients,  who  shone  in  the  schools  and  academies,  and  had  acquired  great  reputation
by  their  various  and  copiously  exhibited  learning."     Schlosser's  Eighteenth  Century,


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE


463


cule,  not  as  the  test  of  truth,  but  as  the  scourge  of  folly.  And  with  such  effect
was  the  punishment  administered  that  not  only  did  the  pedants  and  theologians
of  his  own  time  wince  under  the  lash,  but  even  their  successors  feel  their  ears
tingle  when  they  read  his  biting  words  ;  and  they  revenged  themselves  by  reviling
the  memory  of  that  great  writer,  whose  works  are  as  a  thorn  in  their  side,  and
whose  very  name  they  hold  in  undisguised  abhorrence.

These  two  classes 'have  indeed  reasons  enough  for  the  hatred  with  which
they  still  regard  the  greatest  Frenchman  of  the  eighteenth  century.  For  Vol-
taire did  more  than  any  other  man  to  sap  the  foundation  of  ecclesiastical  power,
and  to  destroy  the  supremacy  of  classical  studies.  This  is  not  the  place  for  dis-
cussing the  theological  opinions  which  he  attacked  ;  but  of  the  state  of  classical
opinions  an  idea  may  be  formed,  by  considering  some  of  those  circumstances
which  were  recorded  by  the  ancients  respecting  their  history,  and  which,  until
the  appearance  of  Voltaire,  were  implicitly  believed  by  modern  scholars,*  and
through  them  by  the  people  at  large.

It  was  believed  that,  in  ancient  times,  Mars  ravished  a  virgin,  and  that  the
offspring  of  the  intrigue  were  no  other  than  Romulus  and  Remus,  both  of  whom
it  was  intended  to  put  to  death  ;  but  they  were  fortunately  saved  by  the  atten-
tions of  a  she -wolf  and  a  woodpecker  ;  the  wolf  giving  them  suck,  and  the
woodpecker  protecting  them  from  insects.  It  was  moreover  believed  that
Romulus  and  Remus,  when  grown  up  to  man's  estate,  determined  to  build  a
city,  and  that,  being  joined  by  the  descendants  of  the  Trojan  warriors,  they
succeeded  in  erecting  Rome.  It  was  believed  that  both  brothers  came  to  an
untimely  end  ;  Remus  being  murdered,  and  Romulus  being  taken  up  to  heaven
by  his  father,  who  descended  for  that  purpose  in  the  midst  of  a  tempest.  The
great  scholars  then  proceeded  to  relate  the  succession  of  several  other  kings  ;
the  most  remarkable  of  whom  was  Numa,  whose  only  communications  with  his
wife  were  carried  on  in  a  sacred  grove.  Another  of  the  sovereigns  of  Rome  was
Tullus  Hostilius,  who,  having  offended  the  clergy,  perished  from  the  effects  of
their  anger  ;  his  death  being  caused  by  lightning,  and  preceded  by  pestilence.
Then  again  there  was  one  Servius  Tullius,  who  was  also  a  king,  and  whose  great-
ness was  prognosticated  by  the  appearance  of  flames  round  his  head  as  he  was
sleeping  in  his  cradle.  After  this  it  was  but  a  slight  matter  that  the  ordinary
laws  of  mortality  should  be  suspended  ;  we  were  therefore  assured  that  those
ignorant  barbarians,  the  early  Romans,  passed  two  hundred  and  forty-five
years  under  the  government  of  only  seven  kings,  all  of  whom  were  elected  in  the
prime  of  life,  one  of  whom  was  expelled  the  city,  and  three  of  whom  were  put  to
death.

These  are  a  few  of  the  idle  stories  in  which  the  great  scholars  took  intense
delight,  and  which,  during  many  centuries,  were  supposed  to  form  a  necessary
part  of  the  annals  of  the  Latin  Empire.  Indeed,  so  universal  was  the  cred-
ulity that,  until  they  were  destroyed  by  Voltaire,  there  were  only  four  writers
who  had  ventured  openly  to  attack  them.  Cluverius,  Perizonius,  Pouilly,
and  Beaufort  were  the  names  of  these  bold  innovators  ;  but  by  none  of  them
was  any  impression  made  on  the  public  mind.  The  works  of  Cluverius  and
Perizonius,  being  composed  in  Latin,  were  addressed  entirely  to  a  class  of  readers
who,  infatuated  with  a  love  of  antiquity,  would  listen  to  nothing  that  diminished
the  reputation  of  its  history.  Pouilly  and  Beaufort  wrote  in  French  ;  both  of
them  and  especially  Beaufort,  were  men  of  considerable  ability  ;  but  their
powers  were  not  versatile  enough  to  enable  them  to  extirpate  prejudices  which
were  so  strongly  protected,  and  which  had  been  fostered  by  the  education  of
ly  successive  generations.!

vol.  i.  p.  120.  At  p.  270  M.  Schlosser  says,  "  And  it  was  only  a  man  of  Voltaire's  wit
and  talents  who  could  throw  the  light  of  an  entirely  new  criticism  upon  the  darkness  of
those  grubbing  and  collecting  pedants."

[*  An  over -statement.     See  the  next  note. — ED.]

[t  This  summary  is  somewhat  hasty.      "  Only  four  writers,"  in  the  circumstances,
is  an  odd  phrase  ;  but  as  it  is,  it  overlooks  Bochart,  Gronovius,  and  above  all  Vico,


464  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  service,  therefore,  rendered  by  Voltaire  in  purging  history  of  these  foolish
conceits  is,  not  that  he  was  the  first  by  whom  they  were  attacked,  but  that
he  was  the  first  to  attack  them  with  success  ;  and  this  because  he  was  also  the
first  who  mingled  ridicule  with  argument,  thus  not  only  assailing  the  system,
but  also  weakening  the  authority  of  those  by  whom  the  system  was  supported.
His  irony,  his  wit,  his  pungent  and  telling  sarcasms,  produced  more  effect  than
the  gravest  arguments  could  have  done  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he
was  fully  justified  in  using  those  great  resources  with  which  nature  had  endowed
him,  since  by  their  aid  he  advanced  the  interests  of  truth  and  relieved  men  from
some  of  their  most  inveterate  prejudices.

It  is  not,  however,  to  be  supposed  that  ridicule  was  the  only  means  employed
by  Voltaire  in  effecting  this  important  object.  So  far  from  that,  I  can  say
with  confidence,  after  a  careful  comparison  of  both  writers,  that  the  most
decisive  arguments  advanced  by  Niebuhr  against  the  early  history  of  Rome
had  all  been  anticipated  by  Voltaire,  in  whose  works  they  may  be  found  by
whoever  will  take  the  trouble  of  reading  what  this  great  man  has  written,  in-
stead of  ignorantly  railing  against  him.  Without  entering  into  needless  detail,
it  is  enough  to  mention  that  amidst  a  great  variety  of  very  ingenious  and  very
learned  discussion,  Niebuhr  has  put  forward  several  views  with  which  later
critics  have  been  dissatisfied  ;  but  that  there  are  three,  and  only  three,  principles
which  are  fundamental  to  his  history,  and  which  it  is  impossible  to  refute.
These  are  : — I.  That  on  account  of  the  inevitable  intermixture  of  fable  essential
to  a  rude  people,  no  nation  can  possess  trustworthy  details  respecting  its  own
origin.  II.  That  even  such  early  documents  as  the  Romans  might  have
possessed  had  been  destroyed  before  they  were  incorporated  into  a  regular
history.  III.  That  ceremonies  established  in  honour  of  certain  events  alleged
to  have  taken  place  in  former  times  were  a  proof,  not  that  the  events  had
happened,  but  that  they  were  believed  to  have  happened.  The  whole  fabric
of  the  early  history  of  Rome  at  once  fell  to  pieces  as  soon  as  these  three  prin-
ciples were  applied  to  it.  What,  however,  is  most  remarkable,  is  that  not  only
are  all  three  laid  down  by  Voltaire,  but  their  bearing  upon  Roman  history  is
distinctly  shown.  He  says  that  no  nation  is  acquainted  with  its  own  origin  ;
so  that  all  primitive  history  is  necessarily  an  invention.124  He  remarks  that
since  even  such  historical  works  as  the  Romans  once  possessed  were  all  destroyed
when  their  city  was  burned,  no  confidence  can  be  placed  in  the  accounts  which,
at  a  much  later  period,  are  given  by  Livy  and  other  compilers.125  And  as

124  "  C'est  1'imagination  seule  qui  a  ecrit  les  premieres  histoires.       Non  seulement
chaque  peuple  inventa  son  origine,  mais  il  inventa  aussi  l'origine  du  monde  entier."    Diet.
Philos.,  article  Histoire,  sec.  2,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xl.  p.  195.     See  also  his  article  on  Chron-
ology, vol.  xxxviii.  p.  77,  for  the  application  of  this  to  the  history  of  Rome,  where  he
says,  "  Tite  Live  n'a  garde  de  dire  en  quelle  annee  Romulus  commenga  son  pretendu
regne."      And  at  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  86,  "  tous  les  peuples  se  sont   attribues   des   origines
imaginaires  ;  et  aucun  n'a  touche  a  la  veritable."

125  «  Qu'on  fasse  attention  que  la  republique  romaine  a  etc  cinq  cents  ans  sans  his-
toriens  ;  que  Tite  Live  lui-meme  deplore  la  perte  des  autres  monuments  qui  perirent
presque  tous  dans  1'incendie  de  Rome,"  &c.      Diet.  Philos.  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xl.  p.  202.
At  p.  1 88,  "  ce  peuple,  si  recent  en  comparaison  des  nations  asiatiques,  a  ete  cinq  cents

who  had  brought  rational  criticism  to  bear  on  the  subject  before  Voltaire.  It  is  clear,
too,  that  some  of  the  fables  mentioned  by  Buckle  were  recognised  as  such  by  many
scholars  long  before.  For  instance,  the  founding  of  the  city  by  Romulus  is  tacitly
rejected  in  a  Discours  sur  les  Tribus  Remains  by  Boindin,  read  to  the  Academy  before
1710  (Mem.  de  Lift.  ed.  La  Haye,  1719,  i.  97).  It  is  therefore  unwarrantable  to  say
that  no  scholars  heeded  Cluverius  and  Perizonius.  As  to  "  extirpating  prejudice,"  it  is
clear  that  Voltaire  in  his  turn  failed,  since  the  whole  matter  had  to  be  freshly  handled
in  the  nineteenth  century  by  Niebuhr.  On  the  merits  of  Beaufort,  to  whom  Niebuhr
was  less  than  just,  and  on  the  other  pioneers,  see  Prof.  Flint's  Hist,  of  the  Philos.  of
Hist.  1893.  pp.  255-261. — ED.]


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  465


innumerable  scholars  busied  themselves  in  collecting  evidence  respecting  cere-
monies instituted  in  celebration  of  certain  events,  and  then  appealed  to  the
evidence  in  order  to  prove  the  events,  Voltaire  makes  a  reflection  which  now
seems  very  obvious,  but  which  these  learned  men  had  entirely  overlooked.
He  notices  that  their  labour  is  bootless,  because  the  date  of  the  evidence  is,
with  extremely  few  exceptions,  much  later  than  the  date  of  the  event  to  which
it  refers.  In  such  cases,  the  existence  of  a  festival  or  of  a  monument  proves
indeed  the  belief  which  men  entertain,  but  by  no  means  proves  the  reality
of  the  occurrence  concerning  which  the  belief  is  held.12^  This  simple  but
important  maxim  is,  even  in  our  own  days,  constantly  lost  sight  of,  while  before
the  eighteenth  century  it  was  universally  neglected.  Hence  it  was  that  his-
torians were  able  to  accumulate  fables  which  were  believed  without  examina-
tion ; 127  it  being  altogether  forgotten  that  fables,  as  Voltaire  says,  begin  to
be  current  in  one  generation,  are  established  in  the  second,  become  respectable
in  the  third,  while  in  the  fourth  generation  temples  are  raised  in  honour  of
them.128

I  have  been  the  more  particular  in  stating  the  immense  obligations  history
is  under  to  Voltaire,  because  in  England  there  exists  against  him  a  prejudice
which  nothing  but  ignorance,  or  something  worse  than  ignorance,  can  excuse  ;*  129

annees  sans  historiens.  Ainsi,  il  n'est  pas  surprenant  que  Romulus  ait  etc  le  fils  de
Mars,  qu'une  louve  ait  ete  sa  nourrice,  qu'il  ait  marche  avec  mille  hommes  de  son  village
de  Rome  centre  vingt-cinq  mille  combattants  du  village  des  Sabins."

126  "  paj-  quel  exces  de  demence,  par  quel  opiniatrete  absurde,  tant  de  compilateurs
ont-ils  voulu  prouver  dans  tant  de  volumes  enormes,  qu'une  fete  publique  etablie  en
memoire  d'un  evenement  etait  une  demonstration  de  la  verite  de  cet  evenement  ?
Essai  sur  les  Mceurs,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xv.  p.  109.      See  also  the  same  remark  applied  to
monuments  in  chap,  cxcvii.,  (Euvres,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  412-414  ;  and  again,   in  vol.  xl.
pp.  203,  204.

127  "La  plupart  des  histoires  ont  ete  crues  sans  examen,  et    cette  creance  est  un
prejuge.      Fabius  Pictor  raconte  que,  plusieurs  siecles  avant  lui,  une  vestale  de  la  ville
d' Albe,  allant  puiser  de  1'eau  dans  sa  cruche,  fut  violee,  qu'elle  accoucha  de  Romulus
et  de  Remus,  qu'ils  furent  nourris  par  une  louve,  etc.        Le  peuple  romain  crut  cette
fable ;  il  n'examina  point  si  dans  ce  temps-la  il  y  avait  des  vestales  dans  le  Latium,  s'il  etait
vraisemblable  que  la  fille  d'un  roi  sortit  de  son  couvent  avec  sa  cruche,  s'il  etait  probable
qu'une  louve  allaitat  deux  enfants  au  lieu  de  les  manger  ;  le  prejuge  s'etablit."     Diet.
Philos.  article  Prejuges,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xli.  pp.  488,  489.

128  "  Les  amateurs  du  merveilleux  disaient :  II  faut  bien  que  ces  faits  soient  vrais,
puisque  tants  de  monuments  en  sont  la  preuve.      Et  nous  disions  :  II  faut  bien  qu'ils
soient  faux,  puisque  le  vulgaire  les  a  crus.     Une  fable  a  quelque  cours  dans  une  gener-
ation ;  elle  s'etablit  dans  la  seconde  ;  elle  devient  respectable  dans  la  troisieme  ;  la  quat-
rieme  lui  eleve    des    temples."        Fragments  sur  VHistoire,  article  i.,  in  (Euvres,  vol.
xxvii.  pp.  158,  159.

129  In  this  case,  as  in  many  others,  ignorance  has  been  fortified  by  bigotry  ;  for,  as
Lord  Campbell  truly  says  of  Voltaire,  "  since  the  French  Revolution,  an  indiscriminate
abuse  of  this  author  has  been  in  England  the  test  of  orthodoxy  and  loyalty."      Camp-
bell's  Chief -Justices,  vol.  ii.  p.  335.     Indeed,  so  extensively  has  the  public  mind  been
prejudiced  against  this  great  man,  that,  until  a  very  few  years  ago,  when  Lord  Brougham
published  a  life  of  him,  there  was  no  book  in  the  English  language  containing  even  a
tolerable  account  of  one  of  the  most  influential  writers  France  has  produced.       This
work  of  Lord  Brougham's,  though  a  middling  performance,  is  at  least  an  honest  one,
and,  as  it  harmonizes  with  the  general  spirit  of  our  time,  it  has  probably  had  considerable
weight.       In  it  he  says  of  Voltaire,  "  nor  can  any  one  since  the  days  of  Luther  be  named,
to  whom  the  spirit  of  free  inquiry,  nay,  the  emancipation  of  the  human  mind  from
spiritual  tyranny,  owes  a  more  lasting  debt  of  gratitude."      Brougham's  Life  of  Vol-
taire, p.  132.      It  is  certain  that  the  better  the  history  of    the  eighteenth  century  is
understood,  the  more  the  reputation  of  Voltaire  will  increase  ;  as  was  clearly  foreseen
by  a  celebrated  writer  nearly  a  generation  ago.      In    1831,  Lerminier  wrote  these  re-


[*  Read  "  explain." — ED.]

30


466  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  because,  taking  him  on  the  whole,  he  is  probably  the  greatest  historian
Europe  has  yet  produced.  In  reference,  however,  to  the  mental  habits  of
the  eighteenth  century,  it  is  important  to  show  that  in  the  same  period  similar
comprehensiveness  was  being  displayed  by  other  French  historians  ;  so  that
in  this  case  as  in  all  others  we  shall  find  that  a  large  share  of  what  is  affected,
even  by  the  most  eminent  men,  is  due  to  the  character  of  the  age  in  which  they
live.

The  vast  labours  of  Voltaire  towards  reforming  the  old  method  of  writing
history  were  greatly  aided  by  those  important  works  which  Montesquieu  put
forward  during  the  same  period.  In  I734,130  this  remarkable  man  published
what  may  be  truly  called  the  first  book  in  which  there  can  be  found  any  in-
formation concerning  the  real  history  of  Rome  ;  because  it  is  also  the  first  in
which  the  affairs  of  the  ancient  world  are  treated  in  a  large  and  comprehensive
spirit.131  Fourteen  years  later  there  appeared,  by  the  same  author,  the  Spirit
of  Laws  ;  a  more  famous  production,  but,  as  it  seems  to  me,  not  a  greater  one.
The  immense  merit  of  the  Spirit  of  Laws  is  indeed  incontestable,  and  cannot  be
affected  by  the  captious  attempts  made  to  diminish  it  by  those  minute  critics,
who  seem  to  think  that  when  they  detect  the  occasional  errors  of  a  great  man,
they  in  some  degree  reduce  him  to  their  own  level.  It  is  not  such  petty
cavilling  which  can  destroy  an  European  reputation  ;  and  the  noble  work  of
Montesquieu  will  long  survive  all  attacks  of  this  kind,  because  its  large  and
suggestive  generalizations  would  retain  their  value  even  if  the  particular  facts
of  which  the  illustrations  consist  were  all  unfounded.132  Still,  I  am  inclined
to  believe,  that  in  point  of  original  thought  it  is  barely  equal  to  his  earlier  work,
though  it  is  unquestionably  the  fruit  of  much  greater  reading.  Without,
however,  instituting  a  comparison  between  them,  our  present  object  is  merely
to  consider  the  contributions  they  jointly  contain  towards  a  right  understanding
of  history,  and  the  way  in  which  those  contributions  are  connected  with  the
general  spirit  of  the  eighteenth  century.

In  this  point  of  view,  there  are  in  the  works  of  Montesquieu  two  leading
peculiarities.  The  first  is,  the  complete  rejection  of  those  personal  anecdotes,
and  those  trivial  details  respecting  individuals,  which  belong  to  biography,
but  with  which,  as  Montesquieu  clearly  saw,  history  has  no  concern.  The
other  peculiarity  is  the  very  remarkable  attempt  which  he  first  made  to  effect

markable,  and,  as  the  result  has  proved,  prophetic  words  :  "  II  est  temps  de  revenir
a  des  sentimens  plus  respectueux  pour  la  memoire  de  Voltaire.  .  .  .  Voltaire  a  fait  pour
la  France  ce  que  Leibnitz  a  fait  pour  1'Allemagne  ;  pendant  trois -quarts  de  siecle  il
a  represente  son  pays,  puissant  a  la  maniere  de  Luther  et  de  Napoleon  ;  il  est  destine
a  survivre  a  bien  des  gloires,  et  je  plains  ceux  qui  se  sont  oublies  jusqu'a  laisser  tomber
des  paroles  dedaigneuses  sur  le  genie  de  cet  homme."  Lerminier,  Philosophic  du  Droit,
vol.  i.  p.  199.  Ccmpare  the  glowing  eulogy  in  Longchamp  et  Wagniere,  Memories  sur
Voltaire,  vol.  ii.  pp.  388,  389,  with  the  remarks  of  Saint -Lambert,  in  Mem.  d'Epinay,
vol.  i.  p.  263.

iso  vie  ae  Montesquieu,  p.  xiv.,  prefixed  to  his  works.

131  Before  Montesquieu,  the  only  two  great  thinkers  who  had  really  studied  Roman
history  were  Machiavelli  and  Vico  ;   but  Machiavelli   did   not   attempt   anything   ap-
proaching the  generalizations  of  Montesquieu,  and  he  suffered,  moreover,  from  the  serious
deficiency  of  being  too  much  occupied  with  the  practical  utility  of  his  subject.      Vico,
whose  genius  was  perhaps  even  more  vast  than  that  of  Montesquieu,  can  hardly  be
considered  his  rival ;  for,  though  his  Scienza  Nuova  contains  the  most  profound  views
on  ancient  history,  they  are  rather  glimpses  of   truth  than  a  systematic  investigation
of  any  one  period.

132  Which  M.  Guizot  (Civilisation  en  France,  vol.  iv.  p.  36),  in  his  remarks  on  the
Esprit  des  Lois,  does  not  take  sufficiently  into  consideration.      A  juster  appreciation
of  Montesquieu  will  be  found  in  Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philosophic,  part  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  182  ;
and  in  Comte,  Philosophic  Positive,  vol.  iv.  pp.  243-252,  261.       Compare  Charles  Comte,
Traitc  de  Legislation,  vol.  i.  p.   125,  with  Meyer,    Esprit  des  Institutions  Judiciaires,
vol.  i.  p.  Ixi.  respecting  the  vast  innovations  he  introduced.


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  467

an  union  between  the  history  of  man  and  those  sciences  which  deal  with  the
external  world.  As  these  are  the  two  great  characteristics  of  the  method
adopted  by  Montesquieu,  it  will  be  necessary  to  give  some  account  of  them,
before  we  can  understand  the  place  he  really  occupies  as  one  of  the  founders
of  the  philosophy  of  history.

We  have  already  seen  that  Voltaire  had  strongly  insisted  on  the  necessity
of  reforming  history,  by  paying  more  attention  to  the  history  of  the  people,
and  less  attention  to  that  of  their  political  and  military  rulers.  We  have  also
seen  that  this  great  improvement  was  so  agreeable  to  the  spirit  of  the  time
that  it  was  generally  and  quickly  adopted,  and  thus  became  an  indication  of
those  democratic  tendencies  of  which  it  was  in  reality  a  result.  It  is  not,
therefore,  surprising  that  Montesquieu  should  have  taken  the  same  course,
even  before  the  movement  had  been  clearly  declared  ;  since  he,  like  most  great
thinkers,  was  a  representative  of  the  intellectual  condition,  and  a  satisfier  of
the  intellectual  wants,  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived.

But  what  constitutes  the  peculiarity  of  Montesquieu  in  this  matter  is  that
with  him  a  contempt  for  those  details  respecting  courts,  ministers,  and  princes,
in  which  ordinary  compilers  take  great  delight,  was  accompanied  by  an  equal
contempt  for  other  details  which  are  really  interesting,  because  they  concern
the  mental  habits  of  the  few  truly  eminent  men  who  from  time  to  time  have
appeared  on  the  stage  of  public  life.  This  was  because  Montesquieu  perceived
that,  though  these  things  are  very  interesting,  they  are  also  very  unimportant.
He  knew,  what  no  historian  before  him  had  even  suspected,  that  in  the  great
march  of  human  affairs  individual  peculiarities  count  for  nothing  ;  and  that
therefore  the  historian  has  no  business  with  them,  but  should  leave  them  to  the
biographer,  to  whose  province  they  properly  belong.  The  consequence  is  that
not  only  does  he  treat  the  most  powerful  princes  with  such  disregard  as  to
relate  the  reigns  of  six  emperors  in  two  lines,133  but  he  constantly  enforces  the
necessity,  even  in  the  case  of  eminent  men,  of  subordinating  their  special  in-
fluence to  the  more  general  influence  of  the  surrounding  society.  Thus,  many
writers  had  ascribed  the  ruin  of  the  Roman  Republic  to  the  ambition  of  Caesar
arid  Pompey,  and  particularly  to'  the  deep  schemes  of  Caesar.  This,  Montes-
quieu totally  denies.  According  to  his  view  of  history,  no  great  alteration  can
be  effected  except  by  virtue  of  a  long  train  of  antecedents,  where  alone  we  are
to  seek  the  cause  of  what  to  a  superficial  eye  is  the  work  of  individuals.  The
republic,  therefore,  was  overthrown,  not  by  Caesar  and  Pompey,  but  by  that
state  of  things  which  made  the  success  of  Caesar  and  Pompey  possible.13*  It
is  thus  that  the  events  which  ordinary  historians  relate  are  utterly  valueless.
Such  events,  instead  of  being  causes,  are  merely  the  occasions  on  which  the
real  causes  act.135  They  may  be  called  the  accidents  of  history  ;  and  they
must  be  treated  as  subservient  to  those  vast  and  comprehensive  conditions,
by  which  alone  the  rise  and  fall  of  nations  are  ultimately  governed.136

This,  then,  was  the  first  great  merit  of  Montesquieu,  that  he  effected  a  com-
plete separation  between  biography  and  history,  and  taught  historians  to  study,

133  He  says  of  the  Emperor  Maximin,  "  il  fut  tue  avec  son  fils  par  ses  soldats.     Les
deux  premiers  Gordiens  perirent  en  Afrique.      Maxime,  Balbin,  et  le  troisieme  Gordien
furent  massacres."     Grandeur  et  Decadence  des  Romains,  chap,  xvi.,  in  (Euvres  de  Mon-
tesquieu, p.  167.

134  Ibid.  chap,  xi.,  in  (Euvres  de  Montesquieu,  pp.  149-153.      Compare  a  similar  re-
mark, respecting  Charles  XII.,  in  Esprit  des  Lois,  livre  x.  chap.  xiii.      (Euvres,  p.  260.

135  On  the  difference  between  cause  and  occasion,  see  Grandeur  et  Decad.  chap.  i.
p.  126.

136  "  II  y  a  des  causes  generates,  soit  morales,  soit  physiques,  qui  agissent  dans  chaque
monarchic,  1'elevent,  la  maintiennent,  ou  la  precipitant ;  tous  les  accidents  sont  soumis
a  ces  causes  ;  et  si  le  hasard  d'une  bataille,  c'est-a-dire  une  cause  parflculiere,  a  ruine
un  etat,  il  y  avoit  une  cause  generate  qui  faisoit  que  cet  etat  devoit  perir  par  une  seulc
bataille.      En  un  mot,  1'allure  principale  entraine  avec  elle  tous  les  accidents  particuliers."
Grand,  ct  Decad.  des  Romains,  chap,  xviii.  p.  172.


468  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

not  the  peculiarities  of  individual  character,  but  the  general  aspect  of  the  society
in  which  the  peculiarities  appeared.  If  this  remarkable  man  had  accomplished
nothing  further,  he  would  have  rendered  an  incalculable  service  to  history,
by  pointing  out  how  one  of  its  most  fertile  sources  of  error  might  be  safely  re-
moved. And  although,  unhappily,  we  have  not  yet  reaped  the  full  benefit
of  his  example,  this  is  because  his  successors  have  rarely  had  the  capacity  of
rising  to  so  high  a  generalization:  it  is  however  certain  that  since  his  time
an  approximation  towards  such  elevated  views  may  be  noticed  even  among
those  inferior  writers  who,  for  want  of  sufficient  grasp,  are  unable  to  adopt  them
to  their  full  extent.

In  addition  to  this,  Montesquieu  made  another  great  advance  in  the  method
of  treating  history.  He  was  the  first  who,  in  an  inquiry  into  the  relations
between  the  social  conditions  of  a  country  and  its  jurisprudence,  called  in
the  aid  of  physical  knowledge  in  order  to  ascertain  how  the  character  of  any
given  civilization  is  modified  by  the  action  of  the  external  world.  In  his
work  on  the  Spirit  of  Laws  he  studies  the  way  in  which  both  the  civil  and
political  legislation  of  a  people  are  naturally  connected  with  their  climate,  soil,
and  food.137  It  is  true  that  in  this  vast  enterprise  he  almost  entirely  failed  ;
but  this  was  because  meteorology,  chemistry,  and  physiology  were  still
too  backward  to  admit  of  such  an  undertaking.  This,  however,  affects  the
value  only  of  his  conclusions,  not  of  his  method  ;  and  here  as  elsewhere  we
see  the  great  thinker  tracing  the  outline  of  a  plan  which,  in  the  then  state  of
knowledge,  it  was  impossible  to  fill  up,  and  the  completion  of  which  he  was
obliged  to  leave  to  the  riper  experience  and  more  powerful  resources  of  a  later
age.*  Thus  to  anticipate  the  march  of  the  human  intellect,  and,  as  it  were,
forestall  its  subsequent  acquisitions,  is  the  peculiar  prerogative  of  minds  of  the
highest  order  ;  and  it  is  this  which  gives  to  the  writings  of  Montesquieu  a  certain
fragmentary  and  provisional  appearance,  which  was  the  necessary  consequence
of  a  profoundly  speculative  genius  dealing  with  materials  that  were  intractable,
simply  because  science  had  not  yet  reduced  them  to  order  by  generalizing  the
laws  of  their  phenomena.  Hence  it  is  that  many  of  the  inferences  drawn
by  Montesquieu  are  untenable  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  those  regarding  the  effect
of  diet  in  stimulating  population  by  increasing  the  fecundity  of  women,138  and
the  effect  of  climate  in  altering  the  proportion  between  the  births  of  the  sexes. 13»
In  other  cases,  an  increased  acquaintance  with  barbarous  nations  has  sufficed
to  correct  his  conclusions,  particularly  those  concerning  the  effect  which  he
supposed  climate  to  produce  on  individual  character  ;  for  we  have  now  the  most
decisive  evidence,  that  he  was  wrong  in  asserting140  that  hot  climates  make
people  unchaste  and  cowardly,  while  cold  climates  make  them  virtuous  and
brave.

These,  indeed,  are  comparatively  trifling  objections,  because  in  all  the  highest
branches  of  knowledge  the  main  difficulty  is  not  to  discover  facts  but  to  dis-
cover the  true  method  according  to  which  the  laws  of  the  facts  may  be
ascertained.1*1  In  this,  Montesquieu  performed  a  double  service,  since
he  not  only  enriched  history  but  also  strengthened  its  foundation.  He
enriched  history  by  incorporating  with  it  physical  inquiries  ;  and  he
strengthened  history  by  separating  it  from  biography,  and  thus  freeing  it  from
details  which  are  always  unimportant,  and  often  unauthentic.  And  although
he  committed  the  error  of  studying  the  influence  of  nature  over  men  considered

137  De  V Esprit  des  Lois,  books  xiv.  to  xviii.  inclusive  ;  in  (Euvres,  pp.  30  -336.

138  Ibid,   livre  xxiii.   chap.   xiii.   p.   395.     Compare  Burdach,   Traite  de  Physiologic,
vol.  ii.  p.  1 1 6.

139  Ibid,  livre  xvi.  chap,  iv.,  and  livre  xxiii.  chap.  xii.  pp.  317,  395.

140  Ibid,  livre  xiv.  chap,  ii.,  livre  xvii.  chap,  ii.,  and  elsewhere.

141  On  the  supreme  importance  of  method,  see  my  defence  of  Bichat  in  the  next  chapter.

[*  In  point  of  fact,  Montesquieu's  errors  as  to  climate  were  exposed  by^Voltaire  and
by  another  editor  in  the  eighteenth  century.  See  Garnier's  variorum  edition. — ED.]


HISTORICAL    LITERATURE    IN    FRANCE  469

as  individuals,1*2  rather  than  over  men  considered  as  an  aggregate  society,  this
arose  principally  from  the  fact  that,  in  his  time,  the  resources  necessary  for
the  more  complicated  study  had  not  yet  been  created.  Those  resources,  as
I  have  shown,  are  political  economy  and  statistics  :  political  economy  supplying
the  means  of  connecting  the  laws  of  physical  agents  with  the  laws  of  the  in-
equality of  wealth,  and  therefore  with  a  great  variety  of  social  disturbances  ;
while  statistics  enable  us  to  verify  those  laws  in  their  widest  extent,  and  to
prove  how  completely  the  volition  of  individual  men  is  controlled  by  their
antecedents,  and  by  the  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed.  It  was
therefore  not  only  natural  but  inevitable  that  Montesquieu  should  fail  in
his  magnificent  attempt  to  unite  the  laws  of  the  human  mind  with  the  laws
of  external  nature.  He  failed,  partly  because  the  sciences  of  external  nature
were  too  backward,  and  partly  because  those  other  branches  of  knowledge
which  connect  nature  with  man  were  still  unformed.  For,  as  to  political
economy,  it  had  no  existence  as  a  science  until  the  publication  of  the  Wealth
of  Nations  in  1776,  twenty-one  years  after  the  death  of  Montesquieu.  As  to
statistics,  their  philosophy  is  a  still  more  recent  creation,  since  it  is  only  during
the  last  thirty  years  that  they  have  been  systematically  applied  to  social
phenomena  ;  the  earlier  statisticians  being  merely  a  body  of  industrious  collectors,
groping  in  the  dark,  bringing  together  facts  of  every  kind  without  selection  or
method,  and  whose  labours  were  consequently  unavailable  for  those  important
purposes  to  which  they  have  been  successfully  applied  during  the  present
generations.

Only  two  years  after  the  publication  of  the  Spirit  of  Laws,  Turgot  delivered
those  celebrated  lectures  of  which  it  has  been  said  that  in  them  he  created  the
philosophy  of  history.143  This  praise  is  somewhat  exaggerated  ;  for  in  the
most  important  matters  relating  to  the  philosophy  of  his  subject,  he  takes  the
same  view  as  Montesquieu  ;  and  Montesquieu,  besides  preceding  him  in  point
of  time,  was  his  superior  certainly  in  learning,  perhaps  in  genius.  Still  the
merit  of  Turgot  is  immense  ;  and  he  belongs  to  that  extremely  small  class  of
men  who  have  looked  at  history  comprehensively,  and  have  recognised  the
almost  boundless  knowledge  needed  for  its  investigation.  In  this  respect
his  method  is  identical  with  that  of  Montesquieu,  since  both  of  these  great  men
excluded  from  their  scheme  the  personal  details  which  ordinary  historians
accumulate,  and  concentrated  their  attention  upon  those  large  general  causes,
by  the  operation  of  which  the  destinies  of  nations  are  permanently  affected.
Turgot  clearly  perceived  that,  notwithstanding  the  variety  of  events  produced
by  the  play  of  human  passions,  there  is  amid  this  apparent  confusion  a  principle
of  order,  and  a  regularity  of  march,  not  to  be  mistaken  by  those  whose  grasp
is  firm  enough  to  seize  the  history  of  man  as  a  complete  and  single  whole. 14*

142  How  completely  futile  this  was,  as  regards  results,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that
a  hundred  years  after  he  wrote,  we,  with  all  our  increased  knowledge,  can  affirm  nothing
positively  respecting  the  direct  action  of  climate,  food,  and  soil,  in  modifying  individual
character  ;  though  it  has,  I  trust,  appeared  in  the  second  chapter  of  this  Introduction
that  something  can  be  ascertained  respecting  their  indirect  action,  that  is,  their  action
on  individual  minds  through  the  medium  of  social  and  economical  organization.

"  II  a  cree  en  1750  la  philosophic  de  1'histoire  dans  ses  deux  discours  prononces
en  Sorbonne."  Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philosophic,  I.  serie,  vol.  i.  p.  147.  There  is  a  short
notice  of  these  striking  productions  in  Condorcet,  Vie  de  Turgot,  pp.  11-16.

14  Nothing  can  be  better  than  his  summary  of  this  vast  conception  :  "  Tous  les  ages
sont  enchaines  par  une  suite  de  causes  et  d'effets  qui  lient  1'etat  du  monde  &  tous  ceux
qui  1'ont  precede."  Second  Discours  en  Sorbonne,  in  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  ii.  p.  52.
Everything  Turgot  wrote  on  history  is  a  development  of  this  pregnant  sentence.  That
he  understood  the  necessity  of  an  historian  being  acquainted  with  physical  science,  and
with  the  laws  of  the  configuration  of  the  earth,  climate,  soil,  and  the  like,  is  evident  in
his  fragment,  La  Geographic  Politique,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  ii.  pp.  166-208.  It  is  no  slight
proof  of  his  political  sagacity,  that  in  1750  he  distinctly  foretold  the  freedom  of  the
American  colonies.  Compare  (Euvres  de  Twgot,  vol.  ii.  p.  66,  with  Mem.  sur  Turgot,


470  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  is  true  that  Turgot,  subsequently  engaged  in  political  life,  never  possessed
sufficient  leisure  to  fill  up  the  splendid  outline  of  what  he  so  successfully  sketched:
but  though  in  the  execution  of  his  plan  he  fell  short  of  Montesquieu,  still  the
analogy  between  the  two  men  is  obvious,  as  also  is  their  relation  to  the  age  in
which  they  lived.  They,  as  well  as  Voltaire,  were  the  unconscious  advocates
of  the  democratic  movement,  inasmuch  as  they  discountenanced  the  homage
which  historians  had  formerly  paid  to  individuals,  and  rescued  history  from
being  a  mere  recital  of  the  deeds  of  political  and  ecclesiastical  rulers.  At  the
same  time,  Turgot,  by  the  captivating  prospects  which  he  held  out  of  future
progress,145  and  by  the  picture  which  he  drew  of  the  capacity  of  society  to
improve  itself,  increased  the  impatience  which  his  countrymen  were  beginning
to  feel  against  that  despotic  government,  in  whose  presence  amelioration  seemed
to  be  hopeless.  These  and  similar  speculations,  which  now  for  the  first  time
appeared  in  French  literature,  stimulated  the  activity  of  the  intellectual  classes,
cheered  them  under  the  persecutions  to  which  they  were  exposed,  and  em-
boldened them  to  the  arduous  enterprise  of  leading  on  the  people  to  attack
the  institutions  of  their  native  land.  Thus  it  was,  that  in  France  everything
tended  to  the  same  result.  Everything  indicated  the  approach  of  some  sharp
and  terrible  struggle,  in  which  the  spirit  of  the  present  should  war  with  the
spirit  of  the  past  ;  and  in  which  it  should  be  finally  settled  whe.ther  the  people
of  France  could  free  themselves  from  the  chains  in  which  they  had  long  been  held,
or  whether,  missing  their  aim,  they  were  doomed  to  sink  still  lower  in  that  igno-
minious vassalage  which  makes  even  the  most  splendid  periods  of  their  political
history  a  warning  and  a  lesson  to  the  civilized  world.

vol.  i.  p.  139.  [The  freedom  of  the  American  colonies  was  predicted  also  by  Dubos
in  1703,  in  Les  Interns  de  V  Angleterre  mal  entendus  dans  la  guerre  presente  (Voltaire,
Siecle  de  Louis  XIV  :  Catalogue  des  Ecrivains);  by  Genovesi  in  1764  (Pecchio,  Storia
delta  economia  pubblica  in  Italia,  1829,  p.  129)  ;  and  at  different  dates  by  Argenson,
Choiseul  and  Vergennes  (Lecky,  Hist,  of  England  in  Eighteenth  Century,  small  ed.  iv.  2  ;
Bancroft,  Hist,  of  U.S.,  Centennial  ed.  iii.  305).  Montesquieu  also  predicted  it  in  one
of  his  Pensees  Diverses  (Notes  sur  V Angleterre). — ED.]

145  A  confidence  which  is  apparent  in  his  economical  as  well  as  in  his  historical  works.
In  1811,  Sir  James  Mackintosh  writes  that  Turgot  "  had  more  comprehensive  views  of
the  progress  of  society  than  any  man  since  Bacon  :  "  Mem.  of  Mackintosh,  vol.  ii.  p.  133  ;
and  see  a  similar  remark  by  Dugald  Stewart,  in  his  Philos.  of  the  Mind,  vol.  i.  p.  246.


CHAPTER    XIV

IOXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  AFTER  THE  MIDDLE  OF  THE
EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY

the  last  chapter  but  one  I  have  attempted   to  ascertain  what   those  cir-

imstances  were  which,  almost  immediately  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,
spared  the  way  for  the  French  Revolution.  The  result  of  the  inquiry  has
m  that  the  French  intellect  was  stimulated  into  activity  by  the  examples
teachings  of  England  ;  and  that  this  stimulus  caused,  or  at  all  events  en-

mraged,  a  great  breach  between  the  government  of  France  and  its  literature  ;
breach  the  more  remarkable,  because  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  the
iterature,  notwithstanding  its  temporary  brilliancy,  had  been  invariably  sub-

dssive,  and  had  intimately  allied  itself  with  the  government,  which  was  always
ready  to  reward  its  services.*  We  have  also  seen  that,  this  rupture  having
arisen  between  the  governing  classes  and  the  intellectual  classes,  it  followed
that  the  former,  true  to  their  ancient  instincts,  began  to  chastize  that  spirit
of  inquiry  to  which  they  were  unaccustomed  :  hence  those  persecutions  which,
with  hardly  a  single  exception,  were  directed  against  every  man  of  letters,  and
hence  too  those  systematic  attempts  to  reduce  literature  to  a  subserviency
similar  to  that  in  which  it  had  been  held  under  Louis  XIV.  It  has  more-
over appeared  that  the  great  Frenchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century,  though
smarting  from  the  injuries  constantly  inflicted  on  them  by  the  government
and  the  church,  abstained  from  attacking  the  government,  but  directed  all
their  hostility  against  the  church.  This  apparent  anomaly,  of  the  religious
institutions  being  assailed,  and  the  political  institutions  being  spared,  has  been
shown  to  be  a  perfectly  natural  circumstance,  arising  out  of  the  antecedents  of
the  French  nation  ;  and  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  explain  what  those  ante-
cedents were,  and  how  they  acted.  In  the  present  chapter  I  purpose  to  com-
plete this  inquiry  by  examining  the  next  great  stage  in  the  history  of  the  French
mind.  It  was  needful  that,  before  both  church  and  state  could  fall,  men  should
change  the  ground  of  their  hostility,  and  should  attack  political  abuses  with  the
zeal  they  had  hitherto  reserved  for  religious  ones.  The  question,  therefore,
now  arises  as  to  the  circumstances  under  which  this  change  took  place,  and
the  period  when  it  actually  occurred.

The  circumstances  which  accompanied  this  great  change  are,  as  we  shall
presently  see,  very  complicated  ;  and,  as  they  have  never  yet  been  studied  in
connexion  with  each  other,  I  shall  in  the  remaining  part  of  this  volume  examine
them  at  considerable  length.  On  this  point  it  will,  I  think,  be  practicable  to
arrive  at  some  precise  and  well-defined  results  respecting  the  history  of  the
French  Revolution.  But  the  other  point,  namely,  the  time  at  which  the  change
took  place,  is  not  only  much  more  obscure,  but  by  its  nature  will  never  admit  of
complete  precision.  This,  however,  is  a  deficiency  it  possesses  in  common

[*  This  has  not  been  shown  above,  and  is  not  matter  of  fact.  Much  of  the  literature
in  no  way  connected  itself  with  the  government ;  and  we  have  the  saying  of  Louis  :
"  Toutes  les  fois  que  je  donne  une  place  vacante,  je  fais  cent  mecon tents  et  un  ingrat," —
ED.}

471


472  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

with  every  other  change  in  the  history  of  man.  The  circumstances  of  each
change  may  always  be  known,  provided  the  evidence  is  ample  and  authentic.
But  no  amount  of  evidence  can  enable  us  to  fix  the  date  of  the  change  itself.
That  to  which  attention  is  usually  drawn  by  the  compilers  of  history  is  not  the
change,  but  is  merely  the  external  result  which  follows  the  change.  The  real
history  of  the  human  race  is  the  history  of  tendencies  which  are  perceived  by  the
mind,  and  not  of  events  which  are  discerned  by  the  senses.  It  is  on  this  account
that  no  historical  epoch  will  ever  admit  of  that  chronological  precision  familiar
to  antiquaries  and  genealogists.  The  death  of  a  prince,  the  loss  of  a  battle,  and
the  change  of  a  dynasty,  are  matters  which  fall  entirely  within  the  province
of  the  senses  ;  and  the  moment  in  which  they  happen  can  be  recorded  by  the
most  ordinary  observers.  But  those  great  intellectual  revolutions  upon  which
all  other  revolutions  are  based,  cannot  be  measured  by  so  simple  a  standard.  To
trace  the  movements  of  the  human  mind,  it  is  necessary  to  contemplate  it  under
several  aspects,  and  then  co-ordinate  the  results  of  what  we  have  separately
studied.  By  this  means  we  arrive  at  certain  general  conclusions,  which,  like  the
ordinary  estimate  of  averages,  increase  in  value  in  proportion  as  we  increase
the  number  of  instances  from  which  they  are  collected.  That  this  is  a  safe  and
available  method,  appears  not  only  from  the  history  of  physical  knowledge,1
but  also  from  the  fact  that  it  is  the  basis  of  the  empirical  maxims  by  which
all  men  of  sound  understanding  are  guided  in  those  ordinary  transactions  of
life  to  which  the  generalizations  of  science  have  not  yet  been  applied.  Indeed
such  maxims,  which  are  highly  valuable,  and  which  in  their  aggregate  form
what  is  called  common  sense,  are  never  collected  with  anything  like  the  pre-
cautions that  the  philosophic  historian  ought  to  feel  himself  bound  to  employ.

The  real  objection,  therefore,  to  generalizations  respecting  the  development
Gf  the  intellect  of  a  nation  is,  not  that  they  want  certainty,  but  that  they  lack
precision.  This  is  just  the  point  at  which  the  historian  diverges  from  the  annalist.
That  the  English  intellect,  for  example,  is  gradually  becoming  more  democratic,
or,  as  it  is  termed,  more  liberal,  is  as  certain  as  that  the  crown  of  this  country
is  worn  by  Queen  Victoria.  But  though  both  these  statements  are  equally  cer-
tain, the  latter  statement  is  more  precise.  We  can  tell  the  very  day  on  which
the  Queen  ascended  the  throne  ;  the  moment  of  her  death  will  be  known  with
equal  precision  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  many  other  particulars  respect-
ing her  will  be  minutely  and  accurately  preserved.  In  tracing,  however,  the
growth  of  English  liberalism,  all  such  exactness  deserts  us.  We  can  point  out
the  year  in  which  the  Reform  Bill  was  passed  ;  but  who  can  point  out  the  year
in  which  the  Reform  Bill  first  became  necessary  ?  In  the  same  way,  that  the
Jews  will  be  admitted  into  parliament,  is  as  certain  as  that  the  Catholics  have
been  admitted.  Both  these  measures  are  the  inevitable  result  of  that  increasing
indifference  to  theological  disputes,  which  must  now  be  obvious  to  every  man
who  does  not  wilfully  shut  his  eyes.  But  while  we  know  the  hour  in  which  the
bill  for  Catholic  emancipation  received  the  assent  of  the  crown,  there  is  no  one
now  living  who  can  tell  even  the  year  in  which  similar  justice  will  be  granted  to
the  Jews.  The  two  events  are  equally  certain,  but  they  are  not  equally  precise.

This  distinction  between  certainty  and  precision  I  have  stated  at  some  length
because  it  seems  to  be  little  understood,2  and  because  it  is  intimately  connected

1  For  a  popular  but  able  view  of  the  value  of  averages  in  scientific  inquiries,   see
HerscheVs  Disc,  on  Nat.  Philos.  pp.  215-219.

2  As  we  see  in  the  pretensions  set  forth  by  mathematicians,  who  often  suppose  that
an  amount  of  certainty  can  be  attained  in  their  own  pursuits  not  to  be  found  in  any
other.     This  error  has  probably  arisen,  as  Locke  suggests,  from  confusing  clearness  with
certainty.     Essay  on  Human  Understanding,  book  iv.  chap.  ii.  sees.  9  and  10,  in  Works,
vol.  ii.  pp.  73,  74.     See  also  Comte,  Philos.  Pos.  vol.  i.  p.  103,  where  it  is  justly  observed,
that  all  branches  of  knowledge  capable  of  being  generalized  into  sciences  admit  of  equal
certainty,  but  not  of  equal  precision  :  "  si,  d'apres  1'explication  precedente,  les  diverges
sciences  doivent  necessairement  presenter  une  precision  tres-inegale,  il  n'en  est  nullement
ainsideleur  certitude,"    This  is  handled  unsatisfactorily  by  Montucla  (Hist,  desMathemat,


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  473

with  the  subject  now  before  us.  The  fact  of  the  French  intellect  having,  during
the  eighteenth  century,  passed  through  two  totally  distinct  epochs  can  be  proved
by  every  description  of  evidence  ;  *  but  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  the  precise
time  when  one  epoch  succeeded  the  other.  All  that  we  can  do  is,  to  compare
the  different  indications  which  the  history  of  that  age  presents,  and  arrive  at
an  approximation  which  may  guide  future  inquirers.  It  would  perhaps  be  more
prudent  to  avoid  making  any  particular  statement  ;  but  as  the  employment  of
dates  seems  necessary  to  bring  such  matters  clearly  before  the  mind,  I  will,  by
way  of  provisional  hypothesis,  fix  on  the  year  1750  as  the  period  when  those
agitations  of  society  which  caused  the  French  Revolution  entered  into  their
second  and  political  stage.

That  this  was  about  the  period  when  the  great  movement,  hitherto  directed
against  the  church,  began  to  be  turned  against  the  state,  f  is  an  inference  which
many  circumstances  seem  to  warrant.  We  know  on  the  best  authority  that,
towards  the  year  1750,  the  French  began  their  celebrated  inquiries  respecting
political  economy,3  and  that  in  their  attempt  to  raise  it  to  a  science  they  were
led  to  perceive  the  immense  injury  which  the  interference  of  government  had
produced  on  the  material  interests  of  the  country.4  Hence  a  conviction  arose
that,  even  in  regard  to  the  accumulation  of  wealth,  the  authority  possessed  by  the
rulers  of  France  was  mischievous,  since  it  enabled  them,  under  the  notion  of
protecting  commerce,  to  trouble  the  freedom  of  individual  action,  and  to  prevent
trade  from  running  into  those  profitable  channels  which  traders  are  best  able
to  select  for  themselves.  Scarcely  had  a  knowledge  of  this  important  truth  been
diffused,  when  its  consequences  were  quickly  seen  in  the  national  literature  and
in  the  habits  of  national  thought.  The  sudden  increase  in  France  of  works

vol.  i.  p.  33),  who  says,  that  the  principal  cause  of  the  peculiar  certainty  reached  by  the
mathematician  is  that  "  d'une  idee  claire  it  ne  deduit  que  des  consequences  claires  et  in-
contestables."  Similarly,  Cudworth  (Intellect.  System,  vol.  iii.  p.  377)  :  "  nay  the
very  essence  of  truth  here  is  this  clear  perceptibility,  or  intelligibility."  On  the  other
hand,  Kant,  a  far  deeper  thinker,  avoided  this  confusion,  by  making  mathematical
clearness  the  mark  of  a  kind  of  certainty  rather  than  of  a  degree  of  it :  "  Die  mathematische
Gewissheit  heisst  auch  Evidenz,weil  ein  intuitives  Erkenntniss  klarer  ist,als  ein  discursives.
Obgleich  also  beides,  das  mathematische  und  das  philosophische  Vernunf terkenntniss,  an
sich  gleich  gewiss  ist,  so  ist  doch  die  Art  der  Gewissheit  in  beiden  verschieden."  Logik,
Einleitung,  sec.  9,  in  Kant's  Werke,vol.  i.  p.  399.  On  the  opinions  of  the  ancients  respect-
ing certainty,  compare  Matter,  Hist,  de  VEcole  d'Alexandrie,  vol.  i.  p.  195,  with  Ritter's
Hist,  of  Ancient  Philos.  vol.  ii.  p.  46,  vol.  iii.  pp.  74,  426,  427,  484,  614.

3  "  Vers  1750,  deux  hommes  de  genie,  observateurs  judicieux  et  profonds,  conduits  par
une  force  d'attention  tres-soutenue  a  une  logique  rigoureuse,  animes  d'un  noble  amour
pour  la  patrie  et  pour  1'humanite,  M.  Quesnay  et  M.  de  Gournay,  s'occuperent  avec  suite
de  savoir  si  la  nature  des  choses  n'indiquerait  pas  une  science  de  1' economic  politique,  et
quels  seraient  les  principes  de  cette  science."     Additions  aux  (Euvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  iii.
p.  310.     M.  Blanqui  (Hist,  de  V Economic  Politique,  vol.  ii.  p.  78)  also  says,  "  vers  1'annee
1750  ;  "  and  Voltaire  (Diet.  Philos.,  article  Ble,  in  (Euvres,  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  384)  says,
"  vers  1'an  1750,  la  nation,  rassasiee  de  vers,  de  tragedies,  de  comedies,  d' opera,  de  romans,
d'histoires  romanesques,  de  reflexions  morales  plus  romanesques  encore,  et  de  disputes
theologiques  sur  la  grace  et  sur  les  convulsions,  se  mit  enfin  a  raisonner  sur  les  bles."

4  The  revolutionary  tendency  of  this  economical  movement  is  noticed  in  Alison's
Europe,  vol.  i.  pp.  184,  185  ;  where,  however,  its  commencement  is  erroneously  assigned
to  "  about  the  year  1761."     See  also,  on  the  hostility  this  caused  against  government,
Mem.  de  Campan,  vol.  i.  pp.  7-8  ;  Mem.  of  Mallet  du  Pan,  vol.  i.  p.  32  ;  and  Barruel,  Hist,
du  Jacobinisme,  vol.  i.  p.  193,  vol.  ii.  p.  152.

[*  Unfortunately  for  the  argument,  the  allegation  of  "  two  totally  distinct  epochs,"
as  we  have  seen,  is  a  concrete  error,  refutable  by  precise  evidence. — ED.]

[f  As  has  been  noted  above,  p.  435,  there  were  not  two  distinct  stages.  The  great
majority  of  the  books  attacking  religion  were  produced  after  1750,  alongside  of  the
political  movement ;  and  the  largest  rate  of  output  was  between  1764  and  1770. — ED.]


474  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

relating  to  finance  and  to  other  questions  of  government  is  indeed  one  of
the  most  remarkable  features  of  that  age.  With  such  rapidity  did  the  move-
ment spread,  that  we  are  told  that  soon  after  1755  the  economists  effected  a
schism  between  the  nation  and  the  government  ; 5  and  Voltaire,  writing  in
1759,  complains  that  the  charms  of  lighter  literature  were  entirely  neglected
amidst  the  general  zeal  for  these  new  studies.6  It  is  not  necessary  to
follow  the  subsequent  history  of  this  great  change  ;  nor  need  I  trace  the  influence
exercised  shortly  before  the  Revolution  by  the  later  economists,  and  particularly
by  Turgot,  the  most  eminent  of  their  leaders.?  It  is  enough  to  say  that  within
about  twenty  years  after  the  movement  was  first  clearly  seen,  the  taste  for
economical  and  financial  inquiries  became  so  common  that  it  penetrated  those
parts  of  society  where  habits  of  thought  are  not  very  frequent  ;  since  we  find  that,
even  in  fashionable  life,  the  conversation  no  longer  turned  upon  new  poems  and
new  plays,  but  upon  political  questions  and  subjects  immediately  connected
with  them.8  Indeed,  when  Necker  in  1781  published  his  celebrated  Report  on
the  Finances  of  France,  the  eagerness  to  obtain  it  was  beyond  all  bounds  ;  six
thousand  copies  were  sold  the  first  day  ;  and  the  demand  still  increasing,  two
presses  were  kept  constantly  at  work  in  order  to  satisfy  the  universal  curiosity.9
And  what  makes  the  democratic  tendency  of  all  this  the  more  obvious  is,  that

5  "  D'ailleurs  la  nation  s'etoit  accoutumee  a  se  separer  toujours  de  plus  en  plus  de
son  gouvernement,  en  raison  merne  de  ce  que  ses  ecrivains  avoient  commence  a  aborder
les  etudes  politiques.     C'etoit  1'epoque  oil  la  secte  des  economistes  se  donnoit  le  plus  de
mouvement,  depuis  que  le  marquis  de  Mirabeau  avoit  public,  en  1755,  son  Ami  des
Homines."     Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franc,  vol.  xxix.  p.  269.     Compare  TocqueviUe,  Regne
de  Louis  XV,  vol.  ii.  p.  58.     In  this  same  year,  1755,  Goldsmith  was  in  Paris,  and  was  so
struck  by  the  progress  of  insubordination   that  he  foretold  the  freedom  of  the  people  ;
though  I  need  hardly  say  that  he  was  not  a  man  to  understand  the  movement  of  the
economists.     Prior's  Life  of   Goldsmith,  vol.  i.  pp.  198,  199  ;  Forster's  Life  of  Goldsmith,
vol.  i  p.  66.

6  In  February,  1759,  he  writes  to  Madame  du  Boccage  :  "  II  me  parait  que  les  graces  et
le  bon  gout  sont  baunis  de  France,  et  ont  cede  la  place  a  la  metaphysique  embrouillee,
a  la  politique  des   cerveaux  creux,    a    des  discussions    enormes   sur   les  finances,  sur
le  commerce,  sur  la  population,  qui  ne  mettront  jamais  dans  1'etat  ni  un  ecu,  ni  un  homme
de  plus."     (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ix.  p.  485.     In  1763  (vol.  Ixiii.  p.  204)  :  "  Adieu  nos
beaux  arts,  si  les  choses  continuent  comme  elles  sont.      La  rage  des  remon trances  et  des
projets  sur  les  finances  a  saisi  la  nation."     Many  of  the  ablest  men  being  thus  drawn  off
from  mere  literary  pursuits,  there  began,  about  twenty  years  before  the  Revolution,  a
marked  deterioration  in  style,  particularly  among  prose  writers.     Compare  Lettres  de
Dudeffand  a  Walpole,  vol.  ii.  p.  358,  vol.  iii.  pp.  163,  299  ;  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  ii.  p.  3/4.
vol.  v.  p.  123,  vol.  viii.  pp.  180,  275  ;  Mercier  sur  Rousseau,  vol.  ii.  p.  151.

?  Georgel,  who  hated  Turgot,  says  of  him  :  "  son  cabinet  et  ses  bureaux  se  transformer-
ent  en  ateliers  ou  les  economistes  forgeoient  leur  systeme  et  leurs  speculations."  Mem.
de  Georgel,  vol.  i.  p.  406  ;  see  also  Blanqui,  Hist,  de  VEcon.  Politique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  96-112  ;
Condorcet,  Vie  de  Turgot,  pp.  32-35  ;  Twiss,  Progress  of  Political  Econ.  pp.  142  seq.

8  Sismondi,  under  the  year  1774,  notices  "  les  ecrits  innombrables  que  chaque  jour
voyoit  eclore  sur  la  politique,  et  qui  avoient  desormais  remplace  dans  1'interet  des  salons
ces  nouveautes  litteraires,  ces  vers,  ces  anecdotes  galantes,  dont  peu  d'annees  auparavant
le  public  etoit  uniquement  occupe."     Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  xxix.  p.  495  ;  and  a  similar
remark  in  Schlosser's  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  ii.  p.  126.

9  See  the  account,  written  in  Feb.,  1781,  in  Grimm,  Corr.  Lit.  vol.  xi.,  p.  260,  where  it  is
said  of  Necker's  Compte  Rendu,  "  La  sensation  qu'a  faite  cet  ouvrage  est,  je  crois,  sans
exemple  ;  il  s'en  est  debite  plus  de  six  mille  exemplaires  le  jour  meme  qu'il  a  paru,  et
depuis,  le  travail  continuel  de  deux  imprimeries  n'a  pu  suffire  encore  aux  demandes
multipliees  de  la  capitale,  des  provinces,  et  des  pays  etrangers."    Segur  (Souvenirs,  vol.  i.
p.  138)  mentions,  that  Necker's  work  was  "  dans  la  poche  de  tous  les  abbes,  et  sur  la
toilette  de  toutes  les  dames."     The  daughter  of  Necker,  Madame  de  Stael,  says  of  her
father's  work,  Administration  des  Finances,  "  on  en  vendit  quatre  vingt  mille  exemplaires,"
De  Stai'l  sur  la  Revolution,  vol.  i,  p.  iii,


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH    REVOLUTION     475

Necker  was  at  that  time  one  of  the  servants  of  the  crown  ;  so  that  his  work,
looking  at  its  general  spirit,  has  been  truly  called  an  appeal  to  the  people  against
the  king  by  one  of  the  ministers  of  the  king  himself.10

This  evidence  of  the  remarkable  change  which,  in  or  about  1750,  the  French
mind  underwent,  and  which  formed  what  I  term  the  second  epoch  of  the  eighteenth
century,  might  be  easily  strengthened  by  a  wider  survey  of  the  literature  of  that
time.  Immediately  after  the  middle  of  the  century,  Rousseau  published  those
eloquent  works  which  exercised  immense  influence,  and  in  which  the  rise  of  the
new  epoch  is  very  observable  ;  for  this  most  powerful  writer  abstained  from  those
attacks  on  Christianity  ll  which  unhappily  had  been  too  frequent,  and  exerted
himself  almost  exclusively  against  the  civil  and  political  abuses  of  the  existing
society.12  To  trace  the  effects  which  this  wonderful,  but  in  some  instances  mis-
guided man  produced  on  the  mind  of  his  own  and  of  the  succeeding  generation,
would  occupy  too  large  a  share  of  this  Introduction  ;  though  the  inquiry  is  full
of  interest,  and  is  one  which  it  were  to  be  wished  some  competent  historian  would
undertake.13  Inasmuch,  however,  as  the  philosophy  of  Rousseau  was  itself
only  a  single  phase  of  a  far  larger  movement,  I  shall  at  present  pass  over  the
individual,  in  order  to  consider  the  general  spirit  of  an  age  in  which  he  played
a  vast,  but  still  a  subsidiary  part.

The  formation  of  a  new  epoch  in  France,  about  the  year  1750,  may  be  further
illustrated  by  three  circumstances  of  considerable  interest,  all  pointing  in  the  same
direction.  The  first  circumstance  is,  that  not  a  single  great  French  writer  attacked


10  The  expression  of  the  Baron  de  Montyon  :  see  Adolphus's  History  of  George  ///.»
vol.  iv.  p.  290  ;  and  on  the  revolutionary  tendency  of  Necker's  financial  works,  Soulavie,
Re gne  de  Louis  XVI,  voL  ii.  pp.  xxxvii.  xxxviii.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  18,  143.      Necker  published
a  justification  of  his  book,  "  malgre  la  defense  du  roi."     Du  Mesnil,  Mem.  sur  Lebrun,
p.  i 08.

11  So  far  as  I  remember,  there  is  not  a  single  instance  in  any  of  his  works  ;  and  those
who  assail  him  on  this  ground  should  adduce  the  passages  on  which  they  rely,  instead
of  bringing  vague  general  charges.     Compare  Life  of  Rousseau,  in  Brougham's  Men  of
Letters,  vol.  i.  p.  189  ;  Stdudlin,  Gesch.  der  theolog.  Wissenschaften,  vol.  ii.  p.  442  ;  Mercier
sur  Rousseau,  1791,  vol.  i.  pp.  27-32,  vol.  ii.  pp.  279,  280.     [In  the  Contrat  Social  (1.  iv
ch.  8.),  Rousseau  writes  that  "  the  Christian  law  is  at  bottom  more  injurious  than  useful
to  the  sound  constitution  of  the  State  "  ;  and  the  Confession  of  Faith  of  a  Savoyard  Vicar
in  the  Emile  was  regarded  by  the  clergy  as  an  attack  on  revelation,  and  denounced
accordingly. — ED.]

12  "  Rousseau,  qui  deja  en  1753  avoit  touche  aux  bases  memes  de  la  societe  humaine,
dans  son  Discours  sur  Vorigine  de  Vinegalite  parmi  les  hommes."  Sismondi,  vol.  xxix.
p.  270.     Schlosser  (Hist,  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  i.  p.  138)  notices  "  the  entirely
new  system  of  absolute  democracy  which  was  brought  forward  by  J.  J.  Rousseau  "  ;
see  also  p.  289,  and  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  v.  p.  208.

13  Napoleon  said  to  Stanislas  Girardin  respecting  Rousseau,  "  sans  lui  la  France  n'auroit
pas  eu  de  revolution."     Holland's  Foreign  Reminiscences,  Lond.  1850,  p.  261.     This  is
certainly  an  exaggeration  ;  but  the  influence  of  Rousseau  was,  during  the  latter  half  of
the  eighteenth  century,  most  extraordinary.     In  1765,  Hume  writes  from  Paris  :    "  It  is
impossible  to  express  or  imagine  the  enthusiasm  of  this  nation  in  his  favour  ;  ...  no
person  ever  so  much  engaged  their  attention  as  Rousseau.     Voltaire  and  everybody  else
are  quite  eclipsed  by  him."     Burton's  Life  of  Hume,  vol.  ii  p.  299.     A  letter  written  in
1754  (in  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  122)  says  that  his  Dijon  Discourse  "  fit  une  espece
de  revolution  a  Paris."     The  circulation  of  his  works  was  unprecedented  ;  and  when  La
Nouvelle  Heloi'se  appeared,  "  les  libraires  ne  pouvaient  suffire  aux  demandes  de  toutes  les
classes.     On  louait  1'ouvrage  a  tant  par  jour,  ou  par  heure.     Quand  il  parut,  on  exigeait
douze  sous  par  volume,  en  n' accordant  que  soixante  minutes  pour  le  lire."  Musset  Pathay,
Vie  de  Rousseau,  vol.  ii.  p.  361.  For  further  evidence  of  the  effect  produced  by  his  works,
see  Lerminier,  Philos.  du  Droit,  vol.  ii.  p.  251  ;  Mem.  de  Roland,  vol.  i.  p.  196,  vol.  ii.
PP-*337>  359  ;  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  v.  p.  193,  vol.  vi.  p.  14  ;  Alison's  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  170,
vol.  iii.  p.  369,  vol.  iv.  p.  376  ;  Mem.  de  Morellet,  vol.  i.  p.  116  ;  Longchamp,  Mem.  sur
Voltaire,  vol.  ii.  p.  50  ;  Life  of  Romilly,  vol.  i.  p.  267  ;  Mem.  of  Mallet  du  Pan,  vol.  i.  p.  127  ;


476  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  political  institutions  of  the  country  before  the  middle  of  the  century  ;*  while
after  that  period,  the  attacks  of  the  ablest  men  were  incessant.  The  second  cir-
cumstance is,  that  the  only  eminent  Frenchmen  who  continued  to  assail  the
clergy,  and  yet  refused  to  interfere  in  politics,  were  those  who,  like  Voltaire,  had
already  reached  an  advanced  age,  and  had,  therefore,  drawn  their  ideas  from  the
preceding  generation,  in  which  the  church  had  been  the  sole  object  of  hostility.
The  third  circumstance,  which  is  even  more  striking  than  the  other  two,  is  that
almost  at  the  same  moment  there  was  seen  a  change  in  the  policy  of  the  govern-
ment ;  since,  singularly  enough,  the  ministers  of  the  crown  displayed  for  the  first
time  an  open  enmity  against  the  church,  just  as  the  intellect  of  the  country  was
preparing  for  its  decisive  onslaught  on  the  government  itself.  Of  these  three
propositions,  the  first  two  will  probably  be  admitted  by  every  student  of  French
literature  :  at  all  events,  if  they  are  false,  they  are  so  exact  and  peremptory  that
it  will  be  easy  to  refute  them  by  giving  examples  to  the  contrary.  But  the  third
proposition,  being  more  general,  is  less  susceptible  of  a  negative,  and  will  there-
fore require  the  support  of  that  special  evidence  which  I  will  now  adduce.

The  great  French  writers  having  by  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  suc-
ceeded in  sapping  the  foundations  of  the  church, f  it  was  natural  that  the  govern-
ment should  step  in  and  plunder  an  establishment  which  the  course  of  events  had
weakened.  This,  which  took  place  in  France  under  Louis  XV.,  was  similar
to  what  occurred  in  England  under  Henry  VIII.  ;  for  in  both  cases  a  remarkable
intellectual  movement,  directed  against  the  clergy,  preceded  and  facilitated  the
attacks  made  on  them  by  the  crown.  It  was  in  1749  that  the  French  govern-
ment took  the  first  decisive  step  against  the  church.  And  what  proves  the
hitherto  backward  state  of  the  country  in  such  matters  is  that  this  consisted  of
an  edict  against  mortmain,  a  simple  contrivance  for  weakening  the  ecclesiastical
power,  which  we  in  England  had  adopted  long  before.  Machault,  who  had  re-
cently been  raised  to  the  office  of  controller -general,  has  the  glory  of  being  the
originator  of  this  new  policy.  In  August,  1749,  u  he  issued  that  celebrated  edict
which  forbade  the  formation  of  any  religious  establishment  without  the  consent
of  the  crown,  duly  expressed  in  letters-patent,  and  registered  in  parliament  ;
effective  precautions,  which,  says  the  great  historian  of  France,  show  that
Machault  "  considered  not  only  the  increase  but  even  the  existence  of  these
ecclesiastical  properties,  as  a  mischief  to  the  kingdom."15

This  was  an  extraordinary  step  on  the  part  of  the  French  government  ;  but


Burke's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  482  ;  Cassagnac,  Causes  de  la  Rev.  vol.  iii.  p.  549  ;  Lamartine,
Hist,  des  Girondins.  vol.  ii.  p.  38,  vol.  iv.  p.  93,  vol.  viii.  p.  125  ;  Wahrheit  und  Dichtung,
in  Gothe's  Werke,  Stuttgart,  1837,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  pp.  83,  104  ;  Grimm,  Correspond.  Lit.
vol.  xii.  p.  222  ;  De  Stael,  Consid.  sur  la  Rev.  vol.  ii.  p.  371.

14  Sismondi  (xxix.  p.  20),  Lacretelle  (XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  no),  and  Tocqueville
(Regne   de  Louis  XV,  vol.  ii.  p.  103),  give  the  date  1749  5   so  that  1747,  in  Biog.  Univ.
vol.  xxvi.  v.  46,  is  apparently  a  misprint.

15  "  Laissant  voir  dans  toute  cette  loi,  qui  est  assez  longue,  qu'il  regardoit  non-seule-
ment  1'accroissement,  mais  1'existence  de  ces  proprietes  ecclesiastiques,  comme  un  mal  pour
leroyaume."     Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Franf.  vol.  xxix.  p.  21.     This,  I  suppose,  is  the  edict
mentioned  by  Turgot,  who  wished  to  push  the  principle  still  further.     (Euvres  de  Turgot,
vol.  iii.  pp.  254,  255  ;  a  bold  and  striking  passage.

[*  It  is  obvious  that  no  book  attacking  the  political  institutions  of  the  country  could
be  published  at  that  period;  but  the  Marquis  d'Argenson  had  written  before  1739  his
Considerations  sur  le  Gouvernement  de  France,  in  which  he  argued  for  decentralisation,
municipal  and  cantonal  councils,  free  trade,  and  a  more  careful  choice  of  officials.  Before
him,  Vauban  and  Bois-Guillebert  had  striven  for  economic  reforms,  and  Fenelon  for
political.  Cp.  Duruy,  Hist,  de  France,  ii.  418.  The  statement  in  the  next  clause,  that
"  the  attacks  of  the  ablest  men  were  incessant,"  is  an  extreme  exaggeration. — ED.]

[t  See  notes  on  pp.  435,  473,  487.— ED.]


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  477

what  followed  showed  that  it  was  only  the  beginning  of  a  much  larger  design.16
Machault,  so  far  from  being  discountenanced,  was,  the  year  after  he  had  issued
this  edict,  intrusted  with  the  seals  in  addition  to  the  controller  ship  ;^  for,  as
Lacretelle  observes,  the  court  "  thought  the  time  had  now  come  to  tax  the  prop-
erty of  the  clergy."  18  During  the  forty  years  which  elapsed  between  this  period
and  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  the  same  anti -ecclesiastical  policy  prevailed.
Among  the  successors  of  Machault,  the  only  three  of  much  ability  were  Choiseul,
Necker,  and  Turgot,  all  of  whom  were  strenuous  opponents  of  that  spiritual
body  which  no  minister  would  have  assailed  in  the  preceding  generation.  Not
only  these  eminent  statesmen,  but  even  such  inferior  men  as  Calonne.Malesherbes,
and  Terray,  looked  on  it  as  a  stroke  of  policy  to  attack  privileges  which  super-
stition had  consecrated,  and  which  the  clergy  had  hitherto  reserved,  partly  to
extend  their  own  influence,  and  partly  to  minister  to  those  luxurious  and  pro-
fligate habits  which  in  the  eighteenth  century  were  a  scandal  to  the  ecclesiastical
order.*

While  these  measures  were  being  adopted  against  the  clergy,  another  important
step  was  taken  in  precisely  the  same  direction.  Now  it  was  that  the  government
began  to  favour  that  great  doctrine  of  religious  liberty,  the  mere  defence  of  which
it  had  hitherto  punished  as  a  dangerous  speculation.  The  connexion  between  the
attacks  on  the  clergy  and  the  subsequent  progress  of  toleration  may  be  illustrated
not  only  by  the  rapidity  with  which  one  event  succeeded  the  other,  but  also  by
the  fact  that  both  of  them  emanated  from  the  same  quarter.  Machault,  who
was  the  author  of  the  edict  of  mortmain,  was  also  the  first  minister  who  showed
a  wish  to  protect  the  Protestants  against  the  persecutions  of  the  Catholic  priest-
hood.19 In  this  he  only  partly  succeeded  ;  but  the  impetus  thus  given  soon  became
irresistible.  In  1760,  that  is  only  nine  years  later,  there  was  seen  a  marked
change  in  the  administration  of  the  laws  ;  and  the  edicts  against  heresy,  though
not  yet  repealed,  were  enforced  with  unprecedented  mildness.20  The  movement

16  Mably  mentions  the  excitement  caused  by  this  proceeding  of  Machault,  Observations
sur  VHistoire  de  France,  vol.  ii.  p.  415  :  "  On  attaqua  alors,  dans  plusieurs  ecrits,  les
immunites  du  clerge."     On  the  dislike  felt  by  the  clergy  against  the  minister,  see  Segur,
Souvenirs,  vol.  i.  p.  35  ;  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  i.  pp.  283,  310,  vol.  ii.  p.  146.

17  In  1750,  "  Machault  obtint  les  sceaux  en  conservant  le  con  trole -general."     Biog.
Univ.  vol.  xxvi.  p.  46.

18  "  Croyait  sur  tout  que  le  temps  etait  venu  d'irnposer  les  biens  du  clerge."    Lacretelle,
XVII Ie  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  107.     Nearly  the  same  words  are  used  in  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxvi.
p.  46.

19  On  which  account,  he  still  further  provoked  the  indignation  of  the  Catholic  clergy.
See  Felice,  Hist,  of  the  Protest,  of  France,  pp.  401,  402  ;  a  letter  written  in  1751.

20  "  The  approach  of  the  year  1760  witnessed  a  sensible  relaxation  of  persecution.  .  .  .
The  clergy  perceived   this  with  dismay  ;   and,  in  their  general  assembly  of  1760,  they
addressed  urgent  remonstrances  to  the  king  against  this  remission  of  the  laws."     Felice,
Protest,  of  France,  p.  422.     Comp.  an  interesting  letter  from  Nismes  in  1776,  in   Thick-
nesse's  Journey  through  France,  London,  1777,  vol.  i.  p.  66.     [Felice,  however,  goes  on  to
tell  how  in  1762  the  pastor  Rochette  was  hanged  and  the  three  Greniers  beheaded  at
Toulouse  on  charges  of  contravention  of  laws  as  to  religious  assemblies,  and  of  constructive
sedition ;  and  how  in  the  same  year  and  at  the  same  place,  the  aged  Jean  Galas  was  broken
on  the  wheel  on  an  improbable  charge,  proved  later  to  be  false.     In  the  same  year,  Sirven
escaped  the  same  fate  at  the  same  place  on  a  similar  charge  only  by  flight ;  and  in  1766,
La  Barre,  a  lad  of  eighteen,  was  executed  at  Amiens  on  a  trumped-up  charge  of  blasphemy.
It  was  from  this  period  that  there  began  the  fiercest  polemic  against  religion,  Voltaire  taking
for  its  motto  Ecrasez  Vinfdme. — ED.]

[*  The  anti-clerical  policy  of  Machault  was  so  on  purely  fiscal  grounds,  there  being  no
other  practicable  way  of  helping  the  revenues.  It  was  the  financial  straits  of  the  State
that  forced  an  ever -increasing  discussion  and  resentment,  the  burden  of  taxation  having
more  than  doubled  since  the  previous  reign,  while  the  resources  of  the  taxpayers  had  not.
Cp.  Duruy,  ii.  395,  402,  407,  411,  415,  419. — ED.]


478  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

quickly  spread  from  the  capital  to  the  remoter  parts  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  we
are  assured  that  after  the  year  1762  the  reaction  was  felt  even  in  those  provinces,
which,  from  their  backward  condition,  had  always  been  most  remarkable  for
religious  bigotry.2i  At  the  same  time,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  a  great  schism
arose  in  the  church  itself,  which  lessened  the  power  of  the  clergy,  by  dividing
them  into  two  hostile  parties.  Of  these  factions,  one  made  common  cause  with
the  state,  still  further  aiding  the  over  throw  of  the  ecclesiastical  hierarchy.  Indeed,
the  dissensions  became  so  violent  that  the  last  great  blow  dealt  to  spiritual  ascen-
dency by  the  government  of  Louis  XVI.  proceeded  not  from  the  hands  of  a  layman,
but  from  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  church  ;  a  man  who,  from  his  standing,  would
under  ordinary  circumstances  have  protected  the  interests  which  he  now  eagerly
attacked.  In  1787,  only  two  years  before  the  Revolution,  Brienne,  Archbishop
of  Toulouse,22  who  was  then  minister,  laid  before  the  parliament  of  Paris  a  royal
edict  by  which  the  discouragement  hitherto  thrown  upon  heresy  was  suddenly
removed.  By  this  law  the  Protestants  were  invested  with  all  those  civil  rights
which  the  Catholic  clergy  had  long  held  out  as  the  reward  of  adherence  to  their
own  opinions.23  It  was  therefore  natural  that  the  more  orthodox  party  should
condemn,  as  an  impious  innovation,24  a  measure  which,  by  placing  the  two  sects
in  some  degree  on  the  same  footing,  seemed  to  sanction  the  progress  of  error  ;
and  which  certainly  deprived  the  French  church  of  one  of  the  chief  attractions
by  which  men  had  hitherto  been  induced  to  join  her  communion.  Now,  however,
all  these  considerations  were  set  at  naught.  Such  was  the  prevailing  temper,
that  the  parliament,  though  then  in  a  mood  very  refractory  to  the  royal  authority,
did  not  hesitate  to  register  the  edict  of  the  king  ;  and  this  great  measure  became
law  ;  the  dominant  party  being  astonished,  we  are  told,  that  any  doubt  could  be
entertained  as  to  the  wisdom  of  the  principles  on  which  it  was  based.  25

These  were  omens  of  the  coming  storm  ;  signs  of  the  time,  which  those  who  run
may  read.  Nor  are  there  wanting  other  marks  by  which  the  true  complexion  of
that  age  may  be  clearly  seen.  In  addition  to  what  has  been  just  related,  the
government,  soon  after  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  inflicted  a  direct
and  fatal  injury  upon  the  spiritual  authority.  This  consisted  in  the  expulsion
of  the  Jesuits  ;  which  is  an  event  important  not  only  for  its  ultimate  effects  but
also  as  an  evidence  of  the  feelings  of  men,  and  of  what  could  be  peaceably  accom-
plished by  the  government  of  him  who  was  called  "  the  most  Christian  king."  20


21  Sisniondi  says  of  1762,  "  Des  lors,  la  reaction  de  I'opinion  publique  centre  I'intolrr-
ance  penetra  jusque  dans  les  provinces  les  plus  fanatiques."     Hist,  des  Franf.  vol.  xxix.
p.  296.     See  also  a  letter  to  Damilaville,  dated  6th  of  May,  1765,  in  Lettrcs  incditcs  de
Voltaire,  vol.  i.  p.  412  ;  and  two  other  letters  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  Ixiv.  p.  225,
vol.  Ixvi.  p.  417.

22  Of  whom  Hume,  several  years  before,  had  formed  a  very  high  opinion.     See  Burton's
Life  of  Hume,  vol.  ii.  p.  497  ;  a  too  favourable  judgment,  which  should  be  contrasted  with
the  opposite  exaggerations,  in  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  ix.  pp.  360-363,  and  Barrucl,  Hist,
du  Jacobinisme,  vol.  i.  pp.  87,  199.

23  Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Franf.  iii.  p.  516  ;  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  656.

24  Georgel,  Memoires,  vol.  ii.  pp.  293,  294 ;  a  violent  outbreak  against  "  Tirreligieux
edit  ....  qui  autorise  tous  les  cultes."

25  "  Le  parlement  de  Paris  discutait  1'edit  sur  les  protestans.     Vingt  ans  plus  tot,
combien  une  telle  resolution  n'eut-elle  pas  agite  et  divise  les  esprits  ?     En  1787,  on  ne
s'etonnait  que  d'une  chose  :  c'etait  qu'il  put  y  avoir  une  discussion  sur  des  principes
evidens."  Lacretelle,  XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  iii.  pp.  342,  343.    In  1776,  Malesherbes,  who  was
then  minister,  wished  to  secure  nearly  the  same  privileges  for  the  Protestants,  but  was
prevented  from  doing  so.     Dutens,  Memoires,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56-58.     Dutens  was  himself
concerned  in  the  negotiation.

26  Henry  II.  used  to  refer  to  this  title,  by  way  of  justifying  his  persecution  of  the
Protestants  (Ranke's  Civil  Wars  in  France,  vol.  i.  p.  241 )  ;  and  great  account  was  made
of  it  by  that  exemplary  prince,  Louis  XV.  Soulavic,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  i.  p.  155.
The  French  antiquaries  trace  it  back  to  Pepin,  the  father  of  Charlemagne.     Barrington's
Observations  on  the  Statutes,  p.  168.


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION     479

The  Jesuits,  for  at  least  fifty  years  after  their  institution,  rendered  immense
services  to  civilization,  partly  by  tempering  with  a  secular  element  the  more  super-
stitious views  of  their  great  predecessors,  the  Dominicans  and  Franciscans,  and
partly  by  organizing  a  system  of  education  far  superior  to  any  yet  seen  in  Europe.
In  no  university  could  there  be  found  a  scheme  of  instruction  so  comprehensive
as  theirs  ;  and  certainly  nowhere  was  displayed  such  skill  in  the  management
of  youth,  or  such  insight  into  the  general  operations  of  the  human  mind.  It
must  in  justice  be  added  that  this  illustrious  society,  notwithstanding  its  eager
and  often  unprincipled  ambition,  was  during  a  considerable  period  the  steady
friend  of  science  *  as  well  as  of  literature  ;  and  that  it  allowed  to  its  members
a  freedom  and  a  boldness  of  speculation  which  had  never  been  permitted  by  any
other  monastic  order.

As,  however,  civilization  advanced,  the  Jesuits,  like  every  spiritual  hierarchy
the  world  has  yet  seen,  began  to  lose  ground  ;  and  this  not  so  much  from  their
own  decay  as  from  a  change  in  the  spirit  of  those  who  surrounded  them.  An
institution  admirably  adapted  to  an  early  form  of  society  was  ill  suited  to  the
same  society  in  its  maturer  state.  In  the  sixteenth  century  the  Jesuits  were
before  their  age  ;  in  the  eighteenth  century  they  were  behind  it.  In  the  sixteenth
century  they  were  the  great  missionaries  of  knowledge  ;  because  they  believed
that  by  its  aid  they  could  subjugate  the  consciences  of  men.  But  in  the  eigh-
teenth century  their  materials  were  more  refractory  ;  they  had  to  deal  with  a
perverse  and  stiff-necked  generation  ;  they  saw  in  every  country  the  ecclesiastical
authority  rapidly  declining  ;  and  they  clearly  perceived  that  their  only  chance  of
retaining  their  old  dominion  was  by  checking  that  knowledge  the  progress  of
which  they  had  formerly  done  much  to  accelerate.27

Under  these  circumstances,  the  statesmen  of  France,  almost  immediately  after
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  determined  to  ruin  an  order  which  had
long  ruled  the  world,  and  which  was  still  the  greatest  bulwark  of  the  church.  In
this  design  they  were  aided  by  a  curious  movement  which  had  taken  place  in  the
church  itself,  and  which,  being  connected  with  views  of  much  wider  import,
deserves  the  attention  even  of  those  for  whom  theological  controversies  have  no
interest.

Among  the  many  points  on  which  metaphysicians  have  wasted  their  strength,
that  of  free-will  has  provoked  the  hottest  disputes.  And  what  has  increased
the  acerbity  of  their  language  is  that  this,  which  is  eminently  a  metaphysical
question,  has  been  taken  up  by  theologians,  who  have  treated  it  with  that  warmth
for  which  they  are  remarkable.28  From  the  time  of  Pelagius,  if  not  earlier,29


27  The  Prince  de  Montbarey,  who  was  educated  by  the  Jesuits  about  1740,  says  that,
in  their  schools,  the  greatest  attention  was  paid  to  pupils  intended  for  the  church  ;  while
the  abilities  of  those  destined  for  secular  professions  were  neglected.     See  this  statement,
which,  coming  from  such  a  quarter,  is  very  remarkable,  in  Memoir es  de  Montbarey,  vol.  i.
pp.  12,  13.     Montbarey,  so  far  from  b.eing  prejudiced  against  the  Jesuits,  ascribes  the
Revolution  to  their  overthrow.   Ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  94.     For  other  evidence  of  the  exclusive
and  unsecular  character  of  their  education  in  the  eighteenth  century,  see  Schlosser's
Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  iv.  pp.  29,  30,  245.

28  See  some  singular  observations  in  Parr's  first  sermon  on  faith  and  morals  (Parr's
Works,  vol.  vi.  p.  598),  where  we  are  told  that,  in  the  management  of  the  feud  between
Calvinists  and  Arminians,  "  the  steadiness  of  defence  should  be  proportionate  to  the
impetuosity  of  assault ;  "  unnecessary  advice,  so  far  as  his  own  profession  is  concerned.
However,  the  Mohammedan  theologians  are  said  to  have  been  even  keener  than  the
Christians  on  this  subject.     See  Troyer's  Discourse  on  the  Dabistan,  vol.  i.  p.  cxxxv. ;  an
important  work  on  the  Asiatic  religions.

29  Neander  (Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.  iv.  p.  105 )  finds  the  germ  of  the  Pelagian  controversy
in  the  dispute  between  Athanasius  and  Apollinaris.     Compare,  respecting  its  origin,  a
note  in  Milmans  Hist,  of  Christianity,  1840,  vol.  iii.  pp.  270,  271.

[*  It  would  be  more  accurate  to  say  that  many  Jesuits  cultivated  the  sciences.  They
were  none  the  less  the  persecutors  of  Galileo,  and  they  sought  to  have  the  Discours  of
Descartes  condemned. — ED.]


480  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Christianity  has  been  divided  into  two  great  sects,  which,  though  in  some  respects
uniting  by  insensible  shades,  have  always  preserved  the  broad  features  of  their
original  difference.  By  one  sect,  the  freedom  of  the  will  is  virtually  and  often
expressly  denied  ;  for  it  is  asserted,  not  only  that  we  cannot  of  our  own  will
effect  anything  meritorious,  but  that  whatever  good  we  may  do  will  be  useless,
since  the  Deity  has  predestined  some  men  to  perdition,  others  to  salvation.  By
the  other  sect,  the  freedom  of  the  will  is  as  strongly  upheld  ;  good  works  are
declared  essential  to  salvation  ;  and  the  opposite  party  is  accused  of  exaggerating
that  state  of  grace  of  which  faith  is  a  necessary  accompaniment.30

These  opposite  principles,  when  pushed  to  their  logical  consequences,  must  lead
the  first  sect  into  antinomianism,31  and  the  second  sect  into  the  doctrine  of
supererogatory  works.32  But  since,  on  such  subjects,  men  feel  far  more  than  they
reason,  it  usually  happens  that  they  prefer  following  some  common  and  accredited
standard,  or  appealing  to  some  ancient  name  :  33  and  they  therefore  generally
class  themselves  on  the  one  side  under  Augustin,  Calvin,  and  Jansenius  ;  on
the  other  side  under  Pelagius,  Arminius,  and  Molina.

Now  it  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  doctrines  which  in  England  are  called
Calvinistic  have  been  always  connected  with  a  democratic  spirit  ;  while  those
of  Arminianism  have  found  most  favour  among  the  aristocratic  or  protective
party.  In  the  republics  of  Switzerland,  of  North  America,  and  of  Holland,
Calvinism  was  always  the  popular  creed.3*  On  the  other  hand,  in  those  evil
days  immediately  after  the  death  of  Elizabeth,  when  our  liberties  were  in  im-
minent peril ;  when  the  Church  of  England,  aided  by  the  crown,  attempted  to  sub-
jugate the  consciences  of  men  ;  and  when  the  monstrous  claim  of  the  divine  right
of  episcopacy  was  first  put  forward  ;  35 — then  it  was  that  Arminianism  became  the
cherished  doctrine  of  the  ablest  and  most  ambitious  of  the  ecclesiastical  party  36

30  No  writer  I  have  met  'vith  has  stated  so  fairly  and  clearly  the  theological  boundaries
of  these  doctrines     s  Gothe.     Wahrheit  und  Dichtung,  in  Werke,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  200,
Stuttgart,  1837.

31  Compare  Sutler's  Mem.  of  the  Catholics,  vol.  iii.  p.  224  ;  Copleston  on  Necessity  and
Predestination,  pp.  25,  26  ;  Mosheim's  Eccles.  History,  vol.  ii.  p.  254.

32  Hence  the  theory  of  indulgences,  constructed  by  the  Church  of  Rome  with  perfect
consistency,  and  against  which  most  of  the  Protestant  arguments  are  illogical.

ss  This  seems  to  be  the  natural  tendency,  and  has  been  observed  by  Neander  in  his
instructive  account  of  the  Gnostics,  History  of  the  Church,  vol.  ii.  p.  121  :  "  The  custom
with  such  sects  to  attach  themselves  to  some  celebrated  name  or  other  of  antiquity."

34  The  Dutch  church  was  the  first  which  adopted  as  an  article  of  faith  the  doctrine  of
election  held  at  Geneva.     Mosheim's  Eccles.  History,  vol.  ii.  p.  112.     See  also,  on  this
doctrine  in  the  Netherlands,  Sinclair's  Corresp.  vol.  ii.  p.  199  ;  Coventry's  Speech  in  1672,
in  Parl.  Hist.  vol.  iv.  p.  537  ;  and  Stdudlin,  Gesch.  der  theolog.  Wissenschaften.  vol.  i.  p.  262  :
"  In  den  Niederlanden  wurde  der  Calvinische  Lehrbegriff  zuerst  in  eine  scholastische
Form  gebracht."

As  to  the  Calvinism  of  North  America,  compare  Bancroft's  American  Revolution,  vol.  i.
pp.  165,  173,  174,  vol.  ii.  pp.  329,  363,  vol.  iii.  p.  213  ;  LyelVs  Second  Visit  to  the  United
States,  1849,  vol.  i.  p.  51  ;  and  Combe's  Notes  on  the  United  States,  vol.  i.  pp.  35,  99,  223,
vol.  iii.  pp.  88,  118,  219,  226.

35  It  is  sometimes  said  that  this  was  advocated  by  Bancroft  as  early  as  1588  ;  but  this
assertion  appears  to  be  erroneous,  and  Mr.  Hallam  can  find  no  instance  before  the  reign
of  James  I.   Const.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  390.  The  dogma,  though  new  in  the  Church  of  England,
was  of  great  antiquity.     See,  on  its  origin  among  the  early  Christians,  Klimrath,  Hist,  du
Droit,  vol.  i.  p.  253.

36  The  spread  of  Arminianism  was  frequently  noticed  in  parliament  during  the  reign
of  Charles  I.   Parl.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  pp.  444,  452,  455,  470,  484,  487,  491,   660,  947,  1368.
On  the  decline  of  Calvinism  at  the  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  early  in  the
seventeenth  century,  see  a  curious  letter  from  Beale  in  Boyle's    Works,  vol.  v.  p.  483  ;
and  on  this  movement  in    the  church  after  Elizabeth,  compare  Yonge's  Diary,  p.  93.
edit.  Camden  Soc.  1848  ;  Orme's  Life  of  Owen,  p.  32  ;  Harris's  Lives  of  the  Stuarts,  vol.  i.
pp.  154-156,  vol.  ii.  pp.  208,  213,  214  ;  Hutchinson's  Mem.  pp.  66,  77  ;  Hallam's  Const.
Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  466  ;  Des  Maizeaux's  Life  of  Chillingworth,  p.  112.


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  481

And  in  that  sharp  retribution  which  followed,  the  Puritans  and  Independents,
by  whom  the  punishment  was  inflicted,  were  with  scarcely  an  exception  Cal-
vinists :  37  nor  should  we  forget  that  the  first  open  movement  against  Charles
proceeded  from  Scotland,  where  the  principles  of  Calvin  had  long  been  in  the
ascendant.

This  different  tendency  of  these  two  creeds  is  so  clearly  marked,  that  an  inquiry
into  its  causes  becomes  a  necessary  part  of  general  history,  and,  as  we  shall  pre-
sently see,  is  intimately  connected  with  the  history  of  the  French  Revolution.

The  first  circumstance  by  which  we  must  be  struck  is,  that  Calvinism  is  a
doctrine  for  the  poor,  and  Arminianism  for  the  rich.  A  creed  which  insists  upon
the  necessity  of  faith  must  be  less  costly  than  one  which  insists  upon  the  necessity
of  works.  In  the  former  case,  the  sinner  seeks  salvation  by  the  strength  of  his
belief  ;  in  the  latter  case,  he  seeks  it  by  the  fulness  of  his  contributions.*  And  as
those  contributions,  wherever  the  clergy  have  much  power,  always  flow  in  the
same  direction,  we  find  that  in  countries  which  favour  the  Arminian  doctrine  of
works  the  priests  are  better  paid,  and  the  churches  more  richly  ornamented,
than  they  are  where  Calvinism  has  the  upper  hand.  Indeed  it  is  evident  to  the
most  vulgar  calculation  that  a  religion  which  concentrates  our  charity  upon  our-
selves is  less  expensive  than  one  which  directs  our  charity  to  others.

This  is  the  first  great  practical  divergence  of  the  two  creeds  :  a  divergence
which  may  be  verified  by  any  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  histories  of  different
Christian  nations,  or  who  has  even  travelled  in  countries  where  the  different
tenets  are  professed.  It  is  also  observable  that  the  Church  of  Rome,  whose
worship  is  addressed  mainly  to  the  senses,  and  who  delights  in  splendid  cathedrals
and  pompous  ceremonies, has  always  displayed  against  the  Calvinists  an  animosity
far  greater  than  she  has  done  against  any  other  Protestant  sect.38

Out  of  these  circumstances  inevitably  arose  the  aristocratic  tendency  of  Armin-
ianism, and  the  democratic  tendency  of  Calvinism.  The  people  love  pomp
and  pageantry  as  much  as  the  nobles  do,  but  they  do  not  love  to  pay  for  them.
Their  untutored  minds  are  easily  captivated  by  the  array  of  a  numerous  priest-
hood, and  by  the  gorgeousness  of  a  well-appointed  temple.  Still,  they  know
full  well  that  these  things  absorb  a  large  part  of  that  wealth  which  would  other-
wise flow  into  their  own  cottages.  On  the  other  hand,  the  aristocracy,  by  their
standing,  their  habits,  and  the  traditions  of  their  education,  naturally  contract
a  taste  for  expense,  which  makes  them  unite  splendour  with  religion,  and  connect
pomp  with  piety.  Besides  this,  they  have  an  intuitive  and  well-founded  belief
that  their  own  interests  are  associated  with  the  interests  of  the  priesthood,
and  that  whatever  weakens  the  one  will  hasten  the  downfall  of  the  other.  Hence
it  is  that  every  Christian  democracy  has  simplified  its  external  worship  ;  every
Christian  aristocracy  has  embellished  it.  By  a  parity  of  reasoning,  the  more
any  society  tends  to  equality,  the  more  likely  it  is  that  its  theological  opinions
will  be  Calvinistic  ;  while  the  more  a  society  tends  towards  inequality,  the  greater
the  probability  of  those  opinions  being  Arminian.

37  Respecting  the  Calvinism  of  the  opponents  of  the  king,  see  Clarendon's  Rebellion,
PP-  36,  37  ;  Bulstrode's  Memoirs,  pp.  8,  9  ;  Burton's  Diary,  vol.  iii.  p.  206  ;  Carlyle's  Crom-
well, vol.  i.  p.  68  ;  and  on  its  influence  in  the  House  of  Commons,  in   1628,  Carwithen's
Hist,  of  the  Church  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  64.

38  Heber  (Life  of  Jeremy  Taylor,  p.  cxx.)  says  that  Calvinism  is  "  a  system  of  all  others
the  least  attractive  to  the  feelings  of  a  Roman  Catholic."     Philip  II.,  the  great^ Catholic
champion,  especially  hated  the  Calvinists,  and  in  one  of  his  edicts  calls  their  sect  "  detest-
able."   De  Thou,  Hist.  vol.  x.  p.  705  :  compare  vol.  xi.  p.  458.    To  give  an  earlier  instance  :
when  the  Roman  inquisition  was  revived  in  1542,  it  was  ordered  that  heretics,  and  in
particular  Calvinists,  should  not  be  tolerated  :  "  besonders  Calvinisten."     Ranke,  Die
Pdpste,  vol.  i.  p.  211.

[*  This  is  hardly  a  fair  account  of  Arminianism.  It  was  a  natural  reaction  against  the
antinomian  tendencies  of  popular  Calvinism  ;  and  its  adherents  certainly  did  not  in
general  hope  to  secure  salvation  by  large  "  contributions." — ED.]


482  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  would  be  easy  to  push  this  contrast  still  further,  and  to  show  that  Calvinism
is  more  favourable  to  the  sciences,  Arminianism  to  the  arts  ;39  and  that,  on  the
same  principle,  the  first  is  better  suited  to  thinkers,  the  other  to  scholars.40  But
without  pretending  to  trace  the  whole  of  this  divergence,  it  is  very  important  to
observe  that  the  professors  of  the  former  religion  are  more  likely  to  acquire
habits  of  independent  thinking  that  those  of  the  latter.  And  this  on  two  distinct
grounds.  In  the  first  place,  even  the  most  ordinary  of  the  Calvinistic  party  are,
by  the  very  terms  of  their  creed,  led  in  religious  matters  to  fix  their  attention
on  their  own  minds  rather  than  on  the  minds  of  others.  They  therefore,  as  a
body,  are  intellectually  more  narrow  than  their  opponents,  but  less  servile  ;
their  views,  though  generalized  from  a  smaller  field,  are  more  independent  ;  they
are  less  attached  to  antiquity,  and  more  heedless  of  those  traditions  to  which
the  Arminian  scholars  attach  great  importance.  In  the  second  place,  those
who  associate  metaphysics  with  their  religion  are  led  by  Calvinism  into  the
doctrine  of  necessity  ;  41  a  theory  which,  though  often  misunderstood,  is  pregnant
with  great  truths,  and  is  better  calculated  than  any  other  system  to  develop
the  intellect,  because  it  involves  that  clear  conception  of  law,  the  attainment
of  which  is  the  highest  point  the  human  understanding  can  reach.

These  considerations  will  enable  the  reader  to  see  the  immense  importance
of  that  revival  of  Jansenism  which  took  place  in  the  French  church  during  the
eighteenth  century.  For,  Jansenism  being  essentially  Calvinistic,42  those  tenden-
cies appeared  in  France  by  which  Calvinism  is  marked.  There  appeared  the
inquisitive,  democratic,  and  insubordinate  spirit,  which  has  always  accompanied

39  By  way  of  illustrating  this,  I  may  mention  that  an  intelligent  observer,  who  trav-
elled all  through  Germany,  remarked  in  1780  that   the  Calvinists,  though  richer  than
their  opponents,  had  less  taste  for  the  arts.     Riesbeck's  Travels  through  Germany,  London,
1787,  vol.  ii.  p.  240.     An  interesting  passage  ;  in  which,  however,  the  author  has  shown
himself  unable  to  generalize  the  facts  which  he  indicates.  [It  has  been  stated  above  that
the  Arminians  are  usually  the  rich  and  Calvinists  usually  the  poor.     If  Germany  be  an
exception,  an  explanation  is  needed.     There,   Calvinism   had   from   the  first  been   a
choice  of  princes  and  not  of  people  (Gardiner,  Thirty  Years'  War,  p.  17),  apparently
because  the  popular  mind  was  given  to  Lutheranism  beforehand. — ED.]

40  The  Arminians  have  had  among  them  many  men  of  great  learning,  particularly  of
patristic  learning  ;   but    the   most   profound  thinkers  have  been  on  the  other  side,  as
in  the  instances  of  Augustin,   Pascal,  and  Jonathan  Edwards.     To  these  Calvinistic
metaphysicians  the  Arminian  party  can  oppose  no  one  of  equal  ability  ;  and  it  is  remark-
able  that  the  Jesuits,  by  far  the  most  zealous  Arminians  in  the  Romish  Church,  have
always  been  celebrated  for  their  erudition,  but  have  paid  so  little  attention  to  the  study
of  the  mind   that,  as  Sir  James  Mackintosh  says  (Dissert,  on  Ethical  Philos.  p.  185),
Buffier  is  "  the  only  Jesuit  whose  name  has  a  place  in  the  history  of  abstract  philosophy."
And  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  this  superiority  of  thought  on  the  part  of  the  Calvin-
ists, accompanied  by  an  inferiority  of  learning,  existed  from  the  beginning  ;  for  Neander
(History  of  the  Church,  vol.  iv.  p.  299)  remarks,  that  Pelagius  "  was  not  possessed  of  the
profound  speculative  spirit  which  we  find  in  Augustin,"  but  that  "  in  learning  he  was
Augustin's  superior."

41  "  A  philosophical  necessity,  grounded  on  the  idea  of  God's  foreknowledge,  has
been  supported  by  theologians  of  the  Calvinistic  school,  more  or  less  rigidly,  throughout
the  whole  of  the  present  century."     MorelVs  Speculative  Philosophy  of  Europe,  1846,
vol.  i.  p.  366.     Indeed  this  tendency  is  so  natural  that  we  find  the  doctrine  of  necessity,
or  something  extremely  like  it,  laid  down  by  Augustin.     See  the  interesting  extracts  in
Neander's  Hist,  of  the  Church,  vol.-  vi.  pp.  424,  425  ;  where,  however,  a  loophole  is  left
to  let  in  the  idea  of  interference,  or  at  all  events  of  superintendence.

42  "The  five  principal  tenets  of  Jansenism,  which  amount  in  fact  to  the  doctrine  of
Calvin."     Palmer  on  the  Church,  vol.  i.  p.  320  ;  and  see  the  remarks  of  Mackintosh  in  his
Memoirs,  vol.  i.  p.  411.  According  to  the  Jesuits,  "  Paulus  genuit  Augustinum,  Augustinus
Calvinum,  Calvinus  Jansenium,  Jansenius  Sancryanum,  Sancryanus  Arnaldum  et  fratres
ejus."     Des  Reaux,  Historiettes,  vol.  iv.  pp.  71,  72.     Compare  Huetius  de  Rebus  ad  eum
pertinentibus,  p.  64  :  "  Jansenium  dogmata  sua  ex  Calvinianis  fontibus  derivasse."


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION     483

that  creed.  A  further  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  principles  just  laid  down
is  that  Jansenism  originated  with  a  native  of  the  Dutch  Republic  ;  43  that  it
was  introduced  into  France  during  the  glimpse  of  freedom  which  preceded  the
power  of  Louis  XIV.  ;  44  that  it  was  forcibly  repressed  in  his  arbitrary  reign  ;  45  and
that  before  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  it  again  arose,  as  the  natural
product  of  a  state  of  society  by  which  the  French  Revolution  was  brought  about.

The  connexion  between  the  revival  of  Jansenism  and  the  destruction  of  the
Jesuits,  is  obvious.  After  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  the  Jansenists  rapidly  gained
ground,  even  in  the  Sorbonne  ;  46  and  by  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century
they  had  organized  a  powerful  party  in  the  French  parliament.47  About  the
same  period,  their  influence  began  to  show  itself  in  the  executive  government
and  among  the  officers  of  the  crown.  Machault,  who  held  the  important  post
of  controller-general,  was  known  to  favour  their  opinions ;  48  and  a  few  years
after  his  retirement  Choiseul  was  called  to  the  he^l  of  affairs  ;  a  man  of  considerable
ability,  by  whom  they  were  openly  protected.49  Their  views  were  likewise
supported  by  Laverdy,  controller-general  in  1764,  and  by  Terray,  controller
of  finances  in  i^6^.50  The  procureur-general,  Gilbert  des  Voisins,  was  a  Jan-
senist  ;  51  so  also  was  one  of  his  successors,  Chauvelin  ;  52  and  so  was  the  advocate-
general,  Pelletier  de  Saint-Fargeau  ;53  and  so  too  was  Camus,  the  well-known
advocate  of  the  clergy.54  Turgot,  the  greatest  statesman  of  the  age,  is  said
to  have  embraced  the  same  opinions  ;  55  while  Necker,  who  on  two  different
occasions  possessed  almost  supreme  power,  was  notoriously  a  rigid  Calvinist.  To
this  may  be  added,  that  not  only  Necker,  but  also  Rousseau,  to  whom  a  large
share  in  causing  the  Revolution  is  justly  ascribed,  were  born  in  Geneva,  and
drew  their  earliest  ideas  from  that  great  nursery  of  the  Calvinistic  theology.

In  such  a  state  of  things  as  this,  it  was  impossible  that  a  body  like  the  Jesuits
should  hold  their  ground.  They  were  the  last  defenders  of  authority  and

43  Jansenius  was  born  in  a  village  near  Leerdam,  and  was  educated,  if  I  mistake  not,  in
Utrecht.

44  The  introduction  of  Jansenism  into  France  is  superficially  related  by  Duvernet
(Hist,  de  la  Sorbonne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  170-175)  ;  but  the  reader  will  find  a  contemporary  and
highly  characteristic  account  in  Mem.  de  Motteville,  vol.  ii.  pp.  224-227.     The  connexion
between  it  and  the  spirit  of  insubordination  was  remarked  at(the  time  ;  and  Des  Reaux,
who  wrote  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  mentions  an  opinion  that  the  Fronde
"etoit  venue  du  Jansenisme."     Historiettes,  vol.  iv.  p.  72     Omer  Talon  too  says  that,
1111648,  "il  se  trouvoit  que  tous  ceux   qui  etoient  de  cette  opinion  n'aimoient  pas  le
gouvernement  present  de  1'etat."     Mem.  d'Omer  Talon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  280,  281.

45  Brienne,  who  knew  Louis  XIV.  personally,  says,  "  Jansenisme,  1'horreur  du  roi."
Mem.  de  Brienne,  vol.  ii.  p.  240.     Compare  Duclos,  Mem.  Secrets,  vol.  i.  p.  112.     At  the
end  of  his  reign  he  promoted  a  bishop  on  the  avowed  ground  of  his  opposition  to  the
Jansenists  ;  this  was  in  1713.     Lettres  inedites  de  Maintenon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  396,  406  ;  and
see  further  vol.  i.  pp.  220,  222.

4R  "  La  Sorbonne,  moliniste  sous  Louis  XIV,  fut  janseniste  sous  le  regent,  et  toujours
divisee."  Duvernet,  Hist,  de  la  Sorbonne,  vol.  ii.  p.  225.

47  On  the  strength  of  the  Jansenists  in  the  parliament  of  Paris,  see  Tocqueville,  Regne
de  Louis  XV,  vol.  i.  p.  352,  vol.  ii.  p.  176  ;  Flassan,  Diplomatic,  vol.  vi.  p.  486  ;  Mem.
deGeorgel,-vo\.  ii.  p.  262  ;  Mem.  de  Bouille,  vol.  i.  p.  67  ;  Palmer's  Treatise  on  the  Church,
vol.  i.  pp.  327,  328.

48  Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  iii.  p.  439-

49  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  i.  pp.  31*  145-

50  Tocqueville,  Regne  de  Louis  XV,  vol.  ii.  p.  385  ;  (&wres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  liv.  p.  275  ;
Mem.  de  Georgel,  vol.  i.  pp.  49-51.

51  Duvernet,  Vie  de  Voltaire,  p.  90.

52  Lacretelle,  XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  119  ;  Lavallee,  vol.  iii.  p.  477-

53  Mem.  de  Georgel,  vol.  i.  p.  57-

54  La  Fayette,  Mem.  vol.  ii.  p.  53  ;  Dumont,  Souvenirs,  p.  154  ;  Georgel,  vol.  ii.  p.  353,
vol.  iii.  p.  10.

55  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  iii.  p.  137-


484  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

tradition,*  and  it  was  natural  that  they  should  fall  in  an  age  when  statesmen  were
sceptics,  and  theologians  were  Calvinists.  Even  the  people  had  already  marked
them  for  destruction  ;  and  when  Damiens,  in  1757,  attempted  to  assassinate
the  king,  it  was  generally  believed  that  they  were  the  instigators  of  the  act.56
this  we  now  know  to  be  false  ;  but  the  existence  of  such  a  rumour  is  evidence
of  the  state  of  the  popular  mind.  At  all  events,  the  doom  of  the  Jesuits  was
fixed.  In  April,  1761,  parliament  ordered  their  constitutions  to  be  laid  before
them.57  In  August,  they  were  forbidden  to  receive  novices,  their  colleges  were
closed,  and  a  number  of  their  most  celebrated  works  were  publicly  burned  by
the  common  hangman.58  Finally,  in  1762,  another  edict  appeared,  by  which
the  Jesuits  were  condemned  without  even  being  heard  in  their  own  defence  ;  r>!J
their  property  was-  directed  to  be  sold,  and  their  order  secularized  ;  they  were
declared  "  unfit  to  be  admitted  into  a  well-governed  country,"  and  their  institute
and  society  were  formally  abolished.60

Such  was  the  way  in  which  this  great  society,  long  the  terror  of  the  world,  fell
before  the  pressure  of  public  opinion.  What  makes  its  fall  the  more  remarkable  is
that  the  pretext  which  was  alleged  to  justify  the  examination  of  its  constitutions,
was  one  so  slight,  that  no  former  government  would  have  listened  to  it  for  a
single  moment.  This  immense  spiritual  corporation  was  actually  tried  by  a
temporal  court  for  ill  faith  in  a  mercantile  transaction,  and  for  refusing  to  pay
a  sum  of  money  said  to  be  due  !  61  The  most  important  body  in  the  Catholic
church,  the  spiritual  leaders  of  France,  the  educators  of  her  youth,  and  the
confessors  of  her  kings,  were  brought  to  the  bar,  and  sued  in  their  collective
capacity,  for  the  fraudulent  repudiation  of  a  common  debt  !  62  So  marked  was
the  predisposition  of  affairs  that  it  was  not  found  necessary  to  employ  for  the
destruction  of  the  Jesuits  any  of  those  arts  by  which  the  popular  mind  is  com-
monly inflamed.  The  charge  upon  which  they  were  sentenced  was  not  that
they  had  plotted  against  the  state  ;  nor  that  they  had  corrupted  the  public
morals  ;  nor  that  they  wished  to  subvert  religion.  These  were  the  accusations
which  were  brought  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  which  suited  the  genius  of
that  age.  But,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  all  that  was  required  was  some
trifling  accident  that  might  serve  as  a  pretence  to  justify  what  the  nation
had  already  determined.  To  ascribe,  therefore,  this  great  event  to  the


56  "  The  Jesuits  are  charged  by  the  vulgar  as  promoters  of  that  attempt."     Letter
from  Stanley,  written  in  1761,  in  Chatham  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  127.     Compare  Campan,
Mem.  de  Marie  Antoinette,  vol.  iii.  pp.  19,  21  ;  Sismondi,  Hist,   des  Franf.   vol.   xxix,
pp.  in,  227.    [The  damaging  circumstance  was  that  the  Jesuit  Busenbaum  had  justified
regicide  in  a  work  of  which  an  edition  appeared  in  1757.     D'Alembert,  Des  Jesuites,
ed.  1821,  p.  226.     See  Nicolini,  History  of  the  Jesuits,  1853,  p.  346,  as  to  the  beliefs  of
Louis  XV.  on  the  subject. — ED.]

57  Lavallee,  Hist,  des  Francais,  vol.  iii.  p.  476.

58  Flassan,  Diplomatic  Fran  p.  vol.  vi.  p.  491.

59  "  Sans  que  les  accuses  eussent  etc  entendus."     Lavallee,  vol.  iii.  p.  477.     "  Pas
un  seul  n'a  ete  entendu  dans  leur  cause."     Barruel  sur  VHist.  du  Jacobinisme,  vol.  ii.
p.  264.

60  Lavallee,  vol.  iii.  p.  477  ;  Flassan,  vol.  vi.  pp.  504,  505  ;  Sismondi,  xxix.  p.  234  ;  and
the  letters  written  by  Diderot,  who,  though  he  was  in  Paris  at  the  time,  gives  rather  an
incomplete  account.     Mem.  de  Diderot,  vol.  ii.  pp.  127,  130-132.

61  Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplomatic,  vol.  vi.  pp.  486-488.

62  "  Enfin  ils  furent  mis  en  cause,  et  le  parlement  de  Paris  eut  1'etonnement  et  la  joie
de  voir  les  Jesuites  amenes  devant    lui    comme    de    vils   banqueroutiers."     Lacretelle,
XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  252.     "  Condemned  in  France  as  fraudulent  traders."  Schlosser's
Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  iv.  p.  451.

[*  This  statement  requires  to  be  modified.  The  Jansenists  were  just  as  anxious  as  the
Jesuits  to  defend  religious  authority  and  tradition  ;  and  an  authoritarian  party  was
never  absent  from  either  the  church  or  the  laity. — ED.]


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION     485

bankruptcy  of  a  trader,  or  the  intrigues  of  a  mistress,63  is  to  confuse  the
cause  of  an  act  with  the  pretext  under  which  the  act  is  committed.  In  the
eyes  of  the  men  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  real  crime  of  the  Jesuits
was  that  they  belonged  to  the  past  rather  than  to  the  present,  and  that  by
defending  the  abuses  of  ancient  establishments  they  obstructed  the  progress  of
mankind.  They  stood  in  the  way  of  the  age,  and  the  age  swept  them  from  its
path.*  This  was  the  real  cause  of  their  abolition  :  a  cause  not  likely  to  be  per-
ceived by  those  writers  who,  under  the  guise  of  historians,  are  only  collectors
of  the  prattle  and  gossip  of  courts  ;  and  who  believe  that  the  destinies  of  great
nations  can  be  settled  in  the  ante -chambers  of  ministers,  and  in  the  councils  of
kings.

After  the  fall  of  the  Jesuits,  there  seemed  to  be  nothing  remaining  which  could
save  the  French  church  from  immediate  destruction.64  The  old  theological
spirit  had  been  for  some  time  declining,  and  the  clergy  were  suffering  from  their
own  decay  even  more  than  from  the  attacks  made  upon  them.  The  advance
of  knowledge  was  producing  in  France  the  same  results  as  those  which  I  have
pointed  out  in  England  ;  and  the  increasing  attractions  of  science  drew  off  many
illustrious  men,  who  in  a  preceding  age  would  have  been  active  members  of  the
spiritual  profession.  That  splendid  eloquence  for  which  the  French  clergy  had
been  remarkable  was  now  dying  away,  and  there  were  no  longer  heard  the
voices  of  those  great  orators,  at  whose  bidding  the  temples  had  formerly  been
filled.65  Massillon  was  the  last  of  that  celebrated  race  who  had  so  enthralled
the  mind,  and  the  magic  of  whose  fascination  it  is  even  now  hard  to
withstand.  He  died  in  1742  ;  and  after  him  the  French  clergy  possessed  nQ
eminent  men  of  any  kind,  neither  thinkers,  nor  orators,  nor  writers.66  Nor
did  there  seem  the  least  possibility  of  their  recovering  their  lost  position.  While
society  was  advancing,  they  were  receding.  All  the  sources  of  their  power

(i3  Several  writers  attribute  the  destruction  of  the  Jesuits  to  the  exertions  of  Madame
de  Pompadour  !

<i4  Choiseul  is  reported  to  have  said  of  the  Jesuits  :  "  leur  education  detruite,  to  us
les  autres  corps  religieux  tomberont  d'eux-memes."  Barruel,  Hist,  du  Jacobinisme,  vol.  i.
p.  63.

65  In  1771,  Horace  Walpole  writes  from  Paris  that  the  churches  and  convents  were
become  so  empty,  as  to  "  appear  like  abandoned  theatres  destined  to  destruction  ;  "  and
this  he  contrasts  with  his  former  experience  of  a  different  state  of  things.     Walpole's
Letters,  vol.  v.  p.  310,  edit.  1840.

66  "  So  low  had  the  talents  of  the  once  illustrious  church  of  France  fallen,  that  in  the
latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  Christianity  itself  was  assailed,  not  one
champion  of  note  appeared  in  its  ranks  ;  and  when  the  convocation  of  the  clergy,  in
1770,  published  their  famous  anathema  against  the  dangers  of  unbelief,  and  offered
rewards  for  the  best  essays  in  defence  of  the  Christian  faith,  the  productions  called  forth
were  so  despicable  that  they  sensibly  injured  the  cause  of  religion."     Alison's  Hist,
of  Europe,  vol.  i.  pp.  180,  181.   [Buckle  here  quotes  Alison  as  to  a  great  attack  on  religion
in  the  latter  part  of  the  century,  after  repeatedly  stating  that  the  attack  was  then  mainly
upon  the  abuses  of  the  state.    Yet  the  error  is  immediately  repeated,  though  in  the  next
paragraph  there  is  made  the  new  statement  that  from  1751  there  began  a  new  propaganda
of  atheism. — ED.]

[*  Here  again  "  the  age  "  is  somewhat  indiscriminately  handled.  It  was  not  merely  the
progressive  minds  who  opposed  the  Jesuits.  Their  habits  of  intrigue  excited  the  dislike
of  many  conservative  churchmen — for  instance,  of  Cardinal  Fleury  (D'Alembert,  Des
Jcsnites,  ed.  1821,  p.  183)  ;  and  their  enemies,  the  Jansenists,  were  hardly  more  enlight-
ened than  they.  It  was  the  meddling  of  the  Jesuits,  and  not  their  backwardness,  that
won  them  the  detestation  of  Pombal  in  Portugal  (Id.  p.  229.  Cp.  Comte  Saint-Priest,
Hist,  of  the  Fall  of  the  Jesuits,  Eng.  tr.  1845,  p.  14).  They  had  further  been  repeatedly
censured  by  the  Papacy,  and  in  particular  denounced  by  Benedict  XIV.  in  1741  as
inobedientes,  contumaces,  captiosi,  etperditi  homines.  Nicolini,  History  of  the  Jesuits,  1853,
pp.  127-8.— ED.]


486  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  dried  up.  They  had  no  active  leaders  ;  they  had  lost  the  confidence  of
government  ;  they  had  forfeited  the  respect  of  the  people  ;  they  had  become  a
mark  for  the  gibes  of  the  age.67

It  does  at  first  sight  seem  strange  that,  under  these  circumstances,  the  French
clergy  should  have  been  able,  for  nearly  thirty  years  after  the  abolition  of  the
Jesuits,  to  maintain  their  standing,  so  as  to  interfere  with  impunity  in  public
affairs.68  The  truth,  however,  is  that  this  temporary  reprieve  of  the  ecclesias-
tical order  was  owing  to  that  movement  which  I  have  already  noticed,  and  by
virtue  of  which  the  French  intellect,  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth
century,  changed  the  ground  of  its  attack,  and,  directing  its  energies  against
political  abuses,  neglected  in  some  degree  those  spiritual  abuses  to  which
its  attention  had  been  hitherto  confined.  The  result  was  that  in  France
the  government  enforced  a  policy  which  the  great  thinkers  had  indeed
originated,  but  respecting  which  they  were  becoming  less  eager.  The
most  eminent  Frenchmen  were  beginning  their  attacks  upon  the  state,
and  in  the  heat  of  their  new  warfare  they  slackened  their  opposition  to  the
church.*  But  in  the  meantime,  the  seeds  they  had  sown  germinated  in  the
state  itself.  So  rapid  was  the  march  of  affairs  that  those  anti-ecclesiastical
opinions  which  a  few  years  earlier  were  punished  as  the  paradoxes  of  designing
men,  were  now  taken  up  and  put  into  execution  by  senators  and  ministers.
The  rulers  of  France  carried  into  effect  principles  which  had  hitherto  been  simply
a  matter  of  theory  ;  and  thus  it  happened,  as  is  always  the  case,  that  practical
statesmen  only  apply  and  work  out  ideas  which  have  long  before  been  suggested
by  more  advanced  thinkers,  f

Hence  it  followed  that  at  no  period  during  the  eighteenth  century  did  the
speculative  classes  and  practical  classes  thoroughly  combine  against  the  church  :
since,  in  the  first  half  of  the  century,  the  clergy  were  principally  assailed  by  the
literature,  and  not  by  the  government  ;  in  the  latter  half  of  the  century,  by  the
government,  and  not  by  the  literature.  J  Some  of  the  circumstances  of  this
singular  transition  have  been  already  stated,  and  I  hope  clearly  brought  before
the  mind  of  the  reader.  I  now  purpose  to  complete  the  generalization,  by
proving  that  a  corresponding  change  was  taking  place  in  all  other  branches  of
inquiry  ;  and  that  while  in  the  first  period  attention  was  chiefly  directed  towards
mental  phenomena,  it  was  in  the  second  period  more  directed  towards  physical
phenomena.  From  this  the  political  movement  received  a  vast  accession  of

67  In  1766,  the  Rev.  William  Cole  writes  to  Alban  Butler  :  "  I  travelled  to  Paris
through  Lille  and  Cambray  in  their  public  voitures,  and  was  greatly  scandalized  and
amazed   at    the   open   and   unreserved  disrespect,  both  of   the   trading   and  military
people,  for  their  clergy  and  religious  establishment.     When  I  got  to  Paris,  it  was  much
worse."     Ellis's  Original  Letters,  second  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  485.     See  also  Walpole's  Letters
to  Lady  Ossory,  vol.  ii.  p.  513,  edit.  1848  ;  and  the  complaint  made  at  Besancon  in  1761,
in  Lepan,  Vie  de  Voltaire,  p.  113.

68  And  also  to  retain  their  immense  property,  which,  when  the  Revolution  occurred,
was  estimated  at  8o,ooo,oooJ.  English  money,  bringing  in  a  yearly  revenue  of  "  some-
what  under   75,000,000    francs."      Alison's    Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  183,  vol.  ii.  p.  20,  vol.
xiv.  pp.  122,  123.

[*  This  repeated  error  must  be  again  noted.  It  is  from  the  date  of  the  fall  of  the
Jesuits  that  Voltaire  begins  his  most  strenuous  attack,  and  the  whole  output  of  the
philosophes  multiplies  in  the  same  period.  Cp.  Rocquain,  L' Esprit  Revolutionnaire  avant
la  Revolution,  1878,  p.  236.  And  see  the  next  paragraph  of  the  text. — ED.]

[t  What  happened  was  simply  that  the  statesmen  of  1750  turned  hopefully  to  the  project
of  taxing  the  wealth  of  the  church,  which  those  of  1710  had  attempted  and  been  forced
to  abandon.  This  project  was  wholly  independent  of  the  polemic  of  the  "  advanced
thinkers."  It  had  been  broached  at  the  Etats  Generaux  of  Pontoise  in  1561  (Duruy,  ii.
419),  as  it  had  been  by  the  Lollards  in  England  at  the  beginning  of  the  previous  century,
and  by  Arnold  of  Brescia  in  the  twelfth. — ED.]

[J  See  notes  on  previous  paragraph. — ED.]


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  487

strength.     For  the  French  intellect,  shifting  the  scene  of  its  labours,  diverted
the  thoughts  of  men  from  the  internal  to  the  external,  and  concentrating  attention
upon  their  material  rather  than  upon  their  spiritual  wants,  turned  against  the
encroachments  of  the  state  an  hostility  formerly  reserved  for  the  encroachments
of  the  church.     Whenever  a  tendency  arises  to  prefer  what  comes  from  without
to  what  comes  from  within,  and  thus  to  aggrandize  matter  at  the  expense  of
mind,  there  will  also  be  a  tendency  to  believe  that  an  institution  which  hampers
our  opinions  is  less  hurtful  than  one  which  controls  our  acts.     Precisely  in  the
same  way,  men  who  reject  the  fundamental  truths  of   religion  will  care  little
for  the  extent  to  which  those  truths  are  perverted.     Men  who  deny  the  existence
)f  the  Deity  and  the  immortality  of    the  soul  will  take  no  heed  of  the  way  in
which  a  gross  and  formal  worship  obscures  those  sublime  doctrines.     All  the
lolatry,  all  the  ceremonials,  all  the  pomp,  all  the  dogmas,  and  all  the  traditions
)y  which  religion  is  retarded,  will  give  them  no  disquietude,  because  they  con-
sider the  opinions  that  are  checked  to  be  equally  false  with  those  that  are  favoured,
ly  should  they  to  whom  transcendental  truths  are  unknown  labour  to  remove
the  superstitions  which  darken    the    truths  ?     Such  a  generation,  so  far  from
ittacking  ecclesiastical  usurpations,  would  rather  look  on  the  clergy  as  conve-
lient  tools  to  ensnare  the  ignorant  and  control  the  vulgar.     Therefore  it  is  that
\re  rarely  hear  of  a  sincere  atheist  being  a  zealous  polemic.*     But  if  that  should
:cur,  which  a  century  ago  occurred  in  France  ;  if  it  should  happen  that  men  of
reat  energy,  and  actuated  by  the  feelings  I  have  described,  were  to  find  them-
jlves  in  the  presence  of  a  political  despotism, — they  would  direct  against  it  the
/hole  of  their  powers  ;  and  they  would  act  with  the  more  determined  vigour,
;ause,  believing  that  their  all  was  at  stake,  temporal  happiness  would  be  to
them  not  only  the  first,  but  also  the  sole  consideration.

It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  the  progress  of  those  atheistical  opinions,
which  now  rose  in  France,  becomes  a  matter  of  great  though  painful  interest.
And  the  date  at  which  they  appeared  fully  corroborates  what  I  have  just  said
respecting  the  change  that  took  place  iri  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century. f
The  first  great  work  in  which  they  were  openly  promulgated,  was  the  celebrated
Encyclopaedia,  published  in  17 5 1.69  Before  that  time  such  degrading  opinions,
though  occasionally  broached,  were  not  held  by  any  men  of  ability  ;  nor  could
they  in  the  preceding  state  of  society  have  made  much  impression  upon  the  age.
But  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  they  affected  every  depart-
ment of  French  literature.  Between  1758  and  1770,  atheistical  tenets  rapidly
gained  ground  ;  70  and  in  1770  was  published  the  famous  work  called  the  System


69  M.  Barante  (Literature  Franfaise  au  XVIIIe  Siecle,  p.  94)  says,  "  On  arriva  bientot
a  tout  nier  ;  deja  1'incredulite  avait  rejete  les  preuves  divines  de  la  revelation,  et  avait
ibjure  les  devoirs  et  les  souvenirs  Chretiens  ;  on  vit  alors  1'atheisme  lever  un  front  plus

rdi,  et  proclamer  que  tout  sentiment  religieux  etait  une  reverie  et  un  desordre  de
1'esprit  humain.  C'est  de  1'epoque  de  1' Encyclopedic  que  datent  les  ecrits  ou  cette
opinion  est  le  plus  expressement  professee.  Ils  furent  peu  imites."  This  last  sentence

erroneous,  I  am  sorry  to  say.  [Only  the  first  volume  of  the  Encyclopedic  was
mblished  in  1751.  In  contradicting  the  last  sentence  of  Barante,  Buckle  accepts  the
one  preceding,  which  is  the  contradiction  of  his  own  repeated  statement.  But  atheism
was  not  expounded  in  the  Encyclopedic,  and  could  not  possibly  have  been,  even  if  the
contributors  had  all  been  atheists,  which  they  certainly  were  not.  Voltaire  was  the
chief,  and  he  always  opposed  atheism. — ED.]

70  "  Dans  un  intervalle  de  douze  annees,  de  1758  a  1770,  la  litterature  frangaise  fut
souillee  par  un  grand  nombre  d'ouvrages  ou  1'atheisme  etoit    ouvertement    professe."

[*  See  this  a  priori  proposition  contradicted  in  the  next  paragraph. — ED.]
[t  This  statement  must  be  pronounced  unintelligible.  The  previous  statement,  many
times  repeated,  was  that  at  the  middle  of  the  century  the  literary  attack  was  turned
away  from  the  church  and  against  the  state.  It  is  now  asserted  that  what  happened
was  a  development  of  atheistic  propaganda,  dating  from  1751.  Neither  statement  is
accurate. — ED.]


488  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  Nature  ;  the  success  and,  unhappily,  the  ability  of  which,  makes  its  appear-
ance an  important  epoch  in  the  history  of  France.  Its  popularity  was  immense;71
and  the  views  it  contained  are  so  clearly  and  methodically  arranged  as  to  have
earned  for  it  the  name  of  the  code  of  atheism.72  Five  years  later,  the  Archbishop
of  Toulouse,  in  a  formal  address  to  the  king  on  behalf  of  the  clergy,  declared
that  atheism  had  now  become  the  prevailing  opinion.73  This,  like  all  similar
assertions,  must  have  been  an  exaggeration  ;  but  that  there  was  a  large  amount
of  truth  in  it  is  known  to  whoever  has  studied  the  mental  habits  of  the  genera-
tion immediately  preceding  the  Revolution.  Among  the  inferior  class  of  writers,
Damilaville,  Deleyre,  Marechal,  Naigeon,  Toussaint,  were  active  supporters  *
of  that  cold  and  gloomy  dogma  which,  in  order  to  extinguish  the  hope  of  a  future
life,  blots  out  from  the  mind  of  man  the  glorious  instincts  of  his  own  immor-
tality.74 And,  strange  to  say,  several  even  of  the  higher  intellects  were  unable  to
escape  the  contagion.  Atheism  was  openly  advocated  by  Condorcet,  by  D'Alem-
bert,  by  Diderot,  bv^  Helvetius,  by  Lalande,  by  Laplace,  by  Mirabeau,  and  by
Saint  Lambert.75  Indeed,  so  thoroughly  did  all  this  harmonize  with  the  general
temper,  that  in  society  men  boasted  of  what  in  other  countries  and  in  other
days  has  been  a  rare  and  singular  error,  an  eccentric  taint,  which  those  affected
by  it  were  willing  to  conceal. f  In  1764  Hume  met,  at  the  house  of  Baron


Lacretelle,  XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  ii.  p.  310.  [No  titles  being  given,  it  must  suffice  to  say
that  the  "  grand  nombre  d'ouvrages  "  in  question,  if  they  existed,  have  passed  out  of
knowledge.  Only  a  few  atheistic  works  are  known  to  have  been  published  in  the  period
named. — ED.]

71  Voltaire,  who  wrote  against  it,  mentions  its  diffusion  among  all  classes,  and  says
it  was  read  by  "  des  savants,  des  ignorants,  des  femmes."  Diet.  Philos.  article  Dieu,
section  iv.,  in  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  vol.  xxxviii.  p.  366  :  see  also  vol.  Ixvii.  p.  260  ;  Long-
champ  et  Wagniere,  Mem.  sur  Voltaire,  vol.  i.  pp.  13,  334  ;  Lettres  inedites  de  Voltaire,
vol..  ii,  pp<  210,  216  ;  and  a  letter  from  him  in  Correspond,  de  Dudeffand,  vol.  ii.  p.  329.
Compare  Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  xi.  p.  320  :  "  mit  ungetheiltem  Beifalle
aufgenommen  worden  und  grossen  Einfluss  gehabt  hat."

7?  "  Le  code  monstrueux  d'atheisme."  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxix.  p.  88.  Morellet,  who
in  such  matters  was  by  no  means  a  harsh  judge,  says,  "  Le  Systeme  de  la  Nature,  surtout,
est  un  catechisme  d'atheisme  complet."  Mem.  de  Morellet,  vol.  i.  p.  133.  Staudlin
(Gesch.  der  theolog.  Wissenschaften,  vol.  ii.  p.  440)  calls  it  "  ein  System  des  entschiedenen
Atheismus  :  "  while  Tennemann,  who  has  given  by  far  the  best  account  of  it  I  have
met  with,  says,  "  Es  machte  bei  seinem  Erscheinen  gewaltiges  Aufsehen,  und  ist  fast
immer  als  das  Handbuch  des  Atheismus  betrachtet  worden."  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  xi.
P-  349-

73  "  Le  monstrueux  atheisme  est  devenu  1'opinion  dominante."     Soulavie,  Regne  de
Louis  XVI,  vol.  hi.  p.  16  :  the  address  of  the  archbishop   with   a   deputation,  "  muni
des  pouvoirs  de  1'assemblee  generate  du  clerge,"  in  September  1775.

74  Biog.  Univ.  vol,  x,  pp,  471,  669,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  8,  vol.  xxx.  p.  542  ;  Mem.  de  Briss&l,
vol.  i.  p.  305  j  Tocqueville*  Regne  de  Louis  XV,  vol.  ii.  p.  77.

75  M$m^  of  Mallet  du  Pan,  vol.  i.  p.  50  ,*  Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  v-  p.  127  ;
fiawuel/,  Histi  dm  Jacobin,  vol.  i.  pp.  104,  135,  225,  vol.  ii.  p.  23,  vol.  iii.  p.  200  ;  Life  of
Ro:milly*vol<  i,  pp.  46,  145  ;  Staudlin,  Theolog.  Wissenschaften,  vol.  ii.  p.  440  ;  Geovgel
Mtm^  vol.  ii.  pp.  250,  350  ;  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  xv.  p.  87  ;  Mem.  de  Morellet,  vol,  i
p..  130  ;  Lepan,  Vie  de  Voltaire,  p.  369  ;  Tennemann,  Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  xi.  p.  350
Musset  Pathay,  Vie  de  Rousseau,  vol.  ii.  pp.  177,  297  ;  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  v.  p.  180
Hitchcock's  Geol...  p..  263  ;  Mem.  d'Epinay,  vol.  ii.  pp.  63,  66,  76.

[*  Damilaville,  Deleyre,  and  Toussaint  published  no  atheistic  works  ;  and  it  is  only
3  guess  that  the  first -named  had  a  hand  in  the  System  of  Nature.  Marechal's  atheistic
\yorks  were  published  after  the  Revolution. — ED.]

[f  For  "  willing  to  conceal "  read  "  bound  to  conceal,  if  they  valued  their  lives,  or
their  peace."  Buckle  must  have  been  aware  that  nowhere  in  the  modern  world,  before
the  period  in  question,  could  a  known  atheist  escape  persecution.  Vanini  was  burnt  as  an
atheist  in  1619. — ED.]


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH    REVOLUTION     489

d'Holbach,  a  party  of  the  most  celebrated  Frenchmen  then  residing  in  Paris.
The  great  Scotchman,  who  was  no  doubt  aware  of  the  prevailing  opinion,  took
occasion  to  raise  an  argument  as  to  the  existence  of  an  atheist,  properly  so  called  ;
for  his  own  part,  he  said,  he  had  never  chanced  to  meet  with  one.  "  You  have
been  somewhat  unfortunate,"  replied  Holbach  ;  "  but  at  the  present  moment  you
are  sitting  at  table  with  seventeen  of  them."  76

This,  sad  as  it  is,  only  forms  a  single  aspect  of  that  immense  movement  by
which,  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  French  intellect
was  withdrawn  from  the  study  of  the  internal,  and  concentrated  upon  that  of  the
external  world.  Of  this  tendency,  we  find  an  interesting  instance  in  the  cele-
brated work  of  Helvetius,  unquestionably  the  ablest  and  most  influential  treatise
on  morals  which  France  produced  at  this  period.  It  was  published  in  1758  ; 77
and  although  it  bears  the  title  of  an  essay  on  "  the  Mind,"  it  does  not  contain
a  single  passage  from  which  we  could  infer  that  the  mind,  in  the  sense  in  which
the  word  is  commonly  used,  has  any  existence.  In  this  work,  which  during  fifty
years  was  the  code  of  French  morals,  principles  are  laid  down  which  bear  exactly
the  same  relation  to  ethics  that  atheism  bears  to  theology.  Helvetius  at  the
beginning  of  his  inquiry  assumes,  as  an  incontestable  fact  that  the  difference
between  man  and  other  animals  is  the  result  of  a  difference  in  their  external
form  ;  and  that  if,  for  example,  our  wrists,  instead  of  ending  with  hands  and
flexible  fingers,  had  merely  ended  like  a  horse's  foot,  we  should  have  always
remained  wanderers  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  ignorant  of  every  art,  entirely
defenceless,  and  having  no  other  concern  but  to  avoid  the  attacks  of  wild  beasts,
and  find  the  needful  supply  of  our  daily  food.78  That  the  structure  of  our  bodies
is  the  sole  cause  of  our  boasted  superiority  becomes  evident  when  we  consider
that  our  thoughts  are  simply  the  product  of  two  faculties  which  we  have  in
common  with  all  other  animals  ;  namely,  the  faculty  of  receiving  impressions
from  external  objects,  and  the  faculty  of  remembering  those  impressions  after
they  are  received.79  From  this,  says  Helvetius,  it  follows  that  the  internal
powers  of  man  being  the  same  as  those  of  all  other  animals,  our  sensibility
and  our  memory  would  be  useless  if  it  were  not  for  those  external  peculiarities
by  which  we  are  eminently  distinguished,  and  to  which  we  owe  everything
that  is  most  valuable.80  These  positions  being  laid  down,  it  is  easy  to  deduce
all  the  essential  principles  of  moral  actions.  For,  memory  being  merely  one
of  the  organs  of  physical  sensibility,81  and  judgment  being  only  a  sensation,82
all  notions  of  duty  and  of  virtue  must  be  tested  by  their  relation  to  the  senses  ;
in  other  words,  by  the  gross  amount  of  physical  enjoyment  to  which  they  give
rise.  This  is  the  true  basis  of  moral  philosophy.  To  take  any  other  view

76  This  was  related  to  Romilly  by  Diderot.     Life  of  Romilly,  vol.  i.  pp.  131,  132  :
see  also  Burton's  Life  of  Hume,  vol.  ii.  p.  220.     Priestley,  who  visited  France  in  1774,
says,  that  "  all  the  philosophical  persons  to  whom  I  was  introduced  at  Paris  (were)
unbelievers  in  Christianity,  and  even  professed  atheists."     Priestley's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.
p.  74.     See  also  a  letter  by  Horace  Walpole,  written  from  Paris  in  1765  (Walpole's  Letters,
edit.  1840,  vol.  v.  p.  96)  :  "  their  avowed  doctrine  is  atheism."

77  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xx.  p.  29.

78  "  Si  la  nature,  au  lieu  de  mains  et  de  doigts  flexibles,  eut  termine   nos    poignets
par  un  pied  de  cheval ;  qui  doute  que  les  hommes,  sans  art,  sans  habitations,  sans  defense
centre  les  animaux,  tout  occupes  du  soin  de  pourvoir  a  leur  nourriture  et  d'eviter  les
betes  feroces,  ne  fussent  encore  errants  dans  les  forets  comme  des  troupeaux  fugitifs  ?  "
Helvetius  de  VEsprit,  vol.  i.  p.  2.     Had  Helvetius  ever  read  the    attack   of   Aristotle
against  Anaxagoras  for  asserting  that  5id  TO   x^pas  £%etj>,  (ppovi^rarov  eli>ou  T&V   &<av
rbv  foepuirov  ?     Cudworth,  Intellec.  Syst.  vol.  iii.  p.  311.

79  De  VEsprit,  vol.  i.  p.  2.  80  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  4.

81  "  En  effet  la  memoire  ne  peut  etre  qu'un  des  organes  de  la  sensibilite  physique,"
vol.  i.  p.  6.  Compare  what  M.  Lepelletier  says  on  this,  in  his  Physiologic  Medicale,  vol.  iii.
P-  272.

"  D'ou  je  conclus  que  tout  jugement  n'est  qu'une  sensation."      De  VEsprit,  vol.  i.
p.  10  ;  "  juger,  comme  je  1'ai  deja  prouve,  n'est  proprement  que  sentir"  p.  41.


490  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

is  to  allow  ourselves  to  be  deceived  by  conventional  expressions,  which  have
110  foundation  except  in  the  prejudices  of  ignorant  men.  Our  vices  and  our
virtues  are  solely  the  result  of  our  passions  ;  and  our  passions  are  caused  by  our
physical  sensibility  to  pain  and  to  pleasure.83  It  was  in  this  way  that  the  sense
of  justice  first  arose.  To  physical  sensibility  men  owed  pleasure  and  pain  ;  hence
the  feeling  of  their  own  interests,  and  hence  the  desire  of  living  together  in
societies.  Being  assembled  in  society,  there  grew  up  the  notion  of  a  general
interest,  since  without  it  society  could  not  hold  together  ;  and,  as  actions  are
only  just  or  unjust  in  proportion  as  they  minister  to  this  general  interest.a  measure
was  established  by  which  justice  is  discriminated  from  injustice.84  With  the
same  inflexible  spirit,  and  with  great  fulness  of  illustration,  Helvetius  exam-
ines the  origin  of  those  other  feelings  which  regulate  human  actions.  Thus,  he
says  that  both  ambition  and  friendship  are  entirely  the  work  of  physical  sensi-
bility. Men  yearn  after  fame,  on  account  either  of  the  pleasure  which  they
expect  the  mere  possession  of  it  will  give,  or  else  as  the  means  of  subsequently
procuring  other  pleasures.85  As  to  friendship,  the  only  use  of  it  is  to  increase
our  pleasures  or  mitigate  our  pains  ;  and  it  is  with  this  object  that  a  man  longs
to  hold  communion  with  his  friend.86  Beyond  this,  life  has  nothing  to  offer.
To  love  what  is  good  for  the  sake  of  the  goodness,  is  as  impossible  as  to  love  what
is  bad  for  the  sake  of  the  evil.87  The  mother  who  weeps  for  the  loss  of  her  child
is  solely  actuated  by  selfishness  ;  she  mourns  because  a  pleasure  is  taken  from
her,  and  because  she  sees  a  void  difficult  to  fill  up.88  So  it  is  that  the  loftiest
virtues  as  well  as  the  meanest  vices  are  equally  caused  by  the  pleasure  we  find
in  the  exercise  of  them.89  This  is  the  great  mover  and  originator  of  all.  Every-
thing that  we  have,  and  everything  that  we  are,  we  owe  to  the  external  world  ;
nor  is  Man  himself  aught  else  except  what  he  is  made  by  the  objects  which  sur-
round him.90

The  views  put  forward  in  this  celebrated  work  I  have  stated  at  some  length  ;
not  so  much  on  account  of  the  ability  with  which  they  are  advocated,  as  on
account  of  the  clue  they  furnish  to  the  movements  of  a  most  remarkable  age.
Indeed,  so  completely  did  they  harmonize  with  the  prevailing  tendencies  that
they  not  only  quickly  obtained  for  their  author  a  vast  European  reputation,91
but  during  many  years  they  continued  to  increase  in  influence,  and  in  France
in  particular  they  exercised  great  sway.92  As  that  was  the  country  in  which

83  "  Ne  sensible  a  la  douleur  et  au  plaisir,  c'est  a  la  sensibilite  physique  que  1'homme
doit  ses  passions  ;  et  a  ses  passions,  qu'il  doit  tous  ses  vices  et  toutes  ses  vertus."     Ibid.
vol.  ii.  p.  53  ;  and  see  vol.  i.  p.  239.

84  "  Une  fois  parvenu  a  cette-verite,  je  decouvre  facilement  la  source  des  vertus  hu-
maines  ;  je  vois  que  sans  la  sensibilite  a  la  douleur  et  au  plaisir  physique,  les  homines,
sans  desirs,  sans  passions,  egalement  indifferents  a  tout,  n'eussent  point  connu  d'interet
personnel ;  que  sans  interet  personnel  ils  ne  se  fussent  point  rassembles  en  societe,  n'eus-
sent point  fait  entr'eux  de  conventions,  qu'il  n'y  eut  point  eu  d'interet  general,  par
consequent  point  d' actions  justes  ou  injustes  ;  et  qu'aiiisi  la  sensibilite  physique  et
rinteret  personnel  ont  ete  les  auteurs  de  toute  justice."     Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  278.

85  De  r Esprit,  vol.  ii.  pp.  19,  20,  30,  34,  293,  294,  318.     Compare  Epicurus,  in  Diog.
Laert.  de  Vit.  Philos.  lib.  x.  seg.  120,  vol.  i.  p.  654.

86  De  I' Esprit,  vol.  ii.  p.  45.     He  sums  up  :  "  il  s'ensuit  que  1'amitie,  ainsi  que  1'avarice,
1'orgueil,  1' ambition  et  les  autres  passions,  est  1'effet  immediat  de  la  sensibilite  physique."

87  "  II  lui  est  aussi  impossible  d' aimer  le  bien  pour  le  bien,  que  d' aimer  le  mal  pour
le  mal."     Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  73.

88  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  249.  S9  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  58.

90  "  Nous  sommes  uniquement  ce  que  nous  font  les  objets  qui  nous  environnent."  Ibid.
vol.  ii.  p.  306.

31  Saint  Surin,  a  zealous  opponent  of  Helvetius,  admits  that  "  les  etrangers  les  plus
eminents  par  leurs  dignites  ou  par  leurs  lumieres,  desiraient  d'etre  introduits  chez  un
philosophe  dont  le  nom  retentissait  dans  toute  1'Europe."  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xx.  p.  33.

>2  Brissot  (Memoir  es,  vol.  i.  p.  339)  says,  that  in  1775,  "  le  systeme  d'Helvetius  avait
alors  la  plus  grande  vogue."  Turgot,  who  wrote  against  it,  complains  that  it  was  praised


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  491

they  arose,  so  also  was  it  the  country  to  which  they  were  best  adapted.  Madame
Dudeffand,  who  passed  her  long  life  in  the  midst  of  French  society,  and  was  one
of  the  keenest  observers  of  her  time,  has  expressed  this  with  great  happiness.
The  work  of  Helvetius,  she  says,  is  popular,  since  he  is  the  man  who  has  told  to
all  their  own  secret.93

True  it  v/as  that  to  the  contemporaries  of  Helvetius  his  views,  notwithstand-
ing their  immense  popularity,  bore  the  appearance  of  a  secret  ;  because  the
connexion  between  them  and  the  general  march  of  events  was  as  yet  but  dimly
perceived.  To  us,  however,  who  after  this  interval  of  time  can  examine  the
question  with  the  resources  of  a  larger  experience,  it  is  obvious  how  such  a  system
met  the  wants  of  an  age  of  which  it  was  the  exponent  and  the  mouthpiece.  That
Helvetius  must  have  carried  with  him  the  sympathies  of  his  countrymen  is  clear,
not  only  from  the  evidence  we  have  of  his  success,  but  also  from  a  more  compre-
hensive view  of  the  general  complexion  of  those  times.  Even  while  he  was  still
pursuing  his  labours,  and  only  four  years  before  he  published  them,  a  work
appeared  in  France  which,  though  displaying  greater  ability  and  possessing  a
higher  influence  than  that  of  Helvetius,  did  nevertheless  point  in  exactly  the
same  direction.  I  allude  to  the  great  metaphysical  treatise  by  Condillac,  in
many  respects  one  of  the  most  remarkable  productions  of  the  eighteenth  century  ;
and  the  authority  of  which,  during  two  generations,  was  so  irresistible  that
without  some  acquaintance  with  it  we  cannot  possibly  understand  the  nature
of  those  complicated  movements  by  which  the  French  Revolution  was  brought
about.

In  I754,94  Condillac  put  forth  his  celebrated  work  on  the  mind,  the  very
title  of  which  was  a  proof  of  the  bias  with  which  it  was  written.  Although  this
profound  thinker  aimed  at  nothing  less  than  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  human
faculties,  and  although  he  is  pronounced  by  a  very  able  but  hostile  critic  to  be
the  only  metaphysician  France  produced  during  the  eighteenth  century,95  still
he  found  it  utterly  impossible  to  escape  *  from  those  tendencies  towards  the
external  which  governed  his  own  age.  The  consequence  was,  that  he  called
his  work  a  "  Treatise  on  Sensations  ;  "  96and  in  it  he  peremptorily  asserts  that
everything  we  know  is  the  result  of  sensation  ;  by  which  he  means  the  effect
produced  on  us  by  the  action  of  the  external  world.  Whatever  may  be  thought
of  the  accuracy  of  this  opinion,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  enforced  with  a
closeness  and  severity  of  reasoning  which  deserves  the  highest  praise.  To
examine,  however,  the  arguments  by  which  his  view  is  supported,  would  lead
to  a  discussion  foreign  to  my  present  object,  which  is  merely  to  point  out  the
relation  between  his  philosophy  and  the  general  temper  of  his  contemporaries.
Without,  therefore,  pretending  to  any  thing  like  a  critical  examination  of  this

"  avec  une  sorte  de  fureur  "  (GEuvres  de  Turgot,  vol.  ix.  p.  297)  ;  and  Georgel  (Memoires,
vol.  ii.  p.  256)  says,  "  ce  livre,  ecrit  avec  un  style  plein  de  chaleur  et  d'images,  se  trouvoit
sur  toutes  les  toilettes."

93  "  D'ailleurs  le  siecle  de  Louis  XV  se  reconnut  dans  1'ouvrage  d'Helvetius,  et  on
prete  a  Mme.  Dudeffand   ce  mot  fin  et  profond :  '  C'est  un  homme  qui  a  dit  le  secret
de  tout  le  monde.'  "     Cousin,  Hist,  de  la  Philos.  I.  serie,  vol.  iii.  p.  201.     Compare  Corresp.
de  Dudeffand,  vol.  i.  p.  xxii.  ;  and  a  similar  sentiment  in  Mem.  de  Roland,  vol.  i.  p.  104.
The  relation  of  Helvetius's  work  to  the  prevailing  philosophy  is  noticed  in  Comic's  Philos.
Pos.  vol.  iii.  pp.  791,  792,  vol.  v.  pp.  744,  745.

94  Biog.  Univ.  vol    ix.  p.  399.

95  "  Condillac  est  le  metaphysicien  francais  du  xviiie  siecle."     Cousin,  Hist,  de  la
Philos.  I.  serie,  vol.  iii.  p.  83.

96  "  Traite  des  Sensations,"  which,  as  M.  Cousin  says,  is,  "  sans  comparaison,  le  chef-
d'oeuvre  de  Condillac."     Hist,  de  la  Philos.  II.  serie,  vol.  ii.  p.  77-

[*  This  mode  of  expression  reverts  to  the  form  of  fallacy  noted  in  Buckle's  allusions
to  "  laws  "  in  his  first  chapter.  It  practically  asserts  an  occult  form  of  causation.
Condillac  was  helping  to  make  a  "  tendency  "  of  his  "  age."  Other  men  opposed  him
in  the  same  age.  Both  sides  developed  from  antecedent  modes  of  thought. — ED.]


492  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

celebrated  book,  I  will  simply  bring  together  the  essential  positions  on  which  it
is  based,  in  order  to  illustrate  the  harmony  between  it  and  the  intellectual  habits
of  the  age  in  which  it  appeared.97

The  materials  from  which  the  philosophy  of  Condillac  was  originally  drawn
were  contained  in  the  great  work  published  by  Locke  about  sixty  years  before
this  time.  But  though  much  of  what  was  most  essential  was  borrowed  from  the
English  philosopher,  there  was  one  very  important  point  in  which  the  disciple
differed  from  his  master.  And  this  difference  is  strikingly  characteristic  of  the
direction  which  the  French  intellect  was  now  taking.  Locke,  with  some  looseness
of  expression,  and  possibly  with  some  looseness  of  thought,  had  asserted  the
separate  existence  of  a  power  of  reflection,  and  had  maintained  that  by  means
of  that  power  the  products  of  sensation  became  available.98  Condillac,  moved
by  the  prevailing  temper  of  his  own  time,  would  not  hear  of  such  a  distinction.
He,  like  most  of  his  contemporaries,  was  jealous  of  any  claim  which  increased
the  authority  of  the  internal,  and  weakened  that  of  the  external.  He  therefore
altogether  rejects  the  faculty  of  reflection  as  a  source  of  our  ideas  ;  and  this
partly  because  it  is  but  the  channel  through  which  ideas  run  from  the  senses,
and  partly  because  in  its  origin  it  is  itself  a  sensation.99  Therefore,  according
to  him,  the  only  question  is  as  to  the  way  in  which  our  contact  with  nature
supplies  us  with  ideas.  For  in  this  scheme  the  faculties  of  man  are  solely  caused
by  the  operation  of  his  senses.  The  judgments  which  we  form  are,  says  Condillac,
often  ascribed  to  the  hand  of  the  Deity  ;  a  convenient  mode  of  reasoning,  which
has  only  arisen  from  the  difficulty  of  analyzing  them.100  By  considering  how
our  judgments  actually  arise,  we  can  alone  remove  these  obscurities.  The  fact
is  that  the  attention  we  give  to  an  object  is  nothing  but  the  sensation  which
that  object  excites  ; 101  and  what  we  call  abstract  ideas  are  merely  different
ways  of  being  attentive.102  Ideas  being  thus  generated,  the  subsequent  process
is  very  simple.  To  attend  to  two  ideas  at  the  same  time,  is  to  compare  them  ;
so  that  comparison  is  not  a  result  of  attention,  but  is  rather  the  attention  itself.103
This  at  once  gives  us  the  faculty  of  judging,  because  directly  we  institute  a
comparison,  we  do  of  necessity  form  a  judgment.104  Thus,  too,  memory  is
a  transformed  sensation  ; 105  while  the  imagination  is  nothing  but  memory,  which,
being  carried  to  its  highest  possible  vivacity,  makes  what  is  absent  appear  to


97  On  the  immense  influence  of  Condillac,  compare  Renouard,  Hist,  de  la  Medecine,
vol.  ii.  p.  355  ;    Cuvier,  Eloges,  vol.  iii.  p.  387  ;   Broussais,  Cours  de  Phrenologie,  pp.  45,
68-71,  829  ;   Pinel,  Alien.  Mentale,  p.  94  ;  Brown's  Philos.  of  the  Mind,  p.  212.

98  Whether  or  not  Locke  held  that  reflection  is  an  independent  as  well  as  a  separate
faculty  is  uncertain  ;  because  passages  could  be  quoted  from  his  writings  to  prove  either
the  affirmative  or  the  negative  ;   Dr.  Whewell  justly  remarks  that  Locke  uses  the  word
so  vaguely  as  to  "  allow  his  disciples  to  make  of  his  doctrines  what  they  please."     History
of  Moral  Philosophy,  1852,  p.  71.

99  "  Locke  distingue  deux  sources  de  nos  idees,  les  sens  et  la  reflexion.     II  seroit  plus
exact  de  n'en  reconnoitre  qu'une,  soit  parceque  la  reflexion  n'estdans  son  principe  que
la  sensation  meme,  soit  parcequ'elle  est  moins  la  source  des  idees,  que  le  canal  par  lequel
elles  decoulent  des  sens."     Condillac,  Traite  des  Sensations,  p.  13  ;   see  also,  at  pp.  19,
216,  the  way  in  which  sensation  becomes  reflection  ;    and  the  summing  up,  at  p.  416,
"  que  toutes  nos  connoissances  viennent  des  sens,  et  particulierement  du  toucher."

100  He  says  of  Malebranche   (Traite  des  Sensations,  p.  312),  "  ne  pouvant  comprendre
comment  nous  formerions  nous-memes  ces  jugemens,  il  les  attribue  a  Dieu  ;    manic-re
de  raisonner  fort  commode,  et  presque  toujours  la  ressource  des  philosophies. "

101  "  Mais  a  peine  j'arrete  la  vue  sur  un  objet,  que  les  sensations  particulieres  que
j'en  recois  sont  1'attention  meme  que  je  lui  donne."     Traite  des  Sensations,  p.  16.

102  "  >je  sont  que  differentes  manieres  d'etre  attentif."    p.  122.

103  "  £)es  qu'ii  y  a  double  attention,  il  y  a  comparaison  ;  car  etre  attentif  a  deux  idees
ou  les  comparer,  c'est  la  meme  chose."  p.  17.

104  "  DCS  qu'il  y  a  comparaison,  il  y  a  jugement."  p.  65.

105  "  La  memoire  n'est  done  que  la  sensation  transformee."  p.  17.     Compare  p.  61.


PROXIMATE    CAUSES    OF   THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION     493

be  present.106  The  impressions  we  receive  from  the  external  world  being
therefore  not  the  cause  of  our  faculties,  but  being  the  faculties  themselves,*
the  conclusion  to  which  we  are  driven  is  inevitable.  It  follows,  says  Condillac,
that  in  man  nature  is  the  beginning  of  all  ;  that  to  nature  we  owe  the  whole  of
our  knowledge  ;  that  we  only  instruct  ourselves  according  to  her  lessons  ;  and
that  the  entire  art  of  reasoning  consists  in  continuing  the  work  which  she  has
appointed  us  to  perform.107

It  is  so  impossible  to  mistake  the  tendency  of  these  views  that  I  need  not
attempt  to  estimate  their  result  otherwise  than  by  measuring  the  extent  to
which  they  were  adopted.  Indeed,  the  zeal  with  which  they  were  now  carried
into  every  department  of  knowledge  can  only  surprise  those  who,  being  led  by
their  habits  of  mind  to  study  history  in  its  separate  fragments,  have  not  accus-
tomed themselves  to  consider  it  as  an  united  whole,  and  who  therefore  do  not
perceive  that  in  every  great  epoch  there  is  some  one  idea  at  work  which  is
more  powerful  than  any  other,  and  which  shapes  the  events  of  the  time  and
determines  their  ultimate  issue.  In  France,  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth
century,  this  idea  was,  the  inferiority  of  the  internal  to  the  external.  It  was
this  dangerous  but  plausible  principle  which  drew  the  attention  of  men  from
the  church  to  the  state  ;  |  which  was  seen  in  Helvetius,  the  most  celebrated  of
the  French  moralists,  and  in  Condillac,  the  most  celebrated  of  the  French  meta-
physicians. It  was  this  same  principle  which,  by  increasing,  if  I  may  so  say,
the  reputation  of  Nature,  induced  the  ablest  thinkers  to  devote  themselves  to
a  study  of  her  laws,  and  to  abandon  those  other  pursuits  which  had  been  popular
in  the  preceding  age.  In  consequence  of  this  movement,  such  wonderful  addi-
tions were  made  to  every  branch  of  physical  science  that  more  new  truths
concerning  the  external  world  were  discovered  in  France  during  the  latter  half
of  the  eighteenth  century  than  during  all  the  previous  periods  put  together.
The  details  of  these  discoveries,  so  far  as  they  have  been  subservient  to  the
general  purposes  of  civilization,  will  be  related  in  another  place  ;  at  present  I
will  indicate  only  the  most  prominent,  in  order  that  the  reader  may  understand
the  course  of  the  subsequent  argument,  and  may  see  the  connexion  between
them  and  the  French  Revolution.

Taking  a  general  view  of  the  external  world,  we  may  say  that  the  three  most
important  forces  by  which  the  operations  of  nature  are  effected  are  heat,  light,
and  electricity  ;  including  under  this  last  magnetic  and  galvanic  phenomena.
On  all  these  subjects  the  French,  for  the  first  time,  now  exerted  themselves
with  signal  success.  In  regard  to  heat,  not  only  were  the  materials  for  subse-
quent induction  collected  with  indefatigable  industry,  but  before  that  generation

1W  "  L'imagination  est  la  memoire  meme,  parvenue  a  toute  la  vivacite  dont  elle  est
susceptible."  p.  78.  "  Or  j'ai  appele  imagination  cette  memoire  vive,  qui  fait  paroitre
present  ce  qui  est  absent."  p.  245.

107  "  II  resulte  de  cette  verite,  que  la  nature  commence  tout  en  nous  :  aussi  ai-je
demon  tre  que,  dans  le  principe  ou  dans  le  commencement,  nos  connoissances  sont  unique  -
ment  son  ouvrage,  que  nous  ne  nous  instruisons  que  d'apres  ses  lecons,  et  que  tout  1'art
de  raisonner  consiste  a  continuer  comme  elle  nous  a  fait  commencer."  p.  178.

[*  Condillac  did  not,  as  Buckle  represents,  first  say  that  the  "  faculties  of  man  are  solely
caused  by  the  operation  of  his  senses,"  and  then  that  his  "  impressions  "  are  "  the  faculties
themselves."  The  line  of  analysis  he  followed  excluded  such  propositions.  His  own
words  must  be  taken  for  his  positions. — ED.]

[f  In  terms  of  the  previous  exposition,  there  was  no  recognition  whatever  of  the
"  inferiority  "  here  alleged,  but  a  denial  of  the  old  distinction.  And  as  the  attention
of  men  was  not  thus  drawn  from  the  church  to  the  State  (the  men  who  so  changed  their
attitude  being  the  believers  and  not  the  unbelievers)  the  theorem  once  more  collapses.
But  when  we  further  remember  that  it  was  believers  who  made  a  political  revolution
in  England  in  the  previous  century,  and  that  believers  like  Boyle  and  Newton  had
there  done  scientific  work  in  the  next  generation,  the  line  of  inference  followed  by  Buckle
is  seen  to  have  been  doubly  arbitrary. — ED.]


494  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

passed  away,  the  induction  was  actually  made  ;  for  while  the  laws  of  its  radiation
were  worked  out  by  Prevost,108  those  of  its  conduction  were  established  by
Fourier,  who,  just  before  the  Revolution,  employed  himself  in  raising  thermotics
to  a  science  by  the  deductive  application  of  that  celebrated  mathematical  theory
which  he  contrived,  and  which  still  bears  his  name.109  In  regard  to  electricity
it  is  enough  to  notice,  during  the  same  period,  the  important  experiments  of
D'Alibard,  followed  by  those  vast  labours  of  Coulomb  which  brought  electrical
phenomena  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  mathematics,  and  thus  completed
what  CEpinus  had  already  prepared.110  As  to  the  laws  of  light,  those  ideas
were  now  accumulating  which  rendered  possible  the  great  steps  that,  at  the
close  of  the  century,  were  taken  by  Malus,  and  still  later  by  Fresnel.111  Both
of  these  eminent  Frenchmen  not  only  made  important  additions  to  our  know-
ledge of  double  refraction,  but  Malus  discovered  the  polarization  of  light,*
undoubtedly  the  most  splendid  contribution  received  by  optical  science  since
the  analysis  of  the  solar  rays.112  It  was  also  in  consequence  of  this  that  Fresnel
began  those  profound  researches  which  placed  on  a  solid  basis  that  great  undu-
latory  theory  of  which  Hooke,  Huygens,  and  above  all  Young,  are  to  be  deemed
the  founders,  and  by  which  the  corpuscular  theory  of  Newton  was  finally  over-
thrown.113

Thus  much  as  to  the  progress  of  French  knowledge  respecting  those  parts

108  Compare  Powell  on  Radiant  Heat,  p.  261,  in  Second  Rep.  of  Brit.  Assoc.  ;  WhcwelVs
History  of  Sciences,  vol.  ii.  p.  526  ;    and  his  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  pp.  339,  340.     Prevost
was  professor  at  Geneva  ;  but  his  great  views  were  followed  up  in  France  by  Dulong  and
Petit ;   and  the  celebrated  theory  of  dew  by  Dr.  Wells  is  merely  an  application  of  them.
HerscheVs  Nat.  Philosophy,  pp.  163,  315,  316.     Respecting  the  further  prosecution  of
these  inquiries,  and  our  present  knowledge  of  radiant  heat,  see  Liebig  and  Kopp's  Reports,
vol.  i.  p.  79,  vol.  hi.  p.  30,  vol.  iv.  p.  45.

109  On   Fourier's  mathematical   theory  of  conduction,   see   Comte,   Philos.   Positive,
vol.  i.  pp.  142,  175,  345,  346,  351,  vol.  ii.  pp.  453,  551  ;    Proufs  Bridgewater  Treatise,
pp.  203,  204  ;    Kelland  on  Heat,  p.  6,  in  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1841  ;    Erman's  Siberia,  vol.  i.
p.  243  ;  Humboldfs  Cosmos,  vol.  i.  p.  169  ;  Hitchcock's  Geology,  p.  198  ;  Pouillet,  Elemens
de  Physique,  ii.  696,  697.

110  Coulomb's  memoirs  on  electricity  and  magnetism  were  published  from  1782  to
1789.     Fifth  Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.  p.  4.     Compare  Liebig  and  Kopp's  Reports,  vol.  iii.
p.  128  ;  and  on  his  relation  to  CEpinus,  who  wrote  in  1759,  see  WhcwelVs  Indue.  Sciences,
vol.  iii.  pp.  24-26,  35,  36,  and  Hauy,  Traite  de  Mineralogie,  vol.  iii.  p.  44,  vol.  iv.  p.  14.
There  is  a  still  fuller  account  of  what  was  effected  by  Coulomb  in  M.  Pouillet's  able  work,
Elemens  de  Physique,  vol.  i.  part  ii.  pp.  63-79,  130-135.

111  Fresnel  belongs  to  the  present  century  ;    but  M.  Biot  says  that  the  researches  of
Malus  began   before  the  passage  of   the  Rhine  in  1797.     Biofs  Life  of  Malus,  in  Biog.
Univ.  vol.  xx vi.  p.  412.

112  Pouillet,  Elemens  de  Physique,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  pp.  484,  514  ;   Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.
for  1832,  p.  314  ;    Leslie's   Nat.    Philos.    p.    83  ;    WhewelVs   Hist,    of   Sciences,    vol.   ii.
pp.  408-410  ;  Philos.  of  Sciences,  vol.  i.  p.  350,  vol.  ii.  p.  25  ;  HerscheVs  Nat.  Philos.  p.  258.

113  The  struggle  between  these  rival  theories,  and  the  ease  with  which  a  man  of  such
immense  powers  as  Young  was  put  down,  and  as  it  were  suppressed,  by  those  ignorant
pretenders  who  presumed  to  criticize  him,  will  be  related  in  another  part  of  this  work,
as  a  valuable  illustration  of  the  history  and  habits  of  the  English  mind.     At  present  the
controversy  is  finished,  so  far  as  the  advocates  of   emission  are  concerned  ;    but  there
are  still  difficulties  on  the  other  side,  which  should  have  prevented  Dr.  Whewell  from
expressing  himself  with  such  extreme  positiveness  on  an  unexhausted  subject.     This
able  writer  says  :   "  The  undulatory  theory  of  light ;   the  only  discovery  which  can  stand
by  the  side  of  the  theory  of  universal  gravitation,  as  a  doctrine  belonging  to  the  same
order,  for  its  generality,  its  fertility,  and  its  certainty."     WhewelVs  Hist,  of  the  Indue.
Sciences,  vol.  ii.  p.  425  ;   see  also  p.  508.

'  [*  Read  "  polarization  of  light  by  reflexion."  See  Buckle's  letter  to  Sir  C.  Wheatstone,
in  Mr.  Huth's  Life,  i.  148. — ED.]


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  495

of  nature  which  are  in  themselves  invisible,  and  of  which  we  cannot  tell  whether
they  have  a  material  existence,  or  whether  they  are  mere  conditions  and  pro-
perties of  other  bodies.114  The  immense  value  of  these  discoveries,  as  increasing
the  number  of  known  truths,  is  incontestable  :  but  at  the  same  time  another
class  of  discoveries  was  made,  which,  dealing  more  palpably  with  the  visible
world,  and  being  also  more  easily  understood,  produced  more  immediate  results,
and,  as  I  shall  presently  show,  exercised  a  remarkable  influence  in  strengthening
that  democratic  tendency  which  accompanied  the  French  Revolution.  It  is.
impossible,  within  the  limits  I  have  assigned  to  myself,  to  give  anything  like
an  adequate  notion  of  the  marvellous  activity  with  which  the  French  now  pushed
their  researches  into  every  department  of  the  organic  and  inorganic  world  ;
still  it  is,  I  think,  practicable  to  compress  into  a  few  pages  such  a  summary  of
the  more  salient  points  as  will  afford  the  reader  some  idea  of  what  was  done  by
that  generation  of  great  thinkers  which  flourished  in  France  during  the  latter
half  of  the  eighteenth  century.

If  we  confine  our  view  to  the  globe  we  inhabit,  it  must  be  allowed  that  chemistry
and  geology  are  the  two  sciences  which  not  only  offer  the  fairest  promise,  but
already  contain  the  largest  generalizations.  The  reason  of  this  will  become
clear  if  we  attend  to  the  ideas  on  which  these  two  great  subjects  are  based.  The
idea  of  chemistry  is  the  study  of  composition  ;  115  the  idea  of  geology  is  the  study
of  position.  The  object  of  the  first  is  to  learn  the  laws  which  govern  the  pro-
perties of  matter  ;  the  object  of  the  second  is  to  learn  the  laws  which  govern
its  locality.*  In  chemistry  we  experiment  ;  in  geology  we  observe.  In  chemistry
we  deal  with  the  molecular  arrangement  of  the  smallest  atoms  ; 116  in  geology
with  the  cosmological  arrangement  of  the  largest  masses.  Hence  it  is  that  the
chemist  by  his  minuteness,  and  the  geologist  by  his  grandeur,  touch  the  two
extremes  of  the  material  universe  ;  and,  starting  from  these  opposite  points,
have,  as  I  could  easily  prove,  a  constantly  increasing  tendency  to  bring  under
their  own  authority  sciences  which  have  at  present  an  independent  existence,
and  which,  for  the  sake  of  a  division  of  labour,  it  is  still  convenient  to  study
separately  ;  though  it  must  be  the  business  of  philosophy,  properly  so  called,
to  integrate  them  into  a  complete  and  effective  whole.  Indeed  it  is  obvious
that  if  we  knew  all  the  laws  of  the  composition  of  matter,  and  likewise
all  the  laws  of  its  position,  we  should  likewise  know  all  the  changes  of
which  matter  is  capable  spontaneously,  that  is,  when  uninterrupted  by  the
mind  of  man.  Every  phenomenon  which  any  given  substance  presents  must
be  caused  either  by  something  taking  place  in  the  substance,  or  else  by  some-
thing taking  place  out  of  it,  but  acting  upon  it  ;  while  what  occurs  within  must
be  explicable  by  its  own  composition,  and  what  occurs  without  must  be  due

its  position  in  relation  to  the  objects  by  which  it  is  affected.     This  is  an  ex-

114  As  to  the  supposed  impossibility  of  conceiving  the  existence  of  matter  without  pro-
f  arties  which  give  rise  to  forces  (note  in  Pagefs  Lectures  on  Pathology,  1853,  vol.  i.  p.  61),
there  are  two  reasons  which  prevent  me  from  attaching  much  weight  to  it.  First,  a
conception  which  in  one  stage  of  knowledge  is  called  impossible  becomes  in  a  later
stage  perfectly  easy,  and  so  natural  as  to  be  often  termed  necessary.  Secondly,  however
indissoluble  the  connexion  may  appear  between  force  and  matter,  it  was  not  found  fatal
to  the  dynamical  theory  of  Leibnitz  ;  it  has  not  prevented  other  eminent  thinkers  from
holding  similar  views  ;  and  the  arguments  of  Berkeley,  though  constantly  attacked,
have  never  been  refuted.

Every  chemical  decomposition  being  only  a  new  form  of  composition.  Robin  el
Verdeil,  Chimie  Anatomique,  vol.  i.  pp.  455,  456,  498  :  "  de  tout  cela  il  resulte,  que  la
dissolution  est  un  cas  particulier  des  combinaisons."

116  What  is  erroneously  called  the  atomic  theory  is,  properly  speaking,  an  hypothesis,
and  not  a  theory  :  but  hypothesis  though  it  be,  it  is  by  its  aid  that  we  wield  the  doctrine
of  definite  proportions,  the  corner-stone  of  chemistry.

[*  This  definition  is  obviously  imperfect.  Air  is  part  of  the  "  matter  "  of  chemistry,
but  not  of  geology. — ED-]


496  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

haustive  statement  of  every  possible  contingency,  and  to  one  of  these  two  classes
of  laws  everything  must  be  referrible  ;  even  those  mysterious  forces  which,
whether  they  be  emanations  from  matter,  or  whether  they  be  merely  properties
of  matter,  must  in  an  ultimate  analysis  depend  either  on  the  internal  arrange-
ment or  else  on  the  external  locality  of  their  physical  antecedents.  However
convenient,  therefore,  it  may  be,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  to  speak
of  vital  principles,  imponderable  fluids,  and  elastic  aethers,  such  terms  can  only
be  provisional,  and  are  to  be  considered  as  mere  names  for  that  residue  of  unex-
plained facts  which  it  will  be  the  business  of  future  ages  to  bring  under
generalizations  wide  enough  to  cover  and  include  the  whole.

These  ideas  of  composition  and  of  position  being  thus  the  basis  of  all  natural
science,  it  is  not  surprising  that  chemistry  and  geology,  which  are  their  best,
but  still  their  insufficient  representatives,  should  in  modern  times  have  made
more  progress  than  any  other  of  the  great  branches  of  human  knowledge.  Al-
though the  chemists  and  geologists  have  not  yet  risen  to  the  full  height  of  their
respective  subjects,117  there  are  few  things  more  curious  than  to  note  the  way
in  which,  during  the  last  two  generations,  they  have  been  rapidly  expanding
their  views, — encroaching  on  topics  with  which,  at  first  sight,  they  appeared
to  have  no  concern, — making  other  branches  of  inquiry  tributary  to  their  own, —
and  collecting  from  every  quarter  that  intellectual  wealth  which,  long  hidden
in  obscure  corners,  had  been  wasted  in  the  cultivation  of  special  and  inferior
pursuits.  This,  as  being  one  of  the  great  intellectual  characteristics  of  the  present
age,  I  shall  hereafter  examine  at  considerable  length  ;  but  what  I  have  now
to  show  is  that  in  these  two  vast  sciences,  which,  though  still  very  imperfect,
must  eventually  be  superior  to  all  others,  the  first  important  steps  were  made
by  Frenchmen  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.

That  we  owe  to  France  the  existence  of  chemistry  as  a  science  will  be  admitted
by  every  one  who  uses  the  word  science  in  the  sense  in  which  alone  it  ought  to
be  understood,  namely,  as  a  body  of  generalizations  so  irrefragably  true  that,
though  they  may  be  subsequently  covered  by  higher  generalizations,  they  cannot
be  overthrown  by  them  ;  in  other  words,  generalizations  which  may  be  absorbed,
but  not  refuted.  In  this  point  of  view,  there  are  in  the  history  of  chemistry
only  three  great  stages.  The  first  stage  was  the  destruction  of  the  phlogistic
theory,  and  the  establishment,  upon  its  ruins,  of  the  doctrines  of  oxidation,
combustion  and  respiration.  The  second  stage  was  the  establishment  of  the
principle  of  definite  proportions,  and  the  application  to  it  of  the  atomic
hypothesis.  The  third  stage,  above  which  we  have  not  yet  risen,  consists  in
the  union  of  chemical  and  electrical  laws,  and  in  the  progress  we  are  making
towards  fusing  into  one  generalization  their  separate  phenomena.  Which  of
these  three  stages  was  in  its  own  age  the  most  valuable  is  not  now  the  question  ;
but  it  is  certain  that  the  first  of  them  was  the  work  of  Lavoisier,  by  far  the
greatest  of  the  French  chemists.  Before  him  several  important  points  had
been  cleared  up  by  the  English  chemists,  whose  experiments  ascertained  the
existence  of  bodies  formerly  unknown.  The  links,  however,  to  connect  the
facts  were  still  wanting  ;  and  until  Lavoisier  entered  the  field  there  were  no
generalizations  wide  enough  to  entitle  chemistry  to  be  called  a  science  ;  or,  to
speak  more  properly,  the  only  large  generalization  commonly  received  was  that
by  Stahl,  which  the  great  Frenchman  proved  to  be  not  only  imperfect  but
altogether  inaccurate.  A  notice  of  the  vast  discoveries  of  Lavoisier  will  be  found
in  many  well-known  books  : 118  it  is  enough  to  say  that  he  not  only  worked
out  the  laws  of  the  oxidation  of  bodies  and  of  their  combustion,  but  that  he  is


117  Many  of  them  being  still  fettered,  in  geology,  by  the  hypothesis  of  catastrophes  ;
in  chemistry,  by  the  hypothesis  of  vital  forces.

118  See,  for  instance,  Cuvier,  Progres  des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  pp.  32-34,  40  ;  Liebig's  Letters
on  Chemistry,  p.  282  ;    Turner's  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  pp.  184,  185  ;  Brande's  Chemistry,
vol.  i.  pp.  Ixxxv.-lxxxix.  302  ;   Thomson's  Animal  Chemistry,  pp.  520,  634,  and  a  great
part  of  the  second  volume  of  his  History  of  Chemistry  ;    also  Mutter's  Physiol,  vol,  i,
PP-  90,  323-


PROXIMATE   CAUSES    OF   THE   FRENCH    REVOLUTION     497

the  author  of  the  true  theory  of  respiration,  the  purely  chemical  character  of
which  he  first  demonstrated  ;  thus  laying  the  foundation  of  those  views  respecting
the  functions  of  food  which  the  German  chemists  subsequently  developed,
and  which,  as  I  have  proved  in  the  second  chapter  of  this  Introduction,  may  be
applied  to  solve  some  great  problems  in  the  history  of  Man.  The  merit  of  this
was  so  obviously  due  to  France,  that  though  the  system  now  established
was  quickly  adopted  in  other  countries,119  it  received  the  name  of  the  French
chemistry.120  At  the  same  time,  the  old  nomenclature  being  full  of  old  errors,
a  new  one  was  required,  and  here  again  France  took  the  initiative  ;  since  this
great  reformation  was  begun  by  four  of  her  most  eminent  chemists,  who  flourished
only  a  few  years  before  the  Revolution.121

While  one  division  of  the  French  thinkers  was  reducing  to  order  the  apparent
irregularities  of  chemical  phenomena,  another  division  of  them  was  performing
precisely  the  same  service  for  geology.  The  first  step  towards  popularizing  this
noble  study  was  taken  by  Buffon,  who  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century
broached  a  geological  theory  which,  though  not  quite  original,  excited  attention
by  its  eloquence,  and  by  the  lofty  speculations  with  which  he  connected  it.122
This  was  followed  by  the  more  special  but  still  important  labours  of  Rouelle,
Desmarest,  Dolomieu,  and  Montlosier,  who  in  less  than  forty  years  effected  a
complete  revolution  in  the  ideas  of  Frenchmen,  by  familiarizing  them  with  the
strange  conception  that  the  surface  of  our  planet,  even  where  it  appears  per-
fectly stable,  is  constantly  undergoing  most  extensive  changes.  It  began  to
be  understood  that  this  perpetual  flux  takes  place  not  only  in  those  parts  of
nature  which  are  obviously  feeble  and  evanescent,  but  also  in  those  which  seem
to  possess  every  element  t>f  strength  and  permanence,  such  as  the  mountains
of  granite  which  wall  the  globe,  and  are  the  shell  and  encasement  in  which  it  is
held.  As  soon  as  the  mind  became  habituated  to  this  notion  of  universal  change,
the  time  was  ripe  for  the  appearance  of  some  great  thinker  who  should  generalize
the  scattered  observations,  and  form  them  into  a  science,  by  connecting  them
with  some  other  department  of  knowledge,  of  which  the  laws,  or  at  all  events
the  empirical  uniformities,  had  been  already  ascertained.

It  was  at  this  point,  and  while  the  inquiries  of  geologists,  notwithstanding
their  value,  were  still  crude  and  unsettled,  that  the  subject  was  taken  up  by


119  According  to  Mr.  Harcourt  (Brit.  Assoc.  Report  for  1839,  p.  10),  Cavendish  has  this
merit,  so  far  as  England  is  concerned  :    "  He,  first  of  all  his  contemporaries,  did  justice
to  the  rival  theory  recently  proposed  by  Lavoisier."

120  "  La  chimie  frangaise."     Thomson's  Hist,  of  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  pp.  101,  130.     On
the  excitement  caused  by  Lavoisier's  views,  see  a  letter  which  Jefferson  wrote  in  Paris
in  1789,  printed  partly  in  Tucker's  Life  of  Jefferson,  vol.  i.  pp.  314,  315  ;   and  at  length
in  Jefferson's  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  pp.  453-455.

121  "  xhe  first  attempt  to  form  a  systematic  chemical  nomenclature  was  made  by
Lavoisier,  Berthollet,  G.  de  Morveau,  and  Fourcroy,  soon  after  the  discovery  of  oxygen
gas."     Turner's  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  127.     Cuvier  (Progres  des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  p.  39)
and  Robin  et  Verdeil  (Chimie  Anatomique,  vol.  i.  pp.  602,  603)  ascribe  the  chief  merit
to  De  Morveau.     Thomson  says  (Hist,  of  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.  133)  :   "  this  new  nomen-
clature very  soon  made  its  way  into  every  part  of  Europe,  and  became  the  common
language  of  chemists,  in  spite  of  the  prejudices  entertained  against  it,  and  the  opposition
which  it  everywhere  met  with."

122  The  famous  central  heat  of  Buffon  is  often  supposed  to  have  been  taken  from
Leibnitz  ;  but  though  it  was  vaguely  taught  by  the  ancients,  the  real  founder  of  the  doc-
trine appears  to  have  been  Descartes.     See  Bordas  Demoulin,  Cartesianisme,  Paris,  1843,
vol.  i.  p-3i2.  There  is  an  unsatisfactory  note  on  this  in  Prichard's  Physical  Hist.vol.  i.p.ioo.
Compare  Experimental  Hist,  of  Cold,  tit.  17,  in  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  308  ;  Brewster's
Life  of  Newton,  vol.  ii.  p.  100.     On  the  central  heat  of  the  Pythagoreans,  see  Tennemann,
Gesch.  der  Philos.  vol.  i.  p.  149  ;    and  as  to  the  central  fire  mentioned  in  the  so-called
Oracles  of  Zoroaster,  see  Beausobre,  Hist,  de  Manichee,  vol.  ii.  p.  152.     But  the  complete
ignorance  of  the  ancients  respecting  geology  made  these  views  nothing  but  guesses.
Compare  some  sensibly  remarks  in  Matter's  Hist,  de  VEcole  d' Alexandrie,  vol.  ii.  p.  282.

32


498  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Cuvier,  one  of  the  greatest  naturalists  Europe  has  ever  produced.  A  few  others
there  are  who  have  surpassed  him  in  depth  ;  but  in  comprehensiveness  it  would
be  hard  to  find  his  superior  ;  and  the  immense  range  of  his  studies  gave  him
a  peculiar  advantage  in  surveying  the  operations  and  dependencies  of  the  external
world.123  This  remarkable  man  is  unquestionably  the  founder  of  geology  as  a
science,  since  he  is  not  only  the  first  who  saw  the  necessity  of  bringing  to  bear
upon  it  the  generalizations  of  comparative  anatomy,  but  he  is  also  the  first  who
actually,  executing  this  great  idea,  succeeded  in  co-ordinating  the  study  of  the
strata  of  the  earth  with  the  study  of  the  fossil  animals  found  in  them.124  Shortly
before  his  researches  were  published,  many  valuable  facts  had  indeed  been  col-
lected respecting  the  separate  strata  ;  the  primary  formations  being  investigated
by  the  Germans,  the  secondary  ones  by  the  English.125  But  these  observations,
notwithstanding  their  merit,  were  isolated  ;  and  they  lacked  that  vast  conception
which  gave  unity  and  grandeur  to  the  whole,  by  connecting  inquiries  concerning
the  inorganic  changes  of  the  surface  of  the  globe  with  other  inquiries  concerning
the  organic  changes  of  the  animals  the  surface  contained.

How  completely  this  immense  step  is  due  to  France,  is  evident  not  only  from
the  part  played  by  Cuvier,  but  also  from  the  admitted  fact  that  to  the  French
we  owe  our  knowledge  respecting  tertiary  strata,126  in  which  the  organic  remains
are  most  numerous,  and  the  general  analogy  to  our  present  state  is  most  in-
timate.127 Another  circumstance  may  likewise  be  added,  as  pointing  to  the
same  conclusion.  This  is,  that  the  first  application  of  the  principles  of  com-
parative anatomy  to  the  study  of  fossil  bones  was  also  the  work  of  a  Frenchman,
the  celebrated  Daubenton.  Hitherto  these  bones  had  been  the  object  of  stupid
wonder  ;  some  saying  that  they  were  rained  from  heaven,  others  saying  that
they  were  the  gigantic  limbs  of  the  ancient  patriarchs,  men  who  were  believed


123  This  comprehensiveness  of  Cuvier  is  justly  remarked  by  M.  Flourens  as  the  leading
characteristic  of  his  mind.     Flourens,  Hist,  des  Travaux  de  Cuvier,  pp.  76,  142,  306  :
"  ce  qui  caracterise  partout  M.  Cuvier,  c'est  1'esprit  vaste."

124  Hence  he  is  called  by  Mr.  Owen,  "  the  founder  of  palaeontological  science."     Owen
on  Fossil  Mammalia,  in  Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1843,  p.  208.     It  was  in  1796  that  there
were  thus  "  opened  to  him  entirely  new  views  of  the  theory  of  the  earth."  p.  209.     See
also  BakewelVs  Geology,  p.  368  ;    and  Milne  Edwards,  Zoologie,  part  ii.  p.  279.     The
importance  of  this  step  is  becoming  more  evident  every  year  ;    and  it  has  been  justly
remarked  that  without   paleontology  there  would  be,  properly  speaking,  no  geology.
Balfour's  Botany,  1849,  p.  591.     Sir  R.  Murchinson  (Siluria,  1854,  p.  366)  says,  "it  is
essentially  the  study  of  organic  remains  which  has  led  to  the  clear  subdivision  of  the
vast  mass  of  older  rocks,  which  were  there  formerly  merged  under  the  unmeaning  term
'  Grauwacke.'  "     In  the  same  able  work,  p.  465,  we  are  told  that,  "  in  surveying  the
whole  series  of  formations,  the  practical  geologist  is  fully  impressed  with  the  conviction
that  there  has  at  all  periods  subsisted  a  very  intimate  connexion  between  the  existence,
or  at  all  events  the  preservation  of  animals,  and  the  media  in  which  they  have  been
fossilized."     For  an  instance  of  this  in  the  old  red  sandstone,  see  p.  329.

125  WhewelVs  Hist,  of  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  p.  679  ;    LyelVs  Geol.  p.  59.     Indeed  gneis
received  its  name  from  the  Germans.     BakewelVs  Geol.  p.  108.

126  Compare  Conybeare's  Report  on  Geology,  p.  371  (Brit.  Assoc.  for  1832),  with  Bake-
well's  Geol.  pp.  367,  368,  419,  and  LyelVs  Geol.  p.  59.

127  In  the  older  half  of  the  secondary  rocks,  mammals  are  hardly  to  be  found,  am
they  do  not  become  common  until  the    tertiary.     Murchison's  Siluria,   pp.  466,  467
and  Strickland  on  Ornithology,  p.  210  (Brit.  Assoc.  for  1844).     So  too  in  the  vegetabl
kingdom,  many  of  the  plants  in  the  tertiary  strata  belong  to  genera  still  existing  ;   but
this  is  rarely  the  case  with  the  secondary  strata  ;   while  in  the  primary  strata  even  the
families  are  different  to  those  now  found  on  the  earth.     Balfour's  Botany,  pp.  592,  593.
Compare  Wilson's  additions  to  Jussieu's  Botany,  1849,  p.  746  ;  and  for  further  illustration
of  this  remarkable  law  of  the  relation  between  advancing  time  and  diminished  similarity,
a  law  suggesting  the  most  curious  speculations,  see  Hitchcock's  Geology,  p.  21  ;    LyelVs
Geology,  p.  183  ;    and  Owen's  Lectures  on  the  Invertebrata,  1855,  pp.  38,  576.


PROXIMATE    CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH    REVOLUTION     499

to  be  tall  because  they  were  known  to  be  old.128  Such  idle  conceits  were  for
ever  destroyed  by  Daubenton,  in  a  Memoir  he  published  in  1762  ; 129  with  which,
however,  we  are  not  now  concerned,  except  that  it  is  evidence  of  the  state  of
the  French  mind,  and  is  worth  noting  as  a  precursor  of  the  discoveries  of  Cuvier.
By  this  union  of  geology  and  anatomy,  there  was  first  introduced  into  the  study
of  nature  a  clear  conception  of  the  magnificent  doctrine  of  universal  change  ;
while  at  the  same  time  there  grew  up  by  its  side  a  conception  equally  steady
of  the  regularity  with  which  the  changes  are  accomplished,  and  of  the  undeviatirig
laws  by  which  they  are  governed.  Similar  ideas  had  no  doubt  been  occasionally
held  in  preceding  ages  ;  but  the  great  Frenchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century
were  the  first  who  applied  them  to  the  entire  structure  of  the  globe,  and  who
thus  prepared  the  way  for  that  still  higher  view  for  which  their  minds  were  not
yet  ripe,130  but  to  which  in  our  own  time  the  most  advanced  thinkers  are  rapidly
rising.  For  it  is  now  beginning  to  be  understood  that  since  every  addition  to
knowledge  affords  fresh  proof  of  the  regularity  with  which  all  the  changes  of
nature  are  conducted,  we  are  bound  to  believe  that  the  same  regularity  existed
long  before  our  little  planet  assumed  its  present  form,  and  long  before  man
trod  the  surface  of  the  earth.  We  have  the  most  abundant  evidence  that  the
movements  incessantly  occurring  in  the  material  world  have  a  character  of
uniformity  ;  and  this  uniformity  is  so  clearly  marked,  that  in  astronomy,  the
most  perfect  of  all  the  sciences,  we  are  able  to  predict  events  many  years  before
they  actually  happen  ;  nor  can  any  one  doubt  that  if  .on  other  subjects  our
science  were  equally  advanced,  our  predictions  would  be  equally  accurate.  It
is  therefore  clear  that  the  burden  of  proof  lies  not  on  those  who  assert  the  eternal
regularity  of  nature,  but  rather  on  those  who  deny  it  ;  and  who  set  up  an
imaginary  period,  to  which  they  assign  an  imaginary  catastrophe,  during  which
they  say  new  laws  were  introduced  and  a  new  order  established.  Such  gratuitous
assumptions,  even  if  they  eventually  turn  out  to  be  true,  are  in  the  present
state  of  knowledge  unwarrantable,  and  ought  to  be  rejected  as  the  last  remains
of  those  theological  prejudices  by  which  the  march  of  every  science  has  in  its
turn  been  hindered.  These  and  all  analogous  notions  work  a  double  mischief.
They  are  mischievous,  because  they  cripple  the  human  mind  by  imposing  limits
to  its  inquiries  ;  and  above  all  they  are  mischievous,  because  they  weaken

128  M.  Geoffrey  Saint  Hilaire  (Anomalies  de  V Organisation,  vol.  i.  pp.  121-127)  has
collected  Some  evidence  respecting  the  opinions  formerly  held  on  these  subjects.  Among
other  instances,  he  mentions  a  learned  man  named  Henrion,  an  academician,  and,  I
suppose,  a  theologian,  who  in  1718  published  a  work  in  which  "  il  assignait  a  Adam
cent  vingt  trois  pieds  neuf  pouces  ;  "  Noah  being  twenty  feet  shorter,  and  so  on.
The  bones  of  elephants  were  sometimes  taken  for  giants  :  see  a  pleasant  circumstance
in  Cuvier,  Hist,  des  Sciences,  part  ii.  p.  43.

"  Daubenton  a  le  premier  detruit  toutes  ces  idees  ;  il  a  le  premier  applique
1' anatomic  comparee  a  la  determination  de  ces  os.  .  .  .  Le  memoire  oii  Daubenton  a
tente,  pour  la  premiere  fois,  la  solution  de  ce  probleme  important  est  de  1762."  Flour  ens,
Travaux  de  Cuvier,  pp.  36,  37.  Agassiz  (Report  on  Fossil  Fishes,  p.  82,  Brit.  Assoc.  for
1842)  claims  this  merit  too  exclusively  for  Cuvier,  overlooking  the  earlier  researches  of
Daubenton  ;  and  the  same  mistake  is  made  in  Hitchcock's  Geol.  p.  249,  and  in  BakewelVs
GeoL  p.  384.

130  Even  Cuvier  held  the  doctrine  of  catastrophes  ;  but,  as  Sir  Charles  Lyell  says
(Principles  of  Geology,  p.  60),  his  own  discoveries  supplied  the  means  of  overthrowing
it,  and  of  familiarizing  us  with  the  idea  of  continuity.  Indeed  it  was  one  of  the  fossil
observations  of  Cuvier  which  first  supplied  the  link  between  reptiles,  fishes,  and  cetaceous
mammals.  See  Owen  on  Fossil  Reptiles,  pp.  60,  198,  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1841  ;  and  compare
Cams' s  Comparative  Anatomy,  vol.  i.  p.  155.  To  this  I  may  add  that  Cuvier  uncon-
sciously prepared  the  way  for  disturbing  the  old  dogma  of  fixity  of  species,  though  he
himself  clung  to  it  to  the  last.  See  some  observations,  which  are  very  remarkable,
considering  the  period  when  they  were  written,  in  Cabanis,  Rapports  du  Physique  et  du
Moral,  pp.  427,  428  ;  conclusions  drawn  from  Cuvier,  which  Cuvier  would  have  himself
rejected.


500  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

that  vast  conception  of  continuous  and  uninterrupted  law,  which  few  indeed
are  able  firmly  to  seize,  but  on  which  the  highest  generalizations  of  future  science
must  ultimately  depend.

It  is  this  deep  conviction  that  changing  phenomena  have  unchanging  laws,
and  that  there  are  principles  of  order  to  which  all  apparent  disorder  may  be
referred, — it  is  this  which,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  guided  in  a  limited
field  Bacon,  Descartes,  and  Newton  ;  which  in  the  eighteenth  century  was  applied
to  every  part  of  the  material  universe  ;  and  which  it  is  the  business  of  the
nineteenth  century  to  extend  to  the  history  of  the  human  intellect.  This  last
department  of  inquiry  we  owe  chiefly  to  Germany  ;  for,  with  the  single  exception
of  Vico,  no  one  even  suspected  the  possibility  of  arriving  at  complete  generaliza-
tions respecting  the  progress  of  man,  until  shortly  before  the  French  Revolution,
when  the  great  German  thinkers  began  to  cultivate  this,  the  highest  and  most
difficult  of  all  studies.  But  the  French  themselves  were  too  much  occupied
with  physical  science  to  pay  attention  to  such  matters  ; 131  and  speaking  generally,
we  may  say  that  in  the  eighteenth  century  each  of  the  three  leading  nations
of  Europe  had  a  separate  part  to  play.  England  diffused  a  love  of  freedom  ;
France,  a  knowledge  of  physical  science  ;  while  Germany,  aided  in  some  degree
by  Scotland,  revived  the  study  of  metaphysics,  and  created  the  study  of  philo-
sophic history.  To  this  classification  some  exceptions  may  of  course  be  made  ;
but  that  these  were  the  marked  characteristics  of  the  three  countries  is  certain.
After  the  death  of  Locke  in  1704,  and  that  of  Newton  in  1727,  there  was  in


131  Neither  Montesquieu  nor  Turgot  appears  to  have  believed  in  the  possibility  of
generalizing  the  past  so  as  to  predict  the  future  ;  while  as  to  Voltaire,  the  weakest
point  in  his  otherwise  profound  view  of  history  was  his  love  of  the  old  saying,  that
great  events  spring  from  little  causes  ;  a  singular  error  for  so  comprehensive  a  mind,
because  it  depended  on  confusing  causes  with  conditions.  That  a  man  like  Voltaire
should  have  committed  what  now  seems  so  gross  a  blunder,  is  a  mortifying  reflection
for  those  who  are  able  to  appreciate  his  vast  and  penetrating  genius,  and  it  may  teach
the  best  of  us  a  wholesome  lesson.  This  fallacy  was  avoided  by  Montesquieu  and  Turgot
and  the  former  writer  in  particular  displayed  such  extraordinary  ability  that  the
can  be  little  doubt  that  had  he  lived  at  a  later  period,  and  thus  had  the  means  of  employ
ing  in  their  full  extent  the  resources  of  political  economy  and  physical  science,  he  woul
have  had  the  honour  not  only  of  laying  the  basis,  but  also  of  rearing  the  structure
the  philosophy  of  the  history  of  Man.  As  it  was,  he  failed  in  conceiving  what  is  the  final
object  of  every  scientific  inquiry,  namely,  the  power  of  foretelling  the  future  ;  and
after  his  death,  in  1755,  all  the  finest  intellects  in  France,  Voltaire  alone  excepted,  con-
centrated their  attention  upon  the  study  of  natural  phenomena.  [Montesquieu  and
Turgot  actually  did  "  predict  the  future  "  in  regard  to  the  severance  of  the  American
colonies  from  Britain  ;  and  Buckle  has  actually  noted  this  in  regard  to  Turgot  (ch.  xiii.
note  144).  As  to  the  question  of  causes  versus  conditions,  see  the  argument  recapitu-
lated in  Mr.  Hulk's  Life  of  Buckle,  ii.  175.  Buckle's  formula,  however,  unduly  simplifies
the  case,  as  it  would  often  be  equally  accurate  to  call  the  conditions  "  great  "  and  the
"  cause  "  small — e.g.  in  the  case  of  a  great  fire  begun  by  a  small  spark,  falling  in  com-
bustible material  and  fanned  by  a  wind.  Schopenhauer  argued  (essay  On  Style)  that  "  to
condition  "  is  the  same  thing  as  "  to  cause."  And  see  above,  ch.  viii.  at  note  22,  Buckle's
specific  admission  as  to  an  "  accident "  introducing  a  "  most  important  change."
As  to  the  statement  in  the  closing  sentence  of  the  above  note,  it  must  be  cancelled.
Rousseau's  Control  Social  and  Emile  appeared  in  1762  ;  and  the  Nouvelle  Heloise
in  1761  ;  the  bulk  of  the  work  of  Diderot,  including  his  writings  on  social  and  historical
questions,  appeared  after  1755  ;  so  did  the  bulk  of  the  work  of  Turgot,  his  chief  economic
writings  being  dated  1766  and  1771  ;  Condorcet  was  only  twenty-two  in  i755»  and
Volney  was  not  born.  One  of  the  most  widely  read  books  of  the  time  was  Raynal's
Histoire  Philosophique  et  politique  .  .  .  des  deux  Indes  (1770),  in  which  Diderot  col-
laborated ;  and  Mably's  Observations  sur  I'histoire  de  France,  praised  by  Buckle,  appeared
in  1765.  The  De  VEsprit  of  Helve tius,* finally,  appeared  in  1758,  and  his  De  VHomme
in  1772.  Before,  Buckle  had  stated  that  after  1750  the  French  intellect  turned  to
political  criticism. — ED.]


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF  THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION     501

England  a  singular  dearth  of  great  speculative  thinkers  ;  and  this  not  because
the  ability  was  wanting,  but  because  it  was  turned  partly  into  practical  pursuits,
partly  into  political  contests.*  I  shall  hereafter  examine  the  causes  of  this
peculiarity,  and  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  extent  to  which  it  has  influenced
the  fortunes  of  the  country.  That  the  results  were  on  the  whole  beneficial,
I  entertain  no  doubt  ;  but  they  were  unquestionably  injurious  to  the  progress
of  science,  because  they  tended  to  divert  it  from  all  new  truths  except  those
likely  to  produce  obvious  and  practical  benefit.  The  consequence  was  that
though  the  English  made  several  great  discoveries,  they  did  not  possess,  during
seventy  years,  a  single  man  who  took  a  really  comprehensive  view  of  the  pheno-
mena of  nature  ;  not  one  who  could  be  compared  with  those  illustrious  thinkers
who  in  France  reformed  every  branch  of  physical  knowledge.  Nor  was  it  until
more  than  two  generations  after  the  death  of  Newton  that  the  first  symptoms
appeared  of  a  remarkable  reaction,  which  quickly  displayed  itself  in  nearly
every  department  of  the  national  intellect.  In  physics,  it  is  enough  to  mention
Dalton,  Davy,  and  Young,  each  of  whom  was  in  his  own  field  the  founder  of  a
new  epoch  ;  while  on  other  subjects  I  can  only  just  refer,  first,  to  the  influence  of
the  Scotch  school ;  and  secondly  to  that  sudden  and  well-deserved  admiration
for  the  German  literature,  of  which  Coleridge  was  the  principal  exponent,  and
which  infused  into  the  English  mind  a  taste  for  generalizations  higher  and  more
fearless  than  any  hitherto  known.  The  history  of  this  vast  movement,  which
began  early  in  the  nineteenth  century,  will  be  traced  in  the  future  volumes  of
this  work  :  at  present  I  merely  notice  it  as  illustrating  the  fact  that  until  the
movement  began,  the  English,  though  superior  to  the  French  in  several  matters
of  extreme  importance,  were  for  many  years  inferior  to  them  in  those  large  and
philosophic  views  without  which  not  only  is  the  most  patient  industry  of  no
avail,  but  even  real  discoveries  lose  their  proper  value,  for  want  of  such  habits
of  generalization  as  would  trace  their  connexion  with  each  other,  and  consolidate
their  severed  fragments  into  one  vast  system  of  complete  and  harmonious  truth.

The  interest  attached  to  these  inquiries  has  induced  me  to  treat  them  at  greater
length  than  I  had  intended  ;  perhaps  at  greater  length  than  is  suitable  to  the
suggestive  and  preparatory  character  of  this  Introduction.  But  the  extraordinary
success  with  which  the  French  now  cultivated  physical  knowledge  is  so  curious,
on  account  of  its  connexion  with  the  Revolution,  that  I  must  mention  a  few  more
of  its  most  prominent  instances  :  though,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  I  will  confine
myself  to  those  three  great  divisions  which,  when  put  together,  form  what  is
called  Natural  History,  and  in  all  of  which  we  shall  see  that  the  most  important
steps  were  taken  in  France  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.

In  the  first  of  these  divisions,  namely,  the  department  of  zoology,  we  owe  to
the  Frenchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century  those  generalizations  which  are  still
the  highest  this  branch  of  knowledge  has  reached.  Taking  zoology  in  the  proper
sense  of  the  term,  it  consists  only  of  two  parts,  the  anatomical  part,  which  is
its  statics,  and  the  physiological  part,  which  is  its  dynamics  :  the  first  referring
to  the  structure  of  animals  ;  the  other  to  their  functions.132  Both  of  these

132  The  line  of  demarcation  between  anatomy  as  statical,  and  physiology  as  dynamical,
is  clearly  drawn  by  M.  Comte  (Philos.  Positive,  vol.  iii.  p.  303)  and  by  MM.  Robin  et
Verdeil  (Chimie  Anatomique,  vol.  i.  pp.  n,  12,  40,  102,  188,  434).  What  is  said  by
Carus  (Comparative  Anatomy,  vol.  ii.  p.  356)  and  by  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  (Lectures  on
Pathology  and  Surgery,  p.  6)  comes  nearly  to  the  same  thing,  though  expressed  with  less
precision.  On  the  other  hand,  M.  Milne  Edwards  (Zoologie,  part  i.  p.  9)  calls  physiology
"  la  science  de  la  vie  ;  "  which,  if  true,  would  simply  prove  that  there  is  no  physiology
at  all,  for  there  certainly  is  at  present  no  science  of  life.

[*  Berkeley  is  here  oddly  overlooked  ;  and  Hume,  though  Scotch,  should  be  included
among  the  great  names  of  English  philosophy.  But  the  admission  is  entirely  accurate
as  regards  the  succession  to  Newton  ;  and^  the  explanation  given  points  to  the  true
account  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.— that  the  national  energy  had  been  turned  into
military  channels. — ED.]


502  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  worked  out,  nearly  at  the  same  time,  by  Cuvier  and  Bichat  ;  and  the
leading  conclusions  at  which  they  arrived  remain,  after  the  lapse  of  sixty  years,
undisturbed  in  their  essential  points.  In  1795,  Cuvier  laid  down  the  great
principle  that  the  study  and  classification  of  animals  was  to  be,  not  as  hereto-
fore, with  a  view  to  external  peculiarities,  but  with  a  view  to  internal  organiza-
tion ;  and  that  therefore  no  real  advance  could  be  made  in  our  knowledge
except  by  extending  the  boundaries  of  comparative  anatomy.133  This  step,
simple  as  it  now  appears,  was  of  immense  importance,  since  by  it  zoology  was
at  once  rescued  from  the  hands  of  the  observer,  and  thrown  into  those  of  the
experimenter  :  the  consequence  of  which  has  been  the  attainment  of  that  pre-
cision and  accuracy  of  detail  which  experiment  alone  can  give,  and  which  is
every  way  superior  to  such  popular  facts  as  observation  supplies.  By  thus
indicating  to  naturalists  the  true  path  of  inquiry,  by  accustoming  them  to  a
close  and  severe  method,  and  by  teaching  them  to  despise  those  vague  descriptions
in  which  they  had  formerly  delighted,  Cuvier  laid  the  foundation  of  a  progress
which  during  the  last  sixty  years  has  surpassed  the  most  sanguine  expectations.
This,  then,  is  the  real  service  rendered  by  Cuvier,  that  he  overthrew  the  artificial
system  which  the  genius  of  Linnasus  had  raised  up,134  and  substituted  in  its
place  that  far  superior  scheme  which  gave  the  freest  scope  to  future  inquiry  :
since  according  to  it  all  systems  are  to  be  deemed  imperfect  and  provisional
so  long  as  anything  remains  to  be  learned  respecting  the  comparative  anatomy
of  the  animal  kingdom.  The  influence  exercised  by  this  great  view  was  increased
by  the  extraordinary  skill  and  industry  with  which  its  proposer  followed  it  out,
and  proved  the  practicability  of  his  own  precepts.  His  additions  to  our  know-
ledge of  comparative  anatomy  are  probably  more  numerous  than  those  made
by  any  other  man  ;  but  what  has  gained  him  most  celebrity  is  the  compre-
hensive spirit  with  which  he  used  what  he  acquired.  Independently  of  other
generalizations,  he  is  the  author  of  that  vast  classification  of  the  whole  animal
kingdom  into  vertebrata,  mollusca,  articulata,  and  radiata  ;  135  a  classification
which  keeps  its  ground,  and  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  instances  of  that
large  and  philosophic  spirit  which  France  brought  to  bear  upon  the  phenomena
of  the  material  world.136

133  In  his  Regne  Animal,  vol.  i.  pp.  vi.  vii.,  he  says  that  preceding  naturalists  "  n'avaient
guere  considere  que  les  rapports  exterieurs  de  ces  especes,  et  personne  ne  s'etait  occupe
de  coordonner  les  classes  et  les  ordres  d'apres  1'ensemble  de  la  structure.    .  .  .    Je  dus
done,  et  cette  obligation  me  prit  un  temps  considerable,  je  dus  faire  marcher  de  front
1'anatomie  et  la  zoologie,  les  dissections  et  le  classement.  .  .  .  Les  premiers  resultats
de  ce  double  travail  parurent  en  1795,  dans  un  memoire  special  sur  une  nouvelle  division
des  animaux  a  sang  blanc."

134  On  the  opposition  between  the  methods  of  Linnaeus  and  of  Cuvier,  see  Jenyns*
Report  on  Zoology,  pp.  144,  145,  in  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1834.

135  The  foundations  of  this  celebrated  arrangement  were  laid  by  Cuvier,  in  a  paper  read
in  1795.     WhewelVs  History  of  the  Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  p.  494.     It  appears,  however
(Flourens,  Travaux  de  Cuvier,  pp.  69,   70),   that  it  was  in  or  just  after  1791    that  the
dissection  of  some  mollusca  suggested  to  him  the  idea  of  reforming  the  classification  of
the  whole  animal  kingdom.     Compare  Cuvier,  Regne  Animal,  vol.  i.  pp.  51,  52  note.

136  The  only  formidable  opposition  made  to  Cuvier's  arrangement  has  proceeded
from  the  advocates  of  the  doctrine  of  circular  progression  :    a  remarkable  theory,  of
which  Lamarck  and  Macleay  are  the  real  originators,  and  which  is  certainly  supported
by  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence.     Still,  among  the  great  majority  of  competent
zoologists,  the  fourfold  division  holds  its  ground,  although  the  constantly-increasing
accuracy  of  microscopical  observations  has  detected  a  nervous  system  much  lower  in
the  scale  than  was  formerly  suspected,  and  has  thereby  induced   some  anatomists   to
divide  the  radiata  into  acrita  and  nematoneura.     Owen's  Invertebrata,  1855,  pp.  14,  15  ;
and  Rymer  Jones's  Animal  Kingdom,  1855,  p.  4.     As,  however,  it  seems  probable  that
all  animals  have  a  distinct  nervous  system,  this  subdivision  is  only  provisional  ;   and  it  is
very  likely  that  when  our  microscopes    are  more    improved  we  shall  have  to  return
to    Cuvier's  arrangement.     Some  of    Cuvier's  successors  have  removed  the  apodous


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION     503

Great,  however,  as  is  the  name  of  Cuvier,  a  greater  still  remains  behind.  I
allude,  of  course,  to  Bichat,  whose  reputation  is  steadily  increasing  as  our  know-
ledge advances,  and  who,  if  we  compare  the  shortness  of  his  life  with  the  reach
and  depth  of  his  views,  must  be  pronounced  the  most  profound  thinker  and  the
most  consummate  observer  by  whom  the  organization  of  the  animal  frame  has
yet  been  studied.137  He  wanted  indeed  that  comprehensive  knowledge  for
which  Cuvier  was  remarkable  ;  but  though  on  this  account  his  generalizations
were  drawn  from  a  smaller  surface,  they  were  on  the  other  hand  less  provisional  ;
they  were,  I  think,  more  complete,  and  certainly  they  dealt  with  more  momentous
topics.  For  the  attention  of  Bichat  was  pre-eminently  directed  to  the  human
frame  138  in  the  largest  sense  of  the  word  ;  his  object  being  so  to  investigate  the
>rganization  of  man  as  to  rise,  if  possible,  to  some  knowledge  concerning  the
tuses  and  nature  of  life.  In  this  magnificent  enterprise,  considered  as  a  whole,
failed  ;  but  what  he  effected  in  certain  parts  of  it  is  so  extraordinary,  and  has
jiven  such  an  impetus  to  some  of  the  highest  branches  of  inquiry,  that  I  will
>riefly  indicate  his  method,  in  order  to  compare  it  with  that  other  method
/hich,  at  the  same  moment,  Cuvier  adopted  with  immense  success.

The  important  step  taken  by  Cuvier  was  that  he  insisted  on  the  necessity
)f  a  comprehensive  study  of  the  organs  of  animals,  instead  of  following  the  old
plan  of  merely  describing  their  habits  and  external  peculiarities.  This  was  a
vast  improvement,  since,  in  the  place  of  loose  and  popular  observations,  he
substituted  direct  experiment,  and  hence  introduced  into  zoology  a  precision
formerly  unknown.139  But  Bichat,  with  a  still  keener  insight,  saw  that  even
this  was  not  enough.  He  saw  that,  each  organ  being  composed  of  different
tissues,  it  was  requisite  to  study  the  tissues  themselves  before  we  could  learn
the  way  in  which,  by  their  combination,  the  organs  are  produced.  This,  like

^hinoderms  from  theradiata  ;  but  in  this  Mr.  Rymer  Jones  (Animal  Kingdom,  p.  211)
'indicates  the  Cuverian  classification.

137  \Ve  may  except  Aristotle  ;  but  between  Aristotle  and  Bichat  I  can  find  no  middle
lan.

138  But  not  exclusively.     M.  Blainville  (Physiol.  comparee,  vol.  ii.  p.  304)  says,  "  celui
uii,  comme  Bichat,  bornait  ses  etudes  a  1'anatomie  humaine  ;  "  and  at  p.  350,  "  quand

ne  considere  que  ce  qui  se  passe  chez  rhomme,  ainsi  que  1'a  fait  Bichat."     This,  how-
ler, is  much  too  positively  stated.     Bichat  mentions  "  les  experiences  nombreuses
jue  j'ai  faites  sur  les  anirnaux  vivans."     Bichat,  Anatomic  Generate,  vol.  i.  p.  332  :   and
>r  other  instances  of  his  experiments  on  animals  below  man,  see  the  same  work,  vol.  i.
>p.  164,  284,  311,  312,  326,  vol.  ii.  pp.  13,  25,  69,  73,  107,  133,  135,  225,  264,  423,  vol.  iii.
).  151,  218,  242,  262,  363,  364,  400,  478,  501,  vol.  iv.  pp.  27,  28,  34,  46,  229,  247,
see  also  Bichat,  Recherches  sur  la  Vie,  pp.  262,  265,  277,  312,  336,  356,  358,  360,
}68,  384,  400,  411,  439,  455,  476,  482,  494,  512  ;    and  his  Traite  des  Membranes,  pp.  48,
I,  67,  130,  158,  196,  201,  224.     These  are  all  experiments  on  inferior  animals,  which
lided  this  great  physiologist  in  establishing  those  vast  generalizations   which,  though
>plied  to  man,  were  by  no  means  collected  merely  from  human  anatomy.     The  impos-
sibility of  understanding  physiology  without  studying    comparative  anatomy  is  well
jointed  out  in  Mr.  Rymer  Jones's  work,  Organization  of  the  Animal  Kingdom,  1855,
)p.  601,  791.

Mr.  Swainson  (Geography  and  Classification  of  Animals,  p.  170)  complains,  strangely
lough,  that  Cuvier  "  rejects  the  more  plain  and  obvious  characters  which  every  one
in  see,  and  which  had  been  so  happily  employed  by  Linnaus,  and  makes  the  differences
itween  these  groups  to  depend  upon  circumstances  which  no  one  but  an  anatomist
in  understand."  See  also  p.  173  :  "  characters  which,  however  good,  are  not  always
iprehensible,  except  to  the  anatomist."  (Compare  Hodgson  on  the  Ornithology  of
Jepal,  in  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xix.  p.  179,  Calcutta,  1836.)  In  other  words,  this  is  a
)mplaint  that  Cuvier  attempted  to  raise  zoology  to  a  science,  and  therefore,  of  course,
sprived  it  of  some  of  its  popular  attractions,  in  order  to  invest  it  with  other  attractions
)f  a  far  higher  character.  The  errors  introduced  into  the  natural  sciences  by  relying
upon  observation  instead  of  experiment  have  been  noticed  by  many  writers  ;  and  by  none
lore  judiciously  than  by  M.  Saint  Hilaire  in  his  Anomalies  de  I' Organisation,  vol.  i.  p.  98,


504  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

all  really  great  ideas,  was  not  entirely  struck  out  by  a  single  man  ;  for  the  physio-
logical value  of  the  tissues  had  been  recognized  by  three  or  four  of  the  immediate
predecessors  of  Bichat,  such  as  Carmichael  Smyth,  Bonn,  Bordeu,  and  Fallopius.
These  inquirers,  however,  notwithstanding  their  industry,  had  effected  nothing
of  much  moment,  since,  though  they  collected  several  special  facts,  there  was
in  their  observations  that  want  of  harmony  and  that  general  incompleteness
always  characteristic  of  the  labours  of  men  who  do  not  rise  to  a  commanding
view  of  the  subject  with  which  they  deal.140

It  was  under  these  circumstances  that  Bichat  began  those  researches  which,
looking  at  their  actual  and  still  more  at  their  prospective  results,  are  probably
the  most  valuable  contribution  ever  made  to  physiology  by  a  single  mind.  In  1 801 ,
only  a  year  before  his  death,141  he  published  his  great  work  on  anatomy,  in  which
the  study  of  the  organs  is  made  altogether  subservient  to  the  study  of  the  tissues
composing  them.  He  lays  it  down  that  the  body  of  man  consists  of  twenty -one
distinct  tissues,  all  of  which,  though  essentially  different,  have  in  common  the
two  great  properties  of  extensibility  and  contractility.142  These  tissues  he,  wit!
indefatigable  industry,143  subjected  to  every  sort  of  examination  ;  he  examim
them  in  different  ages  and  diseases,  with  a  view  to  ascertain  the  laws  of  tl
normal  and  pathological  development.144  He  studied  the  way  each  tissue  ij

140  It  is  very  doubtful  if  Bichat  was  acquainted  with  the  works  of  Smyth,  Bonn,
Fallopius,  and  I  do  not  remember  that  he  anywhere  even  mentions  their  names.     H(
had,  however,  certainly  studied  Bordeu  ;    but  I  suspect  that  the  author  by  whom
was  most  influenced  was  Pinel,  whose  pathological  generalizations  were  put  forw£
just  about  the  time  when  Bichat  began  to  write.     Compare  Bichat,  Traite  des  Membra
pp.  3,  4,  107,  191  ;  Beclard,  Anat.  Gen.  pp.  65,  66  ;  Bouillaud,  Philos.  Medicate,  p.  26
Blainville,  Physiol.  comparee,  vol.  i.  p.  284,  vol.  ii.  pp.  19,  252  ;  Henle,  Anat.  Gen.  vol.  i.
pp.  119,  120.

141  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  iv.  pp.  468,  469.

142  For  a  list  of  the  tissues,  see  Bichat,  Anat.  Gen.  vol.  i.  p.  49.     At  p.  50  he  says
"  en  effet,  quel  que  soit  le  point  de  vue  sous  lequel  on  considere  ces  tissus,  ils  ne  se  ressem-
blent  nullement :   c'est  la  nature,  et  non  la  science,  qui  a  tire  une  ligne  de  demarcatic
entre  eux."     There  is,  however,  now  reason  to  think  that  both  animal  and  vegetabl
tissues  are,  in  all  their  varieties,  referrible  to  a  cellular  origin.     This  great  view,  whic
M.  Schwann  principally  worked  out,  will,  if  fully  established,  be  the  largest  generalizatic
we  possess  respecting  the  organic  world,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  overrate  its  valut
Still  there  is  danger  lest,  in  prematurely  reaching  at  so  vast  a  law,  we  should  negl
the  subordinate  but  strongly -marked  differences  between  the  tissues  as  they  actuallj
exist.     Burdach  (Traite  de  Physiologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  195,  196)  has  made  some  good  remarl
on  the  confusion  introduced  into  the  study  of  tissues  by  neglecting  those  salient  charac-
teristics which  were  indicated  by  Bichat.

143  Pinel  says,  "  dans  un  seul  hiver  il  ouvrit  plus  de  six  cents  cadavres."     Notic
sur  Bichat,  p.  xiii.,  in  vol.  i.  of  Anat.  Gen.     By  such  enormous  labour,  and  by  worl
day  and  night  in  a  necessarily  polluted  atmosphere,  he  laid  the  foundation  for  th;
diseased  habit  which  caused  a  slight  accident  to  prove  fatal,  and  carried  him  off  at  tl
age  of  thirty-one.     "  L' esprit  a  peine  a  concevoir  que  la  vie  d'un  seul  homme  puis
suffire  a  tant  de  travaux,  a  tant  de  decouvertes,  faites  ou  indiquees  :    Bichat  est  me
avant  d'  avoir  accompli  sa  trente-deuxieme  annee  !  "     Pinel,  p.  xvi.

144  To  this  sort  of  comparative  anatomy  (if  it  may  be  so  called),  which  before
time  scarcely  existed,  Bichat  attached  great  importance,  and  clearly  saw  that  it  would
eventually  become  of  the  utmost  value  for  pathology.     Anat.  Gen.  vol.  i.  pp.  331,  332.
vol.  ii.  pp.  234-241,  vol.'iv.  p.  417,  etc.     Unfortunately  these  investigations  were  not
properly  followed  up  by  his  immediate  successors ;    and  Miiller,  writing  long  after  his
death,  was  obliged  to  refer  chiefly  to  Bichat  for  "  the  true  principles  of  general  pathology."
Miiller's  Physiology,  1840,  vol.  i.  p.  808.     M.  Vogel  too,  in  his  Pathological  Anatomy,
1847,  pp.  398,  413,  notices  the  error  committed  by  the  earlier  pathologists,  in  looking  at
changes  in  the  organs,  and  neglecting  those  in  the  tissues  ;  and  the  same  remark  is  made
in  Robin  et  Verdeil,  Chimie  Anatomique,  1853,  vol.  i.  p.  45  ;  and  in  Henle,  Traite  d' Anatomic,
vol.  i.  p.  vii.,  Paris,  1843.     That  "  structural  anatomy,"  and  "  structural  development,"


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF  THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION     505

fected  by  moisture,  air,  and  temperature  ;    also  the  way  in  which  their  pro-
ties  are  altered  by  various  chemical  substances,145  and  even  their  effect  on
taste.146     By  these  means,  and  by  many  other  experiments  tending  in  the
le  direction,  he  took  so  great  and  sudden  a  step,  that  he  is  to  be  regarded
>t  merely  as  an  innovator  on  an  old  science,  but  rather  as  the  creator  of  a  new
,147     And  although  subsequent  observers  have  corrected  some  of  his  con-
ions,  this  has  only  been  done  by  following  his  method  ;   the  value  of  which
now  so  generally  recognized,  that  it  is  adopted  by  nearly  all  the  best  anatomists,
/ho,  differing  in  other  points,  are  agreed  as  to  the  necessity  of  basing  the  future
)gress  of  anatomy  on  a  knowledge  of  the  tissues,  the  supreme  importance  of
rtiich  Bichat  was  the  first  to  perceive.148

The  methods  of  Bichat  and  of  Cuvier,  when  put  together,  exhaust  the  actual
>urces  of  zoological  science  ;  so  that  all  subsequent  naturalists  have  been
ipelled  to  follow  one  of  these  two  schemes  ;  that  is,  either  to  follow  Cuvier
comparing  the  organs  of  animals,  or  else  to  follow  Bichat  in  comparing  the
>ues  which  compose  the  organs.149  And  inasmuch  as  one  comparison  is

to  be  made  the  foundations  of  pathology  is  moreover  observed  in  Simon' s  Pathology ,

$50,  p.  115  (compare  Williams' s  Principles  of  Medicine,  1848,  p.  67),  who  ascribes  the
;f  merit  of  this  "  rational  pathology  "  to  Henle  and  Schwann  ;  omitting  to  mention
that  they  only  executed  Bichat's  scheme,  and  (be  it  said  with  every  respect  for  these
eminent  men)  executed  it  with  a  comprehensiveness  much  inferior  to  that  displayed
by  their  great  predecessor.  In  Broussais,  Examen  des  Doctrines  Medicates,  vol.  iv.  pp.  106,
107,  there  are  some  just  and  liberal  observations  on  the  immense  service  which  Bichat
rendered  to  pathology.  See  also  Beclard,  Anatomie,  Paris,  1852,  p.  184.

i*5  Bichat,  Anat.  Gen.  vol.  i.  pp.  51,  160,  161,  259,  372,  vol.  ii.  pp.  47,  448,  449,  vol.  iii.
pp.  33,  168,  208,  309,  406,  435,  vol.  iv.  pp.  21,  52,  455-461,  5*7-

146  According  to  M.  Comte  (Philos.  Pos.  vol.  iii.  p.  319),  no  one  had  thought  of  this
before  Bichat.  MM.  Robin  et  Verdeil,  in  their  recent  great  work,  fully  admit  the
necessity  of  employing  this  singular  resource.  Chi mie  A natomique,  1853,  vol.  i.  pp.  18,
125,  182,  357,  53i.

i4?  "  Des-lors  il  crea  une  science  nouvelle,  1'anatomie  generale."  Pinel  sur  Bichat,
p.  xii.  "  A  Bichat  appartient  veritablement  la  gloire  d' avoir  concu  et  surtout  execute,
le  premier,  le  plan  d'une  anatomic  nouvelle."  Bouillaud,  Philos.  Medicate,  p.  27-
"  Bichat  fut  le  createur  de  1'histologie,  en  assignant  des  caracteres  precis  a  chaque  classe
de  tissus."  Burdach,  Physiologie,  vol.  vii.  p.  in.  "  Le  createur  de  1'anatomie  generale
fut  Bichat."  Henle,  Anatomie,  vol.  i.  p.  120.  Similar  remarks  will  be  found  in  Saint
Hilaire,  Anomalies  de  r Organisation,  vol.  i.  p.  10  ;  and  in  Robin  et  Verdeil,  Chimie.  Anat.
vol.  i.  p.  xviii.,  vol.  iii.  p.  405.

148  In  Beclard,  Anat.  Gen.  1852,  p.  61,  it  is  said  that  "la    recherche  de  ces  tissus
elementaires,  ou  elements  organiques,  est  devenue  la  preoccupation  presque  exclusive
des  anatomistes  de  nos  jours."     Compare  Blainville,  Physiol.  Gen.  et  Comp.  vol.  i.  p.  93  :
"  Aujourd'hui  nous  aliens  plus  avant,  nous  penetrons  dans  la  structure  intime,  non
seulement  de  ces  organes,  mais  encore  des  tissus  qui  concourent  a  leur  composition  ;
nous  faisons.en  un  mot  de  la  veritable  anatomic,  de  1'anatomie  proprement  dite."     And
at  p.  105  :  "  c'est  un  genre  de  recherches  qui  a  ete  cultive  avec  beaucoup  d'activite,  et
qui  a  re$u  une  grande  extension  depuis  la  publication  du  bel  ouvrage  de  Bichat."     See
also  vol.  ii.  p.  303.

In  consequence  of  this  movement,  there  has  sprung  up,  under  the  name  of  Degenera-
tions of  Tissues,  an  entirely  new  branch  of  morbid  anatomy,  of  which,  I  believe,  no  instance
will  be  found  before  the  time  of  Bichat,  but  the  value  of  which  is  now  recognized  by  most
pathologists.  Compare  Paget's  Surgical  Pathology,  vol.  i.  ^pp.  98-112;  Williams' s
Principles  of  Medicine,  pp.  369-376  ;  Burdach's  Physiologie,  vol.  viii.  p.  367  ;  Reports
of  Brit.  Assoc.  vol.  vi.  p.  147  ;  Jones  and  Sieveking's  Pathological  Anatomy,  1854,  pp.  154—
156,  302-304,  555-558.  "  They  are,"  say  these  last  writers,  "  of  extremely  frequent
occurrence  ;  but  their  nature  has  scarcely  been  recognized  until  of  late."

149  Cuvier  completely  neglected  the  study  of  tissues  ;    and  in  the  very  few  instances
in  which  he  mentions  them,  his  language  is  extremely  vague.     Thus,  in  his  Regne  Animal,
vol.  i.  p.  12,  he  says  of  living  bodies,  "  leur  tissu  est  done  compose  de  reseaux  et  de  mailles,
ou  de  fibres  et  de   lames  solides  qui  renferment  des  liquides  dans  leurs  intervalles."


506  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

chiefly  suggestive  of  function,  and  the  other  comparison  of  structure,  it  is  evident
that  to  raise  the  study  of  the  animal  world  to  the  highest  point  of  which  it  is
capable,  both  these  great  plans  are  necessary  :  but  if  we  ask  which  of  the  two
plans,  unaided  by  the  other,  is  more  likely  to  produce  important  results,  the  palm
must,  I  think,  be  yielded  to  that  proposed  by  Bichat.  Certainly  if  we  look
at  the  question  as  one  to  be  decided  by  authority,  a  majority  of  the  most  eminent
anatomists  and  physiologists  now  incline  to  the  side  of  Bichat,  rather  than  to
that  of  Cuvier  ;  while,  as  a  matter  of  history,  it  may  be  proved  that  the  reputation
of  Bichat  has,  with  the  advance  of  knowledge,  increased  more  rapidly  than  that
of  his  great  rival.  What  however  appears  to  me  still  more  decisive  is  that  the
two  most  important  discoveries  made  in  our  time  respecting  the  classification
of  animals  are  entirely  the  result  of  the  method  which  Bichat  suggested.  The
first  discovery  is  that  made  by  Agassiz,  who  in  the  course  of  his  ichthyological
researches  was  led  to  perceive  that  the  arrangement  by  Cuvier  according  to
organs  did  not  fulfil  its  purpose  in  regard  to  fossil  fishes,  because  in  the  lapse
of  ages  the  characteristics  of  their  structure  were  destroyed.150  He  therefore
adopted  the  only  other  remaining  plan,  and  studied  the  tissues,  which,  being
less  complex  than  the  organs,  are  oftener  found  intact.  The  result  was  the  very
remarkable  discovery  that  the  tegumentary  membrane  of  fishes  is  so  intimately
connected  with  their  organization,  that  if  the  whole  of  a  fish  has  perished  except
this  membrane,  it  is  practicable,  by  noting  its  characteristics,  to  reconstruct
the  animal  in  its  most  essential  parts.  Of  the  value  of  this  principle  of  harmony
some  idea  may  be  formed  from  the  circumstance  that  on  it  Agassiz  has  based
the  whole  of  that  celebrated  classification  of  which  he  is  the  sole  author,  and
by  which  fossil  ichthyology  has  for  the  first  time  assumed  a  precise  and  definite
shape.151

The  other  discovery,  of  which  the  application  is  much  more  extensive,  was
made  in  exactly  the  same  way.  It  consists  of  the  striking  fact  that  the  teeth  of
each  animal  have  a  necessary  connexion  with  the  entire  organization  of  its  frame  ;
so  that  within  certain  limits  we  can  predict  the  organization  by  examining  the
tooth.  This  beautiful  instance  of  the  regularity  of  the  operations  of  nature  was
not  known  until  more  than  thirty  years  after  the  death  of  Bichat,  and  it  is
evidently  due  to  the  prosecution  of  that  method  which  he  sedulously  inculcated.
For  the  teeth  never  having  been  properly  examined  in  regard  to  their  separate
tissues,  it  was  believed  that  they  were  essentially  devoid  of  structure,  or,  as  some
thought,  were  simply  a  fibrous  texture.152  But  by  minute  microscopic  investiga-
tions, it  has  been  recently  ascertained  that  the  tissues  of  the  teeth  are  strictly
analogous  to  those  of  other  parts  of  the  body  ;  153  and  that  the  ivory,  or  dentine

150  A  well-known  ornithologist  makes  the  same  complaint  respecting  the  classification
of  birds.     Strickland  on  Ornithology,  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1844,  pp.  209,  210.     Even  in  regard
to  living  species,  Cuvier  (Regne  Animal,  vol.  ii.  p.  128)  says,  "  La  classe  des  poissons  est
de  toutes,  celle  qui  off  re  le  plus  de  difficultes  quand  on  veut  la  subdiviser  en  ordres  d'apres
des  caracteres  fixes  et  sensibles."

151  The  discoveries  of  M.  Agassiz  are  embodied  in  his  great  work,  Recherches  sur  les
Poissons  fossiles  :    but  the  reader  who  may  not  have  an  opportunity  of  consulting  that
costly  publication,  will  find  two  essays  by  this  eminent  naturalist,  which  will  give  an
idea  of  his  treatment  of  the  subject,  in  Reports  of  British  Assoc.  for  1842,  pp.  80-88,  and
for  1844,  pp.  279-310.     How  essential  this  study  is  to  the  geologist,  appears  from  the
remark  of  Sir  R.  Murchison  (Siluria,  1854,  p.  417),  that  "  fossil  fishes  have  everywhere
proved  the  most  exact  chronometers  of  the  age  of  rocks."

152  That  they  were  composed  of  fibres,  was  the  prevailing  doctrine,  until  the  discovery
of  their  tubes,  in  1835,  by  Purkinje.    Before  Purkinje,  only  one  observer,  Leeuwenhoek,
had  announced  their  tubular  structure  ;  but  no  one  believed  what  he  said,  and  Purkinje
was  unacquainted  with  his  researches.     Compare  Nasmyth's  Researches  on  the  Teeth,
1839,  p.  159  ;  Owen's  Odontography,  1840-1845,  vol.  i.  pp.  ix.  x.  ;  Henle,  Anat.  Gen.  vol.  ii.
p.  457  ;   Reports  of  Brit.  Assoc.  vol.  vii.  pp.  135,  136  (Transac.  of  Sections).

153  Mr.  Nasmyth,  in  his  valuable  but,  I  regret  to  add,  posthumous  work,  notices  as
the  result  of  these  discoveries  "  the  close  affinity  subsisting  between  the  dental  and  other


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION     507

as  it  is  now  called,151  is  highly  organized  ;  that  it,  as  well  as  the  enamel,  is  cellular,
and  is  in  fact  a  development  of  the  living  pulp.  This  discovery,  which  to  the
philosophic  anatomist  is  pregnant  with  meaning,  was  made  about  1838  ;  and
though  the  preliminary  steps  were  taken  by  Purkinje,  Retzius,  and  Schwann,  the
principal  merit  is  due  to  Nasmyth  and  Owen,155  between  whom  it  is  disputed,  but
whose  rival  claims  we  are  not  here  called  upon  to  adjust.156  What  I  wish  to
observe  is  that  the  discovery  is  similar  to  that  which  we  owe  to  Agassiz  ;  similar
in  the  method  by  which  it  was  worked  out,  and  also  in  the  results  which  have
followed  from  it.  Both  are  due  to  a  recognition  of  the  fundamental  maxim  of
Bichat,  that  the  study  of  organs  must  be  subordinate  to  the  study  of  tissues,  and
both  have  supplied  the  most  valuable  aid  to  zoological  classification.  On  this
point,  the  service  rendered  by  Owen  is  incontestable,  whatever  may  be  thought
of  his  original  claims.  This  eminent  naturalist  has,  with  immense  industry,
applied  the  discovery  to  all  vertebrate  animals  ;  and  in  an  elaborate  work
specially  devoted  to  the  subject  he  has  placed  beyond  dispute  the  astonishing
fact  that  the  structure  of  a  single  tooth  is  a  criterion  of  the  nature  and  organiza-
tion of  the  species  to  which  it  belongs.157

Whoever  has  reflected  much  on  the  different  stages  through  which  our  know-
ledge has  successively  passed,  must,  I  think,  be  led  to  the  conclusion  that,  while
fully  recognizing  the  great  merit  of  these  investigators  of  the  animal  frame,  our
highest  admiration  ought  to  be  reserved  not  for  those  who  make  the  discoveries,
but  rather  for  those  who  point  out  how  the  discoveries  are  to  be  made.158  When
the  true  path  of  inquiry  has  once  been  indicated,  the  rest  is  comparatively  easy.
The  beaten  highway  is  always  open  ;  and  the  difficulty  is,  not  to  find  those  who
will  travel  the  old  road,  but  those  who  will  make  a  fresh  one.  Every  age  produces
in  abundance  men  of  sagacity  and  of  considerable  industry,  who,  while  perfectly
competent  to  increase  the  details  of  a  science,  are  unable  to  extend  its  distant
boundaries.  This  is  because  such  extension  must  be  accompanied  by  a  new
method,159  which,  to  be  valuable  as  well  as  new,  supposes  on  the  part  of  its

•

organized  tissues  of  the  animal  frame."  Researches  on  the  Development,  etc.,  of  the  Teeth,
1849,  p.  198.  This  is,  properly  speaking,  a  continuation  of  Mr.  Nasmyth's  former  book,
which  bore  the  same  title,  and  was  published  in  1839.

154  This  name,  which  Mr.  Owen  appears  to  have  first  suggested,  has  been  objected  to,
though,  as  it  seems  to  me,  on  insufficient  grounds.     Compare  Owen's  Odontography,  vol.  i.
p.  iii.  with  Nasmyth's  Researches,  1849,  pp.  3-4.     It  is  adopted  in  Carpenter's  Human
Physiol.  1846,  p.  154  ;   and  in  Jones  and  Sieveking's  Patholog.  Anat.  1854,  pp.  483,  486.

155  See  the  correspondence  in  Brit.  Assoc.  for  1841,  Sec.,  pp.  2-23.

156  In  the  notice  of  it  in  WhewelVs  Hist,  of  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  p.  678,  nothing  is  said  about
Mr.  Nasmyth  ;    while  in  that  in  Wilson's  Human  Anatomy,  p.  65,  edit.  1851,  nothing  is
said  about  Mr.  Owen.     A  specimen  of  the  justice  with  which  men  treat  their  contem-
poraries.    Dr.  Grant  (Supplement  to  Hooper's  Medical  Diet.  1848,  p.  1390)  says,  "  the
researches  of  Mr.  Owen  tend  to  confirm  those  of  Mr.  Nasmyth."     Nasmyth,  in  his  last
work  (Researches  on  the  Teeth,  1849,  p.  81),  only  refers  to  Owen  to  point  out  an  error  ;
while  Owen  (Odontography,  vol.  i.  pp.  xlvi.-lvi.)  treats  Nasmyth  as  an  impudent  plagiarist.

*57  Dr.  Whewell  (Hist,  of  Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  p.  678)  says  that  "  he  has  carried  into
every  part  of  the  animal  kingdpm  an  examination,  founded  upon  this  discovery,  and  has
published  the  results  of  this  in  his  Odontography."  If  this  able  but  rather  hasty  writer
had  read  the  Odontography,  he  would  have  found  that  Mr.  Owen,  so  far  from  carrying  the
examination  "  into  every  part  of  the  animal  kingdom,"  distinctly  confines  himself  to
"  one  of  the  primary  divisions  of  the  animal  kingdom  "  (I  quote  his  own  words  from
Odontography,  vol.  i.  p.  Ixvii. ),  and  appears  to  think  that  below  the  vetebrata  the  inquiry
would  furnish  little  or  no  aid  for  the  purposes  of  classification.

158  But  in  comparing  the  merits  of  discoverers  themselves,  we  must  praise  him  who
proves  rather  than  him  who  suggests.     See  some  sensible  remarks  in  Owen's  Odontography,
vol.  i.  p.  xlix.  ;    which,  however,  do  not  affect  my  observations  on  the  superiority  of
method.

159  By  a  new  method  of  inquiring  into  a  subject,  I  mean  an  application  to  it  of  generaliza-
tions from  some  other  subject,  so  as  to  widen  the  field  of  thought.     To  call  this  a  new


508


THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION


suggester  not  only  a  complete  mastery  over  the  resources  of  his  subject,  but  als
the  possession  of  originality  and  comprehensiveness, — the  two  rarest  forms
human  genius.     In  this  consists  the  real  difficulty  of  every  great  pursuit,
soon  as  any  department  of  knowledge  has  been  generalized  into  laws,  it  contaii
either  in  itself  or  in  its  applications,  three  distinct  branches  ;  namely,  inventio.,
discoveries,  and  method.     Of  these,  the  first  corresponds  to  art  ;    the  second  t(
science  ;   and  the  third  to  philosophy.     In  this  scale,  inventions  have  by  far  tl
lowest  place,  and  minds  of  the  highest  order  are  rarely  occupied  by  them.     Ne:
in  the  series  come  discoveries  ;    and  here  the  province  of  intellect  really  begii
since  here  the  first  attempt  is  made  to  search  after  truth  on  its  own  account,  ai
to  discard  those  practical  considerations  to  which  inventions  are  of  necessity
referred.     This  is  science  properly  so  called  ;   and  how  difficult  it  is  to  reach  this
stage  is  evident  from  the  fact   that  all  half -civilized  nations  have  made  man>
great  inventions,  but  no  great  discoveries.     The  highest,  however,  of  all  tl
three  stages  is  the   philosophy   of   method,  which  bears  the  same    relation  t(
science  that  science  bears  to  art.     Of  its  immense,  and  indeed  supreme  im-
portance the  annals  of  knowledge  supply  abundant  evidence  ;  and  for  want  of  il
some  very  great  men  have  effected  absolutely  nothing,  consuming  their  lives  ii
fruitless  industry,  not  because  their  labour  was  slack,  but  because  their  methc
was  sterile.     The  progress  of  every  science  is  effected  more  by  the  scheme  accorc
ing  to  which  it  is  cultivated  than  by  the  actual  ability  of  the  cultivators  thei
selves.     If  they  who  travel  in  an  unknown  country  spend  their  force  in  runnii
on  the  wrong  road,  they  will  miss  the  point  at  which  they  aim,  and  perchance  maj
faint  and  fall  by  the  way.     In  that  long  and  difficult  journey  after  truth  whic
the  human  mind  has  yet  to  perform,  and  of  which  we  in  our  generation  can  onlj
see  the  distant  prospect,  it  is  certain  that  success  will  depend  not  on  the
with  which  men  hasten  in  the  path  of  inquiry,  but  rather  on  the  skill  with  whic
that  path  is  selected  for  them  by  those  great  and  comprehensive  thinkers  wl
are  as  the  lawgivers  and  founders  of  knowledge  ;  because  they  supply  its  d<
ciencies,  not  by  investigating  particular  difficulties,  but  by  establishing  soi
large  and  sweeping  innovation  which  opens  up  a  new  vein  of  thought,  and  create
fresh  resources,  which  it  is  left  for  their  posterity  to  work  out  and  apply.

It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  we  are  to  rate  the  value  of  Bichat,  whose  worl
like  those  of  all  men  of  the  highest  eminence, — like  those  of  Aristotle,  Bacon,  ai
Descartes, — mark  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind,  and  as  such  a
only  be  fairly  estimated  by  connecting  them  with  the  social  and  intellects
condition  of  the  age  in  which  they  appeared.     This  gives  an  importance  and
meaning  to  the  writings  of  Bichat  of  which  few  indeed  are  fully  aware.     The
greatest  recent  discoveries  respecting  the  classification  of  animals  are,  as  we  ha\
just  seen,  the  result  of  his  teaching  ;   but  his  influence  has  produced  other  effect
still  more  momentous.     He,  aided  by  Cabanis,  rendered  to  physiology  the  ii
calculable  service   of  preventing  it  from  participating  in  that  melancholy
action  to  which  France  was  exposed  early  in  the  nineteenth  century.     This  is  t(
large  a  subject  to  discuss  at  present  ;   but  I  may  mention  that  when  Napoleon,
not  from  feelings  of  conviction,  but  for  selfish  purposes  of  his  own,  attempted  tc
restore  the  power  of  ecclesiastical  principles,  the  men  of  letters,  with  disgracefi
subserviency,  fell  into  his  view  ;  *  and  there  began  a  marked  decline  in  tl


method  is  rather  vague  ;  but  there  is  no  other  word  to  express  the  process.  Properly
speaking,  there  are  only  two  methods,  the  inductive  and  the  deductive  ;  which,  the
essentially  different,  are  so  mixed  together  as  to  make  it  impossible  wholly  to  separal
them.  The  discussion  of  the  real  nature  of  this  difference  I  reserve  for  my  comparis
in  the  next  volume,  of  the  German  and  American  civilizations.  [This  purpose  was  nc
fulfilled — ED.]

[*  As  English  physiologists  are  declared  in  the  same  paragraph  to  have  shown  them,
selves  reactionary,  the  imputation  of    "  disgraceful  subserviency  "   to  French  men
letters  seems  supererogatory.     Reaction  was  as  natural  to  them  as  to  any  class  of  tl
community,  and  it  spread  after  the  Restoration.     Chateaubriand,  whose  reactions


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH    REVOLUTION     509


ependciit  and  innovating  spirit  with  which  during  fifty  years  the  French  had
cultivated  the  highest  departments  of  knowledge.  Hence  that  metaphysical
school  arose  which,  though  professing  to  hold  aloof  from  theology,  was  intimately
allied  with  it  ;  and  whose  showy  conceits  form,  in  their  ephemeral  splendour,  a
striking  contrast  to  the  severer  methods  followed  in  the  preceding  generation.160
Against  this  movement  the  French  physiologists  have  as  a  body  always  pro-
tested ;  and  it  may  be  clearly  proved  that  their  opposition,  which  even  the  great
abilities  of  Cuvier  were  unable  to  win  over,  is  partly  due  to  the  impetus  given  by
Bichat,  in  enforcing  in  his  own  pursuit  the  necessity  of  rejecting  those  assumptions
by  which  metaphysicians  and  theologians  seek  to  control  every  science.  As  an
illustration  of  this,  I  may  mention  two  facts  worthy  of  note.  The  first  is  that  in
England,  where  during  a  considerable  period  the  influence  of  Bichat  was  scarcely
felt,  many  even  of  our  eminent  physiologists  have  shown  a  marked  disposition
to  ally  themselves  with  the  reactionary  party  ;  and  have  not  only  opposed  such
novelties  as  they  could  not  immediately  explain,  but  have  degraded  their  own
noble  science  by  making  it  a  handmaid  to  serve  the  purposes  of  natural  theology.
The  other  fact  is  that  in  France  the  disciples  of  Bichat  have  with  scarcely  an
exception  rejected  the  study  of  final  causes,  to  which  the  school  of  Cuvier  still
adheres  :  while,  as  a  natural  consequence,  the  followers  of  Bichat  are  associated
in  geology  with  the  doctrine  of  uniformity  ;  in  zoology,  with  that  of  the  trans-
mutation of  species  ;  and  in  astronomy,  with  the  nebular  hypothesis  :  vast  and
magnificent  schemes,  under  whose  shelter  the  human  mind  seeks  an  escape  from
that  dogma  of  interference  which  the  march  of  knowledge  everywhere  reduces?
and  the  existence  of  which  is  incompatible  with  those  conceptions  of  eternal
order  towards  which,  during  the  last  two  centuries,  we  have  been  constantly
tending.

These  great  phenomena  which  the  French  intellect  presents,  and  of  which  I
have  only  sketched  a  rapid  outline,  will  be  related  with  suitable  detail  in  the
latter  part  of  this  work,  when  I  shall  examine  the  present  condition  of  the  Euro-
pean mind,  and  endeavour  to  estimate  its  future  prospects.  To  complete,  how-
ever, our  appreciation  of  Bichat,  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  notice  of  what  some
consider  the  most  valuable  of  all  his  productions,  in  which  he  aimed  at  nothing
less  than  an  exhaustive  generalization  of  the  functions  of  life.  It  appears,
indeed  to  me  that  in  many  important  points  Bichat  here  fell  short  ;  but  the  work
itself  still  stands  alone,  and  is  so  striking  an  instance  of  the  genius  of  the  author
that  I  will  give  a  short  account  of  its  fundamental  views.

Life  considered  as  a  whole  has  two  distinct  branches  ;  161  one  branch  being
characteristic  of  animals,  the  other  of  vegetables.  That  which  is  confined  to
animals  is  called  animal  life  ;  that  which  is  common  both  to  animals  and  vege-
tables is  called  organic  life.  While,  therefore,  plants  have  only  one  life,  man  has
two  distinct  lives,  which  are  governed  by  entirely  different  laws,  and  which,
though  intimately  connected,  constantly  oppose  each  other.  In  the  organic  life,

160  In  literature  and  in  theology  Chateaubriand  and  De  Maistre  were  certainly  the
most  eloquent,  and  were  probably  the  most  influential  leaders  of  this  reaction.     Neither
of  them  liked  induction,  but  preferred  reasoning  deductively  from  premises  which  they
assumed,  and  which  they  called  first  principles.     De  Maistre,  however,  was  a  powerful
dialectician,  and  on  that  account  his  works  are  read  by  many  who  care  nothing  for  the
gorgeous  declamation  of  Chateaubriand.      In  metaphysics  a  precisely  similar  movement
occurred  ;  and  Laromiguiere,  Rover  Collard,  and  Maine  de  Biran  founded  that  celebrated
school  which  culminated  in  M.  Cousin,  and  which  is  equally  characterized  by  an  ignorance
of  the  philosophy  of  induction,  and  by  a  want  of  sympathy  with  physical  science.

161  Bichat,  Recherches  sur  la  Vie  et  la  Mart,  pp.  5-9,  226  ;  and  his  Anat.  Gen.  vol.  i.  p.  73.

suited  and  pleased  Napoleon,boldly  attacked  him  after  the  execution  of  the  Due  d'Enghien.
Neither  were  Fontanes,  Morellet,  Daunou,  and  Volney  subservient.  (Cp.  Charpentier,  La
Litt.  Francaise  au  ige  Siecle,  pp.  7,  12,  27  ;  Albert,  La  Litt.  Fr.  sous  la  RevoL,  etc.,  1891,
p.  83.  Laromiguiere,  mentioned  in  the  next  note,  gave  offence  by  his  lectures,  and  had
to  give  them  up. — ED.]


510  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

man  exists  solely  for  himself  ;  in  the  animal  life  he  comes  in  contact  with  others.
The  functions  of  the  first  are  purely  internal,  those  of  the  second  are  external.
His  organic  life  is  limited  to  the  double  process  of  creation  and  destruction  :  the
creative  process  being  that  of  assimilation,  as  digestion,  circulation,  and  nutrition  ;
the  destructive  process  being  that  of  excretion,  such  as  exhalation  and  the  like.
This  is  what  man  has  in  common  with  plants  ;  and  of  this  life  he,  when  in  a  natural
state,  is  unconscious.  But  the  characteristic  of  his  animal  life  is  consciousness,
since  by  it  he  is  made  capable  of  moving,  of  feeling,  of  judging.  By  virtue  of  the
first  life  he  is  merely  a  vegetable  ;  by  the  addition  of  the  second  he  becomes  an
animal.

If  now  we  look  at  the  organs  by  which  in  man  the  functions  of  these  two  lives
are  carried  on,  we  shall  be  struck  by  the  remarkable  fact  that  the  organs  of  his
vegetable  life  are  very  irregular,  those  of  his  animal  life  very  symmetrical.  His
vegetative  or  organic  life  is  conducted  by  the  stomach,  the  intestines,  and  the
glandular  system  in  general,  such  as  the  liver  and  the  pancreas  ;  all  of  which  are
irregular,  and  admit  of  the  greatest  variety  of  form  and  development,  without
their  functions  being  seriously  disturbed.  But  in  his  animal  life  the  organs  are  so
essentially  symmetrical  that  a  very  slight  departure  from  the  ordinary
impairs  their  action.162  Not  only  the  brain,  but  also  the  organs  of  sense,  as  tl
eyes,  the  nose,  the  ears,  are  perfectly  symmetrical  ;  and  they,  as  well  as  the  othei
organs  of  animal  life,  as  the  feet  and  hands,  are  double,  presenting  on  each  side
of  the  body  two  separate  parts  which  correspond  with  each  other,  and  produce
symmetry  unknown  to  our  vegetative  life,  the  organs  of  which  are,  for  the  most
part,  merely  single,  as  in  the  stomach,  liver,  pancreas,  and  spleen.163

From  this  fundamental  difference  between  the  organs  of  the  two  lives  the
have  arisen  several  other  differences  of  great  interest.  Our  animal  life  beinj
double,  while  our  organic  life  is  single,  it  becomes  possible  for  the  former  life  t(
take  rest,  that  is,  stop  part  of  its  functions  for  a  time,  and  afterwe

162  "  C'est  de  la,  sans  doute,  que  nait  cette  autre  difference  entre  les  organes  des  deux
vies,  savoir,  que  la  nature  se  livre  bien  plus  rarement  a  des  ecarts  de  conformation  dai
la  vie  animale  que  dans  la  vie  organique.  .  .  .  C'est  une  remarque  qui  n'a  pu  echapper
celui  dont  les  dissections  ont  ete  un  peu  multipliers,  que  les  frequentes  variations  de
formes,  de  grandeur,  de  position,  de  direction  des  organes  internes,  comme  la  rate,  It
foie,  1'estomac,  les  reins,  les  organes  salivaires,  etc.  .  .  .  Jetons  main  tenant  les  yeux  sui
les  organes  de  la  vie  animale,  sur  les  sens,  les  nerfs,  le  cerveau,  les  muscles  volontaires,  le
larynx  ;   tout  y  est  exact,  precis,  rigoureusement  determine  dans  la  forme,  la  grandeur  e1
la  position.     On  n'y  voit  presque  jamais  de  varietes  de  conformation  ;   s'il  en  existe,  le
fonctions  sont  troublees,  aneanties  ;   tandis  qu'elles  res  tent  les  m  ernes  dans  la  vie  organ-
ique, au  milieu  des  alterations  diverses  des  parties."     Bichat  sur  la  Vie,  pp.  23-25.     P£
of  this  view  is  corroborated  by  the  evidence  collected  by  Saint  Hilaire  (Anomalies  de
V Organisation,  vol.  i.  pp.  248  seq. )  of  the  extraordinary  aberrations  to  which  the  vegetative
organs  are  liable  ;   and  he  mentions  (vol.  ii.  p.  8)  the  case  of  a  man  in  whose  body,  01
dissection,    "  on   reconnut    que    tous   les   visceres   etaient    transposes."     Comparative
anatomy  supplies  another  illustration.     The  bodies  of  mollusca  are  less  symmetrical  thai
those  of  articulata  ;    and  in  the  former  the  "  vegetal  series  of  organs,"  says  Mr.  Owen,
are  more  developed  than  the  animal  series  ;  while  in  the  articulata  "  the  advance  is  most
conspicuous  in  the  organs  peculiar  to  animal  life."     Owen's  Invertebrata,  p.  470.     Compare
Burdach's  Physiologic,  vol.  i.  pp.  153,  189  ;  and  a  confirmation  of  the  "  unsymmetrical "
organs  of  the  gasteropoda,  in  Grant's  Comparative  Anatomy  p.  461.  This  curious  antago-
nism is  still  further  seen  in  the  circumstance  that  idiots,  whose  functions  of  nutritior
and  of  excretion  are  often  very  active,  are  at  the  same  time  remarkable  for  a  want  of
symmetry  in  the  organs  of  sensation.     Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,  vol.  ii.  pp.  331,  332.

A  result,  though  perhaps  an  unconscious  one,  of  the  application  and  extension  of  thes
ideas  is  that  within  the  last  few  years  there  has  arisen  a  pathological  theory  of  what  are
called  "  symmetrical  diseases,"  the  leading  facts  of  which  have  been  long  known,  but  are
now  only  beginning  to  be  generalized.      See  Pagefs  Pathology,  vol.  i.  pp.  18-22,  vol.  ii.  pp.
244,  245  ;  Simon's  Pathology,  pp.  210,  211  ;  Carpenter's  Human  Physiol.  pp.  607,  608.

163  Bichat  sur  la  Vie,  pp.  15-21.


PROXIMATE   CAUSES    OF   THE   FRENCH    REVOLUTION     511

renew  them.  But  in  organic  life,  to  stop  is  to  die.  The  life  which  we
have  in  common  with  vegetables  never  sleeps  ;  and  if  its  movements  entirely
cease  only  for  a  single  instant,  they  cease  for  ever.  That  process  by  which
our  bodies  receive  some  substances  and  give  out  others,  admits  of  no
interruption  ;  it  is  by  its  nature  incessant,  because,  being  single,  it  can  never
receive  supplementary  aid.  The  other  life  we  may  refresh,  not  only  in  sleep,  but
even  when  we  are  awake.  Thus  we  can  exercise  the  organs  of  movement  while
we  rest  the  organs  of  thought  ;  and  it  is  even  possible  to  relieve  a  function  while
we  continue  to  employ  it,  because,  our  animal  life  being  double,  we  are  able  for
a  short  time,  in  case  of  one  of  its  parts  being  fatigued,  to  avail  ourselves  of  the
corresponding  part  ;  using,  for  instance,  a  single  eye  or  a  single  arm,  in  order  to
rest  the  one  which  circumstances  may  have  exhausted  ;  an  expedient  which  the
single  nature  of  organic  life  entirely  prevents.164

Our  animal  life  being  thus  essentially  intermittent,  and  our  organic  life  being
essentially  continuous,165  it  has  necessarily  followed  that  the  first  is  capable  of
an  improvement  of  which  the  second  is  incapable.  There  can  be  no  improve-
ment without  comparison,  since  it  is  only  by  comparing  one  state  with  another
that  we  can  rectify  previous  errors,  and  avoid  future  ones.  Now,  our  organic  life
does  not  admit  of  such  comparison,  because,  T.eing  uninterrupted,  it  is  not  broken
into  stages,  but  when  unchequered  by  disease,  runs  on  in  dull  monotony.  On  the
other  hand,  the  functions  of  our  animal  life,  such  as  thought,  speech,  sight,  and
motion,  cannot  be  long  exercised  without  rest  ;  and  as  they  are  constantly  sus-
pended, it  becomes  practicable  to  compare  them,  and,  therefore,  to  improve  them.
It  is  by  possessing  this  resource  that  the  first  cry  of  the  infant  gradually  rises  into
the  perfect  speech  of  the  man,  and  the  unformed  habits  of  early  thought  are
ripened  into  that  maturity  which  nothing  can  give  but  a  long  series  of  successive
efforts.166  But  our  organic  life,  which  we  have  in  common  with  vegetables,
admits  of  no  interruption,  and  consequently  of  no  improvement.  It  obeys  its
own  laws  ;  but  it  derives  no  benefit  from  that  repetition  to  which  animal  life  is
exclusively  indebted.  Its  functions,  such  as  nutrition  and  the  like,  exist  in  man
several  months  before  he  is  born,  and  while,  his  animal  life  not  having  yet  begun,
the  faculty  of  comparison,  which  is  the  basis  of  improvement,  is  impossible.167
And  although,  as  the  human  frame  increases  in  size,  its  vegetative  organs  become
larger,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  their  functions  really  improve,  since,  in  ordinary
cases,  their  duties  are  performed  as  regularly  and  as  completely  in  childhood  as
in  middle  age.168


164  Ibid.  pp.  21-50.

165  On  intermittence  as  a  quality  of  animal  life,  see  Holland's  Medical  Notes,  pp.  313,
314,  where  Bichat  is  mentioned  as  its  great  expounder.     As  to  the  essential  continuity
of  organic  life,  see  Burdach's  Physiologic,  vol.  viii.  p.  420.     M.  Comte  has  made  some
interesting  remarks  on  Bichat's  law  of  intermittence.     Philos.  Positive,  vol.  iii.  pp.  300,
395,  744,  745,  75o,  75i-

166  On  the  development  arising  from  practice,  see  Bichat  sur  la  Vie,  pp.  207-225.

167  Ibid.  pp.  189-203,  225-230.     M.  Broussais  also  (in  his  able  work,  Cours  de  Phre-
nologie,  p.  487)  says  that  comparison  only  begins  after  birth  ;   but  surely  this  must  be
very  doubtful.     Few  physiologists  will  deny  that  embryological  phenomena,   though
neglected  by  metaphysicians,  play  a  great  part  in  shaping  the  future  character  ;  and  I  do
not  see  how  any  system  of  psychology  can  be  complete  which  ignores   considerations
probable  in  themselves,  and  not  refuted  by  special  evidence.     So  carelessly,  however,  has
this  subject  been  investigated,  that  we  have  the  most  conflicting  statements  respecting
even  the  vagitus  uterinus,  which,  if  it  exists  to  the  extent  alleged  by  some  physiologists,
would  be  a  decisive  proof  that  animal  life  (in  the  sense  of  Bichat)  does  begin  during  the
foetal  period.     Compare  Burdach,  Physiol.  vol.  iv.  pp.  113,  114,  with  Wagners  Physiol.
p.  182.

168  "  Les  organes  internes  qui  entrent  alors  en  exercice,  ou  qui  accroissent  beaucoup
leur  action,  n'ont  besoin  d'aucune  education  ;   ils  atteignent  tout  a  coup  une  perfection
&  laquelle  ceux  de  la  vie  animale  ne  parviennent  que  par    habitude  d'agir  souvent."
Bichat  sur  la  Vie,  p.  231.


512  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Thus  it  is  that,  although  other  causes  conspire,  it  may  be  said  that  the  pro-
gressiyeness  of  animal  life  is  due  to  its  intermit  tence  ;  the  unprogressiveness  of
organic  life  to  its  continuity.  It  may,  moreover,  be  said,  that  the  intermittence
of  the  first  life  results  from  the  symmetry  of  its  organs,  while  the  continuity  of  the
second  life  results  from  their  irregularity.  To  this  wide  and  striking  generaliza-
tion many  objections  may  be  made,  some  of  them  apparently  insuperable  ;  but
that  it  contains  the  germs  of  great  truths  I  entertain  little  doubt,  and  at  all
events  it  is  certain  that  the  method  cannot  be  too  highly  praised,  for  it  unites  the
study  of  function  and  structure  with  that  of  embryology,  of  vegetable  physiology,
of  the  theory  of  comparison,  and  of  the  influence  of  habit  ;  a  vast  and  magnificent
field,  which  the  genius  of  Bichat  was  able  to  cover,  but  of  which,  since  him,
neither  physiologists  nor  metaphysicians  have  even  attempted  a  general  survey.

This  stationary  condition,  during  the  present  century,  of  a  subject  of  such
intense  interest  is  a  decisive  proof  of  the  extraordinarygenius  of  Bichat  ;  since,
notwithstanding  the  additions  made  to  physiology,  and  to  every  branch  of  physics
connected  with  it,  nothing  has  been  done  at  all  comparable  to  that  theory  of  life
which  he,  with  far  inferior  resources,  was  able  to  construct.  This  stupendous
work  he  left,  indeed,  very  imperfect  ;  but  even  in  its  deficiencies  we  see  the  hand
of  the  great  master,  whom,  on  his  own  subject,  no  one  has  yet  approached.  His
essay  on  life  may  well  be  likened  to  those  broken  fragments  of  ancient  art  which,
imperfect  as  they  are,  still  bear  the  impress  of  the  inspiration  which  gave  them
birth,  and  present  in  each  separate  part  that  unity  of  conception  which  to  us
makes  them  a  complete  and  living  whole.

From  the  preceding  summary  of  the  progress  of  physical  knowledge,  the  reader
may  form  some  idea  of  the  ability  of  those  eminent  men  who  arose  in  France
during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.  To  complete  the  picture,  it  is
only  necessary  to  examine  what  was  done  in  the  two  remaining  branches  of
natural  history,  namely,  botany  and  mineralogy,  in  both  of  which  the  first  great
steps  towards  raising  each  study  to  a  science  were  taken  by  Frenchmen  a  few
years  before  the  Revolution.

In  botany,  although  our  knowledge  of  particular  facts  has  during  the  last
hundred  years  rapidly  increased,169  we  are  only  possessed  of  two  generalizations
wide  enough  to  be  called  laws  of  nature.  The  first  generalization  concerns  the
structure  of  plants  ;  the  other  concerns  their  physiology.  That  concerning  their
physiology  is  the  beautiful  morphological  law,  according  to  which  the  different
appearance  of  the  various  organs  arises  from  arrested  development  :  the  stamens,
pistils,  corolla,  calyx,  and  bracts  being  simply  modifications  or  successive  stages
of  the  leaf.  This  is  one  of  many  valuable  discoveries  we  owe  to  Germany,  it
being  made  by  Gothe  late  in  the  eighteenth  century.170  With  its  importance

169  Dioscorides  and  Galen  knew  from  450  to  600  plants  (Winckler,  Geschichte  der
Botanik,  1854,  pp.  34,  40)  ;   but,  according  to  Cuvier   (Eloges,  vol.  iii.  p.  468),  Linnaeus
in  1778  "  en  indiquait  environ  huit  mille  especes  ;  "  and  Meyen  (Geog.  of  Plants,  p.  4)
says,  "  at  the  time  of  Linnaeus's  death,  about  8,000  species  were  known."      Dr.  Whewell,
in  his  Bridgewater  Treatise,  p.  247,  says  "  about  10,000."      Since  then  the  progress  has
been  uninterrupted  ;  and  in  Henslow's  Botany,  1837,  p.  136,  we  are  told  that  "  the  number
of  species  already  known  and  classified  in  works  of  botany  amounts  to  about  60,000."
Ten  years  later,  Dr.  Lindley  (Vegetable  Kingdom,  1847,  p.  800)  states  them  at  92,930  ;
and  two  years  afterwards  Mr.  Balfour  says  "  about  100,000."     Balfour's  Botany,  1849,
p.  560.     Such  is  the  rate  at  which  our  knowledge  of  nature  is  advancing.     To  complete
this  historical  note,  I  ought  to  have  mentioned  that  in  1812  Dr.  Thomson  says  "  nearly
30,000  species  of  plants  have  been  examined  and  described."      Thomson's  Hist,   of  the
Royal  Society,  p.  21.

170  It  was  published  in  1790.     Winckler,  Gesch.  der  Botanik,  p.  389.     But  the  historians
of  botany  have  overlooked  a  short  passage  in  Gothe's  works,  which  proves  that  he  had
glimpses  of  the  discovery  in  or  before  1786.     See  Italidnische  Reise,  in  Gothe's  Werke,
vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  286,  Stuttgart,  1837,  where  he  writes  from  Padua,  in  September,  1786,
"  Hier  in  dieser  neu  mir  entgegen  tretenden  Mannigfaltigkeit  wird  jener  Gedanke  immer
lebendiger  :  dass  man  sich  alle  Pflanzengestalten  vielleicht  aus  Einer  entwickeln  konne.'*


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  513

every  botanist  is  familiar  ;  while  to  the  historian  of  the  human  mind  it  is  peculiarly
interesting,  as  strengthening  that  great  doctrine  of  development  towards  which
the  highest  branches  of  knowledge  are  now  hastening,  and  which,  in  the  present
century,  has  been  also  carried  into  one  of  the  most  difficult  departments  of  animal
physiology.171

But  the  most  comprehensive  truth  with  which  we  are  acquainted  respecting
plants  is  that  which  includes  the  whole  of  their  general  structure  ;  and  this  we
learnt  from  those  great  Frenchmen  who  in  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth
century  began  to  study  the  external  world.  The  first  steps  were  taken  directly
after  the  middle  of  the  century,  by  Adanson,  Duhamel  de  Monceau,  and,  above
all,  Desfontaines  ;  three  eminent  thinkers,  who  proved  the  practicability  of  a
natural  method  hitherto  unknown,  and  of  which  even  Ray  himself  had  only  a
faint  perception.172  This,  by  weakening  the  influence  of  the  artificial  system  of
Linnaeus,173  prepared  the  way  for  an  innovation  more  complete  than  has  been
effected  in  any  other  branch  of  knowledge.  In  the  very  year  in  which  the  Revo-
lution occurred,  Jussieu  put  forward  a  series  of  botanical  generalizations,  of  which
the  most  important  are  all  intimately  connected,  and  still  remain  the  highest
this  department  of  inquiry  has  reached.174  Among  these  I  need  only  mention

There  are  some  interesting  remarks  on  this  brilliant  generalization  in  Owen's  Partheno-
genesis, 1849,  pp.  53  seq.  [Compare  the  remarks  of  Virchow,  Gothe  als  Naturforscher,
1861,  p.  31  seq — ED.]

171  That  is,  into  the  study  of  animal  monstrosities,  which,  however  capricious  they  may
appear,  are  now  understood  to  be  the  necessary  result  of  preceding  events.     Within  the
last  thirty  years  several  of  the  laws  of  these  unnatural  births,  as  they  used  to  be  called,
have  been  discovered  ;  and  it  has  been  proved  that,  so  far  from  being  unnatural,  they  are
strictly  natural.     A  fresh  science  has  thus  been  created,  under  the  name  of  Teratology,
which  is  destroying  the  old  lusus  nature  in  one  of  its  last  and  favourite   strongholds.
[Buckle  here  allows  that  the  term  "unnatural"  has  a  meaning,  but  by  denying  it  any
application  he  makes  it  meaningless — ED.]

172  Dr.  Lindley  (Third  Report  of  Brit.  Assoc.  p.  33)  says  that  Desfontaines  was  the  first
who  demonstrated  the  opposite  modes  of  increase  in  dicotyledonous  and  monocotyle-
donous  stems.     See  also  Richard,  Elements  de  Botanique,  p.  131  ;    and  Cuvier,  Eloges,
vol.  i.  p.  64.    In  regard  to  the  steps  taken  by  Adanson  and  De  Monceau,  see  Winckler,
Gesch.  der  Botanik,  pp.  204,  205  ;   Thomson's  Chemistry  of  Vegetables,  p.  951  ;   Lindley' 's
Introduc.  to  Botany,  vol.  ii.  p.  132.

173  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  even  good  botanists  clung  to  the  Linnaean  system  long
after  the  superiority  of  a  natural  system  was  proved.     This  is  the  more  noticeable
because  Linnceus,  who  was  a  man  of  undoubted  genius,  and  who  possessed  extraordinary
powers  of  combination,  always  allowed  that  his  own  system  was  merely  provisional,  and
that  the  great  object  to  be  attained  was  a  classification  according  to  natural  families.
See  Winckler,  Geschichte  der  Botanik,  p.  202  ;  and  Richard,  Elements  de  Botanique,  p.  570.
Indeed,  what  could  be  thought  of  the  permanent  value  of  a  scheme  which  put  together
the  reed  and  the  barberry,  because  they  were  both  hexandria  ;    and  forced  sorrel  to
associate  with  saffron,  because  both  were  trigynia  ?     Jussieu's  Botany,  1849,  p.  524-

17*  The  Genera  Plantar  urn  of  Antoine  J  ussieu  was  printed  at  Paris  in  1789  ;  and  though
t  is  known  to  have  been  the  result  of  many  years  of  continued  labour,  some  writers  have
asserted  that  the  ideas  in  it  were  borrowed  from  his  uncle,  Bernard  Jussieu.
tions  of  this  kind  rarely  deserve  attention  ;  and  as  Bernard  did  not  choose  to  publish  any-
thing of  his  own,  his  reputation  ought  to  suffer  for  his  uncommunicativeness.     Compare
Winckler,  Gesch.  der  Botanik,  pp.  261-272,  with  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxii.  pp.  162-166.     I  will
only  add  the  following  remarks  from  a  work  of  authority,  Richard,  Elements  de  Botanique,
Paris,  1846,  p.  572  :    "  Mais  ce  ne  fut  qu'en  1789  que  Ton  eut  veritablement  un  ouvrage
complet  sur  la  methode  des  families  naturelles.     Le  Genera  Plantarum  d' A.  L.  de  J
presenta  la  science  des  vegetaux  sous  un  point  de  vue  si  nouveau,  par  la  precision  el
1' elegance  qui  y  regnent,  par  la  profondeur  et  la  justesse  des  principes  generaux  qui  y  son
exposes  pour  la  premiere  fois,  que  c'est  depuis  cette  epoque  seulement  que  la  method
families  naturelles  a  ete  veritablement  creee,  et  que  date  la  nouvelle  ere  de  la  science
vegetaux.  .  .  .  L'auteur  du  Genera  Plantarum  posa  le  premier  les  bases  de  la  s<


5M  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  three  vast  propositions  which  are  now  admitted  to  form  the  basis  of  vegetable
anatomy.  The  first  is  that  the  vegetable  kingdom,  in  its  whole  extent,  is  com-
posed of  plants  either  with  one  cotyledon,  or  with  two  cotyledons,  or  else  with  no
cotyledon  at  all.  The  second  proposition  is  that  this  classification,  so  far  from
being  artificial,  is  strictly  natural  ;  since  it  is  a  law  of  nature  that  plants  having
one  cotyledon  are  endogenous,  and  grow  by  additions  made  to  the  centre  of  their
stems,  while  on  the  other  hand  plants  having  two  cotyledons  are  exogenous,  and
are  compelled  to  grow  by  additions  made  not  to  the  centre  of  their  stems  but
to  the  circumference.175  The  third  proposition  is  that  when  plants  grow  at  their
centre,  the  arrangement  of  the  fruit  and  leaves  is  threefold  ;  when  however  they
grow  at  the  circumference,  it  is  nearly  always  fivefold.176

This  is  what  was  effected  by  the  Frenchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century  for  the
vegetable  kingdom  :  177  and  if  we  now  turn  to  the  mineral  kingdom,  we  shall  find
that  our  obligations  to  them  are  equally  great.  The  study  of  minerals  is  the
most  imperfect  of  the  three  branches  of  natural  history,  because,  notwithstanding
its  apparent  simplicity,  and  the  immense  number  of  experiments  which  have  been
made,  the  true  method  of  investigation  has  not  yet  been  ascertained  ;  it  being
doubtful  whether  mineralogy  ought  to  be  subordinated  to  the  laws  of  chemistry
or  to  those  of  crystallography,  or  whether  both  sets  of  laws  will  have  to  be  con  -
sidered.178  At  all  events  it  is  certain  that,  down  to  the  present  time,  chemistry
has  shown  itself  unable  to  reduce  mineralogical  phenomena  ;  nor  has  any  chemist
possessing  sufficient  powers  of  generalization  attempted  the  task  except  Berze-
lius  ;  and  most  of  his  conclusions  were  overthrown  by  the  splendid  discovery  of
isomorphism,  for  which,  as  is  well  known,  we  are  indebted  to  Mitscherlich,  one
of  the  many  great  thinkers  Germany  has  produced.179

faisant  voir  quelle  etait  1'importance  relative  des  differents  organes  entre  eux,  et  par
consequent  leur  valeur  dans  la  classification.  ...  II  a  fait,  selon  la  remarque  de  Cuvier,
la  meme  revolution  dans  les  sciences  d' observation  que  la  chimie  de  Lavoisier  dans  les
sciences  d' experience.  En  effet,  il  a  non  seulement  change  la  face  de  la  botanique,  mais
son  influence  s'est  egalement  exercee  sur  les  autres  branches  de  1'histoire  naturelle,  et  y  a
introduit  cet  esprit  de  recherches,  de  comparaison,  et  cette  methode  philosophique  et
naturelle,  vers  le  perfectionnement  de  laquelle  tendent  desormais  les  efforts  de  tous  les
naturalistes."

175  Hence  the  removal  of  a  great  source  of  error  ;   since  it  is  now  understood  that  in
dicotyledons  alone  can  age  be  known  with  certainty.     Henslow's  Botany,  p.  243  :  compare
Richard,  Elements  de  Botanique,  p.  159,  aphorisme  xxiv.     On  the  stems  of  endogenous
plants,  which,  being  mostly  tropical,  have  been  less  studied  than  the  exogenous,  see
Lindley's  Botany,  vol.  i.  pp.  221-236  ;  where  there  is  also  an  account,  pp.  229  seq.,  of  the
views  which  Schleiden  advanced  on  this  subject  in  1839.

176  On  the  arrangement  of  the  leaves,  now  called  phyllotaxis,  see  Balfour's  Botany,
p.  92  ;  Burdach's  Physiologic,  vol.  v.  p.  518.

177  The  classification  by  cotyledons  has  been  so  successful  that  "  with  very  few  excep-
tions, however,  nearly  all  plants  may  be  referred  by  any  botanist,  at  a  single  glance,  and
with  unerring  certainty,  to  their  proper  class  ;  and  a  mere  fragment  even  of  the  stem,
leaf,  or  some  other  part,  is  often  quite  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  decide  this  question."
Henslow's  Botany,  p.  30.     In  regard  to  some  difficulties  still  remaining  in  the  way  of  the
threefold  cotyledonous  division  of  the  whole  vegetable  world,  see  Lindley's  Botany,  vol.
ii.  pp.  6i,seq.

178  Mr.  Swainson  (Study  of  Natural  History,  p.  356)  says,  "  mineralogy,  indeed,  which
forms  but  a  part  of  chemistry."     This  is  deciding  the  question  very  rapidly;  but,  in  the
meantime,  what  becomes  of  the  geometrical  laws  of  minerals  ?  and  what  are  we  to  do
with  that  relation  between  their  structure  and   optical  phenomena  which  Sir  David
Brewster  has  worked  out  with  signal  ability  ?

179  The  difficulties  introduced  into  the  study  of  minerals  by  the  discovery  of  isomor-
phism and  polymorphism  are  no  doubt  considerable  ;  but  M.  Beudant  (Mineralogie,  Paris,
1841,  p.  37)  seems  to  me  to  exaggerate  their  effect  upon    "1'importance  des  formes
crystallines."  They  are  much  more  damaging  to  the  purely  chemical  arrangement,  because
our  implements  for  measuring  the  minute  angles  of  crystals  are  still  very  imperfect,  and


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION     515

Although  the  chemical  department  of  mineralogy  is  in  an  unformed  and  indeed
anarchical  condition,  its  other  department,  namely  crystallography,  has  made
great  progress  ;  and  here  again  the  earliest  steps  were  taken  by  two  Frenchmen,
who  lived  in  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.  About  1760,  Rome  de
Lisle  18°  set  the  first  example  of  studying  crystals  according  to  a  scheme  so  large
as  to  include  all  the  varieties  of  their  primary  forms,  and  to  account  for  their
irregularities  and  the  apparent  caprice  with  which  they  were  arranged.  In  this
investigation  he  was  guided  by  the  fundamental  assumption,  that  what  is  called
an  irregularity  is  in  truth  perfectly  regular,  and  that  the  operations  of  nature
are  invariable.181  Scarcely  had  this  great  idea  been  applied  to  the  almost  innu-
merable forms  into  which  minerals  crystallize,  when  it  was  followed  up  with  still
larger  resources  by  Haiiy,  another  eminent  Frenchman.182  This  remarkable

the  goniometer  may  fail  in  detecting  differences  which  really  exist ;  and  therefore  many
alleged  cases  of  isomorphism  are  probably  not  so  in  reality.  Wollaston's  reflecting
goniometer  has  been  long  considered  the  best  instrument  possessed  by  crystallographers  ;
but  I  learn  from  Liebig  and  Kopp's  Reports,  vol.  i.  pp.  19,  20,  that  Frankenheim  has
recently  invented  one  for  measuring  the  angles  of  "  microscopic  crystals."  On  the
amount  of  error  in  the  measurement  of  angles,  see  Phillip's  Mineralogy,  1837,  p.  viii.

180  He  says,  "  depuis  plus  de  vingt  ans  que  je  m'occupe  de  cet  objet."     Rome  de  Lisle,
Cristallographie,  on  Description  des  Formes  propres  a  tous  les  Corps  du  Regne  Mineral,
Paris,  1783,  vol.  i.  p.  91.

181  See  his  Essai  de  Cristallographie,  Paris,  1772,  p.  x.  :  "  un  de  ceux  qui  m'a  le  plus
frappe  ce  sont  les  formes  regulieres  et  constantes  que  prennent  naturellement  certains
corps  que  nous  designons  par  le  nom  de  cristaux."     In  the  same  work,  p.  13,  "  il  faut
necessairement  supposer  que  les  molecules  integrantes  des  corps  ont  chacune,  suivant
qui  lui  est  propre,  une  figure  constante  et  determinee."     In  his  later  treatise  (Cristallo-
graphie,  1783,  vol.  i.  p.  70),  after  giving  some  instances  of  the  extraordinary  complica-
tions presented  by  minerals,  he  adds  :  "  il  n'est  done  pas  etonnant  que  d'habiles  chimistes
n'aieat  rien  vu  de  constant  ni  de  determine  dans  les  formes  cristallines,  tandis  qu'il  n'en
est  aucune  qu'on  ne  puisse,  avec  un  peu  d'attention,  rapporter  a  la  figure  elementaire  et
primordiale  dont  elle  derive."    Even  Buff  on,  notwithstanding  his  fine  perception  of  law,
had  just  declared  "  qu' en  general  la  forme  de  cristallisation  n'est  pas  uncaractere  constant,
mais  plus  equivoque  et  plus  variable  qu'aucun  autre  des  caracteres  par  lesquels  on  doit
distinguer  les  mineraux."     De  Lisle,  vol.  i.  p.  xviii.     Compare,  on  this  great  achievement
of  De  Lisle's,  HerscheVs  Nat.  Philos.  p.  239  :  "  he  first  ascertained  the  important  fact  of
the  constancy  of  the  angles  at  which  their  faces  meet."

182  The  first  work  of  Haiiy  appeared  in  1784  (Querard,  France  Litteraire,  vol.  iv.  p.  41 )  ;
but  he  had  read  two  special  memoirs  in  1781.     Cuvier,  Eloges,  vol.  iii.  p.  138.     The
intellectual  relation  between  his  views  and  those  of  his  predecessor  must  be  obvious  to
every  mineralogist ;  but  Dr.  Whewell,  who    has  noticed  this  judiciously  enough,  adds
(Hist,  of  the  Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  pp.  229,  230)  :  "  Unfortunately  Rome  de  Lisle  and
Hauy  were  not  only  rivals,  but  in  some  measure  enemies.  .  .  .  Haiiy  revenged  himself
by  rarely  mentioning  Rome  in  his  works,  though  it  was  manifest  that  his  obligations  to
him  were  immense  ;  and  by  recording  his  errors  while  he  corrected  them."     The  truth,
however,  is  that  so  far  from  rarely  mentioning  De  Lisle,  he  mentions  him  incessantly  ;
and  I  have  counted  upwards  of  three  hundred  instances  in  Haiiy's  great  work  in  which
he  is  named  and  his  writings  are  referred  to.     On  one  occasion  he  says  of  De  Lisle,  "  En
un  mot,  sa  Cristallographie  est  le  fruit  d'un  travail  immense  par  son  etendue,  presque
entierement  neuf  par  son  objet,  et  tres  precieux  par  son  utilite."     Haiiy,  Traite  de  Minera-
logie,  Paris,  1801,  vol.  i.  p.  17.     Elsewhere  he  calls  him,  "  cet  habile  naturaliste  ;  ce  savant
celebre,"  vol.  ii.  p.  323  ;  "  ce  celebre  naturaliste,"  vol.  iii.  p.  442  ;  see  also  vol.  iv.  pp.  51,
etc.    In  a  work  of  so  much  merit  as  Dr.  Whewell's,  it  is  important  that  these  errors  should
be  indicated,  because  we  have  no  other  book  of  value  on  the  general  history  of  the  sciences  ;
and  many  authors  have  deceived  themselves  and  their  readers  by  implicitly  adopting
the  statements  of  this  able  and  industrious  writer.     I  would  particularly  caution  the
student  in  regard  to  the  physiological  part  of  Dr.  Whewell's  History,  where,  for  instance,
the  antagonism  between  the  methods  of  Cuvier  and  Bichat  is  entirely  lost  sight  of,  and
while  whole  pages  are  devoted  to  Cuvier,  Bichat  is  disposed  of  in  four  lines.


516  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

man  achieved  a  complete  union  between  mineralogy  and  geometry  ;  and,  bringing
the  laws  of  space  to  bear  on  the  molecular  arrangements  of  matter,  he  was  able
to  penetrate  into  the  intimate  structure  of  crystals.18*  By  this  means  he  suc-
ceeded in  proving  that  the  secondary  forms  of  all  crystals  are  derived  from  their
primary  forms  by  a  regular  process  of  decrement  ; 184  and  that,  when  a  substance
is  passing  from  a  liquid  to  a  solid  state,  its  particles  are  compelled  to  cohere, accord-
ing to  a  scheme  which  provides  for  every  possible  change,  since  it  includes  even
those  subsequent  layers  which  alter  the  ordinary  type  of  the  crystal,  by  disturbing
its  natural  symmetry.185  To  ascertain  that  such  violations  of  symmetry  are
susceptible  of  mathematical  calculation,  was  to  make  a  vast  addition  to  our
knowledge  ;  but  what  seems  to  me  still  more  important  is  that  it  indicates  an
approach  to  the  magnificent  idea  that  everything  which  occurs  is  regulated  by
law,  and  that  confusion  and  disorder  are  impossible.186  For,  by  proving  that
even  the  most  uncouth  and  singular  forms  of  minerals  are  the  natural  results  of
their  antecedents,  Haiiy  laid  the  foundation  of  what  may  be  called  the  path-
ology of  the  inorganic  world.  However  paradoxical  such  a  notion  may  seem,
it  is  certain  that  symmetry  is  to  crystals  what  health  is  to  animals  ;  so  that  an
irregularity  of  shape  in  the  first  corresponds  with  an  appearance  of  disease  in
the  second.187  When,  therefore,  the  minds  of  men  became  familiarized  with  the
great  truth  that  in  the  mineral  kingdom  there  is,  properly  speaking,  no  irregu-
larity, it  became  more  easy  for  them  to  grasp  the  still  higher  truth  that  the  same
principle  holds  good  of  the  animal  kingdom,  although,  from  the  superior  com-
plexity of  the  phenomena,  it  will  be  long  before  we  can  arrive  at  an  equal  demon-
stration. But  that  such  a  demonstration  is  possible  is  the  principle  upon  which

183  "  Haliy  est  done  le  seul  veritable  auteur  de  la  science  mathematique  des  cristaux."
Cuvier,  Progres  des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  p.  8  ;  see  also  p.  317.     Dr.  Clarke,  whose  celebrated
lectures  on  mineralogy  excited  much  attention  among  his  hearers,  was  indebted  for  some
of  his  principal  views  to  his  conversations  with  Haiiy  :  see  Otter's  Life  of  Clarke,  vol.  ii.
p.  192.

184  See  an  admirable  statement  of  the  three  forms  of  decrement,  in  Haiiy,  Traite  de
Mincralogie,  vol.  i.  pp.  285,  286.     Compare  WhewelVs  Hist,  of  the  Indue.  Sciences,  vol.  iii.
pp.  224,  225  ;  who,  however,  does  not  mention  Haiiy's  classification  of  "  decroissemeiis
sur  les  bords,"  "  decroissemens  sur  les  angles,"  and  "  decroissemens  intermcdiaires."

185  And,  as  he  clearly  saw,  the  proper  method  was  to  study  the  laws  of  symmetry,  and
then  apply  them  deductively  to  minerals,  instead  of  rising  inductively  from  the  aberra-
tions actually  presented  by  minerals.     This  is  interesting  to  observe,  because  it  is  analo-
gous to  the  method  of  the  best  pathologists,  who  seek  the  philosophy  of  their  subject
in  physiological  phenomena  rather   than  in  pathological  ones ;    striking  downwards
from  the  normal  to  the  abnormal.     "  La  symetrie  des  formes  sous  lesquelles  se  presentent
les  solides  que  nous  avons  consideres  jusqu'ici,  nous  a  fourni  des  donnees  pour  exprimer
les  lois  de  decroissemens  dont  ces  solides  sont  susceptibles."     Haiiy,  Traite  de  Miner  a-
logic,  vol.  i.  p.  442  ;  compare  vol.  ii.  p.  192.

186  "  Un  coup  d'oeil  peu  attentif,  jete  sur  les  cristaux,  les  fit  appeler  d'abord  de  purs
jeux  de  la  nature,  ce  quin'etoit  qu'une  maniere  plus  elegante  de  faire  1'aveu  de  son  ignor-
ance.    Un  examen  reflechi  nous  y  decouvre  des  lois  d' arrangement,  a  1'aide  desquelles
le  calcul  represente  et  enchaine  1'un  a  1'autre  les  resultats  observes  ;  lois  si  variables  ct
en  meme  temps  si  precises  ct  si  regulieres  ;  ordinairement  tres  simples,  sans  rien  perdre
de  leur  fecondite."     Haiiy,  Mineralogie,  vol.  i.  pp.  xiii.  xiv.     Again,  vol.  ii.  p.  57,  "  notre
but,  qui  est  de  prouver  que  les  lois  d'ou  depend  la  structure  du  cristal  sont  les  plus  simples
possibles  dans  leur  ensemble."     [The  phrase  "  confusion  and  disorder  are  impossible'1''  is
another  verbal  confusion.     The  terms  in  question  are  significant  relatively  to  human
ideals.     In  this  sense  Buckle  himself  proceeds  to  use  the  term  "pathology." — ED.]

187  On  the  remarkable  power  possessed  by  crystals,  in  common  with  animals,  of  repair-
ing their  own  injuries,  see  Pagefs  Pathology,  1853,  vol.  i.  pp.  152,  153,  confirming  the
experiments  of  Jordan  on  this  curious  subject:  "The  ability  to  repair  the  damages
sustained  by  injury  ...  is  not  an  exclusive  property  of  living  beings  ;  for  even  crystals
will  repair  themselves  when,  after  pieces  have  been  broken  from  them,  they  are  placed  in
the  same  conditions  in  which  they  were  first  formed."


PROXIMATE    CAUSES    OF    THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION     517

the  future  progress  of  all  organic,  and,  indeed,  of  all  mental  science  depends.
And  it  is  very  observable  that  the  same  generation  which  established  the  fact
that  the  apparent  aberrations  presented  by  minerals  are  strictly  regular,  also
took  the  first  steps  towards  establishing  the  far  higher  fact  that  the  aberrations
of  the  human  mind  are  governed  by  laws  as  unfailing  as  those  which  determine
the  condition  of  inert  matter.  The  examination  of  this  would  lead  to  a  digression
foreign  to  my  present  design  ;  but  I  may  mention  that,  at  the  end  of  the  century,
there  was  written  in  France  the  celebrated  treatise  on  insanity  by  Pinel  ;  a
work  remarkable  in  many  respects,  but  chiefly  in  this,  that  in  it  the  old  notions
respecting  the  mysterious  and  inscrutable  character  of  mental  disease  are  alto-
gether discarded  : t88  the  disease  itself  is  considered  as  a  phenomenon  inevitably
occurring  under  certain  given  conditions,  and  the  foundation  laid  for  supplying
another  link  in  that  vast  chain  of  evidence  which  connects  the  material  with  the
immaterial,  and  thus  uniting  mind  and  matter  into  a  single  study,  is  now  prepar-
ing the  way  for  some  generalization  which,  being  common  to  both,  shall  serve
as  a  centre  round  which  the  disjointed  fragments  of  our  knowledge  may  safely
rally.

These  were  the  views  which,  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,
began  to  dawn  upon  French  thinkers.  The  extraordinary  ability  and  success
with  which  these  eminent  men  cultivated  their  respective  sciences  I  have  traced
at  a  length  greater  than  I  had  intended,  but  still  very  inadequate  to  the  impor-
tance of  the  subject.  Enough,  however,  has  been  brought  forward  to  convince
the  reader  of  the  truth  of  the  proposition  I  wished  to  prove  ;  namely,  that  the
intellect  of  France  was,  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  concen-
trated upon  the  external  world  with  unprecedented  zeal,  and  thus  aided  that
vast  movement  of  which  the  Revolution  itself  was  merely  a  single  consequence.*
The  intimate  connexion  between  scientific  progress  and  social  rebellion  is  evident
from  the  fact  that  both  are  suggested  by  the  same  yearning  after  improvement,
the  same  dissatisfaction  with  what  has  been  previously  done,  the  same  restless,
prying,  insubordinate,  and  audacious  spirit.  But  in  France  this  general  analogy
was  strengthened  by  the  curious  circumstances  I  have  already  noticed,  by  virtue
of  which  the  activity  of  the  country  was,  during  the  first  half  of  the  century,
directed  against  the  church  rather  than  against  the  state  f  ;  so  that,  in  order  to
complete  the  antecedents  of  the  Revolution,  it  was  necessary  that,  in  the  latter
hall  of  the  century,  the  ground  of  attack  should  be  shifted.  This  is  precisely
what  was  done  by  the  wonderful  impetus  given  to  every  branch  of  natural  science.

iss  "  M.  pinel  a  imprime  line  marche  nouvelle  a  1'etude  de  la  folie.  ...  En  la  rangeant
simplernent,  et  sans  differences  aucunes,  au  nombre  des  autres  derangemens  de  nos
organes,  en  lui  assignant  une  place  dans  le  cadre  nosographique,  il  fit  faire  un  pas  immense
a  son  histoire."  Georget,  de  la  Folie,  Paris,  1820,  p.  69.  In  the  same  work,  p.  295,
"  M.  Pinel,  le  premier  en  France,  on  pourrait  dire  en  Europe,  jeta  les  fondemens  d'nn
traitement  vraiment  rationnel  en  rangeant  la  folie  au  nombre  des  autres  affections  or-
guniques."  M.  Esquirol,  who  expresses  the*  modern  and  purely  scientific  view,  says  in
his  great  work  (Des  Maladies  Mentales,  Paris,  1838,  vol.  i.  p.  336),  "  L' alienation  mentale,
que  les  anciens  peuples  regardaient  comme  une  inspiration  ou  une  punition  des  dieux,  qui
dans  la  suite  fut  prise  pour  la  possession  des  demons,  qui  dans  d'autres  temps  passa  pour
une  oouvre  de  la  magie  ;  1' alienation  mentale,  dis-je,  avec  toutes  ses  especes  et  ses  varietes
innombrables,  ne  differe  en  rien  des  autres  maladies."  The  recognition  of  this  he  expressly
ascribes  to  his  predecessor:  "grace  aux  principes  exposes  par  Pinel."  p.  340-  Pinel
himself  clearly  saw  the  connexion  between  his  own  opinions  and  the  spirit  of  the  age  :
see  Pinel,  Traitc  Medico -Philosophique  stir  V Alienation  Mentale,  p.  xxxii.  :  "  Un  ouvrage
de  nu'decine,  public  en  France  a  la  fin  du  dix-huitieme  siecle,  doit  avoir  un  autre  carar.tere
que  s'il  avoit  etc  ecrit  a  une  epoque  anterieure."

[*  As  Bichat's  chief  works  are  dated  1800  and  1801,  he  cannot  be  counted  among  the
Revolution -makers;  and  as  Pinel  was  appointed  to  the  Hopital  Bicetre  only  in  1792,
he  is  in  the  same  case.  As  is  noted  above  (note  174),  Jussieu's  great  work,  in  turn,
belongs  to  the  year  of  the  Revolution. — ED.]

[t  See  edit,  notos  above,  pp.  435,  473,  487. — Eo.1


5*8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

For,  the  attention  of  men  being  thus  steadily  fixed  upon  the  external  world,  the
internal  fell  into  neglect  ;  while,  as  the  external  corresponds  to  the  state,  and  the
internal  to  the  church,  it  was  part  of  the  same  intellectual  development  that  the
assailers  of  the  existing  fabric  should  turn  against  political  abuses  the  energy
which  the  preceding  generation  had  reserved  for  religious  ones.

Thus  it  was  that  the  French  Revolution,  like  every  great  revolution  the  world
has  yet  seen,  was  preceded  by  a  complete  change  in  the  habits  and  associations
of  the  national  intellect.  But  besides  this  there  was  also  taking  place,  precisely
at  the  same  time,  a  vast  social  movement,  which  was  intimately  connected  with
the  intellectual  movement,  and  indeed  formed  part  of  it,  in  so  far  as  it  was  followed
by  similar  results  and  produced  by  similar  causes.  The  nature  of  this  social
revolution  I  shall  examine  only  very  briefly,  because  in  a  future  volume  it  will
be  necessary  to  trace  its  history  minutely,  in  order  to  illustrate  the  slighter  but
still  remarkable  changes  which  in  the  same  period  were  going  on  in  English
society.  *

In  France,  before  the  Revolution,  the  people,  though  always  very  social,  were
also  very  exclusive.  The  upper  classes,  protected  by  an  imaginary  superiority,
ooked  with  scorn  upon  those  whose  birth  or  titles  were  unequal  to  their  own.
The  class  immediately  below  them  copied  and  communicated  their  example,  and
every  order  in  society  endeavoured  to  find  some  fanciful  distinction  which  should
guard  them  from  the  contamination  of  their  inferiors.  The  only  three  real
sources  of  superiority, — the  superiority  of  morals,  of  intellect,  and  of  knowledge, —
were  entirely  overlooked  in  this  absurd  scheme  ;  and  men  became  accustomed
to  pride  themselves  not  on  any  essential  difference,  but  on  those  inferior  matters
which,  with  extremely  few  exceptions,  are  the  result  of  accident,  and  therefore
no  test  of  merit.189

The  first  great  blow  to  this  state  of  things  was  the  unprecedented  impulse
given  to  the  cultivation  of  physical  science.  Those  vast  discoveries  which  were
being  made  not  only  stimulated  the  intellect  of  thinking  men,  but  even  roused
the  curiosity  of  the  more  thoughtless  parts  of  society.  The  lectures  of  chemists,
of  geologists,  of  mineralogists,  and  of  physiologists,  were  attended  by  those  who
came  to  wonder,  as  well  as  by  those  who  came  to  learn.  In  Paris  the
scientific  assemblages  were  crowded  to  overflowing.190  The  halls  and
amphitheatres  in  which  the  great  truths  of  nature  were  expounded  were
no  longer  able  to  hold  their  audiences,  and  in  several  instances  it  was  found
necessary  to  enlarge  them.191  The  sittings  of  the  Academy,  instead  of  being
confined  to  a  few  solitary  scholars,  were  frequented  by  every  one  whose  rank  or
influence  enabled  them  to  secure  a  place.192  Even  women  of  fashion,  forgetting

189  Comp.  Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  i.  p.  23,  with  the  Introduction  to  Des  Reaux,  Historiettes,
vol.  i.  p.  34.     A  good  illustration  of  this  is  that  the  Prince  de  Montbarey,  in  his  Memoirs,
gently  censures  Louis  XV.,  not  for  his  scandalous  profligacy,  but  because  he  selected  for
his  mistresses  some  women  who  were  not  of  high  birth.     Mem.  de  Montbarey,  vol.  i.  p.  341 ,
and  see  vol.  iii.  p.  117.

190  And  that  too  even  on  such  a  subject  as  anatomy.     In  1768,  Antoine  Petit  began
his  anatomical  lectures  in  the  great  amphitheatre  of  the  Jardin  du  Roi ;  and  the  press
to  hear  him  was  so  great,  that  not  only  all  the  seats  were  occupied,  but  the  very  window-
ledges  were  crowded.     See  the  animated  description  in  Biog.  Univ.  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  494.

191  Dr.  Thomson  (Hist,  of  Chemistry,  vol.  ii.  p.  169)  says  of  Fourcroy's  lectures  on
chemistry,  which  began  in  1774  :  "  Such  were  the  crowds,  both  of  men  and  women,  who
flocked  to  hear  him,  that  it  was  twice  necessary  to  enlarge  the  size  of  the  lecture -room."
This  circumstance  is  also  mentioned  in  Cuvier,  Eloges,  vol.  ii.  p.  19.

192  jn  1779  it  was  remarked  that  "  les  seances  publiques  de  1' Academic  Frangaise  sont
devenues  une  espece  de  spectacle  fort  &  la  mode  :  "  and  as  this  continued  to  increase,  the
throng  became  at  length  so  great   that  in  1785  it  was  found  necessary  to  diminish  the
number  of  tickets  of  admission,  and  it  was  even  proposed  that  ladies  should  be  excluded,
in  consquence  of  some  uproarious  scenes  which  had  happened.     Grimm  et  Diderot.  Corres-
pond. Lit.  vol.  x.  p.  341,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  148,  149,  185,  251.

[*  This  plan  Buckle  did  not  live  to  fulfil — ED.]


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  519

their  usual  frivolity,  hastened  to  hear  discussions  on  the  composition  of  a  mineral,
on  the  discovery  of  a  new  salt,  on  the  structure  of  plants,  on  the  organization  of
animals,  on  the  properties  of  the  electric  fluid.193  A  sudden  craving  after  know-
ledge seemed  to  have  smitten  every  rank.  The  largest  and  the  most  difficult
inquiries  found  favour  in  the  eyes  of  those  whose  fathers  had  hardly  heard  the
names  of  the  sciences  to  which  they  belonged.  The  brilliant  imagination  of  Buffon
made  geology  suddenly  popular  ;  the  same  thing  was  effected  for  chemistry  by
the  eloquence  of  Fourcroy,  and  for  electricity  by  Nollet  ;  while  the  admirable
expositions  of  Lalande  caused  astronomy  itself  to  be  generally  cultivated.  In
a  word,  it  is  enough  to  say  that  during  the  thirty  years  preceding  the  Revolution
the  spread  of  physical  science  was  so  rapid  that  in  its  favour  the  old  classical
studies  were  despised  ; 194  it  was  considered  the  essential  basis  of  a  good  education,
and  some  slight  acquaintance  with  it  was  deemed  necessary  for  every  class,  except
those  who  were  obliged  to  support  themselves  by  their  daily  labour.195

The  results  produced  by  this  remarkable  change  are  very  curious,  and  from
their  energy  and  rapidity  were  very  decisive.  As  long  as  the  different  classes
confined  themselves  to  pursuits  peculiar  to  their  own  sphere,  they  were  encouraged
to  preserve  their  separate  habits  ;  and  the  subordination,  or  as  it  were  the  hier-
archy, of  society  was  easily  maintained.  But  when  the  members  of  the  various
orders  met  in  the  same  place  with  the  same  object,  they  became  knit  together  by
a  new  sympathy.  The  highest  and  most  durable  of  all  pleasures,  the  pleasure
caused  by  the  perception  of  fresh  truths,  was  now  a  great  link,  which  banded
together  those  social  elements  that  were  formerly  wrapped  up  in  the  pride  of  their
own  isolation.  Besides  this,  there  was  also  given  to  them  not  only  a  new  pursuit,

193  Goldsmith,  who  was  in  Paris  in  1755,  says  with  surprise,  "  I  have  seen  as  bright
a  circle  of  beauty  at  the  chemical  lectures  of  Rouelle  as  gracing  the  court  of  Versailles."
Prior's  Life  of  Goldsmith,  vol.  i.  p.  180  ;  Forster's  Life  of  Goldsmith,  vol.  i.  p.  65.  In  the
middle  of  the  century  electricity  was  very  popular  among  the  Parisian  ladies  ;  and  the
interest  felt  in  it  was  revived  several  years  later  by  Franklin.  Compare  Grimm,  Corres-
pondance,  vol.  vii.  p.  122,  with  Tucker's  Life  of  Jefferson,  vol.  i.  pp.  190,  191.  Cuvier
(Eloges,  vol.  i.  p.  56)  tells  us  that  even  the  anatomical  descriptions  which  Daubenton
wrote  for  Buffon  were  to  be  found  "  sur  la  toilette  des  femmes."  This  change  of  taste
is  also  noticed,  though  in  a  jeering  spirit,  in  Mem.  de  Genlis,  vol.  vi.  p.  32.  Compare  the
account  given  by  Townsend,  who  visited  France  in  1786,  on  his  way  to  Spain  :  "A  numer-
ous society  of  gentlemen  and  ladies  of  the  first  fashion  meet  to  hear  lectures  on  the
sciences,  delivered  by  men  of  the  highest  rank  in  their  profession.  ...  I  was  much
struck  with  the  fluency  and  elegance  of  language  with  which  the  anatomical  pro-
fessor spoke,  and  not  a  little  so  with  the  deep  attention  of  his  auditors."  Townsend' s
Journey  through  Spain,  vol.  i.  p.  41  :  see  also  Smith's  Tour  on  the  Continent  in  1786,  vol.  i.
p.  117.

19*  In  a  letter  written  in  1756,  it  is  said,  "  Mais  c'est  peine  perdue  aujourd'hui  que  de
plaisanter  les  erudits  ;  il  n'y  en  a  plus  en  France."  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  ii.  p.  15-  In
1764,  "  II  est  honteux  et  incroyable  a  quel  point  1'etude  des  anciens  est  negligee,"  vol.  iv.
p.  97.  In  1768,  "  Une  autre  raison  qui  rendra  les  traductions  des  auteurs  anciens  ^de
plus  en  plus  rares  en  France,  c'est  que  depuis  long-temps  on  n'y  sait  plus  le  Grec,  et  qu'on
neglige  1'etude  du  Latin  tous  les  jours  davantage."  vol.  vi.  p.  140.  Sherlock  (New  Letters
from  an  English  Traveller,  London,  1781,  p.  86)  says,  "  It  is  very  rare  to  meet  a  man  in
France  that  understands  Greek."  In  1785,  Jefferson  writes  from  Paris  to  Madison,
"  Greek  and  Roman  authors  are  dearer  here  than,  I  believe,  anywhere  in  the  world  ;
nobody  here  reads  them,  wherefore  they  are  not  reprinted."  Jefferson's  Correspond,  vol.  i.
p.  301.  See  further,  on  this  neglect  of  the  ancients,  a  significant  precursor  of  the  Revolu-
tion, Mem.  de  Montbarey,  vol.  iii.  p.  181 ;  Villemain,  Litterature  au  XVIIIe  Siecle,  vol.  iii.
pp.  243-248  ;  Schlosser's  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  i.  p.  344-

195  For  further  evidence  of  the  popularity  of  physical  knowledge,  and  of  its  study,
even  by  those  who  might  have  been  expected  to  neglect  it,  see  Mem.  de  Roland,  vol.  i.
pp.  115,  268,  324,  343  ;  Mem.  de  Morellet,  vol.  i.  p.  16  ;  Dupont  de  Nemours,  Mem.  sur
Turgot,  pp.  45,  52,  53,  411  ;  Mem.  de  Brissot,  vol.  i.  pp.  62,  151,  3i9»  336,  338,  357  ;
Cuvier,  Progres  des  Sciences,  vol.  i.  p.  89.


520  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

but  also  a  new  standard  of  merit.  In  the  amphitheatre  and  the  lecture -room
the  first  object  of  attention  is  the  professor  and  the  lecturer.  The  division  is
between  those  who  teach  and  those  who  learn.  The  subordination  of  ranks  makes
way  for  the  subordination  of  knowledge.196  The  petty  and  conventional  distinc-
tions of  fashionable  life  are  succeeded  by  those  large  and  genuine  distinctions  by
which  alone  man  is  really  separated  from  man.  The  progress  of  the  intellect
supplies  a  new  object  of  veneration  ;  the  old  worship  of  rank  is  rudely  disturbed,
and  its  superstitious  devotees  are  taught  to  bow  the  knee  before  what  to  them  is
the  shrine  of  a  strange  god.  The  hall  of  science  is  the  temple  of  democracy
Those  who  come  to  learn,  confess  their  own  ignorance,  abrogate  in  some  degree
their  own  superiority,  and  begin  to  perceive  that  the  greatness  of  men  has  no
connexion  with  the  splendour  of  their  titles,  or  the  dignity  of  their  birth  ;  that  it
is  not  concerned  with  their  quarterings,  their  escutcheons,  their  descents,  their
dexter-chiefs,  their  sinister-chiefs,  their  chevrons,  their  bends,  their  azures,  their
gules,  and  the  other  trumperies  of  their  heraldry  ;  but  that  it  depends  upon
the  largeness  of  their  minds,  the  powers  of  their  intellect,  and  the  fulness  ol
their  knowledge.

These  were  the  views  which  in  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  began
to  influence  those  classes  which  had  long  been  the  undisputed  masters  of  society.197
And  what  shows  the  strength  of  this  great  movement  is  that  it  was  accompanied
by  other  social  changes  which,  though  in  themselves  apparently  trifling,  become
full  of  meaning  when  taken  in  connexion  with  the  general  history  of  the  time.

While  the  immense  progress  of  physical  knowledge  was  revolutionizing  society,
by  inspiring  the  different  classes  with  an  object  common  to  all,  and  thus  raising
a  new  standard  of  merit,  a  more  trivial  but  equally  democratic  tendency  was
observable  even  in  the  conventional  forms  of  social  life.  To  describe  the  whole
of  these  changes  would  occupy  a  space  disproportioned  to  the  other  parts  of  this
Introduction  ;  but  it  is  certain  that,  until  the  changes  have  been  carefully  examined,
it  will  be  impossible  for  any  one  to  write  a  history  of  the  French  Revolution.
As  a  specimen  of  what  I  mean,  I  will  notice  two  of  these  innovations  which  are
very  conspicuous,  and  are  also  interesting  on  account  of  their  analogy  with  what
has  happened  in  English  society.

The  first  of  these  changes  was  an  alteration  in  dress,  and  a  marked  contempt
for  those  external  appearances  hitherto  valued  as  one  of  the  most  important  of
all  matters.  During  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  indeed  during  the  first  half  of
the  reign  of  Louis  XV.,  not  only  men  of  frivolous  tastes,  but  even  those  dis-
tinguished for  their  knowledge,  displayed  in  their  attire  a  dainty  precision,  a
nice  and  studied  adjustment,  a  pomp  of  gold,  of  silver,  and  of  ruffles,  such  as  in
our  days  can  nowhere  be  seen  except  in  the  courts  of  European  princes  where  a
certain  barbarian  splendour  is  still  retained.  So  far  was  this  carried,  that  in  the
seventeenth  century  the  rank  of  a  person  might  be  immediately  known  by  his
appearance  ;  no  one  presuming  to  usurp  a  garb  worn  by  the  class  immediately
above  his  own.198  But  in  that  democratic  movement  which  preceded  the  French

196  A  celebrated  writer  has  well  said,  though  in  a  somewhat  different  point  of  view,
"  II  ne  peut  y  avoir  dans  les  sciences  morales,  pas  plus  que  dans  les  sciences  physiques,
ni  maitres,  ni  esclaves,  ni  rois,  ni  sujets,  ni  citoyens,  ni  etrangers."  Comte,  Traite  de  Legis-
lation, vol.  i.  p.  43.

197  The  remarks  which  Thomas  made  upon  Descartes  in  1765,  in  an  eloge  crowned  by
the  Academy,  illustrate  the  opinions  which  in  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century
were  becoming  rapidly  diffused  in  France.     See  the  passage  beginning    "  O   prejuges  !
6  ridicule  fierte  des  places  et  du  rang  !  "  etc.,  (Euvres  de  Descartes,  vol.  i.  p.  74.     Certainly
no  one  would  have  used  such  language,  on  such  an  occasion,  thirty  years  earlier.     So,  too,
the  Count  de  Segur  says  of  the  younger  nobles  before  the  Revolution,  "  nous  preferions
un  mot  d'eloges  de  D'Alembert,  de  Diderot,  a  la  faveur  la  plus  signalee  d'un  prince."
Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  i.  p.  142  :  see  also  vol.  ii.  p.  46.

i"  Among  many  other  illustrations  which  might  be  given  of  this  distinction  of  classes
by  dress,  see  Monteil,  Hist,  des  divers  Etats,  vol.  vii.  pp.  7-10  ;  and  Tallemant  des  Reaux,
Historiettes,  vol.  i.  p.  36,  note.


PROXIMATE    CAUSES    OF   THE    FRENCH    REVOLUTION     521

Revolution,  the  minds  of  men  became  too  earnest,  too  intent  upon  higher  matters,
to  busy  themselves  with  those  idle  devices  which  engrossed  the  attention  of  their
fathers.  A  contemptuous  disregard  of  such  distinctions  became  general.  In
Paris  the  innovation  was  seen  even  in  those  gay  assemblies  where  a  certain  amount
of  personal  decoration  is  still  considered  natural.  At  dinners,  suppers,  and  balls,
it  is  noticed  by  contemporary  observers  that  the  dress  usually  worn  was  becoming
so  simple  as  to  cause  a  confusion  of  ranks,  until  at  length  every  distinction  was
abandoned  by  both  sexes  ;  the  men,  on  such  occasions,  coming  in  a  common
frock-coat,  the  women  in  their  ordinary  morning-gowns.199  Nay,  to  such  a  pitch
was  this  carried  that  we  are  assured  by  the  Prince  de  Moiitbarey,  who  was  in
Paris  at  the  time,  that  shortly  before  the  Revolution  even  those  who  had  stars
and  orders  were  careful  to  hide  them  by  buttoning  their  coats,  so  that  these  marks
of  superiority  might  no  longer  be  seen.200

The  other  innovation  to  which  I  have  referred  is  equally  interesting  as  charac-
teristic of  the  spirit  of  the  time.  This  is,  that  the  tendency  to  amalgamate  the
different  orders  of  society  201  was  shown  in  the  institution  of  clubs  ;  a  remarkable
contrivance,  which  to  us  seems  perfectly  natural  because  we  are  accustomed  to
it,  but  of  which  it  may  be  truly  said  that  until  the  eighteenth  century  its  existence
was  impossible.  Before  the  eighteenth  century  each  class  was  so  jealous  of  its
superiority  over  the  one  below  it,  that  to  meet  together  on  equal  terms  was  im-
practicable ;  and  although  a  certain  patronizing  familiarity  towards  one's  inferiors
might  be  safely  indulged  in,  this  only  marked  the  immense  interval  of  separation,
since  the  great  man  had  no  fear  of  his  condescension  being  abused.  In  those
good  old  times  a  proper  respect  was  paid  to  rank  and  birth  ;  and  he  who  could
count  his  twenty  ancestors  was  venerated  to  an  extent  of  which  we,  in  these
degenerate  days,  can  hardly  form  an  idea.  As  to  anything  like  social  equality,

199  In  August,  1787,  Jefferson  writes  from  Paris  (Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  224)  :  "  In
society,  the  habit  habille  is  almost  banished,  and  they  begin  to  go  even  to  great  suppers  in
frock  :  the  court  and  diplomatic  corps,  however,  must  always  be  excepted.     They  are
too  high  to  be  reached  by  any  improvement.     They  are  the  last  refuge  from  which
etiquette,  formality,  and  folly  will  be  driven.     Take  away  these,  and  they  would  be  on  a
level  with  other  people."     Jefferson  was  a^statesman  and  a  diplomatist,  and  was  well
acquainted  with  his  profession.     The  change,  however,  which  he  noticed  had  been  coming
on  some  years  earlier.    In  a  letter  written  in  May  1786,  it  is  said  :  "  II  est  rare  aujourd'hui
de  rencontrer  dans  le  monde  des  personnes  qui  soient  ce  qu'on  appelle  habillees.     Les
femmes  sent  en  chemise  et  en  chapeau,  les  homines  en  froc  et  en  gilet."    Grimm,  Correspond.
vol.  xiv.  p.  485  ;  and  on  the  increased  simplicity  of  attire  in  1780,  see  vol.  xi.  pp.   141,
142.     Segur,  who  witnessed  these  changes,  and  was  much   displeased  by  them,  says
of  their  advocates,  "  Us  ne  voyaient  pas  que  les  frocs,  remplacant  les  amples  et  imposans
vetemens  de  1'ancienne  cour,  presagaient  un  penchant  general  pour  1'egalite."  Mem.  de
Segur,  vol.  i.  p.  131.     Soulavie  (Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  Vi.  p.  38)  observes  that  "  les
grands,  vers  les  approches  de  la  revolution,  n'avoient  plus  que  des  habits  simples  et  pen
couteux  ;  "  and  that  "  on  ne  distingua  plus  une  duchesse  d'une  actrice,"  p.  43  :  see  also
an  extract  from  Montjoye,  in  Alison's  History,  vol.  i.  pp.  352,  353.      Compare  Mem.  sur
Marie  Antoinette,  vol.  i.  pp.  226,  372,  vol.  ii.  p.  174,  and  Mem.  de  Madame  du  Hausset,
introduc.  p.  17.

200  "  Les  personnes  du  premier  rang  et  meme  d'un  age  mur,  qui  avaient  travaille  toute
leur  vie  pour  obtenir  les  ordres  du  roi,  preuve  de  la  plus  haute  faveur,  s'habituerent  a  en
cacher  les  marques  distinctives  sous  le  froc  le  plus  simple,  qui  leur  permettait  de  courir  a
pied  dans  les   rues  et   de  se   confondre  dans  la  foule."      Mem.  de  Montbarey,  vol.  iii.
pp.  161, 162.    Another  alteration  of  the  same  tendency  is  worth  recording.   The  Baroness
d'Oberkirch,  who  revisited  Paris  in  1784,  remarked  on  her    arrival  that  "gentlemen
began  about  this  time  to  go  about  unarmed,  and  wore  swords  only  in  full  dress.  .  .  .  And
thus  the  French  nobility  laid  aside  a  usage  which  the  example  of  their  fathers  had  con  -
secrated  through  centuries."    D'Oberkirch's  Memoirs,  Lond.  1852,  vol.  ii.  p.  211.

201  A  striking  instance  of  which   was  moreover   seen  in  the  number  of  mesalliances,
which  first  became  frequent  about  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XV.     Compare  Mem.
de  Montbarey,  vol.  iii.  pp.  116,  156,  157  ;  Lacretelle,  Dix-huitieme  Siecle,  vol.  iii.  p.  220.


522  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

that  was  a  notion  too  preposterous  to  be  conceived  ;  nor  was  it  possible  that  any
institution  should  exist  which  placed  mere  ordinary  men  on  a  level  with  those
illustrious  characters  whose  veins  were  filled  with  the  purest  blood,  and  the
quarterings  of  whose  arms  none  could  hope  to  rival.

But  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  progress  of  knowledge  became  so  remark-
able that  the  new  principle  of  intellectual  superiority  made  rapid  encroachments
on  the  old  principle  of  aristocratic  superiority.  As  soon  as  these  encroachments
had  reached  a  certain  point,  they  gave  rise  to  an  institution  suited  to  them  ;  and
thus  it  was  that  there  were  first  established  clubs  in  which  all  the  educated
classes  could  assemble  without  regard  to  those  other  differences  which  in  the
preceding  period  kept  them  separate.  The  peculiarity  of  this  was  that  for  mere
purposes  of  social  enjoyment  men  were  brought  into  contact  who,  according  to
the  aristocratic  scheme,  had  nothing  in  common,  but  who  were  now  placed  on
the  same  footing  in  so  far  as  they  belonged  to  the  same  establishment,  conformed
to  the  same  rules,  and  reaped  the  same  advantages.  It  was  however  expected
that  the  members,  though  varying  in  many  other  respects,  were  to  be  all  in  some
degree  educated  ;  and  in  this  way  society  first  distinctly  recognized  a  classifica-
tion previously  unknown  ;  the  division  between  noble  and  ignoble  being  succeed^  1
by  another  division  between  educated  and  uneducated.

The  rise  and  growth  of  clubs  is  therefore  to  the  philosophic  observer  a  question
of  immense  importance  ;  and- it  is  one  which,  as  I  shall  hereafter  prove,  played
a  great  part  in  the  history  of  England  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth
century.  In  reference  to  our  present  subject,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that
the  first  clubs,  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  which  ever  existed  in  Paris,  were
formed  about  1782,  only  seven  years  before  the  French  Revolution.  At  the
beginning  they  were  merely  intended  to  be  social  assemblages  ;  but  they  quickly
assumed  a  democratic  character,  conformable  to  the  spirit  of  the  age.  Their
first  result,  as  was  noticed  by  a  keen  observer  of  what  was  then  passing,  was  to
make  the  manners  of  the  upper  classes  more  simple  than  they  had  hitherto  been,
and  to  weaken  that  love  of  form  and  ceremony  suitable  to  their  earlier  habits.
These  clubs  likewise  effected  a  remarkable  separation  between  the  sexes  ;  and
it  is  recorded  that  after  their  establishment  women  associated  more  with  each
other,  and  were  oftener  seen  in  public  unaccompanied  by  men.202  This  had  the
effect  of  encouraging  among  men  a  republican  roughness,  which  the  influence  of
the  other  sex  would  have  tended  to  keep  down.  All  these  things  effaced  the  old
lines  of  demarcation  between  the  different  ranks,  and  by  merging  the  various
classes  into  one,  made  the  force  of  their  united  opposition  irresistible,  and  speedily
overthrew  both  the  church  and  the  state.  The  exact  period  at  which  the  clubs
became  political  cannot  of  course  be  ascertained,  but  the  change  seems  to  have
taken  place  about  i/S.^.203  From  this  moment  all  was  over  ;  and  although  the

202  "  NOUS  commencames  aussi  a  avoir  des  clubs  :  les  hommes  s'y  reunissaient,  non
encore  pour  discuter,  mais  pour  diner,  jouer  au  wisk,  et  lire  tous  les  ouvrages  nouveaux.
Ce  premier  pas,  alors  presque  inapercu,  eut  dans  la  suite  de  grandes,  et  momentanement
de  funestes  consequences.     Dans  le  commencement,  son  premier  resultat  fut  de  separer
les  hommes  des  femmes,  et  d'apporter  ainsi  un  notable  changement  dans  nos  moeurs  :
elles  devinrent  moins  frivoles,  mais  moins  polies  ;  plus  fortes,  mais  moins  aimables  :  la
politique  y  gagna,  la  societe  y  perdit."     Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  ii.  p.  28.     By  the  spring  of
1786  this  separation  of  the  sexes  had  become  still  more  marked  ;  and  it  was  a  common
complaint  that  ladies  were  obliged  to  go  to  the  theatre  alone,  men  being  at  their  clubs.
See  the  very  curious  observations  in  Grimm,  Correspond,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  486-489,  where
there  is  also  a  notice  of  "  le  prodigieux  succes  qu'a  eu  1'etablissement  des  clubs  a  1'anglaise."
See  also,  on  the  diminished  attention  paid  to  women,  Williams's  Letters  from  France,  vol.  ii.
p.  80,  3rd  edit.  1796.

203  The  remarks  of  Georgel  appear  to  apply  to  the  political  clubs  only  :  "A  Paris  les
assemblies  de  nouvellistes,  les  clubs  qui  s'etoient  formes  a  1'instar  de  ceux  des  Anglais,
s'expliquaient  hautement  et  sans  retenue  sur  les  droits  de  I'hoinme,  sur  les  avantages  de
la  liberte,  sur  les  grands  abus  de  1'inegalite  des  conditions.     Ces  clubs,  trop  accredites,
avoient  commence  a  se  former  en  1784."     Mem.  de  Georgel,  vol.  ii.  p.  310.


PROXIMATE  CAUSES  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  523

government  in  1787  issued  orders  to  close  the  leading  club,  in  which  all  classes
discussed  political  questions,  it  was  found  impossible  to  stem  the  torrent.  The
order  therefore  was  rescinded  ;  the  club  reassembled,  and  no  further  attempt
was  made  to  interrupt  that  course  of  affairs  which  a  long  train  of  preceding  events
had  rendered  inevitable.204

While  all  these  things  were  conspiring  to  overthrow  the  old  institutions,  an
event  suddenly  occurred  which  produced  the  most  remarkable  effects  in  France,
and  is  itself  strikingly  characteristic  of  the  spirit  of  the  eighteenth  century.  On
the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  a  great  people,  provoked  by  the  intolerable  injustice
of  the  English  government,  rose  in  arms,  turned  on  their  oppressors,  and  after
a  desperate  struggle  gloriously  obtained  their  independence.  In  1776  the
Americans  laid  before  Europe  that  noble  Declaration  which  ought  to  be  hung
up  in  the  nursery  of  every  king,  and  blazoned  on  the  porch  of  every  royal  palace.
In  words  the  memory  of  which  can  never  die,  they  declared  that  the  object  of
the  institution  of  government  is  to  secure  the  rights  of  the  people  ;  that  from  the
people  alone  it  derives  its  powers  ;  and  "  that  whenever  any  form  of  government
becomes  destructive  of  these  ends,  it  is  the  right  of  the  people  to  alter  or  abolish
it,  and  to  institute  a  new  government,  laying  its  foundations  on  such  principles,
and  organizing  its  powers  in  such  form,  as  to  them  shall  seem  most  likely  to  effect
their  safety  and  happiness."  205

If  this  Declaration  had  been  made  only  one  generation  earlier,  the  whole  of
France,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  advanced  thinkers,  would  have  rejected  it
with  horror  and  with  scorn.  Such,  however,  was  now  the  temper  of  the  public
mind,  that  the  doctrines  it  contained  were  not  merely  welcomed  by  a  majority
of  the  French  nation,  but  even  the  government  itself  was  unable  to  withstand
the  general  feeling.206  In  1776  Franklin  arrived  in  France,  as  envoy  from  the
American  people.  He  met  with  the  warmest  reception  from  all  classes,20?  and
succeeded  in  inducing  the  government  to  sign  a  treaty,  engaging  to  defend  the
young  republic  in  the  rights  it  had  gloriously  won.208  In  Paris  the  enthusiasm
was  irresistible.209  From  every  quarter  large  bodies  of  men  came  forward,  volun-
teering to  cross  the  Atlantic  and  to  fight  for  the  liberties  of  America.  The  heroism

2°*  "  Le  lieutenant  de  police  fit  fermer  le  club  nomme  club  du  salon  ;  ordre  arbitraire
et  inutile  :  ce  club  alors  etait  compose  de  personnes  distinguees  de  la  noblesse  ou  de  la
haute  bourgeoisie,  ainsi  que  des  artistes  et  des  hommes  de  lettres  les  plus  consideres.
Cette  reunion  offrait,  pour  la  premiere  fois,  1'image  d'une  egalite  qui  devient  bientot,  plus
que  la  liberte  meme,  le  voeu  le  plus  ardent  de  la  plus  grande  partie  de  la  nation.  Aussi
le  mecontentement  produit  par  la  cloture  de  ce  club  fut  si  vif,  que  1'autorite  se  crut  obligee
de  le  rouvrir."  Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  iii.  pp.  258,  259.  On  the  increase  of  these  clubs  from
1787  to  1789,  compare  Du  Mesnil,  Mem.  sur  Le  Brun,  p.  148  ;  Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  i.
pp.  312,  322,  391,  434,  vol.  ii.  p.  9  ;  Barruel,  Hist,  du  Jacob,  vol.  i.  p.  40,  vol.  ii.  p.  310,
vol.  v.  pp.  101,  168  ;  Thiers,  Hist,  de  la  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  36,  Paris,  1834.

205  Mem.  of  Franklin,  vol.  ii.  pp.  14  seq.  ;  and  Mem.  of  Jefferson,  vol.  i.  pp.  17-22,
where  the  passages  are  given  which  Congress  altered.

206  Segur  (Mem.  vol.  i.  p.  in)  says  that  his  father  had  been  frequently  told  by  Maure-
pas  that  public  opinion  forced  the  government,  against  its  own  wishes,  to  side  with
America.     Compare  Mem.  de  Georgel,  vol.  iv.  p.  370  ;  and  Flassan,  Diplomatic  Francaise
vol.  vii.  p.  1 66.

2°7  The  news  of  which  soon  reached  England.  In  January,  1777,  Burke  writes  (Works,
vol.  ii.  p.  394),  "  I  hear  that  Dr.  Franklin  has  had  a  most  extraordinary  reception  at  Paris
from  all  ranks  of  people."  Soulavie  (Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  ii.  p.  50)  says,  "  J'ai  vu
Francklin  devenir  un  objet  de  culte."  See  also,  on  his  popularity,  Mem.  d'Epinay,  vol.  iii.
p.  419.

2°8  Flassan,  Diplomatie  Francaise,  vol.  vii.  p.  159  ;  Life  of  Franklin,  by  Himself,  vol.  ii.
pp.  60,  61  ;  Mahon's  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  vii.  pp.  197*  198.

209  The  sneering  letter  written  from  Paris  by  Lord  Stormont,  as  early  as  December,  1774
(Adolphus's  George  III.,  vol.  ii.  p.  316),  should  be  compared  with  Lafayette,  Memoires,
vol.  i.  pp.  24, 169,  229  ;  Dutens,  Mem.  rf'««  Voyageur,  vol.  ii.  p.  317  ;  Mem.  de  Segur,  vol.  i.
p.  149  ;  and  Schlosser's  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  v.  p.  i75'j


524  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

with  which  these  auxiliaries  aided  the  noble  struggle  forms  a  cheering  passage
in  the  history  of  that  time,  but  is  foreign  to  my  present  purpose,  which  is  merely
to  notice  its  effect  in  hastening  the  approach  of  the  French  Revolution.  And
this  effect  was  indeed  most  remarkable.  Besides  the  indirect  result  produced
by  the  example  of  a  successful  rebellion,  the  French  were  still  further  stimulated
by  actual  contact  with  their  new  allies.  The  French  officers  and  soldiers  who
served  in  America  introduced  into  their  own  country  on  their  return  those
democratic  opinions  which  they  had  imbibed  in  the  infant  republic.210  By  this
means  fresh  strength  was  given  to  the  revolutionary  tendencies  already  preva-
lent ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  Lafayette  borrowed  from  the  same  source
one  of  his  most  celebrated  acts.  He  drew  his  sword  on  behalf  of  the  Americans  ;
and  they  in  their  turn  communicated  to  him  that  famous  doctrine  respecting
the  rights  of  man  which,  at  his  instigation,  was  formally  adopted  by  the  National
Assembly.211  Indeed  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  final  blow  the  French
government  received  was  actually  dealt  by  the  hand  of  an  American  ;  for  it  is
said  that  it  was  in  consequence  of  the  advice  of  Jefferson  that  the  popular  part
of  the  legislative  body  proclaimed  itself  the  National  Assembly,  and  thus  set  the
crown  at  open  defiance.212

I  have  now  brought  to  a  close  my  examination  of  the  causes  of  the  French
Revolution  ;  but  before  concluding  the  present  volume,  *  it  appears  to  me  that
the  variety  of  topics  which  have  been  discussed  makes  it  advisable  that  I  should
sum  up  their  leading  points  ;  and  should  state  as  briefly  as  possible  the  steps
of  that  long  and  complicated  argument  by  which  I  have  attempted  to  prove  that
the  Revolution  was  an  event  inevitably  arising  out  of  preceding  circumstances.
Such  a  summary,  by  recalling  the  entire  subject  before  the  reader,  will  remedy
any  confusion  which  the  fulness  of  detail  may  have  produced,  and  will  simplify
an  investigation  which  many  will  consider  to  have  been  needlessly  protracted  ;
but  which  could  not  have  been  abridged  without  weakening  in  some  essential
part  the  support  of  those  general  principles  that  I  seek  to  establish.

Looking  at  the  state  of  France  immediately  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  we
have  seen  that,  his  policy  having  reduced  the  country  to  the  brink  of  ruin,  and
having  destroyed  every  vestige  of  free  inquiry,  a  reaction  became  necessary  ;  but
that  the  materials  for  the  reaction  could  not  be  found  among  a  nation  which  for
fifty  years  had  been  exposed  to  so  debilitating  a  system.  This  deficiency  at
home  caused  the  most  eminent  Frenchmen  to  turn  their  attention  abroad,  and
gave  rise  to  a  sudden  admiration  for  the  English  literature,  and  for  those  habits
of  thought  which  were  then  peculiar  to  the  English  people.  New  life  being  thus
breathed  into  the  wasted  frame  of  French  society,  an  eager  and  inquisitive  spirit

210  De  Stael  stir  la  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  88  ;  Mem.  de   Montbarey,  vol.  iii.  pp.  134,  186  ;
Mem.   de  Segur,   vol.  i.  p.   277;  Campan,  Mem  de   Marie  Antoinette,   vol.    i.   p.    233,
vol.  iii.  pp.  96,  116;   Soulavie,  Regne  de  Louis  XVI,  vol.  ii.  pp.  xxiv.  li.  Iii.  ;  Dunumt,
Souvenirs  sur  Mirabeau,  p.  176;  Mem  de  Du  Hausset,  introduc.  p.  40  ;  Mem.  de  Genlis,
vol.  vi.  p.  57  ;  Jefferson's  Mem.  and  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  59  ;  and  Maitland's  speech,  in
Part.  Hist.  vol.  xxx.  pp,  198,  199  ;  also  the  remarks  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  vol.  xxxi.
p.  663.

211  Lamartine,  Hist,  des  Girondins,  vol.  i.  p.  46.     Dumont  (Souvenirs,  p.  97)  calls  this
"  une  idee  americaine  ;  "  and  see  to  the  same  effect,  Mem.  de  Lafayette,  vol.  i.  pp.  193,  268,
269,  416,  vol.  ii.  pp.  139,  140  ;  Jefferson's  Correspond,  vol.  i.  p.  90  ;   Barruel,  Hist,  tin
J acobinisme,  vol.  v.  p.  311.     The  influence  which  the  American  Revolution  exercised
over  the  mind  of  Lafayette  is  noticed  by  Bouille,  his  cousin  and  his, 'enemy.     Mem.  de
Bonille,  vol.  i.  p.  102,  vol.  ii.  pp.  131,  183.

212  "  The  Duke  of  Dorset,  the  English  ambassador,  writing   to  Mr.  Pitt   from  Paris,
July  9,  1789,  said,  '  Mr.  Jefferson,  the  American  minister  at  this  court,  has  been  a  great
deal  consulted  by  the  principal  leaders  of  the  tiers  etat  ;  and  I  have  gr^eat  reason  to  think
that  it  was  owing  to  his  advice  that  order  called  itself  L'Assemblee  Nationale.'  "     Tom-
line's  Life  of  Pitt,  vol.  ii.  p.  266.  «

[  *  The  first  volume  of  the  original  edition  ended  with  this  chapter ED.]


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH    REVOLUTION     525

was  generated,  such  as  had  not  been  seen  since  the  time  of  Descartes.  The  upper
classes,  taking  offence  at  this  unexpected  movement,  attempted  to  stifle  it,  and
made  strenuous  efforts  to  destroy  that  love  of  inquiry  which  was  daily  gaining
ground.  To  effect  their  object  they  persecuted  literary  men  with  such  bitterness
as  to  make  it  evident  that  the  intellect  of  France  must  either  relapse  into  its
former  servility  or  else  boldly  assume  the  offensive.  Happily  for  the  interests
of  civilization,  the  latter  alternative  was  adopted  ;  and,  in  or  about  1750,  a
deadly  struggle  began,  in  which  those  principles  of  liberty  which  France  borrowed
from  England,  and  which  had  hitherto  been  supposed  only  applicable  to  the
church,  were  for  the  first  time  applied  to  the  state.  Coinciding  with  this  move-
ment, and  indeed  forming  part  of  it,  other  circumstances  occurred  of  the  same
character.  Now  it  was  that  the  political  economists  succeeded  in  proving  that
the  interference  of  the  governing  classes  had  inflicted  great  mischief  even  upon
the  material  interests  of  the  country  ;  and  had,  by  their  protective  measures,
injured  what  they  were  believed  to  have  benefited.  This  remarkable  discovery
in  favour  of  general  freedom  put  a  fresh  weapon  into  the  hands  of  the  democratic
party,  whose  strength  was  still  further  increased  by  the  unrivalled  eloquence
with  which  Rousseau  assailed  the  existing  fabric.  Precisely  the  same  tendency
was  exhibited  in  the  extraordinary  impulse  given  to  every  branch  of  physical
science,  which  familiarized  men  with  ideas  of  progress,  and  brought  them  into
collision  with  the  stationary  and  conservative  ideas  natural  to  government.
The  discoveries  made  respecting  the  external  world  encouraged  a  restlessness
and  excitement  of  mind  hostile  to  the  spirit  of  routine,  and  therefore  full  of  danger
for  institutions  only  recommended  by  their  antiquity.  This  eagerness  for
physical  knowledge  also  effected  a  change  in  education ;  and,  the  ancient  languages
being  neglected,  another  link  was  severed  which  connected  the  present  with  the
past.  The  church,  the  legitimate  protector  of  old  opinions,  was  unable  to  resist
the  passion  for  novelty,  because  she  was  weakened  by  treason  in  her  own  camp.
For  by  this  time  Calvinism  had  spread  so  much  among  the  French  clergy  as  to
break  them  into  two  hostile  parties,  and  render  it  impossible  to  rally  them  against
their  common  foe.  The  growth  of  this  heresy  was  also  important,  because
Calvinism  being  essentially  democratic,  a  revolutionary  spirit  appeared  even  in
the  ecclesiastical  profession,  so  that  the  feud  in  the  church  was  accompanied  by
another  feud  between  the  government  and  the  church.  These  were  the  leading
symptoms  of  that  vast  movement  which  culminated  in  the  French  Revolution  ;
and  all  of  them  indicated  a  state  of  society  so  anarchical  and  so  thoroughly  dis-
organized as  to  make  it  certain  that  some  great  catastrophe  was  impending.
At  length,  and  when  everything  was  ready  for  explosion,  the  news  of  the  American
Rebellion  fell  like  a  spark  on  the  inflammable  mass,  and  ignited  a  flame  which
never  ceased  its  ravages  until  it  had  destroyed  all  that  Frenchmen  once  held  dear,
and  had  left  for  the  instruction  of  mankind  an  awful  lesson  of  the  crimes  into
which  continued  oppression  may  hurry  a  generous  and  long-suffering  people.

Such  is  a  rapid  outline  of  the  view  which  my  studies  have  led  me  to  take  of  the
causes  of  the  French  Revolution.  That  I  have  ascertained  all  the  causes  I  do
not  for  a  moment  suppose  ;  but  it  will,  I  believe,  be  found  that  none  of  importance
have  been  omitted.*  It  is  indeed  true  that  among  the  materials  of  which  the
evidence  consists  many  deficiencies  will  be  seen  ;  and  a  more  protracted  labour
would  have  been  rewarded  by  a  greater  success.  Of  these  shortcomings  I  am
deeply  sensible  ;  and  I  can  only  regret  that  the  necessity  of  passing  on  to  a  still
larger  field  has  compelled  me  to  leave  so  much  for  future  inquirers  to  gather  in.  At
the  same  time,  it  ought  to  be  remembered  that  this  is  the  first  attempt  which  has
ever  been  made  to  study  the  antecedents  of  the  French  Revolution  according  to
a  scheme  wide  enough  to  include  the  whole  of  their  intellectual  bearings.  In
defiance  of  sound  philosophy,  and,  I  may  say,  in  defiance  of  common  under-
standing, historians  obstinately  persist  in  neglecting  those  great  branches  of

[* Perhaps  the  only  serious  omission  is  the  failure  to  note  that  the  progression  of  debt
and  taxation  under  Louis  XV.  provoked  the  attack  on  the  State  system  which  in  the  end
led  to  its  overthrow. — ED.]


526  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

physical  knowledge  in  which  in  every  civilized  country  the  operations  of  the
human  mind  may  be  most  clearly  seen,  and  therefore  the  mental  habits  most
easily  ascertained.  The  result  is  that  the  French  Revolution,  unquestionably
the  most  important,  the  most  complicated,  and  the  most  glorious  event  in  history,
has  been  given  over  to  authors,  many  of  whom  have  displayed  considerable
ability,  but  all  of  whom  have  shown  themselves  destitute  of  that  preliminary
scientific  education,  in  the  absence  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  seize  the  spirit  of
any  period,  or  to  take  a  comprehensive  survey  of  its  various  parts.  Thus,  to
mention  only  a  single  instance  :  we  have  seen  that  the  extraordinary  impulse
given  to  the  study  of  the  external  world  was  intimately  connected  with  that
democratic  movement  which  overthrew  the  institutions  of  France.  But  this
connexion  historians  have  been  unable  to  trace,  because  they  were  unacquainted
with  the  progress  of  the  various  branches  of  natural  philosophy  and  of  natural
history.  Hence  it  is  that  they  have  exhibited  their  great  subject  maimed  and
mutilated,  shorn  of  those  fair  proportions  which  it  ought  to  possess.  According
to  this  scheme  the  historian  sinks  into  the  annalist  ;  so  that  instead  of  solving
a  problem  he  merely  paints  a  picture.  Without,  therefore,  disparaging  the
labours  of  those  industrious  men  who  have  collected  materials  for  a  history  of  the
French  Revolution,  we  may  assuredly  say  that  the  history  itself  has  never  been
written  ;  since  they  who  have  attempted  the  task  have  not  possessed  such
resources  as  would  enable  them  to  consider  it  as  merely  a  single  part  of  that  far
larger  movement  which  was  seen  in  every  department  of  science,  of  philosophy,  of
religion,  and  of  politics.

Whether  or  not  I  have  effected  anything  of  real  value  towards  remedying  this
deficiency  is  a  question  for  competent  judges  to  decide.  Of  this  at  least  I  feel
certain,  that  whatever  imperfections  may  be  observed,  the  fault  consists,  not  in
the  method  proposed,  but  in  the  extreme  difficulty  of  any  single  man  putting
into  full  operation  all  the  parts  of  so  vast  a  scheme.  It  is  on  this  point,  and  on
this  alone,  that  I  feel  the  need  of  great  indulgence.  But  as  to  the  plan  itself  I
have  no  misgivings  ;  because  I  am  deeply  convinced  that  the  time  is  fast  approach-
ing when  the  history  of  Man  will  be  placed  on  its  proper  footing  ;  when  its  study
will  be  recognized  as  the  noblest  and  most  arduous  of  all  pursuits  ;  and  when  it
will  be  clearly  seen  that,  to  cultivate  it  with  success,  there  is  wanted  a  wide  and
comprehensive  mind,  richly  furnished  with  the  highest  branches  of  human  know-
ledge. When  this  is  fully  admitted,  history  will  be  written  only  by  those  whose
habits  fit  them  for  the  task  ;  and  it  will  be  rescued  from  the  hands  of  biographers,
genealogists,  collectors  of  anecdotes,  chroniclers  of  courts,  of  princes,  and  of  nobles,
— those  babblers  of  vain  things,  who  lie  in  wait  at  every  corner  and  infest  this,
the  public  highway  of  our  national  literature.  That  such  compilers  should
trespass  on  a  province  so  far  above  their  own,  and  should  think  that  by  these
means  they  can  throw  light  on  the  affairs  of  men,  is  one  of  many  proofs  of  the
still  backward  condition  of  our  knowledge,  and  of  the  indistinctness  with  which
its  boundaries  have  been  mapped  out.  If  I  have  done  anything  towards  bringing
these  intrusions  into  discredit,  and  inspiring  historians  themselves  with  a  sense
of  the  dignity  of  their  own  calling,  I  shall  have  rendered  in  my  time  some  little
service,  and  I  shall  be  well  content  to  have  it  said  that  in  many  cases  I  have
failed  in  executing  what  I  originally  proposed.  Indeed,  that  there  are  in  this
volume  several  instances  of  such  failure  I  willingly  allow  ;  and  I  can  only  plead
the  immensity  of  the  subject,  the  shortness  of  a  single  life,  and  the  imperfection
of  every  single  enterprise.  I  therefore  wish  this  work  to  be  estimated,  not
according  to  the  finish  of  its  separate  parts,  but  according  to  the  way  in  which
those  parts  have  been  fused  into  a  complete  and  symmetrical  whole.  This,
in  an  undertaking  of  such  novelty  and  magnitude,  I  have  a  right  to  expect.
And  I  would  moreover  add  that  if  the  reader  has  met  with  opinons
adverse  to  his  own,  he  should  remember  that  his  views  are  perchance
the  same  as  those  which  I  too  once  held,  and  which  I  have  abandoned,
because,  after  a  wider  range  of  study,  I  found  them  unsupported  by  solid
proof,  subversive  of  the  interests  of  Man,  and  fatal  to  the  progress  of  his
knowledge.  To  examine  the  notions  in  which  we  have  been  educated,  and  to
turn  aside  from  those  which  will  not  bear  the  test,  is  a  task  so  painful  that  they


PROXIMATE   CAUSES   OF   THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION     527

who  shrink  from  the  suffering  should  pause  before  they  reproach  those  by  whom
the  suffering  is  undergone.  What  I  have  put  forward  may  no  doubt  be  erron-
eous ;  but  it  is  at  all  events  the  result  of  an  honest  searching  after  truth,  of
unsparing  labour,  of  patient  and  anxious  reflection.  Conclusions  arrived  at  in
this  way  are  not  to  be  overturned  by  stating  that  they  endanger  some  other
conclusions  ;  nor  can  they  be  even  affected  by  allegations  against  their  supposed
tendency.  The  principles  which  I  advocate  are  based  upon  distinct  arguments
supported  by  well -ascertained  facts.  The  only  points,  therefore,  to  be  ascer-
tained are  whether  the  arguments  are  fair,  and  whether  the  facts  are  certain.
If  these  two  conditions  have  been  obeyed,  the  principles  follow  by  an  inevitable
inference.  Their  demonstration  is,  in  the  present  volume,  necessarily  incomplete  ;
and  the  reader  must  suspend  his  final  judgment  until  the  close  of  this  Introduction,
when  the  subject  in  all  its  bearings  will  be  laid  before  him.  The  remaining  part
of  the  Introduction  will  be  occupied,  as  I  have  already  intimated,  with  an  investi-
gation of  the  civilizations  of  Germany,  America,*  Scotland,  and  Spain;  each  of
which  presents  a  different  type  of  intellectual  development,  and  has  therefore
followed  a  different  direction  in  its  religious,  scientific,  social  and  political  history.
The  causes  of  these  differences  I  shall  attempt  to  ascertain.  The  next  step  wil
be  to  generalize  the  causes  themselves  ;  and  having  thus  referred  them  to  certain
principles  common  to  all,  we  shall  be  possessed  of  what  may  be  called  the  funda-
mental laws  of  European  thought  ;  the  divergence  of  the  different  countries
being  regulated  either  by  the  direction  those  laws  take,  or  else  by  their  compara-
tive energy.  To  discover  these  fundamental  laws  will  be  the  business  of  the
Introduction  ;  while  in  the  body  of  the  work  I  shall  apply  them  to  the  history
of  England,  and  endeavour  by  their  aid  to  work  out  the  epochs  through  which
we  have  successively  passed,  fix  the  basis  of  our  present  civilization,  and  indicate
the  path  of  our  future  progress.


[  *  See  edit,  notes  above,  pp.  508,  518. — ED.


CHAPTER    XV

OUTLINE  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  SPANISH  INTELLECT  FROM  THE  FIFTH  TO
THE   MIDDLE    OF   THE   NINETEENTH   CENTURY

IN  the  preceding  volume  I  have  endeavoured  to  establish  four  leading  proposi-
tions, which,  according  to  my  view,  are  to  be  deemed  the  basis  of  the  history  of
civilization.  They  are  :  ist.  That  the  progress  of  mankind  depends  on  the
success  with  which  the  laws  of  phenomena  are  investigated,  and  on  the  extent
to  which  a  knowledge  of  those  laws  is  diffused.  2nd.  That  before  such  investiga-
tion can  begin,  a  spirit  of  scepticism  must  arise,  which,  at  first  aiding  the
investigation,  is  afterwards  aided  by  it.  3rd.  That  the  discoveries  thus  made
increase  the  influence  of  intellectual  truths,  and  diminish,  relatively,  not  abso-
lutely, the  influence  of  moral  truths  ;  moral  truths  being  more  stationary  than
intellectual  truths,  and  receiving  fewer  additions.  4th.  That  the  great  enemy
of  this  movement,  and  therefore  the  great  enemy  of  civilization,  is  the  protective
spirit  ;  by  which  I  mean  the  notion  that  society  cannot  prosper  unless  the  affairs
of  life  are  watched  over  and  protected  at  nearly  every  turn  by  the  state  and  the
church  ;  the  state  teaching  men  what  they  are  to  do,  and  the  church  teaching
them  what  they  are  to  believe.  Such  are  the  propositions  which  I  hold  to  be
the  most  essential  for  a  right  understanding  of  history,  and  which  I  have  defended
in  the  only  two  ways  any  proposition  can  be  defended  ;  namely,  inductively  and
deductively.  The  inductive  defence  comprises  a  collection  of  historical  and
scientific  facts,  which  suggest  and  authorize  the  conclusions  drawn  from  them  ;
while  the  deductive  defence  consists  of  a  verification  of  those  conclusions,  by
showing  how  they  explain  the  history  of  different  countries  and  their  various
fortunes.  To  the  former  or  inductive  method  of  defence,  I  am  at  present  unable
to  add  anything  new  ;  but  the  deductive  defence  I  hope  to  strengthen  consider-
ably in  this  volume,*  and  by  its  aid  confirm  not  only  the  four  cardinal  propositions
just  stated,  but  also  several  minor  propositions  which,  though  strictly  speaking
flowing  from  them,  will  require  separate  verification.  According  to  the  plan
already  sketched,  the  remaining  part  of  the  Introduction  will  contain  an  examina-
tion of  the  history  of  Spain,  of  Scotland,  of  Germany,  and  of  the  United  States
of  America,  with  the  object  of  elucidating  principles  on  which  the  history  of
England  supplies  inadequate  information.  And  as  Spain  is  the  country  where
what  I  conceive  to  be  the  fundamental  conditions  of  national  improvement  have
been  most  flagrantly  violated,  so  also  shall  we  find  that  it  is  the  country  where
the  penalty  paid  for  the  violation  has  been  most  heavy,  and  where,  therefore,
it  is  riiost  instructive  to  ascertain  how  the  prevalence  of  certain  opinions  causes
the  decay  of  the  people  among  whom  they  predominate.

We  have  seen  that  the  old  tropical  civilizations  were  accompanied  by  remark-
able features  which  I  have  termed  Aspects  of  Nature,  and  which,  by  inflaming
the  imagination,  encouraged  superstition,  and  prevented  men  from  daring  to
analyze  such  threatening  physical  phenomena  ;  in  other  words,  prevented  the
creation  of  the  physical  sciences.  Now  it  is  an  interesting  fact  that  in  these
respects  no  European  country  is  so  analogous  to  the  tropics  as  Spain.  No  other
part  of  Europe  is  so  clearly  designated  by  nature  as  the  seat  and  refuge  of  super-
stition. Recurring  to  what  has  been  already  proved,1  it  will  be  remembered  that

1  Above,  pp.  67,  84.

[  *  The  second  volume  of  the  original  begins  with  this  chapter — ED.]

528


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT         52$

among  the  most  important  physical  causes  of  superstition  are  famines,  epidemics,
earthquakes,  and  that  general  unhealthiness  of  climate  which,  by  shortening
the  average  duration  of  life,  increases  the  frequency  and  earnestness  with  which
supernatural  aid  is  invoked.  These  peculiarities,  taken  together,  are  more
prominent  in  Spain  than  anywhere  else  in  Europe  ;  it  will  therefore  be  useful  to
give  such  a  summary  of  them  as  will  exhibit  the  mischievous  effects  they  have
produced  in  shaping  the  national  character.

If  we  except  the  northern  extremity  of  Spain,  we  may  say  that  the  two
principal  characteristics  of  the  climate  are  heat  and  dryness,  both  of  which  are
favoured  by  the  extreme  difficulty  which  nature  has  interposed  in  regard  to
irrigation.  For  the  rivers  which  intersect  the  land  run  mostly  in  beds  too  deep
to  be  made  available  for  watering  the  soil,  which  consequently  is,  and  always  has
been,  remarkably  arid.2  Owing  to  this,  and  to  the  infrequency  of  rain,  there  is
no  European  country  as  richly  endowed  in  other  respects  where  droughts  and
therefore  famines  have  been  so  frequent  and  serious.3  At  the  same  time  the
vicissitudes  of  climate,  particularly  in  the  central  parts,  make  Spain  habitually
unhealthy  ;  and  this  general  tendency  being  strengthened  in  the  Middle  Ages  by
the  constant  occurrence  of  famine,  caused  the  ravages  of  pestilence  to  be
unusually  fatal.4  When  we  moreover  add  that  in  the  Peninsula,  including
Portugal,  earthquakes  have  been  extremely  disastrous,5  and  have  excited  all

2  "  The  low  state  of  agriculture  in  Spain  may  be  ascribed  partly  to  physical  and  partly
to  moral  causes.     At  the  head  of  the  former  must  be  placed  the  heat  of  the  climate  and
the  aridity  of  the  soil.     Most  part  of  the  rivers  with  which  the  country  is  intersected  run
in  deep  beds,  and  are  but  little  available,  except  in  a  few  favoured  localities,  for  purposes
of   irrigation."     M'Culloch's    Geographical   and   Statistical   Dictionary,    London,    1849,
vol.  ii.  p.  708.     See  also  Laborde's  Spain,  London,  1809,  vol.  iv.  p.  284,  vol.  v.  p.  261.
The  relative  aridity  of  the  different  parts  is  stated  in  Cook's  Spain,  London,  1834,  vol.  ii.
pp.  216-19.

3  On  these  droughts  and  famines,  see  Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  Madrid,  i794»
vol.  ii.  p.  270,  vol.  iii.  p.  225,  vol.  iv.  p.  32.     Conde,  Historia  de  la  Dominacion  de  los
Arabes  en  Espana,  Paris,  1840,  pp.  142,  149,  154,  170.     Davila,  Historia  de  la  Vida  de
Felipe  Tercero,  Madrid,  1771,  folio,  lib.  ii.  p.  114.     Clarke's  Letters  concerning  the  Spanish
Nation,  London,  1763,  4to,  p.  282.     Udal  ap  Rhys'  Tour  through  Spain,  London,  1760,
pp.  292,  293.     Spain  by  an  American,  London,  1831,  vol.  ii.  p.  282.     Hoskins'  Spain,
London,  1851,  vol.  i.  pp.  127,  132,  152.     "  Espana  es  castigada  frecuentemente  con  las
sequedades  y  faltas  de  lluvias."     Muriel,  Gobierno  de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1839,  p.  193.

4  "  Anadase  a  todo  esto  las  repetidas  pestes,  y  mortales  epidemias  que  han  afligido  a
las  provincias  de  Espana,  mayormente  a  las  meridionales  que  han  sido  las  mas  sujetas
a  estas  plagas.     De  estas  se  hace  mencion  en  los  anales  e  historias  muy  freqiientemente  ;
y  en  su  confirmacion  se  puede  leer  el  tratado  historico,  o  epidemiologia  que  sobre  ellas
ha  publicado  Don  Joachin  de  Villalba,  donde  se  vera  con  dolor  y  espanto  con  quanta
freqtiencia  se  repetian  estos  azotes  desde  mediados  del  siglo  decimoquarto."  ..."  Dos
exemplos  bien  recientes  y  dolorosos  hemos  visto,  y  conservaremos  en  la  memoria,  en  los
fonnidables  estragos  que  acaban  de  padecer  gran  parte  del  reyno  de  Sevilla,  Cadiz,  y  sus
contornos,  M  a  laga,  Cartagena,  y  Alicante  ;  sin  contar  la  mortandad  con  que  han  afligido
a  la  mayor  parte  de  los  pueblos  de  ambas  Castillas  las  epidemias  de  calenturas  putridas
en  el  afto  pasado  de  1805."  ..."  For  otra  parte  la  fundacion  de  tantas  capillas  y
procesiones  a  San  Roque,  y  a  San  Sebastian,  como  abogados  contre  la  peste,  que  todavia
se  conservan  en  la  mayor  parte  de  nuestras  ciudades  de  Espana,  son  otro  testimonio  de
los  grandes  y  repetidos  estragos  que  habian  padecido  sus  pueblos  de  este  azote.     Y  el
gran  numero  de  medicos  espaftoles  que  publicaron  tratados  preservatives  y  curatives
de  la  peste  en  los  reynados  de  Carlos  V.,  Felipe  II.,  Felipe  III.,  y  Felipe  IV.,  confirman
mas  la  verdad  de  los  hechos."     Capmany,  Questiones  Criticas,  Madrid,  1807,  pp.  5J»  52  ;
see  also  pp.  66,  67  ;  and  Janer,  Condicion  Social  de  los  Moriscos  de  Espana,  Madrid,  1857,
pp.  1 06,  107  ;  and  the  notice  of  Malaga  in  Bour going,  Tableau  de  VEspagne,  Paris,  1808,
vol.  iii.  p.  242.

5  "  Earthquakes  are  still  often  felt  at  Granada  and  along  the  coast  of  the  province  of
Alicante,  where  their  effects  have  been  very  disastrous.     Much  further  in  the  interior,

34


530  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

n  the  small  Sierra  del  Tremedal,  or  district  of  Albarracia,  in  the  province  of  Terruel,
eruptions  and  shocks  have  been  very  frequent  since  the  most  remote  periods  ;  the  black
porphyry  is  there  seen  traversing  the  altered  strata  of  the  oolitic  formation.  The  old
inhabitants  of  the  country  speak  of  sinking  of  the  ground  and  of  the  escape  of  sulphur-
eous gases  when  they  were  young  ;  these  same  phenomena  have  occurred  during  four
consecutive  months  of  the  preceding  winter,  accompanied  by  earthquakes,  which  have
caused  considerable  mischief  to  the  buildings  of  seven  villages  situated  within  a  radius
of  two  leagues.  They  have  not,  however,  been  attended  with  any  loss  of  life,  on  account
of  the  inhabitants  hastening  to  abandon  their  dwellings  at  the  first  indications  of  danger."
Ezquerra  on  the  Geology  of  Spain,  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  the  Geological  Society  j)f
London,  vol.  vi.  pp.  412,  413,  London,  1850.  "  The  provinces  of  Malaga,  Murcia,  and
Granada,  and,  in  Portugal,  the  country  round  Lisbon,  are  recorded  at  several  periods
to  have  been  devastated  by  great  earthquakes."  LyelVs  Principles  of  Geology,  London,
1853,  p.  358.  "  Los  terremotos  son  tan  sensibles  y  freqiientes  en  lo  alto  de  las  montanas,
como  en  lo  llano,  pues  Sevilla  esta  sujeta  a  ellos  hallandose  situada  sobre  una  llanura  tan
igual  y  baxa  como  Holanda."  Bowles,  Introduccion  a  la  Historia  Natural  de  Espaiia,
Madrid,  1789,  4to,  pp.  90,  91.  "  The  littoral  plains,  especially  about  Cartagena  and
Alicante,  are  much  subject  to  earthquakes."  Ford's  Spain,  1847,  p.  168.  "This  corner
of  Spain  is  the  chief  volcanic  district  of  the  Peninsula,  which  stretches  from  Cabo  de  Gata
to  near  Cartagena  ;  the  earthquakes  are  very  frequent."  Ford,  p.  174.  "  Spain,  includ-
ing Portugal,  in  its  external  configuration,  with  its  vast  tableland  of  the  two  Castiles,
rising  nearly  2,000  feet  above  the  sea,  is  perhaps  the  most  interesting  portion  of  Europe ,
not  only  in  this  respect,  but  as  a  region  of  earthquake  disturbance,  where  the  energy
and  destroying  power  of  this  agency  have  been  more  than  once  displayed  upon  the  most
tremendous  scale."  Mallets  Earthquake  Catalogue  of  the  British  Association,  Report
for  1858,  p.  9,  London,  1858.

I  quote  these  passages  at  length,  partly  on  account  of  their  interest  as  physical  truths,
and  partly  because  the  facts  stated  in  them  are  essential  for  a  right  understanding  of  the
history  of  Spain.  Their  influence  on  the  Spanish  character  was  pointed  out,  for  I  believe
the  first  time,  in  my  History  of  Civilization,  vol.  i.  pp.  112,  113.  On  that  occasion  I
adduced  no  evidence  to  prove  the  frequency  of  earthquakes  in  the  Peninsula,  because  I
supposed  that  all  persons  moderately  acquainted  with  the  physical  history  of  the  earth
were  aware  of  the  circumstance.  But  in  April,  1858,  a  criticism  of  my  book  appeared
in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  in  which  the  serious  blunders  which  I  am  said  to  have  committed
are  unsparingly  exposed.  In  p.  468  of  that  Review,  the  critic,  after  warning  his  readers
against  my  "inaccuracies,"  observes,  "But  Mr.  Buckle  goes  on  to  state  that  'earth-
quakes and  volcanic  eruptions  are  more  frequent  and  more  destructive  in  Italy,  and  in
the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  peninsula,  than  in  any  other  of  the  great  countries.'  Whence
he  infers,  by  a  singular  process  of  reasoning,  that  superstition  is  more  rife,  and  the  clergy
more  powerful ;  but  that  the  fine  arts  flourish,  poetry  is  cultivated,  and  the  sciences
neglected.  Every  link  in  this  chain  is  more  or  less  faulty.  There  is  no  volcano  in  the
Spanish  peninsula,  and  the  only  earthquake  known  to  have  occurred  there  was  that  of
Lisbon."  Now,  I  have  certainly  no  right  to  expect  that  a  reviewer,  composing  a  popular
article  for  an  immediate  purpose,  and  knowing  that  when  his  article  is  read  it  will  be
thrown  aside  and  forgotten,  should  under  such  unfavourable  circumstances  be  at  the
pains  of  mastering  all  the  details  of  his  subject.  To  look  for  this  would  be  the  height
of  injustice.  He  has  no  interest  in  being  accurate  ;  his  name  being  concealed,  his  reputa-
tion, if  he  have  any,  is  not  at  stake  ;  and  the  errors  into  which  he  falls  ought  to  be
regarded  with  leniency,  inasmuch  as,  their  vehicle  being  an  ephemeral  publication,  they
are  not  likely  to  be  remembered,  and  they  are  therefore  not  likely  to  work  much  mischief.

These  considerations  have  always  prevented  me  from  offering  any  reply  to  anonymous
criticisms.  But  the  passage  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  to  which  I  have  called  attention
displays  such  marvellous  ignorance  that  I  wish  to  rescue  it  from  oblivion,  and  to  put  it
on  record  as  a  literary  curiosity.  The  other  charges  brought  against  me  could,  I  need
hardly  say,  be  refuted  with  equal  ease.  Indeed,  no  reasonable  person  can  possibly  sup-
pose that  after  years  of  arduous  and  uninterrupted  study  I  should  have  committed  those
childish  blunders  with  which  my  opponents  unscrupulously  taunt  me.  Once  for  all,  I
may  say  that  I  have  made  no  assertion  for  the  truth  of  which  I  do  not  possess  ample  and
irrefragable  evidence.  But  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  arrange  and  adduce  all  the  proofs
at  the  same  time  ;  and  in  so  vast  an  enterprise  I  must  in  some  degree  rely,  not  on  the


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT  531

those  superstitious  feelings  which  they  naturally  "provoke,  we  may  form  some
idea  of  the  insecurity  of  life,  and  of  the  ease  with  which  an  artful  and  ambitious
priesthood  could  turn  such  insecurity  into  an  engine  for  the  advancement  of
their  own  power.6


generosity  of  the  reader,  but  on  his  candour.  I  do  not  think  that  I  am  asking  too  much
in  requesting  him,  if  on  any  future  occasion  his  judgment  should  be  in  suspense  between
me  and  my  critics,  to  give  me  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  and  to  bear  in  mind  that  state-
ments embodied  in  a  deliberate  and  slowly  concocted  work,  authenticated  by  the  author's
name,  are  as  a  mere  matter  of  antecedent  probability  more  likely  to  be  accurate  than
statements  made  in  reviews  and  newspapers,  which,  besides  being  written  hastily,  and
often  at  very  short  notice,  are  unsigned,  and  by  which,  consequently,  their  promulgators
evade  all  responsibility,  avoid  all  risk,  and  can  in  their  own  persons  neither  gain  fame
nor  incur  obloquy.

The  simple  fact  is  that  in  Spain  there  have  been  more  earthquakes  than  in  all  other
parts  of  Europe  put  together,  Italy  excepted.  If  the  destruction  of  property  and  of  life
produced  by  this  one  cause  were  summed  up,  the  results  would  be  appalling.  When  we
moreover  add  those  alarming  shocks  which,  though  less  destructive,  are  far  more  fre-
quent, and  of  which  not  scores  nor  hundreds  but  thousands  have  occurred,  and  which
by  increasing  the  total  amount  of  fear  have  to  an  incalculable  extent  promoted  the
growth  of  superstition,  it  is  evident  that  such  phenomena  must  have  played  an  important
part  in  forming  the  national  character  of  the  Spaniards.  Whoever  will  take  the  trouble
of  consulting  the  following  passages  will  find  decisive  proofs  of  the  frightful  ravages
committed  by  earthquakes  in  Spain  alone  ;  Portugal  being  excluded.  They  all  refer
t  >  a  period  of  less  than  two  hundred  years  ;  the  first  being  in  1639,  and  the  last  in  1829.
Lettrcs  de  Madame  de  Villars,  Ambassadrice  en  Espagne,  Amsterdam,  1759,  p.  205.
Laborde's  Spain,  Lond.  1809,  vol.  i.  p.  169.  Dunlop's  Memoirs  of  Spain, .Edinburgh,
1834,  vol.  ii.  pp.  226,  227.  Boisel,  Journal  du  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1669,  4to,  p.  243.
Mallet's  Earthquake  Catalogue  of  the  British  Association,  London,  1858  ;  Report  for  1853,
p.  146  ;  for  1854,  pp.  26,  27,  54,  55,  57,  58,  65,  no,  140,  173,  196,  202.  Swinburne's
Travels  through  Spain,  London,  1787,  vol.  i.  p.  166.  Ford's  Spain,  London,  1847,  p.  178.
Bacon's  Six  Years  in  Biscay,  London,  1838,  p.  32,  compared  with  Inglis'  Spain,  London,
1831,  vol.  i.  p.  393,  vol.  ii.  p.  289-291.

These  authorities  narrate  the  ravages  committed  during  a  hundred  and  ninety  years.
From  their  account  it  is  manifest  that  in  Spain  hardly  a  generation  passed  by  without
castles,  villages,  and  towns  being  destroyed,  and  men,  women,  and  children  killed  by  earth-
quakes. But  according  to  our  anonymous  instructor  it  is  doubtful  if  there  ever  was
an  earthquake  in  Spain  ;  for  he  says  of  the  whole  Peninsula,  including  Portugal,  "  the
only  earthquake  known  to  have  occurred  there  was  that  of  Lisbon."

[It  is  true,  as  has  been  remarked  in  the  editor's  introduction,  that  the  great  majority
of  the  charges  of  error  and  ignorance  brought  against  Buckle  by  his  contemporaries  fall
to  the  ground,  as  does  that  which  he  has  here  exposed.  But,  as  we  have  also  seen  at
many  points,  we  who  stand  at  his  point  of  view,  looking  through  his  new  windows,  and
with  the  help  of  his  method,  do  find  that  on  a  number  of  points  he  has  fallen  into  errors
of  fact,  as  well  as  of  argument.  This,  indeed,  is  the  portion  of  every  pioneer  ;  and  as  he  has
admitted  at  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter  that  what  he  has  put  forward  "  may  no
doubt  be  erroneous,"  the  sweeping  claim  to  inerrancy  in  the  foregoing  note  should  not
have  been  made. — ED.]

6  On  the  superstitious  fears  caused  by  earthquakes  in  Spain,  see  a  good  passage  in
Conde,  Htstoria  de  la  Dominacion  de  los  Arabes,  p.  155-  "  En  el  ano  267,  dia  jueves,
22  de  la  luna  de  Xawal,  temblo  la  tierra  con  tan  espantoso  ruido  y  estremecimiento,  que
cayeron  muchos  alcazares  y  magnificos  edificios,  y  otros  quedaron  muy  quebrantados,  se
hundieron  montes,  se  abrieron  penascos,  y  la  tierra  se  hundio  y  trago  pueblos  y  alturas,  el
mar  se  retrajo  y  aparto  de  las  costas,  y  desaparecieron  islas  y  escollos  en  el  mar.  Las
gentes  abandonaban  los  pueblos  y  huian  a  los  campos,  las  aves  salian  de  sus  nidos,  y  las
fieras  espantadas  dejaban  sus  grutas  y  madrigueras  con  general  turbacion  y  trastorno  ;
nunca  los  hombres  vieron  ni  oyeron  cosa  semejante  ;  se  arruinaron  muchos  pueblos  de
la  costa  meridional  y  occidental  de  Espana.  Todas  estas  cosas  influyeron  tan  to  en  los


532  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Another  feature  of  this  singular  country  is  the  prevalence  of  a  pastoral  life,
mainly  caused  by  the  difficulty  of  establishing  regular  habits  of  agricultural
industry.  In  most  parts  of  Spain  the  climate  renders  it  impossible  for  the
labourer  to  work  the  whole  of  the  day  ;  7  and  this  forced  interruption  encourages
among  the  people  an  irregularity  and  instability  of  purpose  which  makes  them
choose  the  wandering  avocations  of  a  shepherd  rather  than  the  more  fixed
pursuits  of  agriculture.8  And  during  the  long  and  arduous  war  which  they  waged
against  their  Mohammedan  invaders  they  were  subject  to  such  incessant  sur-
prises and  forays  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  as  to  make  it  advisable  that  their
means  of  subsistence  should  be  easily  removed  ;  hence  they  preferred  the  produce
of  their  flocks  to  that  of  their  lands,  and  were  shepherds  instead  of  agriculturists,
simply  because  by  that  means  they  would  suffer  less  in  case  of  an  unfavourable
issue.  Even  after  the  capture  of  Toledo,  late  in  the  eleventh  century,  the
inhabitants  of  the  frontier  in  Estramadura,  La  Mancha,  and  New  Castile,  were
almost  entirely  herdsmen,  and  their  cattle  were  pastured  not  in  private  meadows


aiiimos  de  los  hombres,  y  en  especial  en  la  ignorante  multitud,  que  no  pudo  Almondhir
persuadirles  que  eran  cosas  naturales,  aunque  poco  freciientes,  que  no  tenian  influjo  ni
relacion  con  las  obras  de  los  hombres,  ni  con  sus  empresas,  sino  por  su  ignorancia  y  vanos
temores,  que  lo  mismo  temblaba  la  tierra  para  los  muslirnes  que  para  los  cristianos,  para
las  fieras  que  para  las  inocentes  criaturas."  Compare  Geddes"  Tracts  concerning  Spain,
London,  1730,  vol.  i.  p.  89  ;  and  Mariana,  who,  under  the  year  1395,  says  (Historia  de
Espana,  vol.  v.  p.  27)  :  "  Temblo  la  tierra  en  Valencia  mediado  el  mes  de  Diciembre,  con
que  muchos  edificios  cayeron  por  tierra,  otros  quedaron  desplornados  ;  que  era  maravilla
y  lastima.  HI  pueblo  como  agorero  que  es,  pensaba  cran  senates  del  cielo  y  pronosticos  de
los  dafios  que  temian."  The  history  of  Spain  abounds  with  similar  instances  far  too
numerous  to  quote  or  even  to  refer  to.  But  the  subject  is  so  important  and  has  been  so
misrepresented,  that  even  at  the  risk  of  wearying  the  reader  I  will  give  one  more
illustration  of  the  use  of  earthquakes  in  fostering  Spanish  superstition.  In  1504  "  an
earthquake,  accompanied  by  a  tremendous  hurricane,  such  as  the  oldest  men  did  not
remember,  had  visited  Andalusia,  and  especially  Carmona,  a  place  belonging  to  the
Queen,  and  occasioned  frightful  desolation  there.  The  superstitious  Spaniards  now  read
in  these  portents  the  prophetic  signs  by  which  Heaven  announces  some  great  calamity.
Prayers  were  put  up  in  every  temple,'"  etc.,  etc.  Prescotfs  History  of  Ferdinand  and
Isabella,  Paris,  1842,  vol.  iii.  p.  174.  [As  has  been  shown  by  Dozy  in  his  Histoire  des
Musulmans  d'Espagnc,  1861,  Conde's  narrative  is  not  trustworthy  ;  but  his  errors  are
not  such  as  to  affect  Buckle's  argument  where  he  founds  on  him. — ED.]

7  Above,  p.  24.     See  also  Laborde's  Spain,  vol.  iv.  p.  42.

8  A  writer  early  in  the  eighteenth  century  notices  "  el  gran  numero  de  pastores  que
hay."     Uztariz,  Theorica  y  Practica  de  Comercio,  3rd  ed.  Madrid,   1757,  folio,  p.  20.
As  to  the  Arabic  period,  see  Conde,  Historia  de  la  Dominacion,  p.  244  :  "  Muchos  pueblos,
siguiendo  su  natural  inclinacion,  se  entregaron  a  la  ganaderia."     Hence  "  the  wandering
life  so  congenial  to  the  habits  of  the  Spanish  peasantry,"  noticed  in  Cook's  Spain,  vol.  i.
p.  85,  where,  however,  the  connexion  between  this  and  the  physical  constitution  of  the
country  is  not  indicated.     The  solution  is  given  by  Mr.  Ticknor  with  his  usual  accuracy
and  penetration  :    "  The  climate  and  condition  of  the  Peninsula,  which  from  a  very
remote  period  had  favoured  the  shepherd's  life  and  his  pursuits,  facilitated,  no  doubt,
if  they  did  not  occasion,  the  first  introduction  into  Spanish  poetry  of  a  pastoral  tone,
whose  echoes  are  heard  far  back  among  the  old  ballads."  ..."  From  the  Middle  Ages
the  occupations  of  a  shepherd's  life  had  prevailed  in  Spain  and  Portugal  to  a  greater
extent  than  elsewhere  in  Europe  ;  and,  probably  in  consequence  of   this  circumstance,
eclogues  and  bucolics  were  early  known  in  the  poetry  of  both  countries,  and  became  con-
nected in  both  with  the  origin  of  the  popular  drama."     Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish
Literature,  London,  1849,  vol.  iii.  pp.  9,  36.     On  the  pastoral  literature  of  Spain,  see
Bouterwek's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  London,  1823,  vol.  i.  pp.  123-129  ;  and  on
the  great  number  of  pastoral  romances,  Southey's  Letters  from  Spain,  Bristol,   i799>
p.  336.     But  these  writers,  not  seizing  the  whole  question,  have  failed  to  observe  the
relation  between  the  literary,  physical,  and  social  phenomena.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          533

but  in  the  open  fields.0  All  this  increased  the  uncertainty  of  life,  and  strengthened
that  love  of  adventure  and  that  spirit  of  romance  which  at  a  later  period  gave
a  tone  to  the  popular  literature.  Under  such  circumstances  everything  grew
precarious,  restless,  and  unsettled  ;  thought  and  inquiry  were  impossible  ;  doubt
was  unknown  ;  and  the  way  was  prepared  for  those  superstitious  habits,  and  for
that  deep-rooted  and  tenacious  belief,  which  have  always  formed  a  principal
feature  in  the  history  of  the  Spanish  nation.*

To  what  extent  these  circumstances  would,  if  they  stood  by  themselves,  have
affected  the  ultimate  destiny  of  Spain,  is  a  question  hardly  possible  to  answer  ;
but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  their  effects  must  always  have  been  important,
though,  from  the  paucity  of  evidence,  we  are  unable  to  measure  them  with  pre-
cision. In  regard,  however,  to  the  actual  result,  this  point  is  of  little  moment,
because  a  long  chain  of  other  and  still  more  influential  events  became  interwoven
with  those  just  mentioned,  and,  tending  in  precisely  the  same  direction,  produced
a  combination  which  nothing  could  resist,  and  from  which  we  may  trace  with
unerring  certainty  the  steps  by  which  the  nation  subsequently  declined.  The
history  of  the  causes  of  the  degradation  of  Spain  will  indeed  become  too  clear
to  be  mistaken,  if  studied  in  reference  to  those  general  principles  which  I  have
enunciated,  and  which  will  themselves  be  confirmed  by  the  light  they  throw  on
this  instructive  though  melancholy  subject.

After  the  subversion  of  the  Roman  Empire,  the  first  leading  fact  in  the  history
of  Spain  is  the  settlement  of  the  Visigoths  and  the  establishment  of  their  opinions
in  the  Peninsula.  They,  as  well  as  the  Suevi,  who  immediately  preceded  them,
were  Arians,  and  Spain  during  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  became  the  rallying
point  of  that  famous  heresy,10  to  which  indeed  most  of  the  Gothic  tribes  then
adhered.  But  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  the  Franks,  on  their  conversion
from  Paganism,  adopted  the  opposite  and  orthodox  creed,  and  were  encouraged
by  their  clergy  to  make  war  upon  their  heretical  neighbours.  Clovis,  who  was


9  See  the  memoir  by  Jovellanos,  in  Laborde's  Spain,  vol.  iv.  p.  127-     This  was  the
necessary  consequence  of  those  vindictive  attacks  by  which,  for  several  centuries,  both
Mohammedans  and  Christians  seemed  resolved  to  turn  Spain  into  a  desert ;  ravaging
each  other's  fields,  and  destroying  every  crop  they  could  meet  with.     Conde,  Domination
de  los  Arabes,  pp.  75,  188,  278,  346,  396,  4i7,  418,  471,  499,  SOD,  505,  523,  539,  544,  55L
578,  645,  651,  658.     To  quote  one  of  these  instances,  late  in  the  eleventh  century  :    "  La
constancia  de  Alfonso  ben  Ferdeland  en  hacer  entradas  y  talas  en  tierra  de  Toledo  dos
veces  cada  ano,  fue  tanta  que  empobrecio  y  apuro  los  pueblos  ;  "  .  .  .  "el  tirano  Alfonso
talo  y  quemo  los  campos  y  los  pueblos."     Conde,  p.  346.     As  such  havoc,  which  was
continued  with  few  interruptions  for  about  seven  hundred  years,  has  done  much  towards
forming  the  national  character  of  the  Spaniards,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  refer  to
Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  iii.  p.  438,  vol.  iv.  pp.  193,  314,  vol.  v.  pp.  92,  317,  337  ;
and  to  Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1846,  vol.  i.  p.  99.

10  The  unsettled  chronology  of  the  early  history  of  Spain  appears,  from  the  different
statements  of  various  writers  respecting  the  duration  of  Arianism,  a  point  of  much  more
importance  than  the  death  and  accession  of  kings.     Antequera  (Historia  de  la  Legislation
Espanola,  Madrid,  1849,  p.  37)  says,  "  La  secta  arriana,  pues,  segun  las  epocas  fijadas,
permanecio  en  Espana  125  aftos  ;  "  Fleury  (Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  vii.  p.  586,  Paris,
1758)  says  "  environ  180  ans  ;  "  and  M'Crie,  generally  well  informed,  says  in  his  History
of  the  Reformation  in  Spain,  Edinburgh,  1829,  p.  7,  "  Arianism  was  the  prevailing  and
established  creed  of  the  country  for  nearly  two  centuries  :  "  for  this  he  refers  to  Gregory
of  Tours.     With    good   reason    therefore  does  M.  Fauriel  term  it  "  une  question  qui
souffre  des  difficultes."     See  his  able  work,  Histoire  de  la  Gaule  Meridionale,  Paris,  1836,
vol.  i.  p.  10.

[*  As  habits  of  warfare  were  general  in  Europe  up  to  the  eleventh  century,  the  special
inference  here  drawn  as  to  Spain  seems  unwarranted.  We  have  aheady  seen  (above,
p.  107),  and  shall  see  further,  that  Buckle  has  overrated  the  original  religiosity  of  the
Spaniards. — ED.]


534  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

then  king  of  the  Franks,  was  regarded  by  the  church  as  the  champion  of  the
faith,  in  whose  behalf  he  attacked  the  unbelieving  Visigoths.11  His  successors,
moved  by  the  same  motives,  pursued  the  same  policy  ;  12  and  during  nearly  a
century  there  was  a  war  of  opinions  between  France  and  Spain,  by  which  the
Visigothic  empire  was  seriously  endangered,  and  was  more  than  once  on  the
verge  of  dissolution.  Hence,  in  Spain,  a  war  for  national  independence  became
also  a  war  for  national  religion,13  and  an  intimate  alliance  was  formed  between
the  Arian  kings  and  the  Arian  clergy.  The  latter  class  were,  in  those  ages  of
ignorance,  sure  to  gain  by  such  a  compact,1*  and  they  received  considerable
temporal  advantages  in  return  for  the  prayers  which  they  offered  up  against  the
enemy,  as  also  for  the  miracles  which  they  occasionally  performed.  Thus  early
a  foundation  was  laid  for  the  immense  influence  which  the  Spanish  priesthood
have  possessed  ever  since,  and  which  was  strengthened  by  subsequent  events.
For,  late  in  the  sixth  century,  the  Latin  clergy  converted  their  Visigothic  masters,*
and  the  Spanish  government,  becoming  orthodox,  naturally  conferred  upon  its

11  In  496,  the  orthodox  clergy  looked  on  Clovis  as  "  un  champion  qu'il  peut  opposer
aux  heretiques  visigoths  et  burgondes."     Fauriel,  Histoire  de  la  Gaule  Meridionale,
vol.  ii.  p.  41.     They  also  likened  him  to  Gideon,  p.   66.     Compare  Fleury,  Histoire
EccUsiastique,  vol.  vii.  pp.  89,  90.     Ortiz  is  so  enthusiastic  that  he  forgets  his  patriotism,
and  warmly  praises  the  ferocious  barbarian  who  made    war    indeed  on  his  country,
but  still  whose  speculative  opinions  were  supposed  to  be  sound.     "  Mientras  Alarico
desfogaba  su  encono  contra  los  Catolicos,  tuvo  la  Iglesia  Galicana  el  consuelo  de  ver
Catolico  a  su  gran  Rey  Clodoveo.     Era  el  unico  Monarca  del  mundo  que  a  la  sazon
profesaba  la  Religion  verdadera."     Ortiz,  Compendia  de  la  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.
p.  96,  Madrid,  1796.

12  Thus  in  531  Childebert  marched  against  the  Visigoths  because  they  were  Arians.
Fauriel,  Histoire  de  la  Gaule  Meridionale,  vol.  ii.  p.  131  ;  and  in  542    Childebert  and
Clotaire  made  another  attack,  and  laid  siege  to  Saragossa,  p.  142.     "No  advertian  los
Godos  lo  que  su  falsa  creencia  les  perjudicaba,  y  si  lo  advertian,  su  obcecacion  les  hacia
no  poner  remedio.     Los  reyes  francos,  que  eran  catolicos,  les  movian  guerras  en  las
Galias  por  arrianos,  y  los  obispos  catolicos  de  la  misma  Galia  gotica  deseaban  la  domina-
cion  de  los  francos."     Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  p.  380,  Madrid,  1850.

13  "  Los  Francos  por  el  amor  que  tenian  a  la  Religion  Catholica,  que  poco  antes
abrazaran,  aborrecian  a  los  Visigodos  como  gente  inficionada  de  la  secta  Arriana."
Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  p.  43.     And  of  one  of  their  great  battles  he  says,
p.  46,  "  vulgarmente  se  llamo  el  campo  Arriano  por  causa  de  la  religion  que  los  Godos
seguian."

14  "  En  religion  et  en  croyance,  comme  en  toute  chose,  les  Visigoths  se  montrerent
plus  serieux,  plus  profonds,  plus  tenaces  que  les  Burgondes.     J'ai  dit  ailleurs  comment
ils  etaient  devenus  presque  en  meme  temps  Chretiens  et  ariens.     Transplantes  en  Gaule
et  en  Espagne,  non-seulement  ils  avaient  persevere  dans  leur  heresie  ;  ils  s'y  etaient
affermis,  affectionnes,  et  dans  le  peu  que  1'histoire  laisse  apercevoir  de  leur  clerge,  on
s' assure  qu'il  etait  austere,  zele,  et  qu'il  exercait  un  grand  empire  sur  les  chefs  comme
sur  la  masse  de  la  nation  visigothe."  .  .  .  .  "  Les  rois  visigoths  se  croyaient  obliges  a
de  grandes  demonstrations  de  respect  pour  leur  clerge  arien."     Fauriel,  Histoire  de  la
Gaule  Meridionale,  vol.  i.  pp.  577,  578.

[*  In  the  preceding  note,  the  Visigothic  clergy  are  represented  as  Arians  ;  and  it  appears
that  when  Recared  turned  Catholic  he  had  to  persuade  them  to  follow  him.  He  seems
to  have  abjured  on  grounds  of  statecraft,  seeking  to  set  up  an  "  orthodox  "  church,  as
against  his  turbulent  nobles,  who  were  Arian.  He  seems  to  have  been  helped  by  the
Catholic  bishop  Leander  ;  but  from  the  first  the  mass  of  the  Hispano- Roman  population
had  remained  anti-Arian  under  the  Arian  rule  of  the  Visigoths.  See  U.  R.  Burke's
History  of  Spain,  Hume's  ed.,  1900,  i.  85-88.  The  elective  character  of  the  Visigothic
monarchy  threw  the  king  on  the  one  hand  into  the  arms  of  the  clergy,  and  on  the  other
hand  set  the  nobles  on  winning  the  clergy  to  their  side.  Of  the  thirteen  kings  who
reigned  from  Alaric  to  Athanagila,  451-544*  eleven  were  killed  by  their  nobles  (Id.
pp.  115,  117,  text  and  notes). — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT         535

teachers  an  authority  equal  to  that  wielded  by  the  Arian  hierarchy.^  Indeed,
the  rulers  of  Spain,  grateful  to  those  who  had  shown  them  the  error  of  their
ways,  were  willing  rather  to  increase  the  power  of  the  church  than  to  diminish  it.
The  clergy  took  advantage  of  this  disposition  ;  and  the  result  was,  that  before  the
middle  of  the  seventh  century  the  spiritual  classes  possessed  more  influence  in  Spain
than  in  any  other  part  of  Europe.16  The  ecclesiastical  synods  became  not  only
councils  of  the  church,  but  also  parliaments  of  the  realm. "  At  Toledo,  which
was  then  the  capital  of  Spain,  the  power  of  the  clergy  was  immense,  and  was  so
ostentatiously  displayed  that  in  a  council  they  held  there  in  the  year  633,  we
find  the  king  literally  prostrating  himself  on  the  ground  before  the  bishops  ;  18
and  half  a  century  later  the  ecclesiastical  historian  mentions  that  this  humiliating
practice  was  repeated  by  another  king,  having  become,  he  says,  an  established
custom.19  That  this  was  not  a  mere  meaningless  ceremony  is  moreover  evident
from  other  and  analogous  facts.  Exactly  the  same  tendency  is  seen  in  their
jurisprudence  ;  since  by  the  Visigothic  code  any  layman,  whether  plaintiff  or
defendant,  might  insist  on  his  cause  being  tried  not  by  the  temporal  magistrate,
but  by  the  bishop  of  the  diocese.  Nay,  even  if  both  parties  to  the  suit  were
agreed  in  preferring  the  civil  tribunal,  the  bishop  still  retained  the  power  of
revoking  the  decision,  if  in  his  opinion  it  was  incorrect  ;  and  it  was  his  especial
business  to  watch  over  the  administration  of  justice,  and  to  instruct  the  magis-
trates how  to  perform  their  duty.20  Another  and  more  painful  proof  of  the


15  The  abjuration  of  Recared  took  place  between  the  years  586  and  589.     Dunham's
History  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  London,  1832,  vol.  i.  pp.  126-128.     Mariana,  Historia  de
Espana,  vol.  ii.  pp.  99-101.     Ortiz,  Compendia  de  la  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  p.  120.
Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  pp.  360-363  ;  and  says  Lafuente,  p.  384,  "  Recaredo
fue  el  primero  que  con  todo  el  ardor  de  un  neofito,  comenzo  en  el  tercer  concilio  toledano
a  dar  a  estas  asambleas  conocimiento  y  decision  en  negocios  pertenecientes  al  gobierno
temporal  de  los  pueblos."     Similarly,  Antequera  (Historia  de  la  Legislacion,  p.  31)  is
happy  to  observe  that  "  Recaredo  abjuro  la  heregia  arriana,  abrazo  decididamente  la
religion  de  Jesu-Cristo,  y  concedio  d  los  ministros  de  la  iglesia  una  influencia  en  el  gobierno
del  Estado,  que  vino  d  ser  en  adelante,  ilimitada  y  absoluta."

16  "As  for  the  councils  held  under  the  Visigoth  kings  of  Spain  during  the  seventh  cen-
tury, it  is  not  easy  to  determine  whether  they  are  to  be  considered  as  ecclesiastical  or
temporal  assemblies.     No  kingdom  was  so  thoroughly  under  the  bondage  of  the  hier-
archy as  Spain."     Hallam's  Middle  Ages,  edit.  1846,  vol.  i.  p.  511.     "  Les  pretres  etaient
les  seuls  qui  avaient  conserve  et  meme  augmente  leur  influence  dans  la  monarchic  goth-
espagnole."     Sempere,  Histoire  des  Cortes  d"Espagne,  Bordeaux,  1815,  p.  19.     Compare
Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  p.  368,  on  "  la  influencia  y  preponderancia  del
clero,  no  ya  solo  en  los  negocios  eclesiasticos,  sino  tambien  en  los  politicos  y  de  estado."

17  "  But  it  is  in  Spain,  after  the  Visigoths  had  cast  off  their  Arianism,  that  the  bishops
more  manifestly  influence  the  whole  character  of  the  legislation.     The  synods  of  Toledo
were  not  merely  national  councils,  but  parliaments  of  the  realm."     Milman's  History
of  Latin  Christianity,  London,  1854,  vol.  i.  p.  380.     See  also  Antequera,  Historia  de  la
Legislacion  Espanola,  pp.  41,  42.

is  In  633,  at  a  council  of  Toledo,  the  king  "  s'etant  prosterne  &  terre  devant  les
eveques."     Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  viii.  p.  308,  Paris,  1758-

19  In  688,  at  a  council  of  Toledo,  "  le  roi  Egica  y  etoit  en  personne  ;  et  apres  s'etre
prosterne  devant  les  eveques,  suivant  la  coutume,  il  fit  lire  un  memoire  ou  il  leur  demandoit
conseil,"  etc.     Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  ix.  p.  89,  Paris,  1758-

20  See  a  short  but  admirable  summary  of  this  part  of  the  Visigothic  code  in  Dunham  s
History  of  Spain,  vol.  iv.  pp.  77-78  ;  perhaps  the  best  history  in  the  English  language  of
a  foreign  modern  country.     "  In  Spain,  the  bishops  had  a  special  charge  to  keep  continual
watch  over  the  administration  of  justice,  and  were  summoned  on  all  great  occasions
to  instruct  the  judges  to  act  with  piety  and  justice."     Milman's  History  of  Latin
Christianity,  1854,  vol.  i.  p.  386.     The  council  of  Toledo,  in  633,  directs  bishops
admonish  judges.     Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  viii.  p.  313  ;  and  a  learned  Spanish
lawyer,  Sempere,  says  of  the  bishops,  "  Le  code  du  Fuero  Juzgo  fut  leur  ouvrage  ;  les
juges  etaient  sujets  "a  leur  juridjction ;  les  plaideurs,  greves  par  la  sentence  des  juges,


536  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ascendency  of  the  clergy  is  that  the  laws  against  heretics  were  harsher  in  Spain
than  in  any  other  country  ;  the  Jews  in  particular  being  persecuted  with  unre-
lenting rigour.21  Indeed,  the  desire  of  upholding  the  faith  was  strong  enough
to  produce  a  formal  declaration  that  no  sovereign  should  be  acknowledged
unless  he  promised  to  preserve  its  purity  ;  the  judges  of  the  purity  being  of  course
the  bishops  themselves,  to  whose  suffrage  the  king  owed  his  throne.22

Such  were  the  circumstances  which,  in  and  before  the  seventh  century,  secured
to  the  Spanish  Church  an  influence  unequalled  in  any  other  part  of  Europe.23
Early  in  the  eighth  century  an  event  occurred  which  apparently  broke  up  and
dispersed  the  hierarchy,  but  which  in  reality  was  extremely  favourable  to  them.
In  711  the  Mohammedans  sailed  from  Africa,  landed  in  the  south  of  Spain,  and
in  the  space  of  three  years  conquered  the  whole  country,  except  the  almost
inaccessible  regions  of  the  north-west.  The  Spaniards,  secure  in  their  native


pouvaient  se  plaindre  aux  eveques,  et  ceux-ci  evoquer  ainsi  leurs  arrets,  les  reformer,  et
chatier  les  magistrats.  Les  procureurs  du  roi,  comme  les  juges,  etaient  obliges  de  se
presenter  aux  synodes  diocesains  annuels,  pour  apprendre  des  ecclesiastiques  1' administra-
tion de  la  justice  ;  enfin  le  governement  des  Goths  n'etait  qu'une  monarchic  theocra-
tique."  Sempere,  Monarchic  Espagnole,  Paris,  1826,  vol.  i.  p.  6,  vol.  ii.  pp.  212-214.

21  "  The  terrible  laws  against  heresy,  and  the  atrocious  juridical  persecutions  of  the
Jews,  already  designate  Spain  as  the  throne  and  centre  of  merciless  bigotry."     Milmari's
History  of  Latin  Christianity,  vol.  i.  p.  381.     "Tan  luego  como  la  religion  catolica  se
hallo  dominando  en  el  trono  y  en  el  pueblo,  comenzaron  los  concilianos  toledanos  a
dictar  disposiciones  canonicas  y  a  prescribir  castigos  contra  los  idolatras,  contra  los
judios,   y    contra  los  hereges."      Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ix.  pp.  199-200.
See    also    p.    214,    and    vol.    ii.    pp.    406,    407,    451.     Prescotfs  History  of  Ferdinand
and   Isabella,    vol.   i.    pp.    235,    236.      Johnston's  Institutes  of  the    Civil  Law  of  Spain,
p.  262.     Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes  d'Espagne,  vol.  i.  pp.  260,  261  ;  and  Southey's
Chronicle  of  the  Cid,  p.  18.     I  particularly  indicate  these  passages,  on  account  of  the
extraordinary  assertion  of  Dr.  M'Crie,  that  "  on  a  review  of  criminal  proceedings  in  Spain
anterior  to  the  establishment  of  the  Court  of  Inquisition,  it  appears  in  general  that
heretics  were  more  mildly  treated  there  than  in  other  countries."    M'Crie's  History  of
the  Reformation  in  Spain,  p.  83,  the  best  book  on  the  Spanish  Protestants.     [M'Crie's
statement  is  perfectly  accurate,  and  is  endorsed  by  the  latest  historian  of  Spain,  U.  R.
Burke.     "  From  the  death  of  Roderic  to  the  birth  of  Isabella,  no  governmentjn  western
Europe  was  less  disposed  to  religious  persecution  than  that  of  Aragon  ;  no  Christian
sovereigns  were  less  devoted  to  Rome  than  those  of  Castile.     From  the  conversion  of
Recared  to  the  rout  of  the  Guadalete — a  single  century  of  unchecked  and  humiliating
decadence — the  government  of  Spain  had  indeed  been  distinctly  and  deplorably  intolerant;
but  from  the  advent  of  Taric  to  the  appearance  of  Torquemada  the  religious  inde-
pendence and  the  religious  toleration  of  kings  and  people  compare  favourably  with  those
of  any  country  in  Europe"  (History  of  Spain,  Hume's  ed.  ii.  55).     Buckle  has  failed
to  discriminate  between  the  epochs.     And  Milman  should  have  remembered  that  perse-
cution of  Jews  went  on  simultaneously  in  the  East  and  the  West  in  the  period  of  which
he  speaks  ;  and  for  the  same  reason — the  increase  of  the  Jews  in  numbers  and  wealth.
Cp.  Finlay,  History  of  Greece  from  its  Conquest  by  the  Romans,  ed.  Tozer,  i.  310,  315,  325,
326  ;  ii.  34.     It  will  be  observed  that  the  words  of  Lafuente,  cited  above,  do  not  contradict
M'Crie.     See  also  M.  A.  S.  Hume's  The  Spanish  People,  1900,  p.  177. — ED.]

22  A  council  of  Toledo  in  638  orders  "  qu'a  1'avenir  aucun  roi  ne  montera  sur  le  trone
qu'il  ne  promette  de  conserver  la  foi  catholique  ;  "  and  at  another  council  in  681,  "  le
roi  y  presenta  un  ecrit  par  lequel  il  prioit  les  eveques  de  lui  assurer  le  royaume,  qu'il
tenoit  de  leurs  suffrages."     Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  viii.  p.  339,  vol.  ix.  p.  70.

23  Those  happy  times  have  received  the  warm  applause  of  a  modern  theologian,  because
in  them  the  church  "  ha  opuesto  un  muro  de  bronce  al  error  ;  "  and  because  there  existed
"  la  mas  estrecha  concordia  entre  el  imperio  y  el  sacerdocio,  por  cuyo  inestimable
beneficio   debemos   hacer  incesantes   votos."      Observaciones   sobre  El   Presente  y  El
Porvenir  de   la  Iglesia  en  Espana,  por  Domingo  Costa  y  Borras,  Obispo  de  Barcelona,
Barcelona,  1857,  pp.  73,  75,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          537

mountains,21  soon  recovered  heart,  rallied  their  forces,  and  began  in  their  turn
to  assail  the  invaders.  A  desperate  struggle  ensued,  which  lasted  nearly  eight
centuries,  and  in  which,  a  second  time  in  the  history  of  Spain,  a  war  for  inde-
pendence was  also  a  war  for  religion  ;  the  contest  between  Arabian  Infidels  and
Spanish  Christians  succeeding  that  formerly  carried  on  between  the  Trinitarians
of  France  and  the  Arians  of  Spain.  Slowly,  and  with  infinite  difficulty,  the
Christians  fought  their  way.  By  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  they  reached
the  line  of  the  Douro.25  Before  the  close  of  the  eleventh  century  they  conquered
as  far  as  the  Tagus,  and  Toledo,  their  ancient  capital,  fell  into  their  hands  in
io85.26  Even  then  much  remained  to  be  done.  In  the  south  the  struggle
assumed  its  deadliest  form,  and  there  it  was  prolonged  with  such  obstinacy  that
it  was  not  until  the  capture  of  Malaga  in  1487,  and  of  Granada  in  1492,  that  the
Christian  empire  was  re-established,  and  the  old  Spanish  monarchy  finally
restored.2?

The  effect  of  all  this  on  the  Spanish  character  was  most  remarkable.  During
eight  successive  centuries  the  whole  country  was  engaged  in  a  religious  crusade  ;
and  those  holy  wars  which  other  nations  occasionally  waged  were  in  Spain
prolonged  and  continued  for  more  than  twenty  generations.28  The  object  being
not  only  to  regain  a  territory  but  also  to  re-establish  a  creed,  it  naturally  hap-
pened that  the  expounders  of  that  creed  assumed  a  prominent  and  important
position.  In  the  camp  and  in  the  council -chamber  the  voice  of  ecclesiastics
was  heard  and  obeyed  ;  for  as  the  war  aimed  at  the  propagation  of  Christianity,
it  seemed  right  that  her  ministers  should  play  a  conspicuous  part  in  a  matter

4  To  which  they  fled  with  a  speed  which  caused  their  great  enemy,  Muza,  to  pass  upon
them  a  somewhat  ambiguous  eulogy.  "  Dijo,  son  leones  en  sus  castillos,  aguilas  en  sus
caballos,  y  mugeres  en  sus  escuadrones de  a  pie;  pero  si  ven  la  ocasion  la  saben  apro-
vechar,  y  cuando  quedan  vencidos  son  cabras  en  escapar  a  los  montes,  que  no  ven  la
tierra  que  pisan."  Conde,  Historia  de  la  Domination  de  los  Arabes,  p.  30.

25  Prescotfs  History  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxxviii.  287.     Lafuente
(Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  iii.  p.  363)  marks  the  epoch  rather  indistinctly,  "  basta  ya  el
Duero."     Compare  Florez,  Memorias  de  las  Reynas  Catholicas,  Madrid,  4to,  1761,  vol.  i.
p.  68.

26  There  is  a  spirited  account  of  its  capture  in  Mariana's  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.
pp.  506-513  ;  after  which  Ortiz  (Compendia  de  la  Historia,  vol.  iii.  p.  156)  and  Lafuente
(Historia  General,  vol.  iv.  pp.  236-242)  are  rather  tame.     The  Mohammedan  view  of
this,  the  first  decisive  blow  to  their  cause,  will  be  found  in  Conde,  Historia  de  la  Domination
de  los  Arabes,  p.  347.     "  Asi  se  perdio  aquella  inclita  ciudad,  y  acabo  el  reino  de  Toledo
con  grave  perdida  del  Islam."     The  Christian  view  is  that  "  concedio  Dios  al  Rev  la
conquista  de  aquella  capital."     Florez,  Reynas  Catholicas,  vol.  i.  p.  165.

27  Cir court,  Histoire  des  Arabes,  vol.  i.  pp.  313,  349.     Conde,  Domination  de  los  Arabes,
pp.  656,  664.     Ortiz,  Compendio,  vol.  v.  pp.  509,  561.     Lafuente,  Historia,  vol.  ix.  pp.  341,
399-

28  "  According  to  the  magnificent  style  of  the  Spanish  historians,  eight  centuries  of
almost  uninterrupted  warfare  elapsed,  and  three  thousand  seven  hundred  battles  were
fought,  before  the  last  of  the  Moorish  kingdoms  in  Spain  submitted  to  the  Christian
arms."     Robertson's  Charles  V.  by  Prescott,  London,  1857,  p.  65.     "  En  nuestra  misma
Espana,  en  Leon  y  Castilla,  en  esta  nueva  Tierra  Santa,  donde  se  sostenia  una  cruzada
perpetua  y  constante  contra  los  infieles,  donde  se  mantenia  en  todo  su  fervor  el  espiritu
a  la  vez  religioso  y  guerrero."     Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  v.  p.  293.     "  Era
Espana  theatre  de  una  continua  guerra  contra  los  enemigos  de  la  Fe."     Florez,  Reynas
Catholicas,  vol.  i.  p.  226.     "  El  glorioso  empeno  de  exterminar  a  los  enemigos  de  la  Fe."
P-  453*     "  Esta  guerra  sagrada."     Vol.  ii.  p.  800.     "  Se  armaron  nuestros  Reyes  Cath-
olicos,  con  zelo  y  animo  alentado  del  cielo  ;  y  como  la  causa  era    de    Religion    para
ensanchar  los  Dominios  de  la  Fe,  sacrificaron  todas  las  fuerzas  del  Reyno,  y  sus  mismas
personas."  p.  801.     What  was  called  the  Indulgence  of  the  Crusade  was  granted  by  the
Popes  "  aux  Espagnols  qui  combattoient  centre  les  Mores."     Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesias'
tique,  vol.  xviii.  p.  xxi.,  vol.  xix.  pp.  158,  458,  vol.  xxi.  p.  171,


538  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

which  particularly  concerned  them.29  The  danger  to  which  the  country  was
exposed  being  moreover  very  imminent,  those  superstitious  feelings  were  excited
which  danger  is  apt  to  provoke,  and  to  which,  as  I  have  elsewhere  shown,30  the
tropical  civilizations  owed  some  of  their  leading  peculiarities.  Scarcely  were
the  Spanish  Christians  driven  from  their  homes  and  forced  to  take  refuge  in  the
north,  when  this  great  principle  began  to  operate.  In  their  mountainous  retreat
they  preserved  a  chest  filled  with  relics  of  the  saints,  the  possession  of  which  they
valued  as  their  greatest  security.31  This  was  to  them  a  national  standard,  round
which  they  rallied,  and  by  the  aid  of  which  they  gained  miraculous  victories
over  their  Infidel  opponents.  Looking  upon  themselves  as  soldiers  of  the  Cross,
their  minds  became  habituated  to  supernatural  considerations  to  an  extent
which  we  can  now  hardly  believe,  and  which  distinguished  them  in  this  respect
from  every  other  European  nation.32  Their  young  men  saw  visions,  and  their
old  men  dreamed  dreams.33  Strange  sights  were  vouchsafed  to  them  from  heaven  ;
on  the  eve  of  a  battle  mysterious  portents  appeared  ;  and  it  was  observed  that
whenever  the  Mohammedans  violated  the  tomb  of  a  Christian  saint,  thunder  and
lightning  were  sent  to  rebuke  the  misbelievers,  and,  if  need  be,  to  punish  their
audacious  invasion.34

29  "En  aquellos  tiempos  [y  duro  hasta  todo  el  siglo  xv.  y  toma  de  Granada]  eran  los
obispos  los  primeros  capitanes  de  los  exercitos."     Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  iii.  p.   189.
"  Los  prelados  habian  sido  siempre  los  primeros  no  solo  en  promover  la  guerra  contra
Moros,  sino  a  presentarse  en  campana  con  todo  su  poder  y  esfuerzo,  animando  a  los
demas  con  las  palabras  y  el  exemplo."     Vol.  v.  pp.  507,  508.

30  Above,  pp.  67,  84

31  "  Les  Chretiens  avoient  apporte  dans  les  Asturies  une  arche  ou  coffre  plein  de
reliques,  qu'ils  regarderent  depuis  comme  la  sauve-garde  de  leur  etat."  ..."  Elle  fut
emportee  et  mise  enfin  a  Oviedo,  comme  le  lieu  le  plus  sur  entre  ces  montagnes,  1'ere  773,
1'an  775."     Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  ix.  p.  190.     This  "  area  llena  de  reliquias  "
was  taken  to  the  Asturias  in  714.     Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  p.  227  ;   and,
according  to  Ortiz  (Compendia,  vol.  ii.  p.  182),  it  was  "  un  tesoro  inestimable  de  sagradas
reliquias."     See  also  Geddes'  Tracts  concerning  Spain,  vol.  ii.  p.  237,  London,  1730  ;  and
Ford's  Spain,  1847,  p.  388.     [Such  relics  were  similarly  esteemed  in  all  other  Christian
countries  at  that  period,  and  for  centuries  afterwards. — ED.]

32  "  But  no  people  ever  felt  themselves  to  be  so  absolutely  soldiers  of  the  Cross  as  the
Spaniards  did,  from  the  time  of  their  Moorish  wars  ;  no  people  ever  trusted  so  constantly
to  the  recurrence  of  miracles  in  the  affairs  of  their  daily  life  ;  and  therefore  no  people
ever  talked  of  Divine  things  as  of  matters  in  their  nature  so  familiar  and  commonplace.
Traces  of  this  state  of  feeling  and  character  are  to  be  found  in  Spanish  literature  on  all
sides."     Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  ii.  p.  333.     Compare  Bouterwek's
History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i.  pp.  105,  106  ;  and  the  account  of  the  battle  of  las
Navas  in  Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes  d'Espagne,  vol.  i.  p.  153  :  "On  voulait  trouver
partout  des  miracles."     Some  of  the  most  startling  of  these  miracles  may  be  found  in
Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  v.  p.  227  ;  in  Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.
pp.  378,  395,  vol.  iii.  p.  338  ;  and  in  Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  iii.  p.  248,  vol.  iv.  p.  -22.

33  One  of  the  most  curious  of  these  prophetic  dreams  is  preserved  in  Conde,  Dominacion
de  los  Arabes,  pp.  378,  379,  with  its  interpretation  by  the  theologians.     They  were  for
the  most  part  fulfilled.     In  844  "  El  Apostol  Santiago,  segun  que  lo  prometiera  al  Key,
fue  visto  en  un  caballo  bianco,  y  con  una  bandera  blanca  y  en  medio  della  una  cruz  roxa,
que  capitaneaba  nuestra  gente."     Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  pp.  310,  311.
In  957  "  El  Apostol  Santiago  fue  visto  entre  las  haces  dar  la  victoria  a  los  fieles,"  p.  382.
In  1236  "  Publicose  por  cierto  que  San  Jorge  ayudo  a  los  Christianos,  y  que  se  hallo  en
la  pelea."     Vol.  iii.  p.  323.     On  the  dreams  which  foreshadowed  these  appearances,  see
Mariana,  vol.  ii.  pp.  309,  446,  vol.  iii.  pp.  15,  108.     [Dreams,  visions,  and  miracles,  such
as  are  above  described,  were  common  to  all  Christendom  at  the  same  period. — ED.]

34  "  Priests  mingled  in  the  council  and  the  camp,  and,  arrayed  in  their  sacerdotal
robes,  not  unfrequently  led  the  armies  to  battle.     They  interpreted  the  will  of  Heaven
as  mysteriously  revealed  in  dreams  and  visions.     Miracles  were  a  familiar  occurrence.
The  violated  tombs  of  the  saints  sent  forth  thunders  and  lightnings  to  consume  the
invaders."     Prescotfs  History  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  i.  p.  xxxix.     In  the  middle


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT         539

Under  circumstances  like  these  the  clergy  cculd  not  fail  to  extend  their  in-
fluence ;  or,  we  may  rather  say,  the  course  of  events  extended  it  for  them.  The
Spanish  Christians,  pent  up  for  a  considerable  time  in  the  mountains  of  Asturias,
and  deprived  of  their  former  resources,  quickly  degenerated,  and  soon  lost  the
scanty  civilization  to  which  they  had  attained.  Stripped  of  all  their  wealth,
and  confined  to  what  was  comparatively  a  barren  region,  they  relapsed  into
barbarism,  and  remained  for  at  least  a  century  without  arts,  or  commerce,  or
literature.35  As  their  ignorance  increased,  so  also  did  their  superstition  r  while
this  last,  in  its  turn,  strengthened  the  authority  of  their  priests.  The  order  of
affairs,  therefore,  was  very  natural.  The  Mohammedan  invasion  made  the  Chris-
tians poor;  poverty  caused  ignorance ;  ignorance  caused  credulity,  and  credulity,
depriving  men  both  of  the  power  and  of  the  desire  to  investigate  for  themselves,
encouraged  a  reverential  spirit,  and  confirmed  those  submissive  habits,  and  that
blind  obedience  to  the  Church,  which  form  the  leading  and  most  unfortunate
peculiarity  of  Spanish  history.*

From  this  it  appears  that  there  were  three  ways  in  which  the  Mohammedan
invasion  strengthened  the  devotional  feelings  of  the  Spanish  people.  The  first
way  was  by  promoting  a  long  and  obstinate  religious  war  ;  the  second  was  by  the
presence  of  constant  and  imminent  dangers  ;  and  the  third  way  was  by  the
poverty,  and  therefore  the  ignorance,  which  it  produced  among  the  Christians. f

of  the  ninth  century,  there  happened  the  following  event :  "  En  lo  mas  cruel  de  los
tormentos  "  [to  which  the  Christians  were  exposed]  "  subio  Abderramen  un  dia  a  las
azuteas  6  galerias  de  su  Palacio.  Descubrio  desde  alii  los  cuerpos  de  los  Santos
martirizados  en  los  patibulos  y  atravesados  con  los  palos,  mando  los  quemasen  todos
para  que  no  quedase  reliquia.  Cumpliose  luego  la  orden  :  pero  aquel  impio  probo  bien
presto  los  rigores  de  la  venganza  divina  que  volvia  por  la  sangre  derramada  de  sus  Santos.
Improvisamente  se  le  pego  la  lengua  al  paladar  y  fauces  ;  cerrosele  la  boca,  y  no  pudo
pronunciar  una  palabra,  ni  dar  un  gemido.  Conduxeronle  sus  criados  a  la  cama,  murio
aquella  misma  noche,  y  antes  de  apagarse  las  hogueras  en  que  ardian  los  santos  cuerpos,
entro  la  infeliz  alma  de  Abderramen  en  los  eternos  fuegos  del  infierno."  Ortiz,  Com-
pendia, vol.  iii.  p.  52.

35  Circourt  (Histoire  des  Arabes,  vol.  i.  p.  5)  says,  "  Les  Chretiens  qui  ne  voulurent  pas
se  soumettre  furent  rejetes  dans  les  incultes  ravins  des  Pyrenees,  ou  ils  purent  se  maintenir

[*  The  same  characteristics  have  been  above  specified  as  well  established  before  the
Moslem  invasion.  The  present  argument  is  thus  on  the  face  of  the  case  supererogatory,
and,  being  deductive,  cannot  avail  against  the  historical  testimonies  of  McCrie  and  Burke,
before  cited. — ED.]

[f  It  is  here  taken  for  granted  that  "  wars  of  religion  "  always  deepen  or  develop  reli-
gious faith.  In  point  of  fact,  nearly  all  religious  wars  are  found  to  be  followed  by  a  growth
of  scepticism,  though  in  some  of  the  combatants  and  onlookers  they  may  deepen  fanati-
cism. Thus  growths  of  scepticism  certainly  followed  on  the  Crusades,  the  wars  of  Cath-
olics and  Protestants  in  France,  the  Thirty  Years'  War,  and  the  Great  Rebellion  in  Eng-
land, in  which  religious  feeling  was  largely  involved.  Buckle,  in  positing  "  scepticism  "
as  a  vital  factor  in  progress,  failed  to  note  that  this  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  scepticism
is  most  effectively  generated  in  a  previously  uncritical  community.  Of  course  the
spectacle  of  mere  self-seeking  in  churchmen,  apart  from  civil  war,  may  act  in  the  same
way— as  in  the  intellectual  life  of  Renaissance  Italy,  and  the  England  of  the  Reformation
period.  Taking  the  Spanish  case  inductively,  we  find  that  the  period  of  racial  strife  is
positively  not  one  of  religious  earnestness  or  fanaticism.  The  wars  were  in  general  rather
tribal  than  religious  :  Christians  often  fought  with  Christians,  and  Moslems  with  Moslems :
pretenders  of  each  religion  sometimes  found  shelter  and  help  with  rulers  of  the  other  :
and  the  Cid,  in  particular,  was  simply  a  free  lance,  who  of  ten  fought  for  Moslems  against
Christians  (Burke 's  History,  Hume's  ed.,  i.  185-193).  Thus  on  neither  side  was  there  any
predominant  fanaticism,  though  both  tended  to  be  ferocious.  Among  the  Moors,  we
know,  there  was  much  scepticism  up  to  the  period  of  decline,  when  fanaticism  won  the
upper  hand.  Altogether,  the  case  is  much  more  complex  than  Buckle  here  recognises,—
ED.]


540  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

These  events  being  preceded  by  the  great  Arian  war,  and  being  accompanied
and  perpetually  reinforced  by  those  physical  phenomena  which  I  have  indicated
as  tending  in  the  same  direction,  worked  with  such  combined  and  accumulated
energy  that  in  Spain  the  theological  element  became  not  so  much  a  component
of  the  national  character,  but  rather  the  character  itself.*  The  ablest  and  most
ambitious  of  the  Spanish  kings  were  compelled  to  follow  in  the  general  wake  ;f
and  despots  though  they  were,  they  succumbed  to  that  pressure  of  opinions
which  they  believed  they  were  controlling.  The  war  with  Granada,  late  in  the
fifteenth  century,  was  theological  far  more  than  temporal  ;  and  Isabella,  who
made  the  greatest  sacrifices  in  order  to  conduct  it,  and  who  in  capacity  as  well  as  in
honesty  was  superior  to  Ferdinand,  had  for  her  object  not  so  much  the  acquisition
of  territory  as  the  propagation  of  the  Christian  faith.36  Indeed,  any  doubts
which  could  be  entertained  respecting  the  purpose  of  the  contest  must  have  been
dissipated  by  subsequent  events.  For  scarcely  was  the  war  brought  to  a  close,
when  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  issued  a  decree  expelling  from  the  country  every
Jew  who  refused  to  deny  his  faith  ;  so  that  the  soil  of  Spain  might  be  no  longer
polluted  by  the  presence  of  unbelievers.37  To  make  them  Christians,  or,  failing

comme  les  betes  fauves  se  maintiennent  dans  les  forets."  But  the  most  curious  account
of  the  state  of  the  Spanish  Christians  in  the  last  half  of  the  eighth  century,  and  in  the  first
half  of  the  ninth,  will  be  found  in  Conde,  Historia  de  la  Domination,  pp.  95,  125.  "  Referinn
de  estos  pueblos  de  Galicia  que  son  cristianos,  y  de  los  mas  bravos  de  Afranc  ;  poro  qw;
viven  como  fieras,  que  nunca  lavan  sus  cuerpos  ni  vestidos,  que  no  se  los  mudan,  y  los
llevan  puestos  hasta  que  se  los  caen  despedazados  en  andrajos,  que  entran  unos  en  las
casas  de  otros  sin  pedir  licencia."  ...  In  A.D.  815,  "  no  habia  guerra  sino  contra  cris-
tianos por  mantener  frontera,  y  no  con  deseo  de  ampliar  y  extender  los  limites  del  reino,
ni  por  esperanza  de  sacar  grandes  riquezas,  por  ser  los  cristianos  gente  pobre  de  montafia,
sin  saber  nada  de  comercio  ni  de  buenas  artes."

36  "  Isabella  may  be  regarded  as  the  soul  of  this  war.     She  engaged  in  it  with  the  most
exalted  views,  less  to  acquire  territory  than  to  re-establish  the  empire  of  the  Cross  over
the  ancient  domain  of  Christendom."     Prescotfs  History  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  i.
p.  392.     Compare  Fleury,  Histoire  Ecdesiastique,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  583,  "  bannir  de  toute
1'Espagne  la  secte  de  Mahomet  ;  "  and  Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes  d'Espagne,  vol.  ii.
pp.  99,  109,  "  pour  elle  une  seule  chose  avait  de  1'importance  ;  extirper  de  ses  royaumes
le  nom  et  la  secte  de  Mahomet."  .  .  .  "  Sa  vie  fut  presque  exclusivement  consacree  a  faire
triompher  la  croix  sur  le  croissant."     Mariana  (Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  v.  p.  344,  and
vol.  ii.  pp.  51,  52)  has  warmly  eulogized  her  character,  which  indeed,  from  the  Spanish
point  of  view,  was  perfect.     See  also  Florez,  Reynas  Catholicas,  vol.  ii.  pp.  774,  788,  829.
[This  is  an  express  admission  that  Isabella  followed  her  own  bent,  and  was  not  coerced
by  a  national  tendency. — ED.]

37  "  En  Espana  los  Reyes  Don  Fernando  y  Dona  Isabel  luego  que  se  vieron  desem-
barazados  de  la  guerra  de  los  Moros,  acordaron  de  echar  de  todo  su  reyno  a  los  Judios."
Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  vi.  p.  303.     A  Spanish   historian,  writing  less  than
seventy  years  ago,  expresses  his  approbation  in  the  following  terms  :  "  Arrancado  de
nuestra  peninsula  el  imperio  Mahometano,  quedaba  todavia  la  secta  Judayca,  peste
acaso  mas  perniciosa,  y  sin  duda  mas  peligrosa  y  extendida,  porestar  los  Judios  estable-
cidos  en  todos  los  pueblos  de  ella.     Pero  los  Catolicos  Monarcas,  cuyo  mayor  afan  era
desarraigar  de  sus  reynos  toda  planta  y  raiz  infecta  y  contraria  a  la  fe  de  Jesu-Cristo,
dieron  decreto  en  Granada  dia  30  de  Marzo  del  ano  mismo  de  1492,  mandando  saliesen  de
sus  dominios  los  Judios,  que  no  se  bautizasen  dentro  de  4  meses."    Ortiz,  Compendia,
Madrid,  1798,  vol.  v.  p.  564.   The  importance  of  knowing  how  these  and  similar  events  are
judged  by  Spaniards,  induces  me  to  give  their  own  words  at  a  length  which  otherwise  would

[*  On  this  view,  a  nation's  "  character  "  can  change  again  and  again  ;  in  which  case
the  phrase  loses  all  specific  meaning. — ED.]

[f  This  is  a  begging  of  the  question.  The  historical  evidence,  as  noted  above,  p.  536,
goes  to  show  that  before  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  Spain  was  not  a  specially  fanatical
country ;  and  these  rulers  certainly  imposed  the  Inquisition  on  a  resisting  people.  See
Burkf's  History,  ch.  xl. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT         54*

in  that,  to  exterminate  them,  was  the  business  of  the  Inquisition,  which  was
established  in  the  same  reign,  and  which  before  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century
was  in  full  operation.38  During  the  sixteenth  century  the  throne  was  occupied
by  two  princes  of  eminent  ability,  who  pursued  a  similar  course.  Charles  V.,
who  succeeded  Ferdinand  in  1516,  'governed  Spain  for  forty  years,  and  the  general
character  of  his  administration  was  the  same  as  that  of  his  predecessors.*  In
regard  to  his  foreign  policy,  his  three  principal  wars  were  against  France,  against
the  German  princes,  and  against  Turkey.  Of  these  the  first  was  secular  ;  but
the  two  last  were  essentially  religious.  In  the  German  war  he  defended  the
church  against  innovation  ;  and  at  the  battle  of  Muhlberg  he  so  completely
humbled  the  Protestant  princes  as  to  retard  for  some  time  the  progress  of  the
Reformation.39  In  his  other  great  war  he,  as  the  champion  of  Christianity
against  Mohammedanism,  consummated  what  his  grandfather  Ferdinand  had
begun.  Charles  defeated  and  dislodged  the  Mohammedans  in  the  East,  just  as
Ferdinand  had  done  in  the  West  ;  the  repulse  of  the  Turks  before  Vienna  being
to  the  sixteenth  century  what  the  conquest  of  the  Arabs  of  Granada  was  to  the
fifteenth.40  It  was  therefore  with  reason  that  Charles,  at  the  close  of  his  career,
could  boast  that  he  had  always  preferred  his  creed  to  his  country,  and  that  the
first  object  of  his  ambition  had  been  to  maintain  the  interests  of  Christianity.41

be  needlessly  prolix.  Historians,  generally,  are  too  apt  to  pay  more  attention  to  public
transactions  than  to  the  opinions  which  those  transactions  evoke  ;  though  in  point  of
fact  the  opinions  form  the  most  valuable  part  of  history,  since  they  are  the  result  of
more  general  causes,  while  political  actions  are  often  due  to  the  peculiarities  of  powerful
individuals.

Of  the  number  of  Jews  actually  expelled  I  can  find  no  trustworthy  account.  They  are
differently  estimated  at  from  160,000  to  800,000.  Prescotfs  History  of  Ferdinand  and
Isabella,  vol.  ii.  p.  148.  Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  vi.  p.  304.  Ortiz,  Compendia,
vol.  v.  p.  564.  Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ix.  pp.  412,  413.  Llorente,  Histoire  dt
V Inquisition,  Paris,  1817,  vol.  i.  p.  261.  Mata,  Dos  Discursos,  Madrid,  1794,  pp.  64,  65.
Castro,  Decadencia  de  Espana,  Cadiz,  1852,  p.  19.

!8  It  had  been  introduced  into  Aragon  in  1242  ;  but,  according  to  M.  Tapia,  "  sin
embargo,  la  persecucion  se  limito  entonces  a  la  secta  de  los  albigenses  ;  y  como  de  ellos
bubo  tan  pocos  en  Castilla,  no  se  considero  sin  duda  necesario  en  ella  el  establecimiento
de  aquel  tribunal."  Tapia,  Historia  de  la  Civilizacion  Espanola,  Madrid,  1840,  vol.  ii.
p.  302.  Indeed,  Llorente  says  (Histoire  de  V Inquisition  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1817,  vol.  i.  p.  88),
"  II  est  incertain  si  au  commencement  du  i5e  siecle  1' Inquisition  existait  en  Castille."
In  the  recent  work  by  M.  Lafuente,  1232  is  given  as  its  earliest  date  ;  but  "  a  fines  del  siglo
xiv.  y  principles  del  xv.  apenas  puede  saberse  si  existia  tribunal  de  Inquisicion  en  Castilla."
Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  ix.  pp.  204-206,  Madrid,  1852.  It  seems  therefore  with
good  reason  that  Mariana  (Historia,  vol.  vi.  p.  171)  terms  the  Inquisition  of  Ferdinand
and  Isabella  "  un  niievo  y  santo  tribunal."  See  also  Florez,  Memorias  de  las  Reynas
Catholicas,  vol.  ii.  p.  799.  [This  virtually  concedes  the  proposition  of  McCrie,  scouted
above  in  note  21. — ED.]

39  Prescotfs  History  of  Philip  II. ,  vol.  i.  p.  23,  London,  1857.     navies'  History  of  Hol-
land, vol.  i.  p.  447,  LoRdon,  1841.     On  the  religious  character  of  his  German  policy,
compare  Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  vii.  p.  330  ;    Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  vi.  pp.  195,
196.     [Charles's  anti-Lutheran  policy  was  certainly  ruled  by  political  no  less  than  by
religious  motives,  as  was  that  of  Francis  I. — ED.]

40  Prescotfs  Philip  II.,  vol.  i.  p.  3  ;  and  the  continuation  of  Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesias-
tique,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  280.     Robertson,  though  praising  Charles  V.  for  this  achievement,
seems  rather  inclined  to  underrate  its  magnitude  ;  History  of  Charles  V.,  p.  246.

41  In  the  speech  he  made  at  his  abdication,  he  said  that  "  he  had  been  ever  mindful  of
the  interests  of  the  dear  land  of  his  birth,  but  above  all  of  the  great  interests  of  Christianity.
His  first  object  had  been  to  maintain  these  inviolate  against  the  infidel."      Prescotfs

[*  Charles,  be  it  observed,  was  a  Teuton  by  descent,  by  education,  and  by  physiological
type  ;  and  as  emperor  of  Germany  he  lay  open  to  Teutonic  as  well  as  to  Spanish  influences.
The  argument  as  to  Spanish  bias  is  thus  not  made  out. — ED.]


542  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  zeal  with  which  he  struggled  for  the  faith  also  appears  in  his  exertions
against  heresy  in  the  Low  Countries.  According  to  contemporary  and
competent  authorities,  from  fifty  thousand  to  a  hundred  thousand  persons
were  put  to  death  in  the  Netherlands  during  his  reign  on  account  of  their
religious  opinions.42  Later  inquirers  have  -doubted  the  accuracy  of  this
statement, «  which  is  probably  exaggerated  ;  but  we  know  that  between
1520  and  1550  he  published  a  series  of  laws  to  the  effect  that  those  who
were  convicted  of  heresy  should  be  beheaded,  or  burned  alive,  or  buried
alive.  Tue  penalties  were  thus  various,  to  meet  the  circumstances  of  each
case.  Capital  punishment,  however,  was  always  to  be  inflicted  on  whoever
bought  an  heretical  book,  or  sold  it,  or  even  copied  it  for  his  own  use.44  His
last  advice  to  his  son  well  accorded  with  these  measures.  Only  a  few  days  before
his  death  he  signed  a  codicil  to  his  will,  recommending  that  no  favour  should
ever  be  shown  to  heretics  ;  that  they  should  all  be  put  to  death  ;  and  that  care
should  be  taken  to  uphold  the  Inquisition,  as  the  best  means  of  accomplishing
so  desirable  an  end.45


Philip  II. ,  vol.  i.  p.  8.  Minana  boasts  that  "  el  Cesar  con  piadoso  y  noble  animo  exponia
su  vida  a  los  peligros  para  extender  los  limites  del  Imperio  Christiano."  Continuation
de  Mariana,  vol.  viii.  p.  352.  Compare  the  continuation  of  Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,
vol.  xxxi.  p.  19.  [Charles's  claim  at  the  close  of  his  life,  when  he  retired  to  the  cloister,
is  not  good  evidence  for  his  real  motives  in  earlier  life.  His  sack  of  Rome  cannot  possibly
be  reconciled  with  his  final  pretences.  And  Motley  includes  "  fanaticism  for  the  faith  "
among  the  qualities  which  Charles  "  not  only  lacked  but  despised  "  (Rise  of  the  Dutch
Republic,  i-vol.  ed.  1863,  p.  63).  Compare  Prescott,  Philip  II.,  Kirk's  ed.  1894,  p.  124.
-ED.]

42  Grotius  says  100,000  ;  Bor,  Meteren,  and  Paul  say  50,000.     Watson's   History   of
Philip  II.,  London,  1839,  pp.  45,  51.     Davies'  History  of  Holland,  London,  1841,  vol.  i.
pp.  498,  499.     Motley's  Dutch  Republic,  London,  1858,  vol.  i.  pp.  103,  104.

43  It  is  doubted,  if  I  rightly  remember,  by  Mr.  Prescott.     But  the  opinion  of  that  able
historian  is  entitled  to  less  weight  from  his  want  of  acquaintance  with  Dutch  literature,
where  the  principal  evidence  must  be  sought  for.     On  this,  as  on  many  other  matters,
the  valuable  work  of  Mr.  Motley  leaves  little  to  desire.      [Motley  not   only   gives   no
new  evidence  whatever  from  Dutch  literature  for  the  statement  in  question,  but  admits
that  the  figures  of  the  Venetian  Navigero,  who  estimated  the  victims  at  thirty  thousand
in  1546,  are  "  doubtless  inaccurate."     As  Buckle  admits  the  common  statement  to  be
"  probably  exaggerated,"  his  remark  on  Prescott  is  beside  the  case.     The  latter  had  good
grounds  for  his  doubt,  for  which  he  gives  his  reasons  (Hist,  of  Philip  II.,  Kirk's  ed.  1894
pp.  149-50. — ED.]

44  Prescott's  Philip  II.,  vol.  i.  pp.  196,  197.     -In  1523  the  first  persons  were  burned.
Motley's  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  i.  p.  69.     The  mode  of  burying  alive  is  described  in  Davies'
History  of  Holland,  vol.  i.  p.  383,  vol.  ii.  pp.  311,  312.

45  He  died  on  the  2ist  September  ;  and  on  the  gth  he  signed  a  codicil,  in  which  he  "  en-
joined upon  his  son  to  follow  up  and  bring  to  justice  every  heretic  in  his  dominions,  and
this  without  exception,  and  without  favour  or  mercy  to  any  one.     He  conjured  Philip
to  cherish  the  holy  Inquisition  as  the  best  means  of  accomplishing  this  good  work  "
Prescotfs  Additions  to  Robertson's  Charles  V.,  p.  576.     See  also  his  instructions  to  Philip
in  Raumer's  History  of  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Centuries,  vol.  i.  p.  91  ;  and  on  his
opinion  of  the  Inquisition,  see  his  conversation  with  Sir  Thomas  Wyatt,  printed  from  the
State  Papers  in  Froude's  History  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  456,  London,  1858.     This  may
have  been  mere  declamation  ;  but  in  Tapia's  Civilization  Espanola,  Madrid,  1840,  vol.  iii.
pp.  76,  77,  will  be  found  a  deliberate  and  official  letter,  in  which  Charles  does  not  hesitate
to  say,  "  La  santa  inquisicion  como  oficio  santo  y  puesto  por  los  reyes  catolicos  nuestros
senores  y  abuelos  a  honra  de  Dios  nuestro  senor  y  de  nuestra  santa  fe  catolica,  tengo  firme
e    entranablemente    asentado   y   fijado  en   mi    corazon,  para   la   mandar   favorecer  y
honrar,  como  principe  justo  y  temeroso  de  Dios  es  obligado  y  debe  hacer."

The  codicil  to  the  will  of  Charles  still  exists,  or  did  very  recently,  among  the  archives
at  Simancas.  Ford's  Spain,  1847,  p.  334.  In  M.  Lafuente's  great  work,  Historia  de
Espana,  vol.  xii.  pp.  494,  495,  Madrid,  1853,  it  is  referred  to  in  language  which,  in  more


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH     INTELLECT


543


Tills  barbarous  policy  is  to  be  ascribed  not  to  the  vices  nor  to  the  temperament
)f  the  individual  ruler,  but  to  the  operation  of  large  general  causes,  which  acted
ipon  the  individual  and  impelled  him  to  the  course  he  pursued.  Charles  was
>y  no  means  a  vindictive  man  ;  his  natural  disposition  was  to  mercy  rather  than
o  rigour  ;  his  sincerity  is  unquestionable  ;  he  performed  what  he  believed  to  be
lis  duty  ;  and  he  was  so  kind  a  friend  that  those  who  knew  him  best  were  pre-
;isely  those  who  loved  him  most.46  Little,  however,  could  all  that  avail  in  shaping
tis  public  conduct.  He  was  obliged  to  obey  the  tendencies  of  the  age  and  country
ti  which  he  lived.*  And  what  those  tendencies  were,  appeared  still  more  clearly
ifter  his  death,  when  the  throne  of  Spain  was  occupied  upwards  of  forty  years
>y  a  prince  who  inherited  it  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  whose  reign  is  particularly

iteresting  as  a  symptom  and  a  consequence  of  the  disposition  of  the  people  over

rhom  he  ruled.

Philip  II.,  who  succeeded  Charles  V.  in  1555,  was  indeed  eminently  a  creature
)f  the  time,  and  the  ablest  of  his  biographers  aptly  terms  him  the  most  perfect
type  of  the  national  character.47  His  favourite  maxim,  which  forms  the  key  to
tiis  policy,  was,  "  That  it  is  better  not  to  reign  at  all  than  to  reign  over  heretics."  48
\rmed  with  supreme  power,  he  bent  all  his  energies  towards  carrying  this  principle


jnses  than  one,  is  perfectly  Spanish  :  "  Su  testamento  y  codicilo  respiran  las  ideas  cris-
iansa  y  religiosas  en  que  habia  vivido  y  la  piedad  que  seftalo  su  muerte."  .  .  .  "  Es  muy

notar  su  primera  clausula  [i.e.  of  the  codicil]  por  la  cual  deja  muy  encarecidamente
•ecomeudado  al  rey  don  Felipe  que  use  de  todo  rigor  en  el  castigo  de  los  hereges  luteranos
me  habian  sido  presos  y  se  hubiereii  de  prender  en  Espafia."  .  .  .  "  '  Sin  escepcion  de
jrsona  alguna,  ni  admitir  ruegos,  ni  tener  respeto  a  persona  alguna  ;  porque  para  el

;to  de  ello  favorezca  y  mande  favorecer  al  Santo  Oficio  de  la  Inquisition,'  "  etc.

46  Native  testimony  may  perhaps  be  accused  of  being  partial ;  but  on  the  other  hand
Raumer,  in  his  valuable  History  of  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Centuries,  vol.  i.  p.  22,
justly  observes  that  his  character  has  been  misrepresented  "  by  reason  that  historians
have  availed  themselves  by  preference  of  the  inimical  narratives  of  French  and  Protes-
tant writers."     To  steer  between  these  extremes,  I  will  transcribe  the  summing  up  of

Charles's  reign  as  it  is  given  by  a  learned  and  singularly  unprejudiced  writer.  "  Tortuous
was  sometimes  the  policy  of  the  emperor,  he  never,  like  Francis,  acted  with  treachery  ;
5  mind  had  too  much  of  native  grandeur  for  such  baseness.  Sincere  in  religion  and
riendship,  faithful  to  his  word,  clement  beyond  example,  liberal  towards  his  servants,
idefatigable  in  his  regal  duties,  anxious  for  the  welfare  of  his  subjects,  and  generally
)lameless  in  private  life,  his  character  will  not  suffer  by  a  comparison  with  that  of  any
lonarch  of  his  times."  Dunham's  History  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  41.  "  Clemency  was  the
>asis  of  his  character,"  p.  30.  [After  praising  Motley  as  in  note  43,  Buckle  should  here
lave  noted  his  opinion  on  Charles :  "  He  was  as  false  as  water  "  (Rise  of  the  Dutch  Re-
niblic,  i -vol.  ed.  1863,  p.  63).  The  same  authority  pronounces  Charles  grossly  niggardly
wards  his  servants,  treacherous,  fraudulent,  and  regardless  of  the  welfare  of  his  subjects ;
id  as  to  his  private  habits  says  :  "  He  was  addicted  to  vulgar  and  miscellaneous  incon-
lence  "  (p.  64).  What  Dunham  meant  by  his  eulogy  on  that  score  it  is  hard  to  guess,
lotley  founds  on  a  Spanish  authority. — ED.]

47  "  The  Spaniards,  as  he  grew  in  years,  beheld  with  pride  and  satisfaction,  in  their
iture  sovereign,  the  most  perfect  type  of  the  national  character."     Prescotfs  History

Philip  II.,  vol.  i.  p.  39.     So,  too,  in  Motley's  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  i.  p.  128,  "  he  was
itirely  a  Spaniard  ;  "  and  in  Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  i.  p.  155,  "  pero  el  reinado
Felipe  fue  todo  Espafiol."     [Buckle  omits  to  note  that  Motley  tells  (i-vol.  ed.  1863,
76)  how  "  many  good  Catholics  thought  Philip  much  more  religious  than  was  becom-
ig  to  his  rank  and  age."     Cp.  Prescott,  Philip  II.,  Kirk's  ed.  p.  656. — ED.]

48  Prescotfs  Philip  II.,  vol.  i.  pp.  68,  210,  vol.  ii.  p.  26.     Wttson's  Philip  II.,  p.  55-
jinpare  Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  273.

[*  In  the  time  of  Charles,  Henry  VIII.  of  England  overthrew  the  Catholic  hierarchy
defiance  of  his  "  age  "  and  of  the  bias  of  his  people.  The  formula  "  obliged  to  obey  "
ll  not  bear  examination,  nor  will  the  account  of  Charles'  character  given  in  the  text.—


544  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

into  effect.  Directly  that  he  heard  that  the  Protestants  were  making  converts
in  Spain,  he  strained  every  nerve  to  stifle  the  heresy  ; 49  and  so  admirably  was  he
seconded  by  the  general  temper  of  the  people  *  that  he  was  able  without  risk  to
suppress  opinions  which  convulsed  every  other  part  of  Europe.  In  Spain,  the
Reformation,  after  a  short  struggle,  died  completely  away,  and  in  about  ten
years  the  last  vestige  of  it  disappeared.50  The  Dutch  f  wished  to  adopt,  and  in
many  instances  did  adopt,  the  reformed  doctrine  ;  therefore  Philip  waged  against
them  a  cruel  war,  which  lasted  thirty  years,  and  which  he  continued  till  his  death,
because  he  was  resolved  to  extirpate  the  new  creed.51  He  ordered  that  every
heretic  who  refused  to  recant  should  be  burned.  If  the  heretic  did  recant,  some
indulgence  was  granted  ;  but  having  once  been  tainted,  he  must  die.  Instead
of  being  burned,  he  was  therefore  to  be  executed.52  Of  the  number  of  those  who
actually  suffered  in  the  Low  Countries  we  have  no  precise  information  ;  53  but
Alva  triumphantly  boasted  that,  in  the  live  or  six  years  of  his  administration,
he  had  put  to  death  in  cold  blood  more  than  eighteen  thousand,  besides  a  still
greater  number  whom  he  had  slain  on  the  field  of  battle.54  This,  even  during

.  49  "  Como  era  tan  zeloso  en  la  extirpacion  de  la  heregia,  uno  de  sus  primeros  cuidados
fue  el  castigo  de  los  Luteranos  ;  y  a  presencia  suya,  se  execute  en  Valladolid  el  dia  ocho
de  Octubre  el  suplicio  demuchos  reos  de  este  delito."  Minana,  Continuation  de  Mariana,
vol.  ix.  p.  212.

50  "  The  contest  with  Protestantism  in  Spain,  under  such  auspices,  was  short.    It  began
in  earnest  and  in  blood  about  1559,  and  was  substantially  ended  in  1570."     Ticknor's
History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i.  p.  425.     See  also  M'Crie's  History  of  the  Reformation
in  Spain,  pp.  336,  346.     Thus  it  was  that  "  Espaiia  se  preserve  del  contagio.     Hizolo  con
las  annas  Carlos  V.,  y  con  las  hogueras  los  inquisidores.     Espana  se  aislo  del  movimiento
europeo."     Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  i.  p.  144,  Madrid,  1850.      M.  Lafuente  adds
that  in  his  opinion  all  Christendom  is  about  to  follow  the  good  example  set  by  Spain  of
rejecting  Protestantism.     "Si  no  nos  equivocanios,  en  nuestra  misma  edad  se  notan
sintomas  de  ir  marchando  este  problema  hacia  su  resolucion.     El  catolicisrno  gana  prose -
litos  ;  los  protestantes  de  hoy  no  son  lo  que  antes  fueron,  y  creemos  que  la  unidad  catolica
se  realizara."

51  Before  the  arrival  of  Alva,  "  Philip's  commands  to  Margaret  were  imperative,  to
use  her  utmost  efforts  to  extirpate  the  heretics."     Dames'  History  of  Holland,  vol.  i.  p.  55 1 ;
and  in  1563  he  wrote,  "  The  example  and  calamities  of  France  prove  how  wholesome  it  is
to  punish  heretics  with  rigour."     Raumer's  History  of  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Cen-
turies, vol.  i.  p.  171.     The  Spaniards  deemed  the  Dutch  guilty  of  a  double  crime  ;  being
rebels  against  God  and  the  king  :  "  Rebeldes  a  Dios  por  la  heregia,  y  a  su  Principe  a  quien
debian  obedecer."     Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  vii.  p.  410.     "  Tratauan  de  secreto
de  quitar  la  obediencia  a  Dios  y  a  su  Principe."     V  anderhammen"  s  Don  Filipe  el  Prudente
Segundo  deste  Nombre,  Madrid,  1632,  p.  44  rev.     Or,  as  Minana  phrases  it,  Philip  "  tenia
los  misinos  enemigos  que  Dios."     Continuation  de  Mariana,  vol.  x.  p.  139.

52  Motley's  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  i.  p.  229.     Watson's  Philip  II. ,  pp.  51,  52,  177.

53  Mr.  Motley,  under  the  year  1566,  says,  "  The  Prince  of  Orange  estimated  that  up  to
this  period  fifty  thousand  persons  in  the  provinces  had  been  put  to  death  in  obedience  to
the  edicts.     He  was  a  moderate  man,  and  accustomed  to  weigh  his  words."     Motley's
Dutch  Republic,  vol.  i.  pp.  424,  425.

54  Watson's  Philip  II.,  pp.  248,  249.     Tapia  (Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iii.  p.  95 )  says,

[*  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  persecution  and  expulsion  of  Protestants  in  Spain
under  Philip  was  on  all  fours  with  the  procedure  of  his  wife  in  England,  where  also  the
"  general  temper  of  the  people  "  was  clearly  in  favour  of  Catholicism.  Thousands  of  Pro-
testants left  Spain ;  and  many  left  England  ;  but  under  Elizabeth  they  were  able  to
return.  That  was  the  determining  difference. — ED.]

[f  This  loose  phrasing  obscures  the  facts.  Protestant  heresy  in  Holland  was  long
confined  to  the  "  lower  orders,"  and  was  cruelly  persecuted  with  the  full  acquiescence
of  the  upper  for  a  whole  generation  before  the  nobles,  become  impoverished  and  seeing
a  chance  of  retrieving  their  fortunes  by  getting  the  Church  lands,  began  a  movement  of
armed  resistance.  See  the  editor's  Inlrod.  to  English  Politics,  pp.  307  seq. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE  SPANISH    INTELLECT  545

his  short  tenure  of  power,  would  make  about  forty  thousand  victims  ;  an  estimate
probably  not  far  from  the  truth,  since  we  know  from  other  sources  that  in  one
year  more  than  eight  thousand  were  either  executed  or  burned.55  Such  measures
were  the  result  of  instructions  issued  by  Philip,  and  formed  a  necessary  part  of
his  general  scheme.56  The  desire  paramount  in  his  mind,  and  to  which  he  sacri-
ficed all  other  considerations,  was  to  put  down  the  new  creed,  and  to  re-instate
the  old  one.  To  this,  even  his  immense  ambition  and  his  inordinate  love  of
power  were  subordinate.  He  aimed  at  the  empire  of  Europe,  because  he  longed
to  restore  the  authority  of  the  Church.57  All  his  policy,  all  his  negotiations,  all
his  wars,  pointed  to  this  one  end.  Soon  after  his  accession  he  concluded  an
ignominious  treaty  with  the  Pope,  that  it  might  not  be  said  that  he  bore  arms
against  the  head  of  the  Christian  world.58  And  his  last  great  enterprise,  in  some
respects  the  most  important  of  all,  was  to  fit  out,  at  an  incredible  cost,  that  famous
Armada  with  which  he  hoped  to  humble  England,  and  to  nip  the  heresy  of  Europe
in  its  bud,  by  depriving  the  Protestants  of  their  principal  support,  and  of  the
only  asylum  where  they  were  sure  to  find  safe  and  honourable  refuge.59

"  quito  la  vida  a  mas  de  diez  y  ocho  mil  protestantes  con  diversos  generos  de  suplicios."
Compare  Motley's  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  ii.  p.  423,  and  Davies'  History  of  Holland,  vol.  i.
p.  608.

55  Davies'  History  of  Holland,  vol.  i.  p.  567.     Vanderhammen  (Don  Filipe  el  Prudente,
Madrid,  1632,  p.  52  rev.),  with  tranquil  pleasure,  assures  us  that  "  muriessen  mil  y  sete-
cientas  personas  en  pocos  dias  con  fuego,  cordel  y  cuchillo  en  diuersos  lugares."

56  "El  duque  de  Alba,  obrando  en  conformidad  a  las  instrucciones  de  su  soberano,  y
apoyado  en  la  aprobacion  que  merecian  al  rey  todas  sus  medidas."     Lafuente,  Historia
de  Espana,  vol.  xiii.  p.  221.

s?  "  It  was  to  restore  the  Catholic  Church  that  he  desired  to  obtain  the  empire  of
Europe."  Davies'  History  of  Holland,  vol.  ii.  p.  329.  "  El  protesto  siempre  '  que  sus  desin-
ios  en  la  guerra,  y  sus  exercitos  no  se  encaminauan  a  otra  cosa,  que  al  ensalcamiento  de  la
Religion  Christiana.'  "  V 'anderhammeri 's  Don  Filipe  el  Prudente,  p.  125.  "  El  que
aspiraba  a  someter  todas  las  naciones  de  la  tierra  a  su  credo  religiose."  Lafuente,  Historia
de  Espana,  vol.  xv.  p.  203.  The  Bishop  of  Salamanca  in  1563  openly  boasted  "  que  son
roi  ne  s'etoit  marie  avec  la  reine  d'Angleterre  que  pour  ramener  cette  isle  a  1'obeissance  de
1'eglise."  Continuation  de  Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  331-  Compare
Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  vi.  p.  204.  "  Este  casamiento  no  debio  de  tener  otras  miras  que
el  de  la  religion."

58  On  this  treaty,  the  only  humiliating  one  which  he  ever  concluded,  see  Prescott  s
Philip  II.,  vol.  i.  p.  104.     His  dying  advice  to  his  son  was,  "  Siempre  estareis  en  la  obedi-
encia  de  la  Santa  Iglesia  Romana,  y  del  Sumo  Pontifice,  teniendole  por  vuestro  Padre
espiritual."     Davila,  Historia  de  la  Vida  de  Felipe  Tercero,  Madrid,  1771,  folio,  lib.  i.  p.  29.
According  to  another  writer,  "  La  ultima  palabra  que  le  salio  con  el  espiritu,  fue  :  '  Yo
muero  como  Catolico  Christiano  en  la  Fe  y  obediencia  de  la  Iglesia  Romana,  y  respeto  al
Papa,  como  a  quien  trae  en  sus  manos  las  llaues  del  Cielo,  como  a  Principe  de  la  Iglesia,
y  Teniente  de  Dios  sobre  el  imperio  de  las  almas.'  "     Vanderhammen,  Don  Fihpe  el
Prudente,  p.  124.

59  Elizabeth,  uniting  the  three  terrible  qualities  of  heresy,  power,  and  ability,  was
obnoxious  to  the  Spaniards  to  an  almost  incredible  degree,  and  there  never  was  a  mon
thoroughly  national  enterprise  than  the  fitting  out  of  the  Armada  against  her.     One  or
two  pass-ages  from  a  grave  historian  will  illustrate  the  feelings  with  which  she  was  regarded
even  after  her  death,  and  will  assist  the  reader  in  forming  an  opinion  respecting  the  state
of  the  Spanish  mind.     "  Isabel,  6  Jezabel,  Revna  de  Inglaterra,  heretica  Calvmista,  y  la
mayor  perseguidora  que  ha  tenido  la  sangre  de  Jesu-Christo  y  los  hijos  de  la  Iglesia.
Davila,  Historia  de  Felipe  Tercero,  p.  74-     "  Los  sucesos  de  fuera  causaron  admiraci.

y  el  mayor  y  muy  esperado  de  toda  la  Christiandad  fue  la  muerte  de  Isabela,  Revna  d
Inglaterra,  heretica  Calvinista,  que  hizo  su  nombre  famoso  con  la  mfamia  de  su  vida,  y
perseguir  a  la  Iglesia,  derramando  la  sangre  de  los  Santos,  que  defendian  la  verdadera
Religion  Catolica,  dexando  registradas  sus  maldades  en  las  historias  pubhcas  del  mundo
pasando  su  alma  a  coger  el  desdichado  fruto  de  su  obstinada  soberbia  en  las  penas  d<
Infierno,  donde  conoce  con  el  castigo  perpetuo  el  engano  de  su  vida.    pp.  83,  84.


546  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

While  Philip,  following  the  course  of  his  predecessors,  was  wasting  the  blood
and  treasure  of  Spain  in  order  to  propagate  religious  opinions,60  the  people,  instead
of  rebelling  against  so  monstrous  a  system,  acquiesced  in  it,  and  cordially  sanc-
tioned it.  Indeed,  they  not  only  sanctioned  it,  but  they  almost  worshipped  the
man  by  whom  it  was  enforced.  There  probably  never  lived  a  prince  who,  during
so  long  a  period,  and  amid  so  many  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  was  adored  by  his
subjects  as  Philip  II.  was.  In  evil  report  and  in  good  report,  the  Spaniards
clung  to  him  with  unshaken  loyalty.*  Their  affection  was  not  lessened,  either
by  his  reverses,  or  by  his  forbidding  deportment,  or  by  his  cruelty,  or  by  his
grievous  exactions.  In  spite  of  all,  they  loved  him  to  the  last.  Such  was  his
absurd  arrogance,  that  he  allowed  none,  not  even  the  most  powerful  nobles,  to
address  him  except  on  their  knees,  and  in  return  he  only  spoke  in  half  sentences,
leaving  them  to  guess  the  rest,  and  to  fulfil  his  commands  as  best  they  might.61
And  ready  enough  they  were  to  obey  his  slightest  wishes.  A  contemporary  of
Philip,  struck  by  the  universal  homage  which  he  received,  says  that  the  Spanish
did  "  not  merely  love,  not  merely  reverence,  but  absolutely  adore  him,  and  deem
his  commands  so  sacred,  that  they  could  not  be  violated  without  offence  to
God."  «2

That  a  man  like  Philip  II.,  who  never  possessed  a  friend,  and  whose  usual

60  One  of  the  most  eminent  of  living  historians  well  says,  "  It  was  Philip's  enthusiasm
to  embody  the  wrath  of  God  against  heretics."     Motley's  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  ii.  p.  155.
"  Philip  lived  but  to  enforce  what  he  chose  to  consider  the  will  of  God."  p.  285.

61  "  Personne  vivante  ne  parloit  a  lui  qu'a  genoux,  et  disoit  pour  son  excuse  a  cela
qu'estant  petit  de  corps,  chacun  eust  paru  plus  esleve  que  lui,  outre  qu'il  s?avoit  que  les
Espagnols  estoient  d'humeur  si  altiere  et  hautaine,  qu'il  estoit  besoin  qu'il  les  traittast  de
cette  facon  ;  et  pour  ce  mesme  ne  se  laissoit  voir  que  peu  souvent  du  peuple,  n'y  mesme
des  grands,  sinon  aux  jours  solemnels,  et  action  necessaire,  en  cette  facon  ;  il  faisoit  ses
commandemens  &  demy  mot,  et  falloit  que  Ton  devinast  le  reste,  et  que  Ton  ne  manquast
&  bien  accomplir  toutes  ses  intentions  ;  mesmes  les  gentilshommes  de  sa  chambre,  et
autres  qui  approchoient  plus  pres  de  sa  personne,  n'eussent  ose  parler  devant  luy  s'il  en
leur  eust  commande,  se  tenant  un  tout  seul  a  la  fois  pres  de  la  porte  du  lieu  ou  il  estoit,
et  demeurant  nud  teste  incessamment,  et  appuye  centre  une   tapisserie,  pour  attendre
et  recevoir  ses  commandemens."    Memoires  de  Cheverny,  pp.  352,  353,  in  Petitofs  Collec-
tion des  Memoires,  vol.  xxxvi.  Paris,  1823.

62  These  are  the  words  of  Contarini,  as  given  in  Ranke's  Ottoman  and  Spanish  Empires,
London,  1843,  p.  33:     Sismondi,  though  unacquainted  with  this  passage,  observes  in  his
Literature  of  the  South  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  p.  273,  London,  1846,  that  Philip,  though  "  little
entitled  to  praise,  has  yet  been  always  regarded  with  enthusiasm  by  the  Spaniards."
About  half  a  century  after  his  death,  Sommerdyck  visited  Spain,  and  in  his  curious  account
of  that  country  he  tells  us  that  Philip  was  called  "  le  Salomon  de  son  siecle."  Aarsens  de
Sommerdyck,  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1665,  4to,  pp.  63,  95.     See  also  Yanez,  Memorias
para  la  Historia  de  Felipe  III.,  Madrid,  1723,  p.  294.     "  El  gran  Felipe,  aquel  Sabio
Salomon."     Another  writer  likens  him  to  Numa.     "  Hacia  grandes  progresos  la  piedad,
a  la  qual  se  dedicaba  tanto  el  Rey  Don  Felipe,  que  parecia  su  reynado  en  Espana  lo  que
en  Roma  el  de  Numa,  despues  de  Romulo."  Minana,  Continuacion  de  Mariana,  vol.  ix.
p.  241.     When  he  died,  "  celebradas  sus  exequias  entre  lagrimas  y  gemidos."  vol.  x.
pp.  259, 260.  We  further  learn  from  V 'anderhammen 's  Filipe  Segundo,  Madrid,  1632,  p.  120
rev.,  that  the  people  ascribed  to  him  "  una  grandeza  adorable,  y  alguna  cosa  maS  que  las
ordinarias  a  los  demas  hombres."     [We  have  already  seen   that    "  the  French  mind  "
was  similarly  prostrated  before  Louis  XIV.  a  century  later  ;  and  the  dedication  of  the
authorised  version  of  the  English  Bible  remains  to  show  the  tone  towards  the  crown  even
in  England,  a  few  years  after  Philip's  death.     It  is  necessary  to  realise  how  far  Spanish
practice  was  on  normal  European  lines. — ED.]

[*  Buckle  has  omitted  to  note  the  violent  and  repeated  resistance  of  the  Aragonese  to
Philip's  illegal  treatment  of  Antonio  Perez  (Dunham,  v.  84-85).  The  habit  of  regarding
the  Spaniards  as  one  homogeneous  community,  with  one  opinion,  obscures  many  facts
in  Spanish  history. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          547

demeanour  was  of  the  most  repulsive  kind,  a  harsh  master,  a  brutal  parent,  a
bloody  and  remorseless  ruler, — that  he  should  be  thus  reverenced  by  a  nation
among  whom  he  lived,  and  who  had  their  eyes  constantly  on  his  actions  ;  that
this  should  have  happened  is  surely  one  of  the  most  surprising  and,  at  first  sight,
one  of  the  most  inexplicable  facts  in  modern  history.  Here  we  have  a  king  who
though  afflicted  by  every  quality  most  calculated  to  excite  terror  and  disgust,
is  loved  far  more  than  he  is  feared,  and  is  the  idol  of  a  very  great  people  during  a
very  long  reign.  This  is  so  remarkable  as  to  deserve  our  serious  attention  ;  and
in  order  to  clear  up  the  difficulty,  it  will  be  necessary  to  inquire  into  the  causes  of
that  spirit  of  loyalty  which,  during  several  centuries,  has  distinguished  the
Spaniards  above  every  other  European  people.

One  of  the  leading  causes  was  undoubtedly  the  immense  influence  possessed  by
the  clergy.  For  the  maxims  inculcated  by  that  powerful  body  have  a  natural
tendency  to  make  the  people  reverence  their  princes  more  than  they  would  other-
wise do.  And  that  there  is  a  real  and  practical  connexion  between  loyalty  and
superstition,  appears  from  the  historical  fact  that  the  two  feelings  have  nearly
always  flourished  together  and  decayed  together.  Indeed,  this  is  what  we  should
expect  on  mere  speculative  grounds,  seeing  that  both  feelings  are  the  product  of
those  habits  of  veneration  which  make  men  submissive  in  their  conduct  and
credulous  in  their  belief.63  Experience,  therefore,  as  well  as  reason,  points  to  this
as  a  general  law  of  the  mind,  which  in  its  operation  may  be  occasionally  dis-
turbed, but  which  holds  good  in  a  large  majority  of  cases.  Probably  the  only
instance  in  which  the  principle  fails  is  when  a  despotic  government  so  misunder-
stands its  own  interests  as  to  offend  the  clergy,  and  separate  itself  from  them.
Whenever  this  is  done,  a  struggle  will  arise  between  loyalty  and  superstition  ;
the  first  being  upheld  by  the  political  classes,  the  other  by  the  spiritual  classes.
Such  a  warfare  was  exhibited  in  Scotland  ;  but  history  does  not  afford  many
examples  of  it,  and  certainly  it  never  took  place  in  Spain,  where,  on  the  contrary,
several  circumstances  occurred  to  cement  the  union  between  the  Crown  and  the
Church,  and  to  accustom  the  people  to  look  up  to  both  with  almost  equal  rever-
ence.

By  far  the  most  important  of  these  circumstances  was  the  great  Arab  invasion,
which  drove  the  Christians  into  a  corner  of  Spain,  and  reduced  them  to  such  extre-
mities that  nothing  but  the  strictest  discipline  and  the  most  unhesitating  obedi-
ence to  their  leaders  could  have  enabled  them  to  make  head  against  their  enemies.
Loyalty  to  their  princes  became  not  merely  expedient  but  necessary  ;  for  if  the
Spaniards  had  been  disunited,  they  would,  in  the  face  of  the  fearful  odds  against
which  they  fought,  have  had  no  chance  of  preserving  their  national  existence.*
The  long  war  which  ensued,  being  both  political  and  religious,  caused  an  intimate
alliance  between  the  political  and  religious  classes,  since  the  kings  and  the  clergy
had  an  equal  interest  in  driving  the  Mohammedans  from  Spain.  During  nearly
eight  centuries  this  compact  between  Church  and  State  was  a  necessity  forced
upon  the  Spaniards  by  the  peculiarities  of  their  position  ;  and  after  the  necessity
had  subsided,  it  naturally  happened  that  the  association  of  ideas  survived  the
original  danger,  and  that  an  impression  had  been  made  upon  the  popular  mind
which  it  was  hardly  possible  to  efface.

Evidence  of  this  impression,  and  of  the  unrivalled  loyalty  it  produced,  crowds

63  "  Habits  of  reverence  which,  if  carried  into  religion,  cause  superstition,  and  if  carried
into  politics,  cause  despotism."  Above,  p.  384.

[*  The  Spaniards  in  this  period  were  often  disunited,  as  were  the  Moors ;  and  on  neither
side  was  loyalty  prevalent.  In  describing  the  attempt  to  depose  Henry  IV.  in  1465,
U.  R.  Burke  remarks  (Hume's  ed.  ii.  28)  on  the  "  rich  store  of  precedents  "  for  such  pro-
cedure in  the  history  of  Spain.  For  details  see  his  first  vol.  pp.  153.  *57>  160,  162,  178
(referring  to  "  the  usual  rebellion"),  179,  181,  182,  184,  185,  186,  195,  214,  218,  23^,
236,  237,  256,  258,  259,  266,  267,  369,  etc.  Compare  Prescott,  Philip  //.,  Kirk's  ^ed.
1894,  p.  658,  as  to  the  nobles'  "  privilege,  so  highly  prized,  of  renouncing  their  allegiance
and  declaring  war  upon  their  sovereign." — ED.]


548  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

upon  us  at  every  turn.  In  no  other  country  are  the  old  ballads  so  numerous  and
so  intimately  connected  with  the  national  history.  It  has  however  been  observed
that  their  leading  characteristic  is  the  zeal  with  which  they  inculcate  obedience
and  devotion  to  princes,  and  that  from  this  source,  even  more  than  from  military
achievements,  they  draw  their  most  favourite  examples  of  virtue.64  In  literature
the  first  great  manifestation  of  the  Spanish  mind  was  the  poem  of  The  Cid,  written
at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  in  which  we  find  fresh  proof  of  that  extra-
ordinary loyalty  which  circumstances  had  forced  upon  the  people.65  The  ecclesi-
astical councils  display  a  similar  tendency  ;  for,  notwithstanding  a  few  exceptions,
no  other  church  has  been  equally  eager  in  upholding  the  rights  of  kings.66  In
civil  legislation  we  see  the  same  principle  at  work  ;  it  being  asserted,  on  high
authority,  that  in  no  system  of  laws  is  loyalty  carried  to  such  extreme  height  as
in  the  Spanish  codes.67  Even  their  dramatic  writers  were  unwilling  to  represent

64  "  More  ballads  are  connected  with  Spanish  history  than   with  any  other,  and  in
general  they  are  better.     The  most  striking  peculiarity  of  the  whole  mass  is  perhaps  to
be  found  in  the  degree  in  which  it  expresses  the  national  character.     Loyalty  is  constantly
prominent.     The  Lord  of  Butrago  sacrifices  his  own  life  to  save  that  of  his  sovereign,"  &c.
Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i.  p.  133.     "  In  the  implicit  obedience  of  the
old  Spanish  knight,  the  order  of  the  king  was  paramount  to  every  consideration,  even  in
the  case  of  friendship  and  love.     This  code  of  obedience  has  passed  into  a  proverb — '  mas
pesa  el  Rey  que  la  sangre.'  "     Ford's  Spain,  p.  183.     Compare  the  admirable  little  work
of  Mr.  Lewes,  The  Spanish  Drama,  London,  1846,  p.  120,  "  ballads  full  of  war,  loyalty,
and  love."

65  See  some  interesting  remarks  in  M.  Tapia's  Civilizacion  Espanola,  vol.  i.     He  observes
that,  though  cruelly  persecuted  by  Alfonso,  the  first  thing  done  by  the  Cid,  after  gaining
a  great  victory,  was  to  order  one  of  his  captains  "  para  que  lleve  al  rey  Alfonso  treinta
caballos  arabes  bien  ensillados,  con  sendas  espadas  pendientes  de  los  arzones  en  serial  de
homenage,  a  pesar  del  agravio  que  habia  recibido"  p.  274.     And  at  p.  280,  "  comedido  y
obediente  subdito  a  un  rey  que  tan  mal  le  habia  tratado."     Southey  (Chronicle  of  the  Cid,
p.  268)  notices  with  surprise  that  the  Cid  is  represented  in  the  old  chronicles  as  "  offering
to  kiss  the  feet  of  the  king."     [The  view  here  given  of  the  character  of  the  Cid  is  unduly
restricted.     When  exiled  by  Alfonso,  he  fought  against  him  on  the  Moslem  side.     The
old  poem,  which  probably  belongs  to  the  first  half  of  the  thirteenth   century   (Cp.  H.
Lucas,  Documents  relatifs  a  Vhist.  du  Cid,  1860,  p.  4  ;  Ormsby,  The  Poem  of  the  Cid,  1879,
Introd.  pp.  7-n),  is  not  a  trustworthy  narrative  ;  and  the  story  of  the  Cid's  giving  his
daughters  to  the  Infantes  of  Carrion,  whereat  is  given  the  detail  of  the  offer  to  kiss  the
king's  feet    (Lucas,  p.  13),  is  "undoubtedly  an  invention  of  the  Castilian  minstrels"
(Burke,  Hist,  of  Spain,  Major  Hume's  ed.  i.  193).     For  the  rest,  many  of  the  ballads
characterized  by  Ticknor  as  full  of  loyalty  are  late  :  for  instance,  the  great  majority  of
the  Cid  ballads  are  held  by  Huber  and  Dozy  to  be  no  older  than  the  sixteenth  century
(Burke,  as  cited,  p.  197).    On  the  other  hand,  as  Mr.  Ormsby  has  noted,  there  is  a  consider-
able aw^'-royalist  element  in  many  of  them.     They  have  even  been  described  as  "  a  paean
of  triumphant  democracy."  (Burke,  p.  195  ;  Ormsby,  p.  41).— ED.]

66  "  Le  xvie  Concile  de  Tolede  appelait  les  rois  '  vicaires  de  Dieu  et  du  Christ ;  '  et  rien
n'est  plus  frequent  dans  les  concilesde  cetteepoque  queleurs  exhortations  aux  peuplespour
1'observation  dusermentde  fidelite  a  leurroi,et  leurs  anathemes  centre  lesseditieux."  Sem-
pere,  Monarchic  Espagnole,vo\.i.  p. 41.  "Aparte  delos  asuntos  de  derecho  civil  y  canonico  y
de  otros  varies  que  dicen  relacion  al  gobierno  de  la  iglesia,  sobre  los  cuales  se  contienen  en
todos  ellos  disposicoines  muy  utiles  y  acertadas,  la  mayor  parte  de  las  leyes  dictadas  en
estas  asambleas  tuvieron  por  objeto  dar  fuerza  y  estabilidad  al  poder  real,  proclamando
su  inviolabilidad  y  estableciendo  graves  penas  contra  los  infractores  ;  condenar  las  here-
gias,"  &c.     Antequera,  Historia  de  la  Legislacion   Espanola,  p.  47.     [This    alliance  of
church  and  crown  was  normal  in  Christendom  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  prevailed  in  France
and  England  as  well  as  in  Spain  in  the  eighteenth  century. — ED.]

67  "  Loyalty  to  a  superior  is  carried  to  a  more  atrocious  length  by  the  Spanish  Jaw
than  I  have  seen  it  elsewhere."  ..."  The  Partidas  (P.  2,  T.  13,  L.  i)  speaks  of  an  old
law  whereby  any  man  who  openly  wished  to  see  the  King  dead,  was  condemned  to  death,
and  the  loss  of  all  that  he  had.     The  utmost  mercy  to  be  shown  him  was  to  spare  his  life


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          549

an  act  of  rebellion  on  the  stage,  lest  they  should  appear  to  countenance  what  in
the  eyes  of  every  good  Spaniard  was  one  of  the  most  heinous  of  all  offences.es
Whatever  the  king  came  in  contact  with  was  in  some  degree  hallowed  by  his
touch.  No  one  might  mount  a  horse  which  he  had  ridden  ;  69  no  one  might  marry
a  mistress  whom  he  had  deserted.70  Horse  and  mistress  alike  were  sacred,  and  it
would  have  been  impious  for  any  subject  to  meddle  with  what  had  been  honoured
by  the  Lord's  anointed.  Nor  were  such  rules  confined  to  the  prince  actually
reigning.  On  the  contrary,  they  survived  him,  and,  working  with  a  sort  of  posthu-
mous force,  forbade  any  woman  whom  he  had  taken  as  a  wife,  to  marry,  even  after
he  was  dead.  She  had  been  chosen  by  the  king  ;  such  choice  had  already  raised
her  above  the  rest  of  mortals  ;  and  the  least  she  could  do  was  to  retire  to  a  convent
and  spend  her  life  mourning  over  her  irreparable  loss.  These  regulations  were
enforced  by  custom  rather  than  by  law.71  They  were  upheld  by  the  popular  will,

and  pluck  out  his  eyes,  that  he  might  never  see  with  them  what  he  had  desired.  To  defame
the  King  is  declared  as  great  a  crime  as  to  kill  him,  and  in  like  manner  to  be  punished.
The  utmost  mercy  that  could  be  allowed  was  to  cut  out  the  offender's  tongue.  P.  2,  T.  13.
L.  4."  Southey's  Chronicle  of  the  Cid,  p.  442.  Compare  Johnston's  Civil  Law  of  Spain,
London,  1825,  p.  269,  on  "  Blasphemers  of  the  King."

68  Thus  Montalvan,  the  eminent  poet  and  dramatist,  who  was  born  in  1602,  avoided,
we  are  told,  representing  rebellion  on  the  stage,  lest  he  should  seem  to  encourage  it.
Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  ii.  p.  283.     A  similar  spirit  is  exhibited  in  the
plays  of  Calderon  and  of  Lope  de  Vega.     On  the  "  Castilian  loyalty  "  evinced  in  one  of
Calderon's  comedies,  see  Hallam's  Literature  of  Europe,  2nd  edit.  London,  1843,  vol.  iii.
p.  63  ;  and  as  to  Lope,  see  Lewes  on  the  Spanish  Drama,  p.  78.     [The  exhibition  of  rebel-
lion on  the  stage  under  Elizabeth  in  1601,  in  a  revival  of  Shakespeare's  Richard  II.,  excited
the  royal  displeasure.      Lee's  Life  of  Shakespeare,  pp.  175-6. — ED.]

69  "  His  Majesty's  horses  could  never  be  used  by  any  other  person.     One  day,  while
Philip  IV.  was  going  in  procession  to  the  church  of  Our  Lady  of  Atocha,  the  Duke  of
Medina-de-las-Torres  offered  to  present  him  with  a  beautiful  steed  which  belonged  to
him,  and  which  was  accounted  the  finest  in  Madrid  ;    but  the  King  declined  the  gift,  be-
cause he  should  regret  to  render  so  noble  an  animal  ever  after  useless."     Dunlop's  Me-
moirs, vol.  ii.  p.  372.     Madame  d'Aulnoy,  who  travelled  in  Spain  in  1679,  and  who,  from
her  position,  had  access  to  the  best  sources  of  information,  was  told  of  this  piece  of  eti-
quette.    "  L'on  m'a  dit  que  lors  que  le  Roy  s'est  servy  d'un  cheval,  personne  par  respect
ne  le  monte  jamais."     D'Aulnoy,  Relation  du  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Lyon,  1693,  vol.  ii.  p.  40.
In  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  I  find  another  notice  of  this  loyal  custom,  which,
likely  enough,  is  still  a  tradition  in  the  Spanish  stables.     "  If  the  king  has  once  honoured
a  Pad  so  much  as  to  cross  his  back,  it  is  never  to  be  used  again  by  anybody  else."      A
Tour  through  Spain,  by  Udal  ap  Rhys,  2nd  edit.  London,  1760,  p.  15.

70  Madame  d'Aulnoy,  who  was  very  inquisitive  respecting  these  matters,  says  (Relation
du  Voyage  d'Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  411),  "  II  y  a  une  autre  etiquette,  c'est  qu'apres  que  le
Roi  a  eu  une  Maitresse,  s'il  vient  a  la  quitter,  ii  faut  qu'elle  se  fasse  Religieuse,  comme  je
vous  1'ai  deja  ecrit  ;  et  1'on  m'a  conte  que  le  feu  Roi  s'estant  amoureux  d'une  Dame  du
Palais,  il  fut  un  soir  fraper  doucement  a  la  porte  de  sa  chambre.     Comme  elle  comprit  que
c'estoit  lui,  elle  ne  voulut   pas  lui   ouvrir,  et  elle   se  contenta   de  lui  dire   au   travers
de  la  porte,  Baya,  baya,  con  Dios,  no  quiero  ser  monja  ;    c'est  a  dire,    '  Allez,   allez,
Dieu  vous  conduise,   je  n'ai   pas  en  vie  d'estre   Religieuse.'  "     So  too   Henry   IV.   of
Castile,  who  came  to  the  throne  in  the  year  1454,  made  one  of  his  mistresses  "abbess  of  a
convent  in  Toledo  ;  "  in  this  case  to  the  general  scandal,  because,  says  Mr.  Prescott,  he
first  expelled  "  her  predecessor,  a  lady  of  noble  rank  and  irreproachable  character."
Prescott' s  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  i.  p.  68.

71  There  is,  however,  one  very  remarkable  old  law,  in  the  form  of  a  canon  enacted  by
the  third  Council  of  Saragossa,  which   orders  that  the  royal  widows  "  seront  obligees  a
prendre  1'habit  de  religieuses,  et  a  s'enfermer  dans  un  monastere  pour  le  reste  de  leur  vie."
Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  vol.  ix.  p.  104.     In  1065  Ferdinand  I.  died  ;  and,  says  the
biographer  of  the  Spanish  Queens,  "  La  Reyna  sobrevivio  :  y  parece,  que  muerto  su
marido  entro  en  algun  Monasterio  ;  lo  que  expressamos  no  tanto  por  la  costumbre  antigua,
quanto  por  constar  en  la  Memoria  referida  de  la  Iglesia  de  Leon,  el  dictado  d  '  Consagrada


550  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  were  the  result  of  the  excessive  loyalty  of  the  Spanish  nation.  Of  that  loyalty
their  writers  often  boast,  and  with  good  reason,  since  it  was  certainly  matchless,
and  nothing  seemed  able  to  shake  it.  To  bad  kings  and  to  good  kings  it  equally
applied.  It  was  in  full  strength  amid  the  glory  of  Spain  in  the  sixteenth  century  ;
it  was  conspicuous  when  the  nation  was  decaying  in  the  seventeenth  century  ;  and
it  survived  the  shock  of  civil  wars  early  in  the  eighteenth.1^  Indeed,  the  feeling
had  so  worked  itself  into  the  traditions  of  the  country  as  to  become  not  only  a
national  passion  but  almost  an  article  of  national  faith.  Clarendon,  in  his  His-
tory of  that  great  English  Rebellion,  the  like  of  which,  as  he  well  knew,  could
never  have  happened  in  Spain,  makes  on  this  subject  a  just  and  pertinent  remark.
He  says  that  a  want  of  respect  for  kings  is  regarded  by  the  Spaniards  as  a  "  mons-
trous crime  ;  "  "  submissive  reverence  to  their  princes  being  a  vital  part  of  their
religion."  73

These,  then,  were  the  two  great  elements  of  which  the  Spanish  character  was
compounded.  Loyalty  and  superstition  ;  reverence  for  their  kings  and  reverence
for  their  clergy  were  the  leading  principles  which  influenced  the  Spanish  mind,
and  governed  the  march  of  Spanish  history.*  The  peculiar  and  unexampled

a  Dios,'  frasse  que  denota  estado  Religiose."  Florez,  Memorias  de  las  Reynas  Catholicas,
Madrid,  1761,  4to,  vol.  i.  p.  148.  In  1667  it  was  a  settled  principle  that  "  ies  reines
d'Espagne  n'en  sortent  point.  Le  couvent  de  las  Senoras  descalcas  reales  est  fonde  afin
que  Ies  reines  veuves  s'y  enferment."  Discours  du  Comte  de  Castrillo  a  la  Reine  d'Espagne,
in  Mignet's  Negotiations  relatives  a  la  Succession  d'Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  604,  Paris,  1835,  4to.
This  valuable  work  consists  for  the  most  part  of  documents  previously  unpublished,  many
of  which  are  taken  from  the  Archives  at  Simancas.  To  the  critical  historian  it  would
have  been  more  useful  if  the  original  Spanish  had  been  given.

72  See  some  good  remarks  on  San  Phelipe,  in  Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,
vol.  hi.  pp.  213,  214,  which  might  easily  be  corroborated  by  other  testimony  ;  as,  for
instance, -Lafuente,  under  the  year  1710  :  "  Ni  el  abandono  de  la  Francia,  ni  la  prolonga-
cion  y  los  azares  de  la  guerra,  ni  los  sacrificios  pecuniarios  y  personales  de  tantos  aiios,
nada  bastaba  a  entibiar  el  amor  de  los  castellanos  a  su  rey  Felipe  V."     (Historia  de  Espana
vol.  xviii.  p.  258)  ;  and  Berwick  (Memoires,  vol.  ii.  p.  114,  edit.  Paris,  1778)  :  "  La  fidelite
inouie  des  Espagnols  ;  "  and,  nine  years  earlier,  a  letter  from  Louville  to  Torcy  :  "  Le  mot
revolte,  pris  dans  une  acception  rigoureuse,  n'a  pas  de  sens  en  Espagne."     Louville,  Me-
moires sur  V  etablissement   de   la   Maison   de  Bourbon   en  Espagne,   edit.    Paris,,    1818,
vol.  i.  p.  128.     See  also  Memoirs  of  Ripperda,  London,  1740,  p.  58  ;  and  Memoires  de
Gramont,  vol.  ii.  p.  77,  edit.  Petitot,  Paris,  1827.     All  these  passages  illustrate  Spanish
loyalty  in  the  eighteenth  century,  except  the  reference  to  Gramont,  which  concerns  the
seventeenth,  and  which  should  be  compared  with  the  following  observations  of  Madame
d'Aulnoy,  who  writes  from  Madrid  in  1679  :  "  Quelques  richesses  qu'ayent  Ies  grands
Seigneurs,  quelque  grande  que  soit  leur  fierte  ou  leur  presomption,  ils  obei'ssent  aux  moiii-
dres  ordres  du  Roy,  avec  une  exactitude  et  un  respect  que  Ton  ne  peut  assez  loiier.     Sur
le  premier  ordre  ils  partent,  ils  reviennent,  ils  vont  en  prison,  ou  en  exil,  sans  se  plaindre.
II  ne  se  peut  trouver  une  soumission,  et  une  obe'issance  plus  parfaite,  ni  un  amour  plus
sincere,  que  celui  des  Espagnols  pour  leur  Roi.     Ce  nom  leur  est  sacre,  et  pour  reduire  le
peuple  a  tout  ce  que  Ton  souhaite,  il  suffit  de  dire,  '  Le  Roi  le  veut.'  "     D'Aulnoy,  Voyage,
vol.  ii.  pp.  256,  257.

73  "  And  Olivarez  had  been  heard  to  censure  very  severely  the  duke's  (Buckingham's)

[*  Once  more  this  generalization  must  be  qualified.  The  instances  given  belong  to  the
period  when  the  Inquisition  and  despotism  had  eliminated  all  the  independent  minds
from  Spain.  Ferdinand,  as  an  Aragonese,  was  disrespectfully  treated  by  the  Castilians  ;
Charles  V.  was  slighted  after  his  retirement ;  and  even  in  the  reign  of  Philip  II.  the  Cortes
petitioned  against  the  Burgundian  and  un-Spanish  mode  of  the  upbringing  of  Don  Carlos
(M.A.S.  Hume's  Spain,  1479-1788,  p.  127;  Armstrong's  introd.thereto,  pp.  5,  31;  Robertson's
Charles  V.  B.  xii.  [Works,  edit.  1821,  v.  417]  ;  and  Burke,  History,  as  cited,  ii.  45,  238).
In  the  words  of  Bishop  Stubbs  :  "  To  a  German  race  of  sovereigns  Spain  finally  owed
the  subversion  of  her  national  system  arid  ancient  freedom  "  (Const.  Hist.  4th  ed.  i.  5).—
ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          551

circumstances  under  which  they  arose  have  been  just  indicated  ;  and  having
seen  their  origin,  we  will  now  endeavour  to  trace  their  consequences.  Such  an
examination  of  results  will  be  the  more  important,  not  only  because  nowhere  else
in  Europe  have  these  feelings  been  so  strong,  so  permanent,  and  so  unmixed,  but
also  because  Spain,  being  seated  at  the  further  extremity  of  the  Continent,  from
which  it  is  cut  off  by  the  Pyrenees,  has  from  physical  causes  as  well  as  from
moral  ones,  come  little  into  contact  with  other  nations.74  The  course  of  affairs
being  therefore  undisturbed  by  foreign  habits,  it  becomes  easier  to  discover  the
pure  and  natural  consequences  of  superstition  and  loyalty,  two  of  the  most  power-
ful and  disinterested  feelings  which  have  ever  occupied  the  human  heart,  and  to
whose  united  action  we  may  clearly  trace  the  leading  events  in  the  history  of
Spain.

The  results  of  this  combination  were,  during  a  considerable  period,  apparently
beneficial,  and  certainly  magnificent.  For  the  church  and  the  crown  making
common  cause  with  each  other,  and  being  inspirited  by  the  cordial  support  of  the
people,  threw  their  whole  soul  into  their  enterprises,  and  displayed  an  ardour
which  could  hardly  fail  to  insure  success.  Gradually  advancing  from  the  north
of  Spain,  the  Christians,  fighting  their  way  inch  by  inch,  pressed  on  till  they
reached  the  southern  extremity,  completely  subdued  the  Mohammedans,  and
brought  the  whole  country  under  one  rule  and  one  creed.  This  great  result  was
achieved  late  in  the  fifteenth  century,  and  it  cast  an  extraordinary  lustre  on  the
Spanish  name.75  Spain,  long  occupied  by  her  own  religious  wars,  had  hitherto
been  little  noticed  by  foreign  powers,  and  had  possessed  little  leisure  to  notice
them.  Now,  however,  she  formed  a  compact  and  undivided  monarchy,  and  at
once  assumed  an  important  position  in  European  affairs.76  During  the  next
hundred  years,  her  power  advanced  with  a  speed  of  which  the  world  had  seen  no
example  since  the  days  of  the  Roman  Empire.  So  late  as  1478  Spain  was  still

familiarity  and  want  of  respect  towards  the  prince,  a  crime  monstrous  to  the  Spaniard."
.  .  .  "Their  submissive  reverence  to  their  princes  being  a  vital  part  of  their  religion."
Clarendon's  History  of  the  Rebellion,  ed.  Oxford,  1843,  p.  15.  For  the  religion  of  loyalty,
in  an  earlier  period,  see  Florez,  Reynas  Catholicas,  vol.  i.  p.  421  :  "  La  persona  del  Rey
fue  mirada  de  sus  fieles  vassallos  con  respeto  tan  sagrado,"  that  resistance  was  "  una
especie  de  sacrilegio."

74  These  impediments  to  intercourse  were  once  deemed  almost  invincible.  Fontenay-
Mareuil,  who  visited  Spain  in  1612,  and  was  not  a  little  proud  of  the  achievement,  says,
"  Au  reste,  parcequ'on  ne  va  pas  aussy  ordinairement  en  Espagne  qu'en  France,  en  Italie
et  ailleurs  ;  et  qu'estant  comme  en  un  coin,  et  separee  du  reste  du  monde  par  la  mer  ou
par  les  Pyrenees,  on  n'en  a,  ce  me  semble,  guere  de  connoissance,  j'ay  pense  que  je  devois
faire  icy  une  petite  digression  pour  dire  ce  que  j'en  ay  appris  dans  ce  voyage  et  despuis."
Memoir es  de  Fontenay -Mareuil,  in  Collection  des  Memoir es  par  Petitot,  vol  L.  p.  169,  le
Serie,  Paris,  1826.  Seventy  years  later,  another  writer  on  Spain  says  of  the  Pyrenees,
"  Ces  rnontagnes  sont  a  nos  voyageurs  modernes,  ce  qu'etoit  aux  anciens  mariniers  le  Non
phis  ultra  et  les  colomnes  du  grand  Hercule."  L'Estat  de  V Espagne,  Geneve,  1681,  Epistre,
p.  ii.  This  work,  little  known,  and  not  much  worth  knowing,  forms  the  third  volume  of
Le  Prudent  Voyageur.

™  "  Con  razonse  miro  laconquista  de  Granada,  nocomo  un  acontecimiento  puramente
espanol,  sino  como  un  suceso  que  interesaba  al  mundo.  Con  razon  tambien  se  regocijo
toda  la  cristiandad.  Hacia  medio  siglo  que  otros  mahometanos  se  habian  apoderado  de
Constantinopla  ;  la  caida  de  la  capital  y  del  imperio  bizantino  en  poder  de  los  turcos
habiallenado  de  terror  a  la  Europa  ;  pero  la  Europa  se  console  al  saber  que  en  Espafia
habia  concluido  la  doininacion  de  los  musulmanes."  Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espafia,  vol.  xi.
p.  15.

™  "  L'Espagne,  long-temps  partagee  en  plusieurs  etats,  et  comme  etrangere  au  reste  de
1'Europe,  devint  tout-a-coup  une  puissance  redoutable,  faisant  pencher  pour  elle  la
balance  de  la  politique."  Koch,  Tableau  des  Revolutions  de  V Europe,  Paris,  1823,  vol.  i.
p.  362.  On  the  relation  between  this  and  some  changes  in  literature  which  corresponded
to  it,  see  Bouterwek's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i.  pp.  148-152,  where  there  are
some  ingenious,  though  perhaps  scarcely  tenable,  speculations.


552  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

broken  up  into  independent  and  often  hostile  states  ;  Granada  was  possessed  by
the  Mohammedans  ;  the  throne  of  Castile  was  occupied  by  one  prince,  the  throne
of  Aragon  by  another.  Before  the  year  1 590  not  only  were  these  fragments  firmly
consolidated  into  one  kingdom,  but  acquisitions  were  made  abroad  so  rapidly  as
to  endanger  the  independence  of  Europe.  The  history  of  Spain  during  this
period  is  the  history  of  one  long  and  uninterrupted  success.  That  country,
recently  torn  by  civil  wars,  and  distracted  by  hostile  creeds,  was  able  in  three
generations  to  annex  to  her  territory  the  whole  of  Portugal,  Navarre,  and  Rous-
sillon.  By  diplomacy,  or  by  force  of  arms,  she  acquired  Artois  and  Franche
Comte,  and  the  Netherlands  *  ;  also  the  Milanese,  Naples,  Sicily,  Sardinia,  the
Balearic  Islands,  and  the  Canaries.  One  of  her  kings  was  emperor  of  Germany  ;
while  his  son  influenced  the  councils  of  England,  whose  queen  he  married.  The
Turkish  power,  then  one  of  the  most  formidable  in  the  world,  was  broken  and
beaten  back  on  every  side.  The  French  monarchy  was  humbled.  French  armies
were  constantly  worsted  ;  Paris  was  once  in  imminent  jeopardy  ;  and  a  king  of
France,  after  being  defeated  on  the  field,  was  taken  captive,  and  led  prisoner  to
Madrid.  Out  of  Europe,  the  deeds  of  Spain  were  equally  wonderful.  In  America
the  Spaniards  became  possessed  of  territories  which  covered  sixty  degrees  of  lati-
tude, and  included  both  the  tropics.  Besides  Mexico,  Central  America,  Venezuela,
New  Granada,  Peru,  and  Chili,  they  conquered  Cuba,  San  Domingo,  Jamaica,  and
other  islands.  In  Africa,  they  obtained  Ceuta,  Melilla,  Oran,  Bougiah,  and
Tunis,  and  overawed  the  whole  coast  of  Barbary.  In  Asia,  they  had  settlements
on  each  side  of  the  Deccan  ;  they  held  part  of  Malacca  ;  and  they  established
themselves  in  the  Spice  Islands.  Finally,  by  the  conquest  of  the  noble  archipelago
of  the  Philippines  they  connected  their  most  distant  acquisitions,  and  secured
a  communication  between  every  part  of  that  enormous  empire  which  girdled  the
world.

In  connexion  with  this  a  great  military  spirit  arose,  such  as  no  other  modern
nation  has  ever  exhibited.  All  the  intellect  of  the  country  which  was  not  em-
ployed in  the  service  of  the  Church  was  devoted  to  the  profession  of  arms.
Indeed,  the  two  pursuits  were  often  united  ;  and  it  is  said  that  the  custom  of
ecclesiastics  going  to  war  was  practised  in  Spain  long  after  it  was  abandoned  in
other  parts  of  Europe.77  At  all  events,  the  general  tendency  is  obvious.  A
mere  list  of  successful  battles  and  sieges  in  the  sixteenth  and  part  of  the  fifteenth
century  would  prove  the  vast  superiority  of  the  Spaniards  in  this  respect  over
their  contemporaries,  and  would  show  how  much  genius  they  had  expended  in
maturing  the  arts  of  destruction.  Another  illustration,  if  another  were  required,
might  be  drawn  from  the  singular  fact  that  since  the  time  of  ancient  Greece,  no
country  has  produced  so  many  eminent  literary  men  who  were  also  soldiers.
Calderon,  Cervantes,  and  Lope  de  Vega  risked  their  lives  in  fighting  for  their
country.  The  military  profession  was  also  adopted  by  many  other  celebrated
authors,  among  whom  may  be  mentioned  Argote  de  Molina,  Acuna,  Bernal  Diaz
del  Castillo,  Bos^can,  Carrillo,  Cetina,  Ercilla,  Espinel,  Francisco  de  Figueroa,
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Guillen  de  Castro,  Hita,  Hurtado  de  Mendoza,  Marmol
Carvajal,  Perez  de  Guzman,  Pulgar,  Rebolledo,  Roxas,  and  Virues  ;  all  of  whom
bore,  in  this  manner,  unconscious  testimony  to  the  spirit  by  which  Spain  was
universally  pervaded.

Here,  then,  we  have  a  combination  which  many  readers  will  still  consider  with

77  "  The  holy  war  with  the  infidels  "  (Mohammedans)  "  perpetuated  the  unbecoming
spectacle  of  militant  ecclesiastics  among  the  Spaniards  to  a  still  later  period,  and  long
after  it  had  disappeared  from  the  rest  of  civilized  Europe."  Prescott's  History  of  Fer-
dinand and  Isabella,  vol.  i.  p.  162.

f-  [*  "  Diplomacy "  must  here  be  denned  as  including  royal  marriages.  Franche
Comte  and  the  Netherlands  were  joined  to  Spain  through  the  marriage  of  Philip  (son  of
the  Austrian  archduke  Maximilian  and  Mary  of  Burgundy)  to  Joanna,  daughter  of
Ferdinand  and  Isabella.  One  emperor,  Charles  V.,  was  their  son,  and  succeeded  to  the
Spanish  throne. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          558

favour,  and  which,  at  the  time  it  occurred,  excited  the  admiration,  albeit  the
terror,  of  Europe.  We  have  a  great  people  glowing  with  military,  patriotic,  and
religious  ardour,  whose  fiery  zeal  was  heightened,  rather  than  softened,  by  a
respectful  obedience  to  their  clergy,  and  by  a  chivalrous  devotion  to  their  kings.
The  energy  of  Spain,  being  thus  both  animated  and  controlled,  became  wary  as
well  as  eager  ;  and  to  this  rare  union  of  conflicting  qualities  we  must  ascribe  the
great  deeds  which  have  just  been  related.  But  the  unsound  part  of  a  progress
of  this  sort  is  that  it  depends  too  much  upon  individuals,  and  therefore  cannot
be  permanent.  Such  a  movement  can  only  last  as  long  as  it  is  headed  by  able
men.  When,  however,  competent  leaders  are  succeeded  by  incompetent  ones,
the  system  immediately  falls  to  the  ground,  simply  because  the  people  have  been
accustomed  to  supply  to  every  undertaking  the  necessary  zeal,  but  have  not  been
accustomed  to  supply  the  skill  by  which  the  zeal  is  guided.  A  country  in  this
state,  if  governed  by  hereditary  princes,  is  sure  to  decay  ;  inasmuch  as,  in  the
ordinary  course  of  affairs,  incapable  rulers  must  sometimes  arise.  Directly  this
happens  the  deterioration  begins  ;  for  the  people,  habituated  to  indiscriminate
loyalty,  will  follow  wherever  they  are  led,  and  will  yield  to  foolish  counsels  the
same  obedience  that  they  had  before  paid  to  wise  ones.  This  leads  us  to  perceive
the  essential  difference  between  the  civilization  of  Spain  and  the  civilization  of
England.  We  in  England  are  a  critical,  dissatisfied,  and  captious  people,
constantly  complaining  of  our  rulers,  suspecting  their  schemes,  discussing  their
measures  in  a  hostile  spirit,  allowing  very  little  power  either  to  the  Church  or
to  the  Crown,  managing  our  own  affairs  in  our  own  way,  and  ready,  on  the
slightest  provocation,  to  renounce  that  conventional,  lip-deep  loyalty  which,
having  never  really  touched  our  hearts,  is  a  habit  lying  on  the  surface,  but  not
a  passion  rooted  in  the  mind.  The  loyalty  of  Englishmen  is  not  of  that  sort
which  would  induce  them  to  sacrifice  their  liberties  to  please  their  prince,  nor
does  it  ever  for  a  moment  blind  them  to  a  keen  sense  of  their  own  interests.
The  consequence  is  that  our  progress  is  uninterrupted,  whether  our  kings  are
good  or  whether  they  are  bad.  Under  either  condition  the  great  movement

foes  on.  Our  sovereigns  have  had  their  full  share  of  imbecility  and  of  crime,
till,  even  men  like  Henry  III.  and  Charles  II.  were  unable  to  do  us  harm.  In
the  same  way,  during  the  eighteenth  and  many  years  of  the  nineteenth  century,
when  our  improvement  was  very  conspicuous,  our  rulers  were  very  incompetent.
Anne  and  the  first  two  Georges  were  grossly  ignorant  ;  they  were  wretchedly
educated,  and  nature  had  made  them  at  once  weak  and  obstinate.  Their  united
reigns  lasted  nearly  sixty  years  ;  and  after  they  had  passed  away  we,  for  another
period  of  sixty  years,  were  governed  by  a  prince  who  was  long  incapacitated  by
disease,  but  of  whom  we  must  honestly  say  that,  looking  at  his  general  policy,
he  was  least  mischievous  when  he  was  most  incapable.  This  is  not  the  place  to
expose  the  monstrous  principles  advocated  by  George  III.,  and  to  which  pos-
terity will  do  that  justice  from  which  contemporary  writers  are  apt  to  shrink  ;
but  it  is  certain  that  neither  his  contracted  understanding,  nor  his  despotic
temper,  nor  his  miserable  superstition,  nor  the  incredible  baseness  of  that  ignoble
voluptuary  who  succeeded  him  on  the  throne,  could  do  aught  to  stop  the  march
of  English  civilization,  or  to  stem  the  tide  of  English  prosperity.  We  went  on
our  way  rejoicing,  caring  for  none  of  these  things.  We  were  not  to  be  turned
aside  from  our  path  by  the  folly  of  our  rulers,  because  we  know  full  well  that
we  hold  our  own  fate  in  our  own  hands,  and  that  the  English  people  possess
within  themselves  those  resources  and  that  fertility  of  contrivance  by  which
alone  men  can  be  made  great,  and  happy,  and  wise.*

[*  It  is  hard  to  know  what  Buckle  meant  by  the  "  we  "  of  this  declamatory  passage.
Thus  to  speak  of  a  nation  which  has  always  contained  many  reactionaries,  and  undergone
many  reactions,  is  to  darken  the  facts  of  social  evolution  and  to  reduce  sociology  to
rhetoric.  The  "  tide  of  English  prosperity  "  has  been  "  stemmed  "  a  score  of  times,
sometimes  by  the  acts  of  kings,  as  in  the  case  of  the  American  policy  of  George  III.  ;
sometimes  by  the  policy  of  both  kings  and  statesmen,  as  when  extreme  misery  followed
the  victory  of  Waterloo,  and  when  the  Corn  Laws  created  artificial  famine.  If  Buckle's
picture  in  th«  above  passage  be  true,  there  can  be  no  need  for  any  struggle  towards  any


554  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

In  Spain,  however,  directly  the  government  slackened  its  hold,  the  nation  fell
to  pieces.78  During  that  prosperous  career  which  has  just  been  noticed,  the
Spanish  throne  was  invariably  filled  by  very  able  and  intelligent  princes.  Fer-
dinand and  Isabella,  Charles  V.  and  Philip  II.,  formed  a  line  of  sovereigns  not
to  be  matched  in  any  other  country  for  a  period  of  equal  length.  By  them  the
great  things  were  effected,  and  by  their  care  Spain  apparently  flourished.  But
what  followed  when  they  were  withdrawn  from  the  scene  showed  how  artificial
all  this  was,  and  how  rotten,  even  to  the  core,  is  that  system  of  government
which  must  be  fostered  before  it  can  thrive,  and  which,  being  based  on  the
loyalty  and  reverence  of  the  people,  depends  for  success  not  on  the  ability  of
the  nation,  but  on  the  skill  of  those  to  whom  the  interests  of  the  nation  are
intrusted.*

7S  A  learned  Spanish  lawyer  has  made  some  remarks  which  are  worth  quoting,  and
which  contain  a  curious  mixture  of  truth  and  error  :  "  Comment  la  monarchic  espagnole

reform,  inasmuch  as  "  we  "  are  all  wise  to  political  salvation.  But  what  he  describes  in
the  next  paragraph  as  a  "  falling  to  pieces  "  of  Spain  was  only  an  unchecked  continuance
of  such  mismanagement  as  permitted  the  Dutch  to  enter  the  Medway  under  Charles  II.,
and  lost  the  American  colonies  in  the  next  century.  He  has  thus  partly  missed  setting
forth  the  main  cause  of  Spanish  decadence,  which  was  the  acquisition  of  "  empire  "  in
both  the  New  World  and  the  Old. — ED.]

[*  In  thus  crediting  despots  with  the  power  of  making  as  well  as  marring  the  fortunes
of  a  nation,  Buckle  seems  to  have  forgotten  his  earlier  arguments  as  to  their  impotence,
and  as  to  the  utter  nullity  of  "  protection."  In  point  of  fact,  he  has  given  undue  credit
for  "  success  "  to  both  Charles  V.  and  Philip  II.  Industrial  decadence  began  on  one  side
as  soon  as  the  bullion  delusion  was  enthroned  by  the  possession  of  the  mines  of  the  New
World,  though  the  connexion  with  the  Low  Countries  set  up  a  healthy  commerce  under
Charles  V.  (Armstrong's  Introd.  to  M.  A.  S.  Hume's  Spain,  1898,  pp.  83-4  ;  Grattan,
The  Netherlands,  1830,  pp.  66,  88.)  But  the  policy  of  Charles  depended  largely  on  his
northern  possessions,  the  whole  Low  Countries  yielding  him  two -fifths  of  his  revenues  ;
Spain  and  the  Indies  only  another  fifth  between  them  ;  and  Milan  and  Sicily  the
rest  (Motley,  i  vol.  ed.  p.  59).  Of  Charles  as  a  ruler  the  best  English  authority
writes : — "  He  was  not  great  enough  to  give  unity  to  circumstances  of  extraordinary
perplexity.  Far  from  taking  the  lead,  he  was  from  first  to  last  put  upon  the  defen-
sive "  (E.  Armstrong,  The  Emperor  Charles  V.,  1902,  pref.).  When  Philip  succeeded
"  Spain  was  already  wellnigh  ruined  by  the  drain  of  the  Emperor's  wars  "  (M.  A.  S.
Hume,  Spain,  p.  194).  Thus  even  in  1561  his  revenues  were  mortgaged  past  recovery,
and  his  deficits  irremediable  (Motley,  p.  149  ;  Hume,  p.  195),  so  that  at  length,  in  1597.
he  had  to  get  from  the  Pope  an  absolution  from  payment  of  the  interest  he  owed
to  Spanish  and  Genoese  merchants,  thus  ruining  his  credit  (Davies,  History  of
Holland,  1841,  ii.  304;  cp.  Watson,  Hist,  of  the  Reign  of  Philip  II.,  ed.  1839,
p.  527).  The  loss  of  his  first  Armada,  in  1588,  was  the  greatest  naval  and  financial
disaster  that  had  ever  befallen  any  modern  power,  and  when  that  was  followed
by  the  loss  of  the  second,  the  finances  of  Spain  must  have  been  hopelessly
crippled.  As  Buckle  admits,  further,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Philip  had  been  in
favour  of  the  fatal  project  of  expelling  the  Moriscoes,  carried  out  by  his  successor  (See
below,  note  132).  But  in  his  own  day  ruin  was  in  sight.  When,  not  long  before  his  death,
he  asked  the  Cortes  for  a  vote  of  five  hundred  million  maravedis,  they  answered  :  "  No
one  has  either  money  or  credit  ;  and  the  country  is  utterly  ruined.  Commerce  is  killed
by  the  alcabala.  Where  30,000  arrobas  of  wool  were  manufactured,  there  are  not  now
6,000  ;  and  in  the  principal  cities  most  of  the  houses  are  closed  and  deserted"  (M.  A.  S.
Hume's  Spain,  pp.  198-9).  In  short,  "  Philip  II.  had  nearly  ruined  Spain"  (Id.  p.  196.
See  p.  195  as  to  his  fiscal  methods,  and  compare  Prescott,  Hist,  of  Philip  II.  Kirk's  ed.
1894,  p.  659,  andM.  A.  S.  Hume's  The  Spanish  People,  1901,  pp.  350-403,  and  Philip  II.,
1897,  pp.  252,  256-7).  As  Montesquieu  said  of  him  (Esprit  des  Lois,  xxi.  22),  "  no  prince
suffered  more  than  he  from  the  insolence  and  mutiny  of  his  troops,  always  ill-paid."  Buckle
relied  unduly,  at  this  stage,  on  the  inadequate  History  of  Dunham,  which  he  over  praises,
and  on  the  uncritical  Spanish  writers  he  quotes.  His  account  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.
should  have  suggested  to  him  the  probability  of  a  parallel  development  in  Spain. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          555

Philip  II.,  the  last  of  the  great  kings  of  Spain,  died  in  1598,  and  after  his  death
the  decline  was  portentously  rapid.79  From  1 598  to  1700  the  throne  was  occupied
by  Philip  III.,  Philip  IV.,  and  Charles  II.  The  contrast  between  them  and  their
predecessors  was  most  striking.80  Philip  III.  and  Philip  IV.  were  idle,
ignorant,  infirm  of  purpose,  and  passed  their  lives  in  the  lowest  and  most  sordid
pleasures.  Charles  II.,  the  last  of  that  Austrian  dynasty  which  had  formerly
been  so  distinguished,  possessed  nearly  every  defect  which  can  make  a  mail
ridiculous  and  contemptible.  His  mind  and  his  person  were  such  as,  in  any
nation  less  loyal  than  Spain,  would  have  exposed  him  to  universal  derision.
Although  his  death  took  place  while  he  was  still  in  the  prime  of  life,  he  looked
like  an  old  and  worn-out  debauchee.  At  the  age  of  thirty-five  he  was  com-
pletely bald  ;  he  had  lost  his  eyebrows  ;  he  was  paralyzed  ;  he  was  epileptic  ;

fut-elle  decline  de  taut  de  grandeur  et  de  gloire  ?  Comment  perdit-elle  les  Pays-Bas  et
le  Portugal  dans  le  dix-septieme  siecle,  et  s'y  trouva-t-elle  reduite  a  n'etre  qu'un
squelette  de  ce  qu'elle  avait  ete  auparavant  ?  Comment  vit-elle  disparaitre  plus  d'une
moitie  de  sa  population  ?  Comment,  possedant  les  mines  inepuisables  du  Nouveau
Monde,  les  revenus  de  1'etat  n'etaient  a  peiiie  que  de  six  m.llions  de  ducats  sous  le  regne
de  Philippe  III  ?  Comment  son  agriculture  et  son  Industrie  furent-elles  ruinees  ?  et
comment  presque  tout  son  commerce  passa-t-il  dans  les  mains  de  ses  plus  grands  ennemis  ?
Ce  n'est  point  ici  le  lieu  d'examiner  les  veritables  causes  d'une  metamorphose  si  triste  ;
il  suffira  d'indiquer  que  tous  les  grands  empires  contiennent  en  eux-memes  le  germe  de  leur
dissolution,'"  &c.  "  D'ailleurs  les  successeurs  de  ces  deux  Monarques  "  (Charles  V.  and
Philip  II.)  "  n'eurent  point  les  m  ernes  talens,  ni  les  dues  de  Lerme  et  d'Olivares,  leurs
ministres,  ceux  du  cardinal  Cisneros  ;  et  il  est  difficile  de  calculer  1' influence  de  la- bonne
ou  de  la  mauvaise  direction  des  affaires  sur  la  prosper!  te  ou  les  malheurs  des  nations.
Sous  une  meme  forme  de  gouvernement,  quel  qu'il  puisse  etre,  elles  tombent  ou  se  relivent
suivant  la  capacite  des  hommes  qui  les  dirigent,  et  d'apres  les  circonstances  ou  ils  agissent."
Sempere,  Histoire  des  Cortes,  Bordeaux,  1815,  pp.  265-267.  Of  the  two  passages  which
I  have  marked  with  italics,  the  first  is  a  clumsy,  though  common,  attempt  to  explain
complicated  phenomena  by  a  metaphor  which  saves  the  trouble  of  generalizing  their
Jaws.  The  other  passage,  though  perfectly  true  as  regards  Spain,  does  not  admit  of  that
universal  application  which  M.  Sempere  supposes  ;  inasmuch  as  in  England,  and  in  the
United  States  of  America,  national  prosperity  has  steadily  advanced,  even  when  the
rulers  have  been  very  incapable  men.  [If  this  were  true,  it  would  be  hard  to  show  why
rulers  are  ever  to  be  denounced.  But  English  prosperity  has  not  steadily  advanced
irrespective  of  the  wisdom  of  rulers.  E.g.  the  effect  of  the  Corn  Laws. — ED.]

79  "  with  Philip  II.  ends  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom,  which  from  that  period  declined
with  fearful  rapidity."  Dunham's  History  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  87.  And  Ortiz  (Com-
pendia, vol.  vii.,  Prologo,  p.  6)  classes  together  "  la  muerte  de  Felipe  II.  y  principios  de
nuestra  decadencia."  The  same  judicious  historian  elsewhere  observes  (vol.  vi.  p.  211),
that  if  Philip  III.  had  been  equal  to  his  father,  Spain  would  have  continued  to  flourish.
Several  of  the  more  recent  Spanish  writers,  looking  at  the  heavy  expenses  caused  by  the
policy  of  Philip  II.,  and  at  the  debts  which  he  incurred,  have  supposed  that  the  decline
of  the  country  began  in  the  latter  years  of  his  reign.  But  the  truth  is,  that  no  great
nation  ever  was,  or  ever  will  be,  ruined  by  the  prodigality  of  its  government.  Such
extravagance  causes  general  discomfort,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  tolerated  ;  but,
if  this  were  the  place  for  so  long  an  argument,  I  could  easily  show  that  its  other  and  more
permanent  inconveniences  are  nothing  like  what  they  are  commonly  supposed  to  be.
[The  leap  in  the  second  last  sentence  from  the  proposition  "  the  decline  began  "  to  "  no
nation  was  ever  ruined  "  amounts  to  an  ignoratio  elenchi.  Philip  lost  the  Netherlands,  and
had  to  let  Flanders  pass  from  Spain.  This  was  part  of  the  decadence  as  commonly
regarded.  But  when  Buckle  asserts  that  the  system  was  "  rotten  to  the  core  "  even
when  "  prosperous,"  it  is  hard  to  check  his  reasoning.  Enough  to  say  that  under  Phiiip
commerce  and  industry  were  already  disappearing. — ED.]

so  "  Abstraido  Felipe  III.  en  devociones,  amante  Felipe  IV.  de  regocijos,  mortificado
Carlos  II.  por  padecimientos,  cuidaronse  poco  6  nada  de  la  gobernacion  del  Estado,  y
confiaronla  a  validos  altaneros,  codiciosos,  incapaces,  y  demuy  funesta  memoria."  Rio,
Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1856,  vol.  i.  p.  33.


556  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  he  was  notoriously  impotent.81  His  general  appearance  was  absolutely
revolting,  and  was  that  of  a  drivelling  idiot.  To  an  enormous  mouth,  he  added
a  nether  jaw  protruding  so  hideously  that  his  teeth  could  never  meet,  and  he
was  unable  to  masticate  his  food.82  His  ignorance  would  be  incredible,  if  it  were
not  substantiated  by  unimpeachable  evidence.  He  did  not  know  the  names  of
the  large  towns,  or  even  of  the  provinces,  in  his  dominions  ;  and  during  the  war
with  France  he  was  heard  to  pity  England  for  losing  cities  which  in  fact  formed
part  of  his  own  territory.83  Finally,  he  was  immersed  in  the  most  grovelling
superstition  ;  he  believed  himself  to  be  constantly  tempted  by  the  devil  ;  he
allowed  himself  to  be  exorcised  as  one  possessed  by  evil  spirits  ;  and  he  would
not  retire  to  rest  except  with  his  confessor  and  two  friars,  who  had  to  lie  by  his
side  during  the  night.84

Now  it  was  that  men  might  clearly  see  on  how  sandy  a  foundation  the  grandeur
of  Spain  was  built.  When  there  were  able  sovereigns  the  country  prospered  ;
when  there  were  weak  ones  it  declined.  Nearly  everything  that  had  been  done
by  the  great  princes  of  the  sixteenth  century  was  undone  by  the  little  princes
of  the  seventeenth.  So  rapid  was  the  fall  of  Spain,  that  in  only  three  reigns
after  the  death  of  Philip  II.  the  most  powerful  monarchy  existing  in  the  world
was  depressed  to  the  lowest  point  of  debasement,  was  insulted  with  impunity

81  "  Sans  esperance  de  posterite."      Millot,    Memoires   de  Noailles,   vol.   i.   p.   419.
"  Incapaz  de  tener  hijos."     Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  vi.  p.  560.     See  also  Memoires  de
Louville,  vol.  i.  p.  82  ;  and  the  allusions  in  Lettres  de  Madame  de  Villars,  edit.  Amsterdam,
J759»  PP-  53»  J2o,  164.     She  was  ambassadress  in  Spain  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.     M.
Lafuente,  who,  if  I  rightly  remember,  never  quotes  these  interesting  letters,  and  who,
indeed,  with  very  few  exceptions,  has  used  none  but  Spanish   authorities,  ventures
nevertheless  to  observe  that  "  La  circunstancia  de  no  haber  tenido  sucesion,  falta  que  en
general  se  achabaca  mas  al  rey  que  a  la  reina,"  &c.      Historia  de  Espana,   vol.  xvii.
pp.  198,  199,  Madrid,  1856.    According  to  the  biographer  of  the  Spanish  Queens,  some
persons  imputed  this  to  sorcery,  "  y  aun  se  dijo  si  intervenia  maleficio."     Florez,  Memorias
de  las  Reynas  Catholicas,  vol.  ii.  p.  973,  Madrid,  1761,  4to.

82  In  1696,  Stanhope,  the  English  minister  at  Madrid,  writes  :  "  He  has  a  ravenous
stomach,  and  swallows  all  he  eats  whole,  for  his  nether  jaw  stands  so  much  out,  that  his
two  rows  of  teeth  cannot  meet ;   to  compensate  which  he  has  a  prodigious  wide  throat,
so  that  a  gizzard  or  liver  of  a  hen  passes  down  whole,  and,  his  weak  stomach  not  being
able  to  digest  it,  he  voids  it  in  the  same  manner."     Mahon's  Spain  under  Charles  II.,
London,  1840,  p.  79  ;   a  very  valuable  collection  of  original  documents,  utterly  unknown
to  any  Spanish  historian  I  have  met  with.  '  Some  curious  notices  of  the  appearance  of
Charles  II.  in  his  childhood  may  be  seen,  published  for  the  first  time,  in  Mignet's  Negotia-
tions relatives  a  la  Succession  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1835-1842,  4to,  vol.  i.  pp.  294,  295,  310,
396,  404,  410,  vol.  ii.  p.  130,  vol.  iii.  pp.  418,  419,  423.     See  also  vol.  iv.  p.  636,  for  an
instance  of  his  taciturnity,  which  was  almost  the  only  mark  of  sense  he  ever  gave.  "  Le
roi  1'ecouta,  et  ne  lui  repondit  rien."

83  "  Le  Roy  demeuroit  dans  une  profonde  ignorance  et  de  ses  affaires,  et  meme  des
Etats  de  sa  couronne  ;  a  peine  connoissoit-il  quelles  etoient  les  places  qui  lui  appartenoient
hors  du  continent  d'Espagne."  ..."  La  perte  de  Barcelone  lui  fut  plus  sensible  qu'au-
cune  autre,  parce  que  cette  ville,  capitale  de  la  Catalogue,  et  situee  dans  le  continent  de
1'Espagne,  lui  etoit  plus  connue  que  les  villes  de  Flandre,  dont  il  ignoroit  1'importance  au
point  de  croire  que  Mons  appartenoit  au  roi  d'Angleterre,  et  de  le  plaindre  lorsque  le  Roi
fit  la  conquete  de  cette  province."     Memoires  du  Marquis  de  Torcy,  vol.  i.  pp.  19,  23,
edit.  Petitot,  Paris,  1828.

84  "  Fancying  everything   that  is  said  or  done   to  be  a  temptation  of  the  devil,  and
never  thinking  himself  safe  but  with  his  confessor  and  two  friars  by  his  side,  whom  he
makes  lie  in  his  chamber  every  night."     Mahon's  Spain  under  Charles  II.,  p.  102.     On
account,  no  doubt,  of  this  affection  for  monks,  he  is  declared  by  a  Spanish  historian  to
have  possessed  a   "  corazon  pio  y  religiose."     Bacallar,  Ccmentarios  de  la  Guetra  de
Espana,  vol.  i.  p.  20.     The  best  notice  of  the  exorcism  will  be  found  in  Lafuente's  Historia
de  Espana,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  294-309,  where  there  is  an  entire  chapter,  headed  "  Los  Hechizos
del  Rey."


THE    HISTORY    OF   THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          557

by  foreign  nations,  was  reduced  more  than  once  to  bankruptcy,  was  stripped  of
her  fairest  possessions,*  was  held  up  to  public  opprobrium,  was  made  a  theme
on  which  schoolboys  and  moralists  loved  to  declaim  respecting  the  uncertainty
of  human  affairs,  and  at  length  was  exposed  to  the  bitter  humiliation  of  seeing
her  territories  mapped  out  and  divided  by  a  treaty  in  which  she  took  no  share,
but  the  provisions  of  which  she  was  unable  to  resent.85  Then  truly  did  she
drink  to  the  dregs  the  cup  of  her  own  shame.  Her  glory  had  departed  from  her,
she  was  smitten  down  and  humbled.  Well  might  a  Spaniard  of  that  time  who
compared  the  present  with  the  past,  mourn  over  his  country,  the  chosen  abode
of  chivalry  and  romance,  of  valour  and  of  loyalty.  The  mistress  of  the  world,
the  queen  of  the  ocean,  the  terror  of  nations,  was  gone  ;  her  power  was  gone,
no  more  to  return.  To  her  might  be  applied  that  bitter  lamentation,  which,  on
a  much  slighter  occasion,  the  greatest  of  the  sons  of  men  has  put  into  the  mouth
of  a  dying  statesman.  Good  reason,  indeed,  had  the  sorrowing  patriot  to  weep,
as  one  who  refused  to  be  comforted,  for  the  fate  of  his  earth,  his  realm,  his  land
of  dear  souls,  his  dear,  dear  land,  long  dear  for  her  reputation  through  the  world,
but  now  leased  out  like  to  a  tenement  or  pelting  farm.86

It  would  be  a  weary  and  unprofitable  task  to  relate  the  losses  and  disasters
of  Spain  during  the  seventeenth  century.  The  immediate  cause  of  them  was
undoubtedly  bad  government  and  unskilful  rulers  ;  but  the  real  and  overriding
cause,  which  determined  the  whole  march  and  tone  of  affairs,  was  the  existence
of  that  loyal  and  reverential  spirit  which  made  the  people  submit  to  what  any
other  country  would  have  spurned,  and,  by  accustoming  them  to  place  extreme
confidence  in  individual  men,  reduced  the  nation  to  that  precarious  position  in
which  a  succession  of  incompetent  princes  was  sure  to  overthrow  the  edifice
which  competent  ones  had  built  up.87

85  "  La  foiblesse  de  1'Espagne  ne  permettoit  pas  a  son  roi  de  se  ressentir  du  traitement

dont  il  croyoit  a  propos  de  se  plaindre."     Memoires  de  Torcy,  vol.  i.  p.  81.     Or,  as  an

eminent  native  writer  bitterly  says,  "  Las  naciones  estrangeras  disponiendo  de  la  monar-

quia  espanola  como  de  bienes  sin  dueno."     Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iii.  p.  167.

86  "  xhis  royal  throne  of  kings,  this  scepter'd  isle,

This  earth  of  majesty,  this  seat  of  Mars,

This  other  Eden,  demi -paradise  ;

This  fortress,  built  by  nature  for  herself

Against  infection  and  the  hand  of  war  ;

This  happy  breed  of  men,  this  little  world,

This  precious  stone  set  in  the  silver  sea,

Which  serves  it  in  the  office  of  a  wall,

Or  as  a  moat  defensive  to  a  house,

Against  the  envy  of  less  happier  lands  ;

This  blessed  plot,  this  earth,  this  realm,  this  England,

This  nurse,  this  teeming  womb  of  royal  kings,

Fear'd  by  their  breed,  and  famous  by  their  birth,

Renowned  for  their  deeds  as  far  from  home,

For  Christian  service  and  true  chivalry,

As  is  the  sepulchre  in  stubborn  Jewry

Of  the  world's  ransom,  blessed  Mary's  son  :

This  land  of  such  dear  souls,  this  dear,  dear  land,

Dear  for  her  reputation  through  the  world,

Is  now  leas'd  out,  I  die  pronouncing  it,

Like  to  a  tenement  or  pelting  farm."
87  The  Spanish  theory  of  government  is  well  stated  in  the  following  passage  in  Davila's

[*  Before  the  death  of  Philip  II. ,  as  already  noted,  Spain  was  bankrupt,  had  lost
Holland  and  given  up  Flanders,  and  was  insulted  with  impunity  by  England.  The  two
Armadas  were  undertaken  to  punish  insults,  and  both  failed.  Finally,  the  English  fleet
under  Essex  sacked  Cadiz  for  fifteen  days,  unmolested.  "  This  was  the  last  blow  to  the
naval  supremacy  of  Spain,  and  showed  to  the  whole  world  that,  under  Philip's  system,
his  country  had  become  effete  "  (M.A.  S.  Hume's  Spain,  p.  193).— ED.]


558  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  increasing  influence  of  the  Spanish  Church  was  the  first  and  most  conspicu-
ous consequence  of  the  declining  energy  of  the  Spanish  government.  For,  loyalty
and  superstition  being  the  main  ingredients  of  the  national  character,*  and  both
of  them  being  the  result  of  habits  of  reverence,  it  was  to  be  expected  that,  unless
the  reverence  could  be  weakened,  what  was  taken  from  one  ingredient  would  be
given  to  the  other.  As,  therefore,  the  Spanish  government  during  the  seven-
teenth century  did,  owing  to  its  extreme  imbecility,  undoubtedly  lose  some  part
of  the  hold  it  possessed  over  the  affections  of  the  people,  it  naturally  happened
that  the  Church  stepped  in,  and,  occupying  the  vacant  place,  received  what  the
crown  had  forfeited.  Besides  this,  the  weakness  of  the  executive  government
encouraged  the  pretensions  of  the  priesthood,  and  emboldened  the  clergy  to  acts
of  usurpation  which  the  Spanish  sovereigns  of  the  sixteenth  century,  super-
stitious though  they  were,  would  not  have  allowed  for  a  single  moment.88  Hence
the  very  striking  fact  that  while  in  every  other  great  country,  Scotland  alone
excepted,  the  power  of  the  Church  diminished  during  the  seventeenth  century,
it  in  Spain  actually  increased.  The  results  of  this  are  well  worth  the  attention
not  only  of  philosophic  students  of  history,  but  also  of  every  one  who  cares  for
the  welfare  of  his  own  country,  or  feels  an  interest  in  the  practical  management
of  public  affairs.

For  twenty-three  years  after  the  death  of  Philip  II.  the  throne  was  occupied
by  Philip  III.,  a  prince  as  distinguished  by  his  weakness  as  his  predecessors  had
been  by  their  ability.  During  more  than  a  century  the  Spaniards  had  been
accustomed  to  be  entirely  ruled  by  their  kings,  who,  with  indefatigable  industry,
personally  superintended  the  most  important  transactions,  and  in  other  matters
exercised  the  strictest  supervision  over  their  ministers.  But  Philip  III.,  whose
listlessness  almost  amounted  to  fatuity,  was  unequal  to  such  labour,  and  delegated
the  powers  of  government  to  Lerma,  who  wielded  supreme  authority  for  twenty
years.89  Among  a  people  so  loyal  as  the  Spaniards  this  unusual  proceeding

Life  of  Philip  III.  The  remarks  apply  to  Philip  II.  "  Que  solo  havia  gobernado  sin
Validos  ni  Privados,  tomando  para  si  solo,  como  primera  causa  de  su  gobierno,  el  rnandar,
prohibir,  premiar,  castigar,  hacer  mercedes,  conocer  sugetos,  elegir  Ministros,  dar  oficios,
y  tener  como  espiritu,  que  andaba  sobre  las  aguas,  ciencia  y  providencia  de  todo,  para
que  nada  se  hiciese  sin  su  saber  y  querer ;  no  sirviendo  los  Ministros  mas  que  de  poner  por
obra  (obedeciendo)  lo  que  su  Senor  mandaba,  velando  sobre  cada  uno,  como  pastor  de
sus  ovejas,  para  ver  la  verdad  con  que  executan  sus  Mandamientos  y  Acuerdos."  Davila,
Historia  de  Felipe  Tercero,  lib.  i.  pp.  22,  23.

88  Even  Philip  II.  always  retained  a  certain  ascendency  over  the  ecclesiastical  hierarchy,
though  he  was  completely  subjugated  by  ecclesiastical  prejudices.     "  While  Philip  was
thus  willing  to  exalt  the  religious  order,  already  far  too  powerful,  he  was  careful  that  it
should  never  gain  such  a  height  as  would  enable  it  to  overtop  the  royal  authority."
Prescotfs  History  of  Philip  II.,  vol.  iii.  p.  235.     "  Pero  este  monarca  tan  afecto  a  la
Inquisicion  mientras  le  servia  para  sus  fines  sabia  bien    tener  a  raya  al  Santo   Oncio
cuando  intentaba  invadir  o  usurpar  las  preeminencias  de  la  autoridad  real,  6  arrogarse
un  poder  desmedido."     Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xv.  p.  114.

89  "  Por  cuyo  absolute  poderio  se  executaba   todo."      Yanez,    Memorias   para  la
Historia  de  Felipe  III.,  Prologo,  p.  150.     "  An  absoluteness  in  power  over  king  and
kingdom."     Letter  from  Sir  Charles  Cornwallis  to  the  Lords  of  the  Council  in  England,
dated  Valladolid,  May  31,  1605,  in  Winwoods  Memorials,  vol.  ii.  p.  73,  London,  1725,
folio.     "  Porque  no  era  facil  imaginar  entonces,  ni  por  fortuna  se  ha  repetido  el  ejemplo
despues,  que  hubiera  un  monarca  tan  prodigo  de  autoridad,  y  al  propio  tiempo  tan
indolente,  que  por  no  tomarse  siquiera  el  trabajo  de  firmar  los  documentos  de  Estado,
quisiera  dar  a  la  firma  de  un  vasallo  suyo  la  misma  autoridad  que  a  la  suya  propia,  y  que
advirtiera  y  ordenara,  como  ordeno  Felipe  III.  a  todos  sus  consejos,  tribunales,  y  subditos,
que  dieran  a  los  despachos  firmados  por  el  duque  de  Lerma  el  mismo  cumplimiento  y
obediencia,  y  los  ejecutaran  y  guardaran  con  el  mismo  respeto  que  si  fueran  firmados

[*    Both   are   broadly   forms   of   opinion,   and  results   of   education,   not   parts   of
"  character." — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          559

could  not  fail  to  weaken  the  executive  ;  since  in  their  eyes  the  immediate  and
irresistible  interference  of  the  sovereign  was  essential  to  the  management  of
affairs,  and  to  the  well-being  of  the  nation.  Lerma,  well  aware  of  this  feeling,
and  conscious  that  his  own  position  was  very  precarious,  naturally  desired  to
strengthen  himself  by  additional  support,  so  that  he  might  not  entirely  depend
on  the  favour  of  the  king.  He  therefore  formed  a  strict  alliance  with  the  clergy,
and  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  long  administration  did  everything
in  his  power  to  increase  their  authority.90  Thus  the  influence  lost  by  the  crown
was  gained  by  the  Church,  to  whose  advice  a  deference  was  paid  even  greater
than  had  been  accorded  by  the  superstitious  princes  of  the  sixteenth  century.
In  this  arrangement  the  interests  of  the  people  were  of  course  unheeded.  Their
welfare  formed  no  part  of  the  general  scheme.  On  the  contrary,  the  clergy,
grateful  to  a  government  so  sensible  of  their  merits,  and  so  religiously  disposed,
used  all  their  influence  in  its  favour  ;  and  the  yoke  of  a  double  despotism  was
rivetted  more  firmly  than  ever  upon  the  neck  of  that  miserable  nation,  which
was  now  about  to  reap  the  bitter  fruit  of  a  long  and  ignominious  submission.91

The  increasing  power  of  the  Spanish  Church  during  the  seventeenth  century
may  be  proved  by  nearly  every  description  of  evidence.  The  convents  and
churches  multiplied  with  such  alarming  speed,  and  their  wealth  became  so  pro-
digious, that  even  the  Cortes,  broken  and  humbled  though  they  were,  ventured
on  a  public  remonstrance.  In  1626,  only  five  years  after  the  death  of  Philip  III.,
they  requested  that  some  means  might  be  taken  to  prevent  what  they  described
as  a  constant  invasion  on  the  part  of  the  Church.  In  this  remarkable  document,
the  Cortes,  assembled  at  Madrid,  declared  that  never  a  day  passed  in  which  laymen
were  not  deprived  of  their  property  to  enrich  ecclesiastics  ;  and  the  evil,  they
said,  had  grown  to  such  a  height  that  there  were  then  in  Spain  upwards  of  nine


por  el."  Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xv.  pp.  449,  450.  "  El  duque  de  Lerma,  su
valido,  era  el  que  gobernaba  el  reino  solo."  vol.  xvii.  p.  332.  His  power  lasted  from
1598  to  1618.  Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  vi.  pp.  290,  325.

90  Davila  (Historia  de  Felipe  Tercero,  lib.  ii.  p.  41),  after  eulogizing  the  personal
qualities  of  Lerma,  adds,  "  Y  sin  estas  grandes  partes  tuvo  demos traciones  Christianas,
manifestandolo  en  los  conventos,  iglesias,  colegiatas,  hospitales,  ermitas  y  catedras,  que
dejo  fundadas,  en  que  gasto,  como  me  consta  de  los  libros  de  su  Contaduria,  un  millon
ciento  cincuenta  y  dos  mil  doscientos  ochenta  y  tres  ducados."     After  such  monstrous
prodigality,  Watson  might  well  say,  in  his   rather   superficial  but  on  the  whole  well-
executed  History,  that  Lerma  showed  "  the  most  devoted  attachment  to  the  church,"
and  "  conciliated  the  favour  of  ecclesiastics."     Watson's  History  of  Philip  III.,  London,
1839,  pp.  4,  8,  46,  224.

91  The  only  energy  Philip  III.  ever  displayed  was  in  seconding  the  efforts  of  his  minister
to  extend  the  influence  of  the  Church  ;   and  hence,  according  to  a  Spanish  historian,  he
was  "  monarque  le  plus  pieux  parmi  tous  ceux  qui  ont  occupe  le  trone  d'Espagne  depuis
saint  Ferdinand."     Sempere,  Monarchic  Espagnole,  vol.  i.  p.  245.     "  El  principal  cuidado
de  nuestro  Rey  era  tener  a  Dios  por  amigo,  grangear  y  beneficiar  su  gracia,  para  que  le
asistiese  propicio  en  qua'nto  obrase  y  dixese.     De  aqui  tuvieron  principio  tantos  dones
ofrecidos  a  Dios,  tanta  fundacion  de  Conventos,  y  favores  hechos  a  Iglesias  y  Religiones."
Davila,  Historia  de  Felipe  Tercero,  lib.  ii.  p.  170.     His  wife,  Margaret,  was  equally  active.
See  Florez,  Reynas  Catholicas,  vol.  ii.  pp.  915,  916.     "  Dernas  de  los  frutos  que  dio  para
el  Cielo  y  para  la  tierra  nuestra  Reyna,  tuvo  otros  de  ambas  lineas  en  fundaciones  de
Templos  y  obras  de  piedad  para  bien  del  Reyno  y  de  la  Iglesia.     En  Valladolid  fundo
el  Convento  de  las  Franciscas  Descalzas.     En  Madrid  traslado  a  las  Agustinas  Recoletas
de  Santa  Isabel  desde  la  calle  del  Principe  al  sitio  en  que  hoy  estan.     Protegio  con  sus
limosnas  la  fundacion  de  la  Iglesia  de  Carmelitas  Descalzas  de  Santa  Ana  ;   y  empezo  a
fundar  el  Real  Convento  de  las  Agustinas  Recoletas  con  titulo  de  la  Encarnacion  en  este
misma  Corte,  cuya  primera  piedra  se  puso  a  10  de  Junio  del  1611.     En  la  parroquia  de
S.  Gil  junto  al  Palacio  introdujo  los  Religiosos  Franciscos,  cuyo  Convento  persevera  hoy
con  la  misma  advocacion."     How  the  country  fared,  while  all  this  was  going  on,  we  shall
presently  see,


56o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

thousand  monasteries,  besides  nunneries.92  This  extraordinary  statement  has,
I  believe,  never  been  contradicted,  and  its  probability  is  enhanced  by  several
other  circumstances.  Davila,  who  lived  in  the  reign  of  Philip  III.,  affirms  that
in  1623  the  two  orders  of  Dominicans  and  Franciscans  alone  amounted  to  thirty-
two  thousand.93  The  other  clergy  increased  in  proportion.  Before  the  death
of  Philip  III.  the  number  of  ministers  performing  in  the  Cathedral  of  Seville
had  swelled  to  one  hundred  ;  and  in  the  diocese  of  Seville  there  were  fourteen
thousand  chaplains  ;  in  the  diocese  of  Calahorra,  eighteen  thousand.94  Nor  did
there  seem  any  prospect  of  remedying  this  frightful  condition.  The  richer  the
Church  became  the  greater  was  the  inducement  for  laymen  to  enter  it  ;  so  that
there  appeared  to  be  no  limit  to  the  extent  to  which  the  sacrifice  of  temporal
interests  might  be  carried.95  Indeed,  the  movement,  notwithstanding  its  sudden -

92  The  burden  of  the  petition  was,  "  Que  se  tratasse  con  mas  veras  de  poner  limite  a
los  bienes,  que  se  sacauan  cada  dia  del  brago  Seglar  al  Eclesiastico,  enflaqueciendo  no  tan
solo  el  patrimonio  Real,  mas  el  comun,  pues  siendo  aquel  libre  de  pechos,  contribuciones,
y  gauelas,  alojamientos,  huespedes,  y  otros  grauamenes  mayores,  presidios,   guerras,
y  soldados."  ..."  Que  las  Religiones  eran  muchas,  las  Mendicantes  en  excesso,  y  el
Clero  en  grande  multitud.     Que  auia  en  Espafia  9088  monasteries,  aun  no  cotando  los  de
Monjas.     Que  yuan  metiedo  poco  a  poco,  con  dotaciones,  cofradias,  capellanias,  o  con
copras,  a  todo  el  Reyno  en  su  poder.     Que  se  atajasse  tanto  mal.     Que  huuiesse  numero
en  los  frayles,  moderacion  en  los  Couentos,  y  aun  en  los  Clerigos  seglares."     Cespedes,
Historia  de  Don  Felipe  IV.,  Barcelona,  1634,  folio,  lib.  vii.  cap.  9,  p.  272  rev.     This  is
the  only  noticeable  passage  in  an  unusually  dull  chronicle,  which,  though  professing  to
be  a  history  of  Philip  IV.,  is  confined  to  the  first  few  years  of  his  reign.

93  "  En  este   ano,  que  iba  escribiendo    esta    Historia,  tenian  las  Ordenes  de   Santo
Domingo,  y  S.  Francisco  en  Espafia,  treinta  y  dos  mil  Religiosos,  y  los  Obispados  de
Calahorra  y  Pamplona  veinte  y  quatro  mil  clerigos;  pues  que  tendran  las  demas  Religiones,
y  los  demas  Obispados  ?  "     Davila,  Historia  de  Felipe  Tercero,  lib.  ii.  p.  215.     See  also
cap.  xcvii.  pp.  248,  249  ;   and,  on  the  increase  of  convents,  see  Yanez,  Memorias  para  la
Historia  de  Felipe  III.,  pp.  240,  268,  304,  305.

94  "  The  reign  of  Philip  III.,  surnamed  from  his  piety  the  Good,  was  the  golden  age
of  Churchmen.     Though  religious  foundations  were  already  too  numerous,  great  additions
were  made  to  them  ;    and  in  those  which  already  existed,  new  altars  or  chancels  were
erected.   Thus  the  Duke  of  Lerma  founded  seven  monasteries  and  two  collegiate  churches  ;
thus,  also,  the  diocese  of  Calahorra  numbered  18,000  chaplains,  Seville  14,000.     How
uselessly  the  ministers  of  religion  were  multiplied,  will  appear  still  more  clearly  from  the
fact  that  the  cathedral  of  Seville  alone  had  a  hundred  when  half-a-dozen  would  assuredly
have  been  sufficient  for  the  public  offices  of  devotion."     Dunham's  History  of  Spain,
vol.  v.  p.  274.     According  to  the  passage  quoted  in  note  93,  from  Davila,  there  were
twenty-four  thousand  "clerigos"  in  the  two  dioceses  of  Calahorra  and  Pamplona.

95  "  Entre  tanto  crecia  por  instantes  y  se  aumentaba  prodigiosamente  el  poder  y  la
autoridad  de  la  iglesia.     Sus  pingiies  riquezas  desmembraban  de  una  manera  considerable
las  rentas  de  la  corona  ;   y  el  estado  eclesiastico,  que  muchos  abrazaron  en  un  principio
a  consecuencia  de  las  desgracias  y  calamidades  de  la  epoca,  fue  despues  el  mas  solicitado
por  las  inmensas  ventajas  que  ofrecia  su  condicion  comparada  con  la  de  las  clases  re-
stantes."     Antequera,  Historia  de  la  Legislacion,  pp.  223,  224.     See  also  in  Campomanes,
Apendice  d  la  Education,  Madrid,  1775-1777,  vol.  i.  p.  465,  and  vol.  iv.  p.  219,  a  statement
made  by  the  University  of  Toledo  in  1619  or  1620,  that  "  hay  doblados  religiosos,  clerigos
y  estudiantes  ;   porque  ya  no  hallan  otro  modo  de  vivir,  ni  de  poder  sustentarse."     If  the
eye  of  M.  Lafuente  had  lighted  upon  this  and  other  passages,  which  I  shall  shortly  quote
from  contemporary  observers,  he  would,  I  think,  have  expressed  himself  much  more
strongly  than  he  has  done  respecting  this  period,  in  his  recent  brilliant  but  unsatisfactory
History  of  Spain.     On  the  great  wealth  of  the  convents  in   1679,  when  the  rest  of  the
country  was  steeped  in  poverty,  see  a  letter  dated  Madrid,  July  25,  1679,  in  D'Aulnoy,
Relation  du  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Lyon,  1693,  vol.  ii.  p.  251.     But  the  earliest  evidence  I
have  met  with  is  in  a  letter  written  in  1609  to  Prince  Henry  of  England,  by  Sir  Charles
Cornwallis,  the  English  ambassador  at  Madrid.     "  The  furniture  of  their  churches  here,
and  the  riches  and  lustre  of  their  sepulchures  made  in  every  monasterie  (the  general


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          561

ness,  was  perfectly  regular,  and  was  facilitated  by  a  long  train  of  preceding
circumstances.  Since  the  fifth  century  the  course  of  events,  as  we  have  already
seen,  invariably  tended  in  this  direction,  and  insured  to  the  clergy  a  dominion
which  no  other  nation  would  have  tolerated.  The  minds  of  the  people  being
thus  prepared,  the  people  themselves  looked  on  in  silence  at  what  it  would  have
been  impious  to  oppose  ;  for,  as  a  Spanish  historian  observes,  every  proposition
was  deemed  heretical  which  tended  to  lessen  the  amount,  or  even  to  check  the
growth  of  that  enormous  wealth  which  was  now  possessed  by  the  Spanish
Church.96

How  natural  all  this  was  appears  also  from  another  fact  of  considerable
interest.  In  Europe  generally  the  seventeenth  century  was  distinguished  by
the  rise  of  a  secular  literature  in  which  ecclesiastical  theories  were  disregarded  ;
the  most  influential  writers,  such  as  Bacon  and  Descartes,  being  laymen,  rather
hostile  to  the  Church  than  friendly  to  it,  and  composing  their  works  with  views
purely  temporal.  But  in  Spain  no  change  of  this  sort  occurred.97  In  that
country  the  Church  retained  her  hold  over  the  highest  as  well  as  over  the  lowest
intellects.  Such  was  the  pressure  of  public  opinion,  that  authors  of  every  grade
were  proud  to  count  themselves  members  of  the  ecclesiastical  profession,  the
interests  of  which  they  advocated  with  a  zeal  worthy  of  the  Dark  Ages.  Cer-
vantes, three  years  before  his  death,  became  a  Franciscan  monk.98  Lope  de

povertye  of  this  kingdome  considered),  are  almost  incredible.  The  laity  of  this  nation
may  say  with  Davyde  (though  in  another  sense),  '  Zelus  domus  tuae  comedit  me' :  for,
assuredly,  the  riches  of  the  Temporall  hath  in  a  manner  all  fallen  into  the  mouthes  and
devouring  throates  of  the  Spiritual."  Winwood's  Memorials  of  Affairs  of  State,  vol.  iii.
p.  10,  London,  1725,  folio.

96  "  Deux  millions  de  ducats,  que  le  clerge  possedait  sous  le  regne  de  Charles  V.,
etaient  reputes  comme  un  revenu  exorbitant ;  et,  un  demi-siecle   plus  tard,  lorsque  ces
revenus  s'elevaient  a  huit  millions,  on  qualifiait  d'heretique  toute  proposition  tendante
a  operer  quelque  modification  dans  leur  accroissement."     Sempere,  Monarchic  Espagnole,
vol.  ii.  p.  1 6.

97  In  a  work  on  Spanish  literature  which  was  published  about  seventy  years  ago,  and
which  at  the  time  of  its  appearance  made  considerable  noise,  this  peculiarity  is  frankly
admitted,  but  is  deemed  rather  an  honour  to  Spain  than  otherwise,  inasmuch  as  that
country,  we  are  told,  has  produced  philosophers  who  have  gone  much  deeper  into  things
than  Bacon,  Descartes,  and  Newton,  who,  no  doubt,  were  clever  men,  but  were  nowise
comparable  to  the  great  thinkers  of  the  Peninsula.     Such  assertions,  proceeding,  not
from  some  ignorant  despiser  of  physical  science,  who  contemns  what  he  has  never  been
at  the  pains  to  study,  but  from  a  really  able  and  in  some  respects  competent  judge,  are
important  for  the  history  of  opinion  ;   and  as  the  book  is  not  very  common,  I  will  give
two  or  three  extracts.     "  Confiesan  los  Franceses  con  ingenuidad  que  Descartes  fue  un
novelista  ;  y  con  todo  eso  quieren  hacerle  pasar  por  el  promotor  de  la  filosoffa  en  Europa,
como  si  su  filosofia  se  desemejase  mucho  de  la  que  dominaba  en  las  sectas  de  la  anti-
giiedad.     Su  tratado  '  Del  metodo '  es  nada  en  comparacion  de  los  libros  '  De  la  eor-
rupcion  de  las  artes  '  de  Juan  Luis  Vives,  que  le  antecedio  buen  numero  de  anos.**  Oration
Apolog&ica  por  la  Espana  y  su  Merito  Liter ario  por  D.  J.  P.  Forner,  Madrid,  1786,  p.  xi.
"  No  hemos  tenido  en  los  efectos  un  Cartesio,  no  un  Neuton  :  demoslo  de  barato  :  pero
hemos  tenido  justisiimos  legisladores  y  excelentes  filosofos  practices,  que  han  preferido  el
inefable  gusto  de  trabajar  en  beneficio  de  la  humanidad  a  la  ociosa  ocupacion  de  edificar
mundos  imaginarios  en  la  soledad  y  silencio  de  un  gabinete."  p.  12.     "  Nada  se  disputaba
en  Espana."  p.  61.     At  p.  143  a  comparison  between  Bacon  and  Vives  ;   and  the  final
decision,  p.  146,  that  Vives  enjoys  "  una  gloriosa  superioridad  sobre  todos  los  sabios  de
todos  los  siglos."

98  The  final  profession  was  not  made  till  1616  ;   but  he  began  to  wear  the  clothes  in
1613.     "  Tal  era  su  situacion  el  sabado  santo  2  de  abril  "  [1616]  "  que  por  no  poder  salir
de  su  casa  hubieron  de  darle  en  ella  la  profesion  de  la  venerable  orden  tercera  de  San
Francisco,  cuyo  habito  habia  tornado  en  Alcala,  el  dia  2  de  Julio  de  1613."     Navarrete,
Vida  de  Cervantes,  p.  cii.,  prefixed  to  Don  Quijote,  Barcelona,  1839.     Even  in  1609,  says
Navarrete  (p.  Ixii.),  "  Se  ha  creido  que  entonces  se  incorporo  tambien  Cervantes,  como  lo

36


$62  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Vega  was  a  priest  ;  he  was  an  officer  of  the  Inquisition  ;  and  in  1623  he  assisted
at  an  auto  da  fe,  in  which,  amid  an  immense  concourse  of  people,  a  heretic  was
burned  outside  the  gate  of  Alcala  at  Madrid."  Moreto,  one  of  the  three  greatest
dramatists  Spain  has  produced,  assumed  the  monastic  habit  during  the  last
twelve  years  of  his  life.100  Montalvan,  whose  plays  are  still  remembered,  was  a
priest,  and  held  office  in  the  Inquisition.101  Tarrega,  Mira  de  Mescua,  and  Tirso
de  Molina  were  all  successful  writers  for  the  stage,  and  were  all  clergymen.102
Solis,  the  celebrated  historian  of  Mexico,  was  also  a  clergyman.103  Sandoval,
whom  Philip  III.  appointed  historiographer,  and  who  is  the  principal  authority
for  the  reign  of  Charles  V.,  was  at  first  a  Benedictine  monk,  afterwards  became
Bishop  of  Tuy,  and  later  still  was  raised  to  the  see  of  Pampeluna.104  Davila,
the  biographer  of  Philip  III.,  was  a  priest.105  Mariana  was  a  Jesuit  ; 106  and
Minana,  who  continued  his  History,  was  superior  of  a  convent  in  Valencia.107
Martin  Carrillo  was  a  jurisconsult  as  well  as  an  historian,  but,  not  satisfied  with
his  double  employment,  he  too  entered  the  Church,  and  became  canon  of  Sara-
gossa.108  Antonio,  the  most  learned  bibliographer  Spain  ever  possessed,  was  a
canon  of  Seville.109  Gracian,  whose  prose  works  have  been  much  read,  and  who
was  formerly  deemed  a  great  writer,  was  a  Jesuit.110  Among  the  poets  the
same  tendency  was  exhibited.  Paravicino  was  for  sixteen  years  a  popular  preacher
at  the  courts  of  Philip  III.  and  Philip  IV.111  Zamora  was  a  monk.112  Argensola
was  a  canon  of  Saragossa.113  Gongora  was  a  priest  ;  114  and  Rioja  received  a
high  post  in  the  Inquisition.115  Calderon  was  chaplain  to  Philip  IV.  ;  "«  and  so
fanatical  are  the  sentiments  which  tarnish  his  brilliant  genius  that  he  has  been
termed  the  poet  of  the  Inquisition.117  His  love  for  the  Church  was  a  passion,
and  he  scrupled  at  nothing  which  could  advance  its  interests.  In  Spain  such

hizo  Lope  de  Vega,  en  la  congregacion  del  oratorio  del  Caballero  de  Gracia,  mientras  que
su  rauger  y  su  hermana  dona  Andrea  se  dedicaban  a  semejantes  ejercicios  de  piedad  en
la  venerable  orden  tercera  de  San  Francisco,  cuyo  habito  recibieron  en  8  de  junio  del
mismo  ano."

99  Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  ii.  pp.  125,  126,  137,  147,  148.

100  ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  374.     Biographic  Universelle,  vol.  xxx.  pp.  149,  150.

101  Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  ii.  pp.  276,  327.

102  Ticknor,  vol.  ii.  p.  327.

103  Bouterwek1  s  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i.  p.  525.     But  the  best  account  is
that  given  by  his  biographer,  who  assures  us  of  two  facts  ;    that  he  received  "  todas  las
ordenes  sagradas,"  and  that  he  was  "  devotisimo  de  Maria  santisima."     Vida  de  Solis,
p.  15,  prefixed  to  Solis,  Historia  de  la  Conquista  de  Mejico,  edit.  Paris,  1844.

104  Biographie  Universelle,  vol.  xl.  p.  319.

105  "  Sacerdote  soy."     Davila,  Historia  de  la  Vida  de  Felipe  Tercero,  lib.  ii.  p.  215.

106  Biographie  Universelle,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  42.

107  Ibid.  vol.  xxix.  p.  80.

108  Ibid.  vol.  vii.  p.  219.

109  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  293.

110  Ticknor' s  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  iii.  p.  177.

111  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  491,  vol.  iii.  pp.  117,  118.

112  Sismondi's  Literature  of  the  South  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  p.  348,  London,  1846.

us  "  pero  en  fin  murio  Don  Andres  Martinez,  y  sucediole  en  la  Canongia  nuestro
Bartholome."  Pellicer,  Ensayo  de  una  Bibliotheca,  Madrid,  1778,  4to,  p.  94.  This  was
the  younger  Argensola.

114  Ticknor' s  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  ii.  p.  486.

115  "  Occupied  a  high  place  in  the  Inquisition."     Ticknor,  vol.  ii.  p.  507.     "  Prit  les
ordres,  et  obtint  un  canonicat."     Biographie  Univ.  vol.  xxxviii.  p.  120.

116  In  1663,  Philip  IV.  "  le  honr6  con  otra  Capellania  de  honor  en  su  real  Capilla."
Vida  de  Calderon,  p.  iv.  prefixed  to  Las  Comedias  de  Calderon,  edit.  Keil,  Leipsique,  1827.

117  "  Calderon  is  in  fact  the  true  poet  of   the   Inquisition.     Animated  by  a  religious
feeling  which  is  too  visible  in  all  his  pieces,  he  inspires  me  only  with  horror  for  the  faith
which  he  professes."     Sismondi's  Literature  of  the  South  of  Europe,  vol.  ii.  p,  379.     Comr
pare  Lewes  on  the  Spanish  Drama,  pp.  176-179,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          563

feelings  were  natural  ;  though  to  other  nations  they  seem  so  strange  that  an
eminent  critic  has  declared  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  read  his  works  without
indignation.118  If  this  be  so,  the  indignation  should  be  extended  to  nearly  all
his  contemporary  countrymen,  great  or  small.  There  was  hardly  a  Spaniard  of
that  period  who  did  not  entertain  similar  sentiments.  Even  Villaviciosa,  author
of  one  of  the  very  best  mock-heroic  poems  Spain  has  produced,  was  not  only  an
officer  in  the  Inquisition,  but,  in  his  last  will,  he  strongly  urged  upon  his  family
and  all  his  descendants,  that  they  too  should,  if  possible,  enter  the  service  of  that
noble  institution,  taking  whatever  place  in  it  they  could  obtain,  since  all  its
offices  were,  he  said,  worthy  of  veneration.119  In  such  a  state  of  society  any-
thing approaching  to  a  secular  or  scientific  spirit  was,  of  course,  impossible.
Every  one  believed  ;  no  one  inquired.  Among  the  better  classes  all  were
engaged  in  war  or  theology,  and  most  were  occupied  with  both.  Those  who
made  literature  a  profession  ministered,  as  professional  men  too  often  do,  to
the  prevailing  prejudice.  Whatever  concerned  the  Church  was  treated  not  only
with  respect,  but  with  timid  veneration.  Skill  and  industry  worthy  of  a  far
better  cause  were  expended  in  eulogizing  every  folly  which  superstition  had
invented.  The  more  cruel  and  preposterous  a  custom  was  the  greater  the
number  of  persons  who  wrote  in  its  favour,  albeit  no  one  had  ventured  to  assail  it.
The  quantity  of  Spanish  works  to  prove  the  necessity  of  religious  persecution  is
incalculable  ;  and  this  took  place  in  a  country  where  not  one  man  in  a  thousand
doubted  the  propriety  of  burning  heretics.  As  to  miracles,  which  form  the  otrier
capital  resource  of  theologians,  they,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  were  constantly
happening,  and  as  constantly  being  recorded.  All  literary  men  were  anxious
to  say  something  on  that  important  subject.  Saints,  too,  being  in  great  repute,
their  biographies  were  written  in  profusion,  and  with  an  indifference  to  truth
which  usually  characterizes  that  species  of  composition.  With  these  and  kindred
topics  the  mind  of  Spain  was  chiefly  busied.  Monasteries,  nunneries,  religious
orders,  and  cathedrals  received  equal  attention,  and  huge  books  were  written
about  them,  in  order  that  every  particular  might  be  preserved.  Indeed,  it  often
happened  that  a  single  convent,  or  a  single  cathedral,  would  have  more  than  one
historian,  each  seeking,  to  distance  his  immediate  competitor,  and  all  striving
which  could  do  most  to  honour  the  Church  and  to  uphold  the  interests  of  which
the  Church  was  the  guardian.120

Such  was  the  preponderance  of  the  ecclesiastical  profession,  and  such  was  the
homage  paid  to  ecclesiastical  interests  by  the  Spaniards  during  the  seventeenth


118  Sain  says,  "  Calderon  de  la  Barca  excite  encore  plus  une  sorte  d'indignation,  malgre
son  genie  dramatique,  qui  le  mit  au-dessus  de  Vega,  son  predecesseur.     En  lisant  ses
draines  sans  prevention,  vous  diriez  qu'il  a  voulu  faire  servir  son  talent  uniquemeut  a
confirmer  les  prejuges  et  les  superstitions  les  plus  ridicules  de  sa  nation."     Ginguene,
Histoire  Litteraire  d1  Italic,  vol.  xii.  p.  499,  Paris,  1834.

119  "  Entro  en  el  afio  de  1622  a  ser  Relator  del  Consejo  de  la  General  Inquisition,  cuyo
empleo  sirvio  y  desempeno  con  todo  honor  muchos  afios."      And  he  declared,  "  en  esta
clausula  de  su  Testamento  :  '  Y  por  quanto  yo  y  mis  hermanos  y  toda  nuestra  familia
nos  hemos  sustentado,  autorizado  y  puesto  en  estado  con  las  honras  y  mercedes,  que  nos
ha  hecho  el  santo  Oficio  de  la  Inquisicion,  a  quien  hemos  servido  como  nuestros  ante-
passados  ;    encargo  afectuosissimamente  a  todos  mis  sucessores  le  scan  para  siempre  los
mas  respetuosos  servidores  y  criados,  viviendo  en  ocupacion  de  su  santo  servicio,  pro-
curando  adelantarse  y  senalarse  en  el,  quanto  les  fuere  possible,  en  qualquiera  de  sus
ministerios  ;  pues  todos  son  tan  dignos  de  estimacion  y  veneracion.'  "     La  Mosquea,  por
Villaviciosa,  Prologo,  pp.  x.-xii.,  edit.  Madrid,  1777.

120  "  Hardly  a  convent  or  a  saint  of  any  note  in  Spain,  during  the  sixteenth  and  seven-
teenth centuries,  failed  of  especial  commemoration  ;    and  each  of  the  religious  orders
and  great  cathedrals  had  at  least  one  historian,  and  most  of  them  several.     The  number
of  books  on  Spanish  ecclesiastical  history    is    therefore    one  that  may  well  be  called
enormous."     Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  iii.  p.  132.     'Forner  assures
us,  somewhat  needlessly,  of  what  no  one  ever  doubted,  that  "  los  estudios  sagrados
jamas  decayeron  en  Espafia,"     Forner,  Oration  Apologetica,  Madrid,  1786,  p.  141,


564  THE    HISTORY    OF  CIVILIZATION

century.121  They  did  everything  to  strengthen  the  Church  in  that  very  age
when  other  nations  first  set  themselves  in  earnest  to  weaken  it.  This  unhappy
peculiarity  was  undoubtedly  the  effect  of  preceding  events  ;  but  it  was  the
immediate  cause  of  the  decline  of  Spain,  since,  whatever  may  have  been  the  case
in  former  periods,  it  is  certain  that  in  modern  times  the  prosperity  of  nations
depends  on  principles  to  which  the  clergy  as  a  body  are  invariably  opposed.
Under  Philip  III.  they  gained  an  immense  accession  of  strength  ;  and  in  that
very  reign  they  signalized  this  new  epoch  of  their  power  by  obtaining,  with
circumstances  of  horrible  barbarity,  the  expulsion  of  the  whole  Moorish  nation.
This  was  an  act  so  atrocious  in  itself,122  and  so  terrible  in  its  consequences,  that
some  writers  have  ascribed  to  it  alone  the  subsequent  ruin  of  Spain  ;  forgetting
that  other  causes,  far  more  potent,  were  also  at  work,  and  that  this  stupendous
crime*  could  never  have  been  perpetrated  except  in  a  country  which,  being
long  accustomed  to  regard  heresy  as  the  most  heinous  of  all  offences,  was  ready,
at  any  cost,  to  purge  the  land  and  to  free  itself  from  men  whose  mere  presence
was  regarded  as  an  insult  to  the  Christian  faith.

After  the  reduction,  late  in  the  fifteenth  century,  of  the  last  Mohammedan
kingdom  in  Spain,  the  great  object  of  the  Spaniards  became  to  convert  those
whom  they  had  conquered.123  They  believed  that  the  future  welfare  of  a
whole  people  was  at  stake  ;  and  finding  that  the  exhortations  of  their  clergy
had  no  effect,  they  had  recourse  to  other  means,  and  persecuted  the  men  they
were  unable  to  persuade.  By  torturing  some,  by  burning  others,  and  by  threaten-
ing all,  they  at  length  succeeded  ;  and  we  are  assured  that  after  the  year
1526  there  was  no  Mohammedan  in  Spain  who  had  not  been  converted  to
Christianity.124  Immense  numbers  of  them  were  baptized  by  force  ;  but  being

121  In  1623,  Howell  writes  from  Madrid  :   "  Such  is  the  reverence  they  bear  to  the
church  here,  and  so  holy  a  conceit  they  have  of  all  ecclesiastics,  that  the  greatest  Don
in  Spain  will  tremble  to  offer  the  meanest  of  them  any  outrage  or  affront."     HowelVs
Letters,  edit.  London,  1754,  p.  138.     "The  reverence  they  show  to  the  holy  function
of  the  church  is  wonderful ;  Princes  and  Queens  will  not  disdain  to  kiss  a  Capuchin's
sleeve,  or  the  surplice  of  a  priest."  ..."  There  are  no  such  sceptics  and  cavillers  there,
as  in  other  places."  p.  496.     In  1669,  another  observer  writes  :  "  En  Espagne  les  Re-
ligieux  sont  les  maitres,  et  1'emportent  par  tout  ou  ils  se  trouvent."   Voyages  faits  en
divers  Temps  en  Espagne,  Amsterdam,  1700,  p.  35.     And,  to  quote  one  more  authority,
the  following  picture  is  given  of  Spanish  society  in  the  reign  of  Philip  IV  :  "  No  habia
familia  con  quien  no  estuvieran  entroncados  los  frailes  por  amis  tad  6  parentesco  ;  ni
casa  que  les  cerrara  sus  puertas  ;  ni  conversacion  en  que  no  se  les  cediera  la  palabra  ;  ni
mesa  en  que  no  se  les  obligara  a  ocupar  la  primera  silla  ;  ni  resolucion  grave  entre  ricos
6  pobres  que  se  adoptara  sin  su  consejo  ;  y  si  no  tomaban  parte  en  elles,  las  satisfacciones
domesticas  no  eran  cabales."  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  i.  p.  94.

122  "  Le  cardinal  de  Richelieu,  qui  n'etoit  pas   tres  susceptible  de  pitie,  1'appelle  '  le
plus  hardi  et  le  plus  barbare  conseil  dont  1'histoire  de  tous  les  siecles  precedens  fasse
mention.'  "  Sismondi,  Histoire  des  Francais,  vol.  xxii.  p.  163,  Paris,  1839.

123  "  Porque  los  Reyes  queriendo,  que  en  todo  el  Reino  fuesen  Christianos,  embiaron
a  Frai  Francisco  Ximenez,  que  fue  Arzobispo  de  Toledo  i  Cardenal,  para   que  los  per-
suadiese.     Mas  ellos,  gente  dura,  pertinaz,  nuevamente  conquistada,  estuvier  onrecios."
Mendoza,  Guerra  de  Granada  que  hizo  Felipe  II.  contra  los  Moriscos,  Valencia,  1776,  4to,
p.  10.     The  author  of  this  book  was  born  early  in  the  sixteenth  century,  at  Granada,
where  he  lived  for  a  considerable  period.

124  "  L'annee  1526  vit  done  disparaitre  dans  toutes  les  parties  de  1'Espagne  les  signes
exterieurs  de  l'islamisme."  Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes  d1  Espagne,  Paris,  1846,  vol.  ii.
p.  220.     M.  Lafuente  (Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  x.  p.  132)  says  of  1502,  that  "  desde
entonces,  por  primera  vez  al  cabo  de  ocho  siglos,  no  quedo  un  solo  habitante  en  Espana

[*  Causes  "  far  more  potent  "  than  a  "  stupendous  "  act  must  have  been  potent  indeed.
As  is  fully  shown  below,  the  expulsion  of  the  Moriscoes  did  for  the  industrial  life  of  Spain
what  the  other  work  of  the  Inquisition  had  done  for  the  intellectual.  It  was  thus  a  main
factor  in  the  decay  of  Spain, — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    TH£    SPANISH    INTELLECT          565

baptized,  it  was  held  that  they  belonged  to  the  Church,  and  were  amenable  to
her  discipline.125  That  discipline  was  administered  by  the  Inquisition,  which,
during  the  rest  of  the  sixteenth  century,  subjected  these  new  Christians,  or  Moris'
coes,  as  they  were  now  called,126  to  the  most  barbarous  treatment.  The  genuine-
ness of  their  forced  conversion  was  doubted  ;  it  therefore  became  the  business
of  the  Church  to  inquire  into  their  sincerity.12?  The  civil  government  lent  its
aid  ;  and  among  other  enactments  an  edict  was  issued  by  Philip  II.  in  1566,
ordering  the  Moriscoes  to  abandon  everything  which  by  the  slightest  possibility
could  remind  them  of  their  former  religion.  They  were  commanded,  under
severe  penalties,  to  learn  Spanish,  and  to  give  up  all  their  Arabic  books.  They
were  forbidden  to  read  their  native  language,  or  to  write  it,  or  even  to  speak  it
in  their  own  houses.  Their  ceremonies  and  their  very  games  were  strictly  pro-
hibited. They  were  to  indulge  in  no  amusements  which  had  been  practised
by  their  fathers  ;  neither  were  they  to  wear  such  clothes  as  they  had  been  accus-
tomed to.  Their  women  were  to  go  unveiled  ;  and  as  bathing  was  a  heathenish
custom,  all  public  baths  were  to  be  destroyed,  and  even  all  baths  in  private
houses.12"

By  these  and  similar  measures  129  these  unhappy  people  were  at  length  goaded

que  esteriormente  diera  culto  a  Mahoma  :  "  but  in  vol.  xi.  p.  447,  he  says  that,  in  1524,
"  volvieron  inmediatamente  a  sus  ritos  y  ceremonias  muslimicas."  As  M.  de  Circourt
was  well  acquainted  with  all  the  materials  used  by  M.  Lafuente,  and  is,  moreover,  a  much
more  critical  writer,  it  seems  likely  that  his  statement  is  the  correct  one.

125  "  Ces  malheureux  auraient  tous  ete  extermines,  s'ils  n'avaient  consenti  a  recevoir  le
bap t erne.     Au  milieu  des  decombres  de  leurs  maisons,  sur  les  cadavres  fumans  de  leurs
femmes,  ils  s'agenouillerent.     Les  germanos,  ivres  de  sang,  firent  1'office  de  pretres  ;
Tun  d'eux  prit  un  balai,  aspergea  la  foule  des  musulmans,  en   pronon^ant  les  paroles
sacramentelles,  et  crut  avoir  fait  des  Chretiens.     L'armee  des  germanos  se  repandit
ensuite   dans  le   pays  environnant,   saccageant   d'abord,   baptisant   apres."     Circourt,
Histoire  des  Arabes  d'Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  175.     See  also  p.  202.

126  That  was  their  general  name  ;  but,  in  Aragon,  they  were  termed  "  '  tornadizos,'  en
lenguage  insultante."     Janer,  Condition  de  los  Moriscos  de  Espana,  Madrid,  1857,  p.  26.

127  "  Recibieron  el  Sacramento  por  comodidad,  no  de  voluntad,  y  asi  encubrian  todo
lo  possible  el  viuir  y  morir  en  la  secta  de  Mahoma,  siendo  infieles  apostatas."     Vander-
hammen's  Filipe  Segundo,  p.  12.     "  Porque  la  Inquisicion  los  comenzo  a  apretar  mas  de
lo  ordinario."     Mendoza,  Guerra  de  Granada,  p.  20.     "  Poner  nuevo  cuidado  i  diligencia
en  descubrir  los  motives  destos  hombres."  p.  26.     And  yet  this  very  writer  has  the  im-
pudence to  declaim  against  Mohammedanism  as  a  cruel  religion.     "  Cruel  i  abominable
religion  aplacar  a  Dios  con  vida  i  sangre  inocente  !  "  pp.  107,  108.

128  Vanderhammen  (Filipe  Segundo,  p.  12,  Madrid,  1632)  merely  tells  us  that  "  Por
cedula  el  ano  sesenta  y  seis  les  mando  dexassen  el  habito,  lengua  y  costumbres  de  Moros,
y  fuessen  Christianos  y  lo  pareciessen."  But  the  exact  provisions  were,  "Que  dentro  de  tres
aftos  aprendiesen  los  moriscos  a  hablar  la  lengua  castellana,  ye  de  alii  adelante  ninguno
pudiese  hablar,  leer  ni  escribir  arabigo  en  publico  ni  en  secreto:  que  todos  los  contratos  que
se  hiciesen  en  arabigo  fuesen  nulos  :  que  todos  los  libros  asi  escritos  los  llevasen  en  termino
de  treinta  dias  al  presidente  de  la  audiencia  de  Granada  para  que  los  mandase  examinar,
devolviendoseles  aquellos  queno  ofriecieran  inconveniente  para  que  los  pudiesen  guardar
solo  durante  los  tres  anos  :  que  no  se  hicieran  de  nuevo  marlotas,  almalafas,  calzas  ni
otra  suerte  de  vestidos  de  los  que  se  usaban  en  tiempos  de  moros  ;  que  durante  este
tiempo,  las  mujeres  vestidas  a  la  morisca  llevarian  la  cara  descubier  ta  ;  que  no  usasen
de  las  ceremonias  ni  de  los  regocijos  moros  en  las  bodas,  sino  conforme  al  uso  de  la  Santa
Madre  Iglesia,  abriendo  las  puertas  de  sus  casas  en  tales  dias,  y  tambien  en  los  de  fiesta,  no
haciendo  zambras  ni  leylas  con  instrumentos  ni  cantares  moriscos,  aunque  no  dijesen  en
ellos  cosas   contraria  a  la  religion  cristiana,"  &c.      Janer,   Condition  de  los  Moriscos,
PP-  3i»   32,  where  other  particulars  will  be  found,  which  should  be  compared  with
Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes  d'Espagne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  278,  283,  459-463.

129  Some  of  the  other  steps  which  were  taken  before  1566  to  affront  the  Moriscoes  are
enumerated  in  Prescott's  History  of  Philip  II.,  vol.  iii.  p.  10,  and  elsewhere.     In  the
reign  of  Charles  V.  there  were  many  acts  of  localjyranny  which  escape  the  general  his-


566


THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION


into  rebellion  ;  and  in  1568  they  took  the  desperate  step  of  measuring  their  force
against  that  of  the  whole  Spanish  monarchy.  The  result  could  hardly  be
doubted  ;  but  the  Moriscoes,  maddened  by  their  sufferings,  and  fighting  for  their
all,  protracted  the  contest  till  1571,  when  the  insurrection  was  finally  put  down.130
By  this  unsuccessful  effort  they  were  greatly  reduced  in  numbers  and  in  strength  ;
and  during  the  remaining  twenty -seven  years  of  the  reign  of  Philip  II.  we  hear
comparatively  little  of  them.  Notwithstanding  an  occasional  outbreak,  the
old  animosities  were  subsiding,  and  in  the  course  of  time  would  probably  have
disappeared.  At  all  events,  there  was  no  pretence  for  violence  on  the  part  of
the  Spaniards,  since  it  was  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  Moriscoes,  weakened  in
every  way,  humbled,  broken,  and  scattered  through  the  kingdom,  could,  even
if  they  desired  it,  effect  anything  against  the  resources  of  the  executive  govern-
ment.

But  after  the  death  of  Philip  II.  that  movement  began  which  I  have  just
described,  and  which,  contrary  to  the  course  of  affairs  in  other  nations,  secured
to  the  Spanish  clergy  in  the  seventeenth  century  more  power  than  they  had
possessed  in  the  sixteenth.  The  consequences  of  this  were  immediately  apparent.
The  clergy  did  not  think  that  the  steps  taken  by  Philip  II.  against  the  Moriscoes
were  sufficiently  decisive  ;  and  even  during  his  lifetime  they  looked  forward  to
a  new  reign,  in  which  these  Christians  of  doubtful  sincerity  should  be  either
destroyed  or  driven  from  Spain.131  While  he  was  on  the  throne  the  prudence
of  the  government  restrained  in  some  degree  the  eagerness  of  the  Church  ;  and
the  king,  following  the  advice  of  his  ablest  ministers,  refused  to  adopt  the
measures  to  which  he  was  urged,  and  to  which  his  own  disposition  prompted
him.132  But  under  his  successor  the  clergy,  as  we  have  already  seen,  gained  fresh


torian.  One  of  them,  on  the  part  of  the  Bishop  of  Guadix,  is  worth  quoting.  "  On  le
vit  pousser  Tin  tolerance  jusqu'a  faire  raser  les  femmes  et  les  obliger  a  racier  leurs  ongles
pour  en  faire  disparaitre  les  traces  du  henne,  cosmetique  inoffensif  dont  il  abhorrait
1' usage,  en  raison  de  ce  que  les  Arabes  1'avaient  introduit."  Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes
d'Espagne,  vol.  ii.  p.  226.

130  Its  concluding  scene,  in  March,  1571,  is  skilfully  depicted  in  Prescotfs  History  of
Philip  III.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  148-151.     The  splendid  courage  of  the  Moriscoes  is  attested  by
Mendoza  in  his  contemporary  history  of  the  war  ;  but,  in  narrating  the  horrible  outrages
which  they  undoubtedly  committed,  he  makes  no  allowance  for  the  long -continued  and  in-
sufferable provocations  which  they  had  received  from  the  Spanish  Christians.     What  he
mentions  of  one  of  the  battles  is  curious,  and  I  do  not  remember  to  have  seen  it  elsewhere
recorded.     "  Fue  porfiado  por  ambas  partes  el  combate  hasta  venir  a  las  espadas,  de  que
los  Moros  se  aprovechan  menos  que  nosotros,  por  tener  las  suyas  un  nlo  i  no  herir  ellos
de  punta."     Mendoza,  Guerra  de  Granada,  edit.  4to,  Valencia,  1776,  p.  168.

131  An  instance  of  this  was  exhibited  in  1578,  on  the  very  day  in  which  Philip  III.  was
born.  "  Predicando  en  un  lugar  de  Aragon,  todo  de  Moriscos,  llamado  Ricla,  6  Torrellas,
un  religiose,  llamado  Vargas,  el  mismo  dia  que  nacio  su  Magestad,  viendo  el  poco  fruto
que  hacia  con  sus  sermones,  dixo,  como  en  Profecia,  a  aquella  gente  rebelde  :  Pues  no
quereis  despedir  de  vuestros  pechos  esta  infernal  secta,  sabed,  que  ha  nacido  en  Castilla
vn  Principe  que  os  ha  de  echar  de  Espana."     Porreno,  Dichos  y  Hechos  de  Phelipe  III.,
in  Yanez,  Memorias,  Madrid,  1723,  p.  224  :  and  nearly  the  same  words  in  Janer,  Con-
dicion  de  los  Moriscos,  p.  60.     Mr.  Prescott,  in  his  History  of  Philip  II.,  vol.  iii.  p.  139,
quotes  a  MS.  letter  from  Don  John  of  Austria  to  Philip  II.,  written  in  1570,  and  stating
that  the  Spanish  monks  were  openly  preaching  against  the  leniency  with  which  the  king
treated  the  Moriscoes.     "  Predicando  en  los  pulpitos  publicamente  contra  la  benignidad
y  clemencia  que  V.  M.  ha  mandado  usar  con  esta  gente."

132  In  a  recent  work  of  considerable  authority,  it  is  denied  that  Philip  II.  entertained
the  desire  of  expelling  the  Moriscoes.     "  El  caracter  austero  y  la  severidad  de  Felipe  II.
redundaban  en  favor  de  los  moriscos,  porque  no  daba  oidos  a  las  instigaciones  de  algunos
personajes  que  sefialaban  la  expulsion  general  como  unico  remedio  eficaz  para  los  males
que  ofrecia  al  pais  aquella  desventurada  raza.     Acababa  el  monarca  de  tocar  los  tristes
resultados  de  una  emigracion  por  las  funestas  consecuencias  de  la  despoblacion  del  reino
granadino,  y  preferia  continuar  en  la  senda  de  la  conciliation,  procurando  de  iiuevo  la


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          567

strength,  and  they  soon  felt  themselves  sufficiently  powerful  to  begin  another
and  final  crusade  against  the  miserable  remains  of  the  Moorish  nation.13?

The  Archbishop  of  Valencia  was  the  first  to  take  the  field.  In  1602  thi.s
eminent  prelate  presented  a  memorial  to  Philip  III.  against  the  Moriscoes  ;  and
finding  that  his  views  were  cordially  supported  by  the  clergy,  and  not  dis-
couraged by  the  crown,  he  followed  up  the  blow  by  another  memorial  having
the  same  object.134  The  Archbishop,  who  spoke  as  one  having  authority,  and
who  from  his  rank  and  position  was  a  natural  representative  of  the  Spanish
Church,  assured  the  king  that  all  the  disasters  which  had  befallen  the  monarchy
had  been  caused  by  the  presence  of  these  unbelievers,  whom  it  was  now  necessary
to  root  out,  even  as  David  had  done  to  the  Philistines,  and  Saul  to  the  Amale-
dtes.135  He  declared  that  the  Armada  which  Philip  II.  sent  against  England  in


jfianza  de  los  converses."  Janer,  Condition  de  los  Moriscos,  Madrid,  1857,  p.  59.
But,  to  say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  this  is  contrary  to  all  we  know  of  the  character  of
Philip,  we  have  on  the  other  side  of  the  question  the  testimony  of  Archbishop  Ribera,
who  had  often  communicated  with  the  king  on  the  subject,  and  who  distinctly  states
that  Philip  desired  the  expulsion  of  the  Moors  from  Spain.  "  El  hechar  los  Moros  deste
Reyno,  ha  sido  cosa  muy  desseada,  y  procurada  por  los  Reyes  Predecessores  del  Rey
nuestro  Senor,  aunque  no  executada."  ..."  El  Rey  Don  Felipe  Segundo,  nuestro  Sefior,
despues  de  suceder  en  estos  Reynos,  tuvo  el  mismo  desseo  ;  y  assi  mando,  que  se  juntassen
los  Prelados  deste  Reyno  para  buscar  remedio  el  afio  de  1568  ;  siendo  Arcobispo  desta
Metropoli  el  Reverendissimo  Don  Hernando  de  Lloazes.  Hizieronse  en  aquella  Junta
algunas  Constituciones  de  consider acion,  Visto  que  no  aprovechaban,  mando  el  afio
1587  que  se  hiziesse  ortra  Junta,  en  la  qual  me  halle  yo  :  anadimos  tambien  algunas  nuevas
Constituciones.  Y  constando  a  su  Magestad  que  no  eran  bastantes  las  diligencias
passadas,  y  que  siempre  perseveraban  en  su  heregia,  se  resolvio  de  mandarlos  hechar  del
Reyno,  6  por  lo  menos  meterlos  dentro  de  la  tierra."  Ximenez,  Vida  de  Ribera,  Roma,
1734,  410,  pp.  419,  420.  This  important  passage  is  decisive  as  to  the  real  feelings  of
Philip,  unless  we  assume  that  Rihera  has  stated  a  deliberate  falsehood.  But,  strange  to
say,  even  the  book  in  which  so  remarkable  a  passage  is  contained  appears  to  be  unknown
either  to  M.  Janer  or  to  M.  Lafuente.

133  »  EI  rey  Felipe  III.,  hombre  de  rudo  ingenio,  se  dejaba  gobernar  con  facilidad  por
aquellos  que  sabiendo  los  temores  de  su  conciencia,  se  aprovechaban  de  su  imbecilidad
para  conseguir  cuanto  querian.  Muchos  eclesiasticos,  recordando  las  ,espulsiones  de
judios  y  moros  ejecutadas  de  orden  de  Fernando  e  Isabel,  y  conociendo  que  a  Felipe  ILL
seria  agradable  imitar  a  estos  monarcas,  le  aconsejaron  que  condenase  al  destierro  a
todos  los  moriscos  que  vivian  en  sus  reynos  ;  pues  no  solo  se  obstinaban  en  seguir  la  ley
mahometana,  sino  que  tenian  tratos  con  los  turcos  y  entre  si  para  buscar  suslibertades
por  medio  del  rigor  de  las  armas."  Castro,  Decadencia  de  Espana,  Cadiz,  1852,  pp.
101,  102-

»*  These  memorials  are  printed  in  the  Appendix  to  his  Life  by  Ximenez.     See  the  very
curious  book  entitled  Vida  y  Virtudes  del  Venerable  Siervo  de  Dios  D.  Juan  de  Ribera,
por  el  R.  P.  Fr.  Juan  Ximenez,  Roma,  1734,  4to,  pp.  367-374,  376-393-     This  workls,  J
believe,  extremely  rare  ;    at  all  events  I  endeavoured  in  vain  to   obtain   a  copy  from
Spain  or  Italy,  and  after   some  years'  unsuccessful  search  I  met  with  the  one -I  now
have,  on  a  London  book -stall.     M.  de  Circourt,  in  his  learned  History  of  the  Spanish
Arabs,  does  not  appear  to  have  been  aware  of  its  existence,  and  he  complains  that  he
could  not  procure  the  works  of  Ribera,  whose  Memorials  he  consequently  quotes  second,
hand.     Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1846,  vol.  iii.  pp.  168,  351-     Nor
does  Watson  seem  to  have  known  it ;  though  both  he  and  M.  de  Circourt  refer  t.
Life  of  Ribera.     Watson's  Philip  III.,  London,  1839,  pp.  214-221.     An  abstract
Memorials  is  given   by  Geddes,  who,  though  a  learned  and  accurate  writer,  ^had  the
mischievous  habit  of  not  indicating  the  sources  of  his  information.     Geades
London,  1730,  vol.  i.  pp.  60-71.

n»  "  Por  lo  qual  se  puede  creer,  que  nuestro  Senor  ha  querido  reservar  esta  obra  tan
•digna  de  pecho  Real  para  Vuestra  Magestad,  como  reserve  la  libertad  de  su  pueblo  par
Moyses,  la  entrada  de  la  Tierra  de  Promission  para  Josue,  la  venganca  d
antigua  de    los  Amalequitas  para  Saul,  y  la  victoria  de  los  Fihsteos  para    ,L>avid.


568  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

1588  had  been  destroyed  because  God  would  not  allow  even  that  pious  enter-
prise to  succeed  while  those  who  undertook  it  left  heretics  undisturbed  at
home.  For  the  same  reason  the  late  expedition  to  Algiers  had  failed  ;  it  being
evidently  the  will  of  Heaven  that  nothing  should  prosper  while  Spain  was  in-
habited by  apostates.136  He,  therefore,  exhorted  the  king  to  exile  all  the  Moris -
coes,  except  some  whom  he  might  condemn  to  work  in  the  galleys,  and  others
who  could  become  slaves,  and  labour  in  the  mines  of  America.137  This,  he
added,  would  make  the  reign  of  Philip  glorious  to  all  posterity,  and  would  raise
his  fame  far  above  that  of  his  predecessors,  who  in  this  matter  had  neglected
their  obvious  duty.138

These  remonstrances,  besides  being  in  accordance  with  the  known  views  of

Ximenez,  Vida  de  Ribera,  p.  370.  Again,  p.  377  :  "  Y  al  primer  Rey  que  tuvo  el  Mundo,
en  siendo  elegido  por  Dios,  y  confirmado  en  su  Reyno,  le  embia  a  mandar  por  un  Propheta
que  destruya  a  los  Amalequitas,  sin  dexar  hombres,  ni  mugeres,  ni  nifios,  aunque  sean  de
leche,  en  fin  que  no  quede  rastro  de  ellos,  ni  de  sus  haziendas.  Y  porque  no  cumplio
exactamente  su  mandamiento,  cayo  en  indignacion  de  Dios,  y  fue  privado  del  Reyno.
Al  segundo  Rey,  que  fue  David,  le  mando  Dios  en  siendo  jurado,  que  destruyesse  los
Philisteos,  como  lo  hizo."

136  "  El  ano  quando  se  perdio  la  poderosa  Armada,  que  iba  a  Inglaterra,  confiado  de
la  benignidad  del  Rey  nuestro  Senor,  que  esta  en  el  Cielo,  me  atrevi  con  el  zelo  de  fiel
vassallo  y  Capellan,  a  dezir  a  Su  Mages  tad  ;  que  aviendo  gastado  mucho  tiempo  en  dis-
currir,  que  causa  podia  aver  para  que  Dios,  nuestro  Senor,  permitiesse  aquel  mal  sucesso,
se  me  havia  ofrecido  una  cosa  de  mucha  consideracion,  y  era,  querer  dezir  la  Magestad
Divina  a  Su  Magestad  Catolica  ;  que  mientras  no  ponia  remedio  en  estas  Heregias  de
Espafta,  cuyos  Reynos  le  avia  encomendado,  no  se  debia  ocupar  en  remediar  las  de  los
Reynos  agenos.     Y  ahora  confiando  en  la  misma  benignidad,  y  clemencia  de  Vuestra
Magestad,  me  atrevo  tambien  a  dezir,  que  aviendo  considerado  la  causa,  porque  Dios  nos
ha  quitado  de  las  manos  la  toma  de  Argel,  aviendose  dispuesto  todas  las  prevenciones
para  ella  con  la  mayor  prudencia,  y  sagacidad,  que  hemos  visto  en  nuestros  tiempos,  y
sirviendonos  el  mar,  y  los  ayres,  y  las  ocasiones,  de  la  manera,  que  podiamos  dessear,  tengo
por  sin  duda,  que  ha  sido,  querer  nuestro  Senor  dar  a  Vuestra  Magestad  el  ultimo  recuerdo
de  la  obligacion,  que  tiene,  de  resolver  esta  platica."     Ximenez,  Vida  de  Ribera,  p.  373.
It  would  be  a  pity  if  such  admirable  specimens  of  theological  reasoning  were  to  remain
buried  in  an  old  Roman  quarto.     I  congratulate  myself  and  the  reader  on  my  acquisition
of  this  volume,  which  is  a  vast  repertory  of  powerful  though  obsolete  weapons.

137  "  Todas  estas  cosas,  y  otras  muchas,  que  dexo  de  dezir,  por  no  ser  prolixo,  me  hazen
evidencia,  de  que  conviene  para  el  servicio  de  Dios  nuestro  Senor,  y  que  Vuestra  Magestad
esta  obligado  en  conciencia,  como  Rey,  y  Supremo  Senor,  a  quien  toca  de  justicia  defender,
y  conservar  sus  Reynos,  mandar  desterrar  de  Espafta  todos  estos  Moriscos,  sin  que  quede
hombre,  ni  muger  grande,  ni  pequefio  ;  reservando  tan  solamente  los  niftos,  y  nifias,  que
no  llegaren  a  siete  afios,  para  que  se  guarden  entre  nosotros,  repartiendolos  por  las  casas
particulares  de  Christianos  viejos.     Y  aun  hay  opinion  de  personas  doctas,  que  estos
tales  nifios  y  nifias,  los  puede  Vuestra  Magestad  dar  por  esclavos,  y  lo  fundan  con  razones
probables."     Ximenez,  Vida  de  Ribera,  pp.  379,  380.     "  Destos  que  se  ban  de  desterrar,
podra  Vuestra  Magestad  tomarlos  que  fuere  servido  por  esclavos,  para  proveer  sus
Galeras,  6  para  embiar  a  las  minas  de  las  Indias,  sin  escrupulo  alguno  de  conciencia,  lo
que  tambien  sera  de  no  poca  utilidad."  p.  384.      To  do  this  was  to  be  merciful ;  for
they  all  deserved  capital  punishment,  "  merecian  pena  capital."  p.  381.

138  "  Aora,  Catolica  Magestad,  vemos  que  Dios  nuestro  Sefior  ha  reservado  para
Vuestra  Magestad,  y  para  su  Real  Corona,  el  nombre,  y  hechos  de  Rey  Catholico  :  permi-
tiendo  por  sus  secretos  juizios,  que  los  que  ban  sido  siempre  enemigos  de  su  Iglesia  se
conserven,  y  que  los  que  antes  eran  Catholicos,  ayan  degenerado,  y  apostatado  de  su
santa  ley  y  assi  va  la  honra  de  Dios  nuestro  Sefior,  y  el  exemplo,  y  confusion  de  los  otros
Reyes,  en  que  Vuestra  Magestad  tenga  sus  Reynos  limpios  de  Hereges,  y  principalmente
a  Espafta.     Y  quando  esto  huviesse  de  costar  grandes  trabajos,  y  todo  el  oro,  y  plata,
que  hay  en  las  Indias,  estaria  muy  bien  empleado  :  pues  se  atraviessa  la  honra  de  Dios ,
la  de  su  Santa  Iglesia,  el  antiguo  renombre  desta  Corona,"  &c.  Ximenez,  Vida  de  Ribera,
p.  382.     And  on  the  neglect  of  duty  by  Charles  V.  and  Philip  II.,  see  p.  370.


THE    HISTORY    OF   THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT         569

the  Spanish  Church,  were  warmly  supported  by  the  personal  influence  of  the
Archbishop  of  Toledo,  the  primate  of  Spain.  In  only  one  respect  did  he  differ
from  the  views  advocated  by  the  Archbishop  of  Valencia.  The  Archbishop  of
Valencia  thought  that  children  under  seven  years  of  age  need  not  share  in  the
general  banishment,  but  might,  without  danger  to  the  faith,  be  separated  from
their  parents,  and  kept  in  Spain.  To  this  the  Archbishop  of  Toledo  strongly
objected.  He  was  unwilling,  he  said,  to  run  the  risk  of  pure  Christian  blood
being  polluted  by  infidels  ;  and  he  declared  that  sooner  than  leave  one  of  these
unbelievers  to  corrupt  the  land,  he  would  have  the  whole  of  them,  men,  women,
and  children,  at  once  put  to  the  sword.139

That  they  should  all  be  slain,  instead  of  being  banished,  was  the  desire  of  a
powerful  party  in  the  Church,  who  thought  that  such  signal  punishment  would
work  good  by  striking  terror  into  the  heretics  of  every  nation.  Bleda,  the  cele-
brated Dominican,  one  of  the  most  influential  men  of  his  time,  wished  this  to  be
done,  and  to  be  done  thoroughly.  He  said  that  for  the  sake  of  example  every
Morisco  in  Spain  should  have  his  throat  cut,  because  it  was  impossible  to  tell1
which  of  them  were  Christians  at  heart,  and  it  was  enough  to  leave  the  matter
to  God,  who  knew  his  own,  and  who  would  reward  in  the  next  world  those  who-
were  really  Catholics.140

It  was  evident  that  the  fate  of  the  wretched  remnant  of  a  once  splendid  nation
was  now  sealed.  The  religious  scruples  of  Philip  III.  forbade  him  to  struggle
with  the  Church  ;  and  his  minister  Lerma  would  not  risk  his  own  authority  by
even  the  show  of  opposition.  In  1609  he  announced  to  the  king  that  the
expulsion  of  the  Moriscoes  had  become  necessary.  "  The  resolution,"  replied!
Philip,  "  is  a  great  one  ;  let  it  be  executed."  U1  And  executed  it  was,  with
unflinching  barbarity.  About  one  million  of  the  most  industrious  inhabitants
of  Spain  were  hunted  out  like  wild  beasts,  because  the  sincerity  of  their  religious


139  "  The  most  powerful  promoter  of  their  expulsion   was  Don  Bernardo  de  Roias  y
Sandoval,  Cardinal  Archbishop  of  Toledo,  and  Inquisitor -General  and  Chancellor  of
Spain.     This  great  prelate,  who  was  brother  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  by  whom  the  king
for  some  years  before  and  for  some  years  after  the  expulsion  was  absolutely  governed,
was  so  zealous  to  have  the  whole  race  of  the  Moriscoes  extinguished,  that  he  opposed
the  detaining  of  their  children  who  were  under  seven  years  of  age  ;  affirming  that  of  the
two  he  judged  it  more  advisable  to  cut  the  throats  of  all  the  Moriscoes,  men,  women,  and
children,  than  to  have  any  of  their  children  left  in  Spain,  to  defile  the  true  Spanish  blood
with  a  mixture  of  the  Moorish."     Geddes1  Tracts,  vol.  i.  pp.  85,  86.     Navarrete  has  pro-
nounced a  glowing  eulogy  upon  the  piety  and  other  noble  qualities  of  this  prelate  ;  and
says  that  "  llenando  de  esplendor  con  su  virtud  tres  sillas  episcopates,  merecio  que
Clemente  VIII.  le  honrase  con  el  capelo,  y  fue  elevado  a  la   primada   de  Toledo,  y  al
empleo  de  inquisidor  general."   Vida  de  Cervantes,  pp.  xcvii,  xcviii.,  Barcelona,  1839.

140  "  He  did  assure  all  the  old  Christian  laity  that  whenever  the  king  should  give  the
word,  they  might,  without  any  scruple  of  conscience,  cut  the  throats  of  all  the  Moriscoes,
and  not  spare  any  of  them  upon  their  professing  themselves  Christians  ;  but  to  follow
the  holy  and  laudable  example  of  the  Croisado  that  was  raised  against  the  Albigenses,
who,  upon  their  having  made  themselves  masters  of  the  city  of  Bezeir,  wherein  were  two
hundred  thousand  Catholics  and  here  ticks,  did  ask  Father  Arnold,  a  Cistercian  monk,
who  was  their  chief  preacher,  '  Whether  they  should  put  any  to  the  sword  that  pretended
to  be  Catholics  ;  '  and  were  answered  by  the  holy  Abbot,  '  That  they  should  kill  all  with-
out  distinction,  and  leave  it  to  God,  who  knew  his  own,  to  reward  them  for  being  true
Catholicks  in  the  next  world  ; '  which  was  accordingly  executed."  Geddes,  vol.  i.  p.  84.

141  "   <  Grande  resolucion  !  '  contesto  el  debil  monarca  al  minis tro  favorite  :  '  hacedlo
vos,  duque.'  "  Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xv.  p.  375-    But  this  reply,  so  far  from
being  a  mark  of  weakness  on  the  part  of  Philip,  was  a  strictly  logical  application  of  the
principles  which  he  entertained,  and  which  indeed  were  almost  universal  in  Spain.     We
know  from  his  contemporary  biographer  that  "  Determine  el  Key  en  los  principles  de  su
Reynado,  como  Rey  tan  poderoso  y  Catolico,  de  consagrar  y  dedicar  a  Dios  la  potencia
de  sus  Consejos  y  Armas  para  extinguir  y  acabar  los  enemigos  de  la  Iglesia  Santa."
Davila,  Historia  de  la  Vida  de  Felipe  Tercero,  lib.  i.  p.  44-


.570  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

opinions  was  doubtful.142  Many  were  slain  as  they  approached  the  coast  '
others  were  beaten  and  plundered  ;  and  the  majority,  in  the  most  wretched
plight,  sailed  for  Africa.  During  the  passage,  the  crew,  in  many  of  the  ships,
rose  upon  them,  butchered  the  men,  ravished  the  women,  and  threw  the  children
into  the  sea.  Those  who  escaped  this  fate  landed  on  the  coast  of  Barbary,
where  they  were  attacked  by  the  Bedouins  and  many  of  them  put  to  the  sword.
Others  made  their  way  into  the  desert,  and  perished  from  famine.  Of  the  num-
ber of  lives  actually  sacrificed  we  have  no  authentic  account  ;  but  it  is  said,  on
very  good  authority,  that  in  one  expedition,  in  which  140,000  were  carried  to
Africa,  upwards  of  100,000  suffered  death  in  its  most  frightful  forms  within  a
few  months  after  their  expulsion  from  Spain.143

Now,  for  the  first  time,  the  Church  was  really  triumphant.144  For  the  first
time  there  was  not  a  heretic  to  be  seen  between  the  Pyrenees  and  the  Straits
of  Gibraltar.  All  were  orthodox,  and  all  were  loyal.  Every  inhabitant  of  that
great  country  obeyed  the  Church,  and  feared  the  king.  And  from  this  happy
combination  it  was  believed  that  the  prosperity  and  grandeur  of  Spain  were  sure
to  follow.  The  name  of  Philip  III.  was  to  be  immortal,  and  posterity  would
never  weary  of  admiring  that  heroic  act  by  which  the  last  remains  of  an  infidel
race  were  cast  out  from  the  land.  Those  who  had  even  remotely  participated
in  the  glorious  consummation  were  to  be  rewarded  by  the  choicest  blessings.
Themselves  and  their  families  were  under  the  immediate  protection  of  Heaven.
The  earth  should  bear  more  fruit,  and  the  trees  should  clap  their  hands.  Instead
of  the  thorn  should  come  up  the  fir-tree,  and  instead  of  the  brier,  the  myrtle.
A  new  era  was  now  inaugurated,  in  which  Spain,  purged  of  her  heresy,  was  to
be  at  ease,  and  men,  living  in  safety,  were  to  sleep  under  the  shade  of  their  own

142  This  is  the  average  estimate.  Some  authors  make  it  less,  and  some  more  ;  while
one  writer  says,  "  The  numbers  expelled  have  been  estimated  at  four  hundred  thousand
families,  or  two  millions  of  souls."  Clarke's  Internal  State  of  Spain,  London,  1818,  p.  33.
But  this  is  incredible.  M.  Castro  (Decadencia  de  Espana,  Cadiz,  1852,  p.  105)  says,
'"  Espana  perdio  en  los  moriscos  un  millon  de  habitantes  ;  "  and  M.  Janer  (Condition  de
Jos  Moriscos,  Madrid,  1857,  p.  93),  "Sin  entrar  en  calculos  sobre  los  que  habia  cuando
:se  expidio  el  edicto  de  Valencia  en  1609,  ni  sobre  los  que  fenecieron  en  las  rebeliones,  de
:inano  armada,  de  sed,  de  hambre  6  ahogados,  creemos  poder  fijar,  aproximadamente,  en
.novecientos  mil  los  que  llegaron  a  poner  el  pie  fuera  de  la  peninsula,  despidiendose  para
isiempre  de  las  costasjy  fronteras  de  Espana,  cuya  cifra  deducimos  del  examen  y  contexto
(de  unos  y  otros  escri tores,  de  las  listas  que  nos  han  quedado  de  los  expulsos,  de  los  datos  de
diversas  relaciones,  estados  y  documentos  examinados  con  este  solo  intento  ;  "  and
further  on,  p.  105,  "  la  expulsion  de  un  millon,  6  novecientos  mil  de  sus  habitantes."
Llorente  (Histoire  de  V Inquisition,  vol.  iii.  p.  430,  Paris,  1818)  says,  "  un  million  d'habitans.
utiles  et  laborieux  ;  "  Ximenez  (Vida  de  Ribera,  Roma,  1734,  4to,  p.  70),  "  novecientos
mil ;  "  and  Boisel,  who  was  in  Spain  fifty  years  after  the  expulsion,  and  collected  the
traditionary  evidence,  says,  "  II  sortit  neuf  cens  tant  de  mille  hommes  de  compte  fait,  de
Valence,  d'Andalousie,  et  de  Castille."  Boisel,  Journal  du  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1669,.
4to,  p.  275.

i«  Watson's  Philip  III-,  pp.  234,  235-  Davila,  Vida  de  Felipe  III.,  p.  146.  Yanez,.
Memorias  para  la  Historia  de  Felipe  III.,  pp.  281,  290.  Janer,  Condition  de  los  Moriscos,.
pp.  83,  84,  90.  Some  particulars  respecting  their  expulsion  may  also  be  seen  in  Cotting-
ton's  Letters  from  Madrid,  which  were  written  in  1609,  but  are  of  very  little  value..
Winwood's  Memorials  of  Affairs  of  State,  vol.  iii.  pp.  73,  91,  103,  118,  London,  folio,  1725-

144  In  a  contemporary  sermon  in  commemoration  of  their  expulsion,  the  preacher  joy-
fully exclaims,  "  Pues,  que  mayor  honra  podemos  tener  en  este  Reyno,  que  ser  todos  los
que  vivimos  en  el,  fieles  a  Dios,  y  al  Key,  sin  compania  de  estos  Hereges  y  traydores  ?  "
Ximenez,  Vida  de  Ribera,  p.  423.  Another  clergyman  cries  out,  "  Al  fin  salieroii  estos,.
y  quedo  la  tierra  libre  de  la  infamia  de  esta  gente."  Davila,  Vida  de  Felipe  Tercero,
p.  149.  See  also  p.  151.  "  Y  es  digno  de  poner  en  consideracion  el  zelo  que  los  Reyes^
de  Espana  tuvieron  en  todo  tiernpo  de  sustentar  la  Fe  Catolica  ;  pues  en  diferentes  ex-
pulsiones  que  han  hecho,  han  sacado  de  sus  Reynos  tres  millones  de  Moros,  y  dos  millones.
de  Judios,  enemigos  de  nuestra  Iglesia."


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          571

vineyards,  sow  their  gardens  in  peace,  and  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  they  had
planted.1'15

These  were  the  promises  held  out  by  the  Church,  and  believed  by  the  people.
It  is  our  business  to  inquire  how  far  the  expectations  were  fulfilled,  and  what
the  consequences  were  of  an  act  which  was  instigated  by  the  clergy,  welcomed
by  the  nation,  and  eagerly  applauded  by  some  of  the  greatest  men  of  genius-
Spain  has  produced.146


145  See  the  sermon  by  the  Archbishop  of  Valencia,  printed  at  length  in  the  Appendix  to
Ximenez,  Vida  de  Ribera,  pp.  411—428.    I  would  fain  quote  it  all ;  but  the  reader  must  be
content  with  part  of  the  peroration,  pp.  426,  427.     "  Entre  las  felizidades,  que  cuenta
el  Espiritu  Santo  que  tuvieron  los  hijos  de  Israel  en  el  govierno  del  Rey  Salomon,  es  una  ;
que  vivian  los  hombres  seguros,  durmiendo  a  la  sombra  de  su  parra,  y  de  su  higuera,  sin
tener  de  quien  temer.     Assi  estaremos  en  este  Reyno  de  aqui  adelante,  por  la  misericordia
de  nuestro  Sefior,  y  paternal  providencia  de  Su  Magestad,  todo  nos  sobrara,  y  la  misma
tierra  se  fertilizara  y  dara  fruto  de  bendicion.     Brocardico  es,  de  que  todos  usabades,
diziendo  que  despues,  que  estos  se  bautizaron,  no  se  avia  visto  un  afio  fertil ;  aora  todos
lo  scran,  porque  las  heregias  y  blasfemias  de  estos  tenian  esterilizada,  abrasada,  y  in-
ficionada  la  tierra,  como  dixo  el  Real  Propheta  David,  con  tantos  pecados  y  abomina-
ciones."  .  .  .  "  Y  edificaran  en  las  tierras,  que  antes  eran  desiertas,  plantando  vinas,  y
bebiendo  el  vino  de  ellas,  y  sembraran  huertas,  y  comeran  del  fruto  de  los  arboles,  que
ban  plantado,  y  nunca  seran  hechados  de  sus  casas,  dize  Dios.     Todo  esto  promete
nuestro  Sefior  por  dos  Prophetas  suyos.     Todo  (digo  otra  vez)  nos  sobrard"     All  this  was
to  happen  to  the  people  ;  while,  as  to  the  king,  he,  in  the  same  sermon,  p.  416,  is  likened
to  David  ;  and  it  was  declared  by  another  high  authority  that  his    expulsion  of  the
Moriscoes  was  so  great  an  exploit  ("  hazafia  "),  that  "  durara  su  memoria  por  los  veni-
deros  siglos."     Porreno,  in  Yanez,  Memorias  para  Felipe  III.,  p.  281.

146  "  Amidst   the   devout  exultation   of   the  whole   kingdom, — Cervantes,   Lope  de
Vega,  and  others  of  the  principal  men  of  genius  then  alive,  joining  in  the  general  jubilee."
Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  i,  pp.  428,  429.     Compare  Dunlop's  Memoirs,
vol.  i.   p.   16.     Porrefio  says  that  it  may  be  placed  among  the  seven  wonders  of  the
world  ;  "  la  podemos  poner  entre  las  siete  maravillas  del  mundo."     Yanez,  Memorias,
p.  297  :  and  Davila  (Vida  de  Felipe  Tercero,  lib.  ii.  cap.  41,  p.  139)  pronounces  it  to  be  the
most  glorious  achievement  which  had  been  seen  since  the  days  of  Pelayo.     All  this  is
natural  enough  ;  but  what  is  really  curious  is  to  trace  the  modern  remains  of  this  feeling.
Campomanes  (Apendice  a  la  Education  Popular,  vol.  iv.  p.  130,  Madrid,  i777)»  a  very
able  man,  and  far  more  liberal  than  niost  of  his  countrymen,  is  not  ashamed  to  speak  of
"  la  justa  expulsion  de  los  moriscos  desde  1610  a  i6r3."  Ortiz,  in  1801,  expresses  himself
with  more  hesitation,  but  is  evidently  in  favour  of  a  measure  which  liberated  Spain  from
"  la  perniciosa  semilla  de  Mahoma  que  restaba  en  ella."  Compendia  de  la  Historia  de
Espana,  vol.  vi.  pp.  304,  305.     Nay,  even  in  1856,  the  great  modern  historian  of  Spain,
while  admitting  the  serious  material  injury  which  this  horrible  crime  inflicted  on  the
country,  assures  us  that  it  had  the  "  immense  advantage  "  of  producing  religious  unity  ;
unable  to  perceive  that  the  very  unity  of  which  he  boasts,  generates  an  acquiescence  and
stagnation  of  mind  fatal  to  all  real  improvement,  because  it  prevents  that  play  and
collision  of  opinions  by  which  the  wits  of  men  are  sharpened  and  made  ready  for  use.
"  Con  la  expulsion  se  complete  el  principle  de  la  unidad  religiosa  en  Espana,  que  fue  un
bien  inmenso,  pero  se  consume  la  ruina  de  la  agricultura,  que  fue  un  inmenso  mal."
Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xvii.  p.  340,  Madrid,  1856.     And,  the  year  after  this
sagacious  sentiment  had  been  given  to  the  world,  another  eminent  Spaniard,  in  a  work
crowned  by  the  Royal  Academy  of  History,  went  still  further,  and  declared,  that  not
only  did  the  expulsion  of  the  Moriscoes  cause  great  benefit  by  securing  unity  of  creed,
but  that  such  unity  was  "  necessary  on  the  Spanish  soil."     "  Y  si  bajo  el  aspecto  econ6-
mico  reprobamos   semejante  medida  por  la    influencia  perniciosa   que  tuvo  desde  el
momento  de  dictarse,  la  imparcialidad  de  historiadores  nos  obliga  a  respetarla  por  los
inmensos  bienes   que  produjo  en  el  orden  religiose  y  en  el   orden  politico."   ..."  La
unidad  religiosa  era  necesaria  en  el  suelo  espanol."     Janer,  Condicion  Social  de  los
Moriscos  de  Espana,  Madrid,  1857,  pp.  no,  114.     What  are  we  to  think  of  a  country  in
which  these  opinions  are  expressed,  not  by  some  obscure  fanatic,  from  the  platform  or


572  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  effects  upon  the  material  prosperity  of  Spain  may  be  stated  in  a  few
words.  From  nearly  every  part  of  the  country  large  bodies  of  industrious
agriculturists  and  expert  artificers  were  suddenly  withdrawn.  The  best  systems
of  husbandry  then  known  were  practised  by  the  Moriscoes,  who  tilled  and  irri-
gated with  indefatigable  labour.14?  The  cultivation  of  rice,  cotton,  and  sugar,
and  the  manufacture  of  silk  and  paper,  were  almost  confined  to  them.148  By
their  expulsion  all  this  was  destroyed  at  a  blow,  and  most  of  it  was  destroyed
for  ever.  For  the  Spanish  Christians  considered  such  pursuits  beneath  their
dignity.  In  their  judgment  war  and  religion  were  the  only  two  avocations
worthy  of  being  followed.  To  fight  for  the  king,  or  to  enter  the  Church,  was
honourable  ;  but  everything  else  was  mean  and  sordid.149  When,  therefore,
the  Moriscoes  were  thrust  out  of  Spain  there  was  no  one  else  to  fill  their  place  ;
arts  and  manufactures  either  degenerated  or  were  entirely  lost,  and  immense
regions  of  arable  land  were  left  uncultivated.  Some  of  the  richest  parts  of
Valencia  and  Granada  were  so  neglected  that  means  were  wanting  to  feed  even
the  scanty  population  which  remained  there.150  Whole  districts  were  suddenly
deserted,  and  down  to  the  present  day  have  never  been  repeopled.  These

the  pulpit,  but  by  able  and  learned  men,  who  promulgate  them  with  all  the  authority
of  their  position,  being  themselves  deemed,  if  anything,  rather  too  bold  and  too  liberal
for  the  people  to  whom  they  address  their  works  ?

147  "  Los  moros  eran  muy  diestros  en  todo  lo  que  mira  a  obras  de  agua."     Campo-
manes,  Apendice  a  la  Education  Popular,  vol.  iii.  p.  cvii.      "  The  Moors  were  the  most
intelligent   agriculturists  Spain  ever   had."     Labor  de's   Spain,   vol.   ii.   p.   216.     Even
Jovellanos  admits  that  "except  in  the  parts  occupied  by  the  Moors,  the  Spaniards
were  almost  totally  unacquainted  with  the  art  of  irrigation."     Clarke's  Internal  State
of  Spain,  p.  116.     See  also  Circourt,  Arabes  d'Espagne,  vol.  i.  p.  255,  vol.  ii.  p.  12,  vol.  iii.
pp.  162,  222  ;  Bourgoing,  Tableau  de  VEspagne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  170,  171  ;  and  Townsend's
Spain,  vol.  iii.  p.  74.     Remains  of  their  splendid  aqueducts  still  exist.     Hoskins'  Spain,
vol.  i.  pp.  120,  125,  291,  292.     Compare  Spain  by  an  American,  vol.  ii.  p.  112,  with  UEstat
de  VEspagne,  Geneve,  1681,  p.  399.

148  Compare  Janer,  Condition  de  los  Moriscos,  pp.  47,  48,  with  Campomanes,  Apendice
d  la  Education  Popular,  vol.  iii.  p.  xxii.,  and  Dunlop's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  p.  13.

149  Xhe  more  sensible  among  the  Spaniards  notice,  with  regret,  this  national  contempt
for  every  form  of  useful  industry.     See  Campomanes,  Education  Popular,  p.  128,  and
Sempere,  Monarchic  Espagnole,  vol.  ii.  pp.  277,  278.     A  traveller  in  Spain  in  1669,  says
of  the  people,   "  ils  meprisent  tellement  le  travail,  que  la  plupart  des  artisans  sont
etrangers."     Voyages  faits  en  divers  Temps  par  M.  M****,  Amsterdam,  1700,  p.  80.
Another  traveller,  between  1693  and  1695,  says,  they  "  think  it  below  the  dignity  of  a
Spaniard  to  labour  and  provide  for  the  future."     Travels  by  a  Gentleman  (by  Bromley  ?),
London,  1702,  p.  35.     A  third  observer,  in  1679,  assures  us  that  "ils  souffrent  plus
aisement  la  faim  et  les  autres  necessitez  de  la  vie,  que  de  travailler,  disent-ils,  comme
des  mercenaires,  ce  qui  n'appartient  qu'a  des  Esclaves."     D'Aulnoy,  Relation  du  Voyage
d'Espagne,  Lyon,  1693,  vol.  ii.  pp.  369,  370.     For  further  illustrations  of  this,  see  Labat,
Voyages  en  Espagne,  Paris,  1730,  vol.  i.  pp.  285,  286.     Capmany,  Qiiestiones  Criticas,
pp.  43,  49,  50.     Laborde's  Spain,  vol.  i.  p.  L.     Ranke's  Spanish  Empire,  p.  103.     Town-
send1  s  Journey  through  Spain,  vol.  ii.  pp.  240,  241.

iso  "  pudo,  pues,  decirse  con  razon  de  nuestra  patria,  que  de  Arabia  Feliz  se  habia
convertido  en  Arabia  Desierta,  y  de  Valencia  en  particular,  que  el  bello  jardin  de  Espana
se  habia  convertido  en  paramo  seco  y  deslucido.  Dejose  en  breve  sentir  en  todas  partes
el  azote  del  hambre  ;  y  al  alegre  bullicio  de  las  poblaciones  sucedio  el  melancolico  silencio
de  los  despoblados,  y  al  frecuente  cruzar  de  los  labradores  y  trajineros  por  los  caminos
siguio  el  peligroso  encuentro  de  los  salteadores  que  los  infestaban,  abrigandosc  en  las
ruinas  de  los  pueblos  desiertos."  Janer,  Condition  de  los  Moriscos,  p.  100.  See  also
Dunlop's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.  p.  16.  Campomanes  says,  "  El  gran  numero  de  artesanos,  que
salieron  con  la  expulsion  de  los  moriscos,  causo  un  golpe  mortal  a  las  manufacturas,  y
a  la  labranza."  Apendice  a  la  Education  Popular,  vol.  i.  p.  13.  And  p.  268,  "  El  punto
de  decadencia  de  nuestras  manufacturas,  puede  fixarse  desde  el  ano  de  1609,  en  que
tubo  principio  la  expulsion  de  los  Moriscos."


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          573

solitudes  gave  refuge  to  smugglers  and  brigands,  who  succeeded  the  industrious
inhabitants  formerly  occupying  them  ;  and  it  is  said  that  from  the  expulsion
of  the  Moriscoes  is  to  be  dated  the  existence  of  those  organized  bands  of  robbers
which  after  this  period  became  the  scourge  of  Spain,  and  which  no  subsequent
government  has  been  able  entirely  to  extirpate.151

To  these  disastrous  consequences  others  were  added,  of  a  different,  and  if
possible  of  a  still  more  serious  kind.  The  victory  gained  by  the  Church  in-
creased both  her  power  and  her  reputation.  During  the  rest  of  the  seventeenth
century,  not  only  were  the  interests  of  the  clergy  deemed  superior  to  the  interests
of  laymen,  but  the  interests  of  laymen  were  scarcely  thought  of.  The  greatest
men,  with  hardly  an  exception,  became  ecclesiastics,  and  all  temporal  con-
siderations, all  views  of  earthly  policy,  were  despised  and  set  at  nought.  No
one  inquired  ;  no  one  doubted  ;  no  one  presumed  to  ask  if  all  this  was  right.
The  minds  of  men  succumbed  and  were  prostrate.  While  every  other  country
was  advancing,  Spain  alone  was  receding.*  Every  other  country  was  making
some  addition  to  knowledge,  creating  some  art,  or  enlarging  some  science.  Spain,
numbed  into  a  death-like  torpor,  spell-bound  and  entranced  by  the  accursed
superstition  which  preyed  on  her  strength,  presented  to  Europe  a  solitary  in-
stance of  constant  decay.  For  her  no  hope  remained  ;  and  before  the  close
of  the  seventeenth  century  the  only  question  was  by  whose  hands  the  blow
should  be  struck  which  would  dismember  that  once  mighty  empire,  whose
shadow  had  covered  the  world,  and  whose  vast  remains  were  imposing  even
in  their  ruin.

To  indicate  the  different  steps  which  mark  the  decline  of  Spain  would  be
hardly  possible,  since  even  the  Spaniards,  who,  when  it  was  too  late,  were  stung
with  shame,  have  abstained  from  writing  what  would  only  be  the  history  of
their  own  humiliation  ;  so  that  there  is  no  detailed  account  of  the  wretched
reigns  of  Philip  IV.  and  Charles  II.,  which  together  comprise  a  period  of  nearly
eighty  years.152  Some  facts,  however,  I  have  been  able  to  collect,  and  they

151  "  Sur  la  carte  d'Espagne,  en  mille  endroits  est  inscrit  ce  funeste  mot,  despoblado  ;
en  mille  endroits  la  nature  sauvage  a  repris  la  place  des  cultures.     Etudiez  la  direction
des  despoblados,  et  consultez  les  registres  des  commissaires  de  1'expulsion,  vous  verrez
presque  toujours  que  les  families  morisques  couvraient  ces  solitudes.     Leur  patrimoine
abandonne  forma  le  domaine  des  voleurs,  qui  etablirent  avec  une  sorte  de  securite  leurs
correspondances  effrontees  a  travers  toute  1'Espagne.     Le  brigandage  s'organisa  comme
une  profession  ordinaire  ;  et  la  contrebande,  sa  compagne,  leva  le  front  avec  autant
d'audace,  autant  de  succes."  Circourt,  Histoire  des  Arabes  d'Espagne,  vol.  iii.  pp.  227,  228.

152  "  Decline  pues  muy  sensiblemente  la  vasta  monarquia,  y  callaron  atonitos  los
historiadores,  como  huyendo  la  necesidad  de  traer  a  la  memoria  lo  que  veian  y  apenas
creian.     Enmudecio  pues  la  historia  de  Espafta  en  los  dos  reynados  de  Felipe  IV.  y
Carlos  II.  viendo  continuaba  nuestra  decadencia,  hasta  quedar  Espana  al  nivel  de  los
menos  poderosos  Estados  de  Europa.     Este  silencio  nos  ha  privado  de  saber  no  solo
las  causas  de  nuestra  decadencia,  sino  tambien  de  los  acontecimientos  civiles  y  militares
del  siglo  xvii."     Ortiz,  Compendia  de  la  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  vi.,  Prologo,  p.  i.     No
attempt  was  made  to  supply  the  deficiency  complained  of  by  Ortiz  until  1856,  when
M.  Lafuente  published,  in  Madrid,  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  volumes  of  his  History
of  Spain,  which  contain  the  reigns  of  Philip  IV.  and  Charles  II.     Of  this  work   I  have
no  desire  to  speak  disrespectfully  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  impossible  to  read  it  without
interest,  on   account  of  the  admirable  clearness  with  which    the    different    topics    are
arranged,  and  also  on  account  of  its  beautiful  style,  which  reminds  us  of  the  best  days
of  Castilian  prose.     But  I  feel  constrained  to  say   that   as  a  history,  and  especially  as
a  history  which  undertakes  to  investigate  the  causes  of  the  decline  of  Spain,  it  is  a  com  -
plete  failure.     In  the  first  place,  M.  Lafuente  has  not  emancipated  himself  from  those
very  prejudices  to  which  the  decline  of  his  country  is  owing.     And  in  the  second  place
he  has,  particularly  in  the  reigns  of  Philip  IV.  and  Charles  II.,  not  used  sufficient  diligence

[*  This  is  contradicted  by  the  account  previously  given  of  the  state  of  France  under
Louis  XIV.  And  Germanv,  of  course,  "  receded  "  in  the  Thirty  Years'  War. — ED.}


574  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

are  very  significant.  At  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  popu-
lation of  Madrid  was  estimated  to  be  400,000  ;  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth
century  less  than  200,000. 153  Seville,  one  of  the  richest  cities  in  Spain,  pos-
sessed in  the  sixteenth  century  upwards  of  sixteen  thousand  looms,  which  gave
employment  to  a  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  persons.154  By  the  reign  of
Philip  V.  these  sixteen  thousand  looms  had  dwindled  away  to  less  than  three
hundred  ; 155  and  in  a  report  which  the  Cortes  made  to  Philip  IV.,  in  1662,
it  is  stated  that  the  city  contained  only  a  quarter  of  its  former  number  of  in-
habitants, and  that  even  the  vines  and  olives  cultivated  in  its  neighbourhood,
and  which  comprised  a  considerable  part  of  its  wealth,  were  almost  entirely
neglected.156  Toledo,  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  had  upwards  of
fifty  woollen  manufactories  ;  in  1665  it  had  only  thirteen,  almost  the  whole
of  the  trade  having  been  carried  away  by  the  Moriscoes,  and  established  at
Tunis.157  Owing  to  the  same  cause  the  art  of  manufacturing  silk,  for  which
Toledo  was  celebrated,  was  entirely  lost,  and  nearly  forty  thousand  persons
who  depended  on  it  were  deprived  of  their  means  of  support.158  Other  branches


in  searching  for  materials  for  studying  the  economical  changes  through  which  Spain*
has  passed.  Looking  too  intently  at  the  surface,  he  mistakes  symptoms  for  causes  ;
so  that  the  real  history  of  the  Spanish  people  everywhere  escapes  his  grasp.  As  the
object  to  which  my  studies  are  directed  compels  me  to  contemplate  affairs  from  a  larger
and  more  general  point  of  view  than  he  has  done,  it  naturally  happens  that  the  con-
clusions at  which  we  arrive  are  very  different ;  but  I  wish  to  bear  my  testimony,  what-
ever it  may  be  worth,  to  the  great  merit  of  his  book  as  a  work  of  art,  though  as  a  work
of  science  it  appears  to  me  that  he  has  effected  nothing,  and  has  thrown  no  new  light
on  the  real  history  of  that  unfortunate  albeit  once  splendid  nation,  of  which  his  elo-
quence, his  learning,  and  his  taste,  make  him  one  of  the  chiefest  ornaments.

153  See  Dunlop's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  320  ;  and  the  interesting  Calculations  in  Uztariz,
Theorica  y  Practica  de  Comercio,  Madrid,  1757,  folio,  pp.  35,  36.     Owing  to  the  ignorance
which  formerly  prevailed  respecting  statistics,  such  estimates  are  necessarily  imperfect  ;
but  after  the  desolation  of  Spain  in  the  seventeenth  century,  an  extraordinary  diminution
in  the  population  of  the  capital  was  inevitable.     Indeed,  a  contemporary  of  Charles  II.
states  that  in  1699,  Madrid  had  only  150,000  inhabitants.     Memoir es  de  Louville,  Paris,
1818,  vol.  i.  p.  72.     This  account  is  taken  from  "  un  memoire  manuscrit,  en  langue
espagnole,  trouve  dans  les  papiers  du  marquis  de  Louville,"  p.  67.

154  Capmany  (Qiiestiones  Criticas,  p.  30),  who  seems  to  have  written  his  able  but  not
very  accurate  work  for  the  express  purpose  of   concealing  the  decline  of  his  country,
has  given  these  figures  erroneously.     My  information  is  derived  from  an  official  report
made  in  1701  by  the  trade -corporations  ("  gremios  ")  of  Seville.     "  Fijan  la  epoca  de
la  ruina  de  nuestras  fabricas  desde  el  reynado  de  Felipe  II.  y  afiaden  '  haber  llegado
a  tener  solo  en  esta  ciudad  el  arte  mayor,  y  menor  de  la  sede,  el  numero  de  mas  de  diez
y  seis  mil  telares,  ye  s  ocupaban  en  los  exercicios  adherentes  a  el,  mas  de  ciento  treinta
rail  personas  de  ambos  sexos.'  "     Campomanes,  Apendice  d  la  Education  Popular,  vol.  i.
p.  473,  Madrid,  1775.     See  also  Uztariz,  Theorica  y  Practica  de  Comercio,  p.  14,  ''  diez
y  seis  mil  telares  ;  "  where,  however,  no  authority  is  quoted.

155  "  EI  principal  origen  y  causa  de  que  los  16,000  telares  de  seda,  lana,  oro  y  plata,
que  se  contaban  en  Sevilla,  se  hallen  oy  reducidos  a  menos  de  300."     Uztariz,  Theorica
de  Comercio,  p.  243.

156  Sempere,  Monarchic  Espagnole,  vol.  ii.  p.  52,  who  refers  to  the  report  of  the  Cortes
published  by  Alonso  Nunez  de  Castro.

157  Laborde's  Spain,  vol.  iv.  p.  338,  where  it  is  also  said  that  Tunis  became,  in  conse-
quence of  the  expulsion  of  the  Moriscoes,  famous  for  the  manufacture  of  caps,  which
"  were   subsequently  imitated  at   Orleans."     Compare,   on   the  cap -manufactories  of
Tunis,  a  note  in  Campomanes,  Apendice  d  la  Education  Popular,  vol.  iv.  p.  249.

158  "  Tolede  ou  se  mettaient  en  oeuvre  435,000  livres  de  soie,  avait  deja  perdu  ce
travail,  qui  suffisait  autrefois  a  1'existence  de  38,484  personnes.     La  population  de  cette
ville  avait  eprouve  un  tiers  de  diminution,  et  vingt-cinq  maisonsde  ses  families  les  plus
illustres  etaient  passees  dans  le  domaine  de  divers  couvens,"     Sempere,   Monarchic
Espagnole,  vol.  ii.  p.'  50,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          575

of  industry  shared  the  same  fate.  In  the  sixteenth  century,  and  early  in  the
seventeenth,  Spain  enjoyed  great  repute  for  the  manufacture  of  gloves,  which
were  made  in  enormous  quantities,  and  shipped  to  many  parts,  being  particularly
valued  in  England  and  France,  and  being  also  exported  to  the  Indies.  But
Martinez  de  Mata,  who  wrote  in  the  year  1655,  assures  us  that  at  that  time  this
source  of  wealth  had  disappeared  ;  the  manufacture  of  gloves  having  quite
ceased,  though  formerly,  he  says,  it  had  existed  in  every  city  in  Spain.159  In
the  once -flourishing  province  of  Castile  everything  was  going  to  ruin.  Even
Segovia  lost  its  manufactures,  and  retained  nothing  but  the  memory  of  its  former
wealth.160  The  decay  of  Burgos  was  equally  rapid  ;  the  trade  of  that  famous
city  perished  ;  and  the  deserted  streets  and  empty  houses  formed  such  a  picture
of  desolation,  that  a  contemporary,  struck  by  the  havoc,  emphatically  declared
that  Burgos  had  lost  everything  except  its  name.161  In  other  districts  the
results  were  equally  fatal.  The  beautiful  provinces  of  the  south,  richly  endowed
by  nature,  had  formerly  been  so  wealthy  that  their  contributions  alone  sufficed,
in  time  of  need,  to  replenish  the  imperial  treasury  ;  but  they  now  deteriorated
with  such  rapidity,  that,  by  the  year  1640,  it  was  found  hardly  possible  to  impose
a  tax  on  them  which  would  be  productive.162  During  the  latter  half  of  the

159  See  his  interesting  essay,  reprinted  in  the  appendix  to  Campomanes,  vol.  iv.  p.  251.
He  says,  "  La  fabrica  de  los  guantes,  que  tenian  pocos  afios  ha  todas  las  ciudades  de
estos  reynos  para  el  consume  de  Espana  y  las  Indias,  era  muy  considerable  ;  y  se  ha
destruido,  despues  que  se  dio  entrada  al  consumo  de  guantes  estrangeros."     Such  a
statement,  made  by  a  contemporary,  is  unimpeachable  ;  but  the  reason  he  assigns  is
inadequate.

160  Segovia,  as  it  appeared  in  1659,  is  thus  described  in  Boisel,  Journal  du  Voyage
d'Espagne,  Paris,  1669,  4to,  p.  186  :  "  Autresfois,  cette  ville  qui  paroist  assez  grande,
estoit  fort  riche,  tant  a  cause'  que  les  rois  de  Castille  y  demeuroient,  qu'a  cause  du  grand
commerce  des  laines  et  des  beaux  draps  qui  s'y  faisoient  ;  mais  a  present  le  trafic  n'y
est  plus,  et  on  n'y  fait  plus  que  fort  peu  de  draps,  de  sorte  que  la  ville  est  presque  desert
et  fort  pauvre.     Une  marque  de  sa  pauvrete,  du  mauvais  ordre  d'Espagne,  et  du  peu
de  prevoyance  des  Espagnols  (quoy  qu'on  dise  de  leur  flegme)  c'est  que  le  jour  que  j'y
arrivay  jusques  a  deux  heures  apres  midy  il  n'y  avoit  point  eu  de  pain  en  toute  la  ville,
et  ils  ne  s'en  etonnoient  point."     The  decline  of  the  silk  and  wool  manufactures  of  Segovia
is  also  noticed  by  Martinez  de  la  Mata,  who  wrote  in  1650.     See  his  Dos  Discursos,  edited
by  Canga,  Madrid,  1794,  p.  8.     Saint  Simon,  who  was  there  in  1722  says,  "  A  1'egard
de  leurs  laines,  j'en  vis  les  manufactures  a  Segovie  qui  me  parurent  peu  de  chose  et  fort
tombees  de  leur  ancienne  reputation."     Memories  du  Due  de  Saint  Simon,  vol.  xxxvii.
p.  230,  Paris,  1841.     Segovia  used  to  be  famous  for  the  beautiful  colour  of  its  cloth,  the
dye  of  which  was  taken  from  a  shell -fish  found  in  the  West  Indies,  and  is  supposed  to
be  the  same  as  the  purpura  of  the  ancients.     See  a  note  in  Dillon's  Spain,  Dublin,  1781 ,
pp.  19,  20.

161  Such  is  the  language  of  a  Spaniard  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.
"  Porque  a  la  ciudad  de  Burgos,  cabeza  de  Castilla,  no  le  ha  quedado  sino  el  nombre,
ni  aun  vestigios  de  sus  ruinas  ;  reducida  la  grandeza  de  sus  tratos,  Prior,  y  Consules,
y  ordenanzas  para  la  conservacion  de  ellos,  a  600  vecinos,  que  conservan  el  nombre,
y  lustre  de  aquella  antigua  y  noble  ciudad,  que  encerro  en  si  mas  de  seis  mil,  sin  la  gente
suelta,  natural,  y  forastera."    Campomanes,  A  pendice  a  la  Educacion,  vol.  i.  p.  453,  Madrid,
1775-     An  intelligent  Dutchman,  who  visited  Spain  in  1655,  says  of  Burgos,  "  elle  a
este  autrefois  fort  marchande,  mais  depuis  peu,  elle  a  presque  perdu  tout  son  commerce."
Aarsens  de  Sommerdyck,  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1665,  4to,  p.  16.     To  me  it  certainly
appears  that  facts  of  this  sort  have  more  to  do  with  the  real  history  of  Spain  than  the
details  of  kings,  and  treaties,  and  battles,  which  the  Spanish  historians  love  to  accumulate.

162  "  Could  contribute  little   to   the  exigencies   of   the  state."     Dunlop's   Memoirs,
vol.  i.  p.  285.    Compare  Lamentos  Apologeticos,  in  Dos  Discursos,  edit.  Canga,  Madrid,  I794»
p.  82,  on  the  state  of  things  in  "  lo  mas  fertil  de  Andalucia."     The  government  first
became  alive  to  all  this  when  it  found  that  no  more  money  could  be  wrung  from  the
people.     In  May,  1667,  a  council  of  state,  convoked  by  the  queen,  reported  that  "  quant
3ux  ressources  qu'on  voudrait  tirer  de  1'Espagne,  sous  forme  de  dons  volontaires  ou


576  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

:  seventeenth  century  matters  became  still  worse,  and  the  poverty  and  wretched-
ness of  the  people  surpass  all  description.  In  the  villages  near  Madrid  the
inhabitants  were  literally  famishing  ;  and  those  farmers  who  had  a  stock  of
food  refused  to  sell  it,  because,  much  as  they  needed  money,  they  were  appre-
hensive of  seeing  their  families  perish  around  them.  The  consequence  was

•  that  the  capital  was  in  danger  of  being  starved  ;  and  ordinary  threats  pro-

•  ducing  no  effect,  it  was  found  necessary  in    1664  that  the  President  of  Castile,
^with  an  armed  force,  and  accompanied  by  the  public  executioner,  should  visit
i  the  adjacent  villages,  and  compel  the  inhabitants  to  bring  their  supplies  to  the

markets  of  Madrid.163  All  over  Spain  the  same  destitution  prevailed.  That
•once  rich  and  prosperous  country  was  covered  with  a  rabble  of  monks  and  clergy,
^whose  insatiate  rapacity  absorbed  the  little  wealth  yet  to  be  found.  Hence
?it  happened  that  the  government,  though  almost  penniless,  could  obtain  no
^  supplies.  The  tax-gatherers,  urged  to  make  up  the  deficiency,  adopted  the
1  most  desperate  expedients.  They  not  only  seized  the  beds  and  all  the  furniture,
ibut  they  unroofed  the  houses,  and  sold  the  materials  of  the  roof  for  whatever
'they  would  fetch.  The  inhabitants  were  forced  to  fly  ;  the  fields  were  left
'uncultivated  ;  vast  multitudes  died  from  want  and  exposure  ;  entire  villages

were  deserted  ;  and  in  many  of  the  towns  upwards  of  two-thirds  of  the  houses
>were,  by  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  utterly  destroyed.164

••  autrement,  le  conseil  estime  qu'il  est  bien  difficile  d'imposer  aux  peuples  des  charges
nouvelles  ;  "  and  in  November  of  that  same  year,  at  another  meeting  of  the  council,
a  memoir  was  drawn  up  stating  that  "  depuis  le  regne  de  Don  Ferdinand  le  Catholique
jusqu'a  ce  jour,  la  monarchic  d'Espagne  ne  s'est  pas  encore  vue  si  pres  de  sa  ruine,  si

•  epuisee,  si  denuee  des  ressources  necessaires  pour  faire  face  a  un  grand  peril."  See
'extracts  from  the  proceedings  of  the  Councils,  published  for,  I  believe,  the  first  time,
iby  M.  Mignet,  in  his  Negotiations  relatives  a  la  Succession  d'Espagne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  124,  601,

'Paris,  1835,  4to.     See  also,  in  the  same  valuable  work,  vol.  ii.  p.  127,  a  letter  to  Louis  XIV.

from  his  ambassador  at  Madrid,  dated  2nd  June,  1667,  and  stating  that  "  1'extremite

•  est  ici  si  grande  qu'il  se  fait  une  contribution  volontaire  de  tous  les  particuliers  que  Ton
;appelle  donativo,  pour  fournir  quelque  argent  present  pour  les  necessites  publiques."

163  In  1664,  Sir  Richard  Fanshawe  writes  from  Madrid  to  Secretary  Bennet,  "  Since
;my  last  to  you,  of  yesterday,  the  President  of  Castile,  having,  by  the  king's  special  and
; angry  command,  gone  forth  to  the  neighbouring  villages,  attended  with  the  hangman,
:and  whatsoever  else  of  terror  incident  to  his  place  and  derogatory  to  his  person,  the
'markets  in  this  town  begin  to  be  furnished  again  plentifully  enough."     Memoirs  of
;Lady  Fanshawe,  written  by  herself,  edit.  London,  1830,  p.  291.

164  Nothing  but  the  precise  and  uncontradicted  evidence  of  a  contemporary  witness
'could  make  such  things  credible.     In  1686,  Alvarez  Osorio  y  Redin  wrote  his  Discursos.
They  were  published  in  1687  and  1688  ;  they  were  reprinted  at  Madrid  in  1775  ;  and
from  the  reprint,  pp.  345-348,  I  extract  the  following  particulars  :  "  Es  precise  decir
con  la  mayor  brevedad,  que  pide  el  asunto,  en  la  forma  que  los  comisionantes  continua-
mente  estan  saqueando  todos  los  lugares,  con  capa  de  servir  a  V.  M.     Entran  en  ellos,
intiman  sus  comisiones  a  las  justicias,  y  ellas  les  suplican,  tengan  misericordia  de  los
moradores,  que  estan  con  mucha  necesidad.     Y  luego  que  toman  el  uso,  dicen  :  que
a  ellos  no  les  toca  dispensar  en  hacer  gracias  :  que  traen  orden  de  cobrar  con  todo  rigor
las  cantidades,  que  deben  los  lugares  ;  y  tambien  dicen  han  de  cobrar  sus  salaries.     Y
se  van  entrando  por  las  casas  de  los  pobres  labradores,  y  demas  vecinos  ;  y  con  mucha
cuenta  y  razon,  les  quitan  el  poco  dinero,  que  tienen  :  y  a  los  que  no  tienen,  les  sacan
prendas  :  y  donde  no  las  hallan,  les  quitan  las  pobres  camas,  en  que  duermen  :  y  se
detienen  en  vender  las  prendas,  todo  el  tiempo  que  pueden."  .  .  .  "  Los  saqueos  referidos
van  continuando,  obligando  a  los  mas  vecinos  de  los  lugares,  a  que  se  vayan  huyendo
de  sus  casas,  dexando  baldias  sus  haciendas  de  campo  ;  y  los  cobradores  no  tienen  las-
tima  de  todas  estas  miserias,  y  asolaciones,  como  si  entraran  en  lugares  de  enemigos.
Las  casas,  que  hallan  vacias,  si  hay  quien  se  las  compre,  las  venden  :  y  quando  no  pueden
venderlas,  las  quitan  los  texados  ;  y  venden  la  texa,  y  madera  por  qualquier  dinero.
Con  esta  destruicion  general,  no  han  quedado  en  pie  en  los  lugares  la  tercera  parte  de
casas,  y  se  han  muerto  de  necesidad  gran  multitud  de  personas.     Con  lo  qual  los  lugares


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          577

In  the  midst  of  these  calamities  the  spirit  and  energy  of  Spain  were  extin-
guished. In  every  department  all  power  and  life  disappeared.  The  Spanish
troops  were  defeated  at  Rocroy  in  1643,  and  several  writers  ascribe  to  that
battle  the  destruction  of  the  military  reputation  of  Spain.^s  This  however
was  only  one  of  many  symptoms..1*  In  1656  it  was  proposed  to  fit  out  a  small
fleet  ;  but  the  fisheries  on  the  coast  had  so  declined  that  it  was  found  impossible
to  procure  sailors  enough  to  man  even  the  few  ships  which  were  required.187

no  tienen  la  mitad  de  familias,  que  antiguamente  habia  en  Espafia.     Y  si  no  se  pone
remedio  a  todo  referido,  sera  precise,  que  la  vengan  a  poblar  de  otros  Reynos."

165  "  Alii  acabo  aquella  antigua  milicia  espanola  que  desde  el  tiempo  de  los  reyes
catolicos  habia  ganado  tan  gloriosos  triunfos,  siendo  el  terror  de  sus  enemigos."
Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iii.  p.  150,  Madrid,  1840.  "  La  batalla  de  Rocroy,
en  que  el  joven  Conde  recogio  los  laureles  con  que  engalano  la  dorada  cuna  del  nino'
Luis  XIV.,  acabo  con  la  reputacion  que  aun  habian  podido  ir  conservando  los  viejos
tercios  espanoles  de  Flandres."  Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xvii.  p.  368,  Madrid
1856.

lfifi  In  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  275,  Oxford,  1767,  folio,  I  find  a  letter
written  by  Hopton  to  Secretary  Windebank,  dated  Madrid,  sist  May,  1635.     The  author
of  this  official  communication  gives  an  account  of  the  Spanish  troops  just  raised,  and
says,  "  I  have  observed  these  levies,  and  I  find  the  horses  are  so  weak,  as  the  most  of
them  will  never  be  able  to  go  to  the  rendezvous,  and  those  very  hardly  gotten,  the  infantry
so  unwilling  to  serve,  as  they  are  carried,  like  galley-slaves,  in  chains,  which  serves  not
the  turn,  and  so  far  short  of  the  number  that  was  proposed,  as  they  come  not  to  one
of  three."     This  was  eight  years  before  the  battle  of  Rocroy  ;  after  it  matters  became
rapidly  worse.     A  letter  from  Sir  Edward  Hyde  to  Secretary  Nicholas,  dated  Madrid,
i8th  March,  1649-50,  states,  that  Spanish  "  affairs  are  really  in  huge  disorder,  and
capable  of  being  rendered  almost  desperate  ;  "  and  another  letter,  on  i4th  April,  1650,  "  if
some  miracle  do  not  preserve  them,  this  crown  must  be  speedily  destroyed."     Clarendon
State  Papers,  vol.  iii.  pp.  13,  17,  Oxford,  1786.     An  official  Report  on  the  Netherlands
presented  to  Louis  XIV.  in  1655,  declares  that  the  Dutch  "  considered  Spain  so  weakened
as  to  be  out  of  condition  to  renew  the  war  within  the  next  one  hundred  years."     Raumer's
History  of  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Centuries,  illustrated  by  Original  Documents,
London,  1835,  vol.  i.  p.  237.     See  also  Mignet,  Negotiations  Relatives  a  la  Succession
d'Espagne,  Paris,  1835-1842,  4to,  vol.  i.  pp.  37,  38,  314,  315,  vol.  iii.  p.  684,  vol.  iv.  p.  218  ;
and  VEstat  de  VEspagne,  Geneve,  1681,  pp.  83,  271.     "  L'Espagne  faisant  en  nos  jours
plus  de  pitie  que  de  peur  a  ceux  qu'elle  a  tenus  long-terns  dans  une  crainte  perpetuelle,
et  dans  une  respectueuse  veneration."  ..."  Aussi  peut-on  dire  que  les  Espagnols  qui
etoient  autrefois  des  lions,  ou  des  veritables  hommes  et  incomparables  en  valeur,  sont
maintenant  des  cerfs,  ou  des  femmes,  et  enfin  des  personnes  peu  propres  a  la  guerre."
And  finally,  the  Spanish  explanation  of  all  this  in  Yanez,  Memorias,  Prologo,  pp.  148,
149,  Madrid,  1723.     "  La  Monarquia  de  Espafia,  cuya  decadencia  la  avia  ya  Dios  de-
cretado  desde  el  afio  de  1621,"  etc.  ;  blasphemously  ascribing  to  the  Almighty  what
was  the  result  of  their  own  folly,  and  obstinately  shutting  their  eyes  to  the  real  cause
of  their  ruin.

K"  "  A  century  ago  Spain  had  been  as  supreme  at  sea  as  on  land  ;  her  ordinary  nava
force  was  140  gallies,  which  were  the  terror  both  of  the  Mediterranean  and  Atlantic.
But  now"  (1656),  "in  consequence  of  the  decline  of  commerce  and  fisheries  on  the
coast,  instead  of  the  numerous  squadrons  of  the  Dorias  and  Mendozas,  which  were  wont
to  attend  the  movements  of  the  first  great  John  of  Austria  and  the  Emperor  Charles,
the  present  High -Admiral  of  Spain,  and  favourite  son  of  its  monarch,  put  to  sea  with
three  wretched  gallies,  which  with  difficulty  escaped  from  some  Algerine  corsairs,  and
were  afterwards  nearly  shipwrecked  on  the  coast  of  Africa."  Dunlop's  Memoirs,  vol.  i.
p.  549.  In  1663,  "  II  n'y  avait  a  Cadix  ni  vaisseaux  ni  galeres  en  etat  d'aller  en  mer.
Les  Maures  insultaient  audacieusement  les  cotes  de  1'Andalousie,  et  prenaient  impune-
ment  les  barques  qui  se  hasardaient  a  une  lieue  de  la  rade.  Le  due  d' Albuquerque,
qui  commandait  les  forces  navales,  se  plaignait  hautement  de  la  position  humiliante
dans  laquelle  on  le  laissait.  II  avait  demande  avec  instance  qu'on  lui  donnat  des  matelots
et  des  soldats  pour  mettre  sur  les  vaisseaux  ;  mais  le  Comte  de  Castrillo,  president  du

37


578  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  charts  which  had  been  made  were  either  lost  or  neglected  ;  and  the  ignor-
ance of  the  Spanish  pilots  became  so  notorious  that  no  one  was  willing  to  trust
them.168  As  to  the  military  service,  it  is  stated,  in  an  account  of  Spain  late
in  the  seventeenth  century,  that  most  of  the  troops  had  deserted  their  colours,
and  that  the  few  who  were  faithful  were  clothed  in  rags,  received  no  pay,  and
were  dying  of  hunger.169  Another  account  describes  this  once  mighty  kingdom
as  utterly  unprotected  ;  the  frontier  towns  ungarrisoned  ;  the  fortifications
dilapidated  and  crumbling  away  ;  the  magazines  without  ammunition  ;  the
arsenals  empty  ;  the  workshops  unemployed  ;  and  even  the  art  of  building
ships  entirely  lost.170  .

While  the  country  at  large  was  thus  languishing,  as  if  it  had  been  stricken
by  some  mortal  distemper,  the  most  horrible  scenes  were  occurring  in  the  capital,
under  the  eyes  of  the  sovereign.  The  inhabitants  of  Madrid  were  starving,
and  the  arbitrary  measures  which  had  been  adopted  to  supply  them  with  food
could  only  produce  temporary  relief.  Many  persons  fell  down  in  the  streets
exhausted,  and  died  where  they  fell  j  others  were  seen  in  the  public  highway
evidently  dying,  but  no  one  had  wherewithal  to  feed  them.  At  length  the
people  became  desperate,  and  threw  off  all  control.  In  1680,  not  only  the
workmen  of  Madrid,  but  large  numbers  of  the  tradesmen,  organized  themselves


conseil  de  finances  (de  la  hacienda)  avait  declare  qu'il  n'avait  ni  argent,  ni  la  possibility
d'en  trouver,  et  conseillait  de  renoncer  &  Farmee  navale."  Mignet,  Negotiations  relatives
a  la  Succession  d'Espagne,  vol.  i.  pp.  315,  316,  Paris,  1835,  4to,  from  contemporary
manuscripts.  Even  in  1648,  Spain  had  "  become  so  feeble  in  point  of  naval  affairs
as  to  be  obliged  to  hire  Dutch  vessels  for  carrying  on  her  American  commerce."
Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  ii.  p.  435,  London,  1805,  4to.  And,  to  com-
plete the  chain  of  evidence,  there  is  a  letter  in  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  86,
Oxford,  1773,  folio,  written  from  Madrid  in  June,  1640,  stating  that  "  for  ships  they
have  few,  mariners  fewer,  landmen  not  so  many  as  they  need,  and,  by  all  signs,  money
not  at  all  that  can  be  spared."  The  history  of  Spain  during  this  period  never  having
been  written,  I  am  compelled,  in  my  own  justification,  to  give  these  and  similar  passages
with  a  fulness  which  I  fear  will  weary  some  readers.

168  And  when  they  did,  it  was  to  their  own  cost,  as  Stanhope  found,  at  the  beginning
of  his  career  as  British  minister  to  the  court  of  Madrid,  in  1690.     See  his  letter  to  Lord
Shrewsbury,  in  Mahon's  Spain  under  Charles  II.,  London,  1840,  p.  3.     "  We  were  forced
into  a  small  port,  called  Ferrol,  three  leagues  short  of  the  Groyne,  and  by  the  ignorance
of  a  Spanish  pilot  our  ships  fell  foul  one  with  another,  and  the  admiral's  ship  was  on
ground  for  some  hours,  but  got  off  clear  without  any  damage."     Indeed,  the  Spanish
seamen,  once  the  boldest  and  most  skilful  navigators  in  the  world,  so  degenerated  that
early  in  the  eighteenth  century  we  find  it  stated  as  a  matter  of  course  that  "  to  form
the  Spaniard  to  marine  affairs  is  transporting  them  into  unknown  countries."     The
History  of  Cardinal  Alberoni,  London,  1719,  p.  257.

169  "  Le  peu  de  soldats  qui  resistaient  a  la  desertion,  etaient  vetus  de  haillons,  sans
solde,  sans  pain."     Memoires  de  Louville,  edit.  Paris,  1818,  vol.  i.  p.  72.     "  Dans  Fetat
le  plus  miserable."  p.  43.     Compare  Lafuente,  in  the  reign  of  Philip  IV.  (Historia,  vol.  xvi.
p.  519),  "  los  soldados  peleaban  andrajosos  y  medio  desnudos  ;  "  and  D'Aulnoy,  in  1679
(Relation  du  Voyage  d'Espagne,  vol.  i.  p.  168),    "  II  est  rare  que  dans  tout  un  regiment
il  se  trouve  deux  soldats  qui  ayent  plus  d'une  chemise."

170  "  Ruinosos  los  muros  de  sus  fortalezas,  aun  tenia  Barcelona  abiertas  las  brechas,
que  hizo  el  duque  de  Vendoma  ;  y  desde  Rosas  hasta  Cadiz,  no  habia  Alcazar,  ni  Castillo,
no  solo  presidiado,  pero  ni  montada  su  artilleria.     La  misma  negligencia  se   admiraba
en  los  puertos  de  Vizcaya,  y  Galicia  ;  no  tenian  los  almazenes  sus  provisiones,  faltaban
fundidores  de  armas,  y  las  que  habia,  eran  de  ningun  uso.     Vacios  los  arsenales  y  astil-
leros,  se  habia  olvidado  el  arte  de  construir  naves,  y  no  tenia  el  Rey  mas  que  las  destinadas
al  comercio  de  Indias,  y  algunos  galeones  ;  seis  galeras,  consumidas  del  tiempo,  y  del
ocio,  se  ancoraban  en  Cartagena."     Bacallar,  Comentarios  de  la  Guerra  de  Espana,  vol.  i.
p.  43.     Another  eye-witness  describes  "  the  best  fortresses  consisting  of  ruined  walls,
mounted  with  here  and  there  a  rusty  cannon,  and  the  man  thought  an  able  engineer
who  knew  how  to  fire  them."     Ripperda's  Memoirs,  second  edition,  London,  1740,  p.  227.*


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          579

into  bands,  broke  open  private  houses,  and  robbed  and  murdered  the  inhabitants
in  the  face  of  day.171  During  the  remaining  twenty  years  of  the  seventeenth
century  the  capital  was  in  a  state,  not  of  insurrection,  but  of  anarchy.  Society
was  loosened,  and  seemed  to  be  resolving  itself  into  its  elements.  To  use  the
emphatic  language  of  a  contemporary,  liberty  and  restraint  were  equally  un-
known.1™ The  ordinary  functions  of  the  executive  government  were  suspended.
The  police  of  Madrid,  unable  to  obtain  the  arrears  of  their  pay,  disbanded,  and
gave  themselves  up  to  rapine.  Nor  did  there  seem  any  means  of  remedying
these  evils.  The  exchequer  was  empty,  and  it  was  impossible  to  replenish  it.
Such  was  the  poverty  of  the  court  that  money  was  wanting  to  pay  the  wages
of  the  king's  private  servants,  and  to  meet  the  daily  expenses  of  his  household.173
In  1693  payment  was  suspended  of  every  life -pension  ;  and  all  officers  and  ministers
of  the  crown  were  mulcted  of  one -third  of  their  salaries.174  Nothing,  however,
could  arrest  the  mischief.  Famine  and  poverty  continued  to  increase  ;  175

171  Dunlop's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  pp.  224,  225-      In  1680  Madame  de  Villars,  the  wife
of  the  French  ambassador,  writes  from  Madrid  that  such  was  the  state  of  affairs  there
that  her  husband  thought  it  advisable  that  she  should  return  home.     Lettres  de  Madame
de  Villars,  Amsterdam,  1759,  P-  169.     A  letter  written  by  the  Danish  ambassador  in
1677  describes  every  house  in  Madrid  as  regularly  armed  from  top  to  bottom  ;  "  de
haut  en  bas."     Mignet,   Negotiations  relatives  a  la  Succession,  vol.  iv.  p.   638,  Paris,
1842,  4to.     The  deaths  from  starvation  are  said  to  have  been  particularly  numerous
in   Andalusia.     See   Tapia,   Civilization  Espanola,   vol.   iii.   p.    167.     "  En  Andalucia
especialmente  moria  mucha  gente  de  hambre,  y  el  consulado  de  Sevilla  envio  una  dipu-
tacion  para  representar  que  aquella  ciudad  habia  quedado  reducida  a  la  cuarta  parte
de  la  poblacion  que  habia  tenido  cincuenta  anos  antes."     On  the  state  of  the  people
generally,  in  1680,  compare  Lettres  de  Villars,  pp.  145,  152,  161.

172  "  Point  de  libertes  et  point  de  frein."     Mem.  de  Louville,  vol.  i.  p.  68.

173  In  1681  the  French    ambassadress  writes  from  Madrid,  "  Je  ne  vous  parle  point
de  la  misere  de  ce  royaume.     La  faim  est  jusques  dans  le  palais.     J'etois  hier  avec  huit
ou  dix  camaristes,  et  la  Moline,  qui  disoient  qu'il  y  avoit  fort  longtems  qu'on  ne  leur
donnoit  plus  ni  pain  ni  viande.     Aux  ecuries  du  roi  et  de  la  reine,  de  meme."     Lettres
de  Madame  la  Marquise  de  Villars,  Amsterdam,  1759,  PP-  216,  217.     The  year  after
Charles  II.  died  :  "  II  n'y  avoit  pas  de  fonds  pour  les  choses  les  plus  necessaires,  pour
la  cuisine,  Tecurie,  les  valets  de  pied,"  etc.     Millot,  Memoires  du  Due  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.
p.  26,  ed.  Petitot,  Paris,  1828.     Among  other  reckless  expedients,  the  currency  was  so
depreciated  that  in  a  letter  from  Martin  to  Dr.  Fraser,  dated  Madrid,  March  6th,  1680,
we  hear  of  "  the  fall  of  money  to  one  fourth  part  of  its  former  value."     Miscellany  of
the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  v.  p.  187,  Aberdeen,  4to,  1852.

174  "  xhe  king  has  taken  away,  by  a  late  decree,  a  third  part  of  all  wages  and  salaries
of  all  officers  and  ministers  without  exception,  and  suspended  for  the  ensuing  year,  1694,
all  pensions  for  life  granted  either  by  himself  or  his  father."     Letter  from  the  English
ambassador,  dated  Madrid,  November  i8th,  1693,  in  Mahorfs  Spain  under  Charles  II.,
London,  1840  p.  40.  This  is  also  stated  in  Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  i.  p.  359,  Paris,
1828  ;  "  retranchant  le  tiers  des  depenses  de  sa  maison,  et  des  appointemens  de  ses  officiers
tant  militaires  que  civils."     In  the  preceding  reign  the  pensions  had  been  stopped,  at
all  events  for  a  time.     In  1650  Sir  Edward  Hyde  writes  from  Madrid,  "  There  is  an  uni-
versal stop  of  all  pensions  which  have  been  granted  formerly."     Clarendon  State  Papers,
vol.  ii.  p.  538,  Oxford,  1773.     The  next  step  which  was  taken  was  a  proposal,  in  1667,
to  tax  the  salaries  of  the  members  of  the  Councils  of  Castile,  Arragon,  elc.  ;  but  this
idea  was  abandoned,  until  at  length  they,  like  all  other  public  servants,  came  under  the
comprehensive  edict  of  1693.     See  the  letter  from  the  French  ambassador  to  Louis  XIV.,
dated  Madrid,  June  2nd,  1667,  in  Mignet,  Negotiations,  vol.  ii.  p.  128,  Paris,  1835,  4to.
The  only  chance  of  recovering  the  history  of  Spain  in  the  seventeenth  century  is  by
collating  these  and  similar  documents  with  the  meagre  notices  to  be  found  in  Spanish
writers.

175  In  1695,  "  the  miserable  poverty  in  this  country."     Travels  through  Spain,  per-
formed by  a  Gentleman,  London,  1702,  p.  62.     And,  in  the  same  year,  "  L'Espagne,
manquant  de   tout,   d'hommes  et  d'argent,"      Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.   i.   p.   402,
"  L'Espagne,  presque  aneantie."  p.  424,


58o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  in  1699  Stanhope,  the  British  minister  then  residing  in  Madrid,  writes
that  never  a  day  passed  in  which  people  were  not  killed  in  the  streets  scuffling
for  bread  ;  that  his  own  secretary  had  seen  five  women  stifled  to  death  by  the
crowd  before  a  bakehouse  ;  and  that,  to  swell  the  catalogue  of  misery,  upwards
of  twenty  thousand  additional  beggars  from  the  country  had  recently  flocked
into  the  capital.176

If  this  state  of  things  had  continued  for  another  generation,  the  wildest
anarchy  must  have  ensued,  and  the  whole  frame  of  society  been  broken  up.177
The  only  chance  of  saving  Spain  from  a  relapse  into  barbarism  was  that  it  should
fall,  and  fall  quickly,  under  foreign  dominion.  Such  a  change  was  indispensable  ;
and  there  was  reason  to  fear  that  it  might  come  in  a  form  which  would  have
been  inexpressibly  odious  to  the  nation.  For,  late  in  the  seventeenth  century,
Ceuta  was  besieged  by  the  Mohammedans,  and  as  the  Spanish  government
had  neither  troops  nor  ships,  the  greatest  apprehensions  were  entertained  re-
specting the  fate  of  this  important  fortress  ;  there  being  little  doubt  that  if
it  fell,  Spain  would  be  again  overrun  by  the  infidels,  who  this  time,  at  least,
would  have  found  little  difficulty  in  dealing  with  a  people  weakened  by  suffering
half  famished,  and  almost  worn  out.178

Fortunately,  in  the  year  1700,  when  affairs  were  at  their  worst,  Charles  II.,
the  idiot  king,  died,  and  Spain  fell  into  the  hands  of  Philip  V.,  the  grandson
of  Louis  XIV.  This  change  from  the  Austrian  dynasty  to  the  Bourbon  179
brought  with  it  many  other  changes.  Philip,  who  reigned  from  1700  to  1746, 18°

176  See  the  letters  in  Mahorfs  Spain  under  Charles  II.,  pp.  138-140.     On  the  2ist
of  May,  "  We  have  an  addition  of  above  20,000  beggars,  flocked  from  the  country  around,
to  share  in  that  little  here  is,  who  were  starving  at  home,  and  look  like  ghosts."     On
the  27th  of  May,  "  The  scarcity  of  bread  is  growing  on  apace  towards  a  famine,  which
increases  by  vast  multitudes  of  poor  that  swarm  in  upon  us  from  the  countries  round
about.     I  shifted  the  best  I  could  till  this  day,  but  the  difficulty  of  getting  any  without
authority  has  made  me  recur  to  the  Corregidor,  as  most  of  the  foreign  ministers  had
done  before  ;    he  very  courteously,  after  inquiring  what  my  family  was,  gave  me  an
order  for  twenty  loaves  every  day  ;  but  I  must  send  two  leagues,  to  Vallejas,  to  fetch
it,  as  I  have  done  this  night,  and  my  servants  with  long  guns  to  secure  it  when  they
have  it,  otherwise  it  would  be  taken  from  them,  for  several  people  are  killed  every  day
in  the  streets  in  scuffles  for  bread,  all  being  lawful  prize  that  anybody  can  catch."  .  .  .
"  My  secretary,  Don  Francisco,  saw  yesterday  five  poor  women  stifled  to  death  by  the
crowd  before  a  bakehouse."

177  Even  M.  Lafuente,  who,  having  used  scarcely  any  of  the  authorities  which  I  have
quoted  in  the  last  few  pages,  can  have  no  adequate  idea  of  the  utter  wretchedness  of
Spain,  confesses  that  "  Jamas  monarca  ni  pueblo  alguno  se  vieron  en  tan  lastimosa
situacion  y  en  tan  misero  trance  como  se  hallaron  en  este  tiempo  "  (1699)  "  Carlos  II.  y  la
Espana."     Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xvii.  p.  426,  Madrid,  1856.

178  "  Les  Maures  d'Afrique  assiegeoient  Ceuta.     Le  roi  d'Espagne  manquait  non-
seulement  de  troupes,  mais  de  vaisseaux  pour  transporter  le  peu  de  secours  qu'il  pouvoit
y  envoyer  :  Louis  XIV.  lui  fit  offrir  les  troupes  et  les  vaisseaux  dont  il  auroit  besoin.
II  s'agissoit  non -seulement  de  conserver  Ceuta,  mais  de  plus  Oran  ;  par  consequent
d'empecher  la  prise  de  deux  places  dont  la  conquete  facilitoit  aux  Maures  un  retour
en  Espagne."     Memoires  du  Marquis  de  Torcy,  vol.  i.  p.  46,  ed.  Paris,  1828.      Respecting
the  attacks  made  on  Ceuta,  from  1696  to  1698,  see   Ortiz,  Compendia  de  la  Historia  de
Espana,  vol.  vi.  pp.  556,  557,  561.

179  A  celebrated  modern  writer  has  made  some  remarks  upon  this,  which  are  too
apposite  to  be  omitted.     "  Con  el  siglo  xvii.  acabo  tambien  la  dinastia  austriaca  en
Espana,  dejando  a  esta  nacion  pobre,  despoblada,  sin  fuerzas  maritimas  ni  terrestres,
y  por  consiguiente  a  merced  de  las  demas  potencias  que  intentaron  repartir  entre  si
sus  colonias  y  provincias.    Asi  habia  desparecido  en  poco  mas  de  un  siglo  aquella  grandeza
y  poderio,  aquella  f uerza  y  heroismo,  aquella  cultura  e  ilustracion  con  que  habia  descollado
entre  todas  las  naciones."     Biografia  de  Ensenada,  in  Navarrete,  Opiisculos,  vol.  ii.  p.  5,
Madrid,  1848.

18°  Except  during  the  short  interregnum  of  Louis,  in  1724,  which  only  lasted  a  few


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE     SPANISH    INTELLECT  581

was  a  Frenchman,  not  only  by  birth  and  education,  but  also  in  feelings  and
habits.181  Just  before  he  entered  Spain,  Louis  charged  him  never  to  forget
that  he  was  a  native  of  France,  the  throne  of  which  he  might  some  day  ascend.182
After  he  became  king  he  neglected  the  Spaniards,  despised  their  advice,  and
threw  all  the  power  he  could  command  into  the  hands  of  his  own  countrymen.183
The  affairs  of  Spain  were  now  administered  by  subjects  of  Louis  XIV.,  whose
ambassador  at  Madrid  frequently  performed  the  functions  of  prime  minister.18*
What  had  once  been  the  most  powerful  monarchy  in  the  world  became  little
else  than  a  province  of  France,  all  important  matters  being  decided  in  Paris,
from  whence  Philip  himself  received  his  instructions.185

The  truth  is  that  Spain,  broken  and  prostrate,  was  unable  to  supply  ability
of  any  kind  ;  and  if  the  government  of  the  country  was  to  be  carried  on,  it  was
absolutely  necessary  that  foreigners  should  be  called  in.186  Even  in  1682  that


months,  and  during  which  the  boy,  though  called  king,  exercised  no  real  power,  and
Philip  remained  the  actual  ruler.  "  Aim  el  nuevo  rey  no  resolvia  negocio  de  consideracion
sin  asenso  de  su  padre."  Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  vii.  p.  374.

181  Saint  Simon,  who  knew  Philip  well,  and  who  was  in  Spain  in  1721  and  1722,  says
of  him,  "  L' amour  de  la  France  lui  sortait  de  partout."  Memoires  du  Due  de  Saint
Simon,  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  3,  Paris,  1841.  And,  in  1746,  shortly  before  his  death,  Noailles
writes  from  Aranjuez,  "  Ce  prince  a  le  coeur  tout  franfais."  Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,
vol.  iv.  p.  191,  Paris,  1829.

isa  "  N'oubliez  jamais  que  vous  etes  Francais,  et  ce  qui  peut  vous  arriver."  Millot,
Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  6.  Compare  Coxe's  Memoirs  of  the  Bourbon  Kings  of
Spain,  London,  1815,  vol.  i.  p.  103.

iss  in  1702,  Philip  "  parlait  moins  que  jamais,  et  seulement  aux  Fran^ais,  comme
s'ils  eussent  ete  les  seuls  etres  de  son  espece."  Memoires  de  Louville,  vol.  i.  p.  276.
"  Le  degout  que  Philippe  laissait  voir  pour  sa  cour  espagnole."  p.  333.  A  Spanish  states-
man, celebrated,  or,  I  would  rather  say,  notorious,  at  the  close  of  the  century,  indig-
nantly exclaims,  "  It  was  on  the  accession  of  the  Bourbon  dynasty  that  foreigners  came
to  govern  us  on  our  native  soil."  Godoy's  Memoirs,  ed.  London,  1836,  vol.  ii.  p.  271.

184  In  1701  it  was  the  duty  of  the  French  ambassador,  "  qu'il  put  au  besoin  etre  premier
ministre  d'Espagne."  Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  31  ;  "  que  1'ambassadeur
de  sa  Majeste  soit  ministre  du  roi  Catholique  ;  que,  sans  en  avoir  le  titre,  il  en  exerce
les  fonctions  ;  qu'il  aide  au  roi  d'Espagne  a  connoitre  1'etat  de  ses  affaires,  et  a  gouverner
par  lui-meme."  p.  55.  In  1702  Marsin  writes  to  Louis  XIV.,  "  Comme  il  est  absolument
necessaire  que  1'ainbassadeur  de  Votre  Majeste  en  Espagne  ait  un  credit  sans  bornes
aupres  du  Roy  son  petit-fils."  p.  183.  In  1705  Amelot,  the  French  ambassador,  "de-
cidoit  de  tout  en  Espagne."  Memoires  de  Louville,  vol.  ii.  p.  165  ;  and,  in  1706,  "  etant
a  la  tete  des  affaires,  et  joignant  presque  les  fonctions  de  premier  ministre  a  celles  d'am-
bassadeur."  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  398.

183  In  1703,  "  II  est  clair  que  1'embarras  de  Philippe  venoit  surtout  de  la  crainte  que
ses  decisions  ne  fussent  point  approuvees  en  France,  ou  toutes  les  affaires  importantes
se  decidoient."  Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  244.  "  The  King  of  France
had  always  certain  persons  at  Madrid,  which  compos'd  a  Council,  of  which  that  of  Ver-
sailles was  the  soul ;  and  whose  members  were  all  creatures  of  the  French  Court,  and
seat  to  Madrid  from  time  to  time  to  direct  all  affairs  there,  according  to  the  views  of
the  Most  Christian  King,  and  to  give  him  an  account  of  everything  that  pass'd  in  the
Councils  of  the  Escurial.  Alberoni  got  to  be  initiated  in  the  mysteries  of  this  cabal."
History  of  Cardinal  Alberoni,  London,  1719,  p.  7o.

The  Spanish  historians  are  not  very  fond  of  admitting  this  unquestionable  fact  ;  but
Bacallar,  after  mentioning  the  influence  of  the  French  ambassador,  frankly  adds  :
"  Desde  entonces  tomaron  tanta  mano  sobre  los  de  Espana  los  ministros  Franceses,
que  dieron  mas  zelos  a  los  Principes,  viendo  estrechar  la  union  a  un  grado,  que  todo  se
ponia  al  arbitrio  de  Luis  XIV."  Bacallar,  Comentarios  de  la  Guerra  de  Espana,  vol.  i.
P-  33-

186  Even  the  veteran  diplomatist  Torcy  was  so  struck  by  the  escape  of  Spain  from
complete  ruin,  that  he  ascribes  its  change  of  masters  to  the  direct  interference  of  the
Deity.  "  Sa  seule  puissance  avait  place  Philippe  V  sur  le  trone  d'Espagne  ;  elle  seule


582  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

is,"eighteen  years  before  the  accession  of  Philip  V.,  there  was  not  to  be  found
a  single  native  well  acquainted  with  the  art  of  war  ;  so  that  Charles  II.  was
obliged  to  intrust  the  military  defence  of  the  Spanish  Netherlands  to  De  Grana,
the  Austrian  ambassador  at  Madrid.187  When,  therefore,  the  War  of  the  Suc-
cession broke  out,  in  1702,  even  the  Spaniards  themselves  desired  that  their
troops  should  be  commanded  by  a  foreigner.188  In  1704  the  extraordinary
spectacle  was  exhibited  of  the  Duke  of  Berwick,  an  Englishman,  leading  Spanish
soldiers  against  the  enemy,  and  being  in  fact  generalissimo  of  the  Spanish  army.189
The  King  of  Spain,  dissatisfied  with  his  proceedings,  determined  to  remove
him  ;  but  instead  of  filling  his  place  with  a  native  he  applied  to  Louis  XIV.
for  another  general,  and  this  important  post  was  confided  to  Marshal  Tesse,
a  Frenchman.190  A  little  later,  Berwick  was  again  summoned  to  Madrid,  and
ordered  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Spanish  troops,  and  defend  Estre-
madura  and  Castile.191  This  he  effected  with  complete  success  ;  and,  in  the

pouvoit  1'y  maintenir ;  les  hornmes  n'avaient  pas  conduit  ce  grand  evenement."
Memoires  de  Torcy,  vol.  i.  p.  333.  "  Le  trone  ou  Dieu  1'avait  place,"  p.  401.  See  also
vol.  ii.  pp.  3,  227.  "  The  Spanish  people  received  him  with  unhesitating  obedience
to  the  deceased  king's  will,  and  rejoiced  at  the  prospect  of  a  rule  that  would  at  least
have  the  merit  of  being  different  from  that  under  which  they  had  so  long  withered."
Memoirs  of  Peterborough,  London,  1853,  vol.  i.  p.  102.  "  Muchos  espanoles  recibieron
por  su  soberano  a  Felipe  V.,  cansados  de  la  dominacion  de  la  casa  de  Austria.  Esperaban
de  la  mudanza  de  la  dinastia  la  felicidad  y  el  buen  gobierno."  Castro,  Decadencia  de
Espana,  Cadiz,  1852,  p.  131.  To  the  same  effect,  Millot,  Memoir  es  de  Noailles,  vol.  i.
pp.  420,  426,  vol.  ii.  p.  9.

187  He  "  committed  the  military  defence  of  these  provinces  to  the  Marquis  of  Grana,
the  Austrian  ambassador  at  Madrid,  from  the  want  of  any  Spanish  commander  whose
courage  or  military  endowments  qualified  him  to  repel  such  an  enemy  as  the  King  of
France."     Dunlop's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  232.     Compare,  on  the  want  of  Spanish  generals,
Memoires  du  Marechal  de  Gramont,  vol.  ii.  p.  82,  edit.  Paris,  1827.     The  opinion  which
Grana  himself  formed  of  the  Spanish  government  may  be  learned  from  a  conversation
which  he  held  at  Madrid,  in  1680,  with  the  French  ambassadress,  and  which  is  preserved
in  her  correspondence.     Lettres  de  Madame  la  Marquise  de  Villars,  Amsterdam,  i759»
pp.  118,  119.

188  See  the  letter  of  Philip  V.  to  Louis  XIV.,  dated  June  22,  1703.  in  Memoires  de
Noailles,  vol.  ii.  pp.  256,  257,  Paris,  1828,  edit.  Petitot.

189  See  Bacallar,  Comentarios  de  la  Guerra  de  Espana,  vol.  i.  pp.  137,  166,  where  he
is  called  "  el  Duque  de  Bervich."     His  own  account  is,  "  J 'arrival  a  Madrid  le  15  fevrier  '
(1704),  "  ou  d'abord  S.  M.  Catholique  me  fit  Capitaine  General  de  ses  armees."     Memoires
de  Berwick,  Paris,  1778,  vol.  i.  p.  227  ;  and  see  p.  xxv.     No  one  would  suppose   this
from  the  observations  of  M.  Lafuente,  in  his  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xviii.  p.  80,  Madrid,
1857-

loo  "  Philippe  n'etoit  pas  content  de  Berwick,  ou  plutot  il  temoigna  ne  le  pas  etre,
et  il  demanda  un  autre  general  a  Louis  XIV.  On  lui  envoya  le  marechal  de  Tesse,  pour
qui  il  avoit  montre  du  penchant."  Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  331.  Berwick
himself  ascribes  his  dismissal  to  the  influence  of  Gramont  and  of  the  Queen  of  Spain.
Memoires  de  Berwick,  vol.  i.  pp.  269-273.  At  all  events,  the  new  general  became  supreme.
In  December,  1705,  the  Princess  des  Ursins  writes  from  Madrid  to  Madame  de  Main  tenon,
"  M.  le  marechal  de  Tesse,  quand  il  est  a  Madrid,  est  consulte,  et  decide  sur  toutes  les
affaires,  autant,  pour  le  mains,  que  M.  Vambassadeur  ;  et  lorsqu'il  est  a  1'armee,  il  est  le
maitre  absolu  non  seulement  des  troupes  de  France,  mais  encore  de  celles  d'Espagne,
commandant  aux  capitaines-generaux,  ses  anciens,  centre  1'usage  du  pays."  Lettres
inedites  de  Madame  de  Maintenon  et  de  Madame  la  Princesse  des  Ursins,  vol.  iii.  p.  259,
Paris,  1826.

i9i  In  1706  "  Le  due  de  Berwick,  redemande  par  Philippe  V.,  arrive  a  Madrid  le  ii
mars,  avec  le  titre  de  marechal  de  France,  pour  defendre  1'Estramadure  et  la  Castille
ayant  rassemble  ce  qu'il  peut  de  troupes  espagnoles,  empecha  les  ennemis  d'entreprendre
le  siege  de  Badajoz."  Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  387.  Philip  "  pria  le
Roi,  son  grand-pere,  d'envoyer  un  general  pour  commander  sur  les  frontieres  de  Portugal.
Ce  fut  done  sur  moi  que  le  choix  tomba."  Memoires  de  Berwick,  vol.  i.  p.  305.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          583

battle  of  Almansa,  which  he  fought  in  1707,  he  overthrew  the  invaders,  ruined
the  party  of  the  pretender  Charles,192  and  secured  the  seat  of  Philip  on  the
throne.193  As  the  war,  however,  still  continued,  Philip  in  1710  wrote  to  Paris
for  another  general,  and  requested  that  the  Duke  de  Vendome  might  be  sent
to  him.194  This  able  commander,  on  his  arrival,  infused  new  vigour  into  the
Spanish  counsels,  and  utterly  defeated  the  allies  ;  195  so  that  the  war  by
which  the  independence  of  Spain  was  established  owed  its  success  to  the  ability
of  foreigners,  and  to  the  fact  that  the  campaigns  were  planned  and  conducted
not  by  natives,  but  by  French  and  English  generals.

In  the  same  way,  the  finances  were  by  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century
in  such  deplorable  confusion,  that  Portocarrero,  who  at  the  accession  of  Philip  V.
was  the  nominal  minister  of  Spain,  expressed  a  desire  that  they  should  be  admin-
istered by  some  one  sent  from  Paris,  who  could  restore  them.19^  He  felt  that

192  In  a  recently  published  work  (Memoirs  of  Peterborough,  London,  1853,    vol.
pp.  148,  155,  161,  206,  210,  vol.  ii.  pp.  34,  93),  Charles  is  not  only  called  King  of  Spain
which  he  never  was,  as  Spain  always  refused  to  accept  him,  but,  in  the  teeth  of  all  history,
he  is  actually  termed  Charles  III.  ;  while  Philip  V.  is  merely  "  Philip  of  Anjou."     If
this  were  allowed,  the  consequence    would  be  that  the  king  whom  the  Spaniards  now
call  Charles  III.  would  have  to  change  his  appellation,  and  become  Charles  IV. ;    and
Charles  IV.  would  be  changed  into  Charles  V.     It  is  really  too  much  when  mere  bio-
graphers obtrude  in  this  way  their  own  little  prepossessions  into  the  vast  field  of  history,
and  seek  to  efface  its  established  nomenclature,  because  they  are  enamoured  of  the
hero  whose  life  they  write.

193  "  This  victory  established  the  throne  of  Philip."     Dunham's  History  of  Spain,
vol.  v.  p.  136.     "  A  victory  which  may  be  justly  said  to  have  saved  Spain."     Coxe's
Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  i.  p.  408.     Even  Ortiz  allows  that  if  Berwick  had  failed,
Philip  would  have  been  ruined.     "  Esta  batalla  de  Almansa,  que  las  circunstancias
hicieron  ruidosa,  comenzo  a  poner  mejor  la  corona  de  Espana  en  la  cabeza  de  Felipe  V.
y  se  tuvo  por  indubitable  que  si  la  hubiera  perdido,  tambien  hubiera  perdido  la  corona."
Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  vii.  p.  116.     See  also  Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xviii.
p.  185.     "  Berwick,  a  quien,  sin  duda,  debio  su  salvacion  la  Espana."

194  "  Sa  reputation  etoit  grande  et  bien  etablie  ;  le  roi  d'Espagne  avoit  ete  temoin
de  sa  conduite  en  Lombardie  ;  il  demanda  au  Roi  un  general  si  capable  de  commander
ses  armees."     Memoir es  de  Torcy,  vol.  i.  p.  386.     See  also  History  of  Alberoni,  London
1719,  p.  45.     "  Le  due  de  Vendome  alloit  enfin  commander  les  troupes  d'Espagne.
Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  iii.  p.  12.     According  to  Berwick,  the  offer  was  first  made
to  himself.     Memoires  de  Berwick,  vol.  ii.  pp.  106,  109.     M.  Lafuente,  without  quoting
any  authority,  says  (Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xviii.  p.  279),  "  Luego  que  se  perdio  la
batalla  de  Zaragoza  escribio  Felipe  al  rey  Cristianisimo,  su  abuelo,  rogandole  que,  ya
que  no  pudiera  socorrerle  con  tropas,  le  enviara  al  menos  al  duque  de  Berwick  6  al  de
Vendome."     But  as  Berwick  must  have  had  the  means  of    knowing  the  real  state  of
the  case,  he  is  probably  correct  in  saying  that  the  first  application  was  in  his  own  favour.

195  "  Vendome  arrived  at  this  moment  to  call  into  action  the  spirit  of  the  monarch
and  the  zeal  of  his  subjects."     Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  ii.  p.  41.     "  The
arrival  of  the  Duke  de  Vendome  again  changed  the  fate  of  Spain."     Memoirs  of  Peter  •
borough,  vol.  ii.  p.  130.

196  "  Portocarrero,  abrumado  con  las  dificultades  de  la  gobernacion,  que  excedian
en  mucho  a  sus  escasas  luces,  no  contento  con  haber  inducido  al  rey  a  que  aumentara
su  consejo  de  gabinete  con  dos  minis tros  mas,  que  fueron  el  marques  de  Mancera,  pre-
sidente  del  de  Aragon,  y  el  duque  de  Montalto,  del  de  Italia,  pidio  a  Luis  XIV.  le  enviara
una  persona  que  pudiera  establecer  un  plan  de  hacienda  en  Espana,  y  corregir  y  reformar
los  abuses  de  la  administracion."     Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xviii.  p.  15-     C*n
22nd  June,  1701,  Louis  XIV.  writes  to  the  Due  d'Harcourt,  "  Qu'enfin  le  cardinal  Porto-
Carrero  m'a  fait  demander  quelqu'un  intelligent  en  matiere  de  finances  pour  voir  et
connoitre  1'etat  de  celles  du  roi  d'Espagne,  pour  examiner  les  moyens  les  plus  propres
de  soulager  ses  sujets,  et  de  pourvoir  aux  plus  pressans  besoins  du  public  ;  qu'il  m' assure
que  toute  VEspagne  le  desire  en  general :  toutes  ces  raisons  m'ont  determine  a  choisir  le
sieur  Orry,  pour  1'envoyer  a  Madrid."     Millot,   Memoires   de  Noailles,   vol.   ii.    p.   44-


584  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

no  one  in  Spain  was  equal  to  the  task,  and  he  was  by  no  means  singular  in  this
opinion.  In  1701  Louville  wrote  to  Torcy  that  if  a  financier  did  not  soon  arrive
from  France  there  would  shortly  be  no  finances  to  administer.197  The  choice
fell  upon  Orry,  who  reached  Madrid  in  the  summer  of  i/oi.198  He  found  every-
thing in  the  most  miserable  condition ;  and  the  incompetence  of  the  Spaniards
was  so  obvious  that  he  was  soon  forced  to  undertake  the  management  not
only  of  the  finances  but  also  of  the  war  department.  To  save  appearances,
Canalez  became  the  ostensible  minister  at  war  ;  but  he,  being  completely
ignorant  of  affairs,  merely  performed  the  drudgery  of  that  office,  the  real  duties
of  which  were  fulfilled  by  Orry  himself.199

This  dominion  of  the  French  continued  without  interruption  until  the  second
marriage  of  Philip  V.  in  1714,  and  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  in  1715,  both  of  which
events  weakened  their  influence,  and  for  a  time  almost  destroyed  it.  The
authority,  however,  which  they  lost  was  transferred  not  to  Spaniards  but  to
other  foreigners.  Between  1714  and  1726,  the  two  most  powerful  and  con-
spicuous men  in  Spain  were  Alberoni,  an  Italian,  and  Ripperda,  a  Dutchman.
Ripperda  was  dismissed  in  1726  ;  20°  and  after  his  fall  the  affairs  of  Spain  were
controlled  by  Konigseg,  who  was  a  German,  and  who  indeed  was  the  Austrian
ambassador  residing  at  Madrid.201  Even  Grimaldo,  who  held  office  before  and
after  the  dismissal  of  Ripperda,  was  a  disciple  of  the  French  school,  and  had  been
brought  up  under  Orry.202  All  this  was  not  the  result  of  accident,  nor  is  it  to  be


197  "  II  faudra  que  1'homme  que  vous  enverrez  pour  les  finances  (car  vous  aurez  la
bonte  d'en  envoyer  un,  ou  bien  nous  n'aurons  plus  de  finances)."     Memoires  de  Louville,
vol.  i.  p.  149.

198  ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  181.

199  "  Canalez,  qu'on  a  substitue  a  Rivas  pour  le  departement  de  la  guerre,  n'a  aucun
talent  pour  cet  emploi,  selon  1'instruction  ;  et  toute  1'Espagne  voit  clairement  qu'Orry
ne  le  lui  a  procure  qu'afin  d'en  exercer  les  fonctions  sous  le  nom  d'un  Espagnol."     Millot,
Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  305  ;  under  the  year  1704.     See  also,  on  the  power  of
Orry  in  the  war  department,  Memoires  de  Berwick,  vol.  i.  pp.  226,  227.  306,  316,  vol.  ii.
p.  166.     Berwick,  who  hated  Orry,  says  of  him  (vol.  i.  p.  232),  "  il  se  meloit  de  tout  et
faisoit  tout."     But  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  his  being  a  man  of  very  considerable  ability  ;
and  M.  Lafuente  (Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xix.  p.  253,  Madrid,  1857)  candidly  says,  "  Es
lo  cierto  que  hizo  abrir  mucho  los  ojosde  los  espanoles  en  materia  de  administracion.
Compare  vol.  xviii.  p.  369  ;  Memoires  du  Due  de  Saint  Simon,  vol.  vii.  pp.  102,  195,
Paris,  1842  ;  and  Bacallar,  Comentarios  de  la  Guerra  de  Espana,  vol.  i.  pp.  82,  83,  99,
168,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95,  107.     Bacallar  treats  him  harshly.

200  Ripperda 's  Memoirs,  London,  1740,  second  edition,  pp.  117,  118.     Saint  Simon
(Memoires,  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  246)  says  that   Ripperda  was  "premier  ministre  aussi  absolu
que  le  fut  jamais  son  predecesseur,  Alberoni."     The  English  pamphleteers  and  politicians
of  the  last  century  were  very  unjust  to  Alberoni,  who,  notwithstanding  the  dangerous
boldness  of  his  nature,  was  one  of  the  best  ministers  who  ever  governed  Spain.    M.  La-
fuente, while  admitting  his  faults,  says  (Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xix.  pp.  437,  438),
"  Negarle  gran  capacidad  seria  una  gran  injusticia.     Tampoco  puede  desconocerse  que
reanimo  y  regenero  la  Espana,  levantandola  a  un  grado  de  esplendor  y  de  grandeza  en
que  nunca  se  habia  vuelto  a  ver  desde  los  mejores  tiempos  de  Felipe  II."    See  also  a  good
summary  of  what  he  did  for  Spain,  in  Tapia,  Historia  de  la  Civilizacion  Espanola,  Madrid,
1840,  vol.  iv.  pp.  50,  51.

201  "The  all-powerful  Konigseg."     Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iii.  p.  154;
"  the  prime  mover  of  the  Spanish  counsels."  p.  159  ;  in  1727-8,  "  Konigseg  usurped  the
control  over  every  operation  of  government,"  p.  190  ;  and  see  p.  235.     His  great  power
is  likewise  noticed  in  Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol  xix.  p.  71  :    "el  hombre  de  mas
influjo  y  valimiento  en  la  corte."

202  "  Originally  a  clerk  under  Orri,  he  gained  the  favour  of  his  employer,"  &c.  Coxe's
Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iii.  p.  39.     Coxe  had  access  to  a  large  mass  of  letters  which
were  written  in  the  eighteenth  century  by  persons  connected  with  Spain,  and  many  of
which  are  still  unpublished.      This  makes  his  book  very  valuable  ;  and  as  a  recital  of
political  events  it  is  superior  to  anything  the  Spaniards  have  produced,  though  the


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          585

ascribed  to  the  caprice  of  the  court.  In  Spain  the  national  spirit  had  so  died
away  that  none  but  foreigners,  or  men  imbued  with  foreign  ideas,  were  equal  to
the  duties  of  government.  To  the  evidence  already  quoted  on  this  point  I  will
add  two  other  testimonies.  Noailles,  a  very  fair  judge,  and  by  no  means  pre-
judiced against  the  Spaniards,  emphatically  stated  in  1710  that  notwithstanding
their  loyalty,  they  were  incapable  of  ruling,  inasmuch  as  they  were  ignorant  both
of  war  and  of  politics.203  In  1711  Bonnac  mentions  that  a  resolution  had  been
formed  to  place  no  Spaniard  at  the  head  of  affairs,  because  those  hitherto  em-
ployed had  proved  to  be  either  unfortunate  or  unfaithful.204

The  government  of  Spain,  being  taken  from  the  Spaniards,  now  began  to  show
some  signs  of  vigour.  The  change  was  slight,  but  it  was  in  the  right  direction,
though,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  it  could  not  regenerate  Spain,  owing  to  the  un-
favourable operation  of  general  causes.  Still,  the  intention  was  good.  For  the
first  time,  attempts  mere  made  to  vindicate  the  rights  of  laymen,  and  to  diminish
the  authority  of  ecclesiastics.  Scarcely  had  the  French  established  their  do-
minion when  they  suggested  that  it  might  be  advisable  to  relieve  the  necessities
of  the  state  by  compelling  the  clergy  to  give  up  some  of  the  wealth  which  they
had  accumulated  in  their  churches.205  Even  Louis  XIV.  insisted  that  the  im-
portant office  of  President  of  Castile  should  not  be  conferred  on  an  ecclesiastic,
because,  he  said,  in  Spain  the  priests  and  monks  had  already  too  much  power.206
Orry,  who  for  several  years  possessed  immense  influence,  exerted  it  in  the  same
direction.  He  endeavoured  to  lessen  the  immunities  possessed  by  the  clergy  in
regard  to  taxation,  and  also  in  regard  to  their  exemption  from  lay  jurisdiction.
He  opposed  the  privilege  of  sanctuary  ;  he  sought  to  deprive  churches  of  their
right  of  asylum.  He  even  attacked  the  Inquisition,  and  worked  so  powerfully
on  the  mind  of  the  king  that  Philip  at  one  time  determined  to  suspend  that
dreadful  tribunal,  and  abolish  the  office  of  grand  inquisitor.207  This  intention  was
very  properly  abandoned  ;  for  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  it  had  been  enforced
it  would  have  caused  a  revolution,  in  which  Philip  would  probably  have  lost  his
crown.208  In  such  case,  a  reaction  would  have  set  in  which  would  have  left  the


author  is,  I  need  hardly  say,  far  inferior  to  M.  Lafuente  as  a  writer,  and  also  as  an  artistic
arranger  of  facts.

203  "  Que  les  Espagnols  depuis  longtemps  ignoroient  la  guerre  et  la  politique ;  qu'on
devoit  etre  sensible  a  leurs  demonstrations  d'attachement  et  de  zele,  sans  les  croire
suffisantes  pour  soutenir  un  Etat  "  .  .  ."  I'incapacite  des  su jets  pour  le  gouvernement."
Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  iii.  pp.  24,  25.

204  "  C'etoit  un  parti  pris,  comme  1'observe  Bonnac,  de  ne  plus  mettre  le  gouverne-
ment entre  leurs  mains.     On  avoit  trouve  parmi  eux  peu  d'hommes  capables  des  grands
emplois  :    ceux  a  qui  on  les  avoit  confies,  malheureux  ou  inndeles,  avoient  inspire  de
1'eloignement  pour  les  autres."     Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  iii.  p.  81.

205  in  1701,  "  Les  eglises  d'Espagne  out  des  richesses  immenses  en  or  et  en  argenterie,
qui  augmentent  tous  les  jours  par  le  credit  des  religieux  ;   et  cela  rend  1'espece  tres  rare
dans  le  commerce.     On  propose  d'obliger  le  clerge  a  vendre  une  partie  de  cette  argenterie.
Avant  que  de  prendre  ce  parti,  il  en  faudroit  bien  examiner  non-seulement  1'utilite,
que  Ton  connoit,  mais  aussi  les  inconveniens  qu'un  pareil  ordre  pourroit  produire."
Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  60.

206  "  II  insistoit  sur  la  necessite  de  ne  pas  donner  a  un  ecclesiastique,  ni  a  une  creature
du  cardinal,  la  presidence  de  Castille,  quand  on  rempliroit  cette  importante  place  ;  les
pretres  et  les  moines  n'avoient  deja  que  trop  de  pouvoir."     Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,
vol.  ii.  p.  77.     Compare  pp.  71,  72  ;  a  letter  from  Louville  to  Torcy,  dated  August  5th,
1701.

207  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  ii.  pp.  163-165.     Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  iii

P-  143-

208  in  1714  it  was  thought  necessary  that  Philip  V.,  not  having  had  the  benefit  of  a
Spanish  education,  should  be  enlightened  on  the  subject  of  the  Inquisition.  He  was,  there-
fore, informed,  "que  la  pureza  de  la  religion  Catolica  en  estos  reynos  se  debia  a  la  vigilancia
de  la  Inquisicion  y  sus  ministros,  todos  justos,  clementes  y  circunspectos,  no  rigidos,  vio-
lentos  ni  crueles,  como  por  error  6  malicia  los  pintan  comunmente  los  Franceses.  Y  que  la


586  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Church  stronger  than  ever.  Many  things,  however,  were  done  for  Spain  in  spite
of  the  Spaniards.209  In  1707  the  clergy  were  forced  to  contribute  to  the  state  a
small  part  of  their  enormous  wealth  ;  the  tax  being  disguised  under  the  name  of
a  loan.210  Ten  years  later,  during  the  administration  of  Alberoni,  this  disguise
was  thrown  off  ;  and  not  only  did  government  exact  what  was  now  called  "  the
ecclesiastical  tax,"  but  it  imprisoned  or  exiled  those  priests  who,  refusing  to  pay,
stood  up  for  the  privileges  of  their  order.211  This  was  a  bold  step  to  be  taken  in
Spain,  and  it  was  one  on  which,  at  that  time,  no  Spaniard  would  have  ventured.
Alberoni,  however,  as  a  foreigner,  was  unversed  in  the  traditions  of  the  country,
which  indeed,  on  another  memorable  occasion,  he  set  at  defiance.  The  govern-
ment of  Madrid,  acting  in  complete  unison  with  public  opinion,  had  always  been
unwilling  to  negotiate  with  infidels  ;  meaning  by  infidels,  every  people  whose
religious  notions  differed  from  their  own.  Sometimes  such  negotiations  were
unavoidable,  but  they  were  entered  into  with  fear  and  trembling,  lest  the  pure
Spanish  faith  should  be  tainted  by  too  close  a  contact  with  unbelievers.  Even

11  1698,  when  it  was  evident  that  the  monarchy  was  at  its  last  gasp,  and  that
nothing  could  save  it  from  the  hands  of  the  spoiler,  the  prejudice  was  so  strong

hat  the  Spaniards  refused  to  receive  aid  from  the  Dutch,  because  the  Dutch  were
heretics.  At  that  time,  Holland  was  in  the  most  intimate  relation  with  England,
whose  interest  it  was  to  secure  the  independence  of  Spain  against  the  machina-
tions of  France.  Obvious  however  as  this  was,  the  Spanish  theologians,  being
consulted  respecting  the  proposal,  declared  that  it  was  inadmissible,  since  it
would  enable  the  Dutch  to  propagate  their  religious  opinions  ;  so  that,  according
to  this  view,  it  was  better  to  be  subjugated  by  a  Catholic  enemy  than  to  be
assisted  by  a  Protestant  friend.212

Still,  much  as  the  Spaniards  hated  Protestants,  they  hated  Mohammedans  yet

conservacton  de  la  Monarquia  dependia  en  gran  parte  de  mantener  ilibata  la  religion  Cato-
lica."  Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  vii.  p.  286.  Bacallar  (Comentarios,  vol.  ii.  pp.  122-125)
gives  an  interesting  account  of  the  attacks  made  on  the  rights  of  the  Church,  and  which,
he  says,  p.  122,  were  "  poco  ajustados  a  la  doctrina  de  los  Santos  Padres,  a  la  Inmunidad
de  la  Iglesia,  y  que  sonaban  a  heregia."  He  significantly  adds,  p.  125,  "  Los  pueblos  de
Espana,  que  son  tan  religiosos,  y  professan  la  mayor  veneracion  a  la  Iglesia,  creian,  que
esta  se  atropellaba,  y  huvo  alguna  interna  inquietud,  no  sin  fomento  de  los  adversos  al  Rey,
cuyo  puro  y  sincero  corazon  podia  ser  enganado  ;  pero  no  inducido  a  un  evidente  error
contra  los  Sagrados  Canones,"  &c.  Such  passages,  proceeding,  in  the  eighteenth  century,
from  a  man  like  the  Marquis  de  San  Phelipe,  are  of  no  slight  importance  in  the  history  of
the  Spanish  mind.

209  So  early  as  May,  1702,  Philip  V.,  in  a  letter  to  Louis  XIV.,  complained  that  the
Spaniards  opposed  him  in  everything.      "  Je  crois  etre  oblige  de  vous  dire  que  je  m'aper-
cois  de  plus  en  plus  du  peu  de  zele  que  les  Espagnols  ont  pour  mon  service,  dans   les
petites  choses  comme  dans  les  grandes,  et  qu'ils  s'opposent  a  tout  ce  que  je  desire."
Millot,  Memoir es  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  136.     The  dislike  which  the  Spaniards  felt  for  the
liberal  reforms  advocated  by  the  French  went  on  increasing  until,  in  1709,  "  se  renovaron
los  antiguos  odios  entre  las  dos  naciones,  con  tanto  ardor,  que  deseaban  las  tropas  Espan-
olas  el  haber  de  combatir  con  los  Franceses."     Bacallar,  Comentarios,  vol.  i.  p.  360.

210  "  L' opulence  de  1'Eglise  devoit  evidemment  fournir  des  secours  a  la  patrie.     Un
emprunt  de  quatre  millions,  fait  sur  le  clerge  1'annee  precedente,  1707,  avoit  cependant
fort  deplu  au  Pape  ou  a  ses  ministres."     Millot,  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  ii.  p.  412.

211  "  He  "  (Alberoni)  "  continued  also  the  exaction  of  the  ecclesiastical  tax,  in  spite  of
the  papal  prohibitions,  imprisoning  or  banishing  the  refractory  priests  who  defended  the
privileges  of  their  order."     Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  ii.  p.  288.

212  On  January  2nd,  1698,  Stanhope,  the  British  Minister  at  Madrid,  writes  from  that
capital  :    "  This  Court  is  not  at  all  inclined  to  admit  the  offer  of  the  Dutch  troops  to
garrison  their  places  in  Flanders.     They  have  consulted  their  theologians,  who  declare
against  it  as  a  matter  of  conscience,  since  it  would  give  great  opportunities  to  the  spread-
ing of  heresy.     They  have  not  yet  sent  their  answer  ;  but  it  is  believed  it  will  be  in  the
negative,  and  that  they  will  rather  choose  to  lie  at  the  mercy  of  the  French,  as  being
Catholics."     Mahon's  Spain  under  Charles  II.,  pp.  98,  99.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          587

more.213  They  could'never  forget  how  the  followers  of  that  creed  had  once  con-
quered nearly  the  whole  of  Spain,  and  had  during  several  centuries  possessed  the
fairest  portion  of  it.  The  remembrance  of  this  strengthened  their  religious  ani-
mosity, and  caused  them  to  be  the  chief  supporters  of  nearly  every  war  which  was
waged  against  the  Mohammedans,  both  of  Turkey  and  of  Africa.214  But  Alberoni,
being  a  foreigner,  was  unmoved  by  these  considerations,  and,  to  the  astonishment
of  all  Spain,  he  on  the  mere  ground  of  political  expediency  set  at  naught  the
principles  of  the  Church,  and  not  only  concluded  an  alliance  with  the  Moham-
medans, but  supplied  them  with  arms  and  with  money.215  It  is  indeed  true
that  in  these  and  similar  measures  Alberoni  opposed  himself  to  the  national  will,
and  that  he  lived  to  repent  of  his  boldness.  It  is  however  also  true  that  his
policy  was  part  of  a  great  secular  and  anti-theological  movement,  which  during
the  eighteenth  century  was  felt  all  over  Europe.  The  effects  of  that  movement
were  seen  in  the  government  of  Spain,  but  not  in  the  people.  This  was  because
the  government  for  many  years  was  wielded  by  foreigners,  or  by  natives  imbued
with  a  foreign  spirit.  Hence  we  find  that  during  the  greater  part  of  the  eight-
eenth century  the  politicians  of  Spain  formed  a  class  more  isolated,  and,  if  I  may
so  say,  more  living  on  their  own  intellectual  resources,  than  the  politicians  of  any
other  country  during  the  same  period.  That  this  indicated  a  state  of  disease,
and  that  no  political  improvement  can  produce  real  good  unless  it  is  desired  by
the  people  before  being  conferred  on  them,  will  be  admitted  by  whoever  has
mastered  the  lessons  which  history  contains.  The  results  actually  produced  in
Spain  we  shall  presently  see.  But  it  will  first  be  advisable  that  I  should  give
some  further  evidence  of  the  extent  to  which  the  influence  of  the  Church  had
prostrated  the  national  intellect,  and  by  discouraging  all  inquiry,  and  fettering

213  "  Entre  el  catolicismo  y  las  diferentes  sectas  que  brotaron  en  las  imaginaciones  de
Calvino  y  de  Lutero  podia  mediar  tolerancia,  y  aun  transaction,  si  bien,  como  dice  un
escritor  politico,  cuando  se  comienza  a  transigir  sobre  un  principio,  ese  principio  comienza
a  perder  su  imperio  sobre  las  sociedades  humanas.     Pero  entre  el  cristianismo  de  los
espanoles  y  el  mahometismo  de  los  moriscos  era  imposible  todo  avenimiento."     Janer
Condition  Social  de  los  Moriscos,  Madrid,  1857,  p.  112.

214  The  Marquis  of  San  Phelipe,  who  wrote  in  1725,  says,  "  Es  ley  fundamental  de  los
Reyes  Catholicos,  nunca  hacer  la  paz  con  los  Mahometanos  ;    y  esta  guerra  permanece
desde  el  Rey  Don  Pelayo,  por  mas  de  siete  siglos,  sin  hacer  jamas  paces,  ni  treguas  con
ellos,  como  cada  dia  las  hacen  el  Emperador,  y  otros  Principes  Catholicos."     Bacallar
Comentarios  de  la  Guerra  de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  p.  169.     And  in  the  most  influential  work  on
commerce  which  the  reign  of  Philip  V.  produced,  I  find  the  following  instructive  passage
"  Aunque  en  los  Puertos  de  las  dilatadas  Costas,  que  de  Europa,  Asia  y  Africa  bana  el
Mediterraneo,  se  hace  comercio  muy  considerable,  y  util  por  diversas  naciones,  no  podra
Espana  tener  gran  parte  en  el,  mientras  se  observare  la  maxima  de  hacer  continua  guerra
a  todos  los  Moros  y  Turcos,  en  cuyo  dominio  se  hallan  la  mayor  parte  de  aquellas  Pro-
vincias  ;  sin  embargo  de  ser  constante,  que  en  esta  guerra,  aunque  procedida  de  zelo  Chris-
tiano,  es  mayor  el  dano  que  recibimos,  que  el  que  ocasionamos  a  los  Infieles  "  (the  way  the
mercantile  spirit  peeps  out  here  is  extremely  curious)   "  a  lo  menos  de  muchos  anos  a  esta
parte,  como  lo  he  explicado  en  diversos  capitulos."     Uztariz,  Theorica  y  Practica  de
Comercio,  Madrid,  1757,  p.  399.     This  is  the  third  edition  of  a  book  which,  considering
the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  written,  is  a  very  remarkable  production.

215  Compare  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  London,  1815,  vol.  ii.  p.  314,  with  The
History  of  Alberoni,  London,  1719,  pp.  119,  253  ;   and  Bacallar,  Comentarios  de  la  Guerra
de  Espana,  vol.  ii.  pp.  168,  169.     The  outcry  which  this  caused  may  be  easily  imagined
and  Alberoni,  finding  himself  in  great  peril,  took  advantage  of  the  secrecy  of  the  negotia-
tions to  deny  part,  at  least,  of  the  charges  made  against  him.      See  his  indignant  but  yet
cautious  letter  to  the  Pope,  in  History  of  Alberoni,  1719,  p.  124.     Ortiz,  who  had  evidently
not  looked  into  the  evidence,  is  so  ill-informed  as  to  suppose  that  this  was  a  calumnious
accusation  brought  against  Alberoni  after  his  fall.     "  Caido  ya  por  entonces  Alberoni  de
su  grandeza,  expelido  ignominiosameate  de  Espana,  y  aun  perseguido  por  el  Rey  en  Italia,
preso  en  Roma  por  orden  del  Papa,  etc.  no  era  dificil  atribuirle  culpas  agenas  6  no  come-
tidas."     Note  in  Ortiz,  Compendia,  vol.  vii,  p.  321.


588  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

all  freedom  of  thought,  had  at  length  reduced  the  country  to  such  a  plight  that
the  faculties  of  men,  rusted  by  disuse,  were  no  longer  equal  to  fulfil  the  functions
required  from  them  ;  so  that  in  every  department,  whether  of  political  life  or
of  speculative  philosophy,  or  even  of  mechanical  industry,  it  was  necessary  that
foreigners  should  be  called  in  to  do  that  work  which  the  natives  had  become
unable  to  perform.

The  ignorance  in  which  the  force  of  adverse  circumstances  had  sunk  the
Spaniards,  and  their  inactivity,  both  bodily  and  mental,  would  be  utterly  in-
credible, if  it  were  not  attested  by  every  variety  of  evidence.  Gramont,  writing
from  personal  knowledge  of  the  state  of  Spain  during  the  latter  half  of  the
seventeenth  century,  describes  the  upper  classes  as  not  only  unacquainted  with
science  or  literature,  but  as  knowing  scarcely  any  thing  even  of  the  commonest
events  which  occurred  out  of  their  own  country.  The  lower  ranks,  he  adds,  are
equally  idle,  and  rely  upon  foreigners  to  reap  their  wheat,  to  cut  their  hay,  and
to  build  their  houses.216  Another  observer  of  society,  as  it  existed  in  Madrid  in
1679,  assures  us  that  men  even  of  the  highest  position  never  thought  it  necessary
that  their  sons  should  study  ;  and  that  those  who  were  destined  for  the  army
could  not  learn  mathematics  if  they  desired  to  do  so,  inasmuch  as  there  were
neither  schools  nor  masters  to  teach  them.217  Books,  unless  they  were  books  of
devotion,  were  deemed  utterly  useless  ;  no  one  consulted  them  ;  no  one  collected
them  ;  and  until  the  eighteenth  century  Madrid  did  not  possess  a  single  public
library.218  In  other  cities  professedly  devoted  to  purposes  of  education,  similar
ignorance  prevailed.  Salamanca  was  the  seat  of  the  most  ancient  and  most
famous  university  in  Spain,  and  there  if  anywhere  we  might  look  for  the  en-


216  "  Leur  paresse,  et  1'ignorance  non  seulement  des  sciences  et  des  arts,  mais  quas
generalement  de  tout  ce  qui  se  passe  hors  de  1'Espagne,  et  on  peut  dire  meme  hors  du  lieu
oii  ils  habitent,  vont  presque  de  pair,  et  sont  inconcevables.     La  pauvrete  est  grande
parmi  eux,  ce  qui  provient  de  leur  extreme  paresse  ;    car  si  n ombre  de  nos  Francais
n'alloient  faucher  leurs  foins,  couper  leurs  bles  et  faire  leurs  briques,  je  crois  qu'ils  cour-
roient  fortune  de  se  laisser  mourir  de  faim,  et  de  se  tenir  sous  des  tentes  pour  ne  se  pas
donner  la  peine  de  batir  des  maisons."  .  .  .  "  L'education  de  leurs  enfans  est  semblable
a  celle  qu'ils  ont  eu  de  leurs  peres,  c' est -a -dire  sans  qu'ils  apprennent  ni  sciences  ni
exercices  ;  et  je  ne  crois  pas  que  parmi  tous  les  grands  que  j'ay  pratiques,  il  s'en  trouvat
un  seul  qui  sut  decliner  son  nom."  ..."  Ils  n'ont  nulle  curiosite  de    voir   les   pays
etrangers,  et  encore  moins  de  s'enquerir  de  ce  qui  s'y  passe."     Memoires  du  Marechal  de
Gramont,  vol.  ii.  pp.  77,  78,  82,  83,  in  Collection  des  Memoires  par  Petitot  et  Monmerque,
vol.  Ivii.       See  also  Aarsens  de  Sommerdyck,  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Paris,  1665,  4to,  p.  124.

'  La  terre  inesme  n'y  est  pas  toute  cultiuee  par  des  gens  du  pays  :  au  temps  du  labourage,
des  semailles  et  de  la  recolte,  il  leur  vient  quantite  de  paysans  du  Bearn  et  d'autres
endroits  de  France,  qui  gagnent  beaucoup  d' argent,  pour  leur  mettre  leurs  bleds  en  terre
et  pour  les  recueillir.  Les  architectes  et  charpentiers  y  sont  aussi  pour  la  plupart  cs-
trangers,  qui  se  font  payer  au  triple  de  ce  qu'ils  gagneroient  en  leur  pays.  Dans  Madrid
on  ne  voit  pas  un  porteur  d'eau  qui  ne  soit  estranger,  et  la  plupart  des  cordonniers  et
tailleurs  le  sont  aussi."

217  "  Mais  aussi  de  quelle  maniere  les  eleve-t-on  ?  Ils  n'  etudient  point ;  on  neglige  de
leur  donner  d'habiles  precepteurs  ;    des  qu'on  les  destine  a  I'epee,  on  ne  se  soucie  plus
qu'ils  apprennent  le  latin  ni  1'histoire.     On  devroit  au  moins  leur  enseigner  ce  qui  est  de

eur  mestier,  les  mathematiques,  a  faire  des  armes  et  a  monter  a  cheval.  Ils  n'y  pensent
seulement  pas.  II  n'y  a  point  ici  d'Academie  ni  de  maitres  qui  montrent  ces  sortes  de
choses.  Les  jeunes  hommes  passent  le  terns  qu'ils  devroient  emploier  a  s'instruire  dans
un  oisivete  pitoi'able."  Letter  from  Madrid,  dated  27th  June,  1679,  in  D'Aulnoy,  Rela-
tion du  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Lyon,  1693,  vol.  ii.  pp.  232,  233.

218  "  Madrid  etant  la  capitale  d'une  monarchie  aussi  vaste,  il  n'y  eut  dans  cette  ville
jusqu'  a  1'epoque  du  regne  de  Philippe  V.  aucune  bibliotheque  publique."    Sempere,  Dela
Monarchie  Espagnole,  Paris,  1826,  vol.  ii.  p.  79.     [Buckle  had  previously   pointed   out
(above,  ch.  vii.  note  221)  that  in  1725  there  was  not  a  single  public  library  in  London.
The  argument  is  thus  partly  invalid. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE     SPANISH    INTELLECT         589

couragement  of  science.219  But  De  Torres,  who  was  himself  a  Spaniard,  and  was
educated  at  Salamanca  early  in  the  eighteenth  century,  declares  that  he  had
studied  at  that  university  for  five  years  before  he  had  heard  that  such  things  as
the  mathematical  sciences  existed.220  So  late  as  the  year  1771,  the  same  univer-
sity publicly  refused  to  allow  the  discoveries  of  Newton  to  be  taught  ;  and
assigned  as  a  reason  that  the  system  of  Newton  was  not  so  consonant  with  re-
vealed religion  as  the  system  of  Aristotle.221  All  over  Spain  a  similar  plan  was
adopted.  Everywhere  knowledge  was  spurned,  and  inquiry  discouraged.
Feijoo,  who,  notwithstanding  his  superstition,  and  a  certain  slavishness  of  mind,
from  which  no  Spaniard  of  that  age  could  escape,  did  on  matters  of  science  seek
to  enlighten  his  countrymen,  has  left  upon  record  his  deliberate  opinion  that
whoever  had  acquired  all  that  was  taught  in  his  time  under  the  name  of  philo-
sophy would  as  the  reward  of  his  labour  be  more  ignorant  than  he  was  before
he  began.222  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  right.  There  can  be  no


219  The  university  was  transferred  from  Palencia  to  Salamanca,  early  in  the  thirteenth
century.     Forner,  Oration  Apologetica  por  la  Espana,  Madrid,   1786,  p.  170.     By  the
beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century  it  had  become  very  prosperous  (Sempere,  De  la  Man-
archie  Espagnole,  vol  i.  p.  65)  ;    and  in  1535    it  is  described  as  "a  great  Universitie,
conteyning  seven  or  eight  thowsand  students."     See  a  letter  from  John  Mason,  dated
Valladolid,  3rd  July,  1535,  in  Ellis'"  Original  Letters,  second  series,  vol.  ii.  p.  56,  London,
1827.     But,  like  everything  else  which  was  valuable  in  Spain,  it  declined  in  the  seven-
teenth century  ;  and  Monconys,  who  carefully  examined  it  in  1628,  and  praises  some  of  its
arrangements  which  were  still  in  force,  adds,  "  Mais  je  suis  aussi  contraint  de  dire  apres
tant  de  loiianges,  que  les  ecoliers  qui  etudient  dans  cette  universite  sont  des  vrais  igno-
rans."     Les  Voyages  de  Monsieur  de  Moncowys,  Ouatrieme  Partie,  vol.  v.  p.  22,  Paris,
1695.     However,  their  ignorance,  of  which  Monconys  gives  some  curious  instances,  did
not  prevent  Spanish  writers,  then  and  long  afterwards,  from  deeming  the  University  of
Salamanca  to  be  the  greatest  institution  of  its  kind  in  the  world.     "  La  mayor  del  orbe
madre  gloriosisima  de  todas  las  ciencias  y  de  los  mas  vehementes  ingenios,  que  han

lustrado  las  edades."  Vida  de  Calderon  de  la  Barca,  pp.  iii.  iv.,  reprinted  in  Keil's
edition  of  Calderon,  Leipsique,  1827.  Compare  Davila  (Felipe  Tercero,  p.  81),  "  Salamanca,
madre  de  ciencias  y  letras  ;  "  Yanez  (Memorias,  p.  228),  "  Universidad  insigne,  y  Oficina
de  las  buenas  Letras  de  Espana  ;  "  Bacallar  (Comentarios,  vol.  i.  p.  238),  "  El  emporio
de  las  ciencias  ;  "  and  Ximenez  (Vida  de  Ribera,  p.  6),  "  Salamanca,  cathedra  universal
de  las  artes,  y  emporio  de  todas  ciencias."

220  "  Says   that,  after  he  had  been  five  years  in  one  of  the  schools  of  the  university
there,  it  was  by  accident  he  learned  the  existence  of  the  mathematical  sciences."     Tick-
nor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  iii.  p.  223.     A  celebrated  Spanish  writer  of  the
eighteenth  century    actually  boasts  of  the  ignorance  of  his  countrymen  concerning
mathematics,  and  discerns,  in  their  neglect  of  that  foolish  pursuit,  a  decisive  proof  of  their
superiority  over  other  nations.     "  No  se  dexe  deslumbrar  con  los  asperos  calculos  e
intrincadas  demostraciones  geometricas,  con  que,  astuto  el  entendimiento,  disimula  el
engafto  con  los  disfraces  de  la  verdad.     El  uso  de  las  matematicas  es  la  alquimia  en  la
fisica,  que  da  apariencias  de  oro  a  lo  que  no  lo  es."     Forner,  Oration  Apologetica  por  la
Espana  y  su  Merito  Literario,  Madrid,  1786,  p.  38.     Compare  his  contemptuous  notice
(p.  66)  of   those  insignificant  persons   who  "con  titulo   de   filosofos  han  dado  algun
aumento  a  las  matematicas  ;  "    and  his  comparison  (p.  222)  of  Mercado  with  Newton.

221  "  L' universite  de  Salamanque,  excitee  par  le  Conseil,  a  reformer  ses  etudes,  en
1'annee   1771,  lui  repondit  '  qu'elle  ne  pouvait  se  separer  du  peripatetisme,  parce  que
les  systemes  de  Newton,  Gassendi  et  Descartes,  ne  concordent  pas  autant  avec  les
verites  revelees  que  ceux  d'Aristote.'  "     Sempere,   Monarchic  Espagnole,  vol.  ii.  p.  152.
This  reply,  says  M.  Sempere,  p.  153,  may  be  found  "  dans  la  collection  des  ordonnances
royales."     In  Letters  from  Spain  by  an  English  Officer,  London,   1788,  vol.  ii.  p.   256,
it  is  stated  that,  in  all  the  Spanish  universities,  "  Newton,  and  modern  philosophy,  is  still
prohibited.     Nothing  can  supplant  Aristotle,  and  the  superstitious  fathers  and  doctors
of  the  church."

222  Or,  as  he  in  one  place  expresses  himself,  would   know    "  very   little  more  than
nothing."     "  El  que  estudio  Logica,  y  Metaphysica,  con  lo  demas  que,  debaxo  del  nombre


590  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

doubt  that  in  Spain  the  more  a  man  was  taught,  the  less  he  would  know.  For
he  was  taught  that  inquiry  was  sinful,  that  intellect  must  be  repressed,  and  that
credulity  and  submission  were  the  first  of  human  attributes.  The  Duke  de
Saint  Simon,  who,  in  1721  and  1722,  was  the  French  ambassador  at  Madrid,  sums
up  his  observations  by  the  remark  that  in  Spain  science  is  a  crime,  and  ignor-
ance a  virtue.223  Fifty  years  later,  another  shrewd  observer,  struck  with  amaze-
ment at  the  condition  of  the  national  mind,  expresses  his  opinion  in  a  sentence
equally  pithy  and  almost  equally  severe.  Searching  for  an  illustration  to  convey
his  sense  of  the  general  darkness,  he  emphatically  says  that  the  common  educa-
tion of  an  English  gentleman  would  in  Spain  constitute  a  man  of  learning.224

Those  who  know  what  the  common  education  of  an  English  gentleman  was
eighty  years  ago  will  appreciate  the  force  of  this  comparison,  and  will  understand
how  benighted  a  country  must  have  been  to  which  such  a  taunt  was  applicable.
To  expect  that  under  such  a  state  of  things  the  Spaniards  should  make  any  of
the  discoveries  which  accelerate  the  march  of  nations,  would  be  idle  indeed  ;  for
they  would  not  even  receive  the  discoveries  which  other  nations  had  made  for
them,  and  had  cast  into  the  common  lap.  So  loyal  and  orthodox  a  people  had
nothing  to  do  with  novelties,  which,  being  innovations  on  ancient  opinions,  were
fraught  with  danger.  The  Spaniards  desired  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  their  ances-
tors, and  not  have  their  faith  in  the  past  rudely  disturbed.  In  the  inorganic
world  the  magnificent  discoveries  of  Newton  were  contumeliously  rejected  ;
and  in  the  organic  world  the  circulation  of  the  blood  was  denied,  more  than
a  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  Harvey  had  proved  it.225  These  things  were  new,
and  it  was  better  to  pause  a  little,  and  not  receive  them  too  hastily.  On  the
same  principle,  when  in  the  year  1760  some  bold  men  in  the  government  pro-
posed that  the  streets  of  Madrid  should  be  cleansed,  so  daring  a  suggestion  ex-
cited general  anger.  Not  only  the  vulgar,  but  even  those  who  were  called
educated,  were  loud  in  their  censure.  The  medical  profession,  as  the  guardians
of  the  public  health,  were  desired  by  the  government  to  give  their  opinion.


de  Philosofia,  se  enseiia  en  las  Escuelas,  por  bien  que  sepa  todo,  sabe  muy  poco  mas  que
nada  ;  pero  suena  mucho.  Dicese,  que  es  un  gran  Philosofo  ;  y  no  es  Philosofo  grande,
ni  chico."  Feijoo,  Theatro  Critico  Universal,  vol.  ii.  p.  187,  quinta  impression,  Madrid

1741-

223  "  La  science  est  un  crime,  1'ignorance  et  la  stupidite  la  premiere  vertu."     Memoir  es
du  Due  de  Saint  Simon,  vol.  xxxv.  p.  209,  Paris,  1840.     Elsewhere  (vol.  xxxvi.  p.  252)
he  says,  "  Les  jesuites  savants  partout  et  en  tout  genre  de  science,  ce  qui  ne  leur  est  pas
meme  dispute  par  leurs  ennemis,  les  jesuites,  dis-je,  sont  ignorants  en  Espagne,  mais
d'une  ignorance  a  surprendre."

224  "  The  common  education  of  an  English  gentleman  would  constitute  a  man  of
learning  here  ;    and   should  he  understand  Greek,  he  would  be  quite  a  phenomenon."
Swinburne's  Travels  through  Spain  in  1775  and  1776,  vol.  ii.  pp.  212,  213,  2nd  edit.,  Lon-
don, 1787.

225  So  late  as  1787,  Townsend,  a  very  accomplished  man,  who  travelled  through  Spain
with  the  express  object  of  noting  the  state  of  knowledge,  as  well  as  the  economical  con-
dition of  the  country,  and  who  by  previous  study  had  well  qualified  himself  for  such  an
undertaking,  says,  "  I  have  observed  in  general  that  the  physicians  with  whom  I  have
had  occasion  to  converse  are  disciples  of  their  favourite  doctor  Piquer,  who  denied,  or  at
least  doubted  of,  the  circulation  of  the  blood."     Townsend' s  Journey  through  Spain,  2nd
ed.,  London,  1792,  vol.  iii.  p.  281.     At  that  time  the  Spanish  physicians  were  however
beginning  to  read  Hoffmann,  Cullen,  and  other  heretical  speculators,  in  whose  works  they
would  find,  to  their  astonishment,  that  the  circulation  of  the  blood  was  assumed,  and  was
not  even  treated  as  a  debatable  question.     But  the  students  were  obliged  to  take  such
matters  on  trust ;    for,  adds  Townsend,  p.  282,  "  In  their  medical  classes  they  had  no
dissections."     Compare  Laborde's  Spain,  vol.  i.  p.  76,  vol.  iii.  p.  315,  London,  1809,  and
Godoy's  Memoirs,  London,  1836,  vol.  ii.  p.  157.      Godoy,  speaking  of  the  three  colleges
of  surgery  at  Madrid,  Barcelona,  and  Cadiz,  says  that  until  his  administration  in  i793>
"  In  the  capital,  even  that  of  San  Carlos  had  not  a  lecture -room  for  practical  instruction,"-


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          591

This  they  had  no  difficulty  in  doing.  They  had  no  doubt  that  the  dirt  ought  to
remain.  To  remove  it  was  a  new  experiment  ;  and  of  new  experiments  it  was
impossible  to  foresee  the  issue.  Their  fathers  having  lived  in  the  midst  of  it,  why
should  not  they  do  the  same  ?  Their  fathers  were  wise  men,  and  must  have  had
good  reasons  for  their  conduct.  Even  the  smell,  of  which  some  persons  com-
plained, was  most  likely  wholesome.  For  the  air  being  sharp  and  piercing,  it
was  extremely  probable  that  bad  smells  made  the  atmosphere  heavy,  and  in  that
way  deprived  it  of  some  of  its  injurious  properties.  The  physicians  of  Madrid
were  therefore  of  opinion  that  matters  had  better  remain  as  their  ancestors  had
left  them,  and  that  no  attempts  should  be  made  to  purify  the  capital  by  removing
the  filth  which  lay  scattered  on  every  side.226

While  such  notions  prevailed  respecting  the  preservation  of  health,22?  it  is
hardly  to  be  supposed  that  the  treatment  of  disease  should  be  very  successful.
To  bleed  and  to  purge  were  the  only  remedies  prescribed  by  the  Spanish  phy-
sicians.228 Their  ignorance  of  the  commonest  functions  of  the  human  body  was

226  This  little  episode  is  noticed  by  Cabarrus,  in  his  Elogio  de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1789,
4to,  p.  xiv.     "  La  salubridad  del  ayre,  la  limpieza  y  seguridad  de  las  calles."  ..."  Pero  <;
quien  creera  que  este  noble  empefio  produxo  las  mas  vivas  quejas :  que  se  conmovio  el  vulgo
de  todas  clases  ;  y  que  tuvo  varias  autoridades  a  su  favor  la  extrana  doctrina  de  que  los
vapores  mefiticos  eran  un  corrective  saludable  de  la  rigidez  del  clima  ?  "     But  the  fullest
details  will  be  found  in  the  recently  published  and  very  elaborate  History  of  Charles  III.,
by  M.  Rio,  from  which  I  will  give  one  or  two  extracts.     "  Para  la  limpieza  de  las  calles
poseia  mayores  6  menores  fondos  el  ayuntamiento,  y  cuando  el  Rey  quiso  poner  la  mano
en  este  ramo  de  policia,  le  presentaron  dictamenes  de  medicos  en  que  se   defendia   el
absurdo  de  ser  elemento  de  salubridad  la  basura."    Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,
Madrid,  1856,  vol.  iv.  p.  54.      See  also  vol.  i.  pp.  267,  268,  where  it  is  mentioned  that
when  the  minister  Esquilache  persevered  in  his  attempts  to  have  the  streets  of  Madrid
cleansed,  the  opponents  of  the  scheme  made  inquiries  into  the  opinions  of  their  fathers
on  that  subject ;    and  the  result  was,  "  que  le  presentaron  cierta  originalisima  consult  a
hecha  por  los  medicos  bajo  el  reinado  de  uno  de  los  Felipes  de  Austria,  y  reducida  a
demostrar  que,  siendo  sumamente  sutil  el  aire  de  la  poblacion  a  causa  de  estar  proxima
la  sierra  de  Guadarrama,  ocasionaria  los  mayores  estragos  si  no  se  impregnara  en  los
vapores  de  las  inmundicias  desparramadas  por  las  calles."    That  this  idea  had  long  been
entertained  by  the  physicians  of  Madrid   we  also  know  from  another  testimony,  with
which  none  of  the  Spanish  historians  are  acquainted.     Sir  Richard  Wynne,  who  visited
that  capital  in  1623,  describes  a  disgusting  practice  of  the  inhabitants,  and  adds,  "  Being
desirous  to  know  why  so  beastly  a  custom  is  suffered,  they  say  it's  a  thing  prescribed  by
their  physicians  ;  for  they  hold  the  air  to  be  so  piercing  and  subtle,  that  this  kind  of
corrupting  it  with  these  ill  vapours  keeps  it  in  good  temper."     The  Autobiography  and
Correspondence  of  Sir  Simonds  D'Ewes,  edited  by  J.  O.  Halliwell,  London,  1845,  vol  ii;
p.  446.

227  Even  thirty  years  later,  it  was  said  with  good  reason  that  "  es  menester  deshacer
todo  lo  que  se  ha  hecho,"  and  "  confiar  exclusivamente  el  precioso  deposito  de  la  sanidad
publica  a  las  manos  capaces  de  conservarlo  y  mejorarlo."     Cartas  por  el  Conde  de  Cabarrus,
Madrid,  1813,  p.  280.     These  letters,  which,  though  little  known,  contain  some  interesting
statements,  were  written  in  1792  and  1793.     See  p.  34,  and  Prologo,  p.  i.

228  Bleeding,  however,  had  the  preference.     See  the  curious  evidence  in  Townsend's
Journey  through  Spain  in  1786  and  1787,  vol.  ii.  pp.  37~39-     Townsend,  who  had  some
knowledge  of  medicine,  was  amazed  at  the  ignorance  and  recklessness  of  the  Spanish
physicians.     He  says,  "  The  science  and  practice  of  medicine  are  at  the  lowest  ebb  in
Spain,  but  more  especially  in  the  Asturias."     Compare  Sprengel,  Histoire  de  la  Medecine,
vol.  iii.  p.  217,  Paris,  1815,  with  Winwood's  Memorials,  London,  1725,  folio,  vol.  ii.  p.  219.
The  last  reference  shows  the  terrible  "  purging  and  letting  blood,"  to  which  the  unfor-
tunate Spaniards  were  exposed  in  the  reign  of  Philip  III.     Another  observer,  much  later,
states  that  "  La  saignee  leur  est  assez  familiere.     Us  se  la  font  faire  hors  du  lit  tant  que
leurs  forces  le  permettent,  et  lorsqu*  Us  en  usent  par  precaution,  Us  se  font  tirer  du  sang  deux
jours  de  suite  du  bras  droit  et  du  gauche,  disant  qtfil  faut  egaliser  le  sang.     On  peut  juger
de  la,  si  la  circulation  leur  est  connue."     Voyages  faits  en  Espagne,  par  Monsieur  M**


592  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

altogether  surprising,  and  can  only  be  explained  on  the  supposition,  that  in
medicine  as  in  other  departments  the  Spaniards  of  the  eighteenth  century  knew
no  more  than  their  progenitors  of  the  sixteenth.  Indeed,  in  some  respects  they
appeared  to  know  less.  For  their  treatment  was  so  violent  that  it  was  almost
certain  death  to  submit  to  it  for  any  length  of  time.229  Their  own  king,  Philip  V.,
did  not  dare  to  trust  himself  in  their  hands,  but  preferred  having  an  Irishman  for
his  physician.230  Though  the  Irish  had  no  great  medical  reputation,  anything
was  better  than  a  Spanish  doctor.231  The  arts  incidental  to  medicine  and  surgery
were  equally  backward.  The  instruments  were  rudely  made,  and  the  drugs
badly  prepared.  Pharmacy  being  unknown,  the  apothecaries'  shops  in  the
largest  towns  were  entirely  supplied  from  abroad  ;  while  in  the  smaller  towns,
and  in  districts  remote  from  the  capital,  the  medicines  were  of  such  a  quality,  that
the  best  which  could  be  hoped  of  them  was  that  they  might  be  innocuous.  For
in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  Spain  did  not  possess  one  practical
chemist.  Indeed,  we  are  assured  by  Campomanes  himself  that  so  late  as  the
year  1776  there  was  not  to  be  found  in  the  whole  country  a  single  man  who  knew
how  to  make  the  commonest  drugs,  such  as  magnesia,  Glauber's  salts,  and  the
ordinary  preparations  of  mercury  and  antimony.  This  eminent  statesman  adds,
however,  that  a  chemical  laboratory  was  about  to  be  established  in  Madrid  ;  and
although  the  enterprise,  being  without  a  precedent,  would  surely  be  regarded  as
a  portentous  novelty,  he  expresses  a  confident  expectation  that  by  its  aid  the
universal  ignorance  of  his  countrymen  would  in  time  be  remedied.232

Amsterdam,  1700,  p.  112.  See  further  Clarke's  Letters  concerning  the  Spanish  Nation,
London,  4to,  1763,  p.  55,  and  Spain  by  an  American,  London,  1831,  vol.  ii.  p.  321.

229  In  1780  poor  Cumberland,  when  in  Madrid,  was  as  nearly  as  possible  murdered  by
three  of  their  surgeons  in  a  very  few  days  ;   the  most  dangerous  of  his  assailants  being  no

ess  a  man  than  the  "  chief  surgeon  of  the  Gardes  de  Corps,"  who,  says  the  unfortunate
sufferer,  was  "  sent  to  me  by  authority."  See  Memoirs  of  Richard  Cumberland,  written
by  Himself,  London,  1807,  vol.  ii.  pp.  67,  68.  $

230  Duclos  says  of  Philip  V.,  "  II  etoit  fort  attentif  sur  sa  sante  ;  son  medecin,  s'il  cut
ete  intriguant,  auroit  pu  jouer  un  grand  role.     Hyghins,  Irlandois,  qui  occupoit  cette
premiere  place,  fort  eloigne  de  1'intrigue  et  de  la  cupidite,  instruit  dans  son  art,  s'en
occupoit  uniquement.     Apres  sa  mort,  la  reine  fit  donner  la  place  a  Servi,  son  medecin
particulier."     Memoires  par  Duclos,  26  edit.  Paris,  1791,  vol.  ii.  pp.  200,  201.    "  Hyghens,
premier  medecin,  etait  Irlandais."     Memoires  du  Due  de  Saint  Simon,  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  215,
ed.  Paris,  1841.

231  In  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Spaniards,  generally,  began  to  admit  this  ;    since
they  could  not  shut  their  eyes  to  the  fact  that  their  friends  and  relations  succumbed  so
rapidly  under  professional  treatment  that  sickness  and  death  were  almost  synonymous.
Hence,  notwithstanding  their  hatred  of  the  French  nation,  they  availed  themselves  of  the
services  of  French  physicians  and  French  surgeons,  whenever  they  had  an  opportunity
of  doing  so.      In  1707  the  Princess  des  Ursins  writes  from  Madrid  to  Madame  de  Main-
tenon,  "  Les  chirurgiens  espagnols  sont  mesestimes  meme  de  ceux  de  leur  nation  ;  "  and
in  another  letter,  "  Les  Espagnols  conviennent  que  les  medecins  francais  sont  beaucoup
plus  savants  que  les  leurs  ;  ils  s'en  servent  meme  tres-volon tiers,  mais  ils  sont  persuades
que  ceux  de  la  faculte  de  Montpellier  1'emportent  sur  les  autres."     Lettres  inedites  de
Madame  de  Maintenon  et  de  la  Princesse  des  Ursins,  vol.  iii.  p.  412,  vol.  iv.  p.  90.

232  Campomanes  (Apendice  a  la  Educacion  Popular,  Madrid,  1776,  vol.  iii.  pp.  74»  75 )»
speaking  of  a  work  on  distillation,  says,  "  La  tercera  (parte)  describe  la  preparacion  de
los  productos  quimicos  solidos  :    esto  es  la  preparacion  de  varias  sustancias  terreas,
como  argamasa,  magnesia  blanca,  ojos  de  cangrejo  etc.,  la  de  varios  sales,  como  sal  de
glaubero,  amoniaco,  cristal  mineral,  borax  refinado  etc.,  y  la  del  antimonio,  mercuric,
plomo,  litargirio  etc.,  comunicando  sobre  todo  lo  expresado  varias  noticias,  que  demues-
tran  lo  mucho  que  conducen  a  los  progresos  del  arte,  las  observaciones  del  fisico  reflexivo  :
unidas  a  la  practica  de  un  profesor  experimentado.     Este  arte  en  toda  su  extension  falta  en
Espana.     Solo  le  tenemos  para  aguardientes,  rosolis,  y  mistelas.     La  salud  piiblica  es
demasiado  importante,  para  depender  de  los  estranos  en  cosas  esenciales  ;   quando  no  esti-
mulase  nuestra  industria  la  manutencion  de  muchas  familias."  ..."  Gran    parte    de
estas  cosas  se  introducen  de  fuera,  por  no  coriocerse  bien  las  operaciones  qu  micas.     No


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          593

Whatever  was  useful  in  practice,  or  whatever  subserved  the  purposes  of  know-
ledge, had  to  come  from  abroad.  Eiisenada,  the  well-known  minister  of  Fer-
dinand VI.,  was  appalled  by  the  darkness  and  apathy  of  the  nation,  which  he  tried,
but  tried  in  vain,  to  remove.  When  he  was  at  the  head  of  affairs,  in  the  middle
of  the  eighteenth  century,  he  publicly  declared  that  in  Spain  there  was  no  pro-
fessorship of  public  law,  or  of  physics,  or  of  anatomy,  or  of  botany.  He  further
added  that  there  were  no  good  maps  of  Spain,  and  that  there  was  no  person  who
knew  how  to  construct  them.  All  the  maps  which  they  had  came  from  France
and  Holland.  They  were,  he  said,  very  inaccurate  ;  but  the  Spaniards,  being
unable  to  make  any,  had  nothing  else  to  rely  on.  Such  a  state  of  things  he
pronounced  to  be  shameful.  For,  as  he  bitterly  complained,  if  it  were  not  for  the
exertions  of  Frenchmen  and  Dutchmen  it  would  be  impossible  for  any
Spaniard  to  know  either  the  position  of  his  own  town,  or  the  distance  from  one
place  to  another.233

The  only  remedy  for  all  this  seemed  to  be  foreign  aid  ;  and  Spain  being  now
ruled  by  a  foreign  dynasty,  that  aid  was  called  in.  Cervi  established  the  Medical
Societies  of  Madrid  and  of  Seville  ;  Virgili  founded  the  College  of  Surgery  at
Cadiz  ;  and  Bowles  endeavoured  to  promote  among  the  Spaniards  the  study  of
mineralogy.234  Professors  were  sought  for  far  and  wide  ;  and  application  was
made  to  Linnaeus  to  send  a  person  from  Sweden  who  could  impart  some  idea  of
botany  to  physiological  students.235  Many  other  and  similar  steps  were  taken
by  the  government,  whose  indefatigable  exertions  would  deserve  our  warmest
praise,  if  we  did  not  know  how  impossible  it  is  for  any  government  to  enlighten  a
nation,  and  how  absolutely  essential  it  is  that  the  desire  for  improvement  should
n  the  first  place  proceed  from  the  people  themselves.*  No  progress  is  real  unless

son  dificultosas  en  la  execucion  ;  pero  es  necesario  ensenarlas,  y  conocer  los  instrumentos
que  son  aproposito.  Un  laboratorio  quimico,  que  se  va  d  establecer  en  Madrid,  producira
maestros  para  las  capitales  del  reyno."

233  "  Su  ministro  el  celebre  Ensenada,  que  tenia  grandes  miras  en  todos  los  ramos  de  la
administration  publica,  deseaba  ardientemente  mejorar  la  ensenanza,  lamentandose  del
atraso  en  que  esta  se  hallaba.     '  Es  menester,  decia  hablando  de  las  universidades,  reglar
sus  catedras,reformar  las  superfluas  y  establecer  las  que  f altan  con  nuevas  ordenanzas  para
asegurar  el  mejor  metodo  de  estudios.     No  se  que  haya  catedra  alguna  de  derecho  publico,
de  fisica  esperimental,  de  anatomia  y  botanica.     No  hay  puntuales  cartas   geograficas
del  reino  y  de  sus  provincias,  ni  quien  las  sepa  grabar,  ni  tenemos  otras  que  las  imperfectas
que  vienen  de  Francia  y  Holanda.  De  esto  proviene  que  ignoramos  la  verdadera  situacion
de  los  pueblos  y  sus  distancias,  que  es  una  vergiienza.'  "     Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,
Madrid,  1840,  vol.  iv.  pp.  268,  269.     See  also  Biografia  de  Ensenada,  in  Navarrete,  Colec-
cion  de  Opusculos,  Madrid,  1848,  vol.  ii.  pp.  21,  22.     "  Le  parecia  vergonzoso  que  para
conocer  la  situacion  y  distancias  respectivas  de  nuestros  mismos  pueblos  y  lagures,
dependiesemos  de  los  franceses  y  holandeses,  quienes  por  sus  mapas  imperfectas  de  la
peninsula  extraian  de  ella  sumas  considerables."     Eighty  years  after  this  complaint  was
made  by  Ensenada,  we  find  a  traveller  in  Spain  stating  that  "  a  decent  map  of  any  part,
even  of  the  country  round  the  gates  of  the  capital,  cannot  be  found."     Cook's  Spain
from  1829  to  1832,  London,  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  322.     Compare  Notices  of  Geological  Memoirs,
p.  i,  at  the  end  of  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  the  Geological  Society,  vol.  vi.,  London,  1850  ;
''  even  a  good  geographical  map  of  the  Peninsula  does  not  exist."

234  M.  Rio  (Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  i.  p.  185)  mentions  this  in  a  very
characteristic  manner.     "  Varies  extranjeros  distinguidos  hallaron  fraternidad  entre  los'
espanoles,  y  correspondieron  hidalgamente  al  hospedaje  :    Cervi  dio  vida  a  las  sociedades
medicas  de  Madrid  y  Sevilla  ;    Virgili  al  colegio  de  cirugia  de  Cadiz  ;    Quer  trabajo  sin
descanso  para  que  el  jardin  Botanico  no  fuera  un  simple  lugar  de  recreo,  sino  principal -
mente  de  estudio  ;   Bowles  comunico  grande  impulse  a  la  mineralogia,"  etc.

235  i  have  mislaid  the  evidence  of  this  fact  ;  but  the  reader  may  rely  on  its  accuracy.

[*  See  notes  above,  pp.  155,  163,  346,  354,  372.  In  thus  calling  for  an  absolutely
spontaneous — i.e.  uncaused — change  of  mind  on  the  part  of  a  nation,  Buckle  departs
from  his  primary  principles.  His  words  as  to  "  general  causes  "  in  this  passage  carry  a
quite  fallacious  implication.  Schools  are  "general  causes." — ED.]


594  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

it  is  spontaneous.  The  movement,  to  be  effective,  must  emanate  from  within,
and  not  from  without  ;  it  must  be  due  to  general  causes  acting  on  the  whole
country,  and  not  to  the  mere  will  of  a  few  powerful  individuals.  During  the
eighteenth  century  all  the  means  of  improvement  were  lavishly  supplied  to  the
Spaniards  ;  but  the  Spaniards  did  not  want  to  improve.  They  were  satisfied
with  themselves  ;  they  were  sure  of  the  accuracy  of  their  own  opinions  ;
they  were  proud  of  the  notions  which  they  inherited,  and  which  they  did
not  wish  either  to  increase  or  to  diminish.  Being  unable  to  doubt,  they
were,  therefore,  unwilling  to  inquire.  New  and  beautiful  truths,  conveyed  in  the
clearest  and  most  attractive  language,  could  produce  no  effect  upon  men  whose
minds  were  thus  hardened  and  enslaved.236  An  unhappy  combination  of  events,
working  without  interruption  since  the  fifth  century,  had  predetermined  the
national  character  in  a  particular  direction,  and  neither  statesmen,  nor  kings,
nor  legislators,  could  effect  aught  against  it.  The  seventeenth  century  was,
however,  the  climax  of  all.  In  that  age  the  Spanish  nation  fell  into  a  sleep
from  which,  as  a  nation,  it  has  never  since  awakened.*  It  was  a  sleep  not  of
repose,  but  of  death.  It  was  a  sleep  in  which  the  faculties,  instead  of  being
rested,  were  paralyzed,  and  in  which  a  cold  and  universal  torpor  succeeded
that  glorious  though  partial  activity  which,  while  it  made  the  name  of  Spain
terrible  in  the  world,  had  insured  the  respect  even  of  her  bitterest  enemies.

Even  the  fine  arts,  in  which  the  Spaniards  had  formerly  excelled,  partook  of  the
general  degeneracy,  and,  according  to  the  confession  of  their  own  writers,  had
by  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  fallen  into  complete  decay.237  The
arts  which  secure  national  safety  were  in  the  same  predicament  as  those  which
minister  to  national  pleasure.  There  was  no  one  in  Spain  who  could  build  a  ship  ;
there  was  no  one  who  knew  how  to  rig  it  after  it  was  built.  The  consequence
was  that  by  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  few  ships  which  Spain
possessed  were  so  rotten  that,  says  an  historian,  they  could  hardly  support  the
fire  of  their  own  guns.238  In  1752  the  government,  being  determined  to  restore
the  navy,  found  it  necessary  to  send  to  England  for  shipwrights  ;  and  they  were
also  obliged  to  apply  to  the  same  quarter  for  persons  who  could  make  ropes  and
canvas  ;  the  skill  of  the  natives  being  unequal  to  such  arduous  achievements.239
In  this  way  the  ministers  of  the  Crown,  whose  ability  and  vigour,  considering
the  difficult  circumstances  in  which  the  incapacity  of  the  people  placed  them,
were  extremely  remarkable,  contrived  to  raise  a  fleet  superior  to  any  which  had

236  Townsend  (Journey  through  Spain  in  1786  and  1787,  vol.  ii.  p.  275)  says,  "Don
Antonio  Solano,  professor  of  experimental  philosophy,  merits  attention  for  the  clearness
and  precision  of  his  demonstrations  ;   but,  unfortunately,  although  his  lectures  are  de-
livered gratis,  such  is  the  want  of  taste  for  science  in  Madrid,  that  nobody  attends  them."

237  "  La  ignorancia  reinante  en  los  ultimos   anos  del  siglo  xvii  depravo  en  tal  manera
el  buen  gusto,  que  a  principios  del  xviii  las  artes  se  hallaban  en  la  mas  lastimosa   deca-
dencia."     Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,  Madrid,  1840,  vol.  iv.  p.  346.     See  also,  on  this
decline,  or  rather  destruction,  of  taste,  Velazquez,  Origenes  de  la  Poesia  Castellana,  Malaga,
1754,  4*0.     "  Un  siglo  corrompido,  en  que  las  letras  estaban  abandonadas,  y  el  buen  gusto
casi  desterrado  de  toda  la  nacion."  p.  70.     "  Al  passo  que  la  nacion  perdia  el  buen  gusto,
y  las  letras  iban  caminando  a  su  total  decadencia."  p.  107.     "  Los  caminos  por  donde
nuestros  poetas  en  el  siglo  passado  se  apartaron  del  buen  gusto  en  esta  parte."  p.  170.

238  "  Solo  cuatro  navios  de  linea  y  seis  de  poco  porte  dejaron  los  reyes  de  origen  austri-
aco,  y  todos  tan  podridos  que  apenas  podian  aguantar  el  fuego  de  sus  propias  baterias."
Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1856,  vol.  i.  p.  184.

239  "  Se  mandaron  construir  12  navios  a  la  vez,  y  se  contrataron  otros.     Por  medio  de
D.  Jorge  Juan  se  trajeron  de  Inglaterra  los  mas  habiles  constructores  y  maestros  para  las
fabricas  de  jarcia,  lona  y  otras."     Biografia    de  Ensenada,  in  Navarrete,  Coleccion  de
Opusculos,  Madrid,  1848,  vol.  ii.  p.  18.     M.  Rio,  taking  all  this  as  a  matter  of  course,
quietly  says,  "  D.  Jorge  Juan  fue  a  Londres  para  estudiar  la  construccion  de  navios."
Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1856.  vol.  iv.  p.  485.

[*  This  is  clearly  an  exaggeration — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          595

been  seen  in  Spain  for  more  than  a  century .2*0  They  also  took  many  other  steps
towards  putting  the  national  defences  into  a  satisfactory  condition  ;  though  in
every  instance  they  were  forced  to  rely  on  the  aid  of  foreigners.  Both  the
military  and  the  naval  service  were  in  utter  confusion,  and  had  to  be  organized
afresh.  The  discipline  of  the  infantry  was  re-modelled  by  O'Reilly,  an  Irishman,
to  whose  superintendence  the  military  schools  of  Spain  were  intrusted.241  At
Cadiz  a  great  naval  academy  was  formed,  but  the  head  of  it  was  Colonel  Godin,
a  French  officer.242  The  artillery,  which  like  everything  else  had  become  almost
useless,  was  improved  by  Maritz,  the  Frenchman  ;  while  the  same  service  was
rendered  to  the  arsenals  by  Gazola,  the  Italian.243

The  mines,  which  form  one  of  the  greatest  natural  sources  of  the  wealth  of
Spain,  had  likewise  suffered  from  that  ignorance  and  apathy  into  which  the
force  of  circumstances  had  plunged  the  country.  They  were  either  completely
neglected,  or  if  worked,  they  were  worked  by  other  nations.  The  celebrated
cobalt -mine,  situated  in  the  valley  of  Gist  an  in  Aragon,  was  entirely  in  the  hands
of  the  Germans,  who,  during  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  derived
immense  profit  from  it.244  In  the  same  way,  the  silver -mines  of  Guadalcanal,
the  richest  in  Spain,  were  undertaken  not  by  natives  but  by  foreigners.  Though
they  had  been  discovered  in  the  sixteenth  century,  they,  as  well  as  other  matters
of  importance,  had  been  forgotten  in  the  seventeenth,  and  were  re -opened  in
1728  by  English  adventurers  ;  the  enterprise,  the  tools,  the  capital,  and  even
the  miners,  all  coming  from  England.245  Another  and  still  more  famous  mine
is  that  of  Almaden  in  La  Mancha,  which  produces  mercury  of  the  finest  quality,
and  in  great  profusion.  This  metal,  besides  being  indispensable  for  many  of
the  commonest  arts,  was  of  peculiar  value  to  Spain,  because  without  it  the  gold
and  silver  of  the  New  World  could  not  be  extracted  from  their  ores.  From
Almaden,  where  every  natural  facility  exists  for  collecting  it,  and  where  the
cinnabar  in  which  it  is  found  is  unusually  rich,  vast  supplies  had  formerly  been
drawn  ;  but  they  had  for  some  time  been  diminishing,  although  the  demand,
especially  from  foreign  countries,  was  on  the  increase.  Under  these  circum-

240  M.  Lafuente  says  that  Ensenada  was  the  restorer,  and  almost  the  creator,  of  the
Spanish  navy  ;   "  de  la  cual  fue  el  restaurador,  y  casi  pudiera  decirse  el  creador."     Lafu-
ente, Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xix.  p.  344,  Madrid,  1857.

241  "  C'est  par  un  Irlandais  aussi,  Oreilly,  que  la  discipline  de  1'infanterie  est  reformee.
Bourgoing,  Tableau  de  VEspagne  Moderne,  Paris,  1808,  vol.  ii.  p.  142.     "  Las  escuelas
militares  del  puerto  de  Sta.  Maria  para  la  infanteria,  que  dirigio  con  tanto  acierto  el
general  Ofarril  bajo  las  ordenes  del  conde  de  O'Reilly."     Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,
vol.  iv.  p.  128.

242  "  Vino  a  dirigir  la  academia  de  guardias  marinas  de  Cadiz."     Tapia,  Civilization
Espanola,  vol.  iv.  p.  79.     "  Godin  figuro  como  director  del  colegio  de  guardias  marinas."
Rio,  Historia  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  i.  p.  186.     Compare  Biographic  Universelle,  vol.  xvii.
p.  564,  Paris,  1816.

243  See  the  interesting  remarks  in  Bourgoing,  Tableau  de  VEspagne  Moderne,  Paris,  1808
vol.  ii.  pp.  96,  142.     With  good  reason  therefore  was  it  stated,  some  years  afterwards,
that  "  c'est  a  des  etrangers  que  1'Espagne  doit  presque  tous  les  plans,  les  reformes  utiles
et  les  connoissances  dont  elle  a  eu  besoin."     Voyage  en  Espagne  par  le  Marquis  de  Langle,
!785,  vol.  ii.  p.  159.

244  "  Como  los  del  pais  entendian  poco  de  trabajar  minas,  vinieron  de  Alemania  algunos
practices  para  ensenarlos."  ..."  Los  Alemanes  sacaron  de  dicha    mina    por    largo
tiempo  cosa  de  500  a  600  quintales  de  cobalto  al  afio."     Bowles,  Historia  Natural  de
Espana,  Madrid,  1789,  4to,  pp.  418,  419.     See  also  Dillon's  Spain,  Dublin,  1781,  pp.  227-
229.

245  "  In  1728  a  new  adventurer  undertook  the  work  of  opening  the  mines  of  Guadal-
canal.    This  was  Lady  Mary  Herbert,  daughter  of  the  Marquis  of  Powis."  ..."  Lady
Mary  departed  from  Madrid  for  Guadalcanal,  to  which  miners  and  engines  had  been  sent
from  England  at  her  expense,  and  at  that  of  her  relation,  Mr.  Gage,  who  accompanied
her,  and  of  her  father,  the  marquis."     Jacob's  Historical  Inquiry  into  the  Production  and
Consumption  of  the  Precious  Metals,  London,  1831,  vol.  i.  pp.  278,  279-


596  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

stances  the  Spanish  government,  fearing  that  so  important  a  source  of  wealth
might  altogether  perish,  determined  to  institute  an  inquiry  into  the  manner  in
which  the  mine  was  worked.  As,  however,  no  Spaniard  possessed  the  knowledge
requisite  for  such  an  investigation,  the  advisers  of  the  Crown  were  obliged  to
call  on  foreigners  to  help  them.  In  1752  an  Irish  naturalist  named  Bowles
was  commissioned  to  visit  Almaden,  and  ascertain  the  cause  of  the  failure.  He
found  that  the  miners  had  acquired  a  habit  of  sinking  their  shafts  perpendicularly,
instead  of  following  the  direction  of  the  vein.246  So  absurd  a  process  was  quite
sufficient  to  account  for  their  want  of  success  ;  and  Bowles  reported  to  the  govern-
ment, that  if  a  shaft  were  to  be  sunk  obliquely,  the  mine  would  no  doubt  again
be  productive.  The  government  approved  of  the  suggestion,  and  ordered  it  to'
be  carried  into  effect.  But  the  Spanish  miners  were  too  tenacious  of  their  old
customs  to  give  way.  They  sank  their  shafts  in  the  same  manner  as  their  fathers
had  done  ;  and  what  their  fathers  had  done,  must  be  right.  The  result  was
that  the  mine  had  to  be  taken  out  of  their  hands  ;  but  as  Spain  could  supply
no  other  labourers,  it  was  necessary  to  send  to  Germany  for  fresh  ones.247  After
their  arrival  matters  rapidly  improved.  The  mine,  being  superintended  by  an
Irishman  and  worked  by  Germans,  assumed  quite  a  different  appearance  ;  and
notwithstanding  the  disadvantages  with  which  new  comers  always  have  to  con-
tend, the  immediate  consequence  of  the  change  was  that  the  yield  of  mercury
was  doubled,  and  its  cost  to  the  consumer  correspondingly  lowered.248

Such  ignorance,  pervading  the  whole  nation,  and  extending  to  every  depart-
ment of  life,  is  hardly  conceivable,  considering  the  immense  advantages  which
the  Spaniards  had  formerly  enjoyed.  It  is  particularly  striking  when  con-
trasted with  the  ability  of  the  government,  which  for  more  than  eighty  years
constantly  laboured  to  improve  the  condition  of  the  country.  Early  in  the
eighteenth  century,  Ripperda,  in  the  hopes  of  stimulating  Spanish  industry,
established  a  large  woollen  manufactory  at  Segovia,  which  had  once  been  a  busy
and  prosperous  city.  But  the  commonest  processes  had  now  been  forgotten  ;
and  he  was  obliged  to  import  manufacturers  from  Holland  to  teach  the  Spaniards
how  to  make  up  the  wool,  though  that  was  an  art  for  which  in  better  days  they
had  been  especially  famous.249  In  1757  Wall,  who  was  then  minister,  constructed
upon  a  still  larger  scale  a  similar  manufactory  at  Guadalajara  in  New  Castile.
Soon,  however,  something  went  wrong  with  the  machinery  ;  and  as  the  Spaniards
neither  knew  nor  cared  anything  about  these  matters,  it  was  necessary  to  send

246  "  Los  mineros  de  Almaden  nunca  hicieron  los  socavones  siguiendo  la  inclinacion  de
las  betas,  sino  perpendiculares,  y  baxaban  a  ellos  puestos  en  una  especie  de  cubos  atados
desde  arriba  con  cuerdas.     De  este  mal  metodo  se  origino  todo  el  desorden  de  la  mina,
porque  al  paso  que  los  operarios  penetraban  dentro  de  tierra,  era  forzoso  que  se  apartasen
de  las  betas  y  las  perdiesen."     Bowles,  Historia  Natural  de  Espana,  Madrid,  1789,  4to,
p.  14.

247  "  Fue  mi  proyecto  bien  recibido  del  Ministerio,  y  habiendo  hecho  venir  mineros
Alemanes,  le  han  executado  en  gran  parte  con  mucha  habilidad.     Los  mineros  Espaiioles
de  Almaden  son  atrevidos  y  tienen  robustez,  mafia  y  penetracion  quanta  es  menester,  de
suerte  que  con  el  tiempo  serdn  excelentes  mineros,  pues  no  les  falta  otra  cosa  que  la  verdadera
ciencia  de  las  minas."     Historia  Natural  de  Espana,  p.  16.     The  latter  part  of  this  sen-
tence is  an  evident  struggle  between  the  interests  of  truth  and  the  exigencies  of  a  book
printed  at  the  Royal  Press  of  Madrid,  and  licensed  by  the  Spanish  authorities.

248  "  Encargado  por  el  gobierno  el  laborioso  extrangero  Bowles  de  proponer  los  medios
convenientes  para  beneficiar  con  mas  acierto  las  farnosas  minas  de  azogue  del  Almaden,
descubrio  algunos  nuevos  procedimientos  por  medio  de  los  cuales  casi  se  duplicaron  los
productos  de  aquellas,  y  bajo  una  mitad  el  precio  de  los  azogues."     Tapia,  Civilization
Espanola,  vol.  iv.  p.  117.

2*9  Memoirs  of  Ripperda,  2nd  ed.,  London,  1740,  pp.  23,  62,  91,  104.  "  A  ship  arrived
at  Cadiz  with  fifty  manufacturers  on  board,  whom  the  Baron  de  Ripperda  had  drawn
together  in  Holland."  ..."  The  new  manufactures  at  Segovia,  which,  though  at  this
time  wholly  managed  by  foreigners,  he  wished  in  the  next  age  might  be  carried  on  by
the  Spaniards  themselves,  and  by  them  only."


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          59?

to  England  for  a  workman  to  put  it  right.250  At  length  the  advisers  of  Charles
III.,  despairing  of  rousing  the  people  by  ordinary  means,  devised  a  more  com-
prehensive scheme,  and  invited  thousands  of  foreign  artizans  to  settle  in
Spain  ;  trusting  that  their  example,  and  the  suddenness  of  their  influx,  might
invigorate  this  jaded  nation.251  All  was  in  vain.  The  spirit  of  the  country  was
broken,  and  nothing  could  retrieve  it.*  Among  other  attempts  which  were
made,  the  formation  of  a  National  Bank  was  a  favourite  idea  of  politicians,  who
expected  great  things  from  an  institution  which  was  to  extend  credit  and  make
advances  to  persons  engaged  in  business.  But  though  the  design  was  executed,
it  entirely  failed  in  effecting  its  purpose.  When  the  people  are  not  enterprising,
no  effort  of  government  can  make  them  so.  In  a  country  like  Spain  a  great
bank  was  an  exotic,  which  might  live  with  art,  but  could  never  thrive  by  nature.
Indeed,  both  in  its  origin  and  in  its  completion,  it  was  altogether  foreign,  having
been  first  proposed  by  the  Dutchman  Ripperda,252  and  owing  its  final  organization
to  the  Frenchman  Cabarrus.253

In  everything  the  same  law  prevailed.  In  diplomacy  the  ablest  men  were
not  Spaniards,  but  foreigners  ;  and  during  the  eighteenth  century  the  strange
spectacle  was  frequently  exhibited  of  Spain  being  represented  by  French,
Italian,  and  even  Irish  ambassadors.254  Nothing  was  indigenous  ;  nothing  was

250  "  xhe  minister,  Wall,  an  Irishman,  contrived  to  decoy  over  one  Thomas  Bevan,
from  Melksham,  in  Wiltshire,  to  set  the  machinery  and  matters  to  rights."     Ford's  Spain
London,  1847,  p.  525.

251  "  Ademas  de  la  invitacion  que  se  hizo  a  millares  de  operarios  extrangeros  para
venir  a  establecerse  en  Espana,"  &c.     Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iv.  pp.  112,  113.
In  1768,  Harris,  who  travelled  from  Pampeluna  to  Madrid,  writes,  "  I  did  not  observe  a
dozen  men  either  at  plough  or  any  other  kind  of  labour,  on  the  road."     Diaries  and  Cor-
respondence of  James  Harris,  Earl  of  Malmesbury,  London,  1844,  vol.  i.  p.  38.

252  "A  national  bank, .a  design  originally  suggested  by  Ripperda."     Coxe's  Bourbon
Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  202.

253  Bourgoing,  not  aware  of  Ripperda's  priority,  says  (Tableau  de  VEspagne  Moderne,
vol.  ii.  p.  49),  "  L'idee  de  la  banque  nationale  fut  donnee  au  gouvernement  par  un  banquier
r  angais,  M.  Cabarrus."     Compare  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado    de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iv.
pp.  122,  123  :    "  Banco  nacional  de  San  Carlos  ;    propusolo  Cabarrus,  apoyolo  Florida -
blanca,  y  sancionolo  el  Soberano  por  Real  cedula  de  2  de  junio  de  1782."     This  sounds
well  ;  but  the  inevitable  catastrophe  soon  came.     "  Charles  IV.,"  says  the  Prince  of  the
Peace,  "  had  just  ascended  the  throne  ;    the  bank  of  St.  Carlos  was  rapidly  falling,  and
on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy."     Godoy's  Memoirs,  London,  1836,  vol.  i.  p.  124.

254  "  A  Londres,  a  Stockholm,  a  Paris,  a  Vienne  et  a  Venise,  le  souverain  est  represente
par  des  etrangers.     Le  prince  de  Masserano,  Italien,  ambassadeur  en  Angleterre  ;    le
comte  de  Lacy,  Irlandais,  ministre  a  Stockholm  ;   le  marquis  de  Grimaldi,  ambassadeur
en  France,  avant  de  parvenir  au  ministere  ;  le  comte  de  Mahoni,  Irlandais,  ambassadeur
a  Vienne  ;  le  marquis  de  Squilaci,  ambassadeur  a  Venise,  apres  sa  retraite  du  ministere."
Bourgoing,  Tableau  de  VEspagne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  142,  143.       To  this  I  may  add  that,  in  the
reign  of  Philip  V.,  an  Italian,  the  Marquis  de  Beretti  Landi,  was  the  representative  of
Spain  in  Switzerland,  and  afterwards  at  the  Hague  (Ripperda's  Memoirs,  1740,  pp-  37»
38)  ;    and  that  in,  or  just  before,  1779,  Lacy  filled  the  same  post  at    St.  Petersburg.
Malmesbury' 's  Diaries  and  Correspondence,  1844,  vol.  i.  p.  261.     So,  too,  M.  Rio  (Historia
de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  288,  289)  says  of  the  important  negotiations  which  took  place
in  1761,  between  Spain,  England,  and  France,  "  Y  asi  de  las  negociaciones  en  que  Luis  XV.
trataba  de  enredarla  Carlos  III.,  quedaron  absolutamente  excluidos  los  espaftoles,  como
que  por  una  parte  las  iban  a  seguir  el  duque  de  Choiseul  y  el  marques  de  Ossun,  franceses,
y  por  otra  el  irlandes  D.  Ricardo  Wall,  y  el  genoves  marques  de  Grimaldi."     About  the
same  time,  Clarke  writes  (in  his  Letters  concerning  the  Spanish  Nation,  London,  1763,  4to,
P-  33i)»  "  Spain  has,  for  many  years  past,  been  under  the  direction  of  foreign  ministers.
Whether  this  hath  been  owing  to  want  of  capacity  in  the  natives,  or  disinclination  in
the  sovereign,  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  say  ;  such  as  it  is,  the  native  nobility  lament  it
as  a  great  calamity."

[*  This  is  inconsistent  with  the  statements  made  below,  at  note  279. — ED.]


598  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

done  by  Spain  herself.  Philip  V.,  who  reigned  from  1700  to  1746,  and  possessed
immense  power,  always  clung  to  the  ideas  of  his  own  country,  and  was  a  French-
man to  the  last.  For  thirty  years  after  his  death  the  three  most  prominent
names  in  Spanish  politics  were  :  Wall,  who  was  born  in  France,  of  Irish  parents ; 255
Grimaldi,  who  was  a  native  of  Genoa  ; 256  and  Esquilache,  who  was  a  native  of
Sicily.257  Esquilache  administered  the  finances  for  several  years  ;  and  after
enjoying  the  confidence  of  Charles  III.  to  an  extent  rarely  possessed  by  any
minister,  was  only  dismissed,  in  1766,  in  consequence  of  the  discontent  of  the
people  at  the  innovations  introduced  by  this  bold  foreigner.258  Wall,  a  much
more  remarkable  man,  was,  in  the  absence  of  any  good  Spanish  diplomatist,
sent  envoy  to  London  in  1747  ;  and  after  exercising  great  influence  in  matters
of  state,  he  was  placed  at  the  head  of  affairs  in  1754,  and  remained  supreme  till
I763.259  When  this  eminent  Irishman  relinquished  office,  he  was  succeeded  by
the  Genoese,  Grimaldi,  who  ruled  Spain  from  1763  to  1777,  and  was  entirely
devoted  to  the  French  views  of  policy.260  His  principal  patron  was  Choiseul,
who  had  imbued  him  with  his  own  notions,  and  by  whose  advice  he  was  chiefly
guided.261  Indeed,  Choiseul,  who  was  then  the  first  minister  in  France,  used  to
boast,  with  exaggeration  but  not  without  a  considerable  amount  of  truth,  that
his  influence  in  Madrid  was  even  greater  than  it  was  in  Versailles.262

However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  four  years  after  Grimaldi  took  office,
the  ascendency  of  France  was  exhibited  in  a  remarkable  way.  Choiseul,  who
hated  the  Jesuits,  and  had  just  expelled  them  from  France,  endeavoured  also
to  expel  them  from  Spain.263  The  execution  of  the  plan  was  confided  to  Aranda,

255  Lord  Stanhope,  generally  well  informed  on  Spanish  affairs,  says  that  Wall  was
"  a  native  of  Ireland."     Mahorfs  History  of  England,  vol.  iv.  p.  182,  3rd  edit.,  London,
1853  ;  but  in  Memoires  de  Noailles,  vol.  iv.  p.  47,  edit.  Paris,  1829,  he  is  called  "  irlandais
d'origine,  ne  en  France."     See  also  Biografia  de  Ensenada,  in  Navarrete,  Opiisculos,
Madrid,  1848,  vol.  ii.  p.  26,  "  D.  Ricardo  Wall,  irlandes  de  origen,  nacido  en  Francia."
Swinburne,  who  knew  him  personally,  and  has  given  some  account  of  him,  does  not
mention  where  he  was  born.     Swinburne's  Travels  through  Spain,  second  edition,  London,
1787,  vol.  i.  pp.  314-318.

256  "  A  Genoese,  and  a  creature  of  France."     Dunham's  History  of  Spain,  vol.  v.
p.  170.

257  "  Era  siciliano."     Rio,  Historia  del  Retnado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  i.  p.  244.

258  The  fullest  account  of  his  dismissal  is  given  by  M.  Rio,  in  the  first  chapter  of  the
second  volume  of  his  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  which  should,  however,  be  com-
pared with  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iv.  pp.  340-346.      Coxe  terms  him
Squilaci ;    but  I  follow  the  orthography  of  the  Spanish  writers,  who  always  call  him
Esquilache.     Such  was  his  influence  over  the  King  that,  according  to  Coxe  (vol.  iv.
p.  347),  Charles  III.   "  publicly  said  that  '  if  he  was  reduced  to  a  morsel  of  bread,  he
would  divide  it  with  Squilaci.'  "

259  Coxe's  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iv.  pp.  15,  135.     Rio,  Historia  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  i.
pp.  246,  247,  400,  401.     Navarrete,  Biografia  de  Ensenada,  pp.  26-28.

260  He  resigned  in  1776,  but  held  office  till  the  arrival  of  his  successor,  Florida  Blanca,
n  1777.     Rio,  Historia  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  171,  174.     In  reference  to  his  appoint-
ment in  1763,  M.  Rio  observes   (vol.  i.  p.  402),  "  De  que  Grimaldi  creciera  en  fortuna  se
pudo  congratular  no  Roma,  sino  Francia."     In  1770,  Harris,  the  diplomatist,  who  was
then  in  Spain,  writes,  "  His  doctrine  is  absolutely  French  ;   guided  in  everything  by  the
French  closet,"  &c.     Malmesbury's  Diaries  and  Correspondence,  vol.  i.  p.  56,  London,
1844.

261  "  Guided  in  his  operations  by  the  counsels  of  Choiseul."     Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of
Spain,  vol.  iv.  p.  339.     "  The  prosecution  of  the  schemes  which  he  had  concerted  with
Choiseul."  p.  373.     "  His  friend  and  patron."     p.  391,  and  vol.  v.  p.  6.

262  "  Personne  n'ignoroit  le  credit  prodigieux  que   M.   de  Choiseul  avoit  sur  le   roi
d'Espagne,  dont  il  se  vantoit  lui-meme,  au  point  que  je  lui  ai  cu'i  dire,  qu'il  etoit  plus  sur
de    sa   preponderance    dans    le    cabinet    de    Madrid    que    dans    celui  de  Versailles.'
Memoires  du  Baron  de  Besenval,  ecrits  par  lui-mSme,  vol.  ii.  pp.  14,  15,  Paris,  1805.

2*3  M.  Muriel  (Gobierno  del  Rey  Don  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1839,  pp.  44,  45)  terms  their


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          599

who,  though  a  Spaniard  by  birth,  derived  his  intellectual  culture  from  France,
and  had  contracted  in  the  society  of  Paris  an  intense  hatred  of  every  form  of
ecclesiastical  power.264  The  scheme,  secretly  prepared,  was  skilfully  accom-
plished.265 In  1767  the  Spanish  government,  without  hearing  what  the  Jesuits
had  to  say  in  their  defence  and  indeed  without  giving  them  the  least  notice,
suddenly  ordered  their  expulsion  ;  and  with  such  animosity  were  they  driven
from  the  country  in  which  they  sprung  up,  and  had  long  been  cherished,  that
not  only  was  their  wealth  confiscated,  and  they  themselves  reduced  to  a  wretched
pittance,  but  even  that  was  directed  to  be  taken  from  them  if  they  published
anything  in  their  own  vindication  ;  while  it  was  also  declared  that  whoever
ventured  to  write  respecting  them,  should,  if  he  were  a  subject  of  Spain,  be  put
to  death  as  one  guilty  of  high  treason.266

Such  boldness  on  the  part  of  the  government  267  caused  even  the  Inquisition
to  tremble.  That  once  omnipotent  tribunal,  threatened  and  suspected  by  the
civil  authorities,  became  more  wary  in  its  proceedings,  and  more  tender  in  its
treatment  of  heretics.  Instead  of  extirpating  unbelievers  by  hundreds  or  by
thousands,  it  was  reduced  to  such  pitiful  straits  that  between  1746  and  1759
t  was  only  able  to  burn  ten  persons,  and  between  1759  and  1788  only
four  persons.268  The  extraordinary  diminution  during  the  latter  period
was  partly  owing  to  the  great  authority  wielded  by  Aranda,  the  friend
of  the  encyclopaedists  and  of  other  French  sceptics.  This  remarkable

expulsion  from  Spain  "  este  acto  de  violencia  hecho  meramente  por  complacer  al  duque  de
Choiseul,  ministro  de  Francia  y  protector  del  partido  filosofico."  See  also  Cretineau-
Joly,  Histoire  de  la  Compagnie  de  Jesus,  vol.  v.  p.  291,  Paris,  1845  ;  and  Georgel,  Memoir  es
pour  servir  a  VHistoire  des  Evenemens  depuis  1760,  vol.  i.  p.  95,  Paris,  1817.

284  Archdeacon  Coxe,  in  a  somewhat  professional  tone,  says  of  Aranda,  "  In  France
he  had  acquired  the  graces  of  polished  society,  and  imbibed  that  freedom  of  sentiment
which  then  began  to  be  fashionable,  and  has  since  been  carried  to  such  a  dangerous  excess.'''
Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iv.  p.  402.  His  great  enemy,  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,
wishing  to  be  severe,  unintentionally  praises  him  ;  and  observes  that  he  was  "  connected
with  the  most  distinguished  literary  Frenchmen  of  the  middle  of  the  last  century,"  and
that  he  was  "  divested  of  religious  prejudices,  though  swayed  by  philosophical  enthu-
siasm." Godoy's  Memoirs,  London,  1836,  vol.  i.  p.  319.  The  hostility  of  some  men  is
extremely  valuable.  The  Prince  further  adds  that  Aranda  "  could  only  lay  claim  to  the
inferior  merit  of  a  sectarian  attachment ; "  forgetting  that  in  a  country  like  Spain  every
enlightened  person  must  belong  to  a  miserably  small  sect.

2(J5  Cabarrus  (Elogio  de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1789,  4to,  p.  xxiv.)  says,  rather  magiiilo-
quently,  "  El  acierto  de  la  execucion  que  correspondio  al  pulso  y  prudencia  con  que  se
habia  deliberado  esta  providencia  importante,  pasara  a  la  ultima  posteridad."

266  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iv.  p.  362.  M.  Rio,  in  the  second  volume  of
his  History  of  Charles  III.,  Madrid,  1856,  has  given  a  long,  but  not  very  philosophical  nor
very  accurate  account  of  the  expulsion  of  the  Jesuits,  which  he  considers  solely  from  the
Spanish  point  of  view  ;  overlooking  the  fact  that  it  was  part  of  an  European  movement
headed  by  France.  He  denies  the  influence  of  Choiseul,  p.  125  ;  censures  the  perfectly
correct  statement  of  Coxe,  p.  123  ;  and  finally  ascribes  this  great  event  to  the  operation
of  causes  confined  to  the  Peninsula.  "  De  ser  los  jesuitas  adversaries  del  regalismo
emano  su  ruina  en  Espana,  cuando  triunfaban  las  opiniones  sostenidas  con  heroico  teson
desde  mucho  antes  por  doctisimos  jurisconsultos."  p.  519.

257  One  of  the  most  recent  historians  of  the  Jesuits  indignantly  observes,  "  Depuis
deux  cent  vingt  ans  les  Jesuites  vivent  et  prechent  en  Espagne.  Us  sont  combles  de
bienfaits  par  des  monarques  dont  ils  etendent  la  souverainete.  Le  clerge  et  les  masses
acceptent  avec  bonheur  leur  intervention.  Tout  a  coup  1'Ordre  se  voit  declare  coupable
d'un  crime  de  lese-majeste,  d'un  attentat  public  que  personne  ne  peut  specifier.  La
sentence  prononce  la  peine  sans  enoncer  le  delit."  Cretineau-Joly,  Histoire  de  la  Com-
pagnie  de  Jesus,  vol.  v.  p.  295,  Paris,  1845.

2«8  Dunham's  History  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  285,  where  the  facts  are  well  brought  together.
The  valuable  History  of  the  Inquisition,  by  Llorente,  is  not  quite  precise  enough  in  these
matters  ;  though  it  is  a  very  accurate,  and,  what  is  still  more  surprising,  a  very  honest
book.


6oo  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

man  was  President  of  Castile  till  I773,269  and  he  issued  an  order  forbidding  the
Inquisition  to  interfere  with  the  civil  courts.270  He  also  formed  a  scheme  for
entirely  abolishing  it  ;  but  his  plan  was  frustrated  owing  to  its  premature
announcement  by  his  friends  in  Paris,  to  whom  it  had  been  confided.271  His
views,  however,  were  so  far  successful  that  after  1781  there  is  no  instance  in
Spain  of  a  heretic  being  burned  ;  the  Inqusition  being  too  terrified  by  the  pro-
ceedings of  government  to  do  anything  which  might  compromise  the  safety  of
the  Holy  Institution.272

In  1777  Grimaldi,  one  of  the  chief  supporters  of  that  anti -theological  policy
which  France  introduced  into  Spain,  ceased  to  be  minister  ;  but  he  was  succeeded
by  Florida  Blanca,  who  was  his  creature,  and  to  whom  he  transmitted  his  policy
as  well  as  his  power.273  The  progress  therefore  of  political  affairs  continued  in
the  same  direction.  Under  the  new  minister,  as  under  his  immediate  predecessors,
a  determination  was  shown  to  abridge  the  authority  of  the  Church  and  to  vindi-
cate the  rights  of  laymen.  In  everything  the  ecclesiastical  interests  were
treated  as  subordinate  to  the  secular.  Of  this  many  instances  might  be  given  ;
but  one  is  too  important  to  be  omitted.  We  have  seen  that  early  in  the  eighteenth
century  Alberoni,  when  at  the  head  of  affairs,  was  guilty  of  what  in  Spain  was
deemed  the  enormous  offence  of  contracting  an  alliance  with  Mohammedans  ;
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  his  fall,  since
it  was  held  that  no  prospect  of  mere  temporal  advantages  could  justify  an  union,
or  even  a  peace,  between  a  Christian  nation  and  a  nation  of  unbelievers.274  But
the  Spanish  government,  which,  owing  to  the  causes  I  have  related,  was  far  in
advance  of  Spain  itself,  was  gradually  becoming  bolder,  and  growing  more  and
more  disposed  to  force  upon  the  country  views  which,  abstractedly  considered,

289  Rio,  Historia  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  103-107,  which  must  be  compared  with
the  account  of  Coxe,  who  derived  some  of  his  information  from  a  friend  of  Aranda's.
Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iv.  pp.  401-415.  A  good  life  of  Aranda  would  be
very  interesting.  That  contained  in  the  Biographic  Universelle  is  extremely  meagre,  and
carelessly  written.

270  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iv.  p.  407.

271  "  When  at  Paris,  in  1786,  I  received  the  following  anecdote  from  a  person   con-
nected with  the  encyclopedists.     During  his  residence  in  that  capital,  D' Aranda  had
frequently  testified  to  the  literati  with  whom  he  associated,  his  resolution  to  obtain  the
abolition  of  the  Inquisition,  should  he  ever  be  called  to  power.     His  appointment  was,
therefore,  exultingly  hailed  by  the  party,  particularly  by  D'Alembert ;    and  he  had
scarcely  begun  his  reforms  before  an  article  was  inserted  in  the  Encyclopaedia,  then  print-
ing, in  which  this  event  was  confidently  anticipated,  from  the  liberal  principles  of  the
minister.     D' Aranda  was  struck  on  reading  this  article,  and  said,  '  This  imprudent  dis-
closure will  raise  such  a  ferment  against  me,  that  my  plans  will  be  foiled.'     He  was  not
mistaken  in  his  conjecture."     Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iv.  p.  408.

272  Even  the  case  in  1781  appears  to  have  been  for  witchcraft  rather  than  for  heresy.
"  La  derniere  vie  time  qui  perit  dans  les  flammes  fut  une  beate  :    on  la  brula  a  Seville,
le  7  novembre  1781,  comrae  ayant  fait  un  pacte,  et  entretenu  un  commerce  charnel
avec  le  Demon,  et  pour  avoir  ete  impenitente  negative.     Elle  cut  pu  eviter  la  mort  en
s'avouant  coupable  du  crime  dont  on  1'accusait."     Llorente,  Histoire  de  VInquisition
d'Espagne,  Paris,  1818,  vol.  iv.  p.  270.      About  this  time  torture  began  to  be  disused  in
Spain.     See  an  interesting  note  in  Johnston's  Institutes  of  the  Civil  Law  of  Spain,  London
1825,  p.  263.

273  "  Menester  es  decir  que  el  marques  de  Grimaldi  cayo  venciendo  a  sus  enemigos
pues,  lejos  de  legarles  el.  poder,  a  que  aspiraban  con  anhelo,  trasmitiolo  a  una  de  sus  mas
legitimas  hechuras  ;   que  tal  era  y  por  tal  se  reconocia  el  conde  de  Floridablanca."     Rio
Hlstoria  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  151,  152.

274  In  1690  it  was  stated  that  "  since  the  expulsion  of   the  Moors  "  there  was  no  pre-
c  edent  for  the  King  of  Spain  ever  sending  an  envoy  to  a  Mohammedan  prince.     See

Mahon's  Spain  under  Charles  II.,  p.  5.     In  that  year  an  envoy  was  sent  to  Morocco
but  this  was  merely  concerning  the  redemption  of  prisoners,  and  certainly  without  the
remotest  intention  of  concluding  a  peace.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT  601

were  extremely  enlightened,  but  which  the  popular  mind  was  unable  to  receive.
The  result  was  that  in  1782  Florida  Blanca  concluded  a  treaty  with  Turkey,
which  put  an  end  to  the  war  of  religious  opinions  ;  to  the  astonishment,  as  we
are  told,  of  the  other  European  powers,  who  could  hardly  believe  that  the
Spaniards  would  thus  abandon  their  long-continued  efforts  to  destroy  the
infidels.275  Before,  however,  Europe  had  time  to  recover  from  its  amazement,
other  and  similar  events  occurred,  equally  startling.  In  1784  Spain  signed  a
peace  with  Tripoli  ;  and  in  1785  one  with  Algiers. 2™  And  scarcely  had  these
been  ratified  when  in  1786  a  treaty  was  also  concluded  with  Tunis.277  So  that
the  Spanish  people,  to  their  no  small  surprise,  found  themselves  on  terms  of
amity  with  nations  whom  for  more  than  ten  centuries  they  had  been  taught  to
abhor,  and  whom,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Spanish  Church,  it  was  the  first  duty  of
a  Christian  government  to  make  war  upon,  and  if  possible  to  extirpate.

Putting  aside  for  a  moment  the  remote  and  intellectual  consequences  of
these  transactions,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  immediate  and  materia
consequences  were  very  salutary  ;  though,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  they  produced
no  lasting  benefit,  because  they  were  opposed  by  the  unfavourable  operation  of
more  powerful  and  more  general  causes.  Still  it  must  be  confessed  that  the
direct  results  were  extremely  advantageous  ;  and  to  those  who  take  only  a
short  view  of  human  affairs,  it  might  well  appear  that  the  advantages  would  be
permanent.  The  immense  line  of  coast  from  the  kingdoms  of  Fez  and  Morocco
to  the  furthest  extremity  of  the  Turkish  empire  was  no  longer  allowed  to  pour
forth  those  innumerable  pirates  who,  heretofore,  swept  the  seas,  captured  Spanish
ships,  and  made  slaves  of  Spanish  subjects.  Formerly,  vast  sums  of  money
were  annually  consumed  in  ransoming  these  unhappy  prisoners  ;  278  but  now
all  such  evils  were  ended.  At  the  same  time,  great  impetus  was  given  to  the
commerce  of  Spain  ;  a  new  trade  was  thrown  open,  and  her  ships  could  safely
appear  in  the  rich  countries  of  the  Levant.  This  increased  her  wealth  ;  which
was  moreover  aided  by  another  circumstance  growing  out  of  these  events.  For
the  most  fertile  parts  of  Spain  are  those  which  are  washed  by  the  Mediterranean,
and  which  had  for  centuries  been  the  prey  of  Mohammedan  corsairs,  who,  fre-
quently landing  by  surprise,  had  at  length  caused  such  constant  fear  that  the

275  "  The  other  European  courts,  with  surprise  and  regret,  witnessed  the  conclusion
of  a  treaty  which  terminated  the  political  and  religious  rivalry  so  long  subsisting  between
Spain  and  the  Porte."     Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  pp.  152,  153.     "  Une
des  maximes  de  la  politique  espagnole  avait  ete  celle  de  maintenir  une  guerre  perpetuelle
contre  les  mahometans,  meme  apres  la  conquete  de  Grenade.     Ni  les  pertes  incalculables
eprouvees  par  suite  de  ce  systeme,  ni  1'exemple  de  la  France  et  d'autres  puissances
catholiques  qui  ne  se  faisaient  point  scruple  d'etre  en  paix  avec  les  Turcs,  n'avaient  suffi
pour  detromper  1'Espagne  sur  1'inconvenance  d'une  telle  politique.     Le  genie  eclaire  de
Charles  III.  corrigea  un  prejuge  aussi  dangereux  ;    dicta  la  paix  avec  les  empereurs  de
Turquie  et  d'autres  potentats  mahometans  ;  delivra  ses  sujets  de  la  terrible  piraterie  des
corsaires,  et  ouvrit  a  leur  commerce  de  nouvelles  voies  pour  speculer  avec  de  plus  grands
avantages."     Sempere,  La  Monarchic  Espagnole,  vol.  ii.  p.  160.

276  Ri0,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  11-13.

277  Ibid.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  1 6,  17.

278  "  Ha  sido  notable  el  numero  de  cautivos,  que  los  piratas  de  Berberia  han  hecho
sobre  nuestras  costas  por  tres  centurias.     En  el  siglo  pasado  se  solian  calcular  existentes
a  la  vez  en  nuestras  Argel,  treinta  mil  personas  espanolas.     Su  rescate^a  razon  de  mil
pesos  por  cada  persona  a  lo  menos,  ascendia  a   30  millones  de  pesos."     Campomanes,
Aptndice  d  la  Education  Popular,  vol.  i.  p.  373>  Madrid,  1775.     On  the  precautions  which
had  to  be  used  to  guard  the  coasts   of   Spain  against   the  Mohammedan  corsairs,   see
Uztariz,  Theorica  y  Practica  de  Comercio,  Madrid,  i757>  folio,  pp.  172,  i73»  222-226;  and
Lafuente,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  xv.  p.  476,  Madrid,  1855.     In  the  middle  of  the  eight-
eenth century  a  regular  watch  had  to  be  kept  along  the  Mediterranean  coast  of  Spain,
"  in  order  to  give  the  alarm  upon  the  appearance  of  the  enemy."     See  A  Tour  Through
Spain  by  Udal  ap  Rhys,  2nd  edit.,  London,  1760,  p.  170*     As  to  the  state  of  things  in
the  seventeenth  century,  see  Janer,  Condition  de  los  Moriscos,  Madrid,  1857,  p.  63.


602  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

inhabitants  gradually  retired  towards  the  interior,  and  abstained  from  cultivating
the  richest  soil  in  their  country.  But  by  the  treaties  just  concluded  such
dangers  were  at  once  removed  ;  the  people  returned  to  their  former  abodes  ;
the  earth  again  gave  forth  its  fruits  ;  regular  industry  reappeared  ;  villages
sprung  up  ;  even  manufactures  were  established  ;  and  the  foundation  seemed
to  be  laid  for  a  prosperity  the  like  of  which  had  not  been  known  since  the  Moham-
medans were  driven  out  of  Granada.279

I  have  now  laid  before  the  reader  a  view  of  the  most  important  steps  which
were  taken  by  those  able  and  vigorous  politicians  who  ruled  Spain  during  the
greater  part  of  the  eighteenth  century.  In  considering  how  these  reforms  were
effected,  we  must  not  forget  the  personal  character  of  Charles  III.,  who  occupied
the  throne  from  1759  to  1788. 28°  He  was  a  man  of  great  energy,  and  though
born  in  Spain  had  little  in  common  with  it.  When  he  became  king  he  had
been  long  absent  from  his  native  country,  and  had  contracted  a  taste  for  customs,
and  above  all  for  opinions,  totally  dissimilar  to  those  natural  to  the  Spaniards.281
Comparing  him  with  his  subjects,  he  was  enlightened  indeed.  They  cherished
in  their  hearts  the  most  complete,  and  therefore  the  worst,  form  of  spiritual
power  which  has  ever  been  exhibited  in  Europe.  That  very  power  he  made  it
his  business  to  restrain.  In  this  as  in  other  respects  he  far  surpassed  Ferdinand
VI.  and  Philip  V.,  though  they,  under  the  influence  of  French  ideas,  had  pro-
ceeded to  what  was  deemed  a  dangerous  length.282  The  clergy,  indignant  at
such  proceedings,  murmured,  and  even  threatened.283  They  declared  that

279  "  De  esta  suerte  quedaron  los  mares  limpios  de  piratas  desde  los  reinos  de  Fez  y
Marruecos  hasta  los  ultimos  dominios  del  emperador  Turco,  por  el  Mediterraneo  todo  ;
viose  a  menudo  la  bandera  espanola  en  Levante,  y  las  mismas  naciones  mercantiles
que  la  persiguieron  indirectamente,  preferianla  ahora,  resultando  el  aumento  del  comercio
y  de  la  Real  marina,  y  la  pericia  de  sus  tripulaciones,  y  el  mayor  brillo  de  Espana  y  de  su
augusto  Soberano  :  termino  hubo  la  esclavitud  de  tantos  millares  de  infelices  con  abandono
de  sus  familias  e  indelebles  perjuicios  de  la  religion  y  el  Estado,  cesando  tambien  la
continua  extraccion  de  enormes  sumas  para  los  rescates  que,  al  paso  que  nos  empobrecian,
pasaban  a  enriquecer  a  nuestros  contrarios,  y  a  facilitar  sus  armamentos  para  ofendernos  ;
y  se  empezaban  a  cultivar  rapidamente  en  las  costas  del  Mediterraneo  leguas  de  terrenos
los  mas  fertiles,  del  mundo  desamparados  y  eriales  hasta  entonces  por  miedo  a  los  piratas,
y  donde  se  formaban  ya  pueblos  enteros  para  dar  salida  a  los  frutos  y  las  manufacturas."
Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  17,  18.

280  M.  Rio,  whose  voluminous  History  of  the  Reign  of  Charles  III.  is,  notwithstanding
its  numerous  omissions,  a  work  of  considerable  value,  has  appreciated  the  personal
influence  of  the  king  more  justly  than  any  previous  writer  ;  he  having  had  access  to
unpublished  papers,  which  show  the  great  energy  and  activity  of  Charles.     "  Entre
sus  mas  notables  figuras  ninguna  aventaja  a  la  de  Carlos  III.  ;  y  no  por  el  lugar  jerarquico
que  ocupa,  sino  por  el  brillante  papel  que  representa,  ora  tome  la  iniciativa,  ora  el  consejo,
para  efectuar  las  innumerables  reformas  que  le  valieron  inextinguible  fama.      Ya  se
que   algunos  tachan  a  este  Monarca  de  cortedad  de  luces  y  de  estrechez  de  miras  ;  y  que
algunos  otros  suponen  que  sus  ministros  le  enganaron  6  sorprendieron  para  dictar  ciertas
providencias.  Cuarenta  y  ocho  tomos  de  cartas  semanales  y  escritas  de  su  puno  desde
octubre  de  1759  hasta  marzo  de  1783  al  marques  de  Tanucci,  existentes  en  el  archive  de
Simancas,  por  mi  leidas  hoja  tras  hoja,  sacando  de  ellas  largos  apuntes,  sirven  a  mara-
villa  para  pintarle  tal  como  era,  y  penetrar  hasta  sus  mas  reconditos  pensamientos,  y
contradecir  a  los  que  le  juzgan  a  bulto."     Rio,  Historia   del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,
Madrid,  1856,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxii.  xxiii.

281  "  Although  born  and  educated  in  Spain,  Charles  had  quitted  the  country  at  too
early  an  age  to  retain  a  partiality  to  its  customs,  laws,  manners,  and  language  ;  while,
from  his  residence  abroad,  and  his  intercourse  with  France,  he  had  formed  a  natural
predilection  for  the  French  character  and  institutions."     Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,
vol.  iv.  p.  337.

282  He  "  far  surpassed  his  two    predecessors  in  his  exertions  to  reform  the  morals
and  restrain  the  power  of  the  clergy."     Ibid.,  vol.  v.  p.  215.

283  His   measures   "  alarmaron   al   clero    en   general,  que  eaipezo   a   murmurar  con


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          603

Charles  was  despoiling  the  Church,  taking  away  her  rights,  insulting  her  ministers,
and  thus  ruining  Spain  beyond  human  remedy.284  The  king,  however,  whose
disposition  was  firm  and  somewhat  obstinate,  persevered  in  his  policy  ;  and
as  he  and  his  ministers  were  men  of  undoubted  ability,  they,  notwithstanding
the  opposition  they  encountered,  succeeded  in  accomplishing  most  of  their
plans.  Mistaken  and  short-sighted  though  they  were,  it  is  impossible  to  refrain
from  admiring  the  honesty,  the  courage,  and  the  disinterestedness  which  they
displayed  in  endeavouring  to  alter  the  destiny  of  that  superstitious  and  half-
barbarous  country  over  which  they  ruled.  We  must  not  however  conceal
from  ourselves  that  in  this,  as  in  all  similar  cases,  they,  by  attacking  evils  which
the  people  were  resolved  to  love,  increased  the  affection  which  the  evils  inspired.
To  seek  to  change  opinions  by  laws  is  worse  than  futile.  It  not  only  fails,
but  it  causes  a  reaction  which  leaves  the  opinions  stronger  than  ever.  First
alter  the  opinion,  and  then  you  may  alter  the  law.  As  soon  as  you  have  con-
vinced men  that  superstition  is  mischievous,  you  may  with  advantage  take
active  steps  against  those  classes  who  promote  superstition  and  live  by  it.  But
however  pernicious  any  interest  or  any  great  body  may  be,  beware  of  using  force
against  it,  unless  the  progress  of  knowledge  has  previously  sapped  it  at  its  base,
and  loosened  its  hold  over  the  national  mind.  This  has  always  been  the  error  of
the  most  ardent  reformers,  who,  in  their  eagerness  to  effect  their  purpose,  let
the  political  movement  outstrip  the  intellectual  one,  and,  thus  inverting  the
natural  order,  secure  misery  either  to  themselves  or  to  their  descendants.  They
touch  the  altar,  and  fire  springs  forth  to  consume  them.  Then  comes  another
period  of  superstition  and  of  despotism  ;  another  dark  epoch  in  the  annals  of
the  human  race.  And  this  happens  merely  because  men  will  not  bide  their
time,  but  will  insist  on  precipitating  the  march  of  affairs.  Thus,  for  instance,
in  France  and  Germany  it  is  the  friends  of  freedom  who  have  strengthened
tyranny  ;  it  is  the  enemies  of  superstition  who  have  made  superstition  more
permanent.  In  those  countries  it  is  still  believed  that  government  can  regenerate
society  ;  and  therefore,  directly  they  who  hold  liberal  opinions  get  possession  of
the  government,  they  use  their  power  too  lavishly,  thinking  that  by  doing  so
they  will  best  secure  the  end  at  which  they  aim.  In  England,  the  same  delusion,
though  less  general,  is  far  too  prevalent  ;  but  as  with  us  public  opinion  controls
politicians,  we  escape  from  evils  which  have  happened  abroad  because  we  will
not  allow  any  government  to  enact  laws  which  the  nation  disapproves.  In
Spain,  however,  the  habits  of  the  people  were  so  slavish,  and  their  necks  had
so  long  been  bowed  under  the  yoke,  that  though  the  government  in  the  eighteenth
century  opposed  their  dearest  prejudices,  they  rarely  ventured  to  resist,  and
they  had  no  legal  means  of  making  their  voice  heard.  But  not  the  less  did  they
feel.  The  materials  for  reaction  were  silently  accumulating  ;  and  before  that
century  had  passed  away  the  reaction  itself  was  manifest.  As  long  as  Charles
III.  lived  it  was  kept  under  ;  and  this  was  owing  partly  to  the  fear  which  his
active  and  vigorous  government  inspired,  and  partly  to  the  fact  that  many  of
the  reforms  which  he  introduced  were  so  obviously  beneficial  as  to  shed  a  lustre
on  his  reign,  which  all  classes  could  perceive.  Besides  the  exemption  which  his
policy  insured  from  the  incessant  ravages  of  pirates,  he  also  succeeded  in  obtain-
ing for  Spain  the  most  honourable  peace  which  any  Spanish  government  had
signed  for  two  centuries  ;  thus  recalling  to  the  popular  mind  the  brightest  and


impacieacia,  y  aun  algunos  de  sus  individuos  se  propasaron  a  violentos  actos."     Tapia,
Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iv.  p.  98.

284  A  popular  charge  against  the  government  was,  "  que  se  despojara  a  la  Iglesia
de  sus  inmunidades."  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  ii.  p.  54-  See
also  at  pp.  201,  202,  a  letter,  in  1766,  from  the  Bishop  of  Cuenca  to  the  King's  confessor,
in  which  that  prelate  stated,  "  que  Espafia  corria  a  su  ruina,  que  ya  no  corria,  sino  que
volaba,  y  que  ya  estaba  perdida  sin  remedio  humano  ;  "  and  that  the  cause  of  this  was  the
persecution  of  the  poor  Church,  which  was  "  saqueada  en  sus  bienes,  ultrajada  en  sus
ministros,  y  atropellada  en  su  inmunidad."


604  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

in  >st  glorious  days  of  Philip  II.235  When  Charles  came  to  the  throne  Spain
was  hardly  a  third-rate  power  ;  when  he  died  she  might  fairly  claim  to  be  a  first-
rate  one,  since  she  had  for  some  years  negotiated  on  equal  terms  with  France,
Kngland,  and  Austria,  and  had  taken  a  leading  part  in  the  councils  of  Europe.
To  this  the  personal  character  of  Charles  greatly  contributed  ;  he  being  respected
for  his  honesty,  as  well  as  feared  for  his  vigour.286  Merely  as  a  man,  he  bore
high  repute  ;  while  as  a  sovereign  none  of  his  contemporaries  were  in  any  way
equal  to  him,  except  Frederick  of  Prussia,  whose  vast  abilities  were  however
tarnished  by  a  base  rapacity,  and  by  an  incessant  desire  to  overreach  his  neigh-
bours. Charles  III.  had  nothing  of  this  ;  but  he  carefully  increased  the  defences
of  Spain,  and,  raising  her  establishments  to  a  war-footing,  he  made  her  more
formidable  than  she  had  been  since  the  sixteenth  century.  Instead  of  being
liable  to  insult  from  every  petty  potentate  who  chose  to  triumph  over  her  weak-
ness, the  country  had  now  the  means  of  resisting,  and  if  need  be  of  attacking.
While  the  army  was  greatly  improved  in  the  quality  of  the  troops,  in  their  discip-
line, and  in  the  attention  paid  to  their  comforts,  the  navy  was  nearly  doubled  in
number,  and  more  than  doubled  in  efficiency.287  And  this  was  done  without
imposing  fresh  burdens  on  the  people.  Indeed,  the  national  resources  were
becoming  so  developed,  that  in  the  reign  of  Charles  III.  a  large  amount  of
taxation  could  have  been  easier  paid  than  a  small  one  under  his  predecessors.
A  regularity  hitherto  unknown  was  introduced  into  the  method  both  of  assessing
imposts  and  of  collecting  them.288  The  laws  of  mortmain  were  relaxed,  and  steps
were  taken  towards  diminishing  the  rigidity  of  entails.289  The  industry  of  the  country
was  liberated  from  many  of  the  trammels  which  had  long  been  imposed  upon  it,
and  the  principles  of  free  trade  were  so  far  recognized  that  in  1765  the  old
laws  respecting  corn  were  repealed  ;  its  exportation  was  allowed,  and  also  its
transit  from  one  part  of  Spain  to  another,  uninterrupted  by  those  absurd  precau-
tions which  preceding  governments  had  thought  it  advisable  to  invent.290

285  Coxe  (Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  144)  calls  the  peace  of  1783  "  the  most
honourable  and  advantageous  ever  concluded  by  the  crown  of  Spain  since  the  peace  of
St.  Quinton."  Similarly,  M.  Rio  (Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iii.  p.  397),
"  Siglos  habian  pasado  para  Espafta  de  continuas  y  pcrfiadas  contiendas,  sin  llegar
nunca,  desde  la  famosa  Jornada  de  San  Quintin  y  al  alborear  el  reinado  de  Felipe  II.,  tan
gloriosamente  al  reposo."

283  Towards  the  close  of  his  reign  we  find  a  contemporary  observer,  who  was  any-
thing but  prejudiced  in  his  favour,  bearing  testimony  to  "  the  honest  arid  obstinate
adherence  of  his  present  Catholic  Majesty  to  all  his  treaties,  principles,  and  engage-
ments." Letters  by  an  English  Officer,  London,  1788,  vol.  ii.  p.  329.  Compare  Muriel
(Gobierno  del  Rey  Don  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1839,  p.  34),  "  Tan  conocido  llego  a  ser  Carlos
III.  en  los  reinos  estranos  por  la  rectitud  de  su  caracter,  que  en  las  desavenencias  que
ooiirriau  entre  los  gobiernos,  todos  consentian  en  tomarle  por  arbitro,  y  se  sometian  a
sus  decisiones  ;  "  and  Cabarrus  (Elogio  de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1789,  4to,  p.  xl.),  "  Esta
probidad  llega  a  ser  el  resorte  politico  de  la  Europa  ;  todas  las  cortes  penetradas  de
respeto  a  sus  virtudes  le  buscan  por  arbitro  y  mediador."  Evidence  of  the  great  respect
paid  to  Charles  III.  by  foreign  powers  will  also  be  found  in  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado
de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  41-43,  253.

287  On  the  increase  of  the  navy,  compare  Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iv.  p.  127,
with  Muriel,  Gobierno  del  Rey  Carlos  III.,  pp.  73,  82.

288  These  financial  improvements  were  due,  in  a  great  measure,  to  the  Frenchman,
Cabarrus.     See  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  122,  123.

2S!>  Rio,  ibid.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  164-166,  and  Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iv.  pp.  96,

97-

2ao  "  La  providencia  mas  ascertada  para  el  fomento  de  nuestra  agricultura  fue  sin
duda  la  real  pragmatica  de  n  de  Julio  de  1765,  por  la  cual  se  abolio  la  tasa  de  los  granos,
y  se  permitio  el  libre  comercio  de  ellos."  Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iv.  p.  105.
See  also  Dillon's  Spain,  p.  69,  and  Townsend's  Spain,  vol.  ii.  p.  230.  The  first  step
towards  this  great  reform  was  taken  in  1752.  See  the  edict  issued  in  that  year,  "  Liber  -
tase  de  Derechos  el  trigo,  cebada,  centeno  y  maiz  que  por  mar  se  transportare  de  unas


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          605

It  was  also  in  the  reign  of  Charles  III.  that  the  American  Colonies  were  for
the  first  time  treated  according  to  the  maxims  of  a  wise  and  liberal  policy.  The
behaviour  of  the  Spanish  government  in  this  respect  contrasts  most  favourably
with  the  conduct  pursued  at  the  same  time  towards  our  great  Colonies  by  that
narrow  and  incompetent  man  who  then  filled  the  English  throne.  While  tin-
violence  of  George  III.  was  fomenting  rebellion  in  the  British  Colonies,  Charles
III.  was  busily  engaged  in  conciliating  the  Spanish  ones.  Towards  this  end,
and  with  the  object  of  giving  fair  play  to  the  growth  of  their  wealth,  he  did
everything  which  the  knowledge  and  resources  of  that  age  allowed  him  to  do.
In  1764  he  accomplished  what  was  then  considered  the  great  feat  of  establishing
every  month  a  regular  communication  with  America,  in  order  that  the  reforms
which  he  projected  might  be  more  easily  introduced,  and  the  grievances  of  the
Colonies  attended  to.291  In  the  very  next  year,  free  trade  was  conceded  to  the
West  Indian  Islands,  whose  abundant  commodities  were  now  for  the  first  time
allowed  to  circulate,  to  their  own  benefit  as  well  as  to  the  benefit  of  their  neigh-
bours.292 Into  the  Colonies  generally  vast  improvements  were  introduced
many  oppressions  were  removed,  the  tyranny  of  officials  was  checked,  and  the
burdens  of  the  people  were  lightened.293  Finally,  in  1778,  the  principles  of  free
trade,  having  been  successfully  tried  in  the  American  Islands,  were  now  extended
to  the  American  Continent  ;  the  ports  of  Peru  and  of  New  Spain  were  thrown
open  ;  and  by  this  means  an  immense  impetus  was  given  to  the  prosperity  of
those  magnificent  colonies  which  nature  intended  to  be  rich,  but  which  the
meddling  folly  of  man  had  forced  to  be  poor.294

All  this  reacted  upon  the  mother  country  with  such  rapidity,  that  scarcely
was  the  old  system  of  monopoly  broken  up  when  the  trade  of  Spain  began  to
advance,  and  continued  to  improve,  until  the  exports  and  imports  had  reached
a  height  that  even  the  authors  of  the  reform  could  hardly  have  expected  ;  it
bring  said  that  the  export  of  foreign  commodities  was  tripled,  that  the  export
of  home-produce  was  multiplied  fivefold,  and  the  returns  from  America  nine-
fold.295

provincias  a  otras  de  estos  dominios."  This  document,  which  is  important  for  the
history  of  political  economy,  is  printed  in  the  Appendix  to  Campomanes,  Education
Popular,  vol.  ii.  pp.  16,  17,  Madrid,  1775.

291  "  pronto  se  establecieron  los  correos  maritimos  y  se  comunicaron  con  regularidad
y  frecuencia  no  vistas  hasta  entonces  la  metropoli  y  las  colonias.     For  efecto  del  impor-
tante  decreto  de  24  de  agosto  de  1764,  salia  el  primero  de  cada  mes  un  paquebot  de  la
Coruna  con  toda  la  correspondencia  de  las  Indias  ;  desembarcabala  en  la  Habana,  y
desde  alii  se  distribuia  en  balandras  y  otros  bajeles  a  proposito  para  puntear  los  vientos
escasos,  a  Veracruz,  Portobelo,  Cartagena,  islas  de  Barlovento  y  provincias  de  la  Plata  ;
y  aquellos  ligeros  buques  volvian  a  la  Habana,  de  donde  zarpaba  mensualmente  y  en
dia  fijo  otro  paquebot  para  la  Coruna."     Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  i.
p.  452.      That  part  of  the  plan,  however,  which  aimed  at  making  Coruna  a  rival  of  Cadiz
appears  to  have  been  unsuccessful.      See  a  letter  from  Coruna,  written  in   1774,  in
Dalrymple's  Travels  through  Spain,  London,  1777,  4to,  p.  99.

292  See  the  edicts  in  Campomanes,  Apendice,  vol.  ii.  pp.  37~47»  Madrid,  1775.     They  are
both  dated  October  i6th,  1765.

2»3  It  was  said  with  reason,  by  Alaman,  "  Que  el  gobierno  de  America  llego  al  colmo
de  su  perfeccion  en  tiempo  de  Carlos  III."  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,
vol.  iv.  p.  141.  And  Humboldt  observes  (Essai  Politique  sur  le  Royaume  de  la  Nouvelle-
Espagne,  Paris,  1811,  410,  vol.  i.  p.  102),  "  C'est  le  roi  Charles  III  surtout  qui,  par  des
mesures  aussi  sages  qu'energiques,  est  devenu  le  bienfaiteur  des  indigenes  ;  il  a  annule
les  Encomiendas  ;  il  a  defendu  les  Repartimientos,  par  lesquels  les  corregidors  se  consti-
tuoient  arbitrairement  les  creanciers,  et  par  consequent  les  maitres  du  travail  des  natifs,
en  les  pourvoyant,  a  des  prix  exageres,  de  chevaux,  de  mulets  et  de  vetemens  (ropa)."

294  Cabarrus,  Elogio  de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1789,  P-  xlii.,  and  Canga's  note  in  Martinez
de  la  Mata,  Dos  Discursos,  Madrid,  1794,  p.  31.     But  these  writers  were  not  sufficiently
familiar  with  political  economy  really  to  appreciate  this  measure.

295  "  Early  in  the  reigft  of  Charles  steps  had  been  taken  towards  the  adoption  of  more


6o6  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Many  of  the  taxes  which  bore  heavily  on  the  lower  ranks  were  repealed,  and
the  industrious  classes  being  relieved  of  their  principal  burdens,  it  was  hoped
that  their  condition  would  speedily  improve.296  And  to  benefit  them  still  more,
such  alterations  were  effected  in  the  administration  of  the  law  as  might  enable
them  to  receive  justice  from  the  public  tribunals  when  they  had  occasion  to
complain  of  their  superiors.  Hitherto,  a  poor  man  had  not  the  least  chance
of  succeeding  against  a  rich  one  ;  but  in  the  reign  of  Charles  III.  government
introduced  various  regulations  by  which  labourers  and  mechanics  could  obtain
redress  if  their  masters  defrauded  them  of  their  wages,  or  broke  the  contracts
made  with  them.297

Not  only  the  labouring  classes,  but  also  the  literary  and  scientific  classes,
were  encouraged  and  protected.  One  source  of  danger,  to  which  they  had
long  been  exposed,  was  considerably  lessened  by  the  steps  which  Charles  took
to  curtail  the  power  of  the  Inquisition.  The  king  was  moreover  always  ready
to  reward  them  ;  he  was  a  man  of  cultivated  tastes,  and  he  delighted  in  being
thought  the  patron  of  learning.298  Soon  after  his  accession,  he  issued  an  order
exempting  from  military  service  all  printers,  and  all  persons  immediately  con-
nected with  printing,  such  as  casters  of  type,  and  the  like.299  He  also,  as  far
as  he  was  able,  infused  new  life  into  the  old  universities,  and  did  all  that  was
possible  towards  restoring  their  discipline  and  reputation.300  He  founded  schools,
endowed  colleges,  rewarded  professors,  and  granted  pensions.  In  these  matters
his  munificence  seemed  inexhaustible,  and  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  account  for
the  veneration  with  which  literary  Spaniards  regard  his  memory.  They  have
reason  to  regret  that,  instead  of  living  now,  they  had  not  lived  when  he  was
king.  In  his  reign  it  was  supposed  that  their  interests  must  be  identical  with
the  interests  of  knowledge  ;  and  these  last  were  rated  so  highly  that  in  1771  it
was  laid  down  as  a  settled  principle  of  government,  that  of  all  the  branches  of
public  policy  the  care  of  education  is  the  most  important.301

But  this  is  not  all.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  in  the  reign  of  Charles
III.  the  face  of  Spain  underwent  greater  changes  than  it  had  done  during  the
hundred  and  fifty  years  which  had  elapsed  since  the  final  expulsion  of  the  Moham-
medans. At  his  accession,  in  1759,  the  wise  and  pacific  policy  of  his  predecessor,
Ferdinand  VI.,  had  enabled  that  prince  not  only  to  pay  many  of  the  debts  owed
by  the  crown,  but  also  to  accumulate  and  leave  behind  him  a  considerable  trea-


liberal  principles  in  the  commerce  with  America  ;  but,  in  the  year  1778,  a  complete
and  radical  change  was  introduced.  The  establishment  of  a  free  trade  rapidly  produced
the  most  beneficial  consequences.  The  export  of  foreign  goods  was  tripled,  of  home-
produce  quintupled  ;  and  the  returns  from  America  augmented  in  the  astonishing
proportion  of  nine  to  one.  The  produce  of  the  customs  increased  with  equal  rapidity."
Clarke's  Examination  of  the  Internal  State  of  Spain,  London,  1818,  p.  72.

296  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  pp.  197,  317,  318.

297  See  Florida  Blanca's  statement  in  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  331  ;
'  To  facilitate  to  artisans  and  journeymen  the  scanty  payment  of  their  labours,  in  spite  of

the  privileges  and  interest  of  the  powerful."

29s  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  317,  318,  and  elsewhere.

299  "  '  Desde  mi  feliz  advenimiento  al  trono '  (dijo  el  Key  en  la  ordenanza  de  reem-
plazos)  '  ha  merecido  mi  Real  proteccion  el  arte  de  la  imprenta,  y,  para  que  pueda  arrai-
garse  solidamente  en  estos  reinos,  vengo  en  declarar  la  exencion  del  sorteo  y  servicio
militar,  no  solo  a  los  impresores,  sino  tambien  a  los  fundidores  que  se  empleen  de  continue
en  este  ejercicio,  y  a  los  abridores  de  punzones  y  matrices.'  "  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado
de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iii.  p.  213.

soo  On  the  steps  taken  to  reform  the  universities  between  1768  and  1774,  see  Rio,
Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  185-210.  Compare  vol.  iv.  pp.  296-
299-

301  "  La  educacion  de  la  juyentud  por  los  maestros  de  primeras  letras  es  uno  y  aun
el  mas  principal  ramo  de  la  policia  y  buen  gobierno  del  Estado."  Real  Provision  de  u
de  julio  de  1771,  printed  in  Rio,  vol.  iii.  p.  182.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          607

sure.302  Of  this  Charles  availed  himself,  to  begin  those  works  of  public  splendour
which,  more  than  any  other  part  of  his  administration,  were  sure  to  strike  the
senses,  and  to  give  popularity  to  his  reign.  And  when,  by  the  increase  of  wealth
rather  than  by  the  imposition  of  fresh  burdens,  still  larger  resources  were  placed
at  his  command,  he  devoted  a  considerable  part  of  them  to  completing  his  de-
signs. He  so  beautified  Madrid  that  forty  years  after  his  death  it  was  stated
that,  as  it  then  stood,  all  its  magnificence  was  owing  to  him.  The  public  buildings
and  the  public  gardens,  the  beautiful  walks  round  the  capital,  its  noble  gates,
its  institutions,  and  the  very  roads  leading  from  it  to  the  adjacent  country,
are  all  the  work  of  Charles  III.,  and  are  among  the  most  conspicuous  trophies
which  attest  his  genius  and  the  sumptuousness  of  his  taste.303

In  other  parts  of  the  country  roads  were  laid  down,  and  canals  were  dug,
with  the  view  of  increasing  trade,  by  opening  up  communications  through  tracts
previously  impassable.  At  the  accession  of  Charles  III.  the  whole  of  the  Sierra
Morcna  was  unoccupied,  except  by  wild  beasts  and  banditti,  who  took  refuge
there.304  No  peaceful  traveller  would  venture  into  such  a  place  ;  and  commerce
was  thus  excluded  from  what  nature  had  marked  as  one  of  the  greatest  highways
in  Spain,  standing  as  it  does  between  the  basins  of  the  Guadiana  and  Guadal-
quivir, and  in  the  direct  course  between  the  ports  on  the  Mediterranean  and  those
on  the  Atlantic.  The  active  government  of  Charles  III.  determined  to  remedy
this  evil ;  but  the  Spanish  people  not  having  the  energy  to  do  what  was  required,
six  thousand  Dutch  and  Flemish  were  in  1767  invited  to  settle  in  the  Sierra
Morena.  On  their  arrival,  lands  were  allotted  to  them,  roads  were  cut  through
the  whole  of  the  district,  villages  were  built  ;  and  that  which  had  just  been  an
impervious  desert  was  suddenly  turned  into  a  smiling  and  fruitful  territory.305

302  M.  Lafuente,  who  has  justly  praised  the  love  of  peace  displayed  by  Ferdinand  VI .
(Historic*  de  Espana,  vol.  i.  p.  202,  vol.  xix.  pp.  286,  378),  adds    (vol.  xix.  p.  384),
"  De    modo    que  con   razon  de  admira,  y  es  el  testimonio  mas  honroso  de  la  beuno
administracion  economica  de  este  reinado,  que  al  morir  este  buen  monarca  dejara,  no
diremos  nosotros  preletas  y  apuntaladas  las  areas  publicas,  como  hiperbolicamente  suele
decirse,  pero  si  con  el  considerable  sobrante  de  trescientos  millones  de  reales,  despues
de  cubiertas  todas  las  atenciones  del  Estado  :  fenomeno  que  puede  decirse  se  veia  por
primera  vez  en  Espana,  y  resultado  satisfactorio,  que  aun  supuesta  una  buena  adminis-
tracion, solo  pudo  obtenerse  a  favor  de  su  prudente  politica  de  neutralidad  y  de  paz."

303  "  But  it  is  to  Charles  III.  that  Madrid  owes  all  its  present  magnificence.     Under
his  care,  the  royal  palace  was  finished,  the  noble  gates  of  Alcala  and  San  Vincente  were
raised  ;  the  custom-house,  the  post-office,  the  museum,  and  royal  printing-office   were
constructed  ;  the  academy  of  the  three  noble  arts  improved  ;  the  cabinet  of  natural
history,  the  botanic  garden,  the  national  bank  of  San  Carlos,  and  many  gratuitous  schools
established  ;  while  convenient  roads  leading  from  the  city,  and  delightful  walks  planted
within  and  without  it,  and  adorned  by  statues   and   fountains,  combine  to  announce
the  solicitude  of  this  paternal  king."     Spain  by  an  American,  London,  1831,  vol.  i.  p.  206  ;
see  also  p.  297.

304  The   following  passage  describes  its  state  so  late  as  the  year  1766  :  "  Por  temor
6  por  connivencia  de  los  venteros,  dentro  de  sus   casas   concertaban    frecuentemente
los  ladrones  sus  robos,  y  los  ejecutaban  a  mansalva,  ocultandose  en  guaridas  de  que
ahuyentaban  a  las  fieras.     Acaso  a  muy  largas  distancias  se  descubrian  entre  contados
caserios  algunos  pastores  como  los  que  alii  hizo  encontrar  el  ilustre  manco  de  Lepanto
al   ingenioso  hidalgo  de   la  Mancha.     Parte   de  la  Sierra   estuvo  poblada  en  tiempo
de  moros  ;  actualmente  ya  no  habia  mas  que  espesos  matorrales  hasta  en  torno  de  la
ermita  de  Santa  Elena,  donde  resonaron  canticos  de  gracias  al  Cielo  por  el  magnifico
triunfo  de  las  Navas."     Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iii.  p.  9.     On  the
condition  of  the  Sierra  Morena  a  hundred  years  before  this,  see  Boisel,  Journal  du  Voyage
a"  Espagne,  Paris,  1669,  4to,pp.  62,  296,  where  it  is  termed  "  Le  lieu  le  plus  desert,  et
ou  il  n'y  a  que  quelques  ventas  sans  villages."

305  Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  9-"»  35-     By  1771,  "sin
auxilio  de  la  Real  hacienda  pudieron  mantenerse  al  fin  los  colonos."  p.  42.      See   also
vol.  iv.  pp.  114,  115.     On  the  subsequent  history  of  this  settlement,  see  Inglis'  Spain,
vol.  ii.  pp.  29-31,  London,  1831.


608  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Nearly  all  over  Spain  the  roads  were  repaired  ;  a  fund  having  been,  so  early
as  1760,  specially  set  apart  for  that  purpose.306  Many  new  works  were  begun  ;
and  such  improvements  were  introduced,  while  at  the  same  time  such  vigilance
was  employed  to  prevent  peculation  on  the  part  of  officials,  that  in  a  very  few
years  the  cost  of  making  public  highways  was  reduced  to  less  than  half  of  what  it
used  to  be.307  Of  the  undertakings  which  were  brought  to  a  successful  issue,
the  most  important  were  a  road  now  first  constructed  from  Malaga  to  Ante-
quera,308  and  another  from  Aquilas  to  Lorca.309  In  this  way,  means  of  inter-
course were  supplied  between  the  Mediterranean  and  the  interior  of  Andalusia
and  of  Murcia.  While  these  communications  were  established  in  the  south
and  south-east  of  Spain,  others  were  opened  up  in  the  north  and  north-west.
In  1769  a  road  was  begun  between  Bilbao  and  Osma  ;  31°  and  soon  after,  one
was  completed  between  Galicia  and  Astorga.311  These  and  similar  works  were
so  skilfully  executed  that  the  Spanish  highways,  formerly  among  the  worst  in
Europe,  were  now  classed  among  the  best.  Indeed  a  competent  and  by  no
means  overfriendly  judge  gives  it  as  his  opinion  that  at  the  death  of  Charles
III.  better  roads  were  to  be  found  in  Spain  than  in  any  other  country.312

In  the  interior,  rivers  were  made  navigable,  and  canals  were  formed  to  connect
them  with  each  other.  The  Ebro  runs  through  the  heart  of  Aragon  and  part  of
Old  Castile,  and  is  available  for  purposes  of  traffic  as  high  up  as  Logrono,  and
from  thence  down  to  Tudela.  But  between  Tudela  and  Saragossa  the  navigation
is  interrupted  by  its  great  speed,  and  by  the  rocks  in  its  bed.  Consequently,
Navarre  is  deprived  of  its  natural  communication  with  the  Mediterranean.
In  the  enterprizing  reign  of  Charles  V.  an  attempt  was  made  to  remedy  this
evil ;  but  the  plan  failed,  was  laid  aside,  and  was  forgotten,  until  it  was  revived,
more  than  two  hundred  years  later,  by  Charles  III.  Under  his  auspices  the
great  canal  of  Aragon  was  projected,  with  the  magnificent  idea  of  uniting  the
Mediterranean  and  the  Atlantic.  This,  however,  was  one  of  many  instances
in  which  the  government  of  Spain  was  too  far  in  advance  of  Spain  itself  ;  and
it  was  necessary  to  abandon  a  scheme  to  which  the  resources  of  the  country
were  unequal.  But  what  was  really  effected  was  of  immense  value.  A  canal
was  actually  carried  to  Saragossa,  and  the  waters  of  the  Ebro  were  made  available

306  "  En  1760  se  destine  por  primera  vez  un  fondo  especial  para  la  construccion  de
caminos."     Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,  vol.  iv.  p.  123.

307  Indeed,    M.  Rio  says  that  the  expense  was  reduced  by  two-thirds,  and,  in  some
parts,  by  three -fourths.     "  Antes  se  regulaba  en  un  millon  de  reales  la  construccion
de  cada  legua  ;  ahora  solo  ascendia  a  la  tercera  6  cuarta  parte  de  esta  suma."     Rio,
Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iv.  p.  117.

308  A  note  in  Bowles,  Historia  Natural  de  Espana,  Madrid,  1789,  4to,  p.  158,  terms
this  "  un  camino  alineado  y  solido."     In  Cook's  Spain,  London,  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  209,  it  is
called  "  a  magnificent  road."

309  "  Para  dar  salida  a  los  frutos,  que  regaban  los  pantanos  de  Lorca,  ejecutose  una
bien  trazada  via  al  puerto  de  las  Aguilas."      Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.
vol.  iv.  pp.  115,  116.

3  °  In  1769  Baretti  writes,  in  great  surprise,  "  the  Biscayans  are  actually  making  a
noble  road,  which  is  to  go  from  Bilbao  to  Osma."  Barents  Journey  through  England,
Portugal,  Spain,  and  France,  London,  1770,  vol.  iv.  p.  311.

311  "  Otras  diferentes  carreteras,  construidas  de  nuevo  6  rehabilitadas,  multiplicaron
las  comunicaciones  durante  los  nueve  primeros  anos  de  estar  a  cargo  de  Floridablanca
la  superintendencia  general  de  caminos,  haciendose  de  facil  y  comodo  transito  puntos
escabrosos  como  el  del  Puerto  de  la  Cadena  y  los  que  median  entre  Astorga  y  Galicia,
y  Malaga  y  Antequera."     Rio,  Historia  del  Reinado  de  Carlos  III.,  vol.  iv.  p.  115.

312  "The  reigns  of  Ferdinand  the  Sixth  and  Charles  the  Third  produced  the  most
beneficial  changes  in  this  important  branch   of  political  economy.     New  roads  were
opened,  which  were  carefully  levelled,  and  constructed  with  solidity.     There  are  at  the
present  time  in  Spain  several  superb  roads,  such  as  may  vie  with  the  finest  in  Euupe  ;
indeed  they  have  been  made  with  superior  judgment,  and  upon  a  grander  scale."

Spain,  edit.  London,  1809,  vol. .  iy.  p.  427.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          609

not  only  for  transport,  but  also  for  irrigating  the  soil.  The  means  of  a  safe  and
profitable  trade  were  now  supplied  even  to  the  western  extremity  of  Aragon.
The  old  land,  becoming  more  productive,  rose  in  value,  and  new  land  was  brought
under  the  plough.  From  this  other  parts  of  Spain  also  benefited.  Castile,
for  example,  had  in  seasons  of  scarcity  always  depended  for  supplies  on  Aragon,
though  that  province  could  under  the  former  system  only  produce  enough  for
its  own  consumption.  But  by  this  great  canal,  to  which,  about  the  same  time,
that  of  Tauste  was  also  added,313  the  soil  of  Aragon  became  far  more  productive
than  it  had  ever  yet  been  ;  and  the  rich  plains  of  the  Ebro  yielded  so  abundantly
that  they  were  able  to  supply  wheat  and  other  food  to  the  Castilians  as  well
as  to  the  Aragonese.314

The  government  of  Charles  III.,  moreover,  constructed  a  canal  between
Amposta  and  Alfaques,315  which  irrigated  the  southern  extremity  of  Catalonia,
and  brought  into  cultivation  a  large  district  which,  from  the  constant  lack  of
rain,  had  hitherto  been  untilled.  Another  and  still  greater  enterprise  belonging
to  the  same  reign  was  an  attempt,  only  partly  successful,  to  establish  a  water-
communication  between  the  capital  and  the  Atlantic,  by  running  a  canal  from
Madrid  to  Toledo,  whence  the  Tagus  would  have  conveyed  goods  to  Lisbon,  and
all  the  trade  of  the  west  would  have  been  opened  up.316  But  this  and  many  other
noble  projects  were  nipped  in  the  bud  by  the  death  of  Charles  III.,  with  whom
every  thing  vanished.  When  he  passed  away  the  country  relapsed  into  its
former  inactivity,  and  it  was  clearly  seen  that  these  great  works  were  not  national,
but  political  ;  in  other  words,  that  they  were  due  merely  to  individuals,  whose
most  strenuous  exertions  always  come  to  naught  if  they  are  opposed  by  the
operation  of  those  general  causes  which  are  often  undiscerned,  but  to  which  even
the  strongest  of  us  do,  in  our  own  despite,  pay  implicit  obedience.

Still,  for  a  time,  much  was  done  ;  and  Charles,  reasoning  according  to  the
ordinary  maxims  of  politicians,  might  well  indulge  the  hope  that  what  he  had
effected  would  permanently  change  the  destiny  of  Spain.  For  these  and  other
works  which  he  not  only  planned  but  executed317  were  not  paid  for,  as  is  too

313  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  287.

3*4  Ibid.,  vol.  v.  pp.  198,  199,  286,  287.  Townsend's  Spain,  vol.  i.  pp.  212-215-  La-
borde's  Spain,  vol.  ii.  p.  271.  This  canal,  which  was  intended  to  establish  a  free  commu-
nication between  the  Bay  of  Biscay  and  the  Mediterranean,  is  slightly  noticed  in  Mac-
pherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  iv.  pp.  95,  96  ;  a  learned  and  valuable  work,  but
very  imperfect  as  regards  Spain.  The  economical  value  of  this  great  enterprise,
and  the  extent  to  which  it  succeeded,  are  seriously  under -estimated  in  Ford's  Spain,
p.  587  ;  a  book  which,  notwithstanding  the  praise  that  has  been  conferred  upon  it,  is
carelessly  composed,  and  is  sure  to  mislead  readers  who  have  not  the  means  of  com-
paring it  with  other  authorities.  M.  Rio's  History  of  Charles  III.  contains  some  in-
teresting information  on  the  subject ;  but  unfortunately  I  omitted  to  mark  the
passages.

315  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  pp.  288,  289,  on  the  authority  of  Florida
Blanca  himself.

316  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  199.     Townsend's  Spain,  vol.  i.  p.  3<H-
3"  See  Florida  Blanca's  statement,  in  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  289.

"  In  many  other  parts  similar  works  have  been  promoted,  for  canals  of  irrigation,  and
for  encouraging  agriculture  and  traffic.  The  canals  of  Manzanares  and  Guadarrama
are  continued  by  means  of  the  national  bank,  which  has  appropriated  one -half
of  the  profits  derived  from  the  export  of  silver  to  this  end."  .  .  .  "The  town

>of  Almuradiel,  formed  in  the  middle  of  the  campo  nuevo  of  Andalusia,  for  the
rugged  pass  of  Despena  Perros,  is  another  example  of  agriculture  for  the  neigh-
bouring places  ;  since,  instead  of  woods  and  frightful  deserts,  we  have  seen  in  a  few
years  public  buildings,  houses,  plantations,  and  cultivated  lands,  producing  every  species
of  grain  and  fruits,  which  border  the  road,  and  banish  the  danger  of  robbers  and  banditti.
See  also  Muriel,  Gobierno  del  Key  Don  Carlos  III.,  p.  5-  "  Habiendo  sido  el  remado
de  Carlos  III.  una  serie  continua  de  mejoras  en  todos  ramos  ;  "  and  the  striking  picture
(p.  15),  "  Agricultura,  artes  mecanicas,  comercio,  ensenanza,  milicia,  navegacion,  ciencias,

'


6io  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

often  the  case,  by  taxes  which  oppressed  the  people  and  trammelled  their  indus-
try. At  his  side,  and  constantly  advising  him,  there  were  men  who  really  aimed
at  the  public  good,  and  who  never  would  have  committed  so  fatal  an  error.
Under  his  rule  the  wealth  of  the  country  greatly  increased,  and  the  comforts
of  the  lower  classes,  instead  of  being  abridged,  were  multiplied.  The  imposts  were
more  fairly  assessed  than  they  had  ever  been  before.  Taxes  which  in  the
seventeenth  century  all  the  power  of  the  executive  could  not  wring  from  the
people,  were  now  regularly  paid,  and,  owing  to  the  development  of  the  national
resources,  they  became  at  once  more  productive  and  less  onerous.  In  the  manage  -
ment  of  the  public  finances  an  economy  was  practised,  the  first  example  of
which  had  been  set  in  the  preceding  reign,  when  the  cautious  and  pacific  policy
of  Ferdinand  VI.  laid  a  foundation  for  many  of  the  improvements  just  narrated.
Ferdinand  bequeathed  to  Charles  III.  a  treasure  which  he  had  not  extorted,
but  saved.  Among  the  reforms  which  he  introduced,  and  which  an  unwilling-
ness to  accumulate  details  has  compelled  me  to  omit,  there  is  one  very  important
and  also  very  characteristic  of  his  policy.  Before  his  reign  Spain  had  annually
been  drained  of  an  immense  amount  of  money,  on  account  of  the  right  which  the
Pope  claimed  of  presenting  to  certain  rich  benefices,  and  of  receiving  part  of  their
produce  ;  probably  as  a  recompense  for  the  trouble  he  had  taken.  Of  this  duty
the  Pope  was  relieved  by  Ferdinand  VI.,  who  secured  to  the  Spanish  crown
the  right  of  conferring  such  preferment,  and  thus  saved  to  the  country  those
enormous  sums  on  which  the  Roman  Court  had  been  wont  to  revel.318  This
was  just  the  sort  of  measure  which  would  be  hailed  with  delight  by  Charles  III.,
as  harmonizing  with  his  own  views  ;  and  we  accordingly  find  that  in  his  reign
it  was  not  only  acted  upon  but  extended  still  further.  For  perceiving  that,  in
spite  of  his  efforts,  the  feeling  of  the  Spaniards  on  these  matters  was  so  strong
as  to  impel  them  to  make  offerings  to  him  whom  they  venerated  as  the  Head  of
the  Church,  the  king  determined  to  exercise  control  over  even  these  voluntary
gifts.  To  accomplish  this  end  various  devices  were  suggested  ;  and  at  length
one  was  hit  upon  which  was  thought  sure  to  be  effectual.  A  royal  order  was
issued,  directing  that  no  person  should  send  money  to  Rome,  but  that  if  he  had
occasion  to  make  remittances  there,  they  should  pass  not  through  the  ordinary
channels,  but  through  the  ambassadors,  ministers,  or  other  agents  of  the  Spanish
Crown.319

If  we  now  review  the  transactions  which  I  have  narrated,  and  consider  them
as  a  whole,  extending  from  the  accession  of  Philip  V.  to  the  death  of  Charles  III.,
over  a  period  of  nearly  ninety  years,  we  shall  be  struck  with  wonder  at  their
unity,  at  the  regularity  of  their  march,  and  at  their  apparent  success.  Looking
at  them  merely  in  a  political  point  of  view,  it  may  be  doubted  if  such  vast  and
uninterrupted  progress  has  ever  been  seen  in  any  country  either  before  or  since.
For  three  generations  there  was  no  pause  on  the  part  of  the  government  ;  not
one  reaction,  not  one  sign  of  halting.  Improvement  upon  improvement,  and
reform  upon  reform,  followed  each  other  in  swift  succession.  The  power  of  the

letras,  legislation,  en  una  palabra,  todo  cuanto  puede  influir  en  la  prosperidad  del  Estado,
todo  llamo  la  atencion  de  los  ministros,  y  en  todo  hicieron  las  mejoras  que  permitian
las  circunstancias."  On  the  improvements  in  internal  communications,  see  the  same
valuable  work,  pp.  187-192.

318  Respecting  this  step,  which  was  effected  in  1754,  see  Tapia,  Civilization  Espanola,
Madrid,  1840,  vol.  iv.  pp.  81,  82.  "  Fue  este  tratado  utilisimo  para  la  Espana,  pues
por  el  se  liberto  del  pago  de  enormes  sumas  que  hasta  entonces  habian  pasado  a  los
estados  pontificos.  En  el  informe  canonico -legal  escrito  a  virtud  de  real  orden  en  1746
por  el  fiscal  de  la  camara  de  Castilla  Don  Bias  de  Jover,  se  decia  ;  que  segun  el  testimonio
del  historiador  Cabrera,  en  el  espacio  de  30  anos  el  solo  renglon  de  las  coadjutorias  y
dispensas  habia  hecho  pasar  a  Roma  de  la  corona  de  Castilla  millon  y  medio  de  ducados
romanos.  Y  anade  el  mismo  Jover  que  a  principios  del  siglo  xviii.  subia  aun  esta  con-
tribucion  cada  afio  en  todos  los  estados  de  la  monarquia  espanola  a  500,000  escudos
romanos,  que  era  un  tevcio  poco  mas  6  menos  de  lo  que  Roma  percibia  de  toda  la  cristiandadS '
319  See  Appendix  I.  to  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  334.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          611

Church,  which  has  always  been  the  crying  evil  of  Spain,  and  which  hitherto
none  of  the  boldest  politicians  had  dared  to  touch,  was  restricted  in  every  possible
way  by  a  series  of  statesmen,  from  Orry  to  Florida  Blanca,  whose  efforts  were
latterly,  and  for  nearly  thirty  years,  zealously  aided  by  Charles  III.,  the  ablest
monarch  who  has  sat  on  the  throne  since  the  death  of  Philip  II.  Even  the
Inquisition  was  taught  to  tremble,  and  made  to  loosen  its  hold  over  its  victims.
The  burning  of  heretics  was  stopped.  Torture  was  disused.  Prosecutions  for
heresy  were  discouraged.  Instead  of  punishing  men  for  imaginary  offences,  a
disposition  was  shown  to  attend  to  their  real  interests,  to  alleviate  their  burdens,
to  increase  their  comforts,  and  to  check  the  tyranny  of  those  who  were  set  over
them.  Attempts  were  made  to  restrain  the  cupidity  of  the  clergy,  and  prevent
them  from  preying  at  will  upon  the  national  wealth.  With  this  view,  the  laws
of  mortmain  were  revised,  and  various  measures  taken  to  interpose  obstacles
in  the  way  of  persons  who  desired  to  waste  their  property  by  bequeathing  it  for
ecclesiastical  purposes.  In  this  as  in  other  matters  the  true  interests  of  society
were  preferred  to  the  fictitious  ones.  To  raise  the  secular  classes  above  the
spiritual  ;  to  discountenance  the  exclusive  attention  hitherto  paid  to  questions
respecting  which  nothing  is  known,  and  which  it  is  impossible  to  solve  ;  to  do
this,  and,  in  the  place  of  such  barren  speculations,  to  substitute  a  taste  for  science
or  for  literature,  became  the  object  of  the  Spanish  government  for  the  first  time
since  Spain  had  possessed  a  government  at  all.  As  part  of  the  same  scheme,  the
Jesuits  were  expelled,  the  right  of  sanctuary  was  infringed,  and  the  whole  hier-
archy, from  the  highest  bishop  down  to  the  lowest  monk,  were  taught  to  fear
the  law,  to  curb  their  passions,  and  to  restrain  the  insolence  with  which  they
had  formerly  treated  every  rank  except  their  own.  These  would  have  been
great  deeds  in  any  country  ;  in  such  a  country  as  Spain  they  were  marvellous.
Of  them  I  have  given  an  abridged  and  therefore  an  imperfect  account,  but
still  sufficient  to  show  how  the  government  laboured  to  diminish  superstition,
to  check  bigotry,  to  stimulate  intellect,  to  promote  industry,  and  to  rouse  the
people  from  their  death-like  slumber.  I  have  omitted  many  measures  of  con-
siderable interest,  and  which  tended  in  the  same  direction  ;  because  here  as
elsewhere  I  seek  to  confine  myself  to  those  salient  points  which  most  distinctly
mark  the  general  movement.  Whoever  will  minutely  study  the  history  of
Spain  during  this  period  will  find  additional  proof  of  the  skill  and  vigour  of
those  who  were  at  the  head  of  affairs,  and  who  devoted  their  best  energies  to
regenerating  the  country  which  they  ruled.  But  for  these  special  studies
ispecial  men  are  required  ;  and  I  shall  be  satisfied  if  I  have  firmly  grasped  the
great  march  and  outline  of  the  whole.  It  is  enough  for  my  purpose  if  I  have
•substantiated  the  general  proposition,  and  have  convinced  the  reader  of  the
•clearness  with  which  the  statesmen  of  Spain  discerned  the  evils  under  which
their  country  was  groaning,  and  of  the  zeal  with  which  they  set  themselves
to  remedy  the  mischief,  and  to  resuscitate  the  fortunes  of  what  had  once  not
only  been  the  chief  of  European  monarchies,  but  had  borne  sway  over  the  most
splendid  and  extensive  territory  that  had  been  united  under  a  single  rule  since
the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.

They  who  believe  that  a  government  can  civilize  a  nation,  and  that  legislators
are  the  cause  of  social  progress,  will  naturally  expect  that  Spain  reaped  permanent
benefit  from  those  liberal  maxims  which  now,  .for  the  first  time,  were  put  into
execution.  The  fact  however  is  that  such  a  policy,  wise  as  it  appeared,  was  of
no  avail,  simply  because  it  ran  counter  to  the  whole  train  of  preceding  circum-
stances. It  was  opposed  to  the  habits  of  the  national  mind,  and  was  introduced
into  a  state  of  society  not  yet  ripe  for  it.  No  reform  can  produce  real  good
unless  it  is  the  work  of  public  opinion,  and  unless  the  people  themselves  take  the
initiative.  In  Spain,  during  the  eighteenth  century,  foreign  influence,  and  the
complications  of  foreign  politics,  bestowed  enlightened  rulers  upon  an  unenlight-
ened country.320  The  consequence  was  that  for  a  time  great  things  were  done.

320  It  is  important  to  observe  that  the  Cortes,  where  alone  the  voice  of  the  people
had  a  chance  of  being  heard,  was  assembled  but  three  times  during  the  whole  of  the


6i2  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Evils  were  removed,  grievances  were  redressed,  many  important  improvements
were  introduced  ;  and  a  spirit  of  toleration  was  exhibited  such  as  had  never
before  been  seen  in  that  priest-ridden  and  superstitious  land.  But  the  mind  of
Spain  was  untouched.  While  the  surface,  and  as  it  were  the  symptoms,  of
affairs  were  ameliorated,  affairs  themselves  remained  unchanged.  Below  that
surface,  and  far  out  of  reach  of  any  political  remedy,  large  general  causes  were
at  work  which  had  been  operating  for  many  centuries,  and  which  were  sure,
sooner  or  later,  to  force  politicians  to  retrace  their  steps,  and  compel  them  to
inaugurate  a  policy  which  would  suit  the  traditions  of  the  country,  and  harmonize
with  the  circumstances  under  which  those  traditions  had  been  formed.

At  length  the  reaction  came.  In  1788  Charles  III.  died  ;  and  was  succeeded
by  Charles  IV.,  a  king  of  the  true  Spanish  breed,  devout,  orthodox,  and  ignorant.321
It  was  now  seen  how  insecure  everything  was,  and  how  little'  reliance  can  be
placed  on  reforms  which,  instead  of  being  suggested  by  the  people,  are  bestowed
on  them  by  the  political  classes.  Charles  IV.,  though  a  weak  and  contemp-
tible prince,322  was  so  supported  in  his  general  views  by  the  feelings  of  the
Spanish  nation  that  in  less  than  five  years  he  was  able  completely  to  re-
verse that  liberal  policy  which  it  had  taken  three  generations  of  statesmen
to  build  up.  In  less  than  five  years  everything  was  changed.  The  power  of
the  Church  was  restored  ;  the  slightest  approach  towards  free  discussion  was
forbidden  ;  old  and  arbitrary  principles,  which  had  not  been  heard  of  since  the
seventeenth  century,  were  revived  ;  the  priests  re-assumed  their  former  import-
ance ;  literary  men  were  intimidated,  and  literature  was  discouraged  ;  while  the
Inquisition,  suddenly  starting  up  afresh,  displayed  an  energy  which  caused
its  enemies  to  tremble,  and  proved  that  all  the  attempts  which  had  been  made  to
weaken  it  had  been  unable  to  impair  its  vigour,  or  to  daunt  its  ancient  spirit.

The  ministers  of  Charles  III.,  and  the  authors  of  those  great  reforms  which
signalized  his  reign,  were  dismissed  to  make  way  for  other  advisers,  better  suited
to  this  new  state  of  things.  Charles  IV.  loved  the  Church  too  well  to  tolerate  the
presence  of  enlightened  statesmen.  Aranda  and  Florida  Blanca  were  both
removed  from  office,  and  both  were  placed  in  confinement.323  Jovellanos  was
banished  from  court,  and  Cabarrus  was  thrown  into  prison.324  For  now  work
had  to  be  done  to  which  these  eminent  men  would  not  put  their  hands.  A
policy  which  had  been  followed  with  undeviating  consistency  for  nearly  ninety
years  was  about  to  be  rescinded,  in  order  that  the  old  empire  of  the  seventeenth
century,  which  was  the  empire  of  ignorance,  of  tyranny,  and  of  superstition,
might  be  resuscitated,  and  if  possible  restored  to  its  pristine  vigour.

Once  more  was  Spain  covered  with  darkness  ;  once  more  did  the  shadows  of
night  overtake  that  wretched  land.  The  worst  forms  of  oppression,  says  a
distinguished  writer,  seemed  to  be  settling  on  the  country  with  a  new  and  porten-

eighteenth  century,  and  then  merely  for  the  sake  of  form.  "  Les  Cortes  ne  se  reunirent
que  trois  fois  pendant  le  dix-huitieme  siecle,  et  plutot  encore  comme  des  solennites
formulaires  pour  la  prestation  du  serment  aux  princes  heritiers  de  la  couronne,  que
comme  etant  necessaires  pour  de  nouvelles  lois  et  des  contributions."  Sempere,  Histoire
des  Cortes  d'Espagne,  Bordeaux,  1815,  p.  270.

321  By  combining  these  three  qualities  he  has  deserved  and  received  the  cordial  appro-
bation of  the  present  Bishop  of  Barcelona,  who,  in  his  recent  work  on  the  Spanish  Church,
styles  him  "  un  monarca  tan  piadoso."     Observaciones  sobre  El  Presents  y  El  Porvenir
de  la  Iglesia  en  Espana,  por  Domingo  Costa  y  Borras,  Barcelona,  1857,  p.  80.

322  Even  in  Alison's  History  of  Europe,  where  men  of  his  character  are  usually  made
much  of,  he  is  treated  with  moderate  disdain.     "  Charles  IV.  was  not  destitute  of  good
qualities,  but  he  was  a  weak,  incapable  prince."     Vol.  viii.  p.  382,  Edinburgh,  1849.

323  Sempere,  Monarchic  Espagnole,  vol.  ii.  p.  167.      I  need  hardly  say  that  not  the
slightest  credit  is  to  be  attached  to  the  account  given  in  Godoy's  Memoirs.     Every  one
tolerably  acquainted  with  Spanish  history  will  see  that  his  book  is  an  attempt  to  raise  his
own  reputation  by  defaming  the  character  of  some  of  the  ablest  and  most  high -minded
of  his  contemporaries.

224  Ticknor's  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  iii.  pp.  277,  278.


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          613

tous  weight. 323  At  the  same  time,  and  indeed  as  a  natural  part  of  the  scheme,
every  investigation  likely  to  stimulate  the  mind  was  prohibited,  and  an  order
was  actually  sent  to  all  the  universities,  forbidding  the  study  of  moral  philosophy  ;
the  minister  who  issued  the  order  justly  observing  that  the  king  did  not  want  to
have  philosophers.326  There  was,  however,  little  fear  of  Spain  producing  any-
thing so  dangerous.  The  nation  not  daring,  and,  what  was  still  worse,  not
wishing  to  resist,  gave  way,  and  let  the  king  do  as  he  liked.  Within  a  very  few
years  he  neutralized  the  most  valuable  reforms  which  his  predecessors  had
introduced.  Having  discarded  the  able  advisers  of  his  father,  he  conferred  the
highest  posts  upon  men  as  narrow  and  incompetent  as  himself  ;  he  reduced
the  country  to  the  verge  of  bankruptcy  ;  and,  according  to  the  remark  of  a
Spanish  historian,  he  exhausted  all  the  resources  of  the  state.327

Such  was  the  condition  of  Spain  late  in  the  eighteenth  century.  .  The  French
invasion  quickly  followed  ;  and  that  unhappy  country  underwent  every  form
of  calamity  and  of  degradation.  Herein,  however,  lies  a  difference.  Calamities
may  be  inflicted  by  others  ;  but  no  people  can  be  degraded  except  by  their  own
acts.  The  foreign  spoiler  works  mischief ;  he  cannot  cause  shame.  With
nations,  as  with  individuals,  none  are  dishonoured  if  they  are  true  to  themselves.
Spain,  during  the  present  century,  has  been  plundered  and  oppressed,  and  the
opprobrium  lights  on  the  robbers,  not  on  the  robbed.  She  has  been  overrun  by
a  brutal  and  licentious  soldiery  ;  her  fields  laid  waste,  her  towns  sacked,  her
villages  burned.  It  is  to  the  criminal,  rather  than  to  the  victim,  that  the  igno-
miny of  these  acts  must  belong.  And  even  in  a  material  point  of  view  such
losses  are  sure  to  be  retrieved,  if  the  people  who  incur  them  are  inured  to  those
habits  of  self-government,  and  to  that  feeling  of  self-reliance,  which  are  the
spring  and  the  source  of  all  real  greatness.  With  the  aid  of  these  every  damage
may  be  repaired,  and  every  evil  remedied.  Without  them  the  slightest  blow
may  be  fatal.  In  Spain  they  are  unknown  ;  and  it  seems  impossible  to  establish
them.  In  that  country  men  have  so  long  been  accustomed  to  pay  implicit
deference  to  the  Crown  and  the  Church,  that  loyalty  and  superstition  have
usurped  the  place  of  those  nobler  emotions  to  which  all  freedom  is  owing,  and  in
the  absence  of  which  the  true  idea  of  independence  can  never  be  attained.

More  than  once,  indeed,  during  the  nineteenth  century,  a  spirit  has  appeared,
from  which  better  things  might  have  been  augured.  In  1812,  in  1820,  and  in
1836,  a  few  ardent  and  enthusiastic  reformers  attempted  to  secure  liberty  to  the
Spanish  people  by  endowing  Spain  with  a  free  constitution.  They  succeeded
for  a  moment,  and  that  was  all.  The  forms  of  constitutional  government  they
could  bestow  ;  but  they  could  not  find  the  traditions  and  the  habits  by  which
the  forms  are  worked.  They  mimicked  the  voice  of  liberty  ;  they  copied  her
institutions  ;  they  aped  her  very  gestures.  And  what  then  ?  At  the  first  stroke
of  adverse  fortune  their  idol  fell  to  pieces.  Their  constitutions  were  broken
up,  their  assemblies  dissolved,  their  enactments  rescinded.  The  inevitable
reaction  quickly  followed.  After  each  disturbance  the  hands  of  the  government
were  strengthened,  the  principles  of  despotism  were  confirmed,  and  the  Spanish
liberals  were  taught  to  rue  the  day  in  which  they  vainly  endeavoured  to  impart
freedom  to  their  unhappy  and  ill-starred  country.328

325  "In  all  its  worst  forms,  therefore,  oppression,  civil,  political,  and  religious,  appeared
to  be  settling  down,  with  a  new  and  portentous  weight,  on  the  whole  country."     Ticknor's
History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  iii.  p.  318.

326  "  Caballero,  fearing  the  progress  of  all  learning  which  might  disturb  the  peace  of
the  Court,  sent,  not  long  since,  a  circular  order  to  the  universities,  forbidding  the  study
of  moral  philosophy.      '  His  Majesty,'  it  was  said  in  the  order,  '  was  not  in  want  of
philosophers,   but   of  good   and  obedient  subjects.'  "     Doblado's   Letters  from  Spain,
P-  358.

327  "  Le  gouvernement  de  Charles  IV  avait  epuise  toutes  les  ressources  de  Fetat."
Sempere,  Histoire  des  Cortes  d'Espagne,  p.  323.

328  In  Spain,  the  voice  of  the  people  has  always  been  opposed  to  the  liberal  party,  as
many  writers  have  observed,  without  being  aware  of  the  reason,     Mr,  Walton  (Revolu~

'••


614  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

What  makes  these  failures  the  more  worthy  of  observation  is  that  the  Spaniards
did  possess,  at  a  very  early  period,  municipal  privileges  and  franchises,  similar
to  those  which  we  had  in  England,  and  to  which  our  greatness  is  often  ascribed.
But  such  institutions,  though  they  preserve  freedom,  can  never  create  it.  Spain
had  the  form  of  liberty  without  its  spirit  ;  hence  the  form,  promising  as  it  was,
soon  died  away.*  In  England  the  spirit  preceded  the  form,  and  therefore
the  form  was  durable.  Thus  it  is  that,  though  the  Spaniards  could  boast  of
free  institutions  a  century  before  ourselves,  they  were  unable  to  retain  them,
simply  because  they  had  the  institutions  and  nothing  more.  We  had  no  popular
representation  till  1264  ;  329  but  in  Castile  they  had  it  in  n69,330  and  in  Aragon
in  ii33.331  So,  too,  while  the  earliest  charter  was  granted  to  an  English  town
in  the  twelfth  century,332  we  find  in  Spain  a  charter  conferred  on  Leon  as  early
as  1020  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  eleventh  century  the  enfranchisement  of  towns
was  as  secure  as  laws  could  make  it.333

The  fact  however  is  that  in  Spain  these  institutions,  instead  of  growing
out  of  the  wants  of  the  people,  originated  in  a  stroke  of  policy  on  the  part  of  their
rulers.  They  were  conceded  to  the  citizens,  rather  than  desired  by  them.f
For,  during  the  war  with  the  Mohammedans,  the  Christian  kings  of  Spain,  as
they  advanced  southwards,  were  naturally  anxious  to  induce  their  subjects
to  settle  in  the  frontier  towns,  where  they  might  face  and  repel  the  enemy.
With  this  object,  they  granted  charters  to  the  towns,  and  privileges  to  the  inhab-
itants.334 And  as  the  Mohammedans  were  gradually  beaten  back  from  the
Asturias  to  Granada,  the  frontiers  changed,  and  the  franchises  were  extended

tions  of  Spain,  London,  1837,  vol.  i.  pp.  322,  323)  says  of  the  Cortes,  "  Public  indignation
hurled  them  from  their  seats  in  1814  ;  and  in  1823  they  were  overpowered,  not  by  the
arms  of  France,  but  by  the  displeasure  of  their  own  countrymen,"  &c.  See  also
p.  290  ;  and  Quin's  Memoirs  of  Ferdinand  the  Seventh,  London,  1824,  p.  121,  where  it  is
mentioned  that  "  in  all  the  towns  through  which  the  King  passed,  the  multitude,  excited
by  the  friars  and  clergy,  overturned  the  constitutional  stone,  and  uttered  the  most
atrocious  insults  against  the  Constitution,  the  Cortes,  and  the  Liberals."  Compare
Sempere,  Histoire  des  Cortes,  p.  335,  and  Bacon's  Six  Years  in  Biscay,  p.  40.  Indeed,  a
very  intelligent  writer  on  Spanish  affairs  in  1855  asserts,  with,  I  believe,  perfect  truth,
that  Spain  is  "  un  pays  ou  les  populations  sont  toujours  a  coup  sur  moins  liberates  que
les  gouvernemens."  Annuaire  des  Deux  Mondes,  1854,  1855,  Paris,  1855,  p.  266.

329  Above,  p.  352.

330  Prescotfs  History  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  i.  p.  xlviii.

331  Ibid.,  vol.  i.  p.  xcvi.

332  Kalian's  Middle  Ages,  ninth  edition,  London,  1846,  vol.  ii.  pp.  153-157,  which
must  be  compared  with  Hallam's  Supplemental  Notes,  London,  1848,  pp.  323-327.

333  Ibid.,  vol.  i.  p.  373.     Prescotfs  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  vol.  i.  pp.  xlv.  xlvi.     [From
these  remarks  it  appears  that  Buckle  had  framed  his  earlier   argument   as  to  Spanish
submissiveness  before  he  had  noted  the  details  of  the  history  of  early  Spanish  constitu-
tionalism.    The  facts  here  mentioned  should  have  been  dealt  with  in  the  survey  of  Spanish
development  during  the  Moorish  period.     They  are  now  briefly  noted  and  disposed  of
a  priori  in  such  a  way  as  to  save  the  preceding  argument. — ED.]

334  "  Ce  fut  alors  que  les  successeurs  de  Pelage  descendirent  de  leurs  montagnes  dans
les  plaines,de  leurs  forteresses  perchees  sur  des  rocs  inaccessibles  dans  les  villes  populeuses,
le  long  des  fleuves,  dans  de  fertiles  vallees  et  sur  les  cotes  de  la  mer  ;  ce  fut  alors  que
la  ville  d'Astorgue  revint  du  pouvoir  des  Arabes  a  celui  des  Asturiens  et  chassa  toute

[*  Here  the  formula  is  shaped  by  the  supposed  needs  of  the  argument.  In  Old  Spain
there  had  been  plenty  of  the  "  spirit  "  of  freedom,  otherwise  the  "  forms  "  could  not
have  existed.  Spanish  freedom  was  lost  through  causes  which  would  have  been  equally
efficient  in  any  other  country.  Compare  the  relative  "  freedom  "  in  England  under
Henry  VIII.  and  in  Spain  before  Ferdinand  and  Isabella. — ED.]

[f  The  language  here  confutes  itself.  It  is  impossible  to  "  concede  "  what  is  not
desired.  If,  further,  the  people  were  attracted  by  the  offer  of  privileges,  they  must  have
wanted


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          615

to  the  new  conquests,  in  order  that  what  was  the  post  of  danger  might  also  be
the  place  of  reward.  But  meanwhile  those  general  causes  which  I  have  indi-
cated were  predetermining  the  nation  to  habits  of  loyalty  and  of  superstition,
which  grew  to  a  height  fatal  to  the  spirit  of  liberty.  That  being  the  case,  the
institutions  were  of  no  avail.  They  took  no  root  ;  and  as  they  were  originated
by  one  political  combination,  they  were  destroyed  by  another.  Before  the  close
of  the  fourteenth  century  the  Spaniards  were  so  firmly  seated  in  the  territories
they  had  lately  acquired,  that  there  was  little  danger  of  their  being  again
expelled  ;  335  while  on  the  other  hand  there  was  no  immediate  prospect  of  their
being  able  to  push  their  conquests  further,  and  drive  the  Mohammedans  from
the  strongholds  of  Granada.  The  circumstances,  therefore,  which  gave  rise  to
the  municipal  privileges  had  changed  ;  and  as  soon  as  this  was  apparent,  the
privileges  began  to  perish.  Being  unsuited  to  the  habits  of  the  people,  they
were  sure  to  fall  on  the  first  opportunity.336  Late  in  the  fourteenth  century
their  decline  was  perceptible  ;  by  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century  they  were
almost  extinct  ;  and  early  in  the  sixteenth  century  they  were  finally  over-
thrown.337


la  partie  musulmane  de  ses  habitants  ;  ce  fut  alors,  enfin,  que  commencerent  en  Espagne
ces  concessions  de  franchises  municipales  par  lesquelles  les  rois  et  les  seigneurs  Chretiens
chercherent  a  attirer  des  populations  chretiennes  dans  les  lieux  d'ou  ils  avaient  chasse
les  Musulmans."  Fauriel,  Histoire  de  la  Gaule  Meridionale,  Paris,  1836,  vol.  iii.  p.  215.
See  also  Sempere,  Monarchic  Espagnole,  vol.  ii.  pp.  256,  257.  [In  similar  ways  were
granted  many  municipal  charters  in  England.  Kings  gave  them  in  order  to  win  support
against  the  nobles.  Cp.  Adam  Smith,  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  iii.  ch.  3. — ED.]

335  On  the  increasing  confidence  of  the  Spaniards  in  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth
century,  see  an  interesting  passage  in  Mariana,  Historia  de  Espana,  vol.  iv.  pp.  172,  173-

336  The  deputies  of   the  towns  did  in  fact  eventually   overthrow  their  own  liberties,
as  a  Spanish  historian  truly  remarks.     "  II  n'est  pas  etonnant  que  les  Monarques  espag-
nols  tachassent  d'affermir  leur  autorite  autant  que  possible,  et  encore  moins  que  leurs
conseillers  et  leurs  minis tres  cooperassent  a  leurs  desseins.     L'histoire  de  toutes  les
nations  nous  offre  de  nombreux   exemples  de  cette  politique  ;    mais  ce  qu'il  y  a  de  plus
remarquable  dans  celle  d'Espagne,  c'est  que  les   deputes  des  villes  qui  auraient  dii  etre  les
plus  zeles  defenseurs  de  leurs  droits,  conspirerent  ouvertement  contre  le  tiers -etat,  et  tenterent
d'aneantir  les  restes  de  1'ancienne  representation  nationale."     Sempere,  Histoire  des
Cortes  d'Espagne,  p.  213.      It  strikes  one  as  singular  that  M.  Sempere   should  never
have  inquired  why  this  happened  in  Spain,  and  not  elsewhere.      A  later  writer,  reflecting
on  the  destruction  of  the  municipal  element  by  the  royal  authority,  gives  a  solution
which,  like  many  other  so-called  solutions,  is  merely  a  statement  of  the  same  fact  in
different  words.     "  Al  fin  la  autoridad  real   logro   alcanzar  un  gran  predominio  en  el
gobierno  municipal  de  los  pueblos,  porque  los  corregidores  y  alcaldes  mayores  llegaron
a  eclipsar  la  influencia  de  los  adelantados  y  alcaldes  elegidos  por  los  pueblos."  Antequera,
Historia  de  la  Legislacion  Espanola,  Madrid,  1849,  p.  287.      This,  instead  of  explaining
the  event,  is  simply  narrating  it  afresh.     [The  phrase  "  on  the  first  opportunity  "  is
confuted  in  the  sentence  which  follows.     See  U.  R.  Burke's  History  of  Spain,  Hume's
ed.  i.  372-3,  for  an  account  of  the  process  of  decay.     First  the  commons  helped  to  put
down  the  nobles  ;    then  king  and  nobles  put  down  the  commons.     But  in  the  great
revolt  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Charles  V.  the  deputies  who  had  truckled  to  him
were  hanged  by  their  enraged  constituents.     Burke,  ed.  cited,  ii.  291. — ED.]

S37  The  final  destruction  of  popular  liberty  is  ascribed  by  many  writers  to  the  battle  of
Villalar,  in  1521  ;  though  it  is  quite  certain  that,  if  the  royalists  had  lost  that  battle
instead  of  gaining  it,  the  ultimate  result  would  have  been  the  same.  At  one  time  I
had  purposed  tracing  the  history  of  the  municipal  and  representative  elements  during
the  fifteenth  century  ;  and  the  materials  which  I  then  collected  convinced  me  that  the
spirit  of  freedom  never  really  existed  in  Spain,  and  that  therefore  the  marks  and  forms
of  freedom  were  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  effaced.  [This  summary  solution  is  quite
indefensible.  It  amounts  to  saying  that  the  spirit  of  freedom  has  never  existed  where
freedom  is  suppressed — an  argument  in  a  circle.  The  parliamentary  liberties  of  England
were  often  in  great  jeopardy  up  to  the  fifteenth  century.  See  refs-  in  the  editor's  Intro-


616  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  is  thus  that  general  causes  eventually  triumph  over  every  obstacle.  In  the
average  of  affairs,  and  on  a  comparison  of  long  periods,  they  are  irresistible.
Their  operation  is  often  attacked,  and  occasionally,  for  a  little  time,  stopped
by  politicians,  who  are  always  ready  with  their  empirical  and  short-sighted
remedies.  But  when  the  spirit  of  the  age  is  against  those  remedies  they  can
at  best  only  succeed  for  a  moment  ;  and  after  that  moment  has  passed,  a  reaction
sets  in,  and  the  penalty  for  violence  has  to  be  paid.  Evidence  of  this  will  be
found  in  the  annals  of  every  civilized  country  by  whoever  will  confront  the
history  of  legislation  with  the  history  of  opinion.  The  fate  of  the  Spanish  towns
has  afforded  us  one  good  proof  ;  the  fate  of  the  Spanish  Church  will  supply  us
with  another.  For  more  than  eighty  years  after  the  death  of  Charles  II.  the
rulers  of  Spain  attempted  to  weaken  the  ecclesiastical  power  *  ;  and  the  end  of  all
their  efforts  was  that  even  such  an  insignificant  and  incompetent  king  as  Charles
IV.  was  able,  with  the  greatest  ease,  rapidly  to  undo  what  they  had  done.  This
is  because,  during  the  eighteenth  century,  while  the  clergy  were  assailed  by  law,
they  were  favoured  by  opinion.  The  opinions  of  a  people  invariably  depend  on
large  general  causes,  which  influence  the  whole  country  ;  but  their  laws  are  too
often  the  work  of  a  few  powerful  individuals,  in  opposition  to  the  national  will.f
When  the  legislators  die  or  lose  office,  there  is  always  a  chance  of  their  successors
holding  opposite  views,  and  subverting  their  plans.  In  the  midst,  however,
of  this  play  and  fluctuation  of  political  life,  the  general  causes  remain  steady,
though  they  are  often  kept  out  of  sight,  and  do  not  become  visible  until  poli-
ticians, inclining  to  their  side,  bring  them  to  the  surface,  and  invest  them  with
open  and  public  authority.

This  is  what  Charles  IV.  did  in  Spain  ;  and  when  he  took  measures  to  favour
the  Church,  and  to  discourage  free  inquiry,  he  merely  sanctioned  those  national
habits  which  his  predecessors  had  disregarded.  The  hold  which  the  hierarchy
of  that  country  possess  over  public  opinion  has  always  been  proverbial  ;  but  it
is  even  greater  than  is  commonly  supposed.  What  it  was  in  the  seventeenth
century  we  have  already  seen  ;  and  in  the  eighteenth  century  there  were  no
signs  of  its  diminution,  except  among  a  few  bold  men,  who  could  effect  nothing
while  the  popular  voice  was  so  strong  against  them.  Early  in  the  reign  of  Philip
V.,  Labat,  who  travelled  in  Spain,  informs  us  that  when  a  priest  performed  mass,
nobles  of  the  highest  rank  deemed  it  an  honour  to  help  him  to  dress,  and  that  they
would  go  down  on  their  knees  to  him,  and  kiss  his  hands.338  When  this  was

duction  to  English  Politics,  pp.  403,  409-10,  415.  Broadly  speaking,  Castile  succumbed
to  despotism  after  the  suppression  of  the  revolt  of  the  communes  in  1521  as  France
did  after  the  suppression  of  the  Fronde,  and  as  England  would  have  done  after  the
reformation  had  Charles  II.  and  James  II.  governed  with  the  prudence  of  Charles  V.
and  Louis  XIV.  As  already  noted,  Buckle  cannot  have  had  the  present  problem  before
him  when  he  wrote  his  account  of  the  earlier  political  evolution  of  Spain. — ED.]

338  "  Ceux  qui  servent  la  Messe  en  Espagne,  soit  Religieux,  ou  Seculiers,  ne  manquent
jamais  d'aider  le  Pretre  a  s'habiller,  et  le  font  avec  beaucoup  de  respect.  Les  plus
grands  Seigneurs  s'en  font  honneur,  et  a  mesure  qu'ils  presentent  au  Pretre  quelque
partie  des  ornemens,  ils  lui  baisent  la  main.  On  se  met  £  genoux  pour  donner  a  laver
au  Pretre  pendant  la  Messe,  et  apres  qu'il  a  essuye  ses  doigts,  celui  qui  lui  a  donne  1'eau
demeurant  &  genoux  lui  presente  le  bassin  retourne,  sur  lequel  le  Pretre  met  sa  main
pour  la  lui  laisser  baiser.  Au  re  tour  a  la  Sacristie,  il  ne  manque  pas  d'aider  le  Pretre  a
se  deshabiller,  apres  quoi  il  se  met  a  genoux  pour  recevoir  sa  benediction,  et  baiser  sa
main."  Labat,  Voyages  en  Espagne  et  en  Italic,  Paris,  1730,  vol.  i.  p.  36.

[*  Not  till  Charles  III.,  however,  was  popular  education  thought  of — the  one  thing
needful.— ED.]

[f  Precisely  of  this  character  were  the  laws  which  first  set  up  the  Inquisition  under
Ferdinand  and  Isabella.  It  was  these  laws,  proximately,  which  wrought  the  growth  of
the  "  opinion  "  specified  in  the  text.  And  if  the  successors  of  these  monarch s,  or  of
Charles  V.,  had  cljancecj  Jo  hojd  opposite  views,  Spanish  history  might  have  gone  very
differently,— En,J


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE   SPANISH    INTELLECT          617

done  by  the  proudest  aristocracy  in  Europe,  we  may  suppose  what  the  general
feeling  must  have  been.  Indeed,  Labat  assures  us  that  a  Spaniard  would  hardly
be  considered  of  sound  faith  if  he  did  not  leave  some  portion  of  his  property
to  the  Church  ;  so  completely  had  respect  for  the  hierarchy  become  an  essential
part  of  the  national  character.339

A  still  more  curious  instance  was  exhibited  on  the  occasion  of  the  expulsion
of  the  Jesuits.  That  once  useful  but  now  troublesome  body  was  during  the
eighteenth  century  what  it  is  in  the  nineteenth — the  obstinate  enemy  of  progress
and  of  toleration.  The  rulers  of  Spain,  observing  that  it  opposed  all  their  schemes
of  reform,  resolved  to  get  rid  of  an  obstacle  which  met  them  at  every  turn.
In  France,  the  Jesuits  had  just  been  treated  as  a  public  nuisance,  and  suppressed
at  a  blow,  and  without  difficulty.  The  advisers  of  Charles  III.  saw  no  reason
why  so  salutary  a  measure  should  not  be  imitated  in  their  country  ;  and  in
1767  they,  following  the  example  which  had  been  set  by  the  French  in  1764,  abol-
ished this  great  mainstay  of  the  Church.340  Having  done  this,  the  government
supposed  that  it  had  taken  a  decisive  step  towards  weakening  ecclesiastical
power,  particularly  as  the  sovereign  cordially  approved  of  the  proceeding.  The
year  after  this  occurred,  Charles  III.,  according  to  his  custom,  appeared  in  the
balcony  of  the  palace,  on  the  festival  of  Saint  Charles,  ready  to  grant  any  request
which  the  people  might  make  to  him,  and  which  usually  consisted  of  a  prayer
for  the  dismissal  of  a  minister,  or  for  the  repeal  of  a  tax.  On  this  occasion,
however,  the  citizens  of  Madrid,  instead  of  occupying  themselves  with  such
worldly  matters,  felt  that  still  dearer  interests  were  in  peril ;  and  to  the  surprise
and  terror  of  the  court  they  demanded  with  one  voice  that  the  Jesuits  should
be  allowed  to  return  and  wear  their  usual  dress,  in  order  that  Spain  might  be
gladdened  by  the  sight  of  these  holy  men.341

What  can  you  do  with  a  nation  like  this  ?  What  is  the  use  of  laws  when
the  current  of  public  opinion  thus  sets  in  against  them  ?  In  the  face  of  such


339  "  Telle  est  la  coutume  du  Pai's,  on  s'exposeroit  a  laisser  douter  de  sa  foi,  et  passer
au  moins  pour  Maran,  ou  Chretien  nouveau,  si  on  ne.  laissoit  pas  le  tiers  de  ses  biens
mobiliers  a  1'Eglise."     Labat,  Voyages  en  Espagne,  vol.  i.  p.  268.

340  It  was  the  opinion  of  the  Pope  that  Charles  by  this  act  had  endangered  his  own
soul.     "  Dans  un  bref  adresse  a  Charles  III,  il  declara  :  '  Que  les  actes  du  Roi  centre
les  Jesuites  mettaient  evidemment  son  salut  en  danger.'  "     Cretineau-Joly,  Histoire  de  la
Compagnie  de  Jesus,  Paris,  1845,  vol.  v.  p.  302.

341  As  this  circumstance,  which  is  noticed  by  Cretineau-Joly  (Histoire  de  la  Compagnie
de  JSsus,  vol.  v.  p.  311)  and  other  writers  (Dunham's  History  of  Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  180),
has  been  much  misrepresented,  and  has  even  been  doubted  by  one  author,  I  will  transcribe
the  statement  of  Coxe,  whose  information  respecting  the  reign  of  Charles  III.  was  derived
from  eye-witnesses.     "  A  remarkable  and  alarming  proof  of  their  influence  was  given  at
Madrid,  the  year  after  their  expulsion.     At  the  festival  of  St.  Charles,  when  the  monarch
showed  himself  to  the  people  from  the  balcony  of  the  palace,  and  was  accustomed  to
grant  their  general  request ;    to  the  surprise  and  confusion  of  the  whole  Court  the  voice
of  the  immense  multitude,  with  one  accord,  demanded  the  return  of  the  Jesuits,  and  the
permission  for  them  to  wear  the  habit  of  the  secular  clergy.     This  unexpected  incident
alarmed  and  mortified  the  King  ;  and,  after  a  vigilant  inquiry,  he  thought  proper  to
banish  the  Cardinal  Archbishop  of  Toledo,  and  his  Grand  Vicar,  as  the  secret  instigators
of  this  tumultuary  petition."     Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of  Spain,  2nd  edit.,  London,  1815,
vol.  iv.  pp.  368,  369.     The  remarks  made  on  this  event  by  M.  Rio  (Historia  del  Reinado
de  Carlos  III.,  Madrid,  1856,  vol.  ii.  pp.  197-199)  are  not  very  creditable  either  to  his
criticism  or  to  his  candour.     It  is  uncritical  to  doubt  the  statement  of  a  contemporary,
when  that  statement  relates  what  is  probable  in  itself,  and  what  those  who  lived  nearest
to  the  period  never  denied.     Indeed,  so  far  from  denying  it,  M.  Muriel,  the  learned
translator  of  Coxe's  work  into  Spanish,  gave  it  the  sanction  of  his  name.      And  it  is
surely,  to  say  the  least,  very  uncandid  on  the  part  of  M.  Rio  to  impute  to  Coxe.  the  error
of  placing  this  occurrence  in  1767,  and  then  proving  that,  owing  to  circumstances  con-
nected with  the  Archbishop  of  Toledo,  it  could  not  have  happened  in  that  year.      For
Coxe  distinctly  asserts  that  it  was  in  1768  ;    "  the  year  after  their  expulsion."


618  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

obstacles  the  government  of  Charles  III.,  notwithstanding  its  good  intentions,  was
powerless.  Indeed  it  was  worse  than  powerless  :  it  did  harm  ;  for,  by  rousing
popular  sympathy  in  favour  of  the  Church,  it  strengthened  what  it  sought  to
weaken.  On  that  cruel  and  persecuting  Church,  stained  as  it  was  with  every
sort  of  crime,  the  Spanish  nation  continued  to  bestow  marks  of  affection  which,
instead  of  being  diminished,  were  increased.  Gifts  and  legacies  flowed  in  freely
and  from  every  side  ;  men  being  willing  to  beggar  themselves  and  their  families
in  order  to  swell  the  general  contribution.  And  to  such  a  height  was  this  carried,
that  in  1788  Florida  Blanca,  minister  of  the  crown,  stated  that  within  the  last
fifty  years  the  ecclesiastical  revenues  had  increased  so  rapidly  that  many  of
them  had  doubled  in  value.342

Even  the  Inquisition,  the  most  barbarous  institution  which  the  wit  of  man
has  ever  devised,  was  upheld  by  public  opinion  against  the  attacks  of  the  crown.
The  Spanish  government  wished  to  overthrow  it,  and  did  everything  to  weaken
it  ;  but  the  Spanish  people  loved  it  as  of  old,  and  cherished  it  as  their  best  protec-
tion against  the  inroads  of  heresy.343  An  illustration  of  this  was  exhibited  in
1778,  when,  on  occasion  of  a  heretic  being  sentenced  by  the  Inquisition,  several
of  the  leading  nobles  attended  as  servants,  being  glad  to  have  an  opportunity
of  publicly  displaying  their  obedience  and  docility  to  the  Church.344

All  these  things  were  natural  and  in  order.  They  were  the  result  of  a  long
train  of  causes,  the  operation  of  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  trace,  during
thirteen  centuries,  since  the  outbreak  of  the  Arian  war.  Those  causes  forced
the  Spaniards  to  be  superstitious,  and  it  was  idle  mockery  to  seek  to  change
their  nature  by  legislation.  The  only  remedy  for  superstition  is  knowledge.
Nothing  else  can  wipe  out  that  plague  spot  of  the  human  mind.  Without  it,
the  leper  remains  unwashed,  and  the  slave  unfreed.  It  is  to  a  knowledge  of

342  See  the  statement  of  Florida  Blanca,  in  Appendix  I.  to  Coxe's  Bourbon  Kings  of
Spain,  vol.  v.  p.  282.      Another  Spaniard,  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  says  that  at  the
accession  of  Charles  IV.  in  1788   "  the  cloisters  were  encumbered  with  an  ever -increasing
number  of  monks  of  all  orders  and  of  all  ages."     Godoy's  Memoirs,  edit.  London,  1836,
vol.  i.  p.  126.     See  also,  on  the  state  of  ecclesiastical  establishments  in  the  same  year,
some  interesting  remarks  in  the  Letters  of  Cabarrus  ;  "  con  que  horrible  desproporcion
superabundan  los  individuos  esteriles  a  los  operarios  u  tiles  y  preciosos."     Cartas  escritas
por  el  Conde  de  Cabarrus,  Madrid,  1813,  p.  133.

343  Of  it,  a  celebrated  writer  in  the  reign  of  Philip  V.  boastfully  says,  "  Su  exacta
vigilancia   comprehende   igualmente   a   Naturales   y   Estrangeros."     Uztariz,    Theorica
y  Practica  de  Comercio,  tercera  impression,  Madrid,  i?57,  folio,  p.  27.     When  such  a
man  as  Uztariz  could  pen  a  sentence  like  this,  we  may  imagine  what  was  felt  by  the
people,  who  were  far  more  ignorant  than  he,  and  far  more  orthodox.     M.  Tapia,  in  a
remarkable  and  unusually  bold  passage,  frankly  admits  that  it  was  the  pressure  of  public
opinion   which   prevented  Charles   III.   from   abolishing   the    Inquisition.       "  Estrano
pareceria  que  habiendose  hecho  tanto  en  aquel  reinado  para  limitar  el  poder  escesivo
del  clero,  y  acabar  con  absurdas  preocupaciones,  no  se  suprimiese  el  monstruoso  tribunal
de  la  inquisicion  ;  pero  es  necesario  tener  presente  quel  el  rey  despues  del  motin  de  Madrid
procedia  con  timidez  en  toda  providencia  que  pudiese  contrariar  la  opinion  publica  ;
y  el  creia  que  los  espanoles  querian  la  inquisicion,  como  se  lo  manifesto  al  ministro
Roda   y    al    conde    de   Aranda,    aiiadiendo    que    en    nada    coartaba    su    autoridad."
Tapia,  Civilizacion  Espanola,  vol.  iv.  p.  98,  Madrid,  1840.      To  us  the  Inquisition  seems
rather  a  singular  object  for  men  to  set  their  affections  on  ;  but  of  the  existence  of  the
passion  there  can  be  no  doubt.     "  L'Inquisition  si  reveree  en  Espagne."     Memoires
de  Louville,  vol.  i.  p.  36.     And  Geddes  (Tracts,  London,  1730,  vol.  i.  p.  400)  tells  us  that
"  the  Inquisition  is  not  only  established  by  law,  but  by  a  wonderful  fascination  is  so
fixed  in  the  hearts  and  affections  of  the  people,  that  one  that  should  offer  the  least  affront
to  another  for  having  been  an  informer  or  witness  in  the  Inquisition  would  be  torn  in
a  thousand  pieces."

344  "  The  familiars  of  the  Inquisition,  Abrantes,  Mora,  and  others,  grandees  of  Spain,
attended  as  servants,  without  hats  or  swords."     Coxe's  Bourtbon  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iv,
pp,  418,  419,     This  was,  in  the  great  case  of  Olavide,


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          619

the  laws  and  relations  of  things  that  European  civilization  is  owing  ;  but  it  is
precisely  this  in  which  Spain  has  always  been  deficient.  And  until  that
deficiency  is  remedied,  until  science,  with  her  bold  and  inquisitive  spirit,  has
established  her  right  to  investigate  all  subjects,  after  her  own  fashion,'  and
according  to  her  own  method,  we  may  be  assured  that  in  Spain  neither
literature,  nor  universities,  nor  legislators,  nor  reformers  of  any  kind,  will  ever
be  able  to  rescue  the  people  from  that  helpless  and  benighted  condition  into
which  the  course  of  affairs  has  plunged  them.*

That  no  great  political  improvement,  however  plausible  or  attractive  it  may
appear,  can  be  productive  of  lasting  benefit  unless  it  is  preceded  by  a  change
in  public  opinion,  and  that  every  change  of  public  opinion  is  preceded  by
changes  in  knowledge,  are  propositions  which  all  history  verifies,  but  which
are  particularly  obvious  in  the  history  of  Spain.  The  Spaniards  have  had
everything  except  knowledge.  They  have  had  immense  wealth,  and  fertile
and  well-peopled  territories,  in  all  parts  of  the  globe.  Their  own  country,
washed  by  the  Atlantic  and  the  Mediterranean,  and  possessed  of  excellent
harbours,  is  admirably  situated  for  the  purposes  of  trade  between  Europe  and
America,  being  so  placed  as  to  command  the  commerce  of  both  hemispheres.345
They  had,  at  a  very  early  period,  ample  municipal  privileges  ;  they  had  inde-
pendent parliaments  ;  they  had  the  right  of  choosing  their  own  magistrates,
and  managing  their  own  cities.  They  have  had  rich  and  flourishing  towns,
abundant  manufactures,  and  skilful  artizans,  whose  choice  productions  could
secure  a  ready  sale  in  every  market  in  the  world.  They  have  cultivated  the
fine  arts  with  eminent  success  ;  their  noble  and  exquisite  paintings,  and  their
magnificent  churches,  being  justly  ranked  among  the  most  wonderful  efforts
of  the  human  hand.  They  speak  a  beautiful,  sonorous,  and  flexible  language,
and  their  literature  is  not  unworthy  of  their  language.  Their  soil  yields  treasures
of  every  kind.  It  overflows  with  wine  and  oil,  and  produces  the  choicest
fruits  in  an  almost  tropical  exuberance.346  It  contains  the  most  valuable
minerals,  in  a  profuse  variety  unexampled  in  any  other  part  of  Europe.  No-
where else  do  we  find  such  rare  and  costly  marbles,  so  easily  accessible,  and
in  such  close  communication  with  the  sea,  where  they  might  safely  be  shipped,
and  sent  to  countries  which  require  them.347  As  to  the  metals,  there  is  hardly
one  which  Spain  does  not  possess  in  large  quantities.  Her  mines  of  silver
and  of  quicksilver  are  well  known.  She  abounds  in  copper,348  and  her  supply

343  An  accomplished  modern  geographer  says  :  "  From  the  extent  of  its  coast-line,
its  numerous  ports,  its  geographical  position,  and  natural  products,  Spain  possesses
greater  commercial  advantages  than  any  other  country  of  Europe."  Johnston's
Dictionary  of  Physical,  Statistical,  and  Historical  Geography,  London,  1850,  p.  1213.

346  "  NO  quiero  hablar  de  los  frutos  de  Espana,  no  obstante  que  los  produzca  tan
exquisites  de  todas  especies.  Solo  dire  que  sus  naranjas  dulces  las  traxeron  de  la  China
los  Portugueses,  y  que  de  Portugal  se  ha  difundido  su  planta  por  lo  restante  de  Europa.
En  fin,  Espana  es  celebrada  entre  otras  cosas  por  sus  limones,  por  la  fragancia  de  sus  cidras,
por  sus  limas  dulces,  por  sus  granadas,  por  sus  azeytunas,  que  merecieron  ser  alabadas
hasta  del  gran  Ciceron,  y  sus  almendras,  sus  higos,  sus  uvas,  etc."  Bowles,  Historia
Natural  de  Espana,  Madrid,  1789,  4to,  p.  236.

3"7  "  The  mar.bles  of  Spain  are  in  greater  variety  and  beauty  than  those  of  any  country
in  Europe,  and  most  valuable  kinds  of  them  are  in  situations  of  easy  access  and  com-
munication with  the  sea  ;  but  they  have  long  been  entirely  neglected,  the  greater  part
being  unknown,  even  to  the  more  intelligent  of  the  natives."  Cook's  Spain,  London,
1834,  vol.  ii.  p.  51.  In  the  Cabinet  of  Natural  History  at  Madrid,  "  the  specimens  of
marbles  are  splendid,  and  show  what  treasures  yet  remain  buried  in  the  Peninsula."
Ford's  Spain,  London,  1847,  p.  413.

348  "  Hay  infinitas  minas  de  cobre  en  Espana  las  quales  nunca  se  han  tocado."  Bowles,
Historia  Natural  de  Espana,  Discurso  Preliminar,  p.  34.

F*  Buckle  here  appears  to  say  that  until  Spaniards  are  educated  they  cannot  be
educated.  The  rational  proposition  is  that  education  must  come  gradually.— ED.]


620  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  lead  is  enormous.319  Iron  and  coal,  the  two  most  useful  of  all  the  productions
of  the  inorganic  world,350  are  also  abundant  in  that  highly  favoured  country.
Iron  is  said  to  exist  in  every  part  of  Spain,  and  to  be  of  the  best  quality  ;  351
while  the  coal-mines  of  Asturias  are  described  as  inexhaustible.352  In  short,
nature  has  been  so  prodigal  of  her  bounty,  that  it  has  been  observed,  with  hardly
an  hyperbole,  that  the  Spanish  nation  possesses  within  itself  nearly  every
natural  production  which  can  satisfy  either  the  necessity  or  the  curiosity  of
mankind.353

These  are  splendid  gifts  ;  it  is  for  the  historian  to  tell  how  they  have  been
used.  Certainly  the  people  who  possess  them  have  never  been  deficient
in  natural  endowments.  They  have  had  their  full  share  of  great  states-
men, great  kings,  great  magistrates,  and  great  legislators.  They  have
had  many  able  and  vigorous  rulers  ;  and  their  history  is  ennobled  by  the
frequent  appearance  of  courageous  and  disinterested  patriots,  who  have
sacrificed  their  all  that  they  might  help  their  country.  The  bravery  of  the
people  has  never  been  disputed  ;  while,  as  to  the  upper  classes,  the  punctilious
honour  of  a  Spanish  gentleman  has  passed  into  a  bye-word,  and  circulated
through  the  world.  Of  the  nation  generally,  the  best  observers  pronounce
them  to  be  high-minded,  generous,  truthful,  full  of  integrity,  warm  and  zealous
friends,  affectionate  in  all  the  private  relations  of  life,  frank,  charitable,  and
humane.354  Their  sincerity  in  religious  matters  is  unquestionable  ;  355  they

349  In  1832,  Cook  writes,  "  The  lead-mines  of  the  Sierra  de  Gador  are  in  a  state  of
repletion  at  present  from  the  enormous  quantity  of  the  mineral,  and  the  facility  of
raising  it."  ..."  Lead  abounds  in  other  parts  of  the  same  chain,  nearer  to  Almeria."
Cook's  Spain,  vol.  ii.  p.  75-      "  The  most  valuable  of  the  existing  Spanish  mines  are
those  of  lead  in  Granada  ;    and  the  supplies  obtained  from  them  during  the  last  twenty
years  have  been  so  large  that  they  have  occasioned  the  abandonment  of   several  less
productive  mines  in  other  countries,  and  a  considerable    fall  in    the   price  of   lead."
M'Culloch's  Geographical  and  Statistical  Dictionary,  London,  1849,  vol.  ii.  p.  705.        j~"

350  I  use  the  popular  language  in  referring  coal  to  the  inorganic  world,  despite  its
cellular  tissue  and  vegetable  origin.

351  "  xhe  most  valuable  of  the  whole  mineral  riches  of  Spain  will  be  in  all  probability,
in  a  few  years,  the  iron,  which  is  found  everywhere,  and  of  the  best  qualities."     Cook's
Spain,  vol.  ii.  p.  78.      See  also  Bowles,  Historia  Natural  de  Espana,  pp.  56,  67,  106,  273,
346,  415,  and  Ford's  Spain,  pp.  565,  618.

352  "The  quantity  is  inexhaustible,   the  quality  excellent,   the  working  of    extra-
ordinary facility,  and  they  possess  an  easy  communication  with  the  sea  ;    yet  they  are
practically  useless,  and  afford  only  a  miserable  existence  to  a  few  labourers  and  mules
used  in  conveying  the  mineral  to  Gijon."      Cook's  Spain,  vol.  ii.  pp.  79,  80.      "  In  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  Oviedo  are  some  of  the  largest  coal-fields  in  Europe."
Ford's  Spain,  p.  381  ;   compare  pp.  392,  606.

353  "  La  nacion  espanola  posee  casi  quantas  producciones  naturales  puede  apetecer
la  necesidad,  6  curiosidad  de  los  hombres."      Campomanes,  Apendice  d  la  Educacion
Popular,  vol.  iv.  p.  vi.,  Madrid,  1777.

354  "  Us  sont  fort  charitables,  tant  a  cause  du  merite    que  Ton    s'acquiert  par  les
aumones,  que  par  1'inclination  naturelle  qu'ils  ont  a  donner,  et  la  peine  effective  qu'ils
souffirent  lorsqu'ils  sont  obliges,  soit  par  leur  pauvrete,  soit  par  quelqu'autre  raison,  de
refuser  ce  qu'on  leur  demande.      Us  ont  encore  la  bonne  qualite  de  ne  point  abandonner
leurs  amis  pendant  qu'ils  sont  malades."  .  .  .  "  De  maniere  que  des  personnes  qui  ne
se  voyent  point  quatre  fois  en  un  an,  se  voyent  tous  les  jours  deux  ou  trois  fois,  des
qu'ils  souff rent."     D'Aulnoy,  Relation  du  Voyage  d'Espagne,  Lyon,  1693,  vol.  ii.  p.  374.
"  They  are  grave,  temperate,  and  sober  ;    firm  and  warm  in  their  friendships,  though
cautious  and  slow  in  contracting  them."      A    Tour  through  Spain  by   Udal  ap  Rhys,
second  edition,  London,  1760,  p.  3.      "  When  they  have  once  professed  it,  none  are
more  faithful  friends."  ..."  They  have  great  probity  and  integrity  of  principle."
Clarke's  Letters  concerning  the  Spanish  Nation,  London,  1763,  4to,  p.  334.     "  To  express
all  that  I  feel,  on  the  recollection  of  their  goodness,  would  appear  like, adulation  ;  febut
I  may  venture  at  least  to  say  that  simplicity,  sincerity,   generosity,^a  high   sense  of


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          621

are  moreover  eminently  temperate  and  frugal.356  Yet,  all  these  great
qualities  have  availed  them  nothing,  and  will  avail  them  nothing  so  long  as
they  remain  ignorant.  What  the  end  of  all  this  will  be,  and  whether  in  their
unhappy  country  the  right  path  will  ever  be  taken,  is  impossible  for  any  one
to  say.357  But  if  it  is  not  taken,  no  amelioration  which  can  possibly  be  effected
will  penetrate  below  the  surface.  The  sole  course  is  to  weaken  the  super-
stition of  the  people  ;  and  this  can  only  be  done  by  that  march  of  physical
science  which,  familiarizing  men  with  conceptions  of  order  and  of  regularity,
gradually  encroaches  on  the  old  notions  of  perturbation,  of  prodigy,  and  of
miracle,  and  by  this  means  accustoms  the  mind  to  explain  the  vicissitudes  of
affairs  by  natural  considerations,  instead  of,  as  heretofore,  by  those  which  are
purely  supernatural.*

dignity,  and  strong  principles  of  honour,  are  the  most  prominent  and  striking  features
of  the  Spanish  character."  TownsencTs  Journey  through  Spain,  second  edition,  London,
1792,  vol.  iii.  p.  353.  "  The  Spaniards,  though  naturally  deep  and  artful  politicians,
have  still  something  so  nobly  frank  and  honest  in  their  disposition."  Letters  from
Spain  by  an  English  Officer,  London,  1788,  vol.  ii.  p.  171.  "  The  Spaniards  have  fewer
bad  qualities  than  any  other  people  that  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  know."  Croker's
Travels  through  Spain,  London,  1799,  pp.  237,  238.  "  Spanish  probity  is  proverbial,
and  it  conspicuously  shines  in  commercial  relations."  Laborde's  Spain,  London,  1809,
vol.  iv.  p.  423.  "  Certainly,  if  it  be  taken  in  the  mass,  no  people  are  more  humane
than  the  Spaniards,  or  more  compassionate  and  kind  in  their  feelings  to  others.  They
probably  excel  other  nations,  rather  than  fall  below  them,  in  this  respect."  Cook's
Spain,  London,  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  189.  "The  Spaniards  are  kind-hearted  in  all  the
relations  of  life."  Hoskins'  Spain,  London,  1851,  vol.  ii.  p.  58.  Finally,  I  will  adduce
the  testimony  of  two  professional  politicians,  both  of  whom  were  well  acquainted  with
the  Spaniards.  In  1770  Mr.  Harris,  afterwards  Lord  Malmesbury,  writes,  "They
are  brave,  honest,  and  generous."  Diaries  and  Correspondence  of  the  Earl  of  Malmesbury,
London,  1844,  vol.  i.  p.  48.  And  Lord  Holland,  according  to  Moore,  deemed  "  that
the  Spaniards  altogether  are  amongst  the  best  people  of  Europe."  Moore's  Memoirs,
edited  by  Lord  John  Russell,  vol.  iii.  p.  253,  London,  1853.

sss  This  their  whole  history  decisively  proves  ;  and  as  to  their  more  recent  state,  the
author  of  Revelations  of  Spain  in  1845,  vol.  i.  p.  340,  says  :  "  But  religion  is  so  deeply
rooted  in  the  national  character,  that  the  most  furious  political  storms,  which  prostrate
everything  else,  blow  over  this  and  leave  it  unscathed.  It  is  only  amongst  the  educated
male  population  that  any  lack  of  fervour  is  witnessed."

356  "  The  habitual  temperance  of  these  people  is  really  astonishing  :    I  never  saw  a
Spaniard  drink  a  second  glass  of  wine.      With  the  lower  order  of  people,  a  piece  of
bread  with  an  apple,  an  onion,  or  pomegranate,  is  their  usual    repast."        Croker's
Travels  in  Spain,  London,  1799,  P-  JI6-      "They  are  temperate,  or  rather  abstemious,
in  their  living  to  a  great  degree  :    borracho  is  the  highest  term  of  reproach  ;   and  it  is
rare  to  see  a  drunken  man,  except  it  be  among  the  carriers  or  muleteers."      Dalrymple's
Travels  through  Spain,  London,    1777,  4.to,  p.  174.      "  Drunkenness   is  a  vice  almost
unknown  in  Spain  among  people  of  a  respectable  class,  and  very  uncommon  even  among
the  lower  orders."      Esmenard's  note  in  Godoy's  Memoirs,  London,  1836,  vol.  ii.  p.  321.

357  "  This  is  the  most  wonderful  country  under  the  sun  ;    for  here  intellect  wields  no
power."      Inglis'  Spain,  London,  1831,  vol.  i.  p.  101.      "  Tandis  que  1'activite  publique,
en  Espagne,  se  porte  depuis  quelques  annees  dans  la  sphere  des  interets  pratiques  et
materiels,  il  semble,  au  contraire,  qu'il  y  ait  une  sorte  de  ralentissement  dans  la  vie
intellectuelle."      Annuaire  des  Deux  Mondes  for  1850,  p.  410.      "  La  vie  intellectuelle
n'est  point  malheureusement  la  sphere  ou  se  manifesto  le  plus  d'activite  en  Espagne."
Ibid,  for  1856-1857,  p.  356.      Now,  listen  to  the  practical  consequences  of  not  giving
free  and  fearless  scope  to  the  intellect.      "  It  is  singular,  upon  landing  in  the  Peninsula,
and  making  a  short  excursion  for  a  few  miles  in  any  direction,  to  see  reproduced  the

[*  Buckle  would  probably  not  have  disputed,  on  challenge,  that  a  knowledge  of
historical  (including  anthropological)  science  would  avail  for  much,  as  well  as  that
of  physical  science. — ED.]


622  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

To  this,  in  the  most  advanced  countries  of  Europe,  everything  has  been
tending  for  nearly  three  centuries.  But  in  Spain,  unfortunately,  education
has  always  remained,  and  still  remains,  in  the  hands  of  the  clergy,  who  steadily
oppose  that  progress  of  knowledge  which  they  are  well  aware  would  be  fatal
to  their  own  power.358  The  people,  therefore,  resting  ignorant,  and  the  causes
which  kept  them  in  ignorance  continuing,  it  avails  the  country  nothing  that,
from  time  to  time,  enlightened  rulers  have  come  forward,  and  liberal  measures
been  adopted.  The  Spanish  reformers  have,  with  rare  exceptions,  eagerly
attacked  the  Church,  whose  authority  they  clearly  saw  ought  to  be  diminished.
But  what  they  did  not  see  is  that  such  diminution  can  be  of  no  real  use  unless
it  is  the  result  of  public  opinion  urging  on  politicians  to  the  work.*  In  Spain,  poli  -
ticians  took  the  initiative,  and  the  people  lagged  behind.  Hence,  in  Spain,  what
was  done  at  one  time  was  sure  to  be  undone  at  another.  When  the  liberals
were  in  power,  they  suppressed  the  Inquisition  ;  but  Ferdinand  VII.  easily
restored  it,  because,  though  it  had  been  destroyed  by  Spanish  legislators,  its
existence  was  suited  to  the  habits  and  traditions  of  the  Spanish  nation.359

manners  of  England  five  centuries  back, — to  find  yourself  thrown  into  the  midst  of  a
society  which  is  a  close  counterpart  of  that  extinct  semi-civilization  of  which  no  trace
is  to  be  found  in  our  history  later  than  the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century  and  the  reign
of  Richard  the  Second."  Revelations  of  Spain  in  1845  by  an  English  Resident,  vol.  ii.
p.  i.

358  "  That  the  Spaniards,  as  a  people,  are  ignorant,  supremely  ignorant,  it  is  impossible
to  dissemble  ;  but  this  comes  from  the  control  of  education  being  altogether  in  the  hands
of  the  clergy,  who  exert  themselves  to  maintain  that  ignorance  to  which  they  are  in-
debted for  their  power."      Spain  by  an  American,  vol.  ii.  p.  360.      "The  schools  in
Madrid  are  all  conducted  by  Jesuits  ;    and  the  education  received  in  them  is  such  as
might  be  expected  from  their  heads."      Inglis'  Spain,  vol.  i.  p.  156.      "  Private  educa-
tion here  is  almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  clergy."      Revelations  of  Spain  in  1845,
vol.  ii.  p.  27.       In  Spain,  as  in  all  countries,  Catholic  or  Protestant,  the  clergy,  con-
sidered as  a  body,  inculcate  belief  instead  of   inquiry,  and  by  a  sort  of  conservative
instinct  discourage  that  boldness  of   investigation  without  which  there  can  be  no  real
knowledge,  although  there  may  be  much  erudition  and  mere  book-learning.     In  Spain
the  clergy  are  stronger  than  in  any  other  country  ;    therefore  in  Spain  they  display
this  tendency  more  fearlessly.      A  good  instance  of  this  may  be  seen  in  a  work  lately
published  by  the  Bishop  of  Barcelona,  in  which  a  violent  attack  upon  all  physical  and1
philosophical  knowledge  is  concluded  in  the  following  terms  :    "  No  intento  recriminar
a  ningun  catolico  de  los  que  se  asocian  al  nuevo  sistema  de  filosofar  y  de  extender  in-
definidamente  el  imperio  de  esta  ciencia,  pero  deseo  que  fijen  toda  su  atencion  en  los-
puntos  que  no  hare  sino  indicar.      Primero,  que  las  escuelas  de  Holanda,  Alemania,.
Inglaterra  y  Francia  desafectas  al  Catolicismo,  han  iniciado  y  promovido  con  el  mayor
empefio  ciertas  discusiones  filosoficas,  present andolas  como  un  triunfo  de  la  razon  sobre-
la  Religion,  de  la  filosofia  sobre  la  teologia,  del  materialismo  sobre  el  espiritualismo..
Segundo,  que  sus  maximas  no  son,  en  gran  parte,  mas  que  reproducciones  6  nuevas
evoluciones  de  errores  mil  veces  refutados  y  condenados  por  la  sana  filosofia  y  por  la
Iglesia  ;   bajo  cuyo  concepto  no  tienen  por  que  felicitarse  en  razon  de  su  progreso,  sino-
mas  bien  avergonzarse  por  su  retroceso."      Costa  y  Borras.  Iglesia  en  Espana,  Barcelona,.
1857,  p.  150.

359  "  Immediately  after  his  arrival  in  Madrid,  Ferdinand  re-established  the  Inquisi-
tion ;  and  his  decree  for  that  purpose  was  hailed  throughout  all  Spain  with  illuminations,,
thanksgivings,  and  other  rejoicings."      Quin's  Memoirs    of   Ferdinand  VII.,  London,
1824,  PP-  189*  190.      This  and  similar  acts  gave  such  delight  to  the  Church  as  well  as
to  the  people  that,  according  to  a  great  divine,  the  return  of    Ferdinand  to  Spain  is  to

[*  This  is  one  of  too  many  passages  in  which  Buckle  lapses  into  something  like-
fatalism.  If  the  reformers  are  to  wait  till  "  public  opinion  "  advances,  there  can  be  no
advance  whatever.  Somebody  must  begin,  and  the  beginner  is  a  "  reformer."  The
history  of  the  Anti-Corn  Law  League  in  England  gives  the  object  lesson.  The  League
had  to  create  public  opinion. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          623

Fresh  changes  occurring,  this  odious  tribunal  was  in  1820  again  abolished.
Still,  though  its  form  is  gone,  its  spirit  lives.360  The  name,  the  body,  and
the  visible  appearance  of  the  Inquisition  are  no  more  ;  but  the  spirit  which
generated  the  Inquisition  is  enshrined  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  on  slight
provocation  would  burst  forth  and  reinstate  an  institution  which  is  the  effect,
far  more  than  the  cause,  of  the  intolerant  bigotry  of  the  Spanish  nation.

In  the  same  way,  other  and  more  systematic  attacks  which  were  made  on
the  Church  during  the  present  century  succeeded  at  first,  but  were  sure  to
be  eventually  baffled.361  Under  Joseph,  in  1809,  the  monastic  orders  were
suppressed,  and  their  property  was  confiscated.362  Little,  however,  did  Spain
gain  by  this.  The  nation  was  on  their  side  ;  363  and  as  soon  as  the  storm  passed
away,  they  were  restored.  In  1836  there  was  another  political  movement,
and  the  liberals  being  at  the  head  of  affairs,  Mendizabal  secularized  all  the
Church  property,  and  deprived  the  clergy  of  nearly  the  whole  of  their  enormous
and  ill-gotten  wealth.364  He  did  not  know  how  foolish  it  is  to  attack  an  in-
stitution, unless  you  can  first  lessen  its  influence.  Overrating  the  power  of
legislation,  he  underrated  the  power  of  opinion.  This  the  result  clearly
showed.  Within  a  very  few  years  the  reaction  began.  In  1845  was  enacted
what  was  called  the  law  of  devolution,  by  which  the  first  step  was  taken  towards
the  re-endowment  of  the  clergy.365  In  1851  their  position  was  still  further
improved  by  the  celebrated  Concordat,  in  which  the  right  of  acquiring  as  well


be  deemed  the  immediate  act  of  Divine  Providence,  watching  over  the  interests  of  Spain.
"  La  divina  Providencia  abrevio  los  dias  de  prueba,  y  la  catolica  Espana  respiro  cenida
con  los  laureles  del  triunfo,  recobrando  luego  a  su  tan  deseado  monarca,  el  senor  rey
don  Fernando  VII."  Costa  y  Borras,  Observaciones  sobre  la  Iglesia  en  Espana,  Bar-
celona, 1857,  p.  91.

seo  "  xhe  spirit  of  the  Inquisition  is  still  alive  ;  for  no  king,  cortes,  or  constitution,
ever  permits  in  Spain  any  approach  to  any  religious  toleration."  Ford's  Spain,  London,
1847,  p.  60.  "  Les  cortes  auraient  beau  permettre  1'exercice  du  culte  protestant  ou
juif,  il  n'est  point  certain  que  cela  ne  suscitat  de  perilleux  conflits."  Annuaire  des
Deux  Mondes,  ou  Histoire  Generate  des  Divers  Etats,  1854-1855,  vol.  v.  p.  272,  Paris,
1855  ;  a  work  of  considerable  ability,  planned  on  the  same  scheme  as  the  Annual  Register,
but  far  superior  to  it.  Respecting  the  chance  of  the  Inquisition  being  again  restored,
compare  two  interesting  passages  in  Spain  by  an  American,  1831,  vol.  ii.  p.  330,  and
Inglis'  Spain,  1831,  vol.  i.  p.  85.  Since  then  the  balance  of  affairs  has  on  the  whole
been  in  favour  of  the  Church,  which  received  a  further  accession  of  strength  by  the
success  of  the  essentially  religious  war  recently  waged  against  the  Moors.  Hence,  if  any
fresh  political  catastrophe  were  to  occur  in  Spain,  I  should  not  be  at  all  surprised  to
hear  that  the  Inquisition  was  re-established.

361  Compare  some  very  sensible  remarks  in  Bacon's  Six  Years  in  Biscay,  London,
1838,  pp.  40,  41,  50,  with  Quin's  Memoirs  of  Ferdinand  the  Seventh,  pp.  192,  193.

362  Walton's  Revolutions  of  Spain,  London,  1837,  vol.  ii.  p.  343.

363  Very  shortly  before  the  suppression  of  the  monastic  orders,  "  Le  respect  pour
le  froc  en  general  est  pousse  si  loin,  qu'on  lui  attribue  une  vertue  preservative,  meme
au-dela  de  la  vie,  quelque  peu    reguliere    qu'elle  ait  etc.      Aussi  n'y  a-t-il  rien  de  si
commun  que  de  voir  les  morts  ensevelis  en  robe  de  moines,  et  conduits   ainsi  a  leur
derniere  demeure  a  visage  decouvert."  ...     "  De  meme  que  le  froc  accompagne  les
Espagnols  au  tombeau,  de  meme  il  en  saisit    quelques-uns  au  sortir  du  berceau.     II
n'est  pas  rare  de  rencontrer  de  petits  moines  de  quatre  a  cinq  ans  polissonnant  dans  la
rue."      Bout -going,  Tableau  de  VEspagne,  Paris,  1808,  vol.  ii.  pp.  330,  331.

364  The  confiscation  took  place  at  different  periods  between  1835  and  1841.      Compare
Ford's  Spain,  p.  48.      Revelations  of  Spain  by  an  English  Resident,  vol.  i.  p.  366.      Costa
y  Borras,  Iglesia  en  Espana,  p.  95.      Annuaire  des  Deux  Mondes  for  1850,  Paris,  1851,
p.  369.      I  have  sought  in  vain  for  any  detailed  history  of  these  transactions.

365  "  Des  1845,  une  loi  dite  de  devolution,  en  attendant  un  reglement  definitif,  applique
a  la  dotation  du  clerge  une  portion  des  biens  ecclesiastiques  non  vendus."      Annuaire
des  Deux  Mondes,  1851-2,  Paris,  1852,  p.  318.


624  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

as  of  possessing  was  solemnly  confirmed  to  lhem.;W5fi  With  all  this  the  nation
heartily  concurred.367  Such,  however,  was  the  madness  of  the  liberal  party
that  only  four  years  afterwards,  when  they  for  a  moment  obtained  power,
they  forcibly  annulled  these  arrangements,  and  revoked  concessions  which  had
been  made  to  the  Church,  and  which,  unhappily  for  Spain,  public  opinion  had
ratified.3158  The  results  might  have  been  easily  foreseen.  In  Aragon  and  in
other  parts  of  Spain  the  people  flew  to  arms  ;  a  Carlist  insurrection  broke  out,
and  a  cry  ran  through  the  country  that  religion  was  in  danger.  369  It  is  impos-
sible to  benefit  such  a  nation  as  this.*  The  reformers  were  of  course  over-
thrown, and  by  the  autumn  of  1856  their  party  was  broken  up.  The  political
reaction  now  began,  and  advanced  so  rapidly  that  by  the  spring  of  1857  the
policy  of  the  two  preceding  years  was  completely  reversed.  Those  who  idly
thought  that  they  could  regenerate  their  country  by  laws,  saw  all  their  hopes
confounded.  A  ministry  was  formed  whose  measures  were  more  in  accordance
with  the  national  mind.  In  May,  1857,  Cortes  assembled.  The  representatives
of  the  people  sanctioned  the  proceedings  of  the  executive  government,  and  by
their  united  authority  the  worst  provisions  of  the  Concordat  of  1851  were
amply  confirmed,  the  sale  of  Church  property  was  forbidden,  and  all  the  limit  -
tations  which  had  been  set  to  the  power  of  the  bishops  were  at  once  removed.370
The  reader  will  now  be  able  to  understand  the  real  nature  of  Spanish  civili-
zation. He  will  see  how,  under  the  high-sounding  names  of  loyalty  and
religion,  lurk  the  deadly  evils  which  those  names  have  always  concealed,  but
which  it  is  the  business  of  the  historian  to  drag  to  light  and  expose.  A  blind
spirit  of  reverence,  taking  the  form  of  an  unworthy  and  ignominious  submission
to  the  Crown  and  the  Church,  is  the  capital  and  essential  vice  of  the  Spanish
people.  It  is  their  sole  national  vice,  and  it  has  sufficed  to  ruin  them.  From
it  all  nations  have  grievously  suffered,  and  many  still  suffer.  But  nowhere  in

366  "  ii  y  a  ici  un  reglement  solennel,  sous  la  forme  d'un  traite,  de  toutes  les  affaires
relatives  a  1'eglise  ;  c'est  le  concordat  de  1851.      Le  concordat  reconnait  a  1'eglise  le  droit
d'acquerir  et  de  posseder."      Ibid.,  1854,  1855,  p.  273,  Paris,  1855.

367  The  very  year  in  which  the  Concordat  became  law,  Mr.  Hoskins,  the  well-known
traveller  in  Africa,  a  gentleman  evidently  of  considerable  intelligence,  published,  on  his
return  from  Spain,  an    account  of   that   country.       His   work    is  valuable  as   show-
ing the  state  of    public  feeling  just  before    the    Concordat,    and  while    the    Spanish
clergy  were  still  suffering  from  the   well-intentioned  but  grossly  injudicious  acts  of  the
liberal  party.      "  We  visited  these  churches  on  a  Sunday,  and  were  surprised  to  find
them  all  crowded  to  excess.      The  incomes  of  the  clergy  are  greatly  reduced,  but  their
fortunes  are  gradually  reviving."      Hoskins'  Spain, -London,  1851,  vol.  i.  p.  25.     "  The
priests  are  slowly  re-establishing    their    power  in  Spain."      vol.   ii.   p.   201.      "  The
crowded  churches,  and,  notwithstanding  the  appropriation  of  their  revenues,  the  absence
of  all  appearance  of    anything  like  poverty  in  the  chapels  and  services,  prove  that  the
Spaniards  are  now  as  devout  worshippers,  and  as  zealous  friends  of  the  Church,  as  they
were  in  her  palmy  days."  vol.  ii.  p.  281.

368  "  La  loi  de  desamortissement  promulguee  le  ier  mai,    1855,  ordonne,  comme   on
sait,  la  mise  en  vente  de  tous  les  biens  de  main-morte,  et  en  particulier  des  biens  qui
restent  encore  a  1'eglise."      Annuaire  des  Deux  Mondes,  1855,  1856,  p.  310.      See  also
Annuaire,  1854,  1855,  p.  274.      For  an  account  of  other  steps  taken  against  the  Church
in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1855,  see  Costa  y  Borras,  Observaciones  sobre  la  Iglesia  en
Espana,  Barcelona,  1857,  pp.  119,  286,  292  ;  and  respecting  the  law  of  the  ist  of  May,
see  p.  247.

369  "  Aussi  le  premier  mot  d'ordre  de  1' insurrection  a  ete  la  defense  de  la  religion."
Annuaire  des  Deux  Mondes,  1854,  1855,  p.  275.

370  Annuaire  des  Deux  Mondes,  1856,  1857,  pp.  315-317,  324-331,  336.

[*  Here  again  the  proposition  lapses  into  fatalism.  The  Spanish  people  have  fought
for  their  Church  as  did  the  English  under  Henry  VIII.  and  Edward  VI.,  and  as  did  the
Vendeans  in  1'evolutionary  France.  But  each  struggle  weakens  the  power  of  the  Church,
as  the  preceding  note  shows. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          625

Europe  has  this  principle  been  so  long  supreme  as  in  Spain.  Therefore,  no-
where else  in  Europe  are  the  consequences  so  manifest  and  so  fatal.  The  idea
of  liberty  is  extinct,  if,  indeed,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  it  ever  can  be  said
to  have  existed.  Outbreaks,  no  doubt,  there  have  been,  and  will  be  ;  but
they  are  bursts  of  lawlessness,  rather  than  of  liberty.*  In  the  most  civilized
countries  the  tendency  always  is  to  obey  even  unjust  laws,  but  while  obeying
them  to  insist  on  their  repeal.  This  is  because  we  perceive  that  it  is  better  to
remove  grievances  than  to  resist  them.  While  we  submit  to  the  particular
hardship,  we  assail  the  system  from  which  the  hardship  flows.  For  a  nation
to  take  this  view  requires  a  certain  reach  of  mind  which  in  the  darker  periods
of  European  history  was  unattainable.  Hence  we  find  that  in  the  Middle
Ages,  though  tumults  were  incessant,  rebellions  were  rare.  But  since  the  six-
teenth century,  local  insurrections,  provoked  by  immediate  injustice,  are
diminishing,  and  are  being  superseded  by  revolutions  which  strike  at  once
at  the  source  from  whence  the  injustice  proceeds.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  this  change  is  beneficial  ;  partly  because  it  is  always  good  to  rise  from
effects  to  causes,  and  partly  because,  revolutions  being  less  frequent  than  insur-
rections, the  peace  of  society  would  be  more  rarely  disturbed  if  men  confined
themselves  entirely  to  the  larger  remedy.  At  the  same  time,  insurrections
are  generally  wrong  ;  revolutions  are  always  right.  An  insurrection  is  too
often  the  mad  and  passionate  effort  of  ignorant  persons  who  are  impatient  under
some  immediate  injury,  and  never  stop  to  investigate  its  remote  and  general
causes.  But  a  revolution,  when  it  is  the  work  of  the  nation  itself,  is  a  splendid
and  imposing  spectacle,  because  to  the  moral  quality  of  indignation  produced
by  the  presence  of  evil  it  adds  the  intellectual  qualities  of  foresight  and  com-
bination ;  and,  uniting  in  the  same  act  some  of  the  highest  properties  of  our
nature,  it  achieves  a  double  purpose,  not  only  punishing  the  oppressor  but  also
relieving  the  oppressed.

In  Spain,  however,  there  never  has  been  a  revolution,  properly  so  called;
there  never  has  even  been  one  grand  national  rebellion.  The  people,  though
often  lawless,  are  never  free.  Among  them  we  find  still  preserved  that  peculiar
taint  of  barbarism  which  makes  men  prefer  occasional  disobedience  to  system-
atic liberty.  Certain  feelings  there  are  of  our  common  nature  which  even
their  slavish  loyalty  cannot  eradicate,  and  which,  from  time  to  time,  urge  them
to  resist  injustice.  Such  instincts  are  happily  the  inalienable  lot  of  humanity,
which  we  cannot  forfeit  if  we  would,  and  which  are  too  often  the  last  resource
against  the  extravagances  of  tyranny.  And  this  is  all  that  Spain  now
possesses.  The  Spaniards,  therefore,  resist,  not  because  they  are  Spaniards,
but  because  they  are  men.  Still,  even  while  they  resist,  they  revere.  While
they  will  rise  up  against  a  vexatious  impost,  they  crouch  before  a  system  of
which  the  impost  is  the  smallest  evil.  They  smite  the  tax-gatherer,  but  fall
prostrate  at  the  feet  of  the  contemptible  prince  for  whom  the  tax-gatherer  plies
his  craft.  They  will  even  revile  the  troublesome  and  importunate  monk,  or
sometimes  they  will  scoff  at  the  sleek  and  arrogant  priest  ;  while  such  is  their
infatuation  that  they  would  risk  their  lives  in  defence  of  that  cruel  Church
which  has  inflicted  on  them  hideous  calamities,  but  to  which  they  still  cling
as  if  it  were  the  dearest  object  of  their  affections. f

[*  The  same  could  more  justly  be  said  of  the  beginnings  of  the  revolt  of  the  Nether-
lands against  Spain.  Cp.  Motley,  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic,  i-vol.  ed.  1863,  pp.  462-7*
506,527,  829  ;  Prescott,  Hist,  of  Philip  II.,  Kirk's  ed.  1894,  pp.249,  264-8,  335- — ED.]

[f  A  few  years  after  Buckle  wrote,  these  words  were  disproved  by  the  revolutions
of  1868  and  1873,  which  proved  that  among  the  Spanish  reformers  were  many  repub-
licans, and  not  a  few  freethinkers.  In  the  past  thirty  years  their  numbers  have  been
constantly  growing.  The  whole  of  the  concluding  paragraph  is  thus  an  over-statement.
The  account  of  Spain  as  a  homogeneous  entity  is  substantially  wrong.  The  priests  are
steadily  losing  power  ;  and  since  the  loss  of  Cuba  and  the  Philippines  the  reform  move-
ment gains  ground  more  rapidly  than  ever.  Buckle  failed  to  recognise  the  full  value
of  time  in  evolution. — ED.]

40


626  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Connected  with  these  habits  of  mind,  and  in  sooth  forming  part  of  them,  we
find  a  reverence  for  antiquity,  and  an  inordinate  tenacity  of  old  opinions,  old
beliefs,  and  old  habits,  which  remind  us  of  those  tropical  civilizations  which
formerly  nourished.  Such  prejudices  were  once  universal  even  in  Europe  ;
but  they  began  to  die  out  in  the  sixteenth  century,  and  are  now,  comparatively
speaking,  extinct,  except  in  Spain,  where  they  have  always  been  welcomed.  In
that  country  they  retain  their  original  force,  and  produce  their  natural  results.
By  encouraging  the  notion  that  all  the  truths  most  important  to  know  are
already  known,  they  repress  those  aspirations,  and  dull  that  generous  confidence
in  the  future,  without  which  nothing  really  great  can  be  achieved.  A  people
who  regard  the  past  with  too  wistful  an  eye  will  never  bestir  themselves  to  help
the  onward  progress  ;  they  will  hardly  believe  that  progress  is  possible.  To
them  antiquity  is  synonymous  with  wisdom,  and  every  improvement  is  a  dan-
gerous innovation.  In  this  state  Europe  lingered  for  many  centuries  ;  in  this
state  Spain  still  lingers.  Hence  the  Spaniards  are  remarkable  for  an  inertness,
a  want  of  buoyancy,  and  an  absence  of  hope,  which  in  our  busy  and  enterprizing
age  isolate  them  from  the  rest  of  the  civilized  world.  Believing  that  little
can  be  done,  they  are  in  no  hurry  to  do  it.  Believing  that  the  knowledge  they
have  inherited  is  far  greater  than  any  they  can  obtain,  they  wish  to  preserve
their  intellectual  possessions  whole  and  unimpaired  ;  inasmuch  as  the  least
alteration  in  them  might  lessen  their  value.  Content  with  what  has  been
already  bequeathed,  they  are  excluded  from  that  great  European  movement
which  first,  clearly  perceptible  in  the  sixteenth  century,  has  ever  since  been
steadily  advancing,  unsettling  old  opinions,  destroying  old  follies,  reforming
and  improving  on  every  side,  influencing  even  such  barbarous  countries  as
Russia  and  Turkey  ;  but  leaving  Spain  unscathed.  While  the  human  intellect
has  been  making  the  most  prodigious  and  unheard-of  strides,  while  discoveries
in  every  quarter  are  simultaneously  pressing  upon  us,  and  coming  in  such  rapid
and  bewildering  succession  that  the  strongest  sight,  dazzled  by  the  glare  of
their  splendour,  is  unable  to  contemplate  them  as  a  whole  ;  while  other  dis-
coveries still  more  important,  and  still  more  remote  from  ordinary  experience,
are  manifestly  approaching,  and  may  be  seen  looming  in  the  distance,  whence
they  are  now  obscurely  working  on  the  advanced  thinkers  who  are  nearest  to
them,  filling  their  minds  with  those  ill-defined,  restless,  and  almost  uneasy
feelings  which  are  the  invariable  harbingers  of  future  triumph  ;  while  the
veil  is  being  rudely  torn,  and  nature,  violated  at  all  points,  is  forced  to  disclose
her  secrets,  and  reveal  her  structure,  her  economy,  and  her  laws,  to  the  indomi-
table energy  of  man  ;  while  Europe  is  ringing  with  the  noise  of  intellectual
achievements,  with  which  even  despotic  governments  affect  to  sympathize,  in
order  that  they  may  divert  them  from  their  natural  course  and  use  them  as
new  instruments  whereby  to  oppress  yet  more  the  liberties  of  the  people  ;
while,  amidst  this  general  din  and  excitement,  the  public  mind,  swayed  to
and  fro,  is  tossed  and  agitated, — Spain  sleeps  on,  untroubled,  unheeding,  im-
passive, receiving  no  impressions  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  making  no
impressions  upon  it.  There  she  lies,  at  the  further  extremity. of  the  Continent,
a  huge  and  torpid  mass,  the  sole  representative  now  remaining  of  the  feelings
and  knowledge  of  the  Middle  Ages.*  And,  what  is  the  worst  symptom  of
all,  she  is  satisfied  with  her  own  condition.  Though  she  is  the  most  backward
country  in  Europe,,  she  believes  herself  to  be  the  foremost.  She  is  proud  of
everything  of  which  she  should  be  ashamed.  She  is  proud  of  the  antiquity
of  her  opinions  ;  proud  of  her  orthodoxy  ;  proud  of  the  strength  of  her  faith  ;
proud  of  her  immeasurable  and  childish  credulity  ;  proud  of  her  unwillingness
to  amend  either  her  creed  or  her  customs  ;  proud  of  her  hatred  of  heretics,  and
proud  of  the  undying  vigilance  with  which  she  has  baffled  their  efforts  to  obtain
a  full  and  legal  establishment  on  her  soil.

All  these  things  conspiring  together  produce  in  their  aggregate  that  melan-
choly exhibition  to,  which  we  give  the  collective  name  of  Spain.  The  history

[*  Buckle  is,  here  echoing  and  developing  a  proposition  of  Prescott  (Hist,  of  Philip  //.,
Kirk's  ed.  1894,  p,  181)  which  however  Prescott's  editor  very  properly  rejects. — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF   THE    SPANISH    INTELLECT          627

of  that  single  word  is  the  history  of  nearly  everyfc vicissitude  of  which.the  human
species  is  capable.  It  comprises  the  extremes  of  strength  and  of  weakness,  of
unbounded  wealth  and  of  abject  poverty.  It  is  the  history  of  the  mixture
of  different  races,  languages,  and  bloods.  It  includes  almost  every  political
combination  which  the  wit  of  man  can  devise  ;  laws  infinite  in  variety,  as  well
as  in  number  ;  constitutions  of  all  kinds,  from  the  most  stringent  to  the  most
liberal.  Democracy,  monarchy,  government  by  priests,  government  by
municipalities,  government  by  nobles,  government  by  representative  bodies,
government  by  natives,  government  by  foreigners,  have  been  tried,  and  tried
in  vain.  Material  appliances  have  been  lavishly  used  ;  arts,  inventions,  and
machines  introduced  from  abroad,  manufactures  set  up,  communications
opened,  roads  made,  canals  dug,  mines  worked,  harbours  formed.  In  a  word,
there  has  been  every  sort  of  alteration  except  alterations  of  opinion  ;  there  has
been  every  possible  change  except  changes  in  knowledge.  And  the  result
is  that  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  successive  governments,  in  spite  of  the  influence
of  foreign  customs,  and  in  spite  of  those  physical  ameliorations  which  just
touch  the  surface  of  society,  but  are  unable  to  penetrate  beneath,  there  are  no
signs  of  national  progress  ;  the  priests  are  rather  gaining  ground  than  losing
it  ;  the  slightest  attack  on  the  Church  rouses  the  people  ;  while  even  the  disso-
luteness of  the  clergy,  and  the  odious  vices  which  in  the  present  century  have
stained  the  throne,  can  do  naught  to  lessen  either  the  superstition  or  the  loyalty
which  the  accumulated  force  of  many  centuries  has  graven  on  the  minds,  and
eaten  into  the  hearts,  of  the  Spanish  nation.*


[*  Mr.  M.  A.  S.  Hume,  in  his  Modern  Spain  (1899,  p. 551),  after  practically  bearing  out
all  that  Buckle  has  said  as  to  the  prematureness  of  the  Spanish  reforms  in  the  past
century,  says  :  "  It  may  now  be  safely  asserted  that  during  the  last  thirty  years  the
people  themselves  have  with  much  painful  effort  almost  reached  the  level  of  their  present
political  institutions"  ;  and  in  conclusion  (p.  563)  he  pronounces  that  "absolutism
...  is  past  revival,  and  a  popular  constitutional  government,  republic  or  monarchy,
is  alone  possible  in  Spain,  the  most  naturally  democratic  country  in  Europe."- — ED.]


CHAPTER    XVI.

CONDITION   OF   SCOTLAND  TO  THE   END   OF  THE   FOURTEENTH   CENTURY.

IN  the  preceding  view  of  the  rise  and  decay  of  Spain,  I  have  sought  to  exhibit
the  successive  steps  by  which  what  was  formerly  one  of  the  greatest  nations  of
the  earth  was  broken,  and  cast  down  from  its  high  estate.  As  we  look  back  on
that  scene,  the  picture  is  indeed  striking.  A  country  rich  in  all  natural  produc-
tions, inhabited  by  a  brave,  a  loyal,  and  a  religious  people,  removed,  too,  by  its
geographical  position  from  the  hazards  of  European  revolutions,  did  by  the
operation  of  those  general  causes  which  I  have  indicated,  suddenly  rise  to  un-
paralleled grandeur  ;  and  then,  without  the  occurrence  of  any  new  combination,
but  by  a  mere  continuance  of  the  same  causes,  fall  with  an  equal  velocity.  Yet
these  vicissitudes,  strange  and  startling  as  they  appear,  were  perfectly  regular.
They  were  the  legitimate  consequence  of  a  state  of  society  in  which  the  spirit  of
protection  had  reached  its  highest  point,  and  in  which,  everything  being  done  for
the  people,  nothing  was  done  by  the  people.  Whenever  this  happens,  there  may
be  great  political  progress,  but  there  can  be  no  really  national  progress.  There
may  be  accessions  of  territory,  and  vast  increase  of  fame  and  of  power.  There
may  be  improvements  in  the  practice  of  administration,  in  the  management  of
finances,  in  the  organization  of  armies,  in  the  art  and  theory  of  war,  in  the  tricks
of  diplomacy,  and  in  those  various  contrivances  by  which  one  nation  is  able  to
outwit  and  insult  another.  So  far,  however,  from  this  benefiting  the  people,  it
will  injure  them  in  two  different  ways.  In  the  first  place,  by  increasing  the
reputation  of  the  ruling  classes,  it  encourages  that  blind  and  servile  respect  which
men  are  too  apt  to  feel  for  those  who  are  above  them,  and  which,  wherever  it  has
been  generally  practised,  has  been  found  fatal  to  the  highest  qualities  of  the  citizen,
and  therefore  to  the  permanent  grandeur  of  the  nation.  And,  in  the  second
place,  it  multiplies  the  resources  of  the  executive  government,  and  thus  renders
the  country  unable  as  well  as  unwilling  to  correct  the  errors  of  those  who  are
at  the  head  of  affairs.  Hence,  in  Spain,  as  in  all  countries  similarly  circum-
stanced, it  was  at  the  very  moment  when  things  were  most  prosperous  at  the
surface  that  they  were  most  rotten  at  the  foundation.*  In  presence  of  the  most
splendid  political  success,  the  nation  hastened  to  its  downfall,  and  the  crisis  was
fast  approaching  in  which,  the  whole  edifice  being  overturned,  nothing  would  be
left  except  a  memorable  warning  of  the  consequences  which  must  ensue  when  the
people,  giving  themselves  up  to  the  passions  of  superstition  and  loyalty,  abdicate
their  own  proper  functions,  forego  their  own  responsibility,  renounce  their  highest
duties,  and  degrade  themselves  into  passive  instruments  to  serve  the  will  of  the
Church  and  the  throne.

Such  is  the  great  lesson  taught  by  the  history  of  Spain.  From  the  history  of
Scotland  we  may  gather  another  lesson,  of  a  different  and  yet  of  a  similar  kind.
In  Scotland  the  progress  of  the  nation  has  been  very  slow,  but  on  the  whole  very
sure.  The  country  is  extremely  barren  ;  the  executive  government  has,  with
rare  exceptions,  been  always  weak  ;  and  the  people  have  never  been  burdened
with  those  feelings  of  loyalty  which  circumstances  had  forced  upon  the  Spaniards.
Certainly  the  last  charge  that  will  be  brought  against  the  Scotch  is  that  of

[*  As  has  been  noted  above,  they  were  no  more  prosperous  on  the  surface  than  any-
where else  at  the  period  specified. — ED.]


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      629

superstitious  attachment  to  their  princes.1  We  in  England  have  not  always
been  very  tender  of  the  persons  of  our  sovereigns,  and  we  have  occasionally
punished  them  with  what  some  consider  excessive  severity.  With  this  we  have
been  frequently  taunted  by  the  more  loyal  nations  of  the  Continent  ;  and  in
Spain  in  particular  our  conduct  has  excited  the  greatest  abhorrence.  But  if  we
compare  our  history  with  that  of  our  northern  neighbours,  we  must  pronounce
ourselves  a  meek  and  submissive  people.2  There  have  been  more  rebellions  in
Scotland  than  in  any  other  country  ;  and  the  rebellions  have  been  very  sanguin-
ary, as  well  as  very  numerous.  The  Scotch  have  made  war  upon  most  of  their
kings,  and  put  to  death  many.  To  mention  their  treatment  of  a  single  dynasty,
they  *  murdered  James  I.  and  James  III.  They  rebelled  against  James  II.  and
James  VII.  They  laid  hold  of  James  V.,  and  placed  him  in  confinement.  Mary
they  immured  in  a  castle,  and  afterwards  deposed.  Her  successor,  James  VI.,
they  imprisoned  ;  they  led  him  captive  about  the  country,  and  on  one  occasion
attempted  his  life.  Towards  Charles  I.  they  showed  the  greatest  animosity,  and
they  were  the  first  to  restrain  his  mad  career.  Three  years  before  the  English
ventured  to  rise  against  that  despotic  prince,  the  Scotch  boldly  took  up  arms,
and  made  war  on  him.  The  service  which  they  then  rendered  to  the  cause  of
liberty  it  would  be  hard  to  overrate  ;  but  the  singular  part  of  the  transaction  was
that  having  afterwards  got  possession  of  the  person  of  Charles  they  sold  him  to
the  English  for  a  large  sum  of  money,  of  which  they,  being  very  poor,  had  pressing
need.  Such  a  sale  is  unparalleled  in  history  ;  and  although  the  Scotch  might
have  plausibly  alleged  that  this  was  the  only  gain  they  had  derived,  or  ever  could
derive,  from  the  existence  of  their  hereditary  prince,  still  the  event  is  one  which
stands  alone  ;  it  was  unprecedented  ;  it  has  never  been  imitated  ;  and  its
occurrence  is  a  striking  symptom  of  the  state  of  public  opinion,  and  of  the  feelings
of  the  country  in  which  it  was  permitted.!

1  One  of  their  own  historians  complacently  says,  "  but  the  Scots  were  seldom  distin  -
guished  for  loyalty."     Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  199,  edit.  1819.     See  also
p.  366.     To  the  same  effect,  Brodie  (History  of  the  British  Empire,  Edinburgh,  1822,
vol.  i.  p.  383 )  :  "  The  little  respect  paid  to  royalty  is  conspicuous  in  every  page  of  Scottish
history."     Or,  as  Wilkes  expressed  himself  in  the  House  of  Commons,  "  Scotland  seems,
indeed,  the  natural  foyer  of  rebellion,  as  Egypt  is  of  the  plague."     Parliamentary  History,
vol.  xix.  p.  810,  London,  1814  ;    and  Nimmo  (History  of  Stirlingshire,  Edinburgh,  i777»
p.  219)  :    "  Never  was  any  race  of  monarchs  more  unfortunate  than  the  Scottish.      Their
reigns  were  generally  turbulent  and  disastrous,  and  their  own  end  often  tragical."

2  Indeed,  a  well-known  Scotchman  of   the  seventeenth  century  scornfully  says  of  the
English,  "  such  is  the  obsequiousness,  and  almost  superstitious  devotion  of  that  nation

[*  The  use  of  "  they  "  is  somewhat  indiscriminate.  A  few  malcontents  killed  James  I.,
and  factions  of  nobles  rebelled  against  his  successors.  In  England  there  were  rebellions
against  nearly  every  monarch  from  Richard  II.  to  William  III.,  and  before  Richard  II.
against  Edward  II.,  Henry  III.,  John,  and  so  on.  The  contrast  thus  breaks  down.— ED.]

[f  Seeing  that  the  Scots  Parliament  denounced  the  execution  of  Charles  I.  as  a  crime,
and  took  up  at  once  the  cause  of  his  son,  the  inference  in  the  text  is  clearly  over -strained.
The  popular  account  of  the  "  selling  "  of  Charles,  here  followed  by  Buckle,  is  of  course  a
myth.  The  Scots  had  an  old-standing  and  long-admitted  claim  against  the  English
Parliament,  and  having  got  the  king  they  "  held  the  king  in  pawn  for  their  claim  "
(Burton,  History  of  Scotland,  vi.  408).  But  had  there  been  no  arrears  due  to  them,  the
king  would  have  been  given  up  to  the  English  much  sooner.  The  Scots  had  offered  to
support  and  reinstate  the  king  if  he  would  sign  their  solemn  League  and  Covenant,  even
after  the  English  Parliament  had  threatened  to  make  war  on  them  if  the  king  were  not
delivered  up.  Charles  however  refused  to  sign,  preferring  to  take  his  risks  in  England.
It  was  therefore  a  matter  of  course  that  he  should  be  given  up.  And  it  was  not  by  those
English  commissioners  to  whom  he  was  surrendered  that  he  was  put  to  death,  but  by
their  opponents.  Buckle  gives  a  somewhat  more  accurate  though  still  misleading  account
below  (ch.  xviii.  at  note  51 );  and  after  writing  that  should  have  altered  the  passage  above.


630  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

While,  however,  in  regard  to  loyalty,  the  opposition  between  Scotland  and
Spain  is  complete,  there  is,  strange  to  say,  the  most  striking  similarity  between
those  countries  in  regard  to  superstition.  Both  nations  have  allowed  their  clergy
to  exercise  immense  sway,  and  both  have  submitted  their  actions,  as  well  as  their
consciences,  to  the  authority  of  the  Church.  As  a  natural  consequence,  in  both
countries  intolerance  has  been  and  still  is  a  crying  evil  ;  and  in  matters  of  reli-
gion a  bigotry  is  habitually  displayed,  discreditable  indeed  to  Spain,  but  far  more
discreditable  to  Scotland,  which  has  produced  many  philosophers  of  the  highest
eminence,  who  would  willingly  have  taught  the  people  better  things,  but  who
have  vainly  attempted  to  remove  from  the  national  mind  that  serious  blemish
which  mars  its  beauty,  and  tends  to  neutralize  its  many  other  admirable  qualities.

Herein  lies  the  apparent  paradox,  and  the  real  difficulty,  of  Scotch  history.
That  knowledge  should  not  have  produced  the  effects  which  have  elsewhere
followed  it  ;  that  a  bold  and  inquisitive  literature  should  be  found  in  a  grossly
superstitious  country,  without  diminishing  its  superstition  ;  that  the  people
should  constantly  withstand  their  kings,  and  as  constantly  succumb  to  their
clergy  ;  that  while  they  are  liberal  in  politics  they  should  be  illiberal  in  religion  ;
and  that,  as  a  natural  consequence  of  all  this,  men  who  in  the  visible  and  ex-
ternal department  of  facts  and  of  practical  life  display  a  shrewdness  and  a  bold-
ness rarely  equalled,  should  nevertheless  in  speculative  life  and  in  matters  of
theory,  tremble  like  sheep  before  their  pastors,  and  yield  assent  to  every  absurdity
they  hear,  provided  their  Church  has  sanctioned  it  ;  that  these  discrepancies
should  coexist,  seems  at  first  sight  a  strange  contradiction,  and  is  surely  a  phe-
nomenon worthy  of  our  careful  study.  To  indicate  the  causes  of  this  anomaly,
and  to  trace  the  results  to  which  the  anomaly  has  led,  will  be  the  business  of  the
remaining  part  of  this  volume  ;  and  although  the  investigation  will  be  somewhat
lengthy,  it  will  not,  I  hope,  be  considered  prolix  by  those  who  recognize  the
importance  of  the  inquiry,  and  are  aware  how  completely  it  has  been  neglected,
even  by  those  who  have  written  most  fully  on  the  history  of  the  Scottish  nation.

In  Scotland  as  elsewhere,  the  course  of  events  has  been  influenced  by  its
physical  geography  ;  and  by  this  I  mean,  not  only  its  own  immediate  peculiari-
ties, but  also  its  relation  to  adjoining  countries.  It  is  close  to  Ireland  ;  it  touches
England  ;  and  by  the  contiguity  of  the  Orkney  and  Shetland  Isles  it  was  emi-
nently exposed  to  the  attacks  of  that  great  nation  of  pirates  which  for  centuries
inhabited  the  Scandinavian  peninsula.  Considered  merely  by  itself,  it  is
mountainous  and  sterile  ;  nature  has  interposed  such  obstacles  that  it  was  long
impossible  to  open  regular  communications  between  its  different  parts,  which,
indeed,  in  regard  to  the  Highlands,  was  not  effected  till  after  the  middle  of  the
eighteenth  century.3  Finally — and  this,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  was  a  matter

towards  their  prince."  Baillie's  Letters,  vol.  i.  p.  204,  edit.  Laing,  Edinburgh,  1841.
[The  same  writer  fiercely  denounced  the  execution  of  Charles. — ED.]  This,  however,  was
written  in  1639,  since  which  we  have  effectually  wiped  off  that  reproach.  On  the  other
hand,  an  English  writer  of  the  seventeenth  century  indignantly,  though  with  evident
exaggeration,  imputes  to  the  Scotch  that  "  forty  of  their  kings  have  been  barbarously
murdered  by  them  ;  and  half  as  many  more  have  either  made  away  with  themselves,
for  fear  of  their  torturing  of  them,  or  have  died  miserably  in  strait  imprisonment."
Account  of  Scotland  in  1670,  in  Harleian  Miscellany,  vol.  vi.  p.  140,  edit.  Park,  4to,  1810.
Compare  two  curious  passages  in  Shields'  Hind  Let  Loose,  1687,  pp.  8,  9,  15.

3  In  England  the  travelling  was  bad  enough  ;  in  Scotland  it  was  far  worse.  Morer,
stating  what  he  saw  in  1689,  says,  "  Stage-coaches  they  have  none  ;  yet  there  are  a  few
Hackney's  at  Edinburgh,  which  they  may  hire  into  the  country  upon  urgent  occasions.
The  truth  is,  the  roads  will  hardly  allow  'em  those  conveniences,  which  is  the  reason  that
their  gentry,  men  and  women,  chuse  rather  to  use  their  horses."  Morer' s  Account  of
Scotland,  London,  1702,  p.  24.

As  to  the  northern  parts,  we  have  the  following  account,  written  in  Inverness,  between
1726  and  1730.  "  The  Highlands  are  but  little  known  even  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  low
country  of  Scotland,  for  they  have  ever  dreaded  the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  travelling
among  the  mountains  ;  and  when  some  extraordinary  occasion  has  obliged  any  one  of


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      631

of  great  importance,  the  most  fertile  land  in  Scotland  is  in  the  south,  and  was
therefore  constantly  ravaged  by  the  English  borderers.  Hence  the  accumu-
lation of  wealth  was  hindered,  the  growth  of  towns  was  discouraged  by  the
serious  hazards  to  which  they  were  liable  ;  and  it  was  impossible  to  develop  that
municipal  spirit  which  might  have  existed  if  the  districts  most  favoured  by
nature  had  been  situated  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  instead  of  in  the  south.  If
the  actual  state  of  things  had  been  reversed,  so  that  the  Highlands  were  in  the
south4  and  the  Lowlands  in  the  north,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  after  the
cessation  in  the  thirteenth  century  of  the  great  Scandinavian  invasions  the  most
fertile  parts  of  Scotland,  being  comparatively  secure,  would  have  been  the  seat
of  towns  which  the  active  spirit  of  the  people  would  have  caused  to  prosper,  and
the  prosperity  of  which  would  have  introduced  a  new  element  into  Scotch  affairs,
and  changed  the  course  of  Scotch  history.  This,  however,  was  not  to  be  ;  and,
as  we  have  to  deal  with  events  as"  they  actually  are,  I  will  now  endeavour  to  trace
the  consequences  of  the  physical  peculiarities  which  have  just  been  noticed  ;  and
by  co-ordinating  their  results  I  will,  so  far  as  I  am  able,  show  their  general  mean-
ing, and  the  way  in  which  they  have  shaped  the  national  character.

The  earliest  fact  with  which  we  are  acquainted  respecting  the  history  of  Scot-
land is  the  Roman  invasion  under  Agricola,  late  in  the  first  century.  But
neither  his  conquests  nor  those  of  his  successors  made  any  permanent  impression.
The  country  was  never  really  subjugated,  and  nothing  was  effected  except  a
military  occupation,  which,  in  spite  of  the  erection  of  numerous  forts,  walls,  and


them  to  such  a  progress,  he  has,  generally  speaking,  made  his  testament  before  he  set  out,
as  though  he  were  entering  upon  a  long  and  dangerous  sea -voyage,  wherein  it  was  very
doubtful  if  he  should  ever  return."  Letters  from  a  Gentleman  in  the  North  of  Scotland,
edit.  London,  1815,  vol.  i.  p.  4.  Between  1720  and  1730,  military  roads  were  cut  through
parts  of  the  Highlands,  but  they  were  "  laid  down  by  a  practical  soldier,  and  destined  for
warlike  purposes,  with  scarcely  any  view  towards  the  ends  for  which  free  and  peaceful
citizens  open  up  a  system  of  internal  transit."  Burton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  255.
See  also  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  p.  36.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that,  even  be-
tween Inverness  and  Edinburgh,  "  until  1755,  the  mail  was  conveyed  by  men  on  foot."
Account  of  Inverness -shire,  in  M'Culloch's  British  Empire,  London,  1847,  vol.  i.  p.  299  ;
to  which  I  may  add  that  in  Anderson's  Essay  on  the  Highlands,  Edinburgh,  1827,  pp.  119,
120,  it  is  stated  that  "  A  postchaise  was  first  seen  in  Inverness  itself  in  1760,  and  was  for
a  considerable  time  the  only  four-wheeled  carriage  in  the  district."  As  to  the  communi-
cations in  the  country  about  Perth,  see  Penny's  Traditions  of  Perth,  pp.  131,  132,  Perth,
1836  ;  and  as  to  those  from  Aberdeen  to  Inverness,  and  from  Aberdeen  to  Edinburgh,
see  Kennedy's  Annals  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  ii.  pp.  269,  270,  London,  4to,  1818.

The  history  of  the  improvement  of  the  roads  during  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth
century  has  never  been  written  ;  but  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  its  intellectual
results,  in  causing  national  fusion,  as  well  as  for  its  economical  results,  in  helping  trade.
Some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  extraordinary  energy  displayed  by  Scotland  in  this
matter,  by  comparing  the  following  passages  :  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  pp.  494,  865,
939,  vol.  iii.  pp.  599,  799  ;  Crawfurd's  History  of  the  Shire  of  Renfrew,  part  ii.  pp.  128,  160  ;
Irving' s  History  of  Dumbartonshire,  pp.  245,  246  ;  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,
vol.  i.  pp.  109,  210,  367,  430,  496  ;  vol.  ii.  p.  498  ;  vol.  iii.  pp.  33*»  352,  353  ;  vol.  iy.
p.  313  ;  vol.  v.  pp.  128,  234,  235,  315,  364,365;  vol.  vi.  pp.  107,  154,  180,  458  ;  vol.  vii.
pp.  135,  251,  275,  299,  417  ;  vol.  viii.  pp.  81,  243,  344*  345,  54*  ;  vol.  ix.  pp.  414,  53°  ;
vol.  x.  pp.  221,  237,  238,  466,  618  ;  vol.  xi.  pp.  127,  380,  418.  432,  522,  54*  ;  vol.  xii.  p.  59  ;
vol.  xiii.  pp.  42,  141,  488,  542,  663  ;  vol.  xiv.  pp.  217,  227,  4*3,  443,  466,  506  ;  vol.  xv.
pp.  54,  88,  276  ;  vol.  xvi.  p.  120  ;  vol.  xvii.  pp.  5,  267,  297,  377,  533  ;  vol.  xviii.  p.  309  ;
vol.  xx.  p.  156.

4  I  use  the  word  Highlands  in  the  common  though  improper  sense  ol  including  all
Scotland  from  the  Pentland  Firth  to  the  beginning  of  the  mountains,  a  few  miles  north  of
Glasgow,  Stirling,  Perth,  and  Dundee.  All  such  distinctions  are  necessarily  somewhat
vague,  because  the  boundaries  of  nature  are  never  clearly  marked.  Compare  Macky's
Scotland,  p.  124,  London,  1732,  with  Anderson's  Guide  to  the  Highlands.  Edinburgh,  1847,
pp.  17, 18.


632  THE    HISTORY   OF    CIVILIZATION

ramparts,*  left  the  spirit  of  the  inhabitants  unbroken.       Even  Severus,  who  in

the  year  209  undertook  the  last  and  most  important  expedition  against  Scotland,

does  not  appear  to  have  penetrated  beyond  the  Firth  of  Moray  ;  5    and  directly

he  retired,  the  natives  were  again  in  arms,  and  again  independent.     After  this,

nothing  was  attempted  upon  a  scale  large  enough  to  give  a  chance  of  success.

Indeed  the  Romans,  far  from  being    equal  to  such  an  effort,  were  themselves

deteriorating.       In  their  best  days  their  virtues  were  the  virtues  of  barbarians,

and  even  those  they  were  now  about  to  lose.     From  the  beginning,  their  scheme

of  life  was  so  one-sided  and  imperfect  that  the  increase  of  wealth,  which  improves

the  civilization  of  really  civilized  countries,  was  to  the  Romans  an  irreparable

mischief  ;   and  they  were  corrupted  by  luxury,  instead  of  being  refined  by  it.     In

our  time,  if  we  compare  the  different  nations  of  Europe,  we  find  that  the  richest

are  also  the  most  powerful,  the  most  humane,  and  the  most  happy.     We  live  in

that  advanced  state  of  society  in  which  wealth  is  both  the  cause  and  the  effect  of

progress,  while  poverty  is  the  fruitful  parent  of  weakness,  of  misery,  and  of  crime.

But  the  Romans,  when  they  ceased  to  be  poor,  began  to  be  vicious.     So  unstable

was  the  foundation  of    their  greatness  that  the  very  results  which  their  power

produced  were  fatal  to  the  power  itself.      Their  empire  gave  them  wealth,  and

their  wealth  overthrew  their  empire.     Their  national  character,  notwithstanding

its  apparent  strength,  was  in  truth  of  so  frail  a  texture  that  it  was  ruined  by  its

own  development.     As  it  grew,  it  dwarfed. f      Hence  it  was  that,  in  the  third  and

fourth  centuries,   their  hold  on  mankind  visibly  slackened.     Their  authority

being  undermined,  other  nations  of  course  stepped  in  ;    so  that  the  inroads  of

those  strange  tribes  which  came  pouring  from  the  north,  and  to  whose  appearance

the  final  catastrophe  is  often  ascribed,  were  at  best  the  occasion,  but  by  no  means

the  cause,  of  the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.     Towards  that  great  and  salutary

event  everything  had  long  been  pointing.      The  scourges  and  oppressors  of  the

world,  whom  a  false  and  ignorant    sympathy  has  invested  with  noble  qualities

which  they  never  possessed,  had  now  to  look  to  themselves  ;    and  when,  after

receding  on  all  sides,  they  in  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  withdrew  their  forces

from  the  whole  of  Britain,  they  merely  executed  a  movement  which  a  train  of

circumstances,  continued  through  several  generations,  had  made  inevitable.

It  is  at  this  point  that  we  begin  to  discern  the  operation  of  those  physical  and
geographical  peculiarities  which  I  have  mentioned  as  influencing  the  fortunes  of
Scotland.  The  Romans  gradually  losing  ground,  the  proximity  of  Ireland
caused  repeated  attacks  from  that  fertile  island,  whose  rich  soil  and  great  natural
advantages  gave  rise  to  an  exuberant  and  therefore  a  restless  population.  An

5  Browne  (History  of  the  Highlands,  vol.  i.  p.  33)  says  that  "  he  traversed  the  whole  of
North  Britain,  from  the  wall  of  Antoninus  to  the  very  extremity  of  the  island."  The
same  thing  is  stated  in  Pennant's  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  90.  Neither  of  these  writers  quotes
his  authority  for  this  ;  but  they  probably  relied  on  a  passage  in  Buchanan's  Rerum  Scoti-
carum  Historia,  lib.  iv.  p.  94.  "  Neque  tamen  desideratis  quinquaginta  millibus  (ut
scribit  Dion)  prius  ab  incoepto  destiterunt,  quam  ad  finem  insulae  penetrassent."  I  believe,
however,  that  Scotch  antiquaries  are  now  agreed  that  this  is  wrong,  as  Chalmers  was  one
of  the  first  to  perceive.  See  his  Caledonia,  vol.  i.  p.  187  ;  a  very  valuable  and  learned  but
unhappily  ill -arranged  book,  and  written  in  a  style  which  is  absolutely  afflicting.  See
also  Irving' s  History  of  Dumbartonshire,  4to,  1860,  p.  14.

[*  There  was  only  one  "  wall  "  or  "  rampart  " — the  vallum  of  Antonine.  Recent
research  reduces  the  number  of  accredited  Roman  remains  in  Scotland.  Compare  the
opening  chapters  in  the  Histories  of  Mr.  Lang  and  Mr.  Hume  Brown. — ED.]

[t  Buckle  has  here  failed  to  apply  his  own  theories.  He  has  previously  treated  wealth
as  a  beneficent  force,  promoting  knowledge.  It  is  inconsistent  with  his  doctrine  to  fall
back  on  a  bald  proposition  of  "  frailty  "  of  character.  He  should  have  recognized  that
the  manner  of  acquisition  of  wealth  by  a  nation  is  all -important  ;  and  further  should
have  realized  that  deterioration  of  character  resulting  (not  merely  from  wealth  but)  from
despotism,  was  accompanied  by  an  economic  paralysis,  and  that  the  empire  fell  because
of  the  exhaustion  of  its  fiscal  resources  as  well  as  of  "  national  character." — ED.]


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      633

overflow,  which  in  civilized  times  is  an  emigration,  is  in  barbarous  times  an
invasion.  Hence  the  Irish,  or  Scotti  as  they  were  termed,  established  themselves
by  force  of  arms  in  the  west  of  Scotland,  and  came  into  collision  with  the  Picts,
who  occupied  the  eastern  part.  A  deadly  struggle  ensued,  which  lasted  four
centuries  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  Romans,  and  plunged  the  country  into  the
greatest  confusion.  At  length,  in  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century,  Kenneth
M'Alpine,  king  of  the  Scotti,  gained  the  upper  hand,  and  reduced  the  Picts  to
complete  submission.6  The  country  was  now  united  under  one  rule  ;  and  the
conquerors,  slowly  absorbing  the  conquered,  gave  their  name  to  the  whole,  which
in  the  tenth  century  received  the  appellation  of  Scotland.7

But  the  kingdom  was  to  have  no  rest.  For,  in  the  meantime,  circumstances
which  it  would  be  tedious  to  relate  had  raised  the  inhabitants  of  Norway  to  be
the  greatest  maritime  power  in  Europe.  The  use  which  that  nation  of  pirates
made  of  their  strength  forms  another  and  very  important  link  in  the  history  of
Scotland,  and  moreover  illustrates  the  immense  weight  which,  in  an  earlier
period  of  society,  should  be  assigned  to  mere  geographical  considerations.  The
nearest  land  to  the  centre  of  the  long  coast  of  Norway  is  the  Shetland  Isles,
whence  if  is  an  easy  sail  to  the  Orkneys.  The  northern  pirates  naturally  seized
these  small  but  to  them  most  useful  islands,  and  as  naturally  made  them
intermediate  stations,  from  which  they  could  conveniently  pillage  the  coasts  of
Scotland.  Being  constantly  reinforced  from  Norway,  they  in  the  ninth  and
tenth  centuries  advanced  from  the  Orkneys,  made  permanent  settlements  in
Scotland  itself,  and  occupied  not  only  Caithness,  but  also  great  part  of  Suther-
land. Another  body  of  them  got  possession  of  the  Western  Islands  ;  and  as  Skye
is  only  separated  from  the  mainland  by  a  very  narrow  channel,  these  pirates
easily  crossed  over,  and  fixed  themselves  in  Western  Ross.8  From  their  new
abodes  they  waged  incessant  and  destructive  war  against  every  district  within
their  reach  ;  and,  keeping  a  large  part  of  Scotland  in  constant  alarm,  they  for
about  three  centuries  prevented  the  possibility  of  its  social  improvement.*
Indeed,  that  unhappy  country  was  never  free  from  the  dangers  of  Norwegian

6  The  history  of  Scotland  in  this  period  is  in  great  confusion,  and  perhaps  will  never
be  recovered.      For  the  statements  made  in  the  text  I  have  chiefly  used  the  following
authorities  :    Fordun's  Scotichronicon,  vol.  i.  ;    Buchanan's  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,
lib.  v.  pp.  121-132,  and  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  book.     Also  various  parts  of  Bede  ;
Pinkerton's  Enquiry  into  the  Early  History  of  Scotland  ;    Chalmers'  Caledonia  ;    the  first
volume  of  Browne's  History  of  the  Highlands  ;    and,  above  all,  Mr.  Skene's  acute  and
learned  work  on  the  Highlanders.     In  the  last-named  book,  the  western  boundary  of  the
Picts  is  traced  with  great  ingenuity,  though  perhaps  with  some  uncertainty.     Skene's
Highlanders  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  26—33,  London,  1837.

7  Here  again  we  are  involved  in  doubt ;  it  being  uncertain  when  the  name  Scotia  was
first  applied  to  Scotland.      The  date  therefore  which  I  have  given  is  only  intended  as  an
approximate  truth.      In  arriving  at  it  I  have  compared  the  following  different  and  often
conflicting  passages  :   Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  i.  p.  339.       Browne's  History  of  the  High-
lands, vol.  i.  p.  34.    Pinkerton's  Enquiry  into  the  Early  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  253,
254,  vol.  ii.  pp.  151,  228,  237,  240.     Spottiswoode' s  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  edit.
Russell,  1851,  vol.  i.  p.  16,  note,  where,  however,  Pinkerton's  authority  is  appealed  to  for
an  assertion  which  he  did  not  make.     Skene's  Highlanders,  vol.  i.  pp.  45,  61,  244.     Ander-
son's Prize  Essay  on  the  Highlands,  p.  34.     [Pinkerton  repeatedly  insists,  in  the  passages
cited,  that  Scotland  was  not  so  called  till   the  eleventh  century.     This  is  the  correct
view.     Cp.  Hume  Brown,  History  of  Scotland,  1896,  i.  51. — ED.]

8  Pinkerton's  Enquiry  into  the  Early  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  136,  317,  vol.  ii.
pp.  179,  298.     Skene's  Highlanders,  vol.  i.  pp.  90,  91,  94,  106,  114,  258,  259.     Chal-
mers' Caledonia,  vol.  i.  pp.  340-347.

[*  Considerable  "  improvement  "  had  certainly  taken  place  between  the  time  of
Malcolm  Canmore  and  Alexander  III.,  in  whose  reign  Scotland  seems  to  have  been  in
some  respects  richer  than  she  was  for  nearly  two  centuries  afterwards,  Cp,  Burton,  History
of  Scotland^  ii,  105-111,  325.  And  see  below,  note  28. — ED.]


634  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

invasion  until  the  failure  of  the  last  great  attack,  in  1263,  when  Haco  left  Norway
with  a  prodigious  armament,  which  he  further  strengthened  by  reinforcements
from  the  Orkneys  and  Hebrides.  Scotland  could  offer  but  little  resistance.
Haco,  with  his  allies,  sailed  along  the  western  coast  to  the  Mull  of  Kentire,  wasted
the  country  with  fire  and  sword,  took  Arran  and  Bute,  entered  the  Firth  of  Clyde,
suddenly  fell  upon  Loch  Lomond,  destroyed  all  the  property  on  its  shores  and  on
its  islands,  ravaged  the  whole  county  of  Stirling,  and  threatened  to  descend  with
all  his  force  upon  Ayrshire.  Fortunately  the  inclemency  of  the  weather  broke
up  this  great  expedition,  and  scattered  or  destroyed  the  entire  fleet.9  After  its
dispersal,  the  course  of  affairs  in  Norway  prevented  the  attempt  from  being
renewed  ;  and  danger  from  that  quarter  being  over,  it  might  have  been  hoped
that  Scotland  would  now  enjoy  peace,  and  would  have  leisure  to  develop  the
natural  resources  which  she  possessed,  particularly  those  in  the  southern  and
more  favoured  districts.

This,  however,  was  not  to  be.  For  scarcely  were  the  attacks  from  Norway  at
an  end  when  those  from  England  began.  Early  in  the  thirteenth  century  the
lines  of  demarcation  which  separated  Normans  from  Saxons  were  in  our  country
becoming  so  obliterated  that  in  many  cases  it  was  impossible  to  distinguish
them.10  By  the  middle  of  the  same  century  the  two  races  were  fused  into  one
powerful  nation  ;  and,  as  that  nation  had  a  comparatively  feeble  neighbour,  it
was  certain  that  the  stronger  people  would  try  to  oppress  the  weaker.11  In  an
ignorant  and  barbarous  age,  military  success  is  preferred  to  all  other  kinds  of
fame  ;  and  the  English,  greedy  for  conquest,  set  their  eyes  upon  Scotland,  which
they  were  sure  to  invade  at  the  first  opportunity.  That  Scotland  was  near,  made
it  tempting  ;  that  it  was  believed  to  be  defenceless,  made  the  temptation  irre-
sistible. In  1290  Edward  I.  determined  to  avail  himself  of  the  confusion  into
which  Scotland  was  thrown  by  disputes  respecting  the  succession  to  the  crown.
The  intrigues  which  followed  need  not  be  related  ;  it  is  enough  to  say  that  in
1296  the  sword  was  drawn,  and  Edward  invaded  a  country  which  he  had  long
desired  to  conquer.  But  he  little  recked  of  the  millions  of  treasure,  and  the
hundreds  of  thousands  of  lives,  which  were  to  be  squandered  before  that  war  was
over.12  The  contest  that  ensued  was  of  unexampled  length  and  severity  ;  and
in  its  sad  course  the  Scotch,  notwithstanding  their  heroic  resistance,  and  the
victories  they  occasionally  gained,  had  to  endure  every  evil  which  could  be  in-
flicted by  their  proud  and  insolent  neighbour.  The  darling  object  of  the  English
was  to  subjugate  the  Scotch  ;  and  if  anything  could  increase  the  disgrace  of  so
base  an  enterprise,  it  would  be  that,  having  undertaken  it,  they  ignominiously
failed.13  The  suffering,  however,  was  incalculable,  and  was  aggravated  by  the

9  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  38-54.     The  account  in  HollinsheacTs  Scottish
Chronicle,  vol.  i.  pp.  399-403,  ascribes  too  much  to  the  prowess  of  the  Scotch,  and  too
little  to  the  elements  which  dispersed  the  fleet.     Compare  Irving's  History  of  Dumbarton-
shire, second  edition,  4to.  1860,  pp.  48,  49.

10  Above,  vol.  i.  pp.  565,  566.

11  In  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  18,  "  the  early  part  of  the  reign  "  of  Alex-
ander III.  is  indicated  as  the  period  in  which  "  the  first  approaches  were  made  towards
the  great  plan  for  the  reduction  of  Scotland  "  by  the  English.     Alexander  III.  came  to
the  throne  in  1249.     Earlier,  the  feeling  was  very  different.     Thus,  late  in  the  twelfth
century,   "  the  two  nations,   according  to  Fordun,   seemed  one  people  ;    Englishmen
travelling  at  pleasure  through  all  the  corners  of  Scotland  (?)  ;    and  Scotchmen  in  like
manner  through   England."     Ridpath's  Border  History,  p.   76.     Compare  Dalrymple's
Annals  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  158.     At  that  time,  England,  being  weak,  was  peaceably
disposed.

12  An  old  Scotch  writer  says,  with  some  exaggeration,   "  The  year  1296,  at  which  tyme
the  bloodyest  and  longest  warr  that  ever  was  betwixt  two  nationes  fell  out,  and  continued
two  hundreth  and  sextie  years,  to  the  undoeing  and  ruineing  of  many  noble  families,  with
the  slaughter  of  a  million  of  men."     Somerville's  Memoire  of  the  Somervilles,  vol.  i.  p.  61.

13  See  some  just  and  biting  remarks  in  Hume's  History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  i.
P-  85.          *


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      635

important  fact  that  it  was  precisely  the  most  fertile  part  of  Scotland  which  was
most  exposed  to  the  English  ravages.  This,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  produced
some  very  curious  results  on  the  national  character  ;  and  for  that  reason  I  will,
without  entering  into  many  details,  give  a  slight  summary  of  the  more  immediate
consequences  of  this  long  and  sanguinary  struggle.

In  1296  the  English  entered  Berwick,  the  richest  town  Scotland  possessed,  and
not  only  destroyed  all  the  property,  but  slew  nearly  all  the  inhabitants.1*  They
then  marched  on  to  Aberdeen  and  Elgin  ;  and  so  completely  desolated  the
country  that  the  Scotch,  flying  to  the  mountains,  and  stripped  of  their  all,  had
no  resource  left  but  to  wage  from  their  native  fastnesses  a  war  similar  to  that
which  their  savage  ancestors,  twelve  centuries  earlier,  had  conducted  against  the
Romans.15  In  1298  the  English  again  broke  in,  burnt  Perth  and  St.  Andrews,
and  ravaged  the  whole  territory  south  and  west.16  In  1 3 10  they  invaded  Scotland
by  the  eastern  march,  and  carrying  off  such  provisions  as  were  left,  caused  so
terrible  a  dearth,  that  the  people  were  forced  to  feed  on  horses  and  other  carrion.17
All  over  southern  Scotland,  both  east  and  west,  the  inhabitants  were  now  reduced
to  a  horrible  condition,  being  for  the  most  part  houseless  and  starved.*  In  1314,


14  "  Anno  gratiae  MCCXCVI.  tertio  kalendas  Aprilis,  villa  et  castro  de  Berevvico,  per
magnificum  regem  AngliaB  Eadvvardum  captis,  omnes  ibidem  inuentos  Angli  gladio
occiderunt,  paucis  exceptis,  qui  ipsam  villam  postmodum  abiurariit."     Flores  Histori-
arum  per  Matthceum  Westmonasteriensem  collecti,  Lond.  1570,  folio,  lib.  ii.  p.  403.  "  Atque
modo  praedicto  villa  capta,  civibus  prostratis,  rex  Angliae  praedictus  nulli  aetati  parcens
aut  sexui,  duobus  diebus  rivulis  de  cruore  occisorum  fluentibus,  septem  millia  et  quin-
gentas  animas  promiscui  sexus  jusserat,  in  sua  tyrannide  desaeviens,  trucidari."     Fordun's
Scotichronicon,  cura  Goodall,  Edinb.  1775,  folio,  vol.  ii.  pp.  159,  160.      "  Secutus  Rex  cum
peditum  copiis  miserabilem  omnis  generis  caedem  edit."     Buchanan's  Rerum  Scoticarum
Historia,  Abredoniae,  1762,  lib.  viii.  p.  200.     "  They  left  not  one  creature  alive  of  the
Scotish  blood  within  all  that  toune."     Hollinshead's  Scottish  Chronicle,  Arbroath,  1805,
4to.  vol.  i.  p.  418.     In  1286,  that  is,  only  ten  years  earlier,  "  No  other  port  of  Scot-
land, in  point  of  commercial  importance,  came  near  to  a  comparison  with  Berwick."
Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  London,  4to,  1805,  vol.  i.  p.  446.     Such  were  the
brutal  crimes  of  our  wretched  and  ignorant  ancestors.

15  "  The  Scots  assembled  in  troops  and  companies,  and  betaking  themselves  to  the
woods,  mountains,  and  morasses,  in  which  their  fathers  had  defended  themselves  against
the  Romans,  prepared  for  a  general  insurrection  against  the  English  power."     Scott's
History  of  Scotland,  London,  1830,  vol.  i.  p.  70.     Elgin  appears  to  have  been  the  most
northern  point  of  this  expedition.     See  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  119,  and
Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  i.  p.  657.     The  general  results  are  summed  up  by  Buchanan  :
"  Hanc  stragem  ex  agrorum  incultu  consecuta  est  fames,  et  famem  pestis,  unde  major,
quam  e  bello  clades  timebatur."     Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,  lib.  viii.  p.  203.

16  "  The  army  then  advanced  into   Scotland  by  moderate  marches,  wasting  and  de-
stroying everything  on  their  way."  ...     "A  party  of  Edward's  army,  sent  northwards,
wasted  the  country,  and  burnt  Perth  and  Saint  Andrews."     Ridpath's  Border  History,
pp.  146,  147.

17  "  The  king  entered  Scotland  by  the  eastern  march  with  a  great  army."  .  .  .  "There
was  this  year  so  terrible  a  dearth  and  scarcity  of  provisions  in  Scotland,  arising  from  the
havoc  of  war,  that  many  were  obliged  to  feed  on  the  flesh  of  horses  and  other  carrion."
Ibid.  pp.  164,  165.     See  also  Fordun's  Scotichronicon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  242,  243.     "  Quo  anno,
propter  guerrarum  discrimina,  tanta  erat  panis  inopia  et  victualium  caristia  in  Scotia,
quod  in  plerisque  locis,  compellente  famis  necessitate,  multi  carnibus  equorum  et  aliorum
pecorum  immundorum  vescebantur."

[*  The  word  "  houseless  "  is  misleading.  The  people  were  wont  to  live  in  huts,  easily
constructed  of  boughs,  and  in  general  their  state  was  that  of  hardy  barbarians,  not  of  a
civilized  population  reduced  to  misery.  It  should  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  Scots
frequently  devastated  the  north  of  England.  Cp.  Burton,  History  of  Scotland,  ii.  195,  261,
280-2,  290,  298-302,  354»  356,  357-368,  375,  378.— ED.]


636  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

made  desperate  by  their  state,  they  rallied  for  a  moment,  and,  in  the  battle  of
Bannockburn,  gloriously  defeated  their  oppressors.*  But  their  unrelenting
enemy  was  at  hand,  and  pressed  them  so  hard  that  in  1322  Bruce,  in  order  to
baffle  an  English  invasion,  was  obliged  to  lay  waste  all  the  districts  south  of  the
Firth  of  Forth  ;  the  people  taking  refuge  as  before  in  the  mountains.18  This
time  therefore,  when  Edward  II.  reached  Edinburgh,  he  plundered  nothing,
because,  the  country  being  a  desert,  there  wras  nothing  to  plunder  ;  but  on  his
return  he  did  what  he  could,  and  meeting  with  some  convents,  which  were  the
only  signs  of  life  that  he  encountered,  he  fell  upon  them,  robbed  the  monasteries
of  Melrose  and  Holyrood,  burnt  the  abbey  of  Dryburgh,  and  slew  those  monks
who  from  age  or  disease  were  unable  to  escape.19  In  1336  the  next  king,
Edward  III.,  equipped  a  numerous  army,  devastated  the  Lowlands  and  great
part  of  the  Highlands,  and  destroyed  everything  he  could  find,  as  far  as  Inver-
ness.20 In  1346  the  English  overran  the  districts  of  Tweeddale,  the  Merse,
Ettrick,  Annandale,  and  Galloway;21  and  in  1355  Edward,  in  a  still  more
barbarous  inroad,  burnt  every  church,  every  village,  and  every  town  he  ap-
proached.22 And  scarcely  were  these  frightful  losses  somewhat  repaired,  when
another  storm  burst  upon  the  devoted  land.  In  1385  Richard  II.  traversed  the
southern  counties  to  Aberdeen,  scattering  destruction  on  every  side,  and  reducing
to  ashes  the  cities  of  Edinburgh,  Dunfermline,  Perth,  and  Dundee.23

18  Bruce  "  carefully  laid  the  whole  borders  waste  as  far  as  the  Firth  of  Forth,  removing
the  inhabitants  to  the  mountains,  with  all  their  effects  of  any  value.     When  the  English
army  entered,  they  found  a  land  of  desolation,  which  famine  seemed  to  guard."     Scoffs
History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.   145.     See  also  Buchanan's  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,
lib.  viii.  p.  218.    [It  must  be  remembered  that  in  these  invasions  the  people  always  drove
their  cattle  into  the  hills  and  forests,  returning  with  them  after  the  starving  invaders
had  retreated.     And  the  rivers  abounded  in  salmon.    Cp.  Hume  Brown,  Scotland  before
1700,  1893,  pp.  lo-n,  45,  118,  119,  140,  etc.  ;    and  Early  Travellers  in  Scotland,  1891,
p.  44.— ED.]

19  "  Eadwardus,  rex  Angliae,  intravit  Scotiam  cum  magno  exercitu  equitum  et  peditum,
ac  navium  multitudine  copiosa,  duodecimo  die  mensis  Augusti,  et  usque  villam  de  Edin-
burgh pervenit."  ...     "  Spoliatis  tamen  tune  in  reditu  Anglorum  et  praBdatis  monas-
teriis  Sanctae  Crucis  de  Edinburgh  et  de  Melros,  atque  ad  magnam  desolationem  per-
ductis.     In  ipso  namque  monasterio  de  Melros  dominus  Willelmus  de  Peblis,  ejusdem
monasterii  Prior,  unus  etiam  monachus  tune  infirmus,  et  duo  conversi  caeci  effecti,  in
dormitorio  eorundem  ab  eisdem  Anglis  sunt  interfecti,  et  plures  monachi  lethaliter  vul-
nerati.     Corpus  Dominicum  super  magnum  altare  fuit  projectum,  ablata  pixide  argentea
in  qua  erat  repositum.     Monasterium  de  Driburgh  igne  penitus  consumptum  est  et  in
pulverem  redactum.     Ac  alia  pia  loca  quamplurima  per  praedicti  regis  violentiam  ignis
flamma  consumpsit :  quod,  Deo  retribuente,  eisdem  in  prosperum  non  cessit."   Forduris
Scotichronicon,  vol.  ii.  p.  278.     "  In  redeundo  sacra  juxta  ac  prophana  spoliata.     Monas-
teria  Driburgum  et  Mulrossia  etiam  cassis  monachis  infirmioribus,  qui  vel  defectu  virium,
vel  senectutis  fiducia  soli  remanserant,  incensa."     Buchanan's  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,
lib.  viii.  p.  219.     [The  invading  army,  however,  seems  to  have  suffered  more  than  the
invaded.     See  Burton,  ii.  289. — ED.]

20  Fordun's  Scotichronicon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  322,  323.     Dalrymple's  Annals,  vol.  ii.  pp.  232,
447.     Scott's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  187,  188.

21  Ty tier's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  451.

22  Dalrymple's  Annals,  vol.  ii.  p.  288.     Fordun's  Scotichronicon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  352-354-
[The  date  was  1355  O.S.,  1356  N.S. — ED.]

23  "  Rex  Angliae,  Richardus  secundus  a3gre  ferens  Scotos  et  Francos  tarn  atrociter
terram  suam  depraedare,  et  municipia  sua  assilire  et  ad  terram  prosternere,  exercitum

[*  The  rally  was  for  more  than  a  moment ;  it  lasted,  broadly  speaking,  from  1307  to
1332.  And  between  the  immense  booty  taken  at  Bannockburn  and  the  great  sums  re-
ceived in  addition  for  ransoms,  the  total  movable  wealth  of  Scotland  must  have  been
more  than  doubled  at  a  stroke.  See  Burton,  ii.  269  ;  Hume  Brown,  History  of  Scotland,
1899,  i.  161. — ED.]


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      637

By  these  disasters  the  practice  of  agriculture  was  everywhere  interrupted,  and
in  many  places  ceased  for  several  generations.24  The  labourers  either  fled  or
were  murdered  ;  and  there  being  no  one  to  till  the  ground,  some  of  the  fairest
parts  of  Scotland  were  turned  into  a  wilderness,  overgrown  with  briers  and
thickets.  Between  the  invasions,  a  few  of  the  inhabitants,  taking  courage,
issued  from  the  mountains,  and  raised  wretched  huts  in  the  place  of  their  former
abodes.*  But  even  then  they  were  pursued  to  their  very  doors  by  wolves,
searching  for  food,  and  maddened  with  hunger.  If  they  escaped  from  these
famished  and  ferocious  animals,  they  and  their  families  were  exposed  to  a  danger
still  more  horrible.  For  in  those  terrible  days,  when  famine  stalked  abroad,
despair  perverted  the  souls  of  men,  and  drove  them  to  new  crime.  There  were
cannibals  in  the  land  ;  and  we  have  it  on  contemporary  authority  that  a  man
and  his  wife,  who  were  at  length  brought  to  justice,  subsisted  during  a  consider-
able period  on  the  bodies  of  children,  whom  they  caught  alive  in  traps,  devouring
their  flesh,  and  drinking  their  blood.25

collegit  grandem,  et  intravit  Scotiam,  aetate  tune  novemdecim  annorum,  in  multitudine
superba  progrediens,  omnia  circumquaque  perdens,  et  nihil  salvans  ;  templa  Dei  et
sanctuaria  religiosorum  monasteria  viz.  Driburgh,  Melros  et  Newbottel,  ac  nobilem  villain
de  Edinburgh,  cum  ecclesia  Sancti  ^Egidii  ejusdem,  voraci  flamma  incineravit ;  et,
destructione  permaxima  facta  per  eum  in  Laudonia,  ad  propria  sine  damno  repatriavit."
Fordun's  Scotichronicon,  vol.  ii.  p.  401.  "  En  ce  sejour  que  le  roi  Richard  fit  en  Hainde-
bourch  les  Anglois  coururent  tout  le  pays  d' environ  et  y  firent  moult  de  desrois  ;  mais
nullui  n'y  trouverent ;  car  tout  avoient  retrait  ens  es  torts,  et  ens  es  grands  bois,  et  la
chasse  tout  leur  betail."  .  .  .  "  Et  ardirent  les  Anglois  la  ville  de  Saint-Jean-Ston  en
Ecosse,  ou  la  riviere  du  Tay  cuert,  et  y  a  un  bon  port  pour  aller  partout  le  monde  ;  et
puis  la  ville  de  Dondie  ;  et  n'epargnoient  abbayes  ni  moutiers  ;  tout  mettoient  les  Anglois
en  feu  et  en  flambe  ;  et  coururent  jusques  a  Abredane  les  coureurs  et  1'avant-garde."
Les  Chroniques  de  Froissart,  edit.  Buchon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  334,  335,  Paris,  1835.  See  also,  on
this  ruffianly  expedition,  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  pp.  592,  593,  and  Buchanan's  Rerum
Scoticarum  Historia,  lib.  ix.  p.  253  :  "  Nulli  loco,  neque  sacro,  neque  profano,  nulli
homini,  qui  modo  militari  esset  aetate,  parcebat."  [See  however  in  Burton,  ii.  354-5,
how,  as  soon  as  the  starving  invaders  had  retreated,  the  people  returned  from  the  hills
with  their  cattle,  grain,  and  effects,  taking  "  the  devastation  of  their  land  with  marvellous
indifference,"  rebuilding  their  huts,  and  partly  replenishing  them  with  the  plunder  taken
in  the  simultaneous  raid  made  with  French  help  in  England,  where  "  the  French  said
among  themselves  they  had  burned  in  the  bishoprics  of  Durham  and  Carlisle  more  than
the  value  of  all  the  towns  in  the  kingdom  of  Scotland." — ED.]

24  "  Agriculture  was  ruined  ;   and  the  very  necessaries  of  life  were  lost,  when  the  prin-
cipal lords  had  scarcely  a  bed  to  lye  on."     Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  p.  142.     See  also,
in  p.  867  of  the  same  volume  of  this  learned  work,  some  curious  extracts  from  Scotch
charters  and  other  sources,  illustrating  the  horrible  condition  of  the  country.     And  on
the  difficulty  of  obtaining  food,  compare  Fordun's  Scotichronicon,  vol.  ii.  pp.  242,  324  ;
Dalrymple's  Annals,  vol.  i.  p.  307,  vol.  ii.  pp.  238,  330  ;   and  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,
vol.  ii.  p.  94.

25  Notices  of  Scotch  cannibals  will  be  found  in  Lindsay  of  Pitscottie's  Chronicles  of
Scotland,    edit.   1814,   vol.   i.   p.    163  ;    and  in    Hollinshead's  Scottish  Chronicle,   4to.
1805,    vol.  ii.  pp.   16,  99.     In  Fordun's  Scotichronicon,  vol.  ii.  p.  331.  tne  following
horrible  account  is  given;    it  refers  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Perth  in  the  year  1339:
"  Tota  ilia  patria  circumvicina  eo  tempore  in  tantum  fuit  vastata,  quod  non  remansit
quasi  doinus  inhabitata,  sed  ferae  et  cervi  de  montanis  descendentes  circa  villam  saepius
venabantur.     Tanta  tune  temporis  facta  est  caristia,  et  victualium  inopia,  ut  passim
plebicula  deficeret,  et  tanquam  oves  herbas  depascentes,  in  foveis  mortua  reperirentur.

[*  As  we  have  seen,  not  "  a  few  "  but  the  whole  of  the  inhabitants  normally  returned
to  their  places  as  soon  as  an  invasion  was  over.  The  further  details  about  the  wolves  and
the  cannibals  are  greatly  overstated.  Cannibalism  was  an  exceptional  horror,  belonging
to  times  of  famine  such  as  fell  upon  England  also  in  the  same  age  and  gave  rise  there  to
similar  stories.  See  Social  England,  ed.  1902,  i.  641,  679,  ii.  161. — ED.]


638  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Thus  the  fourteenth  century  passed  away.  In  the  fifteenth  century  the
devastations  of  the  English  became  comparatively  rare  ;  and  although  the  bor-
ders were  the  scene  of  constant  hostilities,26  there  is  110  instance,  since  the  year
1400,  of  any  of  our  kings  invading  Scotland.27  An  end  being  put  to  those  mur-
derous expeditions  which  reduced  the  country  to  a  desert,  Scotland  drew  breath,
and  began  to  recover  her  strength.2®  But  though  the  material  losses  were
gradually  repaired  ;  though  the  fields  were  again  cultivated,  and  the  towns
rebuilt,  there  were  other  consequences  which  were  less  easy  to  remedy,  and  from
whose  effects  the  people  long  smarted.  These  were  the  inordinate  power  of  the
nobles,  and  the  absence  of  the  municipal  spirit.  The  strength  of  the  nobles,  and
the  weakness  of  the  citizens,  are  the  most  important  peculiarities  of  Scotland
during  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries  ;  and  they,  as  I  am  about  to  show,
were  directly  encouraged  by  the  ravages  committed  by  the  English  troops.*
We  shall  moreover  see  that  this  combination  of  events  increased  the  authority
of  the  clergy,  weakened  the  influence  of  the  intellectual  classes, f  and  made  super-
stition more  prevalent  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.  It  is  in  this  way
that  in  Scotland  as  in  all  other  countries  everything  is  linked  together  ;  nothing
is  casual  or  accidental  ;  I  and  the  whole  march  of  affairs  is  governed  by  general
causes,  which,  owing  to  their  largeness  and  remoteness,  often  escape  attention,
but  which,  when  once  recognized,  are  found  to  be  marked  by  a  simplicity  and
uniformity  which  are  the  invariable  characteristics  of  the  highest  truths  that  the
mind  of  man  has  reached.

The  first  circumstance  favourable  to  the  authority  of  the  nobles  was  the
structure  of  the  country.  Mountains,  fens,  lakes,  and  morasses,  which  even  the
resources  of  modern  art  have  only  recently  made  accessible,  supplied  the  great
Scottish  chieftains  with  retreats  in  which  they  could  with  impunity  defy  the
power  of  the  crown.29  The  poverty  of  the  soil  also  made  it  difficult  for  armies

Prope  illinc  in  abditis  latitabat  quidam  robustus  rusticus,  Crysticleik  nomine,  cum  vira-
gine  sua,  qui  mulierculis  et  pueris  ac  juvenibus  insidiabantur,  et,  tanquam  lupi  eos
strangulantes,  de  ipsorurn  carnibus  victitabant."

26  Even  when  the  two  nations  were  at  peace,  the  borderers  were  at  war.     See  Ridpath's
Border  History,  pp.  240,  308,  394  ;   and  for  other  evidence  of  this  chronic  anarchy,  com-
pare Hollinshead's  Scottish  Chronicle,  vol.  ii.  p.  30.     Lesley's  History  of  Scotland,  pp.  40,
52,  67.     Sadler's  State  Papers,  vol.  i.  pp.  300,  301,  444,  449.     State  Papers  of  the  Reign  of
Henry  VIII.,  4to,  1836,  vol.  iv.  pp.  366,  370,  569,  570,  vol.  v.  pp.  17,  18,  161.     Historic
of  James  the  Sext,  pp.  21,91, 146.

27  In  1400  Henry  IV.  made    "  the  last  invasion  which  an  English  monarch  ever  con-
ducted into  Scotland."     Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  406.     It  is  said,  however,
that  it  was  not  till  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  that  an  English  sovereign  "  had  the  policy  to
disavow  any  claim  of  sovereignty  over  Scotland."     Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  i.  p.  650.

28  But  very  slowly.     Pinkerton  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  166,  167)  says  :    "  The
frequent  wars  between  Scotland  and  England,  since  the  death  of  Alexander  III.,  had
occasioned  to  the  former  country  the  loss  of  more  than  a  century  in  the  progress  of
civilization.     While  in  England    only  the    northern    provinces  were  exposed  to  the
Scottish  incursions,  Scotland  suffered  in  its  most  civilized  departments.     It  is  apparent
that  in  the  reign  of  Alexander  III.  the  kingdom  was  more  abundant  in  the  useful  arts  and
manufactures  than  it  was  in  the  time  of  Robert  III."

29  Owing  to  this,  their  castles  were  by  position  the   strongest  in  Europe  ;    Germany

[*  Add  the  many  periods  in  which  the  king  was  a  minor,  from  the  death  of  Bruce  on-
wards.— ED.]

[f  It  would  be  hard  to  specify,  in  medieval  Scotland,  any  "  intellectual  classes  "  apart
from  the  clergy.  But  an  educated  layman,  Sir  David  Lyndsay,  was  able  early  in  the
fifteenth  century  to  make  head  against  the  clergy  as  no  one  of  the  same  period  did  in
England.  Cp.  Burton,  iii.  171,  324,  341,  421. — ED.]

[J  If  "  nothing  is  accidental,"  what  does  "  accidental  "  mean  ?  Buckle  seems  to  have
forgotten  his  remark  on  the  subject  in  a  previous  chapter.  Above  p.  292.  Cp.  p.  250. —
ED.]


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      639

to  find  means  of  subsistence  ;  and  from  this  cause  alone,  the  royal  troops  were
often  unable  to  pursue  the  lawless  and  refractory  barons.30  During  the  four-
teenth century  Scotland  was  constantly  ravaged  by  the  English  ;  and  in  the
intervals  of  their  absence  it  would  have  been  a  hopeless  undertaking  for  any  king
to  try  to  repress  such  powerful  subjects,  since  he  would  have  had  to  march  through
districts  so  devastated  by  the  enemy  that  they  no  longer  yielded  the  common
necessaries  of  life.  Besides  this,  the  war  with  the  English  lessened  the  authority
of  the  crown,  absolutely  as  well  as  relatively.  Its  patrimony,  lying  in  the  south,
was  incessantly  wasted  by  the  borderers,  and  before  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth
century  greatly  deteriorated  in  value.31  In  1346  David  II.  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  English,  and  during  his  captivity  of  eleven  years  the  nobles  carried  all  before
them,  and  affected,  says  an  historian,  the  style  and  title  of  princes.32  The  longer
the  war  with  England  continued,  the  more  these  consequences  were  felt  ;  so  that
before  the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century  a  few  of  the  leading  Scotch  families
had  raised  themselves  to  such  pre-eminence  that  it  was  evident,  either  that  a
deadly  struggle  must  ensue  between  them  and  the  crown,  or  else  that  the  execu-
tive government  would  have  to  abdicate  its  most  essential  functions,  and  leave
the  country  a  prey  to  these  headstrong  and  ferocious  chiefs.33

At  this  crisis  the  natural  allies  of  the  throne  would  have  been  the  citizens  and
free  burgesses,  who  in  most  European  countries  were  the  eager  and  resolute
opponents  of  the  nobles,  whose  licentious  habits  interfered  not  only  with  their
trade  and  manufactures,  but  also  with  their  personal  liberty.  Here  again,  how-
ever, the  long  war  with  England  was  favourable  to  the  aristocracy  of  Scotland.
For,  as  the  invaders  ravaged  the  southern  parts  of  Scotland,  which  were  also  the
only  tolerably  fertile  parts,  it  was  impossible  that  towns  should  nourish  in  the
places  which  nature  had  appointed  for  them.  There  being  no  large  cities,  there
was  no  asylum  for  the  citizens,  and  there  could  be  no  municipal  spirit.  There
being  no  municipal  spirit,  the  crown  was  deprived  of  that  great  resource  which
enabled  the  English  kings  to  curtail  the  power  of  the  nobles,  and  to  punish  a  law-
lessness which  long  impeded  the  progress  of  society.

During  the  Middle  Ages  the  Scotch  towns  were  so  utterly  insignificant  that
but  few  notices  have  been  preserved  of  them  ;  contemporary  writers  concentrat-

alone  excepted.  Respecting  their  sites,  which  were  such  as  to  make  them  in  many  in-
stances almost  unassailable,  see  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  pp.  122,  406,  407,  918,  919,
vol.  iii.  pp.  268,  269,  356-359,  864  ;  Pennant's  Scotland,vol.  i.  pp.  175,  177  >  Sinclair's
Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  169,  vol.  vii.  p.  510,  vol.  xi.  pp.  102,  212,  407,  408,  vol.  xii.  pp.  25*  5^>
vol.  xiii.  p.  598,  vol.  xv.  p.  187,  vol.  xvi.  p.  554,  vol.  xviii.  p.  579,  vol.  xix.  p.  474,  vol.  xx.
PP-  56,  312  ;  Macky's  Scotland,  pp.  183,  297  ;  and  some  good  remarks  in  Nimmo's  History
of  Stirlingshire,  p.  56.  Neither  England,  nor  France,  nor  Italy,  nor  Spain,  afforded  such
immense  natural  advantages  to  their  aristocracy.

80  "By  retiring  to  his  own  castle,  a  mutinous  baron  could  defy  the  power  of  his  sover-
eign, it  being  almost  impracticable  to  lead  an  army  through  a  barren  country  to  places  of
difficult  access  to  a  single  man."  History  of  Scotland,  book  i.  p.  59,  in  Robertson's  Works,
edit.  London,  1831.  Notwithstanding  the  immense  materials  which  have  been  brought
to  light  since  the  time  of  Robertson,  his  History  of  Scotland  is  still  valuable  ;  because  he
possessed  a  grasp  of  mind  which  enabled  him  to  embrace  general  views  that  escape  ordin-
ary compilers,  however  industrious  they  may  be.

31  "  The  patrimony  of  the  Crown  had  been  seriously  dilapidated  during  the  period
of  confusion  which  succeeded  the  battle  of  Durham."   Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.
p.  86.

32  "During  the  long  captivity  of  David,"  the  nobles  had  been  completely  insubordinate
and  "  affected  the  style  and  title  of  princes."     Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  85.
See  also,  on  the  state  of  the  barons  under  David  II.,   Skene's  Highlanders,  vol.   ii.
pp.  63-67.

33  In  1299  "  a  superior  baron  was  in  every  respect  a  king  in  miniature.        Tytler  s
History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  150.      In  1377  "  the  power  of  the  barons  had  been  decidedly
increasing  since  the  days  of  Robert  the  First."  p.  332.      And  by  1398  it  had  risen  still
higher,     p.  392.


640  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ing  their  attention  upon  the  proceedings  of  the  nobles  and  clergy.  Respecting
the  people  who  found  shelter  in  such  miserable  cities  as  then  existed,  our  best
accounts  are  very  imperfect  ;  it  is  however  certain  that  during  the  long  English
wars  the  inhabitants  usually  fled  at  the  approach  of  the  invaders,  and  the
wretched  hovels  in  which  they  lived  were  burned  to  the  ground.34  Hence  the
population  acquired  a  fluctuating  and  vagabond  character,  which  prevented  the
formation  of  settled  habits  of  industry,  and  thus  took  away  one  reason  which
men  have  for  congregating  together.  This  applied  more  especially  to  the
southern  Lowlands  ;  for  the  north,  there  were  other  evils  equally  threatening.  The
ferocious  Highlanders,  who  lived  entirely  by  plunder,*  were  constantly  at  hand  ;
and  to  them  were  not  unfrequently  added  the  freebooters  of  the  Western  Isles.
Anything  which  bore  even  the  semblance  of  wealth  was  an  irresistible  excite-
ment to  their  cupidity.  They  could  not  know  that  a  man  had  property  without
longing  to  steal  it  ;  and  next  to  stealing,  their  greatest  pleasure  was  to  destroy.35
Aberdeen  and  Inverness  were  particularly  exposed  to  their  assaults  ;  and  twice
during  the  fifteenth  century  Inverness  was  totally  consumed  by  fire,  besides
having  to  pay  at  other  times  a  heavy  ransom,  to  save  itself  from  a  similar  fate.36

34  On  this  burning  of  Scotch  towns,  which  appears  to  have  been  the  invariable  practice
of  our  humane  forefathers,  see  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  pp.  592,  593  ;    Kennedy's
Annals  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  i.  pp.  18,  27,  375,  vol.  ii.  p.  304  ;  Mercer's  History  of  Dunfermline,
PP-  55.  56  ;  Sinclair's  Scotland,  vol.  v.  p.  485,  vol.  x.  p.  584,  vol.  xix.  p.  161  ;    Ridpath's
Border  History,  pp.  147,  221,  265.

35  A  curious  description  of  them  is  given  in  a  Scotch  statute  of  the  year  1597.     "They
hawe  lykwayis  throche  thair  barbarus  inhumanitie  maid  and  presentlie  makis  the  saidis
hielandis  and  lies  qlk  are  maist  comodious  in  thame  selwes  alsueill  be  the  ferteillitie  of  the
ground  as  be  riche  fischeingis  altogidder  vnproffitabill  baithe  to  thame  selffis  and  to  all
vthuris  his  hienes  liegis  within  this  realme  ;  Thay  nathair  intertening  onie  ciuil  or  honest
societie  amangis  thame  selffis  neyther  zit  admittit  vtheris  his  hienesse  lieges  to  trafficque
within  thair  boundis  vithe  saiftie  of  thair  Hues  and  gudes ;  for  remeid  quhairof  and  that  the
saidis  inhabitantis  of  the  saidis  hilandeis  and  lies  may  the  better  be  reduced  to  ane  godlie,
honest,  and  ciuill  maner  of  living,  it  is  statute  and  ordanit,"  &c.     Acts  of  the  Parliaments
of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  138,  edit,  folio,  1816.

These  little  peculiarities  of  the  Highlanders  remained  in  full  force  until  about  the
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  as  will  appear  in  the  course  of  this  history.  But  with-
out anticipating  what  will  be  narrated  in  a  subsequent  chapter,  I  will  merely  refer  the
reader  to  two  interesting  passages  in  Pennant's  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  154,  and  in  Heron's
Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  218,  219  ;  both  of  which  illustrate  the  state  of  things  a  little  before
1745-

36  Inverness  was  burned  in  1429.     Gregory's  History  of  the  Western  Highlands,  p.  36  ;
and  again  in  1455,  Buchanan's    Rerum   Scoticarum   Historia,  lib.  xi.  p.    322.      "  The
greatest  part  "  of  it  was  also  burned  in   1411.     See  Anderson  on  the  Highlands,  Edinb.
1827,  p.  82.

Aberdeen,  being  richer,  was  more  tempting,  but  was  likewise  more  able  to  defend  itself.
Still,  its  burgh  records  supply  curious  evidence  of  the  constant  fear  in  which  the  citizens
lived,  and  of  the  precautions  which  they  took  to  ward  off  the  attacks,  sometimes  of  the
English,  and  sometimes  of  the  clans.  See  the  Council  Register  of  Aberdeen  (published  by
theSpalding  Club,  Aberdeen,  1844-1848,  4to),  vol.  i  pp.  8,  19,  60,  83,  197,  219,  232,  268,
vol.  ii.  p.  82.  The  last  entry,  which  is  dated  July  31,  1593,  mentions  "  the  disordourit
and  lawles  helandmen  in  Birss,  Glentanner,  and  their  about,  nocht  onlie  in  the  onmerciful
murthering  of  men  and  bairnis,  bot  in  the  maisterfull  and  violent  robbing  and  spulzeing
of  all  the  bestiall,  guidis,  and  geir  of  a  gryt  pairt  of  the  inhabitantis  of  theas  boundis,

[*  An  obvious  over -statement.  The  account  here  given  of  the  Highlanders  and
Islanders,  though  in  harmony  with  much  of  the  language  of  Pinkerton  and  Burton,  is  out
of  perspective.  The  Lowlanders  had  originally  taken  the  lands  of  the  Highlanders,  who
simply  regarded  themselves  as  at  perpetual  war  with  the  other  race.  But  an  exactly
similar  life  was  led  by  the  Lowland  clans  on  the  borders.  See  the  account  of  Bishop  Leslie,
given  in  Hume  Brown's  Scotland  before  1700,  pp.  166-170.  And  see  below,  note  82. — ED.]


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      641

Such  insecurity  w  both  on  the  north  and  on  the  south  made  peaceful  industry
impossible  in  any  part  of  Scotland.  Nowhere  could  a  town  be  built  without
being  in  danger  of  immediate  destruction.  The  consequence  was  that  during
many  centuries  there  were  no  manufactures  ;  there  was  hardly  any  trade  ;  and
nearly  all  business  was  conducted  by  barter.38  Some  of  the  commonest  arts  were
unknown.  The  Scotch  were  unable  to  make  even  the  arms  with  which  they
fought.  This,  among  such  a  warlike  people,  would  have  been  a  very  profitable
labour  ;  but  they  were  so  ignorant  of  it  that  early  in  the  fifteenth  century  most
of  the  armour  which  they  wore  was  manufactured  abroad,  as  also  were  their
spears,  and  even  their  bows  and  arrows  ;  and  the  heads  of  these  weapons  were
entirely  imported  from  Flanders.39  Indeed,  the  Flemish  artizans  supplied  the
Scotch  with  ordinary  farming  implements,  such  as  cart-wheels  and  wheel -barrows,
which,  about  the  year  1475,  used  to  be  regularly  shipped  from  the  Low  Coun-
tries.40 As  to  the  arts  which  indicate  a  certain  degree  of  refinement,  they  were


rasing  of  gryt  hairschip  furth  of  the  samen,  being  committit  to  ewous  and  nar  this  burgh,
within  xx  mylis  theirunto,  deuysit  and  ordanit  for  preservatioun  of  this  burgh  and  inhabi-
tantis  theirof,  fra  the  tyrannous  invasion  of  the  saidis  hieland  men,  quha  has  na  respect
to  God  nor  man :  that  the  haill  inhabitantis  of  this  burgh, fensiball  persones  als  weill  onfrie
as  frie,  salbe  in  reddiness  weill  armit  for  the  defence  of  this  burgh,  thairawin  lyvis,  gudis,
and  geir,  and  resisting  and  repressing  of  the  said  heland  men  as  occasioun  salbe  offered,
at  all  tymes  and  houris  as  thay  salbe  requirt  and  chargit."

Even  in  1668  we  find  complaints  that  Highlanders  had  forcibly  carried  off  women  from
Aberdeen  or  from  its  neighbourhood.  Records  of  the  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  p.  290.  Other
evidence  of  their  attacks  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  may  be  seen  in
Kennedy's  Annals  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  i.  p.  133  ;  Spalding's  History  of  the  Troubles,  vol.  i.
pp.  25,  217  ;  Extracts  from  the  Presbytery  Book  of  Strathbogie,  pp.  62,  73.

37  Even  Perth  ceased  to  be  the  capital  of  Scotland,  because  "  its  vicinity  to  the  High-
lands "  made  it  dangerous  for  the  sovereign  to  reside  there.     Lawson's  Book  of  Perth,
p.  xxxi.

38  On  the  prevalence  of  barter,  and  lack  of  specie,  in  Scotland,  see  the  Spalding  Club
Miscellany,  vol.  iv.  pp.  lvii.-lx.,  Aberdeen,  1849,  4to.     In  1492,  the  treasury  of  Aberdeen
was  obliged  to  borrow  £4  165.  Scots.     Kennedy's  Annals  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  i.  p.  61.     Com-
pare Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  x.  p.  542.     Fynes  Moryson,  who  was  in
Scotland  late  in  the  sixteenth  century,  says,  "  the  gentlemen  reckon  their  revenues  not
by  rents  of  money,  but  by  chauldrons  of  victuals."      Moryson's  Itinerary,  part  iii.  p.  155,
London,  folio,  1617  ;   a  rare  and  extremely  curious  book,  which  ought  to  be  reprinted.
[See  it  in  Hume  Brown's  Early  Travellers  in  Scotland,  1891. — ED.]  A  hundred  years  after
Moryson  wrote,  it  was  observed  that  "  in  England   the  rents  are   paid  in  money  ;    in
Scotland  they  are,  generally  speaking,  paid  in  kind,  or  victual,  as  they  call  it."     De  Foe's
History  of  the  Union,  p.  130.

39  In  the  reign  of  James  I.  (1424-1436),  "  It  appears  that  armour,  nay  spears,  and
bows  and  arrows,  were  chiefly  imported."  ..."  In  particular,  the  heads  of  arrows  and
of  spears  seem  to  have  been  entirely  imported  from  Flanders."     Pinkerton's  History  of
Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  163.     We  learn  from  Rymer's  Feeder  a  that,  in  1368,  two  Scotchmen
having  occasion  to  fight  a  duel,  got  their  armour  from  London.    Macpherson's  Annals  of
Commerce,  vol.  i.  p.  575.     [On  the  other  hand,  "  the  making  of  brass  cannon  in  Scotland
seems  to  have  preceded  that  art  in  England  "  (The  Days  of  James  IV.,  ed.  by  G.  Gregory
Smith,  1890,  app.  L.  p.  211),  the  Scots  being  well  supplied  in  that  respect  at  Flodden  in
1513. — ED.]

4(>  From  the  Bibel  of  English  Policy,  supposed  to  have  been  written  in  the  reign  of
Edward  IV.,  we  learn  that  "  the  Scottish  imports  from  Flanders  were  mercery,  but  more
haberdashery,  cart-wheels,  and  wheel -barrows."  Pinkerton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.
p.  408.  In  Mercer's  History  of  Dunfermline,  p.  61,  we  are  told  that,  in  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury, "  Even  in  the  best  parts  of  Scotland,  the  inhabitants  could  not  manufacture  the
most  necessary  articles.  Flanders  was  the  great  mart  in  those  times,  and  from  Bruges
chiefly  the  Scots  imported  even  horse -shoes,  harness,  saddles,  bridles,  cart-wheels,  and
wheel -barrows,  besides  all  their  mercery  and  haberdashery."

4?


642  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

then  and  long  afterwards  quite  out  of  the  question.41  Until  the  seventeenth
century  no  glass  was  manufactured  in  Scotland,42  neither  was  any  soap  made
there.43  Even  the  higher  class  of  citizens  would  have  deemed  windows  absurd
in  their  wretched  abodes  ;  44  and  as  they  were  alike  filthy  in  their  persons  as  in
their  houses,  the  demand  for  soap  was  too  small  to  induce  any  one  to  attempt  its
manufacture.45  Other  branches  of  industry  were  equally  backward.  In


41  Aberdeen  was  for  a  long  period  one  of  the  most  wealthy,  and  in  some  respects  the
most  advanced,  of  all  the  Scotch  cities.      But  it  appears  from  the  council -registers  of
Aberdeen  that  "  in  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century  there  was  not  a  mechanic  in
the  town  capable  to  execute  the  ordinary  repairs  of  a  clock."     Kennedy's  Annals  of
Aberdeen,  vol.  i.  p.  99.     On  the  Scotch  clocks  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,
compare  Mr.  Morley's  interesting  Life  of  Cardan,  London,  1854,  vol.  ii.  p.  128.     Cardan
was  in  Scotland  in  1552.

42  About  1619  Sir  George  Hay  "  set  up  at  the  village  of  Wemyss,  in  Fife,  a  small  glass-
work,  being  the  first  known  to  have  existed  amongst  us."     Chambers'  Annals,  vol.  i.
p.  506.     See  also  p.  428.     [Hay  got  his  licence  in  1590.     See  Cochr an -Patrick's  Medieval
Scotland,  1892,  p.  57,  where  "  1690  "  is  a  misprint. — ED.]

43  Before  this  time,  soap  was  imported  into  Scotland  from  foreign  countries,  chiefly
from  Flanders."     Ibid.,  vol.  i.  p.  507,  under  the  year  1619,  where  mention  is  made  of  the
manufactory  set  up  at  Leith.     "  The  sope-workes  of  Leith  "  are  noticed  in  1650,  in
Balfour's  Annales,  vol.  iv.  p.  68.

44  Ray,  who  visited  Scotland  in  1661,  says,  "  In  the  best  Scottish  houses,  even  the  king's
palaces,  the  windows  are  not  glazed  throughout,  but  the  upper  part  only ;  the  lower  have
two  wooden  shuts  or  folds  to  open  at  pleasure  and  admit  the  fresh  air."  ..."  The
ordinary  country-houses  are  pitiful  cots,  built  of  stone,  and  covered  with  turves,  having
in  them  but  one  room,  many  of  them  no  chimneys,  the  windows  very  small  holes  and  not
glazed."    Ray's  Itineraries,  p.   153,  edited  by  Dr.  Lankester,  London,   1846.     "  About
1752  the  glass  window  was  beginning  to  make  its  appearance  in  the  small  farm-houses."
Brown's  History  of  Glasgow,  vol.  ii.  p.  265,  Edinburgh,  1797.     [There  seems  to  have  been
retrogression  in  this  matter  after  the  prosperous  period  of  James  IV.  and  James  V.  ;  for
De  Ayala,  the  Spanish  agent,  who  visited  Scotland  in  1496  and  1497,  writes  that   "  the
houses  are  good,  all  built  of  hewn  stone,  and  provided  with  excellent  doors,  glass  windows,
and  a  great  number  of  chimneys."     He  further  praises  the  furniture  (cited  in  Hume
Brown's  Early  Travellers  in  Scotland,  1893,  p.  47,  and  in  his  History  of  Scotland,  1899,  i.
349).     Ayala  appears  to  be  given  to  exaggeration,  but  there  is  also  the  testimony  of
Alesius  that  in  1529  Edinburgh  was  "  not  built  of  brick,  but  of  natural  stones  squared  "
(cited  in  Hume  Brown's  Scotland  before  1700,  p.  107. — ED.]

45  In  1650  it  was  stated  of  the  Scotch  that  "  many  of  their  women  are  so  sluttish,  that
they  do  not  wash  their  linen  above  once  a  month,  nor  their  hands  and  faces  above  once  a
year."     Whitelock's  Memorials,  p.  468,  London,  1732,  folio.     Six  or  seven  years  after  this,
a  traveller  in  Scotland  says,  "The  linen  they  supplied  us  with,  were  it  not  to  boast  of,  was
little  or  nothing  different  from  those  female  complexions  that  never  washed  their  faces
to  retain  their  Christendom."     Franck's  Northern  Memoirs,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1821,  p.  94-
A  celebrated  Scotchman  notices,  in  1698,  the  uncleanly  habits  of  his  countrymen,  but
gives  a  comical  reason  for  them  ;  since,  according  to  him,  they  were  in  a  great  measure
caused  by  the  position  of  the  capital.     "  As  the  happy  situation  of  London  has  been  the
principal  cause  of  the  glory  and  riches  of  England,  so  the  bad  situation  of  Edinburgh  has
been  one  great  occasion  of  the  poverty  and  uncleanliness  in  which  the  greater  part  of  the
people  of  Scotland  live."  Second  Discourse  on  the  Affairs  of  Scotland,  in  Fletcher  of  Sal-
toun's  Political  Works,  p.  119,  Glasgow,  1749.     Another  Scotchman,  among  his  reminis-
cences of  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  says  that  "  table  and  body  linen  (were)
seldom  shifted."       Memoir -es  by  Sir  Archibald  Grant  of  Monymusk,  in  Spalding  Club
Miscellany,  vol.  ii.  p,  100,  Aberdeen,  1842,  4to.     Finally,  we  have  positive  proof  that  in
some  parts  of  Scotland,  even  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  people  used,  instead
of  soap,  a  substitute  too  disgusting  to  mention.     See  the  account  communicated  by  the
Rev.  William  Leslie  to  Sir  John  Sinclair,  in  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,
vol.  ix.  p.  177,  Edinburgh,  1793-


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      643

1620  the  art  of  tanning  leather  was  for  the  first  time  introduced  into  Scotland  ;  46
and  it  is  stated  on  apparently  good  authority  that  no  paper  was  made  there
until  about  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.47

In  the  midst  of  such  general  stagnation  the  most  flourishing  towns  were,  us
may  be  easily  supposed,  very  thinly  peopled.  Indeed,  men  had  so  little  to  do,
that  if  they  had  collected  in  large  numbers  they  must  have  starved.  Glasgow
is  one  of  the  oldest  cities  in  Scotland,  and  is  said  to  have  been  founded  about  the
sixth  century.48  At  all  events,  in  the  twelfth  century  it  was  according  to  the
measure  of  that  age  a  rich  and  prosperous  place,  enjoying  the  privilege  of  holding
both  a  market  and  a  fair.49  It  had  also  a  municipal  organization,  and  was
governed  by  its  own  provosts  and  baillies.50  Yet  even  this  famous  town  had
no  kind  of  trade  before  the  fifteenth  century,  when  the  inhabitants  began  to  cure
salmon  and  export  it.51  That  was  the  only  branch  of  industry  with  which
Glasgow  was  acquainted.  We  need  not  therefore  be  surprised  at  hearing  that
so  late  as  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  entire  population  did  not  exceed
fifteen  hundred  persons,  whose  wealth  consisted  of  some  small  cattle  and  a  few
acres  of  ill -cultivated  land.52

Other  cities,  though  bearing  a  celebrated  name,  were  equally  backward  at  a
still  more  recent  period.  Dunfermline  is  associated  with  many  historic  reminis-
cences ;  it  was  a  favourite  residence  of  Scotch  kings,  and  many  Scotch  parlia-


41  Chambers'  Annals,  vol.  i.  p.  512.

*7  A  paper-mill  was  established  near  Edinburgh  in  1675  ;  but  "  there  is  reason  to  con-
clude this  paper-mill  was  not  continued,  and  that  paper -making  was  not  successfully  in
troduced  into  Scotland  till  the  middle  of  the  succeeding  century."  Chambers'  Annals.
vol.  ii.  p.  399.  I  have  met  with  so  many  proofs  of  the  great  accuracy  of  this  valuable
work  that  I  should  be  loath  to  question  any  statement  made  by  Mr.  Chambers,  when,  as  in
this  case,  I  have  only  my  memory  to  trust  to.  But  I  think  that  I  have  seen  evidence  of
paper  being  successfully  manufactured  in  Scotland  late  in  the  seventeenth  century,
though  I  cannot  recall  the  passages.  [A  paper  mill  was  set  up  in  Scotland  by  a  German
in  1590  (Cochran -Patrick's  Medieval  Scotland,  p.  61 ).  The  mill  set  up  in  1675  was  burned
down,  but  was  going  again  in  1679,  and  a  company  for  making  superior  paper  got  its
Act  of  Parliament  in  1695  (Id.  p.  62). — ED.]  However,  Arnot,  in  his  History  of  Edin-
burgh, p.  599,  edit.  4to,  says,  "  About  forty  years  ago,  printing  or  writing  paper  began  to
be  manufactured  in  Scotland.  Before  that,  papers  were  imported  from  Holland,  or
brought  from  England."  As  Arnot's  work  was  printed  in  1788,  this  coincides  with  Mr.
Chambers'  statement.  I  may  add  that  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  were
"  two  paper-mills  near  Perth."  Heron's  Journey  through  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  117,  Perth,
1799  ;  and  that  in  1751  and  1763  the  two  first  paper-mills  were  erected  north  of  the
Forth.  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  ix.  p.  593,  vol.  xvi.  p.  373-  Com-
pare Lettice's  Letters  from  Scotland  in  1792,  p-  420.

48  "This  city  was  founded  about  the  sixth  century."     M'Ure's  History  of  Glasgow,
edit.  1830,  p.  120.     Compare  Denholm's  History  of  Glasgow,  p.  2,  Glasgow,  1804.

49  In  1172  a  market  was  granted  to  Glasgow;  and  in  1190,  a  fair.   See  the  charters  in
the  Appendix  to  Gibson's  History  of  Glasgow,  pp.  299,  302,  Glasgow,  1777.

50  By  the  sale  of  land  made  by  Robert  de  Mythyngby  to  Mr.  Reginald  de  Irewyne,
A.D.  1268,  it  is  evident  that  the  town  was  then  governed  by  provosts,  aldermen,  or  wardens,
and  baillies,  who  seem  to  have  been  independent  of  the  bishop,  and  were  possessed  of  a
common  seal,  distinct  from  the  one  made  use  of  by  the  bishop  and  chapter."     Gibson's
History  of  Glasgow,  p.  72.

51  "A  Mr.  William  Elphinston  is  made  mention  of  as  the  first  promoter  of  trade  in
Glasgow,  so  early  as  the  year  1420  .  the  trade  which  he  promoted  was  in  all  probability
the  curing  and  exporting  of  salmon."     Gibson's  History  of  Glasgow,  p.  203.     See  also
M'Ure's  History  of  Glasgow,  p.  93.

52  Gibson  (History  of  Glasgow,  p.  74),  with  every  desire  to  take  a  sanguine  view  of  the
early  state  of  his'  own  city,  says  rthat  in  1450  the  inhabitants  "  might  perhaps  amount  to
fifteen  hundred  :  "    and  that  "  their  wealth  consisted  in  a  few  burrow-roods  very  ill-
cultivated,  and  in  some  small  cattle,  which  fed  on  their  commons."


644  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ments  have  been  held  there.53  Such  events  are  supposed  to  confer  distinction  ;
but  the  illusion  vanishes  when  we  inquire  more  minutely  into  the  condition  of
the  place  where  they  happened.  In  spite  of  the  pomp  of  princes  and  legislators,
Dunfermline,  which  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century  was  still  a  poor  village,
composed  of  wooden  huts,54  had  by  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century
advanced  so  slowly  that  its  whole  population,  including  that  of  its  wretched
suburbs,  did  not  exceed  one  thousand  persons.55  For  a  Scotch  town  that  was
a  considerable  number.  About  the  same  time,  Greenock,  we  are  assured,  was  a
village  consisting  of  a  single  row  of  cottages,  tenanted  by  poor  fishermen.56
Kilmarnock,  which  is  now  a  great  emporium  of  industry  and  of  wealth,  con-
tained in  1668  between  five  and  six  hundred  inhabitants.57  And  to  come  down
still  lower,  even  Paisley  itself,  in  the  year  1700,  possessed  a  population  which,
according  to  the  highest  estimate,  did  not  amount  to  three  thousand.58

Aberdeen,  the  metropolis  of  the  north,  was  looked  up  to  as  one  of  the  most
influential  of  the  Scotch  towns,  and  was  not  a  little  envied  during  the  Middle
Ages  for  its  power  and  importance.  These,  however,  like  all  other  words,
are  relative,  and  mean  different  things  at  different  periods.  Certainly,  we  shall
not  be  much  struck  by  the  magnitude  of  that  city  when  we  learn,  from  calcula-
tions made  from  its  tables  of  mortality,  that  so  late  as  1572  it  could  only  boast
of  about  two  thousand  nine  hundred  inhabitants.59  Such  a  fact  will  dispel  many
a  dream  respecting  the  old  Scotch  towns,  particularly  if  we  call  to  mind  that  it
refers  to  a  date  when  the  anarchy  of  the  Middle  Ages  was  passing  away,  and
Aberdeen  had  for  some  time  been  improving.  That  city — if  so  miserable  a
collection  of  persons  deserves  to  be  termed  a  city — was  nevertheless  one  of  the


53  "  Dunfermline  continued  to  be  a  favourite  royal  residence  as  long  as  the  Scottish
dynasty  existed.    Charles  I.  was  born  here  ;  as  also  his  sister  Elizabeth,  afterwards  Queen
of  Bohemia,  from  whom  her  present  Majesty  is  descended  ;  and  Charles  II.  paid  a  visit  to
this  ancient  seat  of  royalty  in  1650.     The  Scottish  parliament  was  often  held  in  it."
M'Culloch's  Geographical  Dictionary,  London,  1849,  vol.  i.  p.  723.     Compare  Mercer's
History  of  Dunfermline,  1828,  pp.  56,  58,  and  Chalmers'  History  of  Dunfermline,  1844,
p.  264.

54  In  1385  it  was  "  only  a  sorry  wooden  village,  belonging  to  the  monastery."    Mercer's
History  of  Dunfermline,  p.  62.

55  See  "  Ms.  Annals,"  in  Chalmers'  History  of  Dunfermline,  p.  327.     In  1624,  we  learn
from  Balfour's  Annales,  edit.  1825,  vol.  ii.  p.  99,  that  "  the  quholl  bodey  of  the  towne,
wich  did  consist  of  120  tenements,  and  287  families,  was  brunt  and  consumed."

ss  "  Greenock,  which  is  now  one  of  the  largest  shipping  towns  in  Scotland,  was  in  the
end  of  the  sixteenth  century  a  mean  fishing  village,  consisting  of  a  single  row  of  thatched
cottages,  which  was  inhabited  by  poor  fishermen."  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  p.  806,
4to,  1824-

57  In  May,  1668,  Kilmarnock  was  burnt ;   and  "  the  event  is  chiefly  worthy  of  notice
as  marking  the  smallness  of  Kilmarnock  in  those  days,  when  as  yet  there  was  no  such
thing  as  manufacturing  industry  in  the  country.     A  hundred  and  twenty  families  speaks
to  a  population  of  between  five  and  six  hundred."     Chambers'  Annals,  Edinburgh,  1858,
vol.  ii.  p.  320.     In  1658,  their  houses  are  described  by  an  eye-witness  as  "  little  better  than
huts."     Franck's  Northern  Memoirs,  reprinted  Edinburgh,  1821,  p.  101.

58  "  Betwixt  two  and  three  thousand  souls."     Denholm's  History  of  Glasgow,  p.  542,
edit.  Glasgow,  1804.

59  In  1572  the  registers  of   Aberdeen  show  that  seventy-two  deaths  occurred  in  the
year.     An  annual  mortality  of  i  in  40  would  be  a  very  favourable  estimate  ;    indeed
rather  too  favourable,  considering  the  habits  of  the  people  at  that  time.     However,
supposing  it  to  be  i  in  40,  the  population  would  be  2,880  ;  and  if,  as  I  make  no  doubt,  the
mortality  was  more  than  i  in  40,  the  population  must  of  course  have  been  less.     Kennedy ,
in  his  valuable  but  very  uncritical  work,  conjectures  that  "  one  fiftieth  part  of  the  in-
habitants had  died  annually  ;  "    though  it  is  certain  that  there  was  no  town  in  Europe
anything  like  so  healthy  as  that.     On  this  hypothesis,  which  is  contradicted  by  every
sort  of  statistical  evidence  that  has  come  down  to  us,  the  number  would  be  72  x  50  =  3,600,
See  Kennedy's  Annals  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  i.  p.  103,  London,  1818,  4to.


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      645

most  densely  peopled  places  in  Scotland.  From  the  thirteenth  century  to  the
close  of  the  sixteenth,  nowhere  else  were  so  many  Scotchmen  assembled  together,
except  in  Perth,  Edinburgh,  and  possibly  in  Saint  Andrews.60  Respecting  Saint
Andrews,  I  have  been  unable  to  meet  with  any  precise  information  ;  61  but  of
Perth  and  Edinburgh  some  particulars  are  preserved.  Perth  was  long  the
capital  of  Scotland,  and  after  losing  that  pre-eminence  it  was  still  reputed  to  be
the  second  city  in  the  kingdom.62  Its  wealth  was  supposed  to  be  astonishing  ;
and  every  good  Scotchman  was  proud  of  it,  as  one  of  the  chief  ornaments  of  his
country.63  But  according  to  an  estimate  recently  made  by  a  considerable
authority  in  these  matters,  its  entire  population  in  the  year  1585  was  under  nine
thousand.61  This  will  surprise  many  readers  ;  though,  considering  the  state  of
society  at  that  time,  the  real  wonder  is,  not  that  there  were  so  few,  but  that  there
were  so  many.  For  Edinburgh  itself,  notwithstanding  the  officials  and  numerous
hangers-on  which  the  presence  of  a  court  always  brings,  did  not  contain,  late  in
the  fourteenth  century,  more  than  sixteen  thousand  persons.65  Of  their  general
condition,  a  contemporary  observer  has  left  us  some  account.  Eroissart,  who
visited  Scotland,  and  records  what  he  saw  as  well  as  what  he  heard,  gives  a
lamentable  picture  of  the  state  of  affairs.  The  houses  in  Edinburgh  were  mere
huts,  thatched  with  boughs  ;  and  were  so  slightly  put  together  that  when  one  of
them  was  destroyed  it  only  took  three  days  to  rebuild  it.  As  to  the  people  who
inhabited  these  wretched  hovels,  Eroissart,  who  was  by  no  means  given  to
exaggeration,  assures  us  that  the  French,  unless  they  had  seen  them,  could  not
have  believed  that  such  destitution  existed,  and  that  now,  for  the  first  time,  they
understood  what  poverty  really  was.66

H0  "  St.  Andrews,  Perth,  and  Aberdeen,  appear  to  have  been  the  three  most  populous
cities  before  the  Reformation."  Lawsorfs  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  Scotland,  1836,  p.  26.
The  same  assertion  is  made  in  Lyon's  History  of  St.  Andrews,  1843,  vol.  i.  p.  2.  But
neither  of  these  writers  appears  to  have  made  many  researches  on  the  subject,  or  else  they
would  not  have  supposed  that  Aberdeen  was  larger  than  Edinburgh.

61  I  have  carefully  read  the  two  histories  of  St.  Andrews,  by  Dr.  Grierson  and  by  Mr.
Lyon,  but  have  found  nothing  in  them  of  any  value  concerning  the  early  history  of  that
city.    Mr.  Lyon's  work,  which  is  in  two  thick  volumes,  is  unusually  superficial,  even  for  a
local  history  ;  and  that  is  saying  much.

62  "  Of  the  thirteen  parliaments  held  in  the  reign  of  King  James  I.,  eleven  were  held  at
Perth,  one  at  Stirling,  and  one  at  Edinburgh.     The  National  Councils  of  the  Scottish
clergy  were  held  there  uniformly  till  1459.     Though  losing  its  pre-eminence  by  the  selec-
tion of  Edinburgh  as  a  capital,  Perth  has  uniformly  and  constantly  maintained  the  second
place  in  the  order  of  burghs,  and  its  right  to  do  so  has  been  repeatedly  and  solemnly
acknowledged."     Penny's  Traditions  of  Perth,  Perth,  1836,  p.  231.     See  also  p.  305.     It
appears,  however,  from  Froissart,  that  Edinburgh  was  deemed  the  capital  in  the  latter
half  of  the  fourteenth  century.

63  I  find  one  instance  of  its  being  praised  by  a  man  who  was  not  a  Scotchman.     Alex-
ander Necham  "  takes  notice  of  Perth  in  the  following  distich,  quoted  in  Camdens
Britannia :

'  Transis  ample  Tai,  per  rura,  per  oppida,  per  Perth  :

Regnum  sustentant  illius  urbis  opes.'
Thus  Englished  in  Bishop  Gibson's  Translation  of  Camden's  Book  :

'  Great  Tay,  through  Perth,  through  towns,  through  country  flies  :
Perth  the  whole  kingdom  with  her  wealth  supplies.'  "

Sinclair's  Scotland,  vol.  xviii.  p.  511.

64  1,427  X6  =  8,562,  the  computed  population  in  1584  and  1585,  exclusive  of  the  extra-
ordinary mortality  caused  by  the  plague.     Chambers'1  Annals  of  Scotland,  1858,  vol.  i.
p.  158.

'ir>  "  The  inhabitants  of  the  capital,  in  the  reign  of  Robert  II.,  hardly  exceeded  sixteen
thousand."  Pinkerton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  152-

':';  When  the  French  arrived  in  Edinburgh,  the  Scotch  said,  "  '  Quel  diable  les  a  mandes  ?
Ne  savons-nous  pas  bien  faire  notre  guerre  sans  eux  aux  Anglois  ?  Nous  ne  ferons  ja
bonne  besogne  tant  comme  ils  soient  avec  nous.  On  leur  disc  que  ils  s'en  revoisent,  et  que


646  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

After  this"period  there  was  no  doubt  considerable  improvement  ;  but  it  was
very  slow,  and  even  late  in  the  sixteenth  century  skilled  labour  was*  hardly
known,  and  honest  industry  was  universally  despised.67  It  is  not  therefore
surprising  that  the  citizens,  poor,  miserable,  and  ignorant,  should  frequently
purchase  the  protection  of  some  powerful  noble  by  yielding  to  him  the  little  in-
dependence that  they  might  have  retained.68  Few  of  the  Scotch  towns  ventured


nous  sommes  gens  assez  en  Escosse  pour  parmaintenir  notre  guerre,  et  que  point  nous  ne
voulons  leur  compagnie.  Ils  ne  nous  entendent  point,  ni  nous  eux  ;  nous  ne  savons
parler  ensemble  ;  ils  auront  tantot  rifle  et  mange  tout  ce  qui  est  en  ce  pays  :  ils  nous
feront  plus  de  contraires,  de  depits,  et  de  dommages,  si  nous  les  laissons  convenir,  que  les
Anglois  ne  feroient  si  ils  s'etoient  embattus  entre  nous  sans  ardoir.  Et  si  les  Anglois
ardent  nos  maisons,  que  peut  il  chaloir  ?  Nous  les  aurons  tantot  refaites  a  bon  marche,
nous  n'y  mettons  au  refaire  que  trois  jours,  mais  que  nous  ayons  quatre  ou  six  estaches  et
de  la  ramee  pour  lier  par  dessus.'  "

"  Ainsi  disoient  les  Escots  en  Escosse  a  la  venue  des  seigneurs  de  France."  .  .  .  "  Et
quand  les  Anglois  y  chevauchent  ou  que  ils  y  vont,  ainsi  que  ils  y  ont  ete  plusieurs  fois,
il  convient  que  leurs  pourveances,  si  ils  veulent  vivre,  les  suivent  toujours  au  dos  ;  car  on
ne  trouve  rien  sur  le  pays  :  a  grand'peine  y  recuevre-1'en  du  fer  pour  serrer  les  chevaux,
ni  du  cuir  pour  faire  harnois,  selles  ni  brides.  Les  choses  toutes  faites  leur  viennent  par
mer  de  Flandre,  et  quand  cela  leur  defaut,  ils  n'ont  nulle  chose.  Quand  ces  barons  et
ces  chevaliers  de  France  qui  avoient  appris  ces  beaux  hotels  a  trouver,  ces  salles  parees,
ces  chasteaux  et  ces  bons  mols  lits  pour  reposer,  se  virent  et  trouverent  en  celle  povrete,
si  commencerent  a  rire  et  a  dire  :  '  En  quel  pays  nous  a  ci  amenes  1'amiral  ?  Nous  ne
scumes  oncques  que  ce  fut  de  povrete  ni  de  durete  fors  maintenant.'  "  Les  Chroniques
de  Froissart,  edit.  Buchon,  Paris,  1835,  vol.  ii.  pp.  314,  315.  "  The  hovels  of  the  common
people  were  slight  erections  of  turf  or  twigs,  which,  as  they  were  often  laid  waste  by  war,
were  built  merely  for  temporary  accommodation.  Their  towns  consisted  chiefly  of
wooden  cottages."  ...  "  Even  as  late  as  1600  the  houses  of  Edinburgh  were  chiefly
built  of  wood."  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  i.  p.  802.  Another  account,  written  in  1670,
says,  "  The  houses  of  the  commonalty  are  very  mean,  mud-wall  and  thatch,  the  best ;
but  the  poorer  sort  live  in  such  miserable  huts  as  never  eye  beheld."  ...  "In  some
parts,  where  turf  is  plentiful,  they  build  up  little  cabbins  thereof,  with  arched  roofs  of
turf,  without  a  stick  of  timber  in  it ;  when  the  house  is  dry  enough  to  burn,  it  serves  them
for  fuel,  and  they  remove  to  another."  Harleian  Miscellany,  vol.  vi.  p.  139,  4to,  1810.

67  "  Our  manufactures  were  carried  on  by  the  meanest  of  the  people,who  had  small  stocks,
and  were  of  no  reputation.     These  were  for  the  most  part  workmen  for  home-consumpt,
such  as  masons,  house -carpenters,  armourers,  blacksmiths,  taylors,  shoemakers,  and  the
like.     Our  weavers  were  few  in  number,  and  in  the  greatest  contempt,  as  their  employ-
ments were  more  sedentary,  and  themselves  reckoned  less  fit  for  war,  in  which  all  were
obliged  to  serve  when  the  exigencies  of  the  country  demanded  their  attendance."      The
Interest  of  Scotland  Considered,  Edinburgh,  1733,  p.  82.     Pinkerton  (History  of  Scotland,
vol.  ii.  p.  392),  referring  to  the  Sloane  manuscripts,  says,  "  The  author  of  an  interesting
memoir  concerning  the  state  of  Scotland  about  1590  observes  that  the  husbandmen  were
a  kind  of  slaves,  only  holding  their  lands  from  year  to  year  ;   that  the  nobility  being  too
numerous  for  the  extent  of  the  country,  there  arose  too  great  an  inequality  of  rank  and
revenue  ;    and  there  was  no  middle  station  between  a  proud  landholder  and  those  who,
having  no  property  to  lose,  were  ready  for  any  tumult.     A  rich  yeomanry,  numerous
merchants  and  tradesmen  of  property,  and  all  the  denominations  of  the  middle  class,  so
important  in  a  flourishing   society,  were   long  to  be  confined  to  England."      Thirteen
years  later,  we  are  told  that  the  manufacturers  of  Scotland  "  were  confined  to  a  few  of  the
coarsest  nature,  without  which  the  poorest  nations  are  unable  to  subsist."     Laing's
History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  7,  under  the  year  1603.

68  Thus,  for  instance,  "  the  town  of  Dunbar  naturally  grew  up  under  the  shelter  of  the
castle  of  the  same  name."  ..."  Dunbar  became  the  town,  in  demesn,  of  the  successive
Earls  of  Dunbar  and  March,  partaking  of  their  influences,  whether  unfortunate  or  happy.
Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  p.  416.       "  But  when  the  regal  government  became  at  any
time  feeble,  these  towns,  unequal  to  their  own  protection,  placed  themselves  under  the
shelter  of  the  most  powerful  lord  in  their  neighbourhood.    Thus  the  town  of  Elgyn  found  it


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      647

to  elect  their  chief  magistrate  from  among  their  own  people  ;  but  the  usual  course
was  to  choose  a  neighbouring  peer  as  provost  or  baillie.69  Indeed,  it  often
happened  that  his  office  became  hereditary,  and  was  looked  upon  as  the  vested
right  of  some  aristocratic  family.™  To  the  head  of  that  family  everything  gave
way.  His  authority  was  so  incontestable  that  an  injury  done  even  to  one  of  his
retainers  was  resented  as  if  it  had  been  done  to  himself.™  The  burgesses  who
were  sent  to  parliament  were  completely  dependent  on  the  noble  who  ruled  the
town.  Down  to  quite  modern  times  there  was  in  Scotland  no  real  popular
representation.  The  so-called  representatives  were  obliged  to  vote  as  they  were
ordered  ;  they  were  in  fact  delegates  of  the  aristocracy ;  and  as  they  possessed
no  chamber  of  their  own,  they  sat  and  deliberated  in  the  midst  of  their  powerful
masters,  by  whom  they  were  openly  intimidated.72

necessary,  at  various  periods  between  the  years  1389  and  1452,  to  accept  of  many  charters
of  protection,  and  discharges  of  taxes,  from  the  Earls  of  Moray,  who  held  it  in  some
species  of  vassalage."  Sinclair's  Scotland,  vol.  v.  p.  3.  Compare  Pinkerton's  History  of
Scotland,  vol.'  ii.  p.  396  ;  and  two  letters,  written  in  1543  and  1544,  by  the  magistrates
of  Aberdeen,  to  the  Earl  of  Huntly,  and  printed  in  the  Council  Register  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  i.
pp.  190,  201,  Aberdeen,  1844,  4to.  They  say  to  him,  "  Ye  haf  our  band  as  protectour
to  wss."

69  Ty tier's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  225.      See  also  p.  131  ;   and  Pinkerton's  His-
tory of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  179.     Sometimes  the  nobles  did  not  leave  to  the  citizens  even
the  appearance  of  a  free  election,  but  fought  it  out  among  themselves.     An  instance  of
this  happened  at  Perth,  in  1544,  "  where  a  claim  for  the  office  of  provost  was  decided  by
arms,  between  Lord  Ruthven  on  the  one  side,  supported  by  a  numerous  train  of   his
vassals,  and  Lord  Gray,  with  Norman  Lesley  master  of  Rothes,  and  Charteris  of  Kinfauns,
on  the  other."     Tytler,  vol.  iv.  p.  323.

70  For  illustrations  of  this  custom,  see  Hollinshead's  Scottish  Chronicle,  vol.  ii.  p.  230.
Brown's  History  of  Glasgow,  vol.  ii.  p.  154.     Denholm's  History  of  Glasgow,  p.  249.     Mer-
cer's History  of  Dunfertnline,  p.  83.

71  "  An  injury  inflicted  on  the  c  man  '  of  a  nobleman  was  resented  as  much  as  if  he
himself  had  been  the  injured  party."     Preface  to  the  Council  Register  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  i.
p.  xii.

72  See,  in  Macaulay's  History  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  93,  ist  edit.,  a  spirited  description
of  Scotland  in  1639.     "  The  parliament  of  the  northern  kingdom  was  a  very  different  body
from  that  which  bore  the  same  name  in  England."  ...     "  The  three  estates  sat  in  one
house.     The  commissioners  of  the  burghs  were  considered  merely  as  retainers  of  the  great
nobles,"  &c.     To  come  down  much  later,  Lord  Cockburn  gives  a  terrible  account  of  the
state  of  things  in  Scotland  in  1794,  the  year  in  which   Jeffrey  was  called  to  the  bar.
"  There  was  then,  in  this  country,  no  popular  representation,  no  emancipated  burghs,
no  effective  rival  of  the  established  church,  no  independent  press,  no  free  public  meetings,
and  no  better  trial  by  jury,  even  in  political  cases  (except  high  treason),  than  what  was
consistent  with  the  circumstances  that  the   jurors  were  not  sent'  into  court  under  any
impartial  rule,  and  that,  when  in  court,  those  who  were  to  try  the  case  were  named  by
the  presiding  judge.     The  Scotch  representatives  were  only  forty-five,  of  whom  thirty
were  elected  for  counties,  and  fifteen  for  towns.     Both  from  its  price  and  its  nature
(being  enveloped  in  feudal  and  technical  absurdities),  the  elective  franchise  in  counties,
where  alone  it  existed,  was  far  above  the  reach  of  the  whole  lower,  and  of  a  great  majority
of  the  middle,  and  of  many  even  of  the  higher,  ranks.     There  were  probably  not  above
1,500  or  2,000  county  electors  in  all  Scotland  ;   a  body  not  too  large  to  be  held,  hope  in-
cluded, in  government's  hand.     The  return,  therefore,  of  a  single  opposition  member  was
never  to  be  expected."  ...     "  Of  the  fifteen  town  members,  Edinburgh  returned  one.
The  other  fourteen  were  produced  by  clusters  of  four  or  five  unconnected  burghs  electing
each  one  delegate,  and  these  four  or  five  delegates  electing  the  representative.     Whatever
this  system  may  have  been  originally,  it  had  grown,  in  reference  to  the  people,  into  as
complete  a  mockery  as  if  it  had  been  invented  for  their  degradation.     The  people  had
nothing  to  do  with  it.     It  was  all  managed  by  town -councils,  of  never  more  than  thirty  -
three  members  ;   and  every  town-council  was  self-elected,  and  consequently  perpetuated
its  own  interests.     The  election  of  either  the  town  or  the  county  member  was  a  matter  of


648  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Under  these  circumstances,  it  would  have  been  idle  for  the  crown  to  have
expected  aid  from  a  body  of  men  who  themselves  had  no  influence,  and  whose
scanty  privileges  existed  only  on  sufferance.      But  there  was  another  class  which
was  extremely  powerful,  and  to  which  the  Scotch  kings  naturally  turned.     That
class  was  the  clergy  ;    and  the  interest  which  both  parties  had  in  weakening  the
nobles  caused  a  coalition  between  the  church  and  the  throne,  against  the    aris-
tocracy.    During  a  long  period,  and  indeed  until  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth
century,  the  kings  almost  invariably  favoured  the  clergy,  and  increased  their
privileges  in  every  way  they  could.     The  Reformation  dissolved  this  alliance,  and
gave  rise  to  new  combinations,  which  I  shall  presently  indicate.     But  while  the
alliance  lasted  it  was  of  great  use  to  the  clergy,  by  imparting  to  their  claims  a
legitimate  sanction,  and  making  them  appear  the  supporters  of  order  and  of
regular  government.     The  result,  however,  clearly  proved  that  the  nobles  were
more  than  equal  to  the  confederacy  which  opposed  them.     Indeed,  looking  at
their  enormous  power,  the  only  wonder  is  that  the  clergy  could  have  prolonged
the  contest  as  they  did  ;   since  they  were  not  actually  overthrown  until  the  year
1 560.     That  the  struggle  should  have  been  so  arduous,  and  should  have  extended
over  so  considerable  a  period,  is  what,  on  a  superficial  view,  no  one 'could  have
expected.      The  reason  of  this  I  shall  now  endeavour  to  explain  ;   and  I  shall,  I
trust,  succeed  in  proving  that  in  Scotland  there  was  a  long  train  of  general  causes
which  secured  to  the  spiritual  classes  immense  influence,  and  which  enabled  them
not  only  to  do  battle  with  the  most  powerful  aristocracy  in  Europe,  but  to  rise
up,  after  what  seemed  their  final  defeat,  fresh  and  vigorous  as  ever,  and  eventually
to  exercise,  as  Protestant  preachers,  an  authority  nowise  inferior  to  that  which
they  had  wielded  as  Catholic  priests.

Of  all  Protestant  countries,  Scotland  is  certainly  the  one  where  the  course  of
affairs  has  for  the  longest  period  been  most  favourable  to  the  interests  of  super-
stition. How  those  interests  were  encouraged  during  the  seventeenth  and
eighteenth  centuries  I  shall  hereafter  relate.  At  present,  I  purpose  to  examine
the  causes  of  their  early  growth,  and  to  show  the  way  in  which  they  were  not  only
connected  with  the  Reformation,  but  gave  to  that  great  event  some  peculiarities
which  are  extremely  remarkable,  and  are  diametrically  opposed  to  what  happened
in  England.

If  the  reader  will  bear  in  mind  what  I  have  elsewhere  stated,73  he  will  remember
that  the  two  principal  sources  of  superstition  are  ignorance  and  danger  ;  ignor-
ance keeping  men  unacquainted  with  natural  causes,  and  danger  making  them
recur  to  supernatural  ones.  Or,  to  express  the  same  proposition  in  other  words,
the  feeling  of  veneration,  which  under  one  of  its  aspects  takes  the  form  of
superstition,  is  a  product  of  wonder  and  of  fear  ;  '4  and  it  is  obvious  that  wonder
is  connected  with  ignorance,  and  that  fear  is  connected  with  danger.75  Hence
it  is  that  whatever  in  any  country  increases  the  total  amount  of  amazement,  or
whatever  in  any  country  increases  the  total  amount  of  peril,  has  a  direct  tendency

such  utter  indifference  to  the  people  that  they  often  only  knew  of  it  by  the  ringing  of  a
bell,  or  by  seeing  it  mentioned  next  day  in  a  newspaper  ;  for  the  farce  was  generally  per-
formed in  an  apartment  from  which,  if  convenient,  the  public  could  be  excluded,  and
never  in  the  open  air."  Cockburn's  Life  of  Jeffrey,  Edinburgh,  1852,  vol.  i.  pp.  74-76.
On  the  state  of  Scotch  representation  between  this  and  the  Reform  Bill,  compare  Irving' s
History  of  Dumbartonshire,  4to,  1860,  pp.  275,  276,  with  Moore's  Memoirs,  edited  by  Lord
John  Russell,  vol.  iv.  p.  268,  vol.  vi.  p.  163,  London,  1853-4.

73  Above,  pp.  68-71,  211-215.

74  Above,  p.  384.

75  We  must  discriminate  between  wonder  and  admiration.     Wonder  is  the  product  of
ignorance  ;  admiration  is  the  product  of  knowledge.     Ignorance  wonders  at  the  supposed
irregularities  of  nature  ;    science  admires  its  uniformities.     The  earlier  writers  rarely
attended  to  this  distinction,  because  they  were  misled  by  the  etymology  of  the  word
"  admiration."     The  Romans  were  very  superficial  thinkers  upon  all  matters  except
jurisprudence  ;  and  their  blundering  use  of  "  admirari  "  gave  rise  to  the  error,  so  common
among  our  old  writers,  of  "  I  admire,"  instead  of  "  I  wonder."


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF    XIV.  CENTURY     649

to  increase  the  total  amount  of  superstition,  and  therefore  to  strengthen  the
hands  of  the  priesthood.

By  applying  these  principles  to  Scotland,  we  shall  be  able  to  explain  several
facts  in  the  history  of  that  country.  In  the  first  place,  the  features  of  its  scenery
offer  a  marked  contrast  to  those  of  England,  and  are  much  more  likely,  among  an
ignorant  people,  to  suggest  effective  and  permanent  superstitions.*  The  storms
and  the  mists,  the  darkened  sky  flashed  by  frequent  lightning,  the  peals  of  thunder
reverberating  from  mountain  to  mountain,  and  echoing  on  every  side,  the
dangerous  hurricanes,  the  gusts  sweeping  the  innumerable  lakes  with  which  the
country  is  studded,  the  rolling  and  impetuous  torrent  flooding  the  path  of  the
traveller  and  stopping  his  progress,  are  strangely  different  to  those  safer  and
milder  phenomena  among  which  the  English  people  have  developed  their
prosperity,  and  built  up  their  mighty  cities.  Even  the  belief  in  witchcraft,  one
of  the  blackest  superstitions  which  has  ever  defaced  the  human  mind,  has  been
affected  by  these  peculiarities  ;  and  it  has  been  well  observed  that  while  accord-
ing to  the  old  English  creed  the  witch  was  a  miserable  and  decrepit  hag,  the
slave  rather  than  the  mistress  of  the  demons  which  haunted  her,  she  in  Scotland
rose  to  the  dignity  of  a  potent  sorcerer,  who  mastered  the  evil  spirit,  and,  forcing
it  to  do  her  will,  spread  among  the  people  a  far  deeper  and  more  lasting  terror.76

76  "  Our  Scottish  witch  is  a  far  more  frightful  being  than  her  supernatural  coadjutor
on  the  south  side  of  the  Tweed.  She  sometimes  seems  to  rise  from  the  proper  sphere  of
the  witch,  who  is  only  the  slave,  into  that  of  the  sorcerer,  who  is  master  of  the  demon."
..."  In  a  people,  so  far  behind  their  neighbours  in  domestic  organization,  poor  and
hardy,  inhabiting  a  country  of  mountains,  torrents,  and  rocks,  where  cultivation  was
scanty,  accustomed  to  gloomy  mists  and  wild  storms,  every  impression  must  necessarily
assume  a  corresponding  character.  Superstitions,  like  funguses'  and  vermin,  are  exist-
ences peculiar  to  the  spot  where  they  appear,  and  are  governed  by  its  physical  accidents."
..."  And  thus  it  is  that  the  indications  of  witchcraft  in  Scotland  are  as  different  from
those  of  the  superstition  which  in  England  receives  the  same  name,  as  the  Grampian
Mountains  from  Shooter's  Hill  or  Kennington  Common."  Burton's  Criminal  Trials  in
Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  240-243.  This  is  admirably  expressed,  and  exhausts  the  general  view
of  the  subject.  The  relation  between  the  superstition  of  the  Scotch  and  the  physical
aspects  of  their  country  is  also  touched  upon,  though  with  much  inferior  ability,  in
Browne's  History  of  the  Highlands,  vol.  i.  p.  106,  and  in  Sinclair's  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  560.
Hume,  in  his  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  556,  has  an  interesting
passage  on  the  high  pretensions  of  Scotch  witchcraft,  which  never  degenerated,  as  in
other  countries,  into  a  mere  attempt  at  deception,  but  always  remained  a  sturdy  and
deep-rooted  belief.  He  says,  "  For,  among  the  many  trials  for  witchcraft  which  fill  the
record,  I  have  not  observed  that  there  is  even  one  which  proceeds  upon  the  notion  of  a
vain  or  cheating  art,  falsely  used  by  an  impostor  to  deceive  the  weak  and  credulous." t
Further  information  respecting  Scotch  witchcraft  will  be  found  in  Mackenzie's  Criminal
Laws  of  Scotland,  Edinburgh,  folio,  1699,  pp.  42-56  ;  Correspondence  of  Mrs.  Grant  of
Laggan,  London,  1844,  vol.  iii.  pp.  186,  187  ;  Southey's  Life  of  Bell,  London,  1844,  vol.  i.
p.  52  ;  Vernon  Correspondence,  edited  by  James,  London,  1841,  vol.  ii.  p.  301  ;  Weld's
History  of  the  Royal  Society,  London,  1848,  vol.  i.  p.  89  Letters  from  a  Gentleman  in  the

[*  The  weak  point  in  the  following  eloquent  description  is  that  it  applies  mainly  to
the  Highlands,  which  were  not  the  seat  of  the  Reformation  movement.  Even  there,
the  hurricanes  and  thunderstorms  are  not  more  frequent  than  in  England.  On  the  other
hand,  the  description  applies  well  to  the  bulk  of  Switzerland,  where,  in  the  terms  of  the
argument,  the  superstition  should  be  enormous.  It  is  true,  however,  that  the  early
superstitions,  Celtic  and  Teutonic,  kept  their  force  longer  in  Scotland  than  in  Southern
England.  Broadly,  this  may  be  set  down  to  the  much  longer  continuance  of  barbaric
conditions. — ED.]

[t  There  is  here  a  complete  confusion  between  the  beliefs  of  the  accused  and  the
beliefs  of  their  judges.  That  there  were  cheats  as  well  as  deluded  persons  among  those
charged  with  witchcraft  in  Scotland,  as  in  other  countries,  is  certain.  The  passage
cited  tells  only  of  the  unrelieved  superstition  of  their  prosecutors. — ED.]


650  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Similar  results  were  produced  by  the  incessant  and  sanguinary  wars  to  which
Scotland  was  exposed,  and  especially  by  the  cruel  ravages  of  the  English  in  the
fourteenth  century.  Whatever  religion  may  be  in  the  ascendant,  the  influence
of  its  ministers  is  invariably  strengthened  by  a  long  and  dangerous  war,  the
uncertainties  of  which  perplex  the  minds  of  men,  and  induce  them,  when  natural
resources  are  failing,  to  call  on  the  supernatural  for  help.  On  such  occasions
the  clergy  rise  in  importance  ;  the  churches  are  more  than  usually  filled  ;  and
the  priest,  putting  himself  forward  as  the  exponent  of  the  wishes  of  God,  assumes
the  language  of  authority,  and  either  comforts  the  people  under  their  losses  in  a
righteous  cause,  or  else  explains  to  them  that  those  losses  are  sent  as  a  visitation
for  their  sins,  and  as  a  warning  that  they  have  not  been  sufficiently  attentive
to  their  religious  duties  ;  in  other  words,  that  they  have  neglected  rites  and
ceremonies  in  the  performance  of  which  the  priest  himself  has  a  personal  interest.

No  wonder  therefore  that  in  the  fourteenth  century,  when  the  sufferings  of
Scotland  were  at  their  height,  the  clergy  nourished  more  than  ever  ;  so  that  as
the  country  became  poorer,  the  spiritual  classes  became  richer  in  proportion  to
the  rest  of  the  nation.  Even  in  the  fifteenth  and  first  half  of  the  sixteenth
century,  when  industry  began  somewhat  to  advance,  we  are  assured  that  not-
withstanding the  improvement  in  the  position  of  laymen,  the  whole  of  their
wealth  put  together,  and  including  the  possessions  of  all  ranks,  was  barely  equal
to  the  wealth  of  the  Church.77  If  the  hierarchy  were  so  rapacious  and  so  successful
during  a  period  of  comparative  security,  it  would  be  difficult  to  overrate  the
enormous  harvest  they  must  have  reaped  in  those  earlier  days  when,  danger  being
much  more  imminent,  hardly  any  one  died  without  leaving  something  to  them  ;
all  being  anxious  to  testify  their  respect  towards  those  who  knew  more  than  their
fellows,  and  whose  prayers  could  either  avert  present  evil,  or  secure  future
happiness.78

North  of  Scotland,  edit.  1815,  vol.  i.  pp.  220,  221  ;  The  Spottiswoode  Miscellany,  vol.  ii.
p.  41,  Edinburgh,  1845  ;  Lyon's  History  of  St.  Andrews,  Edinburgh,  1843,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56,  57.
The  work  of  James  I.,  and  that  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,  need  hardly  be  referred  to,  as  they
are  well  known  to  every  one  who  is  interested  in  the  history  of  witchcraft ;  but  Pitcairn's
Criminal  Trials,  though  less  read,  are  in  every  respect  more  valuable,  on  account  of
the  materials  they  contain  for  a  study  of  this  department  of  Scotch  superstition.

77  Pinkerton  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  414)  says  that  in  the  reigns  of  James  II.
and  James  III.,  "  the  wealth  of  the  Church  was  at  least  equivalent  to  that  of  all  the  lay
interest."     See  also  Life  of  Spottiswoode,  p.  liii.,  in  volume  i.  of  his  History  of  the  Church
of  Scotland.     "  The  numerous  devices  employed  by  ecclesiastics,  both  secular  and  regular,
for  enriching  the  several  Foundations  to  which  they  were  attached,  had  transferred  into
their  hands  more  than  half  of  the  territorial  property  of  Scotland,  or  of  its  annual  produce."

In  regard  to  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  it  is  stated  by  a  high  authority  that
just  before  the  Reformation  "  the  full  half  of  the  wealth  of  the  nation  belonged  to  the
clergy."  M'Crie's  Life  of  Knox,  p.  10.  And  another  writer  says,  "  If  we  take  into
account  the  annual  value  of  all  these  abbeys  and  monasteries,  in  conjunction  with  the
bishoprics,  it  will  appear  at  once  that  the  Scottish  Catholic  hierarchy  was  more  muni-
ficently endowed,  considering  the  extent  and  resources  of  the  kingdom,  than  it  was  in  any
other  country  in  Europe."  Lawson's  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  Scotland,  p.  22.  See  also,
respecting  the  incomes  of  the  Scotch  bishops,  which,  considering  the  poverty  of  the
country,  were  truly  enormous,  Lyon's  History  of  St.  Andrews,  Edinburgh,  1843,  v°l-  *•
pp.  97,  125.

78  "  They  could  employ  all  the  motives  of  fear  and  of  hope,  of  terror  and  of  consolation,
which  operate  most  powerfully  on  the  human  mind.     They  haunted  the  weak  and  the
credulous  ;   they  besieged  the  beds  of  the  sick  and  of  the  dying  ;   they  suffered  few  to  go
out  of  the  world  without  leaving  marks  of  their  liberality  to  the  Church,  and  taught  them
to  compound  with  the  Almighty  for  their  sins  by  bestowing  riches  upon  those  who  called
themselves  his  servants."     History  of  Scotland,  book  ii.  p.  89,  in  Robertson's  Works,
London,  1831.     It  is  interesting  to  observe  the  eagerness  with  which  the  clergy  of  one
persuasion  expose  the  artifices  of  those  of  another.     By  comparing  their  different  state-
ments, laymen  gain  an  insight  into  the  entire  scheme.


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY      651

Another  consequence  of  these  protracted  wars  was  that  a  more  than  ordinary
proportion  of  the  population  embraced  the  ecclesiastical  profession,  because  in  it
alone  there  was  some  chance  of  safety  ;  and  the  monasteries  in  particular  were
crowded  with  persons  who  hoped,  though  frequently  in  vain,  to  escape  from  the
burnings  and  slaughterings  to  which  Scotland  was  exposed.  When  the  country,
in  the  fifteenth  century,  began  to  recover  from  the  effects  of  these  ravages,  the
absence  of  manufactures  and  of  commerce  made  the  Church  the  best  avenue  to
wealth  ;  79  so  that  it  was  entered  by  peaceful  men  for  the  purpose  of  security,  and
by  ambitious  men  as  the  surest  means  of  achieving  distinction.

Thus  it  was  that  the  want  of  great  cities,  and  of  that  form  of  industry  which
belongs  to  them,  made  the  spiritual  classes  more  numerous  than  they  would  other-
wise have  been  ;  and  what  is  very  observable  is  that  it  not  only  increased  their
number,  but  also  increased  the  disposition  of  the  people  to  obey  them.  Agri-
culturists are  naturally,  and  by  the  very  circumstances  of  their  daily  life,  more
superstitious  than  manufacturers,  because  the  events  with  which  they  deal  are
more  mysterious,  that  is  to  say,  more  difficult  to  generalize  and  predict.80  Hence
it  is  that,  as  a  body,  the  inhabitants  of  agricultural  districts  pay  greater  respect
to  the  teachings  of  their  clergy  than  the  inhabitants  of  manufacturing  districts.
The  growth  of  cities  has  therefore  been  a  main  cause  of  the  decline  of  ecclesiastical
power  ;  and  the  fact  that  until  the  eighteenth  century  Scotland  had  nothing
worthy  of  being  called  a  city,  is  one  of  many  circumstances  which  explain  the
prevalence  of  Scotch  superstition,  and  the  inordinate  influence  of  the  Scotch
clergy.

To  this  we  must  add  another  consideration  of  great  moment.  Partly  from  the
structure  of  the  country,  partly  from  the  weakness  of  the  crown,  and  partly  from
the  necessity  of  being  constantly  in  arms  to  repel  foreign  invaders,  the  predatory
habits  incidental  to  an  early  state  of  society  were  encouraged,  and  consequently
the  reign  of  ignorance  was  prolonged.  Little  was  studied,  and  nothing  was  known.
Until  the  fifteenth  century  there  was  not  even  an  university  in  Scotland,  the  first
having  been  founded  at  St.  Andrews  in  I4I2.81  The  nobles,  when  they  were  not
making  war  upon  the  enemy,  occupied  themselves  in  cutting  each  other's  throats,
and  stealing  each  other's  cattle.82  Such  was  their  ignorance,  that  even  late  in
the  fourteenth  century  there  is  said  to  be  no  instance  of  a  Scotch  baron  being
able  to  sign  his  own  name.83  And  as  nothing  approaching  to  a  middle  class  had

79  Pinkerton  observes,  under  the  year  1514,  that  "  ecclesiastical  dignities  presented
almost  the  only  path  to  opulence."     History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  123.

80  Above,  pp.  213-215.

81  Arnot  (History  of  Edinburgh,  p.  386)  says  that  the  University  of  St.  Andrews  was
founded  in  1412  ;   and  the  same  thing  is  stated  in  Kennedy's  Annals  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  ii.
p.  83.      Grierson,  in  his  History  of  St.  Andrews,  Cupar,  1838,  p.  14,  says,  "  In  1410  the
city  of  St.  Andrews  first  saw  the  establishment  of  its  famous  university,  the  most  ancient
institution  of  the  kind  that  exists  in  Scotland  ;  "  but  at  p.  144  of  the  same  work  we  are
told  that  the  charter,  "  constituting  and  declaring  it  to  be  a  university,"  is  "  dated  at
St.  Andrews,  the  27th  of  February,  1411."  See  also  Lyorfs  History  of  St.  Andrews,  vol.  i.
pp.  203-206,  vol.  ii.  p.  223.     At  all  events,  "  at  the  commencement  of  the  fifteenth
century,  no  university  existed  in  Scotland  ;   and  the  youth  who  were  desirous  of  a  liberal
education  were  under  the  necessity  of  seeking  it  abroad."     M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  i.
p.  211.     The  charter  granted  by  the  Pope,  confirming  the  university,  reached  Scotland
in  1413.     Lawson's  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  Scotland,  Edinburgh,  1836,  p.  12.

82  Those  were  times  when,  as  a  Scotch  lawyer  delicately  expresses  himself,  "  thieving
was  not  the  peculiar  habit  of  the  low  and  indigent,  but  often  common  to  them  with
persons  of  rank  and  landed  estate."     Hume's  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Scotland,  4*0,
1797,  vol.  i.  p.  126.     The  usual  form  of  robbery  being  cattle-stealing,  a  particular  name
was  invented  for  it ;  see  p.  148,  where  we  learn  that  it  "  was  distinguished  by  the  name
of  Hership  or  Herdship,  being  the  driving  away  of  numbers  of  cattle,  or  other  bestial,
by  the  masterful  force  of  armed  people."

83  Tytler,  who  was  a  great  patriot,  and  disposed  to  exaggerate  the  merit  of  everything
which  was  Scotch,  does  nevertheless  allow  that,  "  from  the  accession  of  Alexander  III.


652  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

been  yet  formed,  we  may  from  this  gain  some  idea  of  the  amount  of  knowledge
possessed  by  the  people  at  large.84  Their  minds  must  have  been  immersed  in  a
darkness  which  we  can  now  barely  conceive.  No  trades  or  arts  being  practised
which  required  skill  or  dexterity,  there  was  nothing  to  exercise  their  intellects.
They  consequently  remained  so  stupid  and  brutal  that  an  intelligent  observer
who  visited  Scotland  in  the  year  1360  likens  them  to  savages,  so  much  was  he
struck  by  their  barbarism  and  their  unsocial  manners.83  Another  writer,  early
in  the  fifteenth  century,  uses  the  same  expression  ;  and,  classing  them  with  the
animals  which  they  tended,  he  declares  that  Scotland  is  fuller  of  savages  than  of
cat  tie. 86

By  this  combination  of  events,  and  by  this  union  of  ignorance  with  danger,
the  clergy  had  in  the  fifteenth  century  obtained  more  influence  in  Scotland  than
in  any  other  European  country,  Spain  alone  excepted.  And  as  the  power  of  the
nobles  had  increased  quite  as  rapidly,  it  was  natural  that  the  crown,  completely
overshadowed  by  the  great  barons,  should  turn  for  aid  to  the  Church.  During
the  fifteenth  century  and  part  of  the  sixteenth,  this  alliance  was  strictly  pre-
served ;  87  and  the  political  history  of  Scotland  is  the  history  of  a  struggle  by  the
kings  and  the  clergy  against  the  enormous  authority  of  the  nobles.  The  contest,
after  lasting  about  a  hundred  and  sixty  years,  was  brought  to  a  close  in  1 560,  by
the  triumph  of  the  aristocrary  and  the  overthrow  of  the  Church.  With  such
force,  however,  had  the  circumstance  just  narrated  engrained  superstition  into
the  Scotch  character,  that  the  spiritual  classes  quickly  rallied,  and  under  their
new  name  of  Protestants  they  became  as  formidable  as  under  their  old  name  of
Catholics.  Forty-three  years  after  the  establishment  of  the  Reformation  in
Scotland,  James  VI.  ascended  the  throne  of  England,  and  was  able  to  array  the
force  of  the  southern  country  against  the  refractory  barons  of  the  northern.*
From  that  moment  the  Scotch  aristocracy  began  to  decline  ;  and  the  equipoise
to  the  clergy  being  removed,  the  Church  became  so  powerful  that  during  the
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  it  was  the  most  effectual  obstacle  to  the
progress  of  Scotland  ;  and  even  now  it  exercises  a  sway  which  is  incomprehensible
to  those  who  have  not  carefully  studied  the  whole  chain  of  its  antecedents.  To


to  the  death  of  David  II.  (i.e.  in  1370),  it  would  be  impossible,  I  believe,  to  produce  a
single  instance  of  a  Scottish  baron  who  could  sign  his  own  name."  Ty tier's  History  of
Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  239,  240.  Early  in  the  sixteenth  century,  I  find  it  casually  mentioned
that  "  David  Straiten,  a  cadet  of  the  house  of  Laureston,"  ..."  could  not  read."
Wodrow's  Collections,  vol.  i.  pp.  5,  6.  The  famous  chief,  Walter  Scott  of  Harden,  was
married  in  1567  ;  and  "  his  marriage  contract  is  signed  by  a  notary,  because  none  of  the
parties  could  write  their  names."  Chambers'1  Annals,  vol.  i.  p.  46.  Crawfurd  (History  of
Renfrew,  part  iii.  p.  313)  says  :  "  the  modern  practice  of  subscribing  names  to  writs  of
moment  was  not  used  in  Scotland  till  about  the  year  1540  ;  "  but  he  forgets  to  tell  us  why
it  was  not  used.  In  1564  Robert  Scot  of  Thirlstane,  "  ancestor  of  Lord  Napier,"  could
not  sign  his  name.  See  Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  394.

84  A  Scotchman  of  considerable  learning  says  :    "  Scotland  was  no  less  ignorant  and
superstitious  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century   than  it  was  towards  the  close  of
the  twelfth."     Dalrymple's  Annals  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  428.

85  "  Et  sont  ainsi  comme  gens  sauvages  qui  ne  se  savent  avoir  ni  de  nulli  accointer."
Les  Chroniques  de  Froissart,  edit.  Buchon,  Paris,  1835,  vol.  ii.  p.  315.

86  "  Plus  pleine  de  sauvagine  que  de  bestail."    Hist,  de  Charles  VI.,  par  Le  Labour  em,
quoted  in  Pinkerton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  149.

&  Occasionally  we  find  evidence  of  it  earlier,  but  it  was  hardly  systematic.  Compare
Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  66,  with  Dalrymple's  Annals,  vol.  i.  pp.  72,  no,  in,
194,  vol.  iii.  p.  296  ;  Nimtno's  History  of  Stirlingshire,  p.  88  ;  Chalmers  History  of  Dun-
fermline,  pp.  133,  134.

[*  In  reality,  no  such  array  ever  took  place,  save  in  so  far  as  James  could  summon  a
troublesome  subject  like  Andrew  Melville  to  England.  By  that  time  the  barons  \\ere
glutted  with  the  spoils  of  the  Church. — ED.]


CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  TO  END  OF  XIV.  CENTURY       653

trace  with  minuteness  the  long  course  of  affairs  which  has  led  to  this  unfortunate
result,  would  be  incompatible  with  the  object  of  an  Introduction  whose  only  aim
it  is  to  establish  broad  and  general  principles.  But  to  bring  the  question  clearly
before  the  mind  of  the  reader,  it  will  be  necessary  that  I  should  give  a  slight
sketch  of  the  relation  which  the  nobles  bore  to  the  clergy  in  the  fifteenth  and
sixteenth  centuries,  and  of  the  way  in  which  their  relative  position,  and  their
implacable  hatred  of  each  other,  brought  about  the  Reformation.  By  this  means
we  shall  perceive  that  the  great  Protestant  movement  which  in  other  countries
was  democratic,  was  in  Scotland  aristocratic.  We  shall  also  see  that  in  Scot-
land the  Reformation,  not  being  the  work  of  the  people,  has  never  produced  the
effects  which  might  have  been  expected  from  it,  and  which  it  did  produce  in
England.  It  is  indeed  but  too  evident  that  while  in  England  Protestantism
has  diminished  superstition,  has  weakened  the  clergy,  has  increased  toleration,
and,  in  a  word,  has  secured  the  triumph  of  secular  interests  over  ecclesiastical
ones,  its  result  in  Scotland  has  been  entirely  different  ;  and  that  in  that  country
the  Church,  changing  its  form  without  altering  its  spirit,  not  only  cherished  its
ancient  pretensions,  but  unhappily  retained  its  ancient  power  ;  and  that,  although
that  power  is  now  dwindling  away,  the  Scotch  preachers  still  exhibit,  whenever
they  dare,  an  insolent  and  domineering  spirit  which  shows  how  much  real  weak-
ness there  yet  lurks  in  the  nation,  where  such  extravagant  claims  are  not  imme-
diately silenced  by  the  voice  of  loud  and  general  ridicule.


CHAPTER  XVII
CONDITION  OF  SCOTLAND  IN  THE  FIFTEENTH  AND  SIXTEENTH  CENTURIES.

EARLY  in  the  fifteenth  century  the  alliance  between  the  Crown  and  the  Church,
and  the  determination  of  that  alliance  to  overthrow  the  nobles,  became  manifest .
Indications  of  this  may  be  traced  in  the  policy  of  Albany,  who  was  Regent  from
1406  to  1419,  and  who  made  it  his  principal  object  to  encourage  and  strengthen
the  clergy.1  He  also  dealt  the  first  great  blow  upon  which  any  government
had  ventured  against  the  aristocracy.  Donald,  who  was  one  of  the  most  powerful
of  the  Scottish  chieftains,*  and  who,  indeed,  by  the  possession  of  the  Western
Isles,  was  almost  an  independent  prince,  had  seized  the  earldom  of  Ross,  which,  if
he  could  have  retained,  would  have  enabled  him  to  set  the  Crown  at  defiance.
Albany,  backed  by  the  Church,  marched  into  his  territories  in  1411,  forced  him  to
renounce  the  earldom,  to  make  personal  submission,  and  to  give  hostages  for  his
future  conduct.2  So  vigorous  a  proceeding  on  the  part  of  the  executive  was
extremely  unusual  in  Scotland  ;  3  and  it  was  the  first  of  a  series  of  aggressions
which  ended  in  the  Crown  obtaining  for  itself  not  only  Ross,  but  also  the  Western
Isles.4  The  policy  inaugurated  by  Albany  was  followed  up  with  still  greater
energy  by  James  I.  j  In  1424  this  bold  and  active  prince  procured  an  enactment,

1  "  The  Church  was  eminently  favoured  by  Albany."     Pinkerton's  History  of  Scotland,
vol.  i.  p.  86.     But  Pinkerton  misunderstands  his  policy  in  regard  to  the  nobles.     [The
statement  as  to  the  Church  appears  to  be  an  error.     See  note  on  next  page. — ED.]

2  Skew's  Highlanders,  vol.  ii.  pp.  72-74  ;  Browne's  History  of  the  Highlands,  vol.  i.
p.  1 62,  vol.  iv.  pp.  435,436.     [Donald  had  been  resisted  by  the  whole  Lowland  nobility.
It  was  a  struggle  not  of  church  with  nobles,  but  of  race  with  race.    Donald's  son,  however,
kept  the  earldom. — ED.]

3  Chalmers  (Caledonia,  vol.  i.  pp.  826,  827),  referring  to  the  state  of  things  before
Albany,  says,  "  There  is  not  a  trace  of  any  attempt  by  Robert  II.  to  limit  the  power  of
the  nobles,  whatever  he  may  have  added,  by  his  improvident  grants,  to  their  indepen-
dence.    He  appears  not  to  have  attempted  to  raise  the  royal  prerogative  from  the  debase-
ment in  which  the  imprudence  and  misfortunes  of  David  II.  had  left  it."     And  of  his  suc-
cessor, Robert  III.,  "So  mild  a  prince,  and  so  weak  a  man,  was  not  very  likely  to  make
any  attempt  upon  the  power  of  others,  when  he  could  scarcely  support  his  own."

4  In  1476,  "  the  Earldom  of  Ross  was  inalienably  annexed  to  the  Crown  ;  and  a  great

[*  Buckle  has  not  realized  that  theLord  of  the  Isles,  a  Gaelic  prince,  always  hitherto
hostile  to  the  Scoto-Norman  kings,  was  on  quite  a  different  footing  from  the  Scoto-Norman
nobles.  Albany  attacked  him  only  after  the  battle  of  Harlaw,  in  which  Donald,  the
aggressor,  was  defeated  (Tytler,  History  of  Scotland,  ed.  1869,  ii.  42).  So  far  from  seeking
to  strengthen  the  crown  against  the  nobles,  Albany  merely  sought  to  maintain  his  own
position  ;  and  the  sending  of  Prince  James  to  France — frustrated  by  his  capture  by  the
English — was  planned  by  the  loyal  nobles  in  the  interest  of  the  crown. — ED.]

[t  J  ames's  policy  was  entirely  new.  Albany  had  been  his  enemy,  perhaps  his  betrayer.
The  nobles  whom  James  arrested,  as  noted  below,  were  of  Albany's  party  ;  and  those
whom  he  put  to  death  were  of  Albany's  house — his  own  kindred.  See  Tytler,  ii.  56-59-
Tytler  notes  "  the  indulgence  to  which  the  aristocracy  were  accustomed  under  Albany  "
(p.  58).— ED.J


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  655

obliging  many  of  the  nobles  to  show  their  charters,  in  order  that  it  might  be
ascertained  what  lands  they  held  which  had  formerly  belonged  to  the  Crown.5
And  to  conciliate  the  affections  of  the  clergy,  he  in  1425  issued  a  commission,
authorizing  the  Bishop  of  Saint  Andrews  to  restore  to  the  Church  whatever  had
been  alienated  from  it*  ;  while  he  at  the  same  time  directed  that  the  justiciaries
should  assist  in  enforcing  execution  of  the  decree.6  This  occurred  in  June  ;
and  what  shows  that  it  was  part  of  a  general  scheme  is  that  in  the  preceding
spring  the  king  suddenly  arrested,  in  the  parliament  assembled  at  Perth,  upwards
of  twenty  of  the  principal  nobles,  put  four  of  them  to  death,  and  confiscated
several  of  their  estates.7  Two  years  afterwards,  he  with  equal  perfidy  summoned
the  Highland  chiefs  to  meet  him  at  Inverness,  laid  hands  on  them  also,  executed
three,  and  imprisoned  more  than  forty,  in  different  parts  of  the  kingdom.8

By  these  measures,  and  by  supporting  the  Church  with  the  same  zeal  that  he
attacked  the  nobles,  the  king  thought  to  reverse  the  order  of  affairs  hitherto
established,  and  to  secure  the  supremacy  of  the  throne  over  the  aristocracy.9  But
herein  he  overrated  his  own  power.  Like  nearly  all  politicians,  he  exaggerated
the  value  of  political  remedies.  The  legislator  and  the  magistrate  may  for  a
moment  palliate  an  evil ;  they  can  never  work  a  cure.  General  mischiefs  depend
upon  general  causes,  and  these  are  beyond  their  art.  The  symptoms  of  the  disease
they  can  touch,  while  the  disease  itself  baffles  their  efforts,  and  is  too  often
exasperated  by  their  treatment.  In  Scotland  the  power  of  the  nobles  was  a
cruel  malady,  which  preyed  on  the  vitals  of  the  nation  ;  but  it  had  long  been

blow  was  thus  struck  at  the  power  and  grandeur  of  a  family  which  had  so  repeatedly  dis-
turbed the  tranquillity  of  Scotland."  Gregory's  History  of  the  Western  Highlands,  Edin-
burgh, 1836,  p.  50.  In  1493  "  John,  fourth  and  last  Lord  of  the  Isles,  was  forfeited,  and
deprived  of  his  title  and  estates."  Ibid.  p.  58.

5  As  those  who  held  crown  lands  were  legally,  though  not  in  reality,  the  king's  tenants,
the  act  declared,  that  "  gif  it  like  the  king,  he  may  ger  sumonde  all  and  sindry  his  tenand
at  lauchfull  day  and  place  to  schawe  thar  chartis."  Th'e  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,
vol.  ii.  p.  4,  §  9,  edit,  folio,  1814.

0  "  On  the  8th  June,  1425,  James  issued  a  commission  to  Henry,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,
authorizing  him  to  resume  all  alienations  from  the  Church,  with  power  of  anathema,  and
orders  to  all  justiciaries  to  assist.  This  curious  paper  is  preserved  in  Harl.  MS.  4637,
vol.  iii.  f.  189."  Pinkerton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  1 1 6.  Archbishop  Spottiswoode,
delighted  with  his  policy,  calls  him  a  "  good  king,"  and  says  that  he  built  for  the  Car-
thusians "  a  beautiful  monastery  at  Perth,  bestowing  large  revenues  upon  the  same."
Spottiswoode' 's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  113.  And  Keith  assures  us  that
on  one  occasion  James  I.  went  so  far  as  to  give  to  one  of  the  bishops  "  a  silver  cross,
in  which  was  contained  a  bit  of  the  wooden  cross  on  which  the  apostle  St.  Andrew  had
been  crucified."  Keith's  Catalogue  of  Scotch  Bishops,  Edinburgh,  1755,  4to,  p.  67.

7  Compare  Balfour's  Annales,  vol.  i.  pp.  153-156,  with  Pinkerton's  History,  vol.  i.
pp.  113-115.     Between  these  two  authorities  there  is  a  slight  but  unimportant  discrep  -
ancy.

8  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  pp.  95-98  ;  Skene's  Highlanders,  vol.  ii.  p.  75  ;
and  an  imperfect  narrative  in  Gregory's  History  of  the  Western  Highlands,  p.  35.

9  Tytler  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  126),  under  the  year  1433,  says :  "  In  the  midst
of  his  labours  for  the  pacification  of  his  northern  dominions,  and  his  anxiety  for  the  sup-
pression of  heresy,  the  king  never  forgot  his  great  plan  for  the  diminution  of  the  exorbitant
power  of  the  nobles."     See  also  p.  84.     "  It  was  a  principle  of  this  enterprising  monarch,
in  his  schemes  for  the  recovery  and  consolidation  of  his  own  power,  to  cultivate  the  friend-
ship of  the  clergy,  whom  he  regarded  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  nobles."    Lord  Somerville
(Memorie  of  the  Somervilles,  vol.  i.  p.  173),  says  that  the  superior  noblity  were  "  never  or
seldome  called  to  counsell  dureing  this  king's  reign."

[*  The  statement  of  Tytler  (ed.  1869,  ii.  64)  is  that  the  bishop  (of  Aberdeen)  was
authorized  "  to  resume  all  alienations  of  the  lands  of  the  church  which  had  been  made
during  the  regencies  of  the  two  Albanies  " — a  proof  that  the  first  Albany  had  not  strength-
eaed^the^Church  against  the  nobles. — ED.]


656  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

preparing  ;  it  was  a  chronic  disorder  ;  and,  having  worked  into  the  general  habit,
it  might  be  removed  by  time,  it  could  never  be  diminished  by  violence.  On  the
contrary,  in  this  as  in  all  matters,  whenever  politicians  attempt  great  good,  they
invariably  inflict  great  harm.  Overaction  on  one  side  produces  reaction  on  the
other,  and  the  balance  of  the  fabric  is  disturbed.  By  the  shock  of  conflicting
interests,  the  scheme  of  life  is  made  insecure.  New  animosities  are  kindled,  old
ones  are  embittered,  and  the  natural  jar  and  discordance  are  aggravated,  simply
because  the  rulers  of  mankind  cannot  be  brought  to  understand  that,  in  dealing
with  a  great  country,  they  have  to  do  with  an  organization  so  subtle,  so  extremely
complex,  and  withal  so  obscure,  as  to  make  it  highly  probable  that  whatever
they  alter  in  it  they  will  alter  wrongly,  and  that  while  their  efforts  to  protect
or  to  strengthen  its  particular  parts  are  extremely  hazardous,  it  does  undoubtedly
possess  within  itself  a  capacity  of  repairing  its  injuries,  and  that  to  bring  such
capacity  into  play,  there  is  merely  required  that  time  and  freedom  which  the
interference  of  powerful  men  too  often  prevents  it  from  enjoying.

Thus  it  was  in  Scotland  in  the  fifteenth  century.  The  attempts  of  James  I.
failed  because  they  were  particular  measures  directed  against  general  evils.
Ideas  and  associations,  generated  by  a  long  course  of  events,  and  deeply  seated
in  the  public  mind,  had  given  to  the  aristocracy  immense  power  ;  and  if  every
noble  in  Scotland  had  been  put  to  death,  if  all  their  castles  had  been  razed  to  the
ground,  and  all  their  estates  confiscated,  the  time  would  unquestionably  have
come  when  their  successors  would  have  been  more  influential  than  ever,  because
the  affection  of  their  retainers  and  dependants  would  be  increased  by  the  injustice
that  had  been  perpetrated.  For  every  passion  excites  its  opposite.  Cruelty
to-day  produces  sympathy  to-morrow.  A  hatred  of  injustice  contributes  more
than  any  other  principle  to  correct  the  inequalities  of  life  and  to  maintain  the
balance  of  affairs.  It  is  this  loathing  at  tyranny  which,  by  stirring  to  their  inmost
depth  the  warmest  feelings  of  the  heart,  makes  it  impossible  that  tyranny  should
ever  finally  succeed.  This,  in  sooth,  is  the  noble  side  of  our  nature.  This  is  that
part  of  us  which,  stamped  with  a  godlike  beauty,  reveals  its  divine  origin,  and,
providing  for  the  most  distant  contingencies,  is  our  surest  guarantee  that  violence
shall  never  ultimately  triumph  ;  that  sooner  or  later  despotism  shall  always  be
overthrown  ;  and  that  the  great  and  permanent  interests  of  the  human  race  shall
never  be  injured  by  the  wicked  counsels  of  unjust  men.

In  the  case  of  James  I.,  the  reaction  came  sooner  than  might  have  been  expected;
and,  as  it  happened  in  his  lifetime,  it  was  a  retribution  as  well  as  a  reaction.
For  some  years  he  continued  to  oppress  the  nobles  with  impunity  ;  10  but  in
1436  they  turned  upon  him  and  put  him  to  death,  in  revenge  for  the  treatment
to  which  he  had  subjected  many  of  them.11  Their  power  now  rose  as  suddenly
as  it  had  fallen.  In  the  south  of  Scotland,  the  Douglases  werej  supreme,12  and  the
earl  of  that  family  possessed  revenues  about  equal  to  those  of  the  Crown.13  And
to  show  that  his  authority  was  equal  to  his  wealth,  he,  on  the  marriage  of  James
II.  in  1449,  appeared  at  the  nuptials  with  a  train  composed  of  five  thousand
followers.14  These  were  his  own  retainers,  armed  and  resolute  men,  bound  to


1(*  Compare  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  p.  263,  with  Buchanan's  Rerum  Scoiicarum
Historia,  lib.  x.  p.  286.

11  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  pp.   157,  158.     [The  statement  in  the  text  is
misleading.     James  was  assassinated  by  a  few  malcontents,  who  took  him  by  surprise,
and  there  was  no  combination  of  "  the  nobles  "  for  the  purpose.     Finally,  his  widow  was
able  to  put  the  assassins  to  death. — ED.]

12  Lindsay  of  Pitscottie  (Chronicles,  vol.  i.  p.  2)  says  that  directly  after  the  death  of
James  I.,  "  Alexander,  Earle  of  Douglas,  being  uerie  potent  in  kine  and  friendis,  con-
temned all  the  kingis  officeris,  in  respect  of  his  great  puissance."     The  best  account  I  have
seen  of  the  rise  of  the  Douglases  is  in  Chalmers'  learned  but  ill -digested  work,  Caledonia,
vol.  i.  pp.  579-583-

13  In  1440  "  the  chief  of  that  family  had  revenues,  perhaps  equivalent  to  those  of  the
Scottish  monarch."     Pinkerton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  192.

H  "It  may  give  us  some  idea  of  the  immense  power  possessed  at  this  period  by  the  Earl


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  657

obey  any  command  he  might  issue  to  them.  Not,  indeed,  that  compulsion  was
needed  on  the  part  of  a  Scotch  noble  to  secure  the  obedience  of  his  own  people.
The  servitude  was  a  willing  one,  and  was  essential  to  the  national  manners.  Then
and  long  afterwards  it  was  discreditable,  as  well  as  unsafe,  not  to  belong  to  a
great  clan  ;  and  those  who  were  so  unfortunate  as  to  be  unconnected  with  any
leading  family  were  accustomed  to  take  the  name  of  some  chief,  and  to  secure  his
protection  by  devoting  themselves  to  his  service.15

What  the  Earl  of  Douglas  was  in  the  south  of  Scotland,  that  were  the  Earls  of
Crawford  and  of  Ross  in  the  north.16  Singly  they  were  formidable  ;  united  they
seemed  irresistible.  When,  therefore,  in  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century
they  actually  leagued  together,  and  formed  a  strict  compact  against  all  their
common  enemies,  it  was  hard  to  say  what  limit  could  be  set  to  their  power,
or  what  resource  remained  to  the  government,  except  that  of  sowing  disunion
among  them.17

But  in  the  meantime,  the  disposition  of  the  nobles  to  use  force  against  the
Crown  had  been  increased  by  fresh  violence.  Government,  instead  of  being
warned  by  the  fate  of  James  I.,  imitated  his  unscrupulous  acts,  and  pursued  the
very  policy  which  had  caused  his  destruction.  Because  the  Douglases  were  the
most  powerful  of  all  the  great  families,  it  was  determined  that  their  chiefs  should
be  put  to  death  ;  and  because  they  could  not  be  slain  by  force,  they  were  to  be
murdered  by  treachery.  In  1440  the  Earl  of  Douglas,  a  boy  of  fifteen,  and  his
brother,  who  was  still  younger  than  he,  were  invited  to  Edinburgh  on  a  friendly
visit  to  the  king.*  Scarcely  had  they  arrived,  when  they  were  seized  by  order  of

of  Douglas,  when  we  mention  that  on  this  chivalrous  occasion  the  military  suite  by  which
he  was  surrounded,  and  at  the  head  of  which  he  conducted  the  Scottish  champions  to  the
lists,  consisted  of  a  force  amounting  to  five  thousand  men."  Tytler' s  History  of  Scotland,
vol.  iii.  p.  215.  The  old  historian  of  his  family  says  :  "  He  is  not  easy  to  be  dealt  with  ;
they  must  have  mufles  that  would  catch  such  a  cat.  Indeed,  he  behaved  himself  as  one  that
thought  he  would  not  be  in  danger  of  them  ;  he  entertained  a  great  family  ;  he  rode  ever
well  accompanied  when  he  came  in  publick ;  1,000  or  2,000  horse  were  his  ordinary  train."
Hume's  History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  i.  pp.  273,  274,  reprinted  Edinburgh,  1743.

15  In  the  seventeenth  century,  "  to  be  without  a  chief,  involved  a  kind  of  disrepute  ;
and  those  who  had  no  distinct  personal  position  of  their  own  would  find  it  necessary  to
become  a  Gordon  or  a  Crichton,  as  prudence  or  inclination  might  point  out."     Burton's
Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  207.     Compare  Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,
vol.  iii.  p.  250,  on  "  the  protective  surname  of  Douglas  ;  "  and  Skene's  Highlanders,  vol.  ii.
p.  252,  on  the  extreme  importance  attached  to  the  name  of  Macgregor.

16  "  Men  of  the  greatest  puissance  and  force  next  the  Douglasses,  that  were  in  Scotland
in  their  times."     Hume's  History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  i.  p.  344.     The  great  power
of  the  Earls  of  Ross  in  the  north  dates  from  the  thirteenth  century.      See  Skene's  High-
landers, vol.  i.  pp.  133,  134,  vol.  ii.  p.  52.

"  In  1445  the  Earl  of  Douglas  concluded  "  ane  offensiue  and  defensiue  league  and  com-
binatione  aganist  all,  none  excepted,  (not  the  king  himselue),  with  the  Earle  of  Crawfurd,
and  Donald,  Lord  of  the  Isles  ;  wich  was  mutually  sealled  and  subscriued  by  them  three,
the  7  day  of  Marche."  Balfour's  Ann-ales,  Vol.  i;  p.  173.  This  comprised  the  alliance  of
other  noble  families.  "  He  maid  bandis  with  the  Erie  of  Craufurd,  and  with  Donald  lorde
of  the  Ylis,  and  Erie  of  Ross,  to  take  part  every  ane  with  other,  and  with  dyvers  uther
noble  men  also."  Lesley's  History  of  Scotland,  from  1436  to  1561,  p.  18.  [There  is  some
error  here.  It  appears  to  be  certain  that  Donald,  Lord  of-  the  Isles,  was  dead  about  1420
(Gregory's  History  of  the  Western  Highland s,z&,  i88i,p.  33).  Mr.  Lang  (Hist.ofScotland,  1900

[*  Buckle  has  here  been  misled  by  the  family  history  of  the  Douglases.  The  young
earl  was  seventeen  years  old  at  his  accession  in  1439  (Tytler,  ed.  cited,  ii.  125  ;  Burton,
ii.,414),  so  that  at  the  time  of  his  execution  he  was  eighteen.  He  was  certainly  no
e>  child,"  but  rode  with  a  train  of  a  thousand  men-at-arms,  defied  the  laws  openly,  and
appears  to  have  had  some  idea  of  claiming  the  succession  to  the  throne,  as  he  might  do  with
some  plausibility  (Tytler  and  Burton,  as  cited).  He  was  charge^  with  high  treason.—

42.


658  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  chancellor,  subjected  to  a  mock  trial,  declared  guilty,  dragged  to  the  castle-
yard,  and  the  heads  of  the  poor  children  cut  off.18

Considering  the  warm  feelings  of  attachment  which  the  Scotch  entertained  for
their  chiefs,  it  is  difficult  to  overrate  the  consequences  of  this  barbarous  murder
in  strengthening  a  class  it  was  hoped  to  intimidate.  But  this  horrible  crime  was
committed  by  the  government  only,  and  it  occurred  during  the  king's  minority  :
the  next  assassination  was  the  work  of  the  king  himself.  In  1452  the  Earl  of
Douglas  19  was,  with  great  show  of  civility,  requested  by  James  II.  to  repair  to
the  court  then  assembled  at  Stirling.  The  earl  hesitated,  but  James  overcame  his
reluctance  by  sending  to  him  a  safe -conduct  with  the  royal  signature,  and  issued
under  the  great  seal.20  The  honour  of  the  king  being  pledged,  the  fears  of  Douglas
were  removed.  He  hastened  to  Stirling,  where  he  was  received  with  every  distinc-
tion. The  evening  of  his  arrival,  the  king,  after  supper  was  over,  broke  out  into
reproaches  against  him,  and,  suddenly  drawing  his  dagger,  stabbed  him.  Gray
then  struck  him  with  a  battle-axe,  and  he  fell  dead  on  the  floor,  in  presence  of  his
sovereign,  who  had  lured  him  to  court  that  he  might  murder  him  with  im-
punity.21

The  ferocity  of  the  Scotch  character,  which  was  the  natural  result  of  the
ignorance  and  poverty  of  the  nation,  was  no  doubt  one  cause,  and  a  very  impor-
tant one,  of  the  commission  of  such  crimes  as  these,  not  secretly,  but  in  the  open
light  of  day,  and  by  the  highest  men  in  the  State.*  It  cannot  however  be  denied


i.  328),  disputes  the  narrative  of  Ty tier  (who  follows  Lesley  and  Balfour),  arguing  that
there  is  "  no  evidence  for  the  early  date  of  this  bond."  But  such  a  league  does  seem  to
have  been  entered  into  about  1451.  Hume  Brown,  Hist,  of  Scotland,  i.  (1899)  232. — ED.]

18  [The  executions  were  not  simultaneous  ;  the  younger  brother  and  another  kinsman
were  beheaded  some  days  later. — ED.]     An  interesting  account  of  this  dastardly  crime
is  given  in  Hume's  History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  i.  pp.  274-288,  where  great,  but
natural,  indignation  is  expressed.     On  the  other  hand,  Lesley,  Bishop  of  Ross,  narrates
it  with  a  cold-blooded  indifference,  characteristic  of  the  ill-will  which  existed  between  the
nobles  and  the  clergy,  and  which  prevented  him  from  regarding  the  murder  of  two  chil-
dren as  an  offence.     "  And  eftir  he  was  set  doun  to  the  burd  with  the  governour,  chan-
cellour,  and  otheris  noble  men  present,  the  meit  was  sudantlie  removed,  and  ane  bullis
heid  presented,  quhilk  in  thay  daies  was  ane  signe  of  executione  ;  and  incontinent  the  said
erle,  David  his  broder,  and  Malcolme  Fleming  of  Cummernald,  wer  heidit  before  the  castell
yett  of  Edenburgh."     Lesley's  History,  p.  16.

19  The  cousin  of  the  boys  who  were  murdered  in  1440.     See  Hume's  History  of  the  House
of  Douglas,  vol.  i.  pp.  297,  316.    [His  father  and  predecessor,  the  grand -uncle  of  the  slain
youths,  seems  to  have  connived  at  their  death  (Tytler,  ii.  133). — ED.]

20  "  With  assurance  under  the  broad  seal."     Hume's  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  i.  p.  351,
See  also  Nimmo's  History  of  Stirlingshire,  Edinb.  1777,  pp.  246,  322,  323.

21  Hume's  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  i.  pp.  351-353.     The  king  "  stabbed  him  in  the  breast
with  a  dagger.     At  the  same  instant  Patrick  Gray  struck  him  on  the  head  with  a  pole-ax.
The  rest  that  were  attending  at  the  door,  hearing  the  noise,  entred,  and  fell  also  upon  him  ;
and,  to  show  their  affection  to  the  king,  gave  him  every  man  his  blow  after  he  was  dead."
Compare  Lindsay  of  Pitscottie's  Chronicles- of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  103.     "He  strak  him
throw  the  bodie  thairwith  ;  and  thairefter  the  guard,  hearing  the  tumult  within  the
chamber,  rusched  in  and  slew  the  earle  out  of  hand."     [It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  the  king
had  premeditated  the  assassination.   (Burton,  ii.  425,  insists  that  there  was  no  plan.  Cp.
Hume  Brown,  i.  233  ;  Lang,  i.  329).     The  only  narratives  of  the  episode  represent  the
king  as  appealing  to  Douglas  (his  former  friend)  to  break  his  treasonable  league  ;  and
Douglas  as  replying  with  an  insolence  which  provoked  the  king  to  fury.      What  is  certain
is  that  Douglas  was  an  open  and  brutal  violator  of  the  laws,  and  guilty  of  many  infamous
slaughters,  friends  of  the  king  being  among  his  victims.     It  seems  clear,  however,  that  he
came  on  a  safe-conduct.     Tytler,  ed.  cited,  ii.  153-7. — ED.]

[*  The  period  was  that  of  the  Wars  of  the  Roses.     It  is  doubtful  whether  there  was  a
pin  to  choose  between  the  Scottish  and  the  English  character  at  that  period. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  659

that  another  cause  was  the  influence  of  the  clergy,  whose  interest  it  was  to  humble
the  nobles,  and  who  were  by  no  means  scrupulous  as  to  the  means  that  they
employed.22  As  the  crown  became  more  alienated  from  the  aristocracy,  it
united  itself  still  closer  with  the  Church.  In  1443  a  statute  was  enacted,  the
object  of  which  was  to  secure  ecclesiastical  property  from  the  attacks  made  upon
it  by  the  nobles.23  And  although,  in  that  state  of  society,  it  was  easier  to  pass
laws  than  to  execute  them,  such  a  measure  indicated  the  general  policy  of  the
government,  and  the  union  between  it  and  the  Church.  Indeed,  as  to  this,  no  one
could  be  mistaken.24  For  nearly  twenty  years,  the  avowed  and  confidential
adviser  of  the  Crown  was  Kennedy,  Bishop  of  Saint  Andrews,  who  retained  power
until  his  death,  in  1466,  during  the  minority  of  James  III.25  He  was  the  bitter
enemy  of  the  nobles,  against  whom  he  displayed  an  unrelenting  spirit,  which  was
sharpened  by  personal  injuries  ;  for  the  Earl  of  Crawford  had  plundered  his
lands,  and  the  Earl  of  Douglas  had  attempted  to  seize  him,  and  had  threatened
to  put  him  into  irons.2fi  The  mildest  spirit  might  well  have  been  roused  by  this  ;
and  as  James  II.,  when  he  assassinated  Douglas,  was  more  influenced  by  Kennedy
than  by  any  one  else,  it  is  probable  that  the  bishop  was  privy  to  that  foul  trans-
action.* At  all  events,  he  expressed  no  disapprobation  of  it ;  and  when,  in  conse-
quence of  the  murder,  the  Douglases  and  their  friends  rose  in  open  rebellion,  Ken-
nedy gave  to  the  king  a  crafty  and  insidious  counsel,  highly  characteristic  of  the
cunning  of  his  profession.  Taking  up  a  bundle  of  arrows,  he  showed  James,  that
when  they  were  together,  they  were  not  to  be  broken  ;  but  that  if  separated  they

22  In  Nimmo's  History  of  Stirlingshire,  pp.  99,  100,  the  alienation  of  the  nobles  from  the
Church  is  dated  "  from  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  ;  "  and  this  is  perhaps  correct
in  regard  to  general  dislike,  though  the   movement  may  be  clearly  traced  fifty  years
earlier.

23  See  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  33,  edit,  folio,  1814  ;  respecting  the
"  statute  of  haly  kirk  quhilk  is  oppressit  and  hurt."

24  In  1449  James  II.,    "  with  that  affectionate  respect  for  the  clergy,  which  could  not
fail  to  be  experienced  by  a  prince  who  had  successfully  employed  their  support  and  advice
to  escape  from  the  tyranny  of  his  nobles,  granted  to  them  some  important  privileges."
Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  226.     See  also  p.  309.     Among  many  similar
measures,  he  conceded  to  the  monks  of  Paisley  some  important  powers  of  jurisdiction
that  belonged  to    the  Crown.     Charter,  i3th   January,  1451-2,  in  Chalmers'  Caledonia,
vol.  iii.  p.  823.

25  Pinkerton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  188,  209,  247,  254.     Keith's  Catalogue  of
Scotch  Bishops,  p.  19.     Ridpath's  Border  History,  p.  298.     Hollinshead's  Scottish  Chronicle,
vok  ii.  p.  101.     In  Somerville's  Memorie  of  the  Somervilles,  vol.  i.  p.  213,  it  is  stated,  under
the  year  1452,  that  fear  of  the  great  nobles  "  had  once  possest  his  majestic  with  some
thoughts  of  going  out  of  the  countrey  ;  but  that  he  was  perswaded  to  the  contrary  by
Bishop  Kennedie,  then  Arch -bishop  of  Saint  Andrewes,  whose  counsell  at  that  tyme  and
eftirward  in  most  things  he  followed,  which  at  length  proved  to  his  majesties  great  advan-
tage."    See  also  Lesley's  History,  p.  23.     "  The  king  wes  put  to  sic  a  sharp  point,  that  he
wes  determinit  to  haif  left  the  realme,  and  to  haif  passit  in  Fraunce  by  sey,  were  not  that
bischop  James  Kennedy  of  St.  Androis  causit  him  to  tarrye."

26  "  His  lands  were  plundered  by  the  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Alexander  Ogilvie  of  Inver-
aritie,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Earl  of  Douglas,  who  had  farther  instructed  them  to  seize,
if  possible,  the  person  of  the  bishop,  and  to  put  him  in  irons."     Memoir  of  Kennedy,  in
Chambers'  Lives  of  Scotchmen,  vol.  iii.  p.  307,  Glasgow,  1834.     "  Sed  Kennedus  et  aetate,
et  consilio,  ac  proinde  auctoritate  caeteros  anteibat.     In  eum  potissimum  ira  est  versa.
Crafordiae  comes  et  Alexander  Ogilvius  conflato  satis  magno  exercitu,  agros  ejus  in  Fifa
late  populati,  dum  praedam  magis,  quam  causam  sequuntur,  omni  genere  cladis  in  vicina
etiam  praedia  grassati,  nemine  congredi  auso  pleni  praedarum  in  Angusiam  revertuntur.
Kennedus  ad  sua  arma  conversus  comitem  Crafordiae  disceptationem  juris  fugientem  diris
ecclesiasticis  est  prosecutus."     Buchanan,  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,  lib.  xi.  p.  306.

[*  There  being  no  appearance  of  premeditation,  there  is  no  basis  for  the  charge
against  Kennedy. — ED.]


66o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  easily  destroyed.  Hence  he  inferred  that  the  aristocracy  should  be  over-
thrown by  disuniting  the  nobles,  and  ruining  them  one  by  one.27

In  this  he  was  right,  so  far  as  the  interests  of  his  own  order  were  concerned  ;
but  looking  at  the  interest  of  the  nation,  it  is  evident  that  the  power  of  the  nobles,
notwithstanding  their  gross  abuse  of  it  was  on  the  whole  beneficial,  since  it  was
the  only  barrier  against  despotism.  The  evil  they  actually  engendered  was
indeed  immense.  But  they  kept  off  other  evils  which  would  have  been  worse.
By  causing  present  anarchy.they  secured  future  liberty.  For  as  there  was  no  middle
class,  there  were  only  three  orders  in  the  commonwealth  ;  namely,  government,
clergy,  and  nobles.  The  two  first  being  united  against  the  last,  it  is  certain  that
if  they  had  won  the  day  Scotland  would  have  been  oppressed  by  the  worst  of  all
yokes  to  which  a  country  can  be  subjected.  It  would  have  been  ruled  by  an
absolute  king  and  an  absolute  Church,  who,  playing  into  each  other's  hands,
would  have  tyrannized  over  a  people  who,  though  coarse  and  ignorant,  still  loved
a  certain  rude  and  barbarous  liberty,  which  it  was  good  for  them  to  possess,
but  which,  in  the  face  of  such  a  combination,  they  would  most  assuredly  have
forfeited.*

Happily,  however,  the  power  of  the  nobles  was  too  deeply  rooted  in  the  popular
mindf  to  allow  of  this  catastrophe.  In  vain  did  James  III.  exert  himself  to  dis-
courage them,28  and  to  elevate  their  rivals,  the  clergy.29  Nothing  could  shake
their  authority  ;  and  in  1482  they,  seeing  the  determination  of  the  king,  assem-
bled together,  and  such  was  their  influence  over  their  followers  that  they  had  no


27  "This  holie  bischop  schew  ane  similitud  to  the  king,  quhilk  might  bring  him  to
experience  how  he  might  invaid  againes  the  Douglass,  and  the  rest  of  the  conspiratouris.
This  bischop  tuik  furth  ane  great  scheife  of  arrovves  knitt  togidder  vverrie  fast,  and  de-
sired him  to  put  thame  to  his  knie,  and  break  thame.     The  king  said  it  was  not  possible,
becaus  they  war  so  many,  and  so  weill  fastened  togidder.     The  bischop  answeired,  it  was
werrie  true,  hot  yitt  he  wold  latt  the  king  sea  how  to  break  thame  ;  and  pulled  out  on  be
on,  and  tua  be  tua,  quhill  he  had  brokin  thame  all ;  then  said  to  the  king,  '  Yea  most  doe
with  the  conspiratouris  in  this  manner,  and  thair  complices  that  are  risen  againes  vow.
quho  are  so  many  in  number,  and  so  hard  knit  togidder  in  conspiracie  againes  yow,  that
yea  cannot  gett  thame  brokin  togidder.     Butt  be  sick  pratick  as  I  have  schowin  yow
be  the  similitud  of  thir  arrowes,  that  is  to  say,  yea  must  conqueis  and  break  lord  by  lord
be  thamselffis,  for  yea  may  not  deall  with  thame  all  at  once.'  "     Lindsay  of  Pitscottie's
Chronicles  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  172,  173-         [As  this  story  is  proverbial,  there  is  no
reason  to  believe  that  it  is  true  as  told  by  Pitscottie.     It  is  therefore  gratuitous  to  charge
it  on  the  "  cunning  "  of  the  bishop's  profession.  Kennedy  has  by  far  the  best  character
of  all  the  Scots  statesmen  of  his  age.     See  Tytler,  ed.  1869,  ii.  138,  196  ;  and  Buchanan,
as  there  cited.— ED.]

28  "  He  wald  nocht  suffer  the  noblemen  to  come  to  his  presence,  and  to  governe  the
realme  be  thair  counsell."     Lesley's  History  of  Scotland,  p.  48.     "  Wald  nocht  use  the
counsall  of  his  nobillis."  p.  55.     "  Excluding  the  nobility."     Hume's  History  of  the  House
of  Douglas,  vol.  ii.  p.  33.     "  The  nobility  seeing  his  resolution  to  ruin  them."  p.  46.     "  Hes
conteming  his  nobility."     Bal four's  Annales,  vol.  i.  p.  206.

29  Also  to  aggrandize  them.     See,  for  instance,  what  "  has  obtained  the  name  of  the
golden  charter,  from  the  ample  privileges  it  contains,  confirmed  to  Archbishop  Shevez
by  James  III.  on  gth  July,  1480."     Grierson's  History  of  Saint  Andrews,  p.  58,  Cupar,
1838.


[*  Buckle's  words  read  strangely  to  a  student  of  Scots  history  of  the  period  in  question.
The  nobles  were  as  brutal  tyrants  as  ever  lived,  and  the  Douglases  in  particular  respected
neither  laws  nor  liberties  which  crossed  their  will.  The  Church  could  not  in  such  an  age
tyrannize  as  they  did  ;  and  Kennedy  was  a  protector  of  the  people  against  them. — ED.]

[f  The  "  popular  mind  "  counted  for  little  in  the  matter.  The  nobles  maintained
themselves  by  their  own  armed  forces,  and  in  the  revolt  which  ended  in  the  death  of  J  ames
III.  the  popular  feeling  was  on  the  side  of  the  king.  See  Burton,  iii.  38. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  661

difficulty  in  seizing  his  person  and  imprisoning  him  in  the  Castle  of  Edinburgh.30
After  his  liberation,  fresh  quarrels  arose;31  and  in  1488  the  principal  nobles
collected  troops,  met  him  in  the  field,  defeated  him,  and  put  him  to  death.32
He  was  succeeded  by  James  IV.,  under  whom  the  course  of  affairs  was  exactly
the  same  ;  that  is  to  say,  on  one  side  the  nobles,  and  on  the  other  side  the  Crown
and  the  Church.  Everything  that  the  king  could  do  to  uphold  the  clergy  he
did  cheerfully.*  In  1493  he  obtained  an  act  to  secure  the  immunities  of  the  sees
of  Saint  Andrews  and  of  Glasgow,  the  two  most  important  in  Scotland.33  In
1503  he  procured  a  general  revocation  of  all  grants  and  gifts  prejudicial  to  the
Church,  whether  they  had  been  made  by  the  Parliament  or  by  the  Council.34
And  in  1508  he,  by  the  advice  of  Elphinston,  Bishop  of  Aberdeen,  ventured  on
a  measure  of  still  greater  boldness.  That  able  and  ambitious  prelate  induced
James  to  revive  against  the  nobility  several  obsolete  claims,  by  virtue  of  which
the  king  could  under  certain  circumstances  take  possession  of  their  estates,
and  could,  in  every  instance  in  which  the  owner  held  of  the  Crown,  receive  nearly
the  whole  of  the  proceeds  during  the  minority  of  the  proprietor.3^

To  make  such  claims  was  easy  ;  to  enforce  them  was  impossible.  Indeed,
the  nobles  were  at  this  time  rather  gaining  ground  than  losing  it  ;  and  after  the
death  of  James  IV.  in  1513,  they,  during  the  minority  of  James  V.,  became  so
powerful  that  the  regent,  Albany,  twice  threw  up  the  government  in  despair,
and  at  length  abandoned  it  altogether.3^  He  finally  quitted  Scotland  in  1 524,  and

30  "  Such  was  the  influence  of  the  aristocracy  over  their  warlike  followers,  that  the  king
was  conveyed  to  the  castle  nf  Edinburgh,  without  commotion  or  murmur."     Pinkerton's
History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  308.

31  "  The  king  and  his  ministers  multiplied  the  insults  which  they  offered  to  the  nobility."
.  .  .  "A  proclamation  was  issued,  forbidding  any  person  to  appear  in  arms  within  the
precincts  of  the  court ;  which,  at  a  time  when  no  man  of  rank  left  his  own  house  without
a  numerous  retinue  of  armed  followers,  was  in  effect  debarring  the  nobles  from  all  access
to  the  king."  ..."  His  neglect  of  the  nobles  irritated,  but  did  not  weaken  them."
History  of  Scotland,  book  i.  p.  68,  in  Robertson's  Works,  edit.  London,  1831.

32  Balfour's  Annales,  vol.  i.  pp.  213,  214  ;  Buchanan,  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,
lib.  xii.  p.  358.     Lindsay  of  Pitscottie  (Chronicles,  vol.  i.  p.  222)  says  :  "  This  may  be  ane
example  to  all  kingis  that  cumes  heirefter,  not  to  fall  from  God."  ..."  For,  if  he  had
vsed  the  counsall  of  his  wyselordis  and  barrones,  he  had  not  cum  to  sick  disparatioun."

33  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  folio,  1814,  v°l-  ii-  P-  232-     "  That  the  said
abbaceis  confiirmit  be  thame  sail  neid  na  prouisioun  of  the  court  of  Rome."

34  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  240  ;  and  the  summary  of  the  statute
(p.  21 ),  "  Revocation  of  donations,  statutis,  and  all  uthir  thingis  hurtand  the  croune  or
hali  kirk."      In  the  next  year  (1504)  the  king  "  greatly  augmented  "  the  revenues  of  the
bishoprick  of  Galloway.     Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  p.  417.

35  Pinkerton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  63  ;  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk  of
Scotland,  vol.  viii.  p.  135,  edit.  Wodrow  Society,  Edinburgh,  1849.     The  latter  authority
states  that  "  The  bishop  devysed  wayes  to  King  James  the  Fourth,  how  he  might  attaine
tp  great  gaine  and  profit.     He  advised  him  to  call  his  barons  and  all  those  that  held  any
lands  within  the  realme,  to  show  their  evidents  by  way  of  recognition  ;  and,  if  they  had
not  sufficient  writings  for  their  warrant,  to  dispone  upon  their  lands  at  his  pleasure  ;
for  the  which  advice  he  was  greatlie  hated.      But  the  king  perceaving  the  countrie  to
grudge,  agreed  easilie  with  the  possessors."

36  The  Regency  of  Albany,  little  understood  by  the  earlier  historians,  has  been  carefully
examined  by  Mr.  Tytler,  in  whose  valuable  though  too  prolix  work  the  best  account  of
it  will  be  found.     Ty tier's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  98-160,  Edinburgh,  1845.
On  the  hostility  between  Albany  and  the  nobles,  see  Irving's  History  of  Dumbartonshire,
p.  99  :  and,  on  the  revival  of  their  power  in  the  north,  after  the  death  of  James  IV.,  see
Gregory's  History  of  the  Western  Highlands,  pp.  114,  115.

[*  This  was  precisely  the  kind  of  period  Buckle  had  formerly  described  as  one  in  which
the  Church  could  do  something  for  progress  as  against  mere  feudal  tyranny  ;  and  the  reign
of  James  IV.  was  one  of  great  national  progress  in  industry,  culture,  and  well-being.
Compare  Burton,  iii.  68,  401,  424,  440,  448. — ED.]


662  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

with  him  the  authority  of  the  executive  seemed  to  have  vanished.  The  Douglases
soon  obtained  possession  of  the  person  of  the  king,  and  compelled  Beaton,  Arch-
bishop of  Saint  Andrews,  the  most  influential  man  in  the  Church,  to  resign  the
office  of  chancellor.37  The  whole  command  now  fell  into  their  hands  ;  they  or
their  adherents  filled  every  office  ;  secular  interests  predominated,  and  the  clergy
were  thrown  completely  into  the  shade.38  In  1528,  however,  an  event  occurred
by  which  the  spiritual  classes  not  only  recovered  their  former  position  but  gained
a  pre-eminence  which,  as  it  turned  out,  was  eventually  fatal  to  themselves.  Arch-
bishop Beaton,  impatient  at  proceedings  so  unfavourable  to  the  Church,  organized
a  conspiracy  by  means  of  which  James  effected  his  escape  from  the  Douglases,
and  took  refuge  in  the  castle  of  Stirling.39  This  sudden  reaction  was  not  the  real
and  controlling  cause,  but  it  was  undoubtedly  the  proximate  cause,  of  the  estab-
lishment of  Protestantism  in  Scotland.  For  the  reins  of  government  now  passed
into  the  hands  of  the  Church  ;  and  the  most  influential  of  the  nobles  were  con-
sequently persecuted,  and  some  of  them  driven  from  the  country.  But  though
their  political  power  was  gone,  their  social  power  remained.  They  were  stripped
of  their  honours  and  their  wealth.  They  became  outcasts,  traitors,  and  beggars.
Still  the  real  foundation  of  their  authority  was  unshaken,  because  that  authority
was  the  result  of  a  long  train  of  circumstances,  and  was  based  on  the  affections
of  the  people.*  Therefore  it  was  that  the  nobles,  even  those  who  were  exiled
and  attainted,  were  able  to  conduct  an  arduous  but  eventually  a  successful
struggle  against  their  enemies.  The  desire  of  revenge  whetted  their  exertions,
and  gave  rise  to  a  deadly  contest  between  the  Scotch  aristocracy  and  the  Scotch
Church.  This  most  remarkable  conflict  was  in  some  degree  a  continuation  of
that  which  began  early  in  the  fifteenth  century.  But  it  was  far  more  bitter  ;
it  lasted  without  interruption  for  thirty-two  years  ;  and  it  was  only  concluded
by  the  triumph  of  the  nobles,  who  in  1560  completely  overthrew  the  Church,
and  destroyed  almost  at  a  blow  the  whole  of  the  Scotch  hierarchy.

37  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  180-182  :  "  Within  a  few  months,  there  was
not  an  office  of  trust  or  emolument  in  the  kingdom  which  was  not  filled  by  a  Douglas,
or  by  a  creature  of  that  house."     See  also  pp.  187,  194  ;  and  Keith's  Catalogue  of  Scotch
Bishops,  pp.  22,  23,      Beaton,  who  was  so  rudely  dispossessed  of  the  chancellorship  that,
according  to  Keith,  he  was,  in  1525,  obliged  "  to  lurk  among  his  friends  for  fear  of  his  life,"
is  mentioned,  in  the  preceding  year,  as  having  been  the  main  supporter  of  Albany's
government ;  "  that  most  hath  favoured  the  Duke  of  Albany."     State  Papers  of  the  Reign
of  Henry  VIII.,  vol.  iv.  p.  97,  4to,  1836.

38  The  complete  power  of  the  Douglases  lasted  from  the  cessation  of  Albany's  regency
to  the  escape  of  the  king,  in  1528.     Keith's  History  of  the  Affairs  of  Church  and  State  in
Scotland,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1835,  vol.  i.  pp.  33-35.      Compare  Balfour's  Annales,  vol.  i.
p.  257.  "  The  Earle  of  Angus  violently  takes  one  him  the  gouerniment,  and  retanes  the
king  in  effecte  a  prisoner  with  him  ;  during  wich  tyme  he,  the  Earle  of  Lennox,  and
George  Douglas,  his  auen  brother,  frely  disposses  vpone  all  affaires  both  of  churche  and
staite."

39  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  195,  196.     The  curious  work,  entitled  A
Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  p.  10,  says,  "  In  the  zeir  of  God  1500,  tuantie  aucht  zeiris,  the
kingis  grace  by  slicht  wan  away  fra  the  Douglassis."      From  Stirling  he  repaired  to  Edin-
burgh, on  6th  July,  1528,  and  went  to  "  the  busshop  of  Sainct  Andros  loegeing."     See  a
letter  written  on  the  i8th  of  July,  1528, by  Lord  Dacre  to  Wolsey,  in  State  Papers  of
Henry  VIII.,  vol.  iv.  p.  501,  4to,  1836.     Compare  a  proclamation  on  loth  September,
1528,  in  Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.  part  i.  pp.  138*,  139*,  Edinburgh,
4to,  1833.     I  particularly  indicate  these  documents,  because  Lindsay  of  Pitscottie  (in  his
Chronicles  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  335)  erroneously  places  the  flight  of  James  in  1527  ;  and
he  is  generally  one  of  the  most  accurate  of  the  old  writers,  if  indeed  he  be  the  author  of
the  work  which  bears  his  name.  [This  view  of  Pitscottie's  narrative  is  not  now  held  by
students  of  Scottish  history.     It  is  very  untrustworthy  as  to  dates.     Compare  Hume
Brown,  L  374  ;  and  Lang,  vol.  ii.,  preface,  as  to  his  story  of  the  king's  escape. — ED.]

[*  This  is  an  over -statement.     The  nobles  had  the  "affections  "  of  their  own  retainers
but  hardly  that  of  other  people. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  663

The  events  of  this  struggle,  and  the  vicissitudes  to  which  during  its  con-
tinuance both  parties  were  exposed,  are  related,  though  somewhat  confusedly,
in  our  common  histories  ;  it  will  be  sufficient  if  I  indicate  the  salient  points,  and,
avoiding  needless  detail,  endeavour  to  throw  light  on  the  general  movement.  The
unity  of  the  entire  scheme  will  thus  be  brought  before  our  minds,  and  we  shall  see
that  the  destruction  of  the  Catholic  Church  was  its  natural  consummation,  and
that  the  last  act  of  that  gorgeous  drama,  so  far  from  being  a  strained  and  irregular
sequence,  was  in  fit  keeping  with  the  whole  train  of  the  preceding  plot.

*„ When  James  effected  his  escape  in  1 528,  he  was  a  boy  of  sixteen,  and  his  policy,
so  far  as  he  can  be  said  to  have  had  any  mind  of  his  own,  was  of  course  determined
by  the  clergy,  to  whom  he  owed  his  liberty,  and  who  were  his  natural  protectors.
His  principal  adviser  was  the  Archbishop  of  Saint  Andrews  ;  and  the  important
post  of  chancellor,  which  under  the  Douglases  had  been  held  by  a  layman,  was
now  conferred  on  the  Archbishop  of  Glasgow.40  These  two  prelates  were  supreme;
while  at  the  same  time  the  Abbot  of  Holyrood  was  made  treasurer,  and  the  Bishop
of  Dunkeld  was  made  privy  seal.41  All  nobles,  and  even  all  followers,  of  the
house  of  Douglas,  were  forbidden  to  approach  within  twelve  miles  of  the  court,
under  pain  of  treason.42  An  expedition  was  fitted  out  and  sent  against  the  Earl
of  Caithness,  who  was  defeated  and  slain.43  Just  before  this  occurred,  the  Earl
of  Angus  was  driven  out  of  Scotland,  and  his  estates  confiscated.44  An  act  of
attainder  was  passed  against  the  Douglases.45  The  government,  moreover,
seized  and  threw  into  prison  the  Earl  of  Bothwell,  Home,  Maxwell,  the  two
Kerrs,  and  the  barons  of  Buccleuch,  Johnston,  and  Polwarth.4^

All  this  was  vigorous  enough,  and  was  the  consequence  of  the  Church  recovering
her  power.  Other  measures,  equally  decisive,  were  preparing.  In  1531  the
king  deprived  the  Earl  of  Crawford  of  most  of  his  estates,  and  threw  the  Earl  of
Argyle  into  prison.47  Even  those  nobles  who  had  been  inclined  to  follow  him,
he  now  discouraged.  He  took  every  opportunity  of  treating  them  with  coldness,
while  he  filled  the  highest  offices  with  their  rivals,  the  clergy.48  Finally,  he  in

40  State  Papers  of  Henry  VIII.,  vol.  iv.  p.  501.

41  "  Archibald  was  depryvit  of  the  thesaurarie,  and  placit  thairin  Robert  Cairiicorse,
abbot  of  Halyrudhous.     And  als  was  tane  fra  the  said  Archibald  the  privie  seill,  and  was
givin  to  the  bischope  of  Dunkell."     A  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  p.  n.

42  Tytler  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  196)  says  :  "  His  first  act  was  to  summon  a
council,  and  issue  a  proclamation,  that  no  lord  or  follower  of  the  house  of  Douglas  should
dare  to  approach  within  six  miles  of  the  court,  under  pain  of  treason."     For  this,  no
authority  is  cited  ;  and  the  historian  of  the  Douglas  family  distinctly  states,  "  within
twelve  miles  of  the  king,  under  pain  of  death."     Hume's  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  ii.  p.  99.
See  also  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  p.  10  :  "  that  nane  of  thame  nor  thair  familiaris  cum  neir
the  king  be  tuelf  myllis."      The  reason  was,  that  "  the  said  kingis  grace  haid  greit  suspic-
ioun  of  the  temporall  lordis,  becaus  thaj  favourit  sum  pairt  the  Douglassis."     Diurnal,
p.  12.

43  "  The  Erie  of  Caithnes  and  fyve  hundreth  of  his  men  wes  slayne  an  drownit  in  the
see."     Lesley's  History  of  Scotland,  p.  141.

44  '•Tytler' s  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  203,  204.

45  ^Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  324,  edit,  folio,  1814.

46  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  207.

47  Tytler,  vol.  iv.  p.  212.

48  "  His  preference  of  the  clergy  to  the  temporal  lords  disgusted  these  proud  chiefs."
Tytler' 's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  230.     See  also  p.  236.     His  reasons  are  stated  by
himself,  in  a  curious  letter,  which  he  wrote  so  late  as  1541,  to  Henry  VIII.     "  We  persaif,"
writes  James,  "  be  zoure  saidis  writingis  yat  Ze  ar  informyt  yat  yair  suld  be  sum  thingis
laitlie  attemptat  be  oure  kirkmen  to  oure  hurte  and  skaith,  and  contrar  oure  mynde  and
plesure.     We  can  nocht  understand,  quhat  suld  move  Zou  to  beleif  the  samyn,  assuring
Zou  We  have  nevir  fund  hot  faithfull  and  trew  obedience  of  yame  at  all  tymes,  nor  yai  seik
nor  attemptis  nouthir  jurisdictioun  nor  previlegijs,  forthir  nor  yai  have  usit  sen  the  first
institutioun  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  quhilk  We  may  nocht  apoun  oure  conscience  alter
nor  change  in  ihe  respect  We  have  to  the  honour  and  faith  of  God  and  Halikirk,  and


664  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

1532  aimed  a  deadly  blow  at  their  order  by  depriving  them  of  a  large  part  of  the
jurisdiction  which  they  were  wont  to  exercise  in  their  own  country,  and  to  the
possession  of  which  they  owed  much  of  their  power.  At  the  instigation  of  the
Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  he  established  what  was  called  the  College  of  Justice,
in  which  suits  were  to  be  decided,  instead  of  being  tried  as  heretofore  by  the
barons  at  home  in  their  castles,  It  was  ordered  that  this  new  tribunal  should
consist  of  fifteen  judges,  eight  of  whom  must  be  ecclesiastics  ;  and,  to  make  the
intention  still  more  clear,  it  was  provided  that  the  president  should  invariably
be  a  clergyman.49

This  gave  the  finishing  touch  to  the  whole,  and  it,  taken  in  connexion  with
previous  measures,  exasperated  the  nobles  almost  to  madness.  Their  hatred  of
the  clergy  became  uncontrollable  ;  and  in  their  eagerness  for  revenge  they  not
only  threw  themselves  into  the  arms  of  England,  and  maintained  a  secret  under-
standing with  Henry  VIII.,  but  many  of  them  went  even  further,  and  showed  a
decided  leaning  towards  the  principles  of  the  Reformation.  As  the  enmity
between  the  aristocracy  and  the  Church  grew  more  bitter,  just  in  the  same  pro-
portion did  the  desire  to  reform  the  Church  become  more  marked.  The  love  of
innovation  was  encouraged  by  interested  motives,  until  in  the  course  of  a  few
years  an  immense  majority  of  the  nobles  adopted  extreme  Protestant  opinions  ;
hardly  caring  what  heresy  they  embraced,  so  long  as  they  were  able  by  its  aid
to  damage  a  Church  from  which  they  had  recently  received  the  greatest  injuries,
and  with  which  they  and  their  progenitors  had  been  engaged  in  a  contest  of  nearly
a  hundred  and  fifty  years.50

In  the  meantime,  James  V.  united  himself  closer  than  ever  with  the  hierarchy.
In.  1 534  he  gratified  the  Church  by  personally  assisting  at  the  trial  of  some
heretics,  who  were  brought  before  the  bishops  and  burned.51  The  next  year

douttis  na  inconvenient  be  yame  to  come  to  Ws  and  cure  realme  yerthrou  ;  for  sen-  the
Kirk  wes  first  institute  in  our  realme,  the  stait  yair  of  hes  nevir  failzeit,  bot  hes  remanyt  evir
obedient  to  oure  progenitouris,  and  in  our  tyme  mair  thank e full  to  Ws,  nor  evir  yai  wer  of
before.'"  This  letter,  which,  in  several  points  of  view,  is  worth  reading,  will  be  found  in
State  Papers  of  Henry  VI II., 'vol.  v.  pp.  188-190,  4to,  1836.

49  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  212,  213,  and  Arnofs  History  of  Edinburgh,
4  to,  1788,  p.  468  :  "  fifteen  ordinary  judges,  seven  churchmen,  seven  laymen,  and  a  presi-
dent, whom  it  behoved  to  be  a  churchman."     The  statute,  as  printed  in  the  folio  edition
of  1814  (Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  335 ),  says,  "  xiiij  psoufis  half  spuale
half  temporall  wt  ane  president."      Mr.  Lawson  (Roman  Catholic  Church  in  Scotland,
Edinburgh,  1836,  p.  81 )  supposes  that  it  was  the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  who  advised
the  erection  of  this  tribunal.     [The  costs,  however,  were  met  by  a  tax  laid  on  ecclesiastical
benefices,  which  offended  the  clergy.     (Hume  Brown,  History  of  Scotland,  1899,  i.  380.)
The  number  of  them  among  the  judges  was  not  abnormal  for  the  time. — ED.]

50  Keith,  who  evidently  does  not  admire  this  part  of  the  history  of  his  country,  says,
under  the  year  1546,  "  Several  of  our  nobility  found  it  their  temporal  interest,  as  much
as  their  spiritual,  to  sway  with  the  new  opinions  as  to  religious  matters."     Keith's  Affairs
of  Church  and  State,  vol.  i.  pp.  112, 113.     Later,  and  with  still  more  bluntness:  "  Thenoble-
men  wanted  to  finger  the  patrimony  of  the  kirkmen."  vol.  iii.  p.  n.     [No  proof  is  here
given  that  "  an  immense  majority  of  the  nobles  adopted  extreme  Protestant  opinions,"
and  thestatement  must  be  much  modified.    Extreme  Protestant  opinions  were  at  this  time
very  rare  in  England.     We  know  from  the  correspondence  of  Sir  Ralph  Sadler  that  the
nobles  were  in  general  hostile  to  new  religious  opinions,  however  ready  they  might  be
to  plunder  the  Church.     Tytler,  ed.  1869,  "i-  20.     Mr.  Hume  Brown  even  holds  that
after  the  overthrow  of  the  Church  "  the  great  majority  of  the  country — nobles,  barons,
and  commons— were  still  on  the  side  of  the  old  religion  "  (Hist,  of  Scotland,  ii.  97-)  See  also
below,  note  73. — ED.]

51  "  In  the  month  of  August  (1534),  the  bishops  having  gotten  fitt  opportunitie,  re-
newed their  battell  aganest  Jesus  Christ.     David  Stratilon,  a  gentelman  of  the  House  of
Lawrestoune,  and  Mr.  Norman  Gowrlay,  was  brought  to  judgement  in  the  Abby  of
Halyrudhouse.     The  king  himself,  all  cloathed  with  reid,  being  present,  grait  pains  war
taken  upon  David  Stratoun  to  move  him  to  recant  and  burn  his  bill ;  bot  he,  ever  stand-
ing to  his  defence,  was  in  end  adjudged  to  the  fire.     He  asked  grace  at  the  king.     The


SCOTLAND    IN    XV,    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  665

he  was  offered,  and  he  willingly  accepted,  the  title  of  Defender  of  the  Faith,
which  was  transferred  to  him  from  Henry  VIII.  ;  that  king  being  supposed  to
have  forfeited  it  by  his  impiety.52  At  all  events,  James  well  deserved  it.  He
was  a  staunch  supporter  of  the  Church,  and  his  privy -council  was  chiefly  com-
posed of  ecclesiastics,  as  he  deemed  it  dangerous  to  admit  laymen  to  too  large  a
share  in  the  government.53  And  in  1538  he  still  further  signalized  his  policy
by  taking  for  his  second  wife  Mary  of  Guise  ;  thus  establishing  an  intimate  relation
with  the  most  powerful  Catholic  family  in  Europe,  whose  ambition,  too,  was  equal
to  their  power,  and  who  made  it  their  avowed  object  to  uphold  the  Catholic  faith
and  to  protect  it  from  those  rude  and  unmannerly  invasions  which  were  now
directed  against  it  in  most  parts  of  Europe.54

This  was  hailed  by  the  Church  as  a  guarantee  for  the  intentions  of  the  king.
And  so  indeed  it  proved  to  be.  David  Beaton,  who  negotiated  the  marriage,
became  the  chief  adviser  of  James  during  the  rest  of  his  reign.  He  was  made
Archbishop  of  Saint  Andrews  in  I539,55  and,  by  his  influence,  a  persecution  hotter
than  any  yet  known  was  directed  against  the  Protestants.  Many  of  them
escaped  into  England,56  where  they  swelled  the  number  of  the  exiles,  who  were
waiting  till  the  time  was  ripe  to  take  a  deadly  revenge.  They,  and  their  adher-
ents at  home,  coalesced  with  the  disaffected  nobles,  particularly  with  the  Doug-
lases,57 who  were  by  far  the  most  powerful  of  the  Scotch  aristocracy,  and  who
were  connected  with  most  of  the  great  families,  either  by  old  associations  or  by
the  still  closer  bond  of  the  interest  which  they  all  had  in  reducing  the  power  of  the
Church.ss

bishops  answred  proudlie,  that  '  the  king's  hands  war  bound,  and  that  he  had  no  grace
to  give  to  such  as  were  by  law  condemned.'  So  was  he,  with  Mr.  Norman,  after  dinner,  upon
the  27th  day  of  Agust,  led  to  a  place  beside  the  Rude  of  Greenside,  between  Leth  and;
Ediiibrug,  to  the  intent  that  the  inhabitants  of  Fife,  seeing  the  fire,  might  be  striken  with
terrour  and  feare."  Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.  part  i.  p.  210*.  Also'
Calderwood1  s  Historic  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  106,  107.

52  "  It  appears,  by  a  letter  in  the  State-paper  Office,  that  Henry  remonstrated  against
this  title  being  given  to  James."     Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  223.     See  also1
p.  258.

53  In  1535,  "  his  privy  council  were  mostly  ecclesiastics."     Ibid.  vol.  iv.  p.  222.     And  Sir
Ralph  Sadler,  during  his  embassy  to  Scotland  in  1539-40,  writes  :  "  So  that  the  king,  as  far
as  I  can  perceive,  is  of  force  driven  to  use  the  bishops  and  his  clergy  as  his  only  ministers
for  the  direction  of  his  realm.     They  be  the  men  of  wit  and  policy  that  I  see  here ;  they  be
never  out  of  the  king's  ear.     And  if  they  smell  anything  that  in  the  least  point  may  touch
them,  or  that  the  king  seem  to  be  content  with  any  such  thing,  straight  they  inculk  to
him,  how  catholic  a  prince  his  father  was,  and  feed  him  both  with  fair  words  and  many,
in  such  wise  as  by  those  policies  they  lead  him  (having  also  the  whole  governance  of  his
affairs)  as  they  will."  Slate  Papers  and  Letters  of  Sir  Ralph  Sadler,  Edinb.,  1809,  4to,  vol.  i.
p.  47.     [In  1536,  however,  Angus  writes  to  his  brother  that  the  clergy  are  much  offended
by  the  king's  resistance  to  their  exactions  in  the  way  of  death-duties  and  tithes.     "  J ames
had  alienated  his  nobles  by  repressing  their  disorders.     Now  he  is  alienating  his  clergy
by  repressing  their  greed  "  (Lang,  History  of  Scotland,  1900,  i.  433). — ED.]

54  State  Papers  of  Henry  VIII.,  vol.  v.  p.  128.     A  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  p.  22.     The
Reverend  Mr.  Kirk  ton  pronounces  that  the  new  queen  was  "  ane  egge  of  the  bloody  nest
of  Guise."     Kirkton's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  edited  by  Sharpe,  Edinburgh,
1817,  4to,  p.  7.

55  "At  his  return  home,  he  was  made  coadjutor,  and  declared  future  successor  to  his
uncle  in  the  primacy  of  St.  Andrews,  in  which  see  he  came  to  be  fully  invested  upon  the
death  of  his  uncle  the  next  year,  1539."     Keith's  Catalogue  of  Scotch  Bishops,  pp.  23,  24.

56  M'Crie's  Life  of  Knox,  p.  20.     Spottiswoode' s  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.
p.  139.     Lawson's  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  Scotland,  p.  178.     Wodrow's  Collections  upon
the  Lives  of  the  Reformers,  vol.  i.  p.  100.

57  Tytler  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  241)  says  that  the  cruelties  of  1539  forced
"  many  of  the  persecuted  families  to  embrace  the  interests  of  the  Douglases."

58  It  is  asserted  of  the  Douglases  that  early  in  the  sixteenth  century  their  "  alliances


666  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

At  this  juncture  the  eyes  of  men  were  turned  towards  the  Douglases,  whom
Henry  VIII.  harboured  at  his  court,  and  who  were  now  maturing  their  plans.59
Though  they  did  not  yet  dare  to  return  to  Scotland,  their  spies  and  agents  reported
to  them  all  that  was  done,  and  preserved  their  connections  at  home.  Feudal
covenants,  bonds  of  manrent,  and  other  arrangements,  which,  even  if  illegal,
it  would  have  been  held  disgraceful  to  renounce,  were  in  full  force ;  and  enabled
the  Douglases  to  rely  with  confidence  on  many  of  the  most  powerful  nobles,
who  were,  moreover,  disgusted  at  the  predominance  of  the  clergy,  and  who
welcomed  the  prospect  of  any  change  which  was  likely  to  lessen  the  authority
of  the  Church.so

and  power  were  equal  to  one-half  of  the  nobility  of  Scotland."  Brown's  History  of  Glas-
gow, vol.  i.  p.  8.  See  also,  on  their  connexions,  Hume's  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  i.  pp.  xix.
252,  298,  vol.  ii.  p.  293.

59  Henry  VIII.,  "in  the  year  1532,  sought  it  directly,  among  the  conditions  of  peace,
that  the  Douglas,  according  to  his  promise,  should  be  restored.     For  King  Henry's  own
part,  he  entertained  them  with  all  kind  of  beneficence  and  honour,  and  made  both  the
Earl  and  Sir  George  of  his  Privy  Council."     Hume's  History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,
vol.  ii.  pp.  105, 106.     J  ames  was  very  jealous  of  any  communication  taking  place  between
the  Douglases  and  his  other  subjects  ;  but  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  prevent  it.     See
a  letter  which  he  wrote  to  SirThomasErskine(inMwcd/awy  of  the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  ii.
p.  193,  Aberdeen,  1842,  4to)  beginning,  "  I  commend  me  rycht  hartly  to  yow,  and  weit
ye  that  it  is  murmuryt  hyr  that  ye  sould  a  spolkyn  with  Gorge  and  Archebald  Dougles
in  Ingland,  quhylk  wase  again  my  command  and  your  promys  quhan  we  departyt."  See
also  the  cases  of  Lady  Trakware,  John  Mathesone,  John  Hume,  and  others,  in  Pitcairn's
Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.  part  i.  pp.  161*,  177*,  202*,  243*,  247*.

60  "  The  Douglases  were  still  maintained  with  high  favour  and  generous  allowances
in  England  ;  their  power,  although  nominally  extinct,  was  still  far  from  being  destroyed  ;
their  spies  penetrated  into  every  quarter,  followed  the  king  to  France,  and  gave  infor-
mation of  his  most  private  motions  ;  their  feudal  covenants  and  bands  of  manrent  still
existed,  and  bound  many  of  the  most  potent  nobility  to  their  interest ;  whilst  the  vigour
of  the  king's  government,  and  his  preference  of  the  clergy  to  the  temporal  lords,  dis-
gusted these  proud  chiefs,  and  disposed  them  to  hope  for  a  recovery  of  their  influence
from  any  change  which  might  take  place."     Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  229,
230.     These  bonds  of  manrent,  noticed  by  Tytler,  were  among  the  most  effective  means
by  which  the  Scotch  nobles  secured  their  power.     Without  them,  it  would  have  been
difficult  for  the  aristocracy  to  have  resisted  the  united  force  of  the  Crown  and  the  Church.
On  this  account,  they  deserve  especial  attention.     Chalmers  (Caledonia,  vol.  i.  p.  824)
could  find  no  bond  of  manrent  earlier  than  1354  ;  but  in  Lord  Somerville's  Memorie  of
the  Somervilles,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1815,  vol.  i.  p.  74,  one  is  mentioned  in  1281.     This  is  the
earliest  instance  I  have  met  with  ;    and  they  did  not  become  very  common   till  the
fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries.     Compare  Hume's  History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  vol.
ii.  p.  19.   Somerville's  Memorie  of  the  Somervilles.  vol.  i.  p.  234.    Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials  of
Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  83.     I  rving's  History  of  Dumbartonshire,  pp.  142,143.      Skene's  High-
landers, vol.  ii.  p.  1 86.     Gregory's  History  of  the  Western  Highlands,  p.  126.     Kennedy's
Annals  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  i.  p.  55.     Miscellany  of  the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  ii.  pp.  cvi.  93,  251 ,
vol.  iv.  pp.  xlviii.  179.  As  these  covenants  were  extremely  useful  in  maintaining  the  balance
of  power,  and  preventing  the  Scotch  monarchy  from  becoming  despotic,  acts  of  parlia-
ment were  of  course  passed  against  them.  See  one  in  1457,  and  another  in  i555>  respecting
"  lige  "  and  "  bandis  of  manrent  and  mantenance,"  in  Acts  of  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,
folio,  1814,  vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  495.     Such  enactments  being  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  age,
and  adverse  to  the  exigencies  of  society,  produced  no  effect  upon  the  general  practice,
though  they  caused  the  punishment  of  several  individuals.     Manrent  was  still  frequent
until  about  1620  or  1630,  when  the  great  social  revolution  was  completed  by  which  the
power  of  the  aristocracy  was  subordinated  to  that  of  the  Church.      Then  the  change
of  affairs  effected,  without  difficulty,  and  indeed  spontaneously,  what  the  legislature  had
vainly  attempted  to  achieve.     The  nobles,  gradually  sinking  into  insignificance,  lost
their  spirit,  and  ceased  to  resort  to  those  contrivances  by  which  they  had  long  upheld
their  order.     Bonds  of  manrent  became  every  year  less  common,  and  it  is  doubtful  if
there  is  any  instance  of  them  after  1661.      See  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  pp.  32»  33-


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  667

With  such  a  combination  of  parties  in  a  country  where,  there' being'no  middle
class,*  the  people  counted  for  nothing,  but  followed  wherever  they  were  led,  it  is
evident  that  the  success  or  failure  of  the  Reformation  in  Scotland  was  simply
a  question  of  the  success  or  failure  of  the  nobles.  They  were  bent  on  revenge.
The  only  doubt  was  as  to  their  being  strong  enough  to  gratify  it.  Against
them  they  had  the  Crown  and  the  Church.  On  their  side  they  had  the  feudal
traditions,  the  spirit  of  clanship,  the  devoted  obedience  of  their  innumerable
retainers,  and,  what  was  equally  important,  that  love  of  names  and  of  family
associations  for  which  Scotland  is  still  remarkable,  but  which  in  the  sixteenth
century  possessed  an  influence  difficult  to  exaggerate.

The  moment  for  action  was  now  at  hand.  In  1 540  the  government,  completely
under  the  control  of  the  clergy,  caused  fresh  laws  to  be  enacted  against  the  Pro-
testants, whose  interests  were  by  this  time  identical  with  those  of  the  nobles.
By  these  statutes,  no  one  even  suspected  of  heresy  could  for  the  future  hold  any
office  ;  and  all  Catholics  were  forbidden  to  harbour  or  to  show  favour  to  per-
sons who  professed  the  new  opinions.61  The  clergy,  now  flushed  with  conquest,
and  greedy  for  the  destruction  of  their  ancient  rivals,  proceeded  to  still  further
extremities.  So  unrelenting  was  their  malice  that  in  that  same  year  they  pre-
sented to  James  a  list  containing  the  names  of  upwards  of  three  hundred  mem-
bers of  the  Scotch  aristocracy,  whom  they  formally  accused  as  heretics  who
ought  to  be  put  to  death,  and  whose  estates  they  recommended  the  king  to
confiscate.62

These  hot  and  vindictive  men  little  knew  of  the  storm  which  they  were  evok-
ing, and  which  was  about  to  burst  on  their  heads,  and  cover  them  and  their
Church  with  confusion.  Not  that  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  a  wiser  con-
duct would  have  ultimately  saved  the  Scotch  hierarchy.  On  the  contrary,  the
probability  is  that  their  fate  was  sealed  ;  for  the  general  causes  which  governed
the  entire  movement  had  been  so  long  at  work  that  at  this  period  it  would  have,

It  is,  however,  so  dangerous  to  assert  a  negative  that  I  do  not  wish  to  rely  on  this  date
and  some  few  cases  may  exist  later  ;  but  if  so,  they  are  very  few,  and  it  is  certain  that,
speaking  generally,  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  is  the  epoch  of  their  extinc-
tion.

_61  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  370,  37*'  "That  na  man  quhat-
sueuir  stait  or  conditioun  he  be  luge  ressauve  cherish  nor  favor  ony  heretike."  .  .  .
"  And  alswa  that  na  persoun  that  hes  bene  suspectit  of  heresie  howbeit  thai  be  ressauit
to  penance  and  grace  sail  in  this  realme  exers  haif  nor  brouk  ony  honest  estait  degre
office  nor  judicator  spuall  nor  teporale  in  burgh  nor  w*out  nor  na  salbe  admittit  to  be  of
our  counsale."

62  Lindsay  of  Pitscottie  (Chronicles,  vol.  ii.  p.  383)  says  that  they  "  devysed  to  put
ane  discord  and  variance  betwixt  the  lordis  and  gentlmen  with  thair  prince ;  for  they
delaited,  and  gave  vp  to  the  king  in  writt,  to  the  number  of  thrittie  scoir  of  earles,  lordis,
and  barrones,  gentlmen  and  craftismen,  that  is,  as  thei  alledgit,  wer  all  heretickis,  and
leived  not  after  the  Pope's  lawis,  and  ordinance  of  the  hollie  kirk  ;  quhilk  his  grace
sould  esteme  as  ane  capitall  cry  me,  to  ony  man  that  did  the  same  "  .  .  .  "all  thair
landis,  rentes,  guidis,  and  geir  apperteanis  propperlie  to  your  grace,  for  thair  contempt
of  our  hollie  father  the  Pope,  and  his  lawis,  and  high  contempt  of  your  grace's  authoritie."
This  document  was  found  among  the  king's  papers  after  his  death,  when  it  appeared  that
of  the  six  hundred  names  on  the  list,  more  than  three  hundred  belonged  to  the  principal
nobility  :  "  Bum  timorem  auxerunt  codicilli  post  regis  intritum  reperti,  e  quibus  supra
trecentorum  e  prima  nobilitate  nomina  continebantur."  Buchanan,  Rerum  Scoticarum
Historia,  lib.  xv.  p.  424.  Compare  Sadler's  State  Papers,  1809,  vol.  i.  p.  94  ;  and
Watson's  Historicall  Collections  of  Ecclesiastick Affairs  in  Scotland,  1657,  p.  22.  Accord-
ing to  Watson,  it  "  was  called  the  bloudy  scroll."  ;  _j

"-  [*  "  No  middle  class  "  is  an  over-statement.  The  total  population  being  small,  the
burghs  were  small,  but  they  were  "  in  that  dark  age  the  nurseries  of  industry  and  free-
dom "  (Tytler,  ed.  1869,  ii.  357).  And  where  the  nobles  were  in  large  measure  ready
to  sell  the  national  independence,  the  traders  were  not.  Id.  iii.  19. — ED.]


668  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

been  hardly  possible  to  have  baffled  them.  But  even  if  we  admit  as  certain  that
the  Scotch  clergy  were  doomed,  it  is  also  certain  that  their  violence  made  their
fall  more  grievous,  by  exasperating  the  passions  of  their  adversaries.  The  train
indeed  was  laid  ;  their  enemies  had  supplied  the  materials,  and  all  was  ready  to
explode  ;  but  it  was  themselves  who  at  last  applied  the  match,  and  sprung  the
mine  to  their  own  destruction.

In  1 542  the  nobles,  seeing  that  the  Church  and  the  Crown  were  bent  on  their
ruin,  took  the  most  decisive  step  on. which  they  had  yet  ventured,  and  peremp-
torily refused  to  obey  James  in  making  war  upon  the  English.  They  knew
that  the  war  in  which  they  were  desired  to  participate  had  been  fomented  by  the
clergy,  with  the  twofold  object  of  stopping  all  communication  with  the  exiles,
and  of  checking  the  introduction  of  heretical  opinions.63  Both  these  intentions
they  resolved  to  frustrate,  and,  being  assembled  on  the  field,  they  declared  with
one  voice  that  they  would  not  invade  England.  Threats  and  persuasions  were
equally  useless.  James,  stung  with  vexation,  returned  home,  and  ordered  the
army  to  be  disbanded.  Scarcely  had  he  retired  when  the  clergy  attempted
to  rally  the  troops,  and  to  induce  them  to  act  against  the  enemy.  A  few  of  the
peers,  ashamed  at  what  seemed  a  cowardly  desertion  of  the  king,  appeared  will-
ing to  march.  The  rest  however  refused  ;  and  while  they  were  in  this  state
of  doubt  and  confusion,  the  English,  taking  them  unawares,  suddenly  fell  upon
their  disorderly  ranks,  utterly  routed  them,  and  made  a  large  number  prisoners.
In  this  disgraceful  action  ten  thousand  Scotch  troops  fled  before  three  hundred
English  cavalry.64  The  news  being  brought  to  James,  while  he  was  still  smart-
ing from  the  disobedience  of  the  nobles,  was  too  much  for  his  proud  and  sensitive
mind.  He  reeled  under  the  double  shock  ;  a  slow  fever  wasted  his  strength  ;
he  sunk  into  a  long  stupor  ;  and,  refusing  all  comfort,  he  died  in  December,
1542,  leaving  the  Crown  to  his  infant  daughter,  Mary,  during  whose  reign  the
great  contest  between  the  aristocracy  and  the  Church  was  to  be  finally  decided.65

63  In  the  autumn  of   1542  James  "  was  encouraged  by  the  clergy  to  engage  in  a  war
against  King  Henry,  who  both  assured  him  of  victory,  since  he  fought  against  an  hereti-
cal prince,  and  advanced  an  annuity  of  50,000  crowns  for  prosecuting  the  war."     Craw-
/urd's  History  of  the  Shire  of  Renfrew,  1782,  4to,  part  i.  p.  48.     Compare  in  State  Papers
of  Henry  VIII. ,  vol.  v.  p.  154,  a  letter  written  in  1539  by  Norfolk  to  Cromwell :  "  By
diverse  other  waies  I  am  advertised  that  the  clergie  of  Scotlande  be  in  such  feare  that  their
king  shold  do  theire,  as  the  kinges  highnes  hath  done  in  this  realme,  that  they  do  their
best  to  bring  their  master  to  the  warr  ;  and  by  many  waies  I  am  advertised  that  a  great
parte  of  the  temporaltie  there  wold  their  king  shold  followe  our  insample,  wich  I  pray  God
yeve  hym  grace  to  come  unto."     Even  after  the  battle  of  Solway,  the  policy  of  the  clergy
was  notoriously  the  same.     "  And  undoubtedlie  the  kyrkemen  labor,  by  all  the  meanes
they  can,  to  empeche  the  unitie  and  establishment  of  thiese  two  realmes  ;  uppon  what
groundes  ye  can  easelie  conjecture."     Letter  from  Sadler  to  Parr,  dated  Edinburgh,
27th  March  1543,  iQ  State  Papers  of  Henry  VIII.,  vol.  v.  p.  271,  4to,  1836.    [The  nobles
argued  primarily  that  the  war  was  in  the  interest  of  France  and  not  of  Scotland.     It
seems  to  have  been  on  their  urging  the  risk  of  his  being  killed  and  leaving  no  heir  (and
thus  leaving  the  country  to  the  troubles  which  had  followed  on  the  death  of  his  father)
that  he  stayed  behind.     Hume  Brown  i,  393. — ED.]

64  "  Ten  thousand  Scottish  troops  fled  at  the  sight  of  three  hundred  English  cavalry,
with  scarce  a  momentary  resistance."     Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  264.
[This,  the  traditional  narrative,  deriving  from  Knox,  is  now  discredited-     Despatches
found  in  the  Hamilton  Papers  show  that  the  English  numbered  3,000,  not  300  ;  that  the
disputes  of  the  nobles  threw  the  Scots  army  into  confusion,  though  the  leaders  sought
to  steady  it ;  and  that  the  rout  took  place  at  the  ford  of  the  Esk,  which  was  crossed  in
confusion.     Compare  Hume  Brown,  i.  393-4  ;  Lang,  i.  453-5. — ED.]

•s  The  best  account  of  these  events  will  be  found  in  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,
vol.  iv.  pp.  260-267.  I  have  also  consulted  Ridpath's  Border  History,  pp.  372,  a73-
Hollinshead's  Scottish  Chronicle,  vol.  ii.  pp.  207-209.  Lesley's  History,  pp.  163-166.
Lindsay  of  Pitscottie's  Chronicles,  vol.  ii.  pp.  399-406.  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk
of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  145-152.  Buchanan,  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,  lib.  xiv,  pp.  420
421.


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  669

The  influence  of  the  nobles  was  increased  by  the  death  of  James  V. ,  and  yet  more
by  the  bad  repute  into  which  the  clergy  fell  for  having  instigated  a  war  of  which
the  result  was  so  disgraceful.66  Their  party  was  still  further  strengthened  by  the
exiles,  who,  as  soon  as  they  heard  the  glad  tidings,  prepared  to  leave  England.67
Early  in  1543  Angus  and  Douglas  returned  to  Scotland,68  and  were  soon  followed
by  other  nobles,  most  of  whom  professed  to  be  Protestants,  though,  as  the  result
clearly  proved,  their  Protestantism  was  inspired  by  a  love  of  plunder  and  of
revenge.  The  late  king  had  in  his  will  appointed  Cardinal  Beaton  to  be  guar-
dian of  the  queen,  and  governor  of  the  realm.6^  Beaton,  though  an  unprin-
cipled man,*was  very  able,  and  was  respected  as  the  head  of  the  national  church  ;
he  being  Archbishop  of  Saint  Andrews,  and  primate  of  Scotland.  The  nobles,
however,  at  once  arrested  him,70  deprived  him  of  his  regency,  and  put  in  his  place
the  Earl  of  Arran,  who  at  this  time  affected  to  be  a  zealous  Protestant,  though
on  a  fitting  occasion  he  afterwards  changed  his  opinions.71  Among  the  sup-

';':  "  This  defeat  being  so  very  dishonourable,  especially  to  the  clergy,  who  stirred  up
the  king  to  that  attempt,  and  promised  him  great  success  from  it ;  and  there  being  such
a  visible  evidence  of  the  anger  of  God,  fighting  by  his  providence  against  them,  all  men
were  struck  with  fear  and  astonishment ;  the  bishops  were  ashamed  to  show  their  faces
for  a  time."  Stevenson's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  reprinted,  Edinburgh,  1840,
p.  30.

67  We  may  readily  believe  the  assertion  of  an  old  chronicler,  that  "  the  nobilitie  did
not  greatlie  take  his  death  grievouslie,  because  he  had  fined  manie,  imprisoned  more,
and  caused  nosmallfew  (for  avoiding  his  displeasure)  to  flie  into  England,  and  rather  to
commit  themselves  to  the  enemie  than  to  his  anger."  Hollinshead's  Scottish  Chronicle,
vol.  ii.  p.  210.

t:8  Hume's  History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  ii.  p.  in.

fi9  It  has  been  often  said  that  this  will  was  forged  ;  but  for  such  an  assertion  I  cannot
find  the  slightest  evidence,  except  the  declaration  of  Arran  (Sadler's  State  Papers,
Edinburgh,  1809,  vol.  i.  p.  138),  and  the  testimony,  if  testimony  it  can  be  called,  of  Scotch
historians,  who  do  not  profess  to  have  examined  the  handwriting,  and  who,  being  them-
selves Protestants,  seem  to  suppose  that  the  fact  of  a  man  being  a  cardinal  qualifies
him  for  every  crime.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Beaton  was  thoroughly  unprincipled,
and  therefore  was  capable  of  the  forgery.  Still  we  have  no  proof,  and  the  will  is  such
as  we  might  have  expected  from  the  king.  In  regard  to  Arran,  his  affirmation  is  not
worth  the  paper  it  is  written  on  :  for  he  hated  Beaton  ;  he  was  himself  very  unscru-
pulous; and  he  succeeded  to  the  post  which  Beaton  had  to  vacate  on  the  ground  that  the
will  was  forged.  If  such  circumstances  do  not  disqualify  a  witness,  some  of  the  best-
established  principles  of  evidence  are  false.  The  reader  who  cares  to  look  further  into
this  subject  may  compare,  in  favour  of  the  will  being  forged,  Buchanan,  Rerum  Scot-
icarum  Historia,  lib.  xv.  p.  422,  Abredoniae,  1762  ;  Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  edit.
Laing,  Edinburgh,  1846,  vol.  i.  .pp.  91,  92  ;  Irving's  History  of  Dumbartonshire,  second
edition,  410,  1860,  p.  102  ;  and  in  favour  of  its  being  genuine,  Lyon's  History  of  St.
Andrews,  Edinburgh,  1843,  vol.  i.  pp. 304, 305.  Some  other  writers  on  the  subject  leave  it
doubtful:  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  1845,  vol.  iv. p.  274  ;  Lawson's  Roman  Church  in
Scotland,  1836,  p.  99  ;  and  a  note  in  Keith's  Church  and  State  in  Scotland,  1844,  vol.  i.  p.
63.  [  Mr.  Hume  Brown,  ii.  4,  note,,  citing  article  by  D.  Hay  Fleming,  in  Contemp.
Review,  Sept.  1898,  decides  that  "there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Beaton  did  forge  the
will."  Dr.  Fleming's  case  is  certainly  very  strong. — ED.]

70  On  the  26th  of  January,  1542-3,  "  the  said  cardinall  was  put  in  pressoune  in  Dal-
keith."     A  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  p.  26.     See  also,  respecting  his  imprisonment,  a  letter
written,  on  the  i6th  of  March,  by  Angus  and  Douglas,  in  State  Papers  of  Henry  VIII.,
vol.  v.  p.  263.     He  was  then  in  "  firmance."

71  His  appointment  was  confirmed  by  parliament  on  the  i2th  of  March.     Acts  of  the
Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  411 :  "  tutor  lau^ullto  the  quenis  grace  and  gounour
of  this  realme."     He  excluded  the  clergy  from  power.     On  2oth  March,  in  the  same
year,  Sir  Ralph  Sadler  writes  to  Henry  VIII.,  that  Sir  George  Douglas  "  brought  me

[*  It  is  necessary  to  remember  that  in  this  respect  Beaton  had  many  rivals  among
the  nobles.— ED.]


670  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

porters  of  the  new  creed,  the  most  powerful  were  the  Earl  of  Angus  and  the
Douglases.  They  were  now  freed  from  a  proscription  of  fifteen  years  ;  their
attainder  was  reversed,  and  their  estates  and  honours  were  restored  to  them.72
It  was  evident  that  not  only  the  executive  authority,  but  also  the  legislative,
had  passed  from  the  Church  to  the  aristocracy,  And  they  who  had  the  power
were  not  sparing  in  the  use  of  it.  Lord  Maxwell,  one  of  the  most  active  of  their
party,  had,  like  most  of  them  in  their  zeal  against  the  hierarchy,  embraced  the
principles  of  the  Reformation.73  In  the  spring  of  1543  he  obtained  the  sanction
of  the  Earl  of  Arran,  the  governor  of  Scotland,  for  a  proposal  which  he  made
to  the  Lords  of  the  Articles,  whose  business  it  was  to  digest  the  measures  to  be
brought  before  Parliament.  The  proposal  was  that  the  people  should  be  allowed
to  read  the  Bible  in  a  Scotch  or  English  translation.  The  clergy  arrayed  all
their  force  against  what  they  rightly  deemed  a  step  full  of  danger  to  themselves,
as  conceding  a  fundamental  principle  of  Protestantism.  But  all  was  in  vain.
The  tide  had  set  in  and  was  not  to  be  turned.  The  proposition  was  adopted
by  the  Lords  of  the  Articles.  On  their  authority  it  was  introduced  into  Par-
liament. It  was  passed.  It  received  the  assent  of  the  government  ;  and  amid
the  lamentations  of  the  Church  it  was  proclaimed,  with  every  formality,  at  the
market-cross  of  Edinburgh.74

Scarcely  had  the  nobles  thus  attained  the  upper  hand,  when  they  began  to  quarrel
among  themselves.  They  were  resolved  to  plunder  the  Church  ;  but  they
could  not  agree  as  to  how  the  spoil  should  be  shared.  Neither  could  they  deter-
mine as  to  the  best  mode  of  proceeding  ;  some  being  in  favour  of  an  open  and
immediate  schism,  while  others  wished  to  advance  cautiously,  and  to  temporize
with  their  opponents,  that  they  might  weaken  the  hierarchy  by  degrees.  The
more  active  and  zealous  section  of  the  nobles  were  known  as  the  English  party,75
owing  to  the  intimate  connexion  with  Henry  VIII.,  from  whom  many  of  them
received  supplies  of  money.  But  in  1544  war  broke  out  between  the  two
countries,  and  the  clergy,  headed  by  Archbishop  Beaton,  roused  with  such
success  the  old  feelings  of  national  hatred  against  the  English,  that  the  nobles
were  compelled  for  a  moment  to  bend  before  the  storm,  and  to  advocate  an

into  the  council -chamber,  where  I  found  a  great  number  of  noblemen  and  others  at  a
long  board,  and  divers  standing,  but  not  one  bishop  nor  priest  among  them.  At  the  upper
end  of  the  board  sat  the  governour."  Sadler's  State  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  78.

72  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp,  415,  419,  424,  423*  ;  and  Tytler's
History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  285.

73  "  Had  become  a  convert  to  its  doctrines."     Tytler's  Hist,  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p,  286.
But  he,  as  well  as  the  other  nobles,  neither  knew  nor  cared  much  about  doctrines  ;  and
he  was,  moreover,  very  venal.     In  April,  1543,  Sir  Ralph  Sadler  writes  to  Henry  VIII. ;
"  And  the  lord  Maxwell  told  me  apart,  '  That,  indeed,  he  lacked  silver,  and  had  no  way
of  relief  but  to  your  majesty  ; '  which  he  prayed  me  to  signify  unto  the  same.      I  asked
him  what  would  relieve  him  ?  and  he  said,  soo/.  ;  '  for  the  which,'  he  said,  '  as  your
majesty  seemed,  when  he  was  with  your  grace,  to  have  him  in  more  trust  and  credit  than
the  rest  of  your  majesty's  prisoners,  so  he  trusted  to  do  you  as  good  service  as  any  of
them  ;  and  amongst  them  they  will  do  you  such  service,  as,  if  the  war  succeed,  ye  shall
make  an  easy  conquest  of  this  realm  ;    as  for  his  part  he  shall  deliver  into  your  hands,
at  the  entry  of  your  army,  the  keys  of  the  same  on  the  west  marches,  being  all  the  strongholds
there  in  his  custody.''     I  offered  him  presently  to  write  to  my  lord  of  Suffolk  for  ioo/.  for
him,  if  he  would  ;  but  he  said,  '  he  would  stay  till  he  heard  again  from  your  majesty
in  that  behalf.'  "     Sadler's  State  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  165.

74  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  415,  425.      Sadler's  State  Papers,
vol.  i.  p.  83.     Knox,inhis  History  of  the  Reformation  (edit.  Laing,  vol.  i.  p.  ioo),  archly
says,   "  The  cleargy  hearto  long  repugned  ;  butt  in  the  end,  convicted  by  reassonis,
and  by  multitud  of  votes  in  thare  contrare,  thei  also  condiscended  ;  and  so,  by  Act  of  Par-
liament, it  was  maid  free  to  all  man  and  woman  to  reid  the  Scriptures  in  thair  awin  toung,
or  in  the  Engliss  toung  ;  and  so  war  all  Actes  maid  in  the  contrair  abolished."

75  Or,  as  Keith  calls  them,  "  English  lords."     History  of  the  Affairs  of  Church  and
State  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  80.


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  671

alliance  with  France.  Indeed,  it  seemed  for  a  few  months  as  if  the  Church
and  aristocracy  had  forgotten  their  old  and  inveterate  hostility,  and  were  about
to  unite  their  strength  in  one  common  cause.76

This  however  was  but  a  passing  delusion.  The  antagonism  between  the
two  classes  was  irreconcilable.77  In  the  spring  of  1545  the  leading  Protestant
nobles  formed  a  conspiracy  to  assassinate  Archbishop  Beaton,78  whom  they
hated  more  than  anyone  else,  partly  because  he  was  the  head  of  the  Church,
and  partly  because  he  was  the  ablest  and  most  unscrupulous  of  their  opponents.
A  year,  however,  elapsed  before  their  purpose  could  be  effected  ;  and  it  was
not  till  May,  1546,  that  Lesley,  a  young  baron,  accompanied  by  the  Laird  of
Grange  and  a  few  others,  burst  into  Saint  Andrews,  and  murdered  the  primate
in  his  own  castle.79

76  In  May,  1544,  the  English  attacked  Scotland,  Tytler's  History,  vol.  iv.  p.  316  :
and  in  that  same  month,  the  "  Anglo -Scottish  party  "  consisted  only  of  the  Earls  of
Lennox  and  of  Glencairn,  since  even  "  Angus,  George  Douglas,  and  their  numerous  and
powerful  adherents,  joined  the  cardinal."  p.  319.     As  to  the  part  taken  by  the  Scotch
clergy,  see,  in  Sadler's  State  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  173,  a  letter  to  Henry  VIII.,  written  on  the
ist  of  May,  1543 :  "  And  as  to  the  kirk-men,  I  assure  your  majesty  they  seek  the  war
by  all  the  means  they  can,  and  do  daily  entertain  the  noblemen  with  money  and  rewards
to  sustain  the  wars,  rather  than  there  should  be  any  agreement  with  your  majesty  ;
thinking,  verily,  that  if  peace  and  unity  succeed,  that  they  shall  be  reformed,  and  lose
their  glory,  which  they  had  rather  die,  and  put  all  this  realm  in  hazard,  than  they  would
forego."     See  also  p.  184,  note.

77  Buchanan  records  a  very  curious  conversation  between  the  Regent  and  Douglas,
which,  as  I  do  not  remember  to  have  met  with  it  elsewhere,  I  shall  transcribe.     The
exact  date  of  it  is  not  mentioned  but,  from  the  context  it  evidently  took  place  in  1544
or  1545.     "  Ibi  cum  Prorex  suam  de  ploraret  solitudinem,  et  se  a  nobilitate  derelictum
quereretur,  Duglassius  ostendit  '  id  ipsius  culpa  fieri,  non  nobilium,  qui  et  fortunas
omnes  et  vitam  ad  publicam  salutem  tuendam  conferrent,  quorum  consilio  contempto
ad  sacrificulorum  nutum  circumageretur,  qui  foris  imbelles,  domi  seditiosi,  omniumque
periculorum  expertes  alieni  laboris  fructu  ad  suas  voluptates  abuterentur.     Ex  hoc
fonte  inter  te  et  proceres  facta  est  suspitio,  quae  (quod  neutri  alteris  fidatis)  rebus
gerendis  maxime  est  impedimento.' "     Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,  lib.   xv.   p.   435-
Buchanan  was  at  this  time  about  thirty-eight  years  old  ;    and  that  some  such  conver-
sation as  that  which  he  narrates  actually  took  place  is,  I  think,  highly  probable,  though
the  historian  may  have  thrown  in  some  touches  of  his  own.     At  all  events,  he  was  too
great  a  rhetorician  to  invent  what  his  contemporaries  would  deem  unlikely  to  happen  ;
so  that,  from  either  point  of  view,  the  passage  is  valuable  as  an  evidence  of  the  deep-
rooted  hostility  which  the  nobles  bore  towards  the  Church.

78  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  337.     "  The  plot  is  entirely  unknown  either
to  our  Scottish  or  English  historians  ;  and  now,  after  the  lapse  of  nearly  three  centuries,
has  been  discovered  in  the  secret  correspondence  of  the  State-paper  Office."     The  first
suggestion  of  the  murder  was  in  April,  1544.     See  State  Papers  of  Henry  VIII.,  vol.  v.
p.  377,  and  the  end  of  the  Preface  to  vol.  iv.     But  Mr.  Tytler  and  the  editor  of  the  Stale
Papers  appear  to  have  overlooked  a  still  earlier  indication  of  the  coming  crime  in  Sadler's
Papers.     See,  in  that  collection,  vol.  i.  p.  77,  a  conversation,  held  in  March,  i543»  be-
tween Sir  Ralph  Sadler  and  the  Earl  of  Arran  ;  Sadler  being  conducted  by  the  Earl  of
Glencairn.    On  that  occasion,  the  Earl  of  Arran  used  an  expression  concerning  Beaton,  the
meaning  of  which  Sir  Ralph  evidently  understood.     "  '  By  God,'  quoth  he,  '  he  shall
never  come  out  of  prison  whilst  I  may  have  mine  own  will,  except  it  be  to  his  farther
mischief:     I  allowed  the  same  well"   (replied  Sadler),  "and  said,  'It  were  pity,  but  he
should  receive  such  reward  as  his  merits  did  require.'  "

TO  State  Papers  of  Henry  VIII.,  vol.  v.  p.  560.  A  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  p.  42.  Colder-
wood's  History  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  221-223.  Lindsay  of  Pitscottie
(Chronicles,  vol.  ii.  p.  484)  relates  a  circumstance  respecting  the  murder  which  is  too
horrible  to  mention,  and  of  which  it  is  enough  to  say,  that  it  consisted  of  an  obscene
outrage  committed  on  the  corpse  of  the  victim.  Though  such  facts  cannot  now  be
published,  they  are  so  characteristic  of  the  age,  that  they  ought  not  to  be  passed  over
in  complete  silence,


672  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  horror  with  which  the  Church  heard  of  this  foul  and  barbarous  deed  80
may  be  easily  imagined.  But  the  conspirators,  nothing  daunted,  and  relying  on
the  support  of  a  powerful  party,  justified  their  act,  seized  the  castle  of  Saint
Andrews,  and  prepared  to  defend  it  to  the  last.  And  in  this  resolution  they
were  upheld  by  a  most  remarkable  man,  who  now  first  appeared  to  public  view,
and  who,  being  admirably  suited  to  the  age  in  which  he  lived,  was  destined  to
become  the  most  conspicuous  character  of  those  troublous  times.

That  man  was  John  Knox.  To  say  that  he  was  fearless  and  incorruptible,
that  he  advocated  with  unflinching  zeal  what  he  believed  to  be  the  truth,  and
that  he  devoted  himself  with  untiring  energy  to  what  he  deemed  the  highest
of  all  objects,  is  only  to  render  common  justice  to  the  many  noble  attributes
which  he  undoubtedly  possessed.  But  on  the  other  hand  he  was  stern,  un-
relenting, and  frequently  brutal  ;  he  was  not  only  callous  to  human  suffering,
but  he  could  turn  it  into  a  jest,  and  employ  on  it  the  resources  of  his  coarse
though  exuberant  humour;81  and  he  loved  power  so  inordinately,  that,  unable
to  brook  the  slightest  opposition,  he  trampled  on  all  who  crossed  his  path,  or
stood  even  for  a  moment  in  the  way  of  his  ulterior  designs.

The  influence  of  Knox  in  promoting  the  Reformation  has  indeed  been  grossly
exaggerated  by  historians,  who  are  too  apt  to  ascribe  vast  results  to  individual
exertions  ;  overlooking  those  large  and  general  causes,  in  the  absence  of  which
the  individual  exertion  would  be  fruitless.  Still  he  effected  more  than  any
single  man;82  although  the  really  important  period  of  his  life,  in  regard  to
Scotland,  was  in  and  after  1559,  when  the  triumph  of  Protestantism  was  already
secure,  and  when  he  reaped  the  benefit  of  what  had  been  effected  during  his
long  absence  from  his  own  country.  His  first  effort  was  a  complete  failure,
and  more  than  any  one  of  his  actions  has  injured  his  reputation.  This  was  the
sanction  which  he  gave  to  the  cruel  murder  of  Archbishop  Beaton,  in  1546.
He  repaired  to  the  Castle  of  Saint  Andrews ;  he  shut  himself  up  with  the  assassins  ;*
he  prepared  to  share  their  fate  ;  and,  in  a  work  which  he  afterwards  wrote,
openly  justified  what  they  had  done.83  For  this  nothing  can  excuse  him  ;

80  Respecting  which,  two  Scotch   Protestant  historians  have  expressed  themselves
in  the  following  terms:    "God  admonished   men,  by  this   judgement,. that  he  will  in
end  be  avenged  upon  tyranns  for  their  crueltie,  howsoever  they  strenthen  themselves."
Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  224.      And  whoever  considers  all
the  circumstances  "  must  acknowledge  it  was  a  stupendous  act  of    the  judgment  of
the  Lord,  and  that  the  whole  was  overruled  and  guided  by  Divine  Providence."     Ste-
venson's History  of  the  Church  and  State  of  Scotland,  p.  38.

81  Even  the  editor  of  M'Crie's  Life  of  Knox,  Edinburgh,  1841,  p.  xxxv.,  notices  "  the
ill-timed  merriment  he  displays  in  relating  the  foul  deed  "  of  Beaton's  murder.

82  Shortly  before  his  death  he  said, with  honest  and  justifiable  pride,  "What  I  have
been  to  my  countrie,  albeit   this  vnthankfull  aige  will  not  knowe,  yet  the  aiges  to  come
wil  be  compelled  to  bear  witnes  to  the  treuth."     Bannatyne's  Journal,  Edinburgh,
1806,  p.  119.     Bannatyne  was  Knox's  secretary.     It  is  to  be  regretted  that  no  good
life  of  Knox  should  have  yet  been  published.     That  by  M'Crie  is  an  undistinguishing
and  injudicious  panegyric,  which,  by  provoking  a  reaction  of  opinion,  has  damaged  the
reputation  of  the  great  reformer.     On  the  other  hand,  the  sect  of  Episcopalians  in  Scot-
land are  utterly  blind  to  the  real  grandeur  of  the  man,  and  unable  to  discern  his  intense
love  of  truth,  and  the  noble  fearlessness  of  his  nature.

83  Tytler's  History  of  Scoltand,  vol.  iv.  pp.  374,  375.     M'Crie's  Life  of  Knox,  pp.  27,
28.     Lawson's  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  Scotland,  p.  154.     Presbytery  Displayed,  1663,
4to,  p.  28.    Shield's  Hind  Let  Loose,  1687,  pp.  14,  39,  638,    In  his  History  of  the  Reforma-
tion, edit.  Laing,  vol.  i.  pp.  177,  180,  he  calls  it  a  "  godly  fact,"  and  says,  "  These  ar  the
workis  of  our  God;"  which,  in  plain  language',  is  terming  the  Deity  an  assassin.     But,

[*  This  account  is  unfair  to  Knox.  Mr.  Hume  Brown  more  justly  writes  that  "  After
being  hunted  from  place  to  place  as  a  heretic  and  a  friend  of  England,  John  Knox  was
driven  to  seek  refuge  with  the  murderers  of  ths  Cardinal."  History  of  Scotland,  ii.
(1902)  27-— ED.}


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  673

and  it  is  with  a  certain  sense  of  satisfied  justice  that  we  learn  that  in  1547,
the  castle  being  taken  by  the  French,  Knox  was  treated  with  great  severity,
and  was  made  to  work  at  the  galleys,  from  which  he  was  not  liberated  till  1 549-84

During  the  next  five  years  Knox  remained  in  England,  which  he  quitted  in
1554,  and  arrived  at  Dieppe.85  He  then  travelled  abroad  ;  and  did  not  revisit
Scotland  till  the  autumn  of  1555,  when  he  was  eagerly  welcomed  by  the  prin-
cipal nobles  and  their  adherents.86  From  some  cause,  however,  which  has  not
been  sufficiently  explained,  but  probably  from  an  unwillingness  to  play  a  subor-
dinate part  among  those  proud  chiefs,  he  in  July,  1556,  again  left  Scotland,
and  repaired  to  Geneva,  where  he  had  been  invited  to  take  charge  of  a  congrega-
tion.87 He  stayed  abroad  till  1559,  by  which  time  the  real  struggle  was  almost
over  ;  so  completely  had  the  nobles  succeeded  in  sapping  the  foundations  of  the
Church.

For  the  course  of  events,  having  been  long  prepared,  was  now  rapid  indeed.
In  1554  the  queen  dowager  had  succeeded  Arran  as  regent.88  She  was  that
Mary  of  Guise  whose  marriage  with  James  V.  we  have  noticed  as  one  of  the
indications  of  the  policy  then  prevailing.  If  left  alone,  she  would  probably
have  done  little  harm ; 89  but  her  powerful  and  intolerant  family  exhorted  her
to  suppress  the  heretics,  and,  as  a  natural  part  of  the  same  scheme,  to  put  down
the  nobles.  By  the  advice  of  her  brothers,  the  Duke  of  Guise  and  the  Cardinal
of  Lorraine,  she  in  1555  proposed  to  establish  a  standing  army,  to  supply  the
place  of  the  troops,  which  consisted  of  the  feudal  barons  and  their  retainers.
Such  a  force,  being  paid  by  the  Crown,  would  have  been  entirely  under  its  con-
trol ;  but  the  nobles  saw  the  ulterior  design,  and  compelled  Mary  to  abandon
it,  on  the  ground  that  they  and  their  vassals  were  able  to  defend  Scotland  without
further  aid.90  Her  next  attempt  was  to  consolidate  the  interests  of  the  Catholic

bad  as  this  is,  I  agree  with  M'Crie  that  there  is  no  trustworthy  evidence  for  deeming
him  privy  to  the  murder.  Compare,  however,  A  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  p.  42,  with
Lyon's  History  of  St.  Andrews,  vol.  ii.  p.  364.  [Knox  testified  of  the  assassins  that
"  their  corrupt  life  could  not  escape  punishment  of  God  "  (Hume  Brown,  as  cited,  ii.  27).
—ED.]

84  M'Crie's  Life  of  Knox,  pp.  38,  43,  350.     Argyll's  Presbytery  Examined,  1848,  p.  19.

85  M'Crie' s  Life  of  Knox,  pp.  44,  71.

80  Ibid.,  p.  99.  As  to  the  nobles,  who  received  him  and  heard  him  preach,  see
p.  102.

87  "  Influenced  by  motives  which  have  never  been  fully  comprehended,  he  departed
to  Geneva,  where  for  a  time  he  became  pastor  of  a  Protestant  congregation."     Russell's
History  of  the  Church  in  Scotland,  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  193.     M'Crie,  who  sees  no  difficulty,
simply  says,  "  In  the  month  of  July,  15 56,  he  left  Scotland,  and,  having  arrived  at  Dieppe,
he  proceeded  with  his  family  to  Geneva."     Life  of  Knox,  p.  107.

88  Knox,  in  his  savoury  diction,  likens  her  appointment  to  putting  a  saddle  on  the
back  of  a  cow.     "  She  maid  Regent  in  the  year  of  God  1554  ;  and  a  crouneputt  upone
hir  head,    als  seimlye  a  sight  (yf   men   had   eis),    as   to    putt    a    sadill   upoun  the
back  of  ane  unrewly  kow."     I  copy  this  passage  from  Mr.  Laing's  excellent  edition
of  Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  i.  p.  242  ;  but  in  Watson's  Historicalt  Collections
of  Ecclesiastick  Affairs  in  Scotland,  1657,  p.  73,  there  is  a  slightly  different  version.      '  '  As
seemly  a  sight,'  saith  John  Knox,  in  the  new  gospel  language,  '  as  to  put  the  saddle  upon
the  back  of  an  unruly  sow.'  "

89  The  Duke  of  Argyll,  in  his  Presbytery  Examined,  p.  9,  calls  her  "  ambitious  and
intriguing."     Not  only,  however,  is  she  praised  by  Lesley  (History,  pp.  289,  290),  which
might  have  been  expected,  but  even  Buchanan  does  justice  to  her,  in  a  passage  unusually
gracious  for  so  Protestant  and  democratic  a  writer.     "  Mors  ejus  varie  mentes  hominum
affecit.     Nametapud  quosdam  eorum,  quibuscum  armis  contendit,  non  mediocre  sui
desiderium  reliquit.      Erat  enim  singular!  ingenio  praedita,  et  animo  ad  aequitatem
admodum  propenso."     Buchanan,  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,  lib.  xvi.  p.  487.

9°  History  of  Scotland,  book  ii.  p.  91,  in  Robertson's  Works,  1831.  Tytler's  History,
vol.  v.  pp.  22,  23.  It  appears  from  Lesley  (History,  pp.  254,  255).  that  some  ^of  the
nobles  were  in  favour  of  this  scheme,  hoping  thereby  to  gain  favour.  "  Albeit  sum

43


674  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

party,  which  she  effected  in  1558,  by  ^marrying  her  daughter  to  the  dauphin.
This  increased  the  influence  of  the  Guises,91  whose  niece,  already  queen  of  Scot-
land, would  now,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,  become  queen  of  France.
They  urged  their  sister  to  extreme  measures,  and  promised  to  assist  her  with
French  troops.  On  the  other  hand  the  nobles  remained  firm,  and  prepared  for
the  struggle.  In  December,  1557,  several  of  them  had  drawn  up  a  covenant,
agreeing  to  stand  by  each  other*  and  to  resist  the  tyranny  with  which  they  were
threatened.92  They  now  took  the  name  of  Lords  of  the  Congregation,  and
sent  forth  their  agents  to  secure  the  subscriptions  of  those  who  wished  for  a
reformation  of  the  Church.93  They  moreover  wrote  to  Knox,  whose  style  of
preaching,  being  very  popular,  would,  they  thought,  be  useful  in  stirring  up
the  people  to  rebellion.94  He  was  then  in  Geneva,  and  did  not  arrive  in  Scotland
till  May,  I559,95  by  which  time  the  result  of  the  impending  contest  was  hardly
doubtful,  so  successful  had  the  nobles  been  in  strengthening  their  party,  and  so
much  reason  had  they  to  expect  the  support  of  Elizabeth.

Nine  days  after  Knox  entered  Scotland,  the  first  blow  was  struck.  On  the
nth  of  May,  1559,  he  preached  in  Perth.  After  the  sermon,  a  tumult  arose,  and
the  people  plundered  the  churches,  and  pulled  down  the  monasteries.9^  The
queen-regent,  hastily  assembling  troops,  marched  towards  the  town.  But  the
nobles  were  on  the  alert.  The  Earl  of  Glencairn  joined  the  Congregation
with  two  thousand  five  hundred  men  ;  and  a  treaty  was  concluded,  by  which
both  sides  agreed  to  disarm,  on  condition  that  no  one  should  be  punished  for
what  had  already  happened.97  Such,  however,  was  the  state  of  the  public  mind

of  the  lordis  of  the  nobilitie  for  pleasour  of  the  quene  seamed  to  aggre  thairto  for  the
tyme,  yit  the  barronis  and  gentillmen  was  nathing  content  thairwith  "...  "  affirming
that  thair  foirfatheris  and  predicessouris  had  defendit  the  samyn  "  (i.e.  the  realm)
"  mony  hundreth  yeris,  vailyeantlie  with  thair  awin  handis."

91  "  It  completed  the  almost  despotic  power  of  the  house  of  Guise."     Tytler's  History
of  Scotland,  vol.  v.  27.

92  This  covenant,  which  marks  an  important  epoch  in  the  history  of  Scotland,  is  dated
3rd  of  December,  1557.  It  is  printed  in  Stevenson's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  p.  47 ;
in  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  i.  pp.  326,  327  ;  and  in  Knox's  History  of  the
Reformation,  vol.  i.  pp.  273,  274.

93  In  1558  "  the  lords  of   the  congregation  had  sent  agents  through  the  kingdom  to
solicit  the  subscriptions  of  those  who  were  friendly  to  a  reformation."     Stephen's  History
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  London,  1848,  vol.  i  p.  58.

94  Keith  (Affairs  of  Church  and  State  in  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  82)  calls  him  "  a  trumpeter
of  rebellion,"  which  he  undoubtedly  was,  and  very  much  to  his  credit  too,  though  the
courtly  bishop  imputes  it  to  him  as  a  fault.     The  Scotch,  if  it  had  not  been  for  their
rebellious  spirit,  would  long  since  have  lost  their  liberties.

95  "  He  sailed  from  Dieppe  on  the  22nd  of  April,  1559,  and  landed  safely  at  Leith  in  the
beginning  of  May."     M'Crie's  Life  of  Knox,  p.  139.     Knox  himself  says,  "  the  secound
of  Maij."     History  of  the  Reformation,  edit.  Laing,  vol.  i.  p.  318.     "  He  was  called  home
by  the  noblemen  that  enterprised  the   Reformation."     Spottiswoode1 's  History  of  the
Church  of  Scotland,  edit.  Russell,  vol.  ii.  p.  180.

96  Penny's  Traditions  of  Perth,  p.  310.     Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  i.
pp.  321-323.     Lyon's  History  of  St.  Andrews,  vol.  i.  p.  329  ;  and  a  spirited  narrative  in
Buchanan's  Rerum  Scoticarum  Historia,  lib.  xvi.  pp.  471,  472.     Some  interesting  circum-
stances are  also  preserved  in  Lesley's  History,  pp.  271,  272  ;  but  though  Lesley  was  a
contemporary,  he  erroneously  places  the  riot  in  1558.     He,  moreover,  ascribes  to  Knox
language  more  inflammatory  than  that  which  he  really  used.     [According  to  Knox,  as
cited,  the  monasteries  too  were  only  plundered,  not  pulled  down.     Lesley  seems  to  exag-
gerate.— ED.]

97  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  v.  pp.  59,  62,  63.     Of  the  Earl  of  Glencairn,  Chalmers
(Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  p.  485)  says,  that  he  was  a  "  religious  ruffian,  who  enjoyed  pensions
from  Henry  VIII.  for  injuring  the  country  of  his  birth,  and  benefits."      This,  besides
being  ungrammatical,  is  foolish.     Glencairn,  like  the  other  aristocratic  leaders  of  the
Reformation,  was  no  doubt   influenced    by  sordid  motives  ;   but  so  far  from  injuring


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  675

that  peace  was  impossible.*  In  a  few  days  war  again  broke  out  ;  and  this  time
the  result  was  more  decisive.  The  Lords  of  the  Congregation  mustered  in  great
force.  Perth,  Stirling,  and  Linlithgow  fell  into  their  hands.  The  queen  -
regent  retreated  before  them.  She  evacuated  Edinburgh  ;  and  on  the  29th  of
June  the  Protestants  entered  the  capital  in  triumph.98

All  this  was  done  in  seven  weeks  from  the  breaking  out  of  the  first  riot.  Both
parties  were  now  willing  to  negotiate,  with  the  view  of  gaining  time  ;  the  queen-
regent  expecting  aid  from  France,  the  Lords  expecting  it  from  England."  But
the  proceedings  of  Elizabeth  being  tardy,  the  Protestants,  after  waiting  for
some  months,  determined  to  strike  a  decisive  blow  before  the  reinforcements
arrived.  In  October,  the  principal  peers,  headed  by  the  Duke  of  Chastel-
herault,  the  Earl  of  Arran,  the  Earl  of  Argyle,  and  the  Earl  of  Glencairn,
assembled  at  Edinburgh.  A  great  meeting  was  held,  of  which  Lord  Ruthven
was  appointed  president,  and  in  which  the  queen -regent  was  solemnly  suspended
from  the  government,  on  the  ground  that  she  was  opposed  to  "  the  glory  of
God,  to  the  liberty  of  the  realm,  and  to  the  welfare  of  the  nobles."  10°

In  the  winter,  an  English  fleet  sailed  into  the  Frith,  and  anchored  near  Edin-
burgh.101 In  January,  1560,  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  arrived  at  Berwick,  and


his  country,  he  rendered  it  great  service.  [There  is  nothing  ungrammatical  in  Chalmers'
phrase,  though  the  idiom  is  obsolete,  whereas  Buckle's  own  grammar  is  sometimes  faulty.
Glencairn  was  worse  than  mercenary  :  he  was  guilty  of  gross  treachery  to  both  sides
(Tytler,  ed.  1869,  ii.  20)  ;  and  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  say  that  he  injured  his  country
when  by  his  treason  he  helped  to  cause  the  Solway  rout  after  getting  a  promise  of  a
pension  from  Henry  VI II.  (Id.  pp.  24, 27 ),  and  again  took  the  English  side  when  Scotland  was
being  ravaged  by  the  Protector  Somerset.  Id.  p.  64.  In  the  long  series  of  convulsions
following  on  the  death  of  James  V.,  Scotland  suffered  more  miseries  than  she  had  known
for  two  centuries.  Cp.  Tytler,  ii.  64,  68,  69,  339,  343-4. — ED.]

98  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  v.  pp.  64—73.

99  It  is  stated  of   the  queen-regent  that  in  July,  1559,  "  shee  had  sent  alreadie  to
France  for  more  men  of  warr."     See  the  curious  pamphlet  entitled  "  A  Historic  of  the
Estate  of  Scotland,  from  July  1558  to  April  1560,"  in  Miscellany  of  the  Wodrow  Society,
p.  63,  Edinburgh,  1844.      All  sorts  of  rumours  were  circulated  ;  and  a  letter  dated  i2th
October,  1559,  says,  "  Summe  thinke  the  regent  will  departe  secretlie.     Summe  that
she  will  to  Ynchkeith,  for  that  three  shippes  are  a  preparing.     Summe  saye  that  she  is
verie  sicke.     Summe  saye  the  devill  cannot  kill  her."     Sadler's  State  Papers,  vol.  i.
p.  499.

100  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.v.  p.io4.  This  was  on  the  22nd  of  October,  1559.  Com-
pare Sadler's  State  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  512.    "  This  Mondaye,  the  22  of  October,  was  the  doua-
gier  deprived  from  her  authoritie  by  commen  consent  of  all  lords  and  barons  here  present."
On  this  occasion,  "  Johne  Willocke,"  the  preacher,  delivered  himself  of  a  discourse  in
favour  of  her  deposition.     Among  other  arguments  he  said  "  that  in  deposing  of  princes,
and  these  that  have  beene  in  authoritie,  God  did  not  alwayes  use  His  immediat  power,
but  sometimes  he  used  other  meanes,  which  His  wisdome  thought  good,  and  justice
approved.     As  by  Asa  He  removed  Maacha,  his  owne  mother,  from  honour  and  author-
itie, which  before   she  had  used  ;  by  J  ehu  He  destroyed  J  oram,  and  the  whole  posteritie
of  Achab."     Therefore  "  he  "  (the  orator)  "  could  see  no  reasoun  why  they,  the  borne
counsellors,  the  nobilitie  and  barons  of  the  realme,  might  not  justlie  deprive  her  from
all  regiment."     Colder-wood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  i.  pp.  540,  541  ;  and  Knox's  History
of  the  Reformation,  vol.  i.  pp.  442,  443.

101  The  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  pp.  55,  272,  says  that  the  fleet  arrived  on  24th  of  January,
1559-60  ;  "  aucht  greit  schippis  of  Ingland  in  the  raid  of  Leith."     And  a  letter  (in  Sadler's
State  Papers,  vol.  i.  p.  697),  dated  the  23rd  of  January,  says,  "the  shippes  arrived  yester-
daye  in  the  Frythe  to  the  nomber  of  ix.  or  x.,  as  yet,  and  the  remanent  followith."     The
date,  therefore,  of  the  zoth  of  January,  given  in  a  note  to  Keith's  Church  and  State  in

k[*  There  was  a  better  reason  than  this  for  the  renewal  of  the  fighting.     The  queen -
regent  certainly  broke  faith.     See  Tytler,  ed.  1869,  ii.  95- — ED.]


676  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

concluded  on  the  part  of  Elizabeth  a  treaty  with  the  Lords  of  the  Congregation,
by  virtue  of  which  the  English  army  entered  Scotland  on  the  2nd  of  April.102
Against  this  combination  the  government  could  effect  nothing,  and  in  July
was  glad  to  sign  a  peace,  by  which  the  French  troops  were  to  evacuate  Scotland,
and  the  whole  power  of  administration  was  virtually  consigned  to  the  Protestant
Lords.103

The  complete  success  of  this  great  revolution,  and  the  speed  with  which  it  was
effected,  are  of  themselves  a  decisive  proof  of  the  energy  of  those  general  causes  by
which  the  whole  movement  was  controlled.*  For  more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty
years  there  had  been  a  deadly  struggle  between  the  nobles  and  the  Church ;  and  the
issue  of  that  struggle  was  the  establishment  of  the  Reformation,  and  the  triumph
of  the  aristocracy.  They  had  at  last  carried  their  point.  The  hierarchy  was
overthrown,  and  replaced  by  new  and  untried  men.  All  the  old  notions  of
apostolic  succession,  of  the  imposition  of  hands,  and  of  the  divine  right  of  ordina-
tion, were  suddenly  discarded.  The  offices  of  the  Church  were  performed  by
heretics,  the  majority  of  whom  had  not  even  been  ordained.104  Finally,  and  to
crown  the  whole,  in  the  summer  of  that  same  year,  1560,  the  Scotch  parliament
passed  two  laws  which  utterly  subverted  the  ancient  scheme.  By  one  of  these
laws,  every  statute  which  had  ever  been  enacted  in  favour  of  the  Church  was  at
once  repealed.105  By  the  other  law  it  was  declared  that  whoever  either  said


Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  255,  is  evidently  erroneous.  Important  as  the  event  was,  its  exact
date  is  not  mentioned  either  by  Tytler  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  v.  pp.  114,  115),  or  by
Chalmers  (Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  p.  631).

102  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  ii.  p.  632.     Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  p.  57.
The  Berwick  treaty,  in  February,  is  printed  in  Keith's  Church  and  State  in  Scotland,
vol.  i.  pp.  258-262.     So  great  was  the  influence  of  the  nobles,  that  the  English  troops
were  well  received  by  the  people,  in  spite  of  the  old  and  bitter  animosity  between  the
two  nations.     "  Especially  in  Fyfe  they  were  thankfully  receaved,  and  well  entreated,
with  such  quietnes  and  gentle  entertainement  betwixt  our  nation  and  them,  as  no  man
would  have  thought  that  ever  there  had  beine  any  variance."     A  Historic  of  the  Estate
of  Scotland,  from  1558  to  1560,  in  Miscellany  of  the  Wodrow  Society,  p.  78.

103  "  vpoun  the  vi.  day  of  Julij,  it  wes  concludit   and  finallie  endit  betuix  the  saids
ambassatouris,  tuitching  all  debaittis,  contraversies  and  materis  concernyng  the  asseiging
of  Leith,  depairting  of  the  Frenchemen  thairfra,  and  randering  of  the  same  ;  and  the
said  peax  daitit  this  said  day."     A  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  pp.  277,  278.     See  also  p.  60  ;
and  Keith's  Affairs  of  Church  and  State  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  295.

104  "  That  Knox  himself  was  in  priest's  orders  is  a  fact  which  his  biographer,  the  late
Dr.  M'Crie,  has  placed  beyond  dispute  ;  and  some  of  the  other  leaders  were  also  priests  ;
but  the  greater  number  of  the  preachers,  and  all  those  who  subsequently  became  ministers,
were  totally  without  any  orders  whatever,  not  even  such  as  the  superintendents  could
have  given  them  ;  for  their  own  supposed  call,  the  election  of  the  people,  and  the  civil
ceremony  of  induction  to  the  living,  was  all  that  was  then  '  judged  necessary.'  "  Stephen's
History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  1848,  vol.  i.  pp.  145,  146.     "  A  new-fashioned  sort  of
ministry,  unknown  in  the  Christian  Church  for  all  preceding  generations."     Keith's
Church  and  State  in  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  204.      Compare  Argyll's  Presbytery  Examined,
PP-  34-36.

105  "  The  thre  estaitis  of    parliament  hes  anullit  and  declarit  all  sik  actes  maid  in
tymes  bipast  not  aggreing  w1  goddis  word  and  now  contrair  to  the  confessioufi  of  oure
fay*  according  to  the  said  word  publist  in  this  parliament,  Tobe  of  nane  avale  force  nor
effect.     And  decernis  the  said  actis  and  every  ane  of  thame  to  haue  na  effect  nor  strenth
in  tyme  to  cum."     Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  1814,  folio,  vol.  ii.  p.  535.     This
was  on  24th  August,  1560.

[*  In  the  next  paragraph  it  appears  to  be  argued  that  the  "  general  causes  "  were  of
another  kind.  The  efficient  causes  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Church  were  the  economic
interest  and  the  military  strength  of  the  nobility  as  against  a  weakened  crown  held  by  an
absent  minor. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  677

mass,  or  was  present  while  it  was  said,  should  for  the  first  offence  lose  his  goods  ;
for  the  second  offence  be  exiled,  and  for  the  third  offence  be  put  to  death.106

Thus  it  was  that  an  institution  which  had  borne  the  brunt  of  more  than  a
thousand  years  was  shivered  and  fell  to  pieces.  And  from  its  fall  great  things
were  augured.  It  was  believed  that  the  people  would  be  enlightened,  that
their  eyes  were  opening  to  their  former  follies,  and  that  the  reign  of  superstition
was  about  to  end.*  But  what  was  forgotten  then,  and  what  is  too  often  forgotten
now,  is  that  in  these  affairs  there  is  an  order  and  a  natural  sequence  which
can  never  be  reversed.  This  is  that  every  institution,  as  it  actually  exists,
no  matter  what  its  name  or  pretences  may  be,  is  the  effect  of  public  opinion  far
more  than  the  cause  ;  and  that  it  will  avail  nothing  to  attack  the  institution
unless  you  can  first  change  the  opinion.  In  Scotland,  the  Church  was  grossly
superstitious  ;  but  it  did  not  therefore  follow  that  to  overthrow  the  establish-
ment would  lessen  the  evil.  They  who  think  that  superstition  can  be  weakened
in  this  way  do  not  know  the  vitality  of  that  dark  and  ill-omened  principle.
Against  it  there  is  only  one  weapon,  and  that  weapon  is  knowledge.  When
men  are  ignorant,  they  must  be  superstitious  ;  and  wherever  superstition  exists
it  is  sure  to  organize  itself  into  some  kind  of  system,  which  it  makes  its  home.
If  you  drive  it  from  that  home,  it  will  find  another.  The  spirit  transmigrates  ;
it  assumes  a  new  form  ;  but  still  it  lives.  How  idle  then  is  that  warfare  which
reformers  are  too  apt  to  wage,  in  which  they  slay  the  carcass,  and  spare  the  life  !  f
The  husk,  forsooth,  they  seek  out  and  destroy  ;  >  but  within  that  husk  is  a  seed
of  deadly  poison,  whose  vitality  they  are  unable  to  impair,  and  which,  shifted
from  its  place,  bears  fruit  in  another  direction,  and  shoots  up  with  a  fresh  and
often  a  more  fatal  exuberance.

The  truth  is  that  every  institution,  whether  political  or  religious,  represents,
in  its  actual  working,  the  form  and  pressure  of  the  age.  It  may  be  very  old  ;  it
may  bear  a  venerated  name  ;  it  may  aim  at  the  highest  objects  ;  but  whoever
carefully  studies  its  history  will  find  that,  in  practice,  it  is  successively  modified
by  successive  generations,  and  that,  instead  of  controlling  society,  it  is  controlled
by  it.  When  the  Protestant  Reformation  was  effected,  the  Scotch  were  excessively
ignorant,  and  therefore,  in  spite  of  the  Reformation,  they  remained  excessively
superstitious.  How  long  that  ignorance  continued,  and  what  its  results  were,
we  shall  presently  see  ;  but  before  entering  into  that  inquiry,  it  will  be  advisable
to  trace  the  immediate  consequences  of  the  Reformation  itself,  in  connexion
with  the  powerful  class  by  whose  authority  it  was  established.

The  nobles,  having  overthrown  the  Church,  and  stripped  it  of  a  large  part  of
its  wealth,  thought  that  they  were  to  reap  the  benefit  of  their  own  labour.  They
had  slain  the  enemy,  and  they  wished  to  divide  the  spoil.10?  But  this  did  not
suit  the  views  of  the  Protestant  preachers.  In  their  opinion  it  was  impious

ice  "  xhat  na  maner  of  person  nor  personis  say  mess  nor  zit  heir  mess  nor  be  pnt
thairat  vnder  the  pane  of  confiscation!!  of  all  thair  gud  movable  and  vnmovable  and
pvneissing  of  thair  bodeis  at  the  discretioun  of  the  magistrat  within  quhais  jurisdictioun
sik  personis  happynis  to  be  apprehendit  ffor  the  first  fait :  Banissing  of  the  Realme  for
the  secund  fait,  and  justifying  to  the  deid  for  the  thrid  fait."  Ibid.,  24th  August,
1560,  vol.  ii.  p.  535.

107  As  Robertson  says,  in  his  measured  and  somewhat  feeble  style,  "  Among  the
Scottish  nobility,  some  hated  the  persons,  and  others  coveted  the  wealth,  of  the  dignified
clergy  ;  and, by  abolishing  that  order  of  men,  the  former  indulged  their  resentment,  and
the  latter  hoped  to  gratify  their  avarice."  History  of  Scotland,  book  iii.  p.  116,  in  Robert-

[*  This  is  a  verbal  confusion.  The  reign  of  what  the  Protestants  held  to  be  super-
stition was  at  an  end.  In  the  terms  of  the  following  exposition,  the  Protestants  were
themselves  superstitious  with  a  difference.  The  phrase  as  to  "  what  was  forgotten  then  "
is  beside  the  case.  It  would  be  applicable  only  if  the  Reformers  had  been  devoid  of
superstition. — ED.]

[f  Here  again  the  proposition  is  beside  the  case.  The  reformers  were  part  of  "  the
life  "  in  question,  and  equally  part  of  "  the  carcase," — ED.;)


678  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

to  secularise  ecclesiastical  property,  and  turn  it  aside  to  profane  purposes.  They
held  that  it  was  right,  indeed,  for  the  lords  to  plunder  the  Church  ;  but  they
took  for  granted  that  the  proceeds  of  the  robbery  were  to  enrich  themselves.
They  were  the  godly  men  ;  and  it  was  the  business  of  the  ruling  classes  to  endow
them  with  benefices,  from  which  the  old  and  idolatrous  clergy  were  to  be  ex-
pelled.^

In  accordance  with  these  opinions,  Knox  and  his  colleagues,  in  August,  1560,
presented  a  petition  to  Parliament,  calling  on  the  nobles  to  restore  the  Church
property  which  they  had  seized,  and  to  have  it  properly  applied  to  the  support
of  the  new  ministers.109  To  this  request  those  powerful  chiefs  did  not  even
vouchsafe  a  reply.110  They  were  content  with  matters  as  they  actually  stood,
and  were  therefore  unwilling  to  disturb  the  existing  arrangement.  They  had
fought  the  fight  ;  they  had  gained  the  victory,  and  shared  the  spoil.  It  was  not  to
be  supposed  that  they  would  peaceably  relinquish  what  they  had  won  with
infinite  difficulty.  Nor  was  it  likely  that  after  being  engaged  in  an  arduous
struggle  with  the  Church  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  and  having  at  length
conquered  their  inveterate  enemy,  they  should  forego  the  fruits  of  their  triumph
for  the  sake  of  a  few  preachers,  whom  they  had  but  recently  called  to  their
aid  ;  low-born  and  obscure  men,  who  should  rather  deem  it  an  honour  that
they  were  permitted  to  associate  with  their  superiors  in  a  common  enterprise,
but  were  not  to  presume  on  that  circumstance,  nor  to  suppose  that  they,  who
only  entered  the  field  at  the  eleventh  hour,  were  to  share  the  booty  on  anything
approaching  to  terms  of  equality.111

But  the  aristocracy  of  Scotland  little  knew  the  men  with  whom  they  had  to
deal.  Still  less  did  they  understand  the  character  of  their  own  age.  They
did  not  see  that  in  the  state  of  society  in  which  they  lived  superstition  was
inevitable,*  and  that  therefore  the  spiritual  classes,  though  depressed  for  a
moment,  were  sure  speedily  to  rise  again.  The  nobles  had  overturned  the
Church  ;  but  the  principles  on  which  Church  authority  is  based  remained  intact.
All  that  was  done  was  to  change  the  name  and  the  form.  A  new  hierarchy

son's  Works,  edit.  1831.  The  contemporary  narrative,  in  A  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,
p.  269,  sounds  much  more  vigorous  to  my  ear.  "In  all  this  tyme"  (1559),  "all  kirkmennis
goodis  and  geir  wer  spoulzeit  and  reft  fra  thame,  in  euerie  place  quhair  the  samyne
culd  be  apprehendit ;  for  euerie  man  for  the  maist  pairt  that  culd  get  any  thing  pertenyng
to  any  kirkmen,  thocht  the  same  as  wele  won  geir."

108  "  Knox  never  dreamed  that  the  revenues  of  the  Church  vere  to  be  secularized  ;
but  that  he  and  his  colleagues  were  simply  to  remove  the  old  incumbents,  and  then  take
possession  of  their  benefices."     Stephen's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  ic6.
"  The  ecclesiastical  revenues,  which  they  never  contemplated  for  a  moment  were  to  be
seized  by  the  Protestant  nobility."      Lawson's    Roman   Catholic   Church   in   Scotland,
P-  233.

109  Compare  Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  pp.  89-92,  with  M'Cric's  Life  of
Knox,  p.  179.     Of  this  document,  M'Crie  says,  "  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  received
the  sanction,  if  it  was  not  the  composition,  of    the  reformer."  ...     "It  called  upcn
them  "  (the  nobles)  "  to  restore  the  patrimony  of  the  Church,  of  which  they  had  unjustly
possessed  themselves."

110  "  Making  no  answer  to  the  last  point."     Spottiswoode 's  History  of  the  Church  of
Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  327.     "Without  taking  any  notice."     Keith's  Affairs  of  Church  and
State,  vol.  i.  p.  321.

111  "  They  viewed  the  Protestant    preachers  as  low-born  individuals,  not  far  raised
above  the  condition  of  mechanics  or  tradesmen,  without  influence,  authority,  or  impor-
tance."    Lawson's  Roman  Catholic   Church   in  Scotland,   p.   251.     "  None  were  more
unmercifull  to  the  poore  ministers  than  they  that  had  the  greatest  share  of   the  kirk
rents."     C aider-wood' s  History  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  42.

[*  The  language  here  approaches  absurdity.  The  nobles  were  no  more  concerned
to  cast  out  "  superstition  "  in  general  than  to  pay  the  preachers.  They  held  all  the
ordinary  superstitions  of  their  age. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  679

was  quickly  organized,  which  succeeded  the  old  one  in  the  affections  of  the
people.  Indeed  it  did  more.  For  the  Protestant  clergy,  neglected  by  the
nobles,  and  unendowed  by  the  state,  had  only  a  miserable  pittance  whereupon
to  live,  and  they  necessarily  threw  themselves  into  the  arms  of  the  people,  where
alone  they  could  find  support  and  sympathy.112  Hence  a  closer  and  more
intimate  union  than  would  otherwise  have  been  possible.  Hence,  too,  as  we
shall  presently  see,  the  Presbyterian  clergy,  smarting  under  the  injustice  with
which  they  were  treated,  displayed  that  hatred  of  the  upper  classes,  and  that
peculiar  detestation  of  monarchical  government,  which  they  showed  whenever
they  dared.  In  their  pulpits,  in  their  presbyteries,  and  in  their  General  Assem-
blies, they  encouraged  a  democratic  and  insubordinate  tone,  which  eventually
produced  the  happiest  results  by  keeping  alive,  at  a  critical  moment,  the  spirit  of
liberty  ;  but  which  for  that  very  reason  made  the  higher  ranks  rue  the  day
when,  by  their  ill-timed  and  selfish  parsimony,  they  roused  the  wrath  of  so
powerful  and  implacable  a  class.

The  withdrawal  of  the  French  troops,  in  1560,  had  left  the  nobles  in  possession
of  the  government ; 113  and  it  was  for  them  to  decide  to  what  extent  the  Reformed
clergy  should  be  endowed.  The  first  petition,  presented  by  Knox  and  his
brethren,  was  passed  over  in  contemptuous  silence.  But  the  ministers  were  not
so  easily  put  aside.  Their  next  step  was  to  present  to  the  Privy  Council  what
is  known  as  the  First  Book  of  Discipline,  in  which  they  again  urged  their  re-
quest.114 To  the  tenets  contained  in  this  book  the  council  had  no  objection  ;
but  they  refused  to  ratify  it,  because  by  doing  so  they  would  have  sanctioned
the  principle  that  the  new  church  had  a  right  to  the  revenues  of  the  old  one.115
A  certain  share,  indeed,  they  were  willing  to  concede.  What  the  share  should
be  was  a  matter  of  serious  dispute,  and  caused  the  greatest  ill-will  between  the
two  parties.  At  length  the  nobles  broke  silence  and  in  December,  1561,  they
declared  that  the  Reformed  clergy  should  only  receive  one -sixth  of  the  property
of  the  Church  ;  the  remaining  five -sixths  being  divided  between  the  government
and  the  Catholic  priesthood.116  The  meaning  of  this  was  easily  understood,

112  in  I56i,  "  notwithstanding  the  full  establishment  of  the  Reformation,  the  Protes-
tant ministers  were  in  a  state  of  extreme  poverty,  and  dependent  upon  the  precarious
assistance  of  their  flocks."  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  v.  p.  207.  Compare  a
letter  written  by  Knox  in  1566,  on  "  the  extreame  povertie  wherein  our  ministers
are  brought."  Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  p.  542.

us  "  The  limited  authority  which  the  Crown  had  hitherto  possessed  was  almost  entirely
annihilated,  and  the  aristocratical  power,  which  always  predominated  in  the  Scottish
government  (?),  became  supreme  and  incontrollable."  Russell's  History  of  the  Church
in  Scotland,  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  223.

"4  See  the  First  Book  of  Discipline,  reprinted  in  A  Compendium  of  the  Laws  of  the
Church  of  Scotland,  part  i.,  second  edition,  Edinburgh,  1837.     They  summed  up  the
requests  in  one  comprehensive  passage  (p.  119)  that  "  the  haill  rentis  of  the  Kirk  abusil
in  Papistrie  sal  be  referrit  againe  to  the  Kirk."     In  another  part  (p.  106),  they  frankly
admit  that  "  we  doubt  not  but  some  of  our  petitions  shall  appeare  strange  unto  you
the  first  sight."

us  "  The  form  of  policy  recommended  in  the  First  Book  of  Discipline  never  obtai
the  proper  sanction  of  the  State,  chiefly  in  consequence  of  the  avarice  of  the  nobility  an<J
gentry,  who  were  desirous  of  securing  to  themselves  the  revenues  of  the  Church.       M*
cellany  of  the  Wodrow  Society,  p.  324.     See  also  Argyll's  Presbytery  Examined,  p..  26..
Many  of  the  nobles,  however,  did  sign  it  (Knox'~s  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  n.
p.  129)  ;  but,  says  Spottiswoode  (History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  373).      Most
of  those  that    subscribed,  getting  into  their  hands  the  possessions  of  the  Church,  coi
never  be  induced  to  part  therewith,  and  turned  greater  enemies  in  that  point  of
patrimony  than  were  the  papists,  or  any  other  whatsoever."

us  M'Crie's  Life  of  Knox,  p.  204.     Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  h.  pp.  298-
301,    307-309.      Buchanan's    Rerum    Scoticarum    Historia,     lib.    xvii.    p.    500.     Th
nominal  arrangement,  which  was  contrived  with  considerable  art,  was  that  one-1
Q£  the  church  revenues  should  be  divided  into  two  parts  ;  one  part  for  the  government,,


680  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

since  the  Catholics  were  now  entirely  dependent  on  the  government,  and  the
government  was  in  fact  the  nobles  themselves,  who  were  at  that  period  the
monopolizers  of  political  power.

Such  being  the  case,  it  naturally  happened  that  when  the  arrangement
was  made  known  the  preachers  were  greatly  moved.  They  saw  how  unfavour-
able it  was  to  their  own  interests,  and  therefore  they  held  that  it  was  unfavour-
able to  the  interests  of  religion.  Hence,  in  their  opinion,  it  wa.s  contrived  by
the  devil,  whose  purposes  it  was  calculated  to  serve.117  For  now.  they  who
travailed  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  were  to  be  discouraged,  and  were
to  suffer,  in  order  that  what  rightly  belonged  to  them  might  be  devoured
by  idle  bellies.118  The  nobles  might  benefit  for  a  time,  but  the  ven-
geance of  God  was  swift,  and  would  most  assuredly  overtake  them.119  From
the  beginning  to  the  end  it  was  nothing  but  spoliation.  In  a  really  Christian
land  the  patrimony  of  the  Church  would  be  left  untouched.120  But  in  Scotland,

and  another  part  for  the  preachers.  The  remaining  two-thirds  were  gravely  assigned
to  the  Catholic  priesthood,  who  at  that  very  moment  were  liable,  by  Act  of  Parliament,
to  the  penalty  of  death,  if  they  performed  the  rites  of  their  religion.  Men  whose  lives
were  in  the  hands  of  the  government  were  not  likely  to  quarrel  with  the  government
about  money  matters  ;  and  the  result  was  that  nearly  everything  fell  into  the  possession
of  the  nobles.

117  "  xhe  Ministeris,  evin  in  the  begynnyng,  in  publict  Sermonis  ©pponed  thame
selves  to  suche  corruptioun,  for  thei  foirsaw  the  purpose  of  the  Devill."  Knox's  History
of  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  p.  310.

us  "  For  it  seemeth  altogether  unreasonable  that  idle  belleis  sail  devoure  and  consume
the  patrimonie  of  the  Kirk,  whill  the  faithfull  travellers  in  the  Lord's  vineyarde  suffer
extreme  povertie,  and  the  needie  members  of  Christ's  bodie  are  altogether  neglected."
Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  ii.  pp.  484,  485.  This  was  in  1569  ;  and  in  1571
the  celebrated  Ferguson,  in  one  of  his  sermons,  declared  that  the  holders  of  church
property,  mostrof  whom  were  the  nobility,  were  "ruffians."  See  an  extract  from  his
sermon,  in  Chalmers'  History  of  Dunfermline,  p.  309,  Edinburgh,  1844.  "  For  this  day
Christ  is  spuilzeit  *amang  us,  quhil  yt  quhilk  aucht  to  mantene  the  Ministerie  of  the
Kirk  and  the  pure,  is  geuin  to  prophane  men,  flattereris  in  court,  ruffianes,  and  hyre-
lingis."

119  In  September,  1571,  John  Row  "  preiched,  wha  in  plane  pulpet  pronunced  to  the
lordis,  for  thair  covetusnes,  and  becaus  they  wold  not  grant  the  just  petitiones  of  the
Kirk,  Godis  heastie  vengeance  to  fall  upon  them  ;  and  said,  moreover,  '  I  cair  not,  my
lordis,  your  displeasour  ;  for  I  speik  my  conscience  befoir  God,  wha  will  not  suffer  sic
wickitnes  and  contempt  vnpunished."     Bannatyne's  Journal,   edit.   Edinburgh,   1806,
P-  257-

120  In  1576  the  General  Assembly  declared  that   their  right  to   "  the  patrimonie  of
the  Kirk  "  was  "  ex  jure  divino."     Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,
vol.  i.  p.  360,  Edinburgh,  1839,  4to.     More  than  a  hundred  years  later,  a  Scotch  divine
evinces  how  deeply  the  members  of  his  profession  felt  this  spoliation  of  the  Church,  by
going  out  of  his  way  to  mention  it.     See  Jacob's  Vow,  by  Dr.  John  Cockburn,  Edinburgh,
1696,  pp.  422,  423,  425.     But  this  is  nothing  in  comparison  to  a  recent  writer,  the  Reverend
Mr.  Lyon,  who  deliberately  asserts  that,  because  these  and  similar  acts  occurred  in  the
reign  of  Mary,  therefore  the  queen  came  to  a  violent  end  ;  such  being  the  just  punishment
of  sacrilege.      "The  practice"  (of  saying  masses  for  the  dead)  "ceased,  of  course,  at
the  Reformation  ;  and  the  money  was  transferred  by  Queen  Mary  to  the  civil  authorities
of  the  town.      This  was  undoubtedly  an  act  of  sacrilege  ;  for  though  sacrificial  masses
for  the  dead  was  an  error,  yet  the  guardians  of  the  money  so  bequeathed   were  under
an  obligation  to  apply  it  to  a  sacred  purpose.     This,  and  other  sacrilegious  acts  on  the
part  of  Mary,  of  a  still  more  decided  and  extensive  character,  have  been  justly  considered
as  the  cause  of  all  the  calamities  which  subsequently  befell  her."     History  of  St.  Andrews,
by  the  Rev.  C.J.  Lyon,  M.A.,  Presbyter  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  St.  Andrews,  Edinburgh,
1843,  vol.  i.  p.  54.      Elsewhere  (vol.  ii.  p.  400)  the  same  divine  mentions  that  the  usual
punishment  for  sacrilege  is  a  failure  of  male  issue.      "  The  following  examples,  selected
from  the  diocese  of  St.  Andrews,  according  to  its  boundaries  before  the  Reformation,


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  68 1

alas  !  Satan  had  prevailed,121  and  Christian  charity  had  waxen  cold.122  In
Scotland,  property  which  should  be  regarded  as  sacred  had  been  broken  up
and  divided  ;  and  the  division  was  of  the  worst  kind,  since  by  it,  said  Knox,
two-thirds  are  given  to  the  devil,  and  the  other  third  is  shared  between  God
and  the  devil.  It  was  as  if  Joseph,  when  governor  of  Egypt,  had  refused  food  to
his  brethren,  and  sent  them  back  to  their  families  with  empty  sacks.123  Or,  as
another  preacher  suggested,  the  Church  was  now,  like  the  Maccabees  of  old,
being  oppressed,  sometimes  by  the  Assyrians,  and  sometimes  by  the  Egyp-
tians.12*

But  neither  persuasions  nor  threats 125  produced  any  effect  on  the  obdurate
minds  of  the  Scotch  nobles.      Indeed  their  hearts,  instead  of  being  softened,

will  corroborate  the  general  doctrine  contended  for  throughout  this  work,  that  sacrilege
has  ever  been  punished  in  the  present  life,  and  chiefly  by  the  failure  of  male  issue."  The
italics  are  in  the  text.  See  also  vol.  i.  p.  118.  For  the  sake  of  the  future  historian  of
public  opinion,  it  may  be  well  to  observe  that  the  work  containing  these  sentiments
is  not  a  reprint  of  an  older  book,  but  was  published  for  the  first  time  in  1843,  having
apparently  been  just  written.

121  "  jhe  General  Assemblie  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  convenit  at  Edinburgh  the  25  of
December  1566,  to  the  Nobilitie  of  this  Realme  that  professes  the  Lord  Jesus  with  them,
and  hes  ronouncit  that  Roman  Antichryst,  desyre  constancie  in  faith,  and  the  spirit  of
righteous  judgement.     Seeing  that  Sathan,  be  all  our  negligence,  Right  Honourable,
hes  so  farre  prevailit  within  this  Realme  within  these  late  dayes,  that  we  doe  stand  in
extream  danger, not  only  to  lose  our  temporall  possessiouns,\)ui  also  to  be  depryvit  of
the  glorious  Evangell,"  &c.     Keith's  Church  and  State,  vol.  iii.  pp.  154,  155.

122  In  1566,  in  their  piteous  communication  to  the  English  bishops  and  clergy,  they
said,  "  The  days  are  ill ;  iniquitie  abounds  ;  Christian  charity,  alas,  is  waxen  cold."     Acts
and  Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  87,  Edinburgh,
1839,  4to.

123  "  I  see  twa  partis  freely  gevin  to  the  Devill,  and  the  thrid  maun  be  devided  betwix
God  and  the  Devill :  Weill,  bear  witnes  to  me,  that  this  day  I  say  it,  or  it  be  long  the
Devill  shall  have  three  partis  of  the  thrid  ;  and  judge  you  then  what  Goddis  portioun
shalbe."  ...     "  Who  wold  have  thought,  that  when   Joseph  reulled  Egypt,  that  his
brethren  should  have  travailled  for  vittallis,  and  have  returned  with  empty  seckis  unto
thair  families  ?     Men  wold  rather  have  thought  that  Pharao's  pose,  treasure,  and  gar-
nallis  should  have  bene  diminished,  or  that  the  household  of  Jacob  should  stand  in
danger  to  sterve  for  hungar."     Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  pp.  310,  311.

124  In  May,  1571,  "  This  Sonday,  Mr.  Craig  teiched  the  130  Psalme  ;  and,  in  his  ser-
mond,  he  compared  the  steat  of  the  Kirk  of  God  in  this  tovne  vnto  the  steat  of   the
Maccabeis  ;  wha  were  oppressed  sumtymes  by  the  Assyrianis,  and  sumtymes  by  the
Egiptianis."     Bannatyne"s  Journal,  p.  150.

125  The  first  instance  I  have  observed  of  anything  like  menace  is  in  1567,  when  "  the
Assembly  of  the  Church    being  convened  at  Edinburgh,"  admonished  all  persons  "  as
well  noblemen  as  barons,  and  those  of  the  other  Estates,  to  meet  and  give  their  personal
appearance  at  Edinburgh  on  the  2oth  of  July,  for  giving  their    advice,  counsel,  and
concurrence  in  matters  then  to  be  proponed  ;  especially  for  purging  the  realm  of  popery,
the  establishing  of  the  policy  of  the  Church,  and  restoring  the  patrimony  thereof  to  the  just
possessors.     Assuring  those  that  should  happen  to  absent  themselves  at  the  time,  due
and  lawful  advertisement  being  made,  that  they  should  be  reputed  hinderers  of  the  good
work  intended,  and  as  dissimulate  professors  be  esteemed  unworthy  of  the  fellowship  of
Christ's  flock."     Spottiswoode1  s  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  64.     This
evidently  alludes  to  the  possibility  of  excommunicating  those  who  would  not  surrender
to  the  Protestant  preachers  the  property  stolen  from  the  Catholic  Church  ;  and  in  1570
we  find  another  step  taken  in  the  same  direction.     Under  that  year,  the  following  passage
occurs  in  Acts  and  Proceedings  o'f  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.
p.  181.     "  Q.  If  those  that  withhold  the  duty  of  the  Kirk,  wherethrough  Ministers  want
their  stipends,  may  be  excommunicate  ?    A.  All  things  beand  done  that  the  civill  ordour
requyres  of  them  that  withhaldis  the  duetie  of  the  Kirk,  quherby  Ministers  wants  their
stipends  ;  the  Kirk  may  proceed  to  excommunication,  for  their  contempt."


682  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

became  harder.  Even  the  small  stipends  which  were  allotted  to  the  Protestant
clergy  were  not  regularly  paid,  but  were  mostly  employed  for  other  purposes.126
When  the  ministers  complained,  they  were  laughed  at  and  insulted  by  the
nobles,  who,  having  gained  their  own  ends,  thought  that  they  could  dispense
with  their  former  allies.127  The  Earl  of  Morton,  whose  ability,  as  well  as  con-
nexions, made  him  the  most  powerful  man  in  Scotland,  was  especially  virulent
against  them  ;  and  two  of  the  preachers  who  offended  him  he  put  to  death,
under  circumstances  of  great  cruelty.128  The  nobles,  regarding  him  as  their
chief,  elected  him  Regent  in  1572  ;  129  and  being  now  possessed  of  supreme
power,  he  employed  it  against  the  Church.  He  seized  upon  all  the  benefices
which  became  vacant,  and  retained  their  profits  in  his  own  hands.130  His  hatred
of  the  preachers  passed  all  bounds.  He  publicly  declared  that  there  would  be
neither  peace  nor  order  in  the  country  until  some  of  them  were  hung.131  He
refused  to  sanction  the  General  Assemblies  by  his  presence  ;  he  wished  to  do
away  with  their  privileges,  and  even  with  their  name  ;  and  with  such  determination
did  he  pursue  his  measures,  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  historian  of  the  Scotch
Kirk  nothing  but  the  special  interference  of  the  Deity  could  have  maintained
its  existing  polity.132

126  In  1562   "  the  poore    ministers,  exhorters,  and  readers,  compleaned  at  church
asserableis  that  neither  were  they  able  to  live  upon  the  stipends  allowed,  nor  gett  payment
of  that  small  portioun  which  was  allowed."      Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  ii.
p.  172.     Compare  Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies,  1839,  4to,  vol.  i.  p.  53  ;  "  To  requyre
payment  to  ministers  of  there  stipends  for  the  tyme  by  past,  according  to  the  promise
made."      This  was  in  December,  1564.     In  December,  1565,  the  General  Assembly  said
(p.  71),  "  that  wher  oft  and  divers  tymes  promise  hes  bein  made  to  us,  that  our  saids
brethren,  travelers  and  preachers  in  the  Kirk  of  God,  sould  not  be  defraudit  of  their
appointit  stipends,  neither  zet  in  any  ways  sould  be  molestit  in  their  functioun  ;  zet
nottheles  universallie  they  want  ther  stipends  appointit  for  diverse  tymes  by  past."
On  the  state  of  things  in  1566,  see  "  The  Supplication  of  the  Ministers  to  the  Queen,"
in  Knox's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  p.  529.     See  also,  in  the  Miscellany  of  the
Spalding  Club,  vol.  iv.  pp.  92-101,  Aberdeen,  1849,  4to,  a  letter  written  by  John  Erskine
in  December,  1571,  especially  p.  97  ;  "  the  gretest  of  the  nobilitie  haifing  gretest  rentie
in  possessione,  and  plaicet  of  God  in  maist  hie  honouris,  ceasis  nocht,  maist  wiolentlie
blindit  with  awarice,  to  spoilye  and  draw  to  thame  selfis  the  possessiones  of  the  Kirk."

127  "  Xhe  ministers  were  called  proud  knaves,  and  receaved  manie  injurious  words
from  the  lords,  speciallie  from  Morton,  who  ruled  all.     He  said  he  sould  lay  their  pride,
and  putt  order  to  them."     Colder-wood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  pp.  137,  138.     This
was  in  1571.

128  Chambers'  Annals  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  79,  80.

129  "  Xhe  nobilitie  wnderwrittin  convenit  in  Edinburgh,  and  chesit  and  electit  James
erle  of  Mortoun  regent."     A  Diurnal  of  Occurrents,  p.  320.

130  In  1573,  "  when  any  benefeces  of  Kirk  vaikit,  he  keapit  the  proffet  of  thair  rents
sa  lang  in  his  awin  hand,  till  he  was  urgit  be  the  Kirk  to  mak  donatioun  tharof,  and  that
was  not  gevin  but  proffeit  for  all  that."     The  Historic  and  Life  of  King  James  the  Sext,
edit.  Edinburgh,  1825,  4to,  p.  147.     Even  in  1570,  when  Lennox  was  regent,  "  the  Earle
of  Mortoun  was  the  chiefe  manager  of  every  thing  under  him  ;  "  and  was  "  master  of
the  church  rents,"  and  made  "  gifts  of  them  to  the  nobility."     Wodrow's  Collections
upon  the  Lives  of  the  Reformers  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  part  i.  pp.  27, 126,  Glasgow,
1834,  4to.

!3i  "  During  all  these  Assembleis  and  earnest  endeavoures  of  the  brethrein,  the  regent
was  often  required  to  give  his  presence  to  the  Assemblie,  and  further  the  caus  of  God.
He  not  onlie  refused,  but  threatned  some  of  the  most  zealous  with  hanging,  alledging
that  otherwise  there  could  be  no  peace  nor  order  in  the  countrie."  Calderwood's  History
of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  pp.  393,  394.  "  Uses  grait  thretning  against  the  maist  zelus  breith-
ring,  schoring  to  hang  of  thame,  utherwayes  ther  could  be  na  peace  nor  ordour  in  the
countrey."  The  Autobiography  and  Diary  of  James  Melvill,  edited  by  R.  Pitcairn,
Edinburgh,  1842,  pp.  59,  60.

132  "  He  mislyked  the  Generall  Assembleis,  and  would  have  had  the  name  changed.


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  683

The  rupture  between  Church  and  State  was  now  complete.  It  remained  to  be
seen  which  was  the  stronger  side.  Every  year  the  clergy  became  more  demo-
cratic ;  and  after  the  death  of  Knox,  in  1572,  they  ventured  upon  a  course
which  even  he  would  hardly  have  recommended,  and  which  during  the  earlier
period  of  the  Reformation  would  have  been  impracticable.133  But  by  this
time  they  had  secured  the  support  of  the  people  ;  and  the  treatment  they  were
receiving  from  the  government  and  from  the  nobles  embittered  their  minds,
and  drove  them  into  desperate  counsels.  While  their  plans  were  yet  immature,
and  while  the  future  was  looming  darkly  before  them,  a  new  man  arose  who
was  well  qualified  to  be  their  chief,  and  who  at  once  stepped  into  the  place  which
the  death  of  Knox  left  vacant.  This  was  Andrew  Melville,  who,  by  his  great
ability,  his  boldness  of  character,  and  his  fertility  of  resource,  was  admirably
suited  to  be  the  leader  of  the  Scottish  Church  in  that  arduous  struggle  in  which
it  was  about  to  embark.134

In  1574  Melville,  having  completed  his  education  abroad,  arrived  in  Scot-
land.135 He  quickly  rallied  round  him  the  choicest  spirits  in  the  Church  ;  and,
under  his  auspices  a  struggle  began  with  the  civil  power,  which  continued,  with
many  fluctuations,  until  it  culminated  sixty  years  later  in  open  rebellion  against
Charles  I.  To  narrate  all  the  details  of  the  contest  would  be  inconsistent  with
the  plan  of  this  Introduction  ;  and  notwithstanding  the  extreme  interest  of
the  events  which  now  ensued,  the  greater  part  of  them  must  be  omitted  ;
but  I  will  endeavour  to  indicate  the  general  march,  and  to  put  the  reader  in
possession  of  such  facts  as  are  most  characteristic  of  the  age  in  which  they
occurred.

Melville  had  not  been  in  Scotland  many  months  before  he  began  his  opposition,
at  first  by  secret  intrigues,  afterwards  with  open  and  avowed  hostility.136  In
the  time  of  Knox,  episcopacy  had  been  recognized  as  part  of  the  Protestant
Church,  and  had  received  the  sanction  of  the  leading  Reformers.137  But  that

that  he  might  take  away  the  force  and  priviledge  thereof ;  and  no  questioun  he  had  stayed
the  work  of  policie  that  was  presentlie  in  hands,  if  God  had  not  stirred  up  a  factioun
against  him."  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  396.  See  also
The  Autobiography  of  James  Melvill,  p.  61.

133  "  During  the  two  years  following  the  death  of  Knox,  each  day  was  ripening  the
more  determined  opposition  of  the  Church.     The  breach  between  the  clergy  with  the
great  body  of  the  people,  and  the  government  or  higher  nobility,  was  widening  rapidly."
Argyll's  Presbytery  Examined,  p.  70.

134  "  Next  to  her  Reformer,  who,  under  God,  emancipated  her  from  the  degrading
shackles  of  papal  superstition  and  tyranny,  I  know  no  individual  from  whom  Scot-
land  has   received   such   important   services,  or  to   whom    she   continues    to   owe  so
deep  a  debt  of  national  respect  and  gratitude,  as  Andrew  Melville."     M'Crie's  Life  of
Andrew  Melville,  vol.  ii.  p.  473,  Edinburgh,  1819.      His  nephew,  himself   a  consider-
able person,  says,  "  Scotland  receavit  never  a  graitter  benefit  at  the  hands  of  God  nor
this  man."     The  Autobiography  of  James  Melvill,  p.  38.

135  He  left  Scotland  in  1564,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  and  returned  "  in  the  beginning
of  July,  1574,  after  an  absence  of  ten  years  from  his  native  country."     M'Crie's  Life  of
Andrew  Melville,  vol.  i.  pp.  17,  57.     See  also  Scot's  Apologetical  Narration  of  the  State  of
the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  edit.  Wodrow  Society,  p.  34  ;    and  Howie's  Biographia  Scoticana,
p.  in,  Glasgow,  1781.

136  He  appears  to  have  first  set  to  work  in  November,  1574.     See  Stephen's  History
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  261,  London,  1848.

137  "  The  compilers  of  the  Book  of  Discipline  "  (i.e.  the  First  Book,  in  1560)  "  were
distinguished  by  prelatical  principles  to  the  end  of  their  days."  .  .  .  .  "  That  Knox
himself  was  no  enemy  to  prelacy,  considered  as  an  ancient  and  apostolical  institution,
is  rendered  clear  by  his  '  Exhortation  to  England  for  the  speedy  embracing  of  Christ's
Gospel.'  "     Russell's  History  of  the  Church  in  Scotland,  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  240.     "  The  associ-
ates of  Knox,  it  is  obvious,  were  not  Presbyterians,  and  had  no  intention  of  setting  up  a
system  of  parity  among  the  ministers  of  their  new  establishment."  p.  243.     See  also
p.  332.     Even  in  1572,  the  year  of  Knox's  death,  I  find  it  stated  that  "  the  whole  Diocie


684  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

institution  did  not  harmonize  with  the  democratic  spirit  which  was  now  growing
up.  The  difference  of  ranks  between  the  bishops  and  the  inferior  clergy  was
unpleasant,  and  the  ministers  determined  to  put  an  end  to  it.138  In  1575  one
of  them,  named  John  Dury,  was  instigated  by  Melville  to  bring  the  subject
before  the  General  Assembly  at  Edinburgh. 13»  After  he  had  spoken,  Melville
also  expressed  himself  against  episcopacy  ;  but,  not  being  yet  sure  of  the  temper
of  the  audience,  his  first  proceedings  were  somewhat  cautious.  Such  hesitation
was  however  hardly  necessary  ;  for  owing  to  the  schism  between  the  Church
and  the  upper  classes,  the  ministers  were  becoming  the  eager  enemies  of  those
maxims  of  obedience  and  of  subordination  which  they  would  have  upheld  had
the  higher  ranks  been  on  their  side.  As  it  was,  the  clergy  were  only  favoured
by  the  people  ;  they  therefore  sought  to  organize  a  system  of  equality,  and  were
ripe  for  the  bold  measures  proposed  by  Melville  and  his  followers.  This  was
clearly  shown  by  the  rapidity  of  the  subsequent  movement.  In  1575  the  first
attack  was  made  in  the  General  Assembly  at  Edinburgh.  In  April,  1578,  another
General  Assembly  resolved  that  for  the  future  bishops  should  be  called  by  their
own  names,  and  not  by  their  titles.140  The  same  body  also  declared  that  no
see  should  be  filled  up  until  the  next  Assembly.141  Two  months  afterwards
it  was  announced  that  this  arrangement  was  to  be  perpetual,  and  that  no  new
bishop  should  ever  be  made.142  And  in  1580  the  Assembly  of  the  Church
at  Dundee,  pulling  the  whole  fabric  to  the  ground,  unanimously  resolved  that
the  office  of  bishop  was  a  mere  human  invention  ;  that  it  was  unlawful ;  that  it

of  Sauct  Andrews  is  decerned  be  the  Assembly  to  pertain  to  the  Bishop  of  the  same."
Acts  and  Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  264,
4to,  1839.  The  Scotch  Presbyterians  have  dealt  very  unfairly  with  this  part  of  the
history  of  their  Church.

138  Some  little  time  after  this,  David  Ferguson,  who  died  in  1598,  and  was  minister  at
Dunfermline,  said  very  frankly  to  James  VI.,  "  Yes,  Sir,  ye  may  have  Bishops  here,
but  ye  must  remember  to  make  us  all  equal ;  make  us  all  Bishops,  els  will  ye  never  content
us."     Row's  History  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland  from  1558  to   1637,  edit.  Wodrow  Society,
p.  418.     Compare  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iv.  p.  214  :  in  1584,  "  these
monstruous  titles  of  superioritie."     In  1586,  "  that  tyrannicall  supremacie  of  bishops
and  archbishops  over  ministers."  p.  604.

139  "  He  stirred  up  John  Dury,  one  of  the  ministers  of  Edinburgh,  in  an  Assembly
which  was  then  convened,  to  propound  a  question  touching  the  lawfulness  of  the  episcopal
function,  and  the  authority  of  chapters  in  their  election.     He  himself,  as  though  he  had
not  been  acquainted  with  the  motion,  after  he  had  commended  the  speaker's  zeal,  and
seconded  the  purpose  with  a  long  discourse  of  the  flourishing  estate  of  the  church  of
Geneva,  and  the  opinions  of  Calvin  and  Theodore  Beza  concerning  church  government,
came  to  affirm,  '  That  none  ought  to  be  esteemed  office-bearers  in  the  Church  whose
titles  were  not  found  in  the  book  of  God.     And,  for  the  title  of  bishops,  albeit  the  same
was  found  in  Scripture,  yet  was  it  not  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  that  the  common  sort
did  conceive,  there  being  no  superiority  allowed  by  Christ  amongst  ministers,'  "  &c.
Spottiswoode 's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  200.     See  also  Acts  of  the  General
Assemblies,  vol.  i.  p.  331,  where  it  appears  that  six  bishops  were  present  on  this  memorable
occasion.     The  question  raised  was,  "  Whither  if  the  Bischops,  as  they  are  now  in  the
Kirk  of  Scotland,  hes  thair  function  of  the  word  of  God  or  not,  or  if  the  Chapiter  appointit
for  creating  of  them  aucht  to  be  toller ated  in  this  reformed  Kirk."  p.  340.

140  "  It  was  ordained,  That  Bischops  and  all  vthers  bearand  Ecclesiasticall  functioun,
be  callit  be  thair  awin  names,  or  Brethren,  in  tyme  comeing."     Acts  of  the  General  Assem-
blies of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  404.

141  "  Therfor  the  Kirk  hes  concludit,  That  no  Bischops  salbe  electit  or  made  heirafter,
befor  the  nixt  Generall  Assemblie."     Ibid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  408.

142  "  Anent  the  Act  made  in  the  last  Assemblie,  the  28  of  Aprile  1578,  concerning  the
electioun  of  Bischops,  suspendit  quhill  this  present  Assemblie,  and  the  farther  ordour
reservit  thereto  :  The  General  Assemblie,  all  in  ane  voyce,  hes  concludit,  That  the  said
act  salbe  extendit  for  all  tymes  to  come,  ay  and  quhill  the  corruptioun  of  the  Estate  of
Bischops  be  alluterlie  tane  away."     Ibid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  413.


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  685

must  be  immediately  done  away  with  ;  and  that  every  bishop  should  at  once
resign  his  office,  or  be  excommunicated  if  he  refused  to  do  so.143

The  minister  and  the  people  had  now  done  their  work,  and,  so  far  as  they  were
concerned,  had  done  it  well.144  But  the  same  circumstances  which  made  them
desire  equality,  made  the  upper  classes  desire  inequality.145  A  collision  there-
fore was  inevitable,  and  was  hastened  by  this  bold  proceeding  of  the  Church.
Indeed  the  preachers,  supported  by  the  people,  rather  courted  a  contest  than
avoided  it.  They  used  the  most  inflammatory  language  against  episcopacy  ;
and  shortly  before  abolishing  it  they  completed  and  presented  to  Parliament
the  Second  Book  of  Discipline,  in  which  they  flatly  contradicted  what  they  had
asserted  in  their  First  Book  of  Discipline.146  For  this  they  are  often  taunted
with  inconsistency.147  But  the  charge  is  unjust.  They  were  perfectly  consis-
tent ;*  and  they  merely  changed  their  maxims,  that  they  might  preserve  their

143  "  Forsameikle  as  the  office  of  a  Bischop,  as  it  is  now  vsit,  and  commounly  takin
within  this  realme,  hes  no  sure  warrand,  auctoritie,  nor  good  ground  out  of  the  (Book
and)  Scriptures  of  God  :  but  is  brocht  in  by  the  folie  and  corruptions  of  (men's)  invention,
to  the  great  overthrow  of  the  Kirk  of  God  :  The  haill  Assernblie  of  the  Kirk,  in  ane
voyce,  after  libertie  givin  to  all  men  to  reason  in  the  matter,  none  opponing  themselves
in  defending  the  said  pretendit  office,  Finds  and  declares  the  samein  pretendit  office,  vseit
and  termeit,  as  is  above  said,  vnlaufull  in  the  selfe,  as  haveand  neither  fundament,
ground  nor  warrant  within  the  word  of  God  :  and  ordaines,  That  all  sick  persons  as
bruiks,  or  sail  bruik  heirafter  the  said  office,  salbe  chargeit  simpliciter  to  demitt,  quyt
and  leave  of  the  samein,  as  ane  office  quhervnto  they  are  not  callit  be  God  ;  and  siclyke
to  desist  and  cease  from  all  preaching,  ministration  of  the  sacraments,  or  vsing  any
way  the  office  of  pastors,  quhill  they  receive  de  novo  admission  from  the  Generall  Assem-
blie,  vnder  the  paine  of  excommunicatioun  to  be  denuncit  agains  them  ;  quherin  if  they
be  found  dissobedient,  or  contraveine  this  act  in  any  point,  the  sentence  of  excommunica-
tioun, after  dew  admonitions,  to  be  execute  agains  them."     Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies,
vol.  ii.  p.  453-

144  As  Calderwood  triumphantly  says,  "  the  office  of  bishops  was  damned."     History
of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  p.  469.     "  Their  whole  estat,  both  the  spirituall  and  civill  part,  was
damned."  p.  526.     James  Melvill   (Autobiography,  p.  52)   says  that  in  consequence  of
this    achievement  his  uncle  Andrew   "  gatt  the   nam  of   eTriovcojrofAao-Tt^,   Episcoporum
exactor,  the  flinger  out  of  Bischopes."

145  Tytler  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vi.  p.  302)  observes  that,  while  "  the  great  body
of  the  burghers  and  middle  and  lower  classes  of   the  people  "  were  Presbyterians,  "  a
large  proportion  of  the  nobility  supported  episcopacy."     Instead  of  "  a  large  propor-
tion," he  would  not  have  been  far  wrong  if  he  had   said  "  all."      Indeed,  "  Melville
himself  says  the  whole  peerage  was  against  him."     Stephen's  History  of  the  Church  of
Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  269.     Forbes  ascribes  the  aristocratic  movement  against  presbytery
to  "  godles  atheists,"  who  insisted  "  that  there  could  be  nothing  so  contrair  to  the  nature
of  a  monarchic,"  &c.,  "  than  that  paritie  of  authoritie  in  pastours."     Forbes,  Certaine
Records  touching  the  Estate  of  the  Kirk,  p.  349,  edit.  Wodrow  Society.     See  also  p.  355.
"  That  Democratic  (as  they  called  it)  whilk  allwayes  behoved  to  be  full  of  sedition  and
troublle  to  ane  Aristocratic,  and  so  in  end  to  a  Monarchic."     The  reader  will  observe
this  important  change  in  the  attitude  of  classes  in  Scotland.     Formerly,  the  clergy
had  been  the  allies  of  the  crown  against  the  nobles.     Now,  the  nobles  allied  themselves
with  the  crown  against  the  clergy.     The  clergy,  in  self-defence,  had  to  ally  themselves
with  the  people.

146  On  the  difference  between  the  two  productions  there  are  some    remarks  worth
looking  at  in  Argyll's  Presbytery  Examined,  1848,  pp.  38-43.     But  this  writer,  though
much  freer  from  prejudice  than  most  Presbyterian  authors,  is  unwilling  to  admit  how
completely  the  Second  Book  of  Discipline  contradicts  the  First.

147  By  the  Scotch  episcopalians.

[*  Buckle  more  than  once  forces  a  sense  on  this  word  which  makes  it  useless.  In  his
sense,  no  one  is  ever  inconsistent  who  constantly  seeks  his  own  interests.  If  the  word
is  to  have  any  value,  the  action  of  the  Scots  clergy  in  the  case  under  notice  must  be


686  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

principles.  Like  every  corporation  which  has  ever  existed,  whether  spiritual
or  temporal,  their  supreme  and  paramount  principle  was  to  maintain  their  own
power.  Whether  or  not  this  is  a  good  principle  is  another  matter  ;  but  all
history  proves  that  it  is  an  universal  one.  And  when  the  leaders  of  the  Scotch
Church  found  that  it  was  at  stake,  and  that  the  question  at  issue  was,  who  should
possess  authority,  they  with  perfect  consistency  abandoned  opinions  that  they
had  formerly  held,  because  they  now  perceived  that  those  opinions  were  unfavour-
able to  their  existence  as  an  independent  body.

When  the  First  Book  of  Discipline  appeared  in  1560,  the  government  was
in  the  hands  of  the  nobles,  who  had  just  fought  on  the  side  of  the  Protestant
preachers,  and  were  ready  to  fight  again  on  their  side.  When  the  Second  Book
of  Discipline  appeared  in  1578,  the  government  was  still  held  by  the  nobles  ;
but  those  ambitious  men  had  now  thrown  off  the  mask,  and  having  effected
their  purpose  in  destroying  the  old  hierarchy,  had  actually  turned  round  and
attacked  the  new  one.  The  circumstances  having  changed,  the  Church  changed
with  them  ;  but  in  the  change  there  was  nothing  inconsistent.  On  the  contrary,
it  would  have  been  the  height  of  inconsistency  for  the  ministers  to  have  retained
their  former  notions  of  obedience  and  of  subordination  ;  and  it  was  perfectly
natural*  that,  at  this  crisis,  they  should  advocate  the  democratic  idea  of  equality,
just  as  before  they  had  advocated  the  aristocratic  idea  of  inequality.

Hence  it  was  that,  in  their  First  Book  of  Discipline,  they  established  a  regularly
ascending  hierarchy,  according  to  which  the  general  clergy  owed  obedience  to
their  ecclesiastical  superiors,  to  whom  the  name  of  superintendents  was  given.148
But  in  the  Second  Book  of  Discipline  every  vestige  of  this  was  swept  away  ;
and  it  was  laid  down  in  the  broadest  terms  that,  all  the  preachers  being  fellow-
labourers,  all  were  equal  in  power  ;  that  none  had  authority  over  others  ;  and
that  to  claim  such  authority,  or  to  assert  pre-eminence,  was  a  contrivance  of  man,
not  to  be  permitted  in  a  divinely  constituted  Church.149

%

148  See  the  First  Book  of  Discipline,  reprinted  in  the  first  volume  of  A  Compendium  of
the  Laws  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  2nd  edit.,  Edinburgh,  1837.     The  superintendents
were  "  to  set,  order,  and  appoint  ministers,"  p.  61  ;  and  it  would  seem  (p.  88)  that  no
minister  could  be  deposed  without  the  consent  of  his  superintendent ;  but  this  could
hardly  be  intended  to  interefere  with  the  supreme  authority  of  the  General  Assembly.
See  also  the  summary,  p.  114,  where  it  is  said  of  the  superintendents,  that  "  in  thair
visitatioun  thei  sal  not  onlie  preiche,  but  als  examine  the  doctrine,  life,  diligence,  and
behavior  of  the  ministeris,  reideris,  elderis,  and  deaconis."      According  to  Spottiswoode
(History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  167),  "  the  superintendents  held  their  office
during  life,  and  their  power  was  episcopal ;  for  they  did  elect  and  ordain  ministers,  they
presided  in  synods,  and  directed  all  church  censures,  neither  was  any  excommunication
pronounced  without  their  warrant."     See  further,  on  their  authority,  Knox's  History
of  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  p.  161.     "  That  punyschment  suld  be  appointed  for  suche
as  dissobeyid  or  contemned  the  superintendentes  in  thair  functioun."     This  was  in
1561  ;  and  in  1562  "  it  was  ordained,  that  if  ministers  be  disobedient  to  superintendents
in  anything  belonging  to  edification,  they  must  be  subject  to  correction."     Acts  of  the
General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  i.  p.  14.     Compare  p.  131  :  "  sick  things  as  super-
intendents may  and  aught  decyde  in  their  synodall  conventiouns."

149  "  For  albeit  the  Kirk  of  God  be  rewlit  and  governit  be  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the
onlie  King,  hie  Priest,  and  Heid  thereof,  yit  he  useis  the  ministry  of  men,  as  the  most
necessar  middis  for  this   purpose."  ...     "  And  to  take  away  all  occasion  of  tyrannic,
he  willis  that  they  sould  rewl  with  mutuall  consent  of  brether  and  equality  of  power,
every  one  according  to  thair  functiones."      Second  Book  of  Discipline,  in  A  Compendium

pronounced  inconsistent.  The  word  can  mean  nothing  but  deflection  from  professed
principles.  They  did  not  avow  and  explain  change  of  opinion  :  they  simply  changed
front.  But  it  might  reasonably  be  argued  that  they  were  justified  in  the  change,  if  they
had  acknowledged  it. — ED.]

[*  The  proper  statement  would  be  that  it  was  perfectly  natural  that  they  should  be
inconsistent. — ED.]


'SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  687

The  government,  as  may  be  supposed,  took  a  very  different  view.  Such
doctrines  were  deemed  by  the  upper  classes  to  be  anti-social,  and  to  be  sub-
versive of  all  order.150  So  far  from  sanctioning  them,  they  resolved  if  possible
to  overthrow  them  ;  and  the  year  after  the  General  Assembly  had  abolished
episcopacy  it  was  determined  that  upon  that  very  point  a  trial  of  strength
should  be  made  between  the  two  parties.

In  1581  Robert  Montgomery  was  appointed  archbishop  of  Glasgow.  The
ministers  who  composed  the  chapter  of  Glasgow  refused  to  elect  him  ;  whereupon
the  Privy  Council  declared  that  the  King,  by  virtue  of  his  prerogative,  had  the
right  of  nomination.151  All  was  now  confusion  and  uproar.  The  General
Assembly  forbade  the  archbishop  to  enter  Glasgow.152  He  refused  to  obey  their
order,  and  threw  himself  upon  the  support  of  the  Duke  of  Lennox,  who  had
obtained  the  appointment  for  him,  and  to  whom  he  in  return  had  surrendered
nearly  all  the  revenues  of  the  see,  reserving  for  himself  only  a  small  stipend.153
This  was  a  custom  which  had  grown  up  within  the  last  few  years,  and  was  one  of
many  contrivances  by  which  the  nobles  plundered  the  Church  of  her  property.154

of  the  Laws  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  126,  127.  "  As  to  Bischops,  if  the  name
eTriorKOTros  be  properly  taken,  they  ar  all  ane  with  the  ministers,  as  befoir  was  declairit.
For  it  is  not  a  name  of  superioritie  and  lordschip,  bot  of  office  and  watching."  p.  142.
To  understand  the  full  meaning  of  this,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  the  superintendents
established  by  the  Kirk  in  1560  not  unfrequently  assumed  the  title  of  "Lordship,"  as  an
ornament  to  the  extensive  powers  conferred  upon  them.  See,  for  instance,  the  notes
to  Wodrow's  Collections  upon  the  Lives  of  the  Reformers  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.
part  ii.  p.  461.  But  in  the  Second  Book  of  Discipline,  in  1578,  the  superintendents  are,
if  I  rightly  remember,  not  even  once  named.  [Buckle  has  not  here  brought  out  the  real
cause  of  the  change  of  front  of  the  clergy  as  to  bishops.  As  he  mentions  below  in  note
153,  the  nobility  were  drawing  the  revenues  of  the  bishoprics  by  appointing  men  of
straw  to  the  offices.  (The  Scots  commonalty  called  those  bishops  "  tulchans,"  a  word
meaning  "  the  stuffed  skin  of  a  calf,  placed  beside  the  cow  at  milking  time  to  induce  her
to  yield  her  milk  freely." )  It  was  to  retain  their  power  of  thus  appropriating  the  episcopal
revenues,  and  not  from  any  abstract  concern  for  social  order,  that  the  aristocracy  stood
for  episcopacy.  Cp.  Burton,  History,  v.  81. — ED.]

150  J  ust  as  in  England  we  find  that  the  upper  classes  are  mostly  Episcopalians ;  their
minds  being  influenced,  often  unconsciously,  by  the  to  them    pleasing  spectacle  of  an
inequality  of  rank  which  is  conventional,  and  does  not  depend  upon  ability.     On  the
other  hand,  the  strength  of  the  Dissenters  lies  among  the  middle  and  lower  classes,  where
energy  and  intellect  are  held  in  higher  respect,  and  where  a  contempt  naturally  arises
for  a  system  which,  at  the  mere  will  of  the  sovereign  or  minister  of  the  day,  concedes
titles  and  wealth  to  persons  whom  nature  did  not  intend  for  greatness,  but  who,  to  the
surprise  of  their  contemporaries,  have  greatness  thrust  upon  them.     On  this  difference
of  opinion  in  Scotland,  corresponding  to  the  difference  of  social  position,  see  the  remarks
on  the  seventeenth   century  in  Hume's  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.
p.  544,  Edinburgh,  1797,  4to.

151  Record  of  Privy  Council,  in  M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  i.  p.  267.     '  'The  brethrein
of  Glasgow  were  charged,  under  paine  of  horning,  to  admitt  Mr.  Robert  Montgomrie."
Calderwood 's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  p.  596.

152  "  Charges  the  said  Mr.  Robert  to  continue  in  the  ministrie  of  the  Kirk  of  Striveling,"
&c.     Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies,  vol.  ii.  p.  547.     This  was  in  October,  1581  ;  the
Record  of  the  Privy  Council  was  in  April,  1582.     Moysie,  who  was  a  contemporary,  says
that,  in  March,  1581-2,  not  only  the  dean  and  chapter  but  all  the  clergy   (the  "  haill
ministrie  ")  declared  from  the  pulpit  that  Montgomery's  appointment  "  had  the  warrand
of  the  deuill  and  not  of  the  word  of  God,  bot  wes  damnit  thairby."     Moysie's  Memoirs,
Edinburgh,  1830,  4to,  p.  36.

153  "  The  title  whereof  the  said  duke  had  procured  to  him,  that  he,  having  the  name  of
bishop,  and  eight  hundreth  merks  money  for  his  living  and  sustentatioun,  the  whole
rents  and  other  duteis  of  the  said  benefice,  might  come  to  the  duke's  utilitie  and  behove."
Calderwood' s  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iv.  p.  in.     See  also  p.  401.

154  Scot's  Apologetical  Narration  of  the  State  of  the  Kirk,  pp.  24,  25.     Calderwood' s


688  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

This,  however,  was  not  the  question  now  at  issue.155  The  point  to  be  decided
was  one  not  of  revenue  but  of  power.  For  the  clergy  knew  full  well  that  if
they  established  their  power  the  revenue  would  quickly  follow.  They  therefore
adopted  the  most  energetic  proceedings.  In  April,  1582,  the  General  Assembly
met  at  St.  Andrews,  and  appointed  Melville  as  moderator.156  The  government,
fearing  the  worst,  ordered  the  members,  on  pain  of  rebellion,  to  take  no  steps
respecting  the  archbishopric.157  But  the  representatives  of  the  Church  were
undaunted.  They  summoned  Montgomery  before  them  ;  they  ratified  the
sentence  by  which  he  had  been  suspended  from  the  ministry  ;  and  they  declated
that  he  had  incurred  the  penalties  of  deposition  and  of  excommunication.158

A  sentence  of  excommunication  was  in  those  days  so  ruinous  that  Mont-
gomery was  struck  with  terror  at  the  prospect  before  him.  To  avoid  the  conse-
quences he  appeared  before  the  Assembly,  and  solemnly  promised  that  he
would  make  no  further  attempt  to  possess  himself  of  the  archbishopric.159  By
doing  this,  he  probably  saved  his  life  ;  for  the  people,  siding  with  their  clergy,
were  ripe  for  mischief,  and  were  determined  at  all  hazards  to  maintain  what
they  considered  to  be  the  rights  of  the  Church,  in  opposition  to  the  encroach-
ments of  the  State.*

The  government,  on  the  other  hand,  was  equally  resolute.160  The  Privy
Council  called  several  of  the  ministers  before  them  ;  and  Dury,  one  of  the  most
active,  they  banished  from  Edinburgh.161  Measures  still  more  violent  were
about  to  be  taken,  when  they  were  interrupted  by  one  of  those  singular  events
which  not  unfrequently  occurred  in  Scotland,  and  which  strikingly  evince  the
inherent  weakness  of  the  Crown,  notwithstanding  the  inordinate  pretensions  it
commonly  assumed.

This  was  the  Raid  of  Ruthven,  which  happened  in  1582,  and  in  consequence
of  which  the  person  of  James  VI.  was  held  in  durance  for  ten  months.162  The

History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  p.  302.  Wodrow's  Collections  upon  the  Lives  of  the  Reformers,
vol.  i.  part  i.  p.  206.  Lyon's  History  of  St.  Andrews,  vol.  i.  p.  379.  Gibson's  History  of
Glasgow,  p.  59.  Hume's  History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  ii.  pp.  216,  217.  Chalmers'
Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  p.  624.

155  "  But  the  Church  passing  this  point  "   (i.e.  the  simony)  "  made  quarrel  to  him
for  accepting  the  bishopric."     Spottiswoode"  s  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.
p.  282.

156  Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  ii.  p.  548.

157  "A  messenger -at -arms  entered  the  house,  and  charged  the  moderator  and  members
of  the  assembly,  on  the  pain  of  rebellion,  to  desist  from  the  process."     M'Crie's  Life  of
Melville,  vol.  i.  p.  268.

iss  "  TheAssemblie  and  brether  present,  after  voteing  in  the  said  matter,  depryvit
the  said  Mr.  Robert  from  all  functioun  of  the  Ministrie  in  the  Kirk  of  God,  dureing  the
will  of  the  Kirk  of  God  ;  and  farther,  descernit  the  fearefull  sentence  of  excommunicatioun
to  be  pronuncit  against  him  in  the  face  of  the  haill  Assemblie,  be  the  voyce  and  mouth
of  the  Moderatour  present ;  to  the  effect,  that,  his  proud  flesh  being  cast  into  the  hands  of
Satan,  he  may  be  win  againe,  if  it  be  possible,  to  God  ;  and  the  said  sentence  (to)  be  inti-
mat  be  every  particular  minister,  at  his  awin  particular  kirk,  solemnelie  in  the  first
sermoun  to  be  made  be  them,  after  thair  returning."  Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies
of  the  Kirk,  vol.  ii.  p.  562.

159  Ibid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  565.  Calderwood  (History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  p.  604)  says,  "  After
long  reluctatioun,  at  lenth  he  condescended."

*60  M'Crie  (Life  of  Melville,  vol.  i.  p.  274)  says,  "  In  all  these  contendings,  the  ministers
had  no  countenance  or  support  from  any  of  the  nobility."  It  would  have  been  strange
if  they  had,  seeing  that  the  whole  movement  was  essentially  democratic.

161  Melville's  Autobiography,  p.  129.     Calderwood' s  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  p.  620.
M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  i.  p.  270.

162  He  was  seized  in  August,  1582,  and  was  let  loose  again  in  June,  1583.     Tytler's
History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vi.  pp.  321,  360.     It  is  a  pity  that  this  valuable  and  really  able

[*  Not  of  the  State,  but  of  the  nobles,  who  were  pocketing  the  plunder. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  689

clergy,  tiue  to  the  policy  which  now  governed  them,  loudly  approved  of  the
captivity  of  the  king,  and  pronounced  it  to  be  a  godly  act.163  Dury,  who  had  been
driven  from  his  pulpit,  was  brought  back  to  the  capital  in  triumph ; 164  and  the
General  Assembly,  meeting  at  Edinburgh,  ordered  that  the  imprisonment  of
James  should  be  justified  by  every  minister  to  his  own  congregation.165

In  1583  the  king  recovered  his  liberty,  and  the  struggle  became  more  deadly
than  ever  ;  the  passions  of  both  parties  being  exasperated  by  the  injuries  each
had  inflicted  on  the  other.  The  Ruthven  conspiracy,  having  been  declared
treason,  as  it  undoubtedly  was,  Dury  preached  in  its  favour,  and  openl\  defended
it  ;  and  although,  under  the  influence  of  momentary  fear,  he  afterwards  withdrew
what  he  had  said,166  it  was  evident  from  other  circumstances  that  his  feelings
were  shared  by  his  brethren. 16?  A  number  of  them  being  summoned  before  the
king  for  their  seditious  language,  bade  him  take  heed  what  he  was  about,  and
reminded  him  that  no  occupant  of  the  throne  had  ever  prospered  after  the
ministers  had  begun  to  threaten  him.168  Melville,  who  exercised  immense

work  should  be  so  superficial  in  regard  to  the  ecclesiastical  affairs  of  Scotland.  Mr
Tytler  appears  not  to  have  studied  at  all  the  proceedings  of  the  presbyteries,  or  even
of  the  General  Assemblies  ;  neither  does  he  display  any  acquaintance  with  the  theological
literature  of  his  country.  And  yet,  from  the  year  1560  to  about  1700,  these  sources  dis-
close more  of  the  genuine  history  of  the  Scotch  people  than  all  other  sources  put  together.
[In  the  very  act  of  thus  severely  condemning  Tytler,  Buckle  has  himself  failed  to  explain
the  nature  of  the  Raid  of  Ruthven,  which  Tytler  brings  out  with  great  fulness  and  clear-
ness (ed.  1869,  iv.  41-53).  The  avowed  reasons  for  the  act  were  that  the  king  was  known
to  be  in  correspondence  with  France,  that  his  advisers  Lennox  and  Arran  were  believed
to  be  plotting  the  subversion  of  the  Protestant  Church,  and  that  James  was  believed
to  intend  making  a  demission  of  the  crown  to  his  mother.  Tytler  also  shows  that  the
cause  of  episcopacy  was  felt  to  be  bound  up  with  that  of  the  king's  advisers.  Buckle,
finally,  omits  to  note  that  Montgomery,  after  yielding  on  the  sentence  of  excommuni-
cation, renewed  his  claim  and  was  reinstated  in  his  bishopric,  the  government  pro-
nouncing the  excommunication  null  (Id.  pp.  43,  47).  Then  it  was  that  the  trouble
came  to  a  head. — ED.]

lea  "The  pulpit  resounded  with  applauses  of  the  godly  deed."  Arnofs  History  of
Edinburgh,  p.  37.

164  "  As  he  is  comming  from  Leith  to  Edinburgh,  upon  Tuisday  the  4th  of  September,
there  mett  him  at  the  Gallow  Greene  two  hundreth  men  of  the  inhabitants  of  Edinburgh.
Their  number  still  increassed,  till  he  came  within  the  Neather  Bow.     There  they  beganne
to  sing  the  124  Psalme,  '  Now  may  Israel   say,'  &c.,  and  sang  in  foure  parts,  knowne
to  the  most  part  of  the  people.     They  came  up  the  street  till  they  came  to  the  Great
Kirk,  singing  thus  all  the  way,  to  the  number  of  two  thowsand.     They  were  muche
moved  themselves,  and  so  were  all  the  beholders.     The  duke  was  astonished,  and  more
affrayed  at  that  sight  than  at  anie  thing  that  ever  he  had  seene  before  in  Scotland,  and
rave  his  beard  for  anger."     Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  pp.  646,  647.

165  Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies,  vol.  ii.  pp.  595,  596.     This  was  ordered  by  the
General  Assembly  which  met  at  Edinburgh  on  the  gth  of  October,  1582,  p.  585-     See
also  Watson's  Historicall  Collections  of  Ecclesiastick  Affairs  in  Scotland,  p.  192,  "  requiring
the  ministers  in  all  their  churches  to  commend  it  unto  the  people."

166  Spottiswoode 's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  308.

167  James,  after  his  escape,  "  convocat  all  his  peceabill  Prelatis  and  Nobles,  and  thair
he  notefeit  unto  thayme  the  greif  that  he  consavit  of  his  unlaughfull  detentioun  the
yeir  bygayne,  and  tharefore  desyrit  thame  to  acknawledge  the  same  ;  and  thay  be  thair
generall  voittis  decernit  the  rayd  of  Ruthven  to  be  manifest  treasoun.     The  Ministers
on  the  uther  part,  perswadit  the  people  that  it  was  a  godly  fact,  and  that  whasoever  wald
not  allow  thareof  in  his  hart,  was  not  worthie  to  be  estemit  a  Christien."     The  Historic
of  King  James  the  Sext,  p.  202,  published  by  the  Bannatyne  Club,  Edinburgh,  1825,  4to.

168  "  Disregard  not  our  threatening  ;  for  there  was  never  one  yet  in  this  realm,  in  the
place  where  your  grace  is,  who  prospered  after  the  ministers  began  to  threaten  him."
Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vi.  p.  364.     See  also,  in  Calderwood's  History  of  the
Kirk,  vol.  v.  pp.  540,  541,  a  letter  from  one  of   the  clergy  in  Fife,  addressed  to  the  king

44


690  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

influence  over  both  clergy  and  people,  bearded  the  king  to  his  face,  refused
to  account  for  what  he  had  delivered  in  the  pulpit,  and  told  James  that  he  per-
verted the  laws  both  of  God  and  of  man.169  Simpson  likened  him  to  Cain,  and
warned  him  to  beware  of  the  wrath  of  God.1™  Indeed,  the  spirit  now  displayed
by  the  Church  was  so  implacable,  that  it  seemed  to  delight  in  venting  itself  in
the  most  repulsive  manner.  In  1585  a  clergyman  named  Gibson,  in  a  sermon
which  he  preached  in  Edinburgh,  denounced  against  the  king  the  curse  of  Jero-
boam, that  he  should  die  childless,  and  that  his  race  should  end  with  him.171
The  year  after  this  happened,  James,  finding  that  Elizabeth  was  evidently
determined  to  take  his  mother's  life,  bethought  him  of  what  was  valued  in  that
age  as  an  unfailing  resource,  and  desired  the  clergy  to  offer  up  prayers  on  behalf
of  Mary.  This  they  almost  unanimously  refused.172  And  not  only  did  they
abstain  from  supplication  themselves,  but  they  resolved  that  no  one  else  should
do  what  they  had  declined.  The  Archbishop  of  Saint  Andrews  being  about  to
officiate  before  the  king,  they  induced  a  certain  John  Cowper  to  station  himself
in  the  pulpit  beforehand,  so  as  to  exclude  the  prelate.  Nor  was  it  until  the
captain  of  the  guard  threatened  to  pull  Cowper  from  the  place  he  had  usurped,
that  the  service  could  go  on,  and  the  king  be  allowed  to  hear  his  own  mother
prayed  for,  in  this  sad  crisis  of  her  fate,  when  it  was  still  uncertain  whether
she  would  be  publicly  executed,  or  whether,  as  was  more  generally  believed,
she  would  be  secretly  poisoned.173

in  1597.  "  And  now,  Sir,  lett  me  be  free  with  you  in  writting  other  men's  reports,
and  that  of  the  wisest  politicians.  They  say,  our  bygane  historeis  report,  and  experience
teacheth,  that  raro  et  fere  nunquam  has  a  king  and  a  prince  continued  long  together  in
this  realme  ;  for  Filius  ante  diem  patrios  inquirit  in  annos.  And  they  say,  Sir,  farther,
that  whatsoever  they  were  of  your  Majestie's  predecessors  in  governement  that  oppouned
themselves  directlie  or  indirectlie  to  God's  ordinance  in  his  Kirk,  it  has  beene  their
wracke  and  subversioun  in  the  end.  I  might  herein  be  more  particular  ;  but  I  leave
it  to  your  Majestie's  owne  grave  and  modest  consideratioun,  for  it  concerneth  you  most
neere."

169  "  Saying  '  He  perverted  the  laws  both  of  God  and  man.'  "     Spottiswoode' s  History
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.   ii.  p.   309.     Also   Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,   vol.   vi.
P-  37i.

170  "  Mr.  Patrick  Simson,  preaching   before    the   king   upon  Gen.  iv.  9,  '  The  Lord
said  to  Cain,  Where  is  Abel,  thy  brother  ?  '  said  to  the  king,  before  the  congregation,
'  Sir,  I  assure  you,  in  God's  name,  the  Lord  will  ask  at  you  where  is  the  Earl  of  Moray,
your  brother  ?  '     The  king  replyed,  before  all  the  congregation,  '  Mr.  Patrik,  my  chalmer
doore  wes  never  steeked  upon  you  :  ye  might  have  told  me  anything  ye  thought  in  secret.'
He  replyed,  '  Sir,  the  scandall  is  publict.'  "    Row's  History  of  the  Kirk,  p.  144.     "  Having
occasion,  anno  1593,  to  preach  before  the  king,  he  publicly  exhorted  him  to  beware  that
he  drew  not  the  wrath  of  God  upon  himself  in  patronizing  a  manifest  breach  of  divine
laws."     Howie's  Biographia  Scoticana,  p.  120.

171  "  Saying,  '  That  Captain  James,  with  his  lady  Jesabel,  and  William  Stewart  (mean-
ing the  colonel),  were  taken  to  be  the  persecutors  of  the  Church  ;  but  that  now  it  was
seen  to  be  the  king  himself,  against  whom  he  denounced  the  curse  that  fell  on  Jeroboam —
that  he  would  die  childless,  and  be  the  last  of  his  race.'  "     Spottiswoode1  s  History  of  the
Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  335.

172  "  Jhe  king,  perceiving  by  all  these  letters,  that  the  death  of  his  mother  was  deter-
mined, called  back  his  ambassadors,  and  at  home  gave  order  to  the  ministers  to  remember

,her  in  their  public  prayers,  which  they  denied  to  do."  ...  "  Upon  their  denial,  charges
were  directed  to  command  all  bishops,  ministers,  and  other  office-bearers  in  the  Church
to  make  mention  of  her  distress  in  their  public  prayers,  and  commend  her  to  God  in
the  form  appointed.  But  of  all  the  number  only  Mr.  David  Lindsay  at  Leith  and  the
king's  own  ministers  gave  obedience.  Spottiswoode' s  History  of  the  Church,  vol.  ii,
PP-  355»356.  "They,  with  only  one  exception,  refused  to  comply."  Russell's  History
of  the  Church  in  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  23.  Compare  Watson's  Historicall  Collections  of
Ecclesiastick  Affairs  in  Scotland,  p.  208  ;  and  Historie  of  James  the  Sext,  p.  225.

173  "  They  stirred  up  Mr.  John  Cowper,  a  young  man  not  entered  as  yet  in  the  function,
to  take  the  pulpit  before  the  time,  and  exclude  the  bishop.     The  king  coming  at  the  hour


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  691

In  1594  John  Ross  stated  in  the  pulpit  that  the  advisers  of  the  king  were  all
traitors,  and  that  the  king  himself  was  likewise  a  traitor.  He  was  also  a  rebel
and  a  reprobate.  That  such  should  be  the  case  was  not  surprising,  considering
the  parentage  of  James.  For  his  mother  was  a  Guise,  and  a  persecutor  of  the
saints.  He  avoided  open  persecution,  and  spoke  them  fair  ;  but  his  deeds  did
not  correspond  to  his  words  ;  and  so  great  was  his  dissimulation,  that  he  was  the
most  arrant  hypocrite  then  living  in  Scotland.174

In  1596  David  Black,  one  of  the  most  influential  of  the  Protestant  ministers,
delivered  a  sermon  which  made  much  noise.  He  said  in  his  discourse  that
all  kings  were  children  of  the  devil ;  but  that  in  Scotland  the  head  of  the  Court
was  Satan  himself.  The  members  of  the  council,  he  added,  were  cormorants,
and  the  lords  of  the  session  miscreants.  The  nobility  had  degenerated  :  they
were  godless  ;  they  were  dissemblers  ;  they  were  the  enemies  of  the  Church.
As  to  the  queen  of  England,  she  was  nothing  but  an  atheist.  And  as  to  the  queen
of  Scotland,  all  he  would  say  was,  that  they  might  pray  for  her  if  they  list,  and
because  it  was  the  fashion  to  do  so  ;  but  that  there  was  no  reason  for  it,  inasmuch
as  no  good  would  ever  come  from  her  to  them.175


appointed,  and  seeing  him  in  the  place,  called  to  him  from  his  seat,  and  said,  '  Mr.  John,
that  place  is  destined  for  another ;  yet  since  you  are  there,  if  you  will  obey  the  charge  that
is  given,  and  remember  my  mother  in  your  prayers,  you  shall  go  on.'  He  replying,
'  that  he  would  do  as  the  Spirit  of  God  should  direct  him,'  was  commanded  to  leave  the
place  :  and  making  as  though  he  would  stay,  the  captain  of  the  guard  went  to  pull  him
out ;  whereupon  he  burst  forth  in  these  speeches  :  '  This  day  shall  be  a  witness  against
the  king  in  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  :  '  and  then  denouncing  a  woe  to  the  inhabitants
of  Edinburgh,  he  went  down,  and  the  bishop  of  St.  Andrews  entering  the  pulpit  did
perform  the  duty  required."  Spottiswoode 's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.
p.  356.  "  The  Kingis  Majestic,  to  testefie  hi?  earnest  and  naturall  affection  to  his  mother,
causit  pray  for  hir  oppinly  efter  him  selff  ;  quhairvpone  arrose  a  great  dissensioun  betuix
sum  of  the  ministrie  and  his  Majestic,  namely  the  ministrie  of  Edinburgh.  Quhairvpone
the  king  appoynted  Patrik,  archbischop  of  St.  Androis  to  teache,  bot  he  wes  preuented
be  Mr.  John  Covpar  minister,  quho  come  befoir  and  filled  the  pulpit.  And  as  the  said
Mr.  John  wes  beginnand  the  prayer,  the  Kingis  Majestic  commandit  him  to  stay  :  so  as
Mr.  John  raschit  rm'chtely  vpone  the  pulpit,  saying,  '  This  day  sail  bear  witnes  aganis  yow
in  the  day  of  the  lord  :  woe  be  to  ye  Edinburgh,  for  the  last  of  xi  plaiges  salbe  the  worst."
Moysie's  Memoirs,  p.  59.

174  See  The  Historic  of  King  James  the  Sext,  pp.  316-318,  from  "  a  just  copie  of  his
sermon  "  supplied  by  Ross  himself.     "  His  text  was  upon  the  6  chapter  of  the  Prophet
Jeremias,  verse  28.     '  Brethren,  we  have  manie,  and  almaist  innumerable  enormiteis
in  this  cuntrie  to  be  lamentit,  as  the  misgovernement  of  our  king  be  sinistrous  counsall
of  sum  particular  men.      They  ar  all  rebellious  traitors,  evin  the  king  the  maist  singular
person,  and  particularlie  everie  estait  of  the  land.'  ...     '  Our   king  in  sindrie  poyntis
hes  bene  rebellious  aganis   the   Majestic  of  God.'  .  .  .  '  To  this  howre,  we  gat  never
gude  of  the  Guysien  blude,  for  Queyne  Marie  his  mother  was  an  oppin  persecutor  of  the
sanctis  of  God,  and  althoght  the  king  be  not  an  oppin  persecutor,  we  have  had  many  of
his  fayre  wordis,  wharein  he  is  myghtie  aneugh,  bot  for  his  gude  deiddis,  I  commend  me
to  thayme.'  ...     '  Admit,  that    our  king  be  a  Christien  king,   yit  but   amendement,
he  is  a  reprobat  king.     Of  all  the  men  in  this  nation,  the  king  himself  is  the  maist  fynest,
and  maist  dissembling  hypocreit.'  "     A  very  short  notice  of  this  sermon  is  given  by
Calderwood  (History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  v.  p.  299),  who  probably  had  not  seen  the  original
notes.

175  The  accusation,  which  was   fully  proved,  was   that  "  he  had  publictlie  sayd  in
pulpit,  that  the  papist  erles  wes  come  home  be  the  kingis  knavledge  and  consent,
quhairin  his  Hienes  treacherie  wes  detectit ;    that  all  kingis  war  deuilis  and  come  of
deuilis ;    that    the    deuill   wes  the    head  of    the   court    and   in   the   court ;    that   he
prayit  for  the  Queine  of  Scotland  for  the  faschione,  because  he  saw  na  appearance  of
guid  in  hirtyme."     Moysie's  Memoirs,  p.  128.     [The  return  of  the  papist  earls,  which
Buckle  does  not  mention  in  the  text,  was  the  true  gravamen. — ED.]     "  Having  been
heard  to  affirm  that  the  popish  lords  had  returned  into  the  country  by  the  king's


692  THE  HISTORY  OF  CIVILIZATION

For  preaching  this  sermon,  Black  was  summoned  by  the  Privy  Council.  He
refused  to  attend,  because  it  was  for  a  spiritual  tribunal,  and  not  for  a  temporal
one,  to  take  notice  of  what  was  uttered  in  the  pulpit.  The  Church,  to  be  sure,
he  would  obey  ;  but  having  received  his  message  from  God,  he  was  bound  to
deliver  it,  and  it  would  be  a  dereliction  of  duty  if  he  were  to  allow  the  civil
power  to  judge  such  matters.1™  The  king,  greatly  enraged,  ordered  Black  to
be  cast  into  prison  ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  other  course  was  open  to  him  ;
though  it  was  certain  that  neither  this  nor  any  measure  he  could  adopt  would
tame  the  indomitable  spirit  of  the  Scotch  Church.177

In  December  the  same  year,  the  Church  proclaimed  a  fast  ;  and  Welsh  preached
in  Edinburgh  a  sermon,  with  the  view  of  rousing  the  people  against  their  rulers.
The  king,  he  told  his  audience,  had  formerly  been  possessed  by  a  devil,  and  that
devil  being  put  out,  seven  worse  ones  had  come  in  its  place.  It  was  therefore
evident  that  James  was  demented,  and  it  became  lawful  to  take  the  sword  of
justice  from  his  hands  ;  just  as  it  would  be  lawful  for  servants  or  children  to
seize  the  head  of  their  family,  if  it  had  pleased  heaven  to  afflict  him  with  madness.
In  such  case,  the  preacher  observed,  it  would  be  right  to  lay  hold  of  the  madman,
and  to  tie  him  hand  and  foot,  that  he  might  do  no  further  harm.178

The  hatred  felt  by  the  clergy  was  at  this  period  so  bitter,  and  the  democratic
spirit  in  them  so  strong,179  that  they  seemed  unable  to  restrain  themselves  ;  and


permission,  and  that  thereby  the  king  had  discovered  the  '  treacherous  hypocrisy  of  his
heart  ;  '  that  '  all  kings  were  the  devil's  bairns,  and  that  the  devil  was  in  the  court,
and  the  guiders  of  it.'  He  was  proved  to  have  used  in  this  prayer  these  indecent  words,
when  speaking  of  the  queen,  '  We  must  pray  for  her  for  fashion's  sake  ;  but  we  might  as
well  not,  for  she  will  never  do  us  any  good.'  He  called  the  Queen  of  England  an  atheist,
and  the  Lords  of  Session  bribers  ;  and  said  that  the  nobility  at  large  '  were  degenerate,
godless,  dissemblers,  and  enemies  to  the  churcli.'  "  Grierson's  History  of  Saint  Andrews,
p.  30,  Cupar,  1838.  Among  the  charges  against  him  were,  "  Fourthly,  that  he  had
called  the  queen  of  England  an  atheist.  Fifthly,  that  he  had  discussed  a  suspension
granted  by  the  lords  of  session  in  pulpit,  and  called  them  miscreants  and  bribers.  Sixthly,
that,  speaking  of  the  nobility,  he  said  they  were  '  degenerated,  godless,  dissemblers,
and  enemies  to  the  church.'  Likewise,  speaking  of  the  council,  that  he  had  called  them
'  holiglasses,  cormorants,  and  men  of  no  religion.'  "  Spottiswoode's  History  of  the  Church,
vol.  iii.  p.  21.

176  See  the  original  papers  on  "  The  Declinatour  of  the  King  and  Counsel's  Judicatour
in  Maters  Spiritual!,  namelie  in  Preaching  of  the  Word,"  in  Calderwood's  History  of  the
Kirk,  vol.  v.  pp.  457-459,  475-480.     Tytler  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.  pp.  326-332)
has  given  extracts  from  them,  and  made  some  remarks  on  ttieir  obvious  tendency.     See
also,  on  the Declinature of  Jurisdiction  claimed  by  the  Scotch  Church,  Hallam's  Consti-
tutional History,  4th  edit.  1842,  vol.  ii.  p.  461  ;  and  Mackenzie's  Laws  and  Customs  of
Scotland  in  Matters  Criminal,  Edinburgh,  1699,  folio,  pp.  181,  182.

177  M'Crie  in  his  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  pp.  70  seq.,  has  given  an  account  of  the  punish  -
ment  of   Black,   but   as  usual   conceals   the  provocation  ;  or  at  least  softens  it  down
until  it  hardly  becomes  a  provocation.     According  to  him,  "  David  Black  had  been
served  with  a  summons  to  answer  before  the  privy  council  for  certain  expressions  used
by  him  in  his  sermons."     Certain  expressions,  indeed  !     But  why  name  the  penalty,
and  suppress  the  offence  ?     This  learned  writer  knew  perfectly  well  what  Black  had
done,  and  yet  all  the  information  bestowed  on  the  reader  is  a  note  at  p.  72,  containing  a
mutilated  extract  from  Spottiswoode.

178  "  Saying,  '  He  was  possessed  with  a  devil ;  that  one  devil  being  put  out,  seven
worse  were  entered  in  place  ;  and  that  the  subjects  might  lawfully  rise,  and  take  the
sword  out  of  his  hand  :  '  which  he  confirmed  by  the  example  of  a  father  that,  falling
into  a  frenzy,  might  be  taken  by  the  children  and  servants  of  the  family,  and  tied  hand
and  foot  from  doing  violence."     Spottiswoode's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.
p.  34.     See  also  Arnot's  History  of  Edinburgh,  pp.  46,  47.

179  This  did  not  escape  the  attention  of  the  English  government  ;  and  Elizabeth,
who  was  remarkably  well  informed  respecting  Scotch  affairs,  wrote  to  James,  in  i59°»
a  warning  which  was  hardly  necessary,  but  which  must  have  added  to  his  fears.      "  And


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  693

Andrew  Melville,  in  an  audience  with  the  king,  in  1596,  proceeded  to  personal
insults,  and,  seizing  him  by  the  sleeve,  called  him  God's  silly*  vassal.180  The
large  amount  of  truth  contained  in  this  bitter  taunt  increased  its  pungency.
But  the  ministers  did  not  always  confine  themselves  to  words.181  Their  participa-
tion in  the  Ruthven  conspiracy  is  unquestionable  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  they
were  privy  to  the  last  great  peril  to  which  James  was  exposed,  before  he  escaped
from  that  turbulent  land  which  he  was  believed  to  govern.  Certain  it  is  that
the  Earl  of  Gowrie,  who  in  1600  entrapped  the  king  into  his  castle  in  order  to
murder  him,  was  the  hope  and  the  mainstay  of  the  Presbyterian  clergy,  and
was  intimately  associated  with  their  ambitious  schemes.182  Such  indeed
was  their  infatuation  on  behalf  of  the  assassin,  that  when  his  conspiracy  was
defeated,  and  he  himself  slain,  several  of  the  ministers  propagated  a  report  that
Gowrie  had  fallen  a  victim  to  the  royal  perfidy,  and  that  in  point  of  fact  the
only  plot  which  ever  existed  was  one  concocted  by  the  king,  with  fatal  art,
against  his  mild  and  innocent  host.183

An  absurdity  of  this  sort 184  was  easily  believed  in  an  ignorant  and  therefore
a  credulous  age.  That  the  clergy  should  have  propagated  it,  and  that  in  this
as  in  many  other  cases  they  should  have  laboured  with  malignant  industry  to
defame  the  character  of  their  prince,185  will  astonish  no  one  who  knows  how
quickly  the  wrath  of  the  Church  can  be  roused,  and  how  readily  the  spiritual
classes  always  are  to  cover,  even  with  the  foulest  calumny,  those  who  stand  in

lest  fayre  semblance,  that  easely  may  begile,  do  not  brede  your  ignorance  of  suche  persons
as  ether  pretend  religion  or  dissemble  deuotion,  let  me  warne  you  that  ther  is  risen,
bothe  in  your  realme  and  myne,  a  secte  of  perilous  consequence,  suche  as  wold  have
no  kings  but  a  presbitrye,  and  take  our  place  while  the  inioy  our  privilege,  with  a  shade  of
Codes  word,  wiche  non  is  juged  to  folow  right  without  by  ther  censure  the  be  so  denied.
Yea,  looke  we  wel  unto  them."  Letters  of  Elizabeth  and  James  VI.,  edited  by  John
Bruce,  Camden  Society,  1849,  4to,  p.  63.

180  The  Reverend  J  ames  Melvill,  who  was   present   at  the   scene,  describes  it  with
exuberant  delight.      "  To  the  quhilk,  I  beginning  to  reply,  in  my  maner,  Mr.  Andro
doucht  nocht  abyd  it,  bot  brak  af  upon  the  king  in  sa  zealus,  powerfull,  and  unresistable  a
maner,  that  whowbeit  the  king  used  his  authoritie  in  maist  crabbit  and  colerik  maner,
yit  Mr.  Andro  bure   him  down,  and   outtred   the  Commission    as  from   the  mightie
God,  calling  the  king  bot  '  God's  sillie  vassall ;  '  and  taking  him  be  the  sleive,"  &c.
Autobiography  and  Diary  of  James  Melvill,  p.  370.   See  also  Shield's  Hind  Let  Loose,  1687,
p.  52  ;  and  M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  p.  66.

181  In  1593-4  some  of  them  formed  a  plot  to  seize  him.      See  the  evidence  from  the
State-paper  Office,  in  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.  p.  249,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1845.

182  "  He  was  the  darling  hope  of  the  Presbyterian  party."     Ibid.,  vol.  vii.  p.  410.

183  "  Cowry's  conspiracy  was  by  them  charged  on  the  king,  as  a  contrivance  of  his
to  get  rid  of  that  earl."     Burnefs  History  b/  his  own  Time,  edit.   Oxford,  1823,  vol.  i.
p.  31.     See  also  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,voL  vii.  pp.  439,  440  ;  and  on  the  diffusion
of  "  this  absurd  hallucination,"  see  The  Spottiswoode  Miscellany,  vol.  ii.  p.  320,  Edin-
burgh, 1845.

184  See  a  good  note  in  Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  179,  Edinburgh,
1833,  4to.     Compare  Lawson's  Book  of  Perth,  Edinburgh,  1847,  p.  xxxix.     [The  "  absurd-
ity "  is  not  clear.     The  latest  historians  recognize  that  forged  letters  were  afterwards
produced  as  evidence  against  Gowrie  ;  that  the  king's  story  contains  proved  falsehoods
and  many  discrepancies,  and  that  the  king  was  in  Cowrie's  debt  to  the  extent  of  £80,000,
with  no  prospect  of  releasing  himself.     The  view  of  the  clergy  was  thus  not  unwarranted.
Cp.  Hume  Brown,  ii.  235. — ED.]

185  Their  language,  and  their  general  bearing,  so  enraged  James,  as  to  extort  from
him  a  passionate  declaration,  in  1592,  that  "it  would  not  be  weill  till  noblemen  and
gentlemen  gott  licence  to  breake  ministers'  heads."     Calderwood1  s  History  of  the  Kirk,
vol.  v.  p.  148.

[*  "  Silly  "  in  Scots  has  not  its  English  meaning,  but  properly  signifies  only  "  weak."
Buckle  has  misunderstood  the  word. — ED.]


694  '  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

their  way.      The  evidence  which  has  been  collected  proves  that  the  Presbyterian
ministers  carried  their  violence  against  the  constituted  authorities  of  the  state  to
an  indecent  if  not  to  a  criminal  length  ;  and  we  cannot  absolve  them  from  the
charge  of  being  a  restless  and  unscrupulous  body,  greedy  after  power,  and  grossly
intolerant  of  whatever  opposed  their  own  views.     Still,  the  real  cause  of  their
conduct  was  the  spirit  of  their  age,*  and  the  peculiarities  of  their  position.      None
of  us  can  be  sure  that  if  we  were  placed  exactly  as  they  were  placed,  we  should
have  acted  differently.     Now,  indeed,  we  cannot  read  of  their  proceedings,  as
they  are  recorded  in  their  own  Assemblies,  and  by  the  historians  of  their  own
Church,  without  an  uneasy  feeling  of  dislike,  I  had  almost  said  of  disgust,  at
finding  ourselves  in  presence  of  so  much  of  superstition,  of  chicanery,  of  low,
sordid  arts,  and  yet,  withal,  of  arrogant  and  unbridled  insolence.      The  truth
however  is  that  in  Scotland  the  age  was  evil,  and  the  evil  rose  to  the  surface.
The  times  were  out  of  joint,  and  it  was  hard  to  set  them  right.   The  long  prevalence
of  anarchy,  of  ignorance,  of  poverty,  of  force,  of  fraud,  of  domestic  tumult,  and  of
foreign  invasion,  had  reduced  Scotland  to  a  state  which  it  is  scarcely  possible
for  us  to  realize.       Hereafter  1  shall  give  some  evidence  of  the  effect  which  this
produced  on  the  national  character,  and  of  the  serious  mischief  which  it  wrought.
In  the  meantime  we    should,  in  fairness  to  the  Scotch   clergy,  admit  that  the
condition  of  their  country  affords  the  best  explanation  of  their  conduct.     Every-
thing around  them  was  low  and  coarse  ;  the  habits  of  men  in  their  daily  life
were  violent,  brutal,  and  utterly  regardless  of  common  decency  ;  and  as  a  natural
consequence  the  standard  of  human  actions  was  so  depressed  that  upright  and
well-meaning  persons  did  not  shrink  from  doing  what  to  us,  in  our  advanced
state  of  society,  seems  incredible.      Let  us  then  not  be  rash  in  this  matter.      Let
us  not  be  too  forward  in  censuring  the  leading  actors  in  that  great  crisis  through
which  Scotland  passed  during  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century.      Much
they  did  which  excites  our  strongest  aversion.      But  one  thing  they  achieved,
which  should  make  us  honour  their  memory,  and  repute  them  benefactors  of
their  species.     At  a  most  hazardous  moment  they  kept  alive  the  spirit  of  national
liberty.186     What  the  nobles  and  the  crown  had  put  in  peril,  that  did  the  clergy
save.      By  their  care  the  dying  spark  was  kindled  into  a  bla/e.     When  the  light
grew  dim,  and  nickered  on  the  altar,  their  hands  trimmed  the  lamp,  and  fed  the
sacred  flame.     This  is  their  real  glory,  and  on  this  they  may  well  repose.     They
were  the  guardians  of  Scotch  freedom,  and  they  stood  to  their  post.     Where
danger  was,   they  were  foremost.     By  their  sermons,  by  their  conduct,   both
public  and  private,  by  the  proceedings  of  their  Assemblies,  by  their  bold  and
frequent  attacks  upon    persons  without  regard  to  their  rank,  nay,  even  by  the
very  insolence  with  which  they  treated  their  superiors,  they  stirred  up  the  minds
of  men,  woke  them  from  their  lethargy,  formed  them  to  habits  of  discussion,

186  "  At  the  period  of  which  we  speak  "  (about  the  year  1584)  "  the  pulpit  was,  in
fact,  the  only  organ  by  which  public  opinion  was  or  could  be  expressed  ;  and  the  ecclesi-
astical courts  were  the  only  assemblies  in  the  nation  which  possessed  anything  that
was  entitled  to  the  name  of  liberty  or  independence.  Parliament  had  its  business
prepared  to  its  hand,  and  laid  before  it  in  the  shape  of  acts  which  required  only  its  assent.
Discussion  and  freedom  of  speech  were  unknown  in  its  meetings.  The  courts  of  justice
were  dependent  on  the  will  of  the  sovereign,  and  frequently  had  their  preceedings  regula-
ted, and  their  discussions  dictated,  by  letters  or  messages  from  the  throne.  It  was  the
preachers  who  first  taught  the  people  to  express  an  opinion  on  the  conduct  of  their  rulers  ;
and  the  assemblies  of  the  Church  set  the  earliest  example  of  a  regular  and  firm  opposition
to  the  arbitrary  and  unconstitutional  measures  of  the  Court."  M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,
vol.  i.  302.  [The  clergy  in  reality  opposed  the  Court  very  much  in  the  spirit  in  which
the  nobles  had  previously  done  so  ;  and,  as  we  have  seen,  they  were  no  less  ready  to
justify  violent  methods. — ED.]

[*  No  such  conduct  was  ventured  on  by  the  clergy  in  England.  The  position  of  the
Scots  clergy  was  quite  exceptional,  and  depended  not  on  a  "  spirit  of  the  age,"  but  on
the  local  antecedents  and  circumstances. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XV.    AND    XVI.    CENTURIES  695

and  excited  that  inquisitive  and  democratic  spirit  which  is  the  only  effectual
guarantee  the  people  can  eve1'  possess  against  the  tyranny  of  those  who  are  set
over  them.  This  was  the  work  of  the  Scotch  clergy  ;  and  all  hail  to  them  who
did  it.  It  was  they  who  taught  their  countrymen  to  scrutinize,  with  a  fearless
eye,  the  policy  of  their  rulers.  It  was  they  who  pointed  the  finger  of  scorn  at
kings  and  nobles,  and  laid  bare  the  hollowness  of  their  pretensions.*  They
ridiculed  their  claims,  and  jeered  at  their  mysteries.  They  tore  the  veil,  and
exposed  the  tricks  of  the  scene  which  lay  behind.  The  great  ones  of  the  earth
they  covered  with  contempt  ;  and  those  who  were  above  them  they  cast  down.
Herein  they  did  a  deed  which  should  compensate  for  all  their  offences,  even
were  their  offences  ten  times  as  great.  By  discountenancing  that  pernicious
and  degrading  respect  which  men  are  too  apt  to  pay  to  those  whom  accident,
and  not  merit,  has  raised  above  them,  they  facilitated  the  growth  of  a  proud  and
s-turdy  independence,  which  was  sure  to  do  good  service  at  a  time  of  need.  And
that  time  came  quicker  than  any  one  had  expected.  Within  a  very  few  years,
James  became  master  of  the  resources  of  England,  and  attempted  by  their  aid
to  subvert  the  liberties  of  Scotland. f  The  shameful  enterprise  which  he  began
was  continued  by  his  cruel  and  superstitious  son.  How  their  attempts  failed  ;
how  Charles  I.  in  the  effort  shipwrecked  his  fortune  and  provoked  a  rebellion,
which  brought  to  the  scaffold  that  great  criminal,  who  dared  to  conspire  against
the  people,  and  who,  as  the  common  enemy  and  oppressor  of  all,  was  at  length
visited  with  the  just  punishment  of  his  sins,  is  known  to  every  reader  of  our
history,  t  It  is  also  well  known  that  in  conducting  the  struggle  the  English
were  greatly  indebted  to  the  Scotch,  who  had  moreover  the  merit  of  being
the  first  to  lift  their  hand  against  the  tyrant.  What,  however,  is  less  known,
but  is  undoubtedly  true,  is  that  both  nations  owe  a  debt  they  can  never  repay
to  those  bold  men  who  during  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  dis-
seminated from  their  pulpits  and  Assemblies  sentiments  which  the  people
cherished  in  their  hearts,  and  which  at  a  fitting  moment  they  reproduced,  to
the  dismay,  -and  eventually  to  the  destruction,  of  those  who  threatened  their
liberties.

[*  As  Buckle  goes  on  to  show  with  great  clearness,  the  clergy  proceeded  to  substitute
similarly  hollow  pretensions  of  their  own.  The  above  passage  is  thus  overcharged.
—ED.]

[f  See  note  above,  p.  652  and  below,  p.  703. — ED.]

[j  As  has  been  noted  in  an  earlier  chapter  (above,  p.  370),  the  troubles  of  Charles  in
Scotland  began  with  his  attempt  to  recover  the  tithes  from  the  landowners  who  had
appropriated  them,  not  in  any  attack  on  popular  liberties.  In  the  end  Cromwell
interfered  far  more  effectually  with  Scottish  liberties  than  Charles  did.  And  Charles
was  certainly  not  more  superstitious,  probably  not  more  cruel,  than  his  great  antagonist.
-ED.]


CHAPTER    XVIII

CONDITION    OF   SCOTLAND    DURING   THE    SEVENTEENTH    AND    EIGHTEENTH

CENTURIES.

SCARCELY  had  James  mounted  the  throne  of  England  when  he  began  seriously,
and  on  a  large  scale,  to  attempt  to  subjugate  the  Scotch  Church,  which,  as  he
clearly  saw,  was  the  principal  obstacle  that  stood  between  him  and  despotic
power.  While  he  was  merely  King  of  Scotland  he  made  several  efforts,  which
were  constantly  baffled  ;  but  now  that  he  wielded  the  vast  resources  of  England,
the  victory  seemed  easy.1  As  early  as  1584  he  had  gained  a  temporary  triumph
by  forcing  many  of  the  clergy  to  recognize  episcopacy.2  But  that  institution
was  so  repugnant  to  their  levelling  and  democratic  principles,  that  nothing
could  overcome  their  abhorrence  of  it  ;  3  and,  completely  overawing  the  king,
they  compelled  him  to  give  way,  and  to  retrace  his  steps.  .The  result  was  that
in  1592  an  Act  of  Parliament  was  passed  which  subverted  the  authority  of  the
bishops,  and  established  Presbyterianism  ;  a  scheme  based  on  the  idea  of  equality,
and  therefore  suited  to  the  wants  of  the  Scotch  Church.4

To  this  statute  James  had  assented  with  the  greatest  reluctance.5     Indeed,

1  Lord  Dartmouth  says  (Note  in  Burners  History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  15 ):  "  The
Earl  of  Seafield  told  me  that  King  James  frequently  declared  that  he  never  looked  upon
himself  to  be  more  than  King  of  Scotland  in  name,  till  he  came  to  be  King  of  England ;
but  now,  he  said,  one  kingdom  would  help  him  to  govern  the  other,  or  he  had  studied
kingcraft  to  very  little  purpose  from  his  cradle  to  that  time."     Compare  Burnefs  Memoirs
of  the  Dukes  of  Hamilton,  Oxford,  1852,  p.  36.     "  No  sooner  was  he  happily  settled  on  the
throne  of  England,  but  he  went  more  roundly  to  work."

2  Compare  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vi.  p.  430,  with  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of
Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  303,  §  20  ;  also  the  Act  (p.  293,  §  4),  likewise  in  1584,  limiting  the
power  of  the  General  Assemblies.     James,  who  nattered  himself  that  he  had  now  settled
everything,  signalized   his   triumph   by  personally  abusing  the  clergy  ;  "  calling  them
lownes,  smaicks,  seditious  knaves,  and  so  furth."     See  a  letter,  dated  2nd  of  January,
1585-6,  in  Miscellany  of  the  Wodrow  Society,  p.  438,  Edinburgh,  1844.

3  "  Bishops  were  alwayes  looked  at  with  a  frown."     Kirkton"s  History  of  the  Church
of  Scotland,  p.  129.

4  See  this  remarkable  statute,  in  Acts  of  the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  pp.  541,  2.
As  some  of  the  historians  of  the  Scotch  Church  have  greatly  misrepresented  it,  I  will
quote  that  part  which  expressly  repeals  the  Act  of  1584,  in  favour  of  the  bishops.     "Item
oure  said  souerane  lord  and  estaittis  of  Parliament  foirsaid,  abrogatis  cass  and  anullis  the
xx  act  of  the  same  pliamet  haldin  at  Edinburgh  the  said  zeir  1584  zeiris  granting  comis-
sioun  to  bishoppis  and  vtheris  iuges  constitute  in  ecclesiastical  causs  To  ressaue  his  heines
presentatioun  to  benefices,  To  gif  collatioun  thairvpoun  and  to  put  ordor,  in  all  causs
ecclesiasticall  qlk  his  Maiestie  and  estaittis  foirsaid  declairis  to  be  expyrit  in  the  self
and  to  be  null  in  tyme  cuming  and  of  nane  availl  force  nor  effect."

5  "  The  King  repented  after  that  he  had  agreed  unto  it."     Calderwood's  History  of
the  Kirk,  vol.  v.  p.  162.     But  this  gives  a  faint  idea  of  his  real  feelings.     It  is  perhaps
hardly  necessary  to  adduce  evidence  of    the  opinions  entertained  on  this  point  by  a
prince,  one  of  whose  favourite  sayings  was,  "  No  Bishop,  no  King."     The  reader  will
however  find  in  the  Clarendon  State  Papers  (vol.  ii.  p.  260,  Oxford,  1773,  folio),  a  letter
from  Charles  I.,  which  is  worth  looking  at,  because  it  frankly  avows  that  James,  in  loving


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  697

his  feeling  respecting  it  was  so  strong  that  he  determined  on  the  first  opportunity
to  procure  its  repeal,  even  if  he  used  force  to  effect  his  purpose.  The  course  he
adopted  was  characteristic  both  of  the  man  and  of  the  age.  In  December,  1596,
one  of  those  popular  tumults  arose  in  Edinburgh  which  are  natural  in  barbarous
times,  and  which  under  ordinary  circumstances  would  have  been  quelled,  and
nothing  more  thought  of  it.6  But  James  availed  himself  of  this  to  strike  what
he  deemed  a  decisive  blow.  His  plan  was  nothing  less  than  to  turn  into  the
capital  of  his  own  monarchy  large  bodies  of  armed  and  licensed  banditti,  who,
by  threatening  to  plunder  the  city,  should  oblige  the  clergy  and  their  flocks  to
agree  to  whatever  terms  he  chose  to  dictate.  This  magnanimous  scheme  was
well  worthy  of  the  mind  of  James,  and  it  was  strictly  executed.  From  the  north
he  summoned  the  Highland  nobles,  and  from  the  south  the  border  barons,  who
were  to  be  accompanied  by  their  fierce  retainers, — men  who  lived  by  pillage,
and  whose  delight  it  was  to  imbrue  their  hands  in  blood.  At  the  express  com-
mand of  James,  these  ferocious  brigands,  on  the  ist  of  January,  1597,  appeared
in  the  streets  of  Edinburgh,  gloating  over  the  prospect  before  them,  and  ready,
when  their  sovereign  gave  the  word,  to  sack  the  capital  and  raze  it  to  the  ground.7
Resistance  was  hopeless.  Whatever  the  king  demanded  was  conceded  ;  and
James  supposed  that  the  time  was  now  come  in  which  he  could  firmly  establish
the  authority  of  the  bishops,  and  by  their  aid  control  the  clergy,  and  break
their  refractory  spirit.8

In  this  undertaking  three  years  were  consumed.  To  insure  its  success,  the
king,  supported  by  the  nobles,  relied  not  only  on  force  but  also  on  an  artifice
which  now  seems  to  have  been  employed  for  the  first  time.  This  was,  to  pack

episcopacy  and  hating  presbyterianism,  was  actuated  rather  by  political  motives  than  by
religious  ones.  Charles  writes  :  "  The  prudentiall  part  of  any  consideration  will  never
be  found  opposit  to  the  conscientious,  nay  heere,  they  go  hand  in  hand  ;  for  (according
to  lawyers  lodgique)show  me  any  president  where  ever  Presbiteriall  govern ement  and
Regall  was  together,  without  perpetuall  rebellions.  Which  was  the  cause  that  necessitated
the  King,  my  Father,  to  change  that  government  in  Scotland.""  Compare  what  is  said  by  a
Scotch  Presbyterian  of  the  seventeenth  century,  in  Biographies,  edited  for  the  Wodrow
Society  by  the  Rev.  W.  K.  Tweedie,  Edinburgh,  1845,  vol.  i.  p.  13.  "  The  reason  why
King  James  was  so  violent  for  Bishops  was  neither  their  divine  institution  (which  he
denied  they  had),  nor  yet  the  profit  the  Church  should  reap  by  them  (for  he  knew  well
both  the  men  and  their  communications),  but  merely  because  he  believed  they  were  useful
instruments  to  turn  a  limited  monarchy  into  absolute  dominion,  and  subjects  into  slaves,
the  design  in  the  world  he  minded  most."

6  "  Had  it  not  been  laid  hold  of  by  designing  politicians  as  a  handle  for  accomplishing
their  measures,  it  would  not  now  have  been  known  that  such  an  event  had  ever  occurred.
M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  p.  85.     "  Harmless  as  this  uproar  was,  it  afforded  the
court  a  pretext  for  carrying  into  execution  its  designs  against  the  liberties  and  government
of  the  Church."  p.  89.     [Mc'Crie's  account  here  is  that  of  a  mere  partisan,  and  Buckle
should  not  have  taken  it  as  his  sole  authority.     The  riot  was  a  much  more  serious  matter
than  he  represents.     See  Tytler,  ed.  1869,  iv.  252-3.     Any  other  king  than  James  would
in  that  day  have  punished  it  with  massacre.     He,  a  coward,  was  driven  by  it  into  the
first  vigorous  act  of  his  reign. — ED.]

7  Tytler' s  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.  pp.  342-345.     Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,
vol.  v.  pp.  514,  515,  530,  531.     [Tytler  does  not  say  what  Buckle  does  in  the  text.     The
king  evidently  knew  there  would  be  no  resistance,  the  burghers  being  panic-stricken. —
ED.]

8  "  Intimidated  by  these  menaces,  and  distressed  at  the  loss  of  the  courts  of  justice,
they  came  to  the  resolution  of  making  surrender  o.f  their  political  and  religious  liberties  to
the  King."     M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  p.  92.     This  is  said  of  the  magistrates  of
Edinburgh.     Among  other  threats,  one  was,  the  "  razing  and  ploughing  of  Edinburgh,
and  sowing  it  with  salt."     Wodrow' s  Life  of  Bruce,  p.  48,  prefixed  to  Bruce1 s  Sermons,
edited  by  the  Rev.  William  Cunningham,  Edinburgh,  1843.     On  this  occasion,  Elizabeth
wrote  a  letter  to  James,  which  is  printed  in  Letters  of  Queen  Elizabeth  and  James  VI .,
1849,  4to,  pp.  120,  121.


698  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  General  Assemblies,  by  inundating  them  with  clergymen  drawn  from  the
north  of  Scotland,  where,  the  old  clannish  and  aristocratic  spirit  being  supreme,
the  democratic  spirit  found  in  the  south  was  unknown.  Hitherto  these  northern
ministers  had  rarely  attended  at  the  great  meetings  of  the  Church  ;  but  James
in  1597  sent  Sir  Patrick  Murray  on  a  special  mission  to  them,  urging  them  to  be
present,  in  order  that  they  might  vote  on  his  side.9  They,  being  a  very  ignorant
body,  knowing  little  or  nothing  of  the  questions  really  at  issue,  and  being  more-
over accustomed  to  a  state  of  society  in  which  men,  notwithstanding  their
lawlessness,  paid  the  most  servile  obedience  to  their  immediate  superiors,  were
easily  worked  upon,  and  induced  to  do  what  they  were  bid.  By  their  help  the
crown  and  the  nobles  so  strengthened  their  party  in  the  General  Assembly  as
to  obtain  in  many  instances  a  majority;  and  innovations  were  gradually  intro-
duced, calculated  to  destroy  the  democratic  character  of  the  Scotch  Church.10

In  1597  the  movement  began.  From  then  until  1600,  successive  Assemblies
sanctioned  different  changes,  all  of  which  were  marked  by  that  aristocratic
tendency  which  seemed  about  to  carry  everything  before  it.  In  1600  the
General  Assembly  met  at  Montrose  ;  and  government  determined  on  making  a
final  effort  to  compel  the  Church  to  establish  an  episcopal  polity.  Andrew
Melville,  by  far  the  most  influential  man  in  the  Church,  and  the  leader  of  the
democratic  party,  had  been  elected,  as  usual,  a  member  of  the  Assembly  ;  but
the  king,  arbitrarily  interposing,  refused  to  allow  him  to  take  his  seat.11  Still,
neither  by  threats,  nor  by  force,  nor  by  promises,  could  the  court  carry  their
point.  All  that  they  obtained  was  that  certain  ecclesiastics  should  be  allowed
to  sit  in  parliament  ;  but  it  was  ordered  that  such  persons  should  every  year
lay  their  commissions  at  the  feet  of  the  General  Assembly,  and  render  an  account
of  their  conduct.  The  Assembly  was  to  have  the  power  of  deposing  them  ;  and,
to  keep  them  in  greater  subjection,  they  were  forbidden  to  call  themselves  bishops,
but  were  to  be  content  with  the  inferior  title  of  Commissioners  of  the  Church.12

9  M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  p.  100.     Scot  (Apologetical  Narration  of  the  State  of  the
Kirk,  p.  88)  says,  "  Sir  Patrick  Murray,  the  diligent  apostle  of  the  North,  made  their
acquaintance  with  the  King."     Also,  The  Autobiography  and  Diary  of  James  Melvill,
p.  403.

10  Tytler's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.  pp.  350,  359.     But  by  far  the  best  account  of
the  influence  of  these  northern  clergy  will  be  found  in  M'Crie's  Life  of   Melville  (vol.  ii.
pp.  100-105,  109,  131,  152),  drawn,  in  several  instances,  from  manuscript  authorities.
Compare  Calderwood"  s  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  v.  p.  695.

11  This  is  related  by  his  nephew,   James  Melvill.     "  Mr.  Andro  Melvill  come  to  the
Assembly,  by  Commissioune  of  his  Presbytrie,  but  wes  commandit  to  keip  his  ludgeing  ;
quho,  being  callit  to  the  King  in  private,  and  demandit  Quhy  he  wes  so  trublesume  as  to
come  to  the  Assembly  being  dischairgit  ?     He  an'swerit,  He  had  a  calling  in  the  Kirk  of
God,  and  of  Jesus  Chryst,  the  King  of  kings,  quhilk  he  behovit  to  dischairge  at  all  occa-
siounes,  being  orderlie  callit  thairto,  as  he  wes  at  this  tyme  ;  and  that  for  feir  of  a  grytter
punischment  then  could  any  earthly  King  inflict."     The  Autobiography  and  Diary  of
James  Melvill,.  p.  542.

12  As,  owing  to  the  passions  of  the  rival  classes,  every  step  of  this  part  of  Scotch  history
is  the  subject  of  angry  controversy,  and  as  even  Mr.  Tytler  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.
p.  360)  asserts  that  "  the  final  establishment  of  Episcopacy  "  took  place  at  the  Assembly
of  Montrose,  in  1600,  I  subjoin  a  few  extracts  from  the  enactments  of  that  Assembly,  in
order  that  the  reader  may  judge  for  himself,  and  may  test  the  accuracy  of  what  I  have
stated  in  the  text.    "  Concerning  the  maner  of  choosing  of  him  that  sail  have  vote  in
Parliament  in  name  of  the  Kirk  :  It  is  condiscendit  vpon,  that  he  sail  first  be  recommendit
be  the  Kirk  to  his  Majestic  ;  and  that  the  Kirk  sail  nominat  sixe  for  every  place  that  sail
have  neid  to  be  filled,  of  quhom  his  Majestic  sail  choose  ane,  of  quhom  he  best  lykes  ;  and
his  Majestic  promises,  obleises,  and  binds  himselfe  to  choose   no  vther  but  ane  of  that
number :  And  in  cace  his  Majestic  refuses  the  haill  vpon  ane  just  reason  of  ane  insufficiency,
and  of  greater  sufficiencie  of  vthers  that  are  not  recommendit,  the  Kirk  sail  make  ane  new
recommendatioun  of  men  according  to  the  first  number,  of  the  quhilk,  ane  salbe  chosin  be
his  Majestic  without  any  farther  refuisall  or  new  nominatioun  ;  and  he  that  salbe  chosin
be  his  Majestic,  salbe  admittit  be  the  Synods."     Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies  of  tht


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  699

After  sustaining  this  repulse,  James  seems  to  have  been  disheartened  ;  as  he
made  no  further  effort,  though  he  still  laboured  underhand  at  the  restoration
of  episcopacy.13  If  he  had  persevered,  it  might  have  cost  him  his  crown.  For
his  resources  were  few  ;  he  was  extremely  poor  ; 14  and  recent  events  had  shown
that  the  clergy  were  stronger  than  he  had  supposed.  When  he  thought  himself
most  sure  of  success,  they  had  subjected  him  to  a  mortifying  defeat  ;  and  this
was  the  more  remarkable,  as  it  was  entirely  their  own  work  ;  they  being  by  this
time  so  completely  separated  from  the  nobles  that  they  could  not  rely  upon
even  a  single  member  of  that  powerful  body.

While  affairs  were  in  this  state,  and  while  the  liberties  of  Scotland,  of  which
the  Church  was  the  guardian,  were  trembling  in  the  balance,  Elizabeth  died,  and
the  King  of  Scotland  became  also  King  of  England.  James  at  once  determined
to  employ  the  resources  of  his  new  kingdom  to  curb  his  old  one.  In  1604,  that
is,  only  the  year  after  his  accession  to  the  English  throne,  he  aimed  a  deadly
blow  at  the  Scotch  Church  by  attacking  the  independence  of  their  Assemblies  ;
and  by  his  own  authority  he  prorogued  the  General  Assembly  of  Aberdeen.15

Kirk  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  954.  "  As  to  the  cautions  to  keip  him,  that  sail  have  vote  in
Parliament,  from  corruptiouns  :  They  be  these  following  :  i.  That  he  presume  not,  at
any  tyme,  to  propone  at  Parliament,  Counsell  or  Conventioun,  in  name  of  the  Kirk,  any
thing  without  expresse  warrand  and  directioun  from  the  Kirk,  and  sick  things  as  he  sail
answer  (for)  to  be  for  the  weill  of  the  Kirk,  vnder  the  paine  of  depositioun  from  his
office."  .  .  .  2.  "He  sail  be  bound  at  every  Generall  Assemblie,  to  give  ane  accompt
anent  the  discharge  of  his  commissioun  sen  the  Assemblie  gangand  befor  ;  and  sail  submitt
himself e  to  thair  censure,  and  stand  at  thair  determinatioun  quhatsumever,  without  appella*
tioun  ;  and  sail  seik  and  obtain  ratificatioun  of  his  doings  at  the  said  Assemblie,  vnder  the
paine  of  infamie  and  excommunicatioun"  ...  6.  "  In  the  administration  of  discipline,
collatioun  of  benefices,  visitatioun,  and  all  vther  points  of  ecclesiasticall  government,
he  sail  neither  vsurpe  nor  acclaime  to  himselfe  any  power  or  jurisdictioun  farther  than  any
vther  of  the  rest  of  his  breither,  unlesse  he  be  imployit  be  his  breither,  vnder  the  paine  of
deprivatioun."  p.  955.  "  Anent  his  name  that  for  the  Kirk  sail  (have)  vote  in  Parlia-
ment :  It  is  advyseit,  be  vniforme  consent  of  the  haill  brether,  that  he  salbe  callit  Com-
missioner of  such  a  place."  p.  956.  "  Therfor  the  Generall  Assemblie  having  reasonit
at  length  the  said  questioun,  tuiching  the  continuance  of  him  that  sail  have  vote  in
Parliament,  after  vottingof  the  same,  finds  and  decernes,  that  he  sail  annuatim  give  count
of  his  commission  obtainit  from  the  Assemblie,  and  lay  downe  the  samein  at  thair  feitt,  to  be
continuit  or  alterit  therfra  be  his  Majestic  and  the  Assemblie,  as  the  Assemblie,  with
consent  of  his  Maiestie,  sail  think  most  expedient  for  the  weill  of  the  Kirk."  p.  959.
[Compare  however  the  comments  of  Calderwood,  cited  by  Tytler,  ed.  1869,  iv.  203. — ED.]

13  "  While  James  remained  in  Scotland,  the  scheme  of  introducing  episcopacy,  though
never  lost  sight  of,  was  cautiously  prosecuted."     M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  p.  178.

14  James,  during  the  whole  of  his  reign,  was  chiefly  dependent  on  the  money  which
Elizabeth  gave  him,  and  which  she  dealt  out  rather  niggardly.     Such  were  his  necessities
that  he  was  forced  to  pawn  his  plate,  and  even  then  he  was  often  unable  to  defray  his
ordinary  household  expenses.    See  Tytler 's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  vi.  pp.  265,  266,  272  ;
vol.  vii.  pp.  158,  378-380.     Miscellany  of  the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  ii.  pp.  xlv.  114.     Gre-
gory's History  of  the  Western  Highlands,  pp.  241,  277.     See  also  a  clamorous  begging-
letter  from  J  ames  to  Elizabeth,  written  in  1591,  in  Letters  of  Queen  Elizabeth  and  JamesVI.,
1849,  4to,  pp.  68,  69.      In  1593  she  apologizes  for  sending  him  only  a  small  sum  :  "  The
small  token  you  shall  receave  from  me  I  desire  yt  may  serve  to  make  you  remember  the
tyme  and  my  many  weighty  affaires,  wich  makes  it  les  than  else  I  would,  and  I  dowt
nothing  but  when  you  heare  all,  vow  will  beare  with  this."  p.  84.     A  letter  from  James
Hudson,  written  about  the  year  1591,  states  that  "  both  the  king's  table  and  queen's
had  like  to  have  been  unserved  by  want  ;  and  that  the  king  had  nothing  he  accounted
certain  to  come  into  his  purse,  but  what  he  had  from  the  Queen  of  England."     Ridpath's
Border  History,  p.  465,  Berwick,  1848,  4to.

15  Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  edit.  1819,  vol.  iii.  p.  28.     Calderwood' s  History  of  the
Kirk,  vol.  vi.  pp.  264,  323.     Bower's  History  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  i.  p.  175,
Edinburgh,  1817.     Stevenson's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  p.  88.


700  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

In  1605  he  again  prorogued  it  ;  and  to  make  his  intentions  clear,  he  this  time
refused  to  fix  a  day  for  its  future  meeting.16  Hereupon  some  of  the  ministers,
deputed  by  presbyteries,  took  upon  themselves  to  convene  it,  which  they  had
an  undoubted  right  to  do,  as  the  act  of  the  king  was  manifestly  illegal.  On  the
day  appointed  they  met  in  the  session -house  of  Aberdeen.  They  were  ordered
to  disperse.  Having,  as  they  conceived,  by  the  mere  fact  of  assembling,  suffi-
ciently asserted  their  privileges,  they  obeyed.  But  James,  now  backed  by  the
power  of  England,  resolved  that  they  should  feel  the  change  of  his  position,  and
therefore  of  theirs.  In  consequence  of  orders  which  he  sent  from  London,
fourteen  of  the  clergy  were  committed  to  prison.17  Six  of  them,  who  denied
the  authority  of  the  privy-council,  were  indicted  for  high  treason.  They  were
at  once  put  upon  their  trial.  They  were  convicted.  And  sentence  of  death  was
only  deferred  that  the  pleasure  of  the  king  might  first  be  taken,  as  to  whether
he  would  not  be  satisfied  with  some  punishment  that  fell  short  of  sacrificing  the
lives  of  these  unhappy  men.18

Their  lives  indeed  were  spared  ;  but  they  were  subjected  to  a  close  imprison-
ment, and  then  condemned  to  perpetual  exile.19  In  other  parts  of  the  country
similar  measures  were  adopted.  Nearly  all  over  Scotland  numbers  of  the
clergy  were  either  imprisoned  or  forced  to  fly.20  Terror  and  proscription  were

16  "  Adde  thereunto,  that  the  letter  of  the  commissioner  and  last  moderator  conteaned
no  certane  tyme  nor  day  whereto  the  said  Assemblie  sould  be  prorogued  ;  so  that  it  im-
ported a  casting  loose  and  deserting,  yea,  and  tyning  of  the  possessioun  of  our  Assemblie ;
than  the  which  what  could  be  more  dangerous  to  the  libertie  and  freedom  of  the  Kirk  of
Jesus  Christ,  at  suche  a  tyme,  namelie  of  the  treatie  of  the  Unioun,  when  all  the  estates
of  the  realme  and  everie  particular  are  zealous  and  carefull  of  their  rights  and  posses-
siouns  ?  "     C aider-wood 's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vi.  pp.  309,  310.

17  See  a  list  of  them  in  Caldentfood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vi.  p.  347,  where  the
fourteen  names  are  preserved  with  pious  care.

18  Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  494-502.     Forbes'  Certaine  Records
touching  the  Estate  of  the  Kirk,  edit.  Wodrow  Society,  Edinburgh,  1846,  pp.  463-496.
"  Delayed  the  giving  forth  of  the  sentence  of  condemnation  till  the  King's  mind  were
further  knowne."     See  also  Colder-wood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vi.  pp.  434,  449.     When
they  were  found  guilty,  "  the  peiple  said,  '  Certainely  this  wes  a  worke  of  darknes,  to  mak
Chrystis  faithfull  Ministeres  tratouris  to  the  King  !     God  grant  he  be  niver  in  greater
dangeris  nor  off  sic  traitouris.'  "     MelvilVs  A  utobiography  and  Diary,  p.  626.

19  M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  pp.  207,  208.     Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials,  vol.  ii.
p.  504.     In  connexion  with  these  transactions,  a  letter  is  preserved  in  the  Winwood
Papers,  which  is  much  too  curious  to  be  passed  over  in  silence.     It  is  addressed  by  the
Earl  of  Salisbury  to  Sir  Charles  Cornwallis,  and  is  dated  i2th  September,  1605.    Salisbury,
who  was  then  at  the  head  of  affairs,  writes,  "  True  it  is  that  his  Majestic  seeking  to  adorne
that  kingdome  of  Scotland  with  Prelates  as  they  are  in  England,  some  of  the  Ministers  have
spurned  against  it  ;  and  althouge  his  Majestic  had  ever  warranted  their  calling  of  General
Assemblies  upon  no  other  condition  then  that  they  should  make  him  acquainted,  receive
his  warrant,  and  a  commissioner  for  his  Majestic  resident  in  their  councells,  yet  have  they
(followed  with  some  poor  plebecall  numbers)  presumed  to  hold  their  General  Assemblies
in  some  parte  of  the  Realme  contrarie  to  his  commandement.     Whereupon  his  Majestie
hath  shewed  himself  displeased,  and  cyted  divers  of  them  before  his  councell,"  &c.
Memorials  of  Affairs  of  State,  from  the  Papers  of  Sir  Ralph  Winwood,  London,  1725,  folio,
vol.  ii.  p.  132.     And  yet  the  man  who  could  write  such  nonsense  as  this,  and  who  could
only  see  in  the  great  democratic  movement  of  the  Scotch  mind  a  disinclination  to  the
adornment  of  episcopacy,  was  deemed  one  of  the  most  eminent  statesmen  of  his  time,
and  his  reputation  has  survived  him.     If  great  statesmen  discern  so  little  of  what  is
before  them  and  around  them,  we  are  tempted  to  inquire  how  much  confidence  ought  to
be  placed  in  the  opinions  of  those  average  statesmen  by  whom  countries  are  ruled.     For
my  own  part  I  can  only  say  that  I  have  had  occasion  to  read  many  thousand  letters
written  by  diplomatists  and  politicians,  and  I  have  hardly  ever  found  an  instance  of  one
of  them  who  understood  the  spirit  and  tendency  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived.

20  "  Ministers  in  all  parts  of  the  country  were  thrown  into  prison,  or  declared  rebels,
and  forced  to  abscond."     M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  p.  250.     Liberty  of  speech  was


SCOTLAND    IN  XVII.    AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  701

universal.  Such  was  the  panic,  that  it  was  generally  believed  that  nothing  could
prevent  the  permanent  establishment  of  despotism,  unless  there  were  some  im-
mediate and  providential  interference  on  behalf  of  the  Church  and  the  people.21

Nor  can  it  be  denied  that  there  were  plausible  grounds  for  these  apprehensions.
The  people  had  no  friends  except  among  the  clergy,  and  the  ablest  of  the  clergy
were  either  in  prison  or  in  exile.22  To  deprive  the  Church  entirely  of  her  leaders,
James,  in  1606,  summoned  to  London  Melville  and  seven  of  his  colleagues,
under  pretence  of  needing  their  advice.23  Having  got  possession  of  their  persons,
he  detained  them  in  England.24  They  were  forbidden  to  return  to  Scotland  ;
and  Melville,  who  was  most  feared,  was  committed  to  custody.  He  was  then
imprisoned  in  the  Tower,  where  he  remained  four  years,  and  from  which  he  was
only  liberated  on  condition  of  living  abroad,  and  abandoning  altogether  his
native  country.25  The  seven  ministers  who  had  accompanied  him  to  London
were  also  imprisoned  ;  but  being  considered  less  dangerous  than  their  leader,
they  after  a  time  were  allowed  to  return  home.  The  nephew  of  Melville  was
however  ordered  not  to  travel  more  than  two  miles  from  Newcastle  ;  and  his
six  companions  were  confined  in  different  parts  of  Scotland.215

Everything  now  seemed  ripe  for  the  destruction  of  those  ideas  of  equality
of  which,  in  Scotland,  the  Church  was  the  sole  representative.  In  1 6 10  a  General
Assembly  was  held  at  Glasgow ;  and  as  the  members  of  it  were  nominated  by
the  crown,27  whatever  the  government  wished  was  conceded.  By  their  vote
episcopacy  was  established,  and  the  authority  of  the  bishops  over  the  ministers
was  fully  recognized.28  A  little  earlier,  but  in  the  same  year,  two  courts  of  High

so  completely  suppressed,  that  in  1605,  when  the  most  zealous  and  intelligent  clergy  were
banished,  "  a  strait  command  "  (was)  "  geyin  to  magistrats,  and  uther  officiers  of  burrowis,
that  in  cace  any  preacher  sould  speik  opinlie  aganis  that  baneisment,  or  for  defence  or
mentenence  of  that  assemblie,  or  pray  publiklie  for  ther  saiftie,  that  they  sould  be  noted
and  manifested  to  the  secret  counsell,  and  corrected  for  their  fault."  The  Historic  of
King  James  the  Sext,  p.  380.

21  See  an  eloquent  and  touching  passage  in  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vi.
pp.  696,  697.

22  "  The  godliest,  wisest,  learnedest,  and  most  zealous  men  of  the  minis  trie  in  Scot-
land, were  either  banished,  warded,  or  detained  in  Ingland,  of  purpose  that  they  might
not  be  a  lett  to  the  grand  designe  in  hand."     Row's  History  of  the  Kirk,  p.  238.

23  Scot's  Apologetical  Narration  of  the  State  of  the  Kirk,  pp.  164,  165.     Compare  The
Autobiography  and  Diary  of  James  Melvill,  pp.  642-645.

24  "  Quhen  we  wer  gone  out  of  the  Palice  a  lytle  way  towardis  Kingstoune,  Mr.  Alex-
ander Hay  sendis  back  for  us,  and  withall,  in  the  Uttir  Court,  reidis  to  us  a  chairge  from
the  King  not  to  returne  to  Scotland,  nor  to  com  neire  the  King,  Quein,  nor  Prince  their
Courtis,  without  a  speciall  calling  for  and  licence."     Melvill' s  Autobiography,  p.  661.

25  Marie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  pp.  246,  252,  260,  337-339,  403,  407-411,  414.
This  truly  great  and  fearless  man  died  in  exile,  in  1622,  p.  458.

26  Melvill' s  Autobiography  and  Diary,  p.  709.     Scot's  Apologetical  Narration,  p.  194.
M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  pp.  252,  253,  267,  268.

27  "  Royal  missives  were  sent  to  the  presbyteries,  nominating  the  individuals  whom
they  should  chuse  as  their  representatives  to  it."      M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.
PP-  387,  388.  On  the  character  of  its  members,  compare  Wodrow's  History  of  the  Sufferings
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  edit.  Glasgow,  1838,  vol.  i.  p.  256.     Stevenson's  History  of  the
Church  of  Scotland,  pp.  320,  321.     Crookshank's  Church  of  Scotland,  Edinburgh,  1812,
vol.  i.  p.  28  ;  and  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vii.  pp.  97,  98-

2*  Acts  of  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  iii.  pp.  1096,  1097.  The  Assembly
even  forbade  the  democratic  notion  of  equality  to  be  advocated.  See  p.  npi.  "  Because
it  is  vncivill  that  laws  and  constitutiouns,  either  Civill  or  Ecclesiasticall,  being  anes  estab-
lischit  and  in  force,  by  publick  and  opin  consent,  sould  be  controllit  and  callit  in  questioun
by  any  person  :  therfor  it  is  statute  by  vniforme  consent  of  this  haill  Assemblie,  that  none
of  the  Ministrie  either  in  pulpitt  in  his  preaching,  or  in  the  publick  exercise,  speake  and
reason  against  the  acts  of  this  present  Assemblie,  nor  dissobey  the  same,  vnder  the  paine
of  deprivatioun,  being  tryit  and  convict  thereof  ;  and  speciallie,  that  the  questioun  of
equalitie  and  inequalitie  in  the  Kirk  be  not  treattit  in  pulpitt  vnder  the  said  paine.1'


702  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Commission  were  erected,  one  at  Saint  Andrews,  and  one  at  Glasgow.  To  them
all  ecclesiastical  courts  were  subordinate.  They  were  armed  with  such  immense
power  that  they  could  cite  any  one  they  pleased  before  them,  could  examine
him  respecting  his  religious  opinions,  could  have  him  excommunicated,  and  could
fine  or  imprison  him,  just  as  they  thought  proper.29  Finally,  and  to  complete
the  humiliation  of  Scotland,  the  establishment  of  episcopacy  was  not  considered
complete  until  an  act  was  performed  which  nothing  but  its  being  very  igno-
minious could  have  saved  from  being  ridiculed  as  an  idle  and  childish  farce.
The  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  the  Bishop  of  Brechin  and  the  Bishop  of  Galloway
had  to  travel  all  the  way  to  London  in  order  that  they  might  be  touched  by
some  English  bishops.  Incredible  as  it  may  appear,  it  was  actually  supposed
that  there  was  no  power  in  Scotland  sufficiently  spiritual  to  turn  a  Scotchman
into  a  prelate.  Therefore  it  was  that  the  Archbishop  of  Glasgow  and  his  com-
panions performed  what  was  then  an  arduous  journey  to  a  strange  and  distant
capital,  for  the  sake  of  receiving  some  hidden  virtue,  which  on  their  return
home  they  might  communicate  to  their  brethren.  To  the  grief  and  astonish-
ment of  their  country,  these  unworthy  priests,  abandoning  the  traditions  of  their
native  land,  and  forgetting  the  proud  spirit  which  animated  their  fathers,  con-
sented to  abjure  their  own  independence,  to  humble  themselves  before  the
English  Church,  and  to  submit  to  mummeries  which  in  their  hearts  they  must
have  despised,  but  which  were  now  inflicted  upon  them  by  their  ancient  and
inveterate  foes.30

We  may  easily  imagine  what  would  be  the  future  conduct  of  men  who,  merely

29  Mr.  Russell  (History  of  the  Church  in  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  88),  misled,  probably,  by  a
passage  in  Spottiswoode1  s  History  of  the  Church,  vol.  iii.  p.  210,  says,  "  A  Court  of  High
Commission  was  instituted."     But  it  is  certain  that  there  were  two  such  courts;  one  for
the  diocese  of  Saint  Andrews,  and  one  for  that  of  Glasgow.     See  the  "  commissioun  givin
under  the  great  scale  to  the  two  archbishops,"  dated  isth  of  February,  1610,  in  Calder-
wood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vii.  pp.  57-62.     See  also  p.  210.     They  were  not  united
till  December,  1615.     See  Scot's  Apologetical  Narration  of  the  State  of  the  Kirk,  pp.  218,
239  ;  and  Crookshank's  History  of  the  Sufferings  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  28.
By  the  royal  commission,  these  despotic  tribunals  were  authorized  (Calderwood,  vol.  vii.
p.  59)  "  to  call  before  them  at  suche  tymes  and  places  as  they  sail  thinke  meete,  anie
person  or  persons  dwelling  and  remaining  within  their  provinces  respective  above  writtin
of  St.  Andrews  or  Glasgow,  or  within  anie  dioceis  of  the  same,  being  offenders  ather  in
life  or  religioun,  whom  they  hold  anie  way  to  be  scandalous,  and  that  they  take  tryell  of  the
same  ;  and  if  they  find  them  guiltie  and  impenitent,  refusing  to  acknowledge  their  offence,
they  sail  give  command  to  the  preacher  of  that  parish  where  they  dwell,  to  proceed  with
sentence  of  excommunicatioun  against  them  ;  which,  if  it  be  protracted,  and  their  com-
mand by  that  minister  be  not  presentlie  obeyed,  they  sail  conveene  anie  suche  minister
before  them,  and  proceed  in  censuring  of  him  for  his  disobedience,  ather  by  suspensioun,
deprivatioun,  or  wairding,  according  as  in  their  discretioun  they  sail  hold  his  obstinacie
and  refuse  of  their  directioun  to  have  deserved.     And  further,  to  fyne  at  their  discre-
tiouns,  imprisoun,  or  warde  anie  suche  persoun  who,  being  convicted  before  them,  they
sail  find  upon  tryell  to  have  deserved  anie  suche  punishment."      Hereupon  Calderwood
justly  remarks,  p.  62  :  "  This  commissioun  and  executioun  thereof,  as  it  exalted  the
aspyring  bishops  farre  above  any  prelat  that  ever  was  in  Scotland,  so  it  putt  the  king  in
possessioun  of  that  which  he  had  long  tyme  hunted  for ;  to  witt,  of  the  royall  prerogative,
and  absolute  power  to  use  the  bodeis  and  goods  of  the  subjects  at  pleasure,  without  forme
or  processe  of  the  commoun  law,  even  then  when  the  Lower  Hous  in  England  was  com  -
pleaning  in  their  parliament  upon  the  injurie  therof.     So  our  bishops  were  fitt  instruments
to  overthrow  the  liberteis  both  of  the  Kirk  and  countrie."

30  See  Stevenson's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  p.  93,  and  Kirkton's  History,  p.  15.
Kirkton  indignantly  says  that  James  "  perswaded  a  few  unworthy  men  to  perjure  them-
selves, and  after  their  episcopall  consecration  by  the  English  bishops  in  England,  to
exercise  that  odious  office  in  Scotland  against  their  own  oath  and  the  consciences  of  their
brethren."     Compare  the  contemptuous  notice,  in  Row's  History  of  the  Kirk,  p.  283,  on  the
"  anoynting  of  oyle  and  other  ceremonies,"  and  on  "  the  foolish  guyses  in  it."     Indeed,
on  this  subject  every  Scotch  writer  who  cared  for  the  liberty  of  his  country  expressed


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  ?<>3

for  their  own  aggrandizement,  and  to  please  their  prince,  could  thus  renounce
the  cherished  independence  of  the  Scotch  Church.  They  who  crouch  to  those
who  are  above  them,  always  trample  on  those  who  are  below  them.  Directly
they  returned  to  Scotland,  they  communicated  the  consecration  they  had  re-
ceived in  England  to  their  fellow-bishops,31  who  were  of  the  like  mould  to  them-
selves, in  so  far  as  all  of  them  aided  James  in  his  attempt  to  subjugate  the
liberties  of  their  native  country.  Being  now  properly  ordained,  their  spiritual
life  was  complete  ;  it  remained  for  them  to  secure  the  happiness  of  their  tem-
poral life.  This  they  did  by  gradually  monopolizing  all  authority,  and  treating
with  unsparing  severity  those  who  opposed  them.  The  full  triumph  of  the
bishops  was  reserved  for  the  reign  of  Charles  I.,  when  a  number  of  them  obtained
seats  in  the  privy-council,  where  they  behaved  with  such  overbearing  insolence
that  even  Clarendon,  notwithstanding  his  notorious  partiality  for  their  order,
censures  their  conduct.32  In  the  time  however  of  James  I.  they  carried  nearly
everything  before  them.33  They  deprived  the  towns  of  their  privileges,  and
forced  them  to  receive  magistrates  of  their  own  choosing.34  They  accumulated
wealth,  and  made  an  ostentatious  display  of  it  ;  which  was  the  more  disgraceful,
as  the  country  was  miserably  poor,  and  their  fellow -subjects  were  starving  around
them.35  The  Lords  of  the  Articles,  without  whose  sanction  no  measure  could  be


himself  either  with  con  temp  tor  indignation.  [As  has  been  above  related,  the  Protestant
polity  had  been  imposed  on  Scotland  through  the  armed  force  of  England,  called  in  for
the  purpose,  in  1560.  The  Catholics  had  had  to  submit  in  that  case.  The  Protestants
were  now  submitting  to  the  ecclesiastical  polity  of  their  chosen  allies. — ED.]

31  Calderwood,  with  ill-suppressed  bitterness,  says,  "  efter  the  same  maner  that  they
were  consecrated  themselfs,  als  mere  as  they  could  imitate."  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vii.
p.  152.     Compare  Wodrow's  Collections,  vol.  i.  part  i.  p.  293.     "  The  Bishops  ordeaned
in  England  keeped  as  near  the  manner  taken  with  themselves  there  as  they  could."

32  "  Some  of  them,  by  want  of  temper,  or  want  of  breeding,  did  not  behave  themselves
with  that  decency  in  their  debates,  towards  the  greatest  men  of  the  kingdom,  as  in
discretion  they  ought  to  have  done,  and  as  the  others  reasonably  expected  from  them."
Clarendon's  History  of  the  Rebellion,  edit.  Oxford,  1843,  p.  35.     In  1633  "  nine  of   them
were  privy  councillors  ;  "   and  "  their  pride  was  cried  out  upon  as  unsupportable."
Burnefs  Memoirs  of  the  Dukes  of  Hamilton,  p.  38.     Sir  John  Scot  imputes  to  them  "  in-
solence, pride  and  avarice."     Scot's  Staggering  State  of  the  Scots  Statesmen,  Edinburgh,
1754,  p.  41.     Ses  also  Spaldings  History  of  the  Troubles,  vol.  i.  pp.  46,  47,  Edinburgh,
1828,  4to.

33  So  early  as  1613,  a  letter  from  James  Inglish  (preserved  in  Wodrow's  Collections,
vol.  ii.  part  i.  p.  no,  Glasgow,  1845,  4to)  complains  that  "  the  libertys  of  the  Lord's
Kirk  are  greatly  abridged  by  the  pride  of  Bishops,  and  their  power  daily  increases  over
her."     Civil  rights  were  equally  set  at  nought  by  the  bishops  ;  and,  among  other  enact-
ments which  they  obtained,  one  was,  "  that  no  man  should  be  permitted  to  practise  or
profess  any  physic,  unless  he  had  first  satisfied  the  bishop  of  the  diocese  touching  his
religion."     Spottiswoode1  s  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  236.    This  at  once
gave  them  the  control  of  the  whole  medical  profession.

34  "  Not  satisfied  with  ruling   the  church -courts,   they  claimed  an  extensive  civil
authority  within  their  dioceses.     The  burghs  were  deprived  of  their  privileges,  and  forced
to  receive  such  magistrates  as  their  episcopal  superiors,  in  concert  with  the  court,  were
pleased  to  nominate."  ..."  Archbishop  Gladstanes,  in  a  letter  to  the  King,  J  une  the  gth,
1611,  says  :  '  It  was   your  pleasure  and  direction  that  I  sould  be  possessed  with  the  like
privileges  in  the  electione  of  the  magistrats  there  (in  St  Andrews),  as  my  lord  of  Glasgow
is  endued  with  in  that  his  city.     Sir,  whereas  they  are  troublesome,  I  will  be  answerable
to  your  Majesty  and  Counsell  for  them,  after  that  I  be  possessed  of  my  right.'     MS.  in
Bibl.  Jurid.  Edin.  M.  6,  9.  n°.  72."     M'Crie's  Life  of  Melville,  vol.  ii.  p.  422.

35  And  their  prodigality  was  equal  to  their  rapacity.     When  Archbishop  Gladstanes
died,  in  1615,  it  was  ascertained  that,  "  notwithstanding  of  the  great  rent  of  his  bishopricks
he  died  in  the  debt  of  twentie  thowsand  pounds."  .  Calderwood 's  History  of  the  Kirk,
vol.  vii.  p.  197.     See  also  p.  303.     Also  the  case  of  the  Bishop  of  Galloway,  who  died  in
1619,  and  of  whom  Calderwood  says  (History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vii.  p.  350),  "  It  is  thought


704  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

presented  to  parliament,  had  been  hitherto  elected  by  laymen  ;  but  the  bishops
now  effected  a  change,  by  virtue  of  which  the  right  of  nomination  devolved
on  themselves.36  Having  thus  gained  possession  of  the  legislature,  they  obtained
the  enactment  of  fresh  penalties  against  their  countrymen.  Great  numbers  of
the  clergy  they  suspended  ;  others  they  deprived  of  their  benefices  ;  others  they
imprisoned.  The  city  of  Edinburgh  being  opposed  to  the  rites  and  ceremonies
lately  introduced,  and  being,  like  the  rest  of  the  country,  hostile  to  episcopacy,
the  bishops  fell  on  it  also,  displaced  several  of  its  magistrates,  seized  some  of
the  principal  citizens,  and  threatened  to  deprive  it  of  the  courts  of  justice,  and
of  the  honour  of  being  the  seat  of  government.3?

In  the  midst  of  all  this,  and  while  things  seemed  to  be  at  their  worst,  a  great
reaction  was  preparing.  And  the  explanation  of  the  reaction  is  to  be  found  in
that  vast  and  pregnant  principle  on  which  I  have  often  insisted,  but  which  our
common  historians  are  unable  to  understand  ;  namely,  that  a  bad  government,
bad  laws,  or  laws  badly  administered,  are  indeed  extremely  injurious  at  the
time,  but  can  produce  no  permanent  mischief  ;  in  other  words,  they  may  harm
a  country,  but  can  never  ruin  it.  As  long  as  the  people  are  sound,  there  is  life,
and  while  there  is  life  there  will  be  reaction.  In  such  case,  tyranny  provokes
rebellion,  and  despotism  causes  freedom.  But  if  the  people  are  unsound,  all
hope  is  gone,  and  the  nation  perishes.*  In  both  instances,  government  is  in
the  long  run  inoperative,  and  is  nowise  responsible  for  the  ultimate  result.
The  ruling  classes  have  for  the  moment  immense  power,  which  they  invariably
abuse,  except  when  they  are  restrained  either  by  fear  or  by  shame.  The  people
may  inspire  them  with  fear  ;  public  opinion  may  inspire  them  with  shame.  But
whether  or  not  that  shall  happen,  depends  on  the  spirit  of  the  people,  and  on  the
state  of  opinion.  These  two  circumstances  are  themselves  governed  by  a  long
chain  of  antecedents,  stretching  back  to  a  period  always  very  distant,  and
sometimes  so  remote  as  to  baffle  observation.  When  the  evidence  is  sufficiently
abundant  those  antecedents  may  be  generalized  ;  and  their  generalization

that  if  just  calculation  were  made  of  the  commoditie  extorted  by  him  through  his  diocie,
by  advice  of  his  two  covetous  counsellours,  Andro  Couper,  his^brother,  and  J  ohne  Gilmour,
wrytter  in  Edinburgh,  for  his  use  and  theirs,  by  racting  of  rents,  getting  of  grassoumes,
setting  of  tacks,  of  teithes,  and  other  like  meanes,  wold  surmount  the  soume  of  an  hun-
dreth  thousand  merks,  or,  in  the  opinion  of  others,  almost  the  double  ;  so  that  manie
within  that  diocie,  and  the  annexed  prelacies,  sail  hardlie  recover  their  estates  in  their
time  "  Compare  Stevenson's  History  of  the  Church,  pp.  212,  392.

36  On  this  change,  which  was  completed  in  1621,  see   Laing' s   History  of  Scotland,
vol.  iii.  p.  88  ;  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vii.  p.  490  ;  and  Baillie's  Letters  and
Journals,  vol.  i.  p.  486,  edit.  Laing,  Edinburgh,  1841.

37  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk,  vol.  vii.  pp.  472-474,  507,  509,  511,  517-520,  530-
543,  549-553*  566,  567,  614,  621.     Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  pp.  90,  91.     Laing,
very  unjustly,  accuses  the  bishops  of  being  so  merciful  as  to  disapprove  of  some  of  these
transactions.     But  whoever  has  read  much  of  the  Scotch  literature  of  the  seventeenth
century  will  cheerfully  exonerate  the  bishops  from  a  charge,  which  they  would  them-
selves have  repelled,  and  to  which  they  are  nowise  amenable.

[*  Buckle  here  repeats  a  formula  which  we  have  before  had  to  discount.  No  nation
in  modern  times  has  "perished"  save  in  the  sense  that  Poland  has  been  subjected;
and  to  say  that  this  is  due  to  the  "  unsoundness  "  of  the  people  is  finally  mere  Pharisaism.
Buckle  proceeds  to  cite  "  general  causes  "  as  the  determining  forces.  But  these  causes,
on  his  own  principles,  must  stand  for  either  natural  conditions  or  socio-political  condi-
tions. He  here  specifies  neither.  As  no  natural  conditions  can  be  stated  that  are
adequate  to  the  case,  we  must  revert  to  socio-political  conditions.  These  are  in  terms
(a)  of  the  influence  of  outside  societies,  and  (6)  of  laws  and  governments.  A  nation,
then,  retrogades  or  progresses  in  terms  either  of  its  external  or  of  its  internal  relations.
Unless  the  former  count  for  everything,  the  latter  must  count  for  something.  The  thesis
that  "  government  in  the  long  run  is  inoperative  "  is  thus  an  extravagance.  "  The  long
run  "  is  simply  the  series  of  external  and  internal  reactions. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  705

conducts  us  to  certain  large  and  powerful  causes,  on  which  the  whole  movement
depends.  In  short  periods  the  operation  of  these  causes  is  imperceptible,  but
in  long  periods  it  is  conspicuous  and  supreme  ;  it  colours  the  national  character  ;
it  controls  the  great  sweep  and  average  of  affairs.  In  Scotland,  as  I  have  already
shown,  general  causes  *  made  the  people  love  their  clergy,  and  made  the  clergy
love  liberty.f  As  long  as  these  two  facts  coexisted,  the  destiny  of  the  nation
was  safe.  It  might  be  injured,  insulted,  and  trampled  upon.  It  might  be
harmed  in  various  ways  ;  but  the  greater  the  harm  the  surer  the  remedy,  because
the  higher  the  spirit  of  the  country  would  be  roused.  All  that  was  needed  was
a  little  more  time,  and  a  little  more  provocation.  We  who,  standing  at  a  dis-
tance, can  contemplate  these  matters  from  an  elevation,  and  see  how  events
pressed  on  and  thickened,  cannot  mistake  the  regularity  of  their  sequence.  Not-
withstanding the  apparent  confusion,  all  was  orderly  and  methodical.  To  us
the  scheme  is  revealed.  There  is  the  fabric,  and  it  is  of  one  hue  and  one  make.
The  pattern  is  plainly  marked,  and  fortunately  it  was  worked  into  a  texture
whose  mighty  web  was  not  to  be  broken,  either  by  the  arts  or  the  violence  of
designing  men.

It  was  therefore  of  no  avail  that  tyranny  did  her  utmost.  It  was  of
no  avail  that  the  throne  was  occupied  by  a  despotic  and  unscrupulous  king,
who  was  succeeded  by  another,  more  despotic  and  more  unscrupulous  than
himself.  It  was  of  no  avail  that  a  handful  of  meddling  and  intrusive  bishops,
deriving  their  consecration  from  London,  and  supported  by  the  authority
of  the  English  church,  took  counsel  together,  and  conspired  against  the
liberties  of  their  native  land.  They  played  the  part  of  spies  and  of  traitors,
but  they  played  it  in  vain.  Yet  everything  that  government  could  give  them,
it  gave.  They  had  the  law  on  their  side,  and  they  had  the  right  of  administering
the  law.  They  were  legislators,  councillors,  and  judges.  They  had  wealth  ;
they  had  high-sounding  titles  ;  they  had  all  the  pomp  and  attributes  for  which
they  bartered  their  independence,  and  with  which  they  hoped  to  dazzle  the  eyes
of  the  vulgar.  Still  they  could  not  turn  back  the  stream  ;  they  could  not  even
stop  it  ;  they  could  not  prevent  it  from  coming  on,  and  swallowing  them  up  in  its
course.  Before  that  generation  passed  away,  these  little  men,  big  though  they
were  in  their  own  conceit,  succumbed,  and  fell.  The  hand  of  the  age  was  upon
them,  and  they  were  unable  to  resist.  J  They  were  struck  down  and  humbled  ;
they  were  stripped  of  their  offices,  their  honours,  and  their  splendour  ;  they  lost
all  which  minds  like  theirs  hold  most  dear.  Their  fate  is  an  instructive  lesson.  It
is  a  lesson  both  to  the  rulers  of  nations  and  to  those  who  write  the  history  of
nations.  To  rulers,  in  so  far  as  it  is  one  of  many  proofs  how  little  they  can  do,
and  how  insignificant  is  the  part  which  they  play  in  the  great  drama  of  the
world.  To  historians  the  result  should  be  especially  instructive,  as  convincing
them  that  the  events  on  which  they  concentrate  their  attention,  and  which  they
believe  to  be  of  supreme  importance,  are  in  reality  of  trifling  value,  and,  so  far
from  holding  the  first  rank,  ought  to  be  made  subservient  to  those  large  and
comprehensive  studies  by  whose  aid  alone  we  can  ascertain  the  conditions  which
determine  the  trend  and  destiny  of  nations.

[*  The  causes  specified  have  been  distinctly  "  particular." — ED.]
[f  The  next  chapter  fully  demonstrates  that  what  the  Scots  clergy  strove  for  was  not
"  liberty,"  but  their  own  ascendancy.  They  insisted  that  all  Catholics  were  "  idolaters,"
and  as  such  ought  to  "  die  the  death."  Liberty  was  preserved  only  in  the  sense  that
monarchy  and  aristocracy  were  kept  in  check.  See  Buckle's  later  comments,  below,  at
note  136. — ED.]

[J  Buckle  again  fails  to  explain  the  process  of  causation.  The  throne  had  gained
power  in  the  reign  of  James  because  the  clergy  and  the  nobles  were  now  completely  at
variance  on  the  fundamentally  economic  question  of  episcopacy.  They  were  again
united  by  the  attempt  of  Charles  to  resume  the  alienated  tithes  on  behalf  of  the  crown.
(See  above,  p.  370,  note.)  Between  them,  they  had  the  people  with  them  ;  and  the  riots
of  1637  were  the  planned  result.  The  Covenant  was  part  of  the  total  scheme  of  self
defence.  Compare  Burton,  vol.  vi.  ch.  70. — ED.]

45


706  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  events  that  now  happened  in  Scotland  may  be  quickly  told.  The  patience
of  the  country  was  wellnigh  exhausted,  and  the  day  of  reckoning  was  at  hand.38
In  1637  the  people  began  to  rise.  In  the  summer  of  that  year,  the  first  great
riot  broke  out  in  Edinburgh.39  The  flame  quickly  spread,  and  nothing  could  stop
it.  By  October,  the  whole  nation  was  up,  and  an  accusation  was  preferred  against
the  bishops,  which  was  signed  by  nearly  every  corporation,  and  by  men  of  all
ranks.40  In  November,  the  Scotch,  in  defiance  of  the  Crown,  organized  a  system
of  representation  of  their  own,  in  which  every  class  had  a  share.41  Early  in
1638  the  National  Covenant,  was  framed  ;  and  the  eagerness  with  which  it  was
sworn  to,  showed  that  the  people  were  determined  at  all  hazards  to  vindicate
their  rights.42  It  was  now  evident  that  all  was  over.  During  the  summer  of
1638  preparations  were  made,  and  in  the  autumn  the  storm  broke.''  In  Novem-
ber, the  first  General  Assembly  seen  in  Scotland  for  twenty  years,  met  at  Glas-
gow.43 The  Marquis  of  Hamilton,  the  king's  commissioner,  ordered  the  members
to  separate.44  They  refused.45  Nor  would  they  disband  until  they  had  done
the  work  expected  from  them.46  By  their  vote,  the  democratic  institution  of
presbyteries  was  restored  to  its  old  power  ;  the  forms  of  consecration  were  done
away  with  ;  the  bishops  were  degraded  from  their  functions,  and  episcopacy  was
abolished.4?

38  In  October,  1637,  Baillie,  who  was  carefully  watching  the  course  of  affairs,  writes,
"  No  man  may  speak  any  thing  in  publick  for  the  king's  part,  except  he  would  have
himself  marked  for  a  sacrifice  to  be  killed  one  day.     I  think  our  people  possessed  with  a
bloody  devill,  farr  above  any  thing  that  ever  I  could  have  imagined,  though  the  masse
in  Latine  had  been  presented."      And  in  a  postscript  dated  3rd  October  he  adds  :  "  My
fears  in  my  former  went  no  farther  then  to  ane  ecclesiastik  separation,  but  now  I  am
more  affrayit  for  a  bloudie  civill  warr."     Baillie' s  Letters  and  Journals,  edit.  Laing,
Edinburgh,  1841,  vol.  i.  pp.  23,  25.

39  Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  131.     Chambers'  Annals,  vol.  ii.  pp.  101-104.
Spalding's  History  of  the  Troubles  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  47,  48.

40  "  The  accusation,  among  themselves  a  bond  of  union,  and  to  their  enemies  a  signa
of  hostility,  was  subscribed  by  the  nobility,  the  gentry,  the  clergy,  and  afterwards  by  all
ranks,  and  almost  by  every  corporation  in  the  kingdom."     Laing' s  History  of  Scotland,
vol.  iii.  p.  137.

41  Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p.  138.

42  "  It  was  signed  by  a  large  majority  of  the  people,  in  a  paroxysm  of  enthusiasm  be-
yond all  example  in  our  history."     Chambers'  Annals,  vol.  ii.  p.  105.     Kirkton,  who  was
a  contemporary,  says,  "  And  though  only  eleven  private  men  (and  some  of  them  very
inconsiderable)  had  the  boldness  first  to  begin  this  work,  without  ever  asking  leave  of
king  or  council,  yet  was  it  very  quickly  taken  by  all  the  people  of  Scotland,  with  hands
lifted  up  in  most  solemn  manner."     Kirkton's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  p.  33.
Lord    Somerville,  taking  a  somewhat    different  view  of    affairs,   remarks   that   "  the
generalitie  of  the  natione  entered  into  a  hellish  covenant,  wherein  they  mutually  obleidged
themselves  to  extirpate  episcopacy,  and  to  defend  each  other  against  all  persones  what-
soever, noe  not  excepting  the  persone  of  his  sacred  majestic  ;  but  upon  conditiones  of
ther  oune  frameing."     Somerville'' s  Memorie  of  the  Somervilles,  vol.  ii.  p.  187.

43  There  had  been  no  General  Assembly  since  1618.     Argyll's  Presbytery  Examined,
p.  102  ;  and  the  Spottiswoode  Miscellany,  vol.  i.  p.  88.     But  "  the  provincial  synods,
presbyteries,  and  sessions  still  remained,  and  in  these  good  men  mutually  comforted  one
another."     Stevenson's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  p.  162.

44  "  The  assembly  went  on  at  such  a  rate,  that  the  marquis  judged  it  no  longer  fit  to
bear  with  their  courses."     Burnet's  Memoirs  of  the  Dukes  of  Hamilton,  p.  128.     "  In  end,
seeing  nothing  said  in  reason  did  prevail,  he,  in  his  majesty's  name,  dissolved  the  assembly,
and  discharged  their  further  proceeding  under  pain  of  treason."  p.  135.

45  Stevenson's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  p.  310.

46  "  Notwithstanding  the  Proclamation,  the  Assembly  presently  thereafter  met,  and
sat  daily  for  divers  weeks,  until  they  had  done  their  affairs,  and  were  themselves  pleas'd
to  dissolve."     Guthry's  Memoirs,  p.  41,  edit.  London,  1702.

47  Acts  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of   Scotland,  from  1638  to  1842,  Edin-
burgh, 1843,  pp.  9-18. _  Stevenson's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  pp.  332,  338.


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  707

Thus  the  bishops  fell  even  more  rapidly  than  they  had  risen.48  As,  however,
their  fall  was  merely  a  part  of  the  democratic  movement,  matters  could  not  stop
there.49  Scarcely  had  the  Scotch  expelled  their  bishops,  when  they  made  war  upon
their  king.  In  1639,  they  took  up  arms  against  Charles.  In  1640,  they  invaded
England.  In  1641,  the  king,  with  the  hope  of  appeasing  them,  visited  Scotland,
and  agreed  to  most  of  their  demands.  It  was  too  late.  The  people  were  hot,  and
a  cry  for  blood  had  gone  forth.*  War  again  broke  out.  The  Scotch  united  with
the  English,  and  Charles  was  everywhere  defeated.  As  a  last  chance,  he  threw
himself  upon  the  mercy  of  his  northern  subjects.50  But  his  offences  were  of  that
rank  and  luxuriant  growth,  that  it  was  impossible  to  forgive  them.  Indeed,  the
Scotch,  instead  of  pardoning  him,  turned  him  to  profit. f  He  had  not  only
trampled  on  their  liberties,  he  had  also  put  them  to  an  enormous  expense.  For
the  injury  he  could  offer  no  adequate  atonement  ;  but  the  expense  they  had
incurred  might  be  defrayed.  And  as  it  is  an  old  and  recognized  maxim  that  he
who  cannot  pay  with  his  purse  shall  pay  with  his  body,  the  Scotch  saw  no  reason
why  they  should  not  derive  some  advantage  from  the  person  of  their  sovereign,
particularly  as,  hitherto,  he  had  caused  them  nothing  but  loss  and  annoyance.
They  therefore  gave  him  up  to  the  English,  and  in  return  received  a  large  sum
of  money,  which  they  claimed  as  arrears  due  to  them  for  the  cost  of  making
war  on  him.51  By  this  arrangement  both  of  the  contracting  parties  benefited.

48  See,  on  their  fall,  some  highly  characteristic  remarks  in  Baillie's  Letters  and  Journals,
vol.  i.  p.  168.      In  1639  Howell  writes  from  Edinburgh,  M  The  Bishops  are  all  gone  to
wrack,  and  they  have  had  but  a  sorry  funeral ;  the  very  name  is  grown  so  contemptible,
that  a  black  dog,  if  he  hath  any  white  marks  about  him,  is  called  Bishop.     Our  Lord  of
Canterbury  is  grown  here  so  odious,  that  they  call  him  commonly  in  the  pulpit,  the  Priest
of  Baal,  and  the  Son  of  Belial."     HowelVs  Letters,  edit.  London,  1754,  p.  276.

49  "  That  people,  after  they  had  once  begun,  pursued  the  business  vigorously,  and
with  all  imaginable  contempt  of  the  government."     Clarendon's  History  of  the  Rebellion,
p.  45.     Now,  for  the  first  time,  the  English  government  began  to  tremble.     On  i3th
December,  1639,  Secretary  Windebank  writes  :  "  His  Majesty  near  these  six  weeks  last
past  hath  been  in  continual  consultations  with  a  select  Committee  of  some  of  his  Council
(of  which  I  have  had  the  honour  to  be  one),  how  to  redress  his  affairs  in  Scotland,  the
fire  continuing  there,  and  growing  to  that  danger,  that  it  threatens  not  only  the  Mon-
archical Government  there,  but  even  that  of  this  kingdom."     Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  ii.
p.  81,  Oxford,  1773,  folio.     This  is  the  earliest  intimation  I  have  met  with  of  Charles
and  his  advisers  being  aware  of  their  real  peril.     But  though  the  king  was  capable  of
fear,  he  was  incapable  of  compunction.     There  is  no  evidence  on  record  to  show  that  he
even  felt  remorse  for  having  planned  and  executed  those  arbitrary  and  unprincipled
measures,  by  which  he  inflicted  immense  misery  upon  Scotland  and  England,  but  more
especially  upon  Scotland.

50  "  The  kinge  was  now  so  waik,  haueing  nether  toune,  fort,  nor  armie,  and  Oxford
being  a  waik  and  onfortified  toune,  from  whence  he  looked  daylie  to  be  taken  perforce,  he
therefor  resolues  to  cast  himself  into  the  arms  of  the  Scots  ;  who,  being  his  native  people,
and  of  late  so  ongratfullie  dealt  with  by  the  Inglish,  he  hoped  their  particular  credit,  and
the  credit  of  the  wholl  natione  depending  thereupon,  they  would  not  baslie  rander  him
to  the  Inglish."     Gordon's  Britane's  Distemper,  p.  193,   published  by  the  Spalding  Club,
Aberdeen,  1844,  4to.

51  That  it  may  not  be  supposed  that,  as  an  Englishman,  I  misrepresent  this  transac-
tion by  looking  at  it  from  an  English  point  of  view,  I  will  merely  quote  what  Scotch
writers  have  said  respecting  it.     "  Giveing  up  the  king  to  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the
English  parliament,  that  soe  they  might  come  by  ther  money."     Somerville1  s  Memorie

[*  This  is  misleading.  The  civil  war  began  in  England  in  August,  1642;  the  Scotch
Solemn  League  and  Covenant  was  made  only  in  September  of  1643.  There  was  now
much  less  enthusiasm  than  had  been  shown  for  the  previous  National  Covenant.  See
Hume  Brown,  ii.  330. — ED.]

[f  See  editor's  note  above,  p.  629,  for  a  correct  account  of  the  situation.  Buckle  has
generalized  without  proper  study  of  the  details. — ED.]


?o8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  Scotch,  being  very  poor,  obtained  what  they  most  lacked.  The  English,
a  wealthy  people,  had  indeed  to  pay  the  money,  but  they  were  recompensed  by
getting  hold  of  their  oppressor,  against  whom  they  thirsted  for  revenge  ;  and  they
took  good  care  never  to  let  him  loose  until  they  had  exacted  the  last  penalty  of
his  great  and  manifold  crimes.52

After  the  execution  of  Charles  I.,  the  Scotch  recognized  his  son  as  his  successor.
But  before  they  would  crown  the  new  king,  they  subjected  him  to  a  treatment
which  hereditary  sovereigns  are  not  much  accustomed  to  receive.  They  made
him  sign  a  public  declaration,  expressing  his  regret  for  what  had  happened,  and
acknowledging  that  his  father,  moved  by  evil  counsels,  had  unjustly  shed  the
blood  of  his  subjects.  He  was  also  obliged  to  declare  that  by  these  things  he
felt  humbled  in  spirit.  He  had  moreover  to  apologize  for  his  own  errors,  which
he  ascribed  partly  to  his  inexperience,  and  partly  to  the  badness  of  his  educa-
tion.53 To  evince  the  sincerity  of  this  confession,  and  in  order  that  the  con-


of  the  Somervilles,  vol.  ii.  p.  366.  "  The  Scots  sold  their  unfortunate  king,  who  had  fled
to  them  for  protection,  to  the  commissioners  of  the  English  Parliament,  for  2Oo,ooo/.
sterling."  Lyon's  History  of  St.  Andrews,  vol.  ii.  p.  38.  "The  incident  itself  was
evidence  of  a  bargain  with  a  quid  pro  quo."  Burton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  493.
"  The  sale  of  the  king  to  the  parliament."  Napier's  Life  of  Montrose,  Edinburgh,  1840,
p.  448.  "  The  king  was  delivered  up,  or  rather  sold,  to  the  parliament's  commissioners."
Brown's  History  of  Glasgow,  vol.  i.  p.  91.  "Their  arrears  were  undoubtedly  due;  the
amount  was  ascertained  before  the  dispute  concerning  the  disposal  of  his  person,  and  the
payment  was  undertaken  by  the  English  parliament,  five  months  previous  to  the  delivery,
or  surrender  of  the  king.  But  the  coincidence,  however  unavoidable,  between  that  event
and  the  actual  discharge  and  departure  of  their  army,  still  affords  a  presumptive  proof
of  the  disgraceful  imputation  of  having  sold  their  king ;  '  as  the  English,  unless  previously
assured  of  receiving  his  person,  would  never  have  relinquished  a  sum  so  considerable  as
to  weaken  themselves,  while  it  strengthened  a  people  with  whom  such  a  material  question
remained  to  be  discussed.'  "  Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  pp.  369,  370.  [Most  of
these  citations  are  from  bigoted  royalists,  whose  remarks  should  have  reminded  Buckle
that  "  the  Scotch  "  took  different  sides,  like  the  English.— ED.]

52  A  letter  from  SirEdw.  Hyde  to  Lord  Hatton,  dated  April  12, 1649  (m  tne  Clarendon
State  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  479,  Oxf.  1773,  fol.),  says  of  Charles  II.,  that  the  Scotch  "  sold
his  father  to  those  who  murdered  him."  But  this  is  not  true.  Charles  I.,  though  cer-
tainly bought  by  the  English,  was  not  murdered  by  them.  He  was  tried  in  the  face  of
day  ;  he  was  found  guilty  ;  he  was  executed.  And  most  assuredly  never  did  a  year  pass
without  men  far  less  criminal  than  he,  suffering  the  same  fate.  Possibly  they  are  right
who  deem  all  capital  punishment  needless.  That,  however,  has  never  been  proved  ;  and
if  this  last  and  most  terrible  penalty  is  ever  to  be  exacted,  I  cannot  tell  where  we  should
find  a  more  fitting  subject  to  undergo  it,  than  a  despot  who  seeks  to  subjugate  the  liberties
of  the  people  over  whom  he  is  called  to  rule,  inflicts  cruel  and  illegal  punishment  on  those
who  oppose  him,  and,  sooner  than  renounce  his  designs,  engages  in  a  civil  war,  setting
fathers  against  their  children,  disorganizing  society,  and  causing  the  land  to  run  with
blood.  Such  men  are  outlaws  ;  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  human  race  ;  who  shall  wonder
f  they  fall,  or,  having  fallen,  who  shall  pity  them  ?  [No  historian  now  calls  the  execution
of  Charles  I.  a  murder,  but  the  statement  in  the  text  really  gives  some  colour  to  that
view  by  suggesting  that  the  victors  all  along  intended  to  execute  Charles.  They  of  course
did  not,  but  long  hoped  to  come  to  a  settlement  with  him.  His  duplicity  forced  on  them
final  measures.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the  charge  of  despotism  lies  as  irrefutably
against  Cromwell  as  against  Charles,  and  the  language  of  the  text  and  of  the  foregoing  note
is  thus  far  from  being  judicial. — ED.]

53  The  declaration  was  signed  by  Charles  on  the  i6th  August,  1650.  An  abridgment  of
it  is  given  in  Balfour's  Annales  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  92-94  ;  but  the  entire  document  is
preserved  by  Sir  Edward  Walker.  See  Journal  of  Affairs  in  Scotland,  in  Walker's  His-
torical Discourses,  London,  folio,  1705,  pp.  170-176.  In  it  Charles  is  made  to  state  that
"though  his  Majesty  as  a  dutiful  son  be  obliged  to  honour  the  memory  of  his  Royal  Father,
and  have  in  estimation  the  person  of  his  Mother  ;  yet  doth  he  desire  to  be  deeply  humbled
and  afflicted  in  spirit  before  God,  because  of  his  Father's  hearkening  unto  and  following


SCOTLAND    IN  XVII.    AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  709

fession  might  be  generally  known,  he  was  commanded  to  keep  a  day  of  fasting
and  humiliation,  in  which  the  whole  nation  would  weep  and  pray  for  him,  in  the
hope  that  he  might  escape  the  consequences  of  the  sins  committed  by  his
family.5*

The  spirit  of  which  acts  like  "these  are  but  symptoms,  continued  to  animate  the
Scotch  during  the  rest  of  the  seventeenth  century.  And  fortunately  for  them  it
did  so.  For  the  reigns  of  Charles  II.  and  James  II.  were  but  repetitions  of  the
reigns  of  James  I.  and  Charles  I.*  From  1660  to  1688  Scotland  was  again  sub-
jected to  a  tyranny  so  cruel  and  so  exhausting  that  it  would  have  broken  the
energy  of  almost  any  other  nation.55  The  nobles,  whose  power  had  been  slowly
but  constantly  declining,56  were  unable  to  resist  the  English,  with  whom  indeed

evil  councils  and  his  opposition  to  the  work  of  reformation,  and  to  the  solemn  league  and
covenant  by  which  so  much  of  the  blood  of  the  Lord's  people  hath  been  shed  in  these
kingdoms."  He  went  on  to  say  that  though  he  might  palliate  his  own  misconduct  by
pleading  "  his  education  and  age,"  he  thinks  it  better  to  "  ingeniously  acknowledge  all
his  own  sins  and  the  sins  of  his  father's  house."  Burnet  (History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  ii»
p.  97)  says  of  this  declaration  :  "  In  it  there  were  many  hard  things.  The  king  owned
the  sin  of  his  father  in  marrying  into  anldolatrous  family :  he  acknowledged  the  blood-
shed in  the  late  wars  lay  at  his  father's  door :  he  expressed  a  deep  sense  of  his  own  ill
education,"  &c.

54  In  reference  to  this  event,  the  following  entry  occurs  in  Lamont's  Journal :  "  1650,
Dec.  22. — The  fast  appointed  by  the  commission  of  the  kirke  to  be  keiped  througe  the
kingdome  before  the  coronatione,  was  keiped  att  Largo  the  forsaide  day  by  Mr.  Ja.
Magill ;  his  lecture,  Reu.  3.  from  v.  14  to  the  end  of  the  chapt.  ;  his  text  Reu.  2.  4,  5.
Vpon  the  Thursday  following,  the  26  of  this  instant,  the  fast  was  keiped  in  likemaner ;
his  lecture  2.  Chro.  29  to  v.  12  ;  his  text  2.  Chron.  12,  12.     The  causes  of  the  first  day
(not  read)  was,  the  great  contempt  of  the  gospell,  holden  forth  in  its  branches  ;  of  the
second  day  (which  were  read),  the  sinns  of  the  king,  and  of  his  father's  house,  where  sundry
offences  of  K.  James  the  6  were  acknowledged,  and  of  K.  Charles  the  i,  and  of  K.  Ch.  the  2,
nowe  king."     The  Diary  of  Mr.  John  Lamont  of  Newton,  p.  25,  Edinburgh,  1830,  4to.     See
also  Baillie's  Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  iii.  p.  107 ;  Nicoll's  Diary,  Edinburgh,  4to,  1836,
p.   38  ;  Row's  Continuation  of  Blair's  Autobiography,  edit.  Wodrow  Society,  p.  255  ;
Bower's  History  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  i.  p.  253  ;  Presbytery  Book  of  Strath-
bogie,  edit.  Spalding  Club,  p.  169  ;  and,  above  all,  the  Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Lanark,
published  by  the  Abbotsford  Club,  Edinburgh,  1839,  4to,  pp.  88,  89.

55  Wodrow,  who  had  before  him  the  records  of  the  Privy  Council,  besides  other  evidence
now  lost,  says  that  the  period  from  1660  to  1688  was  "  a  very  horrid  scene  of  oppression,
hardships,  and  cruelty,  which,  were  it  not  incontestably  true,  and  well  vouched  and
supported,  could  not  be  credited  in  after  ages."     Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of
Scotland  from  the  Restoration  to  the  Revolution,  vol.  i.  p.  57.     And  the  Reverend  Alexander
Shields  quaintly  but  truly  observes,  "  that  the  said  government  was  the  most  untender,
unpeaceable,  tyrannical,  arbitrary  and  wicked,  that  ever  was  in  Scotland  in  any  age  or
period."     Shields'  Scots  Inquisition,  Edinburgh,  1745,  p.  24.     [Nevertheless  it  was  a
minority  who  were  tyrannized  over,  not  the  mass  of  the  nation.     See  below,  p.  711. — ED.]

56  When  James  I.  ascended  the  throne  of  England,  "  the  principal  native  nobility"
accompanied  him  ;  and  "  the  very  peace  which  ensued  upon  the  union  of  the  crowns  may
be  considered  as  the  commencement  of  an  era  in  which  many  of  our  national  strongholds
were  either  transformed  into  simple  residences  or  utterly  deserted."     Irving' s  History  of
Dumbartonshire,  4to,  1860,  pp.  137,  166.     The  nobles  "  had  no  further  occasion  to  make
a  figure  in  war,  their  power  in  vassalage  was  of  little  use,  and  their  influence  of  course
decayed.     They  knew  little  of  the  arts  of  peace,  and  had  no  disposition  to  cultivate
them."     The  Interest  of  Scotland  Considered,  Edinburgh,  1733,  p.  85.     Under  Charles  I.
the  movement  continued  ;  "  which  fell  out  partly  through  the  giddiness  of  the  times,  but
more  by  the  way  his  Majesty  had  taken  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign  ;  at  which  time  he

[*  This  is  inexact.  In  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  there  was  no  attempt  to  impose  a
ritual  on  the  Presbyterian  Church,  though  bishops  were  imposed.  And  there  was  no
attempt  to  recover  the  tithes. — ED.]


710  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

they  rather  seemed  willing  to  combine,  in  order  that  they  might  have  a  share  in
plundering  and  oppressing  their  own  country.57  In  this,  the  most  unhappy
period  through  which  Scotland  had  passed  since  the  fourteenth  century,  the
government  was  extremely  powerful  ;  the  upper  classes,  crouching  before  it,
thought  only  of  securing  their  own  safety  ;  the  judges  were  so  corrupt  that
justice,  instead  of  being  badly  administered,  was  not  administered  at  all  ;  58  and
the  parliament,  completely  overawed,  consented  to  what  was  termed  the  recissory
act,  by  which,  at  a  single  stroke,  all  laws  were  repealed  which  had  been  enacted
since  1633  ;  it  being  considered  that  those  twenty-eight  years  formed  an  epoch
of  which  the  memory  should  if  possible  be  effaced.59

did  recover  from  divers  of  them  their  hereditary  offices,  and  also  pressed  them  to  quit
their  tithes  (which  formerly  had  kept  the  gentry  in  a  dependence  upon  them),  whereby
they  were  so  weaken'd,  that  now  when  he  stood  most  in  need  of  them  (except  the  chief  of
the  clans),  they  could  command  none  but  their  vassals  "  Guthry's  Memoirs,  edit.  1702,
pp.  127,  128.  Then  came  the  civil  wars,  and  the  rule  of  Cromwell,  during  which  they
suffered  both  in  person  and  in  property.  Compare  Chambers'  Annals,  vol.  ii.  p.  225,  with
Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  pp.  515,  516.  In  1654  Baillie  writes  (Letters  and
Journals,  vol.  iii.  p.  249)  :  "  Our  nobilitie,  weell  near  all,  are  wracked."  In  1656,  "  Our
nobles  lying  up  in  prisons,  and  under  forfaul tries,  or  debts,  private  or  publict,  are  for  the
most  part  either  broken  or  breaking."  Ibid.,  p.  317.  And,  in  1658,  the  same  observer
writes  (vol.  iii.  p.  387)  :  "  Our  noble  families  are  almost  gone  :  Lennox  hes  little  in  Scot-
land unsold  ;  Hamilton's  estate,  except  Arran  and  the  Baronrie  of  Hamilton,  is  sold;
Argyle  can  pay  little  annuel  rent  for  seven  or  eight  hundred  thousand  merks  ;  and  he
is  no  more  drowned  in  debt  than  publict  hatred,  almost  of  all,  both  Scottish  and  English  ;
the  Gordons  are  gone  ;  the  Douglasses  little  better  ;  Eglintoun  and  Glencairn  on  the
brink  of  breaking  ;  many  of  our  chief  families'  estates  are  cracking  ;  nor  is  there  any
appearance  of  any  human  re7ief  for  the  tyme."

The  result  of  all  this  is  thus  described  by  Wodrow,  under  the  year  1661  :  "  Our  nobility
and  gentry  were  remarkably  changed  to  the  worse  :  it  was  but  few  of  such,  who  had  been
active  in  the  former  years,  were  now  alive,  and  those  few  were  marked  out  for  ruin.  A
young  generation  had^sprung  up  under  the  English  government,  educated  under  penury
and  oppression  ;  their  estates  were  under  burden,  and  many  of  them  had  little  other
prospect  of  mending  their  fortunes  but  by  the  king's  favour,  and  so  were  ready  to  act
that  part  he  was  best  pleased  with."  Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.
p.  89.

57  "  At  the  Restoration,  Charles  II.  regained  full  possession  of  the  royal  prerogative
in  Scotland  ;  and  the  nobles,  whose  estates  were  wasted,  or  their  spirit  broken,  by  the
calamities  to  which  they  had  been  exposed,  were  less  able  and  less  willing  than  ever  to
resist  the  power  of  the  crown.     During  his  reign,  and  that  of  James  VII.,  the  dictates  of
the  monarch  were  received  in  Scotland  with  most  abject  submission.     The  poverty  to
which  many  of -the  nobles  were  reduced,  rendered  them  meaner  slaves  and  more  intolerable
tyrants  than  ever.     The  people,  always  neglected,  were  now  odious,  and  loaded  with
every  injury,  on  account  of  their  attachment  to  religious  and  political  principles,  ex-
tremely repugnant  to  those  adopted  by  their  princes."     Robertson's  History  of  Scotland,
book  viii.  pp.  257,  258.

58  A  writer  of  great  authority,  speaking  of  the  time  of  William  III.,  says  :  "  It  is  scarcely
possible  to  conceive  how  utterly  polluted  the  fountain  of  justice  had  become  during  the
two  preceding  reigns.     The  Scottish  bench  had  been  profligate  and  subservient  to  the
utmost  conceivable  extent  of  profligacy  and  subserviency."       Burton's  History  of  Scot-
land, from  1689  to  1748,  London,  1853,  vol.  i.  p.  72.     See  also  vol.  ii.  p.  37  ;  and  Brown's
History  of  Glasgow,  vol.  i.  p.  194,  Glasgow,  1795.

59  Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  10.    Baillie's  Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  iii.
p.  458.     As  few  persons  take  the  trouble  to  read  Scotch  Acts  of  Parliament,  I  will  extract
from  this  one  its  most  argumentative  passage.      "  And  forasmuch  as  now  it  hath  pleased
Almighty  God,  by  the  power  of  his  oune  right  hand,  so  miracoulously  to  restore  the  Kings
Maiestie  to  the  Government  of  his  Kingdomes,  and  to  the  exercise  of  his  Royall  power  and
Soveranity  over  the  same  :  The  estates  of  Parlia*  doe  conceave  themselffs  obleidged  in
dischairge  of  ther  duetie  and  conscience  to  God  and  the  Kings  Maiestie,  toimploy  all  their


SCOTLAND  rIN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  711

But  though  the  higher  ranks  ignominiously  deserted  their  post,  and  destroyed
the  laws  which  upheld  the  liberties  of  Scotland,  the  result  proved  that  the  liberties
themselves  were  indestructible.  This  was  because  the  spirit  remained  by  which
the  liberties  had  been  won.  The  nation  was  sound  at  the  core  ;  *  and  while
that  was  the  case,  legislators  could,  indeed,  abolish  the  external  manifestations
of  freedom,  but  could  by  no  means  touch  the  causes  on  which  the  freedom  de-
pended. Liberty  was  prostrate,  but  yet  it  lived.  And  the  time  would  surely
come  when  a  people  who  loved  it  so  dearly  would  vindicate  their  rights.  The
time  would  come,  when,  in  the  words  of  the  great  poet  of  English  liberty,  the
nation  would  rouse  herself  like  a  strong  man  after  sleep,  and  shaking  her  in-
vincible locks,  would  be  as  an  eagle  muing  her  mighty  youth,  kindling  her  un-
dazzled  eyes  at  the  midday  beam,  and  purging  and  unsealing  her  sight  at  the
heavenly  fountain  ;  while  the  timorous  birds  of  her  evil  destiny,  loving  the
twilight,  should  nutter  about,  amazed  at  what  she  meant.

Still,  the  crisis  was  sad  and  dangerous.  The  people,  deserted  by  every  one
except  their  clergy,  were  ruthlessly  plundered,  murdered,  and  hunted,  like
wild  beasts,  from  place  to  place. f  From  the  tyranny  of  the  bishops  they  had
so  recently  smarted,  that  they  abhorred  episcopacy  more  than  ever  ;  and  yet
that  institution  was  not  only  forced  upon  them,  but  government  put  at  its  head
Sharp,  a  cruel  and  rapacious  man,  who,  in  1661,  was  raised  to  the  archbishopric
of  St.  Andrews.60  He  set  up  a  court  of  ecclesiastical  commission,  which  filled

power  and  interest  for  vindicateing  his  Maiesties  Authority  from  all  these  violent  in-
vasions that  have  been  made  upon  it ;  And  so  far  as  is  possible  to  remove  out  of  the  way
every  thing  that  may  reiaine  any  remembrance  of  these  things  which  have  been  so  enjurious
to  his  Matie  and  his  Authority,  so  prejudiciall  and  dishonourable  to  the  kingdome,  and
distructive  to  all  just  and  true  interests  within  the  same."  ..."  Not  to  retaine  any
remembrance  thairof,  but  that  the  same  shall  be  held  in  everlasting  oblivion."  Acts  of
the  Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.  p.  87,  edit,  folio,  1820.  The  date  of  this  Act  is  z8th
March,  1661.

60  He  was  made  "  primate  "  in  1661,  but  did  not  arrive  in  Scotland  till  April,  1662.
Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  236,  247  ;  and  NicolVs  Diary,
PP-  363,  364.  "  That  he  was  decent,  if  not  regular,  in  his  deportment,  endued  with
the  most  industrious  diligence,  and  not  illiterate,  was  never  disputed  ;  that  he  was
vain,  vindictive,  perfidious,  at  once  haughty  and  servile,  rapacious  and  cruel,  his  friends
have  never  attempted  to  disown."  Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  98,  99.
The  formal  establishment  of  episcopacy  was  in  the  autumn  of  1661,  as  we  learn  from
an  entry  in  Lament's  Diary.  "  1661.  Sept.  5  being  Thursday,  (the  chancelour,  Glen-
cairne,  and  the  E.  of  Rothes,  haueing  come  downe  from  court  some  dayes  before),  the
cownsell  of  state  satt  att  Edb.,  and  the  nixt  day,  being  Fryday,  they  caused  emitte
and  be  proclaimed  ouer  the  Crosse,  a  proclamation  in  his  Maj.  name,  for  establishing
Episcopacie  againe  in  the  church  of  Scotlande  ;  which  was  done  with  great  solemnitie,
and  was  afterwarde  printed.  All  persons,  wither  men  or weomen,  were  discharged  tospeake
against  that  office,  under  the  paine  of  treason"  The  Diary  of  Mr.  John  Lamont,  p.  140.
This,  as  we  learn  from  another  contemporary,  was  on  account  of  "  the  Kinges  Majestic
having  stedfastlie  resolvit  to  promove  the  estait,  power,  and  dignitie  of  Bischops,  and
to  remove  all  impedimentes  contrary  thairto."  NicolVs  Diary,  4to,  p.  353  ;  on  2ist  No-
vember, 1661.  This  curious  diary,  written  by  John  Nicoll,  and  extending  from  1650
to  1667,  was  printed  at  Edinburgh,  in  1836,  by  the  Bannatyne  Club,  and  is  now  not
often  met  with.

[*  Buckle  here  applies  to  Scotland  a  very  different  measure  from  that  which  he  has
meted  to  Spain.  On  the  face  of  the  case,  it  was  only  the  English  Revolution  of  1688
that  "  saved  "  Scottish  liberties.  Strictly  speaking,  they  had  been  destroyed,  and  had
to  be  reconstituted.  "  Sound  at  the  core  "  is  a  metaphor  which  has  no  proper  place  in
sociology,  and  the  ensuing  rhetoric  really  explains  nothing. — ED.]

[f  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  persecuted  Covenanters  were  a  minority,  and
that  in  the  Eastern  Lowlands  the  common  people  had  little  or  no  sympathy  with  them.
See  Burton,  History,  vii.  172.  It  must  further  be  remembered  that  the  persecuted
Cameronians  were  themselves  determined  opponents  of  toleration. — ED.]


712  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  prisons  to  overflowing  ;  and  when  they  would  hold  no  more,  the  victims
were  transported  to  Barbadoes,*  and  other  unhealthy  settlements.61  The
people,  being  determined  not  to  submit  to  the  dictation  of  government  respect-
ing their  religious  worship,  met  together  in  private  houses  ;  and  when  that
was  declared  illegal,  they  fled  from  their  houses  to  the  fields.  But  there,  too,
the  bishops  were  upon  them.62  Lauderdale,  who  for  many  years  was  at  the
head  of  affairs,  was  greatly  influenced  by  the  new  prelates,  and  aided  them
with  the  authority  of  the  executive.63  Under  their  united  auspices  a  new  con-

61  Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  383,  390-395.     Laing's  His-
tory of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  38  :  "A  court  of  ecclesiastical  commission  was  procured  by
Sharp."     See  also  p.  41  :  "  Under  the  influence  of  Sharp  and  the  prelates,  which  Lauder-
dale's  friends  were  unable  to  resist,  the  government  seemed  to  be  actuated  by  a  blind
resentment  against  its  own  subjects."     Compare  Burnefs  History  of  his  own  Time,
vol.  i.  p.  365.     "  The  truth  is,  the  whole  face  of  the  government  looked  liker  the  pro-
ceedings of  an  inquisition,  than  of  legal  courts  ;  and  yet  Sharp  was  never  satisfied."
Another  contemporary,   Kirkton,  says  of  these  Commissioners  :  "  For  ought  I  could
hear,  never  one  appeared  before  them  that  escapt  without  punishment.     Their  custom
was,  without  premonition  or  lybell,  to  ask  a  man  a  question,  and  judge  him  presently,
either  upon  his  silence  or  his  answer."  ..."  They  many  times  doubled  the  legal
punishment ;  and  not  being  satisfied  with  the  fyne  appointed  by  law,  they  used  to  add
religation  to  some  remote  places,  or  deportation  to  Barbadoes,  or  selling  into  slavery."
Kirkton' s  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  p.  206.     See  also  Naphtali,  or  the  Wrestlings
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  1667,  pp.  126-130.     But  as  particular  cases  bring  such  matters
more  clearly  before  the  mind,  I  will  transcribe,  from  Crookshank's  History  of  the  Church
of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  154,  the  sentences  pronounced  on  a  single  occasion  by  this  episcopal
court.     "  The  treatment  of  some  of  the  parishioners  of  Ancrum  is  not  to  be  omitted.
When  their  excellent  minister,  Mr.  Livingstone,  was  taken  from  them,  one  Mr.  James
Scot,  who  was  under  the  sentence  of  excommunication,  was  presented  to  that  charge.
On  the  day  fixed  for  his  settlement,  several  people  did  meet  together  to  oppose  it ;  and
particularly  a  country  woman,  desiring  to  speak  with  him  in  order  to  dissuade  him
from  intruding  himself  upon  a  reclaiming  people,  pulled  him  by  the  cloak,  intreating
him  to  hear  her  a  little  ;  whereupon  he  turned  and  beat  her  with  his  staff.     This  pro-
voked two  or  three  boys  to  throw  a  few  stones,  which  neither  touched  him  nor  any  of
his  company.     However,  it  was  presently  looked  upon  as  a  treasonable  tumult,  and
therefore  the  sheriff  and  justices  of  the  peace  in  that  bounds  fined  and  imprisoned  some
of  these  people,  which,  one  would  think,  might  atone  for  a  crime  of  this  nature.     But
the  high -commission,  not  thinking  that  sufficient,  ordered  those  criminals  to  be  brought
before  them.     Accordingly,  the  four  boys  and  this  woman,  with  two  brothers  of  hers
of  the  name  of  Turnbull,  were  brought  prisoners  to  Edinburgh.     The  four  boys  con-
fessed, that,  upon  Scot's  beating  the  woman,  they  had  thrown  each  a  stone.     The  com-
missioner told  them  that  hanging  was  too  good  for  them.     However,  the  sentence  of
this  merciless  court  only  was,  that  they  should  be  scourged  through  the  city  of  Edin-
burgh, burnt  in  the  face  with  a  hot  iron,  and  then  sold  as  slaves  to  Barbadoes.     The
boys  endured  their  punishment  like  men  and  Christians,  to  the  admiration  of  multitudes.
The  two  brothers  were  banished  to  Virginia  ;  and  the  woman  was  ordered  to  be  whipped
through  the  town  of  Jedburgh.     Burnet,  bishop  of  Glasgow,  when  applied  to  that  she
might  be  spared  lest  she  should  be  with  child,  mildly  answered,  That  he  would  make
them  claw  the  itch  out  of  her  shoulders."

62  They  were  invested  with  such  immense  power,  that  "  the  old  set  of  bishops  made
by  the  parliament,  1612,  were  but  pigmies  to  the  present  high  and  mighty  lords."
Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  262.     See  also,  at  p.  286,  the  remarks
of  Douglas  :  "  It  is  no  wonder  then  the  complaint  against  their  bishops  be,  that  their
little  finger  is  thicker  than  the  loins  of  the  former."

63  In  1663  Middleton  was  dismissed ;    and  was  succeeded  by  Lauderdale,  who  "  was
dependent  upon    the    prelates,   and  was  compelled  to  yield  to    their   most  furious
demands."      Laings  History  of  Scotland,  vol.   iv.  p.  33.     "The  influence,   or  rather

[*  This  was  done  by  Cromwell  to  many  of  his  victims,  Irish  and  English. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  713

trivance  was  hit  upon  ;  and  a  body  of  soldiers,  commanded  by  Turner,  a  drunken
and  ferocious  soldier,  was  let  loose  upon  the  people.64  The  sufferers,  galled
to  madness,  rose  in  arms.  This  was  made  the  pretence,  in  1667,  for  fresh  military
executions,  by  which  some  of  the  fairest  parts  of  western  Scotland  were  devas-
tated, houses  burned,  men  tortured,  women  ravished.65  In  1670  an  act  of
parliament  was  passed,  declaring  that  whoever  preached  in  the  fields  without
permission  should  be  put  to  death.66  Some  lawyers  were  found  bold  enough  to

the  tyranny,  which  was  thus  at  the  discretion  of  the  prelates,  was  unlimited  ;  and  they
exercised  it  with  an  unsparing  hand."  Bower's  History  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
vol.  i.  p.  284.

64  "Sir  James  Turner,  that  commanded  them,  was  naturally  fierce,  but  was  mad
when  he  was  drunk  ;  and  that  was  very  often."  Burners  History  of  his  own  Time,
vol.  i.  p.  364.  Kirkton  (History  of  the  Church,  p.  221)  says  :  "  Sir  James  Turner  hade
made  ane  expedition  to  the  west  countrey  to  subdue  it  to  the  bishops,  in  the  year  1664;
another  in  the  year  1665  ;  and  a  third  in  the  year  1666  ;  and  this  was  the  worst."  Full
particulars  will  be  found  in  Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  373-375,
411,  vol.  ii.  pp.  8,  17,  vol.  iii.  pp.  264,  265.  "  This  method  of  dragooning  people  to  the
church,  as  it  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  so  it  was  a  stranger  in  Scotland,
till  Bishop  Sharpe  and  the  prelates  brought  it  in."  vol.  i.  p.  401.

Sir  James  Turner,  whose  Memoirs,  written  by  himself,  were  not  published  till  thirty
years  ago,  relates  an  anecdote  of  his  own  drunkenness  in  a  strain  of  maudlin  piety  well
worthy  of  his  career.  Turner's  Memoirs  of  his  own  Life,  Edinburgh,  1829,  4to,  pp.  42,  43.
At  p.  206,  this  impudent  man  writes  :  "  And  yet  I  confesse,  my  humour  never  was,  nor
is  not  yet,  one  of  the  calmest ;  when  it  will  be,  God  onlie  knoues  ;  yet  by  many  sad
passages  of  my  life,  I  know  that  it  hath  beene  good  for  me  to  be  afflicted"  Perhaps,  how-
ever, he  may  take  the  benefit  of  his  assertion  (p.  144),  "  that  I  was  so  farre  from  ex-
ceeding or  transgressing  my  commission  and  instructions,  that  I  never  came  the  full
length  of  them."  Considering  the  cruelties  he  committed,  what  sort  of  instructions
could  his  superiors  have  given  to  him  ?

65  "  Sir  James  Turner  lately  had  forced  Galloway  to  rise  in  arms,  by  his  cruelty  the
last  and  former  years  ;  but  he  was  an  easy  master,  compared  with  General  Dalziel,
his  ruffians,  and  Sir  William  Bannatyne,   this  year."     Wodrow's  Church  of  Scotland.
vol.  ii.  p.  62.     Dalziel  "  cruelly  tortured  whom  he  would."  p.  63.     One  woman  "  is
brought  prisoner  to  Kilmarnock,  where  she  was  sentenced  to  be  let  down  to  a  deep  pit,
under  the  house  of  the  dean,  full  of  toads  and  other  vile  creatures.     Her  shrieks  thence
were  heard  at  a  great  distance."  p.  64.     Two  countrymen  were  "  bound  together  with
cords,  and  hanged  up  by  their  thumbs  to  a  tree,  there  to  hang  all  night."     Ibid.     Sir
William  Bannatyne's  soldiers  seized  a  woman,  "  and  bound  her,  and  put  lighted  matches
betwixt  her  fingers  for  several  hours  ;  the  torture  and  pain  made  her  almost  distracted  ;
she  lost  one  of  her  hands,  and  in  a  few  days  she  died."     Ibid.     "  Oppressions,  murders,
robberies,  rapes."  p.  65.     "He  made  great  fires,  and  laid  down  men  to  roast  before  them,
when  they  would  not,  or  could  not,  give  him  the  money  he  required,  or  the  information
he  was  seeking."  p.  104.     See  also  Crookshantf  s  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.
pp.  204-207.     This  History  is  based  upon  Wodrow's  great  work,  but  contains  many
facts  with  which  Wodrow  was  unacquainted.     See  Crookshank,  vol.  i.  p.  ii.     Respect-
ing the  outrages  in  1667,  there  are  some  horrible  details  in  a  book  published  in  that  very
year,  under  the  title  of  Naphtali,  or  the  Wrestlings  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.    See,  especially,
the  summary  at  p.  174  :  "  wounding,  beating,  stripping  and  imprisoning  men's  persons,
violent  breaking  of  their  houses  both  by  day  and  night,  and  beating  and  wounding  of
wives  and  children,  ravishing  and  deflowring  of  women,  forcing  wives  and  other  persons
by  fired  matches  and  other  tortures  to  discover  their  husbands  and  nearest  relations,
although  it  be  not  within  the  compass  of  their  knowledge,  and  driving  and   spoiling  all
their  goods  that  can  be  carried  away,  without  respect  to  guilt  or  innocency."

66  "  That  whosoever  without  licence  or   authoritie   forsaid  shall  preach,   expound
Scripture,  or  pray  at  any  of  these  meetings  in  the  ffeild,  or  in  any  house  wher  ther  be
moe  persons  nor  the  house  contains,  so  as  some  of  them  be  without  doors  (which  is  heerby
declared  to  be  a  feild  conventicle),  or  who  shall  convocat  any  number  of  people  to  these
meetings,  shall  be  punished  with  death  and  confiscation  of  ther  goods."     Acts  of  the


7M  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

defend  innocent  men,  when  they  were  tried  for  their  lives  ;  it  was  therefore
determined  to  silence  them  also,  and,  in  1674,  a  great  part  of  the  Faculty
of  Advocates  was  expelled  from  Edinburgh.67  In  1678,  by  the  express  com-
mand of  government,  the  Highlanders  were  brought  down  from  their  mountains,
and,  during  three  months,  were  encouraged  to  slay,  plunder,  and  burn  at  their
pleasure  the  inhabitants  of  the  most  populous  and  industrious  parts  of  Scot-
land. For  centuries  the  bitterest  animosity  had  existed  between  the  High-
landers and  Lowlanders  ;  and  now  these  savage  mountaineers  *  were  called
from  their  homes,  that  they  might  take  full  revenge.  And  well  they  glutted
their  ire.  During  three  months  they  enjoyed  every  license.  Eight  thousand  68
armed  Highlanders,  invited  by  the  English  government,  and  receiving  before-
hand an  indemnity  for  every  excess,69  were  left  to  work  their  will  upon  the
towns  and  villages  of  Western  Scotland.  They  spared  neither  age  nor  sex.
They  deprived  the  people  of  their  property  ;  they  even  stripped  them  of  their
clothes,  and  sent  them  out  naked  to  die  in  the  fields.  Upon  many  they  inflicted
the  most  horrible  tortures.  Children,  torn  from  their  mothers,  were  foully
abused  ;  while  both  mothers  and  daughters  were 'subjected  to  a  fate  compared
to  which  death  would  have  been  a  joyful  alternative.70

Parliaments  of  Scotland,  vol.  viii.  p.  9,  edit.  1820,  folio.  This  was  on  the  i3th  August,
1670.

67  The  immediate  pretence  being    to  do  away  with  appeals.      See  Laing's   History
of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  72-74.

68  "  Savage  hosts  of  Highlanders  were  sent  down  to  depopulate  the  western  shires
to  the  number  of  ten  or  eleven  thousand,  who  acted  most  outrageous  barbarities,  even
almost  to  the  laying  some  counties  desolate."     A  Cloud  of  Witnesses  for  the  Royal  Pre-
rogatives of  Jesus  Christ,  edit.  Glasgow,  1779,  p.  18.     But  most  authorities  state  the
number  to  have  been  eight  thousand.     See  Kirkton's  History,  p.  386  ;  Arnofs  History
of  Edinburgh,  p.  154  ;  Burners  History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  134  ;  Denholm's  His-
tory of  Glasgow,  p.  67  ;  and  Life  and  Sufferings  of  John  Nisbet,  in  Select  Biographies,
published  by  the  Wodrow  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  381.     Chalmers,  however,  in  his  Caledonia,
vol.  iii.  p.  592,  says  10,000.     [Six  thousand  seems  to  be  nearer  the  mark.     To  limn
were  added,  however,  3,000  Lowland  militia.    (Hume  Brown,  Hist,  of  Scotland,  ii.  406.)
And  they  had  free  quarters,  not  for  three  months  but  for  one  (/&.)  only,  in  the  houses
of  those  who  refused  to  sign  a  document  abjuring  conventicles,  etc.     Even  Burton,
who  accepts  Wodrow's  account  of  the  plundering,  silently  sets  aside  (vii.  191)  his  stories
of  outrages.     Buckle  also,  in  the  next  chapter,  rejects  his  testimony  as  to  supernatural
interventions  on  behalf  of  preachers.     As  regards  his  charges  against  the  Lowland  troops
of  Dalziel,  there  are  other  testimonies  in  corroboration.     Here  there  are  none.     And
it  is  certain  that  any  thumb-screws  possessed  by  Highlanders  must  have  been  supplied
to  them  by  the  Lowland  Government. — ED.]

39  "  They  were  indemnified  against  all  pursuits,  civil  and  criminal,  on  account  of
killing,  wounding,  apprehending,  or  imprisoning,  such  as  should  oppose  them."  Crook-
shank's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  337,  338.

70  Short  and  imperfect  notices  of  this  "  Highland  Host,"  as  it  was  called  at  the  time,
may  be  found  in  Kirkton's  History,  pp.  385-390,  and  in  Crookshank's  History,  vol.  i.
PP-  354»  355-  But  the  fullest  account  of  the  enormities  committed  by  these  barbarians
is  in  Wodrow's  great  work,  collected  from  authentic  and  official  documents.  See  his
History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  375-413,  421-432,  vol.  iii.  pp.  76,  79,  486.
They  were  provided  beforehand  with  implements  of  torture.  "  They  had  good  store
of  iron  shackles,  as  if  they  were  to  lead  back  vast  numbers  of  slaves,  and  thumb -locks,
as  they  call  them  "  (i.e.  thumb -screws),  "  to  make  their  examinations  and  trials  with,"
vol.  ii.  p.  389.  "  In  some  places  they  tortured  people  by  scorching  their  bodies  at  vast
fires,  and  otherwise,"  vol.  ii.  p.  422.  Compare  Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  88.
"  Neither  age  nor  sex  was  exempt  from  outrage,  and  torture  was  freely  employed  to

[*  Above,  in  note  65,  and  below,  in  note  71,  the  grossest  savageries  are  represented
as  committed  by  Lowlanders.  Yet  the  epithet  "  savage  "  is  always  reserved  by  Buckle,
as  by  his  Lowland  authorities,  for  the  Highlanders. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  715

It  was  in  this  way  that  the  luiglish  government  *  sought  to  break  the  spirit,
and  to  change  the  opinions,  of  the  Scotch  people.  The  nobles  looked  on  in  silence,
and,  so  far  from  resisting,  had  not  even  the  courage  to  remonstrate.  The  par-
liament was  equally  servile,  and  sanctioned  whatever  the  government  demanded. f
Still  the  people  were  firm.  Their  clergy,  drawn  from  the  middle  classes,  clung
to  them  ;  they  clung  to  their  clergy,  and  both  were  unchanged.  The  bishops
were  hated  as  allies  of  the  government,  and  were  with  reason  regarded  as  public
enemies.  They  were  known  to  have  favoured,  and  often  to  have  suggested,
the  atrocities  which  had  been  committed  ;  71  and  they  were  so  pleased  with
the  punishment  inflicted  upon  their  opponents  that  no  one  was  surprised  when
a  few  years  later  they,  in  an  address  to  James  II.,  the  most  cruel  of  all  the
Stuarts,  declared  that  he  was  the  darling  of  heaven,  and  hoped  that  God  might
give  him  the  hearts  of  his  subjects,  and  the  necks  of  his  enemies.72

The  character  of  the  prince  whom  the  bishops  thus  delighted  to  honour  is
now  well  understood.  Horrible  as  were  the  crimes  which  had  been  perpetrated,
they  were  surpassed  by  what  occurred  when  he  in  1680  assumed  the  direction
of  affairs.73  He  had  worked  himself  to  that  pitch  of  iniquity,  as  to  derive  actual
enjoyment  from  witnessing  the  agonies  of  his  fellow-creatures.  This  is  an
abyss  of  wickedness  into  which  even  the  most  corrupt  natures  rarely  fall.  There
have  been,  and  always  will  be,  many  men  who  care  nothing  for  human  suffering,
and  who  will  inflict  any  amount  of  pain  in  order  to  gain  certain  ends.  But
to  take  delight  in  the  spectacle  is  a  peculiar  and  hideous  abomination.  James,
however,  was  so  dead  to  shame  that  he  did  not  care  even  to  conceal  his  horrible
tastes.  Whenever  torture  was  inflicted,  he  was  sure  to  be  present,  feasting


extort  a  confession  of  hidden  wealth."  And,  at  p.  91,  "  The  Highlanders,  after  exacting
free  quarters,  and  wasting  the  country  for  three  months,  were  dismissed  to  their  hills
with  impunity  and  wealth."

71  "  Indeed,  the  whole  of  the  severity,  hardships,  and  bloodshed  from  this  year  "
(1661),  "  until  the  revolution,  was  either  actually  brought  on  by  the  bishops,  procured
by  them,  or  done  for  their  support."     Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.
p.  223.     "It  was  our  prelates  who  pushed  the  council  to  most  of  their  severities."  p.  247.
"  The  bishops,   indeed,   violently  pushed  prosecutions."     Crookshank's  History  of  the
Church,  vol.  i.  p.  298.     In  1666,  "  As  to  the  Prelates,  they  resolved  to  use  all  severities,
and  to  take  all  imaginable  cruel  and  rigorous  ways  and  courses,  first  against  the  rest
of  the  prisoners,  and  then  against  the  whole  west  of  Scotland."     Row's  Continuation
of  Blair's  Autobiography,  pp.  505,  506,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1848.     This  interesting  work
is  edited  by  Dr.  M'Crie,  and  published  by  the  Wodrow  Society.

72  In  1688  "  the  bishops  concurred  in  a  pious  and  convivial  address  to  James,  as  the
darling  of  heaven,  that  God  might  give  him  the  hearts  of  his  subjects  and  the  necks  of
his  enemies."     Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  193.

73  "  After  the  Duke  of  York  came  down  in  October  "  (1680),  "  the  persecution  turned
yet  more  severe."     Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  p.  225-     "  Perse-
cution and  tryanny,  mainly  promoted  by  the  Duke  of  York's  instigation."     Shields'
Hind  Let  Loose,  p.  147.     "  Immediately  upon  his  mounting  the  throne,  the  executions
and  acts  prosecuting  the  persecution  of  the  poor  wanderers  were  more  cruel  than  ever."
p.  200.

[*  The  tyranny  in  Scotland  was  carried  on  by  Scottish  officials.  There  were  royalists
there  as  well  as  in  England.  See  below  as  to  the  bishops.  Buckle's  repeated  allusions
to  "  the  English  government  "  are  thus  misleading. — ED.]

[t  This  misrepresents  the  facts.  There  was  no  parliament  in  1678.  In  1673  the
Parliament  had  opposed  the  policy  of  the  government,  demanding  redress  of  grievances
before  voting  supplies.  It  was  accordingly  dissolved  despite  protest,  and  no  other  was
summoned  during  the  administration  of  Lauderdale,  which  ended  in  December,  1679.
(Hume  Brown,  History,  ii.  403-4).  Nevertheless,  "a  body  of  gentlemen  prepared  to
go  to  the  court  in  London,"  and  there  protest  against  the  employment  of  the  Highland
Host.  They  were  prohibited  by  an  Act  of  Council.  (Burton,  vii.  190.) — ED.]


THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

his  eyes,  and  revelling  with  a  ftendish  joy.?*  It  makes  our  flesh  creep  to  think
that  such  a  man  should  have  been  the  ruler  of  millions.  But  what  shall  we
say  to  the  Scotch  bishops,  who  applauded  him  of  whose  conduct  they  were
daily  witnesses  ?  Where  can  we  find  language  strong  enough  to  stigmatize
those  recreant  priests,  who,  having  passed  years  in  attempting  to  subjugate
the  liberties  of  their  country,  did  towards  the  close  of  their  career,  and  just
before  their  final  fall,  band  together,  and  employ  their  united  authority,  as
ministers  of  a  holy  and  peaceful  religion,  to  stamp  with  public  approval  a  prince
whose  malignant  cruelty  made  him  loathed  by  his  contemporaries,  and  whose
revolting  predilections,  unless  we  ascribe  them  to  a  diseased  brain,  are  not  only
a  slur  upon  the  age  which  tolerated  them,  but  a  disgrace  to  the  higher  instincts
of  our  common  nature  ?

So  utterly  corrupt,  however,  were  the  ruling  classes  in  Scotland  *  that  such
crimes  seem  hardly  to  have  excited  indignation.  The  sufferers  were  refractory
subjects,  and  against  them  everything  was  lawful.  The  usual  torture,  which
was  called  the  torture  of  the  boots,  was  to  place  the  leg  in  a  frame,  into  which
wedges  were  driven  until  the  bones  were  broken.75  But  when  James  visited
Scotland,  an  opinion  began  to  grow  up  that  this  was  too  lenient,  and  that  other
means  must  be  devised.  The  spirit  which  he  communicated  to  his  subordinates
animated  his  immediate  successors,  and  in  1684,  during  his  absence,  a  new
instrument  was  introduced,  termed  the  thumbikins.  This  was  composed  of
small  steel  screws,  arranged  with  such  diabolical  art  that  not  only  the  thumb,

74  This  was  well  known  in  Scotland  ;  and  is  evidently  alluded  to  by  a  writer  of  that
time,  the^Rev.  Alexander  Shields,  who    calls  James  not  a  man,  but  a  monster.     See
Shields'  Hind  Let  Loose,  1687,  p.  365.  "  This  man,  or  monster  rather,  that  is  now  mounted
the  throne."     And  a  monster  surely  he  was.     Compare  Crookshank's  History  of  the
Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  66,  where  it  is  mentioned  that  when  Spreul  was  tortured
"  the  Duke  of  York  was  pleased  to  gratify  his  eyes  with  this  delightful  scene."     Also
Wodrow's  History,  vol.  iii.  p.  253,  and  Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  116.  Accord-
ing to  Burnet,  the  duke's   pleasure  at  witnessing  human  agony  was  a  cold  and  as  it
were  a  speculative  pleasure,  as  if  he  were  present  for  the  purpose  of  contemplating
some  curious  experiment.      But  J  ames  was  so  excitable  a  man  that  this  is  hardly  likely.
At  all  events,  the  remarks  of  Burnet  have  a  painful  interest  for  those  who  study  these
dark,  and,  as  we  may  rejoice  to  think,  these  very  rare  forms  of  human  malignity.    "  When
any  are  to  be  struck  in  the  boots,  it  is  done  in  the  presence  of  the  council ;  and  upon
that  occasion  almost  all  offer  to  run  away.      The  sight  is  so  dreadful,  that  without  an
order  restraining  such  a  number  to  stay,  the  board  would  be  forsaken.     But  the  duke
while  he  had  been  in  Scotland  was  so  far  from  withdrawing  that  he  looked  on  all  the
while  with  an  unmoved  indifference,  and  with  an  attention,  as  if  he  had  been  to  look  on
some  curious  experiment.     This  gave  a  terrible  idea  of  him  to  all  that  observed  it,  as  of
a  man  that  had  no  bowels  nor  humanity  in  him."       Burners  History  of  his  own  Time,
vol.  ii.  pp.  416,  417.     [There  is  no  evidence  here  as  to  "revelling  with  a  fiendish  joy."
That  James  was  cruel  there  can  be  no  question.     But  Buckle  has  expressly  claimed  for
the  old  inquisitors,  who  showed  the  same  disposition,  that  they  were  conscientious  men.
(Above,  p.  108).    The  difference  of  tone  here  is  hardly  scientific. — ED.]

75  Shields  (A  Hind  Let  Loose,p.  186)  describes  the  boots  as  "  a  cruel  engine  of  iron,
whereby,  with  wedges,  the  leg  is  tortured  until  the  marrow  come  out  of  the  bone."  Com-
pare Naphtali,  or  the  Wrestlings  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  1667,  p.  268  :  "  the  extra-
ordinary compression  both  of  flesh,  sinews,  and  bones,  by  the  force  of  timber  wedges
and  hammer."

[*  Such  a  statement  does  not  consist  with  the  facts  (i)  that  fifty  advocates  withdrew
from  the  Edinburgh  bar  in  1674-76,  in  resistance  to  the  interference  of  Lauderdale  with
the  administration  of  the  courts  ;  and  (2)  that  on  the  passing  of  the  Test  Act  in  1681
not  only  the  Marquis  of  Argyle  but  the  President  of  the  Court  of  Session  and  many
gentlemen  and  episcopal  clergymen  refused  to  subscribe.  (Burton,  vii.  194-5  ;  Hume
Brown,  ii.  418  ;  Mathieson,  Politics  and  Religion  :  a  Study  in  Scottish  History,  1902.
ii.  299.)— ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN  XVII.    AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  717

but  also  the  whole  hand,  could  be  compressed  by  them,  producing  pain  more
exquisite  than  any  hitherto  known,  and  having  moreover  the  advantage  of
not  endangering  life  ;  so  that  the  torture  could  be  frequently  repeated  on  the
same  person.76

After  this,  little  more  need  be  said.77  From  the  mere  mention  of  such  things
the  mind  recoils  with  disgust.  The  reader  of  the  history  of  that  time  sickens
and  faints  at  the  contrivances  by  which  these  abject  creatures  sought  to  stifle
public  opinion,  and  to  ruin  for  ever  a  gallant  and  high-spirited  people.*  But
now,  as  before,  they  laboured  in  vain.  More  yet  was  however  to  be  borne.
The  short  reign  of  James  II.  was  ushered  in  by  an  act  of  singular  barbarity.
A  few  weeks  after  this  bad  man  came  to  the  throne  all  the  children  in  Annandale
and  Nithsdale,  between  the  ages  of  six  and  ten,  were  seized  by  the  soldiers,
separated  from  their  parents,  and  threatened  with  immediate  death.78  The

78  In  1684  Carstairs  was  subjected  to  this  torture.  See  his  own  account,  in  a  letter
printed  in  Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  pp.  96-100.  He  writes
(p.  99)  :  "  After  this  communing,  the  king's  smith  was  called  in,  to  bring  in  a  new  instru-
ment to  torture  by  the  thumbkins,  that  had  never  been  used  before.  For  whereas  the
former  was  only  to  screw  on  two  pieces  of  iron  above  and  below  with  finger  and  thumb,
these  were  made  to  turn  about  the  screw  with  the  whole  hand.  And  under  this  torture
I  continued  near  an  hour  and  a  half."  See  also  the  case  of  Spence,  in  the  same  year,
in  Burnefs  History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  418.  "  Little  screws  of  steel  were  made
use  of,  that  screwed  the  thumbs  with  so  exquisite  a  torment,  that  he  sunk  under  this  ;
for  Lord  Perth  told  him,  they  would  screw  every  joint  of  his  whole  body,  one  after
another,  till  he  took  the  oath."  Laing  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  143)  says,  "  the
thumbikins  ;  small  screws  of  steel  that  compressed  the  thumb  and  the  whole  hand
with  an  exquisite  torture  ;  an  invention  brought  by  Drummond  and  Dalziel  from  Russia."
For  other  notices,  see  Fountainhall's  Notes  of  Scottish  Affairs  from  1680  till  1701,  Edin-
burgh, 4to,  1822,  pp.  41,  97,  101  ;  Bower's  History  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  ii.
p.  30  ;  Crookshank's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  192  ;  A  Cloud  of  Wit-
nesses for  the  Royal  Prerogatives  of  Jesus  Christ,  edit.  Glasgow,  1779,  p.  371  ;  and  Life
of  Walter  Smith,  p.  85,  in  the  second  volume  of  Walker's  Biographia  Presbyteriana,  Edin-
burgh, 1827.

77  "  In  1684  the  Scottish    nation  was  in  the  most  distressing  and  pitiable  situation
that  can  be  imagined."  .  .  .  "  The  state  of  society  had  now  become  such  that  in  Edin-
burgh  attention  to  ordinary  business  was  neglected,  and  every  one  was  jealous  of  his
neighbour."     Bower's  History  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  i.  p.  307.

78  "  Upon  the  loth  of  March,  all  freeholders,  heritors,  and  gentlemen  in  Nithsdale
and  Annandale,  and,  I  suppose,  in  most  other  shires  of  the  kingdom,  but  I  name  those
as  being  the  scene  of  the  severities  now  used,  were  summoned  to  attend  the  king's  stan-
dard ;  and  the  militia  in  the  several  shires  were  raised.     Wherever  Claverhouse  came,
he  resolved  upon  narrow  and  universal  work.     He  used  to  set  his  horse  upon  the  hills
and  eminences,  and  that  in  different  parties,  that  none  might  escape  ;  and  there  his
foot  went  through  the  lower,  marshy,  and  mossy  places,  where  the  horse  could  not  do
so  well.     The  shire  he  parcelled  out  in  so  many  divisions,  and  six  or  eight  miles  square
would  be  taken  in  at  once.     In  every  division  the  whole  inhabitants,  men  and  women,
young  and  old,  without  distinction,  were  all  driven  into  one  convenient  place."  .  .  .
"  All  the  children  in  the  division  were  gathered  together  by  themselves,  under  ten  years,
and  above  six  years  of  age,  and  a  party  of  soldiers  were  drawn  out  before  them.     Then
they  were  bid  pray,  for  they  were  going  to  be  shot.     Some  of  them  would  answer,  Sir,
we  cannot  pray."  ..."  At  other  times  they  treated  them  most  inhumanly,  threaten-
ing them  with  death,  and  at  some  little  distance  would  fire  pistols  without  ball  in  their
face.     Some  of  the  poor  children  were  frightened  almost  out  of  their  wits,  and  others
of  them  stood  all  out  with  a  courage  perfectly  above  their  age.     These  accounts  are  so
far  out  of  the  ordinary  way  of  mankind,  that  I  would  not  have  inserted  them,  had  I  not

[*  Here  again  the  conduct  which  on  the  part  of  the  inquisitors  Buckle  credits  to  con-
scientious fanaticism  is  treated  as  possible  only  to  "  abject  creatures."  Deductions
must  clearly  be  made  for  rhetoric  at  both  points. — ED.]


7i8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

next  step  was  to  banish,  by  wholesale,  large  numbers  of  adults,  who  were  shipped
off  to  unhealthy  settlements  ;  many  of  the  men  first  losing  their  ears,  and  the
women  being  branded,  some  on  the  hand,  some  on  the  cheek.79  Those  how-
ever who  remained  behind  were  equal  to  the  emergency,  and  were  ready  to  do
what  remained  to  be  done.  In  1688,  as  in  1642,  the  Scotch  people  and  the
English  people  united  against  their  common  oppressor,  who  saved  himself  by
sudden  and  ignominious  flight.  He  was  a  coward  as  well  as  a  despot,  and  from
him  there  was  no  further  danger.  The  bishops,  indeed,  loved  him  ;  but  they
were  an  insignificant  body,  and  had  enough  to  do  to  look  to  themselves.  His
only  powerful  friends  were  the  Highlanders.  That  barbarous  race  thought
with  regret  of  those  bygone  days  when  the  government  had  not  only  allowed
them,  but  had  ordered  them,  to  plunder  and  oppress  their  southern  neighbours.
For  this  purpose  Charles  II.  had  availed  himself  of  their  services  ;  and  it  could
hardly  be  doubted  that  if  the  Stuart  dynasty  were  restored  they  would  be
again  employed,  and  would  again  enrich  themselves  by  pillaging  the  Low-
landers.80  War  was  their  chief  amusement  ;  it  was  also  their  livelihood  ;  and
it  was  the  only  thing  that  they  understood.81  Besides  this,  the  mere  fact  that
James  no  longer  possessed  authority,  wonderfully  increased  their  loyalty  towards
him.  The  Highlanders  flourished  by  rapine,  and  traded  in  anarchy.82  They
therefore  hated  any  government  which  was  strong  enough  to  punish  crime  ;
and  the  Stuarts  being  now  far  away,  this  nation  of  thieves  loved  them  with
an  ardour  which  nothing  but  their  absence  could  have  caused.  From  William  III.
they  feared  restraint  ;  but  the  exiled  prince  could  do  them  no  hurt,  and  would
look  on  their  excesses  as  the  natural  result  of  their  zeal.*  Not  that  they  cared

before  me  several  informations  agreeing  in  all  these  circumstances,  written  at  this  time
by  people  who  knew  the  truth  of  them."  Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,
vol.  iv.  pp.  255.  256.

79  "  Numbers  were  transported  to  Jamaica,   Barbadoes,  and  the  North  American
settlements  ;  but  the  women  were  not  unfrequently  burnt  in  the  cheek,  and  the  ears
of  the  men  were  lopt  off,  to  prevent,  or  to  detect,  their  return."     Laing's  History  of
Scotland,  vol.   iv.   p.    162.     "  Great  multitudes  banished."     Wodrow's  History  of  the
Church,  vol.  iv.  p.  211.     In  July,  1685,  "  the  men  are  ordered  to  have  their  ears  cropt,
and  the  women  to  be  marked  in  their  hand."  p.  217.     "  To  have  the  following  stigma
and  mark,  that  they  may  be  known  as  banished  persons  if  they  shall  return  to  this  king-
dom, viz.  that  the  men  have  one  of  their  ears  cut  off  by  the  hand  of  the  hangman,  and
that  the  women  be  burnt  by  the  same  hand  on  the  cheek  with  a  burned  iron."  p.  218.
These  are  extracts  from  the  proceedings  of  the  privy-council.

80  "  James  II.  favoured  the  Highland  clans."     Note  in  FountainhalVs  Scottish  Affairs
from  1680  till  1701,  p.  100.      He  could  hardly  do  otherwise.     The  alliance  was  natural,
and  ready-made  for  him.

81  Except  robbing,  which,  however,  in  one  form  or  other,  is  always  a  part  of  war.     In
this  they  were  very  apt.     Burnet  (History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  67)  pithily  describes
them  as  "  good  at  robbing  ;  "  and  Burton  (Lives  of  Lovat  and  Forbes,  p.  47)  says,  "  To
steal  even  vestments  was  considerably  more  creditable  than  to  make  them."     Other-
wise, they  were  completely  absorbed  by  their  passion  for  war.     See  Thomson's  Memoirs
of  the  Jacobites,  vol.  ii.  pp.  175,  176,  London,  1845.

82  "  Revenge  was  accounted  a  duty,  the  destruction  of  a  neighbour  a  meritorious
exploit,  and  rapine  an  honourable  employment."     Browne's  History  of  the  Highlands,
vol.  iv.  p.  395.     "  The  spirit  of  rivalry  between  the  clans  kept  up  a  taste  for  hostility,
and  converted  rapine  into  a  service  of  honour."     Thomson's  Memoirs  of  the  Jacobites,
vol.  ii.  p.  229.

[*  Buckle's  account  of  the  Highlanders  is  somewhat  surprisingly  uncritical,  though
he  followed  the  lead  of  Scotch  writers  such  as  Pinkerton  and  Burton.  He  has  not  realized
the  nature  of  the  Highland  barbarism.  The  tribesmen  did  not  "  think  "  and  feel  in
the  way  he  represents.  They  merely  followed  their  chiefs  against  the  Lowlanders  as
the  English  people  had  followed  the  Edwards  against  Scotland  and  France,  and  Henry  V.
in  his  French  invasion.  It  is  idle  to  denounce  them  for  acting  precisely  as  other  races


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  719

about  the  principle  of  monarchical  succession,  or  speculated  on  the  doctrine
of  divine  right.83  The  only  succession  that  interested  them  was  that  of  their
chiefs.  Their  only  notion  of  right  was  to  do  what  those  chiefs  commanded.
Being  miserably  poor,^  they,  in  raising  a  rebellion,  risked  nothing  except  their
lives,  of  which  in  that  state  of  society  men  are  always  reckless.  If  they  failed,
they  encountered  a  speedy  and,  as  they  deemed  it,  an  honourable  death.*.  If
they  succeeded,  they  gained  fame  and  wealth.  In  either  case  they  were  sure
of  many  enjoyments.  They  were  sure  of  being  able,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  indulge
in  pillage  and  murder,  and  to  practise  without  restraint  those  excesses  which
they  regarded  as  the  choicest  guerdon  of  a  soldier's  career.

So  far,  therefore,  from  the  rebellions  of  1715  and  1745  being  wonderful,85  the
only  wonder  is  that  they  did  not  break  out  sooner,  and  that  they  were  not
better  supported.  In  1745,  when  the  sudden  appearance  of  the  rebels  struck

83  Hence,  looking  as  they  did  merely  at  the   physical   qualities  of   individuals,  the
appearance  of  the   Pretender  in   1715   disgusted  them,  notwithstanding  his  splendid
lineage.     See  some  excellent  remarks  in  Burton's  History  of  Scotland  from  1689  to  1748.
London,  1853,  vol.  ii.  pp.  198,  199.     At  p.  383,  Mr.  Burton  justly  observes  that  "  those
who  really  knew  the  Highlanders  were  aware  that  the  followers  were  no  more  innate
supporters  of  King  James's  claim  to  the  throne  of  Britain,  than  of  Maria  Theresa's
to  the  throne  of  Hungary.     They  went  with  the  policy  of  the  head  of  the  clan,  whatever
that  might  be  ;  and  though  upwards  of  half  a  century's  advocacy  of  the  exiled  house  "
(this  refers  to  the  last  rebellion  in  1745)  "  had  made  Jacobitism  appear  a  political  creed
in  some  clans,  it  was  among  the  followers,  high  and  low,  little  better  than  a  nomen-
clature, which  might  be  changed  with  circumstances."     Since  Robertson,  Mr.  Burton
and  Mr.  Chambers  are,  I  will  venture  to  say,  the  two  writers  who  have  taken  the  most
accurate  and  comprehensive  views  of  the  history  of  Scotland.     Robertson's  History
stops  short  where  the  most  important  period  begins  ;  and  his  materials  were  scanty.
But  what  he  effected  with  those  materials  was  wonderful.      To  my  mind,  his  History
of  Scotland  is  much  the  greatest  of  his  works.

84  A  curious  description  of  their  appearance,  given  by  the  Derby  Mercury  in  1746  (in
Thomson's  Memoirs  of  the  Jacobites,  vol.  iii.  p.  115)  may  be  compared  with  the  more
general  statement  in  Anderson's  Prize  Essay  on  the  Highlands,  Edinburgh,  1827,  p.  128.
"  Cattle  were  the  main  resources  of  the  tribe — the  acquisition  of  these  the  great  object
of  their  hostile  forrays.     The  precarious  crops  gave  them  wherewithal  to  bake  their
oaten  cakes,  or  distil  their  ale  or  whisky.     When  these  failed,  the  crowded  population
suffered  every  extreme  of  misery  and  want.     At  one  time  in  particular,  in  Sutherland,
they  were  compelled  to  subsist  on  broth  made  of  nettles,  thickened  with  a  little  oatmeal.
At  another,  those  who  had  cattle,  to  have  recourse  to  the  expedient  of  bleeding  them
and  mixing  the  blood  with  oatmeal,  which  they  afterwards  cut  into  slices  and  fried."

85  Several  writers  erroneously   term   them   "  unnatural."     See,   for  instance,   Rae's
History   of  the  Rebellion,    London,    1746,   pp.    158,    169  ;    and  Home's  History   of  the
Rebellion,  London,  1802,  4to,  p.  347.     ["  Unnatural  "  here  is  simply  a  royalist  epithet,
carrying  in  part  the  sense  of  "  parricidal."     In  Buckle's  sense  the  word  can  have  no
application  whatever,  as  all  events  are  strictly  "natural."— ED.]

had  acted  at  the  same  or  even  a  later  stage  of  culture.  To  call  them  a  "  nation  of
thieves,"  and  traders  in  anarchy,  is  idle.  No  nation  can  collectively  live  by  thieving  ;
and  the  Highlanders  did  what  they  could  to  breed  cattle  and  grow  corn  in  their  wild
country.  They  were  non -industrious,  just  as  we  have  seen  the  Lowlanders  were  in
previous  centuries  ;  and  they  raided  Lowland  cattle  as  did  the  Lowland  borderers.
After  representing  them  as  collectively  loving  the  Stuarts,  Buckle  goes  on  to  put  in
qualifications  and  to  cite  from  Burton,  with  approval,  a  passage  which  puts  a  different
face  on  the  whole  matter.  He  ought  to  have  rewritten  the  entire  passage,  which  ex-
presses a  misconception.  There  was,  in  fact,  no  such  racial  or  collective  consciousness
among  the  Highland  clans  as  Buckle  had  supposed  ;  and  when  he  says  "they"  raised
a  rebellion — "  they  "  as  apart  from  their  chiefs,  whom  they  had  just  been  represented
as  obeying  blindly — he  combines  delusion  with  self-contradiction.  It  will  be  observed,
finally,  that  Buckle  says  nothing  of  the  Massacre  of  Glencoe.— ED.]


720  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

England  with  terror,  and  when  they  penetrated  even  to  the  heart  of  the  kingdom,
their  numbers,  even  at  their  height,  including  Lowland  and  English  recruits,
never  reached  six  thousand  men.  The  ordinary  amount  was  five  thousand  ;  ^
and  they  cared  so  little  about  the  cause  for  which  they  professed  to  fight,  that
in  1715,  when  they  numbered  much  stronger  than  in  1745,  they  refused  to  enter
England  and  make  head  against  the  government  until  they  were  bribed  by
the  promise  of  additional  pay.87  So  too  in  1745,  after  they  had  won  the  battle
of  Preston-pans,  the  only  result  of  that  great  victory  was  that  the  Highlanders,
instead  of  striking  a  fresh  blow,  deserted  in  large  bodies,  that  they  might  secure
the  booty  they  had  obtained,  and  which  alone  they  valued.  They  heeded  not
whether  Stuart  or  Hanoverian  gained  the  day  ;  and  at  this  critical  moment
they  were  unable,  says  the  historian,  to  resist  their  desire  to  return  to  their
glens,  and  decorate  their  huts  with  the  spoil.88

sa  "  When  the  rebels  began  their  march  to  the  southward,  they  were  not  6,000  men
complete."  j  Home's  History  of  the  Rebellion  in  the  Year  1745,  4to,  p.  137.  At  Stirling,
the  army,  "  after  the  junction  was  made,  amounted  to  somewhat  more  than  9,000  men,
the  greatest  number  that  Charles  ever  had  under  his  command."  p.  164.  But  the  actual
invaders  of  England  were  much  fewer.  "  The  number  of  the  rebels  when  they  began
their  march  into  England  was  a  few  above  5,000  foot,  with  about  500  on  horseback."
Home,  p.  331.  Browne  (History  of  the  Highlands,  vol.  iii.  p.  140)  says  :  "  When  mus-
tered at  Carlisle,  the  prince's  army  amounted  only  to  about  4,500  men  ;  and  Lord  George
Murray  states  that  at  Derby  "  we  were  not  above  five  thousand  fighting  men,  if  so
many."  Jacobite  Memoirs  of  the  Rebellion  of  1745,  edited  by  Robert  Chambers,  Edin-
burgh, 1834,  p.  54.  Another  writer,  relying  mainly  on  traditional  evidence,  says,
"  Charles,  at  the  head  of  4,000  Highlanders,  marched  as  far  as  Derby."  Brown's  History
of  Glasgow,  vol.  ii.  p.  41,  Edinburgh,  1797.  Compare  Johnstone's  Memoirs  of  the  Rebel'
lion,  3rd  edit.,  London,  1822,  pp.  xxxvii.  xxxviii.  30-32,  52.  Johnstone  says,  p.  60,
"  M.  Patullo,  our  muster -master,  reviewed  our  army  at  Carlisle,  when  it  did  not  exceed
four  thousand  five  hundred  men."  Afterwards,  returning  to  Scotland,  "  our  army
was  suddenly  increased  to  eight  thousand  men,  the  double  of  what  it  was  when  we  were
in  England."  p.  in.

87  "  Orders  were  given  to  proceed  in  the  direction  of  Carlisle,  and  recall  the  detach-
ment sent  forward  to  Dumfries.  The  Highlanders,  still  true  to  their  stagnant  principles,
refused  obedience."  ..."  Pecuniary  negotiations  were  now  commenced,  and  they
were  offered  sixpence  a  day  of  regular  pay — reasonable  remuneration  at  that  period
to  ordinary  troops,  but  to  the  wild  children  of  the  mountain  a  glittering  bribe,  which
the  most  steady  obstinacy  would  alone  resist.  It  was  partly  effective."  Burton's
History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  168.  "  And  from  this  day  the  Highlanders  had  sixpence
a  head  per  day  payed  them  to  keep  them  in  good  order  and  under  command."  Patten's
History  of  the  late  Rebellion,  London,  1717,  p.  73.  See  also,  on  the  unwillingness  of  the
Highlanders  to  enter  England,  Rae's  History  of  the  Rebellion,  London,  1746,  2nd  edit,
pp.  270,  271.  Browne  says  (History  of  the  Highlands,  vol.  ii.  pp.  300,  304):  "The
aversion  of  the  Highlanders,  from  different  considerations,  to  a  campaign  in  England,
was  almost  insuperable  ;  "  but  "  by  the  aid  of  great  promises  and  money,  the  greater
part  of  the  Highlanders  were  prevailed  upon  to  follow  the  fortunes  of  their  commander."
•  s8  "  Few  victories  have  been  more  entire.  It  is  said  that  scarcely  two  hundred  of
the  infantry  escaped."  ..."  The  Highlanders  obtained  a  glorious  booty  in  arms  and
clothes,  besides  self-moving  watches,  and  other  products  of  civilization,  which  sur-
prised and  puzzled  them.  Excited  by  such  acquisitions,  a  considerable  number  could
not  resist  the  old  practice  of  their  people  to  return  to  their  glens,  and  decorate  their
huts  with  their  spoil."  Burton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  465.  Compare  Home's
History  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  123.  This  was  an  old  practice  of  theirs,  as  Montrose  found
out,  a  century  earlier,  "  when  many  of  the  Highlanders,  being  loaded  with  spoil,  deserted
privately,  and  soon  after  returned  to  their  old  country."  Wishart's  Memoirs  of  the
Marquis  of  Montrose,  Edinburgh,  1819,  p.  189.  So,  too,  Burnet  (Memoirs  of  the  Dukes
of  Hamilton,  p.  272)  :  "  Besides,  any  companies  could  be  brought  down  from  the  High-
lands might  do  well  enough  for  a  while,  but  no  order  could  be  expected  from  them,  for
as  soon  as  they  were  loaded  with  plunder  and  spoil,  they  would  run  away  home  to  their


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  721

There  are  indeed  few  things  more  absurd  than  that  lying  spirit  of  romance
which  represents  the  rising  of  the  Highlanders  as  the  outburst  of  a  devoted
loyalty.  Nothing  was  further  from  their  minds  than  this.  The  Highlanders
have  crimes  enough  to  account  for  without  being  burdened  by  needless  reproach.
They  were  thieves  and  murderers  ;  *  but  that  was  in  their  way  of  life,  and  they
felt  not  the  stigma.  Though  they  were  ignorant  and  ferocious,  they  were  not
so  foolish  as  to  be  personally  attached  to  that  degraded  family  which,  before
the  accession  of  William  III.,  occupied  the  throne  of  Scotland.  To  love  such
men  as  Charles  II.  and  James  II.  may  perhaps  be  excused  as  one  of  those
peculiarities  of  taste  of  which  one  sometimes  hears.  But  to  love  all  their
descendants  ;  to  feel  an  affection  so  comprehensive  as  to  take  in  the  whole
dynasty,  and,  for  the  sake  of  gratifying  that  eccentric  passion,  not  only  to  undergo
great  hardships,  but  to  inflict  enormous  evil  upon  two  kingdoms,  would  have
been  a  folly  as  well  as  a  wickedness,  and  would  convict  the  Highlanders  of  a
species  of  insanity  alien  to  their  nature.  They  burst  into  insurrection  because
insurrection  suited  their  habits,  and  because  they  hated  all  government  and
all  order.89  But  so  far  from  caring  for  a  monarch,  the  very  institution  of
monarchy  was  repulsive  to  them.  It  was  contrary  to  that  spirit  of  clanship
to  which  they  were  devoted  ;  and  from  their  earliest  childhood  they  were
accustomed  to  respect  none  but  their  chiefs,  to  whom  they  paid  a  willing  obedi-
ence, and  whom  they  considered  far  superior  to  all  the  potentates  of  the  earth.9°


lurking  holes,  and  desert  those  who  had  trusted  them."  See  also  p.  354.  A  more  recent
writer,  drawing  a  veil  over  this  little  infirmity,  remarks,  with  much  delicacy,  that  "  the
Highlanders,  brave  as  they  were,  had  a  custom  of  returning  home  after  a  battle."  Thom-
son's Memoirs  of  the  Jacobites,  London,  1845,  vol.  i.  p.  122.  Not  unfrequently  they
first  robbed  their  fellow -soldiers.  In  1746  Bisset  writes  :  "  The  Highlanders,  who  went
off  after  the  battel,  carried  off  horses  and  baggage  from  their  own  men,  the  Lowlanders."
Diary  of  the  Reverend  John  Bisset,  in  Miscellany  of  the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  i.  p.  377,
Aberdeen,  1841,  4to.  [Here  the  "  not  unfrequently  "  is  entirely  unjustified  ;  and  the
expressions  "  they  "  and  "  the  Highlanders  "  amount  to  charging  on  an  entire  army,
or  race,  the  deeds  of  its  thieves.  On  that  principle  all  armies,  and  all  nations,  are  com-
munities of  thieves. — ED.]

89  "  Whoever  desired,  with  the  sword,  to  disturb  or  overturn  a  fixed  government,
was  sure  of  the  aid  of  the  chiefs,  because  a  settled  government  was  ruinous  to  their  power,
and  almost  inimical  to  their  existence.     The  more  it  cultivated  the  arts  of  peace,  and
throve  on  industrially  created  well-being,  the  more  did  it  drive  into  an  antagonist  position
a  people  who  did  not  change  their  nature,  who  made  no  industrial  progress,  and  who
lived  by  the  swords  which  acquired  for  them  the  fruits  of  other  men's  industry.     With
their  interests,  a  peaceful,  strong  government  was  as  inconsistent  as  a  well -guarded
sheepfold  with  the  interest  of  wolves."     Burton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  pp.  105,  106.
"  The  Highlanders,  in  all  reigns,  have  been  remarkable  for  disturbing  the  established
government  of  Scotland  by  taking  up  arms  on  every  invasion  for  the  invaders."     Mar-
chant's  History  of  the  present  Rebellion,  London,  1746,  p.  18.     See  also  Macky's  Journey
through  Scotland,  London,  1732,  p.  129  ;  and   a  short  but  very  curious  account  of  the
Highlanders,  in  1744,  in  The  Miscellany  of  the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  ii.  pp.  87-89.     [Mar-
chant's  statement,  here  quoted,  is  certainly  false  ;  and  Burton's  is  one  of  many  which
discredit  his  work.     The  whole  question  of  his  unscientific  prejudice  is  discussed  by
the  editor  in  The  Saxon  and  the  Celt,  1897,  sec.  iv. — ED.]

90  An  observer,  who  had  excellent  opportunities  of  studying  their  character  between
the  rebellion  of  1715  and  that  of  1745,  writes,  "The  ordinary  Highlanders  esteem  it
the  most  sublime  degree  of  virtue  to  love  their  chief,  and  pay  him  a  blind  obedience,
although  it  be  in  opposition  to  the  government,  the  laws  of  the  kingdom,  or  even  to
the  law  of  God.     He  is  their  idol ;  and  as  they  profess  to  know  no  king  but  him  (I  was

[*  Murder,  once  more,  was  probably  rarer  in  the  Highlands  than  in  the  Lowlands  or
in  England.  Barbaric  feuds  are  not  acts  of  murder.  Through  the  whole  of  this  con-
cluding section  of  his  work,  Buckle's  ruined  health  is  seen  to  give  an  increasingly  feverish
character  to  his  writing,  and  his  epithets  become  habitually  overstrained. — ED.]

46


722  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

No  one,  indeed,  who  is  really  acquainted  with  their  history  will  think  them
capable  of  having  spilt  their  blood  on  behalf  of  any  sovereign,  be  he  whom  he
might  ;  still  less  can  we  believe  that  they  would  quit  their  native  land,  and
undertake  long  and  hazardous  marches,  with  the  object  of  restoring  that  corrupt
and  tyrannical  dynasty  whose  offences  smelt  to  heaven,  and  whose  cruelties
had  at  length  kindled  the  anger  even  of  humble  and  meek-minded  men.

The  simple  fact  is  that  the  outbreaks  of  1715  and  1745  were  in  our  country
the  last  struggle  of  barbarism  against  civilization.  On  the  one  side,  war  and
confusion.  On  the  other  side,  peace  and  prosperity.  These  were  the  interests
for  which  men  really  fought  ;  and  neither  party  cared  for  Stuarts  or  for  Han-
overians. The  result  of  such  a  contest  in  the  eighteenth  century  could  hardly
be  doubtful.  At  the  time  the  rebellions  caused  great  alarm,  both  from  their
suddenness,  and  from  the  strange  and  ferocious  appearance  of  the  Highland  inva-
ders.91 But  the  knowledge  we  now  possess  enables  us  to  see  that,  from  the

going  farther),  so  will  they  say,  they  ought  to  do  whatever  he  commands,  without  in-
quiry." Letters  from  a  Gentleman  in  the  North  of  Scotland,  edit.  London,  1815,  vol.  ii.
pp.  83,  84.  "  The  Highlanders  in  Scotland  are,  of  all  men  in  the  world,  the  "soonest
wrought  upon  to  follow  their  leaders  or  chiefs  into  the  field,  having  a  wonderful  venera-
tion for  their  Lords  and  Chieftains,  as  they  are  called  there  :  Nor  do  these  people  ever
consider  the  validity  of  the  engaging  cause,  but  blindly  follow  their  chiefs  into  what  mis-
chief they  please,  and  that  with  the  greatest  precipitation  imaginable."  Patten's  His-
tory of  the  Rebellion,  London,  1717,  p.  151.  "  The  power  of  the  chiefs  over  their  clans
was  the  true  source  of  the  two  rebellions.  The  clansmen  cared  no  more  about  the  legiti-
mate race  of  the  Stuarts,  than  they  did  about  the  war  of  the  Spanish  succession."  .  .  .
"The  Jacobite  Highland  chiefs  ranged  their  followers  on  the  Jacobite  side  —  the
Hanoverians  ranged  theirs  on  the  side  of  government.  Lovat's  conduct  was  a  sort  of
experimentum  crucis  ;  he  made  his  clan  Hanoverian  in  one  rebellion,  and  Jacobite  in
another."  Burton's  Lives  of  Lovat  and  Forbes,  p.  150.  Compare  the  change  of  side
of  the  Mackintoshes,  in  Browne's  History  of  the  Highlands,  vol.  ii.  p.  285.  Even  so  late
as  the  American  war,  the  sovereign  was  deemed  subordinate  to  the  chief.  "  One  Captain
Frazer  from  the  northern  district  brought  down  a  hundred  of  his  clan,  all  of  the  name
of  Frazer.  Few  of  them  could  understand  a  word  of  English  ;  and  the  only  distinct
idea  they  had  of  all  the  mustering  of  forces  which  they  saw  around  them,  was  that  they
were  going  to  fight  for  King  Frazer  and  George  ta  Three."  Penny's  Traditions  of  Perth,
pp.  49,  50,  Perth,  1836.  [Buckle  and  his  authorities  here  treat  as  peculiar  to  the  High-
landers a  feudal  habit  which  he  ascribes  below  (p.  727)  to  "  tens  of  thousands  "  of  Low-
landers.  This  is  the  normal  critical  practice  of  the  exponents  of  race -prejudice. — ED.]
si  Which  gave  rise  to  a  report  that  they  w.ere  cannibals.  "  The  late  Mr.  Halkston  of
Rathillet,  who  had  been  in  this  expedition  "  (the  Rebellion  of  1745),  "  told  Mr.  Young
that  the  belief  was  general  among  the  people  of  England,  that  the  Highlanders  ate  children.
Johnstones  Memoirs  of  the  Rebellion,  3rd  edit.  London,  1822,  p.  101.  Such  a  rumour,
notwithstanding  its  absurdity,  was  made  somewhat  plausible  by  the  revolting  conduct
of  the  Highlanders  in  the  first  rebellion  of  1715,  when  they  committed,  in  the  Lowlands,
horrible  outrages  on  corpses  which  they  dug  up.  See  the  contemporary  evidence,  in
Correspondence  of  the  Rev.  Robert  Wodrow,  published  by  the  Wodrow  Society,  vol.  ii.
pp.  86, 87, 93.  "  They  have  even  raised  up  some  of  my  Lord  Rothes's  children  and  mangled
their  dead  bodies  "  .  .  ..  "  till  the  stench  put  them  away."  In  1745  they  signalized
their  entrance  into  England  in  the  following  manner.  "  The  rebels,  during  their  stay  in
Carlisle,  committed  the  most  shocking  detestable  villanies  ;  for,  not  contented  with
robbing  families  of  their  most  valuable  effects,  they  scrupled  not  to  act  their  brutal
insolence  on  the  persons  of  some  young  ladies,  even  in  the  presence  of  their  parents.  A
gentleman,  in  a  letter  to  his  friend  in  London,  writes  thus  :  '  That,  after  being  in  a  manner
stripped  of  everything,  he  had  the  misery  to  see  three  of  his  daughters  treated  in  such  a
manner  that  he  could  not  relate  it.'  "  Marchanfs  History  of  the  present  Rebellion,  London,
1746,  pp.  181,  182.  [Wodrow's  story  is  extremely  improbable,  and  as  his  gross  credulity
is  held  by  Buckle  to  be  obvious  in  other  matters,  it  should  be  held  to  put  his  statement  in
doubt  here.  Marchant's  lack  of  detailed  evidence  for  his  charges  is  significant.  Even
the  anti-Celtic  Burton  admits  (viii.  458)  that  the  Highlanders  behaved  well,  keeping  good


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  723

beginning,  success  was  impossible.  Though  the  government  was  extremely
remiss,  and,  notwithstanding  the  information  it  received,  allowed  itself  on  both
occasions  to  be  taken  by  surprise,  there  was  no  real  danger.92  The  English,  not
being  particularly  enamoured  either  with  the  Highlanders  or  with  the  Stuarts,
refused  to  rise  ;  93  and  it  cannot  be  seriously  supposed  that  a  few  thousand  half-
naked  banditti  had  it  in  their  power  to  prescribe  to  the  people  of  England  what
sovereign  they  should  obey,  and  under  what  sort  of  government  they  should
live.

After  1745  there  was  no  further  interruption.  The  interests  of  civilization,
that  is,  the  interests  of  knowledge,  of  liberty,  and  of  wealth,  gradually  assumed  the
upper  hand,  and  reduced  men  like  the  Highlanders  to  utter  insignificance.
Roads  were  cut  through  their  country  ;  and  for  the  first  time  travellers  from  the
south  began  to  mingle  with  them  in  their  hitherto  inaccessible  wilds.94  In  those

discipline.  They  certainly  never  approached  the  savagery  displayed  by  English  troops
not  merely  in  previous  centuries,  when  England  was  at  a  far  higher  culture -level  than  the
Highlands,  but  after  the  battle  of  Culloden.— ED.]

•>-  Even  when  they  had  penetrated  to  Derby,  the  best  informed  of  their  own  party
despaired  of  success.  See  the  Jacobitical  account  in  The  Lockhart  Papers,  London,  4to,
1817,  vol.  ii.  p.  458  :  "  The  next  thing  to  be  considered  of,  was  what  was  now  to  be  done  ;
they  were  now  at  Derby,  with  an  army  not  half  the  number  of  what  they  were  reported
to  be,  surrounded  in  a  manner  with  regular  troops  on  all  sides,  and  more  than  double
their  number.  To  go  forward  there  was  no  encouragement,  for  their  friends  (if  they  had
any)  had  kept  little  or  no  correspondence  with  them  from  the  time  they  entered  England."
The  Chevalier  De  Johnstone,  who  took  an  active  part  in  the  Rebellion,  frankly  says,
"  If  we  had  continued  to  advance  to  London,  and  had  encountered  all  the  troops  of  England,
with  the  Hessians  and  Swiss  in  its  pay,  there  was  every  appearance  of  our  being  immedi-
ately exterminated,  without  the  chance  of  a  single  man  escaping."  Johnstone' s  Memoirs
of  the  Rebellion  in  1745  and  1746,  p.  79-

03  Lord  George  Murray,  the  commander-in -chief  in  1745,  was  unwilling  to  advance  far
south  of  Carlisle,  "  without  more  encouragement  from  the  country  than  we  had  hitherto
got."  See  his  own  account,  in  The  Jacobite  Memoirs  of  the  Rebellion  of  1745,  edited  by
R.  Chambers,  Edinburgh,  1834,  p.  48.  But  his  prudent  advice  was  overruled.  The
Highlanders  pressed  on  ;  and  that  happened  which  any  one  tolerably  acquainted  with
England  might  have  foreseen.  Johnstone  (Memoirs  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  70)  says,  "  In
case  of  a  defeat  in  England,  no  one  in  our  army  could  by  any  possibility  escape  destruc-
tion, as  the  English  peasants  were  hostile  towards  us  in  the  highest  degree ;  and,  besides,  the
army  of  Marshal  Wade  was  in  our  rear,  to  cut  us  off  from  all  communication  with  Scot-
land." And  at  p.  81,  "  In  every  place  we  passed  through,  we  found  the  English  very  ill
disposed  towards  us,  except  at  Manchester,  where  there  appeared  some  remains  of
attachment  to  the  house  of  Stuart."  The  champion  of  arbitrary  power  would  find  a
different  reception  now,  in  that  magnificent  specimen  of  English  prosperity,  and  of  true,
open-mouthed,  English  fearlessness.  But  a  century  ago  the  men  of  Manchester  were
poor  and  ignorant ;  and  the  statement  of  Johnstone  respecting  them  is  confirmed  by
Home,  who  says,  "  At  Manchester,  several  gentlemen,  and  about  200  or  300  of  the  common
people,  joined  the  rebel  army  ;  these  were  the  only  Englishmen  (a  few  individuals  excepted)
who  joined  Charles  in  his  march  through  the  country  of  England."  Home's  History  of  the
Rebellion  in  /7-/J,  London,  1802,  4to,  p.  145.  In  1715  the  English  equally  held  back,
except  at  Manchester.  See  Patten's  History  of  the  late  Rebellion,  London,  1717,  pp.  89,
1 08-.

94  The  establishment  of  roads  caused  great  displeasure.  Pennant,  who  visited  Scot-
land in  1769,  says,  "  These  publick  works  were  at  first  very  disagreeable  to  the  old  chief-
tains, and  lessened  their  influence  greatly  :  for  by  admitting  strangers  among  them,
their  clans  were  taught  that  the  Lairds  were  not  the  first  of  men."  Pennant's  Tour  in
Scotland,  4th  edit.  Dublin,  1775,  vol.  i.  p.  204.  Towards  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury this  feeling  began  to  die  away.  "  Till  of  late,  the  people  of  Kintail,  as  well  as  other
Highlands,  had  a  strong  aversion  to  roads.  The  more  inaccessible,  the  more  secure,
was  their  maxim."  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  vi.  p.  244,  Edinburgh,
1793-


724  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

parts  the  movement  was  indeed  very  slow  ;  but  in  the  Lowlands  it  was  much
more  rapid.  For  the  traders  and  inhabitants  of  towns  were  now  becoming  pro-
minent, and  their  authority  helped  to  neutralize  the  old  warlike  and  anarchical
habits.  Towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  a  taste  for  commercial
speculation  sprung  up,  and  a  large  amount  of  the  energy  of  Scotland  was  turned
into  this  new  channel.98  Early  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  same  tendency
was  displayed  in  literature  ;  and  works  on  mercantile  and  economical  subjects
became  common.96  A  change  in  manners  was  also  perceptible.  About  this
period  the  Scotch  began  to  lose  something  of  that  rugged  ferocity  which  had
distinguished  them  of  old.  This  improvement  was  evinced  in  several  ways  ;
one  of  the  most  remarkable  being  an  alteration,  which  was  first  observed  in  1710,
when  it  was  noticed  that  men  were  leaving  off  armour,  which  had  hitherto  been
worn  by  every  one  who  could  afford  it,  as  a  useful  precaution  in  a  barbarous,
and  therefore  a  warlike,  society.97

To  trace  the  general  progress  in  its  various  parts,  or  even  to  indicate  the  im-
mediate consequences,  would  require  a  separate  volume.  One  of  the  results  is,
however,  too  conspicuous  to  be  passed  over  in  silence,  though  it  does  not  deserve
all  the  importance  that  has  been  attached  to  it.  This  is,  the  abolition  of  heredi-
tary jurisdictions,  which  after  all  was  but  a  symptom  of  the  great  movement,
and  not  a  cause  of  it  ;  being  itself  due  partly  to  the  growth  of  the  industrial  spirit
and  partly  to  that  diminution  of  the  power  of  the  aristocracy  which  had  been
visible  as  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century.  During  many  ages
certain  persons  of  noble  birth  had  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  trying  offences,  and  even
of  inflicting  capital  punishment,  simply  because  their  ancestors  had  done  so
before  them  ;  the  judicial  power  being  in  fact  part  of  their  patrimony,  and
descending  to  them  like  the  rest  of  their  property  98  An  institution  of  this  sort,

95  "  Soon  after  the  establishment  of  the  revolution  settlement,  the  ardent  feelings  of
the  Scottish  people  were  turned  out  of  their  old  channels  of  religious  controversy  and  war
in  the  direction  of  commercial  enterprise."     Burton's  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.
p.  104.     Compare  Burnefs  History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  iv.  pp.  286,  287,  418  ;  and  the
note  (at  p.  419)  :  "  The  lords  and  commons  of  Scotland  were  then  desirous  of  getting
into  trade."     This  is  under  the  year  1699.     In  1698  Fletcher  of  Saltoun  writes  :  "  By  no
contrivance  of  any  man,  but  by  an  unforeseen  and  unexpected  change  of  the  genius  of
this  nation,  all  their  thoughts  and  inclinations,  as  if  united  and  directed  by  a  higher
power,  seem  to  be  turned  upon  trade,  and  to  conspire  together  for  its  advancement."
First  Discourse  on  the  Affairs  of  Scotland,  in  Fletcher  of  SaUoun's  Political  Works,  Glasgow,
I749»  P-  57-      At  this  the  clergy  were  uneasy.      In  1709  the  Reverend  Robert  Wodrow
expresses  an  opinion,  in  one  of  his  letters,  that  "  the  sin  of  our  too  great  fondness  for
trade,  to  the  neglecting  of  our  more  valuable  interests,  I  humbly  think  will  be  written
upon  our  judgment."     Wodrow's  Correspondence,  Edinburgh,  1842,  8vo,  vol.  i.  p.  67.
In  the  same  year,  some  ships  being  taken  by  the  French,  part  of  the  loss  fell  upon  Glasgow.
Thereupon  Wodrow  writes  :  "It's  said  that  in  all  there  is  about  eighty  thousand  pound
sterling  lost  there,  whereof  Glasgow  has  lost  ten  thousand  pound.     I  wish  trading  persons
may  see  the  language  of  such  a  Providence.     I  am  sure  the  Lord  is  remarkably  frouning
upon  our  trade,  in  more  respects  than  one,  since  it  was  put  in  the  room  of  religion  in  the
late  alteration  of  our  constitution."     Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  i.  p.  218,  4to,  published  by
the  Maitland  Club.

96  Laing  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  296),  under  the  year  1703,  says  :  "  Ever  since
the  projected  settlement  at  Darien,  the  genius  of  the  nation  had  acquired  a  new  direction  ;
and  as  the  press  is  the  true  criterion  of  the  spirit  of  the  times,  the  numerous  productions
on  political  and  commercial  subjects  with  which  it  daily  teemed,  had  supplanted  the
religious  disputes  of  the  former  age."     Unfortunately  for  Scotland,  they  were  by  no
means  supplanted.     Still,  the  movement  was  great,  and  not  to  be  mistaken.

97  "  It  was  only  in  1710  that  they  began  to  throw  off  their  armour,  and  allow  the  soldier
to  merge  into  the  quiet  and  industrious  craftsman."     Penny's  Traditions  of  Perth,  p.  335,
Perth,  1836.     This  particularly  applies  to  the  citizens  of  Perth.

98  On  these  "  hereditary  or  proprietary  jurisdictions,"  which  conferred  the  right,  or,
I  would  rather  say,  the  power,  of  putting  people  to  death,  see  Burton's  History  of  Scotland,


SCOTLAND    IN  XVII.    AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  725

which  made  a  man  a  judge,  not  because  he  was  apt  for  the  office,  but  because  he
was  born  under  particular  circumstances,  was  a  folly  which  the  revolutionary
temper  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  not  likely  to  spare.  The  innovating  spirit
for  which  that  age  was  remarkable  could  hardly  fail  to  attack  so  preposterous
a  custom  ;  and  its  extinction  was  facilitated  both  by  the  decline  of  the  nobles
who  possessed  the  privilege,  and  by  the  rise  of  their  natural  opponents,  the  trading
and  commercial  classes.  The  decay  of  the  Scotch  nobility  in  the  eighteenth
century  may  be  traced  to  two  special  causes,  in  addition  to  those  general  causes
which  were  weakening  the  aristocracy  nearly  all  over  Europe.  With  the  general
causes,  which  were  common  to  England  and  to  most  parts  of  the  Continent,  we
are  not  now  concerned.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  they  were  entirely  dependent
on  that  advance  of  knowledge  which,  by  increasing  the  authority  of  the  intellec-
tual class  undermines,  and  must  eventually  overthrow,  mere  hereditary  and
accidental  distinctions.  But  those  causes  which  were  confined  to  Scotland  had
a  more  political  characrer,  and  though  they  were  purely  local,  they  harmonized
with  the  whole  train  of  events,  and  ought  to  be  noticed,  as  links  of  a  vast  chain,
which  connects  the  present  state  of  that  singular  country  with  its  past  history.

The  first  cause  was  the  Union  of  Scotland  with  England,  in  1707,  which  struck
a  heavy  blow  at  the  Scotch  aristocracy.  By  it  the  legislature  of  the  smaller
country  was  absorbed  in  that  of  the  larger,  and  the  hereditary  legislators  suddenly
sunk  into  insignificance.  In  the  Scottish  parliament  there  were  a  hundred  and
forty-five  peers,  all  of  whom,  except  sixteen,  were  by  the  Act  of  Union  deprived
of  the  power  of  making  laws."  These  sixteen  were  sent  off  to  London,  and  took
their  seats  in  the  House  of  Lords,  of  which  they  formed  a  small  and  miserable
fraction.  On  every  subject,  however  important  to  their  own  country,  they  were
easily  outvoted  ;  their  manners,  their  gesticulations,  and  particularly  their  comical
mode  of  pronouncing  English,  were  openly  ridiculed  ;  10°  and  the  chiefs  of  this

vol.  i.  p.  425,  vol.  ii.  p.  402.  The  technical  term  for  so  monstrous  a  privilege  was  the
right  "  of  pit  and  gallows."  Pitcairn's  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  94  :  and
Mackenzie's  Laws  and  Customs  of  Scotland  in  Matters  Criminal,  pp.  70,  100,  187,  210.
This  meant  that  men  were  to  be  hung,  and  women  to  be  drowned.  See  also  Arnot's  His-
tory of  Edinburgh,  p.  224;  FountainhalV s  Notes  on  Scottish  Affairs,  p.  139;  Hume's
History  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  vol.  i.  p.  346  ;  Lettice's  Scotland,  p.  271  ;  Sinclair's  Scot-
land, vol.  i.  p.  417,  vol.  iv.  p.  478,  vol.  vi.  pp.  195,  258,  vol.  viii.  pp.  129,  348,  vol.  xiii.
P-  563,  vol.  xiv.  p.  34,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  442,  600,  vol.  xviii.  p.  473.

99  Laing  (History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  345)  says  that  in  1706  "  the  commons  in  the
Scottish  parliament  were  160  ;  the  peers  145."     Of  these  peers,  the  Treaty  of  Union
declared  that  "  sixteen  shall  be  the  number  to  sit  and  vote  in  the  House  of  Lords."
De  Foe's  History  of  the  Union  between  England  and  Scotland,  London,  1786,  4to,  pp.  205,
538.     The  English  House  of  Lords  consisted  of  179  members.     See  The  Lockhart  Papers,
London,  1817,  4to,  vol.  i.  pp.  343,  547.     It  was  impossible  to  mistake  the  result  of  this
sweeping  measure,  by  which,  as  was  said  at  the  time,  "  Scotland  was  to  retrench  her
nobility."     De  Foe's  History  of  the  Union,  p.  495.     Compare  p.  471  :  "  The  nobility  being
thereby,  as  it  were,  degraded  of  their  characters."      In  1710  a  Scotchman  writes  in  his
journal :  "It  was  one  of  the  melancholy est  sights  to  any  that  have  any  sense  of  our  antient
Nobility,  to  see  them  going  throu  for  votes,  and  making  partys,  and  giving  their  votes  to
others  who  once  had  their  oun  vote  ;  and  I  suspect  many  of  them  reu  the  bargain  they
made,  in  giving  their  oun  pouer  away."     Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  i.  p.  308.

100  The  Scotch,  consequently,  became  so  eager  to  do  away  with  this  source  of  mirth,
that  even  as  late  as  the  year  1761,  when  the  notorious  lecturer,  Sheridan,  visited  Edin-
burgh, "  such  was  the  rage  for  speaking  with  an  English  accent,  that  more  than  three
hundred  gentlemen,  among  whom  were  the  most  eminent  in  the  country  for  rank  and
learning,  attended  him."     Ritchie's  Life  of  Hume,  London,  1807,  p.  94.  *  It  was  however
during  about  twenty  years  immediately  after  the  Union   that  the  Scotch  members  of
Parliament,  both  Lords  and  Commons,  were  most  jeered  at  in  London,  and  were  treated
with  marked  disrespect,  socially  and  politically.     Not  only  were  they  mocked  and  lam-
pooned, but  they  were  also  made  tools  of.     In  September,  1711,  Wodrow  writes  (Analecta,
vol.  i.  p.  348,  4to,  1842)  :  "  In  the  beginning  of  this  (month),  I  hear  a  generall  dissatis-'


726  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

old  and  powerful  aristocracy  found  themselves,  to  their  utter  amazement,  looked
on  as  men  of  no  account,  and  they  were  often  obliged  to  fawn  and  cringe  at  the
levee  of  the  minister,  in  order  to  procure  a  place  for  some  needy  dependent.  Their
friends  and  relations  applied  to  them  for  offices,  and  generally  applied  in  vain.
Indeed  the  Scotch  nobles,  being  very  poor,  wanted  for  themselves  more  than  the
English  government  was  inclined  to  give,  and  in  the  eagerness  of  their  clamour
they  lost  both  dignity  and  reputation.101  They  were  exposed  to  mortifying
rebuffs,  and  their  true  position  being  soon  known,  weakened  their  influence  at
home,  among  a  people  already  prepared  to  throw  off  their  authority.  To  this,
however,  they  were  comparatively  indifferent,  as  they  looked  for  future  fortune
not  to  Scotland  but  to  England.  London  became  the  centre  of  their  intrigues
and  their  hopes.102  Those  who  had  no  seat  in  the  House  of  Lords  longed  to  have

faction  our  Nobility  that  wer  at  last  Parliament  have  at  their  treatment  at  London.
They  complean  they  are  only  made  use  of  as  tools  among  the  English,  and  cast  by  when
their  party  designes  are  over."  The  next  year  (1712),  the  Scotch  members  of  the  House
of  Commons  met  together,  and  expressed  their  "  high  resentment  of  the  uncivil,  haughty
treatment  they  mett  with  from  the  English."  The  Lockhart  Papers,  London,  1817,  4to,
vol.  i.  p.  417.  See,  further,  Burton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  p.  27.  "  Without  de-
scending to  rudeness,  the  polished  contemporaries  of  Wharton  and  St.  J  ohn  could  madden
the  sensitive  and  haughty  Scots  by  light  shafts  of  raillery  about  their  pronunciation  or
knowledge  of  parliamentary  etiquette."  Some  curious  observations  upon  the  way
in  which  the  Scotch  pronounced  English,  late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  will  be  found
in  Morels  Short  Account  of  Scotland,  London,  1702,  pp.  13,  14.  The  author  of  this  book
was  chaplain  to  a  Scotch  regiment.

101  Among  many  illustrations  with  which  contemporary  memoirs  abound,  the  follow-
ing is  by  no  means  the  worst.  Burnet,  as  a  Scotchman,  thinks  proper  to  say  that  those
of  his  countrymen  who  were  sent  to  Parliament  "  were  persons  of  such  distinction,  that
they  very  well  deserved  "  the  respect  and  esteem  with  which  they  were  treated.  To
which,  Lord  Dartmouth  adds  :  "  and  were  very  importunate  to  have  their  deserts
rewarded.  A  Scotch  earl  pressed  Lord  Godolphin  extremely  for  a  place.  He  said  there
was  none  vacant.  The  other  said,  his  lordship  could  soon  make  one  so,  if  he  pleased.
Lord  Godolphin  asked  him,  if  he  expected  to  have  any  body  killed  to  make  room  ?  He
said,  No  ;  but  Lord  Dartmouth  commonly  voted  against  the  court,  and  every  body
wondered  that  he  had  not  been  turned  out  before  now-  Lord  Godolphin  told  him,  he
hoped  his  lordship  did  not  expect  that  he  should  be  the  person  to  propose  it ;  and  advised
him  never  to  mention  it  any  more,  for  fear  the  queen  should  come  to  hear  of  it ;  for  if
she  did,  his  lordship  would  run  great  risk  never  to  have  a  place  as  long  as  she  lived.  But
he  could  not  forbear  telling  every  where,  how  ill  the  lord  treasurer  had  used  him."  Bur  -
nefs  History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  v.  p.  349,  Oxford,  1823.  Compare  the  account,  in
1710,  in  Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  i.  p.  293.  "  Argyle  is  both  picked  (i.e.  piqued)  at
Marlburrou,  and  his  brother  Yla,  for  refuising  him  a  regiment ;  and  Godolphin  should  have
said  to  the  Queen  that  my  Lord  Yla  was  not  to  be  trusted  with  a  regiment !  The  Earl
of  Marr  was  one  of  the  greatest  cronnies  Godolphine  had,  till  the  matter  of  his  pension,
after  the  Secretary  office  was  taken  from  him,  came  about.  Godolphine  caused  draw  it
during  pleasure  ;  Marr  expected  it  during  life,  which  the  Treasurer  would  not  yield  to,
and  therefore  they  brake."  The  history  of  the  time  is  full  of  these  wretched  squabbles,
which  show  what  the  Scotch  nobles  were  made  of.  Indeed  their  rapacity  was  so  shame-
less that  in  1711  severall  of  them  refused  to  perform  their  legislative  duties  in  London
unless  they  received  some  offices  which  they  expected.  "  About  the  midle  of  this  moneth,
I  hear  ther  was  a  meeting  of  several  of  our  Scots  Peers,  at  the  Viscount  of  Kilsyth's,
where  they  concerted  not  to  goe  up  to  this  parliament  till  peremptorly  writ  for  ;  and
(also)  some  assurance  be  given  of  the  places  they  were  made  to  hope  for  last  session  and
have  missed."  \Vodrow*  s  Analecta,  vol.  i.  p.  365.  In  1712  the  same  Scotchman  writes
(Analecta,  vol.  ii.  p.  8) :  "  Our  Scots  Peers'  secession  from  the  House  of  Peers  makes  much
noise  ;  but  they  doe  not  hold  by  it.  They  somtimes  come  and  somtimes  goe,  and  they
render  themselves  base  in  the  eyes  of  the  English."  See  also  a  letter  "  concerning  the  Scots
Peerage,"  in  Somers  Tracts,  vol.  xii.  p.  607,  edit.  Scott,  London,  1814,  4to.
L  102  A  Scotch  writer,  twenty  years  after  the  Union,  says  :  "  Most  of  our  gentlemen  and


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  72?

One,  arid  it  was  notorious  that  the  darling  obj.ect  of  nearly  every  Scotch  noble
was  to  be  made  an  English  peer.103  The  scene  of  their  ambition  being  shifted,
they  were  gradually  weaned  from  their  old  associations.  Directly  this  was
apparent,  the  foundation  of  their  power  was  gone.  From  that  moment  their
real  nationality  vanished.  It  became  evident  that  their  patriotism  was  but  a
selfish  passion.  They  ceased  to  love  a  country  which  could  give  them  nothing,
and  as  a  natural  consequence  their  country  ceased  to  love  them.

Thus  it  was  that  this  great  tie  was  severed.  In  this,  as  in  all  similar  move-
ments, there  were  of  course  exceptions.  Some  of  the  nobles  were  disinterested,
and  some  of  their  dependents  were  faithful.  But  looking  at  the  Lowlands  as  a
whole,  there  carl  be  Qo  doubt  that  before  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century
that  bond  of  affection  was  gone  which  in  former  times  made  tens  of  thousands
of  Scotchmen  ready  to  follow  their  superiors  in  any  cause,  and  to  sacrifice  their
lives  at  a  nod.*  That  spirit,  which  was  once  deemed  ardent  and  generous,
but  which  a  deeper  analysis  shows  to  be  mean  and  servile,  was  now  almost  extinct,
except  among  the  barbarous  Highlanders,  whose  ignorance  of  affairs  long  prej
vented  them  from  being  influenced  by  the  stream  of  events.  That  the  proximate
cause  of  this  change  was  the  Union,  will  probably  be  denied  by  no  one  who  has
minutely  studied  the  history  of  the  period.  And  that  the  change  was  beneficial,
can  be  questioned  only  by  those  sentimental  dreamers  with  whom  life  is  a  matter
rather  of  feeling  than  of  judgment,  and  who,  despising  real  and  tangible  interests,
reproach  their  own  age  with  its  material  prosperity,  and  with  its  love  of'luxury,
as  if  they  were  the  result  of  low  and  sordid  desires  unknown  to  the  loftier  temper
of  bygone  days.  To  visionaries  of  this  sort,  it  may  well  appear  that  the  bar-
barous and  ignorant  noble,  surrounded  by  a  host  of  devoted  retainers,  and
living  with  rude  simplicity  in  his  own  dull  and  wretched  castle,  forms  a  beautiful
picture  of  those  unmercenary  and  uncalculating  times  when  men,  instead  of
seeking  for  knowledge,  or  for  wealth,  or  for  comfort,  were  content  with  the  frugal
innocence  of  their  fathers,  and  when,  protection  being  accorded  by  one  class,
and  gratitude  felt  by  the  other,  the  subordination  of  society  was  maintained,  and  its
different  parts  were  knit  together  by  sympathy,  and  by  the  force  of  common
emotions,  instead  of,  as  now,  by  the  coarse  maxims  of  a  vulgar  and  selfish  utility.

people  of  quality,  who  have  the  best  estates  in  our  country,  live  for  the  most  part  at
London."  Reasons  for  Improving  the  Fisheries  and  Linen  Manufacture  of  Scotland,  Lon-
don, 1727,  p.  22.  I  do  not  know  who  wrote  this  curious  little  treatise  ;  but  the  author  was
evidently  a  native  of  Scotland.  See  p.  25.  I  have,  however,  still  earlier  evidence  to
adduce.  A  letter  from  Wodrow,  dated  gth  of  August,  1725,  complains  of  "  the  general
sending  our  youth  of  quality  to  England  ;  "  and  a  letter  to  him,  in  1716,  describes  the
Anglicizing  process  going  on  among  the  Scotch  aristocracy,  only  nine  years  after  the
Union.  "  Most  of  our  Lords  and  others  here  do  so  much  depend  on  the  English  for  their
posts,  and  seeking  somewhat  or  other,  that  their  mouths  are  almost  quite  stopped  ;  and
really  most  of  them  go  into  the  English  way  in  all  things"  Wodrow 's  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.
p.  196,  vol.  hi.  p.  224.  The  Earl  of  Mar  lost  popularity  in  Scotland  on  account  of  the
court  he  paid  to  Lord  Godolphin  ;  for  he  "  appears  to  have  passed  much  more  time  in
intrigues  in  London  than  among  the  gardens  of  Alloa."  Thomson's  Memoirs  of  the
Jacobites,  vol.  i.  p.  36.  Even  Earl  Hay,  in  his  anxiety  to  advance  himself  at  the  English
court,  "  used  to  regret  his  being  a  Scots  peer,  and  to  wish  earnestly  he  was  a  commoner."
Letters  of  Lord  Grange,  in  The  Miscellany  of  the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  iii.  p.  39»  Aberdeen,
4to,  1846.

1Q3  Indeed,  their  expectation  ran  so  high,  as  to  induce  a  hope,  not  only  that  those
Commissioners  of  the  Union  who  were  Scotch  peers  should  be  made  English  ones,  but
that  "  the  whole  nobility  of  Scotland  might  in  time  be  admitted."  Laing's  History  of  Scot-
land,  vol.  iv.  p.  346.  Compare  The  Lockhart  Papers,  vol.  i.  pp.  298,  343  :  "  The  Scots
Peerage,  many  of  whom  had  been  bubled  with  the  hopes  of  being  themselves  created
British  Peers."  Also  The  Gordon  Letters,  in  The  Miscellany  of  the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  iii.
pp.  227,  228.

[*  Compare  note  90,  above,  where  precisely  this  attitude  is  specified  as  peculiar  to
Highlanders. — ED.]


728  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Those,  however,  whose  knowledge  gives  them  some  acquaintance  with  the  real
course  of  human  affairs,  will  see  that  in  Scotland,  as  in  all  civilized  countries,
the  decline  of  aristocratic  power  forms  an  essential  part  of  the  general  progress.
It  must  therefore  be  esteemed  a  fortunate  circumstance  that  among  the
Scotch,  where  that  power  had  long  been  enormous,  it  was  weakened  in  the
eighteenth  century,  not  only  by  general  causes,  which  were  operating  elsewhere,
but  also  by  two  smaller  and  more  special  causes.  The  first  of  these  minor  causes
was,  as  we  have  just  seen,  the  Union  with  England.  The  other  cause  was,  com-
paratively speaking,  insignificant,  but  still  it  produced  decided  effect,  particu-
larly in  the  northern  districts.  It  consisted  in  the  fact  that  some  of  the  oldest
Highland  nobles  were  concerned  in  the  rebellion  of  1745,  and  that,  when  that
rebellion  was  put  down,  those  who  escaped  from  the  sword  were  glad  to  save
their  lives  by  flying  abroad,  leaving  their  dependents  to  shift  for  themselves.1**1
They  became  attached  to  the  court  of  the  Pretender,  or  at  all  events  intrigued
for  him.  That  indeed  was  their  only  chance,  their  estates  at  home  being  for-
feited. For  nearly  forty  years  several  great  families  were  in  exile,  and  although
about  1784  they  began  to  return,1**5  other  associations  had  been  formed  during
their  absence,  and  new  ideas  had  arisen,  both  in  their  own  minds  and  in  the
minds  of  their  retainers.  A  fresh  generation  had  grown  up,  and  fresh  influences
had  been  brought  to  bear.  Strangers,  with  whom  the  people  had  no  sympathy,
had  intruded  upon  the  estates  of  the  nobles,  and  though  they  might  receive  obedi-
ence, it  was  an  obedience  unaccompanied  by  deference.  The  real  reverence  was
gone  ;  the  homage  of  the  heart  was  no  more.  And  as  this  state  of  things  lasted
for  about  forty  years,  it  interrupted  the  old  train  of  thought,  and  the  former
habits  were  so  completely  broken  that  even  when  the  chiefs  were  restored  to
their  forfeited  honours,  they  found  that  there  was  another  part  of  their  inheri-
tance which  they  were  unable  to  recover,  and  that  they  had  lost  for  ever  that
unreserved  submission  which  in  times  of  yore  had  been  willingly  paid  to  their
fathers.1***


104  The  Chevalier  de  Johnstone,  in  his  plaintive  remarks  on  the  battle  of  Culloden,
says  :  "  The  ruin  of  many  of  the  most  illustrious  families  in  Scotland  immediately
followed  our  defeat."     Johnstone's   Memoirs  of  the  Rebellion  in  1745,  p.  211.     He  of
course  could  not  perceive  that,  sad  as  such  ruin  was  to  the  individual  sufferers,  it  was
an  immense  benefit  to  the  nation.      Mr.  Skene,  referring  to  the  year  1748,  says  of  the
Highlanders  :  "  Their  long-cherished  ideas  of  clanship  gradually  gave  way  under  the
absence  and  ruin  of  so  many  of  their  chiefs."     Skene's  Highlanders,  vol.  i.  p.  147.

105  "  About  1784  the  exiled  families  began  to  return."      Penny's  Traditions  of  Perth,
p.  41.  See  also  Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  iv.  p.  53.  In  1784  "  a  bill  passed
the  Commons  without  opposition,"  to  restore  the  "  Forfeited  Estates  "  in  the  north  of
Scotland.     See  Parliamentary  History,  vol.  xxiv.  pp.   1316-1322.     On  that  occasion,
Fox  said  (p.  1321),  the  proprietors  "had  been  sufficiently  punished  by  forty  years'
deprivation  of  their  fortunes  for  the  faults  of  their  ancestors."

*  Dean  Ramsay,  in  his  Reminiscences  (5th  edit.  Edinburgh,  1859,  p.  57),  notices  that,
owing  to  "  transfers  of  property  and  extinction  of  old  families  in  the  Highlands,  as  well
as  from  more  general  causes,"  the  old  clannish  affection  "  is  passing  away."  But  this
intelligent  observer  has  not  indicated  the  connexion  between  so  important  a  fact  and  the
Rebellion  of  1745.  In  1792,  Heron  writes  :  "  The  prejudices  of  clanship  have  almost
died  away."  ...  "  The  dependents  of  the  family  of  Kenmure  are  still  attached  to  its
representative  with  much  of  that  affection  and  respect  with  which  the  tribes  of  the  High-
lands have  till  lately  been  accustomed  to  adhere  to  their  lord."  Heron's  Journey  through
the  Western  Counties  of  Scotland,  2nd  edit.  Perth,  1799,  vol.  i.  p.  248,  vol.  ii.  p.  154-  See
also  the  remarks  made,  in  the  same  year,  in  Lettice's  Letters  on  a  Tour  through  various
Parts  of  Scotland,  London,  1794,  p.  340.  To  trace  the  movement  back  still  further,
Pennant  writes,  in  1769  :  "  But  in  many  parts  of  the  Highlands,  their  character  begins  to
be  more  faintly  marked  ;  they  mix  more  with  the  world  ;  and  become  daily  less  attached
to  their  chiefs."  ...  "  During  the  feudal  reign,  their  love  for  their  chef  tain  induced  them
to  bear  many  things,  at  present  intolerable."  These  two  important  passages  are  in  the
4th  edition  of  Pennant's  Tour  in  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  194,  vol.  ii.  p.  307,  Dublin,  1775-  They


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  729

Owing  to  these  circumstances,  the  course  of  affairs  in  Scotland  during  the
eighteenth  century,  and  especially  during  the  first  half  of  it,  was  marked  by  a
more  rapid  decline  of  the  influence  of  the  higher  ranks  than  was  seen  in  any  other
country.  It  was  therefore  an  easy  task  for  the  English  government  to  procure
a  law  which,  by  abolishing  hereditary  jurisdictions,  deprived  the  Scotch  aristoc-
racy, in  1748,  of  the  last  great  ensign  of  their  power.1*)?  The  law,  being  suited
to  the  spirit  of  the  times,  worked  well  ;  and  in  the  Highlands  in  particular
it  was  one  immediate  cause  of  the  establishment  of  something  like  the  order
of  a  settled  state.108  But  in  this  instance  as  in  every  other,  the  real  and  over-
ruling cause  is  to  be  found  in  the  condition  of  the  surrounding  society.  A  few
generations  earlier,  hardly  any  one  would  have  thought  of  abolishing  these  mis-
chievous jurisdictions,  which  were  then  deemed  beneficial,  and  were  respected
as  belonging  to  the  great  families  by  natural  and  inalienable  right.  Such  an  opinion
was  the  inevitable  result  of  the  state  of  things  then  existing.  This  being  the  case,
it  is  certain  that  if  the  legislature  had  at  that  time  been  so  rash  as  to  lay  its
hand  on  what  the  nation  respected,  popular  sympathy  would  have  been  aroused,
and  the  nobles  would  have  been  strengthened  by  what  was  intended  to  weaken
them.109  In  1748,  however,  matters  were  very  different.  Public  opinion  had
changed  ;  and  this  change  of  opinion  was  not  only  the  cause  of  the  new  law,
but  was  the  reason  of  the  new  law  being  effective.  And  so  it  always  is.  They,
indeed,  whose  knowledge  is  almost  confined  to  what  they  see  passing  around
them,  and  who  on  account  of  their  ignorance  are  termed  practical  men,  may  talk
as  they  will  about  the  reforms  which  government  has  introduced,  and  the  improve-
ment to  be  expected  from  legislation.  But  whoever  will  take  a  wider  and  more
commanding  view  of  affairs,  will  soon  discover  that  such  hopes  are  chimerical.
They  will  learn  that  lawgivers  are  nearly  always  the  obstructors  of  society,
instead  of  its  helpers;  and  that  in  the  extremely  few  cases  in  which  their  measures
have  turned  out  well,  their  success  has  been  owing  to  the  fact  that,  contrary
to  their  usual  custom,  they  have  implicitly  obeyed  the  spirit  of  their  time,  and
have  been,  as  they  always  should  be,  the  mere  servants  of  the  people,  to  whose
wishes  they  are  bound  to  give  a  public  and  legal  sanction.*

Another  striking  peculiarity  of  Scotland  during  the  remarkable  period  we  are
now  considering  was  the  sudden  rise  of  trading  and  manufacturing  interests.
This  preceded,  by  a  whole  generation,  the  celebrated  statute  of  1748,  and  was
one  of  the  causes  of  it,  in  so  far  as  it  weakened  the  great  families,  against  whom

prove  that,  twenty-four  years  after  the  Rebellion  of  1745,  the  decay  of  affection  was  so
manifest  as  to  strike  a  candid  and  careful  but  by  no  means  philosophic  observer.  For
Pennant  to  have  discerned  these  changes,  they  must  already  have  risen  to  the  surface.
Other  and  corroborative  evidence  will  be  found  in  Sinclair's  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.
p.  545,  Edinburgh,  1792  ;  and  vol.  iii.  pp.  377,  437,  vol.  xiii.  p.  310,  vol.  xv.  p.  592,  vol.  xx.
P-  33-

107  Burton's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  535-537.     Struthers'  History  of  Scotland,
Glasgow,  1828,  vol.  ii.  pp.  519-525.

108  Macpherson  (Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  iii.  p.  259)  says,  "This  excellent  statute
may  not  unfitly  be  termed  a  new  magna  charta  to  the  free  people  of  Scotland."

109  I  cannot,  therefore,  agree  with  Macpherson,  who  asserts  in  his  valuable  work  that
the  abolition  of  these  jurisdictions  "  should  undoubtedly  have  been  made  an  essential
preliminary  of  the  consolidating  union  of  the  two  kingdoms  of  England  and  Scotland,
concluded  forty  years  before."     Macpherson' s  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  iii.  p.  257.     Com-
pare De  Foe's  History  of  the  Union  between  England  and  Scotland,  pp.  458,  459,  London,
1786,  4to.

[*  Either  it  is  here  implied  that  lawgivers  are  not  obeying  the  spirit  of  their  time  when
they  make  bad  laws,  or  the  whole  theorem  falls  to  the  ground.  But  if  that  proposition
be  maintained,  another  of  Buckle's  theses  is  destroyed,  for  it  will  then  follow  that  legis-
lators are  nearly  always  able  to  legislate  against  the  spirit  of  the  age.  In  that  case  the
spirit  of  the  age  has  practically  no  effect  on  legislation.  The  passage  is  a  reductio  ad
absurdum. — ED.]


730  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

that  statute  was  directed.  The  movement  may  be  traced  back,  as  I  have  already
noticed,  to  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  it  was  in  active  operation
before  the  first  twenty  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  had  passed  away.  A
mercantile  and  money -making  spirit  was  diffused  to  an  extent  formerly  unknown,
and  men  becoming  valued  for  their  wealth  as  well  as  for  their  birth,  a  new  standard
of  excellence  was  introduced,  and  new  actors  appeared  on  the  scene.  Heretofore,
persons  were  respected  solely  for  their  parentage  ;*  now  they  were  also  respected
for  their  riches.  The  old  aristocracy,  made  uneasy  by  the  change,  did  every-
thing they  could  to  thwart  and  discourage  these  young  and  dangerous  rivals.110
Nor  can  we  wonder  at  their  feeling  somewhat  sore.  The  tendency  which  was
exhibited  was  indeed  fatal  to  their  pretensions.  Instead  of  asking  who  was
a  man's  father,  the  question  became,  how  much  he  had  got.  And  certainly,  if
either  question  is  to  be  put,  the  latter  is  the  more  rational.  Wealth  is  a  real  and
substantial  thing,  which  ministers  to  our  pleasures,  increases  our  comfort,  multi-
plies our  resources,  and  not  unfrequently  alleviates  our  pains.  But  birth  is  a
dream  and  a  shadow,  which,  so  far  from  benefiting  either  body  or  mind,  only
puffs  up  its  possessor  with  an  imaginary  excellence,  and  teaches  him  to  despise
those  whom  nature  has  made  his  superiors,  and  who,  whether  engaged  in  adding
to  our  knowledge  or  to  our  wealth,  are  in  either  case  ameliorating  the  condition
of  society,  and  rendering  to  it  true  and  valuable  service.

This  antagonism  between  the  aristocratic  and  trading  spirit  lies  in  the  nature
of  things,  and  is  essential,  however  it  may  be  disguised  at  particular  periods.
Therefore  it  is  that  the  history  of  trade  has  a  philosophic  importance  in  reference
to  the  progress  of  society,  quite  independent  of  practical  considerations.  On
this  account  I  have  called  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  what  otherwise  would  be
foreign  to  the  objects  of  the  present  Introduction  ;  and  I  will  now  trace,  as
briefly  as  possible,  the  beginning  of  that  great  industrial  movement,  to  the  exten-
sion of  which  the  overthrow  of  the  Scotch  aristocracy  is  to  be  partly  ascribed.

The  Union  with  England,  which  was  completed  in  1707,  produced  immediate
and  striking  effects  on  trade.  Its  first  effect  was  to  throw  open  to  the  Scotch
a  new  and  extensive  commerce  with  the  English  colonies  in  America.  Before  the
Union,  no  goods  of  any  kind  could  be  landed  in  Scotland  from  the  American  plan-
tations, unless  they  had  first  been  landed  in  England,  and  paid  duty  there  ;
nor  even,  in  that  case,  might  they  be  conveyed  by  any  Scotch  vessel.111  This  was
one  of  many  foolish  regulations  by  which  our  legislators  interfered  with  the
natural  course  of  affairs,  and  injured  the  interests  of  their  own  country,  as  well
as  those  of  their  neighbours.  Formerly,  however,  such  laws  were  considered  |

110  In  1740  "  the  rising  manufacturing  and  trading  interests  of  the  country  "  were
"  looked  down  upon  and  discouraged  by  the  feudal  aristocracy."  Burton's  Lives  of  Lovat
and  Forbes,  p.  361.

in  "  Whereas  Scotland  had  before  this  prohibited  all  the  English  woollen  manufactures,
under  severe  penalties,  and  England  on  the  other  hand  had  excluded  the  Scots  from
trading  with  Scots  ships  to  their  colonies  in  America,  directly  from  Scotland,  and  had
confiscated  even  their  own  English  ships  trading  to  the  said  colonies  from  England,  if
navigated  or  manned  with  above  one-third  Scots  seamen,"  &c.  De  Foe's  History  of  the
Union,  p.  603.  In  1696  the  wise  men  in  our  English  parliament  passed  a  law,  "  that  on
no  pretence  whatever  any  kind  of  goods  from  the  English  American  plantations  should
hereafter  be  put  on  shore,  either  in  the  kingdoms  of  Ireland  or  Scotland,  without  being
first  landed  in  England,  and  having  also  paid  the  duties  there,  under  forfeiture  of  ship  and
cargo."  Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  ii.  p.  684.  Certainly,  the  more  a  man
knows  of  the  history  of  legislation,  the  more  he  will  wonder  that  nations  should  have  been
able  to  advance  in  the  face  of  the  formidable  impediments  which  legislators  have  thrown
in  their  way.

[*  Buckle  has  here  forgotten  his  previous  account  of  the  respect  of  the  people  for  their
clergy.  And  it  is  not  seriously  to  be  supposed  that  before  the  eighteenth  century  rich
citizens  were  not  respected  for  their  wealth. — ED.]

[f  Considered,  that  is,  by  traders  as  well  as  by  legislators. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  731

to  be  extremely  sagacious,  and  politicians  were  constantly  contriving  protective
schemes  of  this  sort,  which,  with  the  best  intentions,  inflicted  incalculable  harm.
But  if,  as  seems  probable,  one  of  their  objects  in  this  instance  was  to  retard  the
improvement  of  Scotland,  they  were  more  than  usually  successful  in  effecting  the
purpose  at  which  they  aimed.  For  the  whole  of  the  western  coast,  being  cut
off  from  direct  intercourse  with  the  American  colonies,  was  debarred  from  the
only  foreign  trade  it  could  advantageously  follow  ;  since  the  European  ports
lay  to  the  east,  and  could  not  be  reached  by  the  inhabitants  of  Western  Scotland
without  a  long  circumnavigation,  which  prevented  them  from  competing  on  equal
terms  with  their  countrymen,  who,  sailing  from  the  other  side,  were  already  near
the  chief  seats  of  commerce.  The  consequence  was  that  Glasgow  and  the  other
western  ports  remained  almost  stationary  ;  having  comparatively  few  means  of
gratifying  that  enterprising  spirit  which  rose  among  them  late  in  the  seventeenth
century,  and  not  daring  to  trade  with  those  prosperous  colonies  which  were  just
before  them  across  the  Atlantic,  bvit  from  which  they  were  entirely  excluded  by
the  jealous  precautions  of  the  English  parliament.112

When,  however,  by  the  Act  of  Union,  the  two  countries  became  one,  these
precautions  were  discontinued,  and  Scotland  was  allowed  to  hold  direct  inter-
course with  America  and  the  West  India  Islands.  The  result  which  this  pro-
duced on  the  national  industry  was  almost  instantaneous,  because  it  gave  vent
to  a  spirit  which  had  begun  to  appear  among  the  people  late  in  the  seventeenth
century,  and  because  it  was  aided  by  those  still  more  general  causes  which,  in
most  parts  of  Europe,  predisposed  that  age  to  increased  industry.  The  west  of
Scotland,  being  nearest  to  America,  was  the  first  to  feel  the  movement.  -In  1707
the  inhabitants  of  Greenock,  without  the  interference  of  government,  imposed
on  themselves  a  voluntary  assessment,  with  the  object  of  constructing  a  harbour.
In  this  undertaking  they  displayed  so  much  zeal  that  by  the  year  1710  the
whole  of  the  works  were  completed  ;  a  pier  and  capacious  harbour  were  erected,
and  Greenock  was  suddenly  raised  from  insignificance  to  take  an  important  part
in  the  trade  of  the  Atlantic.113  For  a  while,  the  merchants  were  content  to  carry
on  their  traffic  with  ships  hired  from  the  English.  Soon,  however,  they  became
bolder  ;  they  began  to  build  on  their  own  account  ;  and  in  1719  the  first  vessel
belonging  to  Greenock  sailed  for  America.114  From  that  moment  their  commerce

112  "A  spirit  for  commerce  appears  to  have  been  raised  among  the  inhabitants  of
Glasgow  between  the  periods  of  1660  and  1707,  when  the  Union  with  England  took  place."

.  .  But, "  whatever  their  trade  was  at  this  time  it  could  not  be  considerable  ;  the  ports
to  which  they  were  obliged  to  trade  lay  all  to  the  eastward  ;  the  circumnavigation  of  the
island  would  therefore  prove  an  almost  insurmountable  bar  to  the  commerce  of  Glasgow  ;
the  people  upon  the  east  coast,  from  their  situation,  would  be  in  possession  of  almost
the  whole  commerce  of  Scotland."  Gibson's  History  of  Glasgow,  p.  205,  Glasgow,  1777.

113  "  The  importance  of  the  measure  induced  the  inhabitants  of  Greenock  to  make  a
contract  with  the  superior,  by  which  they  agreed  to  an  assessment  of  is.  4^.  sterling  on  every
sack  of  malt  brewed  into  ale  within  the  limits  of  the  town  ;  the  money  so  levied  to  be
applied  in  liquidating  the  expence  of  forming  a  proper  harbour  at  Greenock.     The  work
was  begun  at  the  epoch  of  the  Union,  in  1707  ;    and  a  capacious  harbour,  containing
upwards  of  ten  Scotish  acres,  was  formed  by  building  an  extensive  circular  pier,  with  a
straight  pier,  or  tongue,  in  the  middle,  by  which  the  harbour  was  divided  into  two  parts.
This  formidable  work,  the  greatest  of  the  kind  at  that  time  in  Scotland,  incurred  an
expence  of  more  than  100,000  marks  Scots."     Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  p.  807,  London,
1824,  4to.     In  M'Culloch's  Geographical  and  Statistical  Dictionary,  London,  1849,  vol.  i.
p.  930,  it  is  stated  that  "  the  inhabitants   took  the  matter  (1707)  into  their  own  hands,
and  agreed  with  their  superior  to  assess  themselves  at  a  certain  rate,  to  build  a  proper
pier  and  harbour.     The  work  was  finished  in  1710,  at  an  expense  of  5,555^-"

114  "  The  trade  of  Greenock  has  kept  pace  with  the  improvements  made  on  its  harbour.
The  union  of  the  kingdoms  (1707)  opened  the  colonies  to  the  enterprising  inhabitants
of  this  town,  and  generally  of  the  west  of  Scotland  ;  but  it  was  not  till  1719  that  the  first
vessel  belonging   to  Greenock   crossed   the   Atlantic."     M'Culloch's   Geographical  and
Statistical  Dictionary,  vol.  i.  p.  930.


732  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

increased  so  rapidly  that  by  the  year  1740  the  tax  which  the  citizens  had  laid
on  themselves  sufficed  not  only  to  wipe  off  the  debt  which  had  been  incurred,
but  also  to  leave  a  considerable  surplus  available  for  municipal  purposes.115  At
the  same  time,  and  by  the  action  of  the  same  causes,  Glasgow  emerged  from
obscurity.  In  1718  its  enterprising  inhabitants  launched  in  the  Clyde  the  first
Scotch  vessel  which  ever  crossed  the  Atlantic  ;  thus  anticipating  the  people  of
Greenock  by  one  year.11^  Glasgow  and  Greenock  became  the  two  great  com-
mercial outlets  of  Scotland,  and  the  chief  centres  of  activity.11?  Comforts,  and
indeed  luxuries,  hitherto  only  attainable  at  enormous  cost,  began  to  be  diffused
through  the  country.  The  productions  of  the  tropics  could  now  be  procured
direct  from  the  New  World,  which  in  return  offered  a  rich  and  abundant  market
for  manufactured  goods.  This  was  a  further  stimulus  to  Scotch  industry,  and  its
effects  were  immediately  apparent.  The  inhabitants  of  Glasgow,  finding  a
great  demand  among  the  Americans  for  linen,  introduced  its  manufacture  into
their  city  in  1725,  whence  it  extended  to  other  places,*  and,  in  a  short  time,  gave

"5  "  Such  was  the  effect  of  the  new  harbour  in  increasing  the  trade  and  the  population
of  the  town,  that  the  assessment  and  port -dues  cleared  off  the  whole  debt  before  1740,
and  left  in  that  year  a  clear  surplus  of  27,000  marks  Scots,  or  15001.  sterling."  Chalmers'
Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  p.  807.  "  After  the  Union,  however,  the  trade  of  the  port  increased
so  rapidly  that  in  the  year  1740  the  whole  debt  was  extinguished,  and  there  remained
a  surplus,  the  foundation  of  the  present  town's  funds,  of  27,000  merks."  Sinclair's
Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  v.  p.  576,  Edinburgh,  1793.

116  "By  the  Union,  however,  new  views  were  opened  up  to  the  merchants  of  the  city  ;
they,  thereby  obtained  the  liberty  of  a  free  commerce  to  America  and  the  West  Indies,
from  which  they  had  been  before  shut  out ;  they  chartered  English  vessels  for  these
voyages,  having  none  at  first  fit  for  the  purpose  ;  sent  out  cargoes  of  goods  for  the  use  of
the  colonies,  and  returned  home  laden  with  tobacco.  The  business  doing  well,  vessels
were  built  belonging  to  the  city,  and  in  the  year  1718  the  first  ship,  the  property  of
Glasgow,  crossed  the  Atlantic."  Denholm's  History  of  Glasgow,  p.  405,  3rd  edit.  Glasgow,
1804.  Brown  (History  of  Glasgow,  vol.  ii.  p.  330,  Edinburgh,  1797)  says  that  the  Glasgow
merchants  "  chartered  Whitehaven  ships  for  many  years  ;  "  but  that  "  in  1716  a  vessel
of  sixty  tons  burden  was  launched  at  Crawford's  dike,being  the  first  Clyde  ship  that  went  to
the  British  settlements  in  America  with  goods  and  a  supercargo."  But  this  date  is
probably  two  years  too  early.  Mr.  M'Culloch,  in  his  excellent  Geographical  and  Statistical
Dictionary,  London,  1849,  vol.  ii.  p.  659,  says  :  "  But  for  a  while  the  merchants  of  Glas-
gow, who  first  embarked  in  the  trade  to  America,  carried  it  on  by  means  of  vessels  belong-
ing to  English  ports  ;  and  it  was  not  till  1718  that  a  ship  built  in  Scotland  (in  the  Clyde),
the  property  of  Scotch  owners,  sailed  for  the  American  colonies."  Gibson  also  (History
of  Glasgow,  1777,  p.  206),  says  :  "  In  1718  the  first  vessel  of  the  property  of  Glasgow
crossed  the  Atlantic."  And,  to  the  same  effect,  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,
vol.  v.  p.  498,  Edinburgh,  1793.

!«  The  progress  was  so  rapid  that,  in  a  work  printed  in  1732,  it  is  stated  that  "  this
city  of  Glasgow  is  a  place  of  the  greatest  trade  in  the  kingdom,  especially  to  the  Planta-
tions ;  from  whence  they  have  twenty  or  thirty  sail  of  ships  every  year,  laden  with  tobacco
and  sugar ;  an  advantage  this  kingdom  never  enjoyed  till  the  Union.  They  are  pur-
chasing a  harbour  on  the  Frith  near  Alloway,  to  which  they  have  but  twelve  miles  by  land  ;
and  then  they  can  re-ship  their  sugars  and  tobacco  for  Holland,  Germany,  and  the  Baltick
Sea,  without  being  at  the  trouble  of  sailing  round  England  or  Scotland."  Macky's
Journey  through  Scotland,  pp.  294,  295,  2nd  edit.  London,  1732.  The  first  edition  of  this
book  was  also  printed  in  1732.  See  Watt's  Bibliotheca  Britannica,  vol.  i.  p.  631  m.,  Edin-

[*  It  appears  to  be  here  implied  that  there  had  been  no  linen  manufacture  in  Scotland
previously.  In  reality  it  had  existed  in  the  days  of  Bruce  (Cochran- Patrick,  Medieval
Scotland,  1892,  p.  48),  and  probably  earlier.  In  1639  an  Act  of  Parliament  declares  it  to
be  "  ane  of  the  pryme  commodities  of  this  Kingdome,  wherby  many  people  are  put  to
worke  and  money  is  brought  within  the  same."  (Ibid. )  The  trade  continued  to  develop,
and  in  1700,  John  Corse,  of  Glasgow,  is  found  petitioning  for  the  privileges  accorded  to  a
linen  manufactory.  (Id.  p.  51.) — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN     XVII.    AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  733

employment  to  thousands  of  workmen.118  It  is  also  from  the  year  1725  that
Paisley  dates  its  rise.  So  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  this
rich  and  prosperous  city  was  still  a  straggling  village,  containing  only  a  single
street.119  But  after  the  Union  its  poor  and  hitherto  idle  inhabitants  began  to
be  moved  by  the  activity  which  they  saw  on  every  side.  Gradually  their  views
expanded  ;  and  the  introduction  among  them,  in  1725,  of  the  manufacture  of
thread,  was  the  first  step  in  that  great  career  in  which  they  never  stopped,  until
they  had  raised  Paisley  to  be  a  vast  emporium  of  industry,  and  a  successful
promoter  of  every  art  by  which  industry  is  nurtured.120

Nor  was  it  merely  in  the  west  that  this  movement  was  displayed.  In  Scotland
generally  the  spirit  of  trade  became  so  rife  that  it  began  to  encroach  on  the  old
theological  spirit,  which  had  long  been  supreme.  Hitherto  the  Scotch  had  cared
for  little  except  religious  polemics.  In  every  society  these  had  been  the  chief
subject  of  conversation  ;  and  on  them  men  had  wasted  their  energies,  without
the  least  benefit  either  to  themselves  or  to  others.  But  about  this  time  it  was
observed  that  the  improvement  of  manufactures  became  a  common  topic  of  dis-
course.121 Such  a  statement,  made  by  a  well-informed  writer,  who  witnessed
what  he  relates,  is  a  curious  proof  of  the  change  which  was  beginning,  though  very
faintly,  to  steal  over  the  Scotch  mind.  It  shows  that  there  was  at  all  events
a  tendency  to  turn  aside  from  subjects  which  are  inaccessible  to  our  understand-
ing, and  the  discussion  of  which  has  no  effect  except  to  exasperate  those  who
dispute,  and  to  make  them  more  intolerant  than  ever  of  theological  opinions
different  from  their  own.  Unhappily  there  were,  as  I  shall  presently  point  out,
other  causes  at  work  which  prevented  this  tendency  from  producing  all  the  good
that  might  have  been  expected.  Still,  so  far  as  it  went,  it  was  a  clear  gain.  It
was  a  blow  to  superstition,  inasmuch  as  it  was  an  attempt  to  occupy  the  human
mind  with  mere  secular  considerations.  In  a  country  like  Scotland,  this  alone
was  extremely  important.  We  must  also  add  that  though  it  was  the  effect  of
increased  industry,  it,  as  'often  happens,  reacted  upon  and  strengthened  its
cause.  For  by  diminishing,  however  little,  the  inordinate  respect  formerly  paid
to  theological  pursuits,  it  was  in  the  same  proportion  an  inducement  to  am-
bitious and  enterprising  men  to  abstain  from  those  pursuits,  and  to  engage  in
temporal  matters,  where  ability,  being  less  fettered  by  prejudice,  has  more  scope,


burgh,  1824,  4to.  [Macky  seems  to  have  been  a  careless  writer.  Alloway  (Alloa)  is
on  the  wrong  side  of  the  Firth  for  Glasgow.  Her  natural  and  nearest  eastern  port  was
Grangemouth,  which  is  more  than  twenty  miles  away  in  a  straight  line. — ED.]

118  Gibson,  who  was  a  Glasgow  merchant,  says  in  his  History  of  Glasgow,  p.  236,  "  that
the  commerce  to  America  first  suggested  the  idea  of  introducing  manufactures  into
Glasgow,  is  to  me  very  evident ;  and  that  they  were  only  attempted  to  be  introduced
about  the  year  1725  is  apparent."     Denholm  (History  of  Glasgow,  p.  412)  says:  "The
linen  manufacture,  which  began  here  in  the  year  1725,  was  for  a  long  time  the  staple,
not  only  of  this  city,  but  of  the  west  of  Scotland."     Compare  Heron's  Journey  through
the  Western  Counties  of  Scotland,  Perth,  1799,  vol.  ii.  p.  412.

119  "  Consisting  only  of  one  principal  street  about  half  a  mile  in  length."     Sinclair's
Statistical  A  ccount  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.  p.  62.     But  the  local  historian  mentions,  with  evident
pride,  that  this  one  street  contained  "  handsome  houses."     Crawfurd's  History  of  the
Shire  of  Renfrew,  part  iii.  p.  305,  edit.  Paisley,  1782,  4to.

120  Denholm's  History  of  Glasgow,  pp.  546,  547  ;  and  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of
Scotland,  vol.  vii.  pp.  62-64.     See  also,  on  the  rise  of  Paisley,  Heron's  Journey  through
the  Western  Counties  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  399,  400  ;  Pennant's  Tour  in  Scotland,  vol.  ii.
p.  144  ;  and  Crawfurd's  History  of  the  Shire  of  Renfrew,  part  iii.  p.  321.     At  an  earlier
period,  Paisley  was  famous  in  a  different  way.     In  the  Middle  Ages,  it  swarmed  with
monks.     Keith  (Catalogue  of  Scotch  Bishops,  p.  252,  Edinburgh,  1755,  4to)  tells  us  that,
"  it  formerly  was  a  Priory,  and  afterwards  changed  into  an  Abbey  of  Black  Monks."

121  The  author  of   The  Interest  of  Scotland  Considered,  Edinburgh,  1733,  says  (p.  xvi.)
that  since  1727  "  we  have  happily  turned  our  eyes  upon  the  improvement  of  our  manu-
factures, which  is  now  a  common  subject  in  discourse,  and  this  contributes  not  a  little
to  its  success."


734  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  enjoys  more  freedom  of  action.  Of  those  men,  some  rose  to  the  first  rank  in
literature  ;  while  others,  taking  a  different  but  equally  useful  turn,  became  as
eminent  in  trade.  Hence  Scotland,  during  the  eighteenth  century,  possessed
for  the  first  time  two  powerful  and  active  classes  whose  aim  was  essentially
secular  ;  the  intellectual  class,  and  the  industrial  class.  Before  the  eighteenth
century  neither  of  these  classes  exercised  an  independent  sway,  or  could  indeed
be  said  to  have  a  separate  existence.  The  intellect  of  the  country  was  absorbed
by  the  church  ;  the  industry  of  the  country  was  controlled  by  the  nobles.  The
effect  which  this  change  produced  on  the  literature  of  Scotland  will  be  traced
in  the  last  chapter  of  the  present  volume.  Its  effect  on  industry  was  equally
remarkable,  and  for  the  well-being  of  the  nation  was  equally  valuable.  But  it
does  not  possess  that  general  scientific  interest  which  belongs  to  the  intellectual
movement  ;  and  I  shall  therefore,  in  addition  to  the  evidence  already  given,
confine  myself  to  a  few  more  facts  illustrative  of  the  history  of  Scotch  industry
down  to  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  by  which  time  there  was  no  longer
any  doubt  that  the  flood  of  material  prosperity  had  fairly  set  in.

During  the  seventeenth  century  the  only  Scotch  manufacture  of  any  impor-
tance was  that  of  linen,  which,  however,  like  every  other  branch  of  industry,
was  very  backward,  and  was  exposed  to  all  sorts  of  discouragement.122  But
after  the  Union  it  received  a  sudden  impetus,  from  two  causes.  One  of  these
causes,  as  I  have  already  noticed,  was  the  demand  from  America,  consequent
upon  the  trade  of  the  Atlantic  being  thrown  open.  The  other  cause  was  the
removal  of  the  duty  which  England  had  imposed  upon  the  importation  of  Scotch
linen.  These  two  circumstances,  occurring  nearly  at  the  same  time,  produced
such  effect  on  the  national  industry,  that  De  Foe,  who  had  a  wider  knowledge
of  the  details  of  trade  than  any  man  of  that  age,  said  that  it  seemed  as  if  for  the
future  the  Scotch  poor  could  never  lack  employment.123  Unfortunately  this
was  not  the  case,  and  never  will  be,  until  society  is  radically  changed.  But  the
movement  which  provoked  so  bold  a  remark  from  so  cautious  an  observer  as
De  Foe  must  have  been  very  striking  ;  and  we  know  from  other  sources  that
between  1728  and  1738  the  manufacture  of  linen  for  exportation  alone  was  more
than  doubled.124  After  that  period,  this  and  other  departments  of  Scotch
industry  advanced  with  a  constantly  accelerating  speed.  It  is  mentioned  by  a
contemporary  who  was  likely  to  be  well  informed,  that  between  1715  and  1745
the  trade  and  manufactures  of  Scotland  increased  more  than  they  had  done
for  ages  before.125  Such  a  statement,  though  valuable  as  corroborating  other


122  Morer,  who  was  in  Scotland  in  1688  and  1689,  says,  "  But  that  which  employs  great
part  of  their  land  is  hemp,  of  which  they  have  mighty  burdens,  and  on  which  they  bestow
much  care  and  pains  to  dress  and  prepare  it  for  making  their  linen,  the  most  noted  and
beneficial  manufacture  of  the  kingdom."     Morer' s  Short  Account  of  Scotland,  London,
1702,  pp.  3,  4-

123  "  xhe  duties  upon  linen  from  Scotland  being  taken  off  in  England,  made  so  great
a  demand  for  Scots  linen  more  than  usual,  that  it  seemed  the  poor  could  want  no  employ-
ment."    De  Foe's  History  of  the  Union  between  England  and  Scotland,  p.  604.     Compare
Macpherson's  Annals  of   Commerce,  vol.  ii.  p.  736  :    "  a  prodigious  vent,  not  only  in
England,  but  for  the  American  plantations."     This  concerns  a  later  period.

124  "The  surplus  of  linen  made  above  the  consumption  was  in  1728  2,183,978  yards;
in  1738,  4,666,011."     Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  i.  p.  873.     On  the  increase  between  1728
and  1732,  see  the  Table  in  The  Interest  of  Scotland  Considered,  Edinburgh,  1733,  P-  97-
In  a  work  published  in  1732,  it  is  stated  that  "  they  make  a  great  deal  of  linnen  all  over
the  kingdom,  not  only  for  their  own  use,  but  export  it  to  England,  and  to  the  Plantations.
In  short,  the  women  are  all  kept  employ'd,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  of  them."
Macky's  Journey  through  Scotland,   London,  1732,  p.  271.     This  refers  merely   to  the
women  of  Scotland,  whom  Macky  represents  as  much  more  industrious  than  the  men.

125  In  1745  Craik  writes  to  Lord  Nithisdale,  "  The  present  family  have  now  reigned  over
us  these  thirty  years,  and  though  during  so  long  a  time  they  may  have  fallen  into  errors,
or  may  have  committed  faults,  (as  what  Government  is  without  ?)  yett  I  will  defy  the
most  sanguine  zealot  to  find  in  history  a  period  equal  to  this  in  which  Scotland  possessed


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND  XVIII.  CENTURIES  735

evidence,  is  too  vague  to  be  entirely  relied  on  ;  and  historians,  who  usually
occupy  themselves  with  insignificant  details  about  courts  and  princes  and  states-
men, desert  us  in  matters  which  are  really  important,  so  that  it  is  now  hardly
possible  to  reconstruct  the  history  of  the  Scotch  people  during  this,  the  first  epoch
of  their  material  prosperity.  I  have  however  gathered  a  few  facts  which
appear  to  rest  on  good  authority,  and  which  supply  us  with  something  like  precise
information  as  to  dates.  In  1739  the  manufacture  of  linen  was  introduced  into
Kilbarchan,12^  and,  in  1740,  into  Arbroath.12?  From  the  year  1742  the  manu-
factures of  Kilmarnock  date  their  rise.12^  In  1748  the  first  linen  was  manu-
factured in  Cullen  ;  129  and  in  the  same  year  in  Inverary.130  In  1749  this  great
branch  of  industry  and  source  of  wealth  was  established  on  a  large  scale  in
Aberdeen  ;  131  while  about  1750  it  began  to  diffuse  itself  in  Wemyss,  in  the
county  of  Fife.132  These  things  happening  within  eleven  years,  in  parts  of  the
country  so  distant  from  each  other,  and  so  totally  unconnected,  indicate  the
existence  of  general  causes  which  governed  the  whole  movement  ;  though  in
this  as  in  all  instances  everything  is  popularly  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  a  few
powerful  individuals.  We  have  however  other  proofs  that  the  progress  was
essentially  national.  Even  in  Edinburgh,  where  hitherto  no  claims  had  been
respected  except  those  of  the  nobles  or  clergy,  the  voice  of  this  new  trading
interest  began  to  be  heard.  In  that  poor  and  warlike  capital  a  society  was  now
first  established  for  the  encouragement  of  manufactures  ;  and  we  are  assured  that
this  was  but  a  single  manifestation  of  the  enthusiasm  which  was  generally  felt
on  the  subject.133  Coinciding  with  this  movement,  and  indeed  forming  part  of
it,  we  can  discern  the  earliest  symptoms  of  a  monied  class,  properly  so  called.
In  1749  there  was  established  at  Aberdeen  the  first  county  bank  ever  seen  in
Scotland  ;  and  in  the  very  same  year  a  similar  establishment  was  formed  at
Glasgow.134  These  represented  the  east  and  the  west,  and  by  the  advances  which

so  uninterrupted  a  felicity,  in  which  liberty,  civil  and  religious,  was  so  universally  enjoyed
by  all  people  of  whatever  denomination — nay,  by  the  open  and  avowed  ennemys  of  the
family  and  constitution,  or  a  period  in  which  all  ranks  of  men  have  been  so  effectually
secured  in  their  property.  Have  not  trade,  manufactures,  agriculture,  and  the  spirit  of
industry  in  our  country  extended  themselves  further  during  this  period  and  under  this
family  than  for  ages  before?  "  Thomson's  Memoirs  of  the  Jacobites,  London,  1845,  vol.  ii.
pp.  60,  61.

126  Crawfurd' s  History  of  the  Shire  of  Renfrew,  part  ii.  p.  114.

127  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.  p.  341,  compared  with  vol.  xii.
pp.  176,  177.

128  Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  p.  483.

129  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  xii.  p.  145.

130  Ibid.,  vol.  v.  p.  297.

131  Kennedy's  Annals  of  Aberdeen,  vol.  ii.  pp.  199,  200.

132  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  xvi.  p.  520  :  "  About  the  year  1750."
I  need  hardly  say  that  some  of  these  dates,  depending  upon  tradition,  are  given  by  the
authors  approximatively.

133  "  Betwixt  the  year  1750  and  1760,  a  great  degree  of  patriotic  enthusiasm  arose  in
Scotland  to  encourage  arts  and  manufactures  ;  and  the  Edinburgh  Society  was  established
in  1755  for  the  express  purpose  of  improving  these."     Bower's  History  of  the  University
of  Edinburgh,  vol.  iii.  pp.  126,  7.

134  "  jhe  first  country -bank  that  anywhere  appeared  was  the  Aberdeen  Bank,  which
was  settled  in  1749  :  it  was  immediately  followed  by  a  similar  establishment  in  Glasgow
during  the  same  year."     Chalmers'  Caledonia,  vol.  iii.  p.  9,  4to,  1824.     Kennedy  (Annals
of  Aberdeen,  4to,  1818,  vol.  ii.  p.  195)  says  :  "  Banking  was  originally  projected  in  Aber-
deen about  the  year  1752,  by  a  few  of  the  principal  citizens  who  were  engaged  in  commerce
and  manufactures.     They  commenced  business  upon  a  limited  scale,  in  an  office  on  the
north  side  of  the  Castle  Street,  issued  notes  of  hand,  of  five  pounds  and  of  twenty  shillings
sterling,  and  discounted  bills  and  promissory  notes,  for  the  accommodation  of  the  public."
It  is  uncertain  if  Chalmers  knew  of  this  passage  ;  but  he  was  a  more  accurate  writer  than
Kennedy,  and  I  therefore  prefer  his  authority.     Besides,  Kennedy  vaguely  says,  "  about
the  vear  1752."


736  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

they  were  able  to  make,  each  assisted  the  trade  of  its  own  district.  Between
eastern  and  western  Scotland  the  intercourse,  as  yet,  was  difficult  and  costly.
But  this  likewise  was  about  to  be  remedied  by  an  enterprise  the  mere  conception
of  which  would  formerly  have  excited  ridicule.  After  the  Union,  the  idea  arose
of  uniting  the  east  with  the  west  by  a  canal,  which  should  join  the  Forth  to  the
Clyde.  The  plan  was  deemed  chimerical,  and  was  abandoned.  As  soon,  how-
ever, as  the  manufacturing  and  commercial  classes  had  gained  sufficient  influence
they  adopted  it,  with  that  energy  which  is  characteristic  of  their  order,  and  which
is  more  common  among  them  than  among  any  other  rank  of  society.  The  result
was  that  in  1768  the  great  work  was  fairly  begun  ;  135  and  the  first  step  was
taken  towards  what,  in  a  material  point  of  view,  was  an  enterprise  of  vast  impor-
tance, but  in  a  social  and  intellectual  point  of  view  was  of  still  superior  value,
inasmuch  as,  by  supplying  a  cheap  and  easy  transit  through  the  heart  of  the  most
populous  part  of  Scotland,  it  had  a  direct  tendency  to  make  different  districts
and  different  places  feel  that  each  had  need  of  others,  and  thus  encouraging  the
notion  that  all  belonged  to  one  common  scheme,  it  assisted  in  diminishing  local
prejudice  and  assuaging  local  jealousy  ;  while  in  the  same  proportion,  by  enticing
men  to  move  out  of  the  narrow  circle  in  which  they  had  habitually  lived,  it  pre-
pared them  for  a  certain  enlargement  of  mind,  which  is  the  natural  consequence
of  seeing  affairs  under  various  aspects,  and  which  is  never  found  in  any  country
in  which  the  means  of  travelling  are  either  very  hazardous  or  very  expensive.

Such  was  the  state  of  Scotland  towards  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century ;
and  surely  a  fairer  prospect  was  never  opened  to  any  country.  The  land  was  at
peace.  It  had  nothing  to  fear,  either  from  foreign  invasion  or  from  domestic
tyranny.  The  arts  which  increase  the  comfort  of  man,  and  minister  to  his
happiness,  were  sedulously  cultivated  ;  wealth  was  being  created  with  unexampled
speed,  and  the  blessings  which  follow  in  the  train  of  wealth  were  being  widely
diffused  ;  while  the  insolence  of  the  nobility  was  so  effectually  curbed  that
industrious  citizens  could  for  the  first  time  feel  their  own  independence,  could
know  that  what  they  earned,  that  likewise  they  should  enjoy,  and  could  hold
themselves  erect,  and  with  a  manly  brow,  in  the  presence  of  a  class  before  whom
they  had  long  crouched  in  abject  submission.

Besides  this,  a  great  literature  now  arose,  a  literature  of  rare  and  surpassing
beauty.*  To  narrate  the  intellectual  achievements  of  the  Scotch  during  the
eighteenth  century,  in  a  manner  at  all  commensurate  with  their  importance,
would  require  a  separate  treatise,  and  I  cannot  now  stop  even  to  mention  what  all
educated  persons  are  at  least  partly  acquainted  with ;  each  student  recognizing
the  value  of  what  was  done  in  his  own  pursuit.  In  the  last  chapter  of  this  volume
I  shall  however  attempt  to  give  some  idea  of  the  general  results  considered  as  a
whole  ;  at  present  it  is  enough  to  say  that  in  every  branch  of  knowledge  this
once  poor  and  ignorant  people  produced  original  and  successful  thinkers.  What
makes  this  the  more  remarkable  is  its  complete  contrast  to  their  former  state.
Down  even  to  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  Scotland  could  only  boast
of  two  authors  whose  works  have  benefited  mankind.  They  were  Buchanan  and
Napier.  Buchanan  was  the  first  political  writer  who  held  accurate  views  re-
specting government,  and  who  clearly  defined  the  true  relation  between  the  people
and  their  rulers.  He  placed  popular  rights  on  a  solid  basis,  and  vindicated  by
anticipation  all  subsequent  revolutions.  Napier,  equally  bold  in  another
department,  succeeded  by  a  mighty  effort  of  genius  in  detecting  and  pushing

135  "  After  having  been  frequently  proposed  since  the  Union,  this  canal  was  at  length
begun  in  1768,  and  finished  in  1790.  The  trade  upon  it  is  already  great,  and  is  rapidly
increasing."  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  279,  280,  Edinburgh,
1792.  See  also  vol.  xii.  p.  125  ;  Irving' s  History  of  Dumbartonshire,  1860,  4to,  p.  247  ;
and  an  interesting  contemporary  notice  in  Nimmo's  History  of  Stirlingshire,  Edinburgh,
1777.  PP-  468-481.  In  1767  Watt  was  employed  as  a  surveyor.  See  Muirhead's  Life  of
Watt,  2nd  edit.  London,  1859,  p.  167.

[*^Buckle  here  means,  not  belles  lettres,  but  philosophic  and  scientific  literature. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII.  AND    XVIII.    CENTURIES  737

to  its  extreme  consequence  a  law  of  the  progression  of  numbers,  which  is  so
simple  and  yet  so  potent  that  it  unravels  the  most  tedious  and  intricate  calcu-
lations, and,  thus  economizing  the  labours  of  the  brain,  has  saved  an  enormous
and  incalculable  waste.  These  two  men  were,  indeed,  great  benefactors  of  their
species  ;  but  they  stand  alone,  and  if  all  the  other  authors  Scotland  produced
down  to  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century  had  never  been  born,  or  if,  being
born,  they  had  never  written,  society  would  have  lost  nothing,  but  would  be  in
exactly  the  same  position  as  it  now  is.*

Early,  however,  in  the  eighteenth  century  a  movement  was  felt  all  over
Europe,  and  in  that  movement  Scotland  participated.  A  spirit  of  inquiry  was
abroad,  so  general  and  so  searching,  that  no  country  could  entirely  escape  from
its  action.  Sanguine  men  were  excited,  and  even  grave  men  were  stirred.  It
seemed  as  if  a  long  night  were  about  to  close.  Light  broke  forth  where  before
there  was  nothing  but  darkness.  Opinions  which  had  stood  the  test  of  ages  were
suddenly  questioned  ;  and  in  every  direction  doubts  sprung  up,  and  proofs  were
demanded.  The  human  mind,  waxing  bold,  would  not  be  satisfied  with  the  old
evidence.  Things  were  examined  at  their  foundation,  and  the  basis  of  every
belief  was  jealously  scrutinized.  For  a  time  this  was  confined  to  the  higher
intellects  ;  but  soon  the  movement  spread,  and  in  the  most  advanced  countries
worked  upon  nearly  all  classes.  In  England  and  in  France  the  result  was  ex-
tremely beneficial.  It  might  have  been  hoped  that  in  Scotland  likewise  the
popular  mind  would  gradually  have  become  enlightened.  But  not  so.  Time
rolled  on  ;  one  generation  succeeded  another  ;  the  eighteenth  century  passed
away  ;  the  nineteenth  century  came  ;  and  still  the  people  made  no  sign.  The
gloom  of  the  Middle  Ages  was  yet  upon  them.  While  all  around  was  light,  the
Scotch,  enveloped  in  mist,  crept  on,  groping  their  way  dismally  and  with  fear.
While  other  nations  were  shaking  off  their  old  superstitions,  this  singular  people
clung  to  theirs  with  undiminished  tenacity,  j  Now,  indeed,  their  grasp  is  gradually
slackening,  but  with  extreme  slowness,  and  threatening  reactions  frequently
appear.  This,  as  it  always  has  been  and  still  is  the  curse  of  Scotland,  so  also  is  it
the  chief  difficulty  with  which  the  historian  of  Scotland  has  to  contend.  Every-
where else,  when  the  rise  of  the  intellectual  classes  and  that  of  the  trading  and
manufacturing  classes  have  accompanied  each  other,  the  invariable  result  has
been  a  diminution  of  the  power  of  the  clergy,  and  consequently  a  diminution  of
the  influence  of  superstition.  The  peculiarity  of  Scotland  is  that  during  the
eighteenth  century,  and  even  down  to  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the

[*  This  thesis  is  on  the  lines  of]  that  concerning  French  literature  dealt  with  above,
p.  289.  It  ignores  the  remarkable  literary  work  of  Dunbar  and  Sir  David  Lyndsay,  the
former  the  most  powerful  British  poet  between  Chaucer  and  Shakspere,  the  latter  the
most  remarkable  dramatic  writer  of  his  age  in  Europe.  Compare  A .  W.  Ward's  History
of  English  Dramatic  Literature,  i.  70-71.  If  Buckle's  proposition  can  hold  good  of  these
writers,  it  must  equally  hold  good  of  all  writers  of  belles  lettres  ',  and  his  own  admiration  of
Shakspere  must  be  disallowed.  On  his  own  principles,  further,  he  should  have  joined
with  the  name  of  Buchanan  that  of  Rutherford,  whose  Lex  Rex  (1644)  had  great  influence
in  the  civil  war.  And  after  all,  in  a  later  chapter  (ch.  xx.,  at  note  3)  Buckle  recognizes
poetry  and  drama  as  important  aspects  of  literature,  and  among  the  measures  of  an  age's
civilization. — ED.]

[f  Buckle  here  exaggerates  concerning  Scotland  as  he  has  done  concerning  Spain.
While  the  theological  frost  was  certainly  deeper  and  more  lasting  in  Scotland  than  in
England,  it  was  not  such  as  he  represents.  He  ignores  the  significance  of  Burns  ;  and  he
never  gives  any  definition  of  the  term  "  popular  "  by  which  he  can  be  tested.  It  could
hardly  be  maintained  that  the  mass  of  the  population  became  enlightened  either  in  England
or  in  France  in^jthe  eighteenth  century.  In  Scotland,  on  the  other  hand,  Hume  and  Smith
must  have  had  some  readers  in  the  middle  classes.  Buckle  has  not  realized  that  in  their
time  there  was  a  "  Moderate  "  party  in  the  Kirk  (represented  by  three  historians,  Robert-
son, Henry  and  Watson ),  much  railed  against  by  the  zealots.  For  light  on  the  intellectual
life  of  the  period  see  the  Autobiography  of  the  Rev.  Alexander  Carlyle,  published  in  1860.
Hume  had  many  friends  among  the  younger  clergy  (Carlyle,  pp.  271-2). — ED.]

47


738  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

industrial  and  intellectual  progress  has  continued  without  materially  shaking
the  authority  of  the  priesthood.136  Strange  and  unequalled  combination  !
The  country  of  bold  and  enterprising  merchants,  of  shrewd  manufacturers,  of
far-seeing  men  of  business,  and  of  cunning  artificers  ;  the  country,  too,  of  such
fearless  thinkers  as  George  Buchanan,  David  Hume,  and  Adam  Smith,  is  awed
by  a  few  noisy  and  ignorant  preachers,  to  whom  it  allows  a  license,  and  yields  a
submission,  disgraceful  to  the  age,  and  incompatible  with  the  commonest  notions
of  liberty.  A  people  in  many  respects  very  advanced,  and  holding  upon  political
subjects  enlightened  views,  do  upon  all  religious  subjects  display  a  littleness  of
mind,  an  illiberality  of  sentiment,  a  heat  of  temper,  and  a  love  of  persecuting
others,  which  shows  that  the  Protestantism  of  which  they  boast  has  done  them
no  good  ;  that  in  the  most  important  matters  it  has  left  them  as  narrow  as  it
found  them  ;  and  that  it  has  been  unable  to  free  them  from  prejudices  which
make  them  the  laughing-stock  of  Europe,  and  which  have  turned  the  very  name
of  the  Scotch  Kirk  into  a  by -word  and  a  reproach  among  educated  men.*

I  shall  now  endeavour  to  explain  how  all  this  arose,  and  how  such  apparent
inconsistencies  are  to  be  reconciled.  That  they  may  be  reconciled,  and  that  the
inconsistencies  are  merely  apparent  and  not  real,  will  be  at  once  admitted  by
whoever  is  capable  of  a  scientific  conception  of  history.  For  in  the  moral  world
as  in  the  physical  world,  nothing  is  anomalous  ;  nothing  is  unnatural  ;  nothing  is
strange.  All  is  order,  symmetry,  and  law.  There  are  opposites,  but  there  are  no
contradictions.  In  the  character  of  a  nation,  inconsistency  is  impossible. t
Such,  however,  is  still  the  backward  condition  of  the  human  mind,  and  with  so
evil  and  jaundiced  an  eye  do  we  approach  the  greatest  problems,  that  not  only
common  writers,  but  even  men  from  whom  better  things  might  be  hoped,  are  on
this  point  involved  in  constant  confusion,  perplexing  themselves  and  their  readers
by  speaking  of  inconsistency  as  if  it  were  a  quality  belonging  to  the  subject
which  they  investigate,  instead  of  being,  as  it  really  is,  a  measure  of  their  own
ignorance.  It  is  the  business  of  the  historian  to  remove  this  ignorance,  by
showing  that  the  movements  of  nations  are  perfectly  regular,  and  that,  like  all
other  movements,  they  are  solely  determined  by  their  antecedents.  If  he  cannot
do  this,  he  is  no  historian.  He  may  be  an  annalist,  or  a  biographer,  or  a  chronicler,
but  higher  than  that  he  cannot  rise,  unless  he  is  imbued  with  that  spirit  of  science
which  teaches  as  an  article  of  faith  the  doctrine  of  uniform  sequence ;  in  other
words,  the  doctrine  that  certain  events  having  already  happened,  certain  other
events  corresponding  to  them  will  also  happen.  To  seize  this  idea  with  firmness,
and  to  apply  it  on  all  occasions  without  listening  to  any  exceptions,  is  extremely
difficult,  but  it  must  be  done  by  whoever  wishes  to  elevate  the  study  of  history
from  its  present  crude  and  informal  state,  and  do  what  he  may  towards  placing
it  in  its  proper  rank,  as  the  head  and  chief  of  all  the  sciences.  Even  then  he  can-
not perform  his  task  unless  his  materials  are  ample,  and  derived  from  sources  of

13S  I  will  quote,  in  a  single  passage,  the  opinions  of  an  eminent  German  and  of  an
eminent  Scotchman.  "  Dr.  Spurzheim,  when  he  last  visited  Scotland,  remarked  that  the
Scotch  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  most  priest-ridden  nation  in  Europe  ;  Spain  and  Portu-
gal not  excepted.  After  having  seen  other  countries,  I  can  understand  the  force  of  this
observation"  Notes  on  the  United  States  of  North  America  by  George  Combe,  vol.  iii.  p.  32,
Edinburgh,  1841.  [Adam  Smith  had  said  virtually  the  same  thing  (Wealth  of  Nations,
B.  v.  ch.  i.  Art.  3,  near  end).  But  he  explained  how  the  Scotch  clergy  had  won  the  assent
of  their  flocks. — ED.]

[*  It  is  to  be  feared  that  England  has  not  been  exempt  from  European  criticism  in  these
matters.  Alexander  von  Humboldt  described  it  as  the  "  priest-ridden  kingdom  of  the
leopards,"  and  many  Germans  have  agreed  with  him. — ED.]

[t  These  formulas  simply  reduce  to  insignificance  the  terms  "  anomaly  "  and  "  incon
sistency."     If  "  nothing  is  anomalous,"  what  does  "  anomalous  "  mean  ?     The  following
remarks  on  "  inconsistency  "  amount  to  a  mere  verbal  confusion,  assuming  as  they  do
that  "  inconsistent  "  =  "  uncaused."     It  is  of  course  a  predication  of  logical  inconsequence,
not  of  inconsequence  in  events. — ED.]


SCOTLAND    IN    XVII,  AND  XVIIL  CENTURIES  739

unquestioned  credibility.     But  if  his  facts  are  sufficiently  numerous  ;  if  they
are  very  diversified  ;  if  they  have  been  collected  from  such  various  quarters
that  they  can  check  and  confront  each  other,  so  as  to  do  away  with  all  suspicion
of  their  testimony  being  garbled  ;  and  if  he  who  uses  them  possesses  that  faculty
of  generalization  without  which  nothing  great  can  be  achieved,  he  will  hardly
fail  in  bringing  some  part  of  his  labours  to  a  prosperous  issue,  provided  he  devotes
all  his  strength  to  that  one  enterprise,  postponing  to  it  every  other  object  of
ambition,  and  sacrificing  to  it  many  interests  which  men  hold  dear.     Some  of
the  most  pleasurable  incentives  to  action  he  must  disregard.     Not  for  him  are
those  rewards  which,  in  other  pursuits,  the  same  energy  would  have  earned  ;  not
for  him  the  sweets  of  popular  applause  ;  not  for  him  the  luxury  of  power  ;  not
for  him  a  share  in  the  councils  of  his  country  ;  not  for  him  a  conspicuous  and
honoured  place  before  the  public  eye.     Albeit  conscious  of  what  he  could  do,  he
may  not  compete  in  the  great  contest  ;  he  cannot  hope  to  win  the  prize  ;  he
cannot  even  enjoy  the  excitement  of  the  struggle.     To  him  the  arena  is  closed.
His  recompense  lies  within  himself,  and  he  must  learn  to  care  little  for  the  sym-
pathy of  his  fellow-creatures,  or  for  such  honours  as  they  are  able  to  bestow.     So
far  from  looking  for  these  things,  he  should  rather  be  prepared  for  that  obloquy
which  always  awaits  those  who,  by  opening  up  new  veins  of   thought,  disturb
the   prejudices    of    their    contemporaries.     While    ignorance,    and    worse    than
ignorance,  is  imputed  to  him,  while  his  motives  are  misrepresented  and  his  integ-
rity impeached,  while   he  is  accused  of  denying  the  value  of  moral  principles,
and  of  attacking  the  foundation  of  all  religion,  as  if  he  were  some  public  enemy,
who  made  it  his  business  to  corrupt  society,  and  whose  delight  it  was  to  see  what
evil  he  could  do  ;  while  these  charges  are  brought  forward,  and  repeated  from
mouth  to  mouth,  he  m»st  be  capable  of  pursuing  in  silence  the  even  tenor  of  his
way,  without  swerving,  without  pausing,  and  without  stepping  from  his  path
to  notice  the  angry  outcries  which  he  cannot  but  hear,  and  which  he  is  more  than
human  if  he  does  not  long  to  rebuke.     These  are  the  qualities,  and  these  the  high
resolves,  indispensable  to  him  who,  on  the  most  important  of  all  subjects,  believe
ing  that  the  old  road  is  worn  out  and  useless,  seeks  to  strike  out  a^new  one  for  him-
self, and  in  the  effort  not  only  perhaps  exhausts  his  strength,  but  is  sure  to  incur
the  enmity  of  those  who  are  bent  on  maintaining  the  ancient  scheme  unimpaired.
To  solve  the  great  problem  of  affairs  ;  to  detect  those  hidden  circumstances  which
determine  the  march  and  destiny  of  nations  ;  and  to  find,  in  the  events  of  the
past,  a  key  to  the  proceedings  of  the  future,  is  nothing  less  than  to  unite  into  a  single
science  all  the  laws  of  the  moral  and  physical  world.     Whoever  does  this  will
build  up  afresh  the  fabric  of  our  knowledge,  rearrange  its  various  parts,  and
harmonize  its  apparent  discrepancies.     Perchance  the  human  mind  is  hardly
ready  for  so  vast  an  enterprise.     At  all  events,  he  who  undertakes  it  will  meet  with
little  sympathy,  and  will  find  few  to  help  him.     And  let  him  toil  as  he  may,  the
sun  and  noontide  of   his  life  shall  pass  by,  the  evening  of  his  days  shall  over-
take him,  and  he  himself  have  to  quit  the  scene,  leaving  that  unfinished  which
he  had  vainly  hoped  to  complete.     He  may  lay  the  foundation  ;  it  will  be  for  his
successors  to  raise  the  edifice.     Their  hands  will  give  the  last  touch  ;  they  will
reap  the  glory  ;  their  names  will  be  remembered  when  his  is  forgotten.      It  is
indeed  too  true  that  such  a  work  requires  not  only  several  minds,  but  also  the
successive  experience  of  several  generations.     Once,  I  own,  I  thought  otherwise.
Once,  when  1  first  caught  sight  of  the  whole  field  of  knowledge,  and  seemed,
however  dimly,  to  discern  its  various  parts  and  the  relation  they  bore  to  each
other,  I  was  so  entranced  with  its  surpassing  beauty  that  the  judgment  was  be-
guiled, and  I  deemed  myself  able  not  only  to  cover  the  surface,  but  also  to  master
the  details.     Little  did  I  know  how  the  horizon  enlarges  as  well  as  recedes,  and
how  vainly  we  grasp  at  the  fleeting  forms,  which  melt  away  and  elude  us  in  the
distance.     Of  all  that  I  had  hoped  to  do,  I  now  find  but  too  surely  how  small  a
part  I  shall  accomplish.      In  those  early  aspirations  there  was  much  that  was
fanciful ;  perhaps  there  was  much  that  was  foolish.     Perhaps,  too,  they  con-
tained a  moral  defect,  and  savoured  of  an  arrogance  which  belongs  to  a  strength
that  refuses  to  recognize  its  own  weakness.     Still,  even  now  that  they  are  defeated
and  brought  to  nought,  I  cannot  repent  having  indulged  in  them,  but  on  the


740  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

contrary  I  would  willingly  recall  them  if  I  could.  For  such  hopes  belong  to  that
joyous  and  sanguine  period  of  life  when  alone  we  are  really  happy  ;  when  the
emotions  are  more  active  than  the  judgment  ;  when  experience  has  not  yet  har-
dened our  nature  ;  when  the  affections  are  not  yet  blighted  and  nipped  to  the  core  ;
and  when  the  bitterness  of  disappointment  not  having  yet  been  felt,  difficulties
are  unheeded,  obstacles  are  unseen,  ambition  is  a  pleasure  instead  of  a  pang,  and
the  blood  coursing  swiftly  through  the  veins,  the  pulse  beats  high,  while  the  heart
throbs  at  the  prospect  of  the  future.  Those  are  glorious  days  ;  but  they  go  from
us,  and  nothing  can  compensate  their  absence.  To  me  they  now  seem  more  like
the  visions  of  a  disordered  fancy  than  the  sober  realities  of  things  that  were,
and  are  not.  It  is  painful  to  make  this  confession  ;  but  I  owe  it  to  the  reader,
because  I  would  not  have  him  to  suppose  that  either  in  this  or  in  the  future
volumes  of  my  History  I  shall  be  able  to  redeem  my  pledge,  and  to  perform  all  that
I  promised.  Something  I  hope  to  achieve  which  will  interest  the  thinkers  of
this  age  ;  and  something,  perhaps,  on  which  posterity  may  build.  It  will,  how-
ever, only  be  a  fragment  of  my  original  design.  In  the  two  last  chapters  I  have
attempted,  and  in  the  two  next  chapters  I  shall  still  further  attempt,  to  solve  a
curious  problem  in  the  history  of  Scotland  which  is  intimately  connected  with
other  problems  of  a  yet  graver  import  :  but  though  the  solution  will,  I  believe,
be  complete,  the  evidence  of  the  solution  will  most  assuredly  be  imperfect.
I  regret  to  add  that  such  imperfection  is  henceforth  an  essential  part  of  my  plan.
It  is  essential,  because  I  despair  of  supplying  those  deficiencies  in  my  knowledge
of  which  I  grow  more  sensible  in  proportion  as  my  views  become  more  extensive.
It  is  also  essential  because, after  a  fair  estimate  of  my  own  strength,of  the  probable
duration  of  my  life,  and  of  the  limits  to  which  industry  can  safely  be  pushed,  I
have  been  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  this  Introduction,  which  I  had  projected
as  a  solid  foundation  on  which  the  history  of  England  might  subsequently  be
raised,  must  either  be  greatly  curtailed  and  consequently  shorn  of  its  force,  or
that,  if  not  curtailed,  there  will  hardly  be  a  chance  of  my  being  able  to  narrate,
with  the  amplitude  and  fulness  of  detail  which  they  richly  deserve,  the  deeds  of
that  great  and  splendid  nation  with  which  I  am  best  acquainted,  and  of  which  it
is  my  pride  to  count  myself  a  member.  It  is  with  the  free,  the  noble,  and  the
high-minded  English  people  that  my  sympathies  are  most  closely  connected  ;
on  them  my  affections  naturally  centre  ;  from  their  literature,  and  from  their
example,  my  best  lessons  have  been  learnt  ;  and  it  is  now  the  most  cherished  and
the  most  sacred  desire  of  my  heart  that  I  may  succeed  in  writing  their  history,
and  in  unfolding  the  successive  phases  of  their  mighty  career,  while  I  am  yet
somewhat  equal  to  the  task,  and  before  my  faculties  have  begun  to  dwindle
or  the  power  of  continuous  attention  has  begun  to  decay.*


[*  The  pathetic  stress  of  emotion  here  tells  sufficiently  of  the  breaking  down  of  the
historian's  health,  and  explains  the  overstrained  character  of  much  of  the  writing  in  these
chapters.— ED.]


CHAPTER  XIX

AN  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  THE  SEVENTEENTH

CENTURY

THE  remaining  part  of  this  volume  I  purpose  to  devote  to  an  attempt  to  unravel
still  further  that  two -fold  paradox  which  forms  the  prominent  peculiarity  of
the  history  of  Scotland.  The  paradox  consists,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  fact,  first,
that  the  same  people  have  long  been  liberal  in  politics,  and  illiberal  in  religion  *  ;
and,  secondly,  that  the  brilliant,  inquisitive,  and  sceptical  literature  which  they
produced  in  the  eighteenth  century  was  unable  to  weaken  their  superstition,  or  to
instil  into  them  wiser  and  larger  maxims  on  religious  matters.  From  an  early
period  there  were,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  show,  many  circumstances  which  pre-
disposed the  Scotch  to  superstition,  and,  so  far,  had  a  general  connexion  with  the
subject  before  us.  But  the  remarkable  phenomenon  with  which  we  are  imme-
diately concerned  may,  I  think,  be  traced  to  two  distinct  causes.  The  first  cause
was  that  for  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  after  the  establishment  of  Protestanism
the  rulers  of  Scotland  either  neglected  the  Church  or  persecuted  it,  thereby  driving
the  clergy  into  the  arms  of  the  people,  from  whom  alone  they  could  obtain  sym-
pathy and  support.  Hence  an  alliance  between  the  two  parties  more  intimate
than  would  otherwise  have  been  possible  ;  and  hence,  too,  the  rise  of  that  demo-
cratic spirit  which  was  the  necessary  consequence  of  such  an  union,  and  which  the
clergy  encouraged,  because  they  were  opposed  and  thwarted  by  the  upper  classes.
So  far  the  result  was  extremely  beneficial,  as  it  produced  a  love  of  independence
and  a  hatred  of  tyranny  which,  twice  during  the  seventeenth  century,  saved  the
country  from  the  yoke  of  a  cruel  despotism. f  But  these  very  circumstances,
which  guarded  the  people  against  political  despotism,  exposed  them  all  the  more
to  ecclesiastical  despotism.  For  having  no  one  to  trust  except  their  preachers,
they  trusted  them  entirely,  and  upon  all  subjects.  The  clergy  gradually  became
supreme,  not  only  in  spiritual  matters  but  also  in  temporal  ones.  Late  in  the
sixteenth  century,  they  had  been  glad  to  take  refuge  among  the  people  ;  before
the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  they  ruled  the  people.  How  shamefully
they  abused  their  power,  and  how,  by  encouraging  the  worst  kind  of  superstition,
they  prolonged  the  reign  of  ignorance,  and  stopped  the  march  of  society,  will  be
related  in  the  course  of  this  chapter  ;  but  in  fairness  to  them  we  ought  to  acknow-
ledge that  the  religious  servitude  into  which  the  Scotch  fell  during  the  seventeenth
century  was  on  the  whole  a  willing  one,  and  that,  mischievous  as  it  was,  it  had  at
least  a  noble  origin,  inasmuch  as  the  influence  of  the  Protestant  clergy  is  mainly
to  be  ascribed  to  the  fearlessness  with  which  they  came  forward  as  leaders  of  the
people,  at  a  period  when  that  post  was  full  of  danger,  and  when  the  upper  classes

[*  The  antithesis  here  set  up  is  rather  verbal  than  factual.  In  the  sense  in  which  the
Scots  were  illiberal  in  religion,  they  were  illiberal  in  politics,  inasmuch  as  they  were  politi-
cally intolerant  of  other  worships.  Liberality  is  a  matter  of  mental  attitude,  and  if  it
exists  in  regard  to  politics  it  must  react  on  religion.  Scottish  politics  early  became
demotic  on  the  ecclesiastical  side ;  but  the  Scots  were  not  on  that  score  "  liberal,"  any  more
than  an  early  Teutonic  tribe. — ED.]

[t  See  above,  pp.  370,  695,  70$,  editorial  notes. — ED.]


742  THE    HISTORY    OF   CIVILIZATION

were  ready  to  unite  with  the  crown  in  destroying  the  last  vestiges  of  national
liberty.

To  trace  the  operation  of  this  cause  of  Scotch  superstition  will  be  the  business
of  the  present  chapter  ;  while  in  the  next  and  concluding  chapter  I  shall
examine  the  other  cause,  which  I  have  as  yet  hardly  mentioned.  This  latter
inquiry  will  involve  some  considerations  respecting  the  philosophy  of  method,
still  imperfectly  appreciated  among  us,  and  on  which  the  history  of  the  Scotch
mind  will  throw  considerable  light,  For  it  will  appear  that  during  the  eigh-
teenth century  the  ablest  Scotchmen,  with  hardly  an  exception,  adopted  a
method  of  investigating  truth  which  cut  them  off  from  the  sympathies  of  their
countrymen,  and  prevented  their  works  from  producing  the  effect  which  they
might  otherwise  have  done.  The  result  was  that  though  a  very  sceptical  litera-
ture was  produced,  scepticism  made  no  progress,  and  therefore  superstition  was
undiminished.  The  highly -educated  minds,  indeed,  were  affected  ;  but  they
formed  a  class  apart,  and  there  were  no  means  of  communication  between  them
and  the  people.  That  this  was  owing  to  the  method  which  literary  men  employed
I  hope  to  prove  in  the  next  chapter  ;  and  if  I  succeed  in  doing  so,  it  will  be  evi-
dent that  I  have  been  guilty  of  no  exaggeration  in  terming  this  the  second  great
cause  of  the  prolongation  of  Scotch  superstition,  since  it  was  sufficiently  powerful
to  prevent  the  intellectual  classes  from  exercising  their  natural  functions  as
the  disturbers  of  old  opinions.

We  have  already  seen  that  almost  immediately  after  the  Reformation  ill-
feeling  arose  between  the  upper  classes  and  the  spiritual  leaders  of  the  Protestant
church,  and  that  this  ill-feeling  increased  until,  in  1580,  it  vented  itself  by  the
abolition  of  episcopacy.  This  bold  and  decisive  measure  made  the  breach  irre-
parable. The  preachers  had  now  committed  themselves  too  far  to  recede,  even
if  they  had  desired  to  do  so  ;  and  from  that  moment,  uniting  themselves  heartily
with  the  people,  they  took  up  a  position  which  they  have  never  since  abandoned.
During  the  remaining  twenty-three  years  that  James  was  in  Scotland  they  were
occupied  in  exciting  the  people  against  their  rulers  ;  and  as  they  became  more
democratic,  so  did  the  crown  and  nobles  grow  more  hostile,  and  display,  for  the
first  time,  a  disposition  to  combine  together  in  defence  of  their  common  interests.
In  1603  James  ascended  the  throne  of  England,  and  the  struggle  began  in  earnest.
It  lasted,  with  few  interruptions,  eighty-five  years,  and  during  its  continuance
the  Presbyterian  clergy  never  wavered  ;  they  were  always  steady  to  the  good
cause  ;  always  on  the  side  of  the  people.  This  greatly  increased  their  influence  ;
and  what  favoured  it  still  more  was  that,  besides  being  the  champions  of  popular
liberty,  they  were  also  the  champions  of  national  independence.  When  James  I.  and
the  two  Charleses  attempted  to  force  episcopacy  upon  Scotland,  the  Scotch  re-
jected it,  not  only  because  they  hated  the  institution  but  also  because  they  looked
on  it  as  the  mark  of  a  foreign  domination,  which  they  were  determined  to  resist.
Their  nearest  and  most  dangerous  enemy  was  England  ;  and  they  spurned  the  idea
of  receiving  bishops  who  must  in  the  first  instance  be  consecrated  in  London,
and  who,  it  was  certain,  would  never  have  been  admitted  into  Scotland  unless
England  had  been  the  stronger  country.  It  was  therefore  on  patriotic  as  well
as  religious  grounds  that  the  Scotch  clergy  during  the  seventeenth  century
struggled  against  episcopacy  ;  *  and  when  they  overthrew  it,  in  1638,  their  bold

1  In  1638,  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  Scotch  clergy  writes  :  "  Our  maine  feare"  is
"  to  have  our  religion  lost,  our  throats  cutted,  our  poore  countrey  made  ane  English
province,  to  be  disposed  upon  for  ever  hereafter  at  the  will  of  a  Bishope  of  Canterburie."
Baillie's  Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  i.  p.  66.  Compare  p.  450.  "  This  kirk  is  a  free  and
independant  kirk,  no  less  then  the  kingdom  is  a  free  and  independant  kingdom  ;  and  as
our  own  Patriots  can  best  judge  what  is  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom,  so  our  own  Pastors
should  be  most  able  to  judge  what  form  of  worship  beseemeth  our  Reformation,  and  what
serveth  most  for  the  good  of  the  People."  Two  generations  later,  one  of  the  most  popular
arguments  against  the  Union  was  that  it  might  enable  the  English  to  force  episcopacy
upon  Scotland.  See  De  Foe's  History  of  the  Union  between  England  and  Scotland,  pp.  222,
284,  359.  "  The  danger  of  the  Church  of  Scotland-  from  the  suffrages  of  English
bishops,"  &c.


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         743

and  determined  conduct  associated  in  the  popular  mind  the  love  of  country  with
the  love  of  the  church.  Subsequent  events  strengthened  this  association.2
In  1650  Cromwell  invaded  Scotland,  overthrew  the  Scotch  in  the  battle  of  Dunbar,
and  intrusted  to  Monk  the  task  of  curbing  their  spirit,  by  building  fortresses,
and  establishing  a  long  chain  of  military  posts.3  The  nation,  cowed  and  broken,
gave  way,  and,  for  the  first  time  for  three  centuries,  felt  the  pressure  of  a  foreign
yoke.  The  clergy  alone  remained  firm.4  Cromwell,  who  knew  that  they  were
the  chief  obstacle  to  completing  his  conquest,  hated  them,  and  did  everything  he
could  to  ruin  them.s  But  their  power  was  too  deeply  seated  to  be  shaken.  From
their  pulpits  they  continued  to  influence  and  animate  the  people.  In  face  of  the
invaders,  and  in  spite  of  them,  the  Scotch  church  continued  to  hold  its  General
Assemblies,  until  the  summer  of  1653.  Then  indeed  they  had  to  yield  to  brute
force  ;  and  the  people,  to  their  unutterable  grief,  beheld  the  venerated  represen-
tatives of  the  Scotch  kirk  driven  from  their  place  of  meeting  by  English  soldiers,
and  led  like  criminals  through  the  streets  of  Edinburgh.6

2  The  hatred  which  the  Scotch  naturally  felt  against  the  English  for  having  inflicted  so
much  suffering  upon  them,  was  intense  about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,
notwithstanding  the  temporary  union  of  the  two  nations  against  Charles.      In  1652  "  the
criminal  record  is  full  of  cases  of  murder  of  English  soldiers.  They  were  cut  off  by  the  people
whenever  a  fitting  opportunity  occurred,  and  were  as  much  detested  in  Scotland  as  the
French  soldiers  were  in  Spain  during  the  Peninsular  war."      The  Spottiswoode  Miscellany,
vol.  ii.  p.  98,  Edinburgh,  1845.     See  also  p.  167  :  "A  nationall  quarrell,  and  not  for  the
Stuarts."

3  Browne's  History  of  the  Highlands,  vol.  ii.  pp.  75-77 :  "The  English  army  was  aug-
mented to  twenty  thousand  men,  and  citadels  erected  in  several  towns,  and  a  long  chain
of  military  stations  drawn  across  the  country  to  curb  the  inhabitants."

4  Clarendon,  under  the  year  1655,  says,  "  Though  Scotland  was  vanquished,  and  sub-
dued to  that  degree  that  there  was  no  place  nor  person  who  made  the  least  show  of
opposing  Cromwell ;  who,  by  the  administration  of  Monk,  made  the  yoke  very  grievous  to
the  whole  nation  ;  yet  the  preachers  kept  their  pulpit  license ;  and,  more  for  the  affront
that  was  offered  to   Presbytery   than   the  conscience  of  what  was    due  to  majesty,
many  of  them  presumed  to  pray  for  the  king  ;  and  generally,   though  secretly,  exas-
perated the  minds  of  the  people  against  the  present  government."       Clarendon's  History
of  the  Rebellion,  p.  803.

5  And,  what  they  must  have  felt  very  acutely,  he  would  not  go  to  hear  them  preach.
A  writer  of  that  time  informs  us  that,  even  in  1648,  when  Cromwell  was  in  Edinburgh,
"  he  went  not  to  their  churches  ;  but  it  is  constantlie  reported  that  ewerie  day  he  had
sermons  in  his  oune  ludginge,  himself  being  the  preacher,  whensoewer  the  spirit  came  upon
him  ;  which  took  him  lyk  the  fitts  of  an  ague,  somtyms  twise,  sometyms  thryse  in  a  day."
Gordon's  Britane's  Distemper,  p.  212.     In  1650,  according  to  another  contemporary,  "  he
made  stables  of  all  the  churches  for  hes  horsses  quhersoeuer  he  came,  and  burned  all  the
seatts  and  pewes  in  them  ;  riffled  the  ministers'  housses,  and  distrayed  ther  cornes."
Balfour's  Annales  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.  p.  88.     The  clergy,  on  the  other  hand,  employing  a
resource  with  which  their  profession  has  always  been  familiar,  represented  Cromwell  as
opposing  Providence,  because  he  was  opposing  them.     Rutherford  (Religious  Letters,
reprinted  Glasgow,  1824,  p.  346)  says  that  he  fought  "  against  the  Lord's  secret  ones  ;  "
and  Row  (Continuation  of  Blair's  Autobiography,  p.  335),  under  the  year  1658,  trium-
phantly observes  :  "  In  the  beginning  of  September  this  year,  the  Protector,  that  old  fox,
died.     It  was  observed,  as  a  remarkable  cast  of  divine  providence,  that  he  died  upon  the
3d  of  September,  which  he,  glorying  of  routing  of  our  armies  at  Dunbar  and  Worcester  on
that  day,  used  to  call  his  day.     On  that  same  very  day  the  Just  Judge  called  him  to  an
account,"  &c.

6  See  contemporary  notices  of  this,  in  NicolVs  Diary,  p.  no  ;  and  in  The  Diary  of  Mr,
John  Lamont  of  Newton,  pp.  56,  57.     But  the  best  account  is  that  given  by  Baillie,  in  a
letter  to  Calamy,  dated  Glasgow,  27th  July,  1653.    He  writes  :  "  That  on  the  2oth  of  July
last,  when  our  Generall  Assemblie  wes  sett  in  the  ordinarie  tyme  and  place,  Lieutenant -
Colonell  Cotterall  besett  the  church  with  some  rattes  of  musqueteir  and  a  troup  of  horse  ;
himself  ( after  our  fast,  wherein  Mr.  Dickson  and  Mr.  Dowglas  had  two  gracious  sermons}


744  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Thus  it  was  that  in  Scotland,  after  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century,
everything  tended  to  increase  the  reputation  of  the  clergy,  by  raising  them  to
the  foremost  rank  among  the  defenders  of  their  country.  And  it  was  but  natural
that  the  spiritual  classes,  finding  themselves  in  the  ascendant,  should  conduct
the  contest  according  to  views  habitual  to  their  profession;  and  should  be  anxious
for  religious  advantages  rather  than  for  temporal  benefits.  The  war  which  the
Scotch  waged  against  Charles  I.  partook  more  of  the  character  of  a  crusade
than  any  war  ever  carried  on  by  a  Protestant  nation.7  The  main  object  was
to  raise  up  presbyters,  and  to  destroy  bishops.  Prelacy  was  the  accursed
thing,  and  that  must  be  rooted  out  at  every  hazard.  To  this  all  other  considera-
tions were  subordinate.8  The  Scotch  loved  liberty,  and  hated  England.  Yet
even  these  two  passions,  notwithstanding  their  strength,  were  as  nothing  in  com-
parison with  their  intense  desire  to  extend  and  to  propagate,  if  need  be  at  the


entered  the  Assemblie -house,  and,  immediately  after  Mr.  Dickson  the  Moderator  his
prayer,  required  audience  ;  wherein  he  inquired,  If  we  did  sitt  there  by  the  authority  of
the  Parliament  of  the  Commonwealth  of  England  ?  or  of  the  Commanders  -in  -chiefe  of  the
English  forces  ?  or  of  the  English  Judges  in  Scotland  ?  The  Moderator  replyed,  That  we
were  ane  Ecclesiasticall  synod,  ane  Spirituall  court  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  medled  not
with  any  thing  Civile  ;  that  our  authoritie  wes  from  God,  and  established  by  the  lawes  of
the  land  yet  standing  unrepealed  ;  that,  by  the  Solemn  League  and  Covenant,  the  most
of  the  English  army  stood  obliedged  to  defend  our  Generall  Assemblie.  When  some
speeches  of  this  kind  had  passed,  the  Lieutenant -Colonell  told  us,  his  order  was  to  dissolve
us  ;  whereupon  he  commanded  all  of  us  to  follow  him,  else  he  would  drag  us  out  of  the
rowme.  When  we  had  entered  a  Protestation  of  this  unheard-of  and  unexampled  violence,
we  did  ryse  and  follow  him ;  he  ledd  us  all  through  the  whole  streets  a  myle  out  of  the
towne,  encompassing  us  with  foot -companies  of  musqueteirs,  and  horsemen  without  ;  all
the  people  gazing  and  mourning  as  at  the  saddest  spectacle  they  had  ever  seen.  When
he  had  ledd  us  a  myle  without  the  towne,  he  then  declared  what  further  he  had  in  commis-
sion. That  we  should  not  dare  to  meet  any  more  above  three  in  number ;  and  that  against
eight  o'clock  to-morrow,  we  should  depart  the  towne,  under  paine  of  being  guiltie  of
breaking  the  publick  peace  :  And  the  day  following,  by  sound  of  trumpet,  we  were  com-
manded off  towne  under  the  paine  of  present  imprisonment.  Thus  our  Generall  Assemblie,
the  glory  and  strength  of  our  Church  upon  earth,  is,  by  your  souldiarie,  crushed  and  trod
under  foot,  without  the  least  provocatione  from  us,  at  this  time,  either  in  word  or  deed."
Baillie's  Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  iii.  pp.  225,  226.

7  In  August,  1640,  the  army  marched  into  England  ;    and  "  it  was  very  refreshfull  to
remark,  that  after  we  came  to  ane  quarter  at  night,  there  was  nothing  almost  to  be
heard  throughout  the  whole  army  but  singing  of  psalms,  prayer,  and  reading  of  Scripture
by  the  souldiers  in  their  severall  hutts."     Select  Biographies,  edited  by  Mr.  Tweedie  for
the  Wodrow  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  163.     "  The  most  zealous  among  them  boasted,  they
should  carry  the  triumphant  banners  of  the  covenant  to  Rome  itself."     Arnofs  History
,<?/  Edinburgh,  p.  124.      In  1644  the  celebrated  divine,  Andrew  Cant,  was  appointed  by
the  Commissioners  of  the  General  Assembly  "  to  preach  at  the  opening  of  the  Parlia-
ment, wherein  he  satisfied  their  expectation  fully.      For  the  main  point  he  drove  at  in
his  sermon,  was  to  state  an  opposition  betwixt  King  Charles  and  King  Jesus  (as  he  was
pleased  to  speak),  and  upon  that  account  to  press  resistance  to  King  Charles  for  the
interest  of  King  Jesus.     It  may  be  wondered  that  such  doctrine  should  have  relish'd
with  men  brought  up  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  ;  and  yet,  such  was  the  madness
of  the  times,  that  none  who  preach'd  in  public  since  the  beginning  of  the  Troubles  had
been  so  cried  up  as  he  was  for  that  sermon."     Guthry's  Memoirs,  pp.  136,  137.

8  "  The  rooting  out  of  prelacy  and  the    wicked    hierarchy    therein    so    obviously
described,  is  the  main  duty."     Naphtali,  or  the  Wrestlings  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,
PP-  53»  54-     This  refers  to  the  Covenant  of  1643.     So,  too.,  the  continuator  of  Row's
History  of  the  Kirk,  p.  521,  says,  under  the  year  1639,  that  the  object  of  the  war  was,
"  to  withstand  the  prelaticall  faction  and  malignant,  countenanced  by  the  kinge  in  his
owne  persone."     Compare  the  outbreak  of    the  Reverend  Samuel  Rutherford  against
"  the  accursed  and  wretched  prelates,  the  Antichrist's  first-born,  and  the  first  fruit  of
his  foul  womb."     Rutherford's  Religious  Letters,  p.  179.


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY          745

point  of  the  sword,  their  own  Presbyterian  polity.  This  was  their  first  and
paramount  duty.  They  fought  indeed  for  freedom,  but  above  all  they  fought
for  religion.  In  their  eyes  Charles  was  the  idolatrous  head  of  an  idolatrous
church,  and  that  church  they  were  resolved  to  destroy.  They  felt  that  their
cause  was  holy,  and  they  went  forth  full  of  confidence,  convinced  that  the  sword
of  Gideon  was  drawn  on  their  side,  and  that  their  enemies  would  be  delivered  up
to  them.

The  rebellion  therefore  against  Charles,  which  on  the  part  of  the  English
was  essentially  secular,9  was  on  the  part  of  the  Scotch  essentially  religious.*
This  was  because  with  us  the  laymen  were  stronger  than  the  clergy  ;  while  with
them  the  clergy  were  stronger  than  the  laymen.  In  1643,  both  nations  having
united  against  the  king,  it  was  thought  advisable  that  an  intimate  alliance
should  be  concluded  ;  but  in  the  negotiations  which  followed  it  is  noticed  by
a  contemporary  observer  that  though  the  English  merely  wished  for  a  civil
league,  the  Scotch  demanded  a  religious  covenant.^  And  as  they  would  only
continue  the  war  on  condition  that  this  was  granted,  the  English  were  obliged
to  give  way.  The  result  was  the  Solemn  League  and  Covenant,  by  which  what
seemed  a  cordial  union  was  effected  between  the  two  countries.11  Such  a  com-
pact was  however  sure  to  be  short-lived,  as  each  party  had  different  objects  ;
the  aim  of  the  English  being  political,  while  that  of  the  Scotch  was  religious.
The  consequences  of  this  difference  were  soon  apparent.  In  January,  1645,
negotiations  having  been  opened  with  the  king,  commissioners  met  at  Uxbridge,
with  the  view  of  concluding  a  peace.  The  attempt  failed,  as  might  have  been
expected,  seeing  that  not  only  were  the  pretensions  of  the  king  irreconcilable
with  those  of  his  opponents,  but  that  the  pretensions  of  his  opponents  were
irreconcilable  with  each  other.  At  Uxbridge,  during  the  conferences,  the  Scotch
expressed  their  readiness  to  concede  to  him  what  he  required,  if  he  would  gratify
them  in  regard  to  the  Church  ;  while  the  English,  occupying  themselves  with
civil  and  political  questions,  cared  less,  says  Clarendon,  for  what  concerned  the
Church  than  for  anything  else.12  A  better  illustration  could  hardly  be  found


9  Our  civil  war  was  not  religious  ;  but  was  a  struggle  between  the  Crown  and  the
Parliament.     See  note  above,  pp.  203-4.     [The  antithesis  here  is  only  formal.     Crom-
well himself  declared  that  "  religion  was  not  the  thing  at  first  contested  for,  but  God
brought  it  to  that  issue  at  last."     As  a  high  modern  authority  puts  it :     "  From  the  very
beginning,  men  who  were  determined  to  maintain  the  Church  intact  adopted  the  king's
cause,  and  those  who  desired  to  change  the  government  in  the  Church,  or  sought  freedom
outside  of  it,  supported  the  Parliament  "  (Firth,  Oliver  Cromwell,  1900,  pp.  72-73 ). — ED.]

10  In  September,  1643,  Baillie,  writing  an  account  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Westminster
Assembly  in  the  preceding  month,  says,  "  In  our  committees  also  we  had  hard  enough
debates.     The  English  were  for  a  civill  League,  we  for  a  religious  Covenant."     Letter  to
Mr.  William  Spang,  dated  22nd  September,  1643,  in  Baillie' s  Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  ii.
p.  90.

11  "  The  Solemn  League  and  Covenant,"  which  "  is  memorable  as  the  first  approach
towards  an  intimate  union  between  the  kingdoms;  but,  according  to  the  intolerant
principles  of  the  age,  a  federal  alliance  was  constructed  on  the  frail  and  narrow  basis  of
religious  communion."     Laing's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iii.  pp.  258,  259.     The  passage,
however,  which  I  have  quoted  in  the  last  note  from  Baillie,  shows  that  England  was  not
responsible  for  the  intolerant  principles,  or,  consequently,  for  the  narrow  basis.

!2  The  Chancellor  of  Scotland  "  did  as  good  as  conclude  '  that  if  the  king  would  satisfy
them  in  the  business  of  the  Church,  they  would  not  .concern  themselv.es  in  any  of  the
other  demands.'  "  .  .  .  "  And  it  was  manifest  enough,  by  the  private  conferences  with
other  of  the  commissioners,  that  the  parliament  took  none  of  the  points  in  controversy
less  to  heart,  or  were  less  united  in,  than  in  what  concerned  the  Church."  Clarendon's
History  of  the  Rebellion,  edit.  Oxford,  1843,  p.  522.  See  also  p.  527  :  "  that  the  Scots

[*  As  has  been  above  shown  (p.  370),  the  disaffection  of  the  Scotch  really  originated
in  the  king's  policy  of  recovering  the  tithes— a  .strictly  economic  and  political  motive —
.ED.]


746  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  the  secular  character  of  the  English  rebellion,  as  compared  with  the
spiritual  character  of  the  Scotch  rebellion.  Indeed  the  Scotch,  so  far
from  concealing  this,  boasted  of  it,  and  evidently  thought  that  it  proved  how
superior  they  were  to  their  worldly-minded  neighbours.  In  February,  1645,  the
General  Assembly  issued  an  address  to  the  nation,  including  not  only  those  who
were  at  home,  but  also  those  who  served  in  armies  out  of  Scotland.  In  this
document,  which,  proceeding  from  such  a  quarter,  necessarily  exercised  great
influence,  political  considerations,  as  having  to  do  merely  with  the  temporal
happiness  of  men,  are  treated  as  insignificant  and  almost  despicable.  That
Rupert  was  defeated,  and  that  York  and  Newcastle  were  taken,  were  but  trifling
matters.  They  were  only  the  means  of  accomplishing  an  end,  and  that  end  was
the  reformation  of  religion  in  England,  and  the  establishment  there  of  the  pure
Presbyterian  polity.13

A  war  undertaken  with  such  holy  objects,  and  conceived  in  so  elevated  a
spirit,  was  supposed  to  be  placed  under  the  immediate  protection  of  the  Deity,
on  whose  behalf  it  was  carried  on.  In  the  language  of  the  time,  it  was  a  war
for  God,  and  for  God's  church.  Every  victory  that  was  obtained  was  the  result
not  of  the  skill  of  the  general,  nor  of  the  valour  of  the  troops,  but  was  an  answer
to  prayer.14  When  a  battle  was  lost,  it  was  either  because  God  was  vexed  at
the  sins  of  the  people,15  or  else  to  show  them  that  they  must  not  trust  to  the

would  insist  upon  the  whole  government  of  the  Church,  and  in  all  other  matters  would
defer  to  the  king."

13  See  this  extraordinary  document  in  Acts  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of
Scotland  from  1638  to  1842,  pp.  122-128,  Edinburgh,  1843.      It  is  entitled  "  A  solemne
and  seasonable  warning  to  the  noblemen,  barons,  gentlemen,  burrows,  ministers,  and
commons  of  Scotland  ;  as  also  to  armies  without  and  within  this  kingdom."     In  it
(p.  123)  occurs  the  following  passage  :  "  And  for  our  part,  our  forces  sent  into  that  king-
dom, in  pursuance  of  that  Covenant,  have  been  so  mercifully  and  manifestly  assisted
and  blessed  from  heaven  (though  in  the  mids  of  many  dangers  and  distresses,  and  much
want  and  hardship),  and  have  been  so  farre  instrumentall  to  the  foyling  and  scattering
of  two  principall  armies  ;  first,  the  Marquesse  of  Newcastle  his  army  ;  and  afterward
Prince  Rupert's  and  his  together  ;  and  to  the  reducing  of  two  strong  cities,  York  and
Newcastle,  that  we  have  what  to  answer  the  enemy  that  reproacheth  us  concerning  that
businesse,  and  that  which  may  make  iniquitie  it  self  to  stop  her  mouth.     But  which
is  more  unto  us  than  all  victories  or  whatsomever  temporall  blessing,  the  reformation  of
religion  in  England,  and  uniformity  therein  between  both  kingdoms  (a  principal  end
of  that  Covenant),  is  so  far  advanced,  that  the  English  Service-Book  with  the  Holy-
Dayes  and  many  other  ceremonies  contained  in  it,  together  with  the  Prelacy,  the  fountain
of  all  these,  are  abolished  and  taken  away  by  ordinance  of  parliament,  and  a  directory
for  the  worship  of  God  in  all  the  three  kingdoms  agreed  upon  in  the  Assemblies,  and  in
the  Parliaments  of  both  kingdoms,  without  a  contrary  voice  in  either  ;'  the  government
of  the  kirk  by  congregational  elderships,  classical  presbyteries,  provincial  and  national
assemblies,  is  agreed  upon  by  the  Assembly  of  Divines  at  Westminster,  which  is  also
voted  and  concluded  in  both  Houses  of  the  Parliament  of  England."

14  In  1644  "  God  ansuered  our  Wednesday's  prayers  :   Balfour  and  Waller  had  gotten
a  glorious  victorie  over  Forth  and  Hop  ton,  and  routed  them  totallie,  horse  and  foot."
Baillie's  Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  ii.  p.  155.     In  the  same  year,  thanksgivings  being
offered  at  Aberdeen  for  the  victory  of  Leslie  over  Rupert,  "  oure  minister  Mr.  William
Strathauchin  declairit  out  of  pulpit  that  this  victory  wes  miraculous,  wrocht  by  the
fynger  of  God."     Spalding's  History  of  the  Troubles,  vol.  ii.  p.  254.      In  1648  the  Com-
missioners of  the  General  Assembly,  in  an  address  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  stated  that
the  Deity  had  been  "  fighting  for  his  people  ;  "  meaning  by  his  people,  the  Scotch  people.
They  added  that  the  fact  of  their  enemies  having  been  repulsed  was  a  proof  of  "  how
sore  the  Lord  hath  been  displeased  with  their  way."     Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  ii.
p.  424,  Oxford,  1773,  folio.

15  Two  Scotch  notices  are  now  before  me  of  the  fatal  battle  of  Dunbar.     According
to  one,  the  defeat  was  intended  to  testify  against  "  the  great  sin  and  wickedness  "  of  the
people.     Naphtali,  or  the  Wrestlings  of  the  Ch.ur.ch  of.  Scotland,  p.  75.     According  to  the.


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         747

arms  of  the  flesh.™  Nothing  was  natural  ;  all  was  supernatural.  The  entire
course  of  affairs  was  governed  not  by  their  own  antecedents,  but  by  a  series  of
miracles.  To  assist  the  Scotch,  winds  were  changed,  and  storms  were  lulled.
Such  intelligence  as  was  important  for  them  to  receive  was  often  brought  by  sea  ;
and  on  those  occasions  it  was  expected  that,  if  the  wind  were  unfavourable,'
Providence  would  interfere,  would  shift  it  from  one  quarter  to  another,  and',
when  the  news  had  safely  arrived,  would  allow  it  to  return  to  its  former  direction.1?
It  was  in  this  way  that,  in  Scotland,  everything  conspired  to  strengthen  that
religious  element  which  the  force  of  circumstances  had  at  an  early  period  made
prominent,  and  which  now  threatened  to  absorb  all  the  other  elements  of  the
national  character.  The  clergy  were  supreme  ;  and  habits  of  mind  natural  and
becoming  to  themselves  were  diffused  among  all  classes.  The  theories  of  a
single  profession  outweighed  those  of  all  other  professions  ;  and  not  only  war,
but  also  trade,  literature,  science,  and  art,  were  held  of  no  account  unless  they
ministered  to  the  general  feeling.  A  state  of  society  so  narrow  and  so  one-
sided has  never  been  seen  in  any  other  country  equally  civilized.  Nor  did  there
appear  much  chance  of  abating  this  strange  monopoly.  As  the  seventeenth
century  advanced  the  same  train  of  events  was  continued  ;  the  clergy  and  the
people  always  making  common  cause  against  the  crown,  and  being,  by  the
necessity  of  self-preservation,  forced  into  the  most  intimate  union  with  each
other.  Of  this  the  preachers  availed  themselves  to  strengthen  their  own
influence  ;  and  for  upwards  of  a  century  their  exertions  stopped  all  intellectual
culture,  discouraged  all  independent  inquiry,  made  men  in  religious  matters
fearful  and  austere,  and  coloured  the  whole  national  character  with  that  dark
hue,  which,  though  now  gradually  softening,  it  still  retains.


other,  it  was  owing  to  the  anger  of  the  Deity  at  the  Scotch  showing  any  favour  to  the
partizans  of  Charles.  For,  says  the  Reverend  Alexander  Shields,  "  both  at  that  time
and  since  that  time,  the  Lord  never  countenanced  an  expedition  where  that  malignant
interest  was  taken  in  unto  the  state  of  the  quarrel.  Upon  this,  our  land  was  invaded
by  Oliver  Cromwell,  who  defeat  our  army  at  Dunbar,  where  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was
evidently  seen  to  smoke  against  us,  for  espousing  that  interest."  Shields'  Hind  Let
Loose,  p.  75.  These  opinions  were  formed  after  the  battle.  Before  the  battle,  a  different
hypothesis  was  broached.  Sir  Edward  Walker,  who  was  in  Scotland  at  the  time,  tells
us  that  the  clergy  assured  the  people  that  "  they  had  an  army  of  saints,  and  that  they
could  not  be  beaten."  Journal  of  Affairs  in  Scotland  in  s6jo,  in  Walker's  Historical
Discourses,  London,  1705,  folio,  p.  165.

16  "  Each  new  victory  of  Montrose  was  expressly  attributed  to  the  admonitory  '  indig-
nation of  the  Lord  '  against  his  chosen  people  for  their  sin,  in  '  trusting  too  much  to  the
arm  of  flesh.'  "     Napier's  Life  of  Montrose,  Edinburgh,  1840,  p.  283.     Compare  Guthrie's
Considerations  contributing  unto  the  Discovery  of  the  Dangers  that  threaten  Religion,  pp.  274,
275,  reprinted  Edinburgh,  1846.     Guthrie  was  at  the  height  of  his  reputation  in  the  middle
of  the  seventeenth  century.     Lord  Somerville  says  of  the  Scotch,  when  they  were  making
war  against  Charles  I.,  that  it  was  "  ordinary  for  them,  dureing  the  wholl  tyme  of  this
warre,  to  attribute  ther  great  successe  to  the  goodnesse  and  justice  of  their  cause,  untill
Divyne  Justice  trysted  them  with  some  crosse  dispensatione,  and  then  you  might  have
heard  this  language  from  them,  that  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  give  his  oune  the  heavyest
end  of  the  tree  to  bear,  that  the  saints  and  people  of  God  must  still  be  sufferers  while
they  are  here  away  ;  that  that  malignant  party  was  God's  rod  to  punish  them  for  their
unthankfullnesse,"  etc.     Somerville's  Memorie  of  the  Somervilles,  vol.  ii.  pp.  351,  352.
[Buckle  appears  to  forget  that  Cromwell  habitually  spoke  of  his  victories  as  divine  dis-
pensations ;  and  that  a  Te  Deum  is  still  the  recognized  ritual  after  a  military  success. — ED.]

17  Baillie  mentions,  in  1644,  an  instance  of  these  expectations  being  fulfilled.     He  says
(Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  ii.  p.  138),  "  These  things  were  brought  in  at  a  very  important
nick  of  time,  by  God's  gracious  providence  :  Never  a  more  quick  passage  from  Holy
Island  to  Yarmouth  in  thirtie  houres  ;  they  had  not  cast  anchor  halfe  an  houre  till  the
wind  turned  contrare."     Compare  p.  142  :  "  If  this  were  past,  we  look  for  a  new  lyfe
and  vigoure  in  all  affaires,  especiallie  if  it  please  God  to  send  a  sweet  north -wind,  carrying
the  certain  news  of  the  taking  of  Newcastle,  which  we  dailie  expect."


748  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

The  Scotch,  during  the  seventeenth  century,  instead  of  cultivating  the  arts
of  life,  improving  their  minds,  or  adding  to  their  wealth,  passed  the  greater  part
of  their  time  in  what  were  called  religious  exercises.  The  sermons  were  so  long
and  so  frequent  that  they  absorbed  all  leisure,  and  yet  the  people  were  never
weary  of  hearing  them.  When  a  preacher  was  once  in  the  pulpit,  the  only  limit
to  his  loquacity  was  his  strength.  Being  sure  of  a  patient  and  reverential
audience,  he  went  on  as  long  as  he  could.  If  he  discoursed  for  two  hours  without
intermission,  he  was  valued  as  a  zealous  pastor,  who  had  the  good  of  his  flock
at  heart  ;  and  this  was  about  as  much  as  an  ordinary  clergyman  could  perform,
because,  in  uttering  his  sentiments,  he  was  expected  to  display  great  vehemence,
and  to  evince  his  earnestness  by  toiling  and  sweating  abundantly.18  This
boundary  was,  however,  often  passed  by  those  who  were  equal  to  the  labour  ;
and  Forbes,  who  was  vigorous  as  well  as  voluble,  thought  nothing  of  preaching
for  five  or  six  hours.19  But  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  such  feats  were
rare  ;  and  as  the  people  were  in  these  matters  extremely  eager,  an  ingenious
contrivance  was  hit  upon  whereby  their  desires  might  be  satisfied.  On  great
occasions  several  clergymen  were  present  in  the  same  church,  in  order  that,
when  one  was  fatigued,  he  might  leave  the  pulpit,  and  be  succeeded  by  another,
who,  in  his  turn,  was  followed  by  a  third  ;  the  patience  of  the  hearers  being
apparently  inexhaustible.20  Indeed,  the  Scotch,  by  the  middle  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  had  grown  accustomed  to  look  up  to  their  minister  as  if  he  were
a  god,  and  to  dwell  with  rapture  upon  every  word  that  dropped  from  his  lips.  To
hear  a  favourite  preacher  they  would  incur  any  fatigue,  and  would  undertake
long  journeys  without  sleep  or  food.21  Their  power  of  attention  was  marvellous.


18  No  one,  perhaps,  carried  this  further  than  John  Menzies,  the  celebrated  professor
of  divinity  at  Aberdeen.     "  Such  was  his  uncommon  fervour  in  the  pulpit,  that,  we  are
informed,  he  '  used  to  change  his  shirt  always  after  preaching,  and  to  wet  two  or  three
napkins  with  tears  every  sermon.'  "     Note  in  Wodrow's  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  222.
James  Forbes,  also,  was  "  an  able  and  zealous  preacher,  who  after  every  sermon  behooved
to  change  his  shirt,  he  spoke  with  such  vehemency  and  sweating."     Select  Biographies,
published  by  the  Wodrow  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  333.     Lord  Somerville,  who  wrote  in  1679,
mentions  "  their  thundering  preachings."     Memorie  of  the  Somervilles,  vol.  ii.  p.  388.     A
traditionary  anecdote,  related  by  the  Dean  of  Edinburgh,  refers  to  a  later  period,  but  is
characteristic  of  the  class.     "  Another  description  I  have  heard  of  an  energetic  preacher
more  forcible  than  delicate — '  Eh,  our  minister  had  a  great  power  o'  watter,  for  he  grat,
and  spat,  and  swat  like  mischeef.'  "     Reminiscences  of  Scottish  Life  and  Character,  'by
E.  B.  Ramsay,  Dean  of  Edinburgh,  p.  201.

19  He  "  was  a  very  learned  and  pious  man  ;  he  had  a  strange  faculty  of  preaching  five
or  six  hours  at  a  time."     Burners  History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  38.     Even  early  in
the  eighteenth  century,  when  theological  fervour  was  beginning  to  decline,  and  sermons
were  consequently  shorter,  Hugh  Thomson  came  near  to  Forbes.      "  He  was  the  longest
preacher  ever  I  heard,  and  would  have  preached  four  (or)  five  hours,  and   was  not
generally  under  two  hours  ;  that  almost  every  body  expected."  ...     "He  was  a  piouse
good  man,  and  a  fervent  affectionat  preacher,  and,  when  I  heard  him,  he  had  a  vast  deal
of  heads,  and  a  great  deal  of  matter,  and  generally  very  good  and  practicall,  but  very
long."     Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  iv.  p.  203.

20  In  1653  Lament  casually  mentions,  in  his  journal,  that   "  the  one  came  doune  from
the  pulpit  and  the  other  went  vp,  in  the  tyme  that  the  psalme  after  the  first  sermon  was
singing,  so  that  ther  was  no  intermission  of  the  exercise,  nether  were  the  peopell  dis-
missed till  both  sermons  were  ended."     The  Diary  of  Mr.  John  Lamont  of  Newton,  p.  58.
Burnet  (History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  92)  says,  "  I  remember  in  one  fast  day  there
were  six  sermons  preached  without  intermission.     I  was  there  myself,  and  not  a  little
weary  of  so  tedious  a  service."

21  When  Guthrie  preached  at  Fenwick,  "  his  church,  although  a  large  country  one,
was  overlaid  and  crowded  every  Sabbath-day,  and  very  many,  without  doors,  from
distant  parishes,  such  as  Glasgow,  Paisley,  Hamilton,  Lanerk,  Kilbryde,  Glasford,  Strat-
haven,  Newmills,  Egelsham,  and  many  other  places,  who  hungered  for  the  pure  gospel
preached,  and  got  a  meal  by  the  word  of  his  ministry.     It  was  their  usual  practice  to


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         749

The  same  congregation  would  sometimes  remain  together  for  ten  hours,  listening
to  sermons  and  prayers,  interspersed  with  singings  and  readings.22  In  an
account  of  Scotland  in  1670,  it  is  stated  that,  in  a  single  church  in  Edinburgh,
thirty  sermons  were  delivered  every  week.23  Nor  is  this  at  all  unlikely,  con-
sidering the  religious  enthusiasm  of  the  age.  For  in  those  times  the  people
delighted  in  the  most  harassing  and  ascetic  devotions.  Thus,  for  instance,  in
1653,  when  the  sacrament  was  administered,  they  pursued  the  following  course.
On  Wednesday,  they  fasted,  and  listened  to  prayers  and  sermons  for  more  than
eight  hours.  On  Saturday,  they  heard  two  or  three  sermons  ;  and  on  Sunday,
the  number  of  sermons  was  so  great  that  they  stayed  in  church  more  than  twelve
hours  ;  while,  to  conclude  the  whole,  three  or  four  additional  ones  were  preached
on  Monday  by  way  of  thanksgiving.24

Such  eagerness,  and  yet  such  patience,  indicate  a  state  of  society  altogether
peculiar,  and  for  which  we  find  no  parallel  in  the  history  of  any  civilized  country.
This  intense  desire  to  hear  whatever  the  preachers  had  to  say  was  in  itself  a
homage  of  the  most  flattering  kind,  and  was  naturally  accompanied  by  a  belief
that  they  were  endowed  with  a  light  which  was  withheld  from  their  less  gifted
countrymen.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  clergy,  who,  at  no  period,  and  in  no
nation,  have  been  remarkable  for  their  meekness,  or  for  a  want  of  confidence
in  themselves,  should,  under  circumstances  so  eminently  favourable  to  their
pretensions,  have  been  somewhat  elated,  and  should  have  claimed  an  authority
even  greater  than  that  which  was  conceded  to  them.  And  as  this  is  intimately
connected  with  the  subsequent  history  of  Scotland,  it  will  be  necessary  to  collect
some  evidence  respecting  their  conduct,  which  will  have  the  further  advantage
of  exhibiting  the  true  character  of  spiritual  domination,  and  of  showing  how  it
works,  not  only  on  the  intellectual,  but  also  on  the  practical,  life  of  a  people.

According  to  the  Presbyterian  polity,  which  reached  its  height  in  the  seven-
teenth century,  the  clergyman  of  the  parish  selected  a  certain  number  of  laymen
on  whom  he  could  depend,  and  who,  under  the  name  of  elders,  were  his  councillors,
or  rather  the  ministers  of  his  authority.  They,  when  assembled  together,
formed  what  was  called  the  Kirk -Session,  and  this  little  court,  which  enforced
the  decisions  uttered  in  the  pulpit,  was  so  supported  by  the  superstitious  reverence
of  the  people,  that  it  was  far  more  powerful  than  any  civil  tribunal.  By  its  aid

come  to  Fenwick  on  Saturday,  and  to  spend  the  greatest  part  of  the  night  in  prayer  to
God,  and  conversation  about  the  great  concerns  of  their  souls,  to  attend  the  public  wor-
ship on  the  Sabbath,  to  dedicate  the  remainder  of  that  holy  day  in  religious  exercises,
and  then  to  go  home  on  Monday  the  length  of  ten,  twelve  or  twenty  miles  without
grudging  in  the  least  at  the  long  way,  want  of  sleep  or  other  refreshments  ;  neither  did
they  find  themselves  the  less  prepared  for  any  other  business  through  the  week."  Howie's
Biographia  Scoticana,  2nd  edit.  Glasgow,  1781,  p.  311.  One  woman  went  forty  miles  to
hear  Livingstone  preach.  See  her  own  statement,  in  Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  ii.  p.  249.

22  Spalding  gives  the  following  account  of  what  happened  at  Aberdeen  in  1644.      "  So
heir  in  Old  Abirdene,  upone  the  sevint  of  July,  we  had  ane  fast,  entering  the  churche
be  nyne  houris,  and  continewit  praying  and  preiching  whill  tua  houris.     Efter  sermon,
the  people  sat  still  heiring  reiding  whill  efternone's  sermon  began  and  endit,  whiche
continewit  till  half  hour  to  sex.     Then  the  prayer  bell  rang  to  the  evening  prayeris,  and
continewit  whill  seven."     Spalding's  History  of  the  Troubles,  vol.  ii.  p.  244,  edit.  Edin-
burgh, 1829,  4to.     See  also  p.  42  :  "  The  people  keipit  churche  all  day."     This  was  also
at  Aberdeen,  in  1642.

23  "  Out  of  one  pulpit  now  they  have  thirty  sermons  per  week,  all  under  one  roof."
A  Modern  Account  of  Scotland,  in  The  Harleian  Miscellany,  vol.  vi.  p.  138,  edit.  Park,
London,  1810,  4to.

24  "  But  where  the  greatest  part  was  more  sound,  they  gave  the  sacrament  with  a
new  and  unusual  solemnity.     On  the  Wednesday  before,  they  held  a  fast  day,  with  prayers
and  sermons  for  about  eight  or  ten  hours  together :  on  the  Saturday  they  had  two  or
three  preparation  sermons :  and  on  the  Lord's  day  they  had  so  very  many,  that  the
action  continued  above  twelve  hours  in  some  places :  and  all  ended  with  three  or  four
sermons  on  Monday  for  thanksgiving."     Burnefs  History  of  his  own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  108.


750  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  minister  became  supreme.  For  whoever  presumed  to  disobey  him  was
excommunicated,  was  deprived  of  his  property,  and  was  believed  to  have  incurred
the  penalty  of  eternal  perdition.25  Against  such  weapons,  in  such  a  state  of
society,  resistance  was  impossible.  The  clergy  interfered  with  every  man's
private  concerns,  ordered  how  he  should  govern  his  family,  and  often  took
upon  themselves  the  personal  control  of  his  household.26  Their  minions,  the
elders,  were  everywhere  ;  for  each  parish  was  divided  into  several  quarters,
and  to  each  quarter  one  of  these  officials  was  allotted,  in  order  that  he  might
take  special  notice  of  what  was  done  in  his  own  district.27  Besides  this,  spies

25  "  The  power  of  those  kirk -sessions,  which  are  now  private  assemblages,  in  whose
meetings  and  proceedings  the  public  take  no  interest  whatever,  is  denned  to  be  the
cognizance  of  parochial  matters  and  cases  of  scandal ;  but  in  the  sixteenth  and  seven-
teenth centuries,  especially  during  the  Covenanting  reign  of  terror  after  the  outbreak
of  the  Civil  War  against  Charles  I.,  the  kirk -sessions  of  Scotland  were  the  sources  of
excessive  tyranny  and  oppression — were  arbitrary,  inquisitorial,  and  revengeful,  to  an
extent  which  exceeds  all  belief.     It  is  truly  stated  by  the  author  of  the  '  Memoirs  of
Locheill ' — '  Every  parish  had  a  tyrant,  who  made  the  greatest  Lord  in  his  district  stoop
to  his  authority.     The  kirk  was  the  place  where  he  kept  his  court ;  the  pulpit  his  throne
or  tribunal  from  whence  he  issued  out  his  terrible  decrees  ;  and  twelve  or  fourteen  sour
ignorant  enthusiasts,  under  the  title  of  Elders,  composed  his  council.     If  any,  of  what
quality  soever,  had  the  assurance  to  disobey  his  orders,  the  dreadful  sentence  of  excom-
munication was  immediately  thundered  out  against  him,  his  goods  and  chattels  con-
fiscated and  seized,  and  he  himself  being  looked  upon  as  actually  in  the  possession  of  the
devil,  and  irretrievably  doomed  to  eternal  perdition.'  "     Introduction  to  The  Kirk-
Session  Register  of  Perth,  in  The  Spottiswoode  Miscellany,  vol.  ii.  pp.  229,  230,  Edinburgh,
1845.     In  regard  to  the  perdition  which  the  sentence  of  excommunication  was  supposed
to  involve,  one  of  the  most  influential  Scotch  divines  of  that  time  merely  expresses  the
prevailing  notion  when  he  asserts  that  whoever  was   excommunicated   was    thereby
given  up  to  Satan.     "  That  he  who  is  excommunicated  may  be  truly  said  to  be  delivered
to  Sathan  is  undeniable."     Gillespie's  Aaron's  Rod  Blossoming,  or  the  Divine  Ordinance
of  Church  Government  Vindicated,  1646,  4to,  p.  239.     "  Excommunication,  which  is  a
shutting  out  of  a  Church -member  from  the  Church,  whereby  Sathan  commeth  to  get
dominion  and  power  over  him."     Ibid.,  p.  297.     "  Sure  I  am  an  excommunicate  person
may  truly  be  said  to  be  delivered  to  Sathan."  p.  424.

26  Clarendon,  under  the  year  1640,  emphatically  says  (History  of  the  Rebellion,  p.  67),
"  The  preacher  reprehended  the  husband,  governed  the  wife,  chastised  the  children,  and
insulted  over  the  servants,  in  the  houses  of  the  greatest  men."     The  theory  was,  that
"  ministers  and  elders  must  be  submitted  unto  as  fathers."     Shields'  Enquiry   into
Church  Communion,  2nd  edit.  Edinburgh,  1747,  p.  66.     In  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth
century,  one  of  the  most  famous  of  the  Scotch  preachers  openly  asserted  the  right  of  his
profession  to  interfere  in  family  matters,  on  the  ground  that  such  was  the  custom  in  the
time  of  Joshua.     "The  Ministers  of  God's  house  have  not  only  the  ministry  of  holy
things,  as  Word  and  Sacraments,  committed  to  their  charge,  but  also  the  power  of
ecclesiastical  government  to  take  order  with  scandalous  offences  within  the  familie  ;
both  these  are  here  promised  to  Joshua  and  the  Priests."     Hutcheson's  Exposition  of
the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  iii.  p.  72,  London,  1654.      IQ  i6°3  the  Presbytery  of  Aberdeen
took  upon  themselves  to  order  that  every  master  of  a  house  should  keep  a  rod,  that  his
family,  including  his  servants,  might  be  beaten  if  they  used  improper  language.     "  It
is  concludit  that  thair  salbe  in  ewerie  houss  a  palmar."     Selections  from  the  Records  of
the  Kirk  Session,  Presbytery,  and  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  printed  for  the  Spalding  Club,  4to,
Aberdeen,  1846,  p.  194.       It  also  appears  (p.  303)  that  in  1674  the  clergyman  was
expected  to  exercise  supervision  over  all  visitors  to  private  houses  ;  since  he  ought  to
be  informed,  "  iff  ther  be  anie  persone  receaved  in  the  familie  without  testimoniall  pre-
sented to  the  minister."

27  In  1650  it  was  ordered   "  That  everie  paroche  be  divydit  in  severall  quarteris,  and
each  elder  his  owne  quarter,  over  which  he  is  to  have  speciall  inspectioun,  and  that  everie
elder  visit  his  quarter  once  everie  month  at  least,  according  to  the  act  of  the  Generall
Assemblie.  1649,  and  in  thair  visitatioun  tak  notice  of  all  disorderlie  walkeris,  especiallie


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         751

were  appointed,  so  that  nothing  could  escape  their  supervision.28  Not  only
the  streets,  but  even  private  houses,  were  searched,  and  ransacked  to  see  if  any
one  was  absent  from  church  while  the  minister  was  preaching.29  To  him  all
must  listen,  and  him  all  must  obey.  Without  the  consent  of  his  tribunal,  no
person  might  engage  himself,  either  as  a  domestic  servant,  or  as  a  field  labourer.30
If  any  one  incurred  the  displeasure  of  the  clergy,  they  did  not  scruple  to  summon
his  servants,  and  force  them  to  state  whatever  they  knew  respecting  him,  and
whatever  they  had  seen  done  in  his  house.31  To  speak  disrespectfully  of  a
preacher  was  a  grievous  offence  ;  32  to  differ  from  him  was  a  heresy  ;  33  even  to
pass  him  in  the  streets  without  saluting  him  was  punished  as  a  crime.3*  His

neglectouris  of  God's  worship  in  thair  families,  sueareris,  haunteris  of  aill  houses,
especiallie  at  vnseasonable  tymes,  and  long  sitteris  thair,  and  drinkeris  of  healthis  ;  and
that  he  dilate  these  to  the  Sessioun."  Selections  front  the  Minutes  of  the  Synod  of  Fife,
printed  for  the  Abbotsford  Club,  Edinburgh,  1837,  4to,  p.  168.  "  The  elders  each  one
in  his  own  quarter,  for  trying  the  manners  of  the  people."  The  Government  and  Order
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  Edinburgh,  1690,  p.  14.  This  scarce  little  volume  is  reprinted
from  the  edition  of  1641.  See  the  advertisement  at  the  beginning.

28  In  1652  the  Kirk-Session  of   Glasgow  "  brot  boyes  and  servants  before  them,  for
breaking  the  Sabbath,  and  other  faults.     They  had  clandestine  censors,  and  gave  money
to  some  for  this  end."     Wodrow's  Collections,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  74,  Glasgow,  1848,  4to.

29  "  It  is  thocht  expedient  that  ane  baillie  with  tua  of  the  sessioun  pas  throw  the
towne  everie  Sabboth  day,  and  nott  sic  as  thay  find  absent  fra  the  sermones  ather  afoir
or  efter  none  ;  and  for  that  effect  that  thay  pas  and  sersche  sic  houss  as  they  think  maist
meit,  and  pas  athort  the  streittis."     Selections  from  the  Records  of  the  Kirk  Session,
Presbytery,  and  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  p.  26.     "  To  pas  throw  the  towne  to  caus  the  people
resort  to  the  hering  of  the  sermones."  p.  59.     "  Ganging  throw  the  towne  on  the  ordi-
nar  preiching  dayes  in  the  weik,  als  weill  as  on  the  Saboth  day,  to  caus  the  people  resort
to  the  sermones."  p.  77.     See  also  p.  94  ;  and  Wodrow's  Collections,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  37  :
"  The  Session  allous  the  searchers  to  go  into  houses  and  apprehend  absents  from  the  kirk."

30  "  Another  peculiarity  was  the  supervision  wielded  over  the  movements  of  people
to  such  a  degree  that  they  could  neither  obtain  lodging  nor  employment  except  by  a
licence  from  the  Kirk -Session,  or,  by  defying  this  police  court,  expose  themselves  to  fine
and  imprisonment."     Lawson's  Book  of  Perth,  p.  xxxvii.,  Edinburgh,  1847.

31  In  1652  Sir  Alexander  Irvine  indignantly  writes  that  the  presbytery  of  Aberdeen,
"  when  they  had  tried  many  waves,  bot  in  vaine,  to  mak  probable  this  their  vaine
imaginatione,  they  at  lenthe,  when  all  other  meanes  failed  thame,  by  ane  unparalelled
barbaritie,  enforced  my  serwandis  to  reweall  upon  oathe  what  they  sawe,  herd,  or  knewe
done  within  my  house,  beyond  which  no  Turkische  inquisitione  could  pase."     The
Miscellany  of  the  Spalding  Club,  vol.  iii.  p.  206,  Aberdeen,  1846,  4to.

32  In  1656  a  servant  was  ordered  to  be  brought  before  the  Kirk-Session  of  Aberdeen
"  for  her  rayleing  againest  Mr.  Andrew  Cant,  minister,  in  saying  that  becaus  the  said
Mr.  Andrew  spak  againest  Yuill,  he  spak  lyke  ane  old  fool."     Selections  from  the  Records
of  the  Kirk  Session,  Presbytery,  and  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  p.  138.      In  1642  the  Presbytery
of  Lanark  had  up  a  certain  James  Baillie,  because  he  stated  the  extremely  probable
circumstance    "  that  two  fooles  mett  togither,  when  the  Minister  and  his  sone  mett
togither."     Selections  from  the  Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Lanark,  printed  for  the
Abbotsford  Club,  Edinburgh,  1839,  4to,  p.  30.

33  In  1644,  "  If  you  dissent  from  them  in  a  theological  tenet,  it  is  heresy."     Presbytery
Displayed,  1644,  p.  39,  reprinted  London,  1663,  4to.     In  1637,  "  If  ye  depart  from  what
I  taught  you  in  a  hair-breadth  for  fear  or  favour  of  men,  or  desire  of  ease  in  this  world,  ^1
take  heaven  and  earth  to  witness,  that  ill  shall  come  upon  you  in  end."     Rutherford's
Religious  Letters,  p.  116.      In  1607  "Mr.  William  Cowper,  Minister,  complained  upon
Robert   Keir  that  he  had  disdainfully  spoken  of  his  doctrine.     The   (Kirk)  Session
ordained  him  to  be  warned  to  the  morrow."     Lawson's  Book  of  Perth,  p.  247.

34  In  1619  a  man  was  summoned  before  the  Kirk-Session  of   Perth,  because,  among
other  things,  he  would  not  perform  "  that  civil  duty  of  salutation,  as  becomes  him  to
his  pastor  ;  "  but  "  passed  by  him  without  using  any  kind  of  reverence."     The  Chronicle
of  Perth,  Edinburgh,  1831,  4to,  p.  80.     The  complaint  was  preferred  by  the  minister


752  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

very  name  was  regarded  as  sacred,  and^not  to  be  taken  in  vain.  And  that  it
might  be  properly  protected,  and  held  in  due  honour,  an  Assembly  of  the  Church,
in  1642,  forbade  it  to  be  used  in  any  public  paper  unless  the  consent  of  the  holy
man  had  been  previously  obtained.35

These  and  similar  proceedings,  being  upheld  by  public  opinion,  were  com-
pletely successful.  Indeed  they  could  hardly  have  been  otherwise,  seeing  that
it  was  generally  believed  that  whoever  gainsaid  the  clergy  would  be  visited
not  only  with  temporal  penalties,  but  also  with  spiritual  ones.  For  such  a  crime
there  was  punishment  here,  and  there  was  punishment  hereafter.  The  preachers
willingly  fostered  a  delusion  by  which  they  benefited.  They  told  their  hearers
that  what  was  spoken  in  the  pulpit  was  binding  upon  all  believers,  and  was  to
be  regarded  as  immediately  proceeding  from  the  Deity.36  This  proposition
being  established,  other  propositions  naturally  followed.  The  clergy  believed
that  they  alone  were  privy  to  the  counsels  of  the  Almighty,  and  that  by  virtue
of  this  knowledge  they  could  determine  what  any  man's  future  state  would  be.37
Going  still  further,  they  claimed  the  power  not  only  of  foretelling  his  future  state,
but  also  of  controlling  it  ;  and  they  did  not  scruple  to  affirm  that  by  their
censures  they  could  open  and  shut  the  kingdom  of  heaven.38  As  if  this  were

himself.  Indeed,  the  Scotch  clergy  took  these  things  so  much  to  heart,  that  they  set  up
a  theory  to  the  effect  that  whoever  showed  them  any  disrespect  was  prompted  thereto
by  Satan.  "  It  is  Satan's  great  engine  to  draw  men  to  contemne  God  and  his  word,
under  pretext  of  disrespect  and  prejudice  against  the  Messengers  only."  ...  "It
may  let  us  see  their  guilt  who  despise  most  eminent  ordinary  Messengers."  Hutcheson's
Exposition  of  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  i.  pp.  205,  233.

35  The  General  Assembly  of  Saint  Andrews,  in  1642,  passed  "  an  act  against  using
ministers'  names  in  any  of  the  public  papers,  without  their  own  consent."     Stevenson's
History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  p.  503.

36  "  Directions  for  a  believer's  walk,  given  by  Christ's  ministers  from  his  word,  are  his
own,  and  are  accounted  by  him  as  if  he  did  immediately  speak  them  himself."     Durham's
Exposition  of  the  Song  of  Solomon,  p.  102.     I  quote  from  the  Glasgow  reprint  of  1788.
That  my  references  may  be  easily  verified,  and  any  error,  if  error  there  be,  detected,  I
mention  that  the  exact  edition  used  will,  in  every  case,  be  found  specified  in  the  List  of
Authors  at  the  beginning  of  the  volume.      But  if  it  will  give  the  reader  any  additional
confidence,  I  will  venture  to  observe,  that  I  am  always  scrupulously  careful  in  reference
to  quotations,  having  looked  out  each  passage  afresh  as  the  sheets  came  from  the  printer's
hands.     Some  of  the  circumstances  narrated  in  this  chapter  are  so  monstrous,  that  I
hope  to  be  excused  in  saying  that  I  have  taken  all  possible  pains  to  secure  their  literal
accuracy.

37  "  Yea,  such  was  their  arrogance,  that,  as  if  they  had  been  privy  to  the  councils  of
God,  or  the  dispensers  of  his  vengeance  to  the  world,  they  presumed  to  pronounce  upon
their  future  state,  and  doomed  them,  both  body  and  soul,  to  eternal  torments."  Wishart's
Memoirs  of  the  Marquis  of  Montrose,  p.  237.     "  Ye  heard  of  me  the  whole  counsel  of  God."
Rutherford's  Religious  Letters,  p.  16.     "I  am  free  from  the  blood  of  all  men  ;  for  I  have
communicated  to  you  the  whole  counsel  of  God."     Ibid.,  p.  191.     "This  is  the  great
business  of  Gospel  Ministers,  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God."     Halyburton's  Great
Concern  of  Salvation,  p.  4.     "  Asserting  that  he  had  declared  the  whole  counsel  of  God,
and  had  keeped  nothing  back."     Life  of  the  Rev.  Alexander  Peden,  p.  41,  in  vol.  i.  of
Walker's  Biographia  Presbyteriana.

38  "  The  power  of  the  keys  is  given  to  the  ministers  of  the  church,  wherewith  not  only
by  the  preaching  of  the  word,  but  also  to  church  censures,  (sic)  they  open  and  shut  the
kingdom  of  heaven."     Dickson's   Truth's  Victory  over  Error,  p.  282.     "  To  preach  the
Word,  impugne,  rebuik,  admonishe,  exhort   and  correct,  and  that  under  no  less  paine
then  casting  both  bodie  and  soull  into  eternall  hell's  fire."     Forbes'  Certaine  Records
touching  the  Estate  of  the  Kirk,  p.  519.     "  The  next  words,  '  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on
Earth  shall  be  bound  in  HeaVen,'  being  spoken  to  the  Apostles,  and  in  them  to  other
Ministers  of  Jesus  Christ."     Gillespie's  Aaron's  Rod  Blossoming,  p.  366.     "  The  keys  of
the  kingdom  of  Heaven  "...       "  are  committed  and  intrusted  to  the  pastors  and  other
ruling  officers  of  the  Church."     Ibid.,  p.  260.


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         753

not  enough,  they  also  gave  out  that  a  word  of  theirs  could  hasten  the  moment
of  death,  and  by  cutting  off  the  sinner  in  his  prime,  could  bring  him  at  once
before  the  judgment-seat  of  God.39

Utterly  horrible  as  such  a  pretension  now  appears,  it  was  made  not  only  with
impunity  but  with  advantage  ;  and  numerous  instances  are  recorded  in  which
the  people  believed  that  it  was  strictly  enforced.  The  celebrated  John  Welsh,
sitting  one  night  at  table,  round  which  a  party  were  assembled  at  supper,  began
to  discourse  to  the  company  respecting  the  state  of  their  souls.  Those  who
were  present  listened  with  humility  ;  but  to  this  general  feeling  there  was  one
exception.  For  it  so  happened  that  a  Roman  Catholic  was  in  the  room,  and  he,
of  course,  disagreed  with  the  opinions  expressed  by  the  Presbyterian  divine.
If  he  had  been  a  cautious  man,  he  would  have  kept  his  disagreement  to  himself  ;
but  being  a  hot-headed  youth,  and  being  impatient  at  seeing  a  single  person
engross  the  conversation,  he  lost  his  temper,  and  not  only  ridiculed  Welsh,  but
actually  made  faces  at  him.  Thereupon,  Welsh  charged  the  company  to  take
heed,  and  see  what  the  Lord  was  about  to  do  to  him  who  mocked.  Scarcely  had
this  threat  been  uttered,  when  it  was  carried  into  execution.  He  who  had
dared  to  jest  at  the  minister,  suddenly  fell,  sank  under  the  table,  and  died  there
in  presence  of  the  whole  party.40

This  happened  early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and,  being  bruited  abroad,
it  became  a  great  terror  to  all  evildoers.  But  after  a  time  its  effect  appears
to  have  been  weakened ;  since  another  man  was  equally  rash  some  forty  or  fifty


39  "  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  and  make  you  ready  for  meeting  the  Lord  ;  I  have
often  summoned  you,  and  now  I  summon  you  again,  to  compear  before  your  Judge,  to
make  a  reckoning  of  your  life."     Rutherford's  Religious  Letters,  p.  235.     "  Mr.  Cameron,
musing  a  little,  said,  '  You,  and  all  who  do  not  know  my  God  in  mercy,  shall  know  him
in  his  judgments,  which  shall  be  sudden  and  surprising  in  a  few  days  upon  you  ;  and  I,
as  a  sent  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  whose  commission  I  bear,  and  whose  badge  I  wear  upon
my  breast,  give  you  warning,  and  leave  you  to  the  justice  of  God.'     Accordingly,  in  a
few  days  after,  the  said  Andrew,  being  in  perfect  health,  took  his  breakfast  plentifully,
and  before  he  rose  fell  a-vomiting,  and  vomited  his  heart's  blood  in  the  very  vessel  out
of  which  he  had  taken  his  breakfast ;  and  died  in  a  most  frightful  manner."     Howie's
Biographia  Scoticana,  p.  406.

40  "  Sitting  at  supper  with  the  Lord  Ochiltree  (who  was  uncle  to  Mr.  Welsh's  wife),
as  his  manner  was,  he  entertained  the  company  with  godly  and  edifying  discourse,  which
was  well  received  by  all  the  company  save  only  one  debauched  Popish  young  gentleman,
who  sometimes  laughed,  and  sometimes  mocked  and  made  faces  ;  whereupon  Mr.  Welsh
brake  out  into  a  sad  abrupt  charge  upon  all  the  company  to  be  silent,  and  observe  the
work  of  the  Lord  upon  that  profane  mocker,  which  they  should  presently  behold  :  upon
which  immediately  the  profane  wretch  sunk  down  and  died  beneath  the  table,  but  never
returned  to  life  again,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  all  the  company."     History  of  Mr.
John  Welsh,  Minister  of  the  Gospel  at  Ayr,  in  Select  Biographies,  vol.  i.  p.  29.     "  Mr.
Welsh  being  by  the  Captaine,  set  at  the  upper  end,  intertained  the  company  with  grave
and  edifying  discourse  which  all  delighted  to  hear,  save  this  young  Papist,  who  with
laughter  and  derision  laboured  to  silence  him,  which  was  little  regarded  by  Mr.  Welsh.
But  after  supper  while  the  guests  sate  a  little,  this  youth  stood  up  at  the  lower  end  of
the  table,  and  while  Mr.  Welsh  proceeded  from  grave  to  gracious  entertainment  of  his
company,  the  youth  came  to  that  height  of  insolence  as  with  the  finger  to  point  at  him
and  with  the  face  to  make  flouting  grimaces,  whereby  he  grieved  the  holy  man,  so  as  on
a  suddain  he  was  forced  to  a  silence.     The  whole  company,  who  had  heard  him  with
delight,  were  silent  with  him.     Within  a  little,  Mr.  Welsh,  as  moved  by  the  spirit  of  God,
broke  forth  into  these  words  :  '  Gentlemen,  the  spirit  of  God  is  provoked  against  us,  and
I  shall  intreat  you  not  to  be  afraid  to  see  what  God  shall  do  among  you  before  you  rise
from  the  table,  for  he  will  smite  some  of  you  with  death  before  you  go  hence.'     All  were
silently  astonished,  waiting  to  see  the  issue  with  fear.     And  while  every  man  feared
himselfe,  except  the  insolent  youth,  he  fel  down  dead  suddenly  at  the  foot  of  the  table
to  shew  the  power  of  God's  jealousie  against  the  mockers  of  his  Spirit  and  the  offers  of
his  grace."     Fleming's  Fulfilling  of  the  Scripture,  pp.  37 A  >  375-


754  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

years  afterwards.  It  seems  that  a  Scotch  clergyman  of  considerable  repute,
Mr.  Thomas  Hog,  was,  like  Welsh,  sitting  at  supper,  when  it  so  chanced  that  the
servant  forgot  to  lay  the  knives.  Mr.  Hog,  thinking  the  opportunity  a  favour-
able one,  observed  that  such  forgetfulness  was  of  little  moment,  and  that,  while
we  thought  so  much  of  our  comforts  here,  it  was  far  more  necessary  to  consider
our  condition  hereafter.  A  gentleman  present,  amused  either  by  the  manner
of  Mr.  Hog,  or  by  the  skill  with  which  he  introduced  the  topics  of  his  own  pro-
fession, was  unable  to  restrain  himself,  and  burst  into  a  violent  fit  of  laughter.
The  minister,  however,  was  not  to  be  checked,  and  he  continued  after  such  a
fashion  that  the  laughter  was  repeated  louder  than  ever.  At  length  Mr.  Hog
turned  round,  and  told  his  merry  comrade  that  very  shortly  he  should  seek  for
mercy,  but  find  it  not.  That  same  night,  the  scoffer  was  taken  ill,  and  in  great
alarm  sent  for  Mr.  Hog.  It  was,  however,  useless.  Before  the  clergyman  could
reach  his  room,  the  sinner  was  lying  dead,  a  lost  and  ruined  man.41

Nor  was  it  merely  in  private  houses  that  such  examples  were  made.  Some-
times the  clergyman  denounced  the  offender  from  the  pulpit,  and  the  punish-
ment was  as  public  as  the  offence.  It  is  said  that  Gabriel  Semple,  when  preach-
ing, had  a  strange  habit  of  putting  out  his  tongue,  and  that  this  excited  the  mirth
of  a  drunken  man,  who  went  into  the  church,  and  by  way  of  derision  [put  out
his  tongue  also.  But  to  his  horror  he  found  that  though  he  could  put  it  out
he  could  not  draw  it  in  again.  The  result  was  that  the  tongue  stiffened  ;  it
lost  all  sensibility  ;  and,  paralysis  coming  on,  the  man  died  a  few  days  after  his
transgression.42

41  "  When  they  sat  doun  to  supper,  it  seems,  knives  were  forgote  ;  and  when  the
servant  was  rebuked,  Mr.  Hogg  said,  there  was  noe  matter,  for  he  had  one  in  his  pocket,
and  it  was  a  necessary  companion  for  a  travailer  ;  and,  as  his  use  was  upon  evry  thing,
he  took  occasion  to  raise  a  spirituall  discourse  from  it :  'If  we  wer  soe  carefull  about
accommodations  in  our  way  here,  what  care  should  we  take  in  our  spirituall  journey ! '
and  the  like  ;  at  which  the  factour  takes  a  kink  of  laughing.     Mr.  Hogg  looked  at  him
with  a  frown,  and  went  on  in  his  discourse.     Within  a  little,  at  somewhat  or  other,  he
laughed  out  yet  louder,  and  Mr.  Hogg  stoped  a  litle,  and  looked  him  very  stern  in  the
face,  and  went  on  in  his  discourse,  upon  the  free  grace  of  God  ;  and,  at  some  expression
or  other,  the  man  fell  a  laughing  and  flouting  very  loud  :  Upon  which  Mr.  Hogg  stoped,
and  directed  his  discourse  to  him,  to  this  purpose  :  '  Alace  !  '  sayes  he,  '  my  soul  is
afflicted  to  say  what  I  must  say  to  you,  sir,  and  I  am  constrained  and  pressed  in  spirit
to  say  it,  and   cannot  help  it.      Sir,  you  now  dispise    the  grace    of  God,   and   mock
at  it ;  but  I  tell  you,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  the  time  is  coming,  and    that
very  shortly,  when  you  (will)  seek  ane  offer  of  grace,  but  shall  not  find  it  !  '      Upon
which  the  man  arose,  laughing  and  flouting,  and  went  to  his  room.     After  he  was
away,   the  lady  asked  Mr.    Hogg,   What   he   thought   would   come    upon   him  ?     He
answered,  he  kneu  noe  more  then  he  had  said,  and  that  he  was  constrained  and  oblidged
to  say  it  against  his  inclination  ;  and  he  could  not  accompt  for  some  of  these  impressions
he  sometimes  felt,  and  after  Providences  would  clear,  and  that  shortly  ;  but  what  it  was,
when,  or  where,  he  kneu  not.     The  man  told  some  of  the  servants  that  a  phanatick
Minister  had  been  pronouncing  a  curse  on  him,  but  he  did  not  value  him  nor  it  either.
After  Mr.  Hogg  had  been  somtime  with  the  lady,  he  went  to  his  room  ;  and  after  he  had,
as  he  used  to  doe,  spent  some  time  in  prayer,  he  putt  off  his  cloaths,  and  just  as  he  was
stepping  into  his  bedd,  a  servant  comes  and  knocks  at  the  dore  and  cryes,  '  For  the  Lord's
sake,  Mr.  Hogg,  come  doun  staires,  presently,  to  the  factour's  room  !  '     He  put  on  his
cloaths,  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  came  doun,  but  the  wretch  was  dead  before  he  reached
him  !  "     Analecta,  or  Materials  for  a  History  of  Remarkable  Providences,  mostly  relating
to  Scotch  Ministers  and  Christians,  by  the  Rev.  Robert  Wodrow,  vol.  i.  pp.  265,  266,
Compare  The  Life  of  Mr.  Thomas  Hog,  in  Howie's  Biographia,  p.  543,  where  a  version  is
given,  slightly  different,  but  essentially  the  same.

42  "  He  tells  me,  that  when  in  the  South  country,  he  heard  this  story,  which  was  not
doubted  about  Geddart"  (i.e.  Jedburgh)  :  "  Mr.  Gabriel  Semple  had  gote  a  habite,  when
speaking  and  preaching,  of  putting  out  his  tongue,  and  licking  his  lipps  very  frequently.
Ther  was  a  fellou  that  used  to  ape  him,  in  a  way  of  mock  ;  and  one  day,  in  a  druken


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         755

Occasionally  the  penalty  was  less  severe,  though  the  miracle  was  equally
conspicuous.  .In  1682  a  certain  woman  took  upon  herself  to  scold  the  famous
divine,  Peden,  who  was  justly  regarded  as  one  of  the  great  lights  of  the  Scotch
Church.  "  I  wonder,"  said  that  eminent  man,  "  I  wonder  your  tongue  is  not
sore  with  so  much  idle  clatter."  She  indignantly  replied  that  she  had  never
suffered,  either  from  a  sore  tongue,  or  from  a  sore  mouth.  He  told  her  that  she
soon  would.  And  the  consequence  of  his  saying  so  was  that  her  tongue  and
gums  swelled  to  that  degree,  that  for  some  days  she  was  unable  to  take  her  usual
food.43

She  escaped  with  her  life  ;  others  were  more  sharply  handled.  A  clergyman
was  interrupted  in  the  midst  of  his  sermon  by  three  gentlemen  leaving  the  church.
It  is  not  stated  that  there  was  anything  offensive  in  their  manner  ;  but  their
object  in  going  was  to  amuse  themselves  at  some  fair  or  race,  and  the  minister,
no  doubt,  thought  that  they  should  have  been  content  with  the  gratification
of  hearing  him.  At  all  events  he  was  dissatisfied,  and  after  the  sermon  was
over  he  censured  their  conduct,  and  threatened  them  with  the  divine  displeasure.
His  words  were  remembered,  and,  to  the  awe  of  his  parishioners,  every  tittle
was  fulfilled.  Of  the  three  gentlemen,  all  died  violent  deaths  ;  one  of  them
broke  his  neck  by  falling  from  his  horse,  and  another  was  found  in  his  room  with
his  throat  cut.4*

Cases  of  this  sort  were  frequent  during  the  seventeenth  century  ;  and  as  in
that  credulous  age  they  were  firmly  believed  and  widely  circulated,  the  power
of  the  clergy  was  consolidated  by  them.  The  Laird  of  Hilton  once  ventured  to
pull  a  minister  out  of  a  pulpit  which  was  not  his  own,  and  into  which  he  had
unlawfully  intruded.  "  For  the  injury  you  have  done  to  the  servant  of  God,"
cried  the  enraged  preacher,  "  you  shall  be  brought  into  this  church  like  a  sticked
sow."  And  so  indeed  he  was.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  Hilton  became  entangled
in  a  quarrel,  was  run  through  the  body,  and  his  corpse,  still  bleeding,  was  carried
into  the  very  church  where  the  outrage  had  been  committed.45

caball,  he  was  aping  him  and  putting  out  his  tongue  ;  and  it  turned  stiffe  and  sensless,
and  he  could  not  drau  it  in  again,  but  in  a  feu  dayes  dyed.  This  accompt  is  soe  odd,  that
I  wish  I  may  have  it  confirmed  from  other  hands."  Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  ii.  p.  187.

43  "  About  the  same  time,  wading  Douglas-water  very  deep,"  (he)  "  came  to  a  house
there  ;  the  goodwife  of  the  house  insisted  (as  most  part  of  women  do  not  keep  a  bricUe-
hand)  in  chiding  of  him  ;  which  made  him  to  fret,  and  said,  I  wonder  that  your  tongue
is  not  sore  with  so  much  idle  clatter.     She  said,  I  never  had  a  sore  tongue  nor  mouth  all
my  days.     He  said,  It  will  not  be  long  so.     Accordingly,  her  tongue  and  gooms  swelled
so  that  she  could  get  no  meat  taken  for  some  days."     Account  of  the  Life  and  Death  of
Mr.  Walter  Smith,  p.  93,  in  vol.  ii.  of  Walker's  Biographia  Presbyteriana.

44  "  I  hear  from  Lady  Henriett  Campbell,  who  was  present  at  a  Communion  at  Jeddart
(Jedburgh),  some  years  before  Mr.  Gabriel  Semple's  death,  that  either  on  the  fast  day
or  Saturnday,  ther  wer  three  gentlmen  either  in  the  parish  or  noturely  knouen  thereabout,
who  rose  in  the  time  of  the  last  sermon,  and  with  their  servants  went  out  of  (the  church),
either  to  some  fair  or  some  race,  not  farr  off.     After  sermon,  when  Mr.  Semple  rose  to
give  the  ordinary  advertisements,  he  began  with  taking  nottice  of  this,  and  said,  he  had
remarked  three  gentlmen  rise  in  time  of  sermon,  and  contemptuously  and  boldly  leave
God's  service  to  goe  to  a  fair,  or  race,  as  he  supposed  ;  but  sayes,  '  It's  born  in  upon  me,
and  I  am  perswaded  of  it,  the  Lord  will  not  suffer  them  to  goe  off  time,  without  some
remarkable  judgment,  and  I  am  much  mistaken  if  the  most  part  that  have  seen  them
committ  the  sin,  will  not  hear  of  the  punishment  of  such  open  despite  to  the  ordinances
of  Christ.'     This  peremptory  ness  did  very  much  surprize  Lady  H(enriett),  and  coining
home  from  sermon  with  my  Lord  Lothian  and  his  Lady,  in  coach,  she  expressed  her
surprize  at  it.     My  Lord  Lothian  said,   '  The  Minister  is  a  man  of  God,  and  I  am
perswaded  not  one  word  of  his  will  fall  to  the  ground  !  '     Within  some  feu  moneths,  my
Lord  or  my  Lady,  writing  to  Lady  H(enriett),  signifyed  to  her,  that  one  of  these  geiitlmen
was  found  in  his  room,  (if  I  forgett  not),  with  his  throat  cutt ;  and  a  second,  being  drunk,
fell  off  his  horse,  and  broke  his  neck  ;  and  some  while  after,  shee  heard  the  third  had
dyed  some  violent  death."     Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  i.  pp.  344.  345-

45  "In  the  time  of  sermon,  the  Laird  of  Hiltoun  comes  in,  and  charges  him  in  the


756  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Even  when  a  clergyman  was  in  prison  he  retained  the  same  power.  His
authority  was  delegated  to  him  from  on  high,  and  no  temporal  misfortune  could
curtail  it.  In  1673  the  Reverend  Alexander  Peden,  when  in  confinement,
heard  a  young  girl  laughing  at  him  outside  the  door  of  his  room,  while  he  was
engaged  in  those  vociferous  devotions  for  which  he  was  celebrated.  The  mirth
of  the  poor  child  cost  her  dear.  Peden  denounced  against  her  the  judgment
of  God.  In  consequence  of  that  denunciation,  the  wind  blew  her  from  a  rock
on  which  she  was  walking,  and  swept  her  into  the  sea,  where  she  was  quickly
drowned.46

Sometimes  the  vengeance  of  the  clergy  extended  to  the  innocent  offspring  of
the  man  who  had  offended  them.  A  certain  minister,  whose  name  has  not  been
preserved,  met  with  opposition  in  his  parish,  and  fell  into  pecuniary  and  other
difficulties.  He  applied  for  aid  to  a  trader,  who,  being  wealthy,  ought,  he
thought,  to  afford  him  assistance.  The  trader  however  thought  otherwise,
and  refused.  Upon  this,  the  clergyman  declared  that  God  would  visit  him.
The  result  was  that  his  business  not  only  declined,  but  his  mind  became
impaired,  and  he  died  an  idiot.  He  had  two  sons  and  two  daughters.  Both
his  sons  went  mad.  One  of  his  daughters  likewise  lost  her  reason.  The  other
daughter  being  married,  even  her  husband  became  destitute,  and  the  children  of
that  marriage  became  beggars,  that  the  heinous  crime  might  be  visited  to  the
third  generation.47

midst  of  his  work,  to  come  out  of  (the)  pulpite,  in  the  king's  name.  Mr.  Douglasse
refused  ;  whereupon  the  Laird  comes  to  the  pulpit,  and  pulls  him  out  by  force  !  When
he  sau  he  behoved  to  yeild,  he  said,  '  Hiltoun,  for  this  injury  you  have  done  to  the  servant
of  God,  knou  what  you  are  to  meet  with  !  In  a  litle  time  you  shall  be  brought  into  this
very  church,  like  a  sticked  sou  !  '  And  in  some  litle  time  after,  Hilton  was  run  throu
the  body,  and  dyed  by,  if  I  mistake  not,  Annandale's  brother,  either  in  a  douell  or  a
drunken  toilzie,  and  his  corpes  wer  brought  in,  all  bleeding,  into  that  church.  '  Touch
not  mine  annoynted,  and  doe  my  prophets  noe  harm  ! '  '  Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  ii.
p.  154.  In  the  same  work  (vol.  iv.  p.  268),  the  Reverend  Mr.  Wodrow  writes  that  he
had  been  subsequently  informed  "  that  the  story  is  very  true  about  the  denuntiation
upon  the  Laird  of  Hiltoun,  as  I  have  (I  think)  published  it ;  and  ther  is  a  man  yet  alive
who  was  witnes  to  it,  and  in  the  church  at  the  time."

46  "  While  prisoner  in  the  Bass,  one  Sabbath  morning,  being  about  the  publick  wor-
ship of  God,  a  young  lass,  about  the  age  of  thirteen  or  fourteen  years,  came  to  the  chamber-
door,  mocking  with  loud  laughter :  He  said,  '  Poor  thing,  thou  mocks  and  laughs  at  the
worship  of  God  ;  but  ere  long,  God  shall  write  such  a  sudden,  surprising  judgment  on
thee,  that  shall  stay  thy  laughing,  and  thou  shalt  not  escape  it.'     Very  shortly  thereafter,
she  was  walking  upon  the  rock,  and  there  came  a  blast  of  wind,  and  sweeped  her  off  the
rock  into  the  sea,  where  she  was  lost."     Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  Alexander  Peden,  p.  43,
in  vol.  i.  of  Walker's  Biographia  Presbyteriana.     See  also  Howie's  Biographia  Presby-
teriana,  p.  487.

47  "  He  (Mr.  Fordyce,  in  Aberdeen)  tells  me  this  following  accompt,  which  he  had
from  personall  observation  :  When  he  lived  near  Frazerburge,  in  the  North,  there  was  a
Minister  setled  there  jure  devoluto,  the   toun  being  biggotted  against  Presbytery  to  a
pitch,  and  only  two  or  three  that  had  any  seeming  liking  that  way.     After  the  Minister
is  setled,  he  expected  much  encouragrnent  from  one  Ougstoun,  I  think  his  name  was,
who  had  professed  much  respect  for  him  and  that  way.     A  while  after,  in  some  difficulty,
the  Minister  came  to  him,  and  desired  his  countenance  and  assistance  in  the  difficulty.
He  at  first  put  the  Minister  off  with  delay  ;  and  within  a  little  plainly  mocked  him,  and
would  doe  nothing.     The  Minister  came  from  him  to  my  informer,  who  lived  a  litle  from
the  place,  and  gave  him  ane  account  (of)  what  had  befallen  him,  and  said,  '  I  expected
much  from  that  man,  and  reaconed  upon  his  help  and  assistance,  in  soe  comfortless  a
setlement  as  I  have  ventured  on  ;  and  he  has  not  only  disappointed  me,  but  mocked  me  !  '
And  the  Minister  was  like  to  sink  under  the  thoughts  of  this  carriage  ;  and  after  some
silence,  he  said,  very  peremptorly,  '  I  am  much  mistaken,  yea,  I'le  say  it,  God  hath  sent
me,  and  spoken  by  me.     God  will  visite  that  man,  and  something  more  than  ordinary
will  befall  him  and  his  !  '     My  informer  was  very  much  stunned  and  greived  at  such  a
peremptory  declaration.     However,  it  was  accomplished,  to  my  informer's  personall


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY          757

To  prosecute  a  minister,  or  even  to  assert  one's  rights  against  him  before  a  civil
tribunal,  was  not  only  a  hazard  but  a  certain  ruin.  About  the  year  1665  James
Fraser  was  sued  in  a  court  of  law  for  a  large  sum  of  money,  said  to  be  due  from  his
father's  estate.  As  usually  happens  in  these  cases,  the  party  sued  considered
that  he  was  unjustly  treated,  and  that  his  opponent  had  no  right  to  make  the
claim.  So  far,  all  was  natural.  But  the  peculiarity  was  that  Fraser,  against
whom  the  action  was  brought,  was  a  young  man  preparing  for  the  ministry,  and
therefore  under  the  immediate  protection  of  Providence.  Such  an  one  was  not
to  be  vexed  with  impunity  ;  and  we  are  assured  by  Fraser  himself  that  God
specially  interposed  to  prevent  his  ruin  ;  that  one  of  his  opponents  was  made
unable  to  appear  in  court,  and  that  the  Lord,  laying  his  hand  upon  the  others,
put  them  to  death,  in  order  that  every  obstacle  might  be  at  once  removed.43

While  stories  of  this  sort  were  generally  believed,  it  was  but  natural  that  an
opinion  should  grow  up  that  it  was  dangerous  to  meddle  with  a  minister,  or
in  any  way  to  interfere  with  his  conduct.49  The  clergy,  intoxicated  by  the

knowledge.  The  man  was  a  trader,  who  was  very  rich,  worth  near  four  or  five  thousand
pounds  sterling  in  stock.  He  had  two  sons  and  two  daughters.  Within  some  litle  time,
one  of  his  sons  turned  distracted,  and  I  think  continues  soe  still.  The  other  son,  in
some  distemper,  turned  silly,  and  litle  better,  and  dyed.  His  daughters,  one  was
maryed,  and  her  husband  lost  all  his  stock  at  sea,  twice  or  thrice  ;  his  good -father  stocked
him  once  or  twice,  and  all  was  still  lost,  and  they  and  their  children  are  miserable.  The
other  daughter  fell  into  a  distemper,  wherein  she  lost  her  reason.  The  man  himself,
after  that  time,  never  throve  ;  his  means  wasted  away  insensibly  ;  and  throu  all  things,
he  fell  under  melancholy,  and  turned  silly,  and  dyed  stupide.  All  this  fell  out  in  some
feu  years  after  what  passed  above  ;  and  my  relator  kneu  all  this  particularly,  and  had
occasion  to  be  upon  the  man's  bussiness  and  affairs."  Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  175,
176.  See  also,  in  another  work  by  this  eminent  Scotch  divine,  an  account  of  what
happened,  when  "  a  rash  young  man  "  having  destroyed  the  property  of  a  clergyman,
named  Boyd,  "  it  was  observed  that  that  family  did  never  thrive  afterwards,  but  were
in  a  decaying  condition  till  they  are  reduced  almost  to  nothing."  Wodrow's  Collections
upon  the  Lives  of  Ministers  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  part  i.  p.  215.

48  See  Eraser's  Life  of  Himself,  in  vol.  ii.  of  Select  Biographies,  edited  by  the  Rev.  W.  K.
Tweedie.     "  Nothing  now  remained  of  all  my  father's  great  fortune  but  a  small  wadset  of
sixteen  chalders,  liferented  likewise  by  my  mother.     And  about  the  same  time  a  new
( though  an  unjust)  adversary  charges  both  her  and  me  for  36,000  merks,  and  a  reduction
of  our  rights  ;  so  that  our  whole  livelihood  was  either  gone  or  at  the  stake.   For  four  years
did  this  adversary  vex  us,  and  was  like  to  have  undone  us  as  to  our  temporal  condition,
had  not  the  Lord  prevented."  p.  196.     "  I,  ignorant  what  defences  to  make,  had  in  my
company  a  registrate  horning, which  I  accidentally  and  without  premeditation(  God  putting
it  in  my  mind  at  the  same  time)  did  cast  in,  by  which  he,  being  the  king's  rebel,  was  inca-
pacitate from  pursuing  me.     And  the  Lord  so. ordered  it  that  he  never  after  compeared
to  trouble  me,  by  which  means  I  was  delivered  from  a  loss  and  a  fashery,  and  had  but  one
court  to  wait  upon."  p.  202.     "  My  condition  during  this  time  was  a  wrestling  condition
with  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  that  were  too  strong  for  me  ;  little  or  no  overcoming,  yet  violent
wrestling."     ...         "  For  I  humbled  myself  under  the  sense  of  the  calamities  of  our
family,  and  my  own  particular  wants  ;  I  besought  him  to  keep  us  from  utter  destruction.
And  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  hear  ;  he  destroyed  by  death  my  chief  adversaries,  I  found
shifts  to  pay  my  many  petty  debts,  gained  our  law-action,  and  was  restored  to  some  of
my  ancient  possessions  again."  pp.  227,  228.

49  "  So  hazardous  a  thing  it  is  to  meddle  with  Christ's  sent  servants."     Life  of  Mr.
William  Guthrie,  Minister  at  Fenwick,  by  the  Rev.  William  Dunlop,  reprinted  in  Select
Biographies,  vol.  ii.  p.  62.     To  arrest  a  clergyman  on  a  civil  or  criminal  process  was  an
act  full  of  danger,  inasmuch  as  the  Deity  would  hardly  fail  to  avenge  it.     This  applied
even  to  the  officers  who  executed  the  arrest,  as  well  as  to  him  by  whom  it  was  ordered.
See,  for  instance,  Some  Remarkable  Passages  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  John  Semple,
Minister  of  the  Gospel,  p.  171  (in  Walker's  Biographia  Presbyteriana,  vol.  i.).     "  Some
time  thereafter,  he  gat  orders  to  apprehend  Mr.  Semple  ;  he  intreated  to  excuse  him,  for
Mr.  Semple  was  the  minister  and  man  he  would  not  meddle  with  ;  for  he  was  sure,  if  he  did
that,  some  terrible  mischief  would  suddenly  befal  him.     Mr.  Arthur  Coupar,  who  was  Mr.


758  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

possession  of  power,  reached  to  such  a  pitch  of  arrogance  that  they  did  not  scruple
to  declare  that  whoever  respected  Christ  was  bound  on  that  very  account  to
respect  them.50  They  denounced  the  judgments  of  God  upon  all  who  refused
to  hear  the  opinions  they  propounded  in  their  pulpits.51  Nor  did  this  apply  merely
to  persons  who  usually  formed  their  audience.  Such  was  their  conceit,  and  so
greedy  were  they  after  applause,  that  they  would  not  allow  even  a  stranger  to
remain  in  their  parish  unless  he  too  came  to  listen  to  what  they  chose  to  say.52

Seinple's  precentor,  told  these  passages  to  a  Reverend  Minister  in  the  church,  yet  alive,
worthy  of  all  credit,  who  told  me."  Durham  boasts  that,  "  when  Ministers  have  most  to
do,  and  meet  with  most  opposition,  God  often  furnisheth  them  accordingly  with  more  bold-
nesse,  gifts,  and  assistance  than  ordinary.  Christ's  witnesses  are  a  terrible  party  ;  for
as  few  as  these  witnesses  are,  none  of  their  opposits  do  gain  at  their  hand  ;  whoever  hurteth
them  shall  in  this  manner  be  killed.  Though  they  be  despicable  in  sackcloth,  yet  better
oppose  a  king  in  his  strength,  and  giving  orders  from  his  throne  covered  in  cloath  of  state,
than  them :  though  they  may  burn  some  and  imprison  others,  yet  their  opposers  will  pay
sickerly  for  it.  This  is  not  because  of  any  worth  that  is  in  them,  or  for  their  own  sake  ;
But  i.  for  His  sake  and  for  His  authority  that  sendeth  them.  2-  for  the  event  of  their
word,  which  will  certainly  come  to  passe,  and  that  more  terribly,  and  as  certainly,  as  ever
any  temporall  judgement  was  brought  on  by  Moses  or  Elias."  Durham's  Commentarie
upon  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  416.

50  "  These  who  are  trusted  by  Christ  to  be  keepers  of  the  vineyard,  and  his  ministers,
ought  also  to  be  respected  by  the  people  over  whom  they  are  set ;  and  Christ  allows  this
on  them.     Where  Christ  is  respected  and  gets  his  due,  there  the  keepers  will  be  respected
and  get  their  due."     Durham's  Exposition  of  the  Song  of  Solomon,  pp.  450,  451.     Fergusson
complacently  says  that  to  affront  a  clergyman  by  not  believing  his  statement,  or  "  mes-
sage," as  he  terms  it,  is  a  "  dishonour  done  to  God."     Fergusson's  Exposition  of  the
Epistles  of  Paul,  p.  422.

51  "  As  it  is  true  concerning  vs,  that  necessitie  lyeth  vpon  vs  to  preach,  and  woe  will  bee
to  vs  if  wee  preach  not ;  so  it  is  true  concerning  you,  that  a  necessitie  lyeth  vpon  you  to
heare,  and  woe  will  be  to  you  if  you  heare  not."     Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  156.

52  The  following  order  was  promulgated  by  the  Kirk-Session  of  Aberdeen  on  the  i2th
July,  1607.    "  The  said  day,  in  respect  it  wes  delatit  to  the  sessioun  that  thair  is  sindrie
landvart  gentillmen  and  vtheris  cum  to  this  towne,  quha  mackis  thair  residence  thairin,
and  resortis  not  to  the  preching  nather  on  Saboth  nor  vlk  dayes  ;  thairfor,  it  is  ordanit
that  thrie  elderis  of  everie  quarter  convene  with  the  ministrie  in  the  sessioun  hous,  immedi-
atlie  efter  the  ending  of  the  sermone  on  Tuysday  nixt,  and  thair  tak  vp  the  names  of  the
gentillmen  and  vtheris  skipperis  duelling  in  this  burgh,  quha  kepis  nocht  the  Kirk,  nor
resortis  not  to  the  hering  of  Godis  word  ;  and  thair  names  being  taken  vp,  ordains  ane  off
the  ministeris,  with  a  baillie,  to  pas  vnto  thame  and  admoneis  thame  to  cum  to  the
preichingis,  and  keip  the  Kirk,  vthervayes  to  remowe  thame  aff  the  towne."     Selections
from  the  Records  of  the  Kirk  Session,  Presbytery  and  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  p.  58.     It  was
not  enough  to  go  occasionally  to  church  ;  the  attendance  must  be  regular  ;  otherwise  the
clergy  were  dissatisfied,  and  punished  the  delinquents.      In  the    Presbytery    Book   of
Strathbogie  it  is  recorded  that,  on  the  29th  September,  1649,  "  Mr.  Johne  Reidfurd  being
posed  quhat  diligence  he  had  vsed  to  the  Lady  Frendraught,  reported,  shoe  had  hard
three  sermons,  and  so,  as  he  thought,  shoe  intended  to  continow  ane  hearer.  The  bretheren,
considering  her  long  continowed  contumacie  and  delay  of  her  process,  by  heiring  a  sermon
now  and  then,  thought  not  that'kind  of  heiring  satisfactorie,  quherfor  Mr.  Robert  Watson,
and  Mr.  Robert  Irving,  ver  ordained  to  goe  with  Mr.  Johne  Reidfurd,  and  requyre  the
said  Lady  to  subscryv  the  Covenant,  quherby  shoe  might  testifie  her  conformitie  vith
the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  quhilk,  if  shoe  refused,  the  said  Mr.  Johne  vas  ordained  to  pro-
nunce  the  sentence  of  excommunicatioun  against  hir  before  the  Provinciall  Assemblie,  as
he  void  be  answerable  therto."     Extracts  from  the  Presbytery  Book  of  Strathbogie,  p.  115.
Neither  distance  nor   illness  might  be  pleaded  as  a  valid  excuse.     Under  no  circum-
stances would  the  preachers  tolerate  the  affront  of  any  one  displaying  an  unwillingness  to
hear  their  sermons.      In  1650  "  compeired  the  Lord  Oliphant,  being  summondit  for  not
keeping  his  parish  kirk  of  Abercherdour,  vho  declared  his  inabilitie  of  bodie  many  tymes,
and  the  want  of  houses  for  accommodating  him  and  his  familie  so  f arr  distant  from  the  same


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY          759

Because  they  had  adopted  the  Presbyterian  polity,  they  asserted  that  the  Almighty
had  never  failed  to  punish  every  one  who  tried  to  supersede  it  ;  53  and  as  this  was
the  perfection  of  the  church,  those  who  were  blind  to  its  merits  were  given  over  to
wrath,  and  were  indeed  the  slaves  of  Satan.54  The  clergy  who  held  this  language
respecting  their  opponents  exhausted  the  choicest  epithets  of  praise  on  them-
selves, and  on  their  own  pursuits.  When  one  of  them  got  into  the  pulpit,  or  took
a  pen  in  his  hand,  he  seemed  as  if  he  could  not  find  words  strong  enough  to  express
his  sense  of  the  surpassing  importance  of  that  class  of  which  he  was  himself  a
member.55  They  alone  knew  the  truth  ;  they  alone  were  able  to  inform  and
enlighten  mankind.  They  had  their  instruction  direct  from  heaven  ;  they  were
in  fact  the  ambassadors  of  Christ  ;  from  him  they  received  their  appointment  ;
and  since  no  one  else  could  reward  them,  so  no  one  else  had  a  right  to  rule  them.56

vas  the  onlie  caus,  quhilk  he  promised  to  amend  in  tym  comming.  Mr.  John  Reid-
furd  ordained  to  report  the  same  to  the  presbytrie,  and  vpon  his  continowed  absence,
to  processe  him."  Presbytery  Book  of  Stralhbogie,  p.  149.  See  more  on  this  subject  in
Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Lanark,  pp.  5,  33,  67  ;  Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of  St.
Andrews  and  Cupar,  pp.  67,  68,  90,  153  ;  Minutes  of  the  Synod  of  Fife,  pp.  18,  55,  132  ;
and  Spalding's  History  of  the  Troubles,  vol.  ii.  p.  57.  Spalding  also  mentions  (p.  114)  that
at  Aberdeen,  in  1643,  the  clergy  discoursed  every  Tuesday,  Thursday,  and  Saturday,  in
the  afternoon  ;  on  which  occasions  "  the  people  is  compellit  to  attend  their  Lectureis,
or  then  cryit  out  against."

53  "  And  it  may  be  truly  said,  as  the  Church  of  Scotland  hath  had  no  detractors  but
such  as  were  ignorant  of  her  or  mis -informed  about  her,  or  whom  faction,  partiality,
prejudice,  wickedness,  or  love  of  unlawful  liberty  did  inspire;  so  no  person  or  party  hath
endeavoured  hithertil  to  root  out  Presbytery,  but  the  Lord  hath  made  it  a  burdensome
stone  unto  them."     Naphtali,  sig.  B  2  rev.     "  The  Lord's  wrath  shall  so  meet  his  enemies
in  the  teeth,  wheresoever  they  turn,  that  they  shall  be  forced  to  forsake  their  pursuing  of
the  Church."     Dickson's  Explication  of  the  First  Fifty  Psalms,  p.  115.

54  "  The  true  children  of  the  Kirk  are  indeed  the  excellent  ones  of  the  earth,  and  princes
indeed,  wherever  they  live,  in  comparison  of  all  other  men  who  are  but  the  beastly  slaves
of  Satan."    Dickson's  Explication  of  the  First  Fifty  Psalms,  p.  312.   Another  high  authority
carefully  identifies  "  the  true  religion  "  with  "  the  true  presbyterial  profession."     See
An  Enquiry  into  Church  Communion  by  Mr.  Alexander  Shields,  Minister  of  the  Gospel  at
Saint  Andrews,  p.  126.     His  remark  applies  to  the  "  Burgess -oaths."

55  Fergusson  gives  an  ingenious  turn  to  this,  and  says  that  it  was  their  duty  to  praise
their  own  profession,  not  for  their  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  others.     "  It  is  the  duty
of  Christ's  ministers  to  commend  and  magnify  their  office,  not  for  gaining  praise  and
esteem  to  themselves,  2  Cor.  iii.  i,  but  that  the  malice  of  Satan  and  his  instruments  may
be  hereby  frustrated,  2  Cor.  xi.  12,  who  labours  to  bring  that  sacred  calling  into  contempt  ;
that  so  it  may  have  the  less  of  success  upon  people's  hearts."     Fergusson's  Exposition  of
the  Epistles  of  Paul,  p.  180.

56  "  Neither  is  there  any  mediate  authorise  betweene  the  Lord  and  his  ambassadours,
in  the  affaires  of  their  message  ;  he  only  sendeth  them  ;  he  alone  gives  them  to  be  pastors
and  doctors,  etc.  ;  he  alone  shall  judge  them  ;  he  alone  shall  reward  them  ;  to  him  alone
they  must  give  an  accompt  of  their  dispensation  ;  and  he  himselfe  alone  doth  immedi-
atlie  rule  them  by  his  spirit  and  word."     Forbes'  Certaine  Records  touching  the  Estate  of  the
Kirk,  p.  435.     In  reference  to  these  amazing  pretensions,  the  Scotch  clergy  were  con-
stantly terming  themselves  the  ambassadors  of  the  Deity  ;  thereby  placing  themselves
infinitely  above  all  other  men.     See,  for  instance,  Durham's  Commentarie  upon  the  Book
of  the  Revelation,  pp.  86,  100,  160.      Durham's  Law  Unsealed,  pp.. 85,  96.      Halyburton's
Great  Concern  of  Salvation,  p.  402.     Fergusson' s  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  pp.  17,
273.     Shields'  Enquiry  into  Church  Communion,  p.  72.     Binning' s  Sermons,  vol.  ii.  p.  118,
vol.  iii.  p.  178.     Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  122.     Monro's  Sermons,  p.  207.
Gillespie's  Aaron's  Rod  Blossoming,  pp.  240,  413.     Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  166.     Ruth-
erford's Free  Disputation  against  Pretended  Liberty  of  Conscience,  p.  41.     Dickson's  Truths
Victory  over  Error,  p.  274.     Gray's  Great  and  Precious  Promises,  pp.  50,  74-     Fleming's
Fulfilling  of  the  Scripture,  p.  429.     Cockburn's  Jacob's  Vow,  or  Man's  Felicity  and  Duty,
p.  401.     Hutcheson's  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job,  pp.  461,  479.


760  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

As  they  were  messengers  sent  by  the  Almighty,  they  were  rightly  termed  angels,
and  it  was  the  duty  of  the  people  to  listen  to  their  minister,  as  if  he  were  really  an
angel  who  had  descended  upon  earth.57  His  parishioners,  therefore,  were  bound
not  only  to  acknowledge  him  and  provide  for  him,  but  also  to  submit  to  him.58
Indeed,  no  one  could  refuse  obedience  who  considered  who  the  clergy  were,  and
what  functions  they  performed.  Besides  being  ambassadors  and  angels,  they
were  watchmen,  who  spied  out  every  danger,  and  whose  sleepless  vigilance  pro-
tected the  faithful.59  They  were  the  joy  and  delight  of  the  earth.  They  were
musicians,  singing  the  songs  of  sweetness  ;  nay,  they  were  sirens,  who  sought  to
allure  men  from  the  evil  path,  and  save  them  from  perishing.60  They  were
chosen  arrows,  stored  up  in  the  quiver  of  God.61  They  were  burning  lights  and

57  "  Ministers  are  called  Angels,  because  they  are  God's  Messengers,  intrusted  by  Him
with  a  high  and  heavenly  imployment  ;  and  it  is  a  title  that  should  put  Ministers  in  mind
of  their  duty,  to  do  God's  will  on  earth  as  the  Angels  do  it  in  heaven,  in  a  spiritual  and
heavenly  way,  cheerfully,  willingly  and  readily  ;  and  it  should  put  people  in  mind  of  their
duty,  to  take  this  word  off  Ministers   hands,  as  from   Angels."     Durham's  Commentarie
upon  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  496.     "  Therefore  are  Ministers  called  Angels,  and
Angels,  Ministers."  p.  596.     Cockburn  says  that  this  is  the  reason  why  "  we  should  behave
ourselves  decently  and  reverently  "  in  church  ;  "  for  if  the  presence  of  Kings  overawe  us,
how  much  more  should  the  presence  of  God  and  Angels."     Cockburn's  Jacob's  Vow,  or
Man's  Felicity  and  Duty,  p.  356.     Another  Scotch  divine  asserts  that  he  and  his  brethren
are  able  to  instruct  the  angels,  and  free  them  from  their  ignorance.     See  the  audacious
passage  in  Fergusson's  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  p.  180  :  "  This  may  commend
the  ministers  of  the  gospel  not  a  little  unto  men,  and  beget  reverence  in  them  towards  the
same,  that  even  the  blessed  angels  are  in  some  sort  bettered  by  it,  and  that  it  is  therefore
respected  by  them  :  for  Paul  commendeth  his  office  from  this,  that  by  occasion  thereof
'  unto  the  principalities  and  powers,  was  made  known  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.'
Though  angels  be  most  knowing  creatures,  as  en  joying  the  immediate  sight  and  presence
of  God,  Matt,  xviii.  10,  yet  they  are  ignorant  of  some  things,  which,  by  God's  way  of  dis-
pensing the  Gospel  to  his  church,  they  come  to  a  more  full  knowledge  off."      After  this  it  is
a  slight  matter  to  find  Monro  insisting  that  "  the  people  should  consider  our  character
as  the  most  difficult  and  most  sacred."     Monro's  Sermons,  p.  202.

58  "  He  is  obliged  to  minister  unto  them  in  the  gospel ;  and  they  are  obliged  to  submit
to  him,  strengthen  him,  acknowledge  him,  communicate  to  him  in  all  good  things,  and  to
provide  for  him,"  &c.    Durham's  Commentarie  upon  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  90.     That
the  clergy  are  "  rulers  and  governors,"  and  that  their  business  is  "  ruling  and  watching
over  the  flock,"  is  likewise  affirmed  in  Gillespie's  Aaron's  Rod  Blossoming,  pp.  172,  313.
Compare  The  Correspondence  of  the  Rev.  Robert  Wodrow,  vol.  i.  p.  181  :  "  Rule  over  the
people  and  speak  the  word  ;  "  and  Rutherford's  Free  Disputation  against  Pretended  Liberty
of  Conscience,  p.  41 :  "The  commanding  power  in  the  Ambassadour of  Christ."    See  also
the  "  reverential  estimation  "  inculcated  in  Boston's  Sermons,  p.  186.

59  "  Called  watchmen  by  a  name  borrowed  from  the  practice  of  centinels  in  armies  or
cities."     They  are  "  Satan's  greatest  eye-sores."     Hutcheson's  Exposition  on  the  Minor
Prophets,  vol.  ii.  p.  158,  vol.  iii.  p.  208.     "  They  being  made  watchmen,  do  thereby  become
the  butt  of  Satan's  malice."     ...       "  The  Enemy's    principal  design  is  sure  to  be
against  the  watchman,  because  he  prevents  the  surprising  of  his  people  by  Satan,  at  least
'tis  his  business  to  do  so."     Halyburton's  Great  Concern  of  Salvation,  p.  24.     Compare
Guthrie's  Considerations  contributing    unto  the   Discovery  of    the  Dangers    that   threaten
Religion,  p.  259  ;  Fergusson's  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  pp.  97,  106  ;  Durham's
Exposition  of  the  Song  of  Solomon,  pp.  278,  443  ;    and  Wodrow' s  Correspondence,  vol.  i.
pp.  84,  244-

60  One  of  the  most  popular  of  the  Scotch  preachers  in  the  seventeenth  century  actually
ranks  himself,  in  this  respect,  as  doing  the  same  work  as  the  Son  of  God.     "  Christ  and
his  ministers  are  the  musicians  that  do  apply  their  songs  to  catch  men's  ears  and  hearts,
if  so  be  they  may  stop  their  course  and  not  perish.     These  are  blessed  syrens  that  do  so."
Binning' s  Sermons,  vol.  iii.  p.  265.

61  Rutherford  terms  himself,  "  a  chosen  arrow  hid  in  his  quiver."     Howie's  Biographia
Scoticana,  p.  230,     To  read  the  coarse  materialism  contained  in  this  and  other  extracts


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY          761

shining  torches.  Without  them  darkness  would  prevail  ;  but  their  presence
illumined  the  world,  and  made  things  clear.62  Hence  they  were  called  stars,
which  title  also  expressed  the  eminence  of  their  office,  and  its  superiority  over  all
others.63  To  make  this  still  more  apparent,  prodigies  were  vouchsafed,  and
strange  lights  might  occasionally  be  seen,  which,  hovering  round  the  form  of  the
minister,  confirmed  his  supernatural  mission.64  The  profane  wished  to  jest  at
these  things,  but  they  were  too  notorious  to  be  denied  ;  and  there  was  a  well-known
case  in  which,  at  the  death  of  a  clergyman,  a  star  was  miraculously  exhibited  in
the  firmament,  and  was  seen  by  many  persons,  although  it  was  then  midday.65

Nor  was  this  to  be  regarded  as  a  solitary  occurrence.  On  the  contrary,  it  usually
happened  that  when  a  Scotch  minister  departed  from  this  life  the  event  was
accompanied  by  portents,  in  order  that  the  people  might  understand  that  some-
thing terrible  was  going  on,  and  that  they  were  incurring  a  serious,  perhaps  an
irretrievable,  loss.  Sometimes  the  candles  would  be  mysteriously  extinguished,
without  any  wind,  and  without  any  one  touching  them.66  Sometimes,  even  when
the  clergyman  was  preaching,  the  supernatural  appearance  of  an  animal  would
announce  his  approaching  end  in  face  of  the  congregation,  who  might  vainly
mourn  what  they  were  unable  to  avert.67  Sometimes  the  body  of  the  holy  man

will,  I  know,  shock,  and  so  far  offend,  many  pure  and  refined  minds,  whose  feelings  I
would  not  needlessly  wound.  But  no  one  can  understand  the  history  of  the  Scotch  intel-
lect who  refuses  to  enter  into  these  matters  ;  and  it  is  for  the  reader  to  choose  whether
or  not  he  will  remain  ignorant  of  what  I,  as  an  historian,  am  bound  to  disclose.  His
remedy  is  easy.  He  has  only  either  to  shut  the  book,  or  else  to  pass  on  at  once  to  the  next
chapter.

62  "  The  Lord  calleth  men  to  be  preachers,  and  hath   them  in  his  hand  as  starres,
holding  them  out  sometime  to  one  part  of  the  world,  and  sometime  to  another,  that  we
may  communicate  light  to  them  that  are  sitting  in  darkness."     Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,
p.  360.

63  "  Ministers  are  called  Stars,  for  these  reasons  :    i.  To  signifie  and  point  out  the
eminence  and  dignity  of  the  office,  that  it  is  a  glorious  and  shineing  office.      2.  To  point
out  what  is  the  especiall  end  of  this  office  ;  It  is  to  give  light :  as  the  use  of  Stars  is  to  give
light  to  the  world  ;  so  it's  Ministers  main  imployment  to  shine  and  give  light  to  others  ;
to  make  the  world  which  is  a  dark  night,  to  be  lightsome."     Durham's  Commentarie  upon
the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  43.     See  also  pp.  151,  368  ;    and  Dickson's  Truth's  Victory
over  Error,  p.  176.

64  The  Rev.  James  Kirkton  says  of  the  Rev.  John  Welsh,  that  some  one  who  observed
him  walking,  "  saw  clearly  a  strange  light  surround  him,  and  heard  him  speak  strange
words  about  his  spiritual  joy."     Select  Biographies,  edited  by  the  Rev.  W.  K.  Tweedie,
vol.  i.  p.  12.     But  more  than  this  remains  to  be  told.      The  hearts  of  the  Scotch  clergy
were  so  lifted  up  with  pride,  that  they  believed — horrible  to  relate — that  they  had  audible
and  verbal  communications  from  the  Almighty  God,  which  bystanders  could  hear.     One
of  these  stories,  relating  also  to  Welsh,  will  be  found,  as  tradition  handed  it  down,  in
Howie's  Biographia  Scoticana,  p.  148.     I  cannot  quote  such  blasphemy  ;  and  those  who
doubt  my  statement  had  better  refer  to  the  second  edition  of  ^Howie's  work,  published  at
Glasgow  in  1781.     It  may  probably  be  met  with  in  the  British  Museum.

65  "  Mr.  Johne  M'Birnie  at  Aberdeen,  (but  first  at  the  South  Ferrie,  over  aganis  the
Castell  of  Broughtie),  a  most  zealous  and  painfull  pastor,  a  great  opposer  of  hierarchic.
He  was  a  shyning  torch  and  a  burning  starre ;  wherefore  the  Lord  miraculouslie  made,  at
his  death,  a  starre  to  appeare  in  heaven  at  the  noonetyde  of  the  day  ;    whilk  many  yit
alive  testifies  that  they  did  evidentlie  see  it,  (at  Whitsunday  1609)."     Row's  History  of
the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  p.  421.

66  Mr.  James  Stirling,  minister  of  Barony,  Glasgow,  writes  respecting  his  father,  Mr.
John  Stirling,  minister  at  Kilbarchan,  that  the  "  day  he  was  burryed  ther  wer  two  great
candles  burning  in  the  chamber,  and  they  did  go  out  most  surprisingly  without  any  wind
causing  them  to  go  out."     Analecta,  or   Materials  for  a  History  of  Remarkable  Provi-
dences, by  the  Rev.  Robert  Wodrow,  vol.  iii.  p.  37.

67  "  This  night,  Glanderston  told  me,  that  it  was  reported  for  a  truth  at  Burroustoness,
that  about  six  weeks  since  Mr.  David  Williamson  was  preaching  in  his  own  church  in


762  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

would  remain  for  years  unchanged  and  undecayed  ;  death  not  having  the  power
over  it  which  it  would  have  had  over  the  corpse  of  a  common  person.68  On
other  occasions,  notice  was  given  to  him  of  his  death,  years  before  it  occurred  ;  69
and,  to  strike  greater  awe  into  the  public  mind,  it  was  remarked  that  when  one
minister  died,  others  were  taken  away  at  the  same  time,  so  that,  the  bereavement
being  more  widely  felt,  men  might,  by  the  magnitude  of  the  shock,  be  rendered
sensible  of  the  inestimable  value  of  those  preachers  whose  lives  were  happily
spared.70

It  was  moreover  generally  understood  that  a  minister,  during  his  abode  in
this  world,  was  miraculously  watched  over  and  protected.  He  was  peculiarly
favoured  by  angels,  who,  though  they  did  good  offices  to  all  members  of  the  true
church,  were  especially  kind  to  the  clergy  ;  71  and  it  was  well  known  that  the
celebrated  Rutherford,  when  only  four  years  old,  having  fallen  into  a  well,  was
pulled  out  by  an  angel,  who  came  there  for  the  purpose  of  saving  his  life.72
Another  clergyman,  who  was  in  the  habit  of  over-sleeping  himself,  used  to  be
roused  to  his  duty  in  the  morning  by  three  mysterious  knocks  at  his  door,  which,
if  they  did  not  produce  a  proper  effect,  were  repeated  close  to  his  bed.  These
knocks  never  failed  on  Sunday,  and  on  days  when  he  had  to  administer  the


Edinburgh,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  Sermon,  a  ratton  came  and  sat  doun  on  his  Bible.
This  made  him  stope  ;  and  after  a  little  pause,  he  told  the  congregation  that  this  was  a
message  of  God  to  him,  and  broke  off  his  sermon,  and  took  a  formall  fareweel  of  his  people,
and  went  home,  and  continoues  sick."  Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  i.  p.  12.

68  "  The  same  person  "  (i.e.  the  Rev.  Mr.  White)  "  adds,  that  some  years  ago,  when  Mr.
Bruce's  grave  was  opened,  to  lay  in  his  grandchild,  his  body  was  almost  fresh  and  uncor-
rupted,  to  the  great  wonder  of  many  ;  and  if  I  right  remember,  the  grave  was  again  filled
up,  and  another  made.     The  fresh  body  had  no  noisome  smell.     It  was  then  nearly
eighty  years  after  he  was  buried.     My  informer  was  minister  of  Larbert  when  this  hap-
pened."    Wodrow's  Life  of  Bruce,  p.  150,  prefixed  to  Bruce's  Sermons.

69  "He"  (John  Lockhart)  "tells  me  Mr.  Robert  Paton,  minister  at  Barnweel,  his
father -in -lau,  had  a  particular  for -notice,  seven  or  eight  years  before,  of  his  death  :  That
he  signifyed  so  much  to  my  informer."     ..."  When  my  informer  came,  he  did
not  apprehend  any  hazard,  and  signifyed  so  much  to  his  father -in -lau,  Mr.  Paton.     He
answered,  l  John,  John,  I  am  to  dye  at  this  time  ;  and  this  is  the  time  God  warned  me  of,
as  I  told  you.'     In  eight  or  ten  dayes  he  dyed.     Mr.  Paton  was  a  man  very  much  (beloved)
and  mighty  in  prayer."     Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  iii.  p.  451.     Compare  the  case  of  Hen-
derson (in  Wodrow's  Correspondence,  vol.  Hi.  p.  33),  where  the  notice  was  much  shorter,
but  "  all  fell  out  as  he  had  foretold."

70  "  Generally,  I  observe  that  Ministers'  deaths  are  not  single,  but  severall  of  them
together."     Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  iii.  p.  275.

71  The  Rev.  William  Row  (in  his  Continuation  of  Blair's  Autobiography,  p.  153)  says,
"  Without  all  doubt,  though  it  cannot  be  proven  from  Scripture  that  every  one  has  a
tutelar  angel,  yet  it  is  certain  that  the  good  angels  do  many  good  offices  to  the  people  of
God,  especially  to  his  ministers  and  ambassadors,  which  we  do  not  see,  and  do  not  remark
or  know."

72  "  Mr.  James  Stirling,  and  Mr.  Robert  Muir,  and  severall  others  in  the  company,
agreed  on  this  accompt  of  Mr.  Rutherford.     When  about  four  years  old,  he  was  playing
about  his  father's  house,  and  a  sister  of  his,  somewhat  older  than  he,  with  him.     Mr.
Rutherford  fell  into  a  well  severall  fathoms  deep,  and  not  full,  but  faced  about  with
heuen  stone,  soe  that  it  was  not  possible  for  any  body  to  get  up  almost,  far  less  a  child.
When  he  fell  in,  his  sister  ran  into  the  house  near  by,  and  told  that  Samuell  was  fallen
into  the  well ;  upon  which  his  father  and  mother  ran  out,  and  found  him  sitting  on  the
grasse  beside  the  well ;  and  when  they  asked  him,  Hou  he  gote  out  ?  he  said,  after  he
was  once  at  the  bottome,  he  came  up  to  the  tope,  and  ther  was  a  bonny  young  man  pulled
him  out  by  the  hand.     Ther  was  noe  body  near  by  at  the  time  ;    and  soe  they  concluded
it  was  noe  doubt  ane  angell.     The  Lord  had  much  to  doe  with  him."     Wodrow's  Analecta ,
vol.  i.  p.  57.     See  also  vol.  iii.  pp.  88,  89,  where  this  circumstance  is  again  mentioned  as
"  a  tradition  anent  him  "  in  the  place  of  his  birth.


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY          763

communion  ;  and  they  lasted  during  the  whole  of  his  ministry,  until  he  became
old  and  infirm,  when  they  entirely  ceased.73

By  the  propagation  of  these  and  similar  stories,  in  a  country  already  prepared
for  their  reception,  the  Scotch  mind  became  imbued  with  a  belief  in  miraculous
interposition  to  an  extent  which  would  be  utterly  incredible  if  it  were  not
attested  by  a  host  of  contemporary  and  unimpeachable  witnesses.  The  clergy,
partly  because  they  shared  in  the  general  delusion,  and  partly  because  they
derived  benefit  from  it,  did  everything  they  could  to  increase  the  superstition  of
their  countrymen,  and  to  familiarize  them  with  notions  of  the  supernatural  world
such  as  can  only  be  paralleled  in  the  monastic  legends  of  the  Middle  Ages.74  How
they  laboured  to  corrupt  the  national  intellect,  and  how  successful  they  were  in
that  base  vocation,  has  been  hitherto  known  to  no  modern  reader  ;  because  no
one  has  had  the  patience  to  peruse  their  interminable  discourses,  commentaries,
and  the  other  religious  literature  in  which  their  sentiments  are  preserved.  As,
however,  the  preachers  were  in  Scotland  more  influential  than  all  other  classes
put  together.it  is  only  by  comparing  their  statements  with  what  is  to  be  found  in
the  general  memoirs  and  correspondence  of  the  time,  that  we  can  at  all  succeed  in
reconstructing  the  history  of  a  period  which,  to  the  philosophic  student  of  the
human  mind,  is  full  of  great  though  melancholy  interest.  I  shall  therefore
make  no  apology  for  entering  into  still  further  details  respecting  these  matters  ;
and  I  hope  to  put  the  reader  in  possession  of  such  facts  as  will  connect  the  past
history  of  Scotland  with  its  present  state,  and  will  enable  him  to  understand  why
it  is  that  so  great  a  people  are  in  many  respects  still  struggling  in  darkness,
simply  because  they  still  live  under  the  shadow  of  that  long  and  terrible  night
which  for  more  than  a  century  covered  the  land.  It  will  also  appear  that  their
hardness  and  moroseness  of  character,  their  want  of  gaiety,  and  their  indifference
to  many  of  the  enjoyments  of  life,  are  traceable  to  the  same  cause,  and  are  the
natural  product  of  the  gloomy  and  ascetic  opinions  inculcated  by  their  religious

73  "  Mr.  William  Trail,  minister  at  ****,  tells  me  that  his  father,  Mr.  William  Trail,
minister  at  Borthwick,  used  every  morning,  when  he  had  publick  work  on  his  hand,  to
hear  three  knocks  at  his  chamber  dore  ;  and  if,  throu  wearynes,  or  heaviness,  he  did  sitt
these,  ther  wer  ordinarily  three  knocks  at  his  bed -head,  which  he  never  durst  sitt,  but  gott
up  to  his  work.     This  was  ordinarly  about  three  in  the  morning.     This,  at  first,  in  his
youth,  frighted  him  ;  but  at  lenth  it  turned  easy  to  him,  and  he  believed  these  knocks
and  awaknings  proceeded  from  a  good  art.     That  these  never  failed  him  on  Sabbaths  and
at  Communions,  when  he  was  oblidged  to  rise  early  :  That  when  he  turned  old  and  infirm,
toward  the  close  of  his  dayes.,  they  intirelv  ceased  and  left  him."   Wodrow's  A  nalccta,  vol  ii.
p.  307-      This  work,  in  four  quarto  volumes,  is  invaluable  for  the  history  of  the  Scotch
mind  ;  being  a  vast  repertory  of  the  opinions  and  traditions  of    the  clergy  during  the
seventeenth  and  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century.     Wodrow  was  a  man  of  ability,
certainly  above  the  average  ;  his  honesty  is  unimpeachable,  as  the  jealous  scrutiny  which
the  episcopalians  have  made  of  his  great  work  on  the  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland
decisively  proves  ;  and  he  was  in  the  constant  habit  of  personal  and  epistolary  commu-
nication with  the  leading  characters  of  his  age.      I  have  therefore  freely  used  his  Ana-
lecta  ;  also  his  Collections  upon  the  Lives  of  Ministers,  which  is  likewise  in  four  quarto
volumes  ;  and  his  Correspondence,  in  three  thick  octavo  volumes.     It  would  be  difficult
to  find  a  more  competent  witness  respecting  the  sentiments  of  his  ecclesiastical  brethren.
It  would  be  impossible  to  find  a  more  candid  one.

74  In  illustration  of  this,  a  volume  might  be  filled  with  extracts  from  the  writings  of  the
Scotch  divines  of  the  seventeenth  century.     The  following  passage  is  perhaps  as  good  as
any.     "  Yea,  it  can  hardly  be  instanced  any  great  change,  or  revolution  in  the  earth,
which  hath  not  had  some  such  extraordinary  herald  going  before.     Can  the  world  deny
how  sometimes  these  prodigious  signes  have  been  shaped  out  to  point  at  the  very  natui
of  the  stroke  then  imminent,  by  a  strange  resemblance  to  the  same,  such  as  a  flaming
sword  in  the  air,  the  appearance  of  armies  fighting  even  sometimes  upon  the  earth,  to
the  view  of  many  most  sober  and  judicious  onlookers,  also  showers  of  blood,  the  noise  of
drummes,  and  such  like,  which  are  knownjusually  to  go  before  warr  and  commotions  *
Fleming's  Fulfilling  of  the  Scripture,  1681,  p.  216.


764  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

teachers.  For  in  that  age  as  in  every  other,  the  clergy,  once  possessed  of  power,
showed  themselves  harsh  and  unfeeling  masters.  They  kept  the  people  in  a
worse  than  Egyptian  bondage,  inasmuch  as  they  enslaved  mind  as  well  as  body,
and  not  only  deprived  men  of  innocent  amusements,  but  taught  them  that  those
amusements  were  sinful.  And  so  thoroughly  did  they  do  their  work  that,  though
a  hundred  and  fifty  years  have  elapsed  since  their  supremacy  began  to  wane,
the  imprint  of  their  hands  is  everywhere  discernible.  The  people  still  bear  the
marks  of  the  lash  ;  the  memory  of  their  former  servitude  lives  among  them ;
and  they  crouch  before  their  clergy  as  they  did  of  old,  abandoning  their  rights,
sacrificing  their  independence,  and  yielding  up  their  consciences  to  the  dictates
of  an  intolerant  and  ambitious  priesthood.

Of  all  the  means  of  intimidation  employed  by  the  Scotch  clergy,  none  was  more
efficacious  than  the  doctrines  they  propounded  respecting  evil  spirits  and  future
punishment.  On  these  subjects  they  constantly  uttered  the  most  appalling
threats.  The  language  which  they  used  was  calculated  to  madden  men  with
fear,  and  to  drive  them  to  the  depths  of  despair.  That  it  often  had  this  conse-
quence, and  produced  most  fatal  results,  we  shall  presently  see.  And  what
made  it  more  effectual  was  that  it  completely  harmonized  with  those  other
gloomy  and  ascetic  notions  which  the  clergy  inculcated,  and  according  to  which,
pleasures  being  regarded  as  sinful,  sufferings  were  regarded  as  religious.  Hence
that  love  of  inflicting  pain,  and  that  delight  in  horrible  and  revolting  ideas,
which  characterized  the  Scotch  mind  during  the  seventeenth  century.  A  few
specimens  of  the  prevailing  opinions  will  enable  the  reader  to  understand  the
temper  of  the  time,  and  to  appreciate  the  resources  which  the  Scotch  clergy  could
wield,  and  the  materials  with  which  they  built  up  the  fabric  of  their  power.

It  was  generally  believed  that  the  world  was  overrun  by  evil  spirits,  who  not
only  went  up  and  down  the  earth,  but  also  lived  in  the  air,  and  whose  business  it
was  to  tempt  and  hurt  mankind.75  Their  number  was  infinite,  and  they  were  to
be  found  at  all  places  and  in  all  seasons.  At  their  head  was  Satan  himself,  whose
delight  it  was  to  appear  in  person,  ensnaring  or  terrifying  every  one  he  met.76
With  this  object,  he  assumed  various  forms.  One  day  he  would  visit  the  earth
as  a  black  dog  ;  77  on  another  day,  as  a  raven ; 78  on  another,  he  would  be  heard

75  Durham,  after  mentioning  "  old  abbacies  or  monasteries,  or  castles  when  walls  stand
and  none  dwelleth  in  them,"  adds,  "  If  it  be  asked,  If  there  be  such  a  thing,  as  the  haunting
of  evill  spirits  in  these  desolate  places  ?     We  answer  i.  That  there  are  evill  spirits
rangeing  up  and  down  through  the  earth  is  certain,  even  though  hell  be  their  prison
properly,  yet  have  they  a  sort  of  dominion  and  abode  both  in  the  earth  and  air  ;  partly,
as  a  piece  of  their  curse,  this  is  laid  on  them  to  wander  ;  partly  as  their  exercise  to  tempt
men,  or  bring  spirituall  or  temporall  hurt  to  them,"  &c.     Durham's  Commentarie  upon
the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  582.     So,  too,  Hutcheson  ( Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job,  p.  9) :
"  We  should  remember  that  we  sojourn  in  a  world  where  Devils  are,  and  do  haunt  among
us  ;  "  and  Fleming  (Fulfilling  of  the  Scripture,  p.  217)  :  "  But  the  truth  itself  is  sure,  that
such  a  party  is  at  this  day,  encompassing  the  earth,  and  trafficking  up  and  down  there,
to  prove  which  by  arguments  were  to  light  a  candle  to  let  men  see  that  it  is  day,  while
it  is  known  what  ordinary  familiar  converse  many  have  therewith."     One  of  their  favourite
abodes  was  the  Shetland  Islands,  where,  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  "  almost
every  family  had  a  Brouny  or  evil  spirit  so  called."     See  the  account  given  by  the  Rev.
John  Brand,  in  his  work  entitled  A  Brief  Description  of  Orkney,  Zetland,  Pightland -Firth,
and  Caithness,  pp.  in,  112,  Edinburgh,  1701.

76  "  There  is  not  one  whom  he  assaulteth  not."       Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,
p.    101.     "  On   the  right  hand  and  on   the  left."     Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,   p.   273.
Even  early  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  "  most  popular  divines  "  in  Scotland  affirmed
that  Satan  "  frequently  appears  clothed  in  a  corporeal  substance."      Memoirs  of  Charles
Lee  Lewes,  written  by  Himself,  vol.  iii.  pp.  29,  30,  London,  1805.

77  "  This  night  James  Lochheid  told  me,  that  last  year,  if  I  mistake  not,  at  the  Com-
munion of  Bafron,  he  was  much  helped  all  day.     At  night,  when  dark  somewhat,  he
went  out  to  the  feilds  to  pray  ;  and  a  terrible  slavish  fear  came  on  him,  that  he  almost
lost  his  senses.     Houever,  he  resolved  to  goe  on  to  his  duty.     By  ( the  time)  he  was  at  the


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         765

in  the  distance,  roaring  like  a  bull.™  He  appeared  sometimes  as  a  white  man  in
black  clothes ;  8°  and  sometimes  he  came  as  a  black  man  in  black  clothes,  when
it  was  remarked  that  his  voice  was  ghastly,  that  he  wore  no  shoes,  and  that  one
of  his  feet  was  cloven.81  His  stratagems  were  endless.  For,  in  the  opinion  of
divines,  his  cunning  increased  with  his  age  ;  and  having  been  studying  for  more
than  five  thousand  years,  he  had  now  attained  to  unexampled  dexterity.82  He
could,  and  he  did,  seize  both  men  and  women,  and  carry  them  away  through


place,  his  fear  was  off  him  ;  and  lying  on  a  knou-side,  a  black  dogg  came  to  his  head  and
stood.  He  said  he  kneu  it  to  be  Satan,  and  shooke  his  hand,  but  found  nothing,  it
evanishing."  ..."  Lord  help  against  his  devices,  and  strenthen  against  them  !  "
Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  i.  p.  24.  The  Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Lanark,  p.  77,  contain
a  declaration,  in  1650,  that  "  the  devill  appeared  like  a  little  whelpe,"  and  afterwards,
"  like  a  brown  whelpe."

78  The  celebrated  Peden  was  present  when  "  there  came  down  the  appearance  of  a
raven,  and    sat    upon    one    man's    head."     .     .     .       Thereupon,    "  going    home,    Mr.
Peden  said  to  his  land-lord,  I  always  thought  there  was  Devilry  among  you,  but  I  never
thought  that  he  did  appear  visibly  among  you,  till  now  I  have  seen  it.     O,  for  the  Lord's
sake  quit  this  way."      The  Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  Alexander  Peden,  late  Minister  of  the
Gospel  at  New  Glenluce  in  Galloway,  pp.  111,  112,  in  vol.  i.  of  Walker's  Biographia  Pres-
byteriana.

79  "  I  heard  a  voice  just  before  me  on  the  other  side  of  the  hedge,  and  it  seemed  to  be
like  the  groaning  of  an  aged  man.     It  continued  so  some  time.     I  knew  no  man  could  be
there  ;  for,  on  the  other  side  of  the  hedge,  where  I  heard  the  groaning,  there  was  a  great
stank  or  pool.     I  nothing  doubted  but  it  was  Satan,  and  I  guessed  his  design  ;  but  still  I
went  on  to  beg  the  child's  life.      At  length  he  roared  and  made  a  noise  like  a  bull,  and
that  very  loud.     From  all  this  I  concluded  that  I  had  been  provoking  God  some  way  or
other  in  the  duty,  and  that  he  was  angry  with  me,  and  had  let  the  enemy  loose  on  me
and  might  give  him  leave  to  tear  me  in  pieces.     This  made  me  intreat  of  God,  to  show  me
wherefore  he  contended,  and  begged  he  would  rebuke  Satan.     The  enemy  continued  to
make  a  noise  like  a  bull,  and  seemed  to  be  coming  about  the  hedge  towards  the  door  of
the  summer -seat,  bellowing  as  he  came  along."     Stevenson's  Rare,  Soul-Strengthening,
and  Comforting  Cordial  for  Old  and  Young  Christians,  p.  29.     This  book  was  published,
and  prepared  for  the  press,  by  the  Rev.  William  Cupples.     See  Mr.  Cupples'  letter  at  the
beginning.

80  In  1684,  with  "  black  cloaths,  and  a  blue  band,  and  white  handcuffs."     Sinclair's
Satan's  Invisible  World  Discovered,  p.  8.

81  "  He  observed  one  of  the  black  man's  feet  to  be  cloven,  and  that  the  black  man's
apparel  was  black,  and  that  he  had  a  blue  band  about  his  neck,  and  white  hand -cuffs,
and  that  he  had  hoggers  upon  his  legs  without  shoes  ;  and  that  the  black  man's  voice
was  hollow  and  ghastly."     Satan's  Invisible  World  Discovered,  p.  9.     "  The  devil  appeared
in  the  shape  of  a  black  man."  p.  31.    See  also  Brand's  Description  of  Orkney,  p.  126  :  "  All
in  black."

82  "  The  acquired  knowledge  of  the  Devill  is  great,  hee  being  an  advancing  student,
and  still  learning  now  above  five  thousand  yeares."     Rutherford's  Christ  Dying  and
Drawing  Sinners  to  Himselfe,  p.  204.       "  He  knowes  very  well,  partly  by  the  quicknesse
of  his  nature,  and  partly  by  long  experience,  being  now  very  neere  six  thousand  yeeres
old."     Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  219.     "  Hee,  being  compared  with  vs,  hath  many
vantages  ;  as  that  he  is  more  subtill  in  nature,  being  of  greater  experience,  and  more
ancient,  being  now  almost  sixe  thousand  yeeres  old."     Ibid.,  p.  403.     "  The  diuell  here
is  both  diligent  and  cunning,  and  (now  almost  of  sixe  thousand  yeeres)  of  great  experience."
Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  142.     "  Satan,  such  an  ingenious  and  experimented
spirit."     Binmng's  Sermons,  vol.  i.  p.    67.     "  His  great  sleight  and  cunning."      Ibid.,
p.  no.    Other  eulogies  of  his  skill  maybe  seen  in  Fergusson's  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of
Paul,  p.  475  ;  and  in  Fleming's  Fulfilling  of  the  Scripture,  p.  45.     A  "  minister,"  whose
name  is  not  mentioned,  states  that  he  is  "  of  an  excellent  substance,  of  great  natural
parts,  long  experience,  and  deep  understanding."     Sinclair's  Satan's  Invisible   World
Discovered,  p.  78.


766  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

the  air.83  Usually  he  wore  the  garb  of  laymen,  but  it  was  said  that  on  more
than  one  occasion  he  had  impudently  attired  himself  as  a  minister  of  the  gospel.84
At  all  events,  in  one  dress  or  other,  he  frequently  appeared  to  the  clergy,  and
tried  to  coax  them  over  to  his  side.85  In  that,  of  course,  he  failed  ;  but,  out  of  the
ministry,  few  indeed  could  withstand  him.  He  could  raise  storms  and  tempests  ;
he  could  work  not  only  on  the  mind,  but  also  on  the  organs  of  the  body,  making
men  hear  and  see  whatever  he  chose.ss  Of  his  victims,  some  he  prompted  to

83  In  Professor  Sinclair's  work  (Satan's  Invisible  World  Discovered,  p.  141),  we  find,  in
1684,  "  an  evident  instance  that  the  devil  can  transport  the  bodies  of   men  and  women
through  the  air.   It  is  true,  he  did  not  carry  her  far  off,  but  not  for  want  of  skill  and  power.' '
Late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  it  was  generally  believed  that  one  of  Satan's  accom-
plices was  literally  "  strangled  in  his  chair  by  the  devil,  lest  he  should  make  a  confession
to  the  detriment  of  the  service."     Crawfurd's  History  of  the  Shire  of  Renfrew,  part  iii.

P-  3i9-

84  See  the  account  of  a  young  preacher  being  deceived  in  this  way,  in  Wodrow's  Ana-
lecta,  vol.  i.  pp.  103, 104.  The  Rev.  Robert  Blair  detected  the  cheat,  and  "  with  ane  awful
seriousness  appearing  in  his  countenance,  began  to  tell  the  youth  his  hazard,  and  that
the  man  whom  he  took  for  a  Minister  was  the  Divel,  who  had  trepanned  him,  and  brought
him  into  his  net  ;  advised  him  to  be  earnest  with  God  in  prayer,  and  likewise  not  to  give
way  to  dispair,  for  ther  was  yet  hope."     The  preacher  had  on  this  occasion  been  so  far
duped  as  to  give  the  devil  "  a  written  promise  "  to  do  whatever  he  was  requested.     As
soon  as  the  Rev.  Mr.  Blair  ascertained  this  fact,  he  took  the  young  man  before  the  Pres-
bytery, and  narrated  the  circumstance  to  the  members.     "  They  were  all  strangely
affected  with  it,  and  resolved  unanimously  to  dispatch  the  Presbitry  business  presently,
and  to  stay  all  night  in  town,  and  on  the  morrow  to  meet  for  prayer  in  one  of  the  most
retired  churches  of  the  Presbitry,  acquainting  none  with  their  business,  (but)  taking  the
youth  alongst  with  them,  whom  they  keeped  alwise  close  by  them.     Which  was  done,
and  after  the  Ministers  had  prayed  all  of  them  round,  except  Mr.  Blair,  who  prayed  last,
in  time  of  his  prayer  there  came  a  violent  rushing  of  wind  upon  the  church,  so  great
that  they  thought  the  church  should  have  fallen  down  about  their  ears,  and  with  that
the  youth's  paper  and  covenant  "  (i.e.  the  covenant  which  he  had  signed  at  the  request
of  Satan)  "  droops  down  from  the  roof  of  the  church  among  the  Ministers."

85  "The  devil  strikes  at  them,  that  in  them  he  may  strike  at  the  whole  congregation."
Boston's  Sermons,  p  186.      Fleming  (Fulfilling  of  the  Scripture,  p.  379)  gives  an  account  of
his  appearing  to  one  of  the  Scotch  clergy.     Compare  Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  iv.  p.  no.
In  1624  Bruce  writes,    "I  heard  his  voice  as  vively  as  ever  I  heard  anything,  not  being
sleeping,  but  waking."     Life  of  Bruce,  p.  8,  prefixed  to  Bruce' s  Sermons.     The  only  remedy
was  immediate  resistance.     "  It  is  the  duty  of  called  ministers  to  go  on  with  courage  in
the  work  of  the  Lord,  notwithstanding  of  any  discouragement  of  that  kind,  receiving
manfully  the  first  onset  chiefly  of  Satan's  fury,  as  knowing  their  ceding  to  him  will  make
him  more  cruel."     Fergusson's  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  p.  74.     In  the  seven-
teenth century,  the  Scotch  clergy  often  complimented  each  other  upon  having  baffled
him,  and  thereby  put  him  in  a  passion.     Thus,  in  1626,  Dickson  writes  to  Boyd  :  "  The
devil  is  mad  against  you,  he  fears  his  kingdom."     Life  of  Robert  Boyd,  in  Wodrow's  Col-
lections upon  the  Lives  of  Ministers,  vol.  ii.  part  i.  p.  238.     See  also  pp.  165,  236.

86  "  He  can  delude  ears,  eyes,  &c.,  either  by  misrepresenting  external  objects,  or  by
inward  disturbing  of  the  faculties  and  organes,  whereby  men  and  women  may,  and  do
often,  apprehend  that  they  hear,  see,  &c.  such  and  such  things,  which,  indeed,  they  do
not."     Durham's  Commentarie  upon  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  128.     "  Raise  tempests."
Binning' s  Sermons,  vol.  i.  p.  122.     "  His  power   and  might,  whereby   through   God's
permission  he  doth  raise  up  storms,  commove  the  elements,  destroy  cattle,"  &c.     Fer-
gusson's  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  p.  264.     "  Hee  can  work  curiously  and  strongly
on  the  walls  of  bodily  organs,  on  the  shop  that  the  understanding  soule  lodgeth  in,  and  on
the  necessary  tooles,  organs,  and  powers  of  fancie,  imagination,  memory,  humours,  senses,
spirits,  bloud,"  &c.     Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  p.  212.     Semple,  giving  notice  of  his
intention  to  administer  the  sacrament,  told  the  congregation  "  that  the  Devil  would  be  so
envious  about  the  good  work  they  were  to  go  about,  that  he  was  afraid  he  would  be
permitted  to  raise  a  storm  in  the  air  with  a  speat  of  rain,  to  raise  the  waters,  designing


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         767

commit  suicide,87  others  to  commit  murder.88  Still,  formidable  as  he  was,  no
Christian  was  considered  to  have  attained  to  a  full  religious  experience  unless  he
had  literally  seen  him,  talked  to  him,  and  fought  with  him.89  The  clergy  were
constantly  preaching  about  him,  and  preparing  their  audience  for  an  interview
with  their  great  enemy.  The  consequence  was  that  the  people  became  almost
crazed  with  fear.  Whenever  the  preacher  mentioned  Satan,  the  consternation  was
so  great  that  the  church  resounded  with  sighs  and  IJroans.90  The  aspect  of  a
Scotch  congregation  in  those  days  is  indeed  hard  for  us  to  conceive.  Not  unfre-
quently  the  people,  benumbed  and  stupefied  with  awe,  were  rooted  to  their  seats
by  the  horrible  fascination  exercised  over  them,  which  compelled  them  to  listen,
though  they  are  described  as  gasping  for  breath,  and  with  their  hair  standing  on
end.91  Such  impressions  were  not  easily  effaced.  Images  of  terror  were  left  on
the  mind,  and  followed  the  people  to  their  homes,  and  in  their  daily  pursuits.
They  believed  that  the  devil  was  always,  and  literally,  at  hand  ;  that  he  was
haunting  them,  speaking  to  them,  and  tempting  them.  There  was  no  escape.
Go  where  they  would,  he  was  there.  A  sudden  noise,  nay,  even  the  sight  of  an
inanimate  object,  such  as  a  stone,  was  capable  of  reviving  the  association  of
ideas,  and  of  bringing  back  to  the  memory  the  language  uttered  from  the
pulpit.92

Nor  is  it  strange  that  this  should  be  the  case.      All  over  Scotland  the  sermons


to  drown  some  of  them  ;  but  it  will  not  be  within  the  compass  of  his  power  to  drown  any
of  you,  no  not  so  much  as  a  dog."  Remarkable  Passages  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  Mr.
John  Semple,  Minister  of  the  Gospel,  pp.  168,  169,  in  vol.  i.  of  Walker's  Biographia  Pres-
byteriana.

87  Sinclair's  Satan's  Invisible  World  Discovered,  p.  137.  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and
Experiences  of  Marion  Laird  of  Greenock,  with  a  Preface  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Cock,  pp.  43,  44,

45,  84,  85,  172,  222,  223-

as  "  I  shall  next  show  how  the  murderer  Satan  visibly  appeared  to  a  wicked  man,
stirred  him  up  to  stab  me,  and  how  mercifully  I  was  delivered  therefrom."  The  Autobio-
graphy of  Mr.  Robert  Blair,  Minister  of  St.  Andrews,  p.  65.  See  also  Fleming's  Fulfilling
of  the  Scripture,  pp.  379,  380.

89  "  One  Mr.  Thomas  Hogg,  a  very  popular  presbyterian  preacher  in  the  North,  asked
a  person  of  great  learning,  in  a  religious  conference,  whether  or  not  he  had  seen  the  Devil  ?
It  was  answered  him,  '  That  he  had  never  seen  him  in  any  visible  appearance.'    '  Then,  I
assure  you,'  saith  Mr.  Hogg,  '  that  you  can  never  be  happy  till  you  see  him  in  that  man-
ner ;  that  is,  untill  you  have  both  a  personal  converse  and  combat  with  him.'  "     Scotch
Presbyterian  Eloquence,  pp.  28,  29.

90  "  Ye  go  to  the  kirk,  and  when  ye  hear  the  devil  or  hell  named  in  the  preaching,  ye
sigh  and  make  a  noise."     The  Last  and  Heavenly  Speeches  of  John,  Viscount  Kenmure,  in
Select  Biographies,  vol.  i.  p.  405.

91  Andrew  Gray,  who  died  in  1656,  used  such   language,  "  that  his   contemporary,
the  foresaid  Mr.  Durham,  observed,  That  many  times  he  caused  the  very  hairs  of  their
head  to  stand  up."     Howie's  Biographia  Scoticana,  p.  217-      James  Hutcheson  boasted
of  this  sort  of  success.     "  As  he  expressed  it,  '  I  was  not  a  quarter  of  ane  hour  in  upon  it,
till  I  sau  a  dozen  of  them  all  gasping  before  me.'     He  preached  with  great  ^freedome  all
day,  and  fourteen  or  twenty  dated   their   conversion   from   that  sermon."     Wodrow's
Analecta,  vol.  i.  p.  131.     When  Dickson  preached,  "  many  were  so  choaked  and  taken  by
the  heart,  that  through  terrour,  the  spirit  in  such  a  measure  convincing  them  of  sin,  in
hearing  of  the  word  they  have  been  made  to  fall  over,  and  thus  carried  out  of  the  church."
Fleming's  Fulfilling  of  the  Scripture,  p.  347.     There  was  hardly  any  kind  of  resource
which  these  men  disdained.     Alexander  Dunlop  "  entered  into  the  ministry  at  Paislay,
about  the  year  1643   or   1644."  ...       "He  used  in   the  pulpit,  to  have  a  kind  of
a  groan  at  the  end  of  some  sentences.     Mr.  Peebles  called  it  a  holy  groan."     Wodrow's
Analecta,  vol.  iii-  pp.  16,  21.

92  A  schoolmaster,  recording   his  religious  experiences  (Wodrow  s  Analecta,  vol.   i.
p.  246),  says  :    "  If  any  thing  had  given  a  knock,  I  would  start  and  shiver,  the  seeing  of  a
dogg  made  me  affrayed,  the  seeing  of  a  stone  in  the  feild  made  me  affrayed,  and  as  I
thought  a  voice  in  my  head  saying,  '  It's  Satan.'  "


768  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were,  with  hardly  an  exception,  formed  after  the  same  plan,  and  directed  to  the
same  end.  To  excite  fear  was  the  paramount  object.93  The  clergy  boasted
that  it  was  their  special  mission  to  thunder  out  the  wrath  and  curses  of  the
Lord.94  In  their  eyes,  the  Deity  was  not  a  beneficent  being,  but  a  cruel  and
remorseless  tyrant.  They  declared  that  all  mankind,  a  very  small  portion  only
excepted,  were  doomed  to  eternal  misery.  And  when  they  came  to  describe
what  that  misery  was,  their  dark  imaginations  revelled  and  gloated  at  the
prospect.  In  the  pictures  which  they  drew  they  reproduced  and  heightened
the  barbarous  imagery  of  a  barbarous  age.  They  delighted  in  telling  their
hearers  that  they  would  be  roasted  in  great  fires,  and  hung  up  by  their  tongues.95
They  were  to  be  lashed  with  scorpions,  and  see  their  companions  writhing  and
howling  around  them.96  They  were  to  be  thrown  into  boiling  oil  and  scalding
lead.97  A  river  of  fire  and  brimstone,  broader  than  the  earth,  was  prepared
for  them  ;  98  in  that  they  were  to  be  immersed  ;  their  bones,  their  lungs,  and
their  liver  were  to  boil,  but  never  be  consumed.99  At  the  same  time,  worms


93  Only  those  who  are  extensively  read  in  the  theological  literature  of   that  time  can
form  an  idea  of  this,  its  almost  universal  tendency.     During  about  a  hundred  and  twenty
years  the  Scotch  pulpits  resounded  with  the  most  frightful  denunciations.      The  sins
of  the  people,  the  vengeance  of  God,  the  activity  of  Satan,  and  the  pains  of  hell,  were  the
leading  topics.     In  this  world,  calamities  of  every  kind  were  announced  as  inevitable  ;
they  were  immediately  at  hand  :    that  generation,  perhaps  that  year,  should  not  pass
away  without  the  worst  evils  which  could  be  conceived   falling  on  the  whole  country.
I  will  merely  quote  the  opening  of  a  sermon  which  is  now  lying  before  me,  and  which
was  preached  in   1682   by  no  less  a  man  than  Alexander  Peden.     "  There  is  three  or
four  things  that  I  have  to  tell  you  this  day  ;    and  the  first  is  this,  A  bloody  sword,  a
bloody  sword,  a  bloody  sword,  for  thee,  O  Scotland,  that  shall  reach  the  most  part  of  you
to  the  very  heart.     And  the  second  is  this,  Many  a  mile  shall  ye  travel  in  thee,  O  Scot-
land !   and  shall  see  nothing  but  waste  places.     The  third  is  this,  The  most  fertile  places
in  thee,  O  Scotland  !   shall  be  waste  as  the  mountain  tops.     And  fourthly,  The  women
with  child  in  thee,  O  Scotland  !   shall  be  dashed  in  pieces.     And  fifthly,  There  hath  been
many  conventicles  in  thee,  O  Scotland  !  but  ere  it  be  long,  God  shall  have  a  conventicle
in  thee,  that  shall  make  thee  Scotland  tremble.     Many  a  preaching  hath  God  wared  on
thee,  O  Scotland  !   but  ere  it  be  long  God's  judgments  shall  be  as  frequent  in  Scotland
as  these  precious  meetings,  wherein  he  sent  forth  his  faithful  servants  to  give  faithful
warning  in  his  name  of  their  hazard  in  apostatizing  from  God,  and  in  breaking  all  his
noble  vows.     God  sent  out  a  Welsh,  a  Cameron,  a  Cargill,  and  a  Semple  to  preach  to
thee  ;   but  ere  long  God  shall  preach  to  thee  by  a  bloody  sword."     Sermons  by  Eminent
Divines,  pp.  47,  48.

94  To  "  thunder  out  the  Lord's  wrath  and  curse."     Durham's  Commentarie  upon  the
Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  191.     "It  is  the  duty  of  Ministers  to  preach  judgments."
Hutcheson's  Exposition  on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  i.  p.  93.     "  If  ministers  when  they
threaten  be  not  the  more  serious  and  fervent,  the  most  terrible  threatening  will  but  little
affect  the  most  part  of  hearers."     Fergusson's  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  p.  421.

95  The  clergy  were  not  ashamed  to  propagate  a  story  of  a  boy  who,  in  a  trance,  had
been  mysteriously  conveyed  to  hell,  and  thence  permitted  to  revisit   the  earth.      His
account,  which  is  carefully  preserved  by  the  Rev.  Robert  Wodrow  (Analecta,  vol.  i.
p.  51)  was,  that  "  ther  wer  great  fires  and  men  roasted  in  them,  and  then  cast  into  rivers
of  cold  water,  and  then  into  boy  ling  water  ;  others  hung  up  by  the  tongue.''

96  "  Scortched  in  hell-fire  and  hear  the  howling  of  their  fellow -prisoners,  and  see  the
ugly  devils,  the  bloody  scorpions  with  which  Satan  lasheth  miserable  soules."    Ruther-
ford's Christ  Dying,  pp.  491,  492.

97  "  Boiling  oil,  burning  brimstone,  scalding  lead."     Sermons  by  Eminent  Divines,
P-  362.

98  "  A  river  of  fire  and  brimstone  broader  than  the  earth."     Rutherford's  Religious
Letters,  p.  35.    "  See  the  poor  wretches  lying  in  bundles,  boiling  eternally  in  that  stream
of  brimstone."     Halyburton's  Great  Concern  of  Salvation,  p.  53.

99  "  Tongue,  lungs,  and  liver,  bones  and  all,  shall  boil  and  fry  in  a  torturing  fire."
Rutherford's  Religious  Letters,  p.  17.     "  They  will  be  universal  torments,  every  part  of


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         769

were  to  prey  upon  them  ;  and  while  these  were  gnawing  at  their  bodies,  they
were  to  be  surrounded  by  devils,  mocking  and  making  pastime  of  their  pains.100
Such  were  the  first  stages  of  suffering,  and  they  were  only  the  first.  For  the
torture,  besides  being  unceasing,  was  to  become  gradually  worse.  So  refined
was  the  cruelty  that  one  hell  was  succeeded  by  another  ;  and  lest  the  sufferer
should  grow  callous,  he  was  after  a  time  moved  on,  that  he  might  undergo
fresh  agonies  in  fresh  places,  provision  being  made  that  the  torment  should  not
pall  on  the  sense,  but  should  be  varied  in  its  character,  as  well  as  eternal  in
its  duration.101

All  this  was  the  work  of  the  God  of  the  Scotch  clergy.102  It  was  not  only
his  work,  it  was  his  joy  and  his  pride.  For,  according  to  them,  hell  was  created
before  man  came  into  the  world  ;  the  Almighty,  they  did  not  scruple  to  say,
having  spent  his  previous  leisure  in  preparing  and  completing  this  place  of  torture,
so  that  when  the  human  race  appeared  it  might  be  ready  for  their  reception.103
Ample,  however,  as  the  arrangements  were,  they  were  insufficient  ;  and  hell,
not  being  big  enough  to  contain  the  countless  victims  incessantly  poured  into
it,  had  in  these  latter  days  been  enlarged.104  There  was  now  sufficient  room.
But  in  that  vast  expanse  there  was  no  void,  for  the  whole  of  it  reverberated
with  the  shrieks  and  yells  of  undying  agony.105  They  rent  the  air  with  horrid
sound,  and  amid  their  pauses  other  scenes  occurred,  if  possible  still  more
excruciating.  Loud  reproaches  filled  the  ear :  children  reproaching  their
parents,  and  servants  reproaching  their  masters.  Then  indeed  terror  was
rife,  and  abounded  on  every  side.  For  while  the  child  cursed  his  father,  the
father,  consumed  by  remorse,  felt  his  own  guilt  ;  and  both  children  and  fathers
made  hell  echo  with  their  piercing  screams,  writhing  in  convulsive  agony  at  the
torments  which  they  suffered,  and  knowing  that  other  torments  more  grievous
still  were  reserved  for  them.10^

the  creature  being  tormented  in  that  flame.  When  one  is  cast  into  a  fiery  furnace,  the
fire  makes  it3  way  into  the  very  bowels,  and  leaves  no  member  untouched  :  what  part
then  can  have  ease,  when  the  damned  swim  in  a  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone  ?  "
Boston's  Human  Nature  in  its  Four-fold  State,  p.  458.

100  "  while  wormes  are  sporting  with  thy  bones,  the  devils  shall  make  pastime  of  thy
paines."     Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  97.     "They  will  have  the  society  of
devils  in  their  torments,  being  shut  up  with  them  in  hell."     Boston's  Human  Nature  in  its
Four-fold  State,  p.  442.     "  Their  ears  filled  with  frightful  yellings  of  the  infernal  crew."
Ibid.,  p.  460.

101  This  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  Scotch  divines  is  tersely  summed  up  in  Binning' 's
Sermons,  vol.  iii.  p.  130  :    "  You  shall  go  out  of  one  hell  into  a  worse  ;   eternity  is  the
measure  of  its  continuance,  and  the  degrees  of  itself  are  answerable  to  its  duration."
The  author  of  these  sermons  died  in  1653.

1Q2  And,  according  to  them,  the  barbarous  cruelty  was  the  natural  result  of  His
Omniscience.  It  is  with  pain  that  I  transcribe  the  following  impious  passage.  "  Con-
sider, Who  is  the  contriver  of  these  torments.  There  have  been  some  very  exquisite
torments  contrived  by  the  wit  of  men,  the  naming  of  which,  if  ye  understood  their  nature,
were  enough  to  fill  your  hearts  with  horror  ;  but  all  these  fall  as  far  short  of  the  torments
ye  are  to  endure,  as  the  wisdom  of  man  falls  short  of  that  of  God."  ..."  Infinite  wisdom
has  contrived  that  evil."  The  Great  Concern  of  Salvation,  by  the  late  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas
Halyburton,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1722,  p.  154.

103  "  Men  wonder  what  he  could  be  doing  all  that  time,  if  we  may  call  it  time  which
hath  no  beginning,  and  how  he  was  employed."  ..."  Remember  that  which  a  godly
man  answered  some  wanton  curious  wit,  who,  in  scorn,  demanded  the  same  of  him —
'  He  was  preparing  hell  for  curious  and  proud  fools,'  said  he."     Binning's  Sermons,
vol.  i.  p.  194.

104  "  Hell  hath  inlarged  itselfe."     Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  146.

105  ««  Eternal  shriekings."     Sermons  by  Eminent  Divines,  p.  394-     "  Screakings  and
bowlings."     Gray's  Great  and  Precious  Promises,  p.  20.     "  O  !    the  screechs  and  yels
that  will  be  in  hell."     Durham's  Commentarie  upon  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  654.
"  The  horrible  scrieches  of  them  who  are  burnt  in  it.'.'  Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  175.

ice  «  when  children  and  servants  shall  go,  as  it  were,  in  sholes  to  the  Pit,  cursing  their

49


770  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Even  now  such  language  freezes  the  blood,  when  we  consider  what  must  have
passed  through  the  minds  of  those  who  could  bring  themselves  to  utter  it.  The
enunciation  of  such  ideas  unfolds  the  character  of  the  men,  and  lays  bare  their
inmost  spirit.  We  shudder  when  we  think  of  the  dark  and  corrupted  fancy,
the  vindictive  musings,  the  wild,  lawless,  and  uncertain  thoughts  which  must
have  been  harboured  by  those  who  could  combine  and  arrange  the  different  parts
of  this  hideous  scheme.  No  hesitation,  no  compunction,  no  feelings  of  mercy,
ever  seem  to  have  entered  their  breasts.  It  is  evident  that  their  notions  were
well  matured  ;  it  is  equally  evident  that  they  delighted  in  them.  They  were
marked  by  a  unity  of  conception,  and  were  enforced  with  a  freshness  and  vigour
of  language,  which  shows  that  their  heart  was  in  their  work.  But  before  this
could  have  happened,  they  must  have  been  dead  to  every  emotion  of  pity  and
of  tenderness.  Yet  they  were  the  teachers  of  a  great  nation,  and  were  in  every
respect  the  most  influential  persons  in  that  nation.  The  people,  credulous  and
grossly  ignorant,  listened  and  believed.  We,  at  this  distance  of  time,  and  living
in  another  realm  of  thought,  can  form  but  a  faint  conception  of  the  effect  which
these  horrible  conceits  produced  upon  them.  They  were  convinced  that  in  this
world  they  were  incessantly  pursued  by  the  devil,  and  that  he  and  other  evil
spirits  were  constantly  hovering  around  them,  in  bodily  and  visible  shape,
tempting  them,  and  luring  them  on  to  destruction.  In  the  next  world  the  most
frightful  and  unheard-of  punishments  awaited  them  ;  while  both  this  world
and  the  next  were  governed  by  an  avenging  Deity,  whose  wrath  it  was  impossible
to  propitiate.  No  wonder  that,  with  these  ideas  before  them,  their  reason  should
often  give  way,  and  that  a  religious  mania  should  set  in,  under  whose  influence
they  in  black  despair  put  an  end  to  their  lives.i°7

parents  and  their  masters  who  brought  them  there.  And  parents  and  masters  of  families
shall  be  in  multitudes  plunged  headlong  in  endless  destruction,  because  they  have  not
only  murdered  their  own  souls,  but  also  imbrued  their  hands  in  the  blood  of  their  children
and  servants.  O  how  doleful  will  the  reckoning  be  amongst  them  at  that  day  !  When
the  children  and  servants  shall  upbraid  their  parents  and  masters.  '  Now,  now,  we  must
to  the  Pit,  and  we  have  you  to  blame  for  it ;  your  cursed  example  and  lamentable
negligence  has  brought  us  to  the  Pit.'  "  .  .  .  "  And  on  the  other  hand,  how  will  the
shrieks  of  parents  fill  every  ear  ?  '  I  have  damn'd  myself,  I  have  damn'd  my  children,
I  have  damn'd  my  servants.  While  1  fed  their  bodies,  and  clothed  their  backs,  I  have
ruined  their  souls,  and  brought  double  damnation  on  myself.'  "  Halyburton's  Great
Concern  of  Salvation,  pp.  527,  528.  See  this  further  worked  out  in  Boston's  Human
Nature  in  its  Four-fold  State,  pp.  378,  379  :  "  Curses  instead  of  salutations,  and  tearing
of  themselves,  and  raging  against  one  another,  instead  of  the  wonted  embraces."

107  William  Vetch,  "  preaching  in  the  town  of  Jedburg  to  a  great  congregation,  said,
'  There  are  two  thousand  of  you  here  to  day,  but  I  am  sure  fourscore  of  you  will  not  be
saved  ; '  upon  which,  three  of  his  ignorant  hearers  being  in  despair,  despatch'd  them-
selves soon  after."  Scotch  Presbyterian  Eloquence,  p.  23.  See  also  the  life,  or  rather
panegyric,  of  Vetch  in  Howie's  Biographia  Scoticana,  where  this  circumstance  is  not
denied  but  on  the  contrary  is  stated  to  be  no  "  disparagement  to  him,"  p.  606.  The
frame  of  mind  which  the  teachings  of  the  clergy  encouraged,  and  which  provoked  self-
murder,  is  vividly  depicted  by  Samuel  Rutherford,  the  most  popular  of  all  the  Scotch
divines  of  the  seventeenth  century.  "  Oh  !  hee  lieth  down,  and  hell  beddeth  with  him  ;
hee  sleepeth,  and  hell  and  hee  dreame  together  ;  he  riseth,  and  hell  goeth  to  the  fields
with  him  ;  hee  goes  to  his  garden,  there  is  hell."  ..."  The  man  goes  to  his  table,  O  !
hee  dare  not  eat,  hee  hath  no  right  to  the  creature  ;  to  eat  is  sin  and  hell ;  so  hell  is  in
every  dish.  To  live  is  sinne,  hee  would  faine  chuse  strangling  ;  every  act  of  breathing  is
sin  and  hell.  Hee  goes  to  church,  there  is  a  dog  as  great  as  a  mountaine  before  his  eye  :
Here  be  terrors."  Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  1647,  4to,  pp.  41,  42.  Now  listen  to  the
confessions  of  two  of  the  tortured  victims  of  the  doctrines  enunciated  by  the  clergy  ;
victims  who,  after  undergoing  ineffable  agony,  were  more  than  once,  according  to  their
own  account,  tempted  to  put  an  end  to  their  lives.  "  The  cloud  lasted  for  two  years
and  some  months."  .  .  .  "The  arrows  of  the  Almighty  did  drink  up  my  spirits;  night
and  day  his  hand  lay  heavy  upon  me,  so  that  even  my  bodily  moisture  was  turned  into


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         771

Little  comfort,  indeed,  could  men  then  gain  from,  their  religion.  Not  only  the
devil,  as  the  author  of  all  evil,  but  even  He  whom  we  recognize  as  the  author  of
all  good,  was  in  the  eyes  of  the  Scotch  clergy  a  cruel  and  vindictive  being,  moved
with  anger  like  themselves.  They  looked  into  their  own  hearts,  and  there  they
found  the  picture  of  their  God.  According  to  them,  He  was  a  God  of  terror,
instead  of  a  God  of  love.108  ,;j/Io  Him  they  imputed  the  worst  passions  of  their
own  peevish  and  irritable  nature.  They  ascribed  to  Him  revenge,  cunning,  and
a  constant  disposition  to  inflict  pain.  While  they  declared  that  nearly  all  man-
kind were  sinners  beyond  the  chance  of  redemption,  and  were  indeed  pre-
destined to  eternal  ruin,  they  did  not  scruple  to  accuse  the  Deity  of  resorting
to  artifice  against  these  unhappy  victims  ;  lying  in  wait  for  them,  that  He
might  catch  them  unawares.109  The  Scotch  clergy  taught  their  hearers  that
the  Almighty  was  so  sanguinary,  and  so  prone  to  anger,  that  He  raged  even
against  walls  and  houses  and  senseless  creatures,  wreaking  His  fury  more  than
ever,  and  scattering  desolation  on  every  side.110  Sooner  than  miss  His  fell  and
malignant  purpose,  He  would,  they  said,  let  loose  avenging  angels,  to  fall  upon
men  and  upon  their  families.111  Independently  of  this  resource,  He  had  various

the  drought  of  summer  When  I  said  sometimes  that  my  couch  would  ease  my  com-
plaint, I  was  filled  with  tossings  to  the  dawning  of  the  day."  .  .  .  "  Amidst  all  my  down  -
castings,  I  had  the  roaring  lion  to  grapple  with,  who  likes  well  to  fish  in  muddy  waters.
He  strongly  suggested  to  me  that  I  should  not  eat,  because  I  had  no  right  to  food  ;  or
if  I  ventured  to  do  it,  the  enemy  assured  me  that  the  wrath  of  God  would  go  down  with
my  morsel ;  and  that  I  had  forfeited  a  right  to  the  divine  favour,  and  therefore  had
nothing  to  do  with  any  of  God's  creatures."  .  .  .  "  However,  so  violent  were  the  tempta-
tions of  the  strong  enemy,  that  I  frequently  forgot  to  eat  my  bread,  and  durst  not  attempt
it ;  and  when,  through  the  persuasion  of  my  wife,  I  at  any  time  did  it,  the  enemy  through
the  day  did  buffet  me  in  a  violent  way,  assuring  me  that  the  wrath  of  God  had  gone  over
with  what  I  had  taken."  ..."  The  enemy  after  all  did  so  pursue  me,  that  he  violently
suggested  to  my  soul,  that,  some  time  or  other,  God  would  suddenly  destroy  me  as  with
a  thunderclap  :  which  so  filled  my  soul  with  fear  and  pain,  that,  every  now  and  then,
I  looked  about  me,  to  receive  the  divine  blow,  still  expecting  it  was  a  coming ;  yea,
many  a  night  I  durst  not  sleep,  lest  I  had  awakened  in  everlasting  flames."  Stevenson's
Rare  Cordial,  pp.  11-13.  Another  poor  creature,  after  hearing  one  of  Smiton's  sermons
in  1740,  says,  "  Now,  I  saw  myself  to  be  a  condemned  criminal ;  but  I  knew  not  the  day
of  my  execution.  I  thought  that  there  was  nothing  between  me  and  hell,  but  the  brittle
thread  of  natural  life."  ..."  And  in  this  dreadful  confusion,  I  durst  not  sleep,  least
I  had  awakened  in  everlasting  flames."  ..."  And  Satan  violently  assaulted  me  to
take  away  my  own  life,  seeing  there  was  no  mercy  for  me."  ..."  Soon  after  this,  I  was
again  violently  assaulted  by  the  tempter  to  take  away  my  own  life ;  he  presented  to
me  a  knife  therewith  to  do  it ;  no  person  being  in  the  house  but  myself.  The  enemy
pursued  me  so  close,  that  I  could  not  endure  so  much  as  to  see  the  knife  in  my  sight,
but  laid  it  away."  .  .  .  "  One  evening,  as  I  was  upon  the  street,  Satan  violently  assaulted
me  to  go  into  the  sea  and  drown  myself ;  it  wo  aid  be  the  easiest  death.  Such  a  fear  of
Satan  then  fell  upon  me,  as  made  my  joints  to  shake,  so  that  it  was  much  for  me  to  walk
home  ;  and  when  I  came  to  the  door,  I  found  nobody  within  ;  I  was  afraid  to  go  into
the  house,  lest  Satan  should  get  power  over  me."  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Experiences
of  Marion,  Laird  of  Greenock,  pp.  13,  14,  19,  45.  223,  224.

108  Binning  says,  that  "  since  the  first  rebellion  "  (that  is,  the  fall  of  Adam),  "  there
is  nothing  to  be  seen  but  the  terrible  countenance  of  an  angry  God."     Binning' s  Sermons,
vol.  iii.  p.  254.

109  "  He  will,  as  it  were,  lie  in  wait  to  take  all  advantages  of  sinners  to  undo  them."
Hutcheson's  Exposition  on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  i.  p.  247.

110  "  His  wrath  rages  against  walls,  and  houses,  and  senselesse  creatures  more  now
then  at  that  time  "  (i.e.  at  the  time  when  the  Old  Testament  was  written).     "  See  what
desolation  he  hath  wrought  in  Ireland,  what  eating  of  horses,  of  infants,  and  of  killed
souldiers,  hath  beene  in  that  land,  and  in  Germany."     Rutherford's  Free  Disputation
against  Pretended  Liberty  of  Conscience,  pp.  244,  245.

"i  "  Albeit  there  were  no  earthly  man  to  pursue  Christ's  enemies ;    yet  avenging


772  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

ways  whereby  He  could  at  once  content  Himself  and  plague  His  creatures,  as
was  particularly  shown  in  the  devices  which  He  employed  to  bring  famine  on  a
people.112  When  a  country  was  starving,  it  was  because  God,  in  His  anger,
had  smitten  the  soil,  had  stopped  the  clouds  from  yielding  their  moisture,  and
thus  made  the  fruits  of  the  earth  to  wither.113  All  the  intolerable  sufferings
caused  by  a  want  of  food,  the  slow  deaths,  the  agony,  the  general  misery,  the
crimes  which  that  misery  produced,  the  anguish  of  the  mother  as  she  saw  her
children  wasting  away  and  could  give  them  no  bread,  all  this  was  His  act,  and
the  work  of  His  hands.114  In  His  anger,  He  would  sometimes  injure  the  crops
by  making  the  spring  so  backward,  and  the  weather  so  cold  and  rainy,  as  to
insure  a  deficiency  in  the  coming  harvest.115  Or  else  He  would  deceive  men,
by  sending  them  a  favourable  season,  and  after  letting  them  toil  and  sweat
in  the  hope  of  an  abundant  supply,  He  would  at  the  last  moment  suddenly
step  in,  and  destroy  the  corn  just  as  it  was  fit  to  be  reaped.116  For  the  God

angels,  or  evil  spirits  shall  be  let  forth  upon  them  and  their  families  to  trouble  them."
Dickson's  Explication  of  the  First  Fifty  Psalms,  p.  229.

112  "  God  hath  many  wayes  and  meanes  whereby  to  plague  man,  and  reach  his  content-
ments." Hutcheson's  Exposition  on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  i.  p.  286.  "  God  hath
variety  of  means  whereby  to  plague  men,  and  to  bring  upon  them  any  affliction  he
intendeth  against  them  ;  and  particularly  he  hath  several  wayes  whereby  to  bring  on
famine.  He  can  arme  all  his  creatures  to  cut  off  men's  provision,  one  of  them  after
another  ;  he  can  make  the  change  of  aire,  and  small  insects  do  that  worke  when  he
pleaseth."  Ibid.,  vol.  i.  p.  422.  The  same  divine,  in  another  elaborate  treatise,  dis-
tinctly imputes  to  the  Deity  a  sensation  of  pleasure  in  injuring  even  the  innocent.
"  When  God  sends  out  a  scourge,  of  sword,  famine,  or  pestilence,  suddenly  to  overthrow
and  cut  people  off,  not  only  are  the  wicked  reached  thereby  (which  is  here  supposed),
but  even  the  innocent,  that  is,  such  as  are  righteous  and  free  of  gross  provocations  ;
for,  in  any  other  sense,  none  are  innocent,  or  free  of  sin,  in  this  life.  Yea,  further,  in
trying  of  the  innocent  by  these  scourges,  the  Lord  seems  to  act  as  one  delighted  with  it,  and
little  resenting  the  great  extremities  wherewith  they  are  pressed."  Hutcheson's  Expo-
sition of  the  Book  of  Job,  1669,  folio,  p.  123.  Compare  p.  359.  "  It  pleaseth  the  Lord
to  exercise  great  variety  in  afflicting  the  children  of  men,"  &c.  But  after  all,  mere
extracts  can  give  but  a  faint  idea  of  the  dark  and  malignant  spirit  which  pervades  these
writings.

us  "  xhe  present  death  and  famine  quhilk  seases  vpon  many,  quhairby  God  his  heavie
wrath  is  evidentlie  perceaved  to  be  kindlit  against  vs."  Selections  from  the  Minutes
of  the  Synod  of  Fife,  p.  98.  "  Smiting  of  the  fruits  of  the  ground."  Hutcheson's  Expo-
sition on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  i.  p.  277.  "  Makes  fruits  to  wither."  Ibid.,  vol.  ii.
p.  183.  "  Hee  restraines  the  clouds,  and  bindeth  up  the  wombe  of  heaven,  in  extreme
drought."  Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  p.  52.  "  Sometime  hee  maketh  the  heauen
aboue  as  brasse,  and  the  earth  beneath  as  iron  ;  so  that  albeit  men  labour  and  sow,  yet
they  receiue  no  encrease  :  sometime  againe  hee  giues  in  due  season  the  first  and  latter
raine,  so  that  the  earth  renders  abundance,  but  the  Lord  by  blasting  windes,  or  by  the
caterpiller,  canker-worme  and  grasse-hopper  doth  consume  them,  who  come  out  as
exacters  and  officers  sent  from  God  to  poind  men  in  their  goods."  Cowper's  Heaven
Opened,  p.  433.

114  "  Under  the  late  dearth  this  people  suffered  greatly,  the  poor  were  numerous,  and
many,  especially  about  the  town  of  Kilsyth,  were  at  the  point  of  starving  ;  yet,  as  I
frequently  observed  to  them,  I  could  not  see  any  one  turning  to  the  Lord  who  smote  them,
or  crying  to  him  because  of  their  sins,  while  they  howled  upon  their  beds  for  bread."  Robe's
Narratives  of  the  Extraordinary  Work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  p.  68.

"6  NicolVs  Diary,  pp.  152,  153.  Much  rain  in  the  autumn,  was  "  the  Lord's  dis-
pleasure upon  the  land."  Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of  Saint  Andrews  and  Cupar,  p.  179.
lie  "  Men  sweat,  till,  sow  much,  and  the  sun  and  summer,  and  clouds,  warme  dewes
and  raines  smile  upon  cornes  and  meddowes,  yet  God  steppeth  in  betweene  the  mouth
of  the  husbandman  and  the  sickle,  and  blasteth  all."  Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  p.  87.
Compare  Baillie's  Letters,  vol.  iii.  p.  52,  on  the  "  continuance  of  very  intemperate  rain
upon  the  corns,"  as  one  of  the  "  great  signs  of  the  wrath  of  God."


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         773

of  the  Scotch  Kirk  was  a  God  who  tantalized  His  creatures  as  well  as  punished
them  ;  and  when  He  was  provoked,  He  would  first  allure  men  by  encouraging
their  expectations,  in  order  that  their  subsequent  misery  might  be  more
poignant.11?

Under  the  influence  of  this  horrible  creed,  and  from  the  unbounded  sway
exercised  by  the  clergy  who  advocated  it,  the  Scotch  mind  was  thrown  into
such  a  state  that,  during  the  seventeenth  and  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,
some  of  the  noblest  feelings  of  which  our  nature  is  capable,  the  feelings  of  hope,
of  love,  and  of  gratitude,  were  set  aside,  and  were  replaced  by  the  dictates  of  a
servile  and  ignominious  fear.  The  physical  sufferings  to  which  the  human
frame  is  liable,  nay,  even  the  very  accidents  to  which  we  are  casually  exposed,
were  believed  to  proceed  not  from  our  ignorance,  nor  from  our  carelessness,
but  from  the  rage  of  the  Deity.  If  a  fire  chanced  to  break  out  in  Edinburgh,
the  greatest  alarm  was  excited,  because  it  was  the  voice  of  God  crying  out  against
a  luxurious  and  dissolute  city.118  If  a  boil  or  a  sore  appeared  on  your  body,
that  too  was  a  divine  punishment,  and  it  was  more  than  doubtful  whether
it  might  lawfully  be  cured.119  The  small-pox,  being  one  of  the  most  fatal  as
well  as  one  of  the  most  loathsome  of  all  diseases,  was  especially  sent  by  God  ;
and  on  that  account  the  remedy  of  inoculation  was  scouted  as  a  profane  attempt
to  frustrate  His  intentions.120  Other  disorders,  which,  though  less  terrible,

117  "  When  the  Lord  is  provoked,  he  can  not  only  send  an  affliction,  but  so  order  it,
by  faire  appearances  of  a  better  lot,  and  heightening  of  the  sinners  expectation  and  desire,
as  may  make  it  most  sad."     Hutcheson's  Exposition  on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  iii.  pp.  9,
10.

118  In  1696  there  was  a  fire  in  Edinburgh  ;    whereupon  Moncrief,  in  his  sermon  next
day,  "  told  us,  '  That  God's  voice  was  crying  to  this  city,  and  that  he  was  come  to  the
very  ports,  and  was  crying  over  the  walls  to  us  ;    that  we  should  amend  our  ways,  lest
he  should  come  to  our  city,  and  consume  us  in  a  terrible  manner.'     I  cannot  tell  what
this  Dispensation  of  Providence  wrought  on  me,"  &c.     Memoirs  or  Spiritual  Exercises
of  Elizabeth  Wast,  written  by  her  own  Hand,  pp.  41,  42.     See  also,  at  pp.  122,  123,  the
account  of  another  conflagration,  where  it  is  said,  "There  was  much  of  God  to  be  seen
in  this  fire."     Compare  a  curious  passage  in  Calderwood's  History  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,
vol.  vii.  pp.  455,  456.

119  The  Rev.  James  Fraser  had  a  boil,  and  afterwards  a  fever.     "  During  this  sick-
ness he  miraculously  allayed  the  pain  of  my  boil,  and  speedily,  and  that  without  means,
cured  it ;   for  however  I  bought  some  things  to  prevent  it,  yet,  looking  on  it  as  a  punish-
ment from  God,  I  knew  not  if  I  could  be  free  to  take  the  rod  out  of  his  hand,  and  to
counterwork  him."     Memoirs  of  the  Rev.  James  Fraser  of  Brea,  Minister  of  the  Gospel
at  Culross,  written  by  Himself,  in  Select  Biographies,  vol.  ii.  p.  223.     Durham  declaims
against  "  sinful  shunning  and  shifting  off  suffering  ;  "  and  Rutherford  says,  "  No  man
should  rejoice  at  weakness  and  diseases  ;   but  I  think  we  may  have  a  sort  of  gladness
at  boils  and  sores,  because,  without  them,  Christ's  fingers,  as  a  slain  Lord,  should  never
have   touched  our  skin."     Durham's  Law   Unsealed,  p.    160 ;    Rutherford's  Religious
Letters,  p.  265.     I  do  not  know  what  effect  these  passages  may  produce  upon  the  reader  ;
but  it  makes  my  flesh  creep  to  quote  them.     Compare  Stevenson's  Rare,  Soul -strengthen-
ing, and  Comforting  Cordial,  p.  35.

120  it  was  not  until  late  in  the  eighteenth  century  that  the  Scotch  clergy  gave  up
this  notion.     At  last,  even  they  became  influenced  by  the  ridicule  to  which  their  super-
stition exposed  them,  and  which  produced  more  effect  than  any  argument  could  have
done.     The  doctrines,  however,  which  they  and  their  predecessors  had  long  inculcated,
had  so  corrupted  the  popular  mind,  that  instances  will,  I  believe,  be  found  even  in  the
nineteenth  century,  of  the  Scotch  deeming  precautions  against  small-pox  to  be  criminal,
or,  as  they  called  it,  flying  in  the  face  of  Providence.     The  latest  evidence  I  can  at  this
moment  put  my  hand  on  is  in  a  volume  published  in  1797-      It  is  stated  by  the  Rev.
John  Paterson  that  in  the  parish  of  Auldearn,  in  the  county  of  Nairn,  "  very  few  have
fallen  a  sacrifice  to  the  small -pox,  though  the  people  are  in  general  averse  to  inoculation,
from  the  general  gloominess  of  their  faith,  which  teaches  them    that  all  diseases  which
afflict  the  human  frame  are  instances  of  the  Divine  interposition,  for  the  punishment


774  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  very  painful,  proceeded  from  the  same  source,  and  all  owed  their  origin
to  the  anger  of  the  Almighty.121  In  everything  His  power  was  displayed,  not
by  increasing  the  happiness  of  men,  nor  by  adding  to  their  comforts,  but  by
hurting  and  vexing  them  in  all  possible  ways.  His  hand,  always  raised  against
the  people,  would  sometimes  deprive  them  of  wine  by  causing  the  vintage  to
fail  ;  122  sometimes  would  destroy  their  cattle  in  a  storm  ;  123  and  sometimes
would  even  make  dogs  bite  their  legs  when  they  least  expected  it.124  Sometimes
He  would  display  His  wrath  by  making  the  weather  excessively  dry  ;  125  some-
times by  making  it  equally  wet.126  He  was  always  punishing  ;  always  busy
in  increasing  the  general  suffering,  or,  to  use  the  language  of  the  time,  making
the  creature  smart  under  the  rod.127  Every  fresh  war  was  the  result  of  His
special  interference  ;  it  was  not  caused  by  the  meddling"}  folly  or  insensate
ambition  of  statesmen,  but  it  was  the  immediate  work  of  the  Deity,  who  was
thus  made  responsible  for  all  the  devastations,  the  murders,  and  other  crimes
more  horrible  still  which  war  produces.128  In  the  intervals  of  peace,  which

of  sin  ;  any  interference,  therefore,  on  their  part,  they  deem  an  usurpation  of  the  pre-
rogative of  the  Almighty."  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  vol.  xix.  p.  618,
Edinburgh,  1797.  See  also  vol.  xiv.  p.  52,  Edinburgh,  1795.  This  is  well  said.  No
doubt  so  abject  and  so  pernicious  a  superstition  among  the  people  was  the  result
of  "  the  general  gloominess  of  their  faith."  But  the  Rev.  John  Paterson  has  forgotten
to  add  that  the  gloominess  of  which  he  complains  was  in  strict  conformity  with  the
teachings  of  the  most  able,  the  most  energetic,  and  the  most  venerated  of  the  Scotch
clergy.  Mr.  Paterson  renders  scant  justice  to  his  countrymen,  and  should  rather  have
praised  the  tenacity  with  which  they  adhered  to  the  instructions  they  had  long  been
accustomed  to  receive.

b  121  The  Rev.  John  Welsh,  when  suffering  from  a  painful  disorder,  and  also  from  other
troubles,  writes  :  "  My  douleurs  ar  impossible  to  expresse."  ..."  It  is  the  Lord's
indignation."  See  his  letter,  in  Miscellany  of  the  Wodrow  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  558.  See
also  Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  128.  A  pain  in  one's  side  was  the  work  of  "  the  Lord  "
(Memoirs  of  Marion  Laird,  p.  95)  ;  so  was  a  sore  throat  (Wast's  Memoirs,  p.  203)  ;  and
so  was  the  fever  in  pleurisy  (Robe's  Narratives  of  the  Extraordinary  Work  of  the  Spirit
of  God,  p.  66).

122  In  January,  1653,  "  This  tyme,  and  mony  monethis  befoir,  thair  wes  great  skairshtie
of  wynes.     In  this  also  appered  Godis  justice  toward  this  natioun  for  abusing  of  that
blissing  many  yeiris  befoir."     Nicoll's  Diary,  p.  105.

123  This  idea  was  so  deeply  rooted  that  we  actually  find  a  public  fast  and  humiliation
ordered,  on  account  of  "  this  present  uncouth  storme  of  frost  and  snaw,  quhilk  hes
continewit  sa  lang  that  the  bestiall  ar  dieing  thik  fauld."     Records  of  the  Kirk  Session,
Presbytery,  and  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  p.  82.

124  "  There  was  a  dog  bit  my  leg  most  desperately.     I  no  sooner  received  this,  but  I
saw  the  hand  of  God  in  it."     Wast's  Memoirs,  p.  114.

125  "  The  evident  documentis  of  Goddis  wrath  aganes  the  land,  be  the  extraordinarie
drouth."     Records  of  the  Kirk  Session,  Presbytery,  and  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  p.  78.

120  "  The  hynous  synnes  of  the  land  produced  much  takines  of  Godis  wraith  ;  namelie,
in  this  spring  tyme,  for  all  Februar  and  a  great  pairt  of  Marche  wer  full  of  havie  weittis."
Nicoll's  Diary,  p.  152.

127  Halyburton's  Great  Concern  of  Salvation,  p.  85.     Fleming's  Fulfilling  of  Scripture,
pp.  101,  149,  176.     Balfour's  Annales,  vol.  i.  p.  169.     Boston's  Sermons,  p.  52.     Boston's
Human  Nature  in  its  Four-fold  State,  pp.  67,  136.     Memoirs  of  Marion  Laird,  pp.  63,  90,
113,  163.     Hutcheson's  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job,  pp.  62,  91,  140,  187,  242,  310.  449,
471,  476,  527,  528.

128  "  War  is  one  Of  the  sharp  scourges  whereby  God  punisheth  wicked  nations  ;   and
it  cometh  upon  a  people,  not  accidentally,  but  by  the  especial  providence  of  God,  who  hath
peace  and  war  in  his  own  hand."     Hutcheson's  Exposition  on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  ii.
p.  3.     In  1644,  "  Civill  war  wracks  Spaine,  and  lately  wracked  Italic  :   it  is  coming  by
appearance  shortlie  upon  France.     The  just  Lord,  who  beholds  with  patience  the  wicked -
nesse  of  nations,  at  last  arises  in  furie."  ..."  The  Swedish  and  Danish  fleets,  after
a  hott  fight,  are  making  for  a  new  onsett :    great  blood  is  feared  shall  be  shortly[shed


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         775

at  that  period  were  very  rare,  He  had  other  means  of  vexing  mankind.  The
shock  of  an  earthquake  was  a  mark  of  His  displeasure  ;  129  a  comet  was  a  sign
of  coming  tribulation  ;  13°  and  when  an  eclipse  appeared,  the  panic  was  so  uni-
versal that  persons  of  all  ranks  hastened  to  church  to  deprecate  His  wrath.131
What  they  heard  there  would  increase  their  fear,  instead  of  allaying  it.  For
the  clergy  taught  their  hearers  that  even  so  ordinary  an  event  as  thunder
was  meant  to  excite  awe,  and  was  sent  for  the  purpose  of  showing  to  men  with
how  terrible  a  master  they  had  to  deal.132  Not  to  tremble  at  thunder  was
therefore  a  mark  of  impiety  ;  and  in  this  respect  man  was  unfavourably  con-
trasted with  the  lower  animals,  since  they  were  invariably  moved  by  this  symp-
tom of  divine  power.133

These  visitations,  eclipses,  comets,  earthquakes,  thunder,  famine,  pestilence,
war,  disease,  blights  in  the  air,  failures  in  the  crops,  cold  winters,  dry  summers,
these  and  the  like  were,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Scotch  divines,  outbreaks  of  the
anger  of  the  Almighty  against  the  sins  of  men  ;  and  that  such  outbreaks  were
incessant  is  not  surprising,  when  we  consider  that  in  the  same  age  and  accord-
ing to  the  same  creed,  the  most  innocent  and  even  praiseworthy  actions  were
deemed  sinful,  and  worthy  of  chastisement.  The  opinions  held  on  this  subject
are  not  only  curious,  but  extremely  instructive.  Besides  forming  an  important
part  of  the  history  of  the  human  mind,  they  supply  decisive  proof  of  the  danger
of  allowing  a  single  profession  to  exalt  itself  above  all  other  professions.  For
in  Scotland  as  elsewhere,  directly  the  clergy  succeeded  in  occupying  a  more  than
ordinary  amount  of  public  attention,  they  availed  themselves  of  that  circum-
stance to  propagate  those  ascetic  doctrines  which,  while  they  strike  at  the  root
of  human  happiness,  benefit  no  one  except  the  class  which  advocates  them.
That  class,  indeed,  can  hardly  fail  to  reap  advantage  from  a  policy  which,  by
increasing  the  apprehensions  to  which  the  ignorance  and  timidity  of  men  make
them  too  liable,  does  also  increase  their  eagerness  to  fly  for  support  to  their
spiritual  advisers.  And  the  greater  the  apprehension,  the  greater  the  eager-
ness. Of  this  the  Scotch  clergy,  who  were  perfect  masters  of  their  own  art,

there,  both  by  sea  and  land.     The  anger  of  the  Lord  against  all  christendome  is  great."
Baillie's  Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  ii.  pp.  190,  223.

129  "  Earthquakes,  whereby  God,  when  he  is  angry,  overthrows  and  overturns  very
mountains."  Hutcheson's  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job,  p.  114.     "The  ministris  and
sessioun  convening  in  the  sessioun  hous,  considdering  the  fearfull  erthquak  that  wes
yisternicht,  the  aucht  of  this  instant,  throughout  this  haill  citie  about  nine  houris  at
evin,  to  be  a  document  that  God  is  angrie  aganes  the  land  and  aganes  this  citie  in  par-
ticular, for  the  manifauld  sinnis  of  the  people,"  &c.     Records  of  the  Kirk  Session,  Presby-
tery, and  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  p.  64.

130  "  Whatever  natural  causes  may  be  adduced  for  those  alarming  appearances,  the
system  of  comets  is  yet  so  uncertain,  and  they  have  so  frequently  preceded  desolating
strokes  and  turns  in  public  affairs,  that  they  seem  designed  in  providence  to  stir  up
sinners  to  seriousness.     Those  preachers  from  heaven,  when  God's  messengers  were
silenced,  neither  prince  nor  prelate  could  stop."     Wodrow's  History  of  the  Church  of
Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  421.

131  "  People  of  all  sortes  rane  to  the  churches  to  deprecat  God's  wrath."     Balfour's
Annales,  vol.  i.  p.  403.     This  was  in  1598.

132  "  By  it  he  manifests  his  power  and  shows  himself  terrible."'     Durham's  Commen-
tarie  upon  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  p.  33.     Compare  Row's  History  of  the  Kirk,  p.  333  ;
and  a  passage  in  Laird's  Memoirs^  p.  69,  which  shows  how  greedily  their  credulous  hearers
imbibed  such  notions  :    "  There  were  several  signal  evidences  that  the  Lord's  righteous
judgments  were  abroad  in  the  earth  ;  great  claps  of  thunder,"  &c.

133  "  The  stupidity  and  senselessnesse  of  man  is  greater  than  that  of  the  brute  creatures,
which  are  all  more  moved  with  the  thunder  then    the  hearts  of  men  for  the  most  part."
Dicksorfs  Explication  of  the  First  Fifty  Psalms,  p.  193.     Hutcheson  makes  a  similar
remark  concerning  earthquakes.     "  The  shaking  and  trembling  of  insensible  creatures,
when  God  is  angry,  serves  to  condemn  men,  whc  are  not  sensible  of  it,  nor  will  stoop
under  his  hand."     Hutcheson 's  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job,  p.  115,


776  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

were  well  aware.  Under  their  influence  a  system  of  morals  was  established
which,  representing  nearly  every  act  as  sinful,  kept  the  people  in  perpetual
dread,  lest  unwittingly  they  were  committing  some  enormous  offence,  which
would  bring  upon  their  heads  a  signal  and  overwhelming  punishment.

According  to  this  code,  all  the  natural  affections,  all  social  pleasures,  all  amuse-
ments, and  all  the  joyous  instincts  of  the  human  heart  were  sinful,  and  were  to  be
rooted  out.  It  was  sinful  for  a  mother  to  wish  to  have  sons  ;  134  and,  if  she  had
any,  it  was  sinful  to  be  anxious  about  their  welfare.135  It  was  a  sin  to  please
yourself,  or  to  please  others  ;  for  by  adopting  either  course  you  were  sure  to
displease  God.136  All  pleasures,  therefore,  however  slight  in  themselves,  or
however  lawful  they  might  appear,  must  be  carefully  avoided.137  When  mixing
in  society,  we  should  edify  the  company,  if  the  gift  of  edification  had  been
bestowed  upon  us  ;  but  we  should  by  no  means  attempt  to  amuse  them.138
Cheerfulness,  especially  when  it  rose  to  laughter,  was  to  be  guarded  against  ;
and  we  should  choose  for  our  associates  grave  and  sorrowful  men,  who  were  not
likely  to  indulge  in  so  foolish  a  practice.139  Smiling,  provided  it  stopped  short

134  Lady  Colsfeild  "  had  born  two  or  three  daughters,  and  was  sinfully  anxious  after
a  son,  to  heir  the  estate  of  Colsfeild."     Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  iii.  p.  293.

135  Under  the  influence  of  this  terrible  creed,  the  amiable  mother  of  Duncan  Forbes,
writing  to  him  respecting  his  own  health  and  that  of  his  brother,  speaks  of  "  my  sinful,
God-provoking  anxiety,  both  for  your  souls  and  bodies."     Burton's  Lives  of  Lovat  and
Forbes,  p.  274.      The  theological  theory  underlying  and  suggesting  this  was  that  "  grace
bridles  these  affections."     Boston's  Human  Nature  in  its  Four-fold  State,  p.  184.     Hence
its  rigid  application  on  days  set  apart  for  religious  purposes.     The  Rev.  Mr.  Lyon  (His-
tory of  Saint  Andrews,  vol.  i.  p.  458)  mentions  that  some  of  the  Scotch  clergy,  in  drawing
up  regulations  for  the  government  of  a  colony,  inserted  the  following  clause  :    "No
husband  shall  kiss  his  wife,  and  no  mother  shall  kiss  her  child  on  the  Sabbath  day."

136  "  The  more  you  please  yourselves  and  the  world,  the  further  you  are  from  pleasing
God."  Binning' 's  Sermons,  vol.  ii.  p.  55.     Elsewhere  (vol.  ii.  p.  45)  :    "Amity  to  our-
selves is  enmity  to  God."

137  "  Pleasures  are  most  carefully  to  be  auoided  :    because  they  both  harme  and
deceiue."     Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  251.     At  p.  268,  the  same  authority
says,  "  Beate  downe  thy  body,  and  bring  it  to  subiection  by  abstaining,  not  only  from
vnlawfull  pleasures,  but  also  from  lawfull  and  indifferent  delights."

138  According  to  Hutcheson's  Exposition  of  Job,  p.  6,  "  there  is  no  time  wherein  men
are  more  ready  to  miscarry,  and  discover  any  bitter  root  in  them,  then  when  they  are
about  the  liberal  use  of  the  creatures,  and  amidst  occasions  of  mirth  and  cheerfulness."
How  this  doctrine  ripened  cannot  be  better  illustrated  than  from  the  sentiments  enter-
tained, so  late  as  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  by  Colonel  Blackader,  a  Scotch
officer,  who  was  also  an  educated  man,  who  had  seen  much  of  the  world,  and  might  to
some  degree  be  called  a  man  of  the  world.      In  December,  1714,  he  went  to  a  wedding,
and,  on  his  return  home,  he  writes  :   "  I  was  cheerful,  and  perhaps  gave  too  great  a  swing
to  raillery,  but  I  hope  not  light  or  vain  in  conversation.     I  desire  always  to  have  my
speech  seasoned  with  salt,  and  ministering  profit  to  the  hearers.     Sitting  up  late,  and
merry  enough,  though  I  hope  innocent ;   but  I  will  not  justify  myself."     The  Life  and
Diary  of  Lieut.-Col.  J.  Blackader,  by  Andrew  Crichton,  p.  453.     On  another  occasion
(p.  511),  in  1720,  he  was  at  an  evening  party.     "  The  young  people  were  merry.     I  laid
a  restraint  upon  myself  for  fear  of  going  too  far,  and  joined  but  little,  only  so  as  not  to
show  moroseness  or  ill-breeding.     We  sat  late,  but  the  conversation  was  innocent,  and
no  drinking  but  as  we  pleased.     However,  much  time  is  spent ;  which  I  dare  not  justify.
In  all  things  we  offrnd."      At  p.  159  he  writes,  "  I  should  always  be  mixing  something
that  may  edify  in  my  discourse  ;  "  and,  says  his  biographer  (p.  437),  "Conversation,
when  it  ceased  to  accomplish  this  object,  he  regarded  as  degenerating  into  idle  entertain-
ment, which  ought  to  be  checked  rather  than  encouraged."

139  "  Frequent  the  gravest  company,  and  the  fellowship  of  those  that  are  sorrow -
full."  Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  416.  Compare  the  attacks  on  "  too  much
carnal  mirth  and  laughter,"  in  Durham's  Law  Unsealed,  p.  323  ;  in  Fleming's  Fulfilling
of  the  Scripture,  p.  226  ;  and  in  Fergusson's  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  p.  227.
See  also  Gray's  Spiritual  Warfare,  p.  42.  Cowper  says,  "  Woe  be  unto  them  that  now


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         777

of  laughter,  might  occasionally  be  allowed  ;  still,  being  a  carnal  pastime,  it  was
a  sin  to  smile  on  Sunday.140  Even  on  week-days,  those  who  were  most  imbued
with  religious  principles  hardly  ever  smiled,  but  sighed,  groaned,  and  wept.141
A  true  Christian  would  be  careful  in  his  movements  to  preserve  invariable
gravity,  never  running,  but  walking  soberly,  and  not  treading  out  in  a  brisk
and  lively  manner,  as  unbelievers  are  wont  to  do.142  So,  too,  if  he  wrote  to  a
friend,  he  must  beware  lest  his  letter  should  contain  anything  like  jocoseness  ;
since  jesting  is  incompatible  with  a  holy  and  serious  life.143

laugh,  for  assuredly  they  shall  weepe,  the  end  of  their  joy  shall  be  endlesse  mourning
and  gnashing  of  teeth,  they  shall  shed  tears  abundantly  with  Esau,  but  shall  find  no  place
for  mercy."  Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  271.  Hutcheson,  in  a  strain  of  unusual  liber-
ality, permits  occasional  laughter.  He  says,  "  There  is  a  faculty  of  laughing  given  to
men,  which  certainly  is  given  for  use,  at  least  at  some  times  ;  and  diversions  are  some-
time needfull  for  men  who  are  serious  and  employed  in  weighty  affairs."  ..."  And
particularly,  laughter  is  sometime  lawful  for  magistrates  and  others  in  publick  charge,
not  only  that  they  may  recreate  themselves,  but  that  thereby,  and  by  the  like  insinua-
ting carriage,  they  may  gain  the  affection  of  the  people."  Hutcheson's  Exposition  of  the
Book  of  Job,  edit,  folio,  1669,  pp.  389,  390.

140  In  1650,  when  Charles  II.  was  in  Scotland,  "  the  clergy  reprehended  him  very
sharply,  if  he  smiled  on  those  days  "  (Sundays).     Clarendon's  History  of  the  Rebellion,
book  xiii.  p.  747,  edit.  Oxford,  1843.

141  It  is  said  of  Donald  Cargill,  that  "  his  very  countenance  was  edifying  to  beholders  ;
often  sighing  with  deep  groans."     A  Cloud  of  Witnesses  for  the  Royal  Prerogatives  of
Jesus  Christ,  p.  423,     The  celebrated  James  Durham  was  "  a  person  of  the  utmost
gravity,  and  scarce  smiled  at  anything."     Howie's  Biographia  Scoticana,  p.  226.     Of
Livingston  we  are  told  "  that  he  was  a  very  affectionate   person,  and  weeped  much  ;
that  it  was  his  ordinary  way,  and  might  be  observed  almost  every  Sabbath,  that  when
he  came  into  the  pulpite  he  sate  doun  a  litle,  and  looked  first  to  the  one  end  of  the  kirk,
and  then  to  the  other  ;    and  then,  ordinarly,  the  tear  shott  in  his  eye,  and  he  weeped,
and  oftimes  he  began  his  preface  and  his  work  weeping."     Wodrow's  Analecta,  vol.  ii.
p.  249.     James  Alexander  "  used  to  weep  much  in  prayer  and  preaching  ;  he  was  every
way  most  savoury."     Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p.  39.     As  to  the  Rev.  John  Carstairs,  "  his  band
in  the  Sabbath  would  have  been  all  wett,  as  if   it  had  been  douked  with  tears,  before
he  was  done  with  his  first  prayer."  p.  48.     Aird,  minister  of  Dalserf,  "  weeping  much  "
(Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p.  56),  "  Mr.  James  Stirling  tells  me  was  a  most  fervent,  affectionat,
weeping  preacher."  p.  172  ;    and  the  Rev.  Alexander  Dunlop  was  noted  for  what  was
termed  "  a  holy  groan."  vol.  iii.  p.  21.      See  also,  on  weeping  as  a  mark  of  religion,
Wast's  Memoirs,  pp.  83,  84  ;    and  Robe's  Narratives  of  the  Extraordinary  Work  of  the
Spirit  of  God,  pp.  21,  31,  75,  150.     One  passage  from  the  most  popular  of  the  Scotch
preachers  I  hesitate  as  to  the  propriety  of  quoting  ;   but  it  is  essential  that  their  ideas
should  be  known,  if  the  history  of  Scotland  is  to  be  understood.     Rutherford,  after
stating  whom  it  is  that  we  should  seek  to  imitate,  adds  :  "  Christ  did  never  laugh  on  earth
that  we  read  of,  but  he  wept."     Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  1647,  4to,  p.  525.     I  publish
this  with  no  irreverent  spirit ;    God  forbid  that  I  should.     But  I  will  not  be  deterred
from  letting  this  age  see  the  real  character  of  a  system  which  aimed  at  destroying  all
human  happiness,  exciting  slavish  and  abject  fear,  and  turning  this  glorious  world  into
one  vast  theatre  of  woe.

142  "  Walk  with  a  sober  pace,  not  '  tinkling  with  your  feet.'  "  Memoirs  of  the  Rev.
James  Eraser,  written  by  Himself,  in  Select  Biographies,  vol.  ii.  p.  280.  "  It  is  somewhat
like  this,  or  less  than  this,  which  the  Lord  condemneth,  Isa.  iii.  16, '  Walking  and  mincing,
or  tripping  and  making  a  tinkling  with  their  feet.'  What  is  that  but  disdaining  the  grave
way  of  walking,  to  affect  an  art  in  it  ?  as  many  do  now  in  our  days  ;  and  shall  this  be
displeasing  to  the  Lord,  and  not  the  other  ?  seeing  he  loveth,  and  is  best  pleased  with,
the  native  way  of  carrying  the  body."  Durham's  Law  Unsealed,  p.  324.  "  The  believer
hath,  or  at  least  ought  to  have,  and,  if  he  be  like  himself,  will  have,  a  well  ordered  walk,
and  will  be  in  his  carriage  stately  and  princely."  Durham's  Exposition  of  the  Song  of
Solomon,  p.  365.

143^"  At  home,  writing  letters  to  a  friend.  My  vein  is  inclined  to  jest  and  humour.
The  letter  was  too  comical  and  jocose  ;  and  after  I  had  sent  it  away,  I  had  a  check  that


778  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

It  was  moreover  wrong  to  take  pleasure  in  beautiful  scenery  ;  for  a  pious
man  had  no  concern  with  such  matters,  which  were  beneath  him,  and  the  admira-
tion of  which  should  be  left  to  the  unconverted.144  The  unregenerate  might
delight  in  these  vanities,  but  they  who  were  properly  instructed  saw  Nature
as  she  really  was,  and  knew  that  as  she  for  about  five  thousand  years  had  been
constantly  on  the  move,  her  vigour  was  wellnigh  spent,  and  her  pristine  energy
had  departed.145  To  the  eye  of  ignorance  she  still  seemed  fair  and  fresh  ;  the
fact  however  was  that  she  was  worn  out  and  decrepit  ;  she  was  suffering  from
extreme  old  age  ;  her  frame,  no  longer  elastic,  was  leaning  on  one  side,  and  she
soon  would  perish.146  Owing  to  the  sin  of  man,  all  things  were  getting  worse,
and  nature  was  degenerating  so  fast  that  already  the  lilies  were  losing  their
whiteness,  and  the  roses  their  smell.147  The  heavens  were  waxing  old  ;  148
the  very  sun  which  lighted  the  earth  was  becoming  feeble.  149  This  universal
degeneracy  was  sad  to  think  of  ;  but  the  profane  knew  it  not.  Their  ungodly
eyes  were  still  pleased  by  what  they  saw.  Such  was  the  result  of  their  obstinate
determination  to  indulge  the  senses,  all  of  which  were  evil  ;  the  eye  being
beyond  comparison  the  most  wicked.  Hence  it  was  especially  marked  out  for
divine  punishment  ;  and,  being  constantly  sinning,  it  was  afflicted  with  fifty-
two  different  diseases,  that  is,  one  disease  for  each  week  in  the  year.150

it  was  too  light,  and  jesting  foolishly.  I  sent  and  got  it  back,  and  destroyed  it.  My
temper  goes  too  far  that  way,  and  I  ought  to  check  it,  and  be  more  on  my  guard,  and  study
edification  in  everything."  Crichtorfs  Life  and  Diary  of  Blackader,  pp.  536,  537.  Even
amongst  young  children,  from  eight  years  old  and  upwards,  toys  and  games  were  bad  ;
and  it  was  a  good  sign  when  they  were  discarded.  "  Some  very  young,  of  eight  and  nine
years  of  age,  some  twelve  and  thirteen.  They  still  inclined  more  and  more  to  their
duty,  so  that  they  meet  three  times  a  day,  in  the  morning,  at  night,  and  at  noon.  Also
they  have  forsaken  all  their  childish  fancies  and  plays  ;  so  these  that  have  been  awakened
are  known  by  their  countenance  and  conversation,  their  walk  and  behaviour."  Robe's
Narratives  of  the  Extraordinary  Work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  pp.  79,  80.

144  "  TO  the  unmortified  man,  the  world  smelleth  like  the  garden  of  God  "  .  .  .  "  the
world  is  not  to  him  an  ill-smelled  stinking  corps."     Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  p.  498.
But  those  who  were  properly  mortified  knew  that  "  the  earth  is  but  a  potter's  house  "
(Ibid.,  p.  286);    "an  old  thred -bare -worn  case"  (Ibid.,  p.  530);    a  "smoky  house"
(Rutherford's  Religious  Letters,  p.  100)  ;    a  "  plaistered,  rotten  world"  (Ibid.,  p.  132)  ;
and  "  an  ashy  and  dirty  earth  "  (Ibid.,  p.  169).     "  The  earth  also  is  spotted  (like  the
face  of  a  woman  once  beautifull,  but  now  deformed  with  scabs  of  leprosie)  with  thistles,
thornes,  and  much  barren  wildernesse."     Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  255.

145  "  Wearinesse  and  motion  is  laid  on  Moon  and  Sunne,  and  all  creatures  on  this  side
of  the  Moon.     Seas  ebbe  and  flow,  and  that's  trouble  ;  winds  blow,  rivers  move,  heavens
and  stars  these  five  thousand  yeares,  except  one  time,  have  not  had  sixe  minutes  rest."
..."  The  Sunne  that  never  rests,  but  moves  as  swiftly  in  the  night  as  in  the  day."
Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  pp.  12,  157.     "  This  is  the  world's  old  age  ;    it  is  declining  ;
albeit  it  seem  a  fair  and  beautiful  thing  in  the  eyes  of  them  who  know  no  better,  and
unto  them  who  are  of  yesterday  and  know  nothing,  it  looks  as  if  it  had  been  created
yesterday  ;    yet  the  truth  is,  and  a  believer  knows,  it  is  near  the  grave."     Binning's
Sermons,  vol.  iii.  p.  372.

146  "  This  then,  I  say,  is  the  state  all  things  ye  see  are  in, — it  is  their  old  age.     The
creation  now  is  an  old  rotten  house  that  is  all  dropping  through  and  leaning  to  the  one
side."     Binning's  Sermons,  vol.  iii.  p.  398.

147  "  The  lilies  and  roses,  which,  no  doubt,  had  more  sweetnesse  of  beauty  and  smell,
before  the  sin  of  man  made  them  vanity -sick."     Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  p.  185.

148  "  The  heavens  that  are  supposed  to  be  incorruptible,  yet  they  wax  old  as  doth  a
garment."     Binning's  Sermons,  vol.  i.  p.  95.

149  <*  1^  neerer  the  sun  drawes  to  the  end  of  his  daily  course,  the  lesse  is  his  strength,
for  we  see  the  Sunne  in  the  evening  decayes  in  heat  ;  so  it  is,  the  longer  by  reuolution  he
turnes  about  in  his  sphere,  he  waxes  alway  the  weaker  ;  and,  to  vse  the  similitude  of  the
holy  spirit,  as  a  garment  the  older  it  groweth  becomes  the  lesse  beautifull."     Cowper's
Heaven  Opened,  p.  255.

150  «'  n  is  so  delicate  by  nature,  that  since  it  was  the  first  sense  that   offended,  it  is


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         779

On  this  account  it  was  improper  to  care  for  beauty  of  any  kind  ;  or,  to  speak
more  accurately,  there  was  no  real  beauty.  The  world  afforded  nothing  worth
looking  at,  save  and  except  the  Scotch  Kirk,  which  was  incomparably  the  most
beautiful  thing  under  heaven.151  To  look  at  that  was  a  lawful  enjoyment,
but  every  other  pleasure  was  sinful.  To  write  poetry,  for  instance,  was  a  grievous
offence,  and  worthy  of  especial  condemnation.152  To  listen  to  music  was  equally
wrong  ;  for  men  had  no  right  to  disport  themselves  in  such  idle  recreation.
Hence  the  clergy  forbade  music  to  be  introduced  even  during  the  festivities  of  a
marriage  ;  153  neither  would  they  permit,  on  any  occasion,  the  national  enter-
tainment of  pipers.154  Indeed,  it  was  sinful  to  look  at  any  exhibition  in  the
streets,  even  though  you  only  looked  at  it  from  your  own  window.155  Dancing
was  so  extremely  sinful  that  an  edict  expressly  prohibiting  it  was  enacted  by
the  General  Assembly,  and  read  in  every  church  in  Edinburgh.150  New  Year's
Eve  had  long  been  a  period  of  rejoicing  in  Scotland,  as  in  other  parts  of  Europe.
The  Church  laid  her  hands  on  this  also,  and  ordered  that  no  one  should  sing
the  songs  usual  on  that  day,  or  should  admit  such  singers  into  his  own  private
house.157

At  the  christening  of  a  child  the  Scotch  were  accustomed  to  assemble  their
relations,  including  their  distant  cousins,  in  whom,  then  as  now,  they  much

aboue  all  the  rest  made  subject  (as  a  condigne  punishment)  to  as  many  maladies,  as
there  are  weekes  in  a  yeere."  Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  501.  The  Scotch
divines  were  extremely  displeased  with  our  eyes.  Rutherford  contemptuously  calls  them
"  two  clay  windows."  Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  p.  570.  Gray,  going  still  further,
says,  "  these  cursed  eyes  of  ours."  Gray's  Great  and  Precious  Promises,  p.  53.

isi  "  The  true  visible  Kirk  where  God's  ordinances  are  set  up,  as  he  hath  appointed,
where  his  word  is  purely  preached,  is  the  most  beautifull  thing  under  heaven."  Dick-
son's  Explication  of  the  First  Fifty  Psalms,  p.  341.

152  1  have  one  very  late,  and  on  that  account  very  curious,  instance  of  the  diffusion
of  this  feeling  in  Scotland.       In  1767  a  vacancy  occurred  in  the  mastership  of    the
grammar-school  of  Greenock.     It  was  offered  to  John  Wilson,  the  author  of  "  Clyde."
But,  says  his  biographer,  "  the  magistrates  and  minister  of  Greenock  thought  fit,  before
they  would  admit  Mr.  Wilson  to  the  superintendence  of  the  grammar  school,  to  stipulate
that  he  should  abandon  '  the  profane  and  unprofitable  art  of  poem -making.'  "     Lives
of  Eminent  Scotsmen  by  the  Society  of  Ancient  Scots,  1821,  vol.  v.  p.  169.

153  "  Sept.  22,  1649. — The  quhilk  day  the  Sessioune  caused  mak  this  act,  that  ther
sould  be  no  pypers  at  brydels,  and  who  ever  sould  have  a  pyper  playing  at  their  brydell
on  their  mariage  day,  sail  loose  their  consigned  money,  and  be  farder  punisched  as  the
Sessioune  thinks  fitt."     Extracts  from  the  Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Glasgow,  and  of  the
Kirk  Sessions  of  the  Parishes  of  Cambusnethan  Humbie  and  Stirling,  p.  34.     This  curious
volume  is  a  quarto,  and  without  date  ;   unless,  indeed,  one  of  the  title-pages  is  wanting
in  my  copy.

is*  See  the  Minutes  of  the  Kirk  Session  of  Glasgow,  in  Wodrow's  Collections  upon  the
Lives  of  Ministers,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  76  ;  also  the  case  of  "  Mure,  pyper,"  in  Selections
from  the  Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of  Saint  Andrews  and  Cupar,  p.  72.

155  This  notion  lingered   on,  probably,  to  the  beginning  of  this  century  ;    certainly
to  late  in  the  last.     In  a  work  published  in  Scotland  in  1836,  it  is  stated   that  a  clergy-
man was  still    alive  who  was  "  severely  censured,"  merely  because,  when  Punch  was
performing,  "  the  servant  was  sent  out  to  the  showman  to  request  him  to  come  below
the  windows  of  her  master's  house,  that  the  clergyman  and  his  wife  might  enjoy  the
sight."     Traditions  of  Perth  by  George  Penny,  Perth,  1836,  p.  124.

156  «  I7  Feb.  1650.     Ane  act  of  the  commissioun  of  the  Generall  Assemblie  wes  red
in  all  the  Churches  of  Edinburgh  dischargeing  promiscuous  dansing."     NicolVs  Diary,
p.  3.     See  also  Acts  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  1638-1842,  p.  201  ;
Register  of  the  Kirk  Session  of  Cambusnethan,  p.  35  ;    Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of  St.
Andrews  and  Cupar,  pp.  55,  181  ;    Minutes  of  the  Synod  of  Fife,  pp.  150,  169,  175  ;
and  a  choice  passage  in  A  Collection  of  Sermons  by  Eminent  Divines,  p.  51.

157  See  Selections  from  the  Records  of  the  Kirk  Session,  Presbytery,  and  Synod  of  Aber-
deen, pp.  77,  78,  forbidding  any  one  to  "  giwe  ony  meatt  or  drink  to  these  sangsteris  or
lat  thame  within  thair  houss."     The  singers  were  to  be  "  put  in  prisoun."


780  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

abounded.  But  this  caused  pleasure,  and  pleasure  was  sinful.  It  was  there-
fore forbidden  ;  the  number  of  guests  was  limited  ;  and  the  strictest  super-
vision was  exercised  by  the  clergy,  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  any  one  being
improperly  happy  on  such  occasions.158

Not  only  at  baptisms,  but  also  at  marriages,  the  same  spirit  was  displayed.
In  every  country  it  has  been  usual  to  make  merry  at  marriages  ;  partly  from  a
natural  feeling,  and  partly,  perhaps,  from  a  notion  that  a  contract  so  often
productive  of  misery  might  at  all  events  begin  with  mirth.  The  Scotch  clergy,
however,  thought  otherwise.  At  the  weddings  of  the  poor  they  would  allow
no  rejoicing  ;  159  and  at  the  weddings  of  the  rich  it  was  the  custom  for  one  of
them  to  go  for  the  express  purpose  of  preventing  an  excess  of  gaiety.  A  better
precaution  could  hardly  be  devised  ;  but  they  did  not  trust  exclusively  to  it.
To  check  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  they  furthermore  took  into  account  the  cookery,
the  choice  of  the  meats,  and  the  number  of  the  dishes.  They  were  in  fact
so  solicitous  on  these  points,  and  so  anxious  that  the  nuptial  feast  should  not
be  too  attractive,  that  they  fixed  its  cost,  and  would  not  allow  any  person  to
exceed  the  sum  which  they  thought  proper  to  name.160

Nothing  escaped  their  vigilance.  For  in  their  opinion  even  the  best  man
was  at  his  best  time  so  full  of  turpitude  that  his  actions  could  not  fail  to  be
wicked.161  He  never  passed  a  day  without  sinning,  and  the  smallest  sin  deserved
eternal  wrath.162  Indeed,  everything  he  did  was  sinful,  no  matter  how  pure

158  In  1643  the  Presbytery  of  St.  Andrews  ordered  that  "  because  of  the  great  abuse
that  is  likewayes  among  them  by  conveening  multitudes  at  baptismes  and  contracts,
the  ministers  and  sessions  are  appointed  to  take  strict  order  for  restraineing  these  abuses,
that  in  number  they  exceid  not  sixe  or  seven.     As  also  ordaines  that  the  hostlers
quho  mak  such  feists  salbe  censured  by  the  sessions."     Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of
St.  Andrews  and  Cupar,  p.  n.     See  also  Records  of  the  Kirk  Session,  Presbytery,  and  Synod
of  Aberdeen,  pp.  109,  no,  complaining  of  the  custom  "  that  everie  base  servile  man  in  the
towne,  when  he  hes  a  barne  to  be  baptesed,  invitis  tuelff  or  sextene  persones  to  be  his
gossopes  and  godfatheris  to  his  barne,"  &c.  ;   and  enacting  "  that  it  shall  not  be  lesume
to  any  inhabitant  within  this  burt  quhasoever,  to  invite  any  ma  persones  to  be  god-
fatheris to  thair  barne  in  ony  tyme  cumming  bot  tua  or  four  at  the  most,  lyk  as  the  Kirk
officier  is  expresslie  command!  t  and  prohibitt  that  from  hence  furth  he  tak  vp  no  ma  names
to  be  godfatheris,  nor  giwe  any  ma  vp  to  the  redar  bot  four  at  the  most,  vnder  all  hiest
censure  he  may  incur  be  the  contrarie,  and  this  ordinance  to  be  intimat  out  of  pulpitt,
that  the  people  pretend  no  ignorance  thairof."

159  They  forbade  music  and  dancing;  and  they  ordered  that  not  more  than  twenty-
four  persons  should  be  present.     See  the  enactment,  in  1647,  respecting  "  Pennie  bryd-
dells,"  in  Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of  St.  Andrews  and  Cupar,  p.  117.     In  1650,  "  The
Presbyterie  being  sadly  weghted  with  the  report  of  the  continwance,  and  exhorbitant
and  unnecessarly  numerous  confluences  of  people  at  pennie  brydles,  and  of  inexpedient
and  wnlawfull  pypeing  and  dancing  at  the  same,  so  scandalous  and  sinfull  in  this  tyme
of  our  Churches  lamentable  conditioun  ;    and  being  apprehensive  that  ministers  and
Kirk  Sessiouns  have  not  bein  so  vigilant  and  active  (as  neid  werre),  for  repressing  of  these
disorders,  doe  therfor  most  seriously  recommend  to  ministers  and  Kirk  Sessiouns  to
represse  the  same."     Ibid.,  pp.  169,  170.     See,  further,  Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of
Lanark,  p.  29  ;  and  Extracts  from  the  Presbytery  Book  of  Strathbogie,  pp.  4,  144.

160  See  two  curious  instances  of  limitation  of  price,  in  Irving' s  History  of  Dumbarton-
shire, p.  567  ;    and  in  Wodrow's  Collections  upon  the  Lives  of  Ministers,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.

P-  34-

lei  "  what  a  vile,  haughty,  and  base  creature  he  is — how  denied  and  desperately
wicked  his  nature — how  abominable  his  actions  ;  in  a  word,  what  a  compound  of  dark-
ness and  wickedness  he  is — a  heap  of  denied  dust,  and  a  mass  of  confusion — a  sink  of
impiety  and  iniquity,  even  the  best  of  mankind,  those  of  the  rarest  and  most  refined  extrac-
tion, take  them  at  their  best  estate"  Binning's  Sermons,  vol.  ii.  p.  302.  Compare  Boston's
Human  Nature  in  its  Four-fold  State,  pp.  26,  27.

162  «« The  least  sin  cannot  but  deserve  God's  wrath  and  curse  eternally."  Dickson'i
Truth's  Victory  over  Error,  p.  71.  "  All  men,  even  the  regenerate,  sin  daily."  Ibid.,
P-  153-


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         781

his  motives.163  Man  had  been  gradually  falling  lower  and  lower,  and  had  now
sunk  to  a  point  of  debasement  which  made  him  inferior  to  the  beasts  that  perish.164
Even  before  he  was  born,  and  while  he  was  yet  in  his  mother's  womb,  his  guilt
began.165  And  when  he  grew  up,  his  crimes  multiplied  thick  and  fast  ;  one  of  the
most  heinous  of  them  being  the  practice  of  teaching  children  new  words, — a
horrible  custom,  justly  visited  by  divine  wrath.166  This,  however,  was  but  one
of  a  series  of  innumerable  and  incessant  offences  ;  so  that  the  only  wonder  was
that  the  earth  could  restrain  herself  at  the  hideous  spectacle  which  man  pre-
sented, and  that  she  did  not  open  her  mouth,  as  of  old,  and  swallow  him  even
in  the  midst  of  his  wickedness.16?  For  it  was  certain  that  in  the  whole  creation
there  was  nothing  so  deformed  and  monstrous  as  he.168

Such  being  the  case,  it  behoved  the  clergy  to  come  forward,  and  to  guard
men  against  their  own  vices,  by  controlling  their  daily  actions,  and  forcing
them  to  a  right  conduct.  This  they  did  vigorously.  Aided  by  the  elders,  who
were  their  tools  and  the  creatures  of  their  power,  they,  all  over  Scotland,  organ-
ized themselves  into  legislative  bodies,  and  in  the  midst  of  their  little  senate
they  enacted  laws  which  the  people  were  bound  to  obey.  If  they  refused,  woe
be  to  them.  They  became  unruly  sons  of  the  Church,  and  were  liable  to  be
imprisoned,  to  be  fined,  or  to  be  whipped,169  or  to  be  branded  with  a  hot  iron,170
or  to  do  penance  before  the  whole  congregation,  humbling  themselves,  bare-
footed, and  with  their  hair  cut  on  one  side,171  while  the  minister,  under  pretence

163  "  Our  best  works  have  such  a  mixture  of  corruption  and  sin  in  them,  that  they
deserve  his  curse  and  wrath."  Ibid.,  p.  130.

i6*  "But  now,  falling  away  from  God,  hee  hath  also  so  farre  degenerated  from  his  owne
kind,  that  he  is  become  inferiour  to  the  beasts."  Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  251.
"  O  !  is  not  man  become  so  brutish  and  ignorant,  that  he  may  be  sent  unto  the  beasts
of  the  field  to  be  instructed  of  that  which  is  his  duty  ?  "  Gray's  Spiritual  Warfare,
p.  28.  "  Men  are  naturally  more  brutish  than  beasts  themselves."  Boston's  Human
Nature  in  its  Four-fold  State,  p.  58.  "  Worse  than  the  beast  of  the  field."  Halyburton's
Great  Concern  of  Salvation,  p.  71.

163  "  Infants,  even  in  their  mother's  belly,  have  in  themselves  sufficient  guilt  to  deserve
such  judgments  ;  "  i.e.  when  women  with  child  are  "  ript  up."  Hutcheson's  Exposition
on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  i.  p.  255.

166  "  And  in  our  speech,  our  Scripture  and  old  Scots  names  are  gone  out  of  request  ;
instead  of  Father  and  Mother,  Mamma  and  Papa,  training  children  to  speak  nonsense,
and  what  they  do  not  understand.     These  few  instances,  amongst  many  that  might  be
given,  are  additional  causes  of  God's  wrath."     The  Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  Alexander
Peden,  late  Minister  of  the  Gospel  at  New  Glenluce,  in  Galloway,  in  Walker's  Biographia
Presbyteriana,  vol.  i.  p.  140.

167  "  Yea,  if  the  Lord  did  not  restraine  her,  shee  would  open  her  mouth  and  swallow
the  wicked,  as  she  did  Corah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram."     Cowper's  Heaven  Opened,  p.  257-
Compare  Hutcheson's  Exposition  on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  i.  p.  5°7-

168  "  There  is  nothing  so  monstrous,  so  deformed  in  the  world,  as  man."     Binning' s
Sermons,  vol.  i.  p.  234.     "  There  is  not  in  all  the  creation  such  a  miserable  creature  as
man.'*     Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p.  321.     "Nothing  so  miserable."     Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the
Soule,  p.  37.

16»  "  December  I7th,  1635.  Mention  made  of  a  correction  house,  which  the  Session
ordeans  persons  to  be  taken  to,  both  men  and  women,  and  appoints  them  to  be  whipt
every  day  during  the  Session's  will."  Wodrow's  Collections  upon  the  Lives  of  Ministers,
vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  67.

170  On  the  22nd  October,  1648,  the  Kirk  Session  of  Dunfermline  ordered  that  a  certain
Janet  Robertson  "  shall  be  cartit  and  scourged  through  the  town,  and  markit  with  an
hot  iron."     Chalmers'  History  of  Dunfermhne,  p.  437.

171  "  As  they  punish  by  pecuniary  fines,  so  corporally  too,  by  imprisoning  the  pers<
of  the  delinquents,  using  them  disgracefully,  carting  them  through  cities,  making  then:
stand  in  logges,  as  they  call  them,  pillaries  (which  in  the  country  churches  are  fixed
to  the  two  sides  of  the  main  door  of  the  Parish  Church),  cutting  the  halfe^of  their  hair,
shaving  their  beards,  &c.,  and  it  is  more  than  ordinary,  by  their  '  original '  and    proper
power,'  to  banish  them  out  of  the  bounds  and  limits  of  the  parish,  or  presbytery,  as  they
list  to  order  it."     Presbytery  Display d,  p.  4.


782  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  rebuking  them,  enjoyed  his  triumph.172  All  this  was  natural  enough.  For
the  clergy  were  the  delegates  of  heaven,  and  the  interpreters  of  its  will.  They,
therefore,  were  the  best  judges  of  what  men  ought  to  do  ;  and  any  one  whom  they
censured  was  bound  to  submit  with  humility  and  repentance.173

The  arbitrary  and  irresponsible  tribunals  which  now  sprung  up  all  over
Scotland  united  the  executive  authority  with  the  legislative,  and  exercised  both
functions  at  the  same  time.  Declaring  that  certain  acts  ought  not  to  be  com-
mitted, they  took  the  law  into  their  own  hands,  and  punished  those  who  had
committed  them.  According  to  the  principles  of  this  new  jurisprudence,  of
which  the  clergy  were  the  authors,  it  became  a  sin  for  any  Scotchman  to  travel
in  a  Catholic  country.174  It  was  a  sin  for  any  Scotch  innkeeper  to  admit  a
Catholic  into  his  inn.175  It  was  a  sin  for  any  Scotch  town  to  hold  a  market  either
on  Saturday  or  on  Monday,  because  both  days  were  near  Sunday.176  It  was  a
sin  for  a  Scotch  woman  to  wait  at  a  tavern  ;  177  it  was  a  sin  for  her  to  live
alone  ;  178  it  was  also  a  sin  for  her  to  live  with  unmarried  sisters.179  It  was  a

172  The  Scotch  clergy  of  the  seventeenth  century  were  not  much  given  to  joking  ;
but  on  one  of  these  occasions  a  preacher  is  said  to  have  hazarded  a  pun.     A  woman,
named  Ann  Cantly,  being  made  to  do  penance,  "  Here  "   (said  the  minister),  "  Here
is  one  upon  the  stool  of  repentance,  they  call  her  Cantly  ;   she  saith  herself,  she  is  an
honest  woman,  but  I  trow  scantly."     Scotch  Presbyterian  Eloquence,  p.  125.     From  what
I  have  read  of  Scotch  theology,  I  can  bear  testimony  to  the  accuracy  of  this  book,  so
far  as  its  general  character  is  concerned.     Indeed,  the  author,  through  fear  of  being
entirely  discredited,  has  often  rather  understated  his  case.

173  As  Durham  says,  in  his  Exposition  of  the  Song  of  Solomon,  p.  451,  "  It  is  no  burden
to  an  honest  believer  to  acknowledge  Christ's  ministers,  to  obey  their  doctrine,  and
submit  to  their  censures."

174  A  man  named  Alexander  Laurie  was  brought  before  the  Kirk  Session  of  Perth,
"  and  being  inquired  by  the  minister  if,  in  his  last  being  out  of  this  country,  he  had  been
in  Spain,  answered  that  he  was  in  Portugal,  but  was  never  present  at  mass,  neither  gave
reverence  to  any  procession,  and  that  he  was  never  demanded  by  any  concerning  his
religion.     The  said  Alexander  being  removed  and  censured,  it  was  thought  good  by  the
(Kirk)  Session  that  he  should  be  admonished  not  to  travel  in  these  parts  again,  except
that  they  were  otherwise  reformed  in  religion."     Extracts  from  the  Kirk-Session  Register
of  Perth,  in  The  Spottiswoode  Miscellany,  vol.  ii.  p.  274.      Still  earlier,  that  is  in  1592,
the  clergy  attempted  to  interfere  even  with  commerce,  "  allegeing  that  the  marchands
could  not  mak  vayage  in  Spayne  without  danger  of  thair  sawlis,  and  tharefore  willit
thayme  in  the  nayme  of  God  to  absteyne."     The  Historic  of  King  James  the  Sext,  p.  254.

175  See  the  case  of  Patrick  Stewart,  and  Mr.  Lawson's  note  upon  it,  in  Lawson's  Book
of  Perth,  p.  238.     In  this  instance,  the  "  Roman  Catholic  gentleman  "  had  been  excom-
municated, which  made  matters  still  worse.

iw  The  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  "  by  their  transcendent  sole  authority,  discharged
any  market  to  be  kept  on  Monday  ;  the  reason  was,  because  it  occasioned  the  travelling
of  men  and  horse  the  Lord's -day  before,  which  prophaned  the  Sabbath."  Presbytery
Displayd,  p.  10.  In  1650  Saturday  was  also  taken  in  by  another  ecclesiastical  senate.
"  The  Presbyterie  doe  appoint  the  severall  brethren  in  burghes  to  deale  with  such  as
have  not  changed  ther  Mondayes  and  Satterdayes  mercats  to  other  dayes  of  the  weeke,
that  they  may  doe  the  same  primo  quoque  tempore."  Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of  St.
Andrews  and  Cupar,  p.  53.

177  In  1650,  "  For  '  the  down -bearing  of  sin,'  women  were  not  allowed  to  act  as  waiters
in  taverns,  but  '  allenarly  men-servands  and  boys.'  "  Chambers'  Annals,  vol.  ii.  p.  196.
This  order  "  wes  red  and  publictlie  intimat  in  all  the  kirkis  of  Edinburgh."  NicolVs
Diary,  p.  5.

ITS  "  Forsameikle  as  dilatation  being  made,  that  Janet  Watson  holds  an  house  by  her-
self, where  she  may  give  occasion  of  slander,  therefore  Patrick  Pitcairn,  elder,  is  ordained
to  admonish  her  in  the  session's  name,  either  to  marry,  or  then  pass  to  service,  otherwise
that  she  will  not  be  suffered  to  dwell  by  herself."  Kirk-Session  Records  of  Perth,  in
The  Chronicle  of  Perth,  p.  86.

179  "  Ordains  the  two  sisters,  Elspith  and  Janet  Stewart,  that  they  be  not  found  in


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY          783

sin  to  go  from  one  town  to  another  on  Sunday,  however  pressing  the  business
might  be.180  It  was  a  sin  to  visit  your  friend  on  Sunday  ;  181  it  was  likewise
sinful  either  to  have  your  garden  watered  182  or  your  beard  shaved.183  Such
things  were  not  to  be  tolerated  in  a  Christian  land.  No  one,  on  Sunday,  should
pay  attention  to  his  health,  or  think  of  his  body  at  all.  On  that  day,  horse -
exercise  was  sinful  ;  184  so  was  walking  in  the  fields,  or  in  the  meadows,  or  in
the  streets,  or  enjoying  the  fine  weather  by  sitting  at  the  door  of  your  own
house.185  To  go  to  sleep  on  Sunday,  before  the  duties  of  the  day  were  over,
was  also  sinful,  and  deserved  church  censure.186  Bathing,  being  pleasant  as
well  as  wholesome,  was  a  particularly  grievous  offence  ;  and  no  man  could
be  allowed  to  swim  on  Sunday.187  It  was  in  fact  doubtful  whether  swimming

the  house  again  with  their  sister,  but  every  one  of  them  shall  go  to  service,  or  where
they  may  be  best  entertained  without  slander,  under  the  penalty  of  warding  their  persons
and  banishment  of  the  town."  Kirk-Session  Register,  in  Lawson's  Book  of  Perth,  p.  169.

180  "  Compeirit  William  Kinneir,  and  confest  his  travelling  on  the  Sabbath  day,  which
he  declairit  was  out  of  meer  necessitie,  haveing  two  watters  to  croce,  and  ane  tempestuos
day,  quhilk  moowit  him  to  fear  that  he  wold  not  get  the  watters  crost,  and  so  his  credit
might  faill.     He  was  sharpelie  admonished  ;   and  promist  newer  to  doe  the  lyke  again."
Selections  from  the  Records  of  the  Kirk -Session  of  Aberdeen,  p  136.

181  "  Compearit  Thomas  Gray,  and  confest  that  one  Sunday  in  the  morning  he  went
to  Culter  to  visit  a  friend,  and  stayed  thair  all  night.     The  sessioune  warnit  him,  apud
acta,  to  the  next  day,  and  appointed  Patrick  Gray,  his  master,  to  be  cited  to  the  next
day,  to  give  furder  informatioune  in  the  matter.     (Sharply  rebuked  before  the  pulpit.)  "
Selections  from  the  Records  of  the  Kirk-Session  of  Aberdeen,  p.  146.

182  "  It  was  reported  that  Margaret  Brotherstone  did  water  her  kaill  wpon  the  Sabbath
day,  and  thairwpon  was  ordained  to  be  cited."  ..."  Compeired  Margaret  Brother-
stone,  and  confessed  her  breach  of  Sabbath  in  watering  of  her  kaill,  and  thairwpon
ordained  to  give  evidence  in  publick  of  her  repentance  the  next  Lord's  day."     Extracts
from  the  Register  of  the  Kirk -Session  of  Humbie,  p.  42.

isa  Even  so  late  as  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  "  clergymen  were  sometimes
libelled"  .  .  .  "for  shaving"  on  Sunday.  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,
vol.  xvi.  p.  34,  Edinburgh,  1795.  At  an  earlier  period,  no  one  might  be  shaved  on  that
day.  See  The  Spottiswoode  Miscellany,  vol.  ii.  p.  276  ;  and  Lawson's  Book  of  Perth,
pp.  224,  225.

184  "  Compeired  John  Gordon  of  Avachie,  and  confessed  that  he  had  transgressed

.in  travailing  on  the  Sabbath  day  with  horse,  going  for  a  milston.     Referred  to  the  session

of  Kinor  for  censure."     Extracts  from  the  Presbytery  Book  of  Strathbogie,  p.  236.     See

also  the  case  mentioned  in  Letters  from  a  Gentleman  in  the  North  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  172  ;

"  This  riding  on  horseback  of  a  Sunday  was  deemed  a  great  scandal."

185 -In  1647  the  punishment  was  ordered  of  whoever  was  guilty  of  "  sitting  or  walking
idle  upon  the  streetes  and  feildes  "  on  Sunday.  Selections  from  the  Minutes  of  the  Synod
of  Fife,  p.  152.  In  1742  "  sitting  idle  at  their  doors  "  and  "  sitting  about  doors  "  was
profane.  Robe's  Narratives  of  the  Extraordinary  Work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  pp.  109,  no.
In  1756,  at  Perth,  "  to  stroll  about  the  fields,  or  even  to  walk  upon  the  inches,  was  looked
upon  as  extremely  sinful,  and  an  intolerable  violation  of  the  fourth  commandment."
Penny's  Traditions  of  Perth,  p.  36.

186  In  1656,  "  Cite  Issobell  Balfort,  servand  to  William  Gordone,  tailyeor,  beeing  found
sleeping  at  the  Loche  side  on  the  Lord's  day  in  tyme  of  sermon."     Selections  from  the
Records  of  the  Kirk -Session  of  Aberdeen,  p.  137.     It  was  a  sin  even  for  children  to  feel  tired
of  the  interminable  sermons  which  they  were  forced  to  hear.    Halyburton,  addressing
the  young  people  of  his  congregation,  says,  "  Have  not  you  been  glad  when  the  Lord's
day  was  over  ;  or,  at  least,  when  the  preaching  was  done,  that  ye  might  get  your  liberty  ?
Has  it  not  been  a  burden  to  you,  to  sit  so  long  in  the  church  ?     Well,  this  is  a  great  sin"
See  this  noticeable  passage  in  Halyburton' s  Great  Concern  of  Salvation,  p.  100.

187  In  1719  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh  indignantly  declares,    "  Yea,  some  have
arrived  at  that  height  of  impiety,  as  not  to  be  ashamed  of  washing  in  waters  and  swim-
ming in  rivers  upon  the  holy  Sabbath."     Register  of  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  2gth  April,
i  jig,  in  Arnofs  History  of  Edinburgh,  p.  204.


784  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

was  lawful  for  a  Christian  at  any  time,  even  on  week-days,  and  it  was  certain
that  God  had  on  one  occasion  shown  His  disapproval  by  taking  away  the
life  of  a  boy  while  he  was  indulging  in  that  carnal  practice.188

That  it  was  a  sin  to  cleanse  one's  body  might  indeed  have  been  taken  for
granted  ;  seeing  that  the  Scotch  clergy  looked  on  all  comforts  as  sinful  in  them-
selves, merely  because  they  were  comforts. 189  The  great  object  of  life  was
to  be  in  a  state  of  constant  affliction.190  Whatever  pleased  the  senses  was
to  be  suspected.191  A  Christian  must  beware  of  enjoying  his  dinner  ;  for  none
but  the  ungodly  relished  their  food.192  By  a  parity  of  reasoning,  it  was  wrong
for  a  man  to  wish  to  advance  himself  in  life,  or  in  any  way  to  better  his  con-
dition.193 Either  to  make  money  or  to  save  it  was  unsuited  to  Christians  ;
and  even  to  possess  much  of  it  was  objectionable,  because  it  not  only  ministered
to  human  pleasures  but  encouraged  those  habits  of  foresight  and  of  provision
for  the  future  which  are  incompatible  with  complete  resignation  to  the  Divine
will.  To  wish  for  more  than  was  necessary  to  keep  oneself  alive  was  a  sin  as
well  as  a  folly,  and  was  a  violation  of  the  subjection  we  owe  to  God.104  That

188  So  late  as  1691,  the  Kirk-Session  of  Glasgow  attempted  to  prevent  all  boys  from
swimming,  whatever  the  day  might  be.     But  as  the  Church  was  then  on  the  decline,
it  was  necessary  to  appeal  to  the  civil  authority  for  help.      What  the  result  was  I  have
not  been  able  to  ascertain.      There  is  however  a  curious  notice  in  Wodrow's  Collections
upon  the  Lives  of  Ministers,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  77,  stating   that  on  "  August  6th,  1691,
the  Session  recommends  it  to  the  magistrates  to  think  on  some  overtures  for  discharging
boyes  from  swimming,  in  regard  one  was  lately  lost."     I  have  met  with  other  evidence
respecting  this  ;  but  I  cannot  remember  the  passages.

189  The  Rev.  James  Fraser  says,  "The  world  is  a  dangerous  thing  and  a  great  evil,
and  the  comforts  of  it  a  hell."     Select  Biographies,  vol.  ii.  p.  220.      Compare  Gray's
Spiritual  Warfare,  p.  22.

190  "  It  is  good  to  be  continually  afflicted  here."     Select  Biographies,  vol.  ii.  p.  220.
Gray,  advocating  the  same  doctrine,  sums  up  his  remarks  by  a  suggestion,  that,  "  I
think  David  had  never  so  sweet  a  time  as  then,  when  he  was  pursued  as  a  partridge  by
his  son  Absalom."     Gray's  Great  and  Precious  Promises,  p.  14.

191  "Suspect  that  which  pleaseth  the  senses."     Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,
p.  63.

192  Durham,  in  his  long  catalogue  of  sins,  mentions  as  one,  "  the  preparing  of  meat
studiously,  that  is,  when  it  is  too  riotously  dressed,  for  pleasing  men's  carnal  appetite
and  taste,  or  palate,  by  the  fineness  of  it,  and  other  curiosities  of  that  kind."     Durham's
Law  Unsealed,  p.  333.     See  also  p.  48,  on  "  palate -pleasers  ;  "  and  Dickson's  opinion
of  the  "  rarest  dishes  and  best  meats."     Dickson's  Explication  of  the  Psalms,  p.  84.
According  to  another  of  the  Scotch  divines,  whoever  makes  one  good  meal  and  has
enough  left  for  a  second,  is  in  imminent  peril.     "  He  that  is  full,  and  hath  enough  to
make  him  fuller,  will  easily  deny  God,  and  be  exalted  against  him  :   his  table  shall  be  a
snare  to  his  body,  and  a  snare  to  his  soule."     Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  421.

193  For)  sayS  Abernethy  (Physicke  for  the  Soule,  p.  488),  "  men  are  loth  to  lend  their
eare  to  the  Word,  when  they  abound  in  prosperity."     So,  too,  Hutcheson,  in  his  Expo-
sition of  the  Book  of  Job,  p.  387  :   "  Such  is  the  weakness  even  of  godly  men,  that  they  can
hardly  live  in  a  prosperous  condition,  and  not  be  overtaken  with  some  security,  carnal
confidence,  or  other  miscarriage."

194  See  this  theory  worked  out  in  Cockburn's  Jacob's  Vow,  or  Man's  Felicity  and  Duty,
pp.  71-75.     He  says,  "  And  certainly  to  crave  and  be  desirous  of  more  than  what  is
competent  for  the  maintenance  and  support  of  our  lives,  is  both  inconsistent  with  that
dependence  and  subjection  we  owe  to  God,  and  doth  also  bespeak  a  great  deal  of  vanity,
folly,  and  inconsiderateness."     Boston,  striking  at  the  very  foundation  of  that  practice
of  providing  for  the  future  which  is  the  first  and  most    important  maxim  in  all  civil
wisdom,  and  which  peculiarly  distinguishes  civilized  nations  from  barbarians,  asks  his
hearers,  "  Why  should  men  rack  their  heads  with  cares  how  to  provide  for  to-morrow,
while  they  know  not  if  they  shall  then  need  anything  ?  "     Boston's  Human  Nature  in  its
Four-fold  State,  p.  300.     Hutcheson  thinks  that  those  who  are  guilty  of  such  impious
prudence  deserve  to  be  starved.      "  When  men  are  not  content  with  food  and  rayment,


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         785

it  was  contrary  to  His  desire  was  moreover  evident  from  the  fact  that  He
bestowed  wealth  liberally  upon  misers  and  covetous  men  ;  a  remarkable  circum-
stance, which,  in  the  opinion  of  Scotch  divines,  proved  that  He  was  no  lover  of
riches,  otherwise  He  would  not  give  them  to  such  base  and  sordid  persons.195

To  be  poor,  dirty,  and  hungry,  to  pass  through  life  in  misery,  and  to  leave  it
with  fear,  to  be  plagued  with  boils,  and  sores,  and  diseases  of  every  kind,  to  be
always  sighing  and  groaning,  to  have  the  face  streaming  with  tears  and  the  chest
heaving  with  sobs,  in  a  word,  to  suffer  constant  affliction,  and  to  be  tormented
in  all  possible  ways  ;  to  undergo  these  things  was  deemed  a  proof  of  goodness,
just  as  the  contrary  was  a  proof  of  evil.  It  mattered  not  what  a  man  liked  ;
the  mere  fact  of  his  liking  it  made  it  sinful.  Whatever  was  natural  was  wrong.
The  clergy  deprived  the  people  of  their  holidays,  their  amusements,  their  shows,
their  games,  and  their  sports  ;  they  repressed  every  appearance  of  joy,  they
forbade  all  merriment,  they  stopped  all  festivities,  they  choked  up  every  avenue
by  which  pleasure  could  enter,  and  they  spread  over  the  country  an  universal
gloom.196  Then,  truly,  did  darkness  sit  on  the  land.  Men  in  their  daily  actions
and  in  their  very  looks  became  troubled,  melancholy,  and  ascetic.  Their
countenance  soured,  and  was  downcast.  Not  only  their  opinions,  but  their
gait,  their  demeanour,  their  voice,  their  general  aspect,  were  influenced  by  that
deadly  blight  which  nipped  all  that  was  genial  and  warm.  The  way  of  life
fell  into  the  sear  and  yellow  leaf  ;  its  tints  gradually  deepened  ;  its  bloom  faded,
and  passed  off  ;  its  spring,  its  freshness,  and  its  beauty  were  gone  ;  joy  and
love  either  disappeared  or  were  forced  to  hide  themselves  in  obscure  corners,
until  at  length  the  fairest  and  most  endearing  parts  of  our  nature,  being  con-
stantly repressed,  ceased  to  bear  fruit,  and  seemed  to  be  withered  into  perpetual
sterility.

Thus  it  was  that  the  national  character  of  the  Scotch  was  in  the  seventeenth
century  dwarfed  and  mutilated.  With  nations,  as  with  individuals,  the  har-
mony and  free  development  of  life  can  only  be  attained  by  exercising  its  principal
functions  boldly  and  without  fear.  Those  functions  are  of  two  kinds  ;  one
set  of  them  increasing  the  happiness  of  the  mind,  another  set  increasing  the
happiness  of  the  body.  If  we  could  suppose  a  man  completely  perfect,  we
should  take  for  granted  that  he  would  unite  these  two  forms  of  pleasure  in  the
highest  degree,  and  would  extract,  both  from  body  and  mind,  every  enjoyment
consistent  with  his  own  happiness  and  with  the  happiness  of  others.  But

but  would  still  heap  up  more,  it  is  just  with  God  to  leave  them  not  so  much  as  bread
and  to  suffer  men  to  have  an  evil  eye  upon  £hem,  and  to  pluck  at  them,  even  so  long  as
they  have  meat."  Hutcheson's  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job,  p.  296.  Binning,  going
still  further,  threatens  eternal  ruin.  "  Ye  may  have  things  necessary  here— food  and
raiment ;  and  if  ye  seek  more,  if  ye  will  be  rich,  and  will  have  superfluities,  then  ye  shall
fall  into  many  temptations,  snares,  and  hurtful  lusts  which  shall  drown  you  in  perdition."
Binnings  Sermons,  vol.  iii.  p.  355.

195  "If  God  loved  riches  well,  do  ye  think  he  would  give  them  so  liberally,  and  heap
them  up  upon  some  base  covetous  wretches  ?     Surely  no."     Binnings  Sermons,  vol.  iii.
p.  366.     Gray,  in  his  zeal  against  wealth,  propounds  another  doctrine,  which  I  do  not
remember  to  have  seen  elsewhere.     He  says,  "  All  that  the  owner  of  riches  hath  is  the
seeing  of  them  ;  which  a  man,  who  is  a  passer  by,  may  likeways  have,  though  he  be  not
possessor  of  them."     Gray's  Spiritual  Warfare,  p.  128.     I  hope  that  the  reader  will  not
suspect  me  of  having  maliciously  invented  any  of  these  passages.     The  books  from  which
they  are  quoted  are,  with  only  two  or  three  exceptions,  all  in  my  library,  and  may  be
examined  by  persons  who  are  curious  in  such  matters.

196  "  The  absence  of  external  appearances  of  joy  in  Scotland,  in  contrast  with  the
frequent  holiday  ings  and  merry-makings  of  the  continent,  has  been  much  remarked
upon.     We  find  in  the  records  of  ecclesiastical  discipline  clear  traces  of  the  process
by  which  this  distinction  was  brought  about.     To  the  puritan  kirk  of  the  sixteenth  and
seventeenth  centuries,  every  outward  demonstration  of  natural  good  spirits  was  a  sort
of  sin,  to  be  as  far  as  possible  repressed."  ..."  The  whole  sunshine  of  life  was,  as  it
were,  squeezed  out  of  the  community."     Chambers'"  Annals  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  336,
vol.  ii.  p.  156.

5°


786  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

as  no  such  character  is  to  be  found,  it  invariably  occurs  that  even  the  wisest
of  us  are  unable  to  hold  the  balance  ;  we  therefore  err,  some  in  over-indulging
the  body,  some  in  over-indulging  the  mind.  Comparing  one  set  of  indulgences
with  the  other,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  intellectual  pleasures  are  in
many  respects  superior  to  the  physical  ;  they  are  more  numerous,  more  varied,
more  permanent,  and  more  ennobling  ;  they  are  less  liable  to  cause  satiety  in
the  individual,  and  they  produce  more  good  to  the  species.  But  for  one  person
who  can  enjoy  intellectual  pleasures  there  are  at  least  a  hundred  who  can  enjoy
physical  pleasures.  The  happiness  derived  from  gratifying  the  senses  being
thus  diffused  over  a  wider  area,  and  satisfying  at  any  given  moment  a  greater
number  of  persons  than  the  other  form  of  happiness  is  capable  of,  does  on  that
account  possess  an  importance  which  many  who  call  themselves  philosophers
are  unwilling  to  recognize.  Too  often  have  philosophic  and  speculative  thinkers,
by  a  foolish  denunciation  of  such  pleasures,  done  all  in  their  power  to  curtail
the  quantity  of  happiness  of  which  humanity  is  susceptible.  Forgetting  that
we  have  bodies  as  well  as  minds,  and  forgetting,  too,  that  in  an  immense  majority
of  instances  the  body  is  more  active  than  the  mind,  that  it  is  more  powerful,
that  it  plays  a  more  conspicuous  part,  and  is  fitted  for  greater  achievements,
such  writers  commit  the  enormous  error  of  despising  that  class  of  actions  to  which
ninety-nine  men  out  of  every  hundred  are  most  prone,  and  for  which  they  are
best  fitted.  And  for  committing  this  error  they  pay  the  penalty  of  finding  their
books  unread,  their  systems  disregarded,  and  their  scheme  of  life  adopted,
perhaps,  by  a  small  class  of  solitary  students,  but  shut  out  from  that  great  world
of  reality,  for  which  it  is  unsuited,  and  in  which  it  would  produce  the  most  serious
mischief.

If,  then,  we  review  the  history  of  opinion  in  connexion  with  the  history  of
action,  we  may  probably  say  that  the  ascetic  notions  of  philosophers,  such,
for  instance,  as  the  doctrines  of  the  Stoics,  and  similar  theories  of  mortification,
have  not  worked  the  harm  which  might  have  been  expected,  and  have  not
succeeded  in  abridging  to  any  perceptible  extent  the  substantial  happiness  of
mankind.  There  are,  I  apprehend,  two  reasons  why  they  have  failed.  In  the
first  place,  these  philosophers  have  with  hardly  an  exception  had  little  real
acquaintance  with  human  nature,  and  have  therefore  been  unable  to  touch
those  chords,  and  appeal  to  those  hidden  motives,  by  influencing  which  one
man  gains  over  another  to  his  side.  And  in  the  second  place,  they,  fortunately
for  us,  have  never  possessed  authority,  and  have  therefore  been  unable  either
to  enforce  their  doctrine  by  penalties,  or  to  recommend  it  by  rewards.

But  though  philosophers  have  failed^  in  their  effort  to  lessen  the  pleasures
of  mankind,  there  is  another  body  of  men  who,  in  making  the  same  attempt,
have  met  with  far  greater  success.  I  mean,  of  course,  the  theologians,  who,
considered  as  a  class,  have  in  every  country  and  in  every  age  deliberately
opposed  themselves  to  gratifications  which  are  essential  to  the  happiness  of  an
overwhelming  majority  of  the  human  race.  Raising  up  a  God  of  their  own
creation,  whom  they  hold  out  as  a  lover  of  penance,  of  sacrifice,  and  of  mortifica-
tion, they  under  this  pretence  forbid  enjoyments  which  are  not  only  innocent
but  praiseworthy.  For  every  enjoyment  by  which  no  one  is  injured,  is  innocent  ;
and  every  innocent  enjoyment  is  praiseworthy,  because  it  assists  in  diffusing
that  spirit  of  content  and  of  satisfaction  which  is  favourable  to  the  practice  of
benevolence  towards  others.  The  theologians,  however,  for  reasons  which  I  have
already  stated,  cultivate  an  opposite  spirit,  and,  whenever  they  have  possessed
power  they  have  always  prohibited  a  large  number  of  pleasurable  actions,  on
the  ground  that  such  actions  are  offensive  to  the  Deity.  That  they  have  no
warrant  for  this,  and  that  they  are  simply  indulging  in  peremptory  assertions
on  subjects  respecting  which  we  have  no  trustworthy  information,  is  well  known
to  those  who,  impartially,  and  without  preconceived  bias,  have  studied  their
arguments,  and  the  evidence  which  they  adduce.  On  this,  however,  I  need  not
dilate  ;  for  inasmuch  as  men  are,  almost  every  year,  and  certainly  every  genera-
tion, becoming  more  accustomed  to  close  and  accurate  reasoning,  just  in  the
same  proportion  is  the  conviction  spreading  that  theologians  proceed  from
arbitrary  assumptions,  for  which  they  have  no  proof,  except  by  appealing  to


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         787

other  assumptions,  equally  arbitrary  and  equally  unproven.  Their  whole
system  reposes  upon  fear,  and  upon  fear  of  the  worst  kind  ;  since,  according
to  them,  the  Great  Author  of  our  being  has  used  His  omnipotence  in  so  cruel  a
manner  as  to  endow  His  creatures  with  tastes,  instincts,  and  desires,  which  He
not  only  forbids  them  to  gratify,  but  which,  if  they  do  gratify,  shall  bring  on
themselves  eternal  punishment.

What  the  theologians  are  to  the  closet,  that  are  the  priests  to  the  pulpit.  The
theologians  work  upon  the  studious,  who  read  ;  the  clergy  act  upon  the  idle,
who  listen.  Seeing,  however,  that  the  same  man  often  performs  both  offices,
and  seeing  too  that  the  spirit  and  tendency  of  each  office  are  the  same,  we  may
for  practical  purposes  consider  the  two  classes  as  identical  ;  and,  putting  them
together,  and  treating  them  as  a  whole,  it  must  be  admitted  by  whoever  will  take
a  comprehensive  view  of  what  they  have  actually  done,  that  they  have  been
not  only  the  most  bitter  foes  of  human  happiness,  but  also  the  most  successful
ones.  In  their  high  and  palmy  days,  when  they  reigned  supreme,  when  credulity
was  universal  and  doubt  unknown,  they  afflicted  mankind  in  every  possible  way  ;
enjoining  fasts,  and  penances,  and  pilgrimages,  teaching  their  simple  and  ignorant
victims  every  kind  of  austerity,  teaching  them  to  flog  their  own  bodies,  to  tear
their  own  flesh,  and  to  mortify  the  most  natural  of  their  appetites.  This  was
the  state  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages.  It  is  still  the  state  of  every  part  of  the
world  where  the  priesthood  are  uncontrolled.  Such  ascetic  and  self-tormenting
observances  are  the  inevitable  issue  of  the  theological  spirit,  if  that  spirit  is
unchecked.  Now,  and  owing  to  the  rapid  march  of  our  knowledge,  it  is  con-
stantly losing  ground,  because  the  scientific  and  secular  spirit  is  encroaching
on  its  domain.  Therefore  in  our  time,  and  especially  in  our  country,  its  most
repulsive  features  are  disguised,  and  it  is  forced  to  mask  its  native  ugliness.
Among  our  clergy,  a  habit  of  grave  and  decent  compromise  has  taken  the  place
of  that  bold  and  fiery  war  which  their  predecessors  waged  against  a  sensual  and
benighted  world.  Their  threats  have  perceptibly  diminished.  They  now
allow  us  a  little  pleasure,  a  little  luxury,  a  little  happiness.  They  no  longer
tell  us  to  mortify  every  appetite,  and  to  forego  every  comfort.  The  language  of
power  has  departed  from  them.  Here  and  there  we  find  vestiges  of  the  ancient
spirit  ;  but  this  is  only  among  uneducated  men,  addressing  an  ignorant  audience.
The  superior  clergy,  who  have  a  character  to  lose,  are  grown  cautious  ;  and
whatever  their  private  opinion  may  be,  they  rarely  venture  on  those  terrific
denunciations  with  which  their  pulpits  once  resounded,  and  which  in  times  of
yore  made  the  people  shrink  with  fear,  and  humbled  every  one  except  him  by
whom  the  denunciation  was  uttered.

Still,  though  much  of  this  has  vanished,  enough  remains  to  show  what  the
theological  spirit  is,  and  to  justify  a  belief  that  nothing  but  the  pressure  of
public  opinion  prevents  it  from  breaking  out  into  its  former  extravagance.  Many
of  the  clergy  persist  in  attacking  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  forgetting  that
not  only  the  world,  but  all  which  the  world  contains,  is  the  work  of  the  Almighty,
and  that  the  instincts  and  desires  which  they  stigmatize  as  unholy  are  part  of
His  gifts  to  man.  They  have  yet  to  learn  that  our  appetities,  being  as  much
a  portion  of  ourselves  as  any  other  quality  we  possess,  ought  to  be  indulged,
otherwise  the  whole  individual  is  not  developed.  If  a  man  suppresses  part  of
himself,  he  becomes  maimed  and  shorn.  The  proper  limit  to  self-indulgence  is
that  he  shall  neither  hurt  himself  nor  hurt  others.  Short  of  this,  everything
is  lawful.  It  is  more  than  lawful  ;  it  is  necessary.  He  who  abstains  from  safe
and  moderate  gratification  of  the  senses  lets  some  of  his  essential  faculties  fall
into  abeyance,  and  must  on  that  account  be  deemed  imperfect  and  unfinished.
Such  an  one  is  incomplete  ;  he  is  crippled  ;  he  has  never  reached  his  full  stature.
He  may  be  a  monk  ;  he  may  be  a  saint  ;  but  a  man  he  is  not.  And  now,  more
than  ever,  do  we  want  true  and  genuine  men.  No  previous  age  has  had  so
much  work  to  do,  and  to  accomplish  that  work  we  need  robust  and  vigorous
natures,  whose  every  function  has  been  freely  exercised  without  let  or  hind-
rance.* Never  before  was  the  practice  of  life  so  arduous  ;  never  were  the

[*  Buckle  here  somewhat  overshoots  his  own  mark.     The  very  principle  of  harming


788  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

problems  presented  to  the  human  mind  so  numerous,  or  so  complicated.  Every
addition  to  our  knowledge,  every  fresh  idea,  opens  up  new  difficulties,  and  gives
birth  to  new  combinations.  Under  this  accumulated  pressure  we  shall  assuredly
sink,  if  we  imitate  the  credulity  of  our  forefathers,  who  allowed  their  energies
to  be  cramped  and  weakened  by  those  pernicious  notions  which  the  clergy,
partly  from  ignorance,  and  partly  from  interest,  have  in  every  age  palmed  on  the
people,  and  have  thereby  diminished  the  national  happiness,  and  retarded  the
march  of  national  prosperity.

In  the  same  way,  we  constantly  hear  of  the  evils  of  wealth,  and  of  the  sinful  -
ness  of  loving  money  ;  although  it  is  certain  that,  after  the  love  of  knowledge,
there  is  no  one  passion  which  has  done  so  much  good  to  mankind  as  the  love  of
money.  It  is  to  the  love  of  money  that  we  owe  all  trade  and  commerce  ;  in
other  words,  the  possession  of  every  comfort  and  luxury  which  our  own  country
is  unable  to  supply.  Trade  and  commerce  have  made  us  familiar  with  the
productions  of  many  lands,  have  awakened  curiosity,  have  widened  our  ideas  by
bringing  us  in  contact  with  nations  of  various  manners,  speech,  and  thought,
have  supplied  an  outlet  for  energies  which  would  otherwise  have  been  pent  up
and  wasted,  have  accustomed  men  to  habits  of  enterprise,  forethought  and
calculation,  have  moreover  communicated  to  us  many  arts  of  great  utility,
and  have  put  us  in  possession  of  some  of  the  most  valuable  remedies  with  which
we  are  acquainted,  either  to  save  life  or  to  lessen  pain.  These  things  we  owe
to  the  love  of  money.  If  theologians  could  succeed  in  their  desire  to  destroy
that  love,  all  these  things  would  cease,  and  we  should  relapse  into  comparative
barbarism.  The  love  of  money,  like  all  our  appetites,  is  liable  to  abuse  ;  but
to  declaim  against  it  as  evil  in  itself,  and  above  all  to  represent  it  as  a  feeling
the  indulgence  of  which  provokes  the  wrath  of  God,  is  to  betray  an  ignorance
natural,  perhaps,  in  former  ages,  but  shameful  in  our  time,  particularly  when  it
proceeds  from  men  who  give  themselves  out  as  public  teachers,  and  profess  that
it  is  their  mission  to  enlighten  the  world.

Injurious,  however,  as  all  this  is  to  the  best  interests  of  society,  it  is  nothing
in  comparison  with  the  doctrines  formerly  advocated  by  the  Scotch  divines.
What  their  ideas  were  I  have  shown  from  their  own  sermons,  the  reading  of
which  has  been  the  most  painful  literary  task  I  ever  undertook,  since,  in  addition
to  the  narrowness  and  the  dogmatism  which  even  the  best  of  such  compositions
contain,  there  is  in  these  productions  a  hardness  of  heart,  an  austerity  of  temper,
a  want  of  sympathy  with  human  happiness,  and  a  hatred  of  human  nature,
such  as  have  rarely  been  exhibited  in  any  age,  and,  I  rejoice  to  think,  have
never  been  exhibited  in  any  other  Protestant  country.  These  things  I  have
resuscitated  from  the  oblivion  in  which  they  had  long  been  buried,  partly  because
it  was  necessary  to  do  so  in  order  to  understand  the  history  of  the  Scotch  mind,
and  partly  because  I  desired  to  show  what  the  tendency  of  theologians  is,  when
that  tendency  is  uncontrolled.  Protestants,  generally,  are  too  apt  to  suppose
that  there  is  something  in  their  creed  which  protects  them  against  those  hurtful
extravagances  which  have  been  and  to  a  certain  extent  still  are  practised
in  the  Catholic  Church.  Never  was  a  greater  mistake.  There  is  but  one  pro-
tection against  the  tyranny  of  anylclass  ;  and  that  is,  to  give  that  class  very  little
power.  Whatever  the  pretensions  of  any  body  of  men  may  be,  however  smooth
their  language,  and  however  plausible  their  claims,  they  are  sure  to  abuse  power,
if  much  of  it  is  conferred  on  them.  The  entire  history  of  the  world  affords  no
instance  to  the  contrary.  In  Catholic  countries,  France  alone  excepted,  the
clergy  have  more  authority  than  in  Protestant  countries.  Therefore  in  Catholic
countries  they  do  more  harm  than  in  Protestant  countries,  and  their  peculiar
views  are  developed  with  greater  freedom.  The  difference  depends  not  on  the
nature  of  the  creed,  but  on  the  power  of  the  class.  This  is  very  apparent  in
Scotland,  where  the  clergy,  being  supreme,  did,  Protestants  though  they  were,
imitate  the  ascetic,  the  unsocial,  and  the  cruel  doctrines  which  in  the  Catholic

neither  ourselves  nor  others  is  a  "  let  or  hindrance."  Of  course  he  had  in  mind  super-
stitious and  supererogatory  hindrances. — ED.]


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         789

Church  gave  rise  to  convents,  fastings,  scourgings,  and  all  the  other  appliances
of  an  uncouth  and  ungenial  superstition.

Indeed  the  Scotch  divines,  in  some  of  their  theories,  went  beyond  any  section
of  the  Catholic  Church,  except  the  Spanish.  They  sought  to  destroy  not  only
human  pleasures,  but  also  human  affections.  They  held  that  our  affections
are  necessarily  connected  with  our  lusts,  and  that  we  must  therefore  wean  our-
selves from  them  as  earthly  vanities.19?  A  Christian  had  no  business  with  love
or  sympathy.  He  had  his  own  soul  to  attend  to,  and  that  was  enough  for  him.
Let  him  look  to  himself.  On  Sunday,  in  particular,  he  must  never  think  of
benefiting  others  ;  and  the  Scotch  clergy  did  not  hesitate  to  teach  the  people
that  on  that  day  it  was  sinful  to  save  a  vessel  in  distress,  and  that  it  was  a  proof
of  religion  to  leave  ship  and  crew  to  perish.19^  They  might  go  ;  none  but  their
wives  and  children  would  suffer,  and  that  was  nothing  in  comparison  with  break-
ing the  Sabbath.  So,  too,  did  the  clergy  teach  that  on  no  occasion  must  food
or  shelter  be  given  to  a  starving  man,  unless  his  opinions  were  orthodox.199
What  need  for  him  to  live  ?  Indeed  they  taught  that  it  was  a  sin  to  tolerate
his  notions  at  all,  and  that  the  proper  course  was  to  visit  him  with  sharp  and
immediate  punishment.200  Going  yet  further,  they  broke  the  domestic  ties,
and  set  parents  against  their  offspring.  They  taught  the  father  to  smite  the
unbelieving  child,  and  to  slay  his  own  boy  sooner  than  allow  him  to  propagate
error.201  As  if  this  were  not  enough,  they  tried^to^extirpate^another  affection

197  "A  Christian  should  mortifie  his  affections,  which  are  his  predominant  lusts,  to
which  our  affections  are  so  much  joined,  and  our  soul  doth  so  much  go  out  after."     Gray's
Spiritual  Warfare,  p.  29.     "  That  blessed  work  of  weaning  of  affections  from  all  things
that  are  here."     Gray's  Great  and  Precious  Promises,  p.  86.

198  "  One  of  our  more  northern  ministers,  whose  parish  lies  along  the  coast  between
Spey  and  Findorn,  made  some  fishermen  do  penance  for  sabbath -breaking,  in  going  out
to  sea,  though  purely  with  endeavour  to  save  a  vessel  in  distress  by  a  storm."     Letters
from  a  Gentleman  in  the  North  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  173.

199  "  The  master  of  a  family  may,  and  ought  to,  deny  an  act  of  humanity  or  hospi-
tality to  strangers  that  are  false  teachers."     Rutherford's  Free  Disputation  against  Pre-
tended Liberty  of  Conscience,  p.  176.     "  The  Holy  Ghost  forbiddeth  the  master  of  every
Christian  family  to  owne  a  hereticke  as  a  guest."     Ibid.,  p.  219.     See  also  p.  235-

200  "  We  hold  that  tolleration  of  all  religions  is  not  farre  from  blasphemy."     Ruther-
ford's Free  Disputation  against  Pretended  Liberty  of  Conscience,  p.  20.     "  If  wolves  be
permitted  to  teach  what  is  right  in  their  own  erroneous  conscience,  and  there  be  no
'  Magistrate  to  put  them  to  shame,'  Judg.  xviii.  7,  and  no  King  to  punish  them,  then
godlinesse  and  all  that  concernes  the  first  Table  of  the  Law  must  be  marred."     Ibid.,
p.  230.     "  Wilde  and  atheisticall  liberty  of  conscience."  p.  337.     "  Cursed  toleration."
p.  400.     See  also,  in  the  same  work  (pp.  no,  244),  Rutherford's  remarks  on  the  murder
of  Servetus.      In  1645  Baillie,  who  was  then  in  London,  writes,  "  The  Independents
here  plead  for  a  tolleration  both  for  themselfes  and  other  sects.     My  Dissuasive  is  come
in  time  to  doe  service  here.     We  hope  God  will  assist  us  to  remonstrate  the  wickedness
of  such  an  tolleration."     And  on  account  of  the  Independents  wishing  to  show  common
charity  towards  persons  who  differed  in  opinions  from  themselves,  Baillie  writes  next
year  (1646),  "  The  Independents  has  the  least  zeale  to  the  truth  of  God  of  any  men  we
know."     Battue's  Letters  and  Journals,  vol.  ii.  pp.  328,  361.     Blair,  who  was  in  London
in  1649,  was  sorely  vexed  with  "  the  most  illegal,  irreligious,  and  wicked  proceedings
and  actings  of  the  sectarian  army  ;  "  one  of  their  crimes  being  the  attempt  "  to  ruin
religion  by  their  toleration."     Continuation  of  the  Autobiography  of  Mr.  Robert  Blair,
Minister  of  St.  Andrews,  p.  213.     For  other  evidence  of  this  persecuting  spirit,  see  Dick-
son's  Truth's  Victory  over  Error,  pp.  159,  163,  199-202  ;    Abernethy's  Physicke  for  the
Soule,  p.  215  ;  Durham's  Exposition  of  the  Song  of  Solomon,  p.  147  ;   Durham's  Commen-
tarie  upon  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  pp.  141, 143,  330 ;  and  Shields'  Hind  Let  Loose,  p.  168.

201  "  A  third  benefit  (which  is  a  branch  of  the  former),  is  zeal  in  the  godly  against
false  teachers,  who  shall  be  so  tender  of  the  truth  and  glory  of  God,  and  the  safety  of  the
Church  (all  which  are  endangered  by  error),  that  it  shall  overcome  natural  affection
in  them  ;  so  that  parents  shall  not  spare  their  own  children,  being  seducers,  but  shall


790  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

even  more  sacred  and  more  devoted  still.  They  laid  their  rude  and  merciless
hands  on  the  holiest  passion  of  which  our  nature  is  capable,  the  love  of  a  mother
for  her  son.  Into  that  sanctuary  they  dared  to  intrude  ;  into  that  they  thrust
their  gaunt  and  ungentle  forms.  If  a  mother  held  opinions  of  which  they  dis-
approved, they  did  not  scruple  to  invade  her  household,  take  away  her  children,
and  forbid  her  to  hold  communication  with  them.202  Or  if,  perchance,  her  son
had  incurred  their  displeasure,  they  were  not  satisfied  with  forcible  separation,
but  they  laboured  to  corrupt  her  heart,  and  harden  it  against  her  child,  so  that
she  might  be  privy  to  the  act.  In  one  of  these  cases,  mentioned  in  the  records
of  the  church  of  Glasgow,  the  Kirk -Session  of  that  town  summoned  before  them
a  woman,  merely  because  she  had  received  into  her  house  her  own  son,  after  the
clergy  had  excommunicated  him.  So  effectually  did  they  work  upon  her  mind
that  they  induced  her  to  promise  not  only  that  she  would  shut  her  door  against
her  child,  but  that  she  would  aid  in  bringing  him  to  punishment.  She  had  sinned
in  loving  him  ;  she  had  sinned  even  in  giving  him  shelter  ;  but,  says  the  record,
"  she  promised  not  to  do  it  again,  and  to  tell  the  magistrates  when  he  comes  next
to  her."  203

She  promised  not  to  do  it  again.  She  promised  to  forget  him  whom  she  had
borne  of  her  womb  and  suckled  at  her  breast.  She  promised  to  forget  her  boy
who  had  ofttimes  crept  to  her  knees,  who  had  slept  in  her  bosom,  and  whose
tender  frame  she  had  watched  over  and  nursed.  All  the  dearest  associations
of  the  past,  all  that  the  most  exquisite  form  of  human  affection  can  give  or  receive,
all  that  delights  the  memory,  all  that  brightens  the  prospect  of  life,  all  vanished,
all  passed  away  from  the  mind  of  this  poor  woman,  at  the  bidding  of  her  spiritual
masters.  At  one  fell  swoop  all  were  gone.  So  potent  were  the  arts  of  these
men,  that  they  persuaded  the  mother  to  conspire  against  her  son,  that  she  might
deliver  him  up  to  them.  They  denied  her  nature  by  purging  it  of  its  love.
From  that  day  her  soul  was  polluted.  She  was  lost  to  herself,  as  well  as  lost
to  her  son.  To  hear  of  such  things  is  enough  to  make  one's  blood  surge  again,
and  raise  a  tempest  in  our  inmost  nature.  But  to  have  seen  them,  to  have  lived
in  the  midst  of  them,  and  yet  not  to  have  rebelled  against  them,  is  to  us  utterly
inconceivable,  and  proves  *  in  how  complete  a  thraldom  the  Scotch  were  held,
and  how  thoroughly  their  minds  as  well  as  their  bodies  were  enslaved.

What  more  need  I  say  ?  What  further  evidence  need  I  bring  to  elucidate
the  real  character  of  one  of  the  most  detestable  tyrannies  ever  seen  on  the  earth  ?
When  the  Scotch  Kirk  was  at  the  height  of  its  power,  we  may  search  history  in
vain  for  any  institution  which  can  compete  with  it,  except  the  Spanish  Inquisition.
Between  these  two  there  is  a  close  and  intimate  analogy.  Both  were  intolerant,
both  were  cruel,  both  made  war  upon  the  finest  parts  of  human  nature,  and  both
destroyed  every  vestige  of  religious  freedom.  One  difference  however  there
was,  of  vast  importance.  In  political  matters,  the  Church,  which  was  servile
in  Spain,  was  rebellious  in  Scotland.  Hence,  the  Scotch  always  had  one  direction
in  which  they  could  speak  and  act  with  unrestrained  liberty. f  In  politics

either  by  an  heroick  act  (such  as  was  in  Phinehas,  Numb.  xxv.  8),  themselves  judge  him
worthy  to  die,  and  give  sentence  and  execute  it,  or  cause  him  to  be  punished,  by  bringing
him  to  the  Magistrate,"  &c.  ..."  The  toleration  of  a  false  religion  in  doctrine  or
worship,  and  the  exemption  of  the  erroneous  from  civil  punishment,  is  no  more  lawful
under  the  New  Testament  than  it  was  under  the  Old."  An  Exposition  of  the  Prophetic
of  Zechariah,  in  Hutcheson's  Exposition  on  the  Minor  Prophets,  vol.  iii.  p.  203,  8vo,  1654.

202  Selections  from  the  Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Lanark,  pp.  x.  33,  56,  63,  65,  73.

203  I  copy  the  exact  words  from  Wodrow's  Collections  upon  the  Lives  of  Ministers  of
the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  71.     An  order  had  been  previously  obtained  from
the  government,  "  requiring  the  magistrates  to  expell  furth  of  the  Toun  all  excom-
municated persons."

[*  Hiatus  in  the  text.     Read  "  and  their  toleration  of  such  things  proves." — ED.]

[t  This  is  not  the  complete  account  of  the  case.     English  books  could  circulate  in

Scotland.     Thus  there  was  always  some  little  nourishment  for  the  intellectual  life  of  the

better  minds. — ED.]


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVII.    CENTURY         791

they  found  their  vent.  There  the  mind  was  free.  And  this  was  their  salvation.
This  saved  them  from  the  fate  of  Spain,  by  securing  to  them  the  exercise  of  those
faculties  which  otherwise  would  have  lain  dormant,  if  indeed  they  had  not
been  entirely  destroyed  by  that  long  and  enfeebling  servitude  in  which  their
clergy  retained  them,  and  from  which,  but  for  this  favourable  circumstance,  no
escape  would  have  been  open.


CHAPTER    VI

AN  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  THE  EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY

To  complete  the  history  and  analysis  of  the  Scotch  mind  I  have  now  to  examine
the  peculiar  intellectual  movement  which  appeared  in  the  eighteenth  century,
and  which  for  several  reasons  deserves  careful  attention.  It  was  essentially
a  reaction  against  that  theological  spirit  which  predominated  during  the  seven-
teenth century.  Such  a  reaction  would  hardly  have  been  possible  except  for
the  fact  which  I  have  already  noticed,  namely,  that  the  political  activity  which
produced  the  rebellion  against  the  Stuarts  saved  the  Scotch  mind  from  stagnating,
and  prevented  that  deep  slumber  into  which  the  progress  of  superstition  would
naturally  have  thrown  it.  The  long  and  stubborn  conflict  with  a  despotic
government  kept  alive  a  certain  alertness  and  vigour  of  understanding,  which
survived  the  struggle  that  gave  it  birth.  When  the  contest  was  ended,  and
peace  was  restored,  the  faculties  which  for  three  generations  had  been  exercised
in  resisting  the  executive  authority,  sought  other  employment,  and  found  another
field  in  which  they  could  disport  themselves.  Hence  it  was  that  the  boldness
which  in  the  seventeenth  century  was  practical,  became  in  the  eighteenth  century
speculative,  and  produced  a  literature  which  attempted  to  unsettle  former
opinions,  and  to  disturb  the  ancient  landmarks  of  the  human  mind.  The  move-
ment was  revolutionary,  and  bore  the  same  relation  to  ecclesiastical  tyranny
which  the  previous  movement  had  borne  to  political  tyranny.  But  this  new
rebellion  had  one  striking  characteristic.  In  nearly  every  other  country,  when
the  intellect  has  fairly  arrayed  itself  against  the  exclusive  pretensions  of  the
Church,  it  has  happened  that  the  secular  philosophy  which  has  been  engendered
has  been  an  inductive  philosophy,  taking  for  its  basis  individual  and  specific
experience,  and  seeking  by  that  means  to  overthrow  the  general  and  traditional
notions  on  which  all  church  power  is  founded.  The  plan  has  been  to  refuse
to  accept  principles  which  could  not  be  substantiated  by  facts  ;  while  the  opposite
and  theological  plan  is  to  force  the  facts  to  yield  to  the  principles.  In  the
former  case,  experience  precedes  theory  ;  in  the  latter  case,  theory  precedes
experience,  and  controls  it.  In  theology  certain  principles  are  taken  for  granted  ;
and  it  being  deemed  impious  to  question  them,  all  that  remains  for  us  is  to  reason
from  them  downwards.  This  is  the  deductive  method.  On  the  other  hand,
the  inductive  method  will  concede  nothing,  but  insists  upon  reasoning  upwards,*
and  demands  that  we  shall  have  the  liberty  of  ascertaining  the  principles  for
ourselves.  In  a  complete  scheme  of  our  knowledge,  and  when  all  our  resources
are  fully  developed  and  marshalled  into  order,  as  they  must  eventually  be,  the
two  methods  will  be,  not  hostile,  but  supplementary,  and  will  be  combined  into

[*  In  this  and  subsequent  passages  Buckle  assumes  that  there  is  a  clear  and  undisputed
antithesis  between  "  induction  "  and  "  deduction,"  though  in  the  closing  chapter  he
admits  that  probably  "all  deduction  is  preceded  by  induction."  Beyond  this,  how-
ever, there  is  the  difficulty  that  the  term  Induction  is  used  in  several  senses,  even  Mill
so  extending  it  as  to  make  it  trench  on  deduction.  See  Cairnes*  Character  and  Logical
Method  of  Political  Economy,  ed.  1875,  pp.  60-62.  For  the  strict  definition  of  induction
see  Bain,  Logic,  Pt.  II.  Induction,  ch.  i.  Compare  also  Buckle's  own  remarks  in  his  essay
on  Mill  on  Liberty  (Misc,  Works,  abridged  ed.  i.  95  seq.). — ED.]

792


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVIII.    CENTURY         793

a  single  system.  At  present,  however,  we  are  very  far  from  such  a  result  ;  *
and  not  only  is  every  mind  more  prone  to  one  method  than  to  another,  but  we
find,  historically,  that  different  ages  and  different  countries  have  been  character-
ized by  the  extent  to  which  one  of  these  two  schemes  has  predominated  ;  and
we  also  find  that  a  study  of  this  antagonism  is  the  surest  way  of  understanding
the  intellectual  condition  of  any  period.

That  the  inductive  philosophy  is  even  more  marked  by  its  secular  tendencies
than  by  its  scientific  ones,  will  be  evident  to  whoever  observes  the  epochs  in
which  it  has  been  most  active,  and  has  possessed  most  adherents.  Of  this
the  history  of  the  French  mind  in  the  eighteenth  century  affords  a  good  instance,
where,  after  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.,  we  may  clearly  trace  the  connexion
between  the  growth  of  the  inductive  method  and  the  subsequent  overthrow
of  the  Gallican  church.  In  England,  too,  the  rise  of  the  Baconian  philosophy,
with  its  determination  to  subordinate  ancient  principles  to  modern  experience,
was  the  heaviest  blow  which  has  ever  been  inflicted  on  the  theologians,  whose
method  is  to  begin  not  with  experience  but  with  principles  which  are  said
to  be  inscrutable,  and  which  we  are  bound  to  believe  without  further  difficulty.
And  I  need  hardly  remind  the  reader  that  scarcely  was  that  philosophy  estab-
lished among  us,  when  it  produced  those  bold  inquiries  which  quickly  ended
in  the  downfall  of  the  English  Church  under  Charles  I.f  From  that  terrible
defeat  our  clergy  did  for  a  time  partly  rally  ;  but  as  their  apparent  success
in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  was  owing  to  political  changes,  and  not  to  social
ones,  they  were  unable  to  recover  their  hold  over  society,  and,  unless  the  nation
should  retrograde,  there  is  no  possibility  that  they  ever  should  recover  it.  Over
the  inferior  order  of  minds  they  still  wield  great  influence  ;  but  the  Baconian
philosophy,  by  bringing  their  favourite  method  into  disrepute,  has  sapped  the
very  base  of  their  system.  From  the  moment  that  their  mode  of  investigation
was  discredited,  the  secret  of  their  power  was  gone.  From  the  moment  that  men
began  to  insist  on  inquiring  into  the  validity  of  first  principles,  instead  of  accept-
ing them  without  inquiry  and  humbly  submitting  to  them  as  matters  of  faith
and  of  necessary  belief  ;  from  that  moment,  the  theologians,  driven  from  one
post  to  another,  and  constantly  receding  before  the  pressure  of  advancing  know-
ledge, have  been  forced  to  abandon  entrenchment  after  entrenchment,  until
what  they  have  retained  of  their  former  territory  is  hardly  worth  the  struggle.
As  a  last  resource,  they  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  determined  to  use
the  weapons  of  their  opponents  ;  and  Paley  and  his  successors,  enlarging  the
scheme  which  Ray  and  Derham  had  feebly  sketched,  endeavoured  by  a  skilful
employment  of  the  inductive  method  to  compensate  their  party  for  the  failure
of  the  deductive  one.  But  their  project,  though  ably  conceived,  has  come  to
naught.  It  is  now  generally  admitted  that  nothing  can  be  made  of  it,  and  that
it  is  impossible  to  establish  the  old  theological  premisses  by  a  chain  of  inductive
reasoning.  Respecting  this,  the  most  eminent  philosophers  agree  with  the
most  eminent  theologians  ;  and  since  the  time  of  Kant  in  Germany,  and  of  Coler-
idge in  England,  none  of  our  ablest  men,  even  among  divines  themselves,  have
recurred  to  a  plan  which  Paley  indeed  pursued  with  vigour,  but  of  which  our
Bridgewater  Treatises,  our  Prize-Essays,  and  such  schoolboy  productions,  are
poor  and  barren  imitations.1  No  great  thinkers  now  follow  this  course  in  matters

1  Of  course  I  say  this  merely  in  reference  to  their  theological  bearings.      Some  of  the
Bridgewater  Treatises,  such  as  Bell's,  Buckland's,  and  Prout's,  had  great  scientific  merit

[*  See,  however,  the  contrary  admissions  below,  above,  note  150,  beginning  of  par. — ED.]
[f  This  is  perhaps  the  worst  grounded  of  Buckle's  theses  concerning  the  Rebellion.
There  is  not  the  slightest  ground  for  ascribing  it  in  any  measure  whatever  to  the  influence
of  the  Baconian  philosophy,  which  was  probably  even  less  known  among  the  Parlia-
mentary party  than  among  the  royalists.  His  first  notable  disciple  was  Hobbes.  It  is
true  that  Bacon  before  Hobbes  desired  to  subject  the  Church  to  the  State  ;  but  it  was
not  at  his  fountain  that  the  rebels  drank.  The  early  members  of  the  Royal  Society,
who  greatly  admired  his  work,  were  quietists,  shunning  political  and  religious  contro-
versy. Bacou  had  been  a  supporter  of  the  royal  prerogative.— ED.]


794  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  religion.  On  the  contrary,  they  prefer  the  safer  as  well  as  the  more  philo-
sophic method  of  dealing  with  these  subjects  on  transcendental  grounds,  frankly
confessing  that  they  elude  the  grasp  of  that  inductive  philosophy  which  in  the
department  of  science  has  achieved  such  signal  triumphs.

The  opposition  of  these  two  methods,  and  the  inapplicability  of  the  inductive
method  to  theological  pursuits  being  thus  apparent,  it  is  not  strange  that  the
Scotch  should  have  adopted  one  of  the  methods  with  great  zeal,  and  to  the  almost
complete  exclusion  of  the  other.  Scotland,  being  essentially  theological,  followed
the  theological  plan.  The  intellectual  history  of  that  country  in  the  seventeenth
century  is  almost  entirely  the  history  of  theology.  With  the  single  exception
of  Napier,  who  was  born  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  all  the  most
vigorous  thinkers  were  divines.  In  physical  science  scarcely  anything  was
done.2  There  was  no  poetry,  no  drama,  no  original  philosophy,  no  fine  compo-
sitions, no  secular  literature,  now  worth  reading.3  The  only  men  of  real  in-

at  the  time  of  their  appearance,  and  may  even  now  be  studied  with  advantage  ;  but  the
religious  portion  of  them  is  pitiable,  and  shows  either  that  their  heart  was  not  in  their
work,  or  else  that  the  subject  was  too  wide  for  them.  At  all  events,  it  is  to  be  hoped
that  we  shall  never  again  see  men  of  equal  eminence  hiring  themselves  out  as  paid  advo-
cates, and  receiving  fees  to  support  particular  opinions.  It  is  truly  disgraceful  that  such
great  speculative  questions,  instead  of  being  subjected  to  fair  and  disinterested  argument,
with  a  view  of  eliciting  the  truth,  should  be  turned  into  a  pecuniary  transaction,  in  which
any  one  of  much  money  and  little  wit  can  bribe  as  many  persons  as  he  likes  to  prejudice
the  public  ear  in  favour  of  his  own  theories.

2  "  It  is  humiliating  to  have  to  remark,  that  the  notices  of  comets  which  we  derive
from  Scotch  writers  down  to  this  time  (1682)  contain  nothing  but  accounts  of  the  popular
fancies  regarding  them.     Practical  astronomy  seems  to  have  then  been  unknown  in  our
country  ;   and  hence,  while  in  other  lands  men  were  carefully  observing,  computing,  and
approaching  to  just  conclusions  regarding  these  illustrious  strangers  of  the  sky,  our
diarists  could  only  tell  us  how  many  yards  long  they  seemed  to  be,  what  effects  were
apprehended  from  them  in  the  way  of  war  and  pestilence,  and  how  certain  pious  divines
'  improved  '  them  for  spiritual  edification.     Early  in  this  century  Scotland  had  produced
one  great  philosopher,  who  had  supplied  his  craft  with  the  mathematical  instrument
by  which  complex  problems,  such  as  the  movement  of  comets,  were  alone  to  be  solved.
It  might  have  been  expected  that  the  country  of  Napier,  seventy  years  after  his  time,
would  have  had  many  sons  capable  of  applying  his  key  to  such  mysteries  of  nature.
But  no  one  had  arisen — nor  did  any  rise  for  fifty  years  onward,  when  at  length  Colin
Maclaurin  unfolded  in  the  Edinburgh  University  the  sublime  philosophy  of  Newton.
There  could  not  be  a  more  expressive  signification  of  the  character  of  the  seventeenth
century  in  Scotland.     Our  unhappy  contentions  about  external  religious  matters  had
absorbed  the  whole  genius  of  the  people,  rendering  to  us  the  age  of  Cowley,  of  Waller,
and  of  Milton,  as  barren  of  elegant  literature  as  that  of  Horrocks,  of  Halley,  and  of
Newton,  was  of  science."     Chambers'  Domestic  Annals  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  444,  445-

3  "  Thus,  during  the  whole  seventeenth  century,  the  English  were  gradually  refining
their  language  and  their  taste  ;    in  Scotland,  the  former  was  much  debased   and   the
latter  almost  entirely  lost."     History  of  Scotland,  book  viii.,  in  Robertson's  Works,  p.  260.

"  But  the  taste  and  science,  the  genius  and  the  learning  of  the  age,  were  absorbed
in  the  gulph  of  religious  controversy.  At  a  time  when  the  learning  of  Selden  and  the
genius  of  Milton  conspired  to  adorn  England,  the  Scots  were  reduced  to  such  writers
as  Baillie,  Rutherford,  Guthrie,  and  the  two  Gillespies."  Laing's  History  of  Scotland,
vol.  iii.  p.  510.  "  From  the  Restoration  down  to  the  Union,  the  only  author  of  eminence
whom  Scotland  produced  was  Burnet."  Ibid.,  vol.  iv.  p.  406.

"  The  seventeenth  century,  fatal  to  the  good  taste  of  Italy,  threw  a  total  night  over
Scotland."  ..."  Not  one  writer  who  does  the  least  credit  to  the  nation  flourished
during  the  century  from  1615  to  1715.  excepting  Burnet,  whose  name  would  indeed
honour  the  brightest  period.  In  particular,  no  poet  whose  works  merit  preservation
arose.  By  a  singular  fatality,  the  century  which  stands  highest  in  English  history
and  genius  is  one  of  the  darkest  in  those  of  Scotland."  Ancient  Scotish  Poems,  edited  by
Jo}\n  Pinkerton,  vol.  i.  pp,  iii,  iv.,  London,  1786.


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVIII.    CENTURY         795

fluence  were  the  clergy.  They  governed  the  nation,*  and  the  pulpit  was  the
chief  engine  of  their  power.  From  the  pulpit  they  moved  all  classes  and  all
sorts  of  intellects  ;  the  highest  as  well  as  the  lowest. f  There  they  instructed
them  and  threatened  them  ;  saying  whatever  they  liked,  and  knowing  that
what  they  said  would  be  believed.4  But  all  their  sermons,  and  all  their  contro-
versial writings,  are  eminently  deductive  ;  not  one  of  them  attempts  an  inductive
argument.  The  bare  idea  of  such  a  thing  never  entered  their  heads.  They
assumed  the  truth  of  their  own  religious  and  moral  notions,  most  of  which  they
had  borrowed  from  antiquity;  they  made  those  notions  the  major  premisses  of
their  syllogisms,  and  from  them  they  reasoned  downwards,  till  they  obtained
their  conclusions.  They  never  suspected  that  premisses  taken  from  ancient
times  might  be  the  result  of  the  inductions  of  those  times,  and  that,  as  know-
ledge advanced,  the  inductions  might  need  revising.  They  assumed  that
God  has  given  to  us  first  principles,  and  that  He,  having  revealed  them,  it  would
ill  become  us  to  scrutinize  them.  That  He  had  revealed  them,  they  took  for
granted,  and  deemed  it  unnecessary  to  prove.5  Their  method  being  thus  entirely
deductive,  all  they  were  concerned  with  was  to  beware  that  no  error  crept  in
between  the  premisses  and  the  conclusions.  And  this  part  of  their  task  they
accomplished  with  great  ability.  They  were  acute  dialecticians,  and  rarely
blundered  in  what  is  termed  the  formal  part  of  logic.  In  dealing  with  their
premisses  after  they  obtained  them,  they  were  extremely  skilful ;  how  they
obtained  them,  they  were  very  heedless.  That  was  a  point  they  never  examined
with  anything  approaching  to  impartiality.  According  to  their  method,  all
that  was  requisite  was  to  draw  inferences  from  what  had  been  supernaturally
communicated.  On  the  other  hand  the  inductive  method  would  have  taught
them  that  the  first  question  was,  whether  or  not  they  had  been  supernaturally
communicated  ?  They,  as  deductive  reasoners,  assumed  the  very  preliminaries
which  inductive  reasoners  would  have  disputed.^  They  proceeded  from  generals
to  particulars,  instead  of  from  particulars  to  generals.  And  they  would  not
allow  either  themselves  or  others  to  sift  the  general  propositions,  which  were
to  cover  and  control  the  particular  facts.  It  was  enough  for  them  that  the
wider  propositions  were  already  established,  and  were  to  be  treated  according
to  the  rules  of  the  old  and  syllogistic  logic.  Indeed,  they  were  so  convinced

4  Ray,  who  visited  Scotland  in  1661,  could  not  suppress  a  little   professional  envy
when  he  saw  how  much  higher  ecclesiastics  were  rated  there  than  in  England.     He  says,
"The  people  here  frequent  their  churches  much  better  than  in  England, and  have  their
ministers  in  more  esteem  and  veneration."     Ray's  Memorials,  edited  by  Dr.  Lankester
for  the  Ray  Society,  p.  161.

5  "  Believing  ignorance  is  much  better   than  rash   and  presumptuous  knowledge.
Ask  not  a  reason  of  these  things,  but  rather  adore  and  tremble  at  the  mystery  and  majesty
of  them."     Binnings  Sermons,  vol.  i.  p.  143.     Even  Biblical  criticism  was  prohibited  ;
and  Dickson  says  of  the  different  books  of  the  Bible,  "  We  are  not  to  trouble  ourselves
about  the  name  of  the  writer  or  time  of  writing  of  any  part  thereof,  especially  because
God  of  set  purpose  concealeth  the  name  sundry  times  of  the  writer,  and  the  time  when
it  was  written."     Dickson's  Explication  of  the  Psalms,  p.  291.

I*  That  is,  the  minds  of  the  people.  It  has  been  shown  in  a  previous  chapter  that  the
Government  after  the  Restoration  stood  for  absolutism  and  Episcopalianism. — ED.]

[f  Burton,  on  the  contrary,  writes  that  "  the  higher  orders  have  always  in  Scotland
but  scantily  partaken  in  the  religious  fervour  so  abundant  among  the  humbler  body
of  the  people  "  (History  of  Scotland,  vii.  425) ;  and  Buckle  in  his  own  MSS.  had  trans-
cribed testimony  to  the  same  effect  (Misc.  Works,  abridged  ed.  ii.  234). — ED.]

[t  As  did  all  theologians  till  sceptics  attacked  them.  On  this  point  the  English
theologians  were  in  the  same  case.  However  inductive,  they  never  "  disputed  "  their
own  creed.  Strictly  speaking,  as  Buckle  virtually  admits  a  few  sentences  earlier,
orthodoxy  sets  out  not  with  a  deduction  but  with  an  imperfect  induction,  inasmuch
as  it  reasons  from  the  contents  of  the  Bible  to  its  inspired  authority.  That  being  taken
as  granted,  the  deduction  follows,  as  on  a  scientific  principle, — ED.]


796  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  the  impropriety  of  the  inductive  method  that  they  did  not  hesitate  to  assert
that  it  was  by  means  of  the  syllogism  that  the  Deity  communicated  His  wishes
to  man.6

It  was  naturally  to  be  expected  that  the  clergy  holding  these  views  respecting
the  best  means  of  arriving  at  truth,  should  do  all  in  their  power  to  bring  over  the
nation  to  their  side,  and  should  labour  to  make  their  own  method  of  investigation
entirely  supersede  the  opposite  method.  Nor  was  this  a  very  difficult  task.  The
prevailing  credulity  was  one  great  point  in  their  favour,  inasmuch  as  it  made
men  more  willing  to  accept  propositions  than  to  scrutinize  them.  When  the
propositions  were  accepted,  nothing  was  left  but  to  reason  from  them  ;  and  the
most  active  intellects  in  Scotland,  being  constantly  engaged  in  this  process,
acquired  complete  mastery  over  it,  and  the  dexterity  they  displayed  increased
its  repute.  Besides  this,  the  clergy,  who  were  its  zealous  champions,  had  mono-
polized all  the  sources  of  education,  both  public  and  private.  In  no  other  Pro-
testant country  have  they  exercised  such  control  over  the  universities  ;  not
only  the  doctrines  taught,  but  also  the  mode  of  teaching  them,  being  in  Scot-
land placed  under  the  supervision  of  the  Church.7  This  power  they  of  course
used  to  propagate  their  own  plan  of  obtaining  truth  ;  and  as  long  as  their
power  remained  undiminished,  it  was  hardly  possible  that  the  opposite  or
inductive  plan  should  gain  a  hearing.  Over  grammar-schools  the  clergy
possessed  an  authority  fully  equal  to  that  which  they  had  in  the  universities.8
They  also  appointed  and  removed,  at  their  own  pleasure,  teachers  of  every
grade,  from  village  schoolmasters  to  tutors  in  private  families.9  In  this  way
each  generation,  as  it  arose,  was  brought  under  their  influence,  and  made  subject
to  their  notions.  Taking  the  mind  of  Scotland  while  it  was  young  and  flexible,
they  bent  it  to  their  own  method.  Hence  that  method  became  supreme  ;  it
reigned  everywhere  ;  not  a  voice  was  lifted  up  against  it  ;  and  no  one  had  an
idea  that  there  was  more  than  one  path  by  which  truth  could  be  reached,  or  that

6  "  Christ  from  heaven  propose th  a  syllogism  to  Saul's  fury."     Rutherford's  Christ
Dying,  p.  180.     "  The  conclusion  of  a  practical  syllogism,  whereby  the  believer  conclude  th
from  the  gospel  that  he  shall  be  saved."     Durham's  Law  Unsealed,  p.  97.     "  All  assurance
is  by  practical  syllogism,  the  first  whereof  must  needs  be  a  Scripture  truth."     Gray's
Precious  Promises,  p.  139.     [This  does  not  involve  alleging  "impropriety"  in  the  in-
ductive method.     A  syllogism  proceeds  upon  data  which  may  be  inductively  reached.
If  the  "  first "  be  a  text,  it  is  none  the  less  a  supposed  datum  of  experience,  and  the
"  second  "  may  be  any  fact  of  observation. — ED.]

7  Bower  (History  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  i.  p.  217)  says,  "The  history
of  the  universities  and  of  the  church  is  in  modern  Europe,  and  perhaps  in  every  other
civilized  portion  of  the  globe,  very  nearly  connected.     They  are  more  nearly  connected
in  Scotland  than  in  any  other  civilized  country  called  Protestant ;   because  the  General
Assembly  have  the  legal  power  of  inquiring  into  the  economy  of  the  institutions,  both
as  it  respects  the  mode  of  teaching,  and  the  doctrines,  whether  religious,  moral,  or  physical,
which  are  taught."     Spalding,  under  the  year  1639,  gives  an  instance  of  the  power  of  the
General  Assembly  in  "  the  College  of  Old  Aberdeen."     Spalding's  History  of  the  Troubles,
vol.  i.  p.  178.     See  also,  on  the  authority  exercised  by  the  General  Assembly  over  the
universities,  a  curious  little  book,  called  The  Government  and  Order  of    the  Church  of
Scotland,  Edinburgh,    1690,  p.  25.      [These  writers  do   not  seem  to  have  considered
the  case  of  New  England. — ED.]

8  In  1632  the  "  ministers  "  of    Perth  were  greatly  displeased  because  John  Row  was
made  master  of  the  grammar-school  without  their  consent.     The  Chronicle  of  Perth,
p.  33,  where  it  is  stated  that,  consequently,  "  thair  wes  much  outcrying  in  the  pulpett."

9  See,  for  instance,  Minutes  of  the  Presbyteries  of  St.  Andrews  and  Cupar,  pp.  66,  83,
84,  118.     One  of  the  entries  is,  that  in  January,  1648,  "The  Presbyterie  ordained  that
all  young  students,  who  waittes  on  noblemen  or  gentlemen  within  thir  bounds,  aither  to
teach  ther  children,  or  catechise  and  pray  in  ther  families,  to  frequent  the  Presbyterie,
that  the  brether  may  cognosce  what  they  ar  reading,  and  what  proficiencie  they  make
in  ther  studies,  and  to  know  also  ther  behaviour  in  the  said  families,  and  of  their  affec-
tione  to  the  Covenant  and  present  religione."  p.   118.     Compare  Selections  from  the
Registers  of  the  Presbytery  of  Lanark,  pp.  56,  65,


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVIII.    CENTURY         79?

the  human  understanding  was  of  any  use,  except  to  deal  deductively  with  pre-
misses which  were  not  to  be  inductively  examined.

The  inductive  or  analytic  spirit  *  being  thus  unknown,  and  the  deductive
or  synthetic  spirit  being  alone  favoured,  it  happened  that  when,  early  in  the
eighteenth  century,  the  circumstances  already  mentioned  gave  rise  to  a  great
intellectual  movement,  that  movement,  though  new  in  its  results,  was  not  new
in  the  method  by  which  the  results  were  obtained.  A  secular  philosophy  was
indeed  established,  and  the  ablest  men,  instead  of  being  theological,  became
scientific.  But  so  completely  had  the  theological  plan  occupied  Scotland,  that
even  philosophers  were  unable  to  escape  from  its  method,  and,  as  I  am  about
to  show,  the  inductive  method  exercised  no  influence  over  them.f  This  most
curious  fact  is  the  key  to  the  history  of  Scotland  in  the  eighteenth  century,
and  explains  many  events  which  would  otherwise  appear  incompatible  with
each  other.  It  also  suggests  an  analogy  with  Germany,  where  the  deductive
method  has  for  a  long  period  been  equally  prevalent,  owing  to  precisely  the
same  causes.  In  both  countries  the  secular  movement  of  the  eighteenth  century
was  unable  to  become  inductive  ;  and  this  intellectual  affinity  between  two  such
otherwise  different  nations  is,  I  have  no  doubt,  the  principal  reason  why  the
Scotch  and  German  philosophies  have  so  remarkably  acted  and  reacted  upon
each  other  ;  Kant  and  Hamilton  being  the  most  finished  specimens  of  their  inter-
course. To  this  England  forms  a  complete  contrast.  For  more  than  a  hundred
and  fifty  years  after  the  death  of  Bacon,  the  greatest  English  thinkers,  Newton
and  Harvey  excepted,^  were  eminently  inductive  ;  nor  was  it  until  the  nine-
teenth century  that  signs  were  clearly  exhibited  of  a  counter-movement,  and
an  attempt  was  made  to  return  in  some  degree  to  the  deductive  method.10  This
we  are  in  many  respects  justified  in  doing,  because  in  the  progress  of  our  know-
ledge we  have  by  a  long  course  of  induction  arrived  at  several  conclusions
Which  we  may  safely  treat  deductively  ;  that  is  to  say,  we  may  make  them  the
major  premisses  of  new  arguments.  The  same  process  has  been  seen  in  France,
where  the  exclusively  inductive  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century  ||  preceded

10  This  I  have  already  touched  upon  (above,  p.  501).  Hereafter,  and  in  my  special
history  of  the  English  mind,  I  shall  examine  it  carefully  and  in  detail.  The  revival
of  the  old  logic  is  a  great  symptom  of  it.  Works  like  those  of  Whately,  De  Morgan,
and  Mansel,  could  not  have  been  produced  in  the  eighteenth  century,  or,  at  all  events,
if  by  some  extraordinary  combination  of  events  they  had  been  produced,  they  would
have  found  no  readers.  As  it  is,  they  have  exercised  a  very  extensive  and  very  salutary
influence  ;  and  although  Archbishop  Whately  was  not  well  acquainted  with  the  history
of  formal  logic,  his  exposition  of  its  ordinary  processes  is  so  admirably  clear  that  he  has
probably  contributed  more  than  any  other  man  towards  impressing  his  contemporaries
with  a  sense  of  the  value  of  deductive  reasoning.  He  has  however  not  done  sufficient
justice  to  the  opposite  school,  and  has  indeed  fallen  into  the  old  academical  error  of
supposing  that  all  reasoning  is  by  syllogism.  We  might  just  as  well  say  that  all  move-
ment is  by  descent.

[*  This  definition  will  hardly  hold  good.     Analysis  may  be  carried  on  deductively
and  many  of  the  Scottish  writers  of  the  eighteenth  century  are  much  given  to  it.     Hume's
philosophy  is  at  many  points  an  analysis  of  experience. — ED.]

[f  This  specific  statement  is  probably  an  error.  Secular  thinkers,  such  as  Kames,
Smith,  Hume,  Ferguson,  and  the  other  historians,  must  have  been  influenced  by  induc-
tive processes,  though  what  they  undertook  to  do  as  reasoners  was  to  argue  their  prob-
lems on  deductive  lines.  Parts  of  Hume's  philosophic  argument  are  inductive,  though
he  usually  gives  prominence  to  his  deductions.  See  Buckle's  own  words,  above,  p.  143.
-ED.]

[I  Even  these  must  often  have  reasoned  inductively.  Harvey  certainly  made  autopsies,
and  even  experiments  on  animals,  though  he  seems  to  have  profited  little  by  the  latter.
See  the  citations,  as  distinct  from  the  arguments,  of  Mr.  S.  Paget,  Experiments  on  Animals,
1900,  pp.  6-10. — ED.]

[||  If  this  be  accurate,  the  Scottish  thinkers  were  certainly  "  influenced  "  by  the  indue
tive  method  ;  for  they  were  all  influenced  by  their  French  contemporaries.     See  Carlyle's
Essay  on  Burns,  1869  ed.  of  Miscellanies,  ii.  37-38. — ED.]


798  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

a  partial  resuscitation  of  deductive  philosophy  in  the  nineteenth  century.  In
Scotland,  however,  there  have  been  no  such  vicissitudes.  In  that  country
men  have  always  been  deductive  ;  even  the  most  original  thinkers  being  unable
to  liberate  themselves  from  the  universal  tendency,  and  being  forced  to  accept
a  method  which  time  had  consecrated,  and  which  was  interwoven  with  all  the
associations  of  the  national  mind.

To  understand  the  investigation  into  which  we  are  about  to  enter,  the  reader
must  firmly  seize,  and  keep  before  his  eyes,  the  essential  difference  between
deduction,  which  reasons  from  principles,  and  induction,  which  reasons  to
principles.  He  must  remember  that  induction  proceeds  from  the  smaller
to  the  greater ;  deduction  from  the  greater  to  the  smaller.  Induction  is
from  particulars  to  generals,  and  from  the  senses  to  the  ideas ;  deduction  is
from  generals  to  particulars,  and  from  the  ideas  to  the  senses.  By  induction
we  rise  from  the  concrete  to  the  abstract  ;  by  deduction  we  descend  from
the  abstract  to  the  concrete.  Accompanying  this  distinction  there  are  certain
qualities  of  mind  which,  with  extremely  few  exceptions,  characterize  the  age,
nation,  or  individual  in  which  one  of  these  methods  is  predominant.  The
inductive  philosopher  is  naturally  cautious,  patient,  and  somewhat  creeping  ;
while  the  deductive  philosopher  is  more  remarkable  for  boldness,  dexterity,
and  often  rashness.  The  deductive  thinker  invariably  assumes  certain  pre-
misses, which  are  quite  different  from  the  hypotheses  essential  to  the  best
induction.  These  premisses  are  sometimes  borrowed  from  antiquity  ;  some-
times they  are  taken  from  the  notions  which  happen  to  prevail  in  the  surround-
ing society  ;  sometimes  they  are  the  result  of  a  man's  own  peculiar  organiza-
tion ;  and  sometimes,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  they  are  deliberately  invented
with  the  object  of  arriving  not  at  truth,  but  at  an  approximation  to  truth.
Finally,  and  to  sum  up  the  whole,  we  may  say  that  a  deductive  habit,  being
essentially  synthetic,  always  tends  to  multiply  original  principles  or  laws  ;  while
the  tendency  of  an  inductive  habit  is  to  diminish  those  laws  by  gradual  and
successive  analysis.*

These  being  the  two  fundamental  divisions  of  human  inquiry,  it  is  surely  a
most  remarkable  fact  in  the  history  of  Scotland  that  during  the  eighteenth
century  all  the  great  thinkers  belonged  to  the  former  division,  and  that  in  the
very  few  instances  of  induction  which  their  works  contain,  it  is  evident,  from  the
steps  they  subsequently  took,  that  they  regarded  such  inductions  as  unimportant
in  themselves,  and  as  only  valuable  in  so  far  as  they  supplied  the  premisses  for
another  and  deductive  investigation.  As  the  various  departments  of  our  know-
ledge have  never  yet  been  co-ordinated  and  treated  as  a  whole,  probably  no  one
is  aware  of  the  universality  of  this  movement  in  Scotland,  and  of  the  extent
to  which  it  pervaded  every  science,  and  governed  every  phase  of  thought.  To
prove,  therefore,  the  force  with  which  it  acted,  I  now  purpose  to  examine  its
working  in  all  the  principal  forms  of  speculation,  whether  physical  or  moral,
and  to  show  that  in  each  the  same  method  was  adopted.  In  doing  this  I  must
for  the  sake  of  clearness  proceed  according  to  a  natural  arrangement  of  the
different  topics  ;  but  I  will,  whenever  it  is  possible,  also  follow  the  chrono-
logical order  in  which  the  Scotch  mind  unfolded  itself  ;  so  that  we  may  under-
stand not  only  the  character  of  that  remarkable  literature,  but  likewise  the
steps  of  its  growth,  and  the  astonishing  vigour  with  which  it  emancipated  itself
from  the  shackles  which  superstition  had  imposed.

The  beginning  of  the  great  secular  philosophy  of  Scotland  is  undoubtedly
due  to  Francis  Hutcheson.11  This  eminent  man,  though  born  in  Ireland,  was  of

11  See  a  letter  from  Sir  James  Mackintosh  to  Parr,  in  Mackintosh's  Memoirs,  London,

[*  This  creates  a  difficulty  for  Buckle's  thesis.  It  cannot  be  maintained  that  Hume
and  Smith  "  multiplied  original  principles  "  in  their  reasonings.  It  would  have  been
more  accurate  to  speak  of  d  priori  and  a  posteriori  methods.  If  we  take  the  theory  of
planetary  angels,  or  deities  of  the  elements,  as  a  sample  of  spontaneous  induction,  and
Newton's  law  of  gravitation  as  a  sample  of  deduction,  the  facts  are  not  as  Buckle  says.
-En.]


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVIII.    CENTURY          799

Scotch  family,  and  was  educated  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  where  he  received
the  appointment  of  Professor  of  Philosophy  in  the  year  17 29. 12  By  his  lectures,
and  by  his  works,  he  diffused  a  taste  for  bold  inquiries  into  subjects  of  the  deepest
importance,  but  concerning  which  it  had  previously  been  supposed  nothing
fresh  was  to  be  learned  ;  the  Scotch  having  hitherto  been  taught  that  all  truths
respecting  our  own  nature  which  were  essential  to  be  known,  had  been  already
revealed.  Hutcheson,  however,  did  not  fear  to  construct  a  system  of  morals
according  to  a  plan  entirely  secular,  and  no  example  of  which  had  been  exhibited
in  Scotland  before  his  time.  The  principles  from  which  he  started  were  not
theological,  but  metaphysical.*  They  were  collected  from  what  he  deemed
the  natural  constitution  of  the  mind,  instead  of  being  collected  as  heretofore
from  what  had  been  supernaturally  communicated.  He  therefore  shifted  the
field  of  study.  Though  he  was  a  firm  believer  in  revelation,  he  held  that  the
best  rules  of  conduct  could  be  ascertained  without  its  assistance,  and  could  be
arrived  at  by  the  unaided  wit  of  man  ;  and  that,  when  arrived  at,  they  were
in  their  aggregate  to  be  respected  as  the  Law  of  Nature.13  This  confidence
in  the  power  of  the  human  understanding  was  altogether  new  in  Scotland,  f
and  its  appearance  forms  an  epoch  in  the  national  literature.  Previously,  men
had  been  taught  that  the  understanding  was  a  rash  and  foolish  thing,  which
ought  to  be  repressed,  and  which  was  unfit  to  cope  with  the  problems  presented
to  it.14  Hutcheson,  however,  held  that  it  was  quite  able  to  deal  with  them,
but  that  to  do  so  it  must  be  free  and  unfettered.  Hence  he  strenuously  advo-
cated that  right  of  private  judgment  which  the  Scotch  Kirk  had  not  only  assailed,
but  had  almost  destroyed.  He  insisted  that  each  person  had  a  right  to  form  his
opinion  according  to  the  evidence  he  possessed,  and  that,  this  right  being  inalien


1835,  vol.  i.  p.  334.  "  To  Hutcheson  the  taste  for  speculation  in  Scotland,  and  all  the
philosophical  opinions  (except  the  Berkleian  Humism)  may  be  traced."  M.  Cousin
(Histoire  de  la  Philosophic,  premiere  serie,  vol.  iv.  p.  35,  Paris,  1846)  observes,  that  before
Hutcheson  "  il  n'avait  paru  en  Ecosseniun  ecrivain  ni  un  professeur  de  philosophic  un
peu  remarquable."

12  Tytler's  Memoirs  of  Kames,  Edinburgh,  1814,  vol.  i.  p.  223.     Hutcheson's  Moral
Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  iii.,  London,  1755,  4to.

13  "  The  intention  of  Moral  Philosophy  is  to  direct  men  to  that  course  of  action  which
tends  most  effectually  to  promote  their  greatest  happiness  and  perfection  ;    as  far  as
it  can  be  done  by  observations  and  conclusions  discoverable  from  the  constitution  of
nature,  without  any  aids  of  supernatural  revelation  :    these  maxims  or  rules  of  conduct
are  therefore  reputed  as  laws  of  nature,  and  the  system  or  collection  of  them  is  called
the  LAW  OF  NATURE."     Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  i.

14  "  The  natural  understanding  is  the  most  whorish  thing  in  the  world."  ..."  The
understanding,  even  in  the  search  of  truth  amongst  the  creatures,  is  a  rash,  precipitate,
and  unquiet  thing."     Rutherford's  Christ  Dying,  p.  181.     "  Innocent  Adam,"  indeed,
says  Boston,  "  Innocent  Adam  had  a  stock  of  gracious  abilities,  whereby  he  might  have,
by  the  force  of  moral  considerations,  brought  himself  to  perform  duty  aright.     But
where  is  that  with  us  ?  "    Boston's  Sermons,  p.  65.

[*  In  that  case,  the  "  deductive  "  method  must  be  ascribed  to  a  popular  English
thinker,  for  Hutcheson  as  a  moralist  was  certainly  a  disciple  of  Shaftesbury.  See  the
editor's  introduction  to  Shaftesbury' 's  Characteristics,  1900,  pp.  xiv.,  xxxvii.  Buckle
himself  noted  in  his  Commonplace  Book  (Miscellaneous  and  Posthumous  Works,  abridged
ed.  1885,  i.  277),  that  Shaftesbury  "  followed  the  deductive  method."  But  Prof.  Sidg-
wick  pronounces  Shaftesbury  "  the  first  moralist  who  distinctly  takes  psychological
experience  as  the  basis  of  ethics,"  adding  that  "  the  substance  of  Shaftesbury's  main
arguments  was  adopted  by  Butler."  (Outlines  of  the  History  of  Ethics,  3rd  ed.  p.  100).
—ED.]

[|  That  is,  in  Scottish  literature.  Hobbes  had  however  been  read  by  many  in  Scot-
land, as  had  Spinoza;  See  Halyburtori's  Natural  Religion  Insufficient,  Edinburgh,
1714,  p.  31. — ED.]


8oo  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

able,  none  but  weak  minds  would  abstain  from  exercising  it.15  Every  one  was
to  judge  according  to  his  own  light,  and  nothing  could  be  gained  by  inducing
men  to  profess  sentiments  contrary  to  their  convictions.16  So  far,  however,
was  this  from  being  understood,  that  we  found  all  the  little  sects  quarrelling
among  themselves,  and  abusing  each  other,  merely  because  their  views  were
different.  It  was  strange  to  hear  how  the  professors  of  one  creed  would  stigma-
tize the  professors  of  other  creeds  as  idolatrous,  and  would  demand  that  penalties
should  be  inflicted  on  them.  In  point  of  fact,  all  had  much  that  was  good  ;
and  their  only  real  evil  was  this  love  of  persecution.17  But  the  vulgar  deemed
every  one  a  heretic  who  did  not  believe  what  they  believed  ;  and  this  way  of
thinking  had  been  too  much  countenanced  by  the  clergy,  many  of  whom  felt
their  vanity  offended  at  the  idea  of  laymen  pretending  to  be  wiser  than  their
spiritual  teachers,  and  venturing  to  disagree  with  what  they  said.18

Such  large  views  of  liberty  were  far  in  advance  of  the  country  in  which  they
were  propounded,  and  could  exercise  no  influence,  except  over  a  few  thinking
men.  These  and  similar  doctrines  were,  however,  repeated  by  Hutcheson
in  his  lectures  every  year.19  And  strange  indeed  they  must  have  seemed.  To
those  who  received  them,  they  were  utterly  subversive  of  the  prevailing  theo-
logical spirit,  which  regarded  toleration  as  impious,  and  which,  seeking  to  confine
the  human  mind  within  the  limits  of  foregone  conclusions,  deemed  it  a  duty  to
chastise  those  who  overstepped  them.  In  opposition  to  this,  Hutcheson  let
in  the  elements  of  inquiry,  of  discussion,  and  of  doubt.  There  is  also  another
point  in  which  his  philosophy  is  memorable,  as  the  beginning  of  the  great  rebellion

15  "  A  like  natural  right  every  intelligent  being  has  about  his  own  opinions,  speculative
or  practical,  to  judge  according  to  the  evidence  that  appears  to  him.     This  right  appears
from  the  very  constitution  of  the  rational  mind,  which  can  assent  or  dissent  solely  accord-
ing to  the  evidence  presented,  and  naturally  desires  knowledge.     The  same  considera-
tions show  this  right  to  be  unalienable  :   it  cannot  be  subjected  to  the  will  of  another  :
though  where  there  is  a  previous  judgment  formed  concerning  the  superior  wisdom  of
another,  or  his  infallibility,  the  opinion  of  this  other,  to  a  weak  mind,  may  become
sufficient  evidence.    As  to  opinions  about  the  Deity,  religion,  and  virtue,  this  right  is
further  confirmed  by  all  the  noblest  desires  of  the  soul ;   as  there  can  be  no  virtue,  but
rather  impiety,  in  not  adhering  to  the  opinions  we  think  just,  and  in  professing  the  con-
trary."    Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  pp.  295,  296.     See  also  vol.  ii.  p.  311
"  Every  rational  creature  has  a  right  to  judge  for  itself  in  these  matters  :  and  as  men
must  assent  according  to  the  evidence  that  appears  to  them,  and  cannot  command  their
own  assent  in  opposition  to  it,  this  right  is  plainly  unalienable."

16  "Thus  no  man  can  really  change  his  sentiments,  judgments,  and  inward  affections,
at  the  pleasure  of  another,  nor  can  it  tend  to  any  good  to  make  him  profess  what  is  con-
trary to  his  heart."     Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  pp.  261,  262.

17  "  Arians  and  Socinians  are  idolaters  and  denyers  of  God,  say  the  orthodox.     They
retort  upon  the  orthodox,  that  they  are  Tritheists  ;  and  so  do  other  sects  ;  and  thus  they
spirit  up  magistrates  to  persecute.     While  yet  it  is  plain  that  in  all  these  sects  there  are
all  the  same  motives  to  all  social  virtues  from  a  belief  of  a  moral  providence,  the  same
acknowledgments  that  the  goodness  of  God  is  the  source  of  all  the  good  we  enjoy  or  hope
for,  and  the  same  gratitude  and  resignation  to  him  recommended.     Nor  do  any  of  their
schemes  excite  men  to  vices,  except  that  horrid  tenet,  too  common  to  most  of  them,
the  right  of  persecuting."     Hutcheson' s  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  p.  316.     See  also  vol.  i.
p.  160  ;    and  Hutcheson's  Inquiry  into  our  Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue,  London,  1738,
p.  283.

18  "  We  all  know  the  notions  entertained  by  the  vulgar  concerning  all  hereticks  ;   we
know  the  pride  of  schoolmen  and  many  ecclesiasticks  ;  how  it  galls  their  insolent  vanity
that  any  man  should  assume  to  himself  to  be  wiser  than  they  in  tenets  of  religion  by
differing  from  them."     Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  167.

19  "  As  he  had  occasion  every  year  in  the  course  of  his  lectures  to  explain  the  origin
of  government,  and  compare  the  different  forms  of  it,  he  took  peculiar  care,  while  on  that
subject,  to  inculcate  the  importance  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  to  the  happiness  of  man-
kind."   Lcechman's  Life  of  Hutcheson,  p.  xxxv.,  prefixed  to  Hutcheson'' s  Moral  Philosophy


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVIII.    CENTURY        Sol

of  the  Scotch  intellect.  We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  how  successfully  the  teachers
of  the  people  had  inculcated  doctrines  of  the  darkest  asceticism,  and  how  natur-
ally those  doctrines  had  arisen  out  of  the  enormous  authority  possessed  by  the
Church.  Against  such  notions  Hutcheson  set  his  face  strenuously.  He  rightly
supposed  that  an  admiration  of  every  kind  of  beauty,  so  far  from  being  sinful,
is  essential  to  a  complete  and  well-balanced  mind  ;  and  the  most  original  part
of  his  philosophy  consists  of  the  inquiries  which  he  made  into  the  working  and
origin  of  our  ideas  on  that  subject.  Hitherto,  the  Scotch  had  been  taught  that
the  emotions  which  beauty  excites  were  owing  to  the  corruption  of  our  nature,
and  ought  to  be  repressed.  Hutcheson  on  the  other  hand  insisted)  that  they
were  good  in  themselves  ;  that  they  were  part  of  the  general  scheme  of  human
affairs,  and  that  they  deserved  a  special  and  scientific  study.20  And  with  such
skill  did  he  investigate  them  that,  in  the  opinion  of  one  of  the  highest  living
authorities,  he  is  the  originator  of  all  subsequent  inquiries  into  these  matters  ;
his  being  the  first  attempt  to  deal  with  the  subject  of  beauty  in  a  broad  and
comprehensive  spirit.21

Not  only  in  speculative  views,  but  also  in  practical  recommendations,  Hutche-
son displayed  the  same  tendency  ;  everywhere  endeavouring  to  break  down  that
gloomy  fabric  which  superstition  had  built  up.22  His  predecessors,  and  indeed
nearly  all  his  contemporaries  who  exercised  much  influence,  represented  pleasure
as  immoral,  and  opposed  themselves  to  the  fine  arts,  which  they  considered
dangerous,  as  ministering  to  our  pleasures,  and  thereby  distracting  our  minds
from  serious  concerns.  Hutcheson,  however,  declared  that  the  fine  arts  were
to  be  cherished  ;  for,  he  said,  they  are  not  only  agreeable,  but  also  reputable,
and  to  employ  our  time  with  them  is  honourable.23  That  such  is  the  case  is
obvious  enough  to  us,  but  it  was  long  indeed  since  similar  language  had  been
heard  in  Scotland  from  a  great  public  teacher,*  and  it  was  completely  opposed
to  the  prevailing  notions.  But  Hutcheson  went  even  further.  Not  content


20  "  The  ideas  of  beauty  and  harmony,  like  other  sensible  ideas,  are  necessarily  plea-
sant to  us,  as  well  as  immediately  so."     Hutcheson' s  Inquiry  into  our  Ideas  of  Beauty  and
Virtue,  p.  n.    "  Our  sense  of  beauty  seems  designed  to  give  us  positive  pleasure."  p.  71.
"  Beauty  gives  a  favourable  presumption  of  good  moral  dispositions."  p.  257.     "  But
it  is  plain  we  have  not  in  our  power  the  modelling  of  our  senses  or  desires,  to  form  them
for  a  private  interest ;    they  are  fixed  for  us  by  the  Author  of  our  nature,  subservient
to  the  interest  of  the  system  ;    so  that  each  individual  is  made,  previously  to  his  own
choice,  a  member  of  a  great  body,  and  affected  with  the  fortunes  of  the  whole  ;  or  at
least  of  many  parts  of  it ;  nor  can  he  break  himself  off  at  pleasure."     Hutcheson's  Essay
on  the  Passions,  pp.   105,  106.

21  "  Fille  de  la  scholastique,  la  philosophic  moderne  est  demeuree  longtemps  etrangere
aux  graces,  et  les  Recherches  d' Hutcheson  presentent,  je  crois,  le  premier  traite  special
sur  le  beau,  ecrit  par  un  moderne.     Elles  ont  paru  en  1725.     Cette  date  est  presque
celle  de  1'avenement  de  1'esthetique  dans  la  philosophic  europeenne.     L'ouvrage  du
pere  Andre,  en  France,  est  de  1741,  celui  de  Baumgarten,  en  Allemagne,  est  de  1750.
Ce  n'est  pas  un  petit  honneur  a  Hutcheson  d' avoir  le  premier  soumis   1'idee  du  beau
a  une  analyse  methodique  et  reguliere."     Cousin,  Histoire  de  la  Philosophic,  premiere
serie,  vol.  iv.  p.  84.

22  In  his  Inquiry  into  Beauty  and  Virtue,  p.  107,  he  so  completely  opposed  the  pre-
vailing notions  as  to  assert  that  "  our  perception  of  pleasure  is  necessary,  and  nothing  is
advantageous  or  naturally  good  to  us  but  what  is  apt  to  raise  pleasure  mediately,  or
immediately."     Compare  what  he  says  at  p.  91  respecting  "  superstitious  prejudices
against  actions  apprehended  as  offensive  to  the  Deity."

23  "  Hence  a  taste  for  the  ingenious  arts  of  musick,  sculpture,  painting,  and  even  for
the  manly  diversions,  is  reputable."     Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  83.     At
p.  129  he  says,  that  in  them  "  our  time  is  agreeably  and  honourably  employed."    See  also
vol.  ii.  p.  115.


[*  It  had  never  been  heard  at  all— save  in  so  far  as  Shaftesbury's  Characteristics
the  writings  of  the  French  critics  were  there  read. — ED.]

SI


or


802  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

with  raising  his  voice  in  favour  of  wealth,24  which  the  Scotch  clergy  stigmatized
as  one  of  the  most  pernicious  and  carnal  of  all  things,  he  fearlessly  asserted
that  all  our  natural  appetites  are  lawful,  and  that  the  gratification  of  them  is
consistent  with  the  highest  virtue.25  In  his  eyes  they  were  lawful  because
they  were  natural  ;  while  according  to  the  theological  theory  their  being  natural
made  them  unlawful.  And  here  lies  the  fundamental  difference  between  the
practical  views  of  Hutcheson  and  those  previously  received.  He,  like  every
great  thinker  since  the  seventeenth  century,  loved  human  nature,  and  respected
it  ;  but  he  neither  loved  nor  respected  those  who  unduly  trammelled  it,  and
thereby  weakened  its  vigour,  as  well  as  impaired  its  beauty.  He  placed  more
confidence  in  mankind  than  in  the  rulers  of  mankind.  The  Scotch  divines
who  preceded  him  were  the  libellers  of  their  species  ;  they  calumniated  the  whole
human  race.  According  to  them,  there  was  nothing  in  us  but  sin  and  corruption  ;
and  therefore  all  our  desires  were  to  be  checked.  It  is  the  peculiar  glory  of
Hutcheson  that  he  was  the  first  man  in  Scotland  who  publicly  combated  these
degrading  notions.  With  a  noble  and  lofty  aim  did  he  undertake  his  task.
Venerating  the  human  mind,  he  was  bent  on  vindicating  its  dignity  against
those  who  disputed  its  titles.  Unhappily  he  could  not  succeed  ;  the  prejudices
of  his  time  were  too  strong.  Still,  he  did  all  that  was  in  his  power.  He  opposed
the  tide  which  he  was  unable  to  stem  ;  he  attacked  what  it  was  impossible  to
destroy  ;  and  he  cast  from  his  philosophy,  with  vehement  scorn,  those  base
prejudices  which,  by  aspersing  all  that  is  great  and  magnanimous,  had  long
blinded  the  eyes  of  their  contemporaries,  and  by  bringing  into  fresh  prominence
the  old  and  mischievous  dogma  of  moral  degeneracy,  had  represented  our  nature
as  a  compound  of  vices,  and  had  been  unable  to  see  how  many  virtues  we  really
possess,  how  much  of  the  spirit  of  self-sacrifice  and  of  free  disinterested  benevo-
lence has  always  existed  ;  how  much  of  good  even  the  worst  of  us  retain  ;  and
how,  among  the  ordinary  and  average  characters  of  whom  the  world  is  composed,
the  desire  of  benefiting  others  is  more  frequent  than  the  desire  of  hurting  them,
kindness  is  more  common  than  cruelty,  and  the  number  of  good  deeds  does,  on
the  whole,  far  outweigh  the  number  of  bad  ones.26

24  "Wealth  and  power  are  truly  useful,  not  only  for  the  natural  conveniences  or
pleasures  of  life,  but  as  a  fund  for  good  offices."     Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.
p.  104.     Compare  Hutcheson  on  Beauty  and  Virtue,  pp.  93-95  ;    and  his  Essay  on  the
Passions  and  Affections,  pp.  8,  9,  99.     "  How  weak  also  are  the  reasonings  of  some  recluse
moralists,  who  condemn  in  general  all  pursuits  of  wealth  or  power,  as  below  a  perfectly
virtuous  character  ;   since  wealth  and  power  are  the  most  effectual  means,  and  the  most
powerful  instruments,  even  of  the  greatest  virtues  and  most  generous  actions."

25  "  The  chief  happiness  of  any  being  must  consist  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  all  the
gratifications  its  nature  desires  and  is  capable  of."     Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,
vol.  i.  p.  100.     "  The  highest  sensual  enjoyments  may  be  experienced  by  those  who  employ
both  mind  and  body  vigorously  in  social  virtuous  offices,  and  allow  all  the  natural  appe-
tites to  recur  in  their  due  seasons."  p.  121.     "  Nay,  as  in  fact  it  is  for  the  good  of  the
system  that  every  desire  and  sense  natural  to  us,  even  those  of  the  lowest  kinds,  should
be  gratified  as  far  as  their  gratification  is  consistent  with  the  nobler  enjoyments,  and  in
a  just  subordination  to  them  ;   there  seems  a  natural  notion  of  right  to  attend  them  all."
pp.  254*  255-

26  "  >xis  pleasant  to  observe  how  those  authors  who  paint  out  our  nature  as  a  com-
pound of  sensuality,  selfishness,  and  cunning,  forget  themselves  on  this  subject  in  their
descriptions  of  youth,  when  the  natural  temper  is  less  disguised  than  in  the  subsequent
parts  of  life.     'Tis  made  up  of  many  keen,  inconstant  passions,  many  of  them  generous  ;
'tis  fond  of  present  pleasure,  but  'tis  also  profusely  kind  and  liberal  to  favourites  ;   care-
less about  distant  interests  of  its  own  ;    full  of  confidence  in  others  ;   studious  of  praise
for  kindness  and  generosity  ;   prone  to  friendships,  and  void  of  suspicion."     Hutcheson's
Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  p.  n.     "  Men  are  often  subject  to  anger,  and  upon  sudden
provocations  do  injuries  to  each  other,  and  that  only  from  self  love  without  malice  ;
but  the  greatest  part  of  their  lives  is  employed  in  offices  of  natural  affection,  friendship,
innocent  self  love,  or  love  of  a  country."     Hutcheson's  Essay  on  the  Passions,  pp.  97,  98.


SCOTCH    INTELLECT    DURING    XVIII.    CENTURY         803

Thus  much  as  to  the  tendency  of  Hutcheson's  philosophy.27  We  have  now
to  ascertain  his  method,  that  is  to  say,  the  plan  which  he  adopted  in  order  to
obtain  his  results.  This  is  a  very  important  part  of  our  present  inquiry  ;  and
we  shall  find  that  in  the  study  of  moral  philosophy,  as  in  the  study  of  all  subjects
not  yet  raised  to  sciences,  there  are  not  only  two  methods,  but  that  each  method
leads  to  different  consequences.  If  we  proceed  by  induction  we  arrive  at  one
conclusion  ;  if  we  proceed  by  deduction  we  arrive  at  another.  This  difference
in  the  results  is  always  a  proof  that  the  subject  in  which  the  difference  exists
is  not  yet  capable  of  scientific  treatment,  and  that  some  preliminary  difficulties
have  to  be  removed  before  it  can  pass  from  the  empirical  stage  into  the  scientific
one.  As  soon  as  those  difficulties  are  got  rid  of,  the  results  obtained  by  induction
will  correspond  with  those  obtained  by  deduction  ;  supposing,  of  course,  that
both  lines  of  argument  are  fairly  managed.  In  such  case,  it  will  be  of  no  import-
ance whether  we  reason  from  particulars  to  generals  or  from  generals  to  par-
ticulars. Either  plan  will  yield  the  same  consequences,  and  this  agreement
between  the  consequences  proves  that  our  investigation  is,  properly  speaking,
scientific.  Thus  for  instance  in  chemistry,  if  by  reasoning  deductively  from
general  principles  we  could  always  predict  what  would  happen  when  we  united
two  or  more  elements,  even  supposing  those  elements  were  new  to  us  ;  and  if,
by  reasoning  inductively  from  each  element,  we  could  arrive  at  the  same  con-
clusion, one  process  would  corroborate  the  other,  and  by  their  mutual  verification
the  science  would  be  complete.  In  chemistry  we  cannot  do  this  ;  therefore
chemistry  is  not  yet  a  science,  although,  since  the  introduction  into  it  by  Dalton
of  the  ideas  of  weight  and  number,  there  is  every  prospect  of  its  becoming  one.
On  the  other  hand,  astronomy  is  a  science,  because,  by  employing  the  deductive
weapon  of  mathematics  we  can  compute  the  motions  and  perturbations  of
bodies  ;  and  on  our  employing  the  inductive  weapon  of  observation,  the  tele-
scope reveals  to  us  the  accuracy  of  our  previous  and  as  it  were  foregone  infer
ences.  The  fact  agrees  with  the  idea  ;  the  particular  event  confirms  the  general
principle  ;  the  principle  explains  the  event  ;  and  their  unanimity  authorizes
us  to  believe  that  we  must  be  right,  since,  proceed  as  we  may,  the  conclusion
is  the  same  ;  and  the  inductive  plan,  of  striking  averages,  harmonizes  with  the
deductive  plan,  of  reasoning  from  ideas.

And  at  p.  165  :  "  There  are  no  doubt  many  furious  starts  of  passion,  in  which  malice
may  seem  to  have  place  in  our  constitution  ;  but  how  seldom  and  how  short,  in  com-
parison of  years  spent  in  fixed  kind  pursuits  of  the  good  of  a  family,  a  party,  a  country  ?  "
..."  Here  men  are  apt  to  let  their  imaginations  run  out  upon  all  the  robberies,  piracies,
murders,  perjuries,  frauds,  massacres,  assassinations,  they  have  ever  either  heard  of,
or  read  in  history  ;  thence  concluding  all  mankind  to  be  very  wicked  ;  as  if  a  court  of
justice  were  the  proper  place  for  making  an  estimate  of  the  morals  of  mankind,  or  an
hospital  of  the  heathfulness  of  a  climate.  Ought  they  not  to  consider  that  the  number
of  honest  citizens  and  farmers  far  surpasses  that  of  all  sorts  of  criminals  in  any  state  ;
and  that  the  innocent  or  kind  actions  of  even -criminals  themselves  surpass  their  crimes
in  numbers  ?  That  it  is  the  rarity  of  crimes,  in  comparison  of  innocent  or  good  actions,
which  engages  our  attention  to  them,  and  makes  them  be  recorded  in  history  ;  while
incomparably  more  honest,  generous,  domestic  actions  are  overlooked,  only  because
they  are  so  common  ;  as  one  great  danger,  or  one  month's  sickness,  shall  become  a  fre-
quently repeated  story  during  a  long  life  of  health  and  safety."

27  In  1731  Wodrow,  who  was  the  last  really  great  specimen  of  the  old  Presbyterian
divines,  and  who  was  not  a  little  shocked  at  the  changes  he  saw  going  on  around  him,
writes  :  "  When  Dr.  Calamy  heard  of  Mr.  Hutcheson's  being  called  to  Glasgow,  he
smiled,  and  said,  I  think  to  Thomas  Randy,  that  he  was  not  for  Scotland,  as  he  thought
from  his  book ;  and  that  he  would  be  reckoned  there  as  unorthodox  as  Mr.  Simson.  The
Doctor  has  a  strange  way  of  fishing  out  privat  storyes  and  things  that  pass  in  Scotland."
Wodrow' s  Analecta,  vol.  iv.  p.  227.  It  is  interesting  to  compare  with  this  the  remarks
which  that  worldly-minded  clergyman,  the  Rev.  Alexander  Carlyle,  has  made  upon
Hutcheson.  See  Carlyle' s  Autobiography,  Edinburgh,  1860,  2nd  edit.  pp.  82-85.  [If
Wodrow  was  thus  "  shocked,"  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  such  teaching  as  Hutcheson's
•**  could  not  succeed." — ED.]


804  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

But  in  the  study  of  morals  there  is  no  such  harmony.  Partly  from  the  force
of  prejudice,  and  partly  from  the  complexity  of  the  subject,  all  attempts  at  a
scientific  investigation  of  morals  have  failed.  It  is  not  therefore  surprising
that  in  this  field  the  inductive  inquirer  arrives  at  one  conclusion,  and  the
deductive  inquirer  at  another.  The  inductive  inquirer  endeavours  to  attain  his
object  by  observing  the  actions  of  men,  and  subjecting  them  to  analysis,  in  order
to  learn  the  principles  which  regulate  them.  The  deductive  inquirer,  beginning
at  the  other  end,  assumes  certain  principles  as  original,  and  reasons  from  them
to  the  facts  which  actually  appear  in  the  world.  The  former  proceeds  from  the
concrete  to  the  abstract  ;  the  latter  from  the  abstract  to  the  concrete.  The
inductive  moralist  looks  at  the  history  of  past  society,  or  at  the  condition  of  the
present,  and  takes  for  granted  that  the  first  step  is  to  assemble  the  facts,  and
then  to  generalize  them.  The  deductive  inquirer,  using  the  facts  rather  to
illustrate  his  principles  than  to  suggest  them,  appeals  in  the  first  place  not  to
external  facts  but  to  internal  ideas,  and  he  makes  those  ideas  the  major  premiss
of  a  syllogistic  argument.  "Both  parties  agree  that  we  have  the  power  of  judging
some  actions  to  be  right,  and  others  to  be  wrong.  r  But  as  to  how  we  get  that
power,  and  as  to  what  that  power  is,  they  are  at  utter  variance.  The  inductive
philosopher  says  that  its  object  is  happiness,  that  we  get  it  by  association,  and
that  it  is  due  to  the  action  and  reaction  of  social  causes,  which  are  susceptible
of  analysis.  The  deductive  philosopher  says  that  this  power  of  distinguishing
between  right  and  wrong  aims  not  at  happiness,  but  at  truth  ;  that  it  is  in-
herent, that  it  cannot  be  analyzed,  that  it  is  a  primary  conviction,  and  that  we
may  assume  it  and  reason  from  it,  but  can  never  hope  to  explain  it  by  reasoning
to  it.

It  requires  but  a  slight  acquaintance  with  the  works  of  Hutcheson  to  see  that
he  belongs  to  the  latter  of  these  two  schools.  He  assumes  that  all  men  have
what  he  terms  a  moral  faculty,  which,  being  an  original  principle,  does  not  admit
of  analysis.28  He  further  assumes  that  the  business  of  this  faculty  is  to  regulate
all  our  powers.29  From  these  two  assumptions  he  reasons  downwards  to  the
visible  facts  of  our  conduct,  and  deductively  constructs  the  general  scheme  of
life.  His  plan  being  entirely  synthetic,  he  depreciates  the  analytic  method,
and  complains  of  it  as  an  artful  attempt  to  diminish  the  number  of  our  perceptive
powers.30  The  truth  is  that  every  such  diminution  would  have  taken  away
some  of  his  original  principles,  and  would  thereby  have  prevented  him  from  using
them  as  the  major  premisses  of  separate  arguments.  And  if  you  deprive
a  deductive  reasoner  of  his  major  premisses,  you  leave  him  nothing  on  which
to  stand.  Hutcheson,  therefore,  like  all  the  philosophers  of  his  school,  was
extremely  jealous  of  the  invasions  of  the  inductive  spirit,  with  its  constant
tendency  to  attack  convictions  supposed  to  be  primary,  and  seek  to  resolve  them
into  their  elements.  He  repulsed  such  encroachments  upon  his  major  pre-
misses, because  the  power  and  beauty  of  his  method  were  displayed  in  reasoning
from  the  premisses,  and  not  in  reasoning  to  them.  According  to  him,  the  moral
faculty,  and  the  authority  which  it  exercised,  were  impervious  to  analysis  ;  it
was  impossible  to  track  them  higher,  or  to  resolve  them  into  simpler  constituents  *
and  it  was  in  vain  that  many  attempted  to  refer  them  to  circumstances  external
to  themselves,  such  as  education,  custom,  or  the  association  of  ideas.31

28  In  his  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  52,  he  calls  it  "  an  original  determination  or  sense
in  our  nature,  not  capable  of  being  referred  to  other  powers  of  perception."     [Here  follow-
ing the  "  inductive  "  Shaftesbury. — ED.]

29  "  This  moral  sense  from  its  very  nature  appears  to  be  designed  for  regulating  and
controlling  all  our  powers."     Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  61.

30  See,  in  his  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  79,  his  complaint  against  those  who  "  would
reduce  all  our  perceptive  powers  to  a  very  small  number,  by  one  artful  reference  or
another."

31  "  'Tis  in  vain  here  to  alledge  instruction,  education,  custom,  or  association  of  ideas,

[*  There  can  be  no  "  simpler  constituent  "  than  a  primary  bias  or  appetite.  Hume
here  reinforces  Hutcheson. — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY          805

Hence,  the  judgments  which  men  pass  upon  the  conduct  of  others,  or  of  them-
selves, are  in  their  origin  altogether  inexplicable  ;  each  judgment  being  merely
a  different  form  of  one  great  moral  faculty.  Inasmuch,  however,  as  that  faculty
escapes  observation,  and  is  only  known  by  its  results,  it  is  evident  that  for  all
purposes  of  reasoning  the  judgments  must  be  deemed  primary,  and  arguments
are  to  be  constructed  from  them,  as  if  they  were  the  ultimate  and  highest  con-
ditions of  our  nature.  In  this  way  Hutcheson  was  led  to  that  love  of  multiplying
original  principles  which  Sir  James  Mackintosh  has  justly  noticed  as  a  char-
acteristic of  his  philosophy,  and,  after  him,  of  the  Scotch  philosophy  in  general  ;  32
though  the  distinguished  author  of  this  remark  has  failed  to  perceive  that  such
characteristic  was  but  a  single  part  of  a  far  larger  scheme,  and  was  intimately
connected  with  those  habits  of  deductive  thought  which  a  long  train  of  preceding
circumstances  had  indelibly  imprinted  on  the  Scotch  mind.

In  Hutcheson  the  tendency  was  so  strong  as  to  make  him  believe  that  by
arguing  from  a  certain  number  of  original  principles  he  could  construct  the
theory  and  explain  the  march  of  human  affairs,  with  little  or  no  aid  from  the
experience  of  the  past,  or  indeed  of  the  present.  His  views,  for  instance,
respecting  the  nature  and  objects  of  legislation,  criminal  as  well  as  civil,  might
have  been  written  by  a  recluse  who  had  never  quitted  his  hermitage,  and  whose
purity  was  still  unsoiled  by  the  realities  of  the  world.  Starting  from  the  so-
called  nature  of  things,  his  first  steps  were  ideal,  and  from  them  he  sought  to
advance  to  the  actual.  In  his  account  of  the  duties  of  life,  as  they  existed  before
the  power  of  government  was  consolidated,  he  quotes  no  evidence  to  show
what  really  happened  among  barbarous  tribes  who  were  in  that  state  ;  but  he
contents  himself  with  deductive  inferences  from  the  principles  he  had  previously
laid  down.33  Difficult  questions  relating  to  the  laws  of  property  are  treated
in  the  same  manner  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  conclusions  respecting  them  are  arrived
at  on  speculative  grounds,  and  not  by  comparing  how  the  different  enactments
have  worked  in  different  countries.34  Experience  is  either  shut  out,  or  made
subordinate  to  theory  ;  and  facts  are  adduced  to  illustrate  the  inference,  but  not
to  suggest  it.  So,  too,  the  proper  relation  between  the  people  and  their  rulers,
and  the  amount  of  liberty  which  the  people  should  possess,  instead  of  being
inductively  generalized  from  an  historical  inquiry  into  the  circumstances  which
had  produced  most  happiness,  might  in  the  opinion  of  Hutcheson  be  ascer-
tained by  reasoning  from  the  nature  of  government,  and  from  the  ends  for  which
it  was  instituted.35

The  next  great  attempt  to  study  the  actions  of  men  scientifically,  and  to
generalize  the  principles  of  their  conduct  without  the  intervention  of  supernatural
ideas,  was  made  by  Adam  Smith,  who  in  1759  published  his  Theory  of  Moral

as  the  original  of  moral  approbation."  Hutcheson's  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  57.
Compare  his  work  on  Beauty  and  Virtue,  p.  84.  [Here  Hutcheson  is  surely  quite  right.
The  point  of  the  sentence  lies  in  "  the  original."  It  does  not  deny  that  instruction
and  custom  modify  or  determine  moral  judgments. — ED.]

32  "  To  him  may  also  be  ascribed  that  proneness  to  multiply  ultimate  and  original
principles  in  human  nature,  which  characterized  the  Scottish  School  till  the  second
extinction  of  a  passion  for  metaphysical  speculation  in  Scotland."     Mackintosh's  Disser-
tation on  Ethical  Philosophy,  edit.  Whewell,  Edinburgh,   1837,  p.  208.     [Mackintosh,
however,  notes  that  Hutcheson  develops  Shaftesbury  and  coincides  with  Butler.— ED. ]

33  See  his  ingenious  chapter,  entitled  "  A  deduction  of  the  more  special  laws  of  nature
and  duties  of  life,  previous  to  civil  government  and  other  adventitious  states."     Moral
Philosophy,  vol.  i.  p.  227  ;    and  compare  vol.  ii.  pp.  294-309,  "  How  civil  power  is  ac-
quired."

34  See,  for  example,  his  remarks  on  "  the  right  of  possession."     Moral  Philosophy,
vol.  i.  p.  344  ;  on  "  rights  by  mortgage,"  p.  350  ;  and  on  inheritance,  p.  356.

35  In  his  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  pp.  346,  347,  he  sums  up  a  long  argument  on  "  the
nature  of  civil  laws,"  by  saying  :    "  Thus  the  general  duties  of  magistrates  and  subjects
are  discoverable  from  the  nature  of  the  trust  committed  to  them,  and  the  end  of  all  civil
power."


8o6  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Sentiments,  and  in  1776  his  Wealth  of  Nations.  To  understand  the  philosophy
of  this,  by  far  the  greatest  of  all  the  Scotch  thinkers,*  both  works  must  be  taken
together,  and  considered  as  one  ;  since  they  are  in  reality  the  two  divisions
ot  a  single  subject.  In  the  Moral  Sentiments  he  investigates  the  sympathetic
part  of  human  nature  ;  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations  he  investigates  its  selfish  part.
And  as  all  of  us  are  sympathetic  as  well  as  selfish  ;  in  other  words,  as  all  of  us
look  without  as  well  as  within,  and  as  this  classification  is  a  primary  and  exhaus-
tive division  of  our  motives  to  action,  it  is  evident  that  if  Adam  Smith  had  com-
pletely accomplished  his  vast  design  he  would  at  once  have  raised  the  study  of
human  nature  to  a  science,  leaving  nothing  for  subsequent  inquirers  except  to
ascertain  the  minor  springs  of  affairs,  all  of  which  would  find  their  place  in  this
general  scheme,  and  be  deemed  subordinate  to  it.  In  his  attempt  to  perform
this  prodigious  task,  and  to  traverse  the  enormous  field  which  he  saw  lying  before
him,  he  soon  perceived  that  an  inductive  investigation  was  impossible,  because
it  would  require  the  labour  of  many  lives  even  to  assemble  the  materials  from
which  the  generalization  was  to  be  made.  Moved  by  this  reflection,  and,  pro-
bably, moved  still  more  by  the  intellectual  habits  which  prevailed  around  him,
he  resolved  on  adopting  the  deductive  method  instead  of  the  inductive  ;  but
in  seeking  for  the  premisses  from  which  he  was  to  reason,  and  on  which  his
structure  was  to  be  built,  he  resorted  to  a  peculiar  artifice,  which  is  perfectly
valid,  and  which  he  had  an  undoubted  right  to  employ,  though,  to  make  it
available,  it  requires  such  delicate  tact,  and  involves  so  many  refinements,
that  extremely  few  writers  have  used  it  with  effect  on  social  questions,  either
before  or  since.

The  plan  to  which  I  allude  is  that  when  any  subject  becomes  unmanageable
by  the  inductive  method,  whether  from  the  impossibility  of  experimenting  upon
it,  or  from  its  extreme  natural  complexity,  or  from  the  presence  of  immense
and  bewildering  details  collected  around  it,  we  may  in  all  such  cases  make  an
imaginary  separation  of  inseparable  facts,  and  reason  upon  trains  of  events
which  have  no  real  and  independent  existence,  and  which  are  nowhere  to  be
found  except  in  the  mind  of  the  inquirer.  A  result  obtained  in  this  way  cannot
be  strictly  true  ;  but  if  we  have  reasoned  accurately  it  will  be  as  near  truth
as  were  the  premisses  from  which  we  started.  To  make  it  perfectly  true  we
must  confront  it  with  other  results,  which  we  have  arrived  at  in  a  similar  way,
and  from  the  same  subject.  These  separate  inferences  may  eventually  be
co-ordinated  into  a  single  system ;  so  that,  while  each  inference  contains  only  an
imperfect  truth,  the  whole  of  the  inferences,  when  put  together,  will  contain
perfect  truth.

Such  hypothetical  arguments  are  evidently  based  upon  an  intentional  sup-
pression of  facts  ;  and  the  artifice  is  necessary,  because  without  the  suppression
the  facts  would  be  unmanageable.  Each  argument  leads  to  a  conclusion  which
approximates  to  truth  ;  hence,  whenever  the  premisses  are  so  comprehensive
as  almost  to  exhaust  the  facts  to  which  they  refer,  the  conclusion  will  be  so  near
to  complete  truth  as  to  be  of  the  greatest  value,  even  before  it  is  co-ordinated
with  other  conclusions  drawn  from  the  same  department  of  inquiry.

Geometry  exhibits  the  most  perfect  example  of  this  logical  stratagem.  The
object  of  the  geometrician  is  to  generalize  the  laws  of  space  ;  in  other  words,
to  ascertain  the  necessary  and  universal  relations  of  its  various  parts.  Inas-
much, however,  as  space  would  have  no  parts  unless  it  were  divided,  the  geo-
metrician is  forced  to  assume  such  a  division  ;  and  he  takes  the  simplest  possible
form  of  it,  a  division  by  lines.  Now,  a  line  considered  as  a  fact,  that  is,  as  it  is
found  in  the  actual  world,  must  always  have  two  qualities,  length  and  breadth.
However  slight  these  qualities  may  be,  every  line  has  them  both.  But  if  the
geometrician  took  both  into  consideration  he  would  find  himself  in  the  presence
of  a  problem  too  complicated  for  the  resources  of  the  human  understanding  to
deal  with  ;  or,  at  all  events,  too  complicated  for  the  present  resources  of  our
knowledge.  He  therefore  by  a  scientific  artifice  deliberately  strikes  off  one

^*  Few  if  any  philosophers  to-day  will  thus  set  Smith  "  far,"  or  even  at  all,  above
Hume.— ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  807

of  these  qualities,  and  asserts  that  a  line  is  length  without  breadth.  He  knows
that  the  assertion  is  false,  but  he  also  knows  that  it  is  necessary.  For,  if  you
deny  it,  he  can  prove  nothing.  Tf  you  insist  upon  his  letting  into  his  premisses
the  idea  of  breadth,*  he  is  unable  to  proceed,  and  the  whole  fabric  of  geometry
falls  to  the  ground.  Since,  however,  the  breadth  of  the  faintest  line  is  so  slight
as  to  be  incapable  of  measurement,  except  by  an  instrument  used  under  the
microscope,  it  follows  that  the  assumption  that  there  can  be  lines  without
breadth  is  so  nearly  true,  that  our  senses,  when  unassisted  by  art,  cannot  detect
the  error.  Formerly,  and  until  the  invention  of  the  micrometer  in  the  seven-
teenth century,  it  was  impossible  to  detect  it  at  all.  Hence  the  conclusions
of  the  geometrician  approximate  so  closely  to  truth,  that  we  are  justified  in
accepting  them  as  true.  The  flaw  is  too  minute  to  be  perceived.  But  that  there
is  a  flaw  appears  to  me  certain.  It  appears  certain  that  whenever  something
is  kept  back  in  the  premisses,  something  must  be  wanting  in  the  conclusion.
In  all  such  cases  the  field  of  inquiry  has  not  been  entirely  covered  ;  and  part
of  the  preliminary  facts  being  suppressed,  it  must,  I  think,  be  admitted  that
complete  truth  is  unattainable,  and  that  no  problem  in  geometry  has  yet  been
exhaustively  solved.36

Still,  the  amazing  triumphs  effected  in  this  branch  of  mathematics  show  how
powerful  a  weapon  that  form  of  deduction  is  which  proceeds  by  an  artificial
separation  of  facts,  in  themselves  inseparable.  So  little,  however,  is  the  philo-
sophy of  the  method  understood,  that  when,  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,
political  economy  assumed  a  scientific  form,  many  persons  who  were  otherwise
well  instructed  reproached  its  cultivators  with  their  hard-heartedness  ;  such
objectors  being  unable  to  see  that  the  science  could  not  be  constructed  if  it  were
necessary  to  take  in  the  whole  range  of  generous  and  benevolent  affections.
The  political  economist  aims  at  discovering  the  laws  of  wealth,  which  are  far  too
complicated  to  be  studied  under  every  aspect.  He  therefore  selects  one  of
those  aspects,  and  generalizes  the  laws  as  they  are  exhibited  in  the  selfish  parts
of  human  nature.  And  he  is  right  in  doing  so,  simply  because  men  in  the  pursuit
of  wealth  consider  their  own  gratification  oftener  than  the  gratification  of  others.
Hence  he,  like  the  geometrician,  blots  out  one  part  of  his  premisses  in  order
that  he  may  manipulate  the  remaining  part  with  greater  ease.  But  we  must
always  remember  that  political  economy,  though  a  profound  and  beautiful
science,  is  only  a  science  of  one  department  of  life,  and  is  founded  upon  a  sup-
pression of  some  of  the  facts  in  which  all  large  societies  abound.  It  suppresses.
or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  it  ignores,  many  high  and  magnanimous  feel-
ings which  we  could  ill  afford  to  lose.  We  are  not  therefore  to  allow  its  con-
clusions to  override  all  other  conclusions.  We  may  accept  them  in  science,
and  yet  reject  them  in  practice.  Thus  the  political  economist,  when  confining
himself  to  his  own  department,  says  with  good  reason  that  it  is  both  absurd
and  mischievous  for  government  to  undertake  to  supply  the  working -classes  with
employment.  This  assertion  he,  as  a  political  economist,  can  prove  ;  and  yet,
notwithstanding  its  scientific  truth,  it  may  be  practically  right  for  a  government
to  do  the  exact  opposite.  It  may  be  right  for  a  government  to  supply  the  employ-
ment, when  the  people  are  so  ignorant  as  to  demand  it,  and  when,  at  the  same
time,  they  are  so  powerful  as  to  plunge  the  country  into  anarchy  if  the  demand
is  refused.  Here  the  view  of  the  politician  takes  in  all  the  premisses  of  which
the  political  economist  had  only  taken  in  a  portion.  In  the  same  way,  as  a

36  That  is,  so  far  as  the  facts  are  concerned.  Geometry,  considered  in  the  most  ele-
vated manner,  rests  on  ideas,  and  from  that  point  of 'view  is  impregnable,  unless  the
axioms  can  be  overthrown.  But  if  geometricians  will  insist  on  having  definitions  as
well  as  axioms,  they  gain,  no  doubt,  increased  clearness,  but  they  lose  something  in
accuracy.  I  apprehend  that,  without  definitions,  geometry  could  not  be  a  science  of
space,  but  would  be  a  science  of  magnitudes,  ideally  conceived,  and  consequently  as  pure
as  ratiocination  could  make  it.  This  does  not  touch  the  question  as  to  the  empirical
origin  of  the  axioms.

[*  i.e.  breadth  of  lines.— ED.]


8o8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

matter  of  economic  science,  it  is  wrong  for  any  one  to  relieve  the  poor  ;  since
nothing  is  better  established  than  that  to  relieve  poverty  increases  it,  by  en-
couraging improvidence.  But  in  spite  of  this,  the  antagonistic  principle  of
sympathy  will  come  into  play,  and  will  in  some  minds  operate  with  such  force
as  to  make  it  advisable  that  he  who  feels  it  should  give  alms,  because,  if  he
abstains  from  giving  them,  the  violence  which  he  does  to  his  own  nature  may
inflict  more  mischief  on  himself  than  his  bestowal  of  charity  would  inflict  on  the
general  interests  of  society.

It  will  not,  I  hope,  be  considered  that  in  these  remarks  I  have  digressed
from  the  main  argument  of  the  present  chapter,  since,  although  in  making  them
I  have  aimed  at  clearing  up  a  general  question  respecting  the  nature  of  scientific
proof,  I  have  only  done  so  with  the  more  particular  object  of  illustrating  the
philosophy  of  Adam  Smith,  and  of  explaining  the  method  which  that  most  pro-
found and  original  thinker  pursued.  We  shall  now  be  able  to  see  how  entirely
his  plan  was  deductive,  and  what  a  peculiar  form  of  deduction  it  was.  In  his
two  great  works  he  first  lays  down  certain  ideas,  and  from  them  he  marches
on  to  the  facts  of  the  external  world.  And  in  each  work  he  reasons  from  only
part  of  his  premisses  ;  supplying  the  other  part  in  the  other  work.  None  of  us
is  exclusively  selfish,  and  none  of  us  is  exclusively  sympathetic.  But  Adam
Smith  separates  in  speculation  qualities  which  are  inseparable  in  reality.  In
his  Moral  Sentiments  he  ascribes  our  actions  to  sympathy  ;  in  his  Wealth  of
Nations  he  ascribes  them  to  selfishness.  A  short  view  of  these  two  works  will
prove  the  existence  of  this  fundamental  difference,  and  will  enable  us  to  perceive
that  each  is  supplementary  to  the  other  ;  so  that,  in  order  to  understand  either,
it  is  necessary  to  study  both.

In  the  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments  Adam  Smith  lays  down  one  great  principle
from  which  he  reasons,  and  to  which  all  the  others  are  subordinate.  This  prin-
ciple is  that  the  rules  which  we  prescribe  to  ourselves,  and  which  govern  our
conduct,  are  solely  arrived  at  by  observing  the  conduct  of  others.37  We  judge
ourselves,  because  we  had  previously  judged  them.  Our  notions  are  obtained
from  without,  and  not  from  within.  If  therefore  we  lived  entirely  alone,  we
could  have  no  idea  of  merit  or  demerit,  and  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  form
an  opinion  as  to  whether  our  sentiments  were  right  or  wrong.38  To  acquire  this
knowledge  we  must  look  abroad.  Inasmuch,  however,  as  we  have  no  direct
experience  of  what  other  persons  actually  feel,  we  can  only  gain  the  information
by  conceiving  what  we  should  feel  if  we  were  in  their  place.39  Hence  all  men

37  "  Our  continual  observations  upon  the  conduct  of  others  insensibly  lead  us  to  form
to  ourselves  certain  general  rules  concerning  what  is  fit  and  proper  either  to  be  done
or  to  be  avoided."  .  .  .   "  It  is  thus  that  the  general  rules  of  morality  are  formed.    They
are  ultimately  founded  upon  experience  of  what,  in  particular  instances,  our  moral
faculties,  our  natural  sense  of  merit  and  propriety,  approve  or  disapprove  of.     We  do
not  originally  approve  or  condemn  particular  actions  because  upon  examination  they
appear  to  be  agreeable  or  inconsistent  with  a  certain  general  rule.     The  general  rule,
pn  the  contrary,  is  formed  by  finding  from  experience  that  all  actions  of  a  certain  kind,
or  circumstanced  in  a  certain  manner,  are  approved  of  or  disapproved  of."       Smith's
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  pp.  219,  220.     At  p.  153  :    "  We  either  approve  or
disapprove  of  our  own  conduct,  according  as  we  feel  that,  when  we  place  ourselves  in  the
situation  of  another  man,  and  view  it,  as  it  were,  with  his  eyes  and  from  his  station,
we  either  can  or  cannot  entirely  enter  into  and  sympathize  with  the  sentiments  and
motives  which  influenced  it."

38  "  Were  it  possible  that  a  human  creature  could  grow  up  to  manhood  in  some  solitary
place,  without  any  communicatio'n  with  his  own  species,  he  could  no  more  think  of  hjs
own  character,  of  the  propriety  or  demerit  of  his  own  sentiments  and  conduct,  of  the
beauty  or  deformity  of  his  own  mind,  than  of  the  beauty  or  deformity  of  his  own  face."
Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  p.  154.     "  Our  first  moral  criticisms  are  exercised  upon  the
characters  and  conduct  of  other  people."  p.  156.

39  "  As  we  have  no  immediate  experience  of  what  other  men  feel,  we  can  form  no  idea
of  the  manner  in  which  they  are  affected,  but  by  conceiving  what  we  ourselves  should
feel  in  the  like  situation."     Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  p.  2.


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  809

are  in  imagination  constantly  changing  situations  with  others  ;  and  though
the  change  is  ideal,  and  lasts  but  for  a  moment,  it  is  the  foundation  of  that  great
and  universal  impulse  which  is  called  Sympathy.40

By  proceeding  from  these  premisses,  a  vast  number  of  social  phenomena  may
be  explained.  We  naturally  sympathize  with  joy  more  than  with  sorrow.41
Hence  that  admiration  for  prosperous  and  successful  persons  which  is  quite
independent  of  any  benefit  we  expect  from  them  ;  and  hence,  too,  the  existence
of  different  ranks  and  of  social  distinctions,  all  of  which  emanate  from  the  same
source.42  Hence,  also,  the  feeling  of  loyalty,  which  is  a  product,  not  of  reason,
nor  of  fear,  nor  of  a  sense  of  public  convenience,  but  rather  of  sympathy  with
those  above  us,  begetting  an  extraordinary  compassion  for  even  their  ordinary
sufferings.43  Custom  and  fashion  play  a  great  part  in  the  world,  but  they  owe
their  origin  entirely  to  sympathy  ;  44  and  so  do  the  various  systems  of  philosophy
which  have  flourished  at  different  times,  the  disagreement  between  which  depends
on  the  fact  that  each  philosopher  has  sympathized  with  different  ideas,  some
sympathizing  with  the  notion  of  fitness  or  congruity,  some  with  that  of  prudence,
some  with  that  of  benevolence,  and  every  one  developing  the  conception  para-
mount in  his  own  mind.45  To  sympathy,  again,  we  must  ascribe  the  establish-
ment of  rewards  and  punishments,  and  the  whole  of  our  criminal  laws,  none  of
which  would  have  existed  but  for  our  disposition  to  sympathize  with  those  who
either  do  good  or  suffer  harm  ;  for  the  circumstance  of  society  being  protected
by  penal  laws,  is  a  subsequent  and  subordinate  discovery,  which  confirms  our
sense  of  their  propriety,  but  did  not  suggest  it.46  The  same  principle  causes  the
difference  of  character  exhibited  by  different  classes,  such  as  the  irritability  of
poets,  compared  with  the  coolness  of  mathematicians  ;  47  it  likewise  causes  that
social  difference  between  the  sexes  which  makes  men  more  remarkable  for
generosity,  and  women  for  humanity.48  All  these  results  illustrate  the  workings

40  "  That  imaginary  change  of  situation   upon  which  their  sympathy  is  founded   is
but  momentary."     Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  p.  21.     Compare  vol.  ii.  p.  206.

41  "  I  will  venture  to  affirm  that,  when  there  is  no  envy  in  the  case,  our  propensity
to  sympathize  with  joy  is  much  stronger  than  our  propensity  to  sympathize  with  sorrow."
Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  p.  58.     "  It  is  because  mankind  are  disposed  to  sympathize
more  entirely  with  our  joy  than  with  our  sorrow,  that  we  make  parade  of  our  riches,  and
conceal  our  poverty."  p.  65.

42  "  Upon  this  disposition  of  mankind  to  go  along  with  all  the  passions  of  the  rich
and  the  powerful,  is  founded  the  distinction  of  ranks,  and  the  order  of  society.     Our
obsequiousness  to  our  superiors  more  frequently  arises  from  our  admiration  for  the
advantages  of  their  situation,  than  from  any  private  expectations  of  benefit  from  their
good  will."     Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  p.  69.     See  also  vol.  ii.  p.  72.

43  See  the  striking  remarks  in  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  pp.  70-72.

44  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  ii.  pp.  23,  seq.

45  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  ii.  pp.   131-244.     This  sketch  of  the  different  systems  of
philosophy  is  perhaps  the  ablest  part  of  the  book,  notwithstanding  two  or  three  errors
which  it  contains.

46  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  pp.  89,  92,  115,  116.     The  utmost  which  he  will  concede
to  the  notion  of  social  convenience   is   that  "  we  frequently  have  occasion  to  confirm
our  natural  sense  of  the  propriety  and  fitness  of  punishment,  by  reflecting  how  necessary
it  is  for  preserving  the  order  of  society."  p.  122.

4?  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  pp.  172-174.

4§  "  Humanity  is  the  virtue  of  a  woman,  generosity  of  a  man.  The  fair  sex,  who  have
commonly  much  more  tenderness  than  ours,  have  seldom  so  much  generosity."  Moral
Sentiments,  vol.  ii.  p.  19.  Sufficient  facts  have  not  yet  been  collected  to  enable  us  to
test  the  truth  of  this  remark,  and  the  loose  experience  of  individual  observers  is  worth
very  little  on  so  wide  a  subject.  Still,  I  venture  to  doubt  the  truth  of  Adam  Smith's
.distinction.  I  suspect  that  women  are  on  the  whole  more  generous  than  men,  as  well
as  more  tender.  But  to  establish  a  proposition  of  this  sort  would  require  the  most
.extensive  research,  made  by  a  careful  and  analytic  mind  ;  and  at  present  there  is  not
.even  any  tolerably  good  work  on  the  mental  characteristics  which  distinguish  .the  sexjfcg,
and  there  never  will  be  one  until  physiology  is  united  with  biography.


8io  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  sympathy,  and  are  the  remote,  but  still  the  direct,  operations  of  that  principle.
Indeed,  we  can  trace  to  it  some  of  the  minutest  divisions  of  character  ;  pride
and  vanity,  for  instance,  being  dependent  on  it,  although  those  two  passions
are  often  confused  together,  and  are  sometimes  strangely  blended  in  the  same
mind.49

Sympathy,  then,  is  the  mainspring  of  human  conduct.  It  arises  not  so  much
from  witnessing  the  passions  of  other  persons  as  from  witnessing  the  situation
which  excites  those  passions.50  To  this  single  process  we  are  indebted  not  only
for  the  highest  principles,  but  also  for  the  deepest  emotions.  For  the  greatest
affection  of  which  we  are  capable  is  merely  sympathy  fixed  into  habit  ;  and  the
love  which  exists  between  the  nearest  relations  is  not  inherent,  but  is  derived
from  this  mighty  and  controlling  principle,  which  governs  the  whole  course  of
affairs.5!

By  this  bold  hypothesis  Adam  Smith,  at  one  stroke,  so  narrowed  the  field
of  inquiry  as  to  exclude  from  it  all  considerations  of  selfishness  as  a  primary
principle,  and  only  to  admit  its  great  antagonist,  sympathy.  The  existence  of
the  antagonism  he  distinctly  recognizes.  For  he  will  not  allow  that  sympathy
is  in  any  way  to  be  deemed  a  selfish  principle.52  Although  he  knew  that  it  is
pleasurable,  and  that  all  pleasure  contains  an  element  of  selfishness,  it  did  not
suit  the  method  of  his  philosophy  to  subject  the  principle  of  sympathy  to  such
an  inductive  analysis  as  would  reveal  its  elements.  His  business  was  to  reason
from  it,  and  not  to  it.  Concentrating  his  energy  upon  the  deductive  process,
and  displaying  that  dialectic  skill  which  is  natural  to  his  countrymen,  and  of
which  he  himself  was  one  of  the  most  consummate  masters  the  world  has  ever
seen,  he  constructed  a  system  of  philosophy,  imperfect  indeed,  because  the  pre-
misses were  imperfect,  but  approaching  truth  as  closely  as  it  was  possible  for
any  one  to  do  who  abstained  from  giving  due  consideration  to  the  selfish  part  of
human  nature.  Into  the  workings  of  its  sympathetic  part  he  looked  with
a  minuteness,  and  he  reasoned  from  it  with  a  subtlety,  which  make  his  work
the  most  important  that  has  ever  been  written  on  this  interesting  subject.  But,
inasmuch  as  his  plan  involved  a  deliberate  suppression  of  preliminary  and
essential  facts,  the  results  which  he  obtained  do  not  strictly  correspond  to  those
which  are  actually  observed  in  the  world.53  This,  however,  as  I  have  shown,
is  not  a  valid  objection  ;  since  such  discrepancy  between  the  ideal  and  the  actual,
or  between  the  abstract  and  the  concrete,  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  that
still  early  condition  of  our  knowledge  which  forces  us  to  study  complicated
questions  piecemeal,  and  to  raise  them  to  sciences  by  separate  and  fragmentary
investigations.


49  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  ii.  pp.  115—122.

50  "  Sympathy,  therefore,  does  not  arise  so  much  from  the  view  of  the  passion  as  from
that  of  the  situation  which  excites  it."     Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  p.  6.

Bsi  "What  is  called  affection  is  in  reality  nothing  but  habitual  sympathy."  Moral
Sentiments,  vol.  ii.  p.  63.  "In  some  tragedies  and  romances  we  meet  with  many  beauti-
ful and  interesting  scenes,  founded  upon  what  is  called  the  force  of  blood,  or  upon  the
wonderful  affection  which  near  relations  are  supposed  to  conceive  for  one  another,  even
before  they  know  that  they  have  any  such  connexion.  This  force  of  blood,  however,
I  am  afraid,  exists  nowhere  but  in  tragedies  and  romances."  p.  66.

52  "  Sympathy,  however,  cannot  in  any  sense  be  regarded  as   a   selfish   principle."
Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  ii.  p.  206.     In  vol.  i.  p.  9,  he  complains  of  "  those  who  are  fond
of  deducing  all  our  sentiments  from  certain  refinements  of  self-love."

53  This  is  noticed  by  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  whose  sketch  of  Adam  Smith  is  hasty
and  somewhat  superficial,  but  who,  nevertheless,   truly  observes    that    Smith   "  has
exposed  himself  to  objections  founded  on  experience,  to  which  it  is  impossible  to  attempt
any  answer."     Mackintosh's  Dissertation  on  Ethical  Philosophy,  pp.  239,  240.     See  also
a  letter  from  Hume  to  Adam  Smith,  in  Burton's  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Hume,  vol.  ii.
p.  60.     [It  is  probable  that  Smith  did  not  "  deliberately  "  suppress  the  facts  mentioned
by  Hume,  but  had  overlooked  them.     Nor  was  it  essential  to  his  theory  that  he  should
ignore  them. — ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  811

That  Adam  Smith  saw  this  necessity,  and  that  his  seeing  it  was  the  cause
of  the  method  he  pursued,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  in  his  next  great  work
he  followed  the  same  plan,  and  though  he  argued  from  new  premisses,  he  care-
fully avoided  arguing  from  any  of  the  old  ones.  Convinced  that,  in  his  theory
of  morals,  he  had  reasoned  as  accurately  as  possible  from  the  principles  supplied
by  sympathy,  his  capacious  and  insatiable  mind,  deeming  that  nothing  had  been
done  while  aught  remained  to  do,  urged  him  to  pass  on  to  the  opposite  passion
of  selfishness,  and  treat  it  in  the  same  manner,  so  that  the  whole  domain  of
thought  might  be  covered.  This  he  did  in  his  Wealth  of  Nations,  which,  though
even  a  greater  work  than  his  Moral  Sentiments,  is  equally  one -sided,  in  reference
to  the  principles  which  it  assumes.  It  assumes  that  selfishness  is  the  main
regulator  of  human  affairs,  just  as  his  previous  work  had  assumed  sympathy
to  be  so.  Between  the  two  works  there  elapsed  an  interval  of  seventeen  years  ;
the  Wealth  of  Nations  not  being  published  till  1776.  But  what  shows  that  to
their  author  both  were  part  of  a  single  scheme,  is  the  notable  circumstance
that  so  early  as  1753  he  had  laid  down  the  principles  which  his  later  work  con-
tains.54 This  was  while  his  former  work  was  still  in  meditation,  and  before  it
had  seen  the  light.  It  is  therefore  clear  that  the  study  which  he  made,  first
of  one  passion,  and  then  of  its  opposite,  was  not  a  capricious  or  accidental  arrange-
ment, but  was  the  consequence  of  that  vast  idea  which  presided  over  all  his
labours,  and  which,  when  they  are  rightly  understood,  gives  to  them  a  magnificent
unity.  And  a  glorious  object  of  ambition  it  was.  His  aspiring  and  pomp  re  -
hensive  genius,  sweeping  the  distant  horizon,  and  taking  in  the  intermediate
space  at  a  glance,  sought  to  traverse  the  whole  ground  in  two  separate  and  inde-
pendent directions,  indulging  the  hope  that  by  supplying  in  one  line  of  argu-
ment the  premisses  which  were  wanting  in  the  other,  their  opposite  conclusions
woiild  be  compensatory  rather  than  hostile,  and  would  serve  as  a  broad  and
permanent  basis  on  which  one  great  science  of  human  nature  might  be  safely
built.

The  Wealth  of  Nations  is,  as  I  have  elsewhere  observed,55  probably  the  most
important  book  which  has  ever  been  written,  whether  we  consider  the  amount
of  original  thought  which  it  contains,  or  its  practical  influence.  Its  practical
recommendations  were  extremely  favourable  to  those  doctrines  of  freedom
which  the  eighteenth  century  ushered  in  ;  and  this  secured  to  them  an  attention
which  otherwise  they  would  not  have  received.  While,  therefore,  the  Wealth
of  Nations  was  the  proximate  cause  of  a  great  change  in  legislation,56  a  deeper
analysis  will  show  that  the  success  of  the  book,  and  consequently  the  alteration
of  the  laws,  depended  upon  the  operation  of  more  remote  and  general  causes.*
It  must  also  be  confessed  that  those  same  causes  predisposed  the  mind  of  Adam
Smith  to  the  doctrines  of  liberty,  and  gave  him  a  sort  of  prejudice  in  favour  of
conclusions  which  limited  the  interference  of  the  legislator.  Thus  much  he
borrowed  from  his  age  ;  but  one  thing  he  did  not  borrow.  His  wide  and  organ-
izing mind  was  all  his  own.  This  would  have  made  him  great  under  any  circum-
stances ;  to  make  him  powerful  required  a  peculiar  conjunction  of  events,

s*  "  Mr.  Smith's  political  lectures,  comprehending  the  fundamental  principles  of  his
'  Inquiry,'  were  delivered  at  Glasgow  as  early  as  the  year  1752  or  I753-"  Dugald
Stewart's  Life  of  Adam  Smith,  p.  Ixxviii.,  prefixed  to  Smith's  Posthumous  Essays,  London,
4to,  1795-

55  Above,  p.   122.

5(5  "  Perhaps  the  only  book  which  produced  an  immediate,  general,  and  irrevocable
change  in  some  of  the  most  important  parts  of  the  legislation  of  all  civilized  states."
Mackintosh's  Ethical  Philosophy,  p.  232.  But  this  is  too  strongly  expressed,  as  the
economical  history  of  France  and  Germany  decisively  proves.  [Mackintosh  was  prob-
ably thinking  of  the  general  abandonment  of  the  bullion  delusion.  On  the  continent,
however,  that  was  largely  due  to  Montesquieu  and  the  Physiocrats. — ED.]

[*  On  that  view,  deduction  must  clearly  be  made  from  the  "  importance  "  above
ascribed  to  the'Jbook.  If  general  causes  were  so  influential,  the  work  might  have  been
done  without  Smith. — ED.]


812  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

That  conjunction  he  enjoyed,  and  he  turned  it  to  good  account.     The  influence
of  his  contemporaries  was  enough  to  make  him  liberal  ;    his  own  capacity  was
enough  to  make  him  comprehensive.     He  had,  in  a  most  remarkable  degree,
that  exuberance  of    thought  which  is  one  of  the  highest  forms  of  genius,  but
which  leads  those  who  possess  it  into  distant  excursions,  which,  though  they  have
one  common  aim,  are  often  stigmatized  as  digressions,  simply  because  they  who
criticize  are  unable  to  discern  the  great  principle  which  pervades  the  whole,
and  unites  the  various  parts  into  a  single  scheme.     This  has  been  especially  the
case  with  Adam  Smith,  whose  immortal  work  has  often  been  exposed  to  such
shallow  objections.       And  certainly  the   Wealth  of  Nations  displays  a  breadth
of  treatment  which  those  who  cannot  sympathize  with  it  are  very  likely  to  ridicule.
The  phenomena  not  only  of  wealth,  but  also  of  society  in  general,  classified  and
arranged  under  their  various  forms  ;    the  origin  of  the  division  of  labour,  and  the
consequences  which  that  division  has  produced  ;    the  circumstances  which  gave
rise  to  the  invention  of  money,  and  to  the  subsequent  changes  in  its  value  -;
the  history  of  those  changes  traced  in  different  ages,  and  the  history  of  the
relations  which  the  precious  metals  bear  to  each  other  ;    an  examination  of  the
connexion  between  wages  and  profits,  and  of  the  laws  which  govern  the  rise  and
fall  of  both  ;    another  examination  of   the  way  in  which  these  are  concerned
on  the  one  hand  with  the  rent  of  land,  and  on  the  other  hand  with  the  price
of  commodities  ;    an  inquiry  into  the  reason  why  profits  vary  in  different  trades,
and  at  different  times  ;    a  succinct  but  comprehensive  view  of  the  progress  of
towns  in  Europe  since  the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  ;    the  fluctuations,  during
several  centuries,  in  the  prices  of  the  food  of  the  people,  and  a  statement  of  how
it  is  that  in  different  stages  of  society  the  relative  cost  of  land  and  of  meat
varies  ;    the  history  of  corporation  laws  and  of  municipal  enactments,  and  their
bearing  on  the  four  great  classes  of  apprentices,  manufacturers,  merchants,  and
landlord* ;   an  account  of  the  immense  power  and  riches  formerly  enjoyed  by  the
clergy,  and  of  the  manner  in  which,  as  society  advances,  they  gradually  lose  their
exclusive  privileges  ;    the  nature  of  religious  dissent,  and  the  reason  why  the
clergy  of  the  Established  Church  can  never  contend  with  it  on  terms  of  equality,
and  therefore  call  on  the  State  to  help  them,  and  wish  to  persecute  when  they
cannot  persuade  ;    why  some  sects  profess  more  ascetic  principles,  and  others
more  luxurious  ones  ;    how  it  was    that,  during   the  feudal  times,  the  nobles
acquired  their  power,  and  how  that  power  has  ever  since  been  gradually  diminish-
ing ;    how  the  rights  of  territorial  jurisdiction  originated,  and  how  they  died
away  ;    how  the  sovereigns  of  Europe  obtained  their  revenue,  what  the  sources
of  it  are,  and  what  classes  are  most  heavily  taxed  in  order  to  supply  it  ;   the  cause
of  certain  virtues,  such  as  hospitality,  flourishing  in  barbarous  ages,  and  decaying
in  civilized  ones  ;    the  influence  of  inventions  and  discoveries  in  altering  the
distribution  of  power  among  the  various  classes  of  society  ;   a  bold  and  masterly
sketch  of  the  peculiar  sort  of  advantages  which  Europe  derived  from  the  dis-
covery of  America  and  of  the  passage  round  the  Cape  ;   the  origin  of  universities,
their  degeneracy  from  their  original  plan,  the  corruption  which  has  gradually
crept  over  them,  and  the  reason  why  they  are  so  unwilling  to  adopt  improvements,
and  to  keep  pace  with  the  wants  of  the  age  ;    a  comparison  between  public  and
private  education,  and  an  estimate  of  their  relative  advantages  ; — these,  and  a
vast  number  of  other  subjects,  respecting  the  structure  and  development  of
society,  such  as  the  feudal  system,  slavery,  emancipation  of  serfs,  origin  of  stand-
ing armies  and  of  mercenary  troops,  effects  produced  by  tithes,  laws  of  primo-
geniture, sumptuary  laws,  international  treaties  concerning  trade,  rise  of  Euro-
pean banks,  national  debts,  influence  of  dramatic  representations  over  opinions,
influence  of  foreign  travels  over  opinions,  colonies,  poor-laws, — all  topics  of  a
miscellaneous  character,  and  many  of  them  diverging  from  each  other, — all  are
fused  into  one  great  system,  and  irradiated  by  the  splendour  of  one  great  genius.
Into  that  dense  and  disorderly  mass    did  Adam    Smith  introduce  symmetry,
method,  and  law.      At  his  touch  anarchy  disappeared,  and  darkness  was  suc-
ceeded by  light.     Much,  of  course,  he  took  from  his  predecessors,  though  nothing
like  so  much  as  is  commonly  supposed.      On  this  sort  of  borrowing  the  best  and
strongest  of  us  are  dependent.      But   after  making  every  possible  allowance


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  813

for  what  he  gathered  from  others,  we  must  honestly  say  that  no  single  man
ever  took  so  great  a  step  upon  so  important  a  subject,  and  that  no  single  work
which  is  now  preserved  contains  so  many  views  which  were  novel  at  the  time,
but  which  subsequent  experience  has  ratified.  What,  however,  for  our  present
purpose  is  most  important  to  observe,  is  that  he  obtained  these  results  by  arguing
from  principles  which  the  selfish  part  of  human  nature  exclusively  supplied,
and  that  he  omitted  those  sympathetic  feelings  of  which  every  human  being
possesses  at  least  some  share,  but  which  he  could  not  take  into  consideration
without  producing  a  problem,  the  number  of  whose  complications  it  would  have
been  hopeless  to  unravel.

To  avoid,  therefore,  being  baffled,  he  simplified  the  problem  by  erasing  from
his  view  of  human  nature  those  premisses  which  he  had  already  handled  in  his
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations  he  lays
down  two  propositions  :  ist,  that  all  wealth  is  derived  not  from  land  but  from
labour  ;  and  2nd,  that  the  amount  of  the  wealth  depends  partly  on  the  skill
with  which  the  labour  is  conducted,  and  partly  on  the  proportion  between  the
number  of  those  who  labour  and  the  number  of  those  who  do  not  labour.  The
rest  of  the  work  is  an  application  of  these  principles,  to  explain  the  growth
and  mechanism  of  society.  In  applying  them,  he  everywhere  assumes  that  the
great  moving  power  of  all  men,  all  interests,  and  all  classes,  in  all  ages,  and  in  all
countries,  is  selfishness.  The  opposite  power  of  sympathy  he  entirely  shuts  out  ;
and  I  hardly  remember  an  instance  in  which  even  the  word  occurs  in  the  whole
course  of  his  work.  Its  fundamental  assumption  is  that  each  man  exclusively
follows  his  own  interest,  or  what  he  deems  to  be  his  own  interest.  And  one  of  the
peculiar  features  of  his  book  is  to  show  that,  considering  society  as  a  whole,
it  nearly  always  happens  that  men,  in  promoting  their  own  interest,  will  unin-
tentionally promote  the  interest  of  others.  Hence  the  great  practical  lesson  is
not  to  restrain  selfishness,  but  to  enlighten  it  ;  because  there  is  a  provision  in  the
nature  of  things  by  which  the  selfishness  of  the  individual  accelerates  the  pro-
gress of  the  community.  According  to  this  view,  the  prosperity  of  a  country
depends  on  the  amount  of  its  capital  ;  the  amount  of  its  capital  depends  on  the
habit  of  saving,  that  is,  on  parsimony,  as  opposed  to  generosity  ;  while  the  habit
of  saving  is  in  its  turn  governed  by  the  desire  we  all  feel  of  bettering  our  con-
dition,— a  desire  so  inherent  in  our  nature,  that  it  comes  with  us  from  the  womb,
and  only  leaves  us  in  the  grave.57

This  constant  effort  of  every  man  to  better  his  own  condition  is  so  salutary,
as  well  as  so  powerful,  that  it  is  often  capable  of  securing  the  progress  of  society,
in  spite  of  the  folly  and  extravagance  of  the  rulers  of  mankind.58  If  it  were  not

57  "  Parsimony,  and  not  industry,  is  the  immediate  cause  of  the  increase  of  capital.
Industry,  indeed,  provides  the  subject  which  parsimony  accumulates  ;    but  whatever
industry  might  acquire,  if  parsimony  did  not  save  and  store  up,  the  capital  would  never
be  the  greater."  ..."  But  the  principle  which  prompts  to  save,  is  the  desire  of  bettering
our  condition  ;    a  desire  which,  though  generally  calm  and  dispassionate,  comes  with  us
from  the  womb,  and  never  leaves  us  till  we  go  into  the  grave."      Smith's    Wealth   of
Nations,  book  ii.  chap.  iii.  pp.  138,  140,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1839.     [Capital  in  this  sense
is  merely  money  or  money -credit — an  imperfect  definition. — ED.]

58  "  The  uniform,  constant,  and  uninterrupted  effort  of  every  man  to  better  his  con-
dition, the  principle  from  which  public    and  national  as  well  as  private   opulence   is
originally  derived,  is  frequently  powerful  enough  to  maintain  the  natural  progress  of
things  towards  improvement,  in  spite  both'of  the  extravagance  of  government  and  of  the
greatest  errors  of  administration.     Like  the' unknown  principle  of  animal  life,  it  frequently
restores  health  and  vigour  to  the  constitution,  in  spite  not  only  of  the  disease,  but  of  the
absurd  prescriptions  of  the  doctor."     Wealth  of  Nations,  book  ii.  chap.  iii.  p.  141.     "  The
natural  effort  of  every  individual  to  better  his  own  condition,  when  suffered  to  exert
itself  with  freedom  and  security,  is  so  powerful  a  principle,  that  it  is  alone,  and  without
any  assistance,  not  only  capable  of  carrying  on  the  society  to  wealth  and  prosperity,
but  of  surmounting  a  hundred  impertinent  obstructions  with  which  the  folly  of  human
laws  too  often  encumbers  its  operations."     Book  iv.  chap.  v.  p.  221.


814  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

for  this  propensity,  improvement  would  be  impossible.  For  human  institutions
are  constantly  stopping  our  advance,  by  thwarting  our  natural  inclinations.59
And  no  wonder  that  this  should  be  the  case,  seeing  that  the  men  who  are  at  the
head  of  affairs,  and  by  whom  the  institutions  are  contrived,  have  perhaps  a
certain  rough  and  practical  sagacity,  but  being  from  the  narrowness  of  their
understandings  incapable  of  large  views,  their  councils  are  determined  by  those
mere  casual  fluctuations  which  alone  they  are  able  to  perceive.60  They  do  not
see  that  we  have  prospered,  not  on  account  of  their  enactments,  but  in  the  teeth
of  them  ;  and  that  the  real  cause  of  our  prosperity  is  the  fact  that  we  enjoy  undis-
turbed the  fruit  of  our  own  labour. ei  Whenever  this  right  is  tolerably  secure,
every  man  will  be  bent  on  procuring  for  himself  either  present  enjoyment  or
future  profit  ;  and  if  he  does  not  aim  at  one  of  these  objects,  he  is  void  of  common
understanding.62  If  he  possess  capital,  he  will  probably  aim  at  both,  but  m
doing  so  he  will  never  consider  the  interest  of  others  ;  his  sole  motive  will  be
his  own  private  profit.63  And  it  is  well  that  such  should  be  the  case.  For  by
thus  pursuing  his  personal  interest  he  aids  society  more  than  if  his  views  were
generous  and  exalted.  Some  people  affect  to  carry  on  trade  for  the  good  of
others  ;  but  this  is  mere  affectation,  though,  to  say  the  truth,  it  is  an  affectation
not  very  common  among  merchants,  and  many  words  are  not  needed  to  dissuade
them  from  so  foolish  a  practice.64

In  this  way  Adam  Smith  completely  changes  the  premisses  which  he  had
assumed  in  his  earlier  work.  Here  he  makes  men  naturally  selfish  ;  formerly
he  had  made  them  naturally  sympathetic.65  Here  he  represents  them  a.s
pursuing  wealth  for  sordid  objects,  and  for  the  narrowest  personal  pleasures  ;
formerly  he  represented  them  as  pursuing  it  out  of  regard  to  the  sentiments  ot
others,  and  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  their  sympathy.  66  In  the  Wealth  of
Nat-ions  we  hear  no  more  of  this  conciliatory  and  sympathetic  spirit  ;  such
amiable  maxims  are  altogether  forgotten,  and  the  affairs  of  the  world  are  regulated
by  different  principles.  It  now  appears  that  benevolence  and  affection  have
no  influence  over  our  actions.  Indeed,  Adam  Smith  will  hardly  admit  common

59  See  an  admirable  passage,  p.  156,  too  long  to  quote,  beginning,  "If  human  institu-
tions had  never  thwarted  those  natural  inclinations,"  etc.

60  "  That  insidious  and  crafty  animal,  vulgarly  called  a  statesman  or  politician,  whose
councils  are  directed  by  the  momentary  fluctuations  of  affairs."     Wealth  of  Nations,
book  iv.  chap.  ii.  p.  190.

61  "  That  security  which  the  laws  in  Great  Britain  give  to  every  man,  that  he  shall
enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  own  labour,  is  alone  sufficient  to  make  any  country  flourish,  not-
withstanding these  and   twenty  other  absurd  regulations  of  commerce."     Wealth  of
Nations,  book  iv.  chap.  v.  p.  221.

62  "In  all  countries  where  there  is  a  tolerable  security,  every  man  of  common  under-
standing will  endeavour  to  employ  whatever  stock  he  can  command,  in  procuring  either
present  enjoyment  or  future  profit."     Wealth  of  Nations,  book  ii.  chap.  i.  p.  115.

63  "  The  consideration  of  his  own  private  profit  is  the  sole  motive  which  determines
the  owner  of  any  capital  to  employ  it  either  in  agriculture,  in  manufactures,  or  in  some
particular  branch  of  the  wholesale  or  retail  trade."   Wealth  of  Nations,  book  ii.  chap.  v.

P-   154-

64  "  By  pursuing  his  own  interest,  he  frequently  promotes  that  of  the  society  more
effectually  than  when  he  really  intends  to  promote  it.     I  have  never  known  much  good
done  by  those  who  affected  to  trade  for  the  public  good.     It  is  an  affectation,  indeed,
not  very  common  among  merchants,  and  very  few  words  need  be  employed  in  dissuading
them  from  it."     Wealth  of  Nations,  book  iv.  chap.  ii.  p.  184.

65  In  this  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  p.  21,  he  says  that  mankind  are  "  naturally
sympathetic."

68  "  Nay,  it  is  chiefly  for  this  regard  to  the  sentiments  of  mankind  that  we  pursue  riches
and  avoid  poverty."  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  vol.  i.  p.  66.  "  To  become  the
natural  object  of  the  joyous  congratulations  and  sympathetic  attentions  of  mankind  is,
in  this  manner,  the  circumstance  which  gives  to  prosperity  all  its  dazzling  splendour."
p.  78.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  815

humanity  into  his  theory  of  motives.  If  a  people  emancipate  their  slaves,  it
is  a  proof  not  that  the  people  are  acted  on  by  high  moral  considerations,  nor  that
their  sympathy  is  excited  by  the  cruelty  inflicted  on  these  unhappy  creatures.
Nothing  of  the  sort.  Such  inducements  to  conduct  are  imaginary,  and  exercise
no  real  sway.  All  that  the  emancipation  proves  is  that  the  slaves  were  few
in  number,  and  therefore  small  in  value.  Otherwise,  they  would  not  have
been  emancipated.67

So,  too,  while  in  his  former  work  he  had  ascribed  the  different  systems  of
morals  to  the  power  of  sympathy  he  in  this  work  ascribes  them  entirely  to
the  power  of  selfishness.  He  observes  that  among  the  lower  ranks  of  society
dissipation  is  more  fatal  to  individuals  than  it  is  among  the  higher  ranks.  The
extravagance  which  dissipation  produces  may  injure  the  fortune  of  a  wealthy
man,  but  the  injury  is  usually  capable  of  being  repaired,  or  at  all  events  he  can
indulge  his  vices  for  years  without  completely  destroying  his  fortune,  and  without
bringing  himself  to  utter  ruin.  To  the  labourer,  a  similar  indulgence  would
be  fatal  in  a  single  week  ;  it  would  not  merely  reduce  him  to  beggary,  and
perhaps  send  him  to  jail,  but  it  would  destroy  his  future  prospects  by  "taking
away  that  character  for  sobriety  and  regularity  on  which  his  employment
depends.  Hence  the  better  class  of  common  people,  guided  by  their  interest,
look  with  aversion  on  excesses  which  they  know  to  be  fatal  ;  while  the  upper
ranks,  finding  that  a  moderate  amount  of  vice  hurts  neither  their  purse  nor
their  reputation,  consider  such  licence  to  be  one  of  the  advantages  which  their
fortune  confers,  and  they  value,  as  one  of  the  privileges  belonging  to  their  station,
the  liberty  of  indulging  themselves  without  being  censured.  Therefore  it  is
that  they  who  dissent  from  the  Established  Church  have  a  purer  system  of  morals,
or  at  all  events  an  austerer  one,  than  they  who  agree  with  it.  For  new  religious
sects  usually  begin  among  the  common  people,  the  thinking  part  of  whom  are
by  their  interest  driven  to  strict  views  of  the  duties  of  life.  Consequently
the  advocates  of  the  new  opinion  profess  a  similar  strictness,  seeing  that  it  is
the  surest  means  of  increasing  their  proselytes.  Thus  it  is  that  sectaries  and
heretics,  governed  by  interest  rather  than  by  principle,  adopt  a  code  of  morals
which  is  suited  to  their  own  purpose,  and  the  rigidity  of  which  is  strongly  con-
trasted with  the  laxer  code  of  more  orthodox  believers.68  Owing  to  the

67  "  The  late  resolution  of  the  Quakers  in  Pennsylvania,  to  set  at  liberty  all  their
negro  slaves,  may  satisfy  us  that  their  number  cannot  be  very  great.      Had  they  made
any  considerable  part  of  their  property,  such  a  resolution  could  never  have  been  agreed
to."       Wealth  of  Nations,  book  iii.  chap.  ii.  p.  159.

68  "  In  every  civilized  society,  in  every  society  where  the  distinction  of  ranks  has  once
been  completely  established,  there  have  been  always  two  different  schemes  or  systems
of  morality  current  at  the  same  time  ;    of  which  the  one  may  be  called  the  strict  or
austere  ;   the  other  the  liberal,  or,  if  you  will,  the  loose  system.      The  former  is  generally
revered  and  admired  by  the  common  people  ;    the  latter  is  commonly  more  esteemed
and  adopted  by  what  are  called  the  people  of  fashion.      The  degree  of  disapprobation
with  which  we  ought  to  mark  the  vices  of  levity,  the  vices  which  are  apt  to  arise  from
great  prosperity,  and  from  the  excess  of  gaiety  and  good  humour,  seems  to  constitute  the
principal  distinction  between  those  two  opposite  schemes  or  systems.      In  the  liberal
or  loose  system,  luxury,  wanton  and  even  disorderly  mirth,  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  to
some  degree  of  intemperance,  the  breach  of  chastity,  at  least  in  one  of  the  two  sexes,
provided  they  are  not  accompanied  with  gross  indecency,  and  do  not  lead  to  falsehood
and  injustice,  are  generally  treated  with  a  good  deal  of  indulgence,  and  are  easily  either
excused  or  pardoned  altogether.      In  the  austere  system,  on  the  contrary,  these  excesses
are  regarded  with  the  utmost  abhorrence  and  detestation.     The  vices  of  levity  are  always
ruinous  to  the  common  people,  and  a  single  week's  thoughtlessness  and  dissipation  is
often  sufficient  to  undo  a  poor  workman  for  ever,  and  to  drive  him,  through  despair,
upon  committing  the  most  enormous  crimes.      The  wiser  and  better  sort  of  the  common
people,  therefore,  have  always  the  utmost  abhorrence  and  detestation  of  such  excesses,
which  their  experience  tells  them  are  so  immediately  fatal  to  people  of  their  condition.
The  disorder  and  extravagance  of  several  years,  on  the  contrary,  will  not  always  ruin


8i6  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

operation  of  the  same  principle,  we  also  find  that  among  the  orthodox  them-
selves the  clergy  embrace  a  stricter  system  of  morals  in  countries  where  church
benefices  are  nearly  equal  than  they  do  in  countries  where  the  benefices  are  very
unequal.  This  is  because,  when  all  the  benefices  are  nearly  equal,  none  can
be  very  rich,  and  consequently  even  the  most  conspicuous  among  the  clergy
will  have  but  small  incomes.  But  a  man  who  has  little  to  spend  can  have  no
influence  unless  his  morals  are  exemplary.  Having  no  wealth  to  give  him
weight,  the  vices  of  levity  would  make  him  ridiculous.  To  avoid  contempt,
and  also  to  avoid  the  expense  which  a  looseness  of  conduct  occasions,  and  which
his  narrow  circumstances  cannot  afford,  he  has  but  one  remedy,  and  that  remedy
he  adopts.  He  retains  his  influence,  and  saves  his  pocket,  by  protesting  against
pleasures  which  he  cannot  conveniently  enjoy  ;  in  this  as  in  all  other  cases
pursuing  that  plan  of  life  which  his  own  interest  urges  him  to  follow.69

In  these  striking  generalizations,  which,  though  they  contain  a  large  amount
of  truth,  are  far  from  containing  the  whole  truth,  no  room  is  left  for  the  mag-
nanimous parts  of  our  nature  to  act  ;  but  the  system  of  morals  prevailing
at  any  one  time  or  in  any  one  class  is  solely  ascribed  to  the  dictates  of  unalloyed
selfishness.  Adam  Smith,  by  reasoning  from  this  principle,  with  that  exquisite
subtlety  which  characterized  his  mind,  explains  many  other  circumstances
which  society  presents,  and  which  at  first  sight  appear  incongruous.  According
to  the  old  notions,  which  indeed  are  not  yet  quite  extinct,  those  who  received
wages  were  under  a  personal  obligation  to  those  who  paid  them  ;  that  is  to  say,
they  were  under  a  moral  obligation,  over  and  above  the  obligation  of  performing
certain  services.  It  was  believed  that  a  master  could  not  only  select  what
servants  he  chose,  but  could  pay  them  what  he  chose  ;  or,  at  all  events,  that  it
was  the  will  of  the  masters,  considered  as  a  body,  which  fixed  the  usual  and
average  rate  of  wages.70  The  lower  classes  were  therefore  much  indebted  to

a  man  of  fashion  ;  and  people  of  that  rank  are  very  apt  to  consider  the  power  of  indulging
in  some  degree  of  excess  as  one  of  the  advantages  of  their  fortune  ;  and  the  liberty  of
doing  so  without  censure  or  reproach,  as  one  of  the  privileges  which  belong  to  their  station.
In  people  of  their  own  station,  therefore,  they  regard  such  excesses  with  but  a  small
degree  of  disapprobation,  and  censure  them  either  very  slightly  or  not  at  all.

"  Almost  all  religious  sects  have  begun  among  the  common  people,  from  whom  they
have  generally  drawn  their  earliest  as  well  as  their  most  numerous  proselytes.  The
austere  system  of  morality  has  accordingly  been  adopted  by  those  sects  almost  con-
stantly, or  with  very  few  exceptions  ;  for  there  have  been  some.  It  was  the  system
by  which  they  could  best  recommend  themselves  to  that  order  of  people  to  whom  they
first  proposed  their  plan  of  reformation  upon  what  had  been  before  established.  Many
of  them,  perhaps  the  greater  part  of  them,  had  even  endeavoured  to  gain  credit  by
refining  upon  this  austere  system,  and  by  carrying  it  to  some  degree  of  folly  and  ex-
travagance ;  and  this  excessive  rigour  has  frequently  recommended  them,  more  than
anything  else,  to  the  respect  and  veneration  of  the  common  people."  ..."  In  little
religious  sects,  accordingly,  the  morals  of  the  common  people  have  been  almost  always
remarkably  regular  and  orderly  ;  generally  much  more  so  than  in  the  established  church.
The  morals  of  those  little  sects,  indeed,  have  frequently  been  rather  disagreeably  rigorous
and  unsocial."  Wealth  of  Nations,  book  v.  chap.  i.  pp.  332,  333.

69  "  Where  the  church  benefices  are  all  nearly  equal,  none  of  them  can  be  very  great  ;
and  this  mediocrity  of  benefice,  though  it  may  no  doubt  be  carried  too  far,  has  however
some  very  agreeable  effects.      Nothing  but  exemplary  morals  can  give  dignity  to  a  man
of  small  fortune.      The  vices  of  levity  and  vanity  necessarily  render  him  ridiculous,  and
are,  besides,  almost  as  ruinous  to  him  as  they  are  to  the  common  people.       In  his  own
conduct,  therefore,  he  is  obliged  to  follow  that  system  of  morals  which  the  common
people  respect  the  most.      He  gains  their  esteem    and   affection  by  that  plan  of  life
which  his  own  interest  and  situation  would  lead  him  to  follow."      Wealth  of  Nations,
book  v.  chap.  i.  p.  340.

70  Besides  the  evidence  supplied  by  economical  treatises,  the  laws  in  our  statute-book
respecting  wages  show  the  general  conviction  that  their  rate  could  be  fixed  by  the  upper
classes.


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  817

the  higher  ones  for  giving  them  so  much  as  they  did  ;  and  it  was  incumbent
upon  all  persons  who  received  wages  to  take  them  with  humble  thankfulness,
and  with  a  feeling  of  gratitude,  on  account  of  the  favour  bestowed  upon  them
by  the  generosity  of  their  superiors.

This  doctrine,  so  convenient  to  the  upper  classes  of  society,  and  so  natural
to  the  universal  ignorance  which  formerly  prevailed  on  these  matters,  began
to  be  shaken  by  the  speculative  thinkers  of  the  seventeenth  century  ;  but  it
was  reserved  for  the  eighteenth  century  to  overthrow  it,  by  letting  in  the  great
idea  of  necessity,  and  proving  that  the  rate  of  wages  established  in  a  country
was  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  circumstances  in  which  that  country
was  placed,  and  had  no  connexion  with  the  wishes  of  any  individual,  or
indeed  with  the  wishes  of  any  class.  *  To  all  instructed  persons  this  is
now  a  familiar  truth.  Its  discovery  has  excluded  the  notion  of  gratitude
from  the  pecuniary  relation  between  employers  and  employed,  and  has  made
known  that  servants  or  workmen  who  receive  wages  have  no  more  reason  to
be  grateful  than  those  who  pay  them.  For  no  choice  having  been  exercised
in  fixing  the  wages,  no  favour  can  be  conferred  in  their  payment.  The
whole  process  is  compulsory,  and  is  the  result  of  what  had  previously  happened.
Scarcely  had  the  eighteenth  century  passed  away  when  this  most  important
discovery  was  completed.  It  was  decisively  proved  that  the  reward  of  labour
depends  solely  on  two  things  :  namely,  the  magnitude  of  that  national  fund  out
of  which  all  labour  is  paid,  and  the  number  of  the  labourers  among  whom  the
fund  is  to  be  divided. f

This  vast  step  in  our  knowledge  is  due  mainly,  though  not  entirely,  to  Malthus,
whose  work  on  Population,  besides  marking  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  speculative
thought,  has  already  produced  considerable  practical  results,  and  will  probably  give
rise  to  others  more  considerable  still.  It  was  published  in  1798 ;  so  that  Adam
Smith,  who  died  in  1790,  missed  what  to  him  would  have  been  the  intense  pleasure
of  seeing  how  in  it  his  own  views  were  expanded  rather  than  corrected.  Indeed
it  is  certain  that  without  Smith  there  would  have  been  no  Malthus ;  that  is,  un-
less Smith  had  laid  the  foundation  Malthus  could  not  have  raised  the  super-
structure. It  was  Adam  Smith  who,  far  more  than  any  other  man,  introduced
the  conception  of  uniform  and  necessary  sequence  into  the  apparently  capricious
phenomena  of  wealth,  and  who  studied  those  phenomena  by  the  aid  of  principles
of  which  selfishness  alone  supplied  the  data.  According  to  his  view,  the  employers
of  labour  have,  as  employers,  no  benevolence,  no  sympathy,  no  virtue  of  any
kind.  Their  sole  aim  is  their  own  selfish  interest.  They  are  constantly
engaged  in  a  tacit,  if  not  in  an  open,  combination  to  prevent  the  lower  ranks
from  being  benefited  by  a  rise  of  wages  ;  and  they  sometimes  combine  for  the
purpose  even  of  depressing  those  wages  below  their  actual  rate.71  Having  no
bowels,  they  think  only  of  themselves.  The  idea  of  their  wishing  to  mitigate
the  inequalities  of  fortune  is  to  be  exploded  as  one  of  the  chimeras  of  that

71  "We  rarely  hear,  it  has  been  said,  of  the  combinations  of  masters,  though  frequently
of  those  of  workmen.  But  whoever  imagines,  upon  this  account,  that  masters  rarely
combine,  is  as  ignorant  of  the  world  as  of  the  subject.  Masters  are  always  and  everywhere
in  a  sort  of  tacit,  but  constant  and  uniform,  combination,  not  to  raise  the  wages  of  labour
above  their  actual  rate.  To  violate  this  combination  is  everywhere  a  most  unpopular
action,  and  a  sort  of  reproach  to  a  master  among  his  neighbours  and  equals.  We  seldom,
indeed,  hear  of  this  combination,  because  it  is  the  usual,  and,  one  may  say,  the  natural
state  of  things  which  nobody  ever  hears  of.  Masters,  too,  sometimes  enter  into  particular
combinations  to  sink  the  wages  of  labour  even  below  this  rate."  Wealth  of  Nations,
book  i.  chap.  viii.  p.  28.

[*  On  the  contrary,  Ricardo  admitted  that  the  standard  of  comfort  of  the  workers
does  affect  wages,  and  that  wages  vary  with  that  standard  (Principles  of  Polit.  Econ.
2nd  ed.  pp.  90,  91).  The  expression  "  no  connexion  with  the  wishes  "  is  an  extrava-
gance.— ED.]

[f  As  before  noted,  this  formula  is  now  abandoned  by  economists,  there  being  no  fixed
or  fixable  "  fund  "  applicable  to  wage-paying. — ED.]

52


8:8  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

protective  spirit  which  imagined  that  society  could  not  go  on  unless  the  richer
classes  relieved  the  poorer  ones  and  sympathized  with  their  troubles.  This
antiquated  notion  is  further  rebutted  by  the  fact  that  wages  are  always  higher
in  summer  than  in  winter,  although  the  expenses  which  a  labourer  incurs  in
winter  being  heavier  than  in  summer,  he  ought,  on  principles  of  common
humanity,  to  receive  more  money  during  the  more  expensive  season.72  In
the  same  way,  in  years  of  scarcity,  the  dearness  of  food  causes  many  persons
to  go  to  service,  in  order  to  support  their  families.  The  masters,  instead  of
charitably  paying  such  servants  more  on  account  of  the  unfortunate  position
in  which  they  are  placed,  avail  themselves  of  that  position  to  pay  them  less.
They  make  better  terms  for  themselves  ;  they  lower  wages  just  at  the  moment
when  sympathy  for  misfortune  would  have  raised  them  ;  and  as  they  find  that
their  servants,  besides  being  worse  remunerated,  are  by  poverty  made  more
submissive,  they  consider  that  scarcity  is  a  blessing,  and  that  dear  years  are
to  be  commended  as  more  favourable  to  industry  than  cheap  ones.73

Adam  Smith,  therefore,  though  he  failed  in  grasping  the  remote  cause  of  the
rate  of  wages,  clearly  saw  that  the  proximate  cause  was  not  the  generosity
of  human  nature,  but  its  selfishness,  and  that  the  question  was  one  of  supply
and  demand  ;  each  side  striving  to  extract  as  much  as  possible  from  the  other.74
By  the  aid  of  the  same  principle  he  explained  another  curious  fact,  namely,
the  extravagant  rewards  bestowed  on  some  of  the  most  despicable  classes  of
society,  such,  for  instance,  as  opera-dancers,  who  always  receive  enormous
pay  for  insignificant  services.*  He  observes  that  one  of  the  reasons  why  we
pay  them  so  highly  is  because  we  despise  them.  If  to  be  a  public  dancer
were  a  creditable  occupation,  more  persons  would  be  brought  up  to  it,  and  the
supply  of  public  dancers  becoming  greater,  competition  would  lower  their  wages.
As  it  is,  we  look  on  them  disdainfully.  By  way  of  compensating  the  disdain,
we  have  to  bribe  them  largely  to  induce  them  to  follow  their  pursuit.75  Here
we  see  that  the  reward  which  one  class  bestows  on  another,  instead  of  being


72  "  First,  in  almost  every  part  of  Great  Britain,  there  is  a  distinction,  even  in  the  lowest
species  of  labour,  between  summer  and  winter  wages.      Summer  wages  are  always
highest.      But,  on  account  of  the  extraordinary  expense  of  fuel,  the  maintenance  of  a
family  is  most  expensive  in  winter.      Wages,  therefore,  being  highest  when  this  expense
is  lowest,  it  seems  evident  that  they  are  not  regulated  by  what  is  necessary  for  this
expense,  but  by  the  quantity  and  supposed  value  of  the  work."     Wealth  of  Nations,
book  i.  chap.  viii.  p.  31.

73  "In  years  of  scarcity,  the  difficulty  and  uncertainty  of  subsistence  make  all  such
people  eager  to  return  to  service.     But  the  high  price  of  provisions,  by  diminishing  the
funds  destined  for  the  maintenance  of  servants,  disposes  masters  rather  to  diminish
than  to  increase  the  number  of  those  they  have."  ..."  Masters  of  all  sorts,  therefore,
frequently  make  better  bargains  with  their  servants  in  dear  than  in  cheap  years,  and
find  them  more  humble  and  dependent  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.  They  naturally,
therefore,  commend  the  former  as  more  favourable  to  industry."      Wealth  of  Nations,
book  i.  chap.  viii.  p.  35.

74  "  The  workmen  desire  to  get  as  much,  the  masters  to  give  as  little,  as  possible.
The  former  are  disposed  to  combine  in  order  to  raise,  the  latter  in  order  to  lower,  the
wages  of  labour."      Wealth  of  Nations,  b.  i.  c.  viii.  p.  27-

75  "  It  seems  absurd  at  first  sight,  that  we  should  despise  their  persons,  and  yet  reward
their  talents  with  the  most  profuse  liberality.      While  we  do  the  one,  however,  we  must
of  necessity  do  the  other.    Should  the  public  opinion,  or  prejudice,  ever  alter  with  regard
to  such  occupations,  their  pecuniary  recompense  would  quickly  diminish.      More  people
would  apply  to  them,  and  the  competition  would  quickly  reduce  the  price  of  their  labour.
Such  talents,  though  far  from  being  common,  are  by  no  means  so  rare  as  imagined.      Many
people  possess  them  in  great  perfection,  who  disdain  to  make  this  use  of  them  ;    and
many  more  are  capable  of  acquiring  them,  if  anything  could  be  made  honourably  by

[*  The  term  "  despicable,"  as  Buckle  would  probably  have  admitted,  is  unwarrant
able  ;    and  opera  dancers  certainly  do  not  "  always  receive  enormous  pay." — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVlII.  CENTURY          819

increased  by  sympathy,  is  increased  by  scorn  ;  so  that  the  more  we  contemn
the  tastes  and  the  way  of  life  of  our  fellow  creatures,  the  more  liberal  we  are
in  recompensing  them.*

Passing  to  another  and  somewhat  different  class,  Adam  Smith  threw  new
light  on  the  cause  of  that  hospitality  tor  which  the  clergy  were  famous  during
the  Middle  Ages,  and  for  the  magnificence  of  which  they  have  received  great
praise.  He  shows  that,  although  they  undoubtedly  relieved  a  large  amount
of  distress,  this  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  them  as  a  merit,  since  it  resulted  from
the  peculiarity  of  their  position,  and  since,  moreover,  they  did  it  tor  their  own
advantage.  In  the  Middle  Ages  the  clergy  possessed  enormous  wealth,  and
their  revenues  were  mostly  paid,  not  in  money,  but  in  kind,  such  as  corn,  wine,
and  cattle.  Trade  and  manufactures  being  hardly  known,  the  clergy  could  find
no  use  for  these  commodities  except  to  feed  other  people.  By  employing  them
in  that  way,  they  benefited  themselves  in  the  most  effectual  manner.  They
gained  a  reputation  for  extensive  charity  ;  they  increased  their  influence  ;
they  multiplied  the  number  of  their  adherents  ;  and  they  not  only  advanced
themselves  to  temporal  power,  but  they  secured  to  their  spiritual  threats  a
respect  which,  without  this  contrivance,  it  would  have  been  impossible  for
them  tojobtain.76

The  reader  will  now  be  able  to  understand  the  nature  of  that  method  of
investigation  which  is  adopted  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  and  of  which  I  have
given  more  instances  than  I  should  otherwise  have  done,  partly  because  the
question  of  philosophic  method  lies  at  the  very  root  of  our  knowledge,  and
partly  because  no  attempt  has  hitherto  been  made  to  analyze  the  intellect  of
Adam  Smith  by  considering  his  two  great  works  as  the  opposite,  but  yet  the
compensatory,  parts  of  a  single  scheme.  And  as  he  is  by  far  the  greatest
thinker  Scotland  has  produced,  Ineed  hardly  apologize,  in  a  history  of  the  Scotch
mind,  for  devoting  so  much  attention  to  his  system,  and  endeavouring  to  ex-
amine it  at  its  base.  But,  having  done  so,  it  would  be  a  needless  prolixity  to
treat  with  equal  fulness  the  productions  of  those  other  eminent  Scotchmen
who  lived  at  the  same  time,  and  nearly  all  of  whom  pursued  a  method  essentially,
though  not  entirely,  the  same  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  preferred  the  deductive
process  of  reasoning  from  principles,  to  the  inductive  process  of  reasoning  to
them.  In  that  peculiar  form  of  deduction  which  consists  in  a  deliberate
suppression  of  part  of  the  principles,  Adam  Smith  stands  alone.  For  though
others  attempted  to  follow  that  plan,  they  did  so  irregularly  and  at  intervals,

them."  Wealth  of  Nations,  book  i.  chap.  x.  p.  44.  [Buckle  does  not  ask  whether  Smith
is  here  deductive  or  inductive.  If  deductive,  his  statistical  statement  is  worthless.  But
his  phrases  "  far  from  common  "  and  "  many  people  "  show  he  had  no  clear  basis  for
an  induction.  His  theory  is  in  fact  unsound,  as  the  painful  case  of  prostitutes  suffi-
ciently shows.  Fine  dancing  is  a  rare  accomplishment. — ED.]

TO  "  Over  and  above  the  rents  of  those  estates,  the  clergy  possessed  in  the  tithes  a  very
large  portion  of  the  rents  of  all  the  other  estates  in  ^very  kingdom  of  Europe.  The
revenues  arising  from  both  those  species  of  rents  were,  the  greater  part  of  them,  paid
in  kind,  in  corn,  wine,  cattle,  poultry,  etc.  The  quantity  exceeded  greatly  what  the
clergy  could  themselves  consume  ;  and  there  were  neither  arts  nor  manufactures  for
the  produce  of  which  they  could  exchange  the  surplus.  The  clergy  could  derive  advan-
tage from  this  immense  surplus  in  no  other  way  than  by  employing  it,  as  the  great  barons
employed  the  like  surplus  of  their  revenues,  in  the  most  profuse  hospitality,  and  in  the
most  extensive  charity.  Both  the  hospitality  and  the  charity  of  the  ancient  clergy,
accordingly,  are  said  to  have  been  very  great."  ..."  The  hospitality  and  charity  of
the  clergy,  too,  not  only  gave  them  the  command  of  a  great  temporal  force,  but  increased
very  much  the  weight  of  their  spiritual  weapons.  Those  virtues  procured  them  the
highest  respect  and  veneration  among  all  the  inferior  ranks  of  people,  of  whom  many
were  constantly,  and  almost  all  occasionally,  fed  by  them."  Wealth  of  Nations,  book  v.
chap.  i.  p.  336.

[*  This  is  an  obvious  over-statement  even  of  Smith's  position.  On  this  view,  rag-
pickers would  be  highly  rewarded. — ED.]


820  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  did  not,  like  him,  see  the  importance  of  keeping  close  to  their  method,
and  of  invariably  abstaining  from  letting  into  the  premisses  of  their  arguments
considerations  which  would  complicate  the  problem  that  they  wished  to  solve.
Among  the  contemporaries  of  Adam  Smith,  one  of  the  first,  in  eminence  as  well
as  in  reputation,  is  David  Hume.  His  views  respecting  political  economy  were
published  in  17  52,77  that  is,  the  very  year  in  which  Adam  Smith  taught  the
principles  subsequently  unfolded  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations.  But  Hume,
though  a  most  accomplished  reasoner,  as  well  as  a  profound  and  fearless  thinker,
had  not  the  comprehensiveness  of  Adam  Smith,  nor  had  he  that  invaluable
quality  of  imagination  without  which  no  one  can  so  transport  himself  into  past  ages
as  to  realize  the  long  and  progressive  movements  of  society,  always  fluctuating,
yet  on  the  whole  steadily  advancing.  How  unimaginative  he  was,  appears  not
only  from  the  sentiments  he  expressed,  but  likewise  from  many  traits  in  his
private  life.78  It  appears  also  in  the  very  colour  and  mechanism  of  his
language  ;  that  beautiful  and  chiselled  style  in  which  he  habitually  wrote,
polished  as  marble,  but  cold  as  marble  too,  and  wanting  that  fiery  enthusiasm
and  those  bursts  of  tempestuous  eloquence  which  ever  and  anon  great  objects
naturally  inspire,  and  which  rouse  men  to  their  inmost  depths.  This  it  was
which  in  his  History  of  England, — that  exquisite  production  of  art,  which,  in
spite  of  its  errors,  will  be  admired  as  long  as  taste  remains  among  us,* —  prevented
him  from  sympathizing  with  those  bold  and  generous  natures  who,  in  the
seventeenth  century,  risked  their  all  to  preserve  the  liberty  of  their  country.
His  imagination  was  not  strong  enough  to  picture  the  whole  of  that  great  century,
with  its  vast  discoveries,  its  longings  after  the  unknown,  its  splendid  literature,
and,  what  was  better  than  all  these,  its  stern  determination  to  vindicate  freedom,
and  to  put  down  tyranny.  His  clear  and  powerful  understanding  saw  these
things  separately,  and  in  their  various  parts,  but  could  not  fuse  them  into  a
single  form,  because  he  lacked  that  peculiar  faculty  which  assimilates  the  past
to  the  present,  and  enables  the  mind  to  discern  both  with  almost  equal  ease.
That  Great  Rebellion  which  he  ascribed  to  the  spirit  of  faction,  and  the  leaders
of  which  he  turned  into  ridicule,  was  but  the  continuation  of  a  movement  which
can  be  clearly  traced  to  the  twelfth  century,  and  of  which  such  events  as  the
invention  of  printing,  and  the  establishment  of  the  Reformation,  were  merely
successive  symptoms.  For  all  this  Hume  cared  nothing.  In  regard  to
philosophy,  and  in  regard  to  the  purely  speculative  parts  of  religious  doctrines,
his  penetrating  genius  enabled  him  to  perceive  that  nothing  could  be  done,
except  by  a  spirit  of  fearless  and  unrestrained  liberty.  But  this  was  the  liberty
of  his  own  class  ;  the  liberty  of  thinkers,  and  not  of  actors. f  His  absence  of
imagination  prevented  him  from  extending  the  range  of  his  sympathy  beyond
the  intellectual  classes — that  is,  beyond  the  classes  of  whose  feelings  he  was
directly  cognizant.  It  would  therefore  appear  that  his  political  errors  were
due,  not  as  is  commonly  said,  to  his  want  of  research,  but  rather  to  the  cold-
ness of  his  temperament.79  It  was  this  which  made  him  stop  where  he  did,

•

77  Burton's  Life  of  Hume,  vol.  i.  p.  354.

78  See  Mr.  Burton's  valuable  Life  of  Hume,   Edinburgh,    1846,   vol.  i.   pp.   58,  267,
vol.  ii.  pp.  14,  134.

79  What  confirms  me  in  this  view  is  the  fact  that  the  older  Hume  grew,  and  the  more
he  read  on  history,  the  more  he  became  imbued  with  these  errors  ;  which  would  not  have
been  the  case  if  the  errors  had,  as  many  of  his  critics  say,  been  the  result  of  an  insufficient
acquaintance  with  the  evidence.      Mr.   Burton,  by  comparing    the    different  editions
of  his  History  of  England,  has  shown  that  he  gradually  became  less  favourable  to  popular
liberty  ;  softening  or  erasing,  in  later  editions,  those  expressions  which  seemed  favourable
to  freedom.      Burton's  Life  of  Hume,  vol.  ii.  pp.  74-77-       See  also  pp.  144,  434.      In  his
Own  Life,  p.  xi.  (in  vol.  i.  of  Hume's  Works,  Edinb.  1826),  he  says  :   "  In  above  a  hundred

[*  It  is  to  be  feared  that  present-day  taste  does  not  ratify  Buckle's  verdict,  in  which
he  coincides  with — of  all  men — Alison. — ED.]

[f  It  is  but  fair  to  note  that  Hume,  like  Hobbes,  was  hostile  to  the  Puritan  spirit
precisely  because  it  restricted  liberty  of  speech  and  action. — ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  821

and  which  gave  to  his  works  the  singular  appearance  of  a  profound  and  original
thinker,  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  advocating  practical  doctrines
so  illiberal  that  if  enforced  they  would  lead  to  despotism,  and  yet  at  the  same
time  advocating  speculative  doctrines  so  fearless  and  enlightened  that  they
were  not  only  far  in  advance  of  his  own  age,  but  have  in  some  degree  out-
stripped even  the  age  in  which  we  live.

Among  his  speculative  views,  the  most  important  are  his  theory  of  causation
as  discarding  the  idea  of  power,  and  his  theory  of  the  laws  of  association.
Neither  of  these  theories  are  in  their  primary  conception  quite  original,  but
his  treatment  made  them  as  valuable  as  if  they  had  been  entirely  his  own.  His
theory  of  miracles,  in  connexion,  on  the  one  hand,  with  the  principles  of  evidence,
and  on  the  other  hand  with  the  laws  of  causation,  is  worked  out  with  con-
summate skill,  and,  after  having  received  the  modifications  subsequently  imposed
by  Brown,  has  now  become  the  foundation  on  which  the  best  inquirers  into
these  matters  take  their  stand.80  His  work  on  the  principles  of  morals,  by
generalizing  the  laws  of  expediency,  prepared  the  way  for  Bentham,  who  after-
wards incorporated  with  them  an  estimate  of  the  more  remote  consequences
of  human  actions  ;  Hume  having  chiefly  confined  himself  to  their  more  imme-
diate consequences.  The  doctrine  of  utility  was  common  to  both  ;  but  while
Hume  applied  it  mainly  to  the  individual,  Bentham  applied  it  to  the  surrounding
society.  Though  Bentham  was  more  conprehensive,  yet  Hume,  having  come
first,  was  more  original.  The  praise  of  originality  must  also  be  accorded  to
his  economical  theories,  in  which  he  advocated  those  principles  of  free  trade
which  politicians  began  to  adopt  many  years  after  his  death.81  In  opposition


alterations,  which  farther  study,  reading,  or  reflection,  engaged  me  to  make  in  the  reigns
of  the  two  first  Stuarts,  I  have  made  all  of  them  invariably  to  the  Tory  side."  In  one  of
his  essays,  he  observes  (Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  172)  that  "  there  is  no  enthusiasm
among  philosophers  ;  "  a  remark  perfectly  true,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned,  but  very
unjust  towards  the  class  of  men  to  whom  it  refers.

80  Brown,  in  his  great  work, — one  of  the  greatest  which  this  century  has  produced, —
candidly  confesses  that  his  own  book  is  "  chiefly  reflective  of  the  lights,  which  he  "
(Hume)  "  has  given."     Brown's  Inquiry  into  the  Relation  of  Cause  and  Effect,  London,
1835,  p.  253.      See  also  p.  vii.      [Here  again  Buckle's  eulogy  is  not  endorsed  by  later
students. — ED.]

81  While  the  politicians  of  his  own  time  despised  his  views,  the  politicians  of  our  time
seem  inclined  to  overrate  them.     Lord  Brougham,  for  instance,  in  his  Life  of  Hume,  says,
of  his  political  economy,  "  Mr.  Hume  is,  beyond  all  doubt,  the  author  of  the  modern
doctrines  which  now  rule  the  world  of  science."      Brougham's  Works,  Glasgow,  1856,
vol.  ii.  p.  176.      But  so  far  from  this  being  the  case,  the  science  of  political  economy
has  since  the  time  of  Hume  received  such  additions  that  if  that  illustrious  philosopher
were  to  rise  from  the  dead,  he  would  hardly  be  able  to  recognize  it.      To  him,  many  of
its  largest  and  most  fundamental  principles  were  entirely  unknown.    Hume  knew  nothing
of  the  causes  which  govern  the  accumulation  of  wealth,  and  compel  that  accumulation  to
proceed  with  different  speed  in  different  states  of  society  ;    a  fruitful  and  important
study  almost  entirely  neglected  until  entered  upon  by  Rae.      Neither  did  Hume  know
anything  of  the  law  of  the  ratio  between  population  and  wages  ;  nor  of  the  ratio  between
wages  and  profits.      He  even  supposes  (Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  299,  Edinburgh,
1826)    that  it  is  possible  for  the  labouring  classes  by  combination  "  to  heighten  their
wages  ;  "  and  again  (p.  319)  that  the  richer  a  nation  is,  and  the  more  trade  it  has,  the
easier  it  will  be  for  a  poor  country  to  undersell  its  manufactures,  because  the  poor  nation
enjoys  the  advantage  of  a  "  low  price  of  labour."      Elsewhere,  he  asserts  that  coin  can
be  depreciated  without  raising  prices,  and  that  a  country,  by  taxing  a  foreign  commodity,
could  increase  its  own  population.      "  Were  all  our  money,  for  instance,  re-coined,
and  a  penny's  worth  of  silver  taken  from  every  shilling,  the  new  shilling  would  probably
purchase  everything  that  could  have  been  bought  by  the  old  ;   the  prices  of  everything
would  thereby  be  insensibly  diminished  ;  foreign  trade  enlivened  ;  and  domestic  industry,
by  the  circulation  of  a  great  number  of  pounds  and  shillings,  would  receive  some  increase
and  encouragement."      Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  324.      "  A  tax  on  German  linen


822  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

to  the  notions  then  prevailing,  he  distinctly  asserted  that  all  commodities,
though  apparently  bought  by  money,  are  in  reality  bought  by  labour.82  Money,
therefore,  is  not  the  subject  of  commerce,  and  is  of  no  use  except  to  facilitate
it.83  Hence,  it  is  absurd  for  a  nation  to  trouble  itself  about  the  balance  of
trade,  or  to  make  regulations  to  discourage  the  exportation  of  the  precious
metals.84  Neither  does  the  average  rate  of  interest  depend  on  their  scarcity
or  abundance,  but  upon  the  operation  of  more  general  causes.85  As  a  necessary
consequence  of  these  positions,  Hume  inferred  that  the  established  policy  was
wrong  which  made  trading  states  look  upon  each  other  as  rivals,  while  in  point
of  fact  the  question,  if  considered  from  a  certain  height,  was  one  not  of  rivalry
but  of  co-operation  ;  every  country  being  benefited  by  the  increasing  wealth
of  its  neighbours.86  Those  who  know  the  character  of  commercial  legislation,
and  the  opinions  of  even  the  most  enlightened  statesmen  a  century  ago,  will
consider  these  views  as  extremely  remarkable  to  have  been  propounded  in  the
year  1752.  But  what  is  more  remarkable  still  is  that  their  author  subsequently

encourages  home  manufactures,  and  thereby  mulitiplies  our  people  and  industry."
p.  365.  These  are  cardinal  errors,  which  go  to  the  very  root  of  political  economy  ;
and  when  we  fairly  estimate  what  has  been  done  by  Malthus  and  Ricardo,  it  will  be
evident  that  Hume's  doctrines  do  not  "  rule  the  world  of  science."  This  is  no  disparage-
ment of  Hume,  who,  on  the  contrary,  effected  wonderful  things,  considering  the  then
state  of  knowledge.  The  mistake  is,  in  imagining  that  such  a  rapidly  advancing
science  as  political  economy  can  be  governed  by  doctrines  propounded  more  than  a
century  ago.  [Apart  from  the  last  two  citations,  the  statements  quoted  from  Hume  are
not  errors  at  all.  The  workers  can  raise  their  wages  in  certain  cases  by  combination.
Poor  countries  can  manufacture  more  cheaply  than  rich,  and  so  undersell  them.  And
our  silver  coin  has  been  depreciated  below  face  value  without  raising  prices,  though  the
further  theory  about  bettering  trade  is  a  fallacy.  Smith's  economics,  it  should  be
added,  have  been  improved  upon,  as  well  as  Hume's. — ED.]

82  "  Everything  in  the  world  is  purchased  by  labour,  and  our  passions  are  the  only
causes  of  labour.  "  Essay  I.  On  Commerce,  in  Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  294.
Hence  he  saw  the  fallacy  of  the  assertion  of  the  French  economists,  "  that  all  taxes
fall  ultimately  upon  land."  p.  388.

?3  "  Money  is  not,  properly  speaking,  one  of  the  subjects  of  commerce,  but  only  the
instrument  which  men  have  agreed  upon  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  one  commodity
for  another."  Essay  on  Money,  in  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  317.  "  It  is
indeed  evident  that  money  is  nothing  but  the  representation  of  labour  and  commodities,
and  serves  only  as  a  method  of  rating  or  estimating  them."  p.  321.

84  See  Essay  V.  on  the  Balance  of    Trade,  in  Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.
PP-  348-367-

85  Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.  333-335.      Even  now,  a  knowledge  of  this
truth   is  so  little   diffused   that  lately,  when   Australia   and  California  began  to  yield
immense  quantities  of  gold,  a  notion  was  widely  circulated  that  the  interest  of  money
would  consequently  fall  ;    although  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  if  gold  were,
to  become  as  plentiful  as  iron,  the  interest  of  money  would  be  unaffected.      The  whole
effect  would  fall  upon  price.      The  remarks  on  this  subject  in  Ritchie's   Life  of  Hume,
London,  1807,  pp.  332,  333,  are  interesting,  as  illustrating  the  slow  progress  of  opinion,
and  the  difficulty  which  minds  not  specially  trained  experience  when  they  attempt  to
investigate  these  subjects.

86  "  Nothing  is  more  usual,  among  states  which  have  made  some  advance  in  commerce,
than  to  look  on  the  progress  of  their  neighbours  with  a  suspicious  eye,  to  consider  all
trading  states  as  their  rivals,  and  to  suppose  that  it  is  impossible  for  any  of  them  to
flourish,  but  at  their  expense.     In  opposition  to  this  narrow  and  malignant  opinion.
I  will  venture  to  assert  that  the  increase  of  riches  and  commerce  in  any  one  nation,
instead  of  hurting,  commonly  promotes  the  riches  and  commerce  of  all  its  neighbours."
.  .  .  "  I  go  farther,  and  observe  that  where  an  open  communication  is  preserved  among
nations,  it  is  impossible  but  the  domestic  industry  of  every  one  must  receive  an  increase
from  the  improvements  of  the  others."      Essay  on  the  Jealousy  of  Trade,  in  Hume's
Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.  368,  369.


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  823

detected  the  fundamental  error  which  Adam  Smith  committed,  and  which
vitiates  many  of  his  conclusions.  The  error  consists  in  his  having  resolved
price  into  three  components,  namely,  wages,  profit,  and  rent  ;  whereas  it  is  now
known  that  price  is  a  compound  of  wages  and  profit,  and  that  rent  is  not  an
element  of  it,  but  a  result  o~f  it.*  This  discovery  is  the  corner-stone  of  political
economy  ;  but  it  is  established  by  an  argument  so  long  and  so  refined  that
most  minds  are  unable  to  pursue  it  without  stumbling,  and  the  majority  of
those  who  acquiesce  in  it  are  influenced  by  the  great  writers  to  whom  they  pay
deference,  and  whose  judgment  they  follow.  It  is  therefore  a  striking  proof
of  the  sagacity  of  Hume,  that  in  an  age  when  the  science  was  but  dawning,
and  when  he  could  receive  little  help  from  his  predecessors,  he  should  have
discovered  a  mistake  of  this  sort,  which  lies  so  far  beneath  the  surface.  Directly
the  Wealth  of  Nations  appeared,  he  wrote  to  Adam  Smith,  disputing  his  position
that  rent  is  a  part  of  price  ;  87  and  this  letter,  written  in  the  year  1776,  is  the
first  indication  of  that  celebrated  theory  of  rent  which,  a  little  later,  Anderson,!
Malthus,  and  West,  saw  and  imperfectly  developed,  but  which  it  was  reserved
for  the  genius  of  Ricardo  to  build  up  on  a  broad  and  solid  foundation.

It  is  very  observable  that  Hume*  and  Adam  Smith,  who  made  such  immense
additions  to  our  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  trade,  had  no  practical  acquaint-
ance with  it.88  Hume  had  at  an  early  period  of  his  life  been  in  a  mercantile
house  ;  but  he  threw  up  that  employment  in  disgust,  and  buried  himself  in
a  provincial  town,  to  think,  rather  than  to  observe.8**  Indeed,  one  of  the  capital
defects  of  his  mind  was  a  disregard  of  facts.  This  did  not  proceed,  as  is  too
often  the  case,  from  that  worst  form  of  moral  obliquity,  an  indifference  to  truth  ;

87  This  letter,  which  I  have  referred  to  above,  p.  143,  was  published  for,  I  believe
the  first  time,  in  1846,  in  Burton's  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Hume,  vol.  ii.  p.  486.     It
is   however  very  difficult   to   determine  what  Adam   Smith's  opinion  really  was  upon
this  subject,  and  how  far  he  was  aware  that  rent  did  not  enter  into  price.     In  one  passage
in  the  Wealth  of  Nations  (book  i.  chap.  vi.  p.  21)  he  says  of  wages,  profit,  and  rent,  "  In
every  society,  the  price  of  every  commodity  finally  resolves  itself  into  some  one  or  other,
or  all  of  those  three  parts  ;  and  in  every  improved  society  all  the  three  enter,  more  or  less,
as  component  parts,  into  the  price  of  the  far  greater  part  of  commodities."     But  in  book  i.
chap.  xi.  p.  61,  he  says,  "  High  or  low  wages  and  profit  are  the  causes  of  high  or  low
price  ;  high  or  low  rent  is  the  effect  of  it."     This  latter  opinion  we  now  know  to  be  the.
true  one  ;  it  is,  however,  incompatible  with  that  expressed  in  the  first  passage.     For
if  rent  is  the  effect  of  price,  it  cannot  be  a  component  of  it.

88  Hence,  when  the  Wealth  of  Nations  appeared,  one  of  our  wise  men  gravely  said
that  "  Dr.  Smith,  who  had  never  been  in  trade,  could  not  be  expected  to  write  well
on  that  subject,  any  more  than  a  lawyer  upon  physic."     See  BoswelVs  Life  of  Johnson,
edit.  Croker,  1848,  p.  478,  where  this  remark  is  ascribed  to  Sir  John  Pringle.

89  "  He  was  sent  to  a  mercantile  house  at  Bristol  in  1734  ;  but  he  found  the  drudgery
of  this  employment  intolerable,  and  he  retired  to  Rheims."     Brougham's  Life  of  Hume,
Glasgow,  1856,  p.  169.     See  also  Ritchie's  Life  of  Hume,  p.  6.     In  Roberts'  Memoirs  of
Hannah  More,  and  ed.  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  16,  it  is  said  that  "  two  years  of  his  life  were  spent
in  a  merchant's  counting-house  in  Bristol,  whence  he  was  dismissed  on  account^  of  the
promptitude  of  his  pen  in  the  correction  of  the  letters  intrusted  to  him  to  copy."
latter  part  of  this  story  is  improbable  ;  the  former  part  is  certainly  incorrect^  since
Hume  himself  says,   "  In  1734  I  went  to  Bristol,  with  some  recommendations  to  eminent
merchants,  but  in  a  few  months  found  that  scene  totally  unsuitable  to^me.     I  went  over
to  France,  with  a  view  of  prosecuting  my  studies  in  a  country  retreat."     Own  Life,  p.  v.

[_*  As  goods  are  at  times  sold  below  cost  price,  the  formula  in  the  text  is  not  truly
comprehensive  ;  and  as  regards  manufactured  goods,  rent  may  as  truly  be  said  to  "  enter
into "  normal  price  as  profits,   seeing   that  practically  no   goods   are  produced   sav
in  places  that  pay  monopoly  rent,  and  factory  rents  do  not  rise  with  prices  or  profits.
Strictly,  however,  price  is  an  equation  between  supply  and  demand. — ED.]

[f  Anderson's  exposition  of  the  law  of  rent — which  Buckle  here  mentions,  though
he  overlooked  it  in  a  previous  reference,  to  the  subject — is  not  fairly  to  be  called
imperfect  ;  and  Ricardo  did  not  essentially  improve  upon  it. — ED.]


824  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

since  he  on  the  contrary  was  an  ardent  lover  of  it,  and  was  moreover  a  man
of  the  purest  and  most  exemplary  character,  utterly  incapable  of  falsehood,
or  of  prevarication  of  any  kind.90  In  him,  a  contempt  for  facts  was  merely
the  exaggerated  result  of  a  devotion  to  ideas.  He  not  only  believed,  with  perfect
justice,  that  ideas  are  more  important  than  facts,  but  he  supposed  that  they
should  hold  the  first  place  in  the  order  of  study,  and  that  they  should  be  developed
before  the  facts  are  investigated.  The  Baconian  philosophy,  which,  though
it  allows  a  preliminary  and  tentative  hypothesis,  strongly  insists  upon  the  neces-
sity of  first  collecting  the  facts  and  then  proceeding  to  the  ideas,  excited  his
aversion  ;  and  this,  I  have  no  doubt,  is  the  reason  why  he,  who  was  usually  so
lenient  in  his  judgments,  and  who  was  so  keen  an  admirer  of  intellectual  great-
ness, is  nevertheless  grossly  unfair  towards  Bacon,  with  whose  method  it  was
impossible  for  him  to  sympathize,  though  he  could  not  deny  its  utility  in  physical
science.91  If  Hume  had  followed  the  Baconian  scheme,  of  always  rising  from

90  What  Sir  James  Mackintosh  says  of  him  is  only  a  faint  echo  of  the  general  voice
of  his  contemporaries.     "  His  temper  was  calm,  not  to  say  cold  ;  but  though  none  of
his  feelings  were  ardent,  all  were  engaged  on  the  side  of  virtue.     He  was  free  from  the
slightest  tincture  of  malignity   or  meanness;    his  conduct  was  uniformly  excellent."
Mackintosh's   Memoirs,  vol.  ii.  p.  162.   A  greater  than  Mackintosh,  and  a  man  who  knew
Hume  intimately,  expresses  himself  in  much  warmer  terms.     "  Upon  the  whole,"  writes
Adam  Smith,  "  Upon  the  whole,  I  have  always  considered  him,  both  in  his  lifetime  and
since  his  death,  as  approaching  as  nearly  to  the  idea  of  a  perfectly  wise  and  virtuous
man  as  perhaps  the  nature  of  human  frailty  will  permit."     Hume's  Philosophical  Works,
vol.  i.  p.  xxv.     Some  notices  of  Hume  will  be  found  in  an  interesting  work  just  pub-
lished, Autobiography  of  Alexander  Carlyle,  Edinburgh,  1860,  pp.  272-278.     But  Carlyle,
though  a  man  of   considerable  practical  skill,  was  incapable  of   large  views,  and  was
therefore  unable,  I  will  not  say  to  measure,  but  even  to  conceive,  the  size  of  such  an
understanding  as  that  possessed  by  David  Hume.     Of  his  want  of  speculative  power
a  decisive  instance  appears  in  his  remarks  on  Adam  Smith.     He  gravely  says  (Auto-
biography, p.  281),  "  Smith's  fine  writing  is  chiefly  displayed  in  his  book  on  Moral  Senti-
ment, which  is  the  pleasantest  and  most  eloquent  book  on  the  subject.     His  Wealth  of
Nations,  from  which  he  was  judged  to  be  an  inventive  genius  of  the  first  order,  is  tedious
and  full  of  repetition.     His  separate  essays  in  the  second  volume  have  the  air  of  being
occasional  pamphlets,  without  much  force  or  determination.     On  political  subjects  his
opinions  were  not  very  sound."     It  is  rather  too  much  when  a  village -preacher  writes
in  this  strain  of  the  greatest  man  his  country  has  ever  produced.

91  He  speaks  of  him  in   the  following  extraordinary  terms.     "  If  we  consider  the
variety  of  talents  displayed  by  this  man  ;  as,  a  public  speaker,  a  man  of  business,  a  wit,
a  courtier,  a  companion,  an  author,  a  philosopher,  he  i?  justly  the  object  of  great  admira-
tion.    If  we  consider  him  merely  as  an  author  and  philosopher,  the  light  in  which  we
view  him  at  present,  though  very  estimable,  he  was  yet  inferior  to  his  contemporary  Galileo,
Perhaps  even  to  Kepler."  ..."  The  national  spirit  which  prevails  among  the  English,
and  which  forms  their  great  happiness,  is  the  cause  why  they  bestow  on  all  their  eminent
writers,  and  on  Bacon  among  the  rest,  such  praises  and    acclamations  as  may  often
appear  partial  and  excessive."     Hume's  History  of  England,  vol.  vi.  pp.  194,  195,  London,
1789.    *[It  is  now  very  generally  agreed  that  Bacon's  method  was  of  little  or  no  service
to  physical  science,  though  he  certainly  stimulated  scientific  thought.     Compare  Ellis's
General  Preface  to  his  and  Spedding's  edition  of  Bacon's  Works,  i.  38  ;  Brewster,  Life
of  Newton,  1855,  ii.  400-4  ;  Lange,  History  of  Materialism,   Eng.  tr.  i.  236-7  ;  Jevons,
Principles  of  Science,   i-vol.  ed.  p.  576  ;  Mill,  System  of  Logic,  b.  vi.  ch.  v.  §  5  ;    Tyn-
dall,  Scientific  Use  of  the  Imagination,  etc.  3rd  ed.  pp.  4,  8—9,  42-43  ;  Bagehot,  Postulates
of  English  Political  Economy,  Student's  ed.  pp.  17-19.     See  also  Buckle's  own  admis-
sions in  his  essay  on  Mill  on  Liberty  (Misc.  and  Posth.  Works,  abridged  ed.  i.  97-101,)
and  below,  above  note  149.     These  admissions  go  far  to  justify  Hume's  language.     Cer-
tainly Bacon  did  less  for  science  than  did  Galileo  and  Kepler  ;    and  he  rejected  the
Copernican  theory,  as  Hume  notes.    It  is  true,  however,  that  Hume  met  the  anti-Scotch
animus  common  in  England  in  his  day  by  a  certain  an ti -English  animus,  seen  in  his,
remarks  on  Shakspere.     (Buckle's  Misc.  Works,  as  cited,  ii.  235). — ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  825

particulars  to  generals,  and  from  each  generalization  to  that  immediately  above
it,  he  would  hardly  have  written  one  of  his  works.  Certainly  his  economical
views  would  never  have  appeared,  since  political  economy  is  as  essentially  a
deductive  science  as  geometry  itself.92  Reversing  the  inductive  process,  he
was  in  favour  of  beginning  with  what  he  termed  general  arguments,  by  which
he  hoped  to  demonstrate  the  inaccuracy  of  opinions  which  facts  were  supposed
to  have  proved.93  He  did  not  stop  to  investigate  the  facts  from  which  the
inference  had  been  drawn,  but  he  inverted  the  order  by  which  the  inference
was  to  be  obtained.  The  same  dislike  to  make  the  facts  of  trade  the  basis  of
the  science  of  trade  was  displayed  by  Adam  Smith,  who  expresses  his  want  of
confidence  in  statistics,  or,  as  it  was  then  termed,  political  arithmetic.94  It
is  however  evident  that  statistical  facts  are  as  good  as  any  other  facts,  and,
owing  to  their  mathematical  form,  are  very  precise.95  But  when  they  concern
human  actions,  they  are  the  result  of  all  the  motives  which  govern  those  actions  ;
in  other  words,  they  are  the  result  not  merely  of  selfishness,  but  also  of  sym-
pathy. And  as  Adam  Smith  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations  dealt  with  only  one  of
these  passions,  namely  selfishness,  he  would  have  found  it  impossible  to  con-
duct his  generalization  from  statistics,  which  arc  necessarily  collected  from
the  products  of  both  passions.  Such  statistical  facts  were  in  their  origin  too
complex  to  be  generalized  ;  especially  as  they  could  not  be  experimented  upon,
but  could  only  be  observed  and  arranged.  Adam  Smith,  perceiving  them  to
be  unmanageable,  very  properly  rejected  them  as  the  basis  of  his  science,  and
merely  used  them  by  way  of  illustration,  when  he  could  select  what  he  liked.
The  same  remark  applies  to  other  facts  which  he  drew  from  the  history  of  trade,
and  indeed  from  the  general  history  of  society.  All  of  these  are  essentially
subsequent  to  the  argument.  They  make  the  argument  more  clear,  but  not
more  certain.  For  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  if  all  the  commercial  and
historical  facts  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations  were  false,  the  book  would  still  remain,

92  See  the  note  above,  p.  143.      See   ed.  note   above,  p.  143,  and  Cairnes,  as  there
cited.     A  fresh  difficulty  now  arises  over  the  proper  definition  of  "  political  economy."
Cairnes,  with  Mill,  held  that  it  is  an  essentially  deductive  science.     But  Mr.  J .  N.  Keynes
(Scope  and   Method  of  Political   Economy,    1891,  p.  18),  here   agreeing  with  Professor
Sidgwick  (Principles  of  Political  Economy,    1883,  pp.  34  seq.),   points  out  that  "Mill
and  other  economists  of  his  school  have  always  employed  an  inductive  and  analytical
method,  the  deductive  element  in  their  reasonings  being  in  this  part  of  their  subject
essentially  subordinate.      Mill  is  even  more    distinctly  an  inductive  economist  in  his
elaborate  discussion  of   peasant  proprietorship  in  its  economic  aspects.  .  .  .  Cairnes,
again,   in  his  work   on  the  Slave  Power,    .  .  .    establishes   some   important   economic
doctrines  by  a  careful  inductive  study  of   facts,   little  use    being  made  of  deductive
reasoning."     It  might  be  argued  that  the  reasonings  in  question    are    extraneous  to
"  political  economy  "  as  commonly  defined  ;  but  such  discrepancies  at  least  suggest
the  need  for  caution  in  formal  generalization  on  the  subject. — ED.]

93  Thus,  for  instance,  in  his  remarkable  Essay  on  the  Balance  of  Trade,  he  says  (Philo-
sophical Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  349),  "  Every  man  who  has  ever  reasoned  on  this  subject  has
always  proved  his  theory,  whatever  it  was,  by  facts  and  calculations,  and  by  an  enumeration
of  all  the  commodities  sent  to  all  foreign  kingdoms  ;  "  therefore  (p.  350),  "  it  may  here
be  proper  to  form  a  general  argument  to  prove  the  impossibility  of  this  event,  so  long
as  we  preserve  our  people  and  our  industry."

94  "  I  have  no  great  faith  in  political  arithmetic."     Wealth  of  Nations,  book  iv.  chap.  v.
p.  218.

9s  Indeed,  the  only  possible  objection  to  them  is  that  the  language  of  their  collectors
is  sometimes  ambiguous  ;  so  that  by  the  same  return  one  statistician  may  mean  one
thing,  and  another  statistician  may  mean  something  quite  different.  This  is  well
exemplified  in  medical  statistics  ;  whence  several  writers,  unacquainted  with  the  philo-
sophy of  scientific  proof,  have  supposed  that  medicine  is  incapable  of  mathematical
treatment.  In  point  of  fact,  however,  the  only  real  impediment  is  the  shameful  state
of  clinical  and  pathological  terminology,  which  is  in  such  confusion  as  to  throw  doubt
upon  all  extensive  numerical  statements  respecting^disease.


826  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

and  its  conclusions  would  hold  equally  good,  though  they  would  be  less  attractive.
In  it  everything  depends  upon  general  principles,  and  they,  as  we  have  seen,
were  arrived  at  in  1752,  that  is,  twenty-four  years  before  the  work  was  pub-
lished in  which  those  principles  were  applied.  They  must  therefore  have
been  acquired  independently  of  the  facts  which  Adam  Smith  subsequently
incorporated  with  them,  and  which  he  learnt  during  that  long  period  of  twenty -
four  years.  And  the  ten  years  which  he  employed  in  composing  his  great  work
were  not  spent  in  one  of  those  busy  haunts  of  men  where  he  might  have  observed
all  the  phenomena  of  industry,  and  studied  the  way  in  which  the  operations
of  trade  affect  human  character  and  are  affected. by  it.  He  did  not  resort  to
one  of  those  vast  marts  and  emporiums  of  commerce  where  the  events  were
happening  which  he  was  seeking  to  explain.  That  was  not  his  method.  On
the  contrary,  the  ten  years  during  which  he  was  occupied  in  raising  to  a  science
the  most  active  department  of  life,  were  passed  in  complete  seclusion  in  Kirkcaldy,
his  quiet  little  birthplace.96  He  had  always  been  remarkable  for  absence  oi
mind,  and  was  so  little  given  to  observation  as  to  be  frequently  oblivious  of
what  was  passing  around  him.97  In  that  obliviousness  he,  amid  the  tranquil
scenes  of  his  childhood,  could  now  indulge  without  danger.  There,  cheered
indeed  by  the  society  of  his  mother,  but  with  no  opportunity  of  observing
human  nature  upon  a  large  scale,  and  far  removed  from  the  hum  of  great  cities,
did  this  mighty  thinker,  by  the  force  of  his  own  mind,  unravel  the  numerous
and  complicated  phenomena  of  wealth,  detect  the  motives  which  regulate  the
conduct  of  the  most  energetic  and  industrious  portion  of  mankind,  and  lay
bare  the  schemes  and  the  secrets  of  that  active  life  from  which  he  was  shut  out,
while  he,  immured  in  comparative  solitude,  was  unable  to  witness  the  very
facts  which  he  succeeded  in  explaining.

The  same  determination  to  make  the  study  of  principles  precede  that  of  facts
is  exhibited  by  Hume  in  one  of  his  most  original  works,  the  Natural  History
of  Religion.  In  reference  to  the  title  of  this  treatise,  we  must  observe  that,
according  to  the  Scotch  philosophers,  the  natural  course  of  any  movement  is
by  no  means  the  same  as  its  actual  course.  This  discrepancy  between  the  ideal
and  the  real  was  the  unavoidable  result  of  their  method.93  For  as  they  argued

96  "  Upon  his  return  to  England  in  the  autumn  of  1766,  he  went  to  reside  with  his
mother  at  his  native  town  of  Kirkcaldy,  and  remained  there  for  ten  years.     All  the
attempts  of  his  friends  in  Edinburgh  to  draw  him  thither  were  vain  ;  and  from  a  kind
and  lively  letter  of  Mr.  Hume  upon  the  subject,  complaining  that,  though  within  sight
of  him  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Frith  of  Fofth,  he  could  not  have  speech  of  him,  it
appears  that  no  one  was  aware  of  the  occupations  in  which  those  years  were  passed."
Brougham's  Life  of  Adam  Smith,  p.   189.     Occasionally,  however,  he  saw  his  literary
friends.     See  Dugald  Stewart's  Biographical  Memoirs,  p.  73,  Edinb.   1811,  4to.

97  "  He  was  certainly  not  fitted  for  the  general  commerce  of  the  world,  or  for  the
business   of   active   life.     The   comprehensive   speculations   with   which   he   had   been
occupied  from  his  youth,  and  the  variety  of  materials  which  his  own  invention  constantly
supplied  to  his  thoughts,  rendered  him  habitually  inattentive  to  familiar  objects  and
to  common  occurrences  ;  and  he  frequently  exhibited  instances  of  absence,  which  have
scarcely  been  surpassed  by  the  fancy  of  La  Bruyere."     Stewart's  Biographical  Memoirs,
p.    113.     See  also  Ramsay's  Reminiscences,   5th  edit.,   Edinb.   1859,  p.   236.     Carlyle,
who  knew  him  well,  says,  "  He  was  the  most  absent  man  in  company  that  I  ever  saw,
moving  his  lips,  and  talking  to  himself,  and  smiling,  in  the  midst  of  large  companies."
Autobiography  of  the  Rev.  Alexander  Carlyle,  and  edition,  Edinburgh,  1860,  p.  279.

98  A  Scotch  philosopher  of  great  repute,  but,  as  it  appears  to  me,  of  ability  not  quite
equal  to  his  repute,  has  stated  very  clearly  and  accurately  this  favourite  method  of  his
countrymen.     "  In  examining  the  history  of  mankind,   as  well  as  in  examining  the
phenomena  of  the  material  world,  when  we  cannot  trace  the  process  by  which  an  event
has  been  produced,  it  is  often  of  importance  to  be  able  to  show  how  it  may  have  been
produced  by  natural  causes."  ..."  To   this   species   of  philosophical  investigation,
which  has  no  appropriated  name  in  our  language,  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  giving  the
title  of  Theoretical  or  Conjectural  History  ;  an  expression  which  coincides  pretty  nearly


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  827

deductively  from  fixed  premisses,  they  could  not  take  into  account  the  per-
turbations to  which  their  conclusions  were  liable,  from  the  play  and  friction
of  the  surrounding  society.  To  do  that  required  a  separate  inquiry.  It  would
have  been  needful  to  investigate  the  circumstances  which  caused  the  friction,
and  thus  prevented  the  conclusions  from  being,  in  the  world  of  fact,  the  same
as  they  were  in  the  world  of  speculation.  What  we  call  accidents  are  constantly
happening,  and  they  prevent  the  real  march  of  affairs  from  being  identical  with
the  natural  march.  And  as  long  as  we  are  unable  to  predict  those  accidents
there  will  always  be  a  want  of  complete  harmony  between  the  inferences  of  a
deductive  science  and  the  realities  of  life  ;  in  other  words,  our  inferences  will
tend  towards  truth,  but  never  completely  attain  it."

With  peculiar  propriety,  therefore,  did  Hume  term  his  work  a  Natural  History
of  Religion.  It  is  an  admirable  specimen  of  the  deductive  method.  Its  only
fault  is  that  he  speaks  too  confidently  of  the  accuracy  of  the  results  to  which,
on  such  a  subject,  that  method  could  attain.  He  believed  that  by  observing
the  principles  of  human  nature,  as  he  found  them  in  his  own  mind,  it  was  possible
to  explain  the  whole  course  of  affairs,  both  moral  and  physical.100  These  prin-
ciples were  to  be  arrived  at  by  experiments  made  on  himself  ;  and  having  thus
arrived  at  them,  he  was  to  reason  from  them  deductively,  and  so  construct  the
entire  scheme.  This  he  contrasts  with  the  inductive  plan,  which  he  calls  a
tedious  and  lingering  process  ;  and  while  others  might  follow  that  slow  and
patient  method  of  gradually  working  their  way  towards  first  principles,  his
project  was  to  seize  them  at  once,  or,  as  he  expresses  himself,  not  to  stop  at  the
frontier,  but  to  march  directly  on  the  capital,  being  possessed  of  which,  he  could
gain  an  easy  victory  over  other  difficulties,  and  could  extend  his  conquests
over  the  sciences.101  According  to  Hume,  we  are  not  to  reason,  in  order  to
obtain  ideas,  but  we  are  to  have  clear  ideas  before  we  reason.102  By  this  means

in  its  meaning  with  that  of  Natural  History  as  employed  by  Mr.  Hume,  and  with  what
some  French  writers  have  called  Histoire  Raisonnee."  Dugald  Stewart's  Biographica
Memoirs,  pp.  48,  49.  Hence  (p.  53),  "  in  most  cases  it  is  of  more  importance  to  ascer-
tain the  progress  that  is  most  simple,  than  the  progress  that  is  most  agreeable  to  fact ;
for,  paradoxical  as  the  proposition  may  appear,  it  is  certainly  true,  that  the  real  progress
is  not  always  the  most  natural.  It  may  have  been  determined  by  particular  accidents,
which  are  not  likely  again  to  occur,  and  which  cannot  be  considered  as  forming  any
part  of  that  general  provision  which  nature  has  made  for  the  improvement  of  the  race."

99  Part  of  this  view  is  well  expressed  in  Hume's  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  book  iii.
part  ii.     "  This,  however,  hinders  not  but  that  philosophers  may,  if  they  please,  extend
their  reasoning  to  the  supposed  state  of  nature  ;    provided   they  allow  it  to  be  a  mere
philosophical  fiction,  which  never  had  and  never  could  have  any  reality."  ..."  The
same  liberty  may  be  permitted  to  moral,  which  is  allowed  to  natural  philosophers  ;
and  'tis  very  usual  with  the  latter  to  consider  any  motion  as  compounded  and  consisting
of  two  parts  separate  from  each  other,  though,  at  the  same  time,  they  acknowledge  it
to  be  in  itself  uncompounded  and  inseparable."     Philosophical  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  263.

100  And,  conversely,  that  whatever  was  "  demonstratively  false  "  could  "  never  be
distinctly  conceived  by  the  mind."     Philosophical   Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  33-     Here,  and
sometimes  in  other  passages,  Hume,  though  by  no  means  a  Cartesian,  reminds  us  of
Descartes.

101  "  Here,  then,  is  the  only  expedient  from  which  we  can  hope  for  success  in  our
philosophical  researches,  to  leave  the  tedious,  lingering  method,  which  we  have  hitherto
followed,  and  instead  of  taking  now  and  then  a  castle  or  village  on  the  frontier,  to  march
up  directly  to  the  capital,  or  centre  of    these  sciences,  to  human  nature  itself  :  which
being  once  masters  of,  we  may  everywhere  else  hope  for  an  easy  victory.     From  this
statio'n  we  may  extend  our  conquests  over  all  those  sciences  which  more  immediately
concern  human  life,  and  may  afterwards  proceed,  at  leisure,  to  discover  more  fully
those  which  are  the  objects  of  purefcuriosity."     Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  i.
p.  8.     See  also,  in  vol.  ii.  pp.  73,  74,  his  remarks  on  the  way  "  to  consider  the  matter
d  priori."

102  "  NO  kind  of  reasoning  can  give  rise  to  a  new  idea,  such  as  this  of  power  is  ;  but


828  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

we  arrive  at  philosophy  ;  and  her  conclusions  are  not  to  be  impugned,  even  if
they  do  happen  to  clash  with  science.  On  the  contrary,  her  authority  is  sup-
reme, and  her  decisions,  being  essentially  true,  must  always  be  preferred  to  any
generalization  of  the  facts  which  the  external  world  presents.103

Hume  therefore  believed  that  all  the  secrets  of  the  external  world  are  wrapped
up  in  the  human  mind.  The  mind  was  not  only  the  key  by  which  the  treasure
could  be  unlocked  ;  it  was  also  the  treasure  itself.  Learning  and  science  might
illustrate  and  beautify  our  mental  acquisitions,  but  they  could  not  communicate
real  knowledge  ;  they  could  neither  give  the  prime  original  materials,  nor  could
they  teach  the  design  according  to  which  those  materials  must  be  worked.

In  conformity  with  these  views  the  Natural  History  of  Religion  was  com-
posed. The  object  of  Hume  in  writing  it  was  to  ascertain  the  origin  and
progress  of  religious  ideas  ;  and  he  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  the  worship
of  many  gods  must  everywhere  have  preceded  the  worship  of  one  God.  This
he  regards  as  a  law  of  the  human  mind,  a  thing  not  only  that  always  has  hap-
pened, but  that  always  must  happen.  His  proof  is  entirely  speculative.  He
argues  that  the  earliest  state  of  man  is  necessarily  a  savage  state  ;  that  savages
can  feel  no  interest  in  the  ordinary  operations  of  nature,  and  no  desire  to  study
the  principles  which  govern  those  operations  ;  that  such  men  must  be  devoid
of  curiosity  on  all  subjects  which  do  not  personally  trouble  them  ;  and  that,
therefore,  while  they  neglect  the  usual  events  of  nature,  they  will  turn  their
minds  to  the  unusual  ones.104  A  violent  tempest,  a  monstrous  birth,  excessive
cold,  excessive  rain,  sudden  and  fatal  diseases,  are  the  sort  of  things  to  which
the  attention  of  the  savage  is  confined,  and  of  which  alone  he  desires  to  know
the  causes.  Directly  he  finds  that  such  causes  are  beyond  his  control,  he  reckons

wherever  we  reason,  we  must  antecedently  be  possessed  of  clear  ideas,  which  may  be
the  objects  of  our  reasoning."  Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  217.  Compare
vol.  ii.  p.  276,  on  our  arriving  at  a  knowledge  of  causes  "  by  a  kind  of  taste  or  fancy."
Hence,  the  larger  view  preceding  the  smaller,  and  being  essentially  independent  of  it,
will  constantly  contradict  it  ;  and  he  complains,  for  instance,  that  "  difficulties,  which
seem  unsurmountable  in  theory,  are  easily  got  over  in  practice."  vol.  ii.  p.  357  ;  and
again,  in  vol.  iii.  p.  326,  on  the  effort  needed  to  "  reconcile  reason  to  experience."  But,
after  all,  it  is  rather  by  a  careful  study  of  his  works,  than  by  quoting  particular  passages,
that  his  method  can  be  understood.  In  the  two  sentences,  however,  just  cited,  the
reader  will  see  that  theory  and  reason  represent  the  larger  view  ;  while  practice  and
experience  represent  the  smaller.

103  "  'fis  certainly  a  kind  of  indignity  to  philosophy,   whose  sovereign  authority
ought  everywhere  to  be  acknowledged,  to  oblige  her  on  every  occasion  to  make  apologies
for  her  conclusions,  and  justify  herself    to  every  particular  art  and  science  which  may
be  offended  at  her.     This  puts  one  in  mind  of  a  king  arraigned  for  high  treason  against
his  subjects."     Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  318,  319.

104  "  A  barbarous,  necessitous  animal  (such  as  a  man  is  on  the  first  origin  of  society),
pressed  by  such  numerous  wants  and  passions,  has  no  leisure  to  admire  the  regular  face
of  nature,  or  make  inquiries  concerning  the  cause  of  those  objects  to  which,  from  his
infancy,  he  has  been  gradually  accustomed.     On  the  contrary,  the  more  regular  and
uniform,  that  is  the  more  perfect,  nature  appears,  the  more  is  he  familiarized  to  it,  and
the  less  inclined  to  scrutinize  and  examine  it.     A  monstrous  birth  excites  his  curiosity,
and  is  deemed  a  prodigy.     It  alarms  him  from  its  novelty,  and  immediately  sets  him  a
trembling,  and  sacrificing,  and  praying.     But  an  animal  complete  in  all  its  limbs  and
organs,  is  to  him  an  ordinary  spectacle,  and  produces  no  religious  opinion  or  affection.
Ask  him  whence  that  animal  arose  ?   He  will  tell  you,  from  the  copulation  of  its  parents.
And  these,  whence  ?     From  the  copulation  of  theirs.     A  few  removes  satisfy  his  curiosity,
and  sets  the  objects  at  such  a  distance  that  he  entirely  loses  sight  of  them.     Imagine
not  that  he  will  so  much  as  start  the  question  whence  the  first  animal,  much  less  whence
the  whole  system  or  united  fabric  of  the  universe  arose.     Or,  if  you  start  such  a  question
to  him,  expect  not  that  he  will  employ  his  mind  with  any  anxiety  about  a  subject  so
remote,  so  uninteresting,  and  which  so  much  exceeds  the  bounds  of  his  capacity."  Natural
History  of  Religion,  in  Hume's  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  439.     See  also  pp.  463-465.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  829

them  superior  to  himself,  and,  being  incapable  of  abstracting  them,  he  per-
sonifies them  ;  he  turns  them  into  deities  ;  polytheism  is  established  ;  and
the  earliest  creed  of  mankind  assumes  a  form  which  can  never  be  altered  as
long  as  men  remain  in  this  condition  of  pristine  ignorance.105

These  propositions,  which  are  not  only  plausible  but  are  probably  true,
ought,  according  to  the  inductive  philosophy,  to  have  been  generalized
from  a  survey  of  facts  ;  that  is,  from  a  collection  of  evidence  respecting  the
state  of  religion,  and  of  the  speculative  faculties  among  savage  tribes.  But
this  Hume  abstains  from  doing.  He  refers  to  none  of  the  numerous  travellers
who  have  visited  such  people  ;  he  does  not,  in  the  whole  course  of  his  work,
mention  even  a  single  book  where  facts  respecting  savage  life  are  preserved.
It  was  enough  for  him  that  the  progress  from  a  belief  in  many  gods  to  a  belief
in  one  God  was  the  natural  progress  ;  which  is  saying  in  other  words  that  it
appeared  to  his  mind  to  be  the  natural  progress.106  With  that  he  was  satisfied.
In  other  parts  of  his  essay,  where  he  treats  of  the  religious  opinions  of  the  ancient
Greeks  and  Romans,  he  displays  a  tolerable  though  by  no  means  remarkable
learning  ;  but  the  passages  which  he  cites  do  not  refer  to  that  entirely  bar-
barous society  in  which,  as  he  supposes,  polytheism  first  arose.  The  premisses,
therefore,  of  the  argument  are  evolved  out  of  his  own  mind.  He  reasons  de-
ductively from  the  ideas  which  his  powerful  intellect  supplied,  instead  of
reasoning  inductively  from  the  facts  which  were  peculiar  to  the  subject  he  was
investigating.

Even  in  the  rest  of  his  work,  which  is  full  of  refined  and  curious  speculation,
he  uses  facts,  not  to  demonstrate  his  conclusions,  but  to  illustrate  them.  He
therefore  selected  those  facts  which  suited  his  purpose,  leaving  the  others
untouched.  And  this,  which  many  critics  would  call  unfair,  was  not  unfair
in  him  ;  because  he  believed  that  he  had  already  established  his  principles
without  the  aid  of  those  facts.  The  facts  might  benefit  the  reader  by  making
the  argument  clearer,  but  they  could  not  strengthen  the  argument.  They
were  more  intended  to  persuade  than  to  prove  ;  they  were  rather  rhetorical
than  logical.  Hence  a  critic  would  waste  his  time  if  he  were  to  sift  them  with
a  minuteness  which  would  be  necessary,  supposing  that  Hume  had  built  an
inductive  argument  upon  them.  Otherwise,  without  going  far,  it  might  be

105  "  By  degrees  the  active  imagination  of  men,  uneasy  in  this  abstract  conception
of  objects,  about  which  it  is  incessantly  employed,  begins  to  render  them  more  par-
ticular, and  to  clothe  them  in  shapes  more  suitable  to  its  natural  comprehension.  It
represents  them  to  be  sensible,  intelligent  beings  like  mankind  ;  actuated  by  love  and
hatred,  and  flexible  by  gifts  and  entreaties,  by  prayers  and  sacrifices.  Hence  the  origin
of  religion.  And  hence  the  origin  of  idolatry,  or  polytheism."  Hume's  Philosophical
Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  472.  "  The  primary  religion  of  mankind  arises  chiefly  from  an  anxious
fear  of  future  events."  p.  498.

1CM5  "  It  seems  certain  that,  according  to  the  natural  progress  of  human  thought,  the  ignorant
multitude  must  first  entertain  some  grovelling  and  familiar  notion  of  superior  powers,
before  they  stretch  their  conception  to  that  perfect  Being  who  bestowed  order  on  the
whole  frame  of  nature.  We  may  as  reasonably  imagine  that  men  inhabited  palaces  before
huts  and  cottages,  or  studied  geometry  before  agriculture,  as  assert  that  the  Deity  appeared
to  them  a  pure  spirit,  omniscient,  omnipotent,  and  omnipresent,  before  he  was  appre-
hended to  be  a  powerful  though  limited  being,  with  human  passions  and  appetites,
limbs  and  organs.  The  mind  rises  gradually  from  inferior  to  superior.  By  abstracting
from  what  is  imperfect,  it  forms  an  idea  of  perfection  ;  and  slowly  distinguishing  the
nobler  parts  of  its  own  frame  from  the  grosser,  it  learns  to  transform  only  the  former,
much  elevated  and  refined,  to  its  divinity.  Nothing  could  disturb  this  natural  progress
of  thought  but  some  obvious  and  invincible  argument,  which  might  immediately  lead
the  mind  into  the  pure  principles  of  theism,  and  make  it  overleap,  at  one  bound,  the
vast  interval  which  is  interposed  between  the  human  and  the  Divine  nature.  But
though  I  allow  that  the  order  and  frame  of  the  universe,  when  accurately  examined,
affords  such  an  argument,  yet  I  can  never  think  that  this  consideration  could  have  an
influence  on  mankind,  when  they  formed  their  first  rude  notions  of  religion."  Natural
History  of  Religion,  in  Philosophical  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  438.


830  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

curious  to  contrast  them  with  the  entirely  different  facts  which  Cudworth,
eighty  years  before,  had  collected  from  the  same  source  and  on  the  same  subject.
Cudworth,  who  was  much  superior  to  Hume  in  learning,  and  much  inferior  to
him  in  genius,107  displayed  in  his  great  work  on  the  Intellectual  System  of  the
Universe  a  prodigious  erudition,  to  prove  that  in  the  ancient  world  the  belief
in  one  God  was  a  prevailing  doctrine.  Hume,  who  never  refers  to  Cudworth,
arrives  at  a  precisely  opposite  conclusion.  Both  quoted  ancient  writers  ;  but
while  Cudworth  drew  his  inferences  from  what  he  found  in  those  writers,  Hume
drew  his  from  what  he  found  in  his  own  mind.*  Cudworth,  being  more  learned,
relied  on  his  reading  ;  Hume,  having  more  genius,  relied  on  his  intellect.  Cud-
worth,  trained  in  the  school  of  Bacon,  first  collected  the  evidence  and  then
passed  the  judgment.  Hume,  formed  in  a  school  entirely  different,  believed
that  the  acuteness  of  the  judge  was  more  important  than  the  quantity  ol  tin-
evidence  ;  that  witnesses  were  likely  to  prevaricate  ;  and  that  he  possessed
in  his  own  mind  the  surest  materials  for  arriving  at  an  accurate  conclusion.
It  is  not  therefore  strange  that  Cudworth  and  Hume,  pursuing  opposite  methods,
should  have  obtained  opposite  results,  since  such  a  discrepancy  is,  as  I  have
already  pointed  out,  unavoidable  when  men  investigate  according  to  different
plans  a  subject  which,  in  the  existing  state  of  knowledge,  is  not  amenable  to
scientific  treatment.

The  length  to  which  this  chapter  has  already  extended,  and  the  number  of
topics  which  I  have  still  to  handle,  will  prevent  me  from  examining  in  detail
the  philosophy  of  Reid,  who  was  the  most  eminent  among  the  purely  specu-
lative thinkers  of  Scotland,  after  Hume  and  Adam  Smith,  though  in  point  of
merit  he  must  be  placed  far  below  them.  For  he  had  neither  the  compre-
hensiveness of  Smith  nor  the  fearlessness  of  Hume.  The  range  of  his  know-
ledge was  not  wide  enough  to  allow  him  to  be  comprehensive  ;  while  a  timidity,
almost  amounting  to  moral  cowardice,  made  him  recoil  from  the  views  advocated
by  Hume,  not  so  much  on  account  of  their  being  false,  as  on  account  of  their
being  dangerous.  It  is  however  certain  that  no  man  can  take  high  rank  as
a  philosopher  who  allows  himself  to  be  trammelled  by  considerations  of  that
kind.  A  philosopher  should  aim  solely  at  truth,  and  should  refuse  to  estimate
the  practical  tendency  of  his  speculations.  If  they  are  true,  let  them  stand  ;
if  they  are  false,  let  them  fall.  But  whether  they  are  agreeable  or  disagreeable,
whether  they  are  consolatory  or  disheartening,  whether  they  are  safe  or  mis-
chievous, is  a  question  not  for  philosophers  but  for  practical  men.  Every
new  truth  which  has  ever  been  propounded  has  for  a  time  caused  mischief  ;
it  has  produced  discomfort,  and  often  uiihappiness,  sometimes  by  disturbing
social  or  religious  arrangements,  and  sometimes  merely  by  the  disruption  of
old  and  cherished  associations  of  thought.  It  is  only  after  a  certain  interval,
and  when  the  framework  of  affairs  has  adjusted  itself  to  the  new  truth,  that
its  good  effects  preponderate  ;  and  the  preponderance  continues  to  increase,
until  at  length  the  truth  causes  nothing  but  good.  But  at  the  outset  there
is  always  harm.  And  if  the  truth  is  very  great  as  well  as  very  new,  the  harm
is  serious.  Men  are  made  uneasy  ;  they  flinch  ;  they  cannot  bear  the  sudden
light  ;  a  general  restlessness  supervenes  ;  the  face  of  society  is  disturbed,  or
perhaps  convulsed  ;  old  interests  and  old  beliefs  are  destroyed  before  new
ones  have  been  created.  These  symptoms  are  the  precursors  of  revolution  ;

107  Not  that  he  was  by  any  means  devoid  of  genius,  though  he  holds  a  rank  far  below
so  great  and  original  a  thinker  as  Hume.  He  had  however  collected  more  materials
than  he  was  able  to  wield  ;  and  his  work  on  the  Intellectual  System  of  the  Universe,  which
is  a  treasure  of  ancient  philosophy,  is  badly  arranged,  and  in  many  parts  feebly  argued.
There  is  more  real  power  in  his  posthumous  treatise  on  Eternal  and  Immutable  Morality.

[*  This  is  very  doubtful.  Cudworth  set  out  with  a  parti  pris,  the  ordinary  orthodox
belief  (founded  on  the  Bible)  in  a  primeval  tradition;  and  sought  in  the  ancient  authors
for  the  evidence  he  wanted.  Hume,  though  he  made  little  investigation  at  that  point,
professed  to  start  from  an  accepted  historical  truth,  and  then  argued  deductively  that
the  facts  "  necessarily  must  have  been  "  so.— ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  831

they  have  preceded  all  the  great  changes  through  which  the  world  has  passed  ;
and  while,  if  they  are  not  excessive,  they  forebode  progress,  so,  if  they  are  ex-
cessive, they  threaten  anarchy.  It  is  the  business  of  practical  men  to  moderate
such  symptoms,  and  to  take  care  that  the  truths  which  philosophers  discover
are  not  applied  so  rashly  as  to  dislocate  the  fabric,  instead  of  strengthening
it.  But  the  philosopher  has  only  to  discover  the  truth  and  promulgate  it  ;
and  that  is  hard  work  enough  for  any  man,  let  his  ability  be  as  great  as  it  may.
This  division  of  labour  between  thinkers  and  actors  secures  an  economy  of
force,  and  prevents  either  class  from  wasting  its  power.  It  establishes  a  differ-
ence between  science,  which  ascertains  principles,  and  art,  which  applies  them.
It  also  recognizes  that,  the  philosopher  and  the  practical  man  having  each  a
separate  part  to  play,  each  is  in  his  own  field  supreme.  But  it  is  a  sad  con-
fusion for  either  to  interfere  with  the  other.  In  their  different  spheres,  both
are  independent,  and  both  are  worthy  of  admiration.  Inasmuch,  however,
as  practical  men  should  never  allow  the  speculative  conclusions  of  philosophers,
whatever  be  their  truth,  to  be  put  in  actual  operation,  unless  society  is  in  some
degree  ripe  for  their  reception  ;  so,  on  the  other  hand,  philosophers  are  not  to
hesitate  and  tremble  and  stop  short  in  their  career  because  their  intellect
is  leading  them  to  conclusions  subversive  of  existing  interests.  The  duty  of
a  philosopher  is  clear.  His  path  lies  straight  before  him.  He  must  take  every
pains  to  ascertain  the  truth  ;  and  having  arrived  at  a  conclusion,  he,  instead
of  shrinking  from  it  because  it  is  unpalatable,  or  because  it  seems  dangerous,
should  on  that  very  account  cling  the  closer  to  it,  should  uphold  it  in  bad  repute
more  zealously  than  he  would  have  done  in  good  repute  ;  should  noise  it  abroad
far  and  wide,  utterly  regardless  what  opinions  he  shocks,  or  what  interests  he
imperils  ;  should  on  its  behalf  court  hostility  and  despise  contempt,  being
well  assured  that  if  it  is  not  true  it  will  die,  but  that  if  it  is  true  it  must  pro-
duce ultimate  benefit,  albeit  unsuited  for  practical  adoption  by  the  age  or  country
in  which  it  is  first  propounded.

But  Reid,  notwithstanding  the  clearness  of  his  mind  and  his  great  powers
of  argument,  had  so  little  of  the  real  philosophic  spirit  that  he  loved  truth
not  for  its  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  its  immediate  and  practical  results.  He
himself  tells  us  that  he  began  to  study  philosophy  merely  because  he  was  shocked
at  the  consequences  at  which  philosophers  had  arrived.*  As  long  as  the  specu-
lations of  Locke  and  of  Berkeley  were  not  pushed  to  their  logical  conclusions,
Reid  acquiesced  in  them,  and  they  were  good  in  his  eyes.108  While  they  were
safe  and  tolerably  orthodox,  he  was  not  over-nice  in  inquiring  into  their  validity.
In  the  hands  of  Hume,  however,  philosophy  became  bolder  and  more  inquisitive  ;
she  disturbed  opinions  which  were  ancient,  and  which  it  was  pleasant  to  hold  ;
she  searched  into  the  foundation  of  things,  and  by  forcing  men  to  doubt  and
to  inquire  she  rendered  inestimable  service  to  the  cause  of  truth.  But  this
was  precisely  the  tendency  at  which  Reid  was  displeased.  He. saw  that  such

108  "I  once  believed  this  doctrine  of  ideas  so  firmly  as  to  embrace  the  whole  of  Berke-
ley's system  in  consequence  of  it ;  till,  finding  other  consequences  to  follow  from  it,
which  gave  me  more  uneasiness  than  the  want  of  a  material  world,  it  came  into  my
mind  more  than  forty  years  ago  to  put  the  question,  What  evidence  have  I  for  this
doctrine  that  all  the  objects  of  my  knowledge  are  ideas  in  my  own  mind  ?  From  that
time  to  the  present,  I  have  been  candidly  and  impartially,  as  I  think,  seeking  for  the
evidence  of  this  principle,  but  can  find  none,  excepting  the  authority  of  philosophers."
Reid's  Essays  on  the  Powers  of  the  Human  Mind,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1808,  vol.  i.  p.  172.
And,  in  a  letter  which  he  wrote  to  Hume  in  1763,  he,  with  a  simple  candour  which  must
have  highly  amused  that  eminent  philosopher,  confesses  that  "  your  system  appears
to  me  not  only  coherent  in  all  its  parts,  but  likewise  justly  deduced  from  principles
commonly  received  among  philosophers  ;  principles  which  I  never  thought  of  calling
in  question,  until  the  conclusions  you  draw  from  them  in  the  '  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  '
made  me  suspect  them."  Burton's  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Hume,  vol.  ii.  p.  155.

[*  This  was  after  all  no  bad  motive.  Kant  avowed  that  Hume  roused  him  from
his  "  dogmatic  slumber,"  which  is  only  another  way  of  saying  what  Reid  said. — ED.]


832  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

disturbance  was  uncomfortable  ;  he  saw  that  it  was  hazardous  ;  therefore  he
endeavoured  to  prove  that  it  was  groundless.  Confusing  the  question  of  prac-
tical consequences  with  the  totally  different  question  of  scientific  truth,  he  took
for  granted  that,  because  to  his  age  the  adoption  of  those  consequences  would
be  mischievous,  they  must  be  false.  To  the  profound  views  of  Hume  respecting
causation,  he  gravely  objects  that  if  they  were  carried  into  effect  the  operation
of  criminal  law  would  be  imperilled.109  To  the  speculations  of  the  same  philo-
sopher concerning  the  metaphysical  basis  of  the  theory  of  contracts,  he  replies
that  such  speculations  perplex  men,  and  weaken  their  sense  of  duty  ;  they
are  therefore  to  be  disapproved  of  on  account  of  their  tendency.110  With
Reid  the  main  question  always  is  not  whether  an  inference  is  true,  but  what
will  happen  if  it  is  true.  He  says  that  a  doctrine  is  to  be  judged  by  its  fruits  ;  1U
forgetting  that  the  same  doctrine  will  bear  different  fruits  in  different  ages,
and  that  the  consequences  which  a  theory  produces  in  one  state  of  society  are
often  diametrically  opposed  to  those  which  it  produces  in  another.  He  thus
made  his  own  age  the  standard  of  all  future  ones.  He  also  trammelled  philosophy
with  practical  considerations  ;  diverting  thinkers  from  the  pursuit  of  truth,
which  is  their  proper  department,  into  the  pursuit  of  expediency,  which  is  not
their  department  at  all.  Reid  was  constantly  stopping  to  inquire,  not  whether
theories  were  accurate,  but  whether  it  was  advisable  to  adopt  them  ;  whether
they  were  favourable  to  patriotism,  or  to  generosity,  or  to  friendship  ;  112  in
a  word,  whether  they  were  comfortable,  and  such  as  we  should  at  present  like
to  believe.113  Or  else  he  would  take  other  ground,  still  lower,  and  still  more

109  "  Suppose  a  man  to  be  found  dead  on  the  highway,  his  skull  fractured,  his  body
pierced  with  deadly  wounds,  his  watch  and  money  carried  off.  The  coroner's  jury  sits
upon  the  body,  and  the  question  is  put,  '  What  was  the  cause  of  this  man's  death  ?
Was  it  accident,  or  felo  de  se,  or  murder  by  persons  unknown  ?  '  Let  us  suppose  an  adept
in  Mr.  Hume's  philosophy  to  make  one  of  the  jury,  and  that  he  insists  upon  the  previous
question,  whether  there  was  any  cause  of  the  event,  or  whether  it  happened  without
a  cause."  Reid's  Essays  on  the  Powers  of  the  Mind,  vol.  ii.  p.  286.  Compare  vol.  iii.
p.  33  :  "  This  would  put  an  end  to  all  speculation,  as  well  as  to  all  the  business  of  life."

no  "  xhe  obligation  of  contracts  and  promises  is  a  matter  so  sacred,  and  of  such  conse-
quence to  human  society,  that  speculations  which  have  a  tendency  to  weaken  that  obliga-
tion, and  to  perplex  men's  notions  on  a  subject  so  plain  and  so  important,  ought  to  meet
with  the  disapprobation  of  all  honest  men.  Some  such  speculations,  I  think,  we  have
in  the  third  volume  of  Mr.  Hume's  '  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,'  and  in  his  '  Enquiry
into  the  Principles  of  Morals  ;  '  and  my  design  in  this  chapter  is  to  offer  some  observa-
tions on  the  nature  of  a  contract  or  promise,  and  on  two  passages  of  that  author  on  this
subject.  I  am  far  from  saying  or  thinking  that  Mr.  Hume  meant  to  weaken  men's
obligations  to  honesty  and  fair  dealing,  or  that  he  had  not  a  sense  of  these  obligations
himself.  It  is  not  the  man  I  impeach,  but  his  writings.  Let  us  think  of  the  first  as
charitably  as  we  can,  while  we  freely  examine  the  import  and  tendency  of  the  last."
Reid's  Essays  on  the  Powers  of  the  Mind,  vol.  iii.  p.  444-  In  this,  as  in  most  passages,
the  italics  are  my  own.

111  "  Without  repeating  what  I  have  before  said  of  causes  in  the  first  of  these  Essays,
and  in  the  second  and  third  chapters  of  this,  I  shall  here  mention  some  of  the  conse-
quences that  may  be  justly  deduced  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that  we  may  judge
of  it  by  its  fruits."     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  iii.  p.  339.

112  "  Bishop  Berkeley  surely  did  not  duly  consider  that  it  is  by  means  of  the  material
world  that  we  have  any  correspondence  with  thinking  beings,  or  any  knowledge  of  their
existence,  and  that  by  depriving  us  of  the  material  world,  he  deprived  us  at  the  same
time  of  family,  friends,  country,  and  every  human  creature  ;  of  every  object  of  affection,
esteem  or  concern,   except  ourselves.     The  good  Bishop  surely  never  intended  this.
He  was  too  warm  a  friend,  too  zealous  a  patriot,  and  too  good  a  Christian,  to  be  capable
of  such  a  thought.     He  was  not  aware  of  the  consequences  of  his  system  "  (poor,  ignorant
Berkeley},  "  and  therefore  they  ought  not  to  be  imputed  to  him  ;  but  we  must  impute
them  to  the  system  itself.     It  stifles  every  generous  and  social  principle."     Reid's  Essays,
vol.  ii.  pp.  251,  252.

113  In  his  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  179,  he  says  of  Berkeley,  one  of  the  deepest  and  most  un-


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  833

unworthy  of  a  philosopher.  In  opposing,  for  instance,  the  doctrine  that  our
faculties  sometimes  deceive  us, — a  doctrine  which,  as  he  well  knew,  had  been
held  by  men  whose  honesty  was  equal  to  his  own,  and  whose  ability  was  superior
to  his  own, — he  does  not  scruple  to  enlist  on  his  side  the  prejudices  of  a  vulgar
superstition  ;  seeking  to  blacken  the  tenet  which  he  was  unable  to  refute.  He
actually  asserts  that  they  who  advocate  it  insult  the  Deity,  by  imputing  to  the
Almighty  that  He  has  lied.  Such  being  the  consequence  of  the  opinion,  it  of
course  follows  that  the  opinion  must  be  rejected  without  further  scrutiny,  since
to  accept  it  would  produce  fatal  results  on  our  conduct,  and  would,  indeed,
bs  subversive  of  all  religion,  of  all  morals,  and  of  all  knowledge.114

In  1764  Reid  published  his  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind  ;  and  in  that,  and  in
his  subsequent  work  entitled  Essays  on  the  Powers  of  the  Mind,  he  sought  to
destroy  the  philosophy  of  Locke,  Berkeley  and  Hume.  And  as  Hume  was  the
boldest  of  the  three,  it  was  chiefly  his  philosophy  which  Reid  attacked.  Of  the
character  of  this  attack  some  specimens  have  just  been  given  ;  but  they  rather
concern  his  object  and  motives,  while  what  we  have  now  to  ascertain  is  his  method,
that  is,  the  tactics  of  his  warfare.  He  clearly  saw  that  Hume  had  assumed
certain  principles,  and  had  reasoned  deductively  from  them  to  the  facts,  instead
of  reasoning  inductively  from  the  facts  to  them.  To  this  method  he  strongly  and
perhaps  fairly  objects.  He  admits  that  Hume  had  reasoned  so  accurately  that
if  his  principles  were  conceded,  his  conclusions  must  likewise  be  conceded.115  But,
he  says,  Hume  had  no  right  to  proceed  in  such  a  manner.  He  had  no  right  to
assume  principles  and  then  to  argue  from  them.  The  laws  of  nature  were  to  be
arrived  at  not  by  conjecturing  in  this  way,  but  by  a  patient  induction  of  facts.116
Discoveries  depended  solely  on  observation  and  experiment  ;  and  any  other  plan
could  only  produce  theories,  ingenious  perhaps  and  plausible,  but  quite  worth-
less.11? For  theory  should  yield  to  fact,  and  not  fact  to  theory.1^  Speculators,
indeed,  might  talk  about  first  principles,  and  raise  a  system  by  reasoning  from
them.  But  the  fact  was  that  there  was  no  agreement  as  to  how  a  first  prin-
ciple was  to  be  recognized  ;  since  a  principle  which  one  man  would  deem  self-


answerable  of  all  speculators,  "  But  there  is  one  uncomfortable  consequence  of  his  system
which  he  seems  not  to  have  attended  to,  and  from  which  it  will  be  found  difficult,  if
at  all  possible,  to  guard  it."

114  "  This  doctrine  is  dishonourable  to  our  Maker,  and  lays  a  foundation  for  universal
scepticism.  It  supposes  the  Author  of  our  being  to  have  given  us  one  faculty  on  purpose
to  deceive  us,  and  another  by  which  we  may  detect  the  fallacy,  and  find  that  he  imposed
upon  us."  ..."  The  genuine  dictate  of  our  natural  faculties  is  the  voice  of  God,  no
less  than  what  he  reveals  from  heaven  ;  and  to  say  that  it  is  fallacious,  is  to  impute
a  lie  to  the  God  of  truth."  ..."  Shall  we  impute  to  the  Almighty  what  we  cannot
impute  to  a  man  without  a  heinous  affront  ?  Passing  this  opinion,  therefore,  as  shocking
to  an  ingenious  mind,  and,  in  its  consequences,  subversive  of  all  religion,  all  morals,
and  all  knowledge,"  etc.  Reid's  Essays,  vol.  iii.  p.  310.  See  also  vol.  i.  p.  3*3-

"5  "  His  reasoning  appeared  to  me  to  be  just ;  there  was,  therefore  a  necessity  to  call
in  question  the  principles  upon  which  it  was  founded,  or  to  admit  the  conclusion."  Reid's
Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind,  p.  v.  "  The  received  doctrine  of  ideas  is  the  principle  from
which  it  is  deduced,  and  of  which,  indeed,  it  seems  to  be  a  just  and  natural  consequence."
p.  53.  See  also  Reid's  Essays,  vol.  i.  pp.  199,  200,  vol.  ii.  p.  211.

lie  «  xhe  laws  of  nature  are  the  most  general  facts  we  can  discover  in  the  operations  of
nature.  Like  other  facts,  they  are  not  to  be  hit  upon  by  a  happy  conjecture,  but  justly
deduced  from  observation.  Like  other  general  facts,  they  are  not  to  be  drawn  from  a
few  particulars,  but  from  a  copious,  patient,  and  cautious  induction."  Reid's  Inquiry
into  the  Human  Mind,  pp.  262,  263.

"7  "  Such  discoveries  have  always  been  made  by  patient  observation,  by  accurate
experiments,  or  by  conclusions  drawn  by  strict  reasoning  from  observations  and  experi-
ments ;  and  such  discoveries  have  always  tended  to  refute,  but  not  to  confirm,  the  theories
and  hypotheses  which  ingenious  men  had  invented."  Reid's  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  46.

"8  "  This  is  Mr.  Hume's  notion  of  a  cause."  ..."  But  theory  ought  to  stoop
to  fact,  and  not  fact  to  theory."  Reid's  Essays,  vol,  iii.  p.  276,

/  $3


834  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

evident,  another  would  think  it  necessary  to  prove,  and  a  third  would  altogether
deny.119

The  difficulties  of  deductive  reasoning  are  here  admirably  portrayed.  It  might
have  been  expected  that  Reid  would  have  built  up  his  own  philosophy  according
to  the  inductive  plan,  and  would  have  despised  that  assumption  of  first  principles
with  which  he  taunts  his  opponents.  But  it  is  one  of  the  most  curious  things  in
the  history  of  metaphysics  that  Reid,  after  impeaching  the  method  of  Hume,
follows  the  very  same  method  himself.  When  he  is  attacking  the  philosophy  of
Hume,  he  holds  deduction  to  be  wrong.  When  he  is  raising  his  own  philosophy,
he  holds  it  to  be  right.  He  deemed  certain  conclusions  dangerous,  and  he  objects
to  their  advocates  that  they  argued  from  principles  instead  of  from  facts  ;  and
that  they  assumed  themselves  to  be  in  possession  of  the  first  principles  of  truth,
although  people  were  not  agreed  as  to  what  constituted  a  first  principle.  This  is
well  put  and  hard  to  answer.  Strange  however  to  say,  Reid  arrives  at  his  own
conclusions  by  assuming  first  principles  to  an  extent  far  greater  than  had  been
done  by  any  writer  on  the  opposite  side.  From  them  he  argues  ;  his  whole
scheme  is  deductive  ;  and  his  works  scarcely  contain  a  single  instance  of  that
inductive  logic  which,  when  attacking  his  opponents,  he  found  it  convenient  to
recommend.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  a  better  illustration  of  the  peculiar  char-
acter of  the  Scotch  intellect  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  of  the  firm  hold  which
what  may  be  called  the  anti-Baconian  method  had  upon  that  intellect.  Reid
was  a  man  of  considerable  ability,  of  immaculate  honesty,  and  was  deeply  con-
vinced that  it  was  for  the  good  of  society  that  the  prevailing  philosophy
should  be  overthrown.  To  the  performance  of  that  task  he  dedicated  his  long
and  laborious  life  ;  he  saw  that  the  vulnerable  point  of  the  adverse  system  was  its
method  ;  he  indicated  the  deficiencies  of  that  method,  and  declared,  perhaps
wrongly,  but  at  all  events  sincerely,  that  it  could  never  lead  to  truth.  Yet,  and
notwithstanding  all  this,  such  was  the  pressure  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived,  and
so  completely  did  the  force  of  circumstances  shape  his  understanding,  that  in  his
own  works  he  was  unable  to  avoid  that  very  method  of  investigation  which  he
rebuked  in  others.  Indeed,  so  far  from  avoiding  it,  he  was  a  slave  to  it.  The
evidence  of  this  I  will  now  give,  because,  besides  its  importance  for  the  history  of
the  Scotch  mind,  it  is  valuable  as  one  of  many  lessons  which  teach  us  how  we  are
moulded  by  the  society  which  surrounds  us  ;  how  even  our  most  vigorous  actions
are  influenced  by  general  causes  of  which  we  are  often  ignorant,  and  which  few  of  us
care  to  study  ;  and,  finally,  how  lame  and  impotent  we  are  when  as  individuals
we  try  to  stem  the  onward  current,  resisting  the  great  progress  instead  of  aiding
it,  and  vainly  opposing  our  little  wishes  to  that  majestic  course  of  events  which
admits  of  no  interruption,  but  sweeps  on,  grand  and  terrible,  while  generation
after  generation  passes  away,  successively  absorbed  in  one  mighty  vortex.

Directly  Reid,  ceasing  to  refute  the  philosophy  of  Hume,  began  to  construct
his  own  philosophy,  he  succumbed  to  the  prevailing  method.  He  now  assures  us
that  all  reasoning  must  be  from  first  principles,  and  that,  so  far  from  reasoning
to  those  principles,  we  must  at  once  admit  them,  and  make  them  the  basis  of  all
subsequent  arguments.120  Having  admitted  them,  they  become  a  thread  to

119  "  But  yet  there  seems  to  be  great  difference  of  opinions  among  philosophers  about
first  principles.     What  one  takes  to  be  self-evident,  another  labours  to  prove  by  argu-
ments, and  a  third  denies  altogether."     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  218.      "Mr.  Locke
seems  to  think  first  principles  of  very  small  use."  p.  219.

120  "  All  reasoning  must  be  from  first  principles  ;   and  for  first  principles  no  other
reason  can  be  given  but  this,  that  by  the  constitution  of  our  nature  we  are  under  a  necessity
of  assenting  to  them."     Reid's  Inquiry,  p.  140.     "  All  reasoning  is  from  principles."  .   .  .
"  Most  justly,  therefore,  do  such  principles  disdain  to  be  tried  by  reason,  and  laugh  at
all  the  artillery  of  the  logician  when  it  is  directed  against  them."  p.  372.     "  All  know-
ledge got  by  reasoning  must  be  built  upon  first  principles."     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  ii.
p.  220.     "  In  every  branch  of  real  knowledge   there   must  be  first  principles,  whose
truth  is  known  intuitively,  without  reasoning,  either  probable  or  demonstrative.     They
are  not  grounded  on  reasoning,  but  all  reasoning  is  grounded  on  them,"  p.  360.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  835

guide  the  inquirer  through  the  labyrinth  of  thought.121  His  opponents  had  no
right  to  assume  them,  but  he  might  do  so,  because  to  him  they  were  intuitive.122
Whoever  denied  them  was  not  fit  to  be  reasoned  with.123  Indeed,  to  investigate
them,  or  to  seek  to  analyze  them,  was  wrong  as  well  as  foolish,  because  they  were
part  of  the  constitution  of  things  ;  and  of  the  constitution  of  things  no  account
could  be  given,  except  that  such  was  the  will  of  God.124

As  Reid  obtained  his  first  principles  with  such  ease,  and  as  he  carefully  pro-
tected them  by  forbidding  any  attempt  to  resolve  them  into  simpler  elements,
he  was  under  a  strong  temptation  to  multiply  them  almost  indefinitely,  in  order
that,  by  reasoning  from  them,  he  might  raise  a  complete  and  harmonious  system
of  the  human  mind.  To  that  temptation  he  yielded  with  a  readiness  which  is  truly
surprising  when  we  remember  how  he  reproached  his  opponents  with  doing  the  same
thing.  Among  the  numerous  first  principles  which  he  assumes,  not  only  as  unex-
plained, but  as  inexplicable,  are  the  belief  in  Personal  Identity ; 125  the  belief  in  the
External  World  ;  126  the  belief  in  the  Uniformity  of  Nature  ;  127  the  belief  in  the
Existence  of  Life  in  Others  ;  128  the  belief  in  Testimony,129  also  in  the  power  of
distinguishing  truth  from  error,130  and  even  in  the  correspondence  of  the  face
and  voice  to  the  thoughts.131  Of  belief  generally,  he  asserts  that  there  are  many
principles,132  and  he  regrets  that  any  one  should  have  rashly  attempted  to  explain
them.133  Such  things  are  mysterious,  and  not  to  be  pried  into.  We  have  also  other
faculties,  which  being  original  and  indecomposable,  resist  all  inductive  treatment,
and  can  neither  be  resolved  into  simpler  elements  nor  referred  to  more  general
laws.  To  this  class  Reid  assigns  Memory,13*  Perception,135  Desire  of  Self-
Approbation, 13R  and  not  only  Instinct,  but  even  Habit.137  Many  of  our  ideas,


121  "For, when  any  system  is  grounded  upon  first  principles,  and  deduced  regularly
from  them,  we  have  a  thread  to  lead  us  through  the  labyrinth."     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  ii.
p.  225-

122  "I  call  these  '  first  principles,'  because  they  appear  to  me  to  have  in  themselves  an
intuitive  evidence  which  /  cannot  resist"     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  iii.  p.  375.

123  "  If  any  man  should  think  fit  to  deny  that  these  things  are  qualities,  or  that  they
require  any  subject,  /  leave  him  to  enjoy  his  opinion,  as  a  man  who  denies  first  principles,
and  is  not  fit  to  be  reasoned  with."     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  38.

124  "  No  other  account  can  be  given  of  the  constitution  of  things,  but  the  will  of  Him
that  made  them."     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  115.

125  Ibid.,  vol.  i.  pp.  36,  37,  34O,  343  J  vol.  ii.  p.  245.

126  Ibid.,  vol.  i.  pp.  115, 116,  288-299  ;  vol.  ii.  p.  251.

127  Or,  as  he  expresses  it,  "  our  belief  of  the  continuance  of  the  laws  of  nature."     Reid's
Inquiry,  pp.  426—435  ;  also  his  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  305  ;  vol.  ii.  p.  268.

128  Rei'.t's  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  259.

129  Reid's  Inquiry,  p.  422  ;  and  his  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  266.

130  "  Another  first  principle  is,  '  That  the  natural  faculties  by  which  we  distinguish
truth  from  error  are  not  fallacious.'  "     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  256.

131  "  Another  first  principle  I  take  to  be,  *  That  certain  features  of  the  countenance,
sounds  of  the  voice,  and  gestures  of  the  body,  indicate  certain  thoughts  and  dispositions
of  mind.'  "     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  261.     Compare  his  Inquiry,  p.  416.

132  "  \ve  have  taken  notice  of  several  original  principles  of  belief  in  the  course  of  this
inquiry  ;  and  when  other  faculties  of  the  mind  are  examined,  we  shall  find  more,  which
have  not  occurred  in  the  examination  of  the  five  senses."     Reid's  Inquiry,  p.  471.

133  "  And  if  no  philosopher  had  attempted  to  define  and  explain  belief,  some  paradoxes
in  philosophy,  more  incredible  than  ever  were  brought  forth  by  the  most  abject  super-
stition, or  the  most  frantic  enthusiasm,  had  never  seen  the  light."     Reid's  Inquiry,  p.  45.

134  Reid's  Essays,  vol.  i.  pp.  329,  334  ;  vol.  ii.  p.  247.

135  Ibid.,  vol.  i.  pp.  9,  71,  303,  304.
138  Ibid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  60.

137  "I  see  no  reason  to  think  that  we  shall  ever  be  able  to  assign  the  physical  cause,
either  of  instinct  or  of  the  power  of  habit.  Both  seem  to  be  parts  of  our  original  constitu  -
tion.  Their  end  and  use  is  evident ;  but  we  can  assign  no  cause  of  them  but  the  will  of
Him  who  made  us."  Reid's  Essays,  vol.  iii.  p,  119,


836  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

such  as  those  concerning  Space  and  Time,  are  equally  original  ;  13S  and  other  first
principles  there  are,  which  have  not  been  enunciated,  but  from  which  we  may
reason.139  They  therefore  are  the  major  premisses  of  the  argument  ;  no  reason
having  yet  been  given  for  them,  they  must  be  simple  ;  and  not  having  yet  been
explained,  they  are  of  course  inexplicable.140

All  this  is  arbitrary  enough.  Still  in  justice  to  Reid  it  must  be  said  that,
having  made  these  assumptions,  he  displayed  remarkable  ability  in  arguing  from
them,  and  that  in  attacking  the  philosophy  of  his  time  he  subjected  it  to  a  criti-
cism which  has  been  extremely  serviceable.  His  lucidity,  his  dialectic  skill,
and  the  racy  and  masculine  style  in  which  he  wrote,  made  him  a  formidable
opponent  and  secured  to  his  objections  a  respectful  hearing.  To  me,  however,
it  appears  that  notwithstanding  the  attempts  first  of  M.  Cousin,  and  after-
wards of  Sir  William  Hamilton,  to  prop  up  his  declining  reputation,  his  philosophy
as  an  independent  system  is  untenable,  and  will  not  live.  In  this  I  may  be  mis-
taken ;  but  what  is  quite  certain  is  that  nothing  can  be  more  absurd  than  to
suppOoe,  as  some  have  done,  that  he  adopted  the  inductive,  or,  as  it  is  popularly
called,  Baconian  method.  Bacon  indeed  would  have  smiled  at  such  a  disciple,
assuming  all  sorts  of  major  premisses,  taking  general  principles  for  granted  with  the
greatest  recklessness,  and  reserving  his  skill  for  the  task  of  reasoning  from  propo-
sitions for  which  he  had  no  evidence,  except  that  on  a  cursory,  or  as  he  termed  it,
a  common-sense  inspection,  they  appeared  to  be  true.141  This  refusal  to
analyze  preconceived  notions  conies  under  the  head  of  what  Bacon  stigmatized
as  the  anticipatio  natures,  and  which  he  deemed  the  greatest  enemy  of  knowledge,
on  account  of  the  dangerous  confidence  it  places  in  the  spontaneous  and  uncor-
rected  conclusions  of  the  human  mind.  When,  therefore,  we  find  Reid  holding  up
the  Baconian  philosophy  as  a  pattern  which  it  behoved  all  inquirers  to  follow  ;  142
and  when  we  moreover  find  Dugald  Stewart,  who,  though  a  somewhat  super-
ficial thinker,  was  at  all  events  a  careful  writer,  supposing  that  Reid  had  followed


138  "  I  know  of  no  ideas  or  notions  that  have  a  better  claim  to  be  accounted  simple
and  original,  than  those  of  space  and  time."     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  354.

139  "I  do  not  at  all  affirm  that  those  I  have  mentioned  are  all  the  first  principles  from
which  we  may  reason  concerning  contingent  truths.     Such  enumerations,  even  when
made  after  much  reflection,  are  seldom  perfect."     Reid's  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  270.

140  "  Why  sensation  should  compel  our  belief  of  the  present  existence  of  the  thing,
memory  a  belief  of  its  past  existence,  and  imagination  no  belief  at  all,  /  believe  no  philo-
sopher can  give  a  shadow  of  reason,  but  that  such  is  the  nature  of  these  operations.     They
are  all  simple  and  original,  and  therefore  inexplicable  acts  of  the  mind."     Reid's  Inquiry,
p.  40.     "  We  can  give  no  reason  why  the  retina  is,  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  the  only  one
on  which  pictures  made  by  the  rays  of  light  cause  vision  ;    and  therefore  we  must  resolve
this  solely  into  a  law  of  our  constitution."  p.  258.

141  In  a  recent  work  of  distinguished  merit  an  instance  is  given  of  the  loose  manner  in
which  he  took  for  granted  that  certain  phenomena  were  ultimate,  in  order  that,  instead  of
analyzing  them,  he  might  reason  from  them.     "  Dr.  Reid  has  no  hesitation  in  classing
the  voluntary  command  of  our  organs,  that  is,  the  sequence  of  feeling  and  action  implied
in  all  acts  of  will,  among  instincts.      The  power  of  lifting  a  morsel  of  food  to  the  mouth
is,  according  to  him,  an  instinctive  or  pre-established  conjunction  of  the  wish  and  the
deed  ;   that  is  to  say,  the  emotional  state  of  hunger,  coupled  with  the  sight  of  a  piece  of
bread,  is  associated,  through  a  primitive  link  of  the  mental  constitution,  with  the  several
movements  of  the  hand,  arm,  and  mouth,  concerned  in  the  act  of  eating.     This  assertion
of  Dr.  Reid's  may  be  simply  met  by  appealing  to  the  facts.     It  is  not  true  that  human  beings
possess  at  birth  any  voluntary  command  of  their  limbs  whatsoever.     A  babe  of  two
months  old  cannot  use  its  hands  in  obedience  to  its  desires.     The  infant  can  grasp
nothing,  hold  nothing,  can  scarcely  fix  its  eyes  on  anything."     ...      "If  the  more
perfect  command  of  our  voluntary  movements  implied  in  every  art  be  an  acquisition,  so
is  the  less  perfect  command  of  these  movements  that  grows  upon  a  child  during  the  first
year  of  life."     Bain  on  the  Senses  and  the  Intellect.  London,  1855,  pp.  292,  293.

142  See  Reid's  Inquiry,  pp.  436,  446,  as  well  as  other  parts  of  his  works  :    see  also  an
extract  from  one  of  his  letters  to  Dr.  Gregory  in  Stewart's  Biographical  Memoirs,  p.  432,


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY          837

it,143  we  meet  with  fresh  proof  of  how  difficult  it  was  for  Scotchmen  of  the  last  age
to  imbibe  the  true  spirit  of  inductive  logic,  since  they  believed  that  a  system
which  flagrantly  violated  its  rules  had  been  framed  in  strict  accordance  with
them.

Leaving  mental  philosophy,  I  now  come  to  physical  science,  in  which,  if  any-
where, we  might  expect  that  the  inductive  plan  would  predominate,  and  would
triumph  over  the  opposite  or  deductive  one.  How  far  this  was  the  case,  I  will
endeavour  to  ascertain,  by  an  examination  of  the  most  important  discoveries
which  have  been  made  by  Scotchmen  concerning  the  organic  and  inorganic
world.  And  as  my  object  is  merely  to  indicate  the  turn  and  character  of  the
Scotch  mind,  I  shall  avoid  all  details  respecting  the  practical  effects  of  those
discoveries,  and  shall  confine  myself  to  such  a  narration  as  will  exhibit  their
purely  scientific  aspect,  so  as  to  enable  the  reader  to  understand  what  additions
were  made  to  our  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  in  what  way  the  additions
were  made.  The  character  of  each  discovery  and  its  process  will  be  stated,  but
nothing  more.  Neither  here  nor  in  any  part  of  this  Introduction  do  I  pretend  to
investigate  questions  of  practical  utility,  or  to  trace  the  connexion  between  the
discoveries  of  science  and  the  arts  of  life.  That  I  shall  do  in  the  body  of  the  work
itself,  where  I  hope  to  explain  a  number  of  minute  social  events,  many  of  which
are  regarded  as  isolated,  if  not  incongruous.  For  the  present,  I  solely  aim  at
those  broad  principles  which,  by  marking  out  the  epochs  of  thought,  underlie  the
whole  fabric  of  society,  and  which  must  be  clearly  apprehended  before  history
can  cease  to  be  a  mere  empirical  assemblage  of  facts,  of  which  the  scientific  basis
being  unsettled,  the  true  order  and  coherence  must  be  unknown.

Among  the  sciences  which  concern  the  inorganic  world,  the  laws  of  heat  occupy
a  conspicuous  place.  On  the  one  hand  they  are  connected  with  geology,  being
intimately  allied,  and  indeed  necessarily  bound  up  with  every  speculation  re-
specting the  changes  and  present  condition  of  the  crust  of  the  earth.  On  the  other
hand  they  touch  the  great  questions  of  life,  both  animal  and  vegetable  ;  they
have  to  do  with  the  theory  of  species  and  of  race  ;  they  modify  soil,  food  and
organization  ;  and  to  them  we  must  look  for  valuable  help  towards  solving  those
great  problems  in  biology  which,  of  late  years,  have  occupied  the  attention  of  the
boldest  and  most  advanced  philosophers.

Our  present  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  heat  may  be  briefly  stated  as  branching
into  five  fundamental  divisions.  These  are  :  latent  heat  ;  specific  heat  ;  the
conduction  of  heat  ;  the  radiation  of  heat  ;  and  finally,  the  undulatory  theory  of
heat  ;  by  which  last  we  are  gradually  discarding  our  old  material  views,  and  are
accustoming  ourselves  to  look  upon  heat  as  simply  one  of  the  forms  of  force,  all  of
which,  such  as  light,  electricity,  magnetism,  motion,  gravitation,  and  chemical
affinity,  are  constantly  assuming  each  other's  shape,  but  in  their  total  amount

i«  "  The  idea  of  prosecuting  the  study  of  the  human  mind  on  a  plan  analogous  to  that
which  had  been  so  successfully  adopted  in  physics  by  the  followers  of  Lord  Bacon,  if  not
first  conceived  by  Dr.  Reid,  was,  at  least,  first  carried  successfully  into  execution  in  his
writings."  Stewarts  Biographical  Memoirs,  p.  419.  "  The  influence  of  the  general  views
opened  in  the  Novum  Organum,  may  be  traced  in  almost  every  page  of  his  writings  ;  and
indeed  the  circumstance  by  which  they  are  so  strongly  and  characteristically  distinguished
is  that  they  exhibit  the  first  systematical  attempt  to  exemplify,  in  the  study  of  human
nature,  the  same  plan  of  investigation  which  conducted  Newton  to  the  properties  of
light  and  to  the  law  of  gravitation."  p.  421.  From  this  passage  one  might  hazard  a
supposition  that  Dugald  Stewart  did  not  understand  Bacon  much  better  than  he  did
Aristotle  or  Kant.  Of  the  two  last  most  profound  thinkers  he  certainly  knew  little  or
nothing,  except  what  he  gathered  secondhand.  Consequently,  he  underrates  them.
[It  is  hardly  warrantable  to  charge  Stewart  with  not  understanding  Bacon  be-
cause he  credits  Reid  with  trying  to  apply  the  Baconian  method  to  psychology.  If
Reid  did  not  consistently  apply  Bacon's  propounded  method,  he  therein  resembled  Bacon
himself.  "  When  Bacon  can  proceed  no  further  as  an  experimental  investigator  of
nature,  he  becomes,  in  spite  of  his  method,  a  speculative  natural  phi  osopher  "  (Kuno
Fischer,  Francis  Bacon,  Eng.  tr.  1857,  p.  118).— ED.]


838  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

are  incapable  either  of  increase  or  of  diminution.144  This  grand  conception,
which  is  now  placing  the  indestructibility  of  force  on  the  same  ground  as  the
indestructibility  of  matter,  has  an  importance  far  above  its  scientific  value,
considerable  as  that  undoubtedly  is.  For  by  teaching  us  that  nothing  perishes,
but  that  on  the  contrary  the  slightest  movement  of  the  smallest  body  in  the
remotest  region  produces  results  which  are  perpetual,  which  diffuse  themselves
through  all  space,  and  which,  though  they  may  be  metamorphosed,  cannot  be
destroyed,  it  impresses  us  with  such  an  exalted  idea  of  the  regular  and  compulsory
march  of  physical  affairs,  as  must  eventually  influence  other  and  higher  depart-
ments of  inquiry.  Our  habits  of  thought  are  so  connected  and  interwoven,
that  notions  of  law  and  of  the  necessary  concatenation  of  things  can  never  be
introduced  into  one  field  of  speculation  without  affecting  other  fields  which  lie
contiguous  to  it.  When,  therefore,  the  modern  doctrine  of  conservation  of  force  145
becomes  firmly  coupled  with  the  older  doctrine  of  conservation  of  matter,  we  may
rest  assured  that  the  human  mind  will  not  stop  there,  but  will  extend  to  the
study  of  Man  inferences  analogous  to  those  already  admitted  in  the  study  of
Nature.  Having  once  recognized  that  the  condition  of  the  material  universe,
at  any  one  moment,  is  simply  the  result  of  everything  which  has  happened  at

144  The  theory  of  the  indestructibility  of  force  has  been  applied  to  the  law  of  gravita-
tion by  Professor  Faraday  in  his  Discourse  on  the  Conservation  of  Force,  1857  ;  an  essay
full  of  thought  and  power,  and  which  should  be  carefully  studied  by  every  one  who  wishes
to  understand  the  direction  which  the  highest  speculations  of  physical  science  are  now
taking.     I  will  quote  only  one  passage  from  the  opening,  to  give  the  reader  an  idea  of
its  general  scope,  irrespective  of  the  more  special  question  of  gravitation.     "  The  progress
of  the  strict  science  of  modern  times  has  tended  more  and  more  to  produce  the  conviction
that  force  can  neither  be  created  nor  destroyed  ;    and  to  render  daily  more  manifest

the  value  of  the  knowledge  of  that  truth  in  experimental  research."

"  Agreeing  with  those  who  admit  the  conservation  of  force  to  be  a  principle  in  physics,
as  large  and  sure  as  that  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter  or  the  invariability  of  gravity,
I  think  that  no  particular  idea  of  force  has  a  right  to  unlimited  or  unqualified  acceptance,
that  does  not  include  assent  to  it."

145  As  an  illustration  of  this  doctrine  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  the  following
passage  from  one  of  the  most  suggestive  and  clearly  reasoned  books  which  has  been
written  in  this  century  by  an  English  physicist:  "  Wave  your  hand  ;  the  motion  which  has
apparently  ceased  is  taken  up  by  the  air,  from  the  air  by  the  walls  of  the  room,  etc.,  and  so
by  direct  and  re -acting  waves,  continually  comminuted,  but  never  destroyed.     It  is  true
that  at  a  certain  point  we  lose  all  means  of  detecting  the  motion,  from  its  minute  sub-
division, which  defies  our  most  delicate  means  of  appreciation,  but  we  can  indefinitely
extend  our  power  of  detecting  it  accordingly  as  we  confine  its  direction,  or  increase  the
delicacy  of  our  examination.     Thus  if  the  hand  be  moved  in  unconfined  air,  the  motion
of  the  air  would  not  be  sensible  to  a  person  at  a  few  feet  distance  ;  but  if  a  piston  of  the
same  extent  of  surface  as  the  hand  be  moved  with  the  same  rapidity  in  a  tube,  the  blast  of
air  may  be  distinctly  felt  at  several  yards'  distance.     There  is  no  greater  absolute  amount
of  motion  in  the  air  in  the  second  than  in  the  first  case,  but  its  direction  is  restrained,  so  as
to  make  its  means  of  detection  more  facile.     By  carrying  on  this  restraint,  as  in  the  air-
gun,  we  get  a  power  of  detecting  the  motion,  and  of  moving  other  bodies  at  far  greater
distances.     The  puff  of  air  which  would  in  the  air-gun  project  a  bullet  a  quarter  of  a  mile
if  allowed  to  escape  without  its  direction  being  restrained,  as  by  the  bursting  of  a  bladder,
would  not  be  perceptible  at  a  yard's  distance,  though  the  same  absolute  amount  of  motion
be  impressed  on  the  surrounding  air."     Grove's  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces,  London,
i&55>  PP-  24,  25.    In  a  work  now  issuing  from  the  press,  and  still  unfinished,  it  is  suggested,
with  considerable  plausibility,  that  Persistence  of  Force  would  be  a  more  accurate  expres-
sion than  Conservation  of  Force.     See  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  First  Principles,  London,
1861,  p.  251.     The  title  of  this  book  gives  an  inadequate  notion  of  the  importance  of
the  subjects  with  which  it  deals,  and  of  the  reach  and  subtlety  of  thought  which  charac-
terize it.     Though  some  of  the  generalizations  appear  to  me  rather  premature,  no  well-
instructed  and  disciplined  intellect  can  consider  them  without  admiration  of  the  remark-
able powers  displayed  by  their  author.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  839

all  preceding  moments,  and  that  the  most  trivial  disturbance  would  so  violate
the  general  scheme  as  to  render  anarchy  inevitable,*  and  that  to  sever  from
the  total  mass  even  the  minutest  fragment,  would,  by  dislocating  the  structure,
bury  the  whole  in  one  common  ruin,  we,  thus  admitting  the  exquisite  adjustment
of  the  different  parts,  and  discerning,  too,  in  the  very  beauty  and  completeness  of
the  design  the  best  proof  that  it  has  never  been  tampered  with  by  the  Divine
Architect  who  called  it  into  being,  in  whose  Omniscience  both  the  plan  and  the
issue  of  the  plan  resided  with  such  clearness  and  unerring  certainty  that  not  a
stone  in  that  superb  and  symmetrical  edifice  has  been  touched  since  the  founda-
tion of  the  edifice  was  laid,t  are,  by  ascending  to  this  pitch  and  elevation  of
thought,  most  assuredly  advancing  towards  that  far  higher  step  which  it  will
remain  for  our  posterity  to  take,  and  which  will  raise  their  view  to  so  commanding
a  height  as  to  insure  the  utter  rejection  of  those  old  and  eminently  irreligious
dogmas  of  supernatural  interference  with  the  affairs  of  life,  which  superstition
has  invented,  and  ignorance  has  bequeathed,  and  the  present  acceptance  of  which
betokens  the  yet  early  condition  of  our  knowledge,  the  penury  of  our  intellectual
resources,  and  the  inveteracy  of  the  prejudices  in  which  we  are  still  immersed.

It  is,  therefore,  natural  that  the  physical  doctrine  of  indestructibility  applied
to  force  as  well  as  to  matter,  should  be  essentially  a  creation  of  the  present  century,
notwithstanding  a  few  allusions  made  to  it  by  some  earlier  thinkers,  all  of  whom,
however,  groped  vaguely,  and  without  general  purpose.  $  No  preceding  age  was
bold  enough  to  embrace  so  magnificent  a  view  as  a  whole,  nor  had  any  preceding
philosophers  sufficient  acquaintance  with  nature  to  enable  them  to  defend  such
a  conception,  even  had  they  desired  to  entertain  it.  Thus,  in  the  case  now
before  us,  it  is  evident  that  while  heat  was  believed  to  be  material  it  could  not  be
conceived  as  a  force,  and  therefore  no  one  could  grasp  the  theory  of  its  meta-
morphosis into  other  forces  ;  though  there  are  passages  in  Bacon  which  prove
that  he  wished  to  identify  it  with  motion.  It  was  first  necessary  to  abstract
heat  into  a  mere  property  or  affection  of  matter,  and  there  was  no  chance  of
doing  this  until  heat  was  better  understood  in  its  immediate  antecedents,  that  is,
until  by  the  aid  of  mathematics  its  proximate  laws  had  been  generalized.  But
with  the  single  exception  of  Newton,  whose  efforts,  notwithstanding  his  gigantic
powers,  were  on  this  subject  very  unsatisfactory,  and  who  moreover  had  a  decided
leaning  towards  the  material  theory,  no  one  attempted  to  unravel  the  mathe-
matical laws  of  heat  till  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  Lambert
and  Black  began  the  career  which  Prevost  and  Fourier  followed  up.  The  mind,
•having  been  so  slow  in  mastering  the  preliminaries  and  outworks  of  the  inquiry,
was  not  ripe  for  the  far  more  difficult  enterprise  of  idealizing  heat  itself,  and  so
abstracting  it  as  to  strip  it  of  its  material  attributes,  and  leave  to  it  nothing  but
the  speculative  notion  of  an  immaterial  force.

From  these  considerations,  which  were  necessary  to  enable  the  reader  to  appre-
ciate the  value  of  what  was  done  in  Scotland,  it  will  be  seen  how  essential  it  was
that  the  laws  of  the  movement  of  heat  should  be  studied  before  its  nature  was
investigated,  and  before  the  emission  theory  could  be  so  seriously  attacked  as  to
allow  of  the  possibility  of  that  great  doctrine  of  the  indestructibility  of  force
which,  I  make  no  doubt,  is  destined  to  revolutionize  our  habits  of  thought,
and  to  give  to  future  speculations  a  basis  infinitely  wider  than  any  previously
known.  In  regard  to  the  movements  of  heat,  we  owe  the  laws  of  conduction  and
of  radiation  chiefly  to 'France  and  Geneva,  while  the  laws  of  specific  heat  and
those  of  latent  heat  were  discovered  in  Scotland.  The  doctrine  of  specific  heat,
though  interesting,  has  not  the  scientific  importance  which  belongs  to  the  other

[*  This  trope  merely  amounts  to  saying  that  if  two  and  two  made  five,  anarchy  would
be  inevitable.  Anarchy  in  this  sense  is  unthinkable. — ED.]

[f  Buckle  here  appears  to  be  assume  creatio  ex  nihilo,  which  is  of  course  concep-
tually excluded  by  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  Some  would  call  it  an  "  irre-
ligious dogma,"  as  Buckle  does  the  doctrine  of  "supernatural  interference  with  the
affairs  of  life."— ED.]

[J  This  seems  to  make  too  little  of  the  thinking  of  Leibnitz  on  the  subject.  Cp.
Tyndall,  Heat  a  Mode  of  Motion,  6th  ed.  p.  175. — ED.]


840  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

departments  of  this  great  subject  ;  but  the  doctrine  of  latent  heat  is  extremely
curious,  not  only  in  itself,  but  also  on  account  of  the  analogies  it  suggests  with
various  branches  of  physical  inquiry.

What  is  termed  latent  heat  is  exhibited  in  the  following  manner.  If,  in  conse-
quence of  the  application  of  heat,  a  solid  passes  into  a  liquid,  as  ice,  for  instance,
into  water,  the  conversion  occupies  a  longer  time  than  could  be  explained  by  any
theory  which  had  been  propounded  down  to  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.
Neither  was  it  possible  to  explain  how  it  is  that  ice  never  rises  above  the  tem-
perature of  32°  until  it  is  actually  melted,  no  matter  what  the  heat  of  the  adjacent
bodies  may  be.  There  were  no  means  of  accounting  for  these  circumstances.
And  though  practical  men,  being  familiar  with  them,  did  not  wonder  at  them,
they  caused  great  astonishment  among  thinkers,  who  were  accustomed  to
analyze  events,  and  to  seek  a  reason  for  common  and  every -day  occurrences.

Soon  after  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Black,  who  was  then  one  of  the
professors  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  turned  his  attention  to  this  subject.146
He  struck  out  a  theory  which,  being  eminently  original, was  violently  attacked,  but
is  now  generally  admitted.  With  a  boldness  and  reach  of  thought  not  often
equalled,  he  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  whenever  a  body  loses  some  of  its  consis-
tence, as  in  the  case  of  ice  becoming  water,  or  water  becoming  steam,  such  body
receives  an  amount  of  heat  which  our  senses,  though  aided  by  the  most  delicate
thermometer,  can  never  detect.  For  this  heat  is  absorbed  ;  we  lose  all  sight  of
it,  and  it  produces  no  palpable  effect  on  the  material  world,  but  becomes  as  it
were  a  hidden  property.  Black  therefore  called  it  latent  heat,  because,  though  we
conceive  it  as  an  idea,  we  cannot  trace  it  as  a  fact.  The  body  is  properly  speaking
hotter  ;  and  yet  its  temperature  does  not  rise.  Directly  however  the  foregoing
process  is  inverted,  that  is  to  say,  directly  the  steam  is  condensed  into  water,  or
the  water  hardened  into  ice,  the  heat  returns  into  the  world  of  sense  ;  it  ceases  to
be  latent,  and  communicates  itself  to  the  surrounding  objects.  No  new  heat  has
been  created  ;  it  has  indeed  appeared  and  disappeared  so  far  as  our  senses  are  con-
cerned ;  but  our  senses  were  deceived,  since  there  has  in  truth  been  neither
addition  nor  diminution.147  That  this  remarkable  theory  paved  the  way  for
the  doctrine  of  the  indestructibility  of  force,  will  be  obvious  to  whoever  has
examined  the  manner  in  which,  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind,  scientific  con-
ceptions are  generated.  The  process  is  always  so  slow,  that  no  single  discovery
has  ever  been  made,  except  by  the  united  labours  of  several  successive  generations.

146  He  was  appointed  professor  in  1756  ;   and  "  it  was  during  his  residence  in  Glasgow,
between  the  years  1759  an<l  1763,  that  he  brought  to  maturity  those  speculations  con-
cerning the  combination  of  heat  with  matter,  which  had  frequently  occupied  a  portion
of  his  thoughts."     Thomson's  History  of  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  pp.  3i9>  320.

147  Black's  Lectures  on  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  pp.  116,  117  ;    and  in  various  places.     Dr.
Robinson,  the  editor  of  these  Lectures,  says,  p.  513,  "  Nothing  could  be  more  simple  than
his  doctrines  of  latent  heat.     The  experience  of  more  than  a  century  had  made  us  consider
the  thermometer  as  a  sure  and  an  accurate  indicator  of  heat,  and  of  all  its  variations.
We  had  learned  to  distrust  all  others.    Yet  in  the  liquefaction  and  vaporization  of  bodies,
we  had  proofs  uncontrovertible  of  the  entrance  of  heat  into  the  bodies.     And  we  could,
by  suitable  processes,  get  it  out  of  them  again.     Dr.  Black  said  that  it  was  concealed  in
them, — latent, — it  was  as  much  concealed  as  carbonic  acid  is  in  marble,  or  water  in  zeolite,
— it  was  concealed  till  Dr.  Black  detected  it.  He  called  it  Latent  Heat.   He  did  not  mean
by  this  term  that  it  was  a  different  kind  of  heat  from  the  heat  which  expanded  bodies,
but  merely  that  it  was  concealed  from  our  sense  of  heat,  and  from  the  thermometer."
See  also  p.  xxxvii.  :    "  Philosophers  had  long  been  accustomed  to  consider  the  ther-
mometer as  the  surest  means  for  detecting  the  presence  of  heat  or  fire  in  bodies,  and  they
distrusted  all  others."     [The  physicists  of  to-day  state  the  phenomena  in   somewhat
different  terms  from  those  of  Black  and  Buckle.     Thus  Tyndall :     "  According  to  our
present  theory,  the  heat  expended  in  melting  is  consumed  in  overcoming  molecular  attrac-
tions, and  in  conferring  potential  energy  upon  the  separated  molecules  of  their  poles.      It
is  virtually  the  lifting  of  a  weight  "  (Heat  a  Mode  of  Motion,  6th  ed.  p.  191.  Cp.  p.  318).
Tyndall,  strangely  enough,  omits  to  mention  Black  in  his  historic  retrospect. — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY          841

In  estimating,  therefore,  what  each  man  has  done,  we  must  judge  him  not  by  the
errors  he  commits,  but  by  the  truths  he  propounds.  Most  of  his  errors  are  not
really  his  own.  He  inherits  them  from  his  predecessors  ;  and  if  he  throws  some
of  them  off  we  should  be  grateful,  instead  of  being  dissatisfied  that  he  has  not
rejected  all.  Black,  no  doubt,  fell  into  the  error  of  regarding  heat  as  a  material
substance,  which  obeys  the  laws  of  chemical  composition.148  But  this  was  merely
an  hypothesis  which  was  bequeathed  to  him,  and  with  which  the  existing  state  of
thought  forced  him  to  encumber  his  theory.  He  inherited  the  hypothesis,  and
could  not  get  rid  of  his  troublesome  possession.  The  real  service  which  he
rendered  is  that  in  spite  of  that  hypothesis,  which  clung  to  him  to  the  last,  he,
far  more  than  any  of  his  contemporaries,  contributed  towards  the  great  con-
ception of  idealizing  heat,  and  thus  enabled  his  successors  to  admit  it  into  the  class
of  immaterial  and  supersensual  forces.  Once  admitted  into  that  class,  the  list  of
forces  became  complete  ;  and  it  was  comparatively  easy  to  apply  to  the  whole
body  of  force  the  same  notion  of  indestructibility  which  had  previously  been
applied  to  the  whole  body  of  matter.  But  it  was  hardly  possible  to  effect  this
object  while  heat  stood,  as  it  were,  midway  between  force  and  matter,  yielding
opposite  results  to  different  senses  ;  amenable  to  the  touch,  but  invisible  to  the
eye.  What  was  wanting  was  to  remove  it  altogether  out  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the
senses,  and  to  admit  that,  though  we  experience  its  effects,  we  can  only  conceive
its  existence.  Towards  accomplishing  this  Black  took  a  prodigious  stride.  Un-
conscious, perhaps,  of  the  remote  tendency  of  his  own  labours,  he  undermined  that
doctrine  of  material  heat  which  he  seemed  to  support.  For  by  his  advocacy  of  latent
heat  he  taught  that  its  movements  constantly  baffle  not  only  some  of  our  senses, but
all  of  them;  and  that,  while  our  feelings  make  us  believe  that  heat  is  lost, our  intellect
makes  us  believe  that  it  is  not  lost.  Here  we  have  apparent  destructibility,  and
real  indestructibility.  To  assert  that  a  body  received  heat  without  its  temperature
rising,  was  to  make  the  understanding  correct  the  touch,  and  defy  its  dictates.
It  was  a  bold  and  beautiful  paradox,  which  required  courage  as  well  as  insight  to
broach,  and  the  reception  of  which  marks  an  epoch  in  the  human  mind,  because
\  it  was  an  immense  step  towards  idealizing  matter  into  force.  Some  indeed  have
spoken  of  invisible  matter  ;  but  that  is  a  contradiction  in  terms  which  will  never
be  admitted  as  long  as  the  forms  of  speech  remain  unchanged;  Nothing  can  be
invi&ible  except  force,  mind,  and  the  Supreme  Cause  of  all.*  We  must  therefore
ascribe  to  Black  the  signal  merit  that  he  first,  in  the  study  of  heat,  impeached
the  authority  of  the  senses,  and  thereby  laid  the  foundation  of  everything  which
was  afterwards  done.  Besides  the  relation  which  his  discovery  bears  to  the
indestructibility  of  force,  it  is  also  connected  with  one  of  the  most  splendid
achievements  effected  by  this  generation  in  inorganic  physics  ;  namely,  the
establishment  of  the  identity  of  light  and  heat.  To  the  senses,  light  and  heat,
though  in  some  respects  similar,  are  in  most  respects  dissimilar.  Light,  for
instance,  affectX  the  eye  and  not  the  touch.  Heat  affects  the  touch,  but,  under
ordinary  circumstances,  does  not  affect  the  eye.  The  capital  difference,  however,
between  them  is,\that  heat,  unlike  light,  pos'sesses  the  property  of  temperature  ;
and  this  property  is  so  characteristic,  that  until  our  understandings  are  invigo-
rated by  science,  we  cannot  conceive  heat  separated  from  temperature,  but  are
compelled  to  confuse  one  with  the  other.  Directly,  however,  men  began  to  adopt
the  method  followed  by  Black,  and  were  resolved  to  consider  heat  as  super -
sensual,  they  entered  the  road  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  light  and  heat  being

148  "  Fluidity  is  the  consequence  of  a  certain  combination  of  calorific  matter  with  the
substance  of  solid  bodies,"  &c.  Black's  Lectures,  vol.  i.  p.  133.  Compare  p.  192,  and
ihe  remarks  in  Turner's  Chemistry,  1847,  vol.  i.  p.  31,  on  Black's  views  of  the  "  chemical
combination  "  of  heat.  Among  the  backward  chemists,  we  still  find  traces  of  the  idea  of
heat  obeying  chemical  laws.  [Tyndall  (Heat,  p.  38)  mentions  that  in  his  youth  it  was
still  common  even  for  eminent  chemists  to  employ  the  old  conception. — ED.]

[*  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  Buckle  can  on  this  view  dispose  of  the  hypothetical  ether
of  the  physicists. — ED.]


842  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

merely  different  developments  of  the  same  force.  Ignoring  the  effects  of  heat  on
themselves,  or  on  any  part  of  the  creation  which  was  capable  of  feeling  its  tem-
perature, and  would  therefore  be  deceived  by  it,  nothing  was  left  for  them  to  do
but  to  study  its  effects  on  the  inanimate  world.  Then  all  was  revealed.  The
career  of  discovery  was  fairly  opened  ;  and  analogies  between  light  and  heat,
which  even  the  boldest  imagination  had  hardly  suspected,  were  placed  beyond  a
doubt.  To  the  reflection  of  heat,  which  had  been  formerly  known,  were  now
added  the  refraction  of  heat,  its  double  refraction,  its  polarization,  its  depolariza-
tion, its  circular  polarization,  the  interference  of  its  rays,  and  their  retardation  ;
while,  what  is  more  remarkable  than  all,  the  march  of  our  knowledge  on  these
points  was  so  swift  that  before  the  year  1836  had  come  to  a  close  the  chain  of
evidence  was  completed  by  the  empirical  investigations  of  Forbes  and  Melloni,
they  themselves  little  witting  that  everything  which  they  accomplished  was  pre-
pared before  they  were  born,  that  they  were  but  the  servants  and  followers  of
him  who  indicated  the  path  in  which  they  trod,  and  that  their  experiments,  inge-
nious as  they  were,  and  full  of  resource,  were  simply  the  direct  practical  conse-
quence of  one  of  those  magnificent  ideas  which  Scotland  has  thrown  upon  the
world,  and  the  memory  of  which  is  almost  enough  so  to  bribe  the  judgment  as
to  tempt  us  to  forget  that,  while  the  leading  intellects  of  the  nation  were  engaged
in  such  lofty  pursuits,  the  nation  itself,  untouched  by  them,  passed  them  over
with  cold  and  contemptuous  indifference,  being  steeped  in  that  deadening  super-
stition which  turns  a  deaf  ear  to  every  sort  of  reason,  and  will  not  hearken  to  the
voice  of  the  charmer,  charm  he  never  so  wisely.

By  thus  considering  the  descent  and  relationship  of  scientific  conceptions,
we  can  alone  understand  what  we  really  owe  to  Black's  discovery  of  latent  heat.
In  regard  to  the  method  of  the  discovery  little  need  be  said,  since  every  student
of  the  Baconian  philosophy  must  see  that  the  discovery  was  of  a  kind  for  which
none  of  the  maxims  of  that  system  had  provided.  As  latent  heat  escapes  the
senses,  it  could  not  obey  the  rules  of  a  philosophy  which  grounds  all  truth  on
observation  and  experiment.  The  subject  of  the  inquiry  being  supersensual,
there  was  no  scope  for  what  Bacon  called  crucial  experiments  and  separations
of  nature.  The  truth  was  in  the  idea  ;  experiments  therefore  might  illustrate  it,
might  bring  it  up  to  the  surf  ace,  and  so  enable  men  to  grasp  it,  but  could  not  prove
it.  And  this,  which  appears  on  the  very  face  of  the  discovery,  is  confirmed  by
the  express  testimony  of  Dr.  Thomson,  who  knew  Black,  and  was  indeed  one  of
the  most  eminent  of  his  pupils.  We  are  assured  by  this  unimpeachable  witness
that  Black  about  the  year  1759  began  to  speculate  concerning  heat  ;  that  the
result  of  those  speculations  was  the  theory  of  latent  heat  ;  that  he  publicly  taught
that  theory  in  the  year  1761  ;  but  that  the  experiments  which  were  necessary  to
convince  the  world  of  it  were  not  made  till  i?64,U9  though,  as  I  need  hardly  add,
according  to  the  inductive  method,  it  was  a  breach  of  all  the  rules  of  philosophy
to  be  satisfied  with  the  theory  three  years  before  the  experiments  were  made,

149  "  So  much  was  he  convinced  of  this,  that  he  taught  the  doctrine  in  his  lectures  in
1761,  before  he  had  made  a  single  experiment  on  the  subject."  .  .  .  "The
requisite  experiments  were  first  attempted  by  Dr.  Black  in  1764."  Thomson's  History
of  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  324.  See  also  pp.  319,  320  ;  and  on  the  history  of  the  idea  in
Black's  mind  as  early  as  the  year  1754,  see  the  interesting  extracts  from  his  note -books
in  Robinson's  appendix  to  Black's  Lectures,  vol.  i.  pp.  525,  526.

The  statement  by  Dr.  Thomson  refers  to  the  completion,  or  last  stage,  of  the  discovery,
namely,  the  vaporific  combination  of  heat.  But  from  a  letter  which  Black  wrote  to  Watt
in  1780  (Muirhead's  Life  of  Watt,  London,  1859,  p.  303),  it  appears  that  Thomson  has
even  understated  the  question,  and  that  Black,  instead  of  first  teaching  his  theory  in  1761,
taught  it  three  years  earlier,  that  is  six  years  before  the  decisive  experiments  were  made.
"  I  began,"  writes  Black,  "  to  give  the  doctrine  of  latent  heat  in  my  lectures  at  Glasgow
in  the  winter  1757-58,  which,  I  believe,  was  the  first  winter  of  my  lecturing  there  ;  or
if  I  did  not  give  it  that  winter,  I  certainly  gave  it  in  the  1758-59  ;  and  I  have  delivered  it
every  year  since  that  time  in  my  winter  lectures,  which  I  continued  to  give  at  Glasgow
until  winter  1766-67,  when  I  began  to  lecture  in  Edinburgh."


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY          843

and  it  was  a  still  greater  breach  not  only  to  be  satisfied  with  it,  but  to  have  openly
promulgated  it  as  an  original  and  unquestionable  truth,  which  explained,  in  a  new
manner,  the  economy  of  the  material  world.

The  intellect  of  -Black  belonged  to  a  class  which  in  the  eighteenth  century
was  almost  universal  in  Scotland,*  but  was  hardly  to  be  found  in  England,  and
which,  for  want  of  a  better  word,  we  are  compelled  to  call  deductive,  though
fully  admitting  that  even  the  most  deductive  minds  have  in  them  a  large  amount
ot  induction,  since,  indeed,  without  induction  the  common  business  of  life  could
not  be  carried  on.  But  for  the  purposes  of  scientific  classification  we  may  say
that  a  man  or  an  age  is  deductive,  when  the  favourite  process  is  reasoning  from
principles  instead  of  reasoning  to  them,  and  when  there  is  a  tendency  to  under-
rate the  value  of  specific  experience.  That  this  was  the  case  with  the  illustrious
discoverer  of  latent  heat,  we  have  seen,  both  fom  the  nature  of  the  discovery,
and  from  the  decisive  testimony  of  his  friend  and  pupil.  And  a  further  confirma-
tion may  be  found  in  the  circumstance  that,  having  once  propounded  his  great
idea,  he,  instead  of  instituting  a  long  series  of  laborious  experiments  by  which
it  might  be  verified  in  its  different  branches,  preferred  reasoning  from  it  according
to  the  general  maxims  of  dialectic  ;  pushing  it  to  its  logical  consequences,  rather
than  tracking  it  into  regions  where  the  senses  might  either  confirm  or  refute  it.150
By  following  this  process  of  thought,  he  was  led  to  some  beautiful  speculations,
which  are  so  remote  from  experience  that  even  now,  with  all  the  additional
resources  of  our  knowledge,  we  cannot  tell  whether  they  are  true  or  false.  Of
this  kind  were  his  views  respecting  the  causes  of  the  preservation  of  man,  whose
existence  would,  he  thought,  be  endangered,  except  for  the  power  which  heat
possesses  of  lying  latent  and  unobserved.  Thus,  for  example,  when  a  long  and
severe  winter  was  followed  by  sudden  warmth,  it  appeared  natural  that  the  ice
and  snow  should  melt  with"  corresponding  suddenness  ;  and  if  this  were  to
happen,  the  result  would  be  such  terrible  inundations  that  it  would  be  hardly
possible  for  man  to  escape  from  their  ravages.  Even  if  he  escaped,  his  works,
that  is,  the  material  products  of  his  civilization,  would  perish.  From  this
catastrophe  nothing  saves  him  but  the  latent  power  of  heat.  Owing  to  this
power,  directly  the  ice  and  snow  begin  to  melt  at  their  surface,  the  heat  enters
their  structure,  where  a  large  part  of  it  remains  in  abeyance,  and  thus  losing
much  of  itsjpower,  the  process  of  liquefaction  is  arrested.  This  dreadful  agent
is  lulled,  and  becomes  dormant.  It  is  weakened  at  the  outset  of  its  career,  and
is  laid  up,  as  in  a  storehouse,  from  which  it  can  afterwards  emerge,  gradually,
and  with  safety  to  the  human  species.151

In  this  way,  as  summer  advances,  a  vast  magazine  of  heat  is  accumulated,  and
is  preserved  in  the  midst  of  water,  where  it  can  do  man  no  injury,  since,  indeed,
his  senses  are  unable  to  feel  it.  There  the  heat  remains  buried,  until,  in  the
rotation  of  the  seasons,  winter  returns,  and  the  waters  are  congealed  into  ice.
In  the  process  of  congelation,  that  treasury  of  heat,  which  had  been  hidden

150  And  he  distinctly  states  that,  even  in  other  matters,  when  he  did  make  experiments,
their  object  was  to  confirm  theory,  and  not  to  suggest  it.  Thus,  to  give  one  of  many
instances,  in  his  Lectures,  vol.  i.  p.  354,  he  says,  respecting  salts,  "  When  we  examine
the  solidity  of  this  reasoning  by  an  experiment,  we  have  the  pleasure  to  find  facts  agree
exactly  with  the  theory"

isi  See  a  good  summary  of  this  idea  in  Black's  Lectures  on  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  p.  118.
Contrasting  his  theory  of  heat  with  that  previously  received,  he  says,  "  But  were  the
ice  and  snow  to  melt  as  suddenly  as  they  must  necessarily  do,  were  the  former  opinion
of  the  action  of  heat  in  melting  them  well  founded,  the  torrents  and  inundations  would
be  incomparably  more  irresistible  and  dreadful.  They  would  tear  up  and  sweep  away
every  thing,  and  that  so  suddenly,  that  mankind  should  have  great  difficulty  to  escape
from  their  ravages."

[*  Here  again  there  is  a  contradiction  in  the  use  of  terms.  Buckle  had  expressly
stated  that  the  deductive  method  could  not  appeal  to  the  majority.  For  "  almost
universal  "  read  "  normal  among  the  class  of  independent  thinkers."  The  rest  of  the
sentence  seriously  modifies  the  previous  propositions  on  the  subject. — ED.]


844  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

all  the  summer,  reappears  ;  it  ceases  to  be  latent  ;  and  now,  for  the  first  time,
striking  the  senses  of  man,*  it  tempers,  on  his  behalf,  the  severity  of  winter.
The  faster  the  water  freezes,  the  faster  the  heat  is  disengaged  ;  so  that,  by  virtue
of  this  great  law  of  nature,  cold  actually  generates  warmth,  and  the  inclemency
of  every  season,  though  it  cannot  be  hindered,  is  softened  in  proportion  as  the
inclemency  is  more  threatening.152

Thus,  again,  inasmuch  as  heat  becomes  latent,  and  flies  from  the  senses,  not
only  when  ice  is  passing  into  water,  but  also  when  water  is  passing  into  steam,
we  find  in  this  latter  circumstance  one  of  the  reasons  why  man  and  other  animals
can  live  in  the  tropics,  which,  but  for  this,  would  be  deserted.  They  are  con-
stantly suffering  from  the  heat  which  is  collected  in  their  bodies,  and  which,
considered  by  itself,  is  enough  to  destroy  them.  But  this  heat  causes  thirst,
and  they  consequently  swallow  great  quantities  of  fluid,  much  of  which  exudes
through  the  pores  of  the  skin  in  the  form  of  vapour.  And  as,  according  to  the
theory  of  latent  heat,  vapour  cannot  be  produced  without  a  vast  amount  of
heat  being  buried  within  it,  such  vapour  absorbs  and  carries  off  from  the  body
that  which,  if  left  in  the  system,  would  prove  fatal.  To  this  we  must  add  that
in  the  tropics  the  evaporation  of  water  is  necessarily  rapid,  and  the  vapour
which  is  thus  produced  becomes  another  storehouse  of  heat,  and  a  vehicle  by
which  it  is  removed  from  the  earth,  and  prevented  from  unduly  interfering  with
the  economy  of  life.153

152"  Dr.  Black  quickly  perceived  the  vast  importance  of  this  discovery,  and  took  a  plea-
sure in  laying  before  his  students  a  view  of  the  extensive  and  beneficial  effects  of  this  habi-
tude of  heat  in  the  economy  of  nature.  He  made  them  remark  how  by  this  means  there
was  accumulated,  during  the  summer  season,  a  vast  magazine  of  heat,  which,  by  gradually
emerging,  during  congelation,  from  the  water  which  covers  the  face  of  the  earth,  serves
to  temper  the  deadly  cold  of  winter.  Were  it  not  for  this  quantity  of  heat,  amounting
to  145  degrees,  which  emerges  from  every  particle  of  water  as  it  freezes,  and  which
diffuses  itself  through  the  atmosphere,  the  sun  would  no  sooner  go  a  few  degrees  to
the  south  of  the  equator,  than  we  should  feel  all  the  horrors  of  winter."  Robinson's
Preface  to  Black's  Lectures,  vol.  i.  p.  xxxviii.

153  As  I  am  writing  an  account  of  Black's  views,  and  not  a  criticism  of  them,  I  shall  give
them,  without  comment,  in  his  own  words,  and  in  the  words  of  one  of  his  pupils.  "  Here
we  can  also  trace  another  magnificent  train  of  changes,  which  are  nicely  accommodated
to  the  wants  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  globe.  In  the  equatorial  regions,  the  oppressive
heat  of  the  sun  is  prevented  from  a  destructive  accumulation  by  copious  evaporation.
The  waters,  stored  with  their  vaporific  heat,  are  thus  carried  aloft  into  the  atmosphere,
till  the  rarest  of  the  vapour  reaches  the  very  cold  regions  of  the  air,  which  immediately
forms  a  small  portion  of  it  into  a  fleecy  cloud.  This  also  further  tempers  the  scorching
heat  by  its  opacity,  performing  the  acceptable  office  of  a  screen.  From  thence,  the  clouds
are  carried  to  the  inland  countries,  to  form  the  sources  in  the  mountains,  which  are  to
supply  the  numberless  streams  that  water  the  fields.  And,  by  the  steady  operation  of
causes,  which  are  tolerably  uniform,  the  greater  part  of  the  vapours  pass  on  to  the  circ uni-
polar regions,  there  to  descend  in  rains  and  dews  ;  and  in  this  beneficent  conversion  into
rain,  by  the  cold  of  those  regions,  each  particle  of  steam  gives  up  the  700  or  800  degrees
of  heat  which  were  latent  in  it.  These  are  immediately  diffused,  and  soften  the  rigour
of  those  less  comfortable  climates."  ..."  I  am  persuaded  that  the  heat  absorbed  in
spontaneous  evaporation  greatly  contributes  to  enable  animals  to  bear  the  heat  of  the
tropical  climates,  where  the  thermometer  frequently  continues  to  show  the  temperature
of  the  human  body.  Such  heats,  indeed,  are  barely  supportable,  and  enervate  the  animal,
making  it  lazy  and  indolent,  indulging  in  the  most  relaxed  postures,  and  avoiding  every
exertion  of  body  or  mind.  The  inhabitants  are  induced  to  drink  large  draughts  of
diluting  liquors,  which  transude  through  their  pores  most  copiously,  carrying  off  with
them  a  vast  deal  of  this  troublesome  and  exhausting  heat.  There  is  in  the  body  itself  a
continual  laboratory,  or  manufacture  of  heat,  and  were  the  surrounding  air  of  such

[*  This  is  not  warranted  by  the  argument,  which  alleges  simply  modification  of  the
cold.  On  the  other  hand,  the  presence  of  water  sensibly  modifies  winter  temperatures.
(Tyndall,  Heat,  p.  213).— ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  845

From  these  and  many  other  arguments,  all  of  which  were  so  essentially
speculative,  and  dealt  with  such  hidden  processes  of  nature,  that  even  now
we  are  not  justified  either  in  confidently  admitting  them  or  in  positively  denying
them,  Black  was  led  to  that  great  doctrine  of  the  indestructibility  of  heat,154
which,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  has  in  its  connexion  with  the  indestructibility
of  force  a  moral  and  social  importance  even  superior  to  its  scientific  value.
Though  the  evidence  of  which  he  was  possessed  was  far  more  scanty  than  what
we  now  have,  he,  by  the  reach  of  his  commanding  intellect  rather  than  by  the
number  and  accuracy  of  his  facts,  became  so  penetrated  with  a  conviction  of
the  stability  of  physical  affairs,  that  he  not  only  applied  that  idea  to  the  subtle
phenomena  of  heat,  but,  what  was  much  harder  to  do,  he  applied  it  to  cases
in  which  heat  so  entirely  escapes  the  senses  that  man  has  no  cognizance  of  it,
except  through  the  medium  of  the  imagination.  According  to  his  view,  heat
passes  through  an  immense  variety  of  changes,  during  which  it  appears  to  be  lost  ;
changes  which  no  eye  can  ever  see,  which  no  touch  can  ever  experience,  and  which
no  instrument  can  ever  measure.  Still,  and  in  the  midst  of  all  these  changes,
it  remains  intact.  From  it  nothing  can  be  taken,  and  to  it  nothing  can  be  added.
In  one  of  those  fine  passages  of  his  Lectures,  which,  badly  reported  as  they  are,155
bear  the  impress  of  his  elevated  genius,  Black,  after  stating  what  would  probably
happen  if  the  total  amount  of  heat  existing  in  the  world  were  to  be  diminished,
proceeds  to  speculate  on  the  consequences  of  its  being  increased.  Were  it  possible
for  any  power  to  add  to  it  ever  so  little,  it  would  at  once  overstep  its  bounds  ;
the  equilibrium  would  be  disturbed  ;  the  framework  of  affairs  would  be  disjointed.
The  evil  rapidly  increasing,  and  acting  with  accumulated  force,  nothing  would
be  able  to  stop  its  ravages.  It  must  continue  to  gain  ground  till  all  other  prin-
ciples are  absorbed  and  conquered.  Sweeping  on,  unhindered  and  irresistible,
before  it  every  animal  must  perish,  the  whole  vegetable  world  must  disappear,
the  waters  must  pass  into  vapour,  and  the  solid  parts  of  the  globe  be  merged
and  melted,  until  at  length  the  glorious  fabric,  loosened  and  dissolved,  would
fall  away,  and  return  to  that  original  chaos  out  of  which  it  had  been  evolved.156

These,  like  many  other  of  the  speculations  of  this  great  thinker,  will  find  small
favour  with  those  purely  inductive  philosophers,  who  not  only  suppose,  perhaps
rightly,  that  all  our  knowledge  is  in  its  beginning  built  upon  facts,  but  who
countenance  what  seems  to  me  the  very  dangerous  opinion  that  every  increase

a  temperature  as  not  to  carry  it  off,  it  would  soon  accumulate  so  as  to  destroy  life.  The
excessive  perspiration,  supplied  by  diluting  draughts,  performs  the  same  office  as  the
cold  air  without  the  tropics,  in  guarding  us  from  this  fatal  accumulation."  Black's
Lectures,  vol.  i.  pp.  xlvi.  214.  [Black  has  here  invented  his  facts  to  strengthen  his  theory.
The  inhabitants  of  hot  climates  do  not  drink  large  quantities  of  water,  and  those  who
go  from  temperate  to  hot  climates  generally  learn  the  wisdom  of  similar  abstention.
A  state  of  profuse  perspiration  is  not,  as  Black  seems  to  have  supposed,  a  comfortabl
one  for  a  permanency. — ED.]

is*  See  his  strong  protest  against  the  notion  that  heat  is  ever  destroyed,  in  his  Lectures,
vol.  i.  pp.  125,  126,  164,  165.  .

iss  They  were  published  after  his  death  from  such  scanty  materials  that  their  editor,
Dr.  Robinson,  says  (Preface  to  Black's  Lectures,  vol.  i.  p.  x.)  :    "When  I  then  entered
seriously  on  the  task,  I  found  that  the  notes  were  (with  the  exception  of  perhaps  a  score
of  lectures)  in  the  same  imperfect  condition  that  they  had  been  in  from  the  beginning,
consisting  entirely  of  single  leaves  of  paper,  in  octavo,  full  of  erasions,  mterlmings,  ai
alterations  of  every  kind  ;  so  that,  in  many  places,  it  was  not  very  certain  which  of
notes  was  to  be  chosen."

ise  «  On  the  other  hand,  were  the  heat  which  at  present  cherishes  and  enlivens  t
globe,  allowed  to  increase  beyond  the  bounds  at  present  prescribed  to  it ;    beside  t
destruction  of  all  animal  and  vegetable  life,  which  would  be  the  immediate  and  inevitable
consequence,  the  water  would  lose  its  present  form,  and  assume  that  of  .an  elastic  vapour
like  air  ;  the  solid  parts  of  the  globe  would  be  melted  and  confounded  together,  or  mm
with  the  air  and  water  in  smoke  and  vapour^;   and  nature  would  return  to  the  original
chaos."     Black's  Lectures,  vol.  i.  pp.  246,  247,


846  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  knowledge  must  be  preceded  by  an  increase  of  facts.*  To  such  men  it  will
appear  that  Black  had  far  better  have  occupied  himself  in  making  new  observa
tions,  or  devising  new  experiments,  than  in  thus  indulging  his  imagination  in
wild  and  unprofitable  dreams.  They  will  think  that  these  flights  of  fancy  are
suitable,  indeed,  to  the  poet,  but  unworthy  of  that  severe  accuracy,  and  of  that
close  attention  to  facts,  which  ought  to  characterize  a  philosopher.  In  England
especially  there  is  among  physical  inquirers  an  avowed  determination  to  separ-
ate philosophy  from  poetry,  and  to  look  upon  them  not  only  as  different  but
as  hostile.  Among  that  class  of  thinkers,  whose  zeal  and  ability  are  beyond
all  praise,  and  to  whom  we  owe  almost  unbounded  obligations,  there  dots  un-
doubtedly exist  a  very  strong  opinion  that  in  their  own  pursuit  the  imagination
is  extremely  dangerous,  as  leading  to  speculations  of  which  the  basis  is  not  yet
assured,  and  generating  a  desire  to  catch  too  eagerly  at  distant  glimpses  before
the  intermediate  ground  has  been  traversed.  That  the  imagination  has  this
tendency  is  undeniable.  But  they  who  object  to  it  on  this  account,  and  who
would  therefore  divorce  poetry  from  philosophy,  have,  I  apprehend,  taken  a
too  limited  view  of  the  functions  of  the  human  mind,  and  of  the  manner  in
which  truth  is  obtained.  There  is  in  poetry  a  divine  and  prophetic  power,
and  an  insight  into  the  turn  and  aspect  of  things,  which  if  properly  used  would
make  it  the  ally  of  science  instead  of  the  enemy.  By  the  poet,  nature  is  contem-
plated on  the  side  of  the  emotions  ;  by  the  man  of  science,  on  the  side  of  the  under-
standing. But  the  emotions  are  as  much  a  part  of  us  as  the  understanding  ;
they  are  as  truthful  ;  they  are  as  likely  to  be  right.  Though  their  view  is
different,  it  is  not  capricious.  They  obey  fixed  laws  ;  they  follow  an  orderly
and  uniform  course  ;  they  run  in  sequences  ;  they  have  their  logic  and  method
of  inference.  Poetry,  therefore,  is  a  part  of  philosophy,  simply  because  the
emotions  are  a  part  of  the  mind.  If  the  man  of  science  despises  their  teaching,
so  much  the  worse  for  him.  He  has  only  half  his  weapons  ;  his  arsenal  is  unfilled.
Conquests,  indeed,  he  may  make,  because  his  native  strength  may  compensate
the  defects  of  his  equipment.  But  his  success  would  be  more  complete  and  more
rapid  if  he  were  properly  furnished  and  made  ready  for  the  battle.  And  I
cannot  but  regard  as  the  worst  intellectual  symptom  of  this  great  country  what
I  must  venture  to  call  the  imperfect  education  of  physical  philosophers,  as
exhibited  both  in  their  writings  and  in  their  trains  of  thought.  This  is  the
more  serious,  because  they  as  a  body  form  the  most  important  class  in  England
whether  we  look  at  their  ability,  or  at  the  benefits  we  have  received  from  them,
or  at  the  influence  they  are  exercising,  and  are  likely  to  exercise,  over  the  progress
of  society.  It  cannot  however  be  concealed  that  they  display  an  inordinate
respect  for  experiments,  an  undue  love  of  minute  detail,  and  a  disposition  to
overrate  the  inventors  of  new  instruments,  and  the  discoverers  of  new  but  often
insignificant  facts.  Their  predecessors  of  the  seventeenth  century,  by  using
hypotheses  more  boldly,  and  by  indulging  their  imagination  more  frequently,
did  certainly  effect  greater  things,  in  comparison  with  the  then  state  of  know-
ledge, than  our  contemporaries,  with  much  superior  resources,  have  been  able
to  achieve.  The  magnificent  generalizations  of  Newton  and  Harvey  could  never
have  been  completed  in  an  age  absorbed  in  one  unvarying  round  of  experiments
and  observations.  We  are  in  that  predicament  that  our  facts  have  outstripped
our  knowledge,  and  are  now  encumbering  its  march.  The  publications  of  our
scientific  institutions,  and  of  our  scientific  authors,  overflow  with  minute  and
countless  details,  which  perplex  the  judgment,  and  which  no  memory  can  retain.
In  vain  do  we  demand  that  they  should  be  generalized  and  reduced  into  order.
Instead  of  that,  the  heap  continues  to  swell.  We  want  ideas,  and  we  get  more
facts.  We  hear  constantly  of  what  nature  is  doing,  but  we  rarely  hear  of  what
man  is  thinking.  Owing  to  the  indefatigable  industry  of  this  and  the  preceding
century,  we  are  in  possession  of  a  huge  and  incoherent  mass  of  observations,  which
have  been  stored  up  with  great  care,  but  which,  until  they  are  connected  by
some  presiding  idea,  will  be  utterly  useless.  The  most  effective  way  of  turning

[*  "  Fact  "  is,  of  course,  here  understood  to  mean  an  observed  phenomenon  as  distinct
from  an  inferred  law  of  causation. — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  847

them  to  account  would  be  to  give  more  scope  to  the  imagination,  and  incorporate
the  spirit  of  poetry  with  the  spirit  of  science.  By  this  means  our  philosophers
would  double  their  resources,  instead  of  working,  as  now,  maimed,  and  with
only  half  their  nature.  They  fear  the  imagination,  on  account  of  its  tendency
to  form  hasty  theories.  But  surely  all  our  faculties  are  needed  in  the  pursuit
of  truth,  and  we  cannot  be  justified  in  discrediting  any  part  of  the  human  mind.
And  I  can  hardly  doubt  that  one  of  the  reasons  why  we  in  England  made  such
wonderful  discoveries  during  the  seventeenth  century,  was  because  that  century
was  also  the  great  age  of  English  Poetry.  The  two  mightiest  intellects  our
country  has  produced  are  Shakspeare  and  Newton  ;  and  that  Shakspeare  should
have  preceded  Newton  was,  I  believe,  no  casual  or  unmeaning  event.*  Shaks-
peare and  the  poets  sowed  the  seed  which  Newton  and  the  philosophers  reaped.
Discarding  the  old  scholastic  and  theological  pursuits,  they  drew  attention  to
nature,  and  thus  became  the  real  founders  of  all  natural  science.  They  did  even
more  than  this.  They  first  impregnated  the  mind  of  England  with  bold  and
lofty  conceptions.  They  taught  the  men  of  their  generation  to  crave  after  the
unseen.  They  taught  them  to  pine  for  the  ideal,  and  to  rise  above  the  visible
world  of  sense.  In  this  way,  by  cultivating  the  emotions,  they  opened  one  of
the  paths  which  lead  to  truth.  The  impetus  which  they  communicated  survived
their  own  day,  and  like  all  great  movements  was  felt  in  every  department
of  thought.  But  now  it  is  gone  ;  and,  unless  I  am  greatly  mistaken,  physical
science  is  at  present  suffering  from  its  absence.  Since  the  seventeenth  century
we  have  had  no  poet  of  the  highest  order,  though  Shelley,  had  he  lived,  would
perhaps  have  become  one.  He  had  something  of  that  burning  passion,  that
sacred  fire,  which  kindles  the  soul,  as  though  it  came  fresh  from  the  altar  of  the
gods.  But  he  was  cut  off  in  his  early  prime,  when  his  splendid  genius  was  still
in  its  dawn.  If  we  except  his  immature,  though  marvellous,  efforts,  we  may
assuredly  say  that  for  nearly  two  hundred  years  England  has  produced  no
poetry  which  bears  those  unmistakable  marks  of  inspiration  which  we  find  in
Spenser,  in  Shakspeare,  and  in  Milton. f  The  result  is  that  we,  separated  by  so
long  an  interval  from  those  great  feeders  of  the  imagination  who  nurtured  our
ancestors,  and  being  unable  to  enter  fully  into  the  feelings  of  poets,  who  wrote
when  nearly  all  opinions,  and  therefore  nearly  all  forms  of  emotion,  were  very
different  to  what  they  now  are,  cannot  possibly  sympathize  with  those  immortal
productions  so  closely  as  their  contemporaries  did.  The  noble  English  poetry
of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  is  read  more  than  ever,  but  it  does  not
colour  our  thoughts  ;  it  does  not  shape  our  understandings  as  it  shaped  the  under-
standings of  our  forefathers.  Between  us  and  them  is  a  chasm  which  we  cannot
entirely  bridge.  We  are  so  far  removed  from  the  associations  amid  which  those
poems  were  composed,  that  they  do  not  flash  upon  us  with  that  reality  and
distinctness  of  aim  which  they  would  have  done  had  we  lived  when  they  were
written.  Their  garb  is  strange,  and  belongs  to  another  time.  Not  merely  their
dialect  and  their  dress,  but  their  very  complexion  and  their  inmost  sentiments,
tell  of  bygone  days  of  which  we  have  no  firm  hold.  There  is  no  doubt  a  certain
ornamental  culture  which  the  most  highly  educated  persons  receive  from  the
literature  of  the  past,  and  by  which  they  sometimes  refine  their  taste,  and  some-
times enlarge  their  ideas.  But  the  real  culture  of  a  great  people,  that  which
supplies  each  generation  with  its  principal  strength,  consists  of  what  it  learnt
from  the  generation  immediately  preceding.  Though  we  are  often  unconscious
of  the  process,  we  build  nearly  all  our  conceptions  on  the  basis  recognized  by
those  who  went  just  before  us.  Our  closest  contact  is  not  with  our  forefathers,
but  with  our  fathers.  To  them  we  are  linked  by  a  genuine  affinity,  which,  being


[*  The  only  meaning  attachable  to  this  phrase  is  that  Shakspeare's  work  had  a  direct
or  indirect  effect  on  Newton's  thought.  For  this  there  is  no  evidence  whatever,  though
Newton  seems  to  have  read  Milton. — ED.]

[f  This  surprising  judgment,  which  rules  out  the  poetry  of  Wordsworth,  Coleridge,
and  Keats,  and  all  that  Tennyson  and  Browning  had  produced  down  to  1860,  is  discussed
ia  the  editor's  Buckle  and  his  Critics,  pp.  531-533- — ED.]


848  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

spontaneous,  costs  us  no  effort,  and  from  which  indeed  we  cannot  escape.  We
inherit  their  notions,  and  modify  them,  just  as  they  modified  the  notions  of  their
predecessors.  At  each  successive  modification  something  is  lost  and  something
is  gained,  until  at  length  the  original  type  almost  disappears.  Therefore  it  is,
that  ideas  entertained  several  generations  ago  bear  about  the  same  relation
to  us  as  ideas  preserved  in  a  foreign  literature.  In  both  cases,  the  ideas  may
adorn  our  knowledge,  but  they  are  never  so  thoroughly  incorporated  with  our
minds  as  to  be  the  knowledge  itself.  The  assimilation  is  incomplete,  because
the  sympathy  is  incomplete.  We  have  now  no  great  poets  ;  and  our  poverty
in  this  respect  is  not  compensated  by  the  fact  that  we  once  had  them,  and  that
we  may  and  do  read  their  works.  The  movement  has  gone  by  ;  the  charm  is
broken  ;  the  bond  of  union,  though  not  cancelled,  is  seriously  weakened.  Hence
our  age,  great  as  it  is,  and  in  nearly  all  respects  greater  than  any  the  world
has  yet  seen,  has,  notwithstanding  its  large  and  generous  sentiments,  its  un-
exampled toleration,  its  love  of  liberty,  and  its  profuse  and  almost  reckless
charity,  a  certain  material,  unimaginative,  and  unheroic  character,  which  has
made  several  observers  tremble  for  the  future.  So  far  as  I  can  understand  our
present  condition,  I  do  not  participate  in  these  fears,  because  I  believe  that  the
good  we  have  already  gained  is  beyond  all  comparison  greater  than  what  we
have  lost.  But  that  something  has  been  lost  is  unquestionable.  We  have  lost
much  of  that  imagination  which,  though  in  practical  life  it  often  misleads,  is
in  speculative  life  one  of  the  highest  of  all  qualities,  being  suggestive  as  well  as
creative.  Even  practically  we  should  cherish  it,  because  the  commerce  of  the
affections  mainly  depends  on  it.  It  is,  however,  declining  ;  while  at  the  same
time  the  increasing  refinement  of  society  accustoms  us  more  and  more  to  suppress
our  emotions,  lest  they  should  be  disagreeable  to  others.  And  as  the  play  of  the
emotions  is  the  chief  study  of  the  poet,  we  see  in  this  circumstance  another
reason  which  makes  it  difficult  to  rival  that  great  body  of  poetry  which  our
ancestors  possessed.  Therefore  it  is  doubly  incumbent  on  physical  philosophers
to  cultivate  the  imagination.  It  is  a  duty  they  owe  to  their  own  pursuits,  which
would  be  enriched  and  invigorated  by  such  an  enlargement  of  their  resources.
It  is  also  a  duty  which  they  owe  to  society  in  general ;  since  they,  whose  intellec-
tual influence  is  already  greater  than  that  of  any  other  class,  and  whose  authority
is  perceptibly  on  the  increase,  might  have  power  enough  to  correct  the  most
serious  deficiency  of  the  present  age,  and  to  make  us  some  amends  for  our  in-
ability to  produce  such  a  splendid  imaginative  literature  as  that  which  our  fore-
fathers created,  and  in  which  the  choicest  spirits  of  the  seventeenth  century
did,  if  I  may  so  say,  dwell  and  have  their  being.

If,  therefore,  Black  had  done  nothing  more  than  set  the  example  of  a  great
physical  philosopher  giving  free  scope  to  the  imagination,  he  would  have  con-
ferred upon  us  a  boon,  the  magnitude  of  which  it  is  not  easy  to  overrate.  And  it
is  very  remarkable  that,  before  he  died,  that  department  of  inorganic  physics
which' he  cultivated  with  such  success  was  taken  up  by  another  eminent  Scotch-
man, who  pursued  exactly  the  same  plan,  though  with  somewhat  inferior  genius.
I  allude,  of  course,  to  Leslie,  whose  researches  on  heat  are  well  known  to  those
who  are  occupied  with  this  subject  ;  while,  for  our  present  purpose,  they  are
chiefly  interesting  as  illustrating  that  peculiar  method  which  in  the  eighteenth
century  seemed  essential  to  the  Scotch  mind.

About  thirty  years  after  Black  propounded  his  famous  theory  of  heat,  Leslie
began  to  investigate  the  same  topic,  and,  in  1804,  published  a  special  dissertation
upon  it.157  In  that  work,  and  in  some  papers  in  his  Treatises  on  Philosophy,  are

157  Mr.  Napier,  in  his  Memoirs  of  Leslie,  pp.  16,  17  (prefixed  to  Leslie's  Treatises  on
Philosophy,  Edinb.  1838),  says  that  he  "  composed  the  bulk  of  his  celebrated  work  on
Heat  in  the  years  1801  and  1802  ;  "  but  that  in  1793  he  propounded  "  some  of  its
theoretical  opinions,  as  well  as  the  germs  of  its  discoveries."  It  appears,  however,  from
his  own  statement,  that  he  was  making  experiments  on  heat,  at  all  events,  as  early  as
1791.  See  Leslie's  Experimental  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Propagation  of  Heat,  London,
1804,  p.  409.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  849

contained  his  views,  several  of  which  are  now  known  to  be  inaccurate,158  though
some  are  of  sufficient  value  to  mark  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  science.  Such
was  his  generalization  respecting  the  connexion  between  the  radiation  of  heat
and  its  reflection  :  bodies  which  reflect  it  most,  radiating  it  least,  and  those
which  radiate  it  most,  reflecting  it  least.  Such,  too,  was  another  wide  conclusion,
which  the  best  inquirers  have  since  confirmed,  namely,  that  while  heat  is  ra-
diating from  a  body,  the  intensity  of  each  ray  is  as  the  sine  of  the  angle  which
it  makes  with  the  surface  of  that  body.

These  were  important  steps,  and  they  were  the  result  of  experiments  preceded
by  large  and  judicious  hypotheses.  In  relation,  however,  to  the  economy  of
nature,  considered  as  a  whole,  they  are  of  small  account,  in  comparison  with
what  Leslie  effected  towards  consolidating  the  great  idea  of  light  and  heat  being
identical,  and  thus  preparing  his  contemporaries  for  that  theory  of  the  inter-
change of  forces,  which  is  the  capital  intellectual  achievement  of  the  nineteenth
century.  But  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that,  with  all  his  ardour,  he  could  not
go  beyond  a  certain  length.  He  was  so  hampered  by  the  material  tendencies  of
his  time  that  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  conceive  heat  as  a  purely  super-
sensual  force,  of  which  temperature  was  the  external  manifestation.159  For  this
the  age  was  barely  ripe.  We  accordingly  find  thim  asserting  that  heat  is  an
elastic  fluid,  extremely  subtle,  but  still  a  fluid.160  '  His  real  merit  was  that,  not-
withstanding the  difficulties  which  beset  his  path,  he  firmly  seized  the  great
truth  that  there  is  no  fundamental  difference  between  light  and  heat.  As  he
puts  it,  each  is  merely  a  metamorphosis  of  the  other.  Heat  is  light  in  complete
repose.  Light  is  heat  in  rapid  motion.  Directly  light  is  combined  with  a  body,
it  becomes  heat  ;  but  when  it  is  thrown  off  from  that  body,  it  again  becomes
light,  KM-

Whether  this  is  true  or  false,  we  cannot  tell ;  *  and  many  years,  perhaps
many  generations,  will  have  to  elapse  before  we  shall  be  able  to  tell.  But
the  service  rendered  by  Leslie  is  quite  independent  of  the  accuracy  of  his  opinion
as  to  the  manner  in  which  light  and  heat  are  interchanged.  That  they  are
interchanged  is  the  essential  and  paramount  idea.  And  we  must  remember
that  he  made  this  idea  the  basis  of  his  researches  at  a  period  when  some  very
important  facts,  or,  I  should  rather  say,  some  very  conspicuous  facts,  were
opposed  to  it  ;  while  the  main  facts  which  favoured  it  were  still  unknown.
When  he  composed  his  work,  the  analogies  between  light  and  heat  with  which
we  are  now  acquainted  had  not  been  discovered  ;  no  one  being  aware  that  double
refraction,  polarization,  and  other  curious  properties  are  common  to  both.  To
grasp  so  wide  a  truth  in  the  face  of  such  obstacles  was  a  rare  stroke  of  sagacity.
But  on  account  of  the  obstacles,  the  inductive  mind  of  England  refused  to
receive  the  truth,  as  it  was  not  generalized  from  a  survey  of  all  the  facts.  And
Leslie,  unfortunately  for  himself,  died  too  soon  to  enjoy  the  exquisite  pleasure

158  For  specimens  of  some  of  his  most  indefensible  speculations,  see  Leslie's  Treatises
on  Philosophy,  pp.  38,  43.

i88  Though  he  clearly  distinguishes  between  the  two.  "  It  is  almost  superfluous  to.
remark,  that  the  term  heat  is  of  ambiguous  import,  denoting  either  a  certain  sensation,,
or  the  external  cause  which  excites  it."  Leslie  on  Heat,  p.  137.

160  "  Heat  is  an  elastic  fluid  extremely  subtle  and  active."  Leslie  on  Heat,  p..  150..
At  p.  31,  "  Calorific  and  frigorific  fluid."  See  also  pp.  143,  144  ;  and  the  attempt  to.
measure  its  elasticity,  in  pp.  177,  178.

i«i  "  Heat  is  only  light  in  the  state  of  combination."  Leslie  on  Heat,  p.  162.  "  Heat
in  the  state  of  emission  constitutes  light."  p.  174-  "  It  is,  therefore,  the  same  subtle
matter,  that,  according  to  its  different  modes  of  existence,  constitutes  either  heat  or
light.  Projected  with  rapid  celerity,  it  forms  light ;  in  the  state  of  combination  with
bodies  it  acts  as  heat."  p.  188.  See  also  p.  403,  "  Different  states  of  the  same  identical
substance."

[.*  It  has  just  been  asserted,  a  few  lines  above,  that  it  is  a  "  great  truth."  It  is  clear
that  Buckle  here  wrote  in  an  increasingly  disturbed  state  of  mind. — ED.]

5,4


850  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

of  witnessing  the  empirical  corroboration  of  his  doctrine  by  direct  experiment,
although  he  clearly  perceived  that  the  march  of  discovery,  in  reference  to  polariza-
tion, was  leading  the  scientific  world  to  a  point  of  which  his  keen  eye  had  dis-
cerned the  nature,  when,  to  others,  it  was  an  almost  invisible  speck,  dim  in  the
distant  offing.162

In  regard  to  the  method  adopted  by  Leslie,  he  assures  us  that  in  assuming
the  principles  from  which  he  reasoned  he  derived  great  aid  from  poetry  ;  for
he  knew  that  the  poets  are,  after  their  own  manner,  consummate  observers,
and  that  their  united  observations  form  a  treasury  of  truths  which  are  nowise
inferior  to  the  truths  of  science,  and  of  which  science  must  either  avail  herself,
or  else  suffer  from  neglecting  them.163  To  apply  these  truths  rightly,  and  to  fit
them  to  the  exigencies  of  physical  inquiry,  is  no  doubt  a  most  difficult  task,
since  it  involves  nothing  less  than  holding  the  balance  between  the  conflicting
claims  of  the  emotions  and  the  understanding.  Like  all  great  enterprises,  it
is  full  of  danger,  and  if  undertaken  by  an  ordinary  mind  would  certainly  fail.
But  there  are  two  circumstances  which  make  it  less  dangerous  in  our  time  than
in  any  earlier  period.  The  first  circumstance  is  that  the  supremacy  of  the  human
understanding,  and  its  right  to  judge  all  theories  for  itself ,  is  now  more  generally
admitted  than  ever  ;  so  that  there  can  be  little  fear  of  our  leaning  to  the  opposite
side,  and  allowing  poetry  to  encroach  on  science.  The  other  circumstance  is
that  our  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature  is  much  greater  than  that  possessed  by
any  previous  age  ;  and  there  is  consequently  less  risk  of  the  imagination  leading
us  into  error,  inasmuch  as  we  have  a  large  number  of  well -ascertained  truths,
which  we  can  confront  with  every  speculation,  no  matter  how  plausible  or
ingenious  it  may  appear.

On  both  these  grounds,  Leslie  was,  I  apprehend,  justified  in  taking  the  course
which  he  did.  At  all  events,  it  is  certain  that  by  following  it  he  came  nearer
than  would  otherwise  have  been  possible  to  the  conceptions  of  the  most  ad-
vanced scientific  thinkers  of  our  day.  He  distinctly  recognized  that  in  the
material  world  there  is  neither  break  nor  pause  ;  so  that  what  we  call  the
divisions  of  nature  have  no  existence  except  in  our  minds.164  He  was  even
almost  prepared  to  do  away  with  that  imaginary  difference  between  the  organic
and  inorganic  world  which  still  troubles  many  of  our  physicists,  and  prevents
them  from  comprehending  the  unity  and  uninterrupted  march  of  affairs.  They,
with  their  old  notions  of  inanimate  matter,  are  unable  to  see  that  all  matter  is


162  In  1814,  that  is  ten  years  after  his  great  work  was  published,  and  about  twenty
years  after  it  was  begun,  he  writes  from  Paris  :  "  My  book  on  heat  is  better  known  "  here
"  than  in  England.  I  was  even  reminded  of  some  passages  in  it  which  in  England  were
considered  as  fanciful,  but  which  the  recent  discoveries  on  the  polarity  of  light  have
confirmed."  Napier's  Memoirs  of  Leslie,  p.  28,  prefixed  to  Leslie's  Philosophical  Treatises,
edit.  Edinb.  1838.  Leslie  died  in  1832  (p.  40)  ;  and  the  decisive  experiments  of  Forbes
and  Melloni  were  made  between  1834  and  1836.

tea  "  The  easiest  mode  of  conceiving  the  subject,  is  to  consider  the  heat  that  permeates
all  bodies,  and  unites  .with  them  in  various  proportions,  as  merely  the  subtle  fluid  of  light
in  a  state  of  combination.  When  forcibly  discharged,  or  suddenly  elicited  from  any
substance,  it  again  resumes  its  radiant  splendour."  ..."  The  same  notion  was  em-
braced by  the  poets,  and  gives  sublimity  to  their  finest  odes."  ..."  Those  poetical
images  which  have  descended  to  our  own  times  were  hence  founded  on  a  close  observation
of  nature.  Modern  philosophy  need  not  disdain  to  adopt  them,  and  has  only  to  expand
and  reduce  to  precision  the  original  conceptions."  Leslie's  Treatises  on  Philosophy,
pp.  308,  309.  Again,  at  p.  416  :  "  This  is  not  the  first  occasion  in  which  we  have  to
admire,  through  the  veil  of  poetical  imagery,  the  sagacity  and  penetration  of  those  early
sages.  It  would  be  weakness  to  expect  nice  conclusions  in  the  infancy  of  science  ;  but
it  is  arrogant  presumption  to  regard  all  the  efforts  of  unaided  genius  with  disdain."

164  "  \ye  should  recollect  that  in  all  her  productions  Nature  exhibits  a  chain  of  per-
petual  gradation,  and  that  the  systematic  divisions  and  limitations  are  entirely  artificial,
and  designed  merely  to  assist,'  the  memory  and  facilitate  our  conceptions."  Leslie  on  Heqt.
p.  506.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  851

living,  and  that  what  we  term  death  is  a  mere  expression  by  which  we  signify  a
fresh  form  of  life.  Towards  this  conclusion  all  our  knowledge  is  now  converging  ;
and  it  is  certainly  no  small  merit  in  Leslie  that  he,  sixty  years  ago,  when  really
comprehensive  views,  embracing  the  whole  creation,  were  scarcely  known  among
scientific  men,  should  have  strongly  insisted  that  all  forces  are  of  the  same  kind,
and  that  we  have  no  right  to  distinguish  between  them,  as  if  some  were  living
and  others  were  dead.165

We  owe  much  to  him  by  whom  such  views  were  advocated.  But  they  were  then,
and  in  a  certain  though  far  smaller  degree  they  are  now,  so  out  of  the  domain
of  physical  experience  that  Leslie  never  could  have  obtained  them  by  generalizing
in  the  way  which  the  inductive  philosophy  enjoins.  His  great  work  on  heat  was
executed  as  well  as  conceived  on  the  opposite  plan  ;166  and  his  prejudices  on
this  point  were  so  strong  that  we  are  assured  by  his  biographer  that  he  would
allow  no  merit  to  Bacon,  who  organised  the  inductive  method  into  a  system,  and
to  whose  authority  we  in  England  pay  a  willing,  and  I  had  almost  said  a  servile,
homage.167

Another  curious  illustration  of  the  skill  with  which  the  Scotch  mind,  when
once  possessed  of  a  principle,  worked  from  it  deductively,  appears  in  the  geo-
logical speculations  of  Hutton,  late  in  the  eighteenth  century.  It  is  well  known
that  the  two  great  powers  which  have  altered  the  condition  of  our  planet,  and
made  it  what  it  is,  are  fire  and  water.  Each  has  played  so  considerable  a  part
that  we  can  hardly  measure  their  relative  importance.  Judging,  however,  from
the  present  appearance  of  the  crust  of  the  earth,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that
the  older  rocks  are  chiefly  the  result  of  fusion,  and  that  the  younger  are  aqueous
deposits.  It  is  therefore  not  unlikely  that,  in  the  order  in  which  the  energies
of  nature  have  unfolded  themselves,  fire  preceded  water,  and  was  its  necessary
precursor.168  But  all  that  we  are  as  yet  justified  in  asserting  is  that  these

IBS  "  All  forces  are  radically  of  the  same  kind,  and  the  distinction  of  them  into  living
and  dead  is  not  grounded  on  just  principles."  Leslie  on  Heat,  p.  133.  Compare  p.  299  :
"  We  shall  perhaps  find,  that  this  prejudice,  like  many  others,  has  some  semblance  of
truth  ;  and  that  even  dead  or  inorganic  substances  must,  in  their  recondite  arrangements,
exert  such  varying  energies,  and  so  like  sensation  itself,  as  if  fully  unveiled  to  our  eyes,
could  not  fail  to  strike  us  with  wonder  and  surprise."

166  Mr.  Napier,  in  his  Life  of  Leslie,  p.  17,  says  of  it,  very  gravely,  "  Its  hypotheses  are
not  warranted  by  the  sober  maxims  of  inductive  logic."

167  "  Notwithstanding  the  contrary  testimony,  explicitly  recorded  by  the  founders  of
the  English  experimental  school,  he  denied  all  merit  and  influence  to  the  immortal
delineator  of  the  inductive  logic."  Napier's  Life  of  Leslie,  p.  42.

168  The  supposition  that  volcanic  agencies  were  formerly  more  potent  than  they  are  now
is  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  the  scientific  doctrine  of  uniformity,  though  it  is  generally
considered  to  be  so.     It  is  one  thing  to  assert  the  uniformity  of  natural  laws  ;  it  is  quite
another  thing  to  assert  the  uniformity  of  natural  causes.     Heat  may  once  have  produced
far  greater  effects  than  it  can  do  at  present,  ^nd  yet  the  laws  of  nature  be  unchanged,
and  the  order  and  sequence  of  events  unbroken.     What  I  would  venture  to  suggest  to
geologists  is  that  they  have  not  taken  sufficiently  into  account  the  theory  of  the  inter-
change of  forces,  which  seems  to  offer  a  solution  of  at  least  part  of  the  problem.      For
by  that  theory  a  large  portion  of  the  heat  which  formerly  existed  may  have  been  meta-
morphosed into  other  forces,  such  as  light,  chemical  affinity,  and  gravitation.    The  increase
of  these  forces  consequent  on  the  diminution  of   heat  would  have  facilitated  the  con-
solidation of  matter  ;  and  until  such  forces  possessed  a  certain  energy,  water,  which
afterwards  became  so  prominent,  could  not  have  been  formed.     If  the  power  of  chemical
affinity,  for  instance,  were  much  weaker  than  it  is,  water  would  assuredly  resolve  itself
into  its  component  gases.    Without  wishing  to  lay  too  much  stress  on  this  speculation,  I
submit  it  to  the  consideration  of  competent  judges,  because  I  am  convinced  that  any
hypothesis  not  absolutely  inconsistent  with  the  known  laws  of   nature   is  preferable  to
that  dogma  of  interference  which  what  may  be  called  the  miraculous  school  of  geologists
wish  to  foist  upon  us,  in  utter  ignorance  of  its  incompatibility  with  the  conclusions  of
the  most  advanced  minds  in  other  departments  of  thought.  '

The  remarks  in  Sir  Roderick  Murchison's  great  work  (Siluria,  London,  1854,  pp.  475,


852  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

two  causes,  the  igneous  and  the  aqueous,  were  in  full  operation  long  before  man
existed,  and  are  still  busily  working.  Perhaps  they  are  preparing  another
change  in  our  habitation,  suitable  to  new  forms  of  life,  as  superior  to  man  as
man  is  superior  to  the  beings  who  occupied  the  earth  before  his  time.  Be  this
as  it  may,  fire  and  water  are  the  two  most  important  and  most  general  principles
with  which  geologists  are  concerned  ;  and  though  on  a  superficial  view  each  is
extremely  destructive,  it  is  certain  that  they  can  really  destroy  nothing,  but  can
only  decompose  and  recompose  ;  shifting  the  arrangements  of  nature,  but  leaving
nature  herself  intact.  Whether  one  of  these  elements  will  ever  again  get  the
upper  hand  of  its  opponent  is  a  speculation  of  extreme  interest.  For  there  is
reason  to  suspect  that  at  one  period  fire  was  more  active  than  water,  and  that
at  another  period  water  was  more  active  than  fire.  That  they  are  engaged  in
incessant  warfare  is  a  fact  with  which  geologists  are  perfectly  familiar,  though
in  this  as  in  many  other  cases  the  poets  were  the  first  to  discern  the  truth.  To
the  eye  of  the  geologist,  water  is  constantly  labouring  to  reduce  all  the  inequalities
of  the  earth  to  a  single  level  ;  while  fire,  with  its  volcanic  action,  is  equally  busy
in  restoring  those  inequalities,  by  throwing  up  matter  to  the  surface,  and  in
various  ways  disturbing  the  crust  of  the  globe.169  And  as  the  beauty  of  the
material  world  mainly  depends  on  that  irregularity  of  aspect  without  which
scenery  would  have  presented  no  variety  of  form,  and  but  little  variety  of  colour,
we  shall,  I  think,  not  be  guilty  of  too  refined  a  subtlety  if  we  say  that  fire,  by
saving  us  from  the  monotony  to  which  water  would  have  condemned  us,  has  been
the  remote  cause  of  that  development  of  the  imagination  which  has  given  us  our
poetry,  our  painting,  and  our  sculpture,  and  has  thereby  not  only  wonderfully
increased  the  pleasures  of  life,  but  has  imparted  to  the  human  mind  a  complete-
ness of  function  to  which,  in  the  absence  of  such  a  stimulus,  it  could  not  have
attained.

i*  When  geologists  began  to  study  the  laws  according  to  which  fire  and  water  had
altered  the  structure  of  the  earth,  two  different  courses  were  open  to  them,
namely  the  inductive  and  the  deductive.  The  deductive  plan  was  to  compute
the  probable  consequences  of  fire  and  water,  by  reasoning  from  the  sciences  of
thermotics  and  hydro -dynamics  ;  tracking  each  element  by  an  independent
line  of  argument,  and  afterwards  co-ordinating  into  a  single  scheme  the  results
which  had  been  separately  obtained.  It  would  then  only  remain  to  inquire  how
far  this  imaginary  scheme  harmonized  with  the  actual  state  of  things  ;  and  if  the
discrepancy  between  the  ideal  and  the  actual  were  not  greater  than  might  fairly
be  expected  from  the  perturbations  produced  by  other  causes,  the  ratiocination
would  be  complete,  and  geology  would  in  its  inorganic  department  become  a

476)  on  the  "  grander  intensity  of  former  causation,"  and  on  the  difficulty  this  opposes  to
the  "  uniformitarians,"  apply  merely  to  those  who  take  for  granted  that  each  force  has
always  been  equally  powerful :  they  do  not  affect  those  who  suppose  that  it  is  cnly  the
aggregate  of  force  which  remains  unimpaired.  Though  the  distribution  of  forces  may  be
altered,  their  gross  amount  is  not  susceptible  of  change,  so  far  as  the  highest  conceptions
of  our  actual  science  extend.  Consequently,  there  is  no  need  for  us  to  believe  that,  in  dif-
ferent periods,  the  intensity  of  causation  varies  ;  though  we  may  believe  that  some  one
agent,  such  as  heat,  had  at  one  time  more  energy  than  it  has  ever  had  since.

169  »  The  great  agents  of  change  in  the  inorganic  world  may  be  divided  into  two
principal  classes,  the  aqueous  and  the  igneous.  To  the  aqueous  belong  rain,  rivers,
torrents,  springs,  currents,  and  tides  ;  to  the  igneous,  volcanos  and  earthquakes.  Both
these  classes  are  instruments  of  decay  as  well  as  of  reproduction  ;  but  they  may  also  be
regarded  as  antagonistic  forces.  For  the  aqueous  agents  are  incessantly  labouring  to
reduce  the  inequalities  of  the  earth's  surface  to  a  level ;  while  the  igneous  are  equally
active  in  restoring  the  unevenness  of  the  external  crust,  partly  by  heaping  up  new  matter
in  certain  localities,  and  partly  by  depressing  one  portion,  and  forcing  out  another,  of
the  earth's  envelope."  LyelVs  Principles  of  Geology,  gth  edit.,  London  1853,  p.  198.
[Lyell  seems  to  have  forgotten  that  aqueous  agencies  create  "  unevenness  "—e.g.  in
the  action  of  rivers  and  streams.  His  statement,  "  the  igneous  are  equally  active,"  would
not  now  be  endorsed  by  geologists. — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  853

deductive  science.  That  our  knowledge  is  ripe  for  such  a  process,  I  am  far
indeed  from  supposing  ;  but  this  is  the  path  which  a  deductive  mind  would  take,
so  far  as  it  was  able.  On  the  other  hand,  an  inductive  mind,  instead  of  beginning
with  fire  and  water,  would  begin  with  the  effects  which  fire  and  water  had  pro-
duced, and  would  first  study  these  two  agents,  not  in  their  own  separate  sciences,
but  in  their  united  action  as  exhibited  on  the  crust  of  the  earth.  An  inquirer  of
this  sort  would  assume  that  the  best  way  of  arriving  at  truth  would  be  to  pro-
ceed from  effects  to  causes,  observing  what  had  actually  happened,  and  rising
from  the  complex  results  up  to  a  knowledge  of  the  simple  agents,  by  whose  power
the  results  had  been  brought  about.

If  the  reader  has  followed  the  train  of  thought  which  I  have  endeavoured  to
establish  in  this  chapter,  and  in  part  of  the  preceding  volume,  he  will  be  pre-
pared to  expect  that  when,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  geology
was  first  seriously  studied,  the  inductive  plan  of  proceeding  from  effects  to  causes
became  the  favourite  one  in  England  ;  while  the  deductive  plan  of  proceeding
from  causes  to  effects  was  adopted  in  Scotland  and  in  Germany.  And  such
was  really  the  case.  It  is  generally  admitted  that  in  England  scientific  geology
owes  its  origin  to  William  Smith,  whose  mind  was  singularly  averse  to  system,
and  who,  believing  that  the  best  way  of  understanding  former  causes  was  to
study  present  effects,  occupied  himself  between  the  years  1790  and  1815  in  a
laborious  examination  of  different  strata.170  In  1815  he,  after  traversing  the
whole  of  England  on  foot,  published  the  first  complete  geological  map  which
ever  appeared,  and  thus  took  the  first  great  step  towards  accumulating  the
materials  for  an  inductive  generalization.171  In  1807,  and  therefore  before  he
had  brought  his  arduous  task  to  an  end,  there  was  formed  in  London  the  Geo-
logical Society,  the  express  object  of  which,  we  are  assured,  was  to  observe  the
condition  of  the  earth,  but  by  no  means  to  generalize  the  causes  which  had  pro-
duced that  condition.172  The  resolution  was  perhaps  a  wise  one.  At  all  events,
it  was  highly  characteristic  of  the  sober  and  patient  spirit  of  the  English  intellect.
With  what  energy  and  unsparing  toil  it  has  been  executed,  and  how  the  most
eminent  members  of  the  Geological  Society  have,  in  the  pursuit  of  truth,  not
only  explored  every  part  of  Europe,  but  examined  the  shell  of  the  earth  in
America  and  in  Northern  Asia,  is  well  known  to  all  who  are  interested  in  these,


170  Dr.  Whewell,  comparing  him  with  his  great  German  contemporary,  Werner,  says
"  In  the  German,  considering  him  as  a  geologist,  the  ideal  element  predominated."  .  .  .
"  Of  a  very  different  temper  and  character  was  William  Smith.     No  literary  cultivation
of  his  youth  awoke  in  him  the  speculative  love  of  symmetry  and  system ;  but  a  singular
clearness  and  precision  of  the  classifying  power,  which  he  possessed  as  a  native  talent,
was  exercised  and  developed  by  exactly  those  geological  facts  among  which  his  philo-
sophical task  lay."  ...  "We  see  great  vividness  of  thought  and  activity  of  mind,  un-
folding itself  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  facts  with  which  it  had  to  deal."  ..."  He  dates
his  attempts  to  discriminate  and  connect  strata  from  the  year  1790-"     WhewelVs  History
of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  London,  1847,  vol.  iii.  pp.  562-564.

171  "The  execution  of  his  map  was  completed  in  1815,  and  remains  a  lasting  monu-
ment of  original  talent  and  extraordinary  perseverance  ;  for  he  had  explored  the  whole
country  on  foot  without  the  guidance  of  previous  observers,  or  the  aid  of  fellow -labourers,
and  had  succeded  iii  throwing  into  natural  divisions  the  whole  complicated  series  of
British  rocks."     Ly ell's  Principles  of  Geology,  p.  58.     Geological  maps  of  parts  of  England
had,  however,  been  published  before  1815.     See  Conybeare  on  Geology,  in  Second  Report
of  the  British  Association,  p.  373.

172  "A  great  body  of  new  data  were  required  ;  and  the  Geological  Society  of  London,
founded  in  1807,  conduced  greatly  to  the  attainment  of  this  desirable  end.     To  multiply
and  record  observations,  and  patiently  to  await  the  result  at  some  future  period,  was  the
object  proposed  by  them  ;  and  it  was  their  favourite  maxim  that  the  time  was  not  yet
come  for  a  general  system  of  geology,  but  that  all  must  be  content  for  many  years  to  be
exclusively  engaged  in  furnishing  materials  for  future  generalizations."     LyelVs  Prin-
ciples of  Geology,  p.  59.     Compare  Richardson's  Geology,  1851,  p.  40.


854  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

matters  ;  nor  can  it  be  denied  that  the  great  works  of  Lyell  and  Murchison  *
prove  that  the  men  who  are  capable  of  such  laborious  enterprises  are  also
capable  of  the  still  more  ^difficult  achievement  of  generalizing  their  facts  and
refining  them  into  ideas.  .They  did  not  go  as  mere  observers,  Jaut  they  went
with  the  noble  object  of  making  their  observations  subservient  to  a  discovery
of  the  laws  of  nature.  That  was  their  aim  ;  and  all  honour  be  to  them  for  it.
Still,  it  is  evident  that  their  process  is  essentially  inductive  ;  it  is  a  procedure
from  the  observation  of  complex  phenomena  up  to  the  elements  to  which  those
phenomena  are  owing  ;  it  is,  in  other  words,  a  study  of  natural  effects,  in  order
to  learn  the  operation  of  natural  causes.

Very  different  was  the  process  in  Germany  and  Scotland.  In  1787,  that  is,
only  three  years  before  William  Smith  began  his  labours,  Werner,  by  his  work  on
the  classification  of  mountains,  laid  the  foundation  of  the  German  school  of
geology.173  His  influence  was  immense  ;  and  among  his  pupils  we  find  the  names
of  Mohs,  Raumer,  and  Von  Buch,  and  even  that  of  Alexander  Humboldt.174  But
the  geological  theory  which  he  propounded  depended  entirely  on  a  chain  of  argu-
ment from  cause  to  effect.  He  assumed  that  all  the  great  changes  through
which  the  earth  had  passed  were  due  to  the  action  of  water.  Taking  this  for
granted,  he  reasoned  deductively  from  premisses  with  which  his  knowledge  of
water  supplied  him.  Without  entering  into  details  respecting  his  system,  it  is
enough  to  say,  that,  according  to  it,  there  was  originally  one  vast  and  primeval
sea,  which,  in  the  course  of  time,  deposited  the  primitive  rocks.  The  base  01  all
was  granite  ;  then  gneiss  ;  and  others  followed  in  their  order.  In  the  bosom  of
the  water,  which  at  first  was  tranquil,  agitations  gradually  arose,  which,  destroy-
ing part  of  the  earliest  deposits,  gave  birth  to  new  rocks,  formed  out  of  their
ruins.  The  stratified  thus  succeeded  to  the  unstratified,  and  something  like
variety  was  established.  Then  came  another  period,  in  which  the  face  of  the
waters,  instead  of  being  merely  agitated,  was  convulsed  by  tempests,  and  amid
their  play  and  collision  life  was  generated,  and  plants  and  animals  sprung  into
existence.  The  vast  solitude  was  slowly  peopled,  the  sea  gradually  retired ;  and
a  foundation  was  laid  for  that  epoch  during  which  man  entered  the  scene,  bring-
ing with  him  the  rudiments  of  order  and  of  social  improvement.175
.  These  were  the  leading  views  of  a  system  which,  we  must  remember,  exercised
great  sway  in  the  scientific  world,  and  won  over  to  its  side  minds  of  considerable
power.  Erroneous  and  far-fetched  though  it  was,  it  had  the  merit  of  calling
attention  to  one  of  the  two  chief  principles  which  have  determined  the  present


173  Cuvier,_in  his  Life  of  Werner,  says  (Biographic  Universelle,  vol.  L.  pp.  376,  377),
"  La  connaissance  des  positions  respectives  des  mineraux  dans  la  croute  du  globe,  et  ce
que  Ton  peut  en  conclure  relativement  aux  epoques  de  leur  origine,  forment  une  autre
branche  de  la  science  qu'il  appelle  Geognosie.     II  en  presenta  les  premieres  bases  en
1787,  dans  un  petit  ecrit  intitule  '  Classification  et  description  des  montagnes.'  "

174  WhewelVs  History  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  vol.  iii.  p.  567.

175  "  Une  mer  universelle  et  tranquille  depose  en  grandes  masses  les  roches  primitives,
roches  nettement  cristallisees,  ou  domine  d'abord  la  silice.     Le  granit  fait  la  base  de
tout ;  au  granit  succede  le  gneiss,  qui  n'est  qu'un  granit  comraenpant  a  se  feuilleter."  .  .  .
"  Des  agitations  intestines  du  liquide  detruisent  une  partie  de  ces  premiers  depots
de  nouvelles  roches  se  forment  de  leurs  debris  reunis  par  des  cimens.     C'est  parmi  ces
tempetes  que  nait  la  vie."  ..."  Les  eaux,  de  nouveau  tranquillisees,  mais  dont  le  con-
tenu  a  change,  deposent  des  couches  moins  epaisses  et  plus  variees,  ou  les  debris  des  corps
vivans  s'accumulent  successivement  dans  un  ordre  non  moins  fixe  que  celui  des  roches
qui  les  contiennent.     Enfin,  la  derniere  retraite  des  eaux  repand  sur  le  continent  d'im-
menses  alluvions  de  matieres  meubles,  premiers  sieges  de  la  vegetation,  de  la  culture  et
de  la  sociabilite."     Eloge  de  Werner,  in  Cuvier,  Recueil  des  Eloges  Historiques,  vol.  ii.
pp.  321-323-

[*  Murchison  was  not  an  Englishman  but  a  Scotch  Highlander.  His  work  should
therefore  stand,  on  the  racial  principle,  for  "  the  sober  and  patient  spirit  of  the  Gaelic
intellect." — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  855

condition  of  our  planet.  It  had  the  further  merit  of  provoking  a  controversy
which  was  eminently  serviceable  to  the  interests  of  truth.  For  the  great  enemy
of  knowledge  is  not  error,  but  inertness.  All  that  we  want  is  discussion,  and  then
we  are  sure  to  do  well,  no  matter  what  our  blunders  may  be.  One  error  conflicts
with  another  ;  each  destroys  its  opponent,*  and  truth  is  evolved.  This  is  the
course  of  the  human  mind,  and  it  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  the  authors  of
new  ideas,  the  proposers  of  new  contrivances,  and  the  originators  of  new  heresies,
are  benefactors  of  their  species.  Whether  they  are  right  or  wrong  is  the  least  part
of  the  question.  They  tend  to  excite  the  mind  ;  they  open  up  the  faculties  ;  they
stimulate  us  to  fresh  inquiry  ;  they  place  old  subjects  under  new  aspects  ;  they
disturb  the  public  sloth  ;  and  they  interrupt,  rudely,  but  with  most  salutary
effect,  that  love  of  routine  which,  by  inducing  men  to  go  grovelling  on  in  the
ways  of  their  ancestors,  stands  in  the  path  of  every  improvement  as  a  constant,
an  outlying,  and,  too  often,  a  fatal  obstacle.

The  method  adopted  by  Werner  was  evidently  deductive,  since  he  argued  from
a  supposed  cause,  and  reasoned  from  it  to  the  effects.  In  that  cause  he  found
his  major  premiss,  and  thence  he  worked  downwards  to  his  conclusion,  until  he
reached  the  world  of  sense  and  of  reality.  He  trusted  in  his  one  great  idea,  and
he  handled  that  idea  with  consummate  skill.  On  that ''very  account  did  he  pay
less  attention  to  existing  facts.  Had  he  chosen,  he,  like  other  men,  could  have
collected  them,  and  subjected  them  to  an  inductive  generalization.  But  he
preferred  the  opposite  path.  To  reproach  him  with  this  is  irrational  ;  for,  in  his
journey  after  truth,  he  chose  one  of  the  only  two  roads  which  are  open  to  the
human  mind.  In  England,  indeed,  we  are  apt  to  take  for  granted  that  one  road
is  infinitely  preferable  to  the  other.  It  may  be  so  ;  but  on  this,  as  on  many  other
subjects,  assertions  are  current  which  have  never  been  proved.  At  all  events,
Werner  was  so  satisfied  with  his  method  that  he  would  not  be  at  the  pains  of
examining  the  position  of  rocks  and  their  strata  as  they  are  variously  exhibited
in  different  countries  ;  he  did  not  even  explore  his  own  country,  but,  confining
himself  to  a  corner  of  Germany,  he  began  and  completed  his  celebrated  system
without  investigating  the  facts  on  which,  according  to  the  inductive  method,
that  system  should  have  been  built.176

Exactly  the  same  process,  on  the  same  subject,  and  at  the  same  time,  was
going  on  in  Scotland.  Hutton,  who  was  the  founder  of  Scotch  geology,  and
who  in  1788  published  his  Theory  of  the  Earth,  conducted  the  inquiry  just  as
Werner  did  ;  though  when  he  began  his  speculations  he  had  no  knowledge  of
what  Werner  was  doing.  177  The  only  difference  between  them  was,  that  while
Werner  reasoned  from  the  agency  of  water,  Hutton  reasoned  from  the  agency  of
fire.  The  cause  of  this  may,  I  think,  be  explained.  Hutton  lived  in  a  country

178  "  If  it  be  true  that  delivery  be  the  first,  second,  and  third  requisite  in  a  popular
orator,  it  is  no  less  certain  that  to  travel  is  of  first,  second,  and  third  importance  to  those
who  desire  to  originate  just  and  comprehensive  views  concerning  the  structure  of  our
globe.  Now,  Werner  had  not  travelled  to  distant  countries  :  he  had  merely  explored  a
small  portion  of  Germany,  and  conceived,  and  persuaded  others  to  believe,  that  the  whole
surface  of  our  planet,  and  all  the  mountain  chains  in  the  world,  were  made  after  the  model
of  his  own  province."  ..."  It  now  appears  that  he  had  misinterpreted  many  of  the
most  important  appearances  even  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Freyberg.  Thus,
for  example,  within  a  day's  journey  of  his  school,  the  porphyry,  called  by  him  primitive,
has  been  found  not  only  to  send  forth  veins,  or  dykes,  through  strata  of  the  coal  forma-
tion, but  to  overlie  them  in  mass."  Ly ell's  Principles  of  Geology,  p.  47-

177  Though  Hutton's  Theory  of  the  Earth  was  first  published  in  1788,  the  edition  o
1795,  which  is  the  one  I  have  used,  contains  a  great  number  of  additional  illustrations  of
his  views,  and  was  evidently  re-written.  But  the  main  features  are  the  same  ;  and  we
learn  from  his  friend  Playfair  that  "  the  great  outline  of  his  system  "  was  completed
"  several  years  "  before  1788.  Life  of  Hutton,  in  Playfair's  Works,  vol.  iv.p.  50,  Edin-
burgh, 1822.

[*  Read  rather:  ''each  elicits  criticism  which  destroys  it." — ED.]


856  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

where  some  of  the  most  important  laws  of  heat  had  for  the  first  time  been
generalized,  and  where,  consequently,  that  department  of  inorganic  physics
had  acquired  great  reputation.  It  was  natural  for  a  Scotchman  to  take  more  than
ordinary  interest  in  a  subject  in  which  Scotland  had  been  so  successful,  and  had
obtained  so  much  fame.  We  need  not  therefore  wonder  that  Hutton,  who,  like
all  men,  felt  the  intellectual  bent  of  the  time  in  which  he  lived,  should  have  yielded
to  an  influence  of  which  he  was  perhaps  unconscious.  In  obedience  to  the
general  mental  habits  of  his  country,  he  adopted  the  deductive  method.  In
further  obedience  to  the  more  special  circumstances  connected  with  his  own
immediate  pursuits,  he  gathered  the  principles  from  which  he  reasoned  from  a
study  of  fire,  instead  of  gathering  them,  as  Werner  did,  from  a  study  of  water.

Hence  it  is  that,  in  the  history  of  geology,  the  followers  of  Werner  are  known
as  Neptunists,  and  those  of  Hutton  as  Plutonists.178  And  these  terms  represent
the  only  difference  between  the  two  great  masters.  In  the  most  important
points,  namely,  their  method,  they  were  entirely  agreed.  Both  were  essentially
one-sided  ;  both  paid  a  too  exclusive  attention  to  one  of  the  two  principal  agents
which  have  altered,  and  are  still  altering,  the  crust  of  the  earth  ;  both  reasoned
from  those  agents,  instead  of  reasoning  to  them  ;  and  both  constructed  their
system  without  sufficiently  studying  the  actual  and  existing  facts  ;  committing,
in  this  respect,  an  error  which  the  English  geologists  were  the  first  to  rectify.

As  I  am  writing  a  history  not  of  science  but  of  scientific  method,  I  can  only
briefly  glance  at  the  nature  of  those  services  which  Hutton  rendered  to  geology,
and  which  are  so  considerable  that  his  system  has  been  called  its  present  basis.179
This,  however,  is  too  strongly  expressed  ;  for  though  Hutton  was  far  from
denying  the  influence  of  water,180  he  did  not  concede  enough  to  it,  and  there
is  a  tendency  among  several  geologists  to  admit  that  the  system  of  Werner,
considered  as  an  aqueous  theory,  contains  a  larger  amount  of  truth  than  the
advocates  of  the  igneous  theory  are  willing  to  allow.  Still,  what  Hutton  did
was  most  remarkable,  especially  in  reference  to  what  are  now  termed  meta-
morphic  rocks,  the  theory  of  whose  formation  he  was  the  first  to  conceive.181  Into
this,  and  into  their  connexion  on  the  one  hand  with  the  sedimentary  rocks,
and  on  the  other  hand  with  those  rocks  whose  origin  is  perhaps  purely  igneous,
I  could  not  enter  without  treading  on  debatable  ground.  But,  putting  aside
what  is  yet  uncertain,  I  will  mention  two  circumstances  respecting  Hutton
which  are  undisputed,  and  which  will  give  some  idea  of  his  method,  and  of  the
turn  of  his  mind.  The  firs't  circumstance  is  that,  although  he  ascribed  to  sub-
terranean heat,  as  exhibited  in  volcanic  action,  a  greater  and  more  constant
energy  than  any  previous  inquirers  had  ventured  to  do,182  he  preferred  specu-
lating on  the  probable  consequences  of  that  action,  rather  than  drawing  inferences
from  the  facts  which  the  action  presented  ;  he  being  on  this  point  so  indifferent
that  he  arrived  at  his  conclusions  without  inspecting  even  a  single  region  of

178  Kirwan  appears  to  have  been  the  first  who  called  Hutton's  theory  "  the  Plutonic
System."     See  Illustrations  of  the  Huttonian  Theory  hi  Play  fair's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  145.     On
the  distinction  between  Neptunists  and  Plutonists,  see  the  same  work,  pp.  504,  505.

179  «  Has  not  only  supplanted  that  of  Werner,  but  has  formed  the  foundation  of  the
researches  and  writings  of  our  most  enlightened  observers,  and  is  justly  regarded  as  the
basis  of  all  sound  geology  at  the  present  day."  Richardson's  Geology,  London,   1851,
p.  38.

180  Hutton's  Theory  of  the  Earth,  Edinb.  1795,  vol.  i.  pp.  34,  41,  192,  290,  291,  593,
vol.  ii.  pp.  236,  369,  378,  555.

181  « in  his  writings,  and  in  those  of  his  illustrator,   Playfair,  we  find  the  germ  of
the  metamorphic  theory."     Lyell's  Manual  of  Geology,  London,  1851,  p.  92.

182  The  shortest  summary  of  this  view  is  in  his  Theory  of  the  Earth,  Edin.  1795,  vol.  ii.
p.  556.     "The  doctrine,   therefore,  of    our  theory  is  briefly  this;  That  whatever  may
have  been  the  operation  of  dissolving  water,  and  the  chemical  action  of  it  upon  the
materials  accumulated  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  the  general  solidity  of  that  mass  of
earth,  and  the  placing  of  it  in  the  atmosphere  above  the  surface  of  the  sea,  has  been  the
immediate  operation  of  fire  or  heat  melting  and  expanding  bodies."


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  857

active  volcanos,  where  he  might  have  watched  the  workings  of  nature,  and
seen  what  she  was  really  about.183  The  other  circumstance  is  equally  character-
istic. Hutton,  in  his  speculations  concerning  the  geological  effects  of  heat,
naturally  availed  himself  of  the  laws  which  Black  had  unfolded.  One  of  those
laws  was  that  certain  earths  owe  their  fusibility  to  the  presence  of  fixed  air
in  them  before  heat  has  expelled  it  ;  so  that,  if  it  were  possible  to  force  them
to  retain  their  fixed  air,  or  carbonic  acid  gas,  as  we  now  call  it,  no  amount  of
heat  could  deprive  them  of  the  capability  of  being  fused.  The  fertile  mind
of  Hutton  saw,  in  this  discovery,  a  principle  from  which  he  could  construct  a
geological  argument.  It  occurred  to  him  that  great  pressure  would  prevent
the  escape  of  fixed  air  from  heated  rocks,  and  would  thus  enable  them  to  be
fused,  notwithstanding  their  elevated  temperature.  He  then  supposed  that,
at  a  period  anterior  to  the  existence  of  man,  such  a  process  had  taken  place
under  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  that  the  weight  of  so  great  a  column  of  water
had  prevented  the  rocks  from  being  decomposed  while  they  were  subjected
to  the  action  of  fire.  In  this  way  their  volatile  parts  were  held  together,  and
they  themselves  might  be  melted,  which  could  not  have  happened  except  for
this  enormous  pressure.  By  following  this  line  of  argument,  he  accounted
for  the  consolidation  of  strata  by  heat  ;  since,  according  to  the  premisses  from
which  he  started,  the  oily  or  bituminous  parts  would  remain,  in  spite  of  the
efforts  of  heat  to  disperse  them.184  This  striking  speculation  led  to  the  inference
that  the  volatile  components  of  a  substance  and  its  fixed  components  may
be  made  to  cohere,  in  the  very  teeth  of  that  apparently  irresistible  agent  whose
business  it  is  to  effect  their  separation.  Such  an  inference  was  contrary^to  all
experience  ;  or,  to  say  the  least,  no  man  had  ever  seen  an  instance  of  it.185  In-
deed the  event  was  only  supposed  to  happen  in  consequence  of  circumstances
which  were  never  met  with  on  the  surface  of  the  globe,  and  which,  therefore,
were  out  of  the  range  of  all  human  observation.186  The  utmost  that  could  be
expected  was  that,  by  means  of  our  instruments,  we  might  perhaps  on  a
small  scale  imitate  the  process  which  Hutton  had  imagined.  It  was  possible

183  "Although  Hutton  had  never  explored  any  region  of  active  volcanos,^ he  had
convinced  himself  that  basalt  and  many  other  trap  rocks  were  of  igneous  origin."  LyelVs
Principles  of  Geology,  London,  1853,  p.  51.  To  this  I  may  add,  that  he  wrote  his  work
without  having  examined  granite.  He  says  (Theory  of  the  Earth,  vol.  i.  p.  214),  "  It  is
true,  I  met  with  it  on  my  return  by  the  east  coast,  when  I  just  saw  it,  and  no  more,  at
Peterhead  and  Aberdeen  ;  but  that  was  all  the  granite  I  had  ever  seen  when  I  wrote  my
Theory  of  the  Earth.  I  have,  since  that  time,  seen  it  in  different  places  ;  because  I  went
on  purpose  to  examine  it,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  describe  in  the  course  of  this  work."
Hutton's  theory  of  granite  is  noticed  in  BakewelVs  Geology,  Lond.  1838,  p.  101  ;  but
Mr.  Bakewell  does  not  seem  to  be  aware  that  the  theory  was  formed  before  the  observa-
tions were  made.  .  ,

iw  Huttonian  Theory,  in  Play  fair,  vol.  i.  pp.  38-40,  509,  5io.  Compare  Play ) 'air  s
Life  of  Hutton,  p.  61.

185  Hence   the  objections  of   Kirwan  were  invalid ;  because  his  argument  against
Hutton  was  "  grounded  on  experiments,  where  that  very  separation  of  the  volatile
and  fixed  parts  takes  place,  which  it  excluded  in  that  hypothesis  of  subterraneous  heat.
Huttonian  Theory,  in  Playfair,  vol.  i.  p.  i93»  Edinb.  1822.

iss  Hutton  says  (Theory  of  the  Earth,  Edinb.  1795,  vol.  i.  p.  94).  "  The  place  of  mineral
operations  is  not  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  ;  and  we  are  not  to  limit  nature  with  our
imbecility,  or  estimate  the  powers  of  nature  by  the  measure  of  our  own.       See  also  p^  159.
"  mineral  operations  proper  to  the  lower  regions  of  the  earth."     And  p.  527*
mineral  operations  of  nature  lie  in  a  part  of  the  globe  which  is  necessarily  inaccessibl
to  man,  and  where  the  powers  of  nature  act  under  very  different  conditions  from  those
which  we  find  take  place  in  the  only  situation  where  we  can  live."     Again,  in  vol.  11.
p.  07,  "  The  present  Theory  of  the  Earth  holds  for  principle  that  the  strata  are  consoli-
dated in  the  mineral  regions  far  beyond  the  reach  of  human  observation.       Similarly,
vol.  ii.  p.  484,  "  we  judge  not  of  the  progress  of  things  from  the  actual  operatic
the  surface."


858  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

that  a  direct  experiment  might  artificially  combine  great  pressure  with  great
heat,  and  that  the  result  might  be  that  the  senses  would  realize  what  the  in-
tellect had  conceived.187  But  the  experiment  had  never  been  tried,  and  Hutton,
who  delighted  in  reasoning  from  ideas  rather  than  from  facts,  was  not  likely
to  undertake  it.188  He  cast  his  speculation  on  the  world,  and  left  it  to  its  fate.189
Fortunately,  however,  for  the  reception  of  his  system,  a  very  ingenious  and
skilful  experimenter  of  that  day,  Sir  James  Hall,  determined  to  test  the  specu-
lation by  an  appeal  to  facts  ;  and  as  nature  did  not  supply  the  facts  which  he
wanted,  he  created  them  for  himself.  He  applied  heat  to  powdered  chalk,
while,  at  the  same  time,  with  great  delicacy  of  manipulation,  he  subjected  the
chalk  to  a  pressure  about  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  column  of  water  half  a  mile
high.  The  result  was  that  under  that  pressure  the  volatile  parts  of  the  chalk
were  held  together  ;  the  carbonic  acid  gas  was  unable  to  escape  ;  the  generation
of  quicklime  was  stopped  ;  the  ordinary  operations  of  nature  were  baffled,*
and  the  whole  composition,  being  preserved  in  its  integrity,  was  fused,  and  on
subsequently  cooling  actually  crystallized  into  solid  marble.190  Never  was
triumph  more  complete.  Never  did  a  fact  more  fully  confirm  an  idea.191  But
in  the  mind  of  Hutton  the  idea  preceded  the  fact  by  a  long  interval  ;  since,
before  the  fact  was  known,  the  theory  had  been  raised,  and  the  system  which  was
built  upon  it  had  indeed  been  published  several  years.  It  therefore  appears
that  one  of  the  chief  parts  of  the  Huttonian  Theory,  and  certainly  its  most
successful  part,  was  conceived  in  opposition  to  all  preceding  experience  ;  that

187  Hutton,  however,  did  not  believe  that  this  could  be  done.     "  In  the  Theory  of
the  Earth  which  was  published,  I  was  anxious  to  warn  the  reader  against  the  notion
that  subterraneous  heat  and  fusion  could  be  compared  with  that  which  we  induce  by
our  chemical  operations  on  mineral  substances  here  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth."
Hutton' s  Theory  of  the  Earth,  vol.  i.  p.  251.

188  See,  in  the  Life  of  Hutton,  in  Play  fair's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  62,  note,  a  curious  remark
on  his  indifference  to  experimental  verification.     Innumerable  passages  in  his  work
indicate  this  tendency,  and  show  his  desire  to  reason  immediately  from  general  prin-
ciples.    Thus,  in  vol.  i.  p.  17,  "  Let  us  strictly  examine  our  principles  in  order  to  avoid
fallacy  in  our  reasoning."  ..."  We  are  now,  in  reasoning  from  principles,  come  to
a  point  decisive  of  the  question."  vol.  i.  p.  177.     "  Let  us  now  reason  from  our  prin-
ciples." vol.  ii.  p.  308.      Hence  his  constantly  expressed  contempt  for  experience  ;  as  in
vol.  ii.  p.  367,  where  he  says  that  we  must  "  overcome  those  prejudices  which  contracted
views  of  nature,  and  magnified  opinions  of  the  experience  of  man  may  have  begotten."

189  playfair  (Life  of  Hutton,  p.  64)  says  that  it  drew  "  their  attention  "  (i.e.  the  atten-
tion of  "  men  of  science  ")  "  very  slowly,  so  that  several  years  elapsed  before  any  one
showed  himself  publicly  concerned  about  it,  either  as  an  enemy  or  a  friend."     He  adds,
as  one  of  the  reasons  of  this,  that  it  contained  "  too  little  detail  of  facts  for  a  system
which  involved  so  much  that  was  new,  and  opposite  to  the  opinions  generally  received."

19°  The  account  of  these  experiments  was  read  before  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh
in  1805,  and  is  printed  in  their  Transactions,  vol.  vi.  pp.  71-185,  Edinb.  1812,  4to.  The
general  result  was  (pp.  148,  149),  "That  a  pressure  of  52  atmospheres,  or  1700  feet
of  sea,  is  capable  of  forming  a  limestone  in  a  proper  heat ;  That  under^86  atmospheres,
answering  nearly  to  3000  feet,  or  about  half  a  mile,  a  complete  marble  "may  be  formed  ;
and  lastly,  That,  with  a  pressure  of  173  atmospheres,  or  5700  feet,  that  is  little  more
than  one  mile  of  sea,  the  carbonate  of  lime  is  made  to  undergo  complete  fusion,  and  to
act  powerfully  on  other  earths."  See  also  p.  160  :  "  The  carbonic  acid  of  limestone
cannot  be  constrained  in  heat  by  a  pressure  less  than  that  of  1708  feet  of  sea."  There
is  a  short  and  not  very  accurate  notice  of  these  instructive  experiments  in  BakeivelVs
Geology,  London,  1838,  pp.  249,  250.

191  As  Sir  James  Hall  says,  "The  truth  of  the  most  doubtful  principle  which  Dr.
Hutton  has  assumed  has  thus  been  established  by  direct  experiment."  Transactions
of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  vi.  p.  175.

[*  In  the  terms  of  the  case,  this  operation  of  nature  is  as  "  ordinary  "  as  any  other  ;
and  the  term  "  baffled  "  is  irrelevant  to  the  subject. — ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  859

it  presupposed  a  combination  of  events  which  no  one  had  ever  observed,  and
the  mere  possibility  of  which  nothing  but  artificial  experiment  could  prove  ;
and,  finally,  that  Hutton  was  so  confident  of  the  validity  of  his  own  method
of  inquiry  that  he  disdained  to  make  the  experiment  himself,  but  left  to  another
mind  that  empirical  branch  of  the  investigation  which  he  deemed  of  little  moment,
but  which  we  in  England  are  taught  to  believe  is  the  only  safe  foundation
of  physical  research.192

I  have  now  given  an  account  of  all  the  most  important  discoveries  made  by
Scotland  in  the  eighteenth  century  respecting  the  laws  of  the  inorganic  world.
I  have  said  nothing  of  Watt,  because,  although  the  steam-engine,  which  we
owe  to  him,  is  of  incalculable  importance,  it  is  not  a  discovery  but  an  invention.
An  invention  it  may  justly  be  termed,  rather  than  an  improvement.193  Not-
withstanding what  had  been  effected  in  the  seventeenth  century  by  De  Caus,
Worcester,  Papin,  and  Savery,  and  notwithstanding  the  later  additions  of  New-
comen  and  others,  the  real  originality  of  Watt  is  unimpeachable.  His  engine
was  essentially  a  new  invention  ;  but  under  its  scientific  aspect  it  was  merely
a  skilful  adaptation  of  laws  previously  known  ;  and  one  of  its  most  important
points,  namely,  the  economy  of  heat,  was  a  practical  application  of  ideas  pro-
mulgated by  Black.194  The  only  discovery  made  by  Watt  was  that  of  the
composition  of  water.  Though  his  claims  are  disputed  by  the  friends  of  Caven-
dish, it  would  appear  that  he  was  the  first  who  ascertained  that  water,  instead
of  being  an  element,  is  a  compound  of  two  gases.195  This  discovery  was  a  con-
siderable step  in  the  history  of  chemical  analysis,  but  it  neither  involved  nor


192  See  the  remarks  of  Sir  James  Hall,  in  Transactions,  vol.  vi.  pp.  74,  75-    He  observes
that  Hutton's  "  system,  however,  involves  so  many  suppositions,  apparently  in  con-
tradiction to  common  experience,  which  meet  us  on  the  very  threshold,  that  most  men
have  hitherto  been  deterred  from  an  investigation  of  its  principles,  and  only  a  few  in-
dividuals have  justly  appreciated  its  merits."  ..."  I  conceived  that  the  chemical
effects  ascribed  by  him  to  compression  ought  in  the  first  place  to  be  investigated."  .  .  .
"  It  occurred  to  me  that  this  principle  was  susceptible  of  being  established  in  a  direct
manner  by  experiment,  and  /  urged  him  to  make  the  attempt ;  but  he  always  rejected  this
proposal,  on  account  of  the  immensity  of  the  natural  agents,  whose  operation  he  sup-
posed to  lie  far  beyond  the  reach  of  our  imitation ;  and  he  seemed  to  imagine  that  any
such  attempt  must  undoubtedly  fail,  and  ^hus  throw  discredit  on  opinions,   already
sufficiently  established,  as  he  conceived,  on  other  principles"

193  It  may  be  traced  back,  certainly  to  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,
and  probably  still  higher.     Yet  the  popular  opinion  seems  to  be  correct,  that  Watt  was
its  real  inventor  ;   though  of  course  he  could  not  have  done  what  he  did  without  his
predecessors.     This,  however,  may  be  said  of  all  the  most  eminent  and  successful  men,
as  well  as  of  the  most  ordinary  men.

19*  On  the  obligations  of  Watt  to  Black,  compare  Brougham's  Life  of  Watt  (Brougham's
Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  25,  36-38,  edit.  Glasgow,  1855),  with  Muirhead' s  Life  of  Watt,  second
edit.  London,  1859,  pp.  66,  83.  At  p.  301  Mr.  Muirhead  says  of  Watt,  that  "  his  prin-
cipal inventions  connected  with  the  steam-engine,  with  all  their  prodigious  results,
were  founded,  as  we  have  seen,  on  the  attentive  observation  of  great  philosophical  truths;
and  the  economy  of  fuel,  increase  of  productive  power,  and  saving  of  animal  labour,
which  gradually  ensued,  all  originated  in  the  sagacious  and  careful  thought  with  which
he  investigated  the  nature  and  properties  of  heat."  But  whatever  investigations  Watt
made  into  heat,  he  discovered  no  new  law  respecting  it,  or,  at  all  events,  no  new  law
which  is  large  enough  to  be  noted  in  the  history  of  thermotics,  considered  purely  as  a
science,  and  apart  from  practical  application.  Mr.  Muirhead,  in  his  interesting  work
which  I  have  just  quoted,  has  published  (pp.  484-486)  some  remarks  made  on  the  subject
by  Watt,  several  years  after  the  death  of  Black,  which,  though  perfectly  fair  and  candid,
show  that  Watt  had  a  rather  confused  notion  of  the  real  difference  between  an  invention
and  a  discovery.

MS  Mr.  Muirhead,  in  his  Life  of  Watt,  pp.  301-370,  seems  to  have  put  the  priority
of  Watt  beyond  further  doubt;  though  he  is  somewhat  hard  upon  Cavendish,  who,
there  can  be  little  question,  made  the  discovery  for  himself.


860  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

suggested  any  new  law  of  nature,  and  has  therefore  no  claim  to  mark  an  epoch
in  the  history  of  the  human  mind.196  There  is,  however,  one  circumstance
connected  with  it  which  is  too  characteristic  to  be  passed  over  in  silence.  The
discovery  was  made  in  1783  by  Watt,  the  Scotchman,  and  by  Cavendish,  the
Englishman,  neither  of  whom  seems  to  have  been  aware  of  what  the  other  was
doing.197  But  between  the  two  there  was  this  difference.  Watt,  for  several
years  previously,  had  been  speculating  on  the  subject  of  water  in  connexion
with  air,  and  having  by  Black's  law  of  latent  heat  associated  them  together,
he  was  prepared  to  believe  that  one  is  convertible  into  the  other.198  The  idea
of  an  intimate  analogy  between  the  two  bodies  having  once  entered  his  mind,
gradually  ripened  ;  and  when  he  at  last  completed  the  discovery,  it  was  merely

196  i  would  not  wish  to  diminish  one  jot  of  the  veneration  in  which  the  great  name
of  Watt  is  justly  held.     But  when  I  find  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Withering,  the  botanist,
quoted  to  the  effect  that  his  "  abilities  and  acquirements  placed  him  next,  if  not  superior,
to  Newton  "  (Muirhead's  Life  of  Watt,  p.  302),  1  cannot  but  protest  against  such  indis-
criminate eulogy,  which  would  rank  Watt  in  the  same  class  as  one  of  those  godlike
intellects  of  which  the  whole  world  has  not  produced  a  score,  and  which  are  entitled  to
be  termed  inspired,  if  ever  human  being  was  so.     Another  instance  of  this  injudicious
panegyric  will  be  found  in  the  same  otherwise  excellent  work  (Muirhead,  pp.  324,  325),
where  we  read    that    Watt's  discovery  that  water    consists  of    oxygen    and   hydro-
gen,   was    "  the   commencement    of   a  new   era,  the  dawn  of  a  new  day  in  physical
inquiry,  the  real  foundation  of  the  new  system  of  chemistry  ;  nay,  even  a  discovery
'  perhaps  of  greater  importance  than  any  single  fact  which  human  ingenuity  has  ascer-
tained either  before  or  since.'  "     [The  terms  "  godlike  "  and  "  inspired  "  do  riot  assist
judgment  on  such  an  issue.     It  is  obvious  that  Newton  dealt  with  much  vaster  issues
than  those  taken  up   by  Watt ;   but  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that  Newton  held
certain  erroneous  theories  in  physics,  and  had  no  real  competence  in  the  historical
questions  he  discussed. — ED.]

197  That  there  was  no  plagiarism  on  the  part  of  Watt  we  know  from  positive  evidence  ;
that  there  was  none  on  the  part  of  Cavendish   may  be  fairly  presumed,  both  from  the
character  of  the  man  and  also  from  the  fact  that  in  the  then  state  of  chemical  know-
ledge the  discovery  was  imminent,  and  could  not  have  been  long  delayed.     It  was  ante-
cedently probable  that  the  composition  of  water  would  be  ascertained  by  different
persons  at  the  same  time,  as  we  have  seen  in  many  other  discoveries  which  have  been
simultaneously  made,  when  the  human  mind,  in  that  particular  department  of  inquiry,
had  reached  a  certain  point.     We  are  too  apt  to  suspect  philosophers  of  stealing  from
each  other  what  their  own  abilities  are  sufficient  to  work  out  for  themselves.      It  is
however    certain    that  Watt   thought  himself  ill-treated  by  Cavendish.     See    Watt's
Correspondence  on  the  Composition  of  Water,  London,  1846,  pp.  48,  61.

198  On  26th  November,  1783,  he  writes :  "  For  many  years  I  have  entertained  an  opinion
that  air  was  a  modification  of  water  ;  which  was  originally  founded  on  the  facts,  that
in  most  cases  where  air  was  actually  made,  which  should  be  distinguished  from  those
wherein  it  is  only  extricated  from  substances  containing  it  in  their  pores,  or  otherwise
united  to  them  in  the  state  of  air,  the  substances  were  such  as  were  known  to  contain
water  as  one  of  their  constituent  parts,  yet  no  water  was  obtained  in  the  processes,  except
what  was  known  to  be  only  loosely  connected  with   them,  such  as  the  water  of  the
crystallization  of  salts.     This  opinion  arose  from  a  discovery  that  the  latent  heat  contained
in  steam  diminished,  in  proportion  as  the  sensible  heat  of  the  water  from  which  it  was  pro-
duced increased  ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  latent  heat  of  steam  was  less  when  it  was
produced  under  a  greater  pressure,  or  in  a  more  dense  state,  and  greater  when  it  was
produced  under  a  less  pressure,  or  in  a  less  dense  state  ;  which  led  me  to  conclude,  that
when  a  very  great  degree  of  heat  was  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  steam,  the
latent  heat  would  be  wholly  changed  into  sensible  heat ;  and  that,  in  such  cases,  the
steam  itself  might  suffer  some  remarkable  change.     I  now  abandon  this  opinion,  in
so  far  as  relates  to  the  change  of  water  into  air,  as  I  think  that  may  be  accounted  for
on  better  principles."     See  this  remarkable  passage,  which  is  quite  decisive  as  to  the
real  history  of  Watt's  discovery,  in  Correspondence  of  James  Watt  on  the  Composition
of  Water,  London.  1846,  pp.  84,  85.     Compare  p.  cxxiv.  and  p.  248  note.


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  861

by  reasoning  from  data  which  others  possessed  besides  himself.  Instead  of
bringing  to  light  new  facts,  he  drew  new  conclusions  from  former  ideas.199
Cavendish,  on  the  other  hand,  obtained  his  result  by  the  method  natural  to
an  Englishman.*  He  did  not  venture  to  draw  a  fresh  inference  until  he  had
first  ascertained  some  fresh  facts.  Indeed,  his  discovery  was  so  completely
an  induction  from  his  own  experiments,  that  he  omitted  to  take  into  considera-
tion the  theory  of  latent  heat,  from  which  Watt  had  reasoned,  and  where  that
eminent  Scotchman  had  found  the  premisses  of  his  argument.200  Both  of  these
great  inquirers  arrived  at  truth,  but  they  accomplished  their  journeys  by  different
paths.  And  this  antithesis  is  accurately  expressed  by  one  of  the  most  cele-
brated of  living  chemists,  who,  in  his  remarks  on  the  composition  of  water,
truly  says  that  while  Cavendish  established  the  facts,  Watt  established  the
idea.201

Thus  much  as  to  what  was  effected  by  the  Scotch  in  the  department  of  in-
organic science.  If  we  now  turn  to  organic  science,  we  shall  find  that  there
also  their  labours  were  very  remarkable.  To  those  who  are  capable  of  a  certain
elevation  and  compass  of  'thought,  it  will  appear  in  the  highest  degree  probable
that  between  the  organic  and  inorganic  world  there  is  no  real  difference.  That
they  are  separated,  as  is  commonly  asserted,  by  a  sharp  line  of  demarcation,
which  indicates  where  one  abruptly  ends,  and  the  other  abruptly  begins,  seems
to  be  a  supposition  altogether  untenable.  Nature  does  not  pause  and  break
off  in  this  fitful  and  irregular  manner.  In  her  works  there  is  neither  gap  nor
chasm.  To  a  really  scientific  mind,  the  material  world  presents  one  vast  and
uninterrupted  series,  gradually  rising  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  forms,  but
never  stopping. .  In  one  part  of  that  series  we  find  a  particular  structure  which,
so  far  as  our  observations  have  yet  extended,  we,  in  another  part,  cannot  find.
We  also  observe  particular  functions,  which  correspond  to  the  structure,  and,
as  we  believe,  result  from  it.  This  is  all  we  know.  Yet,  from  these  scanty
facts,  we  who  at  present  are  still  in  the  infancy  of  knowledge,  and  have  but

199  In  the  paper  which  he  communicated  to  the  Royal  Society,  announcing  his  dis-
covery, he,  well  knowing  the  empirical  character  of  the  English  mind,  apologizes  for
this  ;  and  says,  "  I  feel  much  reluctance  to  lay  my  thoughts  on  these  subjects  before
the  public  in  their  present  indigested  state,  and  without  having  been  able  to  bring  them
to  the  test  of  such  experiments  as  would  confirm  or  refute  them"     Watt's  Correspondence
on  the  Discovery  of  the  Composition  of  Water,  pp.  77,  78.     Eleven  months  earlier,  that  is
in  December,  1782,  he  writes  (Ibid.  p.  4)  :    "  Dr.  Priestley  has  made  a  most  surprising
discovery,  which  seems  to  confirm  my  theory  of  water's  undergoing  some  very  remarkable
change  at  the  point  where  all  its  latent  heat  would  be  changed  into  sensible  heat."

200  "He"   (i.e.  Cavendish)  "here  omits  entirely  the  consideration  of  latent  heat;
an  omission  which  he  even  attempts  to  justify  in  one  of  the  passages  interpolated  by
Blagden.     But  it  is  well  known  to  every  one  acquainted  with  the  first  principles  of
chemical  science,  even  as  it  was  taught  in  the  days  of  Black,  and  it  was  indisputably
familiar  to  Mr.  Watt,  that  no  aeriform  fluid  can  be  converted  into  a  liquid,  nor  any  liquid
into  a  solid,  without  the  evolution  of  heat,  previously  latent.     This  essential  part  of
the  process,  Mr.  Cavendish's  theory  does  not  embrace  ;  but  without  it  no  theory  on
the  subject  can  be  complete  ;  and  it  will  presently  be  seen  that  Mr.  Watt  took  it  fully
into  account."     Muirhead's  Life  of  Watt,  p.  315.

201  "  Cavendish  and  Watt  both  discovered  the  composition  of  water.     Cavendish
established  the  facts  ;  Watt  the  idea."  ..."  The  attaching  too  high  a  value  to  the  mere
facts  is  often  a  sign  of  a  want  of  ideas."     Liebigs  Letters  on  Chemistry,  London,  1851,
p.  48.     The  last  sentence  of  this  illustrious  philosopher,  which  I  have  put  in  italics,
should  be  well  pondered  in  England.     If  I  had  my  way,  it  should  be  engraved  in  letters
of  gold  over  the  portals  of  the  Royal  Society  and  of  the  Royal  Institution.

[*  As  Watt  followed  the  method  of  Newton,  Priestley,  Dalton,  and  Davy  ;  and
as  Buckle  has  above  admitted  that  a  deductive  tendency  was  clearly  exhibited  in  English
science  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the  expression  in  the  text  is  inappro-
priate.— ED.]


862  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

skimmed  the  surface  of  things,  are  expected  to  infer  that  there  must  be  a  point
in  the  chain  of  existence  where  both  structure  and  function  suddenly  cease,
and  after  which  we  may  vainly  search  for  signs  of  life.  It  would  be  difficult
to  conceive  a  conclusion  more  repugnant  to  the  whole  march  and  analogy  of
modern  thought.  In  every  department  the  speculations  of  the  greatest  thinkers
are  constantly  tending  to  co-ordinate  all  phenomena,  and  to  regard  them  as
different  indeed  in  degree,  but  by  no  means  as  different  in  kind.  Formerly
men  were  content  to  ground  their  conviction  of  this  difference  in  kind  on  the
evidence  of  the  eye,  which,  on  a  cursory  inspection,  saw  an  organization  in
some  bodies,  and  not  in  others.  From  the  organization  they  inferred  the  life,
and  supposed  that  plants,  for  instance,  had  life,  but  that  minerals  had  none.
This  sort  of  argument  was  long  deemed  satisfactory  ;  but  in  the  course  of  time
it  broke  down  ;  more  evidence  was  required,  and  since  the  middle  of  the  seven-
teenth century  it  has  been  universally  admitted  jthat  the  eye,  by  itself,  is  an
untrustworthy  witness,  and  that  we  must  employ  the  microscope,  instead  of
relying  on  the  unaided  testimony  of  our  own  puny  and  precarious  senses.  But
the  microscope  is  steadily  improving,  and  we  cannot  tell  what  limits  there  are
to  its  capacity  for  improvement.  Consequently,  we  cannot  tell  what  fresh
secrets  it  may  disclose.  Neither  can  we  say  that  it  may  not  be  altogether  super-
seded by  some  new  artificial  resource,  which  shall  furnish  us  with  evidence  as
superior  to  any  yet  supplied,  as  our  present  evidence  is  superior  to  that  of  the
naked  eye.  Even  already,  and  notwithstanding  the  shortness  of  the  time
during  which  the  microscope  has  been  a  really  effective  instrument,  it  has  re-
vealed to  us  organizations  the  existence  of  which  no  one  had  previously  sus-
pected. It  has  proved  that  what  for  thousands  of  years  had  been  deemed
mere  specks  of  inert  matter,  are  in  truth  animals  possessing  most  of  the  functions
which  we  possess,  reproducing  their  species  in  regular  and  orderly  succession,
and  endowed  with  a  nervous  system,  which  shows  that  they  must  be  susceptible
of  pain  and  enjoyment.  It  has  detected  life  hidden  in  the  glaciers  of  Switzerland  ;
it  has  found  it  embedded  in  the  polar  ice  ;  and  if  it  can  nourish  there  it  is  hard
to  say  from  what  quarter  it  can  be  shut  out.  So  unwilling,  however,  are  most
men  to  relinquish  old  notions,  that  the  resources  of  chemistry  have  been  called
in  to  ascertain  the  supposed  difference  between  organic  and  inorganic  matter  ;
it  being  asserted  that  in  the  organic  world  there  is  a  greater  complexity  of
molecular  combination  than  in  the  inorganic.202  Chemists  further  assert  that
in  organic  nature  there  is  a  predominance  of  carbon,  and  in  inorganic  a  pre
dominance  of  silicon.203  But  chemical  analysis,  like  microscopic  observation,
is  making  such  rapid  strides  that  each  generation,  I  had  almost  said  each  year,
is  unsettling  some  of  the  conclusions  previously  established  ;  so  that  now,  and
for  a  long  time  hence,  we  must  regard  those  conclusions  as  empirical,  and  indeed
as  merely  tentative.  Surely  a  permanent  and  universal  inference  cannot  be
drawn  from  shifting  and  precarious  facts,  which  are  admitted  to-day  and  may
be  overthrown  to-morrow.  It  would  therefore  appear  that  in  favour  of  the
opinion  that  some  bodies  are  living  and  that  others  are  dead,  we  have  nothing
except  the  circumstance  that  our  researches,  so  far  as  they  have  yet  gone,  have
shown  that  cellular  structure,  growth,  and  reproduction  are  not  the  invariable
properties  of  matter,  but  are  excluded  from  a  large  part  of  the  visible  world,
which  on  that  account  we  call  inanimate.  This  is  the  whole~of  the  argument

202  "  Organic  substances,   whether  directly   derived  from   the  vegetable  or  animal
kingdom,  or  produced  by  the  subsequent  modification  of  bodies  which  thus  originate,
are  remarkable  as  a  class  for  a  degree  of  complexity  of  constitution  far  exceeding  that
observed  in  any  of  the  compounds  yet  described."     Fownes"  Chemistry,  3rd  edit.,  London,
1850,  p.  353.     I  quote  this,  as  the  first  authority  at  hand,  for  a  doctrine  which  is  univer-
sally admitted  by  chemists,  and  which  is  indubitably  true,  so  far  as  our  experiments
have  at  present  extended.

203  "  AS  the  organic  world  is  characterized  by  the  predominance,  in  quantity,  of
carbon,  so  the  mineral  or  inorganic  world  is  marked  by  a  similar  predominance  of  silicon."
Turner's  Chemistry,  edited  by  Liebig  and  Gregory,  vol.  ii.  p.  678,  London,  1847.


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  863

on  that  side  of  the  question.  On  the  other  side,  we  have  the  fact  that  our  sight,
and  the  artificial  instruments  by  whose  aid  we  have  arrived  at  this  conclusion,
are  confessedly  imperfect  ;  and  we  have  the  further  fact  that,  imperfect  as  they
are,  they  have  proved  that  the  organic  kingdom  is  infinitely  more  extensive
than  the  boldest  dreamer  had  ever  imagined,  while  they  have  not  been  able
to  enlarge  the  boundaries  of  the  inorganic  kingdom  to  anything  like  the  same
amount.  This  shows  that,  so  far  as  our  opinions  are  concerned,  the  balance
is  steadily  inclining  in  one  given  direction  ;  in  other  words,  as  our  knowledge
advances,  a  belief  in  the  organic  is  encroaching  upon  a  belief  in  the  inorganic.204
When  we  moreover  add  that  all  science  is  manifestly  converging  towards  one
simple  and  general  theory,  which  shall  cover  the  whole  range  of  material  phe-
nomena, and  that,  at  each  successive  step,  some  irregularities  are  explained
away,  and  some  inequalities  are  reduced,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  such
a  movement  tends  to  weaken  those  old  distinctions,  the  reality  of  which  has
been  too  hastily  assumed  ;  and  that  in  their  place  we  must  sooner  or  later
substitute  the  more  comprehensive  view  that  life  is  a  property  of  all  matter,
and  that  the  classification  of  bodies  into  animate  and  inanimate,  or  into  organic
and  inorganic,  is  merely  a  provisional  arrangement,  convenient,  perhaps,  for
our  present  purposes,  but  which,  like  all  similar  divisions,  will  eventually  be
merged  in  a  higher  and  wider  scheme.

Until  however  that  step  is  taken,  we  must  be  content  to  reason  according  to  the
evidence  supplied  by  our  imperfect  instruments,  or  by  our  still  more  imperfect
senses.  We  therefore  recognize  the  difference  between  organic  and  inorganic
nature,  not  as  a  scientific  truth,  but  as  a  scientific  artifice,  by  which  we  separate
in  idea  what  is  inseparable  in  fact  ;  hoping  in  this  way  to  pursue  our  course  with
the  greater  ease,  and  ultimately  to  obtain  results  which  will  make  the  artifice
needless.  Assuming  then  this  division,  we  may  refer  all  investigations  of  organic
bodies  to  one  of  two  objects.  The  first  object  is  to  ascertain  the  law  of  those  bodies
in  their  usual  healthy,  or  as  we  somewhat  erroneously  phrase  it,  normal  course.
The  other  object  is  to  ascertain  their  law  in  their  unusual,  unhealthy,  or  abnormal
course.  When  we  attempt  to  do  the  first  of  these  things  we  are  physiologists.
When  we  attempt  to  do  the  second  we  are  pathologists.205

Physiology  and  pathology  are  thus  the  two  fundamental  divisions  of  all  organic
science.206  Each  is  intimately  connected  with  the  other  ;  and  eventually,  no

204  I  mean,  of  course,  to  apply,  this  remark  only  to  the  globe  we  inhabit,  and  not  to
extra-terrestrial  phenomena.     Respecting  the  organization  or  non -organization  of  what
exists  out  of  this  earth,  we  have  no  evidence,  and  can  hardly  expect  to  have  any  for
centuries.      Inferences    have    indeed    been  drawn  from   telescopic   observations ;  and
attempts  are  now  being  made,  abroad,  to  determine  by  a  still  more  refined  process  the
physical  composition  of  some  of  the  heavenly  bodies.     But  without  venturing,  in  this
note,  to  enter  into  such  discussions,  or  even  to  state  their  purport,  I  may  say  that  the
difficulty  of  verification  will  long  prove  an  insuperable  barrier  to  our  knowledge  of  the
truth  or  falsehood  of  any  results  which  may  be  obtained.

205  Mr.  Simon,  in  his  thoughtful  and  suggestive  Lectures,  says,  "  We  may  describe  path-
ology to  consist   in  the  Science  of  Life   under  other  conditions    than   those  of  ideal
perfection."     Simon's  Lectures  on  Pathology,  London,  1850,  p.  14.     This  is  by  far  the  best
description  I  have  met  with  ;  though,  as  it  involves  a  negative,  it  cannot  be  accepted  as
a  definition.     Indeed,  the  context  shows  that  Mr.  Simon  does  not  suppose  it  to  be  one.

206  In  my  former  volume  I  adopted  the  commonly  received  division  of  organic  statics
and  organic  dynamics  ;    the  statics  being  anatomy,  and  the  dynamics  being  physiology.
But  I  now  think  that  our  knowledge  is  not  sufficiently  advanced  to  make  this  so  conve-
nient as  the  division  into  physiological  ami  pathological,  or  into  normal  and  abnormal,  pro-
vided we  remember  that  in  reality  nothing  is  abnormal.     The  practically  useful  but  emi-
nently unscientific  doctrine  that  there  can  be  alteration  of  function  without  alteration  of
structure,  has  effaced  some  of  the  most  essential  distinctions  between  anatomy  and  physi-
ology and  especially  between  morbid  anatomy  and  morbid  physiology.     Until  those  dis-
tinctions are  recognized,  the  scientific  conceptions  of  professional  writers  must  be  confused,
ihowever  valuable  their  practical  suggestions  may  be.     While  men  ace  capable  of  bfiliev4ng


864  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

doubt,  both  will  be  fused  into  a  single  study  by  the  discovery  of  laws  which  will
prove  that  here  as  elsewhere  nothing  is  really  abnormal  or  irregular.  Hitherto,
however,  the  physiologists  have  immeasurably  outstripped  the  pathologists  in
the  comprehensiveness  of  their  views,  and  therefore  in  the  value  of  their  results.
For  the  best  physiologists  distinctly  recognize  that  the  basis  of  their  science  must
include  not  only  the  animals  below  man,  but  also  the  entire  vegetable  kingdom,
and  that,  without  this  commanding  survey  of  the  whole  realm  of  organic  nature,  we
cannot  possibly  understand  even  human  physiology,  still  less  general  physiology.
The  pathologists,  on  the  other  hand,  are  so  much  in  arrear.  that  the  diseases  of  the
lower  animals  rarely  form  part  of  their  plan  ;  while  the  diseases  of  plants  are
almost  entirely  neglected,  although  it  is  certain  that  until  all  these  have  been
studied,  and  some  steps  taken  to  generalize  them,  every  pathological  conclusion
will  be  eminently  empirical,  on  account  of  the  narrowness  of  the  field  from  which
it  is  collected.

The  science  of  pathology  being  still  so  backward  in  the  conception,  as  well  as  in
the  execution,  that  even  men  of  real  ability  believe  that  it  can  be  raised  from  a
mere  study  of  the  human  frame,  it  will  hardly  be  expected  that  the  Scotch,  not-
withstanding the  marvellous  boldness  of  their  speculations,  should  have  been
able  in  the  eighteenth  century  to  anticipate  a  method  which  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury has  yet  to  employ.  But  they  produced  two  pathologists  of  great  ability,
and  to  whom  we  owe  considerable  obligations.  These  were  Cullen  and  John
Hunter.  207  Cullen  was  eminent  only  as  a  pathologist  ;  but  Hunter,
whose  fine  and  discursive  genius  took  a  much  wider  range,  was  great  both
in  physiology  and  in  pathology.  A  short  account  of  their  generalizations
respecting  organic  science  will  be  a  fitting  sequel  to  the  notices  I  have  already
given  of  what  was  done  by  their  countrymen  for  inorganic  science  during  the
same  period.  It  will  complete  our  survey  of  the  Scotch  intellect,  and  will  enable
the  reader  to  form  some  idea  of  the  brilliant  achievements  of  that  most  remarkable
people,  who,  contrary  to  the  course  of  affairs  in  all  other  modern  nations,  have
shown  that  scientific  discoveries  do  not  necessarily  weaken  superstition,*  and  that
it  is  possible  for  two  hostile  principles  to  flourish  side  by  side  without  ever
coming  into  actual  collision,  or  without  sensibly  impairing  each  other's  vigour.

In  1751  Cullen  was  appointed  professor  of  medicine  in  the  University  of
Glasgow  ;  208  from  which,  however,  in  1756,  he  was  removed  to  the  University  of

that  it  is  possible  for  variations  of  function  to  proceed  from  any  cause  except  variations
of  structure,  the  philosophic  importance  of  anatomy  will  be  imperfectly  appreciated,  and
its  true  relation  to  physiology  will  remain  undefined.  Inasmuch  however  as,  with  our
actual  resources,  the  most  careful  dissection  is  often  unable  to  detect  (in  insanity,  for
instance)  those  changes  of  structure  which  produce  changes  of  function,  superficial
thinkers  are  placed  under  a  strong  temptation  to  deny  their  invariable  connexion  ;  and
while  the  microscope  is  so  imperfect,  and  chemistry  so  backward,  it  is  impossible  that
experiments  should  always  convince  them  of  their  mistake.  Hence  I  believe  that  until
our  means  of  empirical  research  are  greatly  improved,  all  such  investigations,  notwith-
standing their  immense  value  in  other  respects,  will  tend  to  lead  mere  inductive  minds
into  error,  by  making  them  rely  too  much  on  what  they  call  the  facts  of  the  case,  to  the
prejudice  of  the  reason.  This  is  what  I  mean  by  saying  that  our  knowledge  is  not  suffi-
ciently advanced  to  make  it  advisable  to  divide  the  sciences  of  organic  "bodies  into  physi-
ological and  anatomical.  At  present,  and  probably  for  some  time  yet,  the  humbler
division  into  physiological  and  pathological  may  be  deemed  safer,  and  more  likely  to
produce  solid  results.

207  Hunter,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  did  take  an  extraordinarily  comprehensive  view
of  pathology,  including  the  whole  of  the  organic  world,  and  even  the  aberrations  of  form
in  the  inorganic.

208  Thomson's  Life  of  Cullen,  vol.  i.  p.  70,  Edinburgh,  1832.

[*  The  phrasing  here  is  loose  and  misleading.  Scientific  discoveries  do  weaken  super-
stition in  those  who  know  or  assimilate  them.  In  Scotland  the  trouble  was  that  the
science  was  unknown  to  the  superstitious  mass. — ED.},


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  865

Edinburgh, 20'J  where  he  delivered  those  celebrated  lectures  on  which  his  fame
now  depends.  During  the  early  part  of  his  career  he  paid  great  attention  to
inorganic  physics,  and  propounded  some  remarkable  speculations,  which  are
supposed  to  have  suggested  the  theory  of  latent  heat  to  Black,  who  was  his  pupil.210
But  to  follow  out  those  views  would  have  required  a  number  of  minute  experi-
ments, which  it  did  not  suit  the  habit  of  his  mind  to  make.  Having  therefore  put
forth  his  ideas,  he  left  them  to  germinate,  and  passed  on  to  his  arduous  attempt  to
generalize  the  laws  of  disease  as  they  are  exhibited  in  the  human  frame.  In  the
study  of  disease,  the  phenomena  being  more  obscure  and  less  amenable  to  experi-
ment, there  was  greater  latitude  for  speculation ;  hence  he  could  more  easily  indulge
in  that  love  of  theory  which  was  his  ruling  passion,  and  with  an  extreme  devotion
to  which  he  has  been  reproached.211  That  the  reproach  is  not  altogether  unjust,
must,  I  think,  be  admitted,  since  we  find  him  laying  down  the  doctrine  that
inasmuch  as  in  the  treatment  of  disease,  theory  could  not  be  separated  from
practice,  it  was  unimportant  which  came  first.212  This  was  tantamount  to  saying
that  a  medical  practitioner  might  allow  his  theories  to  control  his  observations  ;
for  it  is  certain  that  in  an  immense  majority  of  cases  men  are  so  tenacious  of  the
opinions  they  imbibe,  that  whatever  in  any  pursuit  first  occupies  their  under-
standing is  likely  to  mould  all  that  comes  afterwards.  In  ordinary  minds,
associations  of  ideas,  if  firmly  established,  become  indissoluble  ;  and  the  power
of  separating  them,  and  of  arranging  them  in  new  combinations,  is  one  of  the
rarest  of  our  endowments.  An  average  intellect,  when  once  possessed  by  a  theory,
can  hardly  ever  escape  from  it.  Hence,  in  practical  matters,  theory  should  be
feared  just  as  in  scientific  matters  it  should  be  cherished  ;  because  practical
pursuits  are  chiefly  engrossed  by  the  lower  class  of  minds,  where  associations  and
the  force  of  prejudice  are  extremely  strong,  while  scientific  pursuits  concern  the
higher  class,  where  such  prepossessions  are  comparatively  weak  and  where  close
associations  are  more  easily  severed.  The  most  powerful  intellects  are  most
accustomed  to  new  arrangements  of  thought,  and  are  therefore  most  able  to
break  up  old  ones.  On  them  belief  sits  lightly,  because  they  well  know  how
little  evidence  we  have  for  many  of  even  our  oldest  beliefs.  But  the  average,  or  as
we  must  say,  without  meaning  offence,  the  inferior  minds,  are  not  disturbed  by
these  refinements.  Theories  which  they  have  once  heartily  embraced  they  can
hardly  ever  get  rid  of,  and  they  often  dignify  them  with  the  name  of  essential
truths,  and  resent  every  attack  upon  them  as  a  personal  injury.  Having
inherited  such  theories  from  their  fathers,  they  regard  them  with  a  sort  of  filial
piety,  and  cling  to  them  as  if  they  were,  some  rich  acquisition  which  no  one  has
a  right  to  touch.

To  this  latter  class  nearly  all  men  belong  who  are  more  engaged  in  practical
pursuits  than  in  speculative  ones.      Among  them  are  the  ordinary  practitioners,

209  Thomson's  Life  of  Cullen,  vol.  i.  p.  96.     Bower  states  that  Cullen  "  was  appointed
to  the  chair  in  1755."     Bower's  History  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  ii.  p.  216,
Edinburgh,  1817.

210  "It  seems  impossible  to  peruse  the  passages  I  have  quo  ted  from  Dr.  Cullen  s  manu-
script lectures  and  papers,  and  from  his  Essay  on  Evaporation,  without  perceiving  that  his
investigations  with  regard  to  the  heat  and  cold  occasioned  by  the  combination,  lique-
faction, and  evaporation  of  bodies,  must  not  only  have  assisted  to  direct  the  attention  of
his  pupil  Dr.  Black  to  similar  inquiries,  but  must  also  have  furnished  him  with  several
of  the  data  from  which  his  simple  and  comprehensive  theory  of  Latent  Heat  was  after-
wards so  philosophically  deduced."     Thomson's  Life  of  Cullen,  vol.  i.  p.  56.

211  "  It  is  allowed  by  the  admirers  of  this  great  man,  that  he  was  perhaps  too  fond  of
theory."     Bower's  History  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  iii.  p.  278.

212  In  1759  he  wrote  to  Dr.  Balfour  Russell,  one  of  his  favourite  pupils  :  "  You  will  not
find  it  possible  to  separate  practice  from  theory  altogether  ;   and  therefore,  if  you  have  a
mind  to  begin  with  the  theory,  I  have  no  objection."      Thomson's  Life  of  Cullen,  vol.  i.
p  130.     Compare  his  Introductory  Lectures  to  the  Practice  of  Physic,  where,  asserting  truly
"'that  reasoning  in  physic  is  unavoidable  "  (Cullen' s  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  417),  he  boldly  infers
11  that  to  render  it  safe,  it  is  necessary  to  cultivate  theory  in  its  full  extent."


866  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

whether  in  medicine  or  in  any  other  department,  extremely  few  of  whom  are
willing  to  break  up  trains  of  thought  to  which  they  are  inured.213  Though  they
profess  to  despise  theory,  they  are  in  reality  enslaved  by  it.  All  that  they  can
do  is  to  conceal  their  subjection  by  terming  their  theory  a  necessary  belief.
It  must  therefore  be  deemed  a  remarkable  proof  of  Cullen's  love  of  deductive
reasoning,  that  he,  sagacious  and  clear-sighted  as  he  was,  should  have  supposed
that, in  so  practical  an  art  as  medicine,  theory  could  with  impunity  precede  practice,
For  it  is  most  assuredly  true  that,  taking  men  in  the  average,  their  minds  are  so
constructed  that  it  cannot  precede  it  without  controlling  it.  It  is  equally  true
that  such  control  must  be  hurtful.  Even  now,  and  notwithstanding  the  great
steps  which  have  been  taken  in  morbid  anatomy,  in  animal  chemistry,  and  in
the  microscopic  investigation  both  of  the  fluids  and  solids  of  the  human  frame,
the  treatment  of  disease  is  a  question  of  art  far  more  than  a  question  of  science.
What  chiefly  characterizes  the  most  eminent  physicians,  and  gives  them  their
feal  superiority,  is  not  so  much  the  extent  of  their  theoretical  knowledge, —
though  that  too  is  often  considerable, — but  it  is  that  fine  and  delicate  perception
Which  they  owe  partly  to  experience,  and  partly  to  a  natural  quickiiess  in  detecting
analogies  and  differences  which  escape  ordinary  observers.  The  process  which
they  follow  is  one  of  rapid  and  in  some  degree  unconscious  induction.  And  this
is  the  reason  why  the  greatest  physiologists  and  chemists  whom  the  medical
profession  possesses  are  riot  as  a  matter  of  course  the  best  curers  of  disease.  If
medicine  were  a  science  they  would  always  be  the  best.  But  medicine,  being
still  essentially  an  art,  depends  mainly  upon  qualities  which  each  practitioner
has  to  acquire  for  himself,  and  which  no  scientific  theory  can  teach.  The  time
for  a.  general  theory  has  not  yet  come,  and  probably  many  generations  will  have
to  elapse  before  it  does  come.  To  suppose,  therefore,  that  a  theory  of  disease
should  as  a  matter  of  education  precede  the  treatment  of  disease,  is
not  only  practically  dangerous  but  logically  false.  With  its  practical  danger
I  am  not  now  concerned  ;  but  its  logical  aspect  is  a  curious  illustration  of  that
passion  for  systematic  and  dialectic  reasoning  which  characterized  Scotland.
It  shows  that  Cullen,  in  his  eagerness  to  argue  from  principles  to  facts,  instead
of  from  facts  to  principles,  could  in  the  most  important  of  all  arts  recommend
a  method  of  procedure  for  which  even  our  knowledge  is  not  ripe,  but  which  in
his  time  was  so  singularly  rash  and  immature  that  nothing  can  explain  its
adoption  by  a  man  of  such  vigorous  understanding,  except  the  circumstance
of  his  living  in  a  country  in  which  that  peculiar  method  reigned  supreme.

It  must  however  be  admitted  that  Cullen  wielded  the  method  with  great
ability,  especially  in  his  application  of  it  to  the  science  of  pathology,  to  which  it  was
far  better  suited  than  to  the  art  of  therapeutics.  For  we  must  always  remember
that  the  science  which  investigates  the  laws  of  disease  is  quite  a  different  thing
from  the  art  which  cures  it.  The  science  has  a  speculative  interest  which  is
irrespective  of  all  practical  considerations,  and  which  depends  simply  on  the
fact  that,  when  it  is  completed,  it  will  explain  the  aberrations  of  the  whole
organic  world.  Pathology  aims  at  ascertaining  the  causes  which  determine  every
departure  from  the  natural  type,  whether,  of  form  or  of  function.  Hence  it  is
that  no  one  can  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  actual  state  of  knowledge
without  studying  the  theoretic  relations  between  pathology  and  other  depart-
ments of  inquiry.  To  do  this  is  the  business  not  of  practical  men,  but  of  philoso-
phers, properly  so-called.  The  philosophic  pathologist  is  as  different  from  the
physician  as  a  jurist  is  different  from  an  advocate,  or  as  an  agricultural  chemist

213  Even  Cullen  himself  says  rather  roughly,  "  The  great  horde  of  physicians  are  always
servile  imitators,  who  can  neither  perceive  nor  correct  the  faults  of  their  system,  and
are  always  ready  to  growl  at  and  even  to  worry  the  ingenious  person  that  could  attempt
it.  Thus  was  the  system  of  Galen  secured  in  the  possession  of  the  schools  of  physic,
till  soon  after  the  irruption  of  the  Goths  and  Vandals  destroyed  every  vestige  of  literature
in  the  western  parts  of  Europe,  and  drove  all  that  remained  of  it  to  seek  a  feeble  protec-
tion at  Constantinople."  Lectures  Introductory  to  the  Practice  of  Physic,  in  Cullen's
Works,  vol.  i.  p.  386,  Edinburgh,  1827.


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  867

is  different  from  a  farmer,  or  as  a  political  economist  is  different  from  a  statesman,
or  as  an  astronomer,  who  generalizes  the  laws  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  is  different
from  a  captain  who  navigates  his  ship  by  a  practical  application  of  those  laws.
The  two  sets  of  functions  may  be  united,  and  occasionally,  though  very  rarely,
they  are,  but  there  is  no  necessity  for  their  being  so.  While,  therefore,  it  would
be  absurdly  presumptuous  for  an  unprofessional  person  to  pass  judgment  on  the
therapeutical  system  of  Cullen,  it  is  perfectly  legitimate  for  any  one  who  has
studied  the  theory  of  these  matters  to  examine  his  pathological  system  ;  because
that,  like  all  scientific  systems,  must  be  amenable  to  general  considerations,  which
are  to  be  taken  partly  from  the  adjoining  sciences,  and  partly  from  the  universal
logic  of  philosophic  method.

It  is  from  this  latter  or  logical  point  of  view  that  Cullen's  pathology  is  interest-
ing for  the  purposes  of  the  present  chapter.  The  character  of  his  investigations
may  be  illustrated  by  saying  that  his  method  in  pathology  is  analogous  to  that
which  Adam  Smith  adopted  at  the  same  time,  though  in  a  very  different  field.
Both  were  deductive  ;  and  both,  before  arguing  deductively/suppressed  some  of
the  premisses  from  which  they  reasoned.  That  this  suppression  is  the  key  to
Adam  Smith's  method,  and  was  an  intentional  part  of  his  plan,  I  have  already
shown  ;  as  also  that  in  each  of  his  two  works  he  supplied  the  premisses  in
which  the  other  work  was  deficient.  In  this  respect  he  was  far  superior  to
Cullen.  For  though  Cullen,  like  Smith,  began  by  mutilating  his  problem  in  order
to  solve  it  more  readily,  he,  unlike  Smith,  did  not  see  the  necessity  of  instituting
another  and  parallel  inquiry  which  should  complete  the  scheme,  by  starting
from  the  premisses  that  had  been  previously  omitted.

What  I  have  termed  the  mutilation  of  the  problem  was  effected  by  Cullen  in  the
following  manner.  His  object  was  to  generalize  the  phenomena  of  disease  as
they  are  exhibited  in  the  human  frame  ;  and  it  was  obvious  to  him,  as  to  every
one  else,  that  the  human  frame  consists  partly  of  solids  and  partly  of  fluids.  The
peculiarity  of  his  pathology  is  that  he  reasons  almost  entirely  from  the  laws  of
the  solids,  and  makes  so  little  account  of  the  fluids  that  .he  will  only  allow  them  to
be  the  indirect  causes  of  disease,  which  in  a  scientific  view  are  to  be  deemed  strictly
subordinate  to  the  direct  causes,  as  represented  by  the  solid  constituents  of  our
body.214  This  assumption,  though  false,  was  perfectly  justifiable,  since  by  cur-
tailing the  problem  he  simplified  its  study  ;  just  as  Adam  Smith,  in  his  Wealth
of  Nations,  simplified  the  study  of  human  nature  by  curtailing  it  of  all  its  sym-
pathy. But  this  most  comprehensive  thinker  was  careful,  in  his  Theory
of  Moral  Sentiments,  to  restore  to  human  nature  the  quality  of  which  the  Wealth
of  Nations  had  deprived  it*;  and  by  thus  establishing  two  different  lines  of  argu-
ment, he  embraced  the  whole  subject.  In  the  same  way  it  was  incumbent  on
Cullen,  after  having  constructed  a  theory  of  disease  by  reasoning  from  the  solids,
to  have  constructed  another  theory  by  reasoning  from  the  fluids  ;  so  that  a  co-
ordination of  the  two  theories  might  have  raised  a  science  of  pathology  as  com-
plete as  the  then  state  of  knowledge  allowed.21*  But  to  this  his  mind  was  unequal.

21*  This  idea  runs  through  the  whole  of  his  writings.  In  the  following  passage  it  is  more
succinctly  stated  than  in  any  other:  "  In  pathology,  and  in  the  prognosis  of  particular
diseases,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  enter  into  the  distinction  of  these  causes.  I  call  the
one  direct  causes,  those  which  act  upon  the  nervous  system  directly  ;  and  the  other
indirect  causes,  those  which  produce  the  same  effect,  but  by  destroying  those  organs
which  are  necessary  to  the  support  of  the  excitement,  viz.  the  whole  system  of  circulation."
Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  135.  Even  this  passage,  clear  as  it  seems,  can  only  be  rightly
interpreted  by  taking  the  context  into  consideration.

213  For,  as  is  truly  observed  by  probably  the  greatest  pathologist  of  our  time,  "  Humoral
pathology  is  simply  a  requirement  of  common  practical  sense  ;  and  it  has  always  held  a
place  in  medical  science,  although  the  limits  of  its  domain  have,  no  doubt,  been  variously
circumscribed  or  interpreted  at  different  times.  Of  late  years,  it  has  met  with  a  new
basis  and  support  in  morbid  anatomy,  which,  in  the  inadequacy  of  its  discoveries  in  the

*  [Buckle  appears  here  to  forget  that  the  Moral  Sentiments  appeared  long  before  the
Wealth  of  Nations. — ED.]


868  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Able  though  he  was,  he  lacked  the  grasp  of  intellect  which  characterized  Adam
Smith,  and  which  made  that  great  man  perceive  that  every  deductive  argument
which  is  founded  on  a  suppression  of  premisses  must  be  compensated  by  a
parallel  argument  which  takes  those  premisses  into  account.216  So  little  was
Cullen  aware  of  this,  that  having  built  up  that  system  of  pathology  which  is
known  to  medical  writers  as  Solidism,  he  never  took  the  pains  to  accompany  it
by  another  system  which  gave  the  first  rank  to  the  fluids.  On  the  contrary,
he  believed  that  his  plan  was  complete  and  exhaustive,  and  that  what  is  termed
Humoral  Pathology  was  a  fiction  which  had  too  long  usurped  the  place  of  truth.217

Several  of  the  views  advocated  by  Cullen  were  taken  from  Hoffmann,  and
several  of  the  facts  from  Gaubius  ;  but  that  his  pathology,  considered  as  a  whole,
is  essentially  original,  is  evident  from  a  certain  unity  of  design  which  is  inconsistent
with  extensive  plagiarism,  and  which  proves  that  he  had  thoroughly  thought  out
his  subject  for  himself.  Without,  however,  stopping  to  inquire  how  much  he
borrowed  from  others,  I  will  briefly  indicate  a  few  of  the  salient  points  of  his
system,  in  order  to  enable  the  reader  to  understand  its  general  character.

According  to  Cullen,  all  the  solids  in  the  human  body  are  either  simple  or  vital.
The  simple  solids  retain,  after  death,  the  properties  which  they  possessed  during
life.  But  the  vital  solids,  which  form  the  fundamental  part  of  the  nervous  system,
are  marked  by  properties  which  disappear  directly  death  occurs.218  Hence  the
simple  solids,  having  fewer  functions  than  the  vital,  have  also  fewer  diseases  ;
and  the  maladies  to  which  they  are  liable  admit  of  easy  classification.219  The
real  difficulty  lies  in  the  vital  solids,  because  on  their  peculiarities  the  whole
nervous  system  depends,  and  nearly  all  disorders  are  immediately  due  to  changes
in  them.  Cullen,  therefore,  made  the  nervous  system  the  basis  of  his  pathology  ;
and  in  speculating  on  its  functions,  he  assigned  the  chief  place  to  an  occult
principle,  which  he  termed  the  Animal  Power,  or  Energy,  of  the  brain.220  This

solids  to  account  for  disease  and  death,  has  been  compelled  to  seek  for  an  extension  of
its  boundary  through  a  direct  examination  of  the  blood  itself."  Rokitansky's  Patho-
logical Anatomy,  vol.  i.  p.  362,  London,  1854.

216  Unless,  as  in  the  case  in  geometry,  the  premisses,  which  are  suppressed,  are  so
slight  as  to  be  scarcely  perceptible.     [It  cannot  be  said  that  Smith  in  either  of  his  works
applies  one  theory  to  all  the  phenomena.     Thus  the  Wealth  of  Nations  does  not  make  good
any  deficiency  in  the  earlier  treatise  as  a  theory  of  morals.     The  books  are  therefore
not  truly  complementary. — ED.]

217  He  was  so  indignant  at  the  bare  idea  of  a  humoral  pathology,  that  even  Hoffmann,
who  before  himself  was  the  most  eminent  advocate  of  solidism,  fell  under  his  displeasure
for  allowing  some  little  weight  to  the  humoral  doctrines.     He  says  that  Hoffmann  "  has
not  applied  his  fundamental  doctrine  so  extensively  as  he  might  have  done  ;   and  he  has
everywhere  intermixed  an  humoral  pathology,  as  incorrect  and  hypothetical  as  any  other."
Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  410.      At  p.  470,  "  I  have,  therefore,  assumed  the  general
principles  of  Hoffmann.     And,  if  I  have  rendered  them  more  correct,  and  more  extensive
in  their  application,  and,  more  particularly,  if  I  have  avoided  introducing  the  many  hypo
thetical  doctrines  of  the  Humoral  Pathology  which  disfigured  both  his  and  all  the  other  systems
that  have  hitherto  prevailed,  I  hope  I  shall  be  excused  for  attempting  a  system  which,  upon
the  whole,  may  appear  new."

218  "  Xhe  solid  parts  of  the  body  seem  to  be  of  two  kinds  :   one  whose  properties  are
the  same  in  the  dead  as  in  the  living,  and  the  same  in  the  animate  as  in  many  inanimate
bodies  ;  the  other,  whose  properties  appear  only  in  living  bodies.     In  the  last,  a  peculiar
organization,  or  addition,  is  supposed  to  take  place  ;  in  opposition  to  which  the  first  are
called  the  simple  solids.      Of  these  only  we  shall  treat  here  ;    and  of  the  others,  which
may  be  called  vital  solids,  being  the  fundamental  part  of  the  nervous  system,  we  shall
treat  under  that  title  in  the  following  section."     Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  10.

219  These  diseases  are  laxity,  flaccidity,  &c.     See  the  enumeration  of  "  the  diseases
of  the  simple  solids,"  in  Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  14.

220  Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  65,  600,  vol.  ii.  p.  364.     Dr.  Thomson,  who  had  access
to  papers  and  lectures  of  Cullen's,  which  have  never  been  published,  says  (Life  of  Cullen,
vol.  i.  p.  265),  "  His  speculations  with  regard  to  the  different  functions  of  the  nervous
system,  but  more  particularly  with  regard  to  that  of  the  Animal  Power  or  Energy  of  the


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  869

principle  acted  on  the  vital  solids.  When  the  principle  worked  well,  the  body
was  healthy  ;  when  it  worked  ill,  the  body  was  unhealthy.  Since,  then,  the
state  of  the  vital  solids  was  the  main  cause  of  disorder,  and  since  the  Energy  of
the  brain  was  the  main  cause  of  the  state  of  the  vital  solids,  it  became  important
to  know  what  the  influences  were  which  acted  on  the  Energy,  because  in  them
we  should  find  the  beginning  of  the  series.  Those  influences  were  divided  by
Cullen  into  physical  and  mental.  The  physical  were  heat,  cold,  and  effluvia,
the  three  most  potent  of  the  material  disturbers  of  the,  human  frame.2-1  The
mental  influences,  which  excited  the  brain  to  act  on  the  solids,  were  comprised
under  six  different  heads,  namely,  the  will,  the  emotions,  the  appetites,  tin-
propensities,  and,  finally,  the  two  great  principles  of  habit  and  of  imitation,  on
which  he,  with  good  reason,  laid  considerable  stress.222  In  arguing  from  these
mental  causes,  and  in  generalizing  the  relations  between  them  and  the  sensations
of  the  body,  he,  faithful  to  his  favourite  method,  proceeded  deductively  from  the
metaphysical  principles  then  in  vogue,  without  inquiring  inductively  into  their
validity,  such  an  induction  being,  he  thought,  no  part  of  his  duty.223  He  was
too  anxious  to  get  on  with  his  dialectic  to  be  interrupted  by  so  trifling  a  matter
as  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  premisses  on  which  the  reasoning  rested.  What
he  did  in  the  metaphysical  part  of  his  pathology,  he  also  did  in  its  physical  part.
Although  the  blood  and  the  nerves  are  the  two  leading  features  of  the  human
economy,  he  did  not  search  into  them  by  a  separate  induction  ;  he  subjected
them  neither  to  chemical  experiments  in  order  to  learn  their  composition,  nor  to
microscopic  observations  in  order  to  learn  their  structure.224  This  is  the  more

brain,  were  incorporated  with  every  opinion  which  he  taught  concerning  the  phenomena
of  the  animal  economy,  the  causes  of  diseases,  and  the  operation  of  medicines  ;  and  they
may  be  said  to  constitute  a  most  important  part,  if  not  the  sole  basis,  of  that  system  of
the  Practice  of  Physic  which  he  made  the  subject  of  prelection,  as  well  as  of  study,  for
a  period  of  nearly  forty  years,  before  he  ventured  to  give  it  to  the  public."  I  should
mention  that  Cullen,  under  the  term  "  brain,"  included  the  contents  of  the  vertebral
column  as  well  as  of  the  cranium.

221  Culleris  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  40,  546,  558,  648,  vol.  ii.  p.  321.

222  Ibid.,  pp.  86,  91,  100,  101,  108,  115,  116,  553,  592,  vol.  ii.  pp.  35,  366.     Compare
the  summary  of  causes  in  Thomson's  Life  of  Cullen,  vol.  i.  p.  289.

223  He  says  (Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  31,  32),  "  Whoever  has  the  smallest  tincture  of  meta-
physics will  know  the  distinction  pointed  at  here  between  the  qualities  of  bodies  as  primary
and  secondary."  ..."  Whether  these  distinctions  be  well  or  ill  founded,  it  is  not  my
business  to  inquire"     But  though  he  did  not  deem  it  his  business  to  inquire  into  the
accuracy  of  these  and  similar  distinctions,  he  thought  himself  justified  in  assuming  them,
and  reasoning  from  them  as  if  they  could  explain  the  working  of  those  sensations  whose
perversion  formed  the  point  of  contact  between  metaphysics  and  pathology.     See,  for
instance,  in  his  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  46,  the  long  series  of  unproved  and  improvable  assertions
respecting  the  combination  and  comparison  of  sensations  giving  rise  to  memory,  imagina-
tion, and  the  like.

224  Cullen,  with 'that  admirable  candour  which  was  one  of  the  most  attractive  peculi-
arities of  his  fine  intellect,  confesses  his  want  of  acquaintance  with  the  microscope  :
"It  leaves  me,  who  am  not  conversant  in  such  observations,  altogether  uncertain  with
respect  to  the  precise  nature  of  this  part  of  the  blood."     Cullerfs  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  195.
A  pathologist  without  a  microscope  is  an  unarmed  man,  indeed.     In  regard  to  his  animal
chemistry,  one  passage  may  be  quoted  as  a  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which  he  arrived
at  conclusions  speculatively,   instead  of  subjecting   the  phenomena   to  experimental
investigation.     "  We  may  remark  it  to  be  highly  probable,  that  all  animal  matter  is
originally  formed  of  vegetable  ;   because  all  animals  either  feed  directly  and  entirely  on
vegetables,  or  upon  other  animals  that  do  so.      From  hence  it  is  probable  that  all  animal
substances  may  be  traced  to  a  vegetable  origin  ;   and  therefore,  if  we  would  inquire  into
the  production  of  animal  matter,  we  must  first  inquire  in  what  manner  vegetable  matter
may  be  converted  into  animal."     Cullen' s  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  177,  178.      The  therefore
and  the  must,  resulting  merely  from  an  antecedent  probability,  are  characteristic  of  that
over -boldness  into  which    deduction  is  apt  to  degenerate,  and  which  is  ^strongly  con-
trasted with  the  opposite  vice  of  over -timidity,  by  which  inductive  reasoners  are  tainted.


870  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

observable,  because  though  we  must  admit  that  animal  chemistry  was  then
generally  neglected,  and  that  its  real  meaning  was  scarcely  understood  until  the
wonderful  labours  of  Berzelius  revealed  its  importance,  still  the  microscope  was
ready  to  Cullen's  hands  ;  it  having  been  invented  a  hundred  and  fifty  years
before  he  completed  his  pathology,  and  having  been  in  common  scientific  use  for
about  a  hundred  years.  But  his  love  of  synthesis  overcame  him.  His  system
is  constructed  by  reasoning  from  general  principles  ;  and  of  that  process  he
certainly  was  a  consummate  master.  Between  the  premisses  and  the  conclusion
he  hardly  ever  lets  error  creep  in.  And  in  reference  to  the  results  of  his  specula-
tions, he  had  one  immense  merit  which  will  always  secure  to  him  a  conspicuous
place  in  the  history  of  pathology.  By  insisting  on  the  importance  of  the  solids,
he,  one-sided  though  he  was,  corrected  the  equal  one-sidedness  of  his  predeces-
sors ;  for,  with  extremely  few  exceptions,  all  the  best  pathologists,  from  Galen
downwards,  had  erred  in  ascribing  too  much  to  the  fluids,  and  had  upheld  a
purely  humoral  pathology.  Cullen  turned  the  minds  of  men  in  the  other  direc-
tion ;  and  though,  in  teaching  them  that  the  nervous  system  is  the  sole  primary
seat  of  disease,  he  committed  a  great  mistake,  it  was  a  mistake  of  the  most
salutary  kind.  By  leaning  on  that  side,  he  restored  the  balance.  Hence,  I  have
no  doubt,  he  indirectly  encouraged  those  minute  researches  into  the  nerves
which  he  would  not  himself  stop  to  make,  but  which,  in  the  next  generation,
gave  rise  to  the  capital  discoveries  of  Bell,  Shaw,  Mayo,  and  Marshall  Hall.
At  the  same  time,  the  old  humoral  pathology,  which  had  prevailed  for  many
centuries,  was  practically  pernicious,  because,  assuming  that  all  diseases  are  in
the  blood,  it  produced  that  constant  and  -indiscriminate  venesection  which
destroyed  innumerable  lives,  besides  the  irreparable  injury  it  often  inflicted  both
on  body  and  mind  ;  weakening  those  whom  it  was  unable  to  slay.  Against  this
merciless  onslaught,  which  made  medicine  the  curse  of  mankind,  the  Solid
Pathology  was  the  first  effective  barrier.225  Practically,  therefore,  as  well  as
speculatively,  we  must  hail  Cullen  as  a  great  benefactor  of  his  species  ;  and  we
must  regard  his  appearance  as  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  human  comfort,  as
well  as  in  the  history  of  human  thought.

It  may  perhaps  facilitate  the  conceptions  of  unprofessional  readers  if  I  give,
in  as  few  words  as  possible,  a  specimen  of  the  way  in  which  Cullen  employed  his
method  in  investigating  the  theory  of^  some  one  class  of  diseases.  For  this

223  Dr.  Watson  (Principles  and  Practice  of  Physic,  4th  edit.  London,  1857,  vol.  i.  p.  41 )
says  of  the  humoral  pathology,  that  "  the  absurdity  of  the  hypotheses,  and  still  more
the  dangerous  practice  which  this  doctrine  generated,  began  to  be  manifest,  and  led  to  its
total  abandonment."  But,  with  every  respect  for  this  eminent  authority,  I  venture  to
observe  that  this  supposition  of  Dr.  Watson's  is  contradicted  by  the  whole  history  of  the
human  mind.  There  is  no  well -attested  case  on  record  of  any  theory  having  been
abandoned  because  it  produced  dangerous  results.  As  long  as  a  theory  is  believed,  men
will  ascribe  its  evil  consequences  to  any  cause  except  the  right  one.  [This  is  an  ignoratio
elenchi  :  Watson  assumed  recognized  evil  results. — ED.]  And  a  theory  which  is  once
established  will  always  be  believed,  until  there  is  some  change  in  knowledge  which  shc-kes
its  foundation.  Every  practical  change  may,  by  careful  analysis,  be  shown  to  depend  in
the  first  instance  on  some  change  of  speculative  opinions.  Even  at  the  present  day  many
doctrines  are  generally  held  in  the  most  civilized  countries  which  are  producing  dangerous
practical  consequences,  and  have  produced  those  consequences  for  centuries.  But  the
mischief  which  the  doctrine  engenders  does  not  weaken  the  doctrine  itself.  Nothing
can  do  that  but  the  general  progress  of  knowledge,  which,  by  altering  former  opinions,
modifies  future  conduct.  [This  argument  resolves  itself  into  a  contradiction.  First
"  change  of  speculative  opinions  "  is  posited  as  the  prime  factor  ;  then  "  the  general
progress  of  knowledge  " — the  latter  being  Buckle's  usual  doctrine.  He  has  fallen  into
contradiction  through  failing  to  note  that  "  the  mischief  which  the  doctrine  engenders  "
is  not  recognized  as  such  by  those  who  cling  to  the  doctrine.  Below,  pp.  891,  893,  he
affirms  that  the  deductive  method  does  not  diffuse  knowledge,  while  the  inductive  does,
because  "  facts  seern  to  come  home  to  every  one  and  are  undeniable."  There  is  a  radical
failure  of  co-ordination  in  these  concluding  reasonings. — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  871

purpose  I  will  select  his  doctrine  of  fever,  which,  though  now  generally  abandoned,
once  exercised  more  influence  than  any  other  part  of  his  pathology.  Here  as
elsewhere  he  reasons  from  the  solids.226  Disregarding  the  state  of  the  blood,
he  says  that  the  cause  of  all  fever  is  a  diminished  energy  of  the  brain.227  Such
diminution  may  be  produced  by  various  sedatives,  the  most  common  of  which
are  effluvia,  whether  marsh  or  human,  intemperance,  fear,  and  cold.228  Directly
the  energy  of  the  brain  is  impaired,  the  disease  begins.  Rapidly  passing  through
the  nervous  system,  its  first  palpable  effect  is  a  chill,  or  cold  fit,  which  is  accom-
panied by  a  spasm  on  the  extremities  of  the  arteries,  particularly  where  they
touch  the  surface  of  the  body.229  This  spasm  on  the  extreme  vessels  irritates
the  heart  and  arteries,  and  the  irritation  continues  till  the  spasm  is  relaxed.230
At  the  same  time,  the  increased  action  of  the  heart  restores  the  energy  of  the

226  Some  writers,  who  have  taken  notice  of  Cullen,  have  been  deceived  in  this  respect
by  his  occasional  use  of  the  expression  "  nervous  fluid,"  as  if  he  were  willing  to  let  in  the
idea  of  huinorism.     But  in  one  place  he   distinctly  guards  himself  against  such  mis-
construction.    "  Now,  to  avoid  determining  anything  with  regard  to  these  opinions,  I
have  used  the  term  of  nervous  power  ;  but  as  this  is  a  little  ambiguous,  I  choose  to  express
it  by  nervous  fluid  ;  not  that  I  suppose,  with  Dr.  Boerhaave,  that  the  brain  is  an  excretory,
and  that  a  fluid  is  secreted  from  it :   /  mean  nothing  more  than  that  there  is  a  condition  of
the  nerves  which  fits  them  for  the  communication  of  motion.     But  I  defer  the  consideration
of  these  opinions  for  the  present,  and  perhaps  ad  Grcecas  calendas  ;  but  nothing  shall  be
rested  upon  the  nervous  fluid,  it  shall  be  considered  merely  as  a  power  fitted  for  com-
municating motions."     Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  17.     Without  this  passage,  his  remarks
on  "  the  nervous  fluid  in  the  brain  "  (Works,'voL  i.  p.  129)  might  easily  be  misunderstood.

227  "  Together  with  this,  the  languor,  inactivity,  and  debility  of  the  animal  motions,
the  imperfect  sensations,  the  feeling  of  cold,  while  the  body  is  truly  warm,  and  some  other
symptoms,  all  show  that  the  energy  of  the  brain  is,  on  this  occasion,  greatly  weakened  ;
and  I  presume  that,  as  the  weakness  of  the  action  of  the  heart  can  hardly  be  imputed  to
any  other  cause,  this  weakness  also  is  a  proof  of  the  diminished  energy  of  the  brain.     So
I  conclude,  that  a  debility  of  the  nervous  power  forms  the  beginning  of  the  cold  fit,  and
lays  the  foundation  of  all  the  other  phenomena."     Practice  of  Physic,  in  Cullen's  Works,
vol.  i.  p.  492.

228  "  TO  render  our  doctrine  of  fever  consistent  and  complete,  it  is  necessary  to  add
here,  that  those  remote  causes  of  fever,  human  and  marsh  effluvia,  seem   to  be  of  a
debilitating  or  sedative  quality."  ..."  Though  we  have  endeavoured  to  show  that
fevers  generally  arise  from  marsh  or  human  effluvia,  we  cannot,  with  any  certainty,
exclude  some  other  remote  causes,  which  are  commonly  supposed  to  have  at  least  a
share  in  producing  those  diseases.     And  I  proceed,  therefore,  to  inquire  concerning  these
causes  ;  the  first  of  which  that  merits  attention  is  the  power  of  cold  applied  to  the  human
body."  ..."  Besides  cold,  there  are  other  powers  that  seem  to  be  remote  causes  oi
fever  ;  such  as  fear,  intemperance  in  drinking,  excess  in  venery,  and  other  circumstances,
which  evidently  weaken  the  system.    But  whether  any  of  these  sedative  powers  be  alone
the  remote  cause  of  fever,  or  if  they  only  operate  either  as  concurring  with  the  operatic
of  marsh  or  human  effluvia,  or  as  giving  an  opportunity  to  the  operation  of  cold,  are
questions  not  to  be  positively  answered."     Practice  of  Physic,  in  Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i,
pp.  546,  552.     One  part  of  this  view  has  been  corroborated   since  the  time  of  Cullen.
"  The  experiments  of  Chossat  and  others  clearly  prove  cold  to  be  a  direct  sedative.^
Williams'  Principles  of  Medicine,  second  edit.  London,  1848,  p.  n.     Compare  Watsoi
Principles  and  Practice  of  Physic,  4th  edit.  London,  1857,  vol.  i.  pp.  87-92,  249-     Hence,
perhaps,  the  "  irresistible  tendency  to  sleep  caused  by  exposure  to  severe  or  long -cor
tinued  cold."     Erichsen's  Surgery,  second  edit.  London,  1857,  p.  336  ;    but  as  to  tt
Dr.  Watson  (Principles  of  Physic,  vol.  i.  p.  89)  is  sceptical,  and  thinks  that,  in  those  cases
which  are  recorded,  the  drowsiness  ascribed  to  cold  is  in  a  great  measure  the  result

229  Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  493.     Compare,  respecting  his  general  theory  of  spasm,
p.  84,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  400.

230  "  The  idea  of  fever,  then,  may  be,  that  a  spasm  of  the  extreme  vessels,  howeve
induced,  proves  an  irritation  to  the  heart  and  arteries  ;   and  that  this  continues  till  the
spasm  is  relaxed  or  overcome."     Cullen'*;  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  494.


872  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

brain  ;  the  system  rallies  ;  the  extreme  vessels  are  relieved  ;  while,  as  a  conse-
quence of  the  whole  movement,  sweat  is  excreted,  and  the  fever  abates.23!  Shut-
ting out,  therefore,  all  consideration  of  the  fluids  of  the  body,  the  successive
stages  of  languor,  cold  fit,  and  hot  fit,  might,  in  Cullen's  opinion,  be  generalized
by  reasoning  merely  from  the  solids,  which,  furthermore,  produced  his  well-
known  distinction  between  fevers  the  continuance  of  which  is  owing  to  an  excess
of  spasm,  and  those  the  continuance  of  which  is  owing  to  an  excess  of  debility.232
A  similar  process  of  thought  gave  birth  to  his  Nosology,  or  general  classification
of  diseases,  which  some  have  regarded  as  the  most  valuable  part  of  his  labours  ;  233
though,  for  reasons  already  mentioned,  we  must,  I  think,  reject  all  such  attempts
as  premature,  and  as  likely  to  work  more  harm  than  good,  unless  they  are  simply
used  as  a  contrivance  to  aid  the  memory.  At  all  events,  the  Nosology  of  Cullen,
though  it  exhibits  clear  traces  of  his  powerful  and  organizing  mind,  is  fast  falling
into  disrepute,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  for  a  long  time  yet  a  similar  fate  will
await  its  successors.  Our  pathological  knowledge  is  still  too  young  for  so  great
an  enterprise.23*  We  have  every  reason  to  expect  that,  with  the  aid  of  chemistry
and  of  the  microscope,  it  will  continue  to  grow  more  rapidly  than  it  has  hitherto
done.  Without  venturing  to  predict  the  rate  of  its  increase,  we  may  form  some
idea  of  it  by  considering  what  has  been  effected  with  resources  very  inferior  to
those  we  now  possess.  In  a  work  of  great  authority,  published  in  the  year  1848,
it  is  stated  that  since  the  appearance  of  Cullen's  Nosology  our  mere  enumeration
of  diseases  has  almost  doubled,  while  our  knowledge  of  the  facts  relating  to
disease  has  more  than  doubled.235

231  "  Such  however  is  at  the  same  time  the  nature  of  the  animal  economy,  that  this
debility  proves  an  indirect  stimulus  to  the  sanguiferous  system  ;   whence,  by  the  inter-
vention of  the  cold  stage  and  spasm  connected  with  it,  the  action  of  the  heart  and  larger
arteries  is  increased,  and  continues  so  till  it  has  had  the  effect  of  restoring  the  energy  of
the  brain,  of  extending  this  energy  to  the  extreme  vessels,  of  restoring,  therefore,  their
action,  and  thereby  especially  overcoming  the  spasm  affecting  them  ;  upon  the  removing
of  which,  the  excretion  of  sweat,  and  other  marks  of  the  relaxation  of  excretories  take
place."     Practice  of  Physic,  in  Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  501,  502.     See  also  p.  636,
§  cciii.     Or,  as  he  elsewhere  expresses  himself  (vol.  i.  p.  561):  "  With  regard  to  the  event
of  fevers,  this  is  the  fundamental  principle  :   in  fevers,  nature  cures  the  disease  ;   that  is,
certain  motions  tending  to  death  continue  the  disease,  but,  in  consequence  of  the  laws
of  the  animal  economy,  other  motions  are  excited  by  these  which  have  a  tendency  to
remove  it."

232  "  if  We  may  trust  to  our  conclusions  with  respect  to  the  proximate  cause,  it  follows
most  naturally  from  the  view  there  given  that  the  continued  fever  is  always  owing  to  an
excess  of  spasm,  or  to  an  excess  of  debility  :  as  the  one  or  other  of  these  prevails,  it  will
give  one  or  other  of  the  two  forms,  either  the  Synocha  or  inflammatory  fever,  or  the  Typhus
or  nervous  fever."     Cullen's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  518.

233  "Cullen's  most  esteemed  work  is  his  Nosology."     Hamilton's  History  of  Medicine,
London,  1831,  vol.  ii.  p.  279.     "  His  Nosology  will  probably  survive  all  his  other  works  ;
it  is  indisputably  the  best  system  which  has  yet  appeared."     Lives  of  British  Physicians,
London,  1830,  p.  213.     "  Celle  de  Cullen,  qui  parut  eni772,etqui  constitue  un  veritable
progres."     Renouard,  Histoire  de  la   Medecine,  Paris,  1846,  vol.  ii.  p.  231.      See   also
Hooper's  Medical  Dictionary,  edited  by  Dr.  Grant,  London,  1848,  p.  937.      But  in  the
most  celebrated  medical  works  which  have  appeared  in  England  during  the  last  twelve
or  fifteen  years,  I  doubt  if  there  is  any  instance  of  the  adoption  of  Cullen's  nosological
arrangement.     Abroad,  and  particularly  in  Italy,  it  is  more  valued.

234  "  I  had  rather  not  be  cramped  and  hampered  by  attempting  what  abler  heads
than  mine  have  failed  to  achieve,  and  what,  in  truth,  I  believe,  in  the  present  state  of
our  science,  to  be  impossible,  a  complete  methodical  system  of  nosology."     Watson's
Principles  and  Practice- of  Physic,  London,  1857,  vol.  i.  p.  9.     This  is  the  wisdom  of  a
powerful  understanding.

235  "  NOW,  when  the  diseases  of  Cullen's  nosology  have  been  almost  doubled,  and  the
facts  relating  to  them  have  been  more  than  doubled."     Williams'  Principles  of  Medicine,
London,  1848,  p.  522.


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  873

I  have  now  only  one  more  name  to  add  to  this  splendid  catalogue  of  the  great
Scotchmen  of  the  eighteenth  century.236  But  it  is  the  name  of  a  man  who,  for
comprehensive  and  original  genius,  comes  immediately  after  Adam  Smith,  and
must  be  placed  far  above  any  other  philosopher  whom  Scotland  has  produced.*
I  mean,  of  course,  John  Hunter,  whose  only  fault  was  an  occasional  obscurity,
not  merely  of  language,  but  also  of  thought.  In  this  respect,  and  perhaps  in
this  alone,  Adam  Smith  had  the  advantage  ;  for  his  mind  was  so  llexible,  and
moved  so  freely,  that  even  the  vastest  designs  were  unable  to  oppress  it.  With
Hunter,  on  the  contrary,  it  sometimes  seemed  as  if  the  understanding  was
troubled  by  the  grandeur  of  its  own  conceptions,  and  doubted  what  path  it  ought
to  take.  He  hesitated  ;  the  utterance  of  his  intellect  was  indistinct.23?  Still,
his  powers  were  so  extraordinary  that  among  the  great  masters  of  organic
science  he  belongs,  I  apprehend,  to  the  same  rank  as  Aristotle,  Harvey, and  Bichat,
and  is  somewhat  superior  either  to  Haller  or  Cuvier.  As  to  this  classification,
men  will  differ  according  to  their  different  ideas  of  the  nature  of  science,  and,
above  all,  according  to  the  extent  to  which  they  appreciate  the  importance  of
philosophic  method.  It  is  from  this  latter  point  of  view  that  I  have  at  present
to  consider  the  character  of  John  Hunter  ;  and  in  tracing  the  movements  of  his
most  remarkable  mind  we  shall  find  that  in  it  deduction  and  induction  were
more  intimately  united  than  in  any  other  Scotch  intellect,  either  of  the  seven-
teenth or  eighteenth  century.  The  causes  of  this  unusual  combination  I  will
now  endeavour  to  ascertain.  When  they  are  understood,  they  will  not  only
explain  many  peculiarities  in  his  works,  but  will  afford  materials  for  speculation
to  those  who  love  to  examine  the  development  of  ideas,  and  who  are  able  to
discern  the  way  in  which  different  schemes  of  national  thought  have  given
different  shapes  to  national  character,  and  have  thereby  modified  the  whole
course  of  human  affairs  to  an  extent  of  which  the  ordinary  compilers  of  history
have  not  the  slightest  suspicion.

236  I  had  intended  giving  some  account  of  the  once  celebrated  Brunonian  system,
which  was  founded  by  Dr.  John  Brown,  who  was  first  the  pupil  of  Cullen  and  after-
wards his  rival.     But  a  careful  perusal  of  his  works  has  convinced  me  that  the  real
basis  of  his  doctrine,  or  the  point  from  which  he  started,  was  not  pathology,  but  thera-
peutics.    His  hasty  division  of    all  diseases  into  sthenic  and  asthenic  has  no  claim  to  be
deemed  a  scientific  generalization,  but  was  a  mere  artificial  arrangement,  resulting  from
a  desire  to  substitute  a  stimulating  treatment  in  the  place  of  the  old  lowering  one.     He,
no  doubt,  went  to  the  opposite  extreme  ;    but  that  being  a  purely  practical  subject,
this  Introduction  has  no  concern  with  it.      For  the  same  reason  I  omit  all  mention  of
Currie,  who,  though  an  eminent  therapeutician,  was  a  commonplace  pathologist.     That
so  poor  and  thinly -peopled  a  country  as   Scotland  should,  in  so  short  a  period,  have
produced  so  many  remarkable  men,  is  extremely  curious.

237  Mr.  Ottley  (Life  of  Hunter,  p.  186)  says,  "  In  his  writings  we  occasionally  find  an
obscurity  in  the  expression  of  his  thoughts,  a  want  of  logical  accuracy  in  his  reasonings,
and  an  incorrectness  in  his  language,  resulting  from  a  deficient  education."
deficient  education  will  never  make  a  man  obscure.     Neither  will  a  good  education
make  him  lucid.     The  only  cause  of  clearness  of  expression  is  clearness  of  thought ;  and
clearness  of  thought  is  a  natural  gift,  which  the  most  finished  and  systematic  culture
can  but  slightly  improve.     Uneducated  men,  without  a  thousandth  part  of  J  ohn  Hunter  s
intellect,  are  often  clear  enough.     On  the  other  hand,  it  as  frequently  happens  that  men
who  have  received  an  excellent  education  cannot  speak  or  write  ten  consecutive  sentences
which  do  not  contain  some  troublesome  ambiguity.     In  Hunter's  works  such  ambigu-
ities are  abundant ;   and  this  is  probably  one  of  the  reasons  why  no  one  has  yet  given  a
connected  view   of    his   philosophy.     On  his   obscurity,  compare  Cooper  s  Life  of  Sir
Astley  Cooper,  London,  1843,  vol.  i.  pp.  151,  152  ;  Paget's  Lectures  on  Surgical  Pathology,
London,  1853,  vol.  i.  p.  419  ;  and  the  remarks  of  his  enemy,  Foot,  in  Foot  s  Life  of  Hunter,
London,  1794,  p.  59-

[*  No  philosophic  student  will  now  endorse  this  judgment,  which  in  setting  Hunter
above  Hume  is  as  arbitrary  as  that  of  the  patriot  who  set  Watt  beside  or  above  Newton.
—En.]


874  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Hunter  remained  in  Scotland  till  the  age  of  twenty,  when  he  settled  in  London  ;
and  though  he  was  abroad  for  about  three  years,  he  abandoned  his  own  country,
and  became  socially  and  intellectually  a  native  of  England.238  Hence  the  early
associations  of  his  mind  were  formed  in  the  midst  of  a  deductive  nation  ;  the
later  associations  in  the  midst  of  an  inductive  one.*  For  twenty  years  he  lived
among  a  people  who  are  perhaps  the  acutest  reasoners  in  Europe,  if  you  concede
to  them  the  principles  from  which  they  reason  ;  but  who,  on  the  other  hand,
owing  to  their  proneness  to  this  method,  are  so  greedy  after  general  principles
that  they  will  accept  them  on  almost  any  evidence, f  and  are  therefore  at  once
very  credulous  and  very  logical.  In  that  school,  and  surrounded  by  those  habits,
the  intellect  of  John  Hunter  was  nurtured  during  the  most  impressible  period  of
his  life.  Then  the  scene  suddenly  shifted.  Coming  to  England,  he  passed
forty  years  in  the  heart  of  the  most  empirical  nation  in  Europe  ;  a  nation  utterly
abhorring  all  general  principles,  priding  itself  on  its  common  sense,  boasting,  and
with  good  reason  too,  of  its  practical  sagacity,  proclaiming  aloud  the  superiority
of  facts  over  ideas,  and  despising  every  theory,  unless  some  direct  and  immediate
benefit  could  be  expected  to  accrue  from  it.  The  young  and  ardent  Scotchman
found  himself  transplanted  into  a  country  totally  different  from  that  which  he
had  just  quitted  ;  and  such  a  difference  could  not  fail  to  influence  his  mind.
He  saw  on  every  side  marks  of  prosperity  and  of  long  and  uninterrupted  success,
not  only  in  practical  but  also  in  speculative  J  life  ;  and  he  was  told  that  these
things  were  effected  by  a  system  which  made  facts  the  first  consideration.  He
was  ambitious  of  fame,  but  he  perceived  that  the  road  to  fame  was  not  the  same
in  England  as  in  Scotland.  In  Scotland  a  great  logician  would  be  deemed  a
great  man  §  ;  in  England  little  account  would  be  made  of  the  beauty  of  his  logic,
unless  he  was  careful  that  the  premisses  from  which  he  argued  were  trustworthy,
and  verified  by  experience.  A  new  machine,  a  new  experiment,  the  discovery
of  a  salt  or  of  a  bone,  would  in  England  receive  a  wider  homage  than  the  most
profound  speculation  from  which  no  obvious  results  were  apprehended.  That
this  way  of  contemplating  affairs  has  produced  great  good  is  certain.  But  it  is
also  certain  that  it  is  a  one-sided  way,  and  satisfies  only  part  of  -the  human  mind.
Many  of  the  noblest  intellects  crave  for  something  which  it  cannot  supply.  In
England,  however,  during  the  greater  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  it  was  even
more  supreme  than  it  is  now,  and  was  indeed  so  universal  that,  from  the  year
1727  until  nearly  the  close  of  the  century,  our  country  did  not  possess  in  any
branch  of  science  a  speculator  who  had  sufficient  force  to  raise  himself  above
those  narrow  views  which  were  then  deemed  the  perfection  of  wisdom.239  Much
was  added  to  our  knowledge,  but  its  distant  boundaries  were  not  enlarged.
Though  there  was  an  increase  of  curious  and  valuable  details,  and  though  several
of  the  small  and  proximate  laws  of  nature  were  generalized,  it  must  be  admitted
that  those  lofty  generalizations  which  we  owe  to  the  seventeenth  century

238  He  was  born  in  1728,  and  came  to  London  in  1748.     Adams'  Life  of  John  Hunter,
second  edit.  London,  1818,  pp.  20,  203.     According  to  Adams  (pp.  30-35),  he  was  abroad
as  surgeon  in  the  English  army  from  1761  to  1763  ;  though,  in  Foot's  Life  of  Hunter,
London,  1794,  p.  78,  he  is  said  to  have  returned  to  England  in  1762.     Mr.  Ottley  says
that  he  returned  in  1763.     Ottley's  Life  of  Hunter,  p.  22,  in  vol.  i.  of  Hunter's  Works,
edited  by  Palmer,  London,  1835.

239  Above,  pp.  500,501.

[*  See  edit,  note  above,  after  note  199. — ED.]

[f  This  is  a  new  proposition,  not  warranted  by  anything  in  the  previous  inquiry  save
the  details  as  to  superstition,  which  hold  equally  good  of  all  nations.  The  Scots  Protes-
tants had  rejected  the  evidence  on  which  Catholics  accepted  transubstantiation,  the
Papacy,  and  many  miracles  ;  and  Hume  and  Smith,  Black  and  Cullen,  were  certainly
not  specially  credulous. — ED.]

[J  Compare  the  sentence  below,  beginning  "  In  England." — ED.]

[§  This  hardly  consists  with  the  subsequent  remarks  (pp.  891,  893:  cp.  edit,  notes)
as  to  the  failure  of  the  Scotch  deductive  thinkers  to  influence  their  countrymen. — ED]-


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  875

remained  stationary,  and  that  no  attempt  was  made  to  push  beyond  them.
When  John  Hunter  arrived  in  London  in  1748,  Newton  had  been  dead  more  than
twenty  years,  and  the  English  people,  absorbed  in  practical  pursuits,  and  now
beginning  for  the  first  time  to  enter  into  political  life,  had  become  more  averse
than  ever  to  inquiries  which  aimed  at  truth  without  regard  to  utility,  and  had
accustomed  themselves  to  value  science  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  the  direct  and
tangible  benefit  which  they  might  hope  to  derive  from  it.

That  Hunter  must  have  been  influenced  by  these  circumstances  will  be  obvious
to  whoever  considers  how  impossible  it  is  for  any  single  mind  to  escape  from  the
pressure  of  contemporary  opinion.  But  inasmuch  as  all  his  early  associations
had  inclined  him  in  another  direction,  we  perceive  that  during  his  long  residence
in  England  he  was  acted  on  by  two  conflicting  forces.  The  country  of  his  birth
made  him  deductive  ;  the  country  of  his  adoption  made  him  inductive.  As  a
Scotchman,  he  preferred  reasoning  from  general  principles  to  particular  facts  ;
as  an  inhabitant  of  England,  he  became  inured  to  the  opposite  plan  of  reasoning
from  particular  facts  to  general  principles.  In  every  country  men  naturally
give  the  first  place  to  what  is  most  valued.  The  English  respect  facts  more  than
principles,  and  therefore  begin  with  the  facts.  The  Scotch  consider  principles
as  most  important,  and  therefore  begin  with  the  principles.  And  I  make  no
doubt  that  one  of  the  reasons  why  Hunter,  in  investigating  a  subject,  is  often
obscure,  is  that  on  such  occasions  his  mind  was  divided  between  these  two
hostile  methods,  and  that,  leaning  sometimes  to  one  and  sometimes  to  the  other,
he  was  unable  to  determine  which  he  should  choose.  The  conflict  darkened  his
understanding.  Adam  Smith,  on  the  other  hand,  in  common  with  all  the  great
Scotchmen  who  remained  in  Scotland,  was  remarkably  clear.  He,  like  Hume,
Black,  and  Cullen,  never  wavered  in  his  method.  These  eminent  men  were  not
acted  on  by  English  influence.  Of  all  the  most  illustrious  Scotchmen  of  the
eighteenth  century,  Hunter  alone  underwent  that  influence,  and  he  alone  dis-
played a  certain  hesitation  and  perplexity  of  thought,  which  seems  unnatural  to
so  great  a  mind,  and  which,  as  it  appears  to  me,  is  best  explained  by  the  peculiar
circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed.

One  of  the  ablest  of  his  commentators  has  justly  observed  that  his  natural
inclination  was  to  conjecture  what  the  laws  of  nature  were,  and  then  reason
from  them,  instead  of  reasoning  to  them  by  slow  and  gradual  induction.240  This
process  of  deduction  was,  as  I  have  shown,  the  favourite  method  of  all  Scotchmen,
and  therefore  was  precisely  the  course  which  we  should  have  expected  him  to
adopt.  But  inasmuch  as  he  was  surrounded  by  the  followers  of  Bacon,241  this
natural  bias  was  warped,  and  a  large  part  of  his  marvellous  activity  was  em-
ployed in  observations  and  experiments  such  as  no  Scotch  thinker  living  in

240  "  He  followed  his  natural  inclination.     He  preferred  the  more  delusive,  apparently
the  more  direct,  road,  which  has  seduced  so  many  philosophers.     He  sought  to  arrive
at  the  general  laws  of  nature  at  once  by  conjecture;  rather  than  by  a  close  and  detailed
study  of   her  inferior  operations,  to  ascend  slop  by  step  through  a  slow  and  gradual
induction  to  those  laws  which  govern  her  general  procedure."     Babington's  Preface  to
Hunter's  Treatise  on  the  Venereal  Disease,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  129.     Compare  the
narrow  and  carping  criticism  in  Foot's  Life  of  Hunter,  p.  163.

241  That  I  may  not  be  suspected  of  exaggeration,  I  will  quote  what  by  far  the  greatest
of  all  the  historians  of  medicine  has  said  upon  this  subject.     "  La  majorite  des  medecins
qui  pretendaient  s'etre  formes  d'apres  Bacon,  n'avaient  herite  de  lui  qu'une  repugnance
invincible  pour  les  hypotheses  et  les  systemes,  une  grande  veneration  pour  I'experience,
et  un  desir  extreme  de  multiplier  le  nombre  des  observations.     Ce  fut  chez  les  Anglais
que  la  methode  empirique  en  medecine  trouva  le  plus  de  partisans,  et  c'est  principalement
aussi  chez  eux  qu'elle  s'est  repandue  jusqu'aux  temps  les  plus  rapproches  de  nous.     Sa
propagation  y  fut  favorisee,  non-seulement  par  le  profond  respect  que  les  Anglais  con-
tinuent  toujours  de  porter  a  I'immortel  chancelier,  mais  encore  par^la  haute  importance
que  la  nation  entiere  attache  au  sens  commun,  common  sense,  et  elle[y  demeura  1'ennemie
irreconciliable  de  tous  les  systemes  qui  ne  reposent  pas  sur  1'observation."     Sprengel,
Histoire  de  la  Medecine,  vol.  v.  p.  411,  Paris,  1815.


876  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

Scotland  would  over  have  engaged  in.  He  himself  declared  that  thinking  was
his  delight  ;  242  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  had  he  been  differently  situated,
thinking  would  have  been  his  principal  pursuit.  As  it  was,  the  industry  with
which  he  collected  facts  is  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  features  in  his  career.
His  researches  covered  the  whole  range  of  the  animal  kingdom,  and  were  con-
ducted with  such  untiring  zeal  that  he  dissected  upwards  of  five  hundred  different
species,  exclusive  of  dissections  of  different  individuals,  and  exclusive,  too,  of
dissections  of  a  large  number  of  plants.243  The  results  were  carefully  arranged
and  stored  up  in  that  noble  collection  which  he  formed,  and  of  the  magnitude  of
which  we  may  gain  some  idea  from  the  statement  that  at  his  death  it  contained
upwards  of  ten  thousand  preparations  illustrative  of  the  phenomena  of  nature.244
By  this  means  he  became  so  intimately  acquainted  with  the  animal  kingdom
that  he  made  a  vast  number  of  discoveries  which,  considered  singly,  are  curious,
but  which  when  put  together  constitute  an  invaluable  body  of  new  truths.  Of
these  the  most  important  are,  the  true  nature  of  the  circulation  in  Crustacea  and
insects  ;  245  the  organ  of  hearing  in  cephalopods  ;  246  the  power  possessed  by
mollusks  of  absorbing  their  shells  ;  247  the  fact  that  bees  do  not  collect  wax,  but
secrete  it  ;  248  the  semicircular  cajials  of  the  cetacea  ;  249  the  lymphatics  of

242  Clive  says,  "  Much  as  Mr.  Hunter  did,  he  thought  still  more.     He  has  often  told
me,  his  delight  was   to  think."     Abernethy's  Hunterian  Oration,  London,  1819,  p.  26.

243  Mr.  Owen,  in  his  interesting  Preface  to  the  fourth  volume  of  Hunter's  Works,  says
(p.  vii.),  "  There  is  proof  that  Hunter  anatomized  at  least  five  hundred  different  species  of
animals,  exclusive  of  repeated  dissections  of  different  individuals  of  the  same  species,  be-
sides the  dissections  of  plants  to  a  considerable  amount."

244  "  Some  idea  may  be  formed  of  Hunter's  extraordinary  diligence,  by  the  fact  that
his  museum  contained  at  the  time  of  his  death  upwards  of  10,000  preparations,  illustra-
tive of  human  and  comparative  anatomy,  physiology,   and  pathology,   and  natural
history."     Weld's  History  of  the  Royal  Society,  London,  1848,  vol.  ii.  p.  92.

245  "  I  have  tested  the  conflicting  evidence  of  these  observers  by  dissection  of  the  heart
i  n  the  lobster  ;  and  you  will  perceive  by  this  preparation  that  it  is  more  complicated  than
even  the  Danish  naturalist  supposed,  and  fully  bears  out  the  opinion  of  Hunter  in  regard
to  the  mixed  nature  of  the  circulation  in  the  Crustacea."     Owen's  Lectures  on  the  Com-
parative Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  the  Invertebrate  Animals,  2nd  edit.  London,  1855,
p.  318.     "  Cuvier,  misled  by  the  anomalous  diffused  condition  of  the  venous  system,
supposed  that  there  was  no  circulation  of  the  blood  in  insects  ;  yet  the  dorsal  vessel  was
too  conspicuous  a  structure  to  be  overlooked.     Such,  however,  was  the  authority  of  the
great  anatomist,  that  the  nature  of  the  heart  began  to  be  doubted,  and  the  strangest
functions  to  be  attributed  to  it.     Hunter,  however,  who  was  prepared  to  appreciate
the  true  state  of  the  circulating  system  in  insects,  by  his  discovery  of  the  approximately
diffused  and  irregular  structure  of  the  veins  in  the  Crustacea,  has  described,  in  his  work
on  the  blood,  all  the  leading  characters  of  the  circulation  in  insects  as  it  is  recognized  by
comparative  physiologists  of  the  present  day."     Ibid.,  p.  383.     Compare  Hunter's  Essays
and  Observations  on  Natural  History,  London,  1861,  vol.  i.  p.  108.

246  "  The  class  called  Sepia  has  the  organ  of  hearing,  though  somewhat  differently
constructed  from  what  it  is  in  fishes."     An  Account  of  the  Organ  of  Hearing  in  Fishes,
in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  294.     At  the  bottom  of  the  page  Mr.  Owen  observes,  in  a
note,  "  This  is  the  first  announcement  of  the  existence  of  an  organ  of  hearing  in  the
Cephalopoda."

247  "  Hunter  discovered  that  the  molluscous  inhabitant  of  a  shell  had  the  power  of
absorbing  part  of  its  dwelling."     Owen's  Lectures  on   the   Comparative   Anatomy   and
Physiology  of  the  Invertebrate  Animals,  London,  1855,  p.  544.     "  Every  shell -fish  has
the  power  of  removing  a  part  of  its  shell,  so  as  to  adapt  the  new  and  the  old  together,
which  is  not  done  by  any  mechanical  power,  but  by  absorption."     Anatomical  Remarks
on  a  New  Marine  Animal,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  469,  edit.  Palmer.     In  a  note  to
this  passage  it  is  said  that  "  the  doctrine  of  the  absorption  of  shell  has  been  lately  "
(i.e.  in  1833)  "  adduced  as  a  new  discovery."

248  "  His  keen   observation  did  not  fail   to  detect  several  errors  which  preceding
naturalists  had  fallen  into,  especially  with  regard  to  the  formation  of  the  wax,  which


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  877

birds  ;  250  and  the  air-cells  in  the  bones  of  birds.25*  We  are  also  assured  that
he  anticipated  the  recent  discoveries  respecting  the  embryo  of  the  Kangaroo  ;  K2
and  his  published  works  prove  that,  in  the  human  subject,  he  discovered  the
muscularity  of  the  arteries,^  the  muscularity  of  the  iris,254  and  the  digestion
of  the  stomach  after  death  by  its  own  juice.25*  Although  in  his  time  animal
chemistry  was  not  yet  raised  to  a  system,  and  was  consequently  little  heeded
by  physiologists,  Hunter  endeavoured  by  its  aid  to  search  out  the  qualities
of  the  blood,  so  as  to  ascertain  the  properties  of  its  constituents.258  He  also

he  proved  to  be  secreted,  riot  collected,  by  the  animal."  Ottley's  Life  of  Hunter,  p.  122.
"  The  wax  is  formed  by  the  bees  themselves  ;  it  may  be  called  an  external  secretion  of
oil,  and  I  have  found  that  it  is  formed  between  each  scale  of  the  under  side  of  the  belly."
Observations  on  Bees,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  433.

249  "  In  the  terminating  part  there  are  a  number  of  perforations  into  the  cochlea,  and
one  into  the  semicircular  canals,  which  afford  a  passage  to  the  different  divisions  of  the
auditory  nerve."     Observations  on  the  Structure  and  (Economy  of  Whales,  in  Hunter's
Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  383,  384.     "  The  semicircular  canals  of  the  cetacea,  described  by
Hunter  in  the  paper  on  Whales,  a  structure  which  Cuvier  rightly  states  that  Camper
overlooked,  but  incorrectly  claims  the  discovery  as  his  own."     Preface  to  vol.  iv.  of
Hunter's  Works,  p.  xxi.

250  Dr.  Adams,  in  his  somewhat  hasty  Life  of  Hunter,  says  (pp.  27,  28),  "  Mr.  Hewson
always  claimed  the  discovery  of  lymphatics  in  birds."      But  the  truth  is  that  Hewson
never  claimed  it.     He  says,  "It  may  be  necessary  to  mention  here,  that  the  dispute
between  Dr.  Monro  and  me  is,  who  first  discovered  the  lacteals  of  birds  ?  for  as  to  the
lymphatics  in  their  necks  (mentioned  in  this  gentleman's  note),  these  we  both  allow  were
discovered  by  Mr.  John  Hunter,  about  ten  years  ago."     And,  again,  "  These  lymphatics
in  the  necks  of  fowls  were  first  discovered  by  Mr.  John  Hunter."     Hewson 's  Works,  edit.
Gulliver  (Sydenham  Soc.),  pp.  102,  145.

251  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  xxi.  176.

252  "  See  Nos.  3731,  3734,  3735,  in  the  Physiological  series  of  the  Hunterian  Museum,
in  which  there  are  evidences  that  Mr.  Hunter  had  anticipated  most  of  the  anatomical
discoveries  which  have  subsequently  been  made  upon  the  embryo  of  the  Kangaroo."
Rymer  Jones'  Organization  of  the  Animal  Kingdom,  London,  1855,  pp.  829,  380.

253  "  The  muscularity  of  arteries,  of  which  John  Hunter  made  physiological  proof,  is
now  a  matter  of  eyesight."     Simon's  Pathology,  London,  1850,  p.  69.     "  To  prove  the
muscularity  of  an  artery,  it  is  only  necessary  to  compare  its  action  with  that  of  elastic
substances."  ..."  When  the  various  uses  of  arteries  are  considered,  such  as  their
forming  different  parts  of  the  body  out  of  the  blood,  their  performing  the  different
secretions,  their  allowing  at  one  time  the  blood  to  pass  readily  into  the  smaller  branches,
as  in  blushing,  and  at  another  preventing  it  altogether,  as  in  paleness  from  fear  :   and  if
to  these  we  add  the  power  of  producing  a  diseased  increase  of  any  or  every  part  of  the
body,  we  cannot  but  conclude  that  they  are  possessed  of  muscular  powers."     Hunter's
Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  157.     See  also  vol.  iv.  p.  254.     Mr.  Gulliver,  in  his  edition  of  Hewson' s
Works,  London,  1846,  says  (p.  125),  that  Hunter's  "experiments  on  the  functions  of
the  arteries  are  supported  by  the  latest  and  best  observations  on  their  structure."

25i  "  xhe  fact  of  the  muscularity  of  the  iris,  which  is  here  presumed  from  analogy  by
Mr.  Hunter,  has  been  since  directly  proved  by  the  observations  of  Bauer  and  Jacob
(Phil.  Trans.  1822),  and  indirectly  by  Berzelius,  who  found  that  the  iris  possesses  all
the  chemical  properties  of  muscle."  Palmer's  note  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  146,
London,  1837.

^s  Adams'  Life  of  Hunter,  pp.  59,  60,  245.  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  43  ;  vol.  iv.
pp.  116-121.  Watson's  Principles  of  Physic,  vol.  ii.  p.  440.

256  "  Hunter  subjects  the  blood  to  both  mechanical  and  chemical  analysis,  and  en-
deavours to  determine  the  characteristic  properties  of  its  different  constituents."  Owen's
Preface  to  vol.  iv.  of  Hunter's  Works,  p.  xii.  But  this  gives,  perhaps,  rather  too  high
an  idea  of  his  animal  chemistry  ;  for  such  was  then  the  miserable  state  of  this  extremely
important  branch  of  knowledge,  that  he  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  "  blood  gives
no  analysis  excepting  that  of  common  animal  matter."  Principles  of  Surgery,  chap.  iii.
in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  229.


878  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

examined  it  in  different  stages  of  embryonic  life,  and  by  minutely  tracking  it
through  its  periods  of  development,  he  made  the  capital  discovery  that  the  red
globules  of  the  blood  are  formed  later  than  its  other  components.  His  contem-
poraries, however,  were  so  little  alive  to  the  importance  of  this  great  physiological
truth  that  it  fell  dead  upon  them,  and,  being  forgotten,  it  was  about  fifty  years
afterwards  rediscovered,  and  was  announced  in  1832  as  a  law  of  nature  which
had  just  been  brought  to  light.257  This  is  one  of  many  instances  in  the  history
of  our  knowledge  which  proves  how  useless  it  is  for  a  man  to  advance  too  far
beyond  the  age  in  which  he  lives.258  But  Hunter,  besides  making  the  discovery,
also  saw  its  meaning.  From  it  he  inferred  that  the  function  of  the  red  globules
is  to  minister  to  the  strength  of  the  system  rather  than  to  its  repair.259  This  is
now  universally  admitted  ;  but  it  was  not  admitted  till  long  after  his  death.  Its
recognition  is  chiefly  owing  to  the  rapid  advance  of  animal  chemistry,  and  to
improvements  in  the  microscope.  For  by  the  employment  of  these  resources
it  has  become  manifest  that  the  red  globules,  the  respiratory  process,  the  pro-
duction of  animal  heat,  and  the  energy  of  the  locomotive  organs,  are  but  different
parts  of  a  single  scheme.200  Their  connexion  with  each  other  is  established,  not
only  by  a  comparison  of  different  species,  but  also  by  a  comparison  of  different
members  of  the  same  species.  In  human  beings,  for  example,  the  locomotive
and  other  animal  functions  are  more  active  in  persons  of  a  sanguine  tempera-
ment than  in  those  of  a  lymphatic  temperament  ;  while  in  sanguine  tempera-
ments the  globules  are  more  numerous  than  in  lymphatic  ones.  The  knowledge
of  this  fact  we  owe  to  Lecanu  ;  2t51  and  to  him  we  are  also  indebted  for  an  analogous

257  "  In  seeking  to  determine  the  respective  importance  of  the  different  constituents
of  the  blood,  by  the  philosophical  and  most  difficult  inquiry  into  their  respective  periods
of  formation  in  the  development  of  the  embryo,  Hunter  made  the  interesting  discovery
that  the  vessels  of  the  embryo  of  a  red-blooded  animal  circulated  in  the  first  instance
colourless  blood,  as  in  the  invertebrate  animals.     '  The  red  globules,'  he  observes, '  seemed
to  be  formed  later  in  life  than  the  other  two  constituents,  for  we  see  while  the  chick  is
in  the  egg  the  heart  beating,  and  it  then  contains  a  transparent  fluid  before  any  red
globules  are  formed,  which  fluid  we  may  suppose  to  be  the  serum  and  the  lymph.'     I
well  remember  the  feelings  of  surprise  with  which  I  listened,  while  at  Paris  in  1832,  to  a
memoir  read  before  the  Academy  of  Science,  by  MM.  Delpech  and  Coste,  the  object  of
which  was  the  announcement  of  the  same  fact  as  a  novel  and  important  discovery.     The
statement  of  the  French  observers  was  received  with  all  the  consideration  which  its  im-
portance justly  merited,  without  its  being  suspected  that  our  great  physiologist  had  half
a  century  before  embraced  it,  with  all  its  legitimate  deductions,  in  the  extended  circle
of  his  investigations."     Owen's  Preface  to  vol.  iv.  of  Hunter's  Works,  p.  xiii.

258  Indeed,  if  we  may  rely  on  the  references  recently  given  by  Mr.  Gulliver,  which,
from  his  great  general  accuracy,  there  seems  no  reason  to  question,  the  fact  that  the  pale
blood  precedes  the  red  was  known  even  in  the  time  of  Glisson.      See  Gulliver's  learned
edition  of  Hewson's  Works,  London,  1846,  p.  222.      But  to  the  contemporaries  of  Glisson
such  a  fact  was  isolated,  and  consequently  useless.     Nothing  is  valuable  while  it  appears
to  stand  alone.

259  "  From  the  above  account  it  appears  that  whatever  may  be  their  utility  in  the
machine,  the  red  globules  certainly  are  not  of  such  universal  use  as  the  coagulating  lymph,
since  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  all  animals,  nor  so  early  in  those  that  have  them  ;   nor  are
they  pushed  into  the  extreme  arteries,  where  we  must  suppose  the  coagulating  lymph
reaches  ;  neither  do  they  appear  to  be  so  readily  formed.     This  being  the  case,  we  must
conclude  them  not  to  be  the  important  part  of  the  blood  in  contributing  to  growth,  repair,  &c.
Their  use  would  seem  to  be  connected  with  strength."     A  Treatise  on  the  Blood,  Inflamma-
tion, and  Gun-shot  Wounds,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  68.     In  another  remarkable
passage,  he  touches  on  the  possibility  of  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  red  globules  being
connected  with  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  heat.     "  I  will  not  pretend  to  determine  how
far  this  may  assist  in  keeping  up  the  animal  heat."     Observations  on  the  Structure  and
(Economy  of  Whales,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  364.

260  The  evidence  of  this  is  collected  in  the  notes  above,  pp.  33-36.

261  "  According  to  Lecanu,  temperament  has  an  influence  upon  the  composition  of
the  blood.     He  infers  from  his  analyses  that  the  blood  of  lymphatic  persons  is  poorer  in


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  879

fact  corroborating  the  same  view.  He  has  shown  thai  the  blood  of  women
contains  more  water  and  fewer  red  globules  than  the  blood  of  men  ;  »'*  so  that
here  again  we  discern  the  relation  between  these  globules  and  the  energy  of
animal  life.  Inasmuch,  however,  as  these  researches  were  not  made  until  many
years  after  the  death  of  Hunter,  the  coincidence  between  them  and  his  sperula-
:ive  conclusions  is  a  striking  instance  of  his  power  of  geiierali/a.li«»n,  and  of  that
unrivalled  knowledge  of  comparative  anatomy  which  supplied  him  with  materials
from  which,  in  spite  of  the  backwardness  of  animal  chemistry,  he  was  ;,!,!,-  !,,
draw  an  inference  which  later  and  minuter  researches  have  decisively  verified.-'™
Having  thus,  by  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the  animal  world,  associated  its
remarkable  faculty  of  movement  with  the  state  of  its  blood,  Hunter  tunic.!  |,1S
attention  to  another  aspect  of  the  question,  and  took  into  consideration  tin;
movements  of  the  vegetable  world,  in  the  hope  that  by  comparing  these  two
divisions  ot  nature  he  might  detect  some  law  which,  being  common  to  both,
should  unite  into  one  study  all  the  principles  of  organic  motion.  Though  he
failed  in  this  great  undertaking,  some  of  his  generalizations  are  very  suggest  i\e,
and  well  illustrate  the  power  and  grasp  of  his  mind.  Looking  at  the  organic
kingdom  as  a  whole,  he  supposed  that  its  capacity  of  action,  both  in  animals
and  in  vegetables,  was  of  three  kinds.  The  first  kind  was  the  action  of  the
individual  upon  the  materials  it  already  possessed  ;  and  this  gave  rise  to  growth,
secretion,  and  other  functions,  in  which  the  juice  of  the  plant  was  equivalent
to  the  blood  of  the  animal.26*  The  second  kind  of  action  had  for  its  object  to

solid  constituents,  and  especially  in  blood  corpuscules,  than  that  of  persons  of  sanguineous
temperament,  while  the  quantity  of  albumen  is  much  the  same  in  both."  Simon's
Animal  Chemistry  with  reference  to  the  Physiology  and  Pathology  of  Man,  London,  1845,
vol.  i.  p.  236.  Compare  Thomson's  Chemistry  of  Animal  Bodies,  Edinburgh,  1843,  p.  370.
62  Simon's  Animal  Chemistry,  vol.  i.  pp.  234,  235.  Subsequent  experiments  have
confirmed  this.  "  The  proportion  of  red  globules  dried  to  1000  parts  of  blood,  is  in  healthy
males  estimated  at  127  parts  by  Andral  and  Gavarret ;  lower  and  higher  figures  have  been
given  by  other  analysts,  but  this  probably  is  the  result  of  somewhat  different  modes  of
proceeding.  In  females  the  proportion  of  globules  is  lower.  Becquerel  and  Rodier  make
the  difference  to  be  about  15  parts  per  1000."  Jones  and  Sieveking's  Pathological
Anatomy,  London,  1854,  p.  23.  Hence  the  greater  specific  gravity  of  male  blood.  See
the  interesting  results  of  Dr.  Davy's  experiments  in  Davy's  Physiological  and  Anatomical
Researches,  London,  1839,  vol.  ii.  p.  32.

263  Hunter  died  in  1793.     The  researches  of  Lecanu  were  published  in  1831.

Another  and  still  more  remarkable  proof  of  the  extent  to  which  Hunter  outstripped
his  own  age,  appears  in  the  following  passage,  which  has  just  been  published  in  his  post-
humous works,  and  in  which  he  anticipates  the  grandest  and  most  suggestive  of  all  the
ideas  belonging  to  the  physiology  of  the  nineteenth  century.  "  If  we  were  capable  of
following  the  progress  of  increase  of  the  number  of  the  parts  of  the  most  perfect  animal,
as  they  first  formed  in  succession,  from  the  very  first  to  its  state  of  full  perfection,  we
should  probably  be  able  to  compare  it  with  some  one  of  the  incomplete  animals  them-
selves, of  every  order  of  animals  in  the  Creation,  being  at  no  stage  different  from  some  of
the  inferior  orders.  Or,  in  other  words,  if  we  were  to  take  a  series  of  animals,  from  the
more  imperfect  to  the  perfect,  we  should  probably  find  an  imperfect  animal  correspond-
ing with  some  stage  of  the  most  perfect."  Essays  and  Observations  by  John  Hunter,  being
his  Posthumous  Papers,  London,  1861,  vol.  i.  p.  203.

2U4  "  Tne  natural  salutary  actions,  arising  from  stimuli,  take  place  both  in  animals
and  vegetables,  and  may  be  divided  into  three  kinds.  The  first  kind  of  action,  or  self-
motion,  is  employed  simply  in  the  ceconomical  operations,  by  which  means  the  immediate
functions  are  carried  on,  and  the  necessary  operations  performed,  with  the  materials  the
animal  or  vegetable  is  in  possession  of,  such  as  growth,  support,  secretion,  &c.  The  blood
is  disposed  of  by  the  actions  of  the  vessels,  according  to  their  specific  stimulus,  producing
all  the  above  effects.  The  juices  of  a  plant  are  disposed  of  according  to  the  different
actions  of  the  sap -vessels,  arising  also  from  their  specific  stimulus,  which  is  different  from
that  of  blood-vessels,  but  equally  produces  growth  ;  but  a  vine  will  grow  twenty  feet  in
one  summer,  while  a  whale,  probably,  does  not  grow  so  much  in  as  many  years."  Crooman
Lectures  on  Muscular  Motion,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  199.


88o  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

increase  these  materials  ;  it  was  always  excited  by  want,  and  its  result  was
to  nourish  and  preserve  the  individual.265  The  third  kind  was  entirely  due  to
external  causes,  including  the  whole  material  world,  all  the  phenomena  of  which
were  a  stimulus  to  some  kind  of  action.266  By  combining,  in  different  ways,
these  different  sources  of  motion,  and  by  studying  every  incitement  to  action,
first  in  reference  to  one  of  the  three  great  divisions  just  indicated,  and  secondly
in  reference  to  the  power  of  action,  as  distinguished  from  the  quantity  of  action,267
Hunter  believed  that  some  fundamental  truths  might  be  obtained,  if  not  by
himself,  at  all  events  by  his  successors.  For  he  thought  that,  though  animals
can  do  many  things  which  plants  cannot,  still  the  immediate  .cause  of  action  is  in
both  cases  the  same.268  In  animals  there  is  more  variety  of  motion,  but  in
plants  there  is  more  real  power.  A  horse  is  certainly  far  stronger  than  a  man.
Yet  a  small  vine  can  not  only  support,  but  can  raise,  a  column  of  fluid  five
times  higher  than  a  horse  can.  Indeed,  the  power  which  a  plant  exercises  of
holding  a  leaf  erect  during  an  entire  day,  without  pause  and  without  fatigue,  is
an  effort  of  astonishing  vigour,  and  is  one  of  many  proofs  that  a  principle  of
compensation  is  at  work,  so  that  the  same  energy  which  in  the  animal  world  is
weakened  by  being  directed  to  many  objects,  is  in  the  vegetable  world
strengthened  by  being  concentrated  on  a  few.269

265  "The  second  kind  of  action  is  in  pursuit  of  external  influence,  and  arises  from  a
compound  of  internal  and  external  stimulus  ;  it  is  excited  by  the  state  of  the  animal  or
vegetable,  which  gives  the  stimulus  of  want,  and  being  completed  by  external  stimulus,
produces  the  proper  supplies  of  nourishment.     It  produces  motions  of  whole  parts  :  thus
we  see  the  Hedysarum  gyrans  moving  its  lesser  foliola.     This  is  an  action  apparently
similar  to  breathing  in  animals,  though,  perhaps,  it  does  not  answer  the  same  purpose  ;
yet  there  is  an  alternate  motion  in  both."     Croonian  Lectures,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.
p.  200.

266  "  The  third  kind  of  motion  is  from  external  stimulus,  and  consists  principally  of
the  motion  of  whole  parts,  which  is  not  inconsiderable  in  vegetables,  as  in  the  Dioncza
muscipula  and  Mimosa  pudica  is  very  evident."  .  .  .  "These  actions  are  similar  to  what
arise  in  many  animals  from  external  stimulus."     Ibid.,  vol.  iv.  p.  201.

267  "  i  make  a  material  difference  between  the  power  and  the  quantity  of  action.
Some  motions  may  be  very  small,  yet  act  with  great  force  ;  while  others  are  of  considerable
extent,  although  very  weak."     Ibid.,  vol.  iv.  p.  204.

268  "  xhe  immediate  cause  of  motion  in  all  vegetables  is  most  probably  the  same,  and
it  is  probably  the  same  in  all  animals  ;  but  how  far  they  are  the  same  in  both  classes,
has  not  yet  been  determined.     But  I  think  it  will  appear,  in  the  investigation  of  this
subject,  that  vegetables  and  animals  have  actions  evidently  common  to  both,  and  that
the  causes  of  these  actions  are  apparently  the  same  in  both  ;  and  most  probably  there  is
not  an  action  in  the  vegetable  which  does  not  correspond  or  belong  to  the  animal,  although
the  mode  of  action  in  the  parts  may  not  be  the  same,  or  muscular,  in  both."     Croonian
Lectures,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  196.     Compare  the  section  "  Of  Motion  in  Vege-
tables," in  Hunter's  Essays,  London,  1861,  vol.  i.  p.  24.

269  "  The  variety  of  motions  is  greater  in  animals,  and  more  purposes  are  answered
by  them."  ..."  The  first  kind  of  action  appears  to  be  stronger  in  its  power,  although
less  in  quantity,  in  vegetables  than  in  animals  ;  for  a  small  vine  was  capable  of  sustaining,
and  even  of  raising,  a  column  of  sap  43  feet  high,  while  a  horse's  heart  was  only  capable
of  supporting  a  column  of  blood  8  feet  9  inches  high  ;  both  of  which  columns  must  have
been  supported  by  the  action  of  the  internal  parts,  for  we  must  suppose  the  heart  equal,
or  nearly  so,  to  the  strength  or  action  of  the  other  parts  of  the  vascular  system  ;  and  when
we  consider  that  the  sap  of  the  tallest  tree  must  be  supported,  and  even  raised  from  the
root  to  the  most  distant  branches,  it  must  appear  that  the  power  of  such  vegetables  far
exceeds  the  power  of  any  animal,  and,  indeed,  it  is  such  as  the  texture  of  a  vegetable  only
can  support.     The  power  of  supporting  a  leaf  erect  for  a  whole  day  is  as  great  an  effort
of  action  as  that  of  the  elevator  palpebrarum  muscle  of  the  eye  of  an  animal."     Hunter's
Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  203,  204.     See  also  Hunter 'sEssays,  vol.  i.  p.  342  :  "  It  is  probable  that
the  vegetable  .which  can  the  least  bear  a  suspension  of  its  actions,  can  do  so  more  than
the  animal  which  can  bear  it  longest."


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  881

In  pursuing  these  speculations,  which,  amid  much  that  is  uncertain,  contain,
L  firmly  believe,  a  large  amount  of  important  though  neglected  truth,  Hunter
was  led  to  consider  how  motion  is  produced  by  various  forces,  such  as  magnetism,
electricity,  gravitation,  and  chemical  attraction.2™  This  carried  him  into
inorganic  science,  where,  as  he  clearly  saw,  the  foundation  of  all  organic  science
must  be  laid.  Just  as,  on  the  one  hand,  the  human  frame  could  never  be  suc-
cessfully studied  except  by  the  aid  of  principles  which  had  been  collected  from
an  investigation  of  animals  below  man,271  so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  laws  of  those
very  animals  must,  he  said,  be  approached  through  the  laws  of  common  or
inorganic  matter.2?2  He  therefore  aimed  at  nothing  less  than  to  unite  all  the
branches  of  physical  science,  taking  them  in  the  order  of  their  relative  complexity,
and  proceeding  from  the  simplest  to  the  most  intricate.  With  this  view  he
examined  the  structure  of  the  mineral  kingdom,  and  by  an  extensive  com-
parison of  crystals  he  sought  to  generalize  the  principles  of  form,  in  the  same
way  as,  by  a  comparison  of  animals,  he  sought  to  generalize  the  principles  of
function.  And  in  doing  this  he  took  into  account  not  only  regular  crystals,
but  also  irregular  ones.2?3  For  he  knew  that  in  nature  nothing  is  really
irregular  or  disorderly ;  though  our  imperfect  apprehension,  or  rather  the  back-
wardness of  our  knowledge,  prevents  us  from  discerning  the  symmetry  of  the
universal  scheme.

The  beauty  of  the  plan,  and  the  necessity  of  the  sequence,  are  not  always  per-
ceptible. Hence  we  are  too  apt  to  fancy  that  the  chain  is  broken  because
we  cannot  see  every  link  in  it.  From  this  serious  error  Hunter  was  saved  by
his  genius,  even  more  than  by  his  knowledge.  Being  satisfied  that  everything
which  happens  in  the  material  world  is  so  connected  and  bound  up  with  its
antecedents  as  to  be  the  inevitable  result  of  what  had  previously  occurred,  he
looked  with  a  true  philosophic  eye  at  the  strangest  and  most  capricious  shapes,
because  to  him  they  had  a  meaning  and  a  necessary  purpose.  To  him  they
were  neither  strange  nor  capricious.  They  were  deviations  from  the  natural


270  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  255.

271  In  his  Principles  of  Surgery,  he  says  (Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  220),  "  The  human
body  is  what  I  mean  chiefly  to  treat  of ;  but  I  shall  often  find  it  necessary  to  illustrate  some
of  the  propositions  which  I  shall  lay  down  from  animals  of  an  inferior  order,  in  whom  the
principles  may  be  more  distinct  and  less  blended  with  others,  or  where  the  parts  are
differently  constructed,  in  order  to  show,  from  many  varieties  of  structure,  and  from
many  different  considerations,  what  are  the  uses  of  the  same  parts  in  man  ;  or,  at  least,
to  show  that  they  are  not  for  the  uses  which  have  been  commonly  assigned  to  them  ;
and  as  man  is  the  most  complicated  part  of  the  whole  animal  creation,  it  will  be  proper,
in  the  first  place,  to  point  out  general  principles,  common  to  all  this  species  of  mat
that  I  may  be  better  understood  when  I  come  to  the  more  complicated  machine,  namely,
the  human."

272  "  Before  we  endeavour  to  give  an  idea  of  an  animal,  it  is  necessary  to  understand
the  properties  of  that  matter  of  which  an  animal  is  composed  ;  but  the  better  to  unde
stand  animal  matter,  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the  properties  of  common  matter  ;
else  we  shall  be  often  applying  our  ideas  of  common  matter,  which  are  familiar  to  us,
to  animal  matter,  an  error  hitherto  too  common,  but  which  we  should  carefully  avoid.
Principles  of  Surgery,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  211.     "  In  the  natural  history  o
vegetables  and  animals,  therefore,  it  will  be  necessary  to  go  back  to  the  first  or  commor
matter  of  this  globe,  and  give  its  general  properties  ;  then  see  how  far  these  proper
are  introduced  into  the  vegetable  and  animal  operations  ;  or  rather,  perhaps,  how  fc
they  are  of  use  or  subservient  to  their  actions."     Hunter's  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  4-        Ever;
property  in  man  is  similar  to  some  property,  either  in  another  animal,  or  probably  in  a
vegetable,  or  even  in  inanimate  matter.     Thereby  (man)  becomes  classible  with  those  u
some  of  his  parts."     Ibid.,  p.  10.

^3  He  made  "  a  valuable  collection  of  crystallizations,  both  of  regular  and  r
forms,  which  he  was  accustomed  to  use  in  his  lectures  to  exemplify  the  difference  between
the  laws  which  regulate  the  growth  of  organic  and  the  increase  of  inorganic  bodies.
Ottley's  Life  of  Hunter,  p.  138.

56


882  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

course  ;  but  it  was  a  fundamental  tenet  of  his  philosophy  that  nature,  even  in
the  midst  of  her  deviations,  still  retains  her  regularity.274  Or,  as  he  elsewhere
expresses  it,  deviation  is  under  certain  circumstances  part  of  the  law  of  nature.275
To  generalize  such  irregularities,  or,  in  other  words,  to  show  that  they  are  not
irregularities  at  all,  was  the  main  object  of  Hunter's  life,  and  was  the  noblest
part  of  his  mission.  Hence,  notwithstanding  his  vast  achievements  in  physi-
ology, his  favourite  pursuit  was  pathology,276  where,  the  phenomena  being  more
complex,  the  intellect  has  more  play.  In  this  great  field  he  studied  the  aber-
rations of  structure  and  of  function  in  the  vegetable,  as  well  as  in  the  animal,
world  ;  277  while,  for  the  aberrations  of  form,  which  are  the  external  manifesta-
tions of  disturbed  structure,  he  took  into  consideration  the  appearances  presented
by  the  mineral  kingdom.  There  the  power  of  crystallization  is  the  leading
feature,  and  there  violations  of  symmetry  constitute  the  essential  disorder,
whether  the  deformity  of  the  crystal  is  subsequent  to  its  production,  or  whether,
being  the  result  of  what  happened  before  its  production,  it  is  an  original  and,
if  we  may  so  say,  congenital  defect.  In  either  case,  it  is  a  deviation  from  the
normal  type,  and  as  such  is  analogous  to  the  monstrosities,  both  of  animals  and
of  vegetables.278  The  mind  of  Hunter,  by  sweeping  through  this  immense  range

274  "  Nature  is  always  uniform  in  her  operations,  and  when  she  deviates  is  still  regular
in  her  deviations."     Principles  of  Surgery,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  485  ;  see  also
vol.  iv.  pp.  44,  45.

275  "  It  certainly  may  be  laid  down,  as  one  of  the  principles  or  laws  of  nature,  to  deviate
under  certain  circumstances."     Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  278.

276  Dr.  Adams,  who  knew  him  personally,  says  that  he  studied  "  physiology,  more
particularly  as  connected  with  pathology."     Adams'  Life  of  Hunter,  p.  77.

277  His  Principles  of  Surgery  contain  some  curious  evidence  of  his  desire  to  establish
a  connexion  between  animal  and  vegetable  pathology.     See,  for  instance,  his  remarks
on  "  local  diseases  "  (Works,  vol.  i.  p.  341)  ;  on  the  influence  of  the  seasons  in  producing
diseases  (vol.  i.  pp.  345,  346)  ;  and  on  the  theory  of  inflammation  exhibited  in  an  oak-
leaf  (vol.  i.  p.  391).      But  even  now  too  little  is  known  of  the  diseases  of  the  vegetable
world  to  enable  their  study  to  be  incorporated  with  the  science  of  the  diseases  of  the
animal  world  ;  and  in  the  time  of  Hunter  the  attempt  was  still  less  promising.     Still,
the  effort  shows  the  grandeur  and  range  of  the  man's  mind ;  and  though  little  was  effected,
the  method  was  right.     So,  too,  in  one  of  his  essays  on  the  Power  of  Producing  Heat,  he
says,  "  In  the  course  of  a  variety  of  experiments  on  animals  and  vegetables,  I  have
frequently  observed  that  the  result  of  experiments  in  the  one  has  explained  the  oecononiy
of  the  other,  and  pointed  out  some  principle  common  to  both."     Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.
p.  136.

278  "  Nature  being  pretty  constant  in  the  kind  and  number  of  the  different  parts
peculiar  to  each  species  of   animal,  as  also  in  the  situation,  formation,  and  construction
of  such  parts,  we  call  everything  that  deviates  from  that  uniformity  a  '  monster,'  whether
(it  occur  in)  crystallization,  vegetation,  or  animalization.     There  must  be  some  principle
for  those  deviations  from  the  regular  course  of  nature,  in  the  economy  of  such  species
as  they  occur  in.     In  the  present  inquiry  it  is  the  animal  creation  I  mean  to  consider.
Yet,  as  there  may  be  in  some  degree  an  analogy  between  all  the  three  (kingdoms  of
nature),  I  shall  consider  the  other  two,  so  far  as  this  analogy  seems  to  take  place."  .  .  .
"  Monsters  are  not  peculiar  to  animals  :  they  are  less  so  in  them,  perhaps,  than  in  any
species  of  matter.     The  vegetable  (kingdom)  abounds  with  monsters  ;  and  perhaps  the
uncommon  formation  of  many  crystals  may  be  brought  within  the  same  species  of  pro-
duction, and  accounted  for  upon  the  same  principle,  viz.  some  influence  interfering  with
the  established  law  of  regular  formation.     Monsters  in  crystals  may  arise  from  the  same
cause,  as  mentioned  in  the  '  Introduction  ;  '  viz.  either  a  wrong  arrangement  of  the  parts
of  which  the  crystal  is  to  be  composed,  or  a  defect  in  the  formation,  from  the  "first  setting
out  being  wrong,  and  (the  formation)  going  on  in  the  same  (wrong)  line.     The  principle
of  crystallization  is  in  the  solution  ;  yet  it  requires  more  to  set  it  a  going,  or  into  action,
such,  e.g.,  as  a  solid  surface.     The  deficiency  in  the  production  of  a  true  crystal  may  be
in  the  solution  itself ;  or  I  can  conceive  that  a  very  slight  circumstance  might  alter  the
form  of  a  crystal,  and  even  give  the  disposition  for  one  (crystal)  to  form  upon  another.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY          883

of  thought,  attained  to  such  commanding  views  of  the  philosophy  of  disease,  that
in  that  department  he  is  certainly  without  a  rival.  As  a  physiologist  he  was
equalled,  or  perhaps  excelled,  by  Aristotle  ;  but  as  a  pathologist  he  stands
alone,  if  we  consider  what  pathology  was  when  he  found  it,  and  what  it  was
when  he  left  it.279  Since  his  death  the  rapid  advance  of  morbid  anatomy  and  of
chemistry  has  caused  some  of  his  doctrines  to  be  modified,  and  some  of  them  to
be  overturned.  This  has  been  the  work  of  inferior  men,  wielding  superior
chemical  and  microscopical  resources.  To  say  that  the  successors  of  John
Hunter  are  inferior  to  him  is  no  disparagement  to  their  abilities,  since  he  was
one  of  those  extremely  rare  characters  who  only  appear  at  very  long  intervals,  and
who,  when  they  do  appear,  remodel  the  fabric  of  knowledge.  They  revolutionize
our  modes  of  thought  ;  they  stir  up  the  intellect  to  insurrection  ;  they  are  the
rebels  and  demagogues  of  science.  And  though  the  pathologists  of  the  nine-
teenth century  have  chosen  a  humbler  path,  this  must  not  blind  us  to  their
merits,  or  prevent  us  from  being  grateful  for  what  they  have  done.  We  cannot,
however,  be  too  often  reminded  that  the  really  great  men,  and  those  who  are
the  sole  permanent  benefactors  of  their  species,  are  not  the  great  experimenters,
nor  the  great  observers,  nor  the  great  readers,  nor  the  great  scholars,  but  the  great
thinkers.  Thought  is  the  creator  and  vivifier  of  all  human  affairs.  Actions,
facts,  and  external  manifestations  of  every  kind,  often  triumph  for  a  while  ;  but
it  is  the  progress  of  ideas  which  ultimately  determines  the  progress  of  the  world.
Unless  these  are  changed,  every  other  change  is  superficial,  and  every  improve-
ment is  precarious.  It  is  however  evident  that  in  the  present  state  of  our
knowledge  all  ideas  respecting  nature  must  refer  either  to  the  normal  or  to  the
abnormal  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  must  be  concerned  either  with  what  is  regular,
uniform,  and  obedient  to  recognized  principles,  or  else  with  what  is  irregular,
perturbed,  and  disobedient.  Of  these  two  divisions,  the  first  belongs  to  science  ;
the  second,  to  superstition.  John  Hunter  formed  the  superb  conception  of
merging  both  classes  of  ideas  into  one,  by  showing  that  nothing  is  irregular,  that
nothing  is  perturbed,  that  nothing  is  disobedient.  Centuries,  perhaps,  may
elapse  before  that  conception  will  be  consummated.  But  what  Hunter  effected
towards  it  places  him  at  the  head  of  all  pathologists,  ancient  or  modem.  For
with  him  the  science  of  pathology  did  not  mean  the  laws  of  disease  in  man  alone,
or  even  in  all  animals,  or  even  in  the  whole  organic  kingdom  ;  but  it  meant  the
laws  of  disease  and  of  malformation  in  the  entire  material  world,  organic  and
inorganic.  His  great  object  was  to  raise  a' science  of  the  abnormal.  He  deter-
mined to  contemplate  nature  as  a  vast  and  united  whole,  exhibiting,  indeed,
at  different  times  different  appearances,  but  preserving  amidst  every  change  a
principle  of  uniform  and  uninterrupted  order,  admitting  of  no  deviation,  under-
going no  disturbance,  and  presenting  no  real  irregularity,  albeit  to  the  common
eye  irregularities  abound  on  every  side.

As  pathology  was  the  science  to  which  Hunter  was  most  devoted,  so  also
was  it  that  in  which  his  natural  love  of  deduction  was  most  apparent.  Here,
far  more  than  in  his  physiological  inquiries,  do  we  find  a  desire  to  multiply

Quickness  in  the  progress  of  crystallization  produces  irregularity  and  diminution  in  size."
Hunter's  Essays,  London,  1861,  vol.  i.  pp.  239-241-  The  reader  must  remember  that
when  these  remarks  were  written,  the  phenomena  of  crystallization  had  not  been  sub-
jected to  that  exact  mathematical  treatment  which  subsequently  revealed  so  many  of
their  laws.  Indeed,  the  'goniometer  was  then  so  coarse  an  instrument  that  it  was
impossible  to  measure  the  angles  of  crystals  with  accuracy.

279  Abernethy  says,  "He  appears  to  me  as  a  new  character  in  our  profession  ;  and,
briefly  to  express  his  peculiar  merit,  I  may  call  him  the  first  and  great  physionosologist,  or
expositor  of  the  nature  of  disease."  A  bernethy's  Hunterian  Oration,  p.  29,  London,  1819.
"He  may  be  regarded  as  the  first  who  applied  the  great  truths  of  anatomical  and
pvhsiological  science  to  these  most  important  subjects,  by  tracing  the  processes  which,
nature  employs  in  the  construction  of  organic  changes,  in  building  up  new  formations
and  in  repairing  the  effects  of  injury  or  disease."  Hodgson's  Hunterian  Oration,  1855,
p.  32.


884  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

original  principles  from  which  he  could  reason  ;  in  opposition  to  the  inductive
method,  which  always  aims  at  diminishing  these  principles  by  gradual  and  suc-
cessive analysis.*  Thus,  for  instance,  in  his  animal  pathology,  he  attempted  to
introduce,  as  an  ultimate  principle  from  which  he  could  argue,  the  idea  that  all
diseases  move  more  rapidly  towards  the  skin  than  towards  internal  parts,  by
virtue  of  some  hidden  force,  which  also  obliges  vegetables  to  approach  the  surface
of  the  earth.280  Another  favourite  proposition,  which  he  often  used  as  a  major
premiss,  and  by  its  aid  constructed  deductively  a  pathological  argument,  was
that  in  no  substance,  be  it  what  it  may,  can  two  processes  go  on  in  the  same
part  at  the  same  time.281  By  applying  this  universal  proposition  to  the  more
limited  phenomena  of  animal  life,  he  inferred  that  two  general  diseases  cannot
coexist  in  the  same  individual  ;  and  he  relied  so  much  on  this  ratiocination
that  he  refused  to  credit  any  testimony  by  which  it  was  impugned.282  There  is
reason  to  believe  that  his  conclusion  is  erroneous,  and  that  different  diseases  can
so  accompany  each  other  as  to  be  united  in  the  same  individual,  at  the  same
time,  and  in  the  same  part.283  Whether  or  not  this  be  the  case,  it  is  equally  inter-


aso  "  xhe  specific  qualities  in  diseases  also  tend  more  rapidly  to  the  skin  than  to  the
deeper -seated  parts,  except  the  cancer  ;  although,  even  in  this  disease,  the  progress
towards  the  superficies  is  more  quick  than  its  progress  towards  the  centre."  ..."  In
short,  this  is  a  law  of  nature,  and  it  probably  is  upon  the  same  principle  by  which  vege-
tables always  approach  the  surface  of  the  earth."  A  Treatise  on  the  Blood.  Inflammation,
and  Gun-shot  Wounds,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  285.  "  Granulations  always  tend
to  the  skin,  which  is  exactly  similar  to  vegetation,  for  plants  always  grow  from  the  centre
of  the  earth  towards  the  surface  ;  and  this  principle  was  taken  notice  of  when  we  were
treating  of  abscesses  coming  towards  the  skin."  Ibid.,  pp.  489,  490.

281  "  It  may  be  admitted  as  an  axiom   that  two  processes  cannot  go  on  at  the  same
time  in  the  same  part  of  any  substance."     Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  96.     Compare
Hunter's  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  333  ;  "  As  it  appears,  in  general,  that  Nature  can  hardly  make
one  part  perform  two  actions  with  advantage."

282  "  Thus,  we  hear  of  pocky  itch  and  of  scurvy  and  the  venereal  disease  combined  ;
but  this  supposition  appears  to  me  to  be  founded  in  error.     I  have  never  seen  any  such
cases,  nor  do  they  seem  to  be  consistent  with  the  principles  of  morbid  action  in  the  animal
oeconomy.    It  appears  to  me  beyond  a  doubt  that  no  two  actions  can  take  place  in  the  same
constitution,  or  in  the  same  part,  at  one  and  the  same  time."     Hunter's  Works,  vol.  ii.
p.  132.     "  As  I  reckon  every  operation  in  the  body  an  action,  whether  universal  or  partial,
it  appears  to  me  beyond  a  doubt  that  no  two  actions  can  take  place  in  the  same  con-
stitution, nor  in  the  same  part,  at  one  and  the  same  time  ;  the  operations  of  the  body
are  similar  in  this  respect  to  actions  or  motions  in  common  matter.     It  naturally  results
from  this  principle,  that  no  two  different  fevers  can  exist  in  the  same  constitution,  nor
two  local  diseases  in  the  same  part,  at  the  same  time.     There  are  many  local  diseases
which  have  dispositions  totally  different,  but  having  very  similar  appearances,  have
been  supposed  by  some  to  be  one  sort  of  disease,  by  others  to  be  a  different  kind,  and
by  others  again  a  compound  of  two  diseases."  ..."  These,  therefore,  are  often  supposed
to  be  mixed,  and  to  exist  in  the  same  part.     Thus  we  hear  of  a  pocky -scurvy,  a  pocky -
itch,  rheumatic -gout,  &c.  &c.,  which  names,  according  to  my  principle,  imply  a  union
that  cannot  possibly  exist."     Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  3,  4.

283  Dr.  Robert  Williams  (Encyclopedia  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  London,  1847,  4to,
p.  688),  says,  "  The  diagnosis  between  gout  and  rheumatism  is  often  exceedingly  difficult,
so  much  so  that  nosologists   have  given  a  mixed  class,  or  rheumatic  gout.     Mr.  Hunter
warmly  opposed  this  compound  appellation,  for,  in  his  opinion,  no  two  distinct  diseases,
or  even  distinct  diatheses,  can  co -exist  in  the  same  constitution  ;  a  law,  it  must  be  ad-
mitted, to  have  many  exceptions."    Compare  Watson's  Principles  and  Practice  of  Physic,
London,  1857,  vol.  i.  p.  312  :  "Acting  upon  the  aphorism  of  John  Hunter  (an  aphorism,
however,  which  requires  some  qualification),  that  two  diseases  or  actions  cannot  go  on  in  a
part  at  the  same  time."     According  to  another  authority,  "  There  can  be  little   doubt

[*  See  edit,  note  above,  p.  792. — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY          885

esting  to  notice  the  process  of  thought  which  led  Hunter  to  bestow  infinitely
more  pains  in  arguing  from  the  general  theory  than  in  arguing  to  it.  Indeed,
he  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  argued  to  it  at  all,  since  he  obtained  it  by  a  rough
and  hasty  generalization  from  what  seemed  to  be  the  obvious  properties  of  in-
organic matter.  Having  thus  obtained  it,  he  applied  it  to  the  pathological
phenomena  of  the  organic  world,  and  especially  of  the  animal  world.  That  he
should  have  adopted  this  course  is  a  curious  proof  of  the  energy  of  his  deductive
habits,  and  of  the  force  of  mind  which  enabled  him  so  to  set  at  naught  the  tradi-
tions of  his  English  contemporaries  as  to  follow  a  method  which,  in  the  opinion
of  every  one  who  surrounded  him,  was  not  only  full  of  danger,  but  could  never
lead  to  truth.

Other  parts  of  his  pathology  abound  with  similar  instances,  which  show  how
anxious  he  was  to  assume  principles  on  which  he  could  build  arguments.  Of
this  kind  were  his  ideas  respecting  sympathy,  as  connected  with  action.  He
suggested  that  the  simplest  forms  of  sympathy  would  probably  be  found  in  the
vegetable  world,  because  there  the  general  arrangements  are  less  intricate  than
in  the  animal  world.284  On  this  supposition  he  constructed  a  series  of  curious
and  refined  speculations,  of  which,  however,  I  must  confine  myself  to  giving  a
very  short  summary.  As  animals  sympathize  more  than  vegetables,  this  helps
us  to  understand  why  it  is  that  their  movements  are  more  numerous.  For
sympathy,  being  a  susceptibility  to  impression,  is  also  a  principle  of  action.285
Like  other  principles  of  action,  it  may  be  either  natural  or  diseased.286  But
whichever  it  be,  it  can  in  plants  have  only  one  mode  of  development,  because  in
them  it  can  only  be  influenced  by  stimulus  ;  while  in  animals,  which  have  sensa-
tion, it  has  necessarily  three  modes,  one  from  stimulus,  one  from  sensation,  and
a  third  compounded  of  the  other  two.287  These  are  the  largest  divisions  of
sympathy,  if  we  consider  the  organic  world  as  a  whole.  In  single  cases,  however,
sympathy  admits  of  still  further  subdivision.  We  may  reason  from  it  in  reference
to  the  age  of  the  individual  ;  288  we  may  also  reason  from  it  in  reference  to
temperament,  since,  in  point  of  fact,  temperament  is  nothing  but  susceptibility

that  two  or  more  zymotic  processes  do  often  go  on  simultaneously  in  the  blood  and  body  ;
a  fact  of  profound  interest  to  the  pathologist,  and  worthy  of  attentive  investigation."
Report  on  the  Public  Health  for  1847,  in  Journal  of  the  Statistical  Society,  vol.  xi.  p.  168,
London,  1848.  See  also,  on  the  co -existence  of  specific  poisons,  Erichsen's  Surgery,
2nd  edit.  London,  1857,  p.  430.  Mr.  Paget,  in  his  striking  and  eminently  suggestive
Lectures  on  Pathology,  London,  1853,  vol.  ii.  pp.  537,  538,  has  made  some  interesting
remarks  on  one  part  of  the  theory  of  coexistence  ;  and  his  observations,  so  far  as  they
go,  tend  to  corroborate  Hunter's  view.  He  has  put  very  forcibly  the  antagonism  between
cancer  and  other  specific  diseases  ;  and  especially  between  the  cancerous  diathesis  and
the  tuberculous.

284  "  xhe  most  simple  sympathy  is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  vegetables,  these  being  much
more  simple  than  the  most  simple  animal."     Principles  of  Surgery,  in  Hunter's  Works,
vol.  i.  p.  327.

285  "  This  principle  of  action,  called  sympathy,"  &c.     Ibid.,  vol.  i.  p.  318.

286  "  Sympathy  may  be  divided  into  two  kinds,  the  natural  and  the  diseased."     Princi-
ples of  Surgery,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  320  ;  see  also  A  Treatise  on  the  Blood,  Inflam-
mation, &c.,  in  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  6.

287  Croonian  Lectures  on  Muscular  Motion,  in  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  207  ;    and
exactly  the  same  words  in  his  Phytology,  in  Hunter's  Essays,  London,  1861,  vol.  i.  p.  361.

238  "  Local  or  partial  sympathy  is  found  more  in  old  than  in  young  ;  whereas
universal  sympathy  is  more  in  young  than  in  old.  Sympathy  is  less  determined  in  young
persons,  every  part  being  then  ready  to  sympathize  with  other  parts  under  disease."
..."  As  the  child  advances,  the  power  of  sympathy  becomes  partial,  there  not  being
now,  in  the  constitution,  that  universal  consent  of  parts,  but  some  part,  which  has
greater  sympathy  than  the  rest,  falls  into  the  whole  irritation  ;  therefore  the  whole
disposition  to  sympathy  is  directed  to  some  particular  part.  The  different  organs  acquire
more  and  more  of  their  own  independent  actions,  as  the  child  grows  older."  Hunter's
Works,  vol.  i.  pp.  322,  323.


886  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

to  action.289  And  when  sympathy  is  in  action,  we  may,  by  analyzing  our  idea
of  it,  reduce  it  to  five  different  heads,  and  may  classify  it  as  continued,  or  con-
tiguous, or  remote,  or  similar,  or  dissimilar.290  All  these  supplied  Hunter  with
principles  from  which,  by  reasoning  deductively,  he  attempted  to  explain  the
facts  of  disease  ;  for,  according  to  him,  disease  merely  consists  in  a  want  of
combination  of  actions.291  By  this  process  of  thought,  he  was  induced  to  neglect
those  predisposing  causes  to  which  inductive  pathologists  pay  great  attention,
and  with  which  the  works  of  his  English  contemporaries  were  much  occupied.
Such  causes  could  only  be  generalized  from  observation,  and  Hunter  made  no
account  of  them.  Indeed,  he  even  denies  their  real  existence,  and  asserts  that
a  predisposing  cause  is  simply  an  increased  susceptibility  to  form  disposition  to
action.292

By  reasoning  from  the  twofold  ideas  of  action  and  of  sympathy,  Hunter  con-
structed the  deductive  or  synthetic  part  of  his  pathology.  This  he  did  as  a
Scotchman,  and  to  this,  had  he  always  lived  in  Scotland,  he  would  probably
have  confined  himself.  But  being  for  forty  years  surrounded  by  Englishmen,
and  having  his  mind  impregnated  by  English  habits,  he  contracted  something  of
their  mode  of  thought.  We  accordingly  find  that  a  considerable  portion  of
his  pathology  is  as  inductive  as  the  most  eager  disciple  of  Bacon  could  desire  ;
forming  in  this  respect  a  striking  contrast  to  the  purely  synthetic  method  of
Cullen,  the  other  great  pathologist  of  Scotland.  In  the  attempt,  however,
which  Hunter  made  to  mix  these  two  methods,  he  perplexed  both  himself  and
his  readers.  Hence  that  obscurity  which  even  his  warmest  admirers  have
noticed,  though  they  have  not  perceived  its  cause.*  Vast  as  his  powers  were,
he  was  unable  to  effect  a  complete  union  between  induction  and  deduction.
That  this  should  have  happened  will  not  surprise  any  one  who  considers  how
some  of  the  greatest  thinkers  have  failed  in  this,  the  most  difficult  of  all  enter-
prises. Among  the  ancients,  Plato  failed  in  induction,  and  all  his  followers
failed  with  him  ;  since  none  of  them  have  placed  sufficient  confidence  in  facts,
and  in  the  process  of  reasoning  from  particulars  to  generals.  Among  the  moderns,
Bacon  was  deficient  in  deduction,  and  every  Baconian  has  been  similarly  defi-

289  "  Susceptibilities  for  dispositions  and  actions  appear  to  me  to  be  the  same  with
what  are  usually  understood  by  temperament.     Temperament  is  the  state  of  the  body
fitting  it  for  the  disposition  or  action  it  is  then  in."      Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  307.

290  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  393.

291  "  As  every  natural  action  of  the  body  depends,  for  its  perfection,  on  a  number  of
circumstances,  we  are  led  to  conclude  that  all  the  various  combining  actions  are  estab-
lished while  the  body  is  in  health,  and  well  disposed  ;    but  this  does  not  take  place  in
diseased  actions,  for  disease,  on  the  contrary,  consists  in  the  want  of  this  very  combina-
tion."    Hunter's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  10.     Compare  vol.  i.  p.  310  :  "I  have  explained  that
a  disease  is  a  disposition  for  a  wrong  action,  and  that  the  action  is  the  immediate  effect
of  the  disposition,  and  that  either  the  actions,  or  the  effects  of  those  actions,  produce  the
symptoms  which  are  generally  called  the  disease  ;  such  as  sensations,  which  are  commonly
pain  of  all  kinds,  sickness,  alteration  visible  or  invisible  in  the  structure  of  the  part  or
parts  that  act,  and  sympathy."

292  "  There  is  no  such  thing,  strictly  speaking,  as  a  predisposing  cause.     What  is
commonly  understood  by  a  predisposing  cause  is  an  increased  susceptibility  to  form
disposition  to  action.     When  I  say  I  am  predisposed  for  such  and  such  actions,  it  is  only
that  I  am  very  susceptible  of  such  and  such  impressions."     Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  303.
See  also  p.  301  :  "  The  most  simple  idea  I  can  form  of  an  animal  being  capable  of  disease
is,  that  every  animal  is  endued  with  a  power  of  action,  and  a  susceptibility  of  impression,
which  impression  forms  a  disposition,  which  disposition  may  produce  action,  which
action  becomes  the  immediate  sign  of  the  disease  ;   all  of  which  will  be  according  to  the
nature  of  the  impression  and  of  the  part  impressed."

[*  The  explanation  is  probably  simpler  than  Buckle  makes  out.  Hunter  was  lacking
in  verbal  or  expository  faculty  to  start  with,  and  his  obscurity  has  often  nothing  to  do
with  his  theoretic  standpoint. — ED,]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  887

cient  ;  it  being  the  essential  vice  of  that  school  to  despise  reasoning  from  general
propositions,  and  to  underrate  the  value  of  the  syllogism.  It  may  indeed  l>r
doubted  if  the  history  of  the  world  supplies  more  than  two  instances  <>t  physical
philosophers  being  as  great  in  one  form  of  investigation  as  hi  tin-  other.  "Thry
are  Aristotle  and  Newton,  who  wielded  each  method  with  equal  cast-,  combining
the  skill  and  boldness  of  deduction  with  the  caution  and  perseverance  of  induction,
masters  alike  of  synthesis  and  of  analysis,  as  capable  of  proceeding  from  gem-nils
to  particulars,  as  from  particulars  to  generals,  sometimes  making  ideas  precede
facts,  and  sometimes  making  facts  precede  ideas,  but  never  faltering,  never
doubting  which  course  to  take,  and  never  allowing  either  scheme,  unduly  to
encroach  on  its  opposite.*  That  Hunter  should  be  unable  to  perform  this,  merely
proves  that  he  was  inferior  to  these  two  men,  whose  almost  incredible  achieve-
ments entitle  them  to  be  termed  the  prodigies  of  the  human  race.  But  what
he  did  was  wonderful,  and,  in  his  own  department,  has  never  been  rivalled.  Of
the  character  and  extent  of  his  inquiries  I  have  given  a  sketch  which,  notwith-
standing its  imperfections,  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  antagonism  of  the  Scotch
and  English  intellects,  by  showing  how  the  methods  peculiar  to  each  nation
struggled  for  mastery  in  that  great  mind,  which  was  exposed  to  the  action  of
both.  Which  method  predominated  in  Hunter  it  would  be  hard  to  say.  But
it  is  certain  that  his  understanding  was  troubled  by  their  conflict.  It  is  also
certain  that,  owing  to  his  love  of  deduction,  or  of  reasoning  from  general  ideas,
he  exercised  much  less  sway  over  his  English  contemporaries  than  he  would
have  done  if  he  had  exclusively  followed  their  favourite  method  of  reasoning
from  particular  facts.  Hence  the  disproportion  between  his  influence  and  his
merits.  As  to  his  merits,  it  is  now  admitted  that,  in  addition  to  his  physio-
logical discoveries,  and  the  great  pathological  views  which  he  propounded,  we
may  trace  to  him  nearly  all  the  surgical  improvements  which  were  introduced
within  about  forty  years  after  his  death.293  He  was  the  first  who  explained,
and  indeed  the  first  who  recognized,  the  disease  of  inflammation  of  the  veins,
which  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  under  the  name  of  phlebitis  has  latterly
been  much  studied,  but  which  before  his  time  had  been  ascribed  to  the  most
erroneous  causes.294  On  general  inflammation  he  threw  so  much  light  that  the

293  Hunter  died  in  1793.  In  1835  Mr.  Palmer  writes  :  "Those  who  have  traced  the
progress  of  modern  surgery  to  its  true  source,  will  not  fail  to  have  discerned,  in  the
principles  which  Hunter  established,  the  germs  of  almost  all  the  improvements  which
have  been  since  introduced."  Hunter's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  vii.  Eighteen  years  later,
Mr.  Paget  says  of  Hunter's  views  respecting  the  healing  of  injuries  :  "  In  these  sentences
Mr.  Hunter  has  embodied  the  principle  on  which  is  founded  the  whole  practice  of  sub-
cutaneous surgery ;  a  principle  of  which,  indeed,  it  seems  hardly  possible  to  exaggerate  the
importance."  Pagefs  Lectures  on  Surgical  Pathology,  London,  1853,  vol.  i.  p.  170.  At
pp.  197,  198  :  "  After  what  I  have  said  respecting  the  process  of  immediate  union,  it
may  appear  that  Mr.  Hunter  was  more  nearly  right  than  his  successors."

29*  »  Inflammation   of   the  veins,  originally  studied   by  Hunter,    has  of  late   years
attracted   the   attention  of  many  distinguished  Continental  and  British   pathologists.
Erichsen's   Surgery,    London,    1857,  p.  475-     "No  subject  more  amply  illustrates
essential  services  which  the  science  and  art  of  medicine  have  derived  from  path<
anatomy  than  that  of  phlebitis.     By  this  study  many  a  dark  point  in  the  phenomena  oi
disease  has  been   either   thoroughly  elucidated,  or,  at  all  events,  rendered  more  com
prehensible.     We  need  only  refer  to  the  so -termed  malignant  intermittents,  consequent
upon  wounds  and  surgical  operations,— to  certain  typhoid  conditions,  puerperal  diseases,
and  the  like.     John  Hunter,  the  elder  Meckel,  and  Peter  Frank,  were  the  first  to  com-
mence the  investigation."     HassSs  Anatomical  Description  of  the  Diseases  of  the  0
of  Circulation  and  Respiration,  London,  1846,  p.  10.     "  Hunter  was  the  first  to  open  the
way,  and  since  that  period  the  scalpel  has  shown  that  many  previously  unmtelligibl

r*  Whatever  is  to  be  said  of  Newton,  this  eulogy  of  Aristotle  will  not  now  be  widely
concurred  in.  Compare  Benn,  The  Greek  Philosophers,  1882,  vol.  i.  ch  6  ;  Berry,  Short
History  of  Astronomy,  1898,  p.  33  ;  Lange,  Hist,  of  Materialism,  Eng.  tr.  i.  82-9o.-ED.]


888  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

doctrines  which  he  advocated,  and  which  were  then  ridiculed  as  whimsical
novelties,  are  now  taught  in  the  schools,  and  have  become  part  of  the  common
traditions  of  the  medical  profession.295  He  moreover  introduced  what  is
probably  the  most  capital  improvement  in  surgery  ever  effected  by  a  single  man  ;
namely,  the  practice  in  aneurism  of  tying  the  artery  at  a  distance  from  the  seat
of  disease.  This  one  suggestion  has  saved  thousands  of  lives  ;  and  both  the
suggestion  and  the  first  successful  execution  of  it  are  entirely  owing  to  John

malignant  conditions  are  attributable  to  phlebitis."  Jones  and  Sieveking's  Pathological
Anatomy,  London,  1854,  p.  362.  On  the  application  of  this  discovery  to  the  theory  of
inflammation  of  the  spleen,  see  Rokitansky's  Pathological  Anatomy,  vol.  ii.  p.  173,  London,
1849  ;  compare  vol.  iv.  p.  335.

295  sir  Benjamin  Brodie  says  :  "  It  is  true  that  the  essential  parts  of  John  Hunter's
doctrines  as  to  inflammation  and  its  consequences  are  now  so  incorporated  with  what  is
taught  in  the  schools,  that  to  be  acquainted  with  them  you  need  not  seek  them  in  his
works  ;  but  I  recommend  you,  nevertheless,  to  make  these  your  especial  study,  for  the
sake  of  the  other  valuable  information  which  they  contain,  and  the  important  views  in
physiology  and  pathology  which,  in  almost  every  page,  are  offered  to  your  contemplation."
Brodie's  Lectures  on  Pathology  and  Surgery,  London,  1846,  p.  25.     "  John  Hunter,  whose
treatise  on  Inflammation  is  a  mine  in  which  all  succeeding  writers  have  dug."     Watson's
Principles  and  Practice  of  Physic,  London,  1857,  vol.  i.  p.  146.     "  The  appeal  to  philoso-
phical principles  in  Hunter's  works  was  indeed  the  cause  of  their  being  a  closed  volume
to  his  less  enlightened  contemporaries  ;  but  though  the  principles  implied  or  expressed
subjected  them  to  the  scorn  and  neglect  of  those  less  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  philosophy,
the  results  of  those  principles,  verified  as  they  were  by  facts,  have  gradually  and  in-
sensibly forced  themselves  on  the  conviction  of  the  profession  ;    and  though  adopted
silently  and  without   acknowledgment,  as  if   the  authors  themselves  had  forgotten  or
were  ignorant  from  whence  they  were  derived,  they  now  form  the  very  groundwork  of
all  books,  treatises,  and  lectures  on  professional  subjects."     Green's  Vital  Dynamics,
London,  1840,  p.  81.    Finally,  I  will  quote  the  very  recent  testimony  of  Mr.  Simon,  who,
in  his  masterly  and  singularly  beautiful  essay  on  Inflammation,  has  not  only  brought
together  nearly  everything  which  is  known  on  that  interesting  subject,  but  has  shown
himself  to  be  possessed  of  powers  of  generalization  rare  in   the  medical  profession,  or
indeed  in  any  other  profession.      "  Without  undue  partiality,  an  Englishman  may  be
glad  to  say  that  the  special  study  of  Inflammation  dates  from  the  labours  of  John  Hunter.
An  indefatigable  observer  of  nature,  untrammelled  by  educational  forms,  and  thoroughly
a  sceptic  in  his  method  of  study,  this  large-minded  surgeon  of  ours  went  to  work  at
inflammation  with  a  full  estimate  of  the  physiological  vastness  of  his  subject.     He  saw
that,  in  order  to  understand  inflammation,  he  must  regard  it,  not  as  one  solitary  fact  of
disease,  but  in  connexion  with  kindred  phenomena — some  of  them  truly  morbid  in  their
nature,  but  many  of  them  within  the  limits  of  health.     He  saw  that,  for  any  one  who
would  explain  inflammation,  all  inequalities  of  blood-supply,  all  periodicities  of  growth,
all  actions  of  sympathy,  were  part  of  the  problem  to  be  solved."  ..."  He  cannot  be
understood  without  more  reflection  than  average  readers  will  give  ;   and  only  they  who
are  content  to  struggle  through  a  veil  of  obscure  language,  up  to  the  very  reality  of  his
intent,  can  learn  with  how  great  a  master  they  are  communing."  ..."  Doubtless,  he
was  a  great  discoverer.     But  it  is  for  the  spirit  of  his  labours,  even  more  than  for  the
establishment  of  new  doctrine,  that  English  surgery  is  for  ever  indebted  to  him.     Of
facts  in  pathology,  he  may,  perhaps,  be  no  permanent  teacher  ;   but  to  the  student  of
medicine  he  must  always  be  a  noble  pattern.     Emphatically,  it  may  be  said  of  him,  that
he  was  the  physiological  surgeon.       Others  before  him  (Galen,  for  instance,  eminently)
had  been  at  once  physiologists  and  practitioners;  but  science  in  their  case  had  come  little
into  contact  with  practice.     Never  had  physiology  been  so  incorporated  with  surgery,
never  been  so  applied  to  the  investigation  of  disease  and  the  suggestion  of  treatment,  as
it  was  by  this  master -workman  of  ours.     And  to  him,  so  far  as  such  obligations  can  be
personal,  we  assuredly  owe  it  that  for  the  last  half -century  the  foundations  of  English
surgery  have,  at  least  professedly,  been  changing  from  a  basis  of  empiricism  to  a  basis
of  science."     Simon  on  Inflammation,  in  A  System  of  Surgery,  edited  by  T.  Holmes,
London,  1860,  vol.  i.  pp.  134-136.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  889

Hunter,  who,  if  he  had  done  nothing  else,  would  on  this  account  alone  have  a
right  to  be  classed  among  the  principal  benefactors  of  mankind.290

But  so  far  as  his  own  immediate  reputation  was  concerned,  all  was  in  vain.
He  was  in  the  midst  of  a  people  who  had  no  sympathy  with  that  mode  of
thought  which  was  most  natural  to  him.  They  cared  nothing  for  ideas,
except  with  a  view  to  direct  and  tangible  results  ;  he  valued  ideas  for  them-
selves, and  for  the  sake  of  their  truth,  independently  of  all  other  considerations.
His  English  contemporaries,  prudent,  sagacious,  but  short-sighted,  seeing  few
things  at  a  time,  but  seeing  those  things  with  admirable  clearness,  were  unable
to  appreciate  his  comprehensive  speculations.  Hence,  in  their  opinion,  he  was
little  else  than  an  innovator  and  an  enthusiast. 297  Hence,  too,  even  the  practical
improvements  which  he  introduced  were  coldly  received,  because  they  proceeded
from  so  suspicious  a  source.  The  great  Scotchman,  thrown  among  a  nation
whose  habits  of  mind  were  uncongenial  to  his  own,  stood,  says  one  of  the  most
celebrated  of  his  disciples,  in  a  position  of  solitary  and  comfortless  superiority.298
Indeed,  so  little  was  he  regarded  by  that  very  profession  of  which  he  was  the
chiefest  ornament,  that  during  the  many  years  in  which  he  delivered  lectures  in
London  on  anatomy  and  on  surgery,  his  audience  never  amounted  to  twenty
persons.299

I  have  now  completed  my  examination  of  the  Scotch  intellect  as  it  unfolded
itself  in  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries.  The  difference  between

296  Mr.  Bowman,  in  his  Principles  of  Surgery  (Encyclopedia  of  the  Medical  Sciences,
London,  4to,  1847)  says  (p.  831) :  "  Before  the  time  of  Hunter,  the  operation  was  per-
formed by  cutting  into  the  sac  of  the  aneurism,  and  tying  the  vessel  above  and  below.
So  formidable  was  this  proceeding  in  its  consequences,  that  amputation  of  the  limb  was
frequently  preferred,  as  a  less  dangerous  and  fatal  measure.     The  genius  of  Hunter  led
him  to  tie  the  femoral  artery,  in  a  case  of  popliteal  aneurism,  leaving  the  tumour  un-
touched.    The  safety  and  efficacy  of  this  mode  of  operating  have  now  been  fully  estab-
lished, and  the  principle  has  been  extended  to  all  operations  for  the  cure  of  this  formidable
disease."     See  also  p.  873  ;  Pagefs  Surgical  Pathology,  vol.  i.  pp.  36,  37  ;    and  Erichsen's
Surgery,  pp.  141,  142,  508,  509.

297  "  The  majority  of  Hunter's  contemporaries  considered  his  pursuits  to  have  little
connexion  with  practice,  charged  him  with  attending  to  physiology  more  than  surgery,
and  looked  on  him  as  little  better  than  an  innovator  and  an  enthusiast."     Ottley's  Life
of  Hunter,  p.  126.      In  a  work  which  was  written  by  a  surgeon  only  the  year  after  Hunter
died,  the  reader  is  told,  in  regard  to  his  remarkable  inquiries  respecting  animal  heat,
that  "  his  experiments,  if  they  be  true,  carry  with  them  no  manner  of  information  : —
if  they  be  true,  no  effect  for  the  benefit  of  man  can  possibly  be  derived  from  them."
Foot's  Life  of  Hunter,  London,  1794,  p.  116.     At  p.  225,  the  same  practitioner  reproaches
the  great  philosopher  with  propounding  "  purely  a  piece  of  theory,  without  any  practical
purpose  whatever."     Foot,  indeed,  wrote  under  the  influence  of  personal  feelings,  but
he  rightly  judged  that  these  were  the  sort  of  charges  which  would  be  most  likely  to
prejudice  the  English  public  against  Hunter.     It  never  occurred  to  Foot,  any  more  than
it  would  occur  to  his  readers,  that  the  quest  of  Iruth  as  truth  is  a  magnificent  object,
even  if  its  practical  benefit  is  imperceptible.     One  other  testimony  is  worth  quoting.
Sir  Astley  Cooper  writes  of  Cline  :  "  His  high  opinion  of  Mr.  Hunter  shows  his  judgment ;
for  almost  all  others  of  Mr.  Hunter's  contemporaries,  although  they  praise  him  now,
abused  him  while  he  lived."     The  Life  of  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  by  Bransby  Blake  Cooper,
London,  1843,  vol.  ii.  p.  337-

298  "  Those  who  far  precede  others  must  necessarily  remain  alone  ;   and  their  actions
often  appear  unaccountable,  nay,  even  extravagant,  to  their  distant  followers,  who  know
not  the  causes  that  give  rise  to  them,  nor  the  effects  which  they  are  designed  to  produce.
In  such  a  situation  stood  Mr.  Hunter  with  relation  to  his  contemporaries.      It  was  a
comfortless  precedence,   for  it  deprived  him  of  sympathy  and  social  co-operation."
Abernethy's  Hunterian  Oration,  p.  49-

299  "  These  he  continued  for  several  years  ;   but  so  far  were  his  talents  and  his  en-
lightened views  from  exciting  the  attention  they  merited,  that  his  hearers  never  amounted
to  twenty."     Ottley's  Life  of  Hunter,  p.  28.


890  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

those  two  periods  must  strike  every  reader.  In  the  seventeenth  century  the
ablest  Scotchmen  wasted  their  energies  on  theological  subjects,  respecting  which
we  have  no  trustworthy  information,  and  no  means  of  obtaining  any.  On  these
topics  different  persons  and  different  nations,  equally  honest,  equally  enlightened,
and  equally  competent,  have  entertained,  and  still  entertain,  the  most  different
opinions,  which  they  advocate  with  the  greatest  confidence,  and  support  by
arguments  perfectly  satisfactory  to  themselves,  but  contemptuously  rejected  by
their  opponents.  Each  side  deeming  itself  in  possession  of  the  truth,  the  impartial
inquirer,  that  is,  he  who  really  loves  truth  and  knows  how  difficult  it  is  to  obtain
it,  seeks  for  some  means  by  which  he  may  fairly  adjudicate  between  these  con-
flicting pretensions,  and  determine  which  is  right  and  which  is  wrong.  The
further  he  searches,  the  more  he  becomes  convinced  that  no  such  means  are  to
be  found,  and  that  these  questions,  if  they  do  not  transcend  the  limits  of  the
human  understanding,  do  certainly  transcend  its  present  resources,  and  have
no  chance  of  being  answered,  while  other  and  much  simpler  problems  are  still
unsolved.  It  would  be  strange  indeed  if  we,  ignorant  of  so  many  lower  and
subordinate  matters,  should  be  able  to  reach  and  penetrate  these  remote  and
complicated  mysteries.  It  would  be  strange  if  we,  who,  notwithstanding  the
advances  we  have  made,  are  still  in  the  infancy  of  our  career,  and  who,  like
infants,  can  only  walk  with  unsteady  gait,  and  are  scarce  able  to  move  without
stumbling,  even  on  plain  and  level  ground,  should  nathless  succeed  in  scaling
those  dizzy  heights  which,  overhanging  our  path,  lure  us  on  where  we  are  sure
to  fall.  Unfortunately,  however,  men  are  in  every  age  so  little  conscious  of
their  deficiencies  that  they  not  only  attempt  this  impossible  task,  but  believe
they  have  achieved  it.  Of  those  who  are  a  prey  to  this  delusion,  there  are
always  a  certain  number  who,  seated  on  their  imaginary  eminence,  are  so
inflated  by  the  fancied  superiority,  as  to  undertake  to  instruct,  to  warn,  and  to
rebuke  the  rest  of  mankind.  Giving  themselves  out  as  spiritual  advisers,  and
professing  to  teach  what  they  have  not  yet  learned,  they  exhibit  in  their  own
persons  that  most  consistent  of  all  combinations,  a  combination  of  great  igno-
rance with  great  arrogance.  From  this  other  evils  inevitably  follow.  The
ignorance  produces  superstition  ;  the  arrogance  produces  tyranny.  Hence  it  is
that  in  a  country  like  Scotland,  where  the  pressure  of  long-continued  and  adverse
circumstances  has  consolidated  the  power  of  these  pretenders  to  wisdom,  such
sad  results  become  conspicuous  in  every  direction.  Not  only  the  national
character,  but  also  the  national  literature,  feels  their  influence,  and  is  coloured
by  them.  It  was  therefore  natural  that  in  Scotland  in  the  seventeenth  century,
when  the  authority  of  the  clergy  was  most  uncontrolled,  the  consequences  of
that  authority  should  be  most  apparent.  It  was  natural  that  a  literature  should
be  created  such  as  that  of  which  I  have  given  some  account  ;  a  literature  which
encouraged  superstition,  intolerance,  and  bigotry  ;  a  literature  full  of  dark
misgivings,  and  of  still  darker  threats  ;  a  literature  which  taught  men  that  it
was  wrong  to  enjoy  the  present,  and  that  it  was  right  to  tremble  at  the  future  ;
a  literature,  in  a  word,  which,  spreading  gloom  on  every  side,  soured  the  temper,
corrupted  the  affections,  numbed  the  intellect,  and  brought  into  complete  dis-
credit those  bold  and  original  inquiries  without  which  there  can  be  no  advance
in  human  knowledge,  and  consequently  no  increase  of  human  happiness.

To  this  the  literature  of  the  eighteenth  century  offered  a  striking  and  most
exhilarating  contrast.  It  seemed  as  if  in  a  moment  all  was  changed.  The
Baillies,  the  Binnings,  the  Dicksons,  the  Durham?,  the  Flemings,  the  Frasers,
the  Gillespies,  the  Guthries,  the  Halyburtons,  the  Hendersons,  the  Rutherfords,
and  the  rest  of  that  monkish  rabble,  were  succeeded  by  eminent  and  enterprising
thinkers,  whose  genius  lighted  up  every  department  of  knowledge,  and  whose
minds,  fresh  and  vigorous  as  the  morning,  opened  for  themselves  a  new  career,
and  secured  for  their  country  a  high  place  in  the  annals  of  European  intellect.
Something  of  what  they  effected  I  have  endeavoured  to  narrate  ;  much,  however,
has  been  left  untold.  But  I  have  brought  forward  sufficient  evidence  to  convince
even  the  most  sceptical  reader  of  the  splendour  of  their  achievements,  and  of
the  difference  between  the  noble  literature  which  they  produced  and  those
wretched  compositions  which  disfigured  the  preceding  century.


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  891

Still,  great  as  the  difference  was,  the  two  literatures  had,  as  I  have  shown,
one  important  point  in  common.  Both  were  essentially  deductive  ;  and  the
proof  of  this  I  have  given  at  considerable  length,  because,  though  it  has,  so  far
as  I  am  aware,  escaped  the  attention  of  all  previous  inquirers,  its  consequences
were  of  the  utmost  moment  to  the  fortunes  of  Scotland,  and  are  moreover  full
of  interest  to  those  who,  in  their  investigations  of  human  affairs,  desire  to  pene-
trate below  the  mere  surface  and  symptoms  of  things.

If  we  take  a  general  view  of  those  countries  where  science  has  been  cultivated,
we  shall  find  that,  wherever  the  deductive  method  of  inquiry  has  predominated',
knowledge,  though  often  increased  and  accumulated,  has  never  been  widely
diffused.  On  the  other  hand  we  shall  find  that,  when  the  inductive  method
has  'predominated,  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  has  always  been  considerable,
or  at  all  events  has  been  beyond  comparison  greater  than  when  deduction  was
prevalent.  This  holds  good  not  only  of  different  countries,  but  also  of  different
periods  in  the  same  country.  It  even  holds  good  of  different  individuals  in  the
same  period,  and  in  the  same  country.  If  in  any  civilized  nation  two  men
equally  gifted  were  to  propound  some  new  and  startling  conclusion,  and  one  of
these  men -were  to  defend  his  conclusion  by  reasoning  from  ideas  or  general
principles,  while  the  other  man  defended  his  by  reasoning  from  particular  and
visible  facts,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  supposing  all  other  things  the  same,
the  latter  man  would  gain  most  adherents.  His  conclusion  would  be  more  easily
diffused,  simply  because  a  direct  appeal,  in  the  first  instance,  to  palpable  facts,
strikes  the  vulgar  with  immediate  effect  ;  while  an  appeal  to  principles  is  beyond
their  ken,  and  as  they  do  not  sympathize  with  it,  they  are  apt  to  ridicule  it.  Facts
seem  to  come  home  to  every  one,  and  are  undeniable.*  Principles  are  not  so
obvious,  and,  being  often  disputed,  they  have,  to  those  who  do  not  grasp  them,
an  unreal  and  illusory  appearance,  which  weakens  their  influence.  Hence  it  is
that  inductive  science,  which  always  gives  the  first  place  to  facts,  is  essentially
popular,  and  has  on  its  side  those  innumerable  persons  who  will  not  listen  to  the
more  refined  and  subtle  teachings  of  deductive  science.  Hence,  too,  we  find
historically  that  the  establishment  of  the  modern  inductive  philosophy,  with  its
varied  and  attractive  experiments,  its  material  appliances,  and  its  constant
appeal  to  the  senses,  has  been  intimately  connected  with  the  awakening  of  the
public  mind,  and  coincides  with  that  spirit  of  inquiry,  and  with  that  love  of
liberty,  which  have  been  constantly  advancing  since  the  sixteenth  century.  We
may  assuredly  say  that  scepticism  and  democracy  are  the  two  leading  features
of  this  great  scientific  movement.  The  seventeenth  century,  which  ushered  in
the  Baconian  philosophy,  was  remarkable  for  its  insubordinate  spirit,  especially
in  the  country  where  that  philosophy  originated,  and  where  it  most  flourished.
In  the  next  age  it  was  transplanted  into  France,  and  there  too  it  worked  upon
the  popular  mind,  and  was,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  one  of  the  principal
causes  of  the  French  Revolution.

If  we  look  still  closer  into  this  interesting  question,  we  shall  find  further  cor-
roboration  of  the  view  that  the  inferences  of  an  inductive  philosophy  are  more
likely  to  be  diffused  than  those  of  a  deductive  one.  Inductive  science  rests
immediately  upon  experience,  or  at  all  events  upon  experiment,  which  is  merely
experience  artificially  modified.  Now  an  immense  majority  of  mankind,  even
in  the  most  advanced  countries,  are  by  the  constitution  of  their  minds  incapable
of  seizing  general  principles  and  applying  them  to  daily  affairs,  without  doing
serious  mischief  either  to  themselves  or  to  others.  Such  an  application  requires
not  only  great  dexterity  but  also  a  knowledge  of  those  disturbing  causes  which
affect  the  operation  of  all  general  theorems.  The  task,  being  so  difficult  to
perform,  is  rarely  attempted  ;  and  average  men,  possessed  of  a  tolerably  sound

[*  It  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  facts.  As  Buckle  has  shown,  the  clergy  found
general  acceptance  for  their  "  principles  "  because  certain  doctrinal  "  facts  "  were  taken
for  granted.  But  the  Copernican  theory,  which  established  a  new  order  of  facts,  was
slow  to  win  acceptance  ;  and  the  facts  of  geology  and  biology  and  the  "  higher  criticism  "
fared  similarly. — ED.]


892  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

judgment,  do  with  good  reason  rely  mainly  on  experience,  which  is  to  them  a
safer  and  more  useful  guide  than  any  principle,  however  accurate  and  scientific
it  might  be.  This  begets  in  their  minds  a  prejudice  on  behalf  of  experimental
inquiries,  and  a  corresponding  dislike  of  the  opposite  and  more  speculative
method.  And  it  can,  I  think,  hardly  be  doubted  that  one  of  the  causes  of  the
triumph  of  the  Baconian  philosophy  is  the  growth  of  the  industrious  classes,
whose  business-like  and  methodical  habits  are  eminently  favourable  to  empirical
observations  of  the  uniformities  of  sequence,  since,  indeed,  on  the  accuracy  of
such  observations  the  success  of  all  practical  affairs  depends.  Certainly  we  find
that  the  overthrow  of  the  purely  deductive  scholasticism  of  the  Middle  Ages  has
been  everywhere  accompanied  by  the  spread  of  trade  ;  and  whoever  will  carefully
study  the  history  of  Europe  will  discern  many  traces  of  a  connexion  between  the
two  movements,  both  of  which  are  marked  by  an  increasing  respect  for  material
and  empirical  interests,  and  a  disregard  of  ideal  and  speculative  pursuits.

The  relation  between  all  this  and  the  popular  tendency  of  induction  is  obvious.
For  one  person  who  can  think,  there  are  at  least  a  hundred  persons  who  can
observe.  An  accurate  observer  is  no  doubt  rare  ;  but  an  accurate  thinker  is
far  rarer.  Of  this  the  proofs  are  too  abundant  to  be  disputed.  Indeed,  no  one
can  mix  with  his  fellow -creatures  without  seeing  how  much  more  natural  it  is
for  them  to  notice  than  to  reflect  ;  and  how  extremely  unusual  it  is  to  meet  with
any  one  whose  conversation  or  whose  writings  bear  marks  of  patient  and
original  thought.  And  inasmuch  as  thinkers  are  more  prone  to  accumulate
ideas,  while  observers  are  more  prone  to  accumulate  facts,  the  overwhelming
predominance  of  the  observing  class  is  a  decisive  reason  why  induction,  which
begins  with  facts,  is  always  more  popular  than  deduction,  which  begins  with
ideas.  It  is  often  said,  and  probably  with  truth,  that  all  deduction  is  preceded
by  induction  ;  so  that,  in  every  syllogism,  the  major  premiss,  however  obvious
and  necessary  it  may  appear,  is  merely  a  generalization  of  facts,  or  a  record  of
what  the  senses  had  already  observed.  But  this  opinion,  whether  true  or  false,
does  not  affect  what  I  have  just  stated,  because  it  concerns  the  origin  of  our
knowledge,  and  not  its  subsequent  treatment  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  metaphysical
opinion,  rather  than  a  logical  one.  For,  even  supposing  that  all  deduction  rests
ultimately  on  induction,  it  is,  nevertheless,  certain  that  there  are  innumerable
cases  in  which  the  induction  takes  place  at  so  early  a  period  of  life  that  we  are
unconscious  of  it,  and  can  by  no  effort  recall  the  process.  The  axioms  of  geometry
afford  a  good  specimen  of  this.  No  one  can  tell  when  or  how  he  first  believed
that  the  whole  is  greater  than  its  part,  or  that  things  which  are  equal  to  the
same  thing  are  equal  to  one  another.  All  these  preliminary  steps  are  concealed
from  us,  and  the  strength  and  dexterity  of  deduction  are  displayed  in  the  subse-
quent steps  by  which  the  major  premiss  is  adjusted,  and,  as  it  were,  fitted  to  the
minor.  This  often  requires  great  subtlety  of  thought,  and  in  every  instance
the  external  world  is  put  aside,  and  lost  sight  of.  The  process,  being  ideal,  has
no  concern  either  with  observations  or  experiments.  The  suggestions  of  the
senses  are  shut  out,  while  the  mind  passes  through  a  long  train  of  successive
syllogisms,  in  which  each  conclusion  is  turned  into  the  premiss  of  a  new  argument,
until  at  length  an  inference  is  deductively  obtained  which,  to  those  who  merely
hear  it  enunciated,  seems  to  have  no  connexion  with  the  first  premisses,  though
in  reality  it  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  them.

A  method  so  recondite,  and  so  hidden  from  the  public  gaze,  can  never  command
the  public  sympathy.  Unless,  therefore,  the  human  mind  should  undergo  some
remarkable  change  in  its  nature  as  well  as  in  its  resources,  the  sensuous  process
of  working  upwards  from  particular  facts  to  general  principles  will  always  be
more  attractive  than  the  ideal  process  of  working  downwards  from  principles  to
facts.  In  both  cases  there  is  no  doubt  a  line  of  argument  essentially  ideal  ;  just
as  in  both  cases  there  is  an  assemblage  of  facts  essentially  sensuous.  No  method
is  pure,  or  stands  entirely  by  itself.  But  inasmuch  as  in  induction  the  facts
are  more  prominent  than  the  ideas,  while  in  deduction  the  ideas  are  more
prominent  than  the  facts,  it  is  evident  that  conclusions  arrived  at  by  the  former
plan  will  as  a  general  rule  obtain  a  wider  assent  than  conclusions  arrived  at
by  the  latter  plan.  Obtaining  a  wider  assent,  they  will  produce  more  decisive


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  893

results,  and  will  be  more  likely  to  shape  the  national  character  and  influence  the
course  of  national  affairs.

The  only  exception  to  this  is  theology.  There  the  inductive  method,  as  I  have
already  observed,  is  inapplicable,  and  nothing  remains  but  deduction,  which  is
quite  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  the  theologian.  For  he  has  a  peculiar  resource
which  supplies  him  with  general  principles  from  which  he  can  argue  ;  and  the
possession  of  this  resource  forms  the  fundamental  difference  between  him  and
the  man  of  science.  Science  is  the  result  of  inquiry  ;  theology  is  the  result  of
faith.  In  the  one  the  spirit  of  doubt  ;  in  the  other  the  spirit  of  belief.  In
science  originality  is  the  parent  of  discovery,  and  is  therefore  a  merit  ;  in
theology  it  is  the  parent  of  heresy,  and  is  therefore  a  crime.  Every  system
of  religion  the  world  has  yet  seen  recognizes  faith  as  an  indispensable  duty ;  but
to  every  system  of  science  it  is  a  hindrance  instead  of  a  duty,  inasmuch  as  it
discourages  those  inquisitive  and  innovating  habits  on  which  all  intellectual
progress  depends.  The  theologian,  thus  turning  credulity  into  an  honour,  and
valuing  men  in  proportion  as  they  are  simple-minded  and  easy  of  belief,  has  little
need  to  trouble  himself  with  facts,  which  indeed  he  sets  at  open  defiance  in  his
eagerness  to  narrate  portentous  and  often  miraculous  events.  To  the  inductive
philosopher  such  a  licence  is  forbidden.  He  is  obliged  to  ground  his  inferences
011  facts  which  no  one  disputes,  or  which,  at  all  events,  any  one  can  either  verify
for  himself,  or  see  verified  by  others.  And  if  he  does  not  adopt  this  course,  his
inferences,  be  they  ever  so  true,  will  have  the  greatest  difficulty  in  working  them-
selves into  the  popular  mind,  because  they  will  savour  of  a  subtlety  and  refine-
ment of  thought  which,  more  than  anything  else,  predisposes  common  under-
standings to  reject  the  conclusions  at  which  philosophers  arrive.

From  the  facts  and  arguments  contained  in  this  and  the  preceding  chapter,
the  reader  will,  I  trust,  be  able  to  see  why  it  was  that  the  Scotch  intellect  during
the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  was  pre-eminently  deductive  ;  and
also  why  it  was  that,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Scotch  literature,  notwith-
standing its  brilliancy,  its  power,  and  the  splendid  discoveries  of  which  it  was
the  vehicle,  produced  little  or  no  effect  on  the  nation  at  large.  That  literature,
by  its  bold  and  innovating  character,  seemed  peculiarly  fitted  to  disturb  ancient
prejudices,  and  to  rouse  up  a  spirit  of  inquiry.  But  its  method,  both  of  investiga-
tion and  of  proof,  was  too  refined  to  suit  ordinary  understandings.*  Therefore,
upon  ordinary  understandings  it  was  inoperative.  In  Scotland,  as  in  ancient
Greece  and  in  modern  Germany,  the  intellectual  classes,  being  essentially
deductive,  have  been  unable  to  influence  the  main  body  of  the  people,  f  They
have  considered  things  at  too  great  an  altitude,  and  at  too  great  a  remove.  In
Greece,  Aristotle  alone  had  a  true  idea  of  what  induction  really  was.  But  even
he  knew  nothing  of  crucial  instances  and  the  theory  of  averages,  the  two  capital
resources  of  that  inductive  philosophy  which  we  now  possess.  Neither  did  he,
nor  any  of  the  great  German  philosophers,  nor  any  of  the  great  Scotch  philoso-
phers, attach  sufficient  importance  J  to  the  slow  and  cautious  method  of  gradually
rising  from  each  generalization  to  the  one  immediately  above  it,  without  omitting
any  intermediate  generalization.  On  this  method  Bacou,indeed,insists  too  strongly,

[*  There  is  a  perplexity  here  which  Buckle  has  not  sought  to  solve.  If  "  the  Scotch
intellect"  was  deductive,  why  should  deductive  reasoning  fail  to  "suit"  it,  even  in  the
case  of  the  common  people  ?  If  they  could  best  be  appealed  to  by  inductive  reasoning,
why  say  the  national  intellect  is  deductive  ?  It  seems  necessary  to  restate  the  case.
Deductive  dialectic  resulted  from  the  pulpit  practice  ;  but  pulpit  authority,  rooted  in
a  popular  form  of  church  government,  excluded  sceptical  doctrine  of  all  kinds.  The  obstacle
was  thus  secondary,  not  primary.— ED.]

Ft  The  clergy,  in  terms  of  Buckle's  own  exposition,  are     essentially  deductive,     and
yet  have  a  great  influence  over  the  people.     It  is  thus  not  the  dialectic  method,  but
the  preliminary  beliefs,  and  the  state  of  culture  as  determining  these,  that  explain  tt
small  influence  of  the  critical  literature  in  the  period  in  question.— ED.]

[J  Above,  p.  873,  Aristotle  has  been  credited  with  a  perfect  sense  of  the  relative
importance  of  the  two  methods. — ED.]


894  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

since  many  most  important  discoveries  have -been  made  independently  of  it,  or,
I  should  rather  say,  in  contradiction  to  it.  But  it  is  a  wonderful  weapon,  and
none  except  men  of  real  genius  can  dispense  with  its  use.  And  when  they  do
dispense  with  it,  they  cut  themselves  off  from  the  general  sympathies  of  their
age  and  country.  For  these  small  and  proximate  generalizations,  which  they
neglect,  are  precisely  those  parts  of  philosophy  which,  being  least  removed  from
the  region  of  visible  facts,  are  best  understood  by  the  people,  and  therefore
form  the  only  common  ground  between  thinkers  and  practitioners.  They  are
a  sort  of  middle  term,  which,  being  comprehended  by  both  classes,  is  accessible
to  either.  In  all  deductive  reasoning  this  intermediate  and,  if  I  may  so  say,
neutral  territory  disappears,  and  the  two  classes  have  no  meeting-place.  Hence
it  is  that  the  Scotch  philosophy,  like  the  German  philosophy,  and  like  the  Greek
philosophy,  has  had  no  national  influence.  But  in  England  since  the  seventeenth
century,  and  in  France  since  the  eighteenth  century,  the  prevailing  philosophy
has  been  inductive,  and  has  therefore  not  only  affected  the  intellectual  classes,
but  also  moved  the  public  mind.  The  German  philosophers  are  far  superior,
both  in  depth  and  in  comprehensiveness,  to  the  philosophers  either  of  France  or
of  England.  Their  profound  researches  have  however  done  so  little  for  their
country  that  the  German  people  are  every  way  inferior  to  the  French  and  English
people.  So  too  in  the  philosophy  of  ancient  Greece  we  find  a  vast  body  of
massive  and  original  thought,  and,  what  is  infinitely  better,  we  find  a  boldness
of  inquiry  and  a  passionate  love  of  truth  such  as  no  modern  nation  has  sur-
passed, and  few  modern  nations  have  equalled.  But  the  method  of  that  philo-
sophy was  an  insuperable  barrier  to  its  propagation.  The  people  were  untouched,
and  went  grovelling  on  in  their  old  folly,  a  prey  to  superstitions,  most  of  which
the  great  thinkers  despised  and  often  attacked,  but  could  by  no  means  root  out.
Bad,  however,  as  those  superstitions  were,  we  may  confidently  say  that  they  were
less  noxious,  that  is,  less  detrimental  to  the  happiness  of  man,  than  the  repulsive
and  horrible  notions  advocated  by  the  Scotch  clergy,  and  sanctioned  by  the
Scotch  people.  And  on  those  notions  the  Scotch  philosophy  could  make  no
impression.  In  Scotland,  during  the  eighteenth  century,  superstition  and
science,  the  most  irreconcilable  of  all  enemies,  flourished  side  by  side,  unable  to
weaken  each  other,  and  unable  indeed  to  come  into  collision  with  each  other.*
There  was  coexistence  without  contact.  The  two  forces  kept  apart,  and  the
result  was  that  while  the  Scotch  thinkers  were  creating  a  noble  and  most
enlightened  literature,  the  Scotch  people,  refusing  to  listen  to  those  great  masters
of  wisdom  which  their  country  possessed,  remained  in  darkness,  leaving  the  blind
to  follow  the  blind,  and  no  one  there  to  help  them.

It  is  indeed  curious  to  observe  how  little  effect  was  produced  by  tjie  many
great  works  written  by  Scotchmen  in  the  eighteenth  century.  If  we  except  the
Wealth  of  Nations,  I  can  hardly  call  to  mind  one  which  has  perceptibly  influenced
public  opinion.  The  reason  of  this  exception  may  be  easily  explained.  The
Wealth  of  Nations  restricted  the  action  of  government  within  narrower  limits  than
had  ever  been  assigned  to  it  by  any  other  book  of  great  merit.  No  previous
political  writer  of  admitted  genius  had  left  so  much  to  the  people,  and  had
demanded  for  them  so  much  liberty  in  managing  their  own  affairs,  as  Adam
Smith  did.  The  Wealth  of  Nations,  being  thus  eminently  a  democratic  book,
was  sure  to  find  favour  in  Scotland,  which  was  eminently  a  democratic  country.
Directly  men  heard  its  conclusions,  they  were  prejudiced  in  favour  of  its  argu-
ments. So,  too,  in  England,  that  love  of  liberty  which  for  many  centuries  has
been  our  leading  characteristic,  and  which  does  us  more  real  honour  than  all  our
conquests,  all  our  literature,  and  all  our  philosophy  put  together,  invariably
causes  a  popular  bias  on  behalf  of  any  claim  to  freedom.  We,  therefore,  not-
withstanding the  activity  of  interested  parties,  were  predisposed  to  the  side  of
free  trade  as  one  of  the  means  of  letting  each  man  do  what  he  liked  with  his  own.
But  to  imagine  that  ordinary  minds  are  capable  of  mastering  such  a  work  as  the

[*  An  exaggeration.  Superstition  was  certainly  weakened  in  the  eighteenth  as  com-
pared with  the  seventeenth  century. — ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  895

Wealth  of  Nations,  and  of  following  without  confusion  its  long  and  intricate
arguments,  is  simply  absurd.  It  has  been  read  by  tens  of  thousands  <>t  j >••]>•  >ns
who  accept  its  conclusions  because  they  like  them  ;  which  is  merely  saying
because  the  movement  of  the  age  tends  that  way.*  The  other  great  work  of
Adam  Smith,  namely  the  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  has  had  no  influence  except
on  a  very  small  class  of  metaphysicians,  although  its  style  is,  as  some  think,
superior  to  that  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  and  it  is  certainly  easier  to  understand.
It  is  moreover  much  shorter,  which  to  most  readers  is  no  small  recommendation  ;
and  it  deals  with  subjects  of  great  interest,  which  come  home  to  the  feelings  of
all.  But  the  age,  not  caring  for  its  conclusions,  neglected  its  arguments.  On
the  other  hand,  the  Wealth  of  Nations  harmonized  with  the  general  tendency,
and  its  success  was  Supreme.  It  quickly  moved,  not  only  philosophers,  but  even
statesmen  and  politicians,  who  eventually  f  put  into  force  its  leading  recommenda-
tions, though,  as  their  laws  and  their  speeches  abundantly  prove,  they  have  never
succeeded  in  mastering  those  great  principles  which  underlie  it,  and  of  which
the  freedom  of  trade  is  but  a  minor  accessory.

Putting  aside  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  we  shall  find  that  the  Scotch  literature
of  the  eighteenth  century  did  scarcely  anything  for  Scotland,  considered  as  a
whole.  How  it  has  failed  in  its  great  aim  of  weakening  superstition  is  but  too
apparent  to  whoever  has  travelled  in  that  country,  and  observed  the  habits
and  turn  of  mind  still  predominant.  Many  able  and  enlightened  men  who  live
there  are  so  cowed  by  the  general  spirit  that  for  their  own  comfort,  and  for
the  peace  of  their  families,  they  make  no  resistance,  but  tacitly  comply  with
what  they  heartily  despise.  That  they  err  in  doing  so,  I  at  least  firmly  believe  ;
though  I  know  that  many  honest  and  in  every  respect  competent  judges  are  of
opinion  that  no  man  is  bound  to  be  a  martyr,  or  to  jeopardize  his  personal
'interests,  unless  he  clearly  sees  his  way  to  some  immediate  public  good.  To  me
however  it  appears  that  this  is  a  narrow  view,  and  that  the  first  duty  of  every
one  is  to  set  his  face  in  direct  opposition  to  what  he  believes  to  be  false,  and,
having  done  that,  leave  the  results  of  his  conduct  to  take  care  of  themselves.
Still,  the  temptation  to  a  contrary  course  is  always  very  strong,  and  in  a  country
like  Scotland  is  by  many  deemed  irresistible.  In  no  other  Protestant  nation,
and  indeed  in  no  Catholic  nation  except  Spain,  will  a  man  who  is  known  to  hold
unorthodox  opinions  find  his  life  equally  uncomfortable. t  In  a  few  of  the
large  towns  he  may  possibly  escape  animadversion  if  his  sentiments  are  not
too  bold,  and  are  not  too  openly  expressed.  If  he  is  timid  and  taciturn,  his
heresy  may  perchance  be  overlooked.  But  even  in  large  towns  impunity  is
the  exception,  and  not  the  rule.  Even  in  the  capital  of  Scotland,  in  that  centre
of  intelligence  which  once  boasted  of  being  the  Modern  Athens,  a  whisper  will
quickly  circulate  that  such  an  one  is  to  be  avoided,  for  that  he  is  a  free-thinker
as  if  free-thinking  were  a  crime,  or  as  if  it  were  not  better  to  be  a  free-thmk<
than  a  slavish  thinker.  In  other  parts,  that  is,  in  Scotland  generally,  the  state
of  things  is  far  worse.  I  speak  not  on  vague  rumour,  but  from  what  I  know  as
existing  at  the  present  time,  and  for  the  accuracy  of  which  I  vouch  and  hold
myself  responsible.  I  challenge  any  one  to  contradict  my  assertion,  when  I  say
that,  at  this  moment,  nearly  all  over  Scotland  the  finger  of  scorn  is  pointed  ;
every  man  who,  in  the  exercise  of  his  sacred  and  inalienable  right  of  free  judg
refuses  to  acquiesce  in  those  religious  notions  and  to  practi:

F*  Here  again  it  is  in  effect  denied  that  Smith  in  any  degree  made  the  movement  of
the  age.  On  that  view,  wherein  lay  the  importance  of  his  book  ?  And  how  can  any
book  be  important?  Below,  it  is  avowed  that  Smith's  book  mo,^  politicians.  On
the  general  principles  above  laid  down,  however,  it  was  radically  unfitted  to  influence
eithe"  Sc"laPnd o/Englancl,  the  former  being  theological  in  its  d eductiveness  ; ancT the
latter  too  inductive  to  care  for  deduction.  It  is  more  reasonable  to  say  that  Smith
modified  the  habits  of  thought  of  both  countries.— ED.]

ft  I  e     after  seventy  years !     Such  practical  success  is  not  exactly  dazzhng.-
[J  Probably  matter  were  as  bad,  when  Buckle  wrote,  in  Scandinavia.     Certainly
they  were  in  Ulster. — ED.]


896  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

customs  which  time,  indeed,  has  consecrated,  but  many  of  which  are  repulsive
to  the  eye  of  reason,  though  to  all  of  them,  however  irrational  they  may  be,  the
people  adhere  with  sullen  and  inflexible  obstinacy.  Knowing  that  these  words
will  be  widely  read  and  circulated  in  Scotland,  and  averse  as  I  naturally  am  to
bring  on  myself  the  hostility  of  a  nation  for  whose  many  sterling  and  valuable
qualities  I  entertain  sincere  respect,  I  do  nevertheless  deliberately  affirm  that
in  no  civilized  country  is  toleration  so  little  understood,  and  that  in  none  is  the
spirit  of  bigotry  and  of  persecution  so  extensively  diffused.  Nor  can  any  one
wonder  that  such  should  be  the  case,  who  observes  what  is  going  on  there.  The
churches  are  as  crowded  as  they  were  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  are  filled  with
devout  and  ignorant  worshippers,  who  flock  together  to  listen  to  opinions  of
which  the  Middle  Ages  alone  were  worthy.*  Those  opinions  they  treasure  up,
and  when  they  return  to  their  homes,  or  enter  into  the  daily  business  of  life,
they  put  them  in  force.  And  the  result  is  that  there  runs  through  the  entire
country  a  sour  and  fanatical  spirit,  an  aversion  to  innocent  gaiety,  a  disposition
to  limit  the  enjoyments  of  others,  and  a  love  of  inquiring  into  the  opinions  of
others,  and  of  interfering  with  them,  such  as  is  hardly  anywhere  else  to  be
found  ;  while  in  the  midst  of  all  this  there  flourishes  a  national  creed,  gloomy
and  austere  to  the  last  degree,  a  creed  which  is  full  of  forebodings  and  threats
and  horrors  of  every  sort,  and  which  rejoices  in  proclaiming  to  mankind  how
wretched  and  miserable  they  are,  how  small  a  portion  of  them  can  be  saved,
and  what  an  overwhelming  majority  is  necessarily  reserved  for  excruciating,
unspeakable,  and  eternal  agony.

Before  bringing  this  volume  to  a  close,  it  may  be  fitting  that  I  should  narrate
an  event  which,  notwithstanding  its  recent  occurrence,  and  the  great  attention
it  excited  at  the  time,  has,  amid  the  pressure  of  weightier  matters,  fallen  into
comparative  oblivion,  although  it  is  full  of  interest  to  those  who  study  the  various
forms  of  national  character,  while  it  moreover  supplies  an  admirable  illustration
of  the  essential  antagonism  which  still  exists  between  the  Scotch  and  English
minds  ;  an  antagonism  extremely  remarkable  when  found  among  nations  both
of  whom,  besides  being  contiguous  and  constantly  mixing  together,  speak  the
same  language,  read  the  same  books,  belong  to  the  same  empire,  and  possess  the
same  interests,  and  yet  are  in  many  important  respects  as  different  as  if  there
had  never  been  any  means  of  their  influencing  each  other,  and  as  if  they  had
never  had  any  thing  in  common.

In  the  year  1853  the  cholera,  after  having  committed  serious  ravages  in  many
parts  of  Europe,  visited  Scotland.  There  it  was  sure  to  find  numerous  victims
among  a  badly  fed,  badly  housed,  and  not  over-cleanly  people.  For  if  there
is  one  thing  better  established  than  another  respecting  this  disease,  it  is  that  it
invariably  attacks  with  the  greatest  effect  those  classes  who  from  poverty  or
from  sloth  are  imperfectly  nourished,  neglect  their  persons,  and  live  in  dirty,  ill-
drained,  or  ill -ventilated  dwellings.  In  Scotland  such  classes  are  very  numerous.
In  Scotland,  therefore,  the  cholera  must  needs  be  very  fatal.  In  this  there  was
nothing  mysterious.  On  the  contrary,  the  mystery  would  have  been  if  an
epidemic  like  the  Asiatic  cholera  had  spared  a  country  like  Scotland,  where  all
the  materials  were  collected  on  which  pestilence  feeds,  and  where  filth,  penury,
and  disorder  abound  on  every  side.

Under  these  circumstances  it  must  have  been  evident,  not  merely  to  men  of
science  but  to  all  men  of  plain,  sound  understanding,  who  would  apply  their
minds  to  the  matter  without  prejudice,  that  the  Scotch  had  only  one  way  of
successfully  grappling  with  their  terrible  enemy.  It  behoved  them  to  feed  their

[*  The  amount  of  progress  made  since  Buckle  wrote  may  be  gathered  from  a  report
in  the  Weekly  Scotsman  of  May  30,  1903,  bearing  the  headings  : — "  What  do  our  Ministers
Believe  ?  "  "  Suckled  in  a  Creed  Outworn."  The  report  is  an  account  of  a  speech
in  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  by  Principal  Story  of  Glasgow,
on  the  question  of  creed  subscription.  Dr.  Story  makes  reference  to  "  the  steady,  the  grow-
ing dissatisfaction  "  with  the  rule  of  subscription,  and  goes  on  to  indict  some  of  the
ethical  doctrines  of  the  Confession  in  a  fashion  suggestive  of  a  free -thinking  lecture. — ED.]


SCOTCH   INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY  897

poor,  to  cleanse  their  cesspools,  and  to  ventilate  their  houses.  If  they  had  done
this,  and  done  it  quickly,  thousands  of  lives  would  have  been  spared.  But  they
neglected  it,  and  the  country  was  thrown  into  mourning.  Nay,  they  not  only
neglected  it,  but,  moved  by  that  dire  superstition  which  sits  like  an  incubus  upon
them,  they  adopted  a  course  which,  if  it  had  been  carried  into  full  operation,
would  have  aggravated  the  calamity  to  a  frightful  extent.  It  is  well  known
that  whenever  an  epidemic  is  raging,  physical  exhaustion  and  mental  depression
make  the  human  frame  more  liable  to  it,  and  are  therefore  especially  to  be  guarded
against.  But  though  this  is  a  matter  of  common  notoriety,  the  Scotch  clergy,
backed,  sad  to  say,  by  the  general  voice  of  the  Scotch  people,  wished  the  public
authorities  to  take  a  step  which  was  certain  to  cause  physical  exhaustion,  and  to
encourage  mental  depression.  In  the  name  of  religion,  whose  offices  they  thus
abused  and  perverted  to  the  detriment  of  man,  instead  of  employing  them  for  his
benefit,  they  insisted  on  the  propriety  of  ordering  a  national  fast,  which  in  so
superstitious  a  country  was  sure  to  be  rigidly  kept,  and,  being  rigidly  kept,
was  equally  sure  to  enfeeble  thousands  of  delicate  persons,  and,  before  twenty-
four  hours  were  passed,  prepare  them  to  receive  that  deadly  poison  which  was
already  lurking  around  them,  and  which  hitherto  they  had  just  strength  enough
to  resist.  The  public  fast  was  also  to  be  accompanied  by  a  public  humiliation,
in  order  that  nothing  might  be  wanting  to  appal  the  mind  and  fill  it  with  terror.
On  the  same  occasion  the  preachers  were  to  thunder  from  their  pulpits  and
proclaim  aloud  the  sins  of  the  land  ;  while  the  poor  benighted  people,  panic-
struck,  were  to  sit  in  awe,  were  to  remain  the  whole  day  without  proper  nourish-
ment, and  retire  to  their  beds,  weeping  and  starved.  Then  it  was  hoped  that
the  Deity  would  be  propitiated,  and  the  plague  be  stayed.  As  soon  as  the
entire  nation  had  taken  the  course  which  of  all  others  was  most  certain  to
increase  the  mortality,  it  was  believed  that  man  having  done  his  worst,  the
Almighty  would  interpose,  would  violate  the  laws  of  nature,  and,  by  working  a
miracle,  would  preserve  his  creatures  from  what,  without  a  miracle,  would  be
the  inevitable  consequence  of  their  own  deliberate  act.

This  was  the  scheme  projected  by  the  Scotch  clergy,  and  they  were  determined
to  put  it  into  execution.  To"  give  greater  effect  to  it,  they  called  upon  England
to  help  them,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1853  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  thinking
that  from  their  position  they  were  bound  to  take  the  lead,  caused  their  Moderator
to  address  a  letter,  ostensibly  to  the  English  Minister,  but  in  reality  to  the  English
nation.  In  this  choice  production,  a  copy  of  which  is  now  lying  before  me,
the  Home  Secretary  is  assured  that  the  members  of  the  Presbytery  had  delayed
appointing  a  day  for  fasting  and  humiliation  on  their  own  ecclesiastical  authority,
because  they  thought  it  likely  that  one  would  be  appointed  by  the  royal  authority.
But  as  this  had  not  been  done,  the  Presbytery  respectfully  requested  to  be  in-
formed if  it  was  intended  to  be  done.  They  apologized  for  the  liberty  they  were
taking  ;  they  had  no  desire  unduly  to  intrude  themselves  ;  neither  did  they  wish
the  Home  Secretary  to  answer  their  question  unless  he  felt  himself  justified  in
doing  so.  Still,  if  he  were  able  to  answer  it,  they  would  be  glad.  For  there
was  no  doubt  that  Asiatic  cholera  was  in  the  country  ;  and  such  being  the  case,
the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh  were  interested  in  knowing  if  the  appointment  by
the  Queen  of  a  national  fast  was  in  contemplation.300

This  letter,  which,  through  the  medium  of  the  press,  was  sure  to  become  well
known  and  to  be  widely  read,  was  evidently  intended  to  act  on  public  opinion
in  England.  It  was  in  fact  a  covert  reproach  on  the  English  Government  for
having  neglected  its  spiritual  duties,  and  for  not  having  perceived  that  fasting

300  "  The  members  were  of  opinion,"  writes  the  Moderator,  "  The  members  were  of
opinion  that  it  was  likely,  in  the  circumstances,  that  a  national  fast  would  be  appointed
on  royal  authority.  For  this  reason,  they  delayed  making  an  appointment  for  t:
locality,  and  directed  me,  in  the  meantime,  respectfully  to  request  that  you  would  be
pleased  to  say— if  you  feel  yourself  at  liberty  to  do  so— whether  the  appointment  of
a  national  fast  by  the  Queen  is  in  contemplation.  The  Presbytery  hope  to  be  excused
for  the  liberty  they  use  in  preferring  this  request."


898  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

was  the  most  effectual  way  of  stopping  an  epidemic.  In  Scotland,  generally,
it  received  great  praise,  and  was  regarded  as  a  dignified  rebuke  addressed  to  the
irreligious  habits  of  the  English  people,  who,  seeing  the  cholera  at  their  doors,
merely  occupied  themselves  with  sanitary  measures,  and  carnal  devices  to  improve
the  public  health,  showing  thereby  that  they  trusted  too  much  to  the  arms  of
the  flesh.  In  England,  on  the  other  hand,  this  manifesto  of  the  Scotch  Church
was  met  with  almost  universal  ridicule,  and  indeed  found  no  favourers  except
among  the  most  ignorant  and  credulous  part  of  the  nation.*  The  minister  to
whom  it  was  addressed  was  Lord  Palmerston,  a  man  of  vast  experience,  and
perhaps  better  acquainted  with  public  opinion  than  any  politician  of  his  time.
He,  being  well  aware  of  the  difference  between  Scotland  and  England,  knew
that  what  was  suitable  for  one  country  was  not  suitable  for  the  other,  and  that
notions  which  the  Scotch  deemed  religious,  the  English  deemed  fanatical.  On
a  former  occasion,  the  imperial  government,  yielding  to  the  clamour  which  a
few  active  and  interested  men  succeeded  in  raising,  had  been  foolish  enough  to
set  themselves  in  this  matter  in  opposition  to  the  temper  of  the  age,  and  to  enjoin
public  observances  which,  happily,  were  not  strictly  obeyed,  but  which,  in  so
far  as  they  were  obeyed,  heightened  the  general  terror  by  reinforcing  natural
fears  with  supernatural  ones,  and  thus,  depressing  the  nervous  system,  increased
the  chance  of  mortality  from  the  pestilence.  To  have  the  plague  in  our  country
is  bad  enough,  since,  do  what  we  may,  many  victims  will  be  struck  down  by  it.
But  a  fearful  responsibility  is  entailed  upon  those  who,  at  such  a  period,  instead
of  exerting  themselves  to  check  its  ravages,  either  by  precautionary  measures
or  by  soothing  and  reassuring  the  people,  do  everything  in  their  power  to
aggravate  the  calamity,  by  encouraging  that  superstitious  dread  which  weakens
the  popular  energy  at  the  very  moment  when  energy  is  most  requisite,  and
troubles  the  coolness,  the  self-reliance,  and  self-possession,  without  which  no
crisis  of  national  danger  can  ever  be  averted.

This  time,  however,  there  was  no  risk  of  the  government  committing  so  serious
a  blunder.  Lord  Palmerston,  who  knew  that  the  sound  sense  of  the  English
people  would  support  him  in  what  he  was  doing,  directed  a  letter  to  be  sent  to
the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  which,  unless  I  am  greatly  mistaken,  will  in  future
ages  be  quoted  as  an  interesting  document  for  illustrating  the  history  of  the
progress  of  public  opinion.  A  century  ago,  any  statesman  who  had  written  such
a  letter  would  have  been  driven  from  office  by  a  storm  of  general  indignation.
Two  centuries  ago,  the  consequences  to  him  would  have  been  still  more  disastrous,
and  would  indeed  have  ruined  him  socially,  as  well  as  politically.  For  in  it
he  sets  at  defiance  those  superstitious  fancies  respecting  the  origin  of  disease
which  were  once  universally  cherished  as  an  essential  part  of  every  religious
creed.  Traditions,  the  memory  of  which  is  preserved  in  the  theological  literature
of  all  Pagan  countries,  of  all  Catholic  countries,  and  of  all  Protestant  countries,
are  quietly  put  aside  as  if  they  were  matters  of  no  moment,  and  as  if  it  were  not
worth  while  to  discuss  them.  The  Scotch  clergy,  occupying  the  old  ground  on
which  the  members  of  their  profession  had  always  been  accustomed  to  stand,
took  for  granted  that  the  cholera  was  the  result  of  the  Divine  anger,  and  was
intended  to  chastize  our  sins.  In  the  reply  which  they  now  received  from  the
English  Government,  a  doctrine  was  enunciated  which  to  Englishmen  seems
right  enough,  but  which  to  Scotchmen  sounded  very  profane.f  The  Presbytery
were  informed  that  the  affairs  of  this  world  are  regulated  by  natural  laws,  on
the  observance  or  neglect  of  which  the  weal  or  woe  of  mankind  depends.301  One

301  "The  weal  or  woe  of  mankind  depends  upon  the  observance  or  neglect  of  those
laws."

[*  Buckle  here  somewhat  overstates  the  English  enlightenment  of  his  day.  The
ignorant  and  credulous,  then  as  now,  formed  a  large  party. — ED.]

[f  This  passage,  which  affirms  that  Englishmen  in  general  were  rationalistic,  and
Scotchmen  in  general  supernaturalistic,  is  one  of  the  fallacies  which  flow  from  the
habit  of  taking  nations  as  entities  in  matters  of  opinion. — ED.]


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.   CENTURY  899

of  those  laws  connects  disease  with  the  exhalations  of  bodies  ;  and  it  is  by  virtue
of  this  law  that  contagion  spreads,  either  in  crowded  cities,  or  in  places  where
vegetable  decomposition  is  going  on.  Man,  by  exerting  himself,  can  disperse
or  neutralize  these  noxious  influences.  The  appearance  of  the  cholera  proves
that  he  has  not  exerted  himself.  The  towns  have  not  been  purified  ;  hence  the
root  of  the  evil.  The  Home  Secretary,  therefore,  advised  the  Presbytery  of
Edinburgh  that  it  was  better  to  cleanse  than  to  fast.  He  thought  that  the  plague
being  upon  them,  activity  was  preferable  to  humiliation.  It  was  now  autumn,
and  before  the  hot  weather  would  return  a  considerable  period  must  elapse.
That  period  should  be  employed  in  destroying  the  causes  of  disease,  by  improving
the  abodes  of  the  poor.  If  this  were  done,  all  would  go  well.  Otherwise,  pesti-
lence would  be  sure  to  revisit  them,  "  in  spite  " — I  quote  the  words  of  the  English
minister—"  in  spite  of  all  the  prayers  and  fastings  of  a  united  but  inactive
nation."  302

This  correspondence  between  the  Scotch  clergy  and  the  English  statesman
is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  passing  episode  of  light  or  temporary  interest.
On  the  contrary,  it  represents  that  terrible  struggle  between  theology  and  science
which,  hav  ng  begun  in  the  persecution  of  science  and  in  the  martyrdom  of  scien-
tific men,  has  in  these  later  days  taken  a  happier  turn,  and  is  now  manifestly
destroying  that  old  theological  spirit  which  has  brought  so  much  misery  and
ruin  upon  the  world.  The  ancient  superstition,  which  was  once  universal,  but
is  now  slowly  though  surely  dying  away,  represented  the  Deity  as  being  con-
stantly moved  to  anger,  delighting  in  seeing  His  creatures  abase  and  mortify
themselves,  taking  pleasure  in  their  sacrifices  and  their  austerities,  and,  notwith-
standing all  they  could  do,  constantly  inflicting  on  them  the  most  grievous
punishments,  among  which  the  different  forms  of  pestilence  were  conspicuous.
It  is  by  science,  and  by  science  alone,  that  these  horrible  delusions  are  being
dissipated^  Events  which  formerly  were  deemed  supernatural  visitations  are
now  shown  to  depend  upon  natural  causes,  and  to  be  amenable  to  natural
remedies.  Man  can  predict  them,  and  man  can  deal  with  them.  Being  the
inevitable  result  of  their  own  antecedents,  no  room  is  left  for  the  notion  of  their
being  special  inflictions.  This  great  change  in  our  opinions  is  fatal  to  theology,
but  is  serviceable  to  religion.  Eor  by  it  science,  instead  of  being  the  enemy  of
religion,  becomes  its  ally.  Religion  is  to  each  individual  according  to  the  inward
light  with  which  he  is  endowed.  In  different  characters,  therefore,  it  assumes
different  forms,  and  can  never  be  reduced  to  one  common  and  arbitrary  rule.
Theology  on  the  other  hand,  claiming  authority  over  all  minds,  and  refusing  to
recognize  their  essential  divergence,  seeks  to  compel  them  to  a  single  creed,  and
sets  up  one  standard  of  absolute  truth,  by  which  it  tests  every  one's  opinions  ;
presumptuously  condemning  those  who  disagree  with  that  standard.  Such
arrogant  pretensions  need  means  of  support.  Those  means  are  threats  which
in  ignorant  times  are  universally  believed,  and  which  by  causing  fear  produce
submission.  Hence  it  is  that  the  books  of  every  theological  system  narrate
acts  of  the  grossest  cruelty,  which,  without  the  least  hesitation,  are  ascribed  to
the  direct  interposition  of  God.  Humane  and  gentle  natures  revolt  at  such
cruelties,  even  while  they  try  to  believe  them.  It  is  the  business  of  science  to
purify  theology,  by  showing  that  there  has  been  no  cruelty,  because  there  has
been  no  interposition.  Science  ascribes  to  natural  causes  what  theology  ascribes
to  supernatural  ones.  According  to  this  view,  the  calamities  with  which  the

302  "  Lord  Palmerston  would  therefore  suggest  that  the  best  course  which  the  people
of  this  country  can  pursue  to  deserve  that  the  further  progress  of  the  cholera  should  be
stayed,  will  be  to  employ  the  interval  that  will  elapse  between  the  present  time  and  the
beginning  of  next  spring  in  planning  and  executing  measures  by  which  those  portions
of  their  towns  and  cities  which  are  inhabited  by  the  poorest  classes,  and  which,  from
the  nature  of  things,  must  most  need  purification  and  improvement,  may  be  freed  from
those  causes  and  sources  of  contagion  which,  if  allowed  to  remain,  will  infallibly  breed
pestilence,  and  be  fruitful  in  death,  in  spite  of  all  the  prayers  and  fastings  of  a  united
but  inactive  nation."


900  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

world  is  afflicted  are  the  result  of  the  ignorance  of  man,  and  not  of  the  inter-
ference of  God.  We  must  not,  therefore,  ascribe  to  Him  what  is  due  to  our
own  folly,  or  to  our  own  vice.  We  must  not  calumniate  an  all -wise  and  all-
merciful  Being  by  imputing  to  Him  those  little  passions  which  move  ourselves,
as  if  He  were  capable  of  rage,  of  jealousy,  and  of  revenge,  and  as  if  He,  with
outstretched  arm,  were  constantly  employed  in  aggravating  the  sufferings  of
mankind,  and  making  the  miseries  of  the  human  race  more  poignant  than  they
would  otherwise  be.

That  this  remarkable  improvement  in  religious  ideas  is  due  to  the  progress  of
physical  science  is  apparent  not  only  from  general  arguments  which  would  lead
us  to  anticipate  that  such  must  be  the  case,  but  also    from  the  historical  fact
that  the  gradual  destruction  of  the  old  theology  is  everywhere  preceded  by  the
growth  and  diffusion  of  physical  truths.     The  more  we  know  of  the  laws  of  nature,
the  more  clearly  do  we  understand  that  everything  which  happens  in  the  material
world,  pestilence,  earthquake,  famine,  or  whatever  it  may  be,  is  the  necessary
result  of  something  which  had  previously  happened.     Cause  produces  effect,  and
the  effect  becomes  in  its  turn  a  cause  of  other  effects.     In  that  operation  we  see
no  gap,  and  we  admit  of  no  pause.     To  us  the  chain  is  unbroken  ;   the  constancy
of  nature  is  unviolated.      Our  minds  become  habituated    to  contemplate   all
physical  phenomena  as  presenting  an  orderly,  uniform,  and  spontaneous  march,
and  running  on  in  one  regular  and  uninterrupted  sequence.     This  is  the  scientific
view.     It  is  also  the  religious  view.      Against  it  we  have  the  theological  view  ;
but  that  which  has  already  lost  its  hold  over  the  intellect  of  men  is  now  losing
its  hold  over  their  affections,  and  is  so  manifestly  perishing  that  at  present  no
educated  person  ventures  to  defend  it,  without  so  limiting  and  guarding  his
meaning  as  to  concede  to  its  opponents  nearly  every  point  which  is  really  at  issue.
While,  however,  in  regard  to  the  material  world,  the  narrow  notions  formerly
entertained  are  in  the  most  enlightened    countries  almost  extinct,  it  must  be
confessed  that  in  regard  to  the  moral  world  the  progress  of  opinion  is  less  rapid.
The  same  men  who  believe  that  Nature  is  undisturbed  by  miraculous  inter-
position, refuse  to  believe  that  Man  is  equally  undisturbed.      In   the  one  case
they  assert   the  scientific  doctrine  of  regularity  ;    in  the  other  they  assert  the
theological  doctrine  of  irregularity.     The  reason  of  this  difference  of  opinion  is
that  the  movements  of  nature  are  less  complex  than  the  movements  of  man.
Being  less  complex,  they  are  more  easily  studied,  and  more  quickly  understood.
Hence  we  find    that  while   natural  science  has  long  been  cultivated,  historical
science  hardly  yet  exists.     Our  knowledge  of  the  circumstances  which  determine
the  course  of  mankind  is  still  so  imperfect,  and  has  been  so  badly  digested,  that
it    has   produced  scarcely  any  effect  on  popular  ideas.      Philosophers    indeed
are  aware  that  here  as  elsewhere  there  must  be  a  necessary  connexion  between
even  the  most  remote  and  dissimilar  events.     They  know  that  every  discrepancy
is  capable  of  being  reconciled,  though  we,  in   the  present   state  of  knowledge,
may  be  unequal  to  the  task.     This  is  their  faith,  and  nothing  can  wean  them
from  it.     But  the  great  majority  of  people  have  a  different  faith.     They  believe
that  what  is  unexplained  is  inexplicable,  and  that  what  is  inexplicable  is  super-
natural.    Science  has  explained  an  immense  number  of  physical  phenomena,
and  therefore,  even  to  the  vulgar,  those  phenomena  no  longer  seem  supernatural,
but  are  ascribed  to  natural  causes.     On  the  other  hand,  science  has  not  yet
explained  the  phenomena  of  history  ;    consequently  the  theological  spirit  lays
hold  of  them,  and  presses  them  into  its  own  service.      In  this  way  there  has
arisen  that  famous  and  ancient  theory  which  has  received  the  name  of  the  moral
government  of   the  world.      It  is  a  high-sounding  title,  and  imposes  on  many
who,  if  they  examined  its  pretensions,  would  never  be  duped  by  them.    For,  like
that  other  notion  which  we  have  just  considered,  it  is  not  only  unscientific  but
it  is  eminently  irreligious.      It  is  in  fact  an  impeachment  of  one  of  the  noblest
attributes  of  the  Deity.     It  is  a  slur  on  the  Omniscience  of  God.     It  assumes
that  the  fate  of  nations,  instead  of  being  the  result  of  preceding  and  surrounding
events,  is  specially  subject  to  the  control  and  interference  of  Providence.     It
assumes  that  there  are  great  public  emergencies  in  which  such  interference  is
needed.      It  assumes  that,  without  the  interference,  the  course  of  affairs  could  not


SCOTCH  INTELLECT  DURING  XVIII.  CENTURY          901

run  smoothly  ;  that  they  would  be  jangled  and  out  of  tune  ;  that  the  plav
and  harmony  of  the  whole  would  be  incomplete.  And  thus  it  is  that  the
very  men  who  at  one  moment  proclaim  the  Divine  Omniscience,  do  at  the  next
moment  advocate  a  theory  which  reduces  that  Omniscience  to  nothing  since
it  imputes  to  an  All-Wise  Being  that  the  scheme  of  human  affairs,  of  which  He
must  from  the  beginning  have  foreseen  every  issue  and  every  consequence  is
so  weakly  contrived  as  to  be  liable  to  be  frustrated  ;  that  it  has  not  turned  out
as  He  could  have  wished  ;  that  it  has  been  baffled  by  His  own  creatures ;  and  that
to  preserve  its  integrity  its  operations  must  be  tampered  with,  and  its  disorders
redressed.  The  great  Architect  of  the  universe,  the  Creator  and  Designer  of
all  existing  things,  is  likened  to  some  clumsy  mechanic,  who  knows  his  trade  so
ill  that  he  has  to  be  called  in  to  alter  the  working  of  his  own  machine,  to  supply
its  deficiencies,  to  fill  up  its  flaws,  and  to  rectify  its  errors.

It  is  time  that  such  unworthy  notions  should  come  to  an  end.  It  is  time  that
what  has  long  been  known  to  philosophers  should  also  be  known  to  historians,
and  that  the  history  of  mankind  should  cease  to  be  troubled  by  what,  to  those
who  are  imbued  with  the  scientific  spirit,  must  seem  little  better  than  arrant
trifling.  Of  two  things,  choose  one.  Either  deny  the  Omniscience  of  the  Creator,
or  else  admit  it.  If  you  deny  it,  you  deny  what,  to  my  mind  at  least,  is  a  funda-
mental truth,  and  on  these  matters  there  can  be  no  sympathy  between  us.
But  if  you  admit  the  Omniscience  of  God,  beware  of  libelling  what  you  profess
to  defend.  For  when  you  assert  what  is  termed  the  moral  government  of  the
world,  you  slander  Omniscience,  inasmuch  as  you  declare  that  the  mechanism
of  the  entire  universe,  including  the  actions  both  of  Nature  and  of  Man,  planned
as  it  is  by  Infinite  Wisdom,  is  unequal  to  its  duties,  unless  that  same  Wisdom
does  from  time  to  time  interfere  with  it.  You  assert,  in  fact,  either  that  Omni-
science has  been  deceived,  or  that  Omnipotence  has  been  defeated.  Surely,
they  who  believe,  and  whose  pride  and  happiness  it  is  to  believe,  that  there  is  a
Power  above  all  and  before  all,  knowing  all  and  creating  all',  ought  not  to  fall
into  such  a  snare  as  this.  They  who,  dissatisfied  with  this  little  world  of  sense,
seek  to  raise  their  minds  to  something  which  the  senses  are  unable  to  grasp,  can
hardly  fail,  on  deeper  reflection,  to  perceive  how  coarse  and  material  is  that
theological  prejudice  which  ascribes  to  such  a  Power  the  vulgar  functions  of  a
temporal  ruler,  arrays  Him  in  the  garb  of  an  earthly  potentate,  and  represents
Him  as  meddling  here  and  meddling  there,  uttering  threats,  inflicting  punish-
ments, bestowing  rewards.  These  are  base  and  grovelling  conceptions,  the  off-
spring of  ignorance  and  of  darkness.  Such  gross  and  sordid  notions  are  but  one
remove  from  actual  idolatry.  They  are  the  draff  and  offal  of  a  bygone  age,
and  we  will  not  have  them  obtruded  here.  Well  suited  they  were  to  those  old
and  barbarous  times  when  men,  being  unable  to  refine  their  ideas,  were  there-
fore unable  to  purify  their  creed.  Now,  however,  they  jar  upon  us  ;  they  do
not  assimilate  with  other  parts  of  our  knowledge  ;  they  are  incongruous  ;  their
concord  is  gone.*  Everything  is  against  them.  They  stand  alone  ;  there  is
nothing  left  with  which  they  harmonize.  The  whole  scope  and  tendency  of
modern  thought  force  upon  our  minds  conceptions  of  regularity  and  of  law
to  which  they  are  diametrically  opposed.  Even  those  who  cling  to  them  do
so  from  the  influence  of  tradition,  rather  than  from  complete  and  unswerving
belief.  That  child-like  and  unhesitating  faith  with  which  the  doctrine  of  inter-
position was  once  received,  is  succeeded  by  a  cold  and  lifeless  assent,  very  different
from  the  enthusiasm  of  former  times.  Soon,  too,  this  will  vanish,  and  men  will
cease  to  be  terrified  by  phantoms  which  their  own  ignorance  has  reared.  This
age,  haply,  may  not  witness  the  emancipation  ;  but  so  surely  as  the  human
mind  advances,  so  surely  will  that  emancipation  come.  It  may  come  quicker
than  any  one  expects.  For  we  are  stepping  on  far  and  fast.  The  signs  of
the  time  are  all  around,  and  they  who  list  may  read.  The  handwriting  is  on
the  wall  •  the  fiat  has  gone  forth  ;  the  ancient  empire  shall  be  subverted  ;  the
dominion  of  superstition,  already  decaying,  shall  break  away,  and  crumble

[*  Compare  the  closing  sentence  and  note  thereon. — ED.]


902  THE    HISTORY    OF    CIVILIZATION

into  dust  ;  and  new  life  being  breathed  into  the  confused  and  chaotic  mass,
it  shall  be  clearly  seen  that  from  the  beginning  there  has  been  no  discrepancy,
no  incongruity,  no  disorder,  no  interruption,  no  interference  ;  but  that  all  the
events  which  surround  us,  even  to  the  furthest  limits  of  the  material  creation,
are  but  different  parts  of  a  single  scheme  which  is  permeated  by  one  glorious
principle  of  universal  and  undeviating  regularity.*


[*  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  repeat,  in  conclusion,  that  such  propositions  as  the  above
concerning  "  discrepancy,"  "  disorder,"  "  interruption,"  and  so  on,  merely  empty  these
terms  of  all  meaning.  But  it  may  be  well  to  note  that  the  general  doctrine  of  these
closing  pages  cancels  that  put  forth  at  the  close  of  the  section  on  Spain. — ED.]


INDEX


Aberdeen,    644-5

Manufacture  of  linen  in,  735
Abyssinia,  Christianity  in  (150-1,  note)
Acquirements,    intellectual,    superiority    of,    over

moral  feeling,  105-6,  128,  130
Actions,  Human,  true  sources  of,  12-16,  19,  132,

3.14

Uniformity  of,  12-18
Agassiz,  Researches  by,  506  (506,  note)
Albany,  Regent  of  Scotland,  policy  of,  654,  661-2

(661,  note)
Alberoni,  584,  586
Alfred  of  Beverley,   183
Alva,  in  Low  Countries,  544-5
America  and  Germany  compared,  138,  140
Central,  civilization  in,  54
Diffusion  of  Knowledge  in,  139
Independence  of,  declaration  of,  523  ;  Effect  of,

in  France,  523

North,  civilization  in,  56-7  (57,  note)
South,  civilization  in,  57-62
Taxation  of,  by  England,  270-1  ;  Cruelties  ac-
companying,   271-2 ;    Indirect    effect    of,  on
England,  272  (272,  notes)
American  War,  result  of  views  held  by  George  III,

270,  271  (271,  note)

„     Crisis  in  history  of  England,  273
Americans,  inductive  intellect  of,  140
Angels,  Scottish  Ministers  called,  760-1  (760,  note)
Anne's,  Queen,  deference  to  the  Church,  result  of,

237

Antiquity,  harm  of  exaggerated  respect  for,  76
Hindu  respect  for,  77-8
Spanish  respect  for,  626
Arabs,  character  of,  25-6  (25-6,  notes)
Arbroath,  manufacture  of  linen  in,  735
Arian  controversy,  242
Aristocracy,  decline  of,  an  essential  condition  of

national  progress,  728
English,  cause  of  their  having  less  power  than

French,  349-50,  351-2
Desire  of,  to  take  America,  271  (271,  note)
French,  greater  power  than  English,  349,  350-1,

353,   359

„     Temper  of,   379-84,   385-6  (384,   note)
Natural  love  for  old  institutions,  365-6
Natural  sympathy  between,  and  clergy,  366,  367
Aristotle,  873,  887
Ark,  building  of  a  second,  187
Arminianism,  8,  480-1
Army,  Spanish,  efforts  to  reconstruct,  595
Standing,  origin  of  a,  118-9

„          In  Scotland,  attempt  to  establish,  673
Armorial  Bearings,  invention  of,  349
Arran,  Earl  of,  appointed  Regent  of  Scotland,  669
Art,  effect  of  aspects  of  nature  on,  75

Greek  (82,  note)
Arts,  fine,  absence  of  in  Scotland,  641-3

„      and    Imagination,   connexion     between

70  (70,  note)

„      Effect  of  patronage  on,  407-9
Arthur,  King,  history  relating  to,  181,  182-3
Assembly,    General    (French)    submissiveness    of,

701
of  Rochelle,  320,  321


Astronomy,  Louis  XIV's  patronage  of,  395-6
Atheism  in  France,  progress  of,  487-93  (487,  note)
Audigier,  on  origin  of  the  French,  447-8
Augustin,  7  (7,  note)
Auriol,  187

Austria,  house  of,  Richelieu's  attempts  to  humble,
305  (306,  note)

Bacon,  186

System  of,  141

Ballad  singers,  decline  of  influence  of,  168
Ballads,  historical  accuracy  of,  167  (167,  note)

Their  place  in  history,  165,  (165,  166,  167,  notes)
Banana,  the,  63  (63,  note)
Bangorian  controversy,  242
Banks,  establishment  of,  735  (735,  note)
Bannockburn,  Battle  of,  636  (636  notes)
Barrow,  Isaac,  222

Beaton,  Abp.,  of  St.  Andrews,  arrest  of,    669  ;
Murder   of,  671-3  (671,  notes)  ;  Knox's  con-
nexion with,  672-3
Bedford,  Earl  of,  apostacy  of,  373-4
Berkeley,  on  philosophers  (95,  note)
Berlin,  important  intellectual  position  of,  136
Berwick,  Duke  of,  commands  Spanish  army,  582
BerzeUus,  870
Bichat,  502-12,  873

Appreciation  of,  508-12

Great  work  done  by,  503-6,  507  (505-6,  notes)
Bigotry,   last  gasps  of,   in  England,   195
Birth   of   Sexes,  laws  regulating   proportion    of

96-8  (97,  note)  (98-9,  notes)

Bishops,  English,  in  House  of  Lords,  236-7  (237,
note)

Injudicious  action  of  230-31,  232;  Effect  upon
nation,  231-2

Scotch,  degradation  of,  706-7

„         Disgraceful  conduct  of,  716
„          Laying  on  of  hands,  702-3
Black,  David,  sermon  by,  691,  692
Black,  Joseph,  discoveries  of,  839-59  (84,  note)

Nature  of  his  intellect,  843

Work  accomplished  by,  848
Blackburn,  on  confessional,  242  (242,  note)
Blondel,  405
Bodin,  184

His  views  on  history  (131,  note)
Boileau,  406
Book  of  Discipline,  First,  679,  685,  686  (686,  note)

Second,  685,  686  (686,  note)
Books,  the  dedication  of  (248,  notes)

Lending  of,  prohibition  of,  277  (277,  note)
Bossuet,  447,  448-53

Attack  on  Protestantism,  449

Personal  characteristics  of,  453

His  treatment  of  Mohammed,  451-2

His  Universal  History,  448-52  (449.  notes)

and  Voltaire,  works  of,  compared,  447-67
Botanists,  eminent,  513
Botany,  condition  of  science  of,  512

Generalization  in,  512,  513-4  (514,  notes)

Neglect  of,  under  Louis  XIV,  400-401
Bourdaloue,  404
Boyle,  Christianity  of,  210

Discoveries  of,  208  (209,  note)
903


9°4


INDEX


Sceptical  chemist,  210  (210,  note)

Teachings  of,  209-10  (209  note)
Brahmanism,  170

Brain,  human,  the,  does  it  improve  ?   100-1  (100-1,
note)

Effect  of  exercise  on  (32,  note)
Brazil,  59-62

Civilization  in,  60-1

Climate  of,  61

Fertility  of,  59-60

Insects  of  (61,  note)

Power lessness  of  man  in,  60- 1
Brown,  Dr.  John,  founder  of    Brunonian  system

(873,  note)

Browne,  Sir  Thomas,  207
Bruce,  636

Brunonian  system  (873,  note)
Buch,  Von,  854

Buchanan,  his  merits  as  a  political  writer,  736-7
Buffon,  first  popularizer  of  geology,  497  (497,  note)

Student  of  English,  413
Burke,  Edmund,  258-69  (258,  notes)
Burnet,  right  of  private  judgment  maintaittedjby,
199

Calvin,   7

Calvinism,  480-1

Calvinists,  aided  by  Richelieu,  306,  327

Canal,  between  Forth  and  Clyde,  construction  of,

736

Castes,  Division  of  Nations  into,  65
Catholicism,  Roman,  148,  150
Catholics  and  Protestants  in  France,  reversal  of
natural  position  of,  321-2

,,  „  Scottish,  treaty  between,  674-5

Emancipation  of,  in  England,  283  (283,  note)

French,  tolerance  displayed  by,  321

Persecution  of,  in  Scotland,  676-7
Caussin,  Father,  Richelieu's  treatment  of,  302-3
Cavaliers,  371  (371,  note)
Cavendish,  859,  860  (860-1,  notes)

Methods  of,  861.
Cecil,  368,  369
Centralization,  bane  of  France,  355  (355,  note),

(358,  note)

Century,  Eighteenth,  see  Eighteenth
Ceremonies,   Pagan,   imposed  upon  Christianity,

148  (148,  note  )

Certainty  and  Precision,  difference  between,  472
Chance,  Doctrine  of,  4-5  (4,  note)
Character,  English,  influence  of  France  upon,  134-5
(i34,  135,  notes)

National,  affected  by  climate,  468 ;   food,  468 ;
soil,  468

Scottish,  causes  of  hardness  of,  763-41  7&7,  775-

85,    789-90    (776-85,    notes)
Characteristics,  leading,  of  England,  France  and

Germany  in  eighteenth  century,  500
Charlemagne,   chronicle  relating   to,    180-81
Charles  I  of  England,  revolt  in  Scotland  against,
707-8

Confession  of,   708-9
Charles  II  of  England,  Church  policy  of,  221-2

Dislike  to  the  clergy,  220

Foreign  policy  of,  215

True  estimate  of  reign  of,  215

Laws  passed  during,  215

Progress  of  science  during,  215  (215,  note)

Reforms  effected  during,  216-8,  219

Personal  character  of,  215-6,  219-20

Favourable  to  growth  of  national  liberty,  220

Religious  indifference  of,  205
Charles  II  of  Spain,  555-6  (556,  note)
Charles  III   of  Spain,   policy  of,    602-10   (notes

passim)

Charles  IV  of  Spain,  612

Charles  V  of  Spain,  character  of   administration
in  Spain,  541

Devotion  to  Catholicism,  541-2  (542,  note)

Personal  character  of,  543  (543,  note)


Charron,    doctrine    of    development    of    religions
(297-8,  note)

Teachings  of,  296-8  (296,  note)

and  Montaigne  compared,   297

Treatise  on  Wisdom,  296

Chatham,  his  hatred  of  George  III,  254  (254,  note)
Chemistry,  great  importance  of,  495-7

Progress   made  in,   496-7

Science  of,  due  to  France,  496
Chillingworth,   196  (197,  note)

Compared  with  Hooker  and  Jewel,  199

Compared  with   Descartes,   Hooker   and  Mon-
taigne, 332

Private  judgment,  right  of,  maintained  by,  197-8
(198,  note)

Religion  of  Protestants,   196-9,   (199,  note)
Chivalry,  decline  of,  in  England,  363-4

Evils  of,   361-2

Less  power  in  England  than  in  France,  362-3

Rise  of,  360-2  (362,  notes)
China,    traditions   of,   authenticity   of,    171    (171,

note)
Cholera  in  Scotland,  896-9

Superstitious  action  of  clergy,  during,  897-8
Christianity,   crusade  against,  in  France,  428-9,

Divergence   of   treatment  of,   by   English    and

French  intellects,  431,   434
Effect  of,  on  Romans,  &c.,  147-8
Pagan  ceremonies  imposed  upon,  148  (148,  note)
Chronicle  of  Turpin,  180-1
Chroniclers,  the,  164
Church,  State  protection  a  source  of  weakness  to

a,  315  (315,  note)
Influence  of,  in  France  and  England,  compared,

287-91   (288,  notes)

Church,   Anglican,    and  Dissenters,    struggle  be-
tween,   238-43
Breaking  up  of  the,  199
Decadence  of  power  of,  204,  205,  222-3,  232.  233)

235-7,  240  (200-1,  204,  223,  notes)
Feud  in,  233-4
Interest  in,  transferred  to  State,  203-5  (203,  233,

notes)

Repeal  of  Corporation  Act,  effect  on,  283
Church,  French,  attacks  upon,  476

Movement  against  turned  against  State,  473,  476
Schism  in,  478

Subordination  of,  to  State,  by  Richelieu,  301-8
Church,  Scotch,  and  people,  alliance  between,  699,

741,  742,  747

and  Spanish  Inquisition,  analogy  between,  790-1
Attack  on,  by  James  VI,  699-702
Commissioners  of,  698
Popularity  of,  as  a  profession,  651
Church,  Spanish,  and  literature,  bonds  between,

561-3

Enormous  wealth  of,  559-61,  618
Futile  attempts  to  weaken,  623
Increased  influence  of,  558,  559-64,  566
Secularization  of,  623
Church  -  government,    a    matter    of    policy    not

religion,  433
Cid,  The,  548
Civil  wars,  English,  secular  nature  of,  289

French,  religious  nature  of,  289
Civilization  dependent  on  wealth,  28
Due  solely  to  knowledge,  163
Durability  of,  28,  144
Egyptian,  47,  48,  49
English  and  French,  divergence  between,  287-90

(287,  note)
European,  progress  of,  88-90

„       and  non- European,  division  between,  87
Failure  of  governments  to  aid  in,  154-6,  157,

158,  159,  160,  161,  219
Indian,  46,  48,  49
Knowledge  sole  source  of,  163
Laws  regulating  progress  of,  131
Modern  starting-point  of,  346


INDEX


905


Origination  of,  47

Services  rendered  to,  by  Jesuits,  479
Three  forces  on  which  it  depends,  128
Two  great  divisions  of,  139
Uniformity  of  laws  governing,  49-62
Clanship,  decline  of,  in  Scotland,  725-8  (725,-8

notes)

Clarke,  Adam,  239

Class  distinctions  in  England,  360,  France,   360
Classes,  laws  governing  divisions  of,  29-30,  39

Monied,  rise  of  the,  228  (228,  note)
Claude   Lorraine,    405
Clergy,  depressing  influence  of,  786-8

English,  absence  of  men  of  eminence  amongst,

201,  235  (201,  235,  notes)
Action  upon  accession  of  James  II,  224-7
Action  upon  advent  of  William  III,  230-3  (25,

226,  notes),  Effect  upon  nation,  231-2
Aid  of,  in  oppressing  colonies,  270-1  (271,  note)
and  dissenters,  coalition  between,  226—7
Antagonism  to  physical  science,  211
Change  of  front  of,  252
Charles  II,  dislike  to,  220  (220,  note),  Patronage

of,  221

Divided  allegiance  among,  234
Hobbes'  opposition  to,  220
Clergy,  French,  alarm  of,  300

Inevitable  tendency  among,  to  tyrannize    322,

325
Power  of,  during  dark  ages,  346

,.     Decline  of,  315,  485-6

„     and  feudal  system,  connexion  between,344

„     Reason  of  slowness  of  Decline,  486-7

,,     Downfall  of,  434

,,     Effects  of  great  Power,  286-7,  290-2
Efforts  to  retain,  347  (347,  note)
Clergy,  Scotch,  character  of,  788-91

Coalition  between,  and  throne,  against  nobles,

648,  654-5,  659,  660-1,  663-4,  667-8
Comparative  wealth  of,  650  (650,  note)
Means  of  intimidation  employed  by,  764,  775-8,

781-2  (776,  782-3,  notes)
Power  of,  638,  648,  652-3,  741-91,  794-7

„     Causes  of,  649-50,  652,  737-8,  741,  743~4,

747,  748-63
Preposterous  pretensions  of,  751-6,  757-8,  759-

63  (751-6,  758,  notes)
Superstitious   action   during   cholera   epidemic,

897-8
Views  as  to   the  Deity,   768-9,   771-5   (768-9,

notes)

„     as  to  hell,  768-9  (768-9,  notes)
Clergy,  Spanish,  great  power  of,  616-7,  Attempts

to  lessen,  585-6,  598-601
Re-endowment  of,  623-4
Climate,  influence  on  civilization,  23-67,  On  food,

35,  On  national  character,  23,  24,  28,  29,  468,

On  population,  33


Clubs,  formation  of,  among  industrial  classes,  245

(245  note) ;  In   France,   521-3

Effect  on  manners  in  France,  522
Comines,  Philip  de,   184-5   (185,  note)
Commerce,  Spanish,  revival  of,  601-2
Commissioners  of  Scottish  Church,  698
Commons,  House  of,  see  House
Commonwealth,  leaders  of,  low  origin  of,  375-8

Respect  due  to  them,  386
Condillac,  teaching  of,  491-3  (492,  493,  notes)

Treatise  on  Sensations,  491-3
Condorcet,  266  (266,  note)
Conduct,  mutability  of  standard  of,  102

General  regulation  of,  102
Congress  of  Westphalia,  importance  of,  308-9
Connexion,  necessary,  doctrine  of,  5,  6
Conquest,  Norman,  of  England,  350-1
Consciousness,  8-10  (8-9,  12-3,  notes)
Conservation  of  force,  838  (838,  notes)

of   matter,  838  (838,  note)


Controversy,  Arian,   242

Bangorian,  242

Convocation,  prorogation  of,  234-5
Copyholders,  the  guarantors  of.  English  liberties,

353
Corn  laws,  repeal  of  the,  283

Cause  of,   155-6
Corneille,  406
Corporation  Act,  224

Repeal  of,  effect  on  English  Church,  283
Courts  of  High  Commission,  establishment  of,  702
Covenant,  national,  706

Solemn  league  and,  745
Crawford,  Earl  of,  657
Crime,  regularity  of,  13-6,  131  (17-8,  note)
Cromwell,  115

in  Scotland,  743  (743,  note)
Crystallography,  advances  made  in,  515
Cudworth  and  Hume  compared,  830
Cullen,  manufacture  of  linen  in,  735
Cullen,  William,  864-72

and  Adam  Smith,  analogy  between,  867

Appointed  Professor  of  Medicine  in  Glasgow,  864

Appointed  Professor  of  Medicine  in  Edinburgh
864-5

Deductive  method  of,  867-72

Eminent  only  as  pathologist,  864

Great  merit  of,  870

Love  of  theory,  865-6

Nosology  872  (872,  note)

Peculiarity  of  his  pathology,  867

System  of,  868-70

Theory  of  causes  of  fever,  870-2  (871,  notes)

Wherein  he  failed,  867-8
Culture,  real,  in  what  it  consists,  847-8
Cumberland,  Bishop  of  Peterborough,  240
Cuvier,  founder  of  science  of  geology,  498,   873
(498,  note)

Great  work  done  by,  498-500,  502,  503,  505,  506
(502-3,  505,  notes)


D'Alibard,  Experiments  of,  494
Danger,  Effect  on  mind,  69,  72

Worship  of,  71  (71,  notes)
Dangers,  Diminution  of,  87-8  (88,  note)
Dark  Ages,  power  of  clergy  during,  346
Dates,  48-9  (48,  49,  notes)
De  Gaus,  859
De  Thorr,  300

History  of  France  by,  440
Death,  fear  of,  effect  of,  72
Debates,    right    of    daily    press     to  publish,  246

(246,  note)
Declaration  of  Independence,  American,  523

Effect  of,  in  France,  523
Declaration  of  indulgence,  224
Der.oration,  personal,  French  love  of,  363-4
Deductive  and  inductive  methods  compared,  140
141,  792-8,  804,  806-7,  843,  852-3,  891-3

Reasoning,  difficulties  of,  833-4
Deity,  views  of,  held  by  Scottish  clergy,   768-9,

771-5  (768-9,  772,  notes)
Descartes,  Rene,  186,  327-36  (327-36,  345,  notes)

Author  of  Modern  Philosophy,  330

Chillingworth,  Hooker,    and    Montaigne    com-
pared, 332

Discours,  331  (331,  note)

Great  work  accomplished  by,  327-31,  335~6,  338

Philosophy  of,  331-2,  333-4

and  Richelieu,  analogy  between,  336-7,  338
Dhourra,  The,  49-50
Disbelief,    spirit    of,    prevalent    in    seventeenth

century,  206
Disscusion,  freedom  of,  threatened,275-8o  (275-80,

note)
Diderot,  admiration  for  novels  of  Richardson,  413

Persecution  of,  225-6,  424

Discoverers  and  inventors,  distinction  between,
859


9o6


INDEX


Disease,   attribution  of,    to  Divine  anger,   72-3

(72-3,  note)

Extermination  of,  88-9
Non-European  origin  of,  74
Dissent,  growth  of,  in  England,  237-40,  242  (289,

note)
Dissenters,  attitude  of,  237,  238,  239

Perfect  organization  of,  239-40
Divine  right  of  kings,  futile    attempt  to    revive

doctrine  of,  223-4  (223,  note)
Dogmas,    as   opposed    to   morals,    preference    of

Church  for,  314  (314,  note)
Doubt,  necessary  to  progress,  189-91
Douglas,  Earls  of,  656,  657,  658,  662,  663,  666,  669

(666,  notes)

Du  Haillan's  history  of  Kings  of  France,  438-9
Ducal  order,  extinction  of,  by  Queen  Elizabeth,

3.69  (369,  note)

Duelling,  popularity  of,  in  France,  364
Dunfermline,  643-4

Dupleix,  Scipio,  history  of  France  by,  441
«*  System  of  philosophy  by,  441
Dury,  John,  684,  689
Dutch  Protestants,  aided  by  Richelieu,  306-7,  327


Earthquakes  in  Spain  (529-32,  notes)

Terror  inspired  by,  69-70  (69-70,  note)
Economists,  political,  service  rendered  by,  125
Eddas,  the,  170
Edict  of  Nantes,  confirmation  of,  300,  326,  338

Protestant  indifference  to,  316

Publication  of,  293  (293,  note)

Revocation  of,  388

Stipulations  of,  316
Edinburgh,  645

Advance  of,  243-4

Riots  in,  706

Spread  of  trading  interest  to,  735
Egypt,  civilization  in,  28  (28,  note)

Economic  conditions  of,  47-8,  52-3

Population  of,  50-2

Religion  of  (81,  note)

and  India,  analogous  conditions  of,  50
Egyptians,  disregard  of  human  suffering,  52-3
Eighteenth  century,  advance  during,  234

Advance  of  physical  science  in  late,  493-4,  495

Distinguishing  trait  of,  244

Inquiring  spirit  of,  737

Leading  characteristics  of  France  in,  500

Leading  characteristics  of  Germany  in,  500
Elders,  Scottish,  749,  750

Elizabeth,  Queen,  contempt  for  class  distinctions,
369

Death  of,  699

Masterly  tactics  of,  towards  aristocracy  and
clergy,  367-9

Religious  toleration  of,  191,  203
Encyclopedia,  the,  421-2,  487
Encyclopaedias,  invention  of,  245
England    and    France,     distinguishing    features
between,  274-5,  343-4

Intellectual  progress  in,  analogy  between,  342-3

War  between,  274

and  Spain,  compared,  614

Dearth  of  speculative  thinkers  in  eighteenth
century,  in,  501

Hatred  of,  in  France,  410-11  (410  note)

Hatred  of,  in  Scotland  (743,  note)

History  of,  importance  of,  132-5,  138-9,  144

Leading  characteristics  of,  in  eighteenth  century,
500

Liberties  of,  threatened,  272-3,  275-80  (272-80,
notes)

Opposing  tendencies  in,  between  Government
and  advance  in  knowledge  under  George  III,
280-1

Activity  of  national  intellect  in,  in  nineteenth
century,  501

Respect  for,  in  France,  411-16


Views  held  by  Frenchmen  on,  419

Villenage  in,  extinction  of,  359  (359,  note)
English  and  French,  amenities  between,  125-6

,,     Intellects,  divergence  in  treatment  of  Chris-
tianity, 431,  434

Inductive  intellect  of,  140

Intellectual  peculiarities  of  the,  874-5

Political  skill  of,  282-3

Rebellion  and  Fronde,  compared,  371-86

Scepticism  in,  results  of,  190-1,  195

Universal  study  of  language  in  France,  414-6
Episcopacy   in   Scotland   abolished,    230,    684-5,
742-3

Bitterness    of    Presbyterian    ministry    against,
688-9

Efforts  of  James  VI  to  restore,  697-9

Establishment  of,  701-4

Hatred  of,  711

Struggles  against,  742
Essex,  Earl  of,  distrust  of,  373
Europe,  intellectual  regeneration  of,  186

Social  regeneration  of,  186
European  and  non-European  civilization,  division

between,  87

Events,  predictability  of,  3-4,  10
Expediency  the  true  aim  of  a  legislator,  259

Farmers,  superstition  of,  cause  of,  213-4,  215

Fear  (68,  note)

Fenelon,  cruel  treatment  of,  445

Telemaque,  445
Fermat,  394

Ferrier,  persecution  of,  317-8  (318,  note)
Feudal   system,  and  power  of  clergy,  connexion

between  and  decline  of,  348
Decline  of,  353
Rise  of,  347-8  (348,  note)
Fifth-Monarchy  men,  375
Finances,  Spanish,    administered    by   foreigners,

583-4

Fine  Arts. — See  Arts.

Fire  and  Water,  two  most  general  principles  dealt
w  lh  by  geologists,  852
Warfare  between,  852
Precursor  of  water,  supposition  of,  851-2(851-

2,  note)

The  remote  cause  of  development  of  the  imagina-
tion, 852

Fire,  Great,  of  London,  219

First  Book  of  Discipline,  679,  685,  686  (686,  note)
Food  and  animal  heat,    connexion   between  (86,

note)

and  respiration,  connexion  between  (86,  note)
Disadvantages  of  cheap  (38,  note)
Divisions  of,  31-2,  34-5  (32,  note)
Influence  of,   on  civilization,  23-67;  National
character,  23,  31,  468;  Population,  31,  33,
36,  38-9,  49  (31,  note)
Objects  of,  33-4

Laws  influencing,  nature  of,  31  (31,  note)
Relative  costs  of,  35-6
Forbes,  investigations  of,  842
Force,    conservation    of,    modern     doctrine    of,

838  (838,  note)

Fourier,  discoveries  by,  494,  839
Fox,  enmity  of  George  III  for,  255
France,  absence  of  superstition  in,  139

and  England,  distinguishing   features  between,

274-5  ;  War  between,  274
Effects  of  power  of  clergy  in,  286-7,  290-2
Decline  of  power  of  clergy  in,  315
Government  of,  change  in  policy,  301
Intellect   of,    concentrated   on   external   world

at  end  of  eighteenth  century,  517
Leading  characteristics  of,  in  eighteenth  cen-
tury, 500
Liberality  of,  151
Loss  to,  had  Protestants  obtained  upper  hand,

322,  325
Protective  spirit  in,  139


INDEX


907


Result  of  scepticism  in,  190-1

Visit  of  Franklin  to,  523
Franklin,  visit  to  France,  523
Frauds  and  perjuries,  statute  of,  218
Free  Press,  rise  of  a,  340  (340,  note)
Free-will,  doctrine  of,  8,  479-80

and  Predestination,  antagonism  between  (7,  note)

Dr.  Johnson  on  (8,  note)

Connexion  with  French  Revolution,  481

Origin  of  doctrine,  5,  6-7  (5,  note)
French  character,  influence  of  England  on,   135

Intellect,  history  of,  from  sixteenth  century  to
accession  of  Louis  XIV,  285-345

Nobility,  authority  of,  301-2

Revolution,  273

Deficiences  of,  historians  of,  525-6

„  Proximate  causes  of,  after  middle  of

eighteenth  century,  471-527
Fresnel,  Augustin,  discoveries  by,  494
Fronde,  the,  302,  340-83

and  English  civil  war,  analogy  with,  340,  371-
86

Avowed  purpose  of,  341

Breaking  out  of,  340

Leaders  of,  aristocratic  origin  of,  378  (378,  note)

Objects  of,  372

Some  causes  of  failure  of,  379,  383  (383,  note)

Gassendi,  394

General  Assembly  and  Church,  opposition  between,

684

and  Privy  Council,  dispute  between,  687-8
Attempt  to  pack,  698
Re-assembling  of,  706
Generalization,  botanical,  512,  513-4  (514,  notes)

Historical,  need  for  precision  in,  472-3
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  181,  183
Geological  map,  first  ever  published,   853   (853,

note)

Society,  founded  in  London,  853  (853,  note)
Geology,    deductive    systems   of    Germany    and

Scotland,  853

English,  William  Smith,  founder  of,  853
German,  Werner,  founder  of,  854-5
Importance  of  study  of,  495,  497
Inductive  system  of  England,  853
Progress  made  in,  496
Scottish,  Hutton,  founder  of,  851,  855
Work  accomplished  by  Cuvier  in,  498-506
George  III,  of  England,  attitude  towards  French

Revolution,  273-4
Course  pursued  by,  253-7
Dangers  attending  accession,  251,  252
Effect  of  opinions  on  national  interests,  270,  272,

281
Effect  of  use  of  prerogative  by,  on  Upper  House,

256-7

Ignorance  of,  252-3
Peers  created  by,  256
Political  degeneracy  of  England  under,  257-78,

281

Respect  for  the  Church  (252,  note)
Supporter  of  slavery,  253  (253,  note)
Georges,  the   two  first,    characteristics   of,    250,

281  (250,  note)

Ill-feeling  of  Church  towards,  250,  251
Germany,  accumulation  of  knowledge  in,   139
and  America  compared,  138
and  Scotland  in  philosophy,  analogy  between,

797

Deductive  intellect  of,  140
History  of,  comparative  unimportance  of,  135
Intellectual    gulf   between    classes    in,    136-8,

152  (136-8,  note)
Leading  characteristics  of,  in  eighteenth  century,

500

Literature  of,  136  (136,  note)
System  of  education  in,  136-8  (136.  note)
Wealth  in  profound  thinkers,  135-6
Glasgow,  643,  731-2  (731-2,  notes)


Glencairn,  Earl  of,  674  (674-5,   note)
Glisson,  services  rendered  by  399
Golden  Tooth,  controversy  of  the,  187-8
Governments,  154-62
Action  of,  cause  of  perjury,  159-61
and    literature,    influence    exercised     by,    on,

130-62

and  religion,  influence  exercised  by,  on,  130-62
Charges  against,   159-61
Duties  of,  159,  162
Effect,  not  cause  of  civilization,  163
Failure  to  aid  in  progress  of  civilization,  154-6

157,  158,  159,  160,  161,  219
Powerlessness    to    achieve    permanent    results,

704-5

Real  services  rendered  by,  158-9
Retrogressive  actions  by,  157,  158-61
Two  aims  of,  435

Government,     French,     paternal     character     of,
356-7 ;  applied  to  literature,  387-94 ;  cause
of.  387 ;  consequences  of,  357-8
Granada,  Spain's  war  with,  real  object  of,  540
Great  fire  of  London,  219
Great  Rebellion  (English)  and  Fronde  compared,

371-86  (372,  note)
Hume's  error  as  to  true  causes  of,  820  (820,

note)

True  character  of,  360,  371-8
Greece  and  India  compared.  75-84
Greenock,  644,  731-2  (731,  note)
Grotius  and  Vattel  compared  (308,  note)
Guise,  Mary  of,  policy  of,  as  regent,  673

Suspension  from  government,  675  (675,  note)
Guizot's  Civilization  en  Europe  (186,  note)
Gunpowder,  invention  of  (118,  notes)
Effect  of,  116-20


Habeas  Corpus  Act,  218  (218,  note)

Suspension  of,  280
Hales,  right  of  private  judgment  maintained  by,

199

Hall,  Sir  James,  experiments  by,  858
Haller,  873
Hamilton,  Marquis  of,  706

Action  of  (706,  note)
Harvey,  873
Ha'uy,    work    accomplished    by,    515-6    (515-6,

notes)
Heat  and  light,  identity  of,  establishment  of  the,

by  Black,  841-2,  by  Leslie,  849
Conduction  and  radiation  of,  laws  of,  discovered

in  France  and  Switzerland,  839
Effects  of,  56,  57
Importance  of  laws  of,  837
Indestructibility  of,  845
Latent,  discovery  of,  by  Black,  839-45  (844-5,

notes)
Material,  doctrine  of,  undermining  of  the,  by

Black,  841
Specific   and   latent,    discovered  in    Scotland,

839
Helvetius,  love  for  the  English,  413

Teachings  of,  489-91
Hell,  as  depicted  by  Scottish  clergy,  768-9  (768-

9)  notes
Henry  IV.,  of  France,  importance  of  accession  of,

292  (292  note)
Murder  of,  299
Refusal  to  persecute,  298-9
Toleration  of,  293

Henshaw,  botanical  discoveries  by,  401
Heraldic  devices,  invention  of,  349
Hercules,  168  (168  note)

Heredity,  fallacy  of  arguments  on  (101-2,  note)
Herodotus,  reliability  of  (51,  note)
Hierarchy,    in    Scotland,    overthrow    of,  676-7,

684-5  (685  notes)

Hierarchy,  Protestant,  and  Popish  king,  alliance
between,  224


908


INDEX


Highlanders,     Scottish,     fear    inspired    by,     722

(722  note)

Gradual  subjugation  of,  723-4
Love  for  Stuarts,  718-22  (720-1  note)
Rebellions  of,  cause  of,  722-3
Hindus,   authenticity   of   traditions   of,  170,  171,

(171,  note)

Historian,  spirit  essential  for  the  true,  738-40
Historians,  absurdities  of,  result  of  surroundings,

184

Dearth  of,  in  middle  ages,  438
Decline  of,  under  Louis  XIV.,  446
French,  improvements  introduced  by,  164
Incompetence  of,  131-2
Methods  employed  by,  for  discovering  laws  of

history,  90-1

Natural  abilities  not  lacking  among,  184
Of  early  igth  century,  438-43
Treatment  of,  by  Louis  XIV,  445
Historical  literature,  state  of,  during  middle  ages,

history  of  origin  of,  163-88

Historical  literature  in  France,  from  end  of  six-
teenth to  end  of  eighteenth  century,  437-470
History,  ebb  and  flow  of,  128-9
Methods  employed  by  historians  for  discovering

laws  of,  90-1
European,  corruption  of,  in  middle  ages,  164-5,

causes  of,  174-5
Groundwork  of,  139
Laws  of,  90
Origin  of,  164

Place,  of  ballads  in,  165-7  (165,  166,  167,  notes)
Methods  of  writing,  slight  improvement  in,  184,

186
Natural  important  work  in,  in  France  in  late

i8th  century,  501

Necessity  of  generalization  in,  2-3
Of  English  intellect  from  middle  of  i6th  to  end

of  1 8th  centuries,  189-284
Origin  of  and  state  of  historical  literature  during

middle  ages,  163-88
Philosophy  of,  87

Poisoning  of  the  sources  of,  170-3  (170-3,  notes)
Propositions   for   the  right   understanding   of,

528

Reactionary  period  of,  250-73  (250,  notes)
Sources  for  investigation  of,  1-21
True  standard  by  which  to  measure  value  of,

132-3

Universal,  basis  of,  87
Want  of  precision  in,  472-3
History  of  France  (La  Popeliniere),  441
History  of  France  (Mezeray),  442-3
History  of  the  Britons,  181-4  (183,  note)
History  of  the  Kings  of  France,  438-9
Hobbes,  opposition  to  clergy,  220
Hog,  Thomas,  754  (754,  note)
Hooker,  192  (197,  note)

and  Jewel,  compared,  193-4,199   (193-4  notes)
Botanical  discoveries  by,  401
Chillingworth,   Montaigne  and  Descartes  com-
pared, 332

Ecclesiastical  Polity,  192  (192  note)
House    of  Commons,   increasing  power   of,   354,

origin  of,  352
Lords,  see  Lords
Human    understanding,    increased    respect     for,

850

Humboldt,  Alex.,  854

Hume,  David,  122-3,  820-30  (821-2,  824,  notes)
Advocate  of  free  trade,  821
and  Bentham  compared,  821
and  Cudworth  compared,  830
and  Smith  (Adam)  compared,  825
Coldness  of  his  style,  820
Criticism  of  (f 43-4,  note)
History  of  England,  820
Lack  of  imagination,  820-1
Method  of,  143  (143,  note)
Natural  History  of  Religion,  826-9


Opinions  of,  143  (143,  note)

Opinions  on  great  Rebellion,  820  (820,  note)

Principle  of  morals,  821

Theory  of  causation,  821,  of  laws  of  association,

821,  of  miracles,  821
Unfairness  to  Bacon,  824  (824,  note)
Humoral  Pathology,  868,  870
Hunter,  John,  864,  874-89

Aimed  at  uniting  all  branches  of  physical  science,

881
Attempt  to  discover  forces  producing  motion,

881
Attempt  to  prove  common  organic  principles

of  animals  and  vegetables,  879-80  (880,  notes)
Attempt  to  unite  into  one  study  all  the  principles

of  organic  motion,  879
Collection  of  facts,  876
Discoveries  by,  876-9  (876,  879,  notes)
Eminent  as  pathologist  and  physiologist,  864
English  lack  of  appreciation  of,  during  his  life-
time, 889

Great  object  of,  883

Inflammation,  doctrine  of,  887-9  (887-8,  notes)
Intellect,  magnificence  of,  873
Merits  of,  887

Methods  of  reasoning,  874-5,  886-7
Pathology,  favourite  study,  882-6
Perplexity  of  thought,  874-5
Principles  of  surgery  (881-2  notes),  (875  notes)
Sympathy,  views  on,  885  (885  notes)
Hutcheson,  Francis,  798-805
Belief  in  beauty,  801  (801,  note)
In  human  understanding,  799
In  human  nature,  802  (802-3,  note)
In  revelation,  799
In  wealth,  802  (802,  note)
Difference  between  his  views  and  those  of  his

predecessors,  802
Maintainer  of  right  of  private  judgment,  799-

800

Method  of,  142,  803-5  (142  note)
System  of  morals,  799-803  (800  note)
Hutton,    James,    founder    of    Scottish    geology,

851-9

Method  of,  855-9

Services  rendered  by,  856-9  (857,  notes)
Theory  of  the  Earth,  855  (855,  note)


Ignorance  and  superstition,  connexion  between,

7i

Cause  of,  25
Imagination  and  fine  arts,    connexion  between,

70  (70,  note)

Domination  of,  in  tropics,  69
Power  of,  68,  72

Tendency  of,   outside  Europe,  to  weaken  un-
derstanding, 74,  75
Improvements,   political,   not   due   to  lawgivers,

155-6
Independents,  the,  204

Buffooneries  at  expense  of  ,  205-6
Indestructibility,   physical   doctrine  of,  applied  to

force,  839,  845
India  and  Greece  compared,  75-84

Economical  condition  of,  40-6,  and  notes  passim
Indians,  native  laws  respecting,  45-6  (45,  46,  notes)
Indifference  of  French  Protestant  leaders  to  their

religion,  310-3
Inductive  and  deductive  methods  compared,  140,

141,  792-8,  804,  852-3,  891-3
Method,  very  difficult  to  Scotchmen,  837
Inquiry,  spirit  of,  spread  of,  249
Inquisition  in  Spain,  107-8,  599,  600,  611,  612,  618,
622,  623;  Effect  of,  190;  Upheld  by  Charles  V,

Spanish  and  Scotch  Church,  analogy  between,

790-1

Institutions,  municipal,  absence  of  in  France,  354
Public,  all  bear  impress  of  the  age,  677


INDEX


909


Insurrections  and  revolutions,  distinction  between,

625
Intellect,  English  and  French  compared,  289-90,

295
,,         Divergence  in  treatment  of  Christianity,

431,  434

,,         Junction  between,  410,  418
„         Outline    of    History    of,    from    middle
of   sixteenth   to   end   of    eighteenth
centuries,  189-284

„         English,  Peculiarities  of,  874-5
French    Development   of,    analogous     to     that

of  the  English,  342-3
„          History  of,  from   sixteenth  century  to

accession  of  Louis  XIV,  285-345
,,         Human,  increasing  respect  of  historians

for,  163

Scottish,  during  seventeenth  century,  741-91
,,          During   seventeenth    and    eighteenth

centuries,  contrasted,  889,  893
„         During  eighteenth  century,  792-902
„         Deductive,  nature  of,  843,  851,  874
Spanish,   history   of,   from  fifth   to   middle   of

nineteenth  century,  528-627
Intellectual  truths,  progress  of,  103-4,  129,  130
Interference,  providential  (n,  note)

Supernatural,  rejection  of  dogmas  of,  839
Interposition,    divine,    Scottish    belief   in,    746-7

(747,  note)
Intolerance,  common  to  Puritans  and  Churchmen

(203,  note)

Knowledge,  the  enemy  of,  109
Inventors   and   discoverers,    distinction   between,

859

Inverary,  manufacture  of  linen  in,  735
Ireland,  economic  condition  of,  38  (38,  note)
Isabella  of  Castile,  540  (540,  note)

James  I   of  England  (VI    of  Scotland),  action  of,
654-5,  656  (655,  note)

Attack  on  Church  of  Scotland,  696,  697-8,  699-
702

Audience  with  Melville,  692-3

Bearded  by  Melville,  690

Denounced  by  John  Ross,  691

Imprisonment  of,  688-9

Poverty  of  (699,  note)

Preached  against  by  Walsh,  692

Reaction  against,  656-7

James  II  of  England,  accession  of,  223-4,  Action
of  clergy  upon,  224-7  (225,  226,  notes)

Brutal  character  of,  715

Cause  of  loss  of  crown,  226

Conciliatory  acts  of,  229

James  II   of  Scotland,  barbarous  conduct  of,  658
James  V   of  Scotland,  death  of,  669

Policy  of,  663-5
Jansenists,   483

and  destruction  of   Jesuits,  connexion  between

483

Rapid  advance  of,  483
Jealousy,   commercial,   a  frequent  cause  of  war,

in  past,  120-1
Jeffreys,  Judge,  225
Jesuits,  cause  of  their  fall,  485

Expulsion   from    France,    478,     483-5  5     "om
Spain,  599,  6",  617  (599,  617,  notes)

Services  to  civilization  rendered  by,  479
Jewel,  192

and  Hooker,  compared,  193-4,  199  (i93-4,  notes)

Methods  of,   198

Jewel's  Apology  for  the  Church  of  England,  192
J  ews,  Ignorance  of  the,  45°  (450,  note)

Persecution  of,  536,  54<>-i  (536,  note)

J  udgment,  right  of  private,  doctrine  of,  366
Jurisdictions,  hereditary,  in  Scotland,  abolition  of,
i    724—5,*  720
Justice,  in  Scotland,  failure  of,  710


Kant,  on  difficulties  of  metaphysicians  (95,  note,
Views  on  predestination  and  free-will  (10,20
notes)

Kennedy,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  policy  of,  659-
60

Kilbarchan,  manufacture  of  linen  in,  735

Kilmarnock,  644
Manufacture  of  linen,  in,  735

Kirk,  Scottish,  and  Spanish  Inquisition,  analogy
between,  790—1

Kirk-session,  749-50  (750,  751,  notes\

Kirke,  Col.  Percy,  225

Knights  of  St.  James,  361
St.  John,  361
St.  Michael,  361
Templars,  361

Knowledge    and    opinions,    intimate     connexion

between,  146-7

Crusade  against,  in  France,  420,  421-6,  427,  434
Enemy  of  Intolerance,  109
Futility  of  opposing  advance  of,  123
in  Spain,  almost  stationary,  190
In  what  does  it  consist  ?   152,  190
Remedy  against  superstition,  618,  619,  621,677
Source  of  civilization,  16.;

Knox,  John,  672-5

Connexion  with  murder  of  Beaton,  672-3
Services  to  the  Reformation,  672-3,  674


La  Fayette,  266,  524  (266,  note)

La  Fontaine,   406

La  Popeliniere,  History  of  France  by,  44 1

Lambert,   839

Laud,  197  (197,  note)

Lavoisier,  great  discoveries  made  by,  496-7,  (497,

notes)
Lawgivers,  nearly  always  obstructors  of  society,

156,  729

Laws,  mental,    increasing    influence    of    89,    90 ;
Methods  employed  by  metaphysicians  for  dis-
covering, 87-95  ;  Of  greater  importance  than
physical  90.
Historical,    methods    employed     by    historian-^

for  discovering,  90-1 ;  Objections  to,  91-4
Moral   and  intellectual,    compared   by   inquiry
into  effect  produced  by  each  on  pro-
society,  96,— 129
of  European  history,  90
of  human  mind,  90

Physical,    influence   exercised  by,    on   society,
22-86,  Lessening  influence  of,   89;     Of   Jess
importance  than  mental,  90
Layamon,  183
Le  Brun,  405
Learning  in  France,  under  Protective  system  of

Louis  XIV,  390-94,  395-403,  404
Lecanu,  discoveries  due  to,  878-9  (878-9  note)
Legislator,  true  aim  of  the,  259,  283

Sir  C.  Lewis  on  (284,  note)
Leicester,  Earl  of,  352  (352,  note)
Leslie,  848-51

Doctrine  of  interchangeability  of  heat  and  light,

849

Methods  pursued  by,  850-1.
Researches  on  heat,  848-9  (849-50,  notes) .
What  we  owe  to  him,  851
Lesueur,  405

L'Hopital  and  toleration,  291  (291,  note)
Liberties,  English,  guarantors  of,  353
Liberty,  English  love  of,  894 ;  Religious,  favoured

by  French  Government,  477
Scottish  love  of,  894
Libraries,  circulating  (244,  note)
Light  and  heat,  establishment  of  identity  of,  by-
Black,  841-2
By  Leslie,  849

Linen,  manufacture  of,  in  Scotland,  734
Linnaeus,  error  of  his  system,  513  (513,  note)


9io


INDEX


Literary  men  and  politicians,  schism  between,  in

France,  418,  419-26,  471
Literature,    change   in   form  of,  247,  248  (247-8,

notes)

Effect,  not  cause,  of  civilization,  163
Effect  of  aspects  of  Nature  on,  75
Effect  of  royal  or  state  patronage  on,  390-4,  403,

404  (392,  note)

English  independence  of,  134-5  (i34-5,  note)
French  and  English  compared,  289-90
French,  paternal  system  of  government  applied

to,  387;  Harm  worked  by,  153-4
Historical,   condition  of,   during   Middle   Ages,

163-88

Influence  exercised  by,  151-4,  130-62
Its  uses,  152-4
Monopolized  by    clergy,   evil  effects  of,  when,

173-4,  1 80

Persecution  of,  420-6,  427,  434  (426,  note)
Religion     and    government,     influence     upon,

130-62

Scottish,  rise  of,  736-7;  Sceptical  nature  of,  742
Under  Louis  XIV,  406
What  it  is,  151

Liver,  functions  of  the  (84-5,  note)
Locke,  On  Learning  (153,  note)

Right  of  private  judgment  maintained  by,  199
Lords,  House  of,  decline  in  intellectual  superiority

during  reign  of  George  III,  255-6,  257,  273
Lords  of  the  Articles,  703-4

„        ,,        Congregation,     674 ;    Treaty     with

Elizabeth,  675-6
Lorraine,  Claude,  405
Louis  XIII,  great  progress  made  during  reign  of,

327

Superstition  of,  301
Louis  XIV,  Age  of,  first  great  characteristic  of,

394-404

Second  great  characteristic  of,  404-5,  406-7
Aim  of,  387

Dearth  of  discovery  under,  394,  396-7
Death  of,  rejoicings  at,  410
Ignorance  of,  444

Indictment  against,  408-9  (408,  note)
Reaction  against  protective  spirit,  and  prepara-
tion for  French  Revolution,  410-36
Religious  persecutions  instigated  by,  388-90
Thirst  for  glory,  446
True  nature  of  his  reign,  388-90,  394,  402  (388,

389,  notes)

Low  Countries,  religious  persecutions  in,  544
Loyalty  and  superstition,  connexion  between,  547  ;
Of  French  to  Crown,  429-30  (430,  note)  •  Conse-
quences of,  430-1
Of    Spaniards    to  Crown,    548-50   (549,  note) ;

Consequences  of,  551-2,  553,  554
Spanish  and  English  compared,  553
Lutherans,  aided  by  Richelieu,  306,  307,  327
Lyell,  854


Machault,  defence  of  Protestants  by,  477-8,  483
(477,  note)

Originator  of  policy  against  Church,  476-7
Machiavelli,  184

System  of  U66,note)
Madrid,  anarchy  in,  578-80
Magna  Charta,  351
Maize,  62-3  (62-3,  notes)
Malebranche,  406
Malloni,  investigations  by,  842
Malthus,  debt  owed  by,  to  Adam  Smith,  817

On  population,  817
Malus,  discoveries  by,  494
Manichaeans,  7  (83,  note)
Mankind,  facts  bearing  on  progress  of,  1-2
Mansart,  405
Manufactures,  absence  of,  in  Scotland,  641  (641,

646,  nctes)
Service  rendered  to  civilization  by,  215


Map,   geological,   first  ever  published,   853   (853

note)

Marat,  profound  knowledge  of  English,  417
Marmontel,  persecution  of,  424-5
Massillon,  485

Matter,  conservation  of,  old  doctrine  of,  838  (838,
note)

Organic  and  inorganic,  supposed  difference  be-

tween  merely  empirical,  862-3
Matthew  of  Westminster,  statements  by,  179(179,

note)
Mazarin,  Cardinal,  338-40

Alliance  with  Cromwell,  339

Toleration  of,  338-40
Medici,  Mary  de,  superstition  of,  301

Toleration  of,  300  (300,  note)
Melville,  Andrew,  683,  688,  689-90,  698,  701

Appointed  Moderator  of  General  Assembly,  688

Hostile  attitude  towards  episcopacy,  683-5
Mental  Progress,  laws  of,  how  to  discover,  99

or  Moral  Progress,  which  the  more  important  ?
100

Two  elements  of,  99
Mersenne,  394

Metaphysicians,  failure  of,  97
Metaphysics,  definition  of  (93,  note)
Method,  philosophy  of,  742
Mexico,  art  of  (64,  note)

Civilization  of,  54,  57,  62,  64

Economic  condition  of,  64-5  (64,  note)

Peru  and  Egypt  compared,  65-7
Mezeray,  history  of  France,  by,  442-3

Treatment  of,  444,  445
Microscope,  the,  value  of,  862
Middle  Ages,  incredible  ignorance  of,  189

Illustrations  of  opinions  held  in,  180,  187

Method  of  writing  history  in,  184-6
Militia,  decline  of  old,  119
Mill,  J.  S.,  criticisms  on  political  economy  by  (143,

note)

Millington,  botanical  discoveries  by,  401
Mind,  English,  peculiarities  of  the,  282

Human,  laws   regulating,  90;  Process  through
which  it  passed  in  working  out  its  emancipa-
tion, 198-201,  209-10
Minds,  English  and  Scottish,  antagonism  between,

896

Mineralogy,  study  of,  difficulties  surrounding,  514
Mines,  Spanish,  foreign  exploitation  of,  595-6  (595,

note)

Ministry,  Presbyterian,  bitterness  against  Court,
688-94

„          Good  work  done  by,  694-9,  74*,  742
Mirabeau,  intimate  knowledge  of  English,  417
Miracles,  controversy  concerning,  242
Mitscherlich,  514

Mohammedans  and  Spaniards,  struggle  between
536-7

Besiege  Ceuta,  580

Persecution  of,  564-5

Spanish  hatred  of,  586-7
Mohs,  854

Moisture,  effects  of,  55,  57
Moliere,  406
Money,  love  of,  beneficent  effect  of  the,  788,  802

(802,  note)

Monmouth,  Geoffrey  of,  181,  183
Montaigne,  295-6  (296,  notes)

and  Charron  compared,  297

and  Rabelais  compared,  295

Chillingworth,  Hooker  and  Descartes  compared,
332

Essays,  295  (295,  notes)

Montesquieu,  466-9

Admiration  of  England,  412-3,  419

Esprit  des  Lois,  468

Peculiarities  of  his  method,  466,  468

Services  rendered  by,  468  g

Montgomery,  Robert,  687,  688
Moors,  Expulsion  from  Spain,  568-70  (569,  570


INDEX


notes)  ;  Effect  of,  on  Spain,  572-3  (573-4,
notes)  ;  Rejoicings  in  Spain  at.  570-1  ("570-1
notes)

Insurrection  of,  566
Moral  laws,  subordinate  to  intellectual,  128

Motives,  small  influence  exercised  by,  102,  128-9
Progress,  or  mental,  which  more  important  ?  too  ;
Truths,  stationary  character  of,  103,  128-0  130

(103-4,  note)

Morals,  sole  essentials  of,  103  (103-4,  note)
Study  of,  no  harmony  in,  804
System  of,  without  Theology,  240
Transitory  effects  of,  105,  128-9
Morellet,  persecution  of,  424-5
Morton,  Earl  of,  acts  of  persecution  by,  682

Elected  Regent,  682
Motives,  moral,  small  influence  exercised  by,  102,

128-9

Municipal  Institutions,  absence  of,  in  France,  354
Murchison,  854
Myths,  historical,  175-9  (i75,  note)

Napier,  115

On  progression  of  numbers,  736-7
Napoleon,  115

Nasmyth,  discovery  by,  507
National  Covenant,  706
Nations,  intercourse  between,  effects  of,  126-7

Fictions  regarding  origin  of,  175  (175,  176  notes)

Nature.aspects  of,  influence  of,  in  India,  75-8,  80-2 ;

On  Art  75 ;  On  Man,  67-75  ,'   On  literature,  75 ;

On  religion,  75,  80,81-3  (81,  note);  Divisions  of,

68

Nature,  Laws  of,  advance  in  knowledge  of,  850
„      Governing  plant  life,  55  (55,  notes).
,,      Regularity  of,  96  (17,  note)
Nature,  powers  of,  harm  caused  by,  87
Necessary  connexion,  doctrine  of,  5,  6
Necker,  435,  474~5,  477
Neptunists,  856
New  World  and  Old  compared,  62-3

Civilization  of,  53
Newcomen,  859
Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  prodigy  of  the  human  race,  a,

847,  887

Niebuhr  anticipated  by  Voltaire,  464
Nobles,  Scottish,  and  English  Nation,  combination

between,  710,  715

and  Reformed  Church,  antagonism  between,  742
and  Ministers  of    Reformed  Church,   disputes

between,  678-82,  742  (679-81,  notes)
and  Ministry,  separation  of,  699
Decline  of  power  of,  652,  709,  725-8,  729
Cause  of  decline.,  725-8,  729-30
Defiance  of  Church  and  Throne,  668-76
Majority  adopt  Protestantism,  664,  669
Persecution  of,  662
Resentment  of,  667
Return  to  power,  656-7,  660,  670
Triumph  over  Church,  662,  668
Norman  Conquest  of  England,  350-1
Normans  and  Saxons  in  England,  amalgamation  of,
35i

Oaths,  degeneration  of,  to  mere  form,  159-61
Obedience,  passive,  futile  attempt  to  revive  doc-
trine of,  223-4  (223,  note)
Old  World  and  New  compared,  62-3
Opinions    and    knowledge,     intimate    connexion

between,  146-7

Democratic,  advance  of,  283-4
Power  of,  in  England,  a  sign  of  political  health,

282
Public,   ultimate    victory  of,   inevitable,   281,

283-4
Oratory,  sacred,  in  France,  decline  of,  485

Under  Louis  XIV,  404

Organic  science,  foundation  of  all,  must  be  laid
in  inorganic,  88 1


Orleans,   Duke  of,  influenced    by  England    417

420  (417,  note)
Outline  of  history  of  Spanish  intellect  from  fifth

to  middle  of   nineteenth   centuries,   528-627
Owen    Discovery  by,  507  (507,  note)

Right    of    private   judgment    maintained    by

199

Painters  in  reign  of  Louis  XIV,  405

Paisley,  rise  of,  644,  733

Paley,  system  of,  241  (241,  note)

Papin,  859

Parliament,  Scottish,  647  (647,  note)

Pascal,  394,  406

Passions,  human,  counterbalancing  of,  128,  131

Passive    obedience,    futile    attempts    to    revive

doctrine  of,  223-4  (223,  note)
Pathology    and     physiology,     two    fundamental

divisions  of  organic  science,  863-4
Aims  of,  866-7
Backward  condition  of,  864
Humoral,  868,  870.
Peculiarity  of  Cullen's,  867

Pecquet,  discoverer  of  the  receptacle  of  the  chyle,
397

>le,  condition   of,  and  their  views  respecting
the  past,  connexion  between,   164
Independence  of  the  English,  origin  of,  352-3
Perjuries  and  frauds,  statute  of,  218
Perrault,  405

Persecution,  religious,  225-6,  237,  238  (237,  note)
Arguments  in  favour  of,  195
By  Christians  in  Spain,  107-8
Decrease  of,  156

Gradations  through  which  it  passes,  322
Greatest  evils  of,  109
Instigated  by  Sharp,  Abp.  of  St.  Andrews,  712-8

(712-8,  notes)
Motives  of,  105-6,  107-8
Of  Christians  in  Rome,  106-7  (107,  note)
Persia,   traditions  of,  unauthenticity    of,    171-2

(171-2,  note)
Perth,  645  (645,  note)
Peru,  art  of  (64,  note)

Civilization  of,  54,  62,  64
Economic  conditions  of,  64-5  (64,  note)
Egypt  and  Mexico  compared,  65-7
Phenomena,  mental,  succession  of,  12
Philip  II  of  Spain,  543-5
Adoration  of,  by  subjects,  546-7
Decline  of  Spain  after  death  of,  555  (555,  note)
Religious  persecutions  by,  in  Low  Countries,

544-6

Philip  III  of  Spain,  558  (558,  560,  notes)
Philip  V  of  Spain,  accession  of,  580-1
Philosophy,  Baconian,  effects   of,  793  (793,  note  )

Mental,  present  condition  of,  94-5
Physics,  spirit  of  inquiry  regarding,  in  England,

196,  206  (206,  note);  Cause  of,  206
Physiologists,  failure  of,  97  (98,  note)
Physiology    and    pathology,     two    fundamental

divisions  of  organic  science,  863-4
Pigs  and  Mahommed,  tradition   about,  178  (178,

note)

Pinel,  on  insanity,  517  (517,  note)
Pitt,  Wm.,  253,  254
Places,  origin  of  fictions  relating  to,  175-7  (176-7,

note)

Plague,  the  Great,  219
Plutonists,  856
Poetry   and    science,    spirits   of,    desirability   of

uniting  them,  846-7
Political  Economists,  aim  of,  807,
Reproaches  brought  against,  807
Services  rendered  by,  125
Economy,   science  of,  807  (825,  note)  ;  Corner
stone  of,  823;  Discoveries  made  by  means  of,
120-4;  Essentially  a  deductive  science,  825;
Interest  aroused  in  France  in,  473-4  (474,  note),
Rise  of  the,  121-2  (122,  note)


912


INDEX


Politicians   and    literary   men,    schism    between

in  France,  418,  419-26,  471
Politics,  a  backward  art,  283

First  conditions  of  success  in,  343
Scottish  Interest  in,  good  effects  of,  790-1
Polynesia,  traditions  of,  unauthenticity  of,  172-3
Pork  as  food,  178  (178,  note)
Person  and  Trevis,  controversy  between,  243
Potatoes,  effect  of,  as  a  food,  37-8,  63  (37,  63,

notes)

Poussin,  Nicolas,  405
Poverty,  relief  of,  wrong,  808
Power,  fatal  effect,  on  any  body  of  men,  of  too

much,  788

Prayer,  doctrine  of,  tendency  of  (6,  note)
Precision  and  certainty,  difference  between,  472
Predestination  and  free-will,  antagonism  between,
7,  480-3   (482,  notes)  ;  Doctrine   of,  480;   Con-
nected  with   French    Revolution,  481;  Kant's
views  on  (10,  20,  notes)-   Origin   of,   5,  6-7  (5,
note)
Pre-emption    purveyance,     right     of,     abolished

(218,  note)
Presbyterian  Ministry,  bitterness  of,  against  court,

688-94

Good  work  done  by,  694-9,  741,  742
Presbyterianism  established  in  Scotland,  696
Presbyteries,  restoration  of,  706
Presence,  royal,  right  of  sitting  in,  381-2  (381-2,

note)
Press,   daily,   and  debates,   right  of    publishing,

246  (246,  note)

Fox  on  freedom  of,  278  (278,  notes)
Freedom  of,  161;  Threatened,  275-80  (275-80

notes)
Pretender,  Scotch  (252,  note)

Death  of,  251-2

Prevost,  discoveries  by,  494,  839
Pride,  Colonel,  375
Pride  and  vanity,  distinction  between,  380,  385

(385,  note)

Principles  which  govern  the  world,  two,  392
Printing  (218,  note)

Privileges,  municipal,  in  Spain,  614-5
Profession,  Ecclesiastical,  decline  of,  cause  of,  114

Military,  decline  of,  114;  Causes  of,  116
Progress,  effective,  28
European,  88

Insecurity  of,  in  ancient  world,  67
Intellectual,    permanent    results    arising    from,

104

Mental  and  moral,  what  due  to,  102
National,  retarded  in  England,  249
Of  mankind,  facts  bearing  on,  1-2
Scientific,   and    social    rebellion  connexion  be-
tween, 5 17
Protection,   abolition   of,  in   England,  effect  of,

283

Cause  of  crime,  a,  158-9
Harm  worked  by,  655-6,  731
Injurious  to  trade,  154-9

Source  of  weakness  to  a  church,  315  (315,  note)
Spirit  of,  carried  by  Louis  XIV  into  literature
and  consequent  alliance  between  intellectual
and  governing  classes  in  France,  387-409
Fatal  to  ultimate  progress  of  a  people,  628
History  of,  and  comparison  between  England  and

France,  346-70
Protective  spirit  in  France,  cause  of  failure  of  the

Fronde,  371-86.
Protestantism  as  illiberal  as  Catholicism,  313-4,

319

Influence  exercised  by,  148-9.
Protestant  clergy,  French,  assumption  of  author-
ity by,  320-1;  Discontent  of,  316;  Intolerance
among,  316-7,   319,  320,  323-4,    326,    (319,
note) ;     Virulent    books  published  by,  319
Protestants  and  Catholics  in  France,  reversal  of
natural  positions,  321-2
„  „     Scottish,   treaty  between,   674-5


Dutch,  aided  by  Richelieu,  306-7,  327
French,  action  of,  at  Beam,  cause  of  subsequent
misfortunes,    319-20;  Consequences    arising
from  greater   leniency  towards,  310—3,  316;
Increasing   indifference    of   leaders    to  their
religion,     310-3;    Intense      hatred     of,    for
Catholics,    319;    Turbulence     of,    310;    In-
tolerance of,   313,  316;     Persecution  of,    in
France,  477  (477,  note) ;  in  Scotland,  667-73
Public  institutions,  ail  bear  the  impress  of  their

age,  677

Opinion,  rise  of,  120
Press,  foundation  of,  218
Purveyance  and  pre-emption,  right  of,  abolished

(218,  note)
Pyrenees,  Treaty  of  the,  339

Quia  Emptores,  Statute  of,  353

Rabelais,   293-4   (293,  note)

and  Montaigne  compared,  295
Racine,  406

Ragnar,   168   (169,  note)
Rain,  prayers  for,  213-4  (214,  note)
Raleigh,  Sir  Walter,  115
Raumer,  854
Rebellion     and     scientific     progress,      connexion

between,   517

Great  English,  a  war  of  classes  as  well  as  of
factions,  371-8,  and  Fronde  compared,
372-86  (372,  note),  of  1643,  real  cause  of,  in
England,  745-6  (745-6,  notes) ;  In  Scotland,
745-6

of  1715,  in  Scotland,  719-23  (719-23,  notes)
of  1745,  in  Scotland,  719-23  (719-23,  notes)
Rebellions,  causes  of,  162
Reciprocity,  true,  124
Recissory  Act,  710
Reform  Bill,  156,  283
Reformation,   the,   148,   149

English,  decline  of  aristocracy  and  of  clerical
power,  due  to,  366,  367 ;  Origin  of,  360,  365
Rebellious  nature  of,  366
Scottish,  immediate  consequences  of,  677
Reforms,  in  what  they  consist,  156

Parliamentary,  at  end  of  eighteenth  century,  281 ;

At  beginning  of  nineteenth  century,  283
Reid,  Thomas,  attempts  to  destroy  philosophy  of

Berkeley,  Hume  and  Locke,  833-4
Essays  on  the  Powers  of  the  Mind,  833
First  principles  assumed  by,  835-6  (853-4,  notes)
Inquiry  into  the  Hitman  Mind,  833
Method  pursued  by,  833-4
System  of  philosophy  untenable,  836
Religion,  attitude  of  nations  towards,  145-7,  150-1
Change  of,  harmful  to  accuracy  of  early  history,

170-3  (170-3,  notes)
Effect,  not  cause  of,  civilization,  163
Effect  of  aspects  of  nature  on,  75
Effect  of  subjecting  it  to  test  of  reason,  195
Evil  effect  of  indifference  of  rulers  to,  149
Government  and  literature,  influence  exercised

by,  on,  130-62
National,  no  longer  a  test  of  measure  of  country's

civilization,   150
"  Religious  exercises,"  love  of,  in  Scotland,  748

(748,  note)

Religious  indifference  of  English,  288-9
Religious  Revolution,  237

War  in  Beam,   320

Remedies,  political,  to  succeed,  must  be  in  har-
mony with  spirit  of  the  age,  616
Rent,  and  wages,  ratio  between,  43-4

Theory  of,  823
Representation,  personal,  doctrine  of,  246-7  (246-7

note)

Retz,  Cardinal  de,  341-2
Reviews,  periodical,  245  (245,  note)
Revolution,  French,  273;  Attitude    of    England
towards,     273-4    (274,   note);   Causes  leading


INDEX


913


crim£    4f  8~28    428~9'    431'    5^8;  Cause    of
of.    429,   434-5,    524-5  ;   English  in-
J  °n>  4l8'  47I;  of  l688'  what  England


Religious  in  England,  237

.evolutions  and  insurrections,  distinction  between,
Rice  (41,  note)
Richelieu  and  Napoleon  I.  compared,  301

cause  of  action  against  Protestants,  327

Charges  brought  against,  30-5

Greatest  glory  of,  308

Tactics  put  an  end  to  religious  wars    308

Seventy  with  the  clergy,  302-4

loleration  of,  309-10,  325,  326-7

Treatment  of  Protestants    300    *2S

True  greatness  of,  301-10

Irue  objects,  306-7
Riolan,  397-8
Riots  in  Edinburgh,  706
River  Systems,  55-6    so  (ss    nntr\
Rochefoucauld,  dl  la,  406
Rochelle,  religious  war  in,   320

Siege  of,  326
Roland,   Mme.,  student  of   the  English    and  of

England,  417

Romans,  deteriorating  effect  of  wealth  upon    632
Rome  de  Lisle  (515,  note)
Ross,  Earl  of,  657
Ross,  John,  691-2
Roundheads,  371   (37!,  note)


Royal  Society,  Charter  of,  210  (210,  note)

Hostility  towards,  211

Incorporation  of  the,  210
Russians,  characteristics  of  (113.  notes)
Ruthven,  raid  of,  688-9


St.  Andrews,  645  (645,  note)

St.  Bartholomew,  massacre  of,  291

Sailors,  superstition  of,  cause  of,  212-3    2 is

Savery,  859

Scepticism   and    toleration,    connexion   between

295

Necessity  for,  190-1,  203,  210
Rise  and  growth  of,  195-201,  203,  210,  243,  249

(243,  note)
In  France,  rise  and  growth  of,  293,  295,  296,

298-9,  327,  337

^  Historical,  rise  of,  437-8,  439~40,  44L  442
Schools,  establishment  of,  for  poorer  orders,  244

(244,  note)

Science,  absence  of,  in  Peninsula,  70-1  (70-1,  note)
Advances  of,  88-90  (88,  note)
and  Poetry,  spirits  of,  desirability  of   mating

them,  846-7
Definition  of,  803
Physical,  837
Advance  in,  in  late  eighteenth  century,  493-4,

495

Inorganic,  discoveries  in,   by  Scots,   837-61
Medical,  state  of,  in  Spain,  590-2
Organic,  discoveries  in,  by  Scots,  861
Progress  in,  and  rebellion,  connexion  between,

517

Suffering  from,  absence  of  imagination,  847
Symptoms  of  decline  under  Louis  XIV,  397,

398-403
Scipio  Dupleix,  History  of  France  by,  441

System  of  Philosophy  of,  441
Scotland,  absence  of  fine  arts  in,  641-3,  of  Manu-
factures in,   641   (637,   note)
and  the  cholera,  see  Cholera
and  England,  union  of,  effects  of,  725-8,  730-40

(and  notes)

and  Germany,  analogy  between,  in  philosophy,
797


and  Spain,    superstition   of,   parallel   between

630,  652
Bigotry  in,   151
Cannibalism  in,  637
Conquest  of,  by  Ireland,  <>  ?  5
Condition    of,    at    end  of    fourteenth  century
028-53;  in  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries.
054-95  ;   In  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  rtu-
turies,  696-740

Deductive  intellect  of,   140,   141-4
General  absence  of  loyalty  in,  628-9
Geographical  position  of,  influence  of,  631,  632

649
In   eighteenth    century,    peculiar   character   of

literature,  792,  794-8

Invasion  of  by  Edward  1  of  England,  634-5  •
consequences    of,    635;  By   Norway,   633-4;
By  Romans,  631
Invasions,   subsequent,   636
Power  of  clergy  in,   638,    648;    of   nobles   in,
038-9;   Circumstances  favourable  to,  638-9
Progress  in,  slow  but  sure,  628
Protestant    movement    in,    aristocratic    nature

of,  653

Rebellions  common  in,  629  (629,  note)
Servile  condition  of,  715,  716,  717
Softening  of  manners  in,  724
Sufferings  in,  637,  711,  712-8  (712-8,  notes)
Torture  in,   716-7   (717,   note)
Wealth  in  great   thinkers,   894
Scots,  intolerant  mental  attitude  of,  895-6
Moroseness  of  temper,   763,  896
Superstition  of,  141,  150,  630,  648,  864,  894,  897
Uncleanly  habits  of,  642  (642,  note)
Scottish   Highlanders,   see  Highlanders
Second  Book  of  Discipline,  685,  686  (686,  notes)
Sects,  rise  of  innumerable,  196
Self-indulgence,    proper   limit   of,    787
Semple,  Gabriel,  strange  fate  of,  754  (754-5,  note)
Sequence,  doctrine  of,  necessary  to  true  science

of  history,  738-4
Serra,    123

Serres,  History  of  France  by,  440
Sexes,    birth   of,  laws   regulating   proportion  of,

96-8,  (97,  98-9,  notes)
Shakespeare,  Wm.,  847
Sharp,  Apb.  of  St.  Andrews,  711

Religious    persecution    instigated    by,     712-8

(712-8,  notes)

Shipping  ventures,  first  Scottish,  731
Simson,  method  of,  141-2  (141-2,  notes)
Slavery,  supported  by  George  III,  253  (253,  notes)
Smith,  Adam,  122,  124,  805-19,  825-6
Artifice  employed  by,  806
Deductive  method  of,  142,  808-19  (142,  notes)
Disbelief  in  statistics,  825  (825,  note)
Greatest  thinker  Scotland  has  produced,  819
Philosophy   of,    806-10
Scheme  too   vast  for  inductive  investigation,

806
Spread  of  his  doctrines,  123

See  also  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments  and  Wealth

of  Nations.
Smith,  William,   originator  of  scientific  geology

in  England,  853
Publishes  geological  map  of  England,  853  (853,

note)

Smugglers,  rise  of  armed,  158  (158,  notes)
Social  movement  in  France,   previous  to  Revo-
lution,   518-23;  Effect  on  dress,  520-1  (521,
notes)
Societies,  debating,  formation  of,  in  England,  245

(245,   note)
Society,  natural  proportions  of,  adversely  affected

by  protective  measures,  391-4
Soil,  effect  on  national  character,  23,  25,  28,  29,  468

On  civilization,  23-67
Solemn  League  and  Covenant,  745
Solidism,    868
Somers,  his  services  to  Hanoverian  dynasty,  255.

58


914


INDEX


Spain,    'abnormal   Tprogress    in,   610-11,    612-3

Cause  of  temporary  nature  of,  611-2
Advantages,  natural,  enjoyed  by,  619-20
and  Mohammedans,  struggle  between,  536-7!
and  Scotland,  superstition  of,  parallel  between,

630

and  tropics,  analogy  between,  528-31
Bankrupt  state  of,  579  (579,  note)
Colonies,  wise  treatment  of,  605
Conditions  of  national  progress  violated  in,  528
Decline>f,  556-7,  573-6,  577~8i  (575,  576,  notes) ;

cause  of,  557,  564

Early  history  of,  533-6  (533-4,  notes)
Earthquakes  in  (529-32,  notes)
Ignominious  submission  to  Crown  and  Church,

national  vice  of,  624-5

Ignorance,  national,  clergy  the  cause  of,  622
Incompetence  in,  619

Improvement,  gradual  in  condition  of,  599-604
Invasion  of,  by  French,  613
Mohammedans  in,  536  ;  Effect  01,537-9,  547-50
Military  reputation  destroyed,  577-8  (577,  note)

„         Spirit  in,  rise  of,  552-3
National  characteristics,  620-1  (620-1,  notes)
Navy,  decline  of,  577-8   (577-8,  note) ;  Recon-
struction of,  594-5
Pastoral  life  of,  532-3
Power  of,   551-3

Clergy  in,  534-6 ;  results  of,  587-8
Reformation  in,  fate  of,  544
Spiritual  protection  in,  140
War  of  succession  in,  582-3
Spaniards,  character  of,  two  great  elements  of,  550;
Consequences  of,  551
General  incompetence  of,  588-98  (588, 589,  notes);

efforts  to  remedy  it,  593-4
Hatred  of  Elizabeth  (545,  note)
Spanish  mines,  foreign  exploitation  of,  595-6  (595,

note)
Spirit,  commercial,  pacific  nature  of,  125

Theological,    depressing    influence    of,    786-8;

Reaction  against,  in  Scotland,  792
Spirits,    evil    world    overrun    by,    according    to

Scottish  clergy,  764-7  (764-6,  notes)
Stafford,  123  (122,  note)
State,   interest    transferred  from   Church    to,  in

England,  203-5  (203,  233,  notes)
Movement  turned  against,  instead  of  Church,

in  France,  473,  476
States-General,  want  of  influence  of,  354-5  (354,

note)

Statute  of  frauds  and  perjuries,  218
Statisticians,  progress  made  by  (13,  note)
Statistics,  science  of  (19,  note)
Steam  power,  discovery  of,  effect  of,  125-7
Steam-engine,  859
Stewart,  teachings  of,  141-2
Stirling  (645,  note)
Stoeffler,  prophecy  by,  187
Stoics,  causes  of  their  failure,  786
Stuart,  House  of,  expulsion  of,  benefit  of,  227-8
Hopes  of,  destroyed,  251  (251,  note)
Love  of  Scottish  Highlanders  for,  718-22  (720,

721,  notes)

Suffrage,  extension  of,  283
Suicide,  tendency,  in  Scotland  (770-1,  notes)
Sully,  History  of  France,  440
Supernatural  interference,  rejection  of  dogmas  of,

Superiority,  European,  cause  of,  88
Superstition  and  knowledge,  antagonism  between,
211   (212,  note)

Causes  of,  22,  70,  648-9,  651-2,  (70,  note)

Knowledge,  the  sole  cure  for,  677

Scottish,  causes  of  continuance  of,  741-63

Universality  of,  346
Surnames,  first  use  of,  349
Sweden,  intolerance  in,  150  (150,  notes)
Sydenham,  services  rendered  by,  398-9
System  of  Nature,  487-8


Taylor,  Jeremy,  right  of  private  judgment  main
''"<     tained  by,  199,  222'         3         .:.,..
Taxation  in  France,  359-60
Temperament,  difficulty  in  studying  (100,  noU)
Temple,  right  of  private  judgment  maintained  by

199
Test  Act,  224

Repeal  of,  effect  on  English  Church,  283
Theological  interest,  decadence  of,  200
Spirit,  depressing  influence  of,  786-8

Predominance  of,  in  France,  effect  of,  291-2
Reaction  against,  in  Scotland,  792
Theologians,  depressing  influence  of,  786-8
Theology,   diminishing  respect  for,  in  Scotland,

733-4

Separation  of,  from  morals,  240
Separation  of,  from  politics,  240
Theories,  dangers  of,  865-7

Theory  of  Moral  Sentiment  and  Wealth  of  Nations
(AdamSmith),  supplementary  to  one  another,
805-6,  808,  811,  814,  819,  867,  894-5
Principle  from  which  author  reasons  in  it,  808-9

(808,  note)

Selfishness  not  a  primary  principle,  810
Sympathy  the  mainspring  of  human  conduct,

810

Sympathy,  origin  of  custom,  809  ;  of  criminal
law,    809  ;  of   fashion,    809 ;    of  philosophy.
809
Thinkers,  the  really  great  men  are  the,  883

Scotland  pre-eminent  in,  894
Thirty  Years'   War,   the  last  religious  war,   309

(309,  note)
Thomson,  Dr.,  statements  relating  to  Black,  842,

(842,  note)
Thought,  distribution  of,  influence  of  aspects  of

nature  on,  67-75
Tillotson,  right  of  private  judgment  maintained

by,  199
Toleration,  religious,  history  of,  191,  195,  199-201,

203,  224-7

Important  factor  in  civilization,  191
William  III,  the  friend  of,  229-30
Tooth,  golden,  controversy  of  the,  187-8
Torture  in  Scotland,  716-7  (717,  note)
Tournefort,  401-2  (402,  note)
Towns,   Scottish,   insignificance  and  insecurity  of,

639-405,  646-7  (640-1,  notes)
Trade,  good  resulting  from  spread  of,  157

Injurious    effect    of    State    interference    upon,

15.7-8
International,  old  views  on,  120-1  (i2o-r,  122,

notes)

Scottish,  growth  of,  731-6
Trade-wind,  effects  of,  58-9  (59,  note)
Trading  spirit,  philosophic  interest  of,  730

Spread  of,  in  Scotland,  724,  729-30,  731,  733-6
Travel,  habit  of,  among  English,  133-4
Travis  and  Person,  controversy  between,  243
Treaty    between    Catholics    and    Protestants    in

Scotland,  674-5
Troops,  mercenary,  119
Truths,  intellectual,  progress  of,  103-4,  I29»  I3°

Moral  and  intellectual  compared,  103-6,  130
Turenne,  Marshal  of  France,  339  (339,  note)
Turgot,  435,  469-70,  474,  477
Turpin,  chronicle  of,  180-1

Understanding,  human,  68
Increased  respect  for,  850
Subordination  of,  72

Tendency,  in  Europe,  to  strengthen,  74-5
Union  of  England  and  Scotland,  725-8,  730-40,

(725-8,  730,  notes)

U.S.  America,  history  of,   of  comparative  unim-
portance, 135,  138
Usury,  effect  of  legislation  on,  160  -i

Vanity  and  pride,  distinction  between,  380,  385
(385,  note)


'  INDEX


915


Vassy,  massacre  of,  291

Vattel  and  Grotius  compared  (308,  note)

Villenage  in  England,   extinction  of,    359    (359,

note)

Voltaire,  453-8,  459-63,  464-6,   467  '(456,   457.
notes)  %

His  anticipation  of  Niebuhr,  464

Knowledge  of  English,  411-2

Persecution  of,  420-1

Views  on  the  English,  419


Wages  and  rent,  ratio  between,  43-4  \

Causes  which  govern,  42
Fluctuation  of,  36-7,  38,  39  (38,  note)  f

Governed  by  population,  30  (30,  note)
Regulation  of,  816-9  (817,  note)
Walpole,  Sir  Robert,  on  taxation  of  America,  270

(270,  note)

Services  to  Hanoverian  dynasty,  255
Walter,  of  Oxford,  181,  183
War,  decrease  in,  109-12
Cause  of,  110-27

Love  of,  among  savage  races  (in,  notesft   In
England,  extinct,  114  ;  cause  of  this,  114,  125  ;
Unintellectual,  113
Second  greatest  evil,  109
Warburton,   Bishop    of    Gloucester,  opinions  of,

240,  241  (241,  note)
Washington,  George,  115
Water  and  fire,  two  most  general  principles  dealt

with  by  geologists,  852  (852,  note)
Warfare  between,  852
Watt,  James,  discoverer  water  being  compound

of  two  gases,  859-61  (860-1,  notes)
Inventor  of  steam  engine,  859
Wealth,   accumulation  of,   importance  of,   23-5,
28,    41    (23,   note) ;  what   governs  it,    24-7,

39

Distribution    of,    laws    of,    29-30,    67    (29-30,
note)


f  Personal,    increasing    power    of,    In    Scotland

73°,  735

Wealth  of  Nations  (Adam  Smith),  806/811-9, 825-6

and  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiment,  supplementary

to  one  another,  808,  811,  814,  8x9,  867,  894-5

Cause  of  change  in  legislation,  811  H

Dissenters   lead  purer   lives   than  Churchmen,

and  why,  815  (815-6,  note)

Propositions  on  which  theory  of  book  is  based,

813  :  First,  wealth  derived  from  land  and  not

n  from  labour,  813  ;  Second,  wealth  depends  on

|,    skill  of  labour  and  on  proportion  of  those

who  labour  and  those  who  do  not,  813
Pt  Publication  of,  122  ;  effects  of,  122,  124

Selfishness  the  moving  power  in  all  things,  813-6
Wages,  regulation  of  rate  of,  816-9  (8l7,  ™te)
WelUngton,  Duke  of,  115-6
Welsh,  John,  692,  753  (753,  note)
Wemyss,  manufacture  of  linen  in,  735
Werner,  founder  of  German  School  of   Geology,

854

His  method,  854-5,  856  (854,  note)
Wesley,  first  theological  statesman,  238
Westphalia,  Congress  of,  importance  of,  308-9
Whately,   Dangers   to   Christian   Faith   (199-200,

note)
Whitefield,    first    of    English  theological  orators,

238

William  III,  characteristics  of  his  reign,  228
Witches,  649  (649-50,  note)
Worcester,  859
Works,  public,  instituted  by  Charles  III  of  Spain,

607-9
World,  end  of,  prophesied,  187

External,  effects  on  human  mind,  67-75
Writing,  introduction  of  art  of,  167  ;  effects  of,
167-9,  17°  ;  errors  due  to,  168-70  (168,  note)

Yeomanry,  decay  of  English,  353    (353,  note)
Zoology,  discoveries  in,  in  France,  501


Butler  &  Tanner,  The  Selwood  Printing  Works,  Frome,  and  London.


ROUTLEDGE'S     POPULAR    LIBRARY.

Large  demy  8vo,  cloth,  each  vol.  3/6.

A  collection  of  standard -works,  well  printed  and  uniformly  bound.
Nights'    Entertain-


10


24


Arabian
ment.    750  pp.


with  8  plates.


CARLETON  (W.).  Traits  and
Stories  of  the  IrishPeasantry.

818  pp.

DISRAELI  (I.).  Curiosities  of
Literature.  598  pp.,  with  a
portrait.

Don  Quixote,  transl.  by  JARVIS.
544  pp.,  with  9  plates.

CERVANTES

EMERSON  (R.  W.}.  Works.
640  pp.,  with  a  steel  portrait.

EURIPIDES.  Plays,  transl.  by
R.  POTTER.  894  pp.

FERNANDEZ  (I.).  Reciter.
512  pp.,  with  a  portrait.

Gil  Bias,  transl.  by  SMOLLETT.
456  pp.,  with  plates  by  PIN-
WELL.  LESAGE

GOLDSMITH  (Oliver.).  Com-
plete Works  in  Prose  and
Yerse.  736  pp.

HOLMES  (O.  W.).  Breakfast
Table  Series  (Autocrat,  Poet,
and  Professor  at  the  Breakfast
Table).  615  pp.,  with  an  en-
graved portrait.

HOMER.  Iliad  and  Odyssey,
transl.  by  A.  POPE;  edited  by
H.  F.  GARY,  M.A.  534  pp.


13


M


15


16


LAMB  (C.).  Works ;  complete,
edit,  by  C.  KENT.  706  pp.

MACKAY(Dr.C.)  1001  Gemi
of  Prose.  538  pp.

Memoirs  of  Extraordi-
nary Popular  Delusions.  638
pp.,  with  116  woodcuts.

MAHONEY(F.).  The  Works
of  Father  Prout.  542  pp.,
with  a  portrait.

MILL  (J.  S.)  Principles  of
Political  Economy.  640  pp.

MONTAIGNE  (M.de).  Essays,
transl.  by  FLORIO.  640  pp.

SHAKESPEARE  (W.).  Works,
ed.  by  C.  KNIGHT.  1092  pp.

SMITH  (A.).  The  Wealth  of
Nations.  796  pp.

Spectator  (The).    944  pp.

The  same.  Large  type  edn.,
edit,  by  Prof.  H.  MORLEY.  3
vols.  2208  pp.


STERNE
Works.


(L. ).      Complete


Ten     Thousand

Things.    704   pp.
dreds  of  illns.


Wonderful

with    hun-
E.  T.  KING


HISTORICAL    AND


BOSWELL(J.}.  Life  of  John-
son. 530  pp.

CARLYLE  (T.).  History  of
the  French  Revolution.  240
pp.,  with  an  engraved  portrait.

Lives    of    Schiller    and  i

Sterling.    428  pp.


BIOGRAPHICAL    SECTION.

26    D'AUBIGNE   (M.).     Story  of
the  Reformation.    594  pp.


27  DA  VENPORT  (R.  A.)  History
of  the  Bastile  and  its  Prin-
cipal Captives,  with  a  His-
tory of  the  Man  in  the  Iron

Mask.    554  pp.


ROUTLEDGE'S    POPULAR    LIBRARY— Continued.


a8  DEFOE  (D.)  Journal  of  the
Plague  Year.  440  pp.,  with
4  steel  plates  by  G.  CRUIK-
SHANK.

29  FRO  I  SS  ART  (Sir  J).     Chron-

icles of  England,  France,
and  Spain.  512  pp.,  with  8
plates.

30  HOWITT  (W.).    Homes   and

Haunts    of    British     Poets.

648  pp.,  with  illns.

31  JOSEPHUS.      Works,    transl.

by  WHISTON.    768  pp.

32  LEWES  (G.  H.).  Biographical

History  of  Philosophy.  650  pp.


33


48


MA  CA  ULA  Y  (Lord) .  Essays ;
and  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome.
924  pp.,  with  an  engraved
portrait.


34  MILMAN  (Dean).     History  of

the  Jews.    640  pp.

35  MOTLEY  (J.  T).    Rise  of  the

Dutch  Republic.  942 pp.,  with
an  engraved  portrait.

36  PLUTARCH.    Lives    of    the

Greeks  and  Romans.    768  pp.

37  PRESCOTT  (W.  H.).    Charles

the  Fifth.

38  —  Conquest  of  Mexico.

39    Conquest  of  Peru ;  Mis-
cellanies.

40    Ferdinand  and  Isabella.

41    Philip  the  Second.

42  ROBERTSON  (Dr.).     Charles

Y. ;  and  PRESCOTT,  Charles
Y.    708  pp.

43  SMILES  (S.).    The  Huguenots

in  France.


REFERENCE    SECTION.


44  ADAMS  (W.  H.  D.)    Concord-

ance to  Shakespeare.  500  pp.

45  BARTLETT    (J).      Familiar

Quotations.    532  pp.

46  CRABBE(G.).   English  Syno-

nyms, with  copious  Illustra-
tions and  Examples.  638  pp.

47  CRUDEN  (A.).    Concordance

to  the  Old  and  New  Test.
Edited  by  Rev.  S.  C.  CAREY.
528  pp.


Family  Doctor  (The).    770  pp.
with  500  illns.


49  GROCOTT  (J.  C.).  Familiar
Quotations.  New  edn.,  with
an  Appendix  containing  Ameri-
can Authors  704  pp.


50  LEMPRIERE  (J).  Classical
Dictionary  (Unabridged)
700  pp.


51  RAMAGE  (C.  T.).    Beautiful

Thoughts  from  French  and
Italian  Authors.

52    Beautiful  Thoughts  from

German  and  Spanish  Authors.
576  pp.

53    Beautiful  Thoughts  from

Greek  Authors.    605  pp.

54  -    —  Beautiful  Thoughts  from

Latin  Authors.    860  pp.


55  WALKER  (J.).  Rhyming
Dictionary  of  the  English
Language.  800  pp.


GEORGE     ROUTLEDGE    &    SONS,    LIMITED,     LONDON.


DA
110
B89
1904


Buckle,  Henry  Thomas

Introduction  to  the  history
of  civilization  in  England


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

SCARBOROUGH  COLLEGE  LIBRARY


