Amulets and Superstitions (E. A. Wallis Budge, 1930)
=========================
Budge's 1930 compendium (reprinted as 'Amulets and Talismans') — the classic English survey of Egyptian and Near Eastern amulets, with original texts and translations. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/amuletssuperstit00budg).

AA
SOA
SN A


SS


ae
ARRON
S RANK


\S
AA)


Ws


NAS
‘ IPN NR
WY OK oe PAWS AN ANS LQ AAG
Sa . :


RAK
Ss SS
9! SS
.


\ WN NY LAAY AN LARNS WY


S : SAY RAY


SY .
SEMRKAYs

WS yy \


s


SY
SAN


RNG
AX
LY


Wn


MOY \
ONS \


NY


AK
\ \ WS .

LASANSS SAS


LIBRARY OF THE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY
PRINCETON, N. J.
e


PURCHASED BY THE


Mary CHEVES Duties FuNnD


BF 1411 .B92 | |
Budge, E. A. Wallis |
Amulets and superstitions |


" "hy ee


Ni -


e


j
i ’
Ws) ,
vy al
iy %
Pook, he
t q
f
fl =
b rly!
f
i
wy


iT aay Pees i ea anid ir
RON Read hae
Rei Peary F811 Oy
\' ‘ ‘he c : ; f 00) |


F
ae Pe ie ie


Ny


: AY 13 193]
LOGIGAL SEN


AMULETS AND
SUPERSTITIONS


THE ORIGINAL TEXTS WITH TRANSLATIONS AND
DESCRIPTIONS OF A LONG SERIES OF EGYPTIAN,
SUMERIAN, ASSYRIAN, HEBREW, CHRISTIAN, GNOSTIC
AND MUSLIM AMULETS AND TALISMANS AND MAGICAL
FIGURES, WITH CHAPTERS ON. FHE EVIL EYE, THE
ORIGIN OF THE AMULET, THE PENTAGON, THE
SWASTIKA, THE CROSS (PAGAN AND. CHRISTIAN),
THE PROPERTIES OF STONES, RINGS, DIVINATION,
NUMBERS, THE KABBALAH, ANCIENT ASTROLOGY,
TC:


BY


Pes WATTLIS, BUDGE. Kr


Nie Nore tere) eT BP ww) el. be Oke


SOMETIME KEEPER OF THE EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN ANTIQUITIES IN THE
BRITISH MUSEUM, SCHOLAR OF CHRIST'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND
TYRWHITT HEBREW SCHOLAR


With Twenty-two plates
and three hundred illustrations in the text


OXFORDEUNIVERSITY>SPRESS


LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW LEIPZIG NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE
CAPETOWN BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS SHANGHAI


LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD
. 1930


[All vights reserved]


First published in 1930
[All rights reserved]


Made in Great Britain
Printed by Harrison & Sons, Ltd., St. Martin’s Lane, London, W.C.2


lil


CON TENTS


PAGE

I. THE UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS DUE TO MAN’S

BELIEF IN THE EXISTENCE OF DEMONS AND
PVILFSPIRI Tow... Lean oe oot ats ae 1
II. ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS AND TALISMANS BO
III. BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS ey 82
ive (COPTIC *AMULETS a3 oe a ae Roe a7)
V. EGYPTIAN AMULETS Ae ke si eel BO
VI. ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS ... one ee
VII. GNOSTIC AMULETS ae Aah ae meet pevlds’)
VIII. HEBREW AMULETS ane oat oe ee DT,
IX. MANDAEAN (MANDAITIC) AMULETS _ ... heap poset)
X. PHOENICIAN AMULETS ... ay Be eeu
XI. SAMARITAN AMULETS ... aie ne ete OS
XII. SYRIAC AMULETS 56 oes Be. in phe
XIII. BABYLONIAN TERRA-COTTA DEVIL-TRAPS ee 3
XIV. THE RING AMULET woe ae es elec)

XV. STONES AND THEIR PROPHYLACTIC AND THERA-
PEUTIC’ QUALITIES” = <2. ae er a FOGG

XVI. THE IMPORTANCE OF COLOUR, SHAPE, AND
FORM IN AMULETS ... a La en olO
XVII. THE SWASTIKA OR SVASTIKA ... i Sate. KOOL
XVIII. THE CROSS Ft in oe ae fat Jd 30
Sie tHE. CRUCIFIX, ak. ee 205 id fra Poa


a2


iv


XXIV.


KV.


XXVI.


XXVII.
XXVIII.


XXIX.


XXX.


XXXIV.
XXXV.


XXXVI.


CONTENTS


THE EVIL EYE
KABBALAH...
ASTROLOGY


THE KABBALISTIG NAMES AND SIGNS, AND
MAGICAL FIGURES, AND “SQUARES OF ZHE
SEVEN ASTROLOGICAL STARS OR PLANETS...


THE STARS OR SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC AND THEIR


INFLUENCES, THE HOUSES OF HEAVEN AND
THE DEKANS


THE SPONES “OF? THE’ PLANETS AND, THEIR
INFLUENCES


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS AND THEIR MYSTIC
AND SACRED CHARACTER


DIVINATION
DIVINATION “BY (WATER: 1.


DIVINATION
ANIMAL


BY MEANS OF THE LIVER OF AN


ece eee eee


THE INSCRIBED BRONZE DIVINING DISK OF
PERGAMON


DIVINATION BY EARTH OR SAND (GEOMANCY)
LUCKY AND UNLUCKY DAYS

THE HAND OF FATIMAH...
CONTRACTS WITH THE DEVIL. ...
ENVOUTEMENT


MISCELLANEOUS


INDEX


390


PistyvOr PLACES


PLATE
T—1. Arabic amulet made of the skin of the
unborn kid
2. Arabic amulet made of paper


II. Silver amulet case inscribed on both sides with
a series of short texts from the Kur’an


III. Silver necklace with plaques and tubes to hold
small amuletic rolls


IV. Mirza Khan’s Kur’an amulet ...


V. Persian agate amulet inscribed with texts from
the Kur’an


VI. Persian agate amulet inscribed with texts from
the Kur’an


VII.—1. Mother-of-pearl amulet, Christ Beare by
John ae
2. Mother-of- crear l let eae a sn From

the Falls of the Jordan


VIII.—1 & 2. Two silver Indian pregnancy amulets...
3. Bee amulet of a soldier
4. Silver Hebrew amulet with the tacor Bi
Solomon


5 & 6. Two silver pregnancy Briniees etribed
in Arabic


IX.—1. Amulet armlet of a Turkish soldier... ;
2. Slate amulet inscribed with Arabic letters
as numerals


X. Ten archaic Babylonian and Assyrian amulets


XI. Seven Babylonian cylinder-seal amulets


PAGE


vi ViStOn PEATEs


PLATE PAGE
XII. Eight Babylonian and Assyrian amulets... 93
XIII. Three Babylonian amulets ... o% a 95
XIV. Bronze Pazuzu-Nergal plaque ... a A ee 815,
XV. Lamashtu plaque—obverse ... xen set) OR
XVI. Lamashtu plaque—reverse... oi Peyegieeae 8 i
XVII. The amulet of ’Absara Dengel ... ee Koc? Se

XVIII. Extract from a Mandaean amulet in the British
Museum — woe oP Aa Siac DAO

XIX. Extract from a Mandaean amulet with magical
drawings = ee ats oe we, 240

XX. Extract from a Samaritan phylactery in the
British Museum he P33 ry ee
XXI. The metal case which held the same ... wie aloes


XXII. <A group of five crosses in gold, Limoges enamel
and steel i he Boa a ... 45


Vil


Hiskteor tLe s TRATIONS


PAGE
Face of the Babylonian demon Humbaba... oe nd 2
The god Khepera in his phantom boat He ag Ne 7
Ra, the Sun-god at ue CELINA NS: ve Legs oe
Thoth, the Word-god... ben en Se A a
Specimens of Arabic magical asainee Fie Bes es 39
The Seven Seals and the Hexagram Bes ue es 40
Magical number squares oy, A .. 45 and 46
The Kur’an amulet and its case atl a ner ehi fensta 53
Whe Ayat al-Kursi’ ... nee Pe. iA ae Be ee
The Ayat al-’Arsh ... wh Pe me: Ay. = 56
The Fatihat al-Kitab oe be Pe ee ee 59
fine sural ofthe Unity of God © .;. the ip ae: 61
The animal amulets inscribed on their bases is ; 86
Cylinder-seal engraved with a figure of the naked pode 92
A Babylonian house-amulet ... ... Ne ne ae 7
Two prophylactic figures... ss en =e ate LOO
Two prophylactic figures... sig a on eee Ot
Whe Sirush .... . a ii Loe mA eo O02
Two men beating adrum .... oP aA Aas oo oe LOS
Fishiamulet »... ae vi Sawer, 103
Pazuzu, son of Hanpu, king e ee air eae sae a Be
Two Achaemenian seals he ee an ah Line kt a
Six Pehlevi seals eS “at ie Be aes ia 26
Saint George of Lydda ah ar patel ol
The amulet of the Sun-god at sunrise cand ae aks in. 134
The Prayer-spell of the Heart-scarab 7 et Sed ed sis)
The Baboon, the associate of Thoth oes sik se) SAL
The Cat slaughtering the Serpent of Darkness... eo  lAS
The Vulture-goddess Mut... ie a a ae LOO
ihesDivine Goose. ... " aoe gtat
Amuletic figures of Deakhyn gods Zena goddesses. 156-158
The Shabti Spell ap ea 4. ULS9


The Metternich Seen ess ee sib ee, a 166


Vill LIST OF FLLUST RATIONS


The Metternich Stele—reverse

Egyptian Amulets
The magical forms of the Caceit in Reont
The Divine Face

The Chariot of Elijah ae
The Net in which Solomon caught dene fo:
Solomon and his wife.. ;

Adam and Eve in the ieatden of Buen

The Cross with the Divine Face

The Cross of “Abi Fara

Chnoumis above a Bacchic altar

Anubis and the goddess of Truth

Horus the Child in the boat of Iaé

The god Abrasax

The three-headed Hecate, ie Guee of Hell
A god in the form of Osiris asa mummy .
The Arch-demon Set, ass-headed

Amulet from a magical papyrus

Hebrew child-bed amulet

Hexagram amulet from the Book of Raziel
Two triangles amulet from the Book of Razieél
Amulet to secure success in business

Three amulets in the secret writing

Portrait of Cornelius Agrippa

Seven seal amulets inscribed in Hebrew, ae
Three forms of the Pentagram

Hebrew magical square

German magical square

Hebrew amulet

Cylinder-seal of PRSHNDT

Cylinder-seal of HRTKL

Cylinder-seal of PLTHAN

Cylinder-seal of YRPAL

Cylinder-seal of SRGD

Cylinder-seal of MDBRG
Cylinder-seal of AKDBN the at

The Hebrew and Samaritan Alphabets
Magical square from a Samaritan Phylactery


PAGE


167
172-176
178
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
205
206
207
208
208
209
210
211
229
226
227
228
229
231
232
233
234
235
237
254
254
259
255
256
256
257
268
271


Bist eOr-eLelesLRATIGNS


Facsimile of a page of the Syriac “ Book of Protection ”’


‘Gabriel spearing the woman of the Evil Eye

Mar George of Lydda spearing the Great Dragon...
King Solomon spearing a devil

Elijah and Enoch eating the fruit of the i of fife
Mar Daniel spearing the ravening wolf


Thaumasius spearing the spirit of the daughter ofthe moon 279


Rabban Hérmizd spearing a lion

The Four Evangelists *
Babylonian Devil-trap, with a ree amlarniitin
Babylonian Devil-trap, with a magical inscription
Babylonian Devil-trap, with a magical inscription
Babylonian Devil-trap, with a magical inscription


The goddess Nekhebit bestowing the Tee of fe


whole earth on the king of Egypt
Two forms of the signet ring a
Cylinder-seal of Sebak-neferu-Ra ane Aaah
Two rings with bezels
Magical square of figures on a ring
The magical square of Musawwir
Magical diamond square on aring ..
Forms of the Swastika
Forms of the Cross


Silver Host case in the form of a cross). lhe Cruciaxion
Silver Host case in the form of across. The Ascension...


The Kabbalistic Tree

Drawing of the Perfect man ni the reine

The Ten Sephiréth in ten concentric circles

The Ten Sephiréth as a wheel

Magical letter-wheels and letter-circles

The Twelve Houses of Heaven

The Seven Worlds, the Earth, and the World ore
The Egyptian gods of the Five Planets

The Circles of the Signs of the Zodiac

Symbols of Stars and Constellations

The Seals of the Seven Angels

The Kabbalistic symbols of the er oloeital Blahets
The Kamé‘a of Lead .. ahs ae te oA


303


332-335


336-343
344
347
371
372
373
374
376
384
385
386
387
388
389


391, 392


394


x Listy OF HEEUSERA EONS


The Kamé‘a of Tin (or silver)

The Kamé‘a of Iron ...

The Kamé‘a of Gold ...

The Kamé‘a of Copper

The Kamé‘a of Quicksilver ...

The Kamé‘a of Silver

Symbols of the Moon and hee seat
The human hand and the stars

Specimen of Kabbalistic Scripts

The Signs of the Zodiac

Sacred Heart with Signs of the eee

The Creation Hexagram ie
Bronze liver in Piacenza is
Clay model of a liver of a Rie ene
Clay model of a liver of a sheep—reverse ...
The divining disk of Pergamon

Fragment of a geomantic tablet

The Hand of Fatimah

Devils waiting to carry off the soul af a man


The Virgin Mary rescuing two souls from devils ...


The Virgin Mary rescuing the soul of the cannibal
The magical rod of Ningishzida


PAGE


394
395
395
396
396
397


398, 399°


402
404
410
415
432
452
454
455
459
462
468.
477
478.


479, 480


489°


x1


PRE AC


PiveVeiue thesyearelo7> the: lates Dr) Samuel
Birch, Keeper of Oriental Antiquities in the
British Museum, gave me permission to copy
cuneiform tablets in his private study, and to use
the Departmental Library. His study, which was
entered from the Ktytnjik Gallery and no longer
exists, was a comparatively small room, and he
was obliged to transact his business, both official
and private, in the presence of the few students
whom he allowed to work init. These were accom-
modated at a table and a desk which stood under
the north and west windows respectively. Day by
day there came to him antica dealers and amateur
collectors, who wished to show him objects which
they possessed or were about to acquire, and to
know what purpose they had served, what the marks
or inscriptions on them meant, and what their
pecuniary value was. The objects brought were
usually Oriental, papyri, Egyptian and Coptic,
cuneiform tablets, figures of gods, palm-leaf manu-
scripts, rings, pendants, necklaces, amulets of all
kinds, inscribed metal plaques, Chinese pottery
pieerseals, etc, But no matter what. the object
put before him was, Birch always seemed to know
something about it, and to be able to refer his
visitors to authoritative books, or to living scholars,
for further information. That he was the greatest
Egyptologist in England, and that officials from the


xi PREFACE


Chinese Embassy in London came to him for infor-
mation about ancient Chinese history and the old
forms of Chinese pictographs we all knew, but one
could only listen and wonder at the encyclopaedic
character of his general, knowledge. Naturally he
was consulted by many members of the general
public on matters dealing with Egyptology and
Assyriology, for the greater number of the anti-
quities under his charge came from Egypt, Baby-
lonia and Assyria. But some of his visitors asked
him for information, and usually got it, about the
Moabite Stone, the Cyprian inscriptions (which were
at that time undeciphered), the Massorah, the Kab-
balah, the Sinaitic inscriptions, the monuments of
Susa and Persepolis, the inscriptions of Mal Amir,
the Himyaritic inscriptions, astrology, the ritual of
fire-worship, the rites of the Yazidis or Devil-
worshippers, etc. His answers and short disserta-
tions were always interesting, and that we, 1.e.
Naville, Strassmaier, W. H. Rylands and myself,
more often lstened to them than worked need not
be wondered at.

One day, when he seemed to have a little leisure,
I ventured to ask him if members of the public ever
put to him questions which he could not answer ?
and she replied,” Yesgottens = said 1s) *hhenawha:
happens?’ He answered promptly, “I confess
my ignorance, and refer the visitor to another member
of the staff. When the enquirer has gone I at once
write down the question he has asked on a slip of
paper, and as soon as I can | try to obtain the
information necessary to answer the question. And
if the day ever comes when you are an Assistant in
this Department I recommend you to write all the


PREFACE Xl


sensible questions which you are asked upon slips of
paper and search out the answers to them. Many
members of the public ask the same question,
especially about matters of general interest.”

Ten years later I had the good fortune to become
one of Dr. Birch’s Assistants, and in due course I
was asked many questions by the public which I
could not answer satisfactorily. Therefore I adopted
Dr, Birch’s plan and wrote such.questions on slips
of paper, and I continued to do this during the years
of my long service in the British Museum. When I
resigned in 1924 and left my official residence I
brought away with me a very thick bundle of slips
with questions written on them. During the first
years of my service the questions were of a very
miscellaneous character and dealt with a great
variety of subjects. But when Dr. Birch’s successor
found that the answering of questions orally and by
letter took up so much of his time daily, he moved
the Trustees to change the title of the Department
to that of “ Department of Egyptian and Assyrian
matiquities.’ This change limited .the scope but
not the number of enquiries, and little by little the
questions chiefly concerned Egyptian and Assyrian,
Babylonian and other Semitic antiquities.

As opportunity offered, after my retirement I
read over the mass of slips which I had collected,
and discovering by the letters sent to me that the
public were asking much the same kinds of questions
which their fathers and mothers had asked me thirty
and forty years ago, I determined to deal with the
questions, as far as possible comprehensively, and
to write a book which in a series of chapters would
supply answers to them; and the present volume


XiV PREFACE


is the result. As at least three-fourths of the
questions concerned amulets and the beliefs which
they represented I have called it “ AMULETS AND
SUPERSTITIONS,” though perhaps a more correct
title would have substituted “ Magic”’ for “ Super-
stitions.”’ But the reader must note that in this
book no attempt has been made to deal with amulets
in general, for the writing of a history of the amulets
which have been and still are in use throughout the
world is beyond the power of any one man. Such
a work would fill many thick volumes, and only a
syndicate of specialists working together could pro-
duce the necessary “ copy’ for the printer. The use
of amulets is the result of the belief in the power of the
Evi_ EYE in man and beast, and a proof of the vast-
ness of the literature of this subject, which is growing
daily, is furnished by the fact that the “ Quellen-
Register’ in DR. SELIGMANN’S Der Bose Blick (Berlin,
1910) contains nearly 2,500 entries. And in his
Die Zauberkraft der Auges (Hamburg, 1922) the
authorities quoted number many hundreds more.

In this volume I have described the principal
amulets which were used by the Semitic peoples of
Western Asia, Egypt, Nubia and Ethiopia, beginning
with those of the third millennium B.c. from Sumer
and Elam. I have given many illustrations of them,
reproduced photographically from the collections in
the British Museum, and from those which are in
the hands of private collectors, including my own.
The description of the actual amulet is a com-
paratively simple matter, for in most cases the
object explains itself. But when we come to the
inscriptions on amulets, which consist of symbols,
sacred and divine names used as words of power,


PREFACE XV


spells, etc., explanations of some length are necessary
of the ideas and beliefs which they represent.
Therefore I have added a series of short chapters
‘in which I have tried to set forth the principal
theories about the powers of “ working ’’ amulets, and
the meaning of the inscriptions and symbols inscribed
on them, and to indicate the beliefs concerning
them which were held by the ancient Babylonian
and Egyptian magicians, and by the later Kab-
balists, Gnostics, both pagan and Christian, and
astrologers. And I have incorporated in them
many of the views of the astrologers, makers of
horoscopes, casters of nativities, diviners, crystal-
gazers, palmists and fortune-tellers with whom I
came in contact in Egypt, the Sidan and Meso-
potamia during my official Missions to those countries.
x The use of amulets dates from the time when
animism or magic satisfied the spiritual needs of
man. Primitive man seems to have adopted them
as a result of an internal urge or the natural instinct
which made him take steps to protect himself and
to try to divine the future. He required amulets
to enable him to beget children, to give him strength
to overcome his enemies, visible and invisible, and
above all the Evit Eve, and to protect his women
and children, and house and cattle; and his de-
scendants throughout the world have always done
the same. When the notion of a god developed
in his mind, he ascribed to that god the authorship
of the magical powers which he believed to be
inherent in his amulets, and he believed that his
god needed them as much as he himself did. He
did not think it possible for his god to exist without
the help of magical powers. At a later period he


XV1 PREFACE


regarded his god as the bestower of magical powers:
on men, and we find this view current among the
civilized priests of Egypt, Sumer and Babylonia.
These priests did not reject the crude magical beliefs.
and practices of their predecessors, whether savage
or semi-savage ; on the contrary they adopted many
of them unaltered, and they formed an integral part
of the mystery of the RELIGION which they formu-
lated. Henceforth magic and religion went hand
inhand. The gods became magicians, and employed
magic when necessary, and dispensed it through
their priests to mankind.

The Jewish Rabbis and some of the Christian
Fathers condemned the use of amulets, some because
they associated them with magic, and some because
they regarded their use as an indication of distrust in
the wisdom and arts of Divine Providence. But
their condemnation had no lasting effect except to
incite men to do what was arbitrarily forbidden,
and the making and wearing of amulets went on
as before. Men have always craved for amulets.
and the priests, both Pagans and Christians, should
have taken steps to satisfy this craving. In this
way they could have more or less controlled the
use of amulets of every kind. The ancient literature
of Babylonia and Egypt makes it clear that magic
was believed to be an essential part of the equipment
of the gods, who used it to help themselves and each
other, and when they willed transmitted it to men.

In a papyrus at St. Petersburg’ there is a remark-

1 Published by W. GOLENISCHEFF, Les Papyrus Iératiques
No. ZI1II5, III6A and 1116B de l’Ermiiage imperial a
St. Pétersbourg, 1913. The papyrus is not older than the


XVIIIth Dynasty, but the work itself was written under the
IXth or Xth Dynasty.


PREFACE XVI


able passage in which it is stated that the great god,
presumably Ra, created magic for the benefit of
man. It occurs in a work written by a king called
KHATI, who reigned during the troublous times
between the downfall of the VIth Dynasty and the
rise of the Theban Kingdom, in the third millennium
before Christ. This work contains a series of
“ Teachings,’ which the king advised his son
MERI-KA-Ra to follow closely. In section XXVIII
the king enumerates the great things which God
has done for men and women, whom he describes as
the “ flocks and herds of God,” and says, ““ He made
heaven and earth for their pleasure ; He dissipated
the darkness of the waters (i.e. the primeval ocean) ;
He made the breezes of life for their nostrils ; they
(1.e. men and women) are the images of Him and
taey proceeded from His members; He rises in
the sky to gratify them; He made fruits and
vegetables and flocks and herds, and feathered
fowl and fish for their food; He slew his enemies,
he destroyed his own children when they murmured
against him and rebelled ; He made the daylight
to ad them ; and


i FURS = mE


hie one for them magic for a weapon


fs wm GS Sell


for resisting the power of [evil] happenings [and] the dream


fee ff


ete (5)
of the night as wellas of the day.”


a)


The word #ekau here rendered “‘ magic,” includes
in its meaning, spells, incantations, words of power,
b


XVill PREFACE


and all the arts of the witch and sorcerer. The
word Kheprit must mean unlucky or untoward, or
evil happenings. And the kind, of dream is-noz
indicated ; the writer may mean the dream which
terrifies, or the dreams in which the dreamer is
shown future events, and is enabled in consequence
to arrange or rearrange his affairs in respect of
them. If it is the latter kind of dream which is
referred to by the king, we have a proof that dreams
were often employed by the gods in making their
will known to the Egyptians. And this proves that
the art of divining by means of dreams was commonly
practised.

The literature of Babylonia also gives instances
of the use of magic by the gods themselves. Thus
when the Abyss-god Apsti rebelled against his
overlord Ea, he had no opportunity of fighting him,
for Ea first cast a mighty spell on him which made
him fall into a heavy sleep, and then he killed him
and seized his habitation; and Mummu, the com-
mander-in-chief of the forces of Apst, was over-
powered or bewitched by the same means and
rendered impotent. When the gods found that
they were to be attacked by Tiamat, the personifica-
tion and mother of all evil, and by all the powers of
darkness under the leadership of her son Kingu,
they selected Marduk, the son of Ea, as their
champion, and endowed him with the power which
they believed would enable him to avenge their
Cause, eiiectively But .\before he set. out song
mission, they felt it necessary to make quite sure
that his power as a magician was adequate for his
task. They caused a cloak to appear in their
midst, and said to him, “ Thou shalt be chief among


PREPACK mabe


the gods, to cause the overthrow [of Tiamat] and
the reconstruction [of creation], and it shall come
to pass. Nevertheless speak one word only and let
the cloak disappear. Speak a second [word] and
femaine cloak steappear suninjured. |“ lheretipon
Marduk uttered a word of power and the cloak
disappeared ; he uttered a second and the cloak
reappeared. When the gods saw that their champion ~
was able to invest his words with magical power
they were satisfied and gave him the sceptre and
throne and other symbols of sovereignty and the
invincible weapon with which he was to slay Tiamat.

An instance of the invincible magical power
attributed to the great god Neb-er-djer (z.e. the Lord
to the limit) or Khepera is furnished by an Egyptian
papyrus in the British Museum (No. 10188). In the
Book of Knowing the Generations of Ra it is stated
that the god existed by himself in the primeval
ocean in name only. In some way not described
by the use of Zeka or magic, he worked on his heart
(z.e. mind) and so became a being, whom the Egyptians
knew as Khepera or Ra. That the god existed by
means of his name only is proved by the well-known
legend in which the god reveals the secret name to
Isis, who craved to know it so that she might rule
over the whole world. Through her knowledge of
magic Isis was able to construct a venomous reptile
and to make it bite the god with such terrible effect
that he nearly died. When death stared him in the
face, he revealed his secret name to Isis, and she
recited a spell which healed him. Thus Isis was
skilled in the art of Black Magic as well as White.
The idea of a god existing in name only is also found
in Ethiopic literature, and some native writers have

b 2


xx PREFACE


gone so far as to state that the Three Persons of the
Trinity at first existed in name only in the primeval
ocean, and that their existence is maintained by
the use of words of power, 7.€. magic.

And the ancient gods of Babylonia also used
amulets. A most interesting example of this fact
is given in the Creation Epic. When the great god
Marduk, the son of Ea, the champion of the gods,
set out to fight Tiamat, he was heavily armed and
carried invincible weapons ; but he carried between
his lips an amulet made of red paste, or red stone,
in the form of an eye, and he held in one hand
a bunch of herbs which was intended to protect
him from any magical influence which would be
hostile to him.! And there is no doubt that Tiamat,
the ‘‘ mother of everything,” the fomenter and leader
of rebellion against the gods, also possessed a
remarkable object, which seems to have been of the
nature of an amulet and which, in any case, was the
source of all her powers In the texts this objéct 1s
called “‘ DuppU SHEMATI,’ which is usually trans-
lated “ Tablet of Destinies,’”’ but no detailed descrip-
tion of it is extant. Whence she obtained it is not
known, and whether she carried it on her head or
wore it on her breast is not clear.

Tiamat created a number of horrible creatures
of monstrous shape and form, to help her in her
fight against the gods, and she made her first born
son Kingu the commander-in-chief of her forces.
In one place she calls Kingu “ my only spouse.”
She bestowed upon him all the power which she
could, and she gave him the Tablet of Destinies
and fastened it to his breast, though a variant


' Meissner, Altortentafesche Texte, II, 41, 44, line 61 f.


PREFACE XXi


(ine 105, Third Tablet of Creation) says that she
placed it on his head. When Marduk had defeated
Kingu and his host, he took from him the Tablet
of Destinies ‘“‘ which should never have been his,”’
and sealed it with his seal, which showed that he
regarded the Tablet as being legally his, and fastened
itpon his breast, Lhistaction Suggests that -the
Tablet was, like the Paizah of the Mongols, a sign of
authority, which was worn on the breast, being
suspended from the neck by a chain, In this case
also we must ask, How did Tiamat get it ? Was it
given to her, andif so by whom ? Itis evident from
the narrative of the Creation Texts that the Tablet
was the source of Tiamat’s power, and that her
spells and incantations enabled her to use it in
producing evil results, 2.e. to work Black Magic with
it. In itself it cannot have been a thing of evil,
for when Marduk obtained possession of it he fastened
it to his breast. Therefore it seems that we must
regard the Tablet of Destinies as an amulet.

The whole of the Babylonian story of the Creation
shows that men believed that all the great works
of the gods and devils were performed by magic.
The magic of Marduk was more powerful than that
of Tiamat, and his spells and incantations were more
powerful than hers and therefore made her curses
and spells to have no effect.

some form of the belief that the gods of the
Sumerians, Babylonians and Egyptians made use
of amulets as protectors on urgent occasions made
its way, probably at a very early date, into Ethiopia.
In the Book of the Mysteries of Heaven and Earth
we find an account of the rebellion of Satan against
the Almighty. The Prince of Darkness mustered his


XXll PREFACE


troops and engaged in battle with the hosts of God.
Twice the divine armies were repulsed and over-
thrown and Satan was about to assume the position
of the conqueror of God. The Almighty reformed
His armies and sent them forth a third time to
destroy Satan and his followers, but on this occasion
He sent forth with them a Cross of Light on which
the Names of the Three Persons of the Trinity were
written. When Satan saw the Cross and the Three
Names of Power, his boldness and courage forsook
him, his arms lost their strength and the weapons
which he was wielding fell from them and he and
his hosts turned their backs and were hurled down
into the abyss of hell by the now invincible angels
of God. The Abyssinian belief in the power of the
Cross to vanquish evil spirits and the diseases caused
by them is based on this Legend; and from early
Christian times the Cross has been regarded as the
amulet and talisman far. excellence throughout
Ethiopia.

Since the oldest civilized ancient nations believed
that their gods had need of and made use of magic,
it is not surprising that men and women had recourse
to magic in periods of stress and difficulty. What
was good for the gods was good also for man. Men
made and used amulets to protect themselves, and
the fundamental idea in their minds was to safe-
guard the lfe and strength which had been given
to them by the gods, although the divine powers
seemed inattentive to them; each generation in
every country borrowed something from its pre-
decessors, but, apparently, abandoned no essential
part of the tradition, belief or teaching concerning
amulets. It was always assumed that materials


PREFACE XXill


from which amulets were made possessed certain
qualities or attributes or powers which were beneficial
to man. The influence of the inscription or device
or name or word of power which was written upon
the amulet, supplemented and perhaps increased
the innate power in the material. To this power
belief added that of the good will or affection or love
Oi the, fiver of the amulet. When to these was
added the firm belief of the wearer of the amulet
in the qualities of the material it is clear that no
amulet could be regarded as a piece of inert and dead
matter. It became, in fact, a “ working’ amulet.
A dose of medicine might be regarded as an amulet
applied internally, and the effect of the matter which
composed the dose was supplemented by the spell
of the pagan, or the prayer of the Christian. The
good will of both, AND THE FaiTH of the patient
joined to them, healed him and saved his life. The
power and effect of FAITH in all such matters cannot
be over-estimated.

Looking back over the history of amulets it is
difficult to understand why ecclesiastical and other
bodies condemned their use. The universal use of
the amulet was, and still is, due to an instinct of the
race, viz., that of self-preservation, and has nothing
evil connected with it ; it has never been, and never
can be, connected with what is commonly called
“ Black Magic.” If we examine carefully the groups
of amulets and amuletic inscriptions described and
translated in this book, we find that each and all of
them was believed to derive its protective powers
from figures of the gods either engraved or drawn,
and from the great names of the gods and of their
divine attributes and the figures of sacred animals,


XXIV PREFACE


and from inscriptions which contain divine names in
various forms. All these amulets base their appeal
to the Divine Powers for virility, fecundity, pre-
servation of the family, success and well-being on
the belief of their makers and wearers in the triumph
of the Power of. God over the Satans of every age
and country, and the victory of Good over Evil,
Law over Chaos, and Light) over. Darkness Siie
wearers of many of them may be said to have per-
formed acts of worship when they wore them, and
should have won the approval of their spiritual
pastors and masters. It is probable that in Baby-
lonia, Assyria and Egypt amulets were designed
and made by workmen attached to the great temples,
and that the inscriptions on them were drafted by
the priests and engraved by employés in the
temples.

From the Babylonian and Egyptian inscriptions
we know that amulets made of certain kinds of
stones secured for their wearers the presence of
gods and goddesses, and brought them into daily
contact with divine beings. Men possessing these
had no need to have recourse to any system of
divination in order to find out what the will of the
gods was in respect of themselves, for no man ‘‘ whose
god was always with him” could come to harm.
The insatiable desire to know the future was and
still is a deep-rooted instinct in man, and many
kinds of divination were practised in the earliest
times. Some amulets were believed to make the
wearer dream dreams in which his future would be
revealed to him, but as few men were satisfied with
their own interpretations of their dreams, a class of
professional interpreters of dreams came into being.


PREFACE XXV


The interpreters of dreams and omens were usually
members of the priesthoods of the temples, and
were men of solid learning, but in country villages
impostors and charlatans were many. The ancient
Asiatic peoples seem to have had three methods of
divination, viz., by lots, by the pronouncements of
astrologers, and by oracles which were given by the
priests of the great temples. And among many
peoples the “seer ’’ was commonly consulted about
the future. Ordinary folk cast lots and though their
kind of divination was denounced by both the
Hebrews and the Christians, it was often resorted
to by them when other means of divination failed.
Balaam, the diviner, was slain by the Israelites
(Joshua xiii. 22), but Matthias was chosen to be an
apostle by the casting of lots (Mark xv. 24)! The
Metrologer atid the. “seer” (especially the latter)
were likewise denounced, because their prophetic
ecstacy or frenzy was regarded as madness and
delirium.

The most reputable form of divination was
enquiry by oracle. Shamash was the “Lord of
Oracles,’ but many other great Babylonian gods were
givers of oracles; the first man in Babylonia to
enquire by oracle was Enmeduranki, the king of
Sippar, who reigned in prehistoric times. The
goddess Ishtar of Arbela, too, gave oracular responses
to Esarhaddon, King of Assyria. In Egypt the
great giver of oracles was Ra, the Sun-god, or Amen-
ka. In Israel God gave His oracles through Aaron
and his successors, but the story of Saul shows that
there were occasions when He would give no oracle.
“Saul asked counsel of God, . . . but He answered
him not that day’ (1 Sam. xiv. 37). And again,


XXVI1 PREFACE


© When: Saul enquired of ;the. Lord, the Lord
answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim,
nor by prophets ”’ (1 Sam. xxviil. 6). In desperation
Saul consulted the witch of Endor and a day or so
later met his fate. The witch herself, before she
obeyed his commands, reminded him that he had
“put away those who had familiar spirits, and the
wizards out of his land ”’ (1 Sam. xxviii. 3).

Now although the Law decreed that there should
not be in Israel any one who used divination, or
observed times, or who was an enchanter, or a witch,
or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits,
or a wizard or a necromancer (Deut. xviii. 10, II),
we find that one kind of divination was permitted
by the Law, namely, the enquiry by Urim and Tum-
mim, and that Moses gave very careful directions
for the preparation of the means by which it could
be carried out. Urim and Tummim were the names
of two small pebbles, or plaques, or bits of wood,
which were used much as we use dice. They were
kept in a small pocket or pouch which was made at
the back of the “ breast-plate of judgment ” (Exod.
XXVills 305 Lev. vie $3) cand mit was: the, duty
Aaron and his successors to keep them there in
safety, and to produce them when men wished to
enquire of them. It is quite clear that the use of
these two little objects for divining purposes was very
ancient, and that Moses, being unable to suppress
entirely the arts of divining which were among the
Israelites, adopted this the oldest and most reputable
form of divination and kept it under the control of
himself and the priests of the Levites. In short, he
regularized the use of Urim and Tummim and made
enquiry by them a semi-religious ceremony ; and


PREFACE XXVI


naturally he condemned all other forms of divination
just as he condemned the use of all other amulets
except the Phylacteries or frontlet bands which were
worn between the eyes, the Meztizah or door-post
amulet, and the Sisith, z.e. tassel or fringe.

The object of all systems of divination was to
compel the gods and the Deity to make their wills
in respect of certain matters known to earnest,
and it may be added, lawful enquirers, and Moses
in common with pagan priests considered that there
were occasions when the orthodox Israelite might
be assisted in his quest.

Chrysostom and many other Christian Fathers
condemned the use of amulets and systems of divina-
tion because of their connection with magic, but it is
quite clear that the Christians of the Orient clung
to many practices of pagan magic long after they
had ceased to exist among European Christians. To
the latter FAITH in God’s Government was sufficient,
and systems of divination were therefore unnecessary,
and their priests were not called upon to be as
tolerant as their brethren in the European parts of
Asia Minor, Egypt, Nubia, Palestine, and Syria.
Fvidences of this are given in the New Testament.
The story of the Star which led the Magi (Matt.
ii. 2) shows that astrology was regarded with tolera-
tion by St. Matthew and his readers ; the mention
of the dream of Joseph (Matt. ii. 12, 13, 19, 22) and
the dream of Pilate’s wife proves that dreams were
still regarded as legalized forms of divination. The
waking dreams or trance of Peter (Acts x. 10) and
Paul (Acts xxii. 17) were thought of in the same
light by the early Christians. The pagan belief in
the virtue which is latent in the shadow of a holy


XXVIll PREFACE


man is referred to in Acts v. 15, where we are told
that the sick folk and demoniacs on whom the shadow
of Peter fell ““ were healed every one.’  Jhe belief
was common that there were healing powers in the
apparel of holy men, and when the “ handkerchiefs
and aprons’”’ of Paul were brought and laid upon
the sick, “‘ the diseases departed from them, and the
evil spirits went out of them ”’ (Acts xix. 12).

Soon after the close of the [Vth century of our
Era a sort of revival in the use of amulets began,
and the Christians began to make use of amulets
which were connected with their religion. First and
foremost was the Cross, which appeared in various
forms, and the sign of the Cross, which was commonly
used by the clergy and laity alike to drive away
devils and disease-producing spirits. Then came
pictures of the Virgin Mary, and pictures and figures
of the Archangels and the great saints, and the
cult of the relics of the martyrs who were the victims
of the numerous persecutions which took place in
the first four centuries of our Era. Untanned leather
and parchment and papyrus and stones were also
inscribed with extracts from the Scriptures, and
finally, after the invention of paper, amulets and
talismans of paper became common. And a species
of Christian Magic came into being. The greatest
Name and word of power was Jesus, and the Host
and sacramental oil and incense became to many
amulets of invincible power, and the Sacred Elements
were actually called ‘‘ immortal medicine.”

Oriental magic of every kind made its way into
Europe in the Middle Ages, and traces of it are
recognizable throughout the West, even at the pre-
sent day. The mathematician and the astronomer


PREFACE XX1x


and the physician have founded their sciences on
the lore of the Sumerians and Babylonians and
Assyrians, and believe that they have taken from
the arithmetic and astrological and medical tablets
everything there is of value in them, but in this
they are mistaken. Astrology, divination, the use
of numbers, and the system of medicine which were
in use in Mesopotamia in the third millennium before
Christ are as much alive and as active in that country
as ever, and are held by the natives in far higher
esteem than the exact sciences which Europeans
have derived from them. And even in England
and America at the present time large numbers of
people are influenced by beliefs which were common
in Babylonia four or five thousand years ago. No
amount of development, culture or education will
make men abandon wholly the use of amulets and
systems of divination. For amulets give their
wearers a sense of comfort, and protection and well-
being, and they harm no one. And he who practises
the arts of divination can harm nobody but himself.

Writers of books and articles on occult matters
in encyclopaedic works frequently refer to astrology
and divination and kindred subjects as if they were
products of the ages of ignorance and are rapidly
becoming non-existent; but if they really believe
this they have fallen into grievous error. We are told
that ASTROLOGY is a pseudo-science, although it has
been developed entirely on the lines of experiment
and experience, and accurate records of facts. This
development does not make it an exact science, but
it is impossible not to be struck with the general
accuracy of the readings of a large number of the
characters of men and women which are based upon


XXX PREFACE


the readings of horoscopes. There are living among
us parents who have had horoscopes made imme-
diately after births of their children, and who bring
up their children according to the directions supplied
by the horoscopist. Similarly there are medical
practitioners who have horoscopes of their patients
made, and who use the information derived from them
as a guide to the treatment which they eventually
prescribe for their patients. Among one’s friends
and acquaintances are many men and women who
have their horoscopes made annually, and who
plan their work and travel and pleasure in accord-
ance with the positions of the planets and the Signs
of the Zodiac at the Vernal Equinox. The publica-
tion of the astrological works by Mr. Waite and
‘““ Sepharial ’’ and Miss Adams and others proves
that the number of astrologers and amateur astro-
logers in our country must be very great. Men
have always believed that their lives are directed
by the stars, and among a large proportion of the
dwellers on the earth it will never die. The results
which astrologers obtain sometimes are so remark-
able, and their prognostications are so _ often
fulfilled to the letter by subsequent events, that even
the unbeliever is compelled to admit that there
must be “ something in it.”

PALMISTRY likewise is dubbed a pseudo-science.
It grew up in the East and made its way into Europe
via India and Mesopotamia and Egypt. The Oriental
experts in palmistry are usually learned and able
men who are shrewd and wise judges of character,
and they can undoubtedly give accurate estimates
as to the nature of the past and present of men’s
lives by examining the lines of the hand. When


PREFACE Sesext


palmistry came into being is unknown, but it seems
to have been used as a means of divination by the
earliest inhabitants of our earth. Parsee friends
assert that the face and the palms of the hands supply
a key to the true nature, character and disposition
of every man. And every one who has seen the
Parsee expert handling this key, and been able to
check his statements subsequently, must admit
that his character sketches are accurate, and that
the fulfilment of his prophecies is so exact as to be
uncanny. He can literally read faces: and hands
and the ability to do so enables him to avoid contact
with bad and vicious men.

fihe art Of CRYSTAL-GAZING, Or. > Scrying, 1s
practised by many men and women, and some
“gazers ’’ obtain very remarkable results. ‘There
is no imposture when the “ gaze ”’ is honest, for the
staring into the crystal globe hypnotizes the “gazer,”’
and his mind falls into the state of the “seer”’ of
old, who saw visions which he was unable to describe.
In short, he goes into a sort of trance, which causes
the optic nerve to stimulate the brain, and makes
it dispatch visions along it into the eye. Excessive
“ Scrying ”’ is harmful to the sight, and excess in the
use of the ball of crystal should be carefully avoided.
The skilled “ gazer ’’ can obtain just as good results
for the enquirer by gazing into a mirror, or into
water or a cup or bowl, or pail, or a pond, or water
or ink cupped in the hand.

The belief in the existence of WITCHES has perished
in our land, although at a few outlying districts
in Western Scotland and Ireland ‘“‘ spae women ”’ (or
“ wise women ”’) are said still to be found. But it
must not be thought that the belief in WITCHCRAFT


XXX1li PREFACE


has died out, for such is not the case. There are in
all large towns numbers of women who earn quite
good livings by fortune-telling by cards and by
trances in which they claim to hold converse with
the dead, and to be able to bring the living and the
dead together. These women make no pretence
to read the past in the lives of their clients, but
claim to foretell the futures of some of them, and
it must be admitted that their efforts are sometimes
extraordinarily successful, that is to say their
prognostications are often fulfilled literally. An
experienced and discreet clairvoyante numbers her
clients by the score, and they belong to all classes—
soldiers, sailors, politicians, civil servants, and
ecclesiastics, besides a considerable number of women,
titled and untitled. The wish to divine the future
seems to be as general now as ever. Divining by
means of trance is described as very exhausting for
the diviner, and conscientious clairvoyantes say
that they can only “ work ”’ for a limited number of
hours each day, and that these hours must not be
consecutive. The modern witch, male or female,
no longer dispenses “ hell broth ”’ and decoctions of
drugs, and philtres made from bats’ eyes, and the
insides of reptiles, and human fat, and the juice of
adders, because the Law stands in the way, and she
no longer travels through the air astride of a besom
or broomstick. But there is little doubt that she
still exercises her traditional wiles and crafts among
civilized folk who pay her well for her trouble. It
is only fair to say that she deceives herself as well
as her clients.

The witch man of the West is much less to be
feared or concerned about than his colleague in the


PREFACE XXXIl1


East. No one who has lived among Siidani peoples
and the Fang people of West Africa and the devil-
ridden natives of the swamps of Lower Babylonia
can help believing that their witch-doctors possess
some kind of psychic power unknown to us. They
seem to kill their own enemies, and for payment
other people’s enemies, by SUGGESTION, that is to
say, the witch doctor goes to a man and tells him
that he should die on or before a certain day, and
he follows this up by wishing intensively for the
man’s death, and at length the man does actually
die. The witch doctor also seems to have the power
of “ suggesting ’’ blindness or rheumatism, or some
wasting disease which will cause the victim to
welcome death. The only answer that anyone who
has seen the witch-doctors of the East work can give
to the question, “ Is it possible for any man, black
or white, to possess such a power of suggestion ? ”’ is
“I do not know.” When in the East the traveller
believes that it is possible and goes delicately, and is
afraid ; in the West he still believes but is unafraid.

Against the wearing of amulets little objection,
it seems to me, can be made. It may be foolish or
superstitious to wear and treasure inanimate objects,
even thought they be made of gold or silver or plati-
num or precious stones. The wearers gain from them
feelings of comfort and protection, and they often
represent the affection and love of friends. And
beautiful amulets evoke the admiration of their
wearers and their friends, and frequently satisfy
the lust of the eye for beauty. In the Near East
amulets are used universally and unashamedly. The
old camel postman who guided me from Damascus
to Baghdad attributed our safe arrival to the five


c


XXXIV PREFACE


blue beads which were fastened on the foreheads of
each of his camels. Such success as I had in collect-
ing manuscripts in the Tiyari country was also
attributed to the blue beads, and the Kur’an amulets
which I bought there. Under the protection of a
small bag of dust from the tomb of Rabban Hoérmizd
our caravan travelled from Mosul through the country
of the Yazidis or Devil-worshippers, and under the
protection of a bag of dust from Kubbah Idris our
boat sailed in safety from Dulgo to Késhah in the
Third Cataract. When the Shammar Arabs pillaged
our caravan and stole our food and clothes and
carried off our beasts they discussed the question
as to whether they should cut our throats or strip
us naked and turn us loose into the desert for God
to kill by thirst and cold. They did neither, but
Muhammad Amin assured me that we escaped only
because he was wearing on his breast an agate
plaque engraved with the Throne Verse from the
Kur’an, and I had another in my cigar case. From
this it seems that Mushm amulets are tolerant of
Christians. The same authority assured me that
we were able to shoot two of the thieves who came
to steal two cases of indigo from our raft at Kal‘ah
Sherkat, and to slit our sheep skin bags and sink us,
because we had those two amulets in our possession.
To him the wearing of orthodox amulets was a species
of worship. It was the samein Egypt. The acrobats
refused to exhibit their sword dance until we gave
them time to put on their amulets, and the dancing
women of Kana and Manstrah cheerfully divested
themselves of everything except the little neck
bands on which they wore their amulets. Dozens
of instances of a similar character might be quoted. .


PREFACE XXXV


In the West, too, many great and distinguished
men had a firm belief in the power of their amulets
to protect them. The late Czar of Russia attached
great value to a ring which contained a piece of the
wood of the True Cross ; the ring had protected his
grandfather, but on the day in which he forgot
to take the ring with him he was assassinated
(SHARPER KNOWLSON, Origins of Popular Super-
Siiti0NS, Pp. 156). Mr..J. ‘D. Rockefeller, a Non-
conformist, has for years carried in his pocket an
“eagle stone’ in a hollow in which there are con-
cretions which rattle when the stone is shaken.
He regarded it as a charm against disease, shipwreck
and other calamities (7b1d., p. 10). The late Prof. W.
Wright, of Cambridge, a very hard-headed Scotsman,
wore by day and night a gold ring from Loango on
which were worked in wire the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac. He used to say that he could never work
Mess he had at on his finger. A colleague at
Cambridge being worsted in an official dispute with
him, cursed him by the ineffable Name of God,
and Wright believed that the fatal disease which
attacked him was due to this curse.

_ During the last fifty years the Egyptian scarab has
become a very favourite and popular amulet or
mascot because of the ideas of new life and resurrec-
tion which the Egyptians associated withit. But one
lady paid £50 for a pretty blue glazed porcelain scarab
of Queen Hatshepsut because she believed that she
was a reincarnation of the Great Queen, and had
in herself the divinity of the god Amen her father.
And another lady paid a large sum for a pretty
scarab of Queen Ti because she believed that she
was a reincarnation of that beautiful woman, whom


XXXVI PREFACE


in features she thought she resembled. On the
other hand many owners of scarabs have changed
their opinions, and because they regarded them as
sources of ill-luck and misfortune have presented
them to the British Museum.

Paragraphs in the daily press often contain inter-
esting reading about the objects which are chosen
as mascots. The late Sir Henry Segrave always
carried with him a rabbit’s paw, which the negroes
say is the luckiest thing in the world. The paw
was with him at Daytona when he made all his
great successes as the speed king. But when calamity
overtook his boat and death claimed him the rabbit’s
paw was not with him! (Evening Standard, June 14,
1930). The Australian cricketers had a large rubber
kangaroo mascot, which one of their number knocked
over and broke. Mr. Woodfull had it repaired and
set up at once (Evening Standard, June 16, p. 11).
Eight people killed an octopus near Corbiére light-
house in Jersey; they took it back to their hotel
and set it up as a mascot (Daily Express, June 17,
p. 11). An instance of how the rabbit’s paw saved
the hfe and the money of a man is told in Mr. Ernest
Poole's' excellent story, The Car of Croesus, p.jroas
When Hobbs went in to play he wanted 16 runs to
beat Grace’s record of 54,896 runs, and with him went
a white sparrow ; the sparrow stayed until he scored
40 runs and then flew away. The bystanders said
““ Hobbs’ luck has gone,’ and three balls later Hobbs
was bowled (Sunday Graphic, August I0, 1930, p. 2).
Surely one of the strangest mascots ever placed on
a motor car is that of Mr. Somerset Maxwell: this
is a tiny figure of a huntsman in pink, holding up
a dead fox (Evening Standard, Oct, 15, p. I).


PREFACE XXXVil


* Pear,’ the Wisdom of Solomon saith, “‘is
nothing else but a betraying of the succours which
reason offereth ’’ (xvii. 12). It is impossible not to
conclude that it was man’s fear which brought
amulets into being, and that it is only his belief
which endows them with power, and his implicit
and invincible FAITH which makes them operative.

‘My grateful thanks are due to the Trustees of the
British Museum for their permission to photo-
graph extracts from—r, Mandaean, Samaritan and
Syriac manuscripts ; 2, diagrams from MSS. of the
Kabbalah ; 3, amulets and drawings from printed
books, including the rare Book of Raziél; and 4, a
comprehensive collection of Sumerian, Babylonian,
Assyrian, Phoenician, Pehlevi and other amulets.
This work has been greatly facilitated through the
kindness of my former colleagues, Dr. L. O. BARNETT,
Keeper of the Department of Oriental Printed Books
and Manuscripts, and Mr. J. D. LEVEEN, B.A., and
their staff of Clerks. The selection of the amulets
from Babylonia and Elam for publication was made
by Mr. SIDNEY SmirTH, of the British Museum. His
translation of the texts explaining the use of the
prophylactic and atropopaeic figures which Mr.
WOOLLEY excavated at Ur of the Chaldees and
described in a learned paper in the Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society, have brought to light many
fundamental facts concerning early Mesopotamian
religion. The co-operation of the trained philologist
and the expert excavator has produced most ex-
eent results. To Mr. C. J..Gapp, of the British
Museum, I am indebted for many facts concerning
ancient Babylonian beliefs about precious stones,
and for the information about the clay model of a


XXXVill PREFACE


sheep’s liver in the British Museum, which his
researches have made available. Further, I am
greatly indebted to Dr. Moses GASTER, Chief Rabbi
of the Sephardic Communities in England, for
permission to publish several extracts from the
Corpus of his works which he published this year
under the title of Studies and Texts in Magic, Folk-
lore, Samantan Archaeology, 3 vols., 1923-28. Much
has been written by commentators and others about
the phylacteries which are mentioned in the New
Testament, what they were and what they were not,
etc., but Dr. Gaster was the first to publish phy-
lactery-texts, and to translate and explain not
only the language of the Samaritans, but also their
philosophy and their religion.

During the writing of this book I Rant consulted
many works on the so-called “ Occult Sciences,”’
and read many scores of papers and articles on the
various subjects which I have dealt with in the
following pages. The more useful to the student
are undoubtedly the volumes of Dr. 5S. SELIGMANN.
This distinguished author has shown that amulets
and amuletic objects are the result of the belief
of man in the Evit EYE, and its far-reaching and
terrible power. This he has made clear in his works,
Der bose Blick und Verwandter, 2 vols., Igo, and
Die Zauberkraft der Auges, 1922, and they will form
the standard works on the subject for many years
to come. The Kabbalah is a great fount of occult-
ism and mysticism as well as forming a great system
of religious philosophy. The Kabbala Denudata by
Baron von ROSENROTH (1677-78), and the Kabbalah
by Ginsburg (1865), and the works of Mr. WaItE
are very useful books on the subject, but the practica]


PREFACE XXXixX


side of Kabbalah is very successfully handled by
Dr. Ericu BiscHorr, a skilled MHebraist, in his
Die Kabbalah (Einfiihrung), Leipzig, 1923, and more
fully in his larger work, Die Elemente der Kabbalah,
2 vols., 1920. The student will also find much of
interest in the German translations of the old books
of magic by PETER of Abano, Pictortus of Villingen,
GERHARD of Cremona, in LINDEN’s edition of
CORNELIUS AGRIPPA, 3 vols., Berlin, 1921. The
extracts from Mr. MONTGOMERY’s translations of the
texts on the terra-cotta “devil-traps ’ found at
Babylon and Niffar well illustrate the character of
the magic of the MANDAEANS.

The addition of a Bibliography to a volume already
bulky was unnecessary, because the works of the
principal authorities are named in the various
chapters. Those who wish to explore occult litera-
ture, both ancient and modern, more fully should
consult the lists of books and papers given by
Dr. Seligmann, and the invaluable SuBjEcT-Index
volumes published by the British Museum. The
long and very full Index which I have added
will, I hope, make reference to this book easy.
My thanks are also due to Messrs. G. A. Crane,
S. J. Wadlow and the Readers of the staff of
Messrs. Harrison & Sons, Ltd., for many practical
suggestions which I have gladly adopted.


E. A. WALLIS BUDGE.
21st October, 1930.


48, BLOOMSBURY STREET,
BEDFORD SQUARE, W.C.1.


(dala PADI ea i


foes UNIVERSAL USE OF, AMULETS DUE TO MAN'S
BELIEF IN THE EXISTENCE OF DEMONS AND
EVIL. SPIRITS.


IN every place in our own country and in foreign
lands where excavations on the sites of ancient
cities have been made, the spade of the excavator
has brought to ight a number of objects of various
kinds and sizes which we may call generally
AMULETS and TALISMANS, and regard as the works
of men who were believers in Maacic. The use of
these objects was not confined to any one place,
or people, or period, and the great mass of the
evidence about the matter now available justifies
the statement that the use of amulets and talismans
was and, it may be added, still is, universal. We
may even go further and say that it is coeval with
the existence of Homo sapiens on the earth. It is
natural to ask why amulets and talismans are so
numerous, and so widely distributed over the earth,
and what purpose they served? ‘The answer to
these questions is not far to seek. Early man lived
days of misery and nights of anxiety and fear, not
to say terror. To feed himself and his woman and
their children was often difficult, and to avoid or
overcome the beasts and reptiles which were his
natural enemies must have taxed his wit and
strength to the uttermost; and the fear of the


unknown dangers of the darkness and night, when
A


2 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the beasts of prey were prowling round his cave
or his thicket, added greatly to his misery. In
some places the vicissitudes of climate laid an


NG

Nea

Va tanam pot
Face of the very early Babylonian demon Humbaba, whose voice was like
that of a storm, and whose breath was like a hurricane. He was con-
quered by Gilgamish, King of Erach, and Enkidu. The face is formed of
a single raised line, the twistings of which represent the convolutions of
the entrails, and form the features. How the demon came to have his
face represented thus is discussed by SIDNEY SMITH in the Liverpool

Amnals, vol. xi. p. 107 f.

The above rough tracing made from Plate V of the Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society, July, 1926, is published with the kind permission
of the Council of the Society. The original is in the British Museum,

No. 116737.


additional burden upon him and he had to be ever
on the. watch in order to frustrate the attacks of
his human enemies. The physical difficulties which


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 3


he faced and triumphed over were indeed sufficient
to trouble and exhaust him; but, though why he did
so 1s inexplicable, he proceeded to fashion in his
mind a whole host of invisible, hostile beings,
DEVILS, DEMONS and EVIL SPIRITS. These, he
believed, not only had the power to curse him and
everything he had, but also to cast upon him and
his woman and beasts the Evit Eve, and he went
daily and hourly in terror lest they should do so.
He attributed all his bodily ills and ailments to the
operations of the evil spirits, and any and every mis-
fortune that might befall any member of his family
and his servants and other possessions. He attri-
buted horrible forms to them, and thought them
capable of assuming any disguises, animal or human,
which would enable them to work their wicked wills
on him. The men and women who openly made
themselves servants of the evil spirits he regarded
aS MAGICIANS and WITCHES, and he believed that
they as well as the evil spirits could, at will, do
him incalculable harm, and compass his death.
As time went on his fear of evil spirits did not
diminish; on the other hand, it increased, and
each generation became more devil-ridden than
its predecessor. The civilized Sumerians, Baby-
lonians, and Egyptians, like the savages or half-civil-
ized peoples who were their neighbours, were as
much obsessed by the fear of evil spirits as their
savage ancestors who had lived in Mesopotamia
and Egypt some thousands of years before them.
This, in the case of the Sumerians and Babylonians,
is made quite clear by the great Legend of the
Creation, written in cuneiform, which has come
down to us.


AZ


4 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


THE EVIL SPIRITS OF BABY LONIZS


According to this Legend the great primeval,
watery abyss called Apst was the home of both
devils and gods, 1.e. evil spirits and good spirits ;
the abyss and its inhabitants had existed from ever-
lasting. The evil spirits had hideous forms, part
animal, part bird, part reptile and part human ;
the good spirits were in the image of men. After a
countless series of aeons had passed two gods
appeared, ANSHAR and KIsHAR, and they performed
some preliminary act of creation, and after another
very long period of time had elapsed the great gods
of Babylonia, among them ANU, the Sky-god, BEL,
the Earth-god, and Ea, god of the watery abyss,
came into being. These gods began the work of
ordering Creation, and in so doing caused Apst to be
greatly troubled. This god saw with dismay that
chaos, of which he was the symbol and type, was
doomed to disappear as a result of the operations of
the gods, and he took counsel with TIAMAT and
began to evolve plans to destroy the works and powers
of the gods. ‘Tiamat is shown by native reliefs and
figures to have had the scaly body of a Typhonic
animal or serpent, and to have possessed wings and
claws. She was the personification of all evil, yet,
strange to say, she was the “ mother of everything,”’
and was the keeper of the TABLET of DESTINIEs,
probably a sort of talisman by means of which she
preserved her being. Apst and T1AMarT sent forth an
envoy called Mummu to obstruct the work of Ea, but
in the fight which followed Ea was the conqueror,
and J1AmMatT’s plan was defeated and Apst was
slain. Then TIAMAT spawned a brood of devilish


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 5


monsters, and she and her male counterpart KINGu
collected their hosts of evil beings, and made ready
to fight the gods; and the TABLET of DESTINIES
was transferred to Kincu by [T1AmarT to assist him
in gaining the victory over them.

The gods, feeling themselves unable to cope with
TIAMAT, nominated MarpDuK, their champion, and
having bestowed upon him all their powers this
god armed himself with a bow, spear, a club and
a net, and set out to do battle with T1AmMatT. When
KinGu saw MARDUK arrayed in his terrible panoply
of war, he was terrified and stumbled about and
took refuge in the body of T1Amart, and all his allies
became stupefied with fear. When MARDUK ap-
proached TIAMAT she recited the spells and incanta-
tions which she believed to render him powerless,
but they had no effect upon him. Straightway he
cast his net over her, and blew a gale of wind into
her through her mouth, and as soon as her body
was blown up like a bladder he drove his spear
through her hide, and she split asunder and her
womb fell out from her. He took the TABLET of
DESTINIES from Kingu’s breast, and then one by
one he caught the Eleven Allies of Tiamat in his
net and trampled upon them. He smashed in the
skull of TIAMAT with his club and, having split her
body into two parts, he fashioned the vault of
heaven out of one of them, and out of the other he
constructed the abode of Ea or the World-Ocean.

This done, MARDUK set to work to arrange the
heavens and the earth and everything which is
in them in the order in which they now are. As the
gods complained to him that there was no one to
worship them or to bring offerings to them, MARDUK,


6 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


after consultation with the other gods, determined
to create man. He proposed that one of the gods
should be sacrificed, so that the others might be
rendered free of service, and the gods decided that
KinGu should suffer death because he had been the
commander-in-chief of the forces of evil which had
opposed Marpuk. Thereupon KINGU was seized
and bound in fetters, and slain, and EA fashioned
man from his blood for the service of the gods. Man
therefore had in him the taint of evil which always
prompted him to evil ways and deeds.

The Babylonian story of the Creation makes it quite
clear that MARDUK conquered all the ringleaders of
the revolt against the gods, but he did not destroy
the hosts of evil utterly, and these remained in
existence to vex and harass and injure men who were
descended from the man who had been made from
the evil blood of Kingu. Thus Marpuk’s victory
was not complete and absolute, for he did not destroy
evil once and for all. He safeguarded himself and
his fellow-gods, but men were left by him to be the
prey of the evil spirits which had escaped from his
wrath. The enormous number of clay tablets in the
great Museums of the world, inscribed in cuneiform
with spells and incantations against devils and evil
spirits, prove that the Babylonians were far more
afraid of evil spirits than of their gods.


THE EVIL SPIRITS OF EGYPYE.


The Literature of Ancient Egypt does not supply
us with any detailed account of the Creation,
but the texts state briefly that there was a time
when nothing existed except a mass of dark and
inert water, of great and indefinite extent, called


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 7


Nu or Nenu. It was covered by dense darkness,
and was the abode of a god called NEBERDJER,
who existed there either in the form of a liquid or
essence, or in mame only, and of a host of creatures
in Typhonic forms who are called “ Mesu Be¢shu,”


The god Khepera, 7.e. the “‘ Generator,” in the form of a beetle-headed

man, seated in his phantom or “ spirit’”’ boat, which is sailing over the

waters of the primeval Ocean called Nu or Nenu. Motion was given to
the boat by the hawk-headed paddle which possessed magical power.


1.e. Spawn of rebellious malice. The god took
counsel with his heart, and possessing magical
power (eka), he uttered his own name as a spell
or word of power, and he straightway came into
being under the form of the god KHEPERA, and
began the work of creation. The inert powers of


8 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


evil were disturbed by his actions and at once began
to oppose him actively. The making of light was
the first act of creation, and the fight between SET,
the personification of darkness and night and evil,
and EIER-uR, the personification of light and day
and night, began. The Day was established, but so
was the Night, and thus matters stood for a long
period. KHEPERA next created a god, SHU, and a
goddess, TEFNUT, from matter ejected from his
body, and thus was formed the first triad or TRINITY.
The work of creation proceeded rapidly and the
heavens and the earth were fashioned; the sun,
moon, and stars were assigned their places in the
sky, men and women were formed from the tears
which dropped from the eyes of KHEPERA, and
animals, birds and reptiles appeared on the earth.
Then Set collected his powers of darkness and evil,
and waged war against the Sun-god RA and was
defeated. He next set the monster ApEp in the
eastern part of the sky so that he and his allies
might destroy the Sun-god RA, and prevent him
rising upon our world. RA sent forth his rays and
darts of fire and scattered the allies of ApEp, and
he cast a spell upon ApEP himself which paralysed
him and reduced him to impotence. The Sun-god
rose in the heavens triumphantly and continued his
course across the sky until the evening, when he
disappeared into the darkness of night. But when
he wished to rise on the following morning he found
all his enemies lying in wait for him, for ApEpP had
recovered his strength and surrounded himself with
his old allies, and the fight with the Sun-god was
renewed and enacted daily. Thus RA never gained
an absolute victory over Apep, and he failed to


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS


io)


slay him, and as a result his evil spirits were able
to attack men and to harm them spiritually and
physically.

In spite of the high character of their religion, the
Egyptians found it necessary to burn daily a wax
figure of APEP in the great temple of AMEN-RA at
Thebes, and to recite numerous spells in order to
prevent that monster from obstructing the course


TuorTu, the mind and tongue of RA,


RA, the self-created, self-existent,

and everlasting Sun-god, who caused

his material body to come into

being by pronouncing his own

secret NAME, which was unknown
to mortal ever.


of the Sun-god and from


the Word-god, through whose utter-
ances all things material come into
being. He invented writing and
was the first writer of magical and
religious books, and the author of
spells, incantations, etc.


working destruction upon


themselves through the operations of the spirits of
evil. The Egyptians embraced Christianity in the
first century of our Era, but retained their belief
in evil spirits and in the efficacy of amulets and
talismans, and magic, as means of defence against
them; and they believe this at the present day.
The greater number of the modern Egyptians are


10 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


MUHAMMADANS, but though they confess many times
daily their belief in the almightiness of ALLAH, their
fear of evil spirits is very great, and they resort to
many forms, of magic for protection for themselves
and their families and their beasts and cattle.


EVIL SPIRITS IN CHRISTIAN UANDS:


Several Christian Apocrypha contain the state-
ment, based upon Hebrew traditions written after
the Captivity, that God created nine classes of
angels who were divided into three groups, viz. :—
1. Cherubim, seraphimvand » lhroness 923 om:
Powers and Rulers. 3. Principalities, Archangels
and Angels. The Egyptian and Ethiopian Churches
hold ‘the view: that MICHAEL, ~~ the angel o1miue
Face,’ was the commander-in-chief of all these
angels, and that he and all the angels of his class
were created during the first hour of the sixth day
of Creation, 1.¢. on Friday. But another class of
angels, the tenth, was created on that day, towards
the evening, and its commander was SATNAEL or
SATAN. The creation of ADAM followed that of the
angels, and when Satan saw the great honour which
Gop bestowed upon the first man he was filled with
wrath. A week later he usurped the honour due to
God, and declared war on the hosts of the Almighty.
These consisted of horsemen, shield-bearers, chario-
teers, torch-bearers, dagger-bearers, axe-bearers,
cross-bearers, lamp-bearers and slingers, in number
about 4,100,000 beings of fire. The angels uttered
their battle cries and prepared to fight, but Satan
charged them and put them to flight; the divine
hosts reformed and renewed the fight, but Satan
charged them and put them to flight a second time.


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 1]


God then sent to His hosts a Cross of Light on which
was inscribed the names of the Three Persons of
the Trinity, and when Satan and his devils saw this,
their strength oozed out of them and they became
faint, and turned their backs and fled. MICHAEL
and the angels pursued them, and drove them
down into hell, where they are still believed to dwell
by many Christian peoples. None of the founders
of the great religions of the world have attempted
to teach their followers that the Devil, by whatever
name he may be called, and the spirits of evil have
been destroyed. In some religious systems the
Devil and God have been regarded as almost equal
though opposing powers, and there have not been
wanting peoples, e.g. the YAzipis, who worshipped the
Devil. And even in Europe there are many more
adherents to Satanism than is commonly thought.
The mind of primitive man was not sufficiently
advanced to enable him to understand stories of
the fight between the Devil and God, 7.e. Darkness
and Evil, and Good and Light, such as have been
described in the preceding paragraphs, still less to
invent them. It seems to have been instinct rather
than reason which directed him to the use of amulets
and talismans as a means of defence against the Evil
Eye and the attacks of evil spirits, and which induced
him to believe that the things which he chose as
amulets possessed some innate power to protect him.
But before further consideration of this question we
must try to find out what the words “ amulet ” and
~ talisman ”’ really mean and, supposing we can find
their correct, or even probable, meanings, whether
they will tell us what was the idea in the mind of
primitive man which underlay his use of amulets.


LZ AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


‘““ AMULET ’”’ AND “ TALISMAN.’


The word AMULET is borrowed from the Latin
AMULETUM, which we find in PLINy, who uses the
word to indicate (1) an object which preserves a
man from some trouble ; (2) medical or prophylactic
treatment ; and (3) a substance used in medicine.
He says that the European cyclamen prevents all
magical arts from coming near the place where it
is planted, and that it is therefore called “ amulet ”
(Nat.nHist., Xxviep; 105)Gy that aieas vines babes
carried round the house, and nailed to a window with
its head downwards, it will act as an “amulet ”
(tbid., Xx1x. p. 83); the large, indented horns of the
scarabaeus, attached to the bodies of infants, have
all the virtues ofan, @amulet «| (Wo¢d2 xxx Dp pea
it is useful to tie a piece of amber to delicate children
dsvan.” amulet (ghia... xxviluepa Sl, allWovermur.
East men wear jasper as an “amulet” (2b1d., xxvii.
D: 117) in connection with the use of another
“amulet ’’ the user had to spit upon urine and
into the shoe of the right foot (¢bzd., xxvii. p. 88) ;
the blood of the basilisk is regarded as a remedy for
various diseases, and as an “amulet” which will
protect a man from spells and incantations (zbid.,
XX1X. p. 66) ; the gall of a black dog is an “ amulet ”’
for the whole house, if it be cleaned or fumigated
therewith (xxx. p. 82). One ancient writer thought
that “‘amulet’’ was equivalent to “ phylactery,”’
and according to another it meant something which
drove away the Evil Eye; but no one seems to
have known the exact meaning of the word. Some
have connected “amulet” with the sacramental
vessel called aun and others with ‘aypa, a knot


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 13


or band, and apvdov, or amylum, but it is unlikely
that any one of these suggested derivations, except
the last, will be accepted. In many books it is
stated that “amulet” is derived from the Arabic
imala, which the lexicographer Dozy says is the
word for the cord by which an amulet is suspended
from the neck, as well as for the amulet itself.
HG6OFLER thought that “amulet ’’ was derived from
some lost Etruscan word, or from an Etruscan word
to which the Latin suffix eto was added. SELIGMANN
(Hel und Schutzmittel, Stuttgart, 1920, p. 26) is
of opinion that “ amulet ” is derived from the Old
Latin AMOLETUM, 17.e. a “‘ means of defence,’ and
this derivation seems to me to be the best of those
which have been suggested.

We shall never know exactly what meaning was
attached to the word ‘‘amulet”’ by its inventor, or
by those who first used one, or even by PLINy, but
clearly it was different from the meaning which we

attach toit to-day. Tousan “amulet” is an object
which is endowed with magical powers, and which of
its own accord uses these powers ceaselessly on be-
half of the person who carries it, or causes it to be
laid up in his house, or attaches it to some one of his
possessions, to protect him and his belongings from
the attacks of evil spirits or from the Evil Eye.

As for “ TALISMAN,” the derivation and meaning
of this strange word are difficult to determine.
It is found in Arabic under the forms ¢ilasm and
tillasm, plural faldsim, filasmat and filassamat, and
the root falisam means “to make marks like a
magician.’ But there is little evidence that the
Arabs borrowed the word from the Greek 7é\ecpa,
one of the meanings of which is a “ consecrated


14 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


religious object.” The object of the talisman is
quite different from that of the amulet. The amulet
is supposed to exercise its protective powers on
behalf of the individual or thing continually, whereas
the talisman is only intended to perform one specific
task. Thus a talisman may be placed in the ground
with money or treasure, which it 1s expected to
protect and to do nothing else. But the line which
divides the amulet from the talisman has rarely
been observed by any people who regard such things
as parts of the machinery of magic, and in modern
times the use and meanings of the two objects are
generally confounded, even by educated folk who
are superstitious. And the experts are not agreed on
the subject.


BULLA, FASCINUM AND FETISH.


BULLA was the name given to a certain kind of
amulet by the Romans and Christians during the
early centuries of our Era; its primary meaning
is some object which is rounded and inflated or
swollen, e.g. a bubble, the boss of a shield, a metal
stud, the head of nail or door-bolt, etc. This amulet
was made of wood or metal, and was worn by the
living as an ornament, and also buried with the dead ;
in shape it resembled a flat, rounded capsule, with
a little loop at the top. When made of metal it
was often engraved with magical figures and inscrip-
tions, and it was filled with some substance to which
magical powers and properties were attributed,
this substance being the real amulet. Thus the
complete Buila was an amulet in its case. The
substance in the case was called frvaebia, and
was composed of various ingredients, each of which


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 15


was believed to drive away evil from the wearer and
to defeat the machinations of witches and magicians.
The Christians (Copts) of AkHMim in Upper Egypt
tied bullae to the necks of their dead, and they
contained dust from a saint’s tomb, or dust made
from saints’ bones, or some small bone or other
sacred relic.

The Greeks and Romans believed firmly that
certain men had the power to harm their fellows,
and even to kill them, and to destroy cattle by
looking at them. The Greek Baoxawew means to
“kill with a glance of the eye.”’ The amulet used
against the Evil Eye é6d@adpos Backavos was called
BASKANION or PROBASKANION, and FASCINUM, and
it was usually in the form of the PHALLUS. As
children were specially liable to be attacked by the
Evil Eye, models of the phallus were hung round
their necks (Varro, De Lingua Lat., vil. pp. 97, 107).
It was used as a house-amulet and was also placed
in gardens, and in front of blacksmiths’ forges, and
even under chariots. Other names of the phallus
amulet were mutonium, scaevola, and Satyrica signa ;
for the last name see Phimy, Nat. Hist., 11x. p. 10, 81.


FETISH.


The word FeErTisH is of Portuguese origin. Some
derive it from “ feiti¢o,” 1.e. something which is
made by the hand, and is therefore regarded as
artificial, and unnatural, and later the word comes
to mean magical ; others derive it from “ faticeira,”’
wee witch, “or from “ faticaria,” +.e. “ witch-
craft.’ The word was, as Dr. NASSAU Says, originally
applied to the amulets and talismans, e.g. crucifixes,
crosses, rosaries, images of saints, relics, etc., which


16 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


were in use among the Roman Catholic natives on
the west coast of Africa in the XVth and XVIth
centuries. The natives themselves used quite other
words to describe their amulets and talismans which
they regarded as ‘“‘ Medicine,’ because they healed
sicknesses as well as warded-off evils. Thus
we have ‘Gri-eri,”) Juju, “Wong; Mondass
“ Mkissi,”’ “‘ Biang,”’ etc.

The religions of the negro peoples on the west
coast of Africa and elsewhere is commonly known
as FETISHISM. According to some travellers and
students, the natives believe that the fetish con-
tains a god or spirit which the priest can keep
there and command to do his -will: -but *such
is mot the icase.”) -Uhis Viewsis dhe aesult votes
misconception, and is due to the teachings of the
Christian missionaries who did not understand the
natives’ views about the fetish, or realize the fact .
that it only contained MEDICINE. There is no doubt,
as SELIGMANN says, that there are two kinds of
fetishes, viz. the natural or simple fetish, and the
artificial fetish, which is either charged or impreg-
nated with “‘ medicine,’ z.e¢. some substance which
is supposed to possess magical properties and to be
also prophylactic in character. The simple fetish
corresponds roughly to our amulets and talismans,
and the objects forming them are simple in nature,
and are easily made, and they produce their effects
by means of the native power which dwells in them.
They are commonly employed for household pur-
poses. The artificial fetish contains two substances,
viz. the substance which possesses magical powers,
and the “‘ medicine,’’ which is really an extract, or a
decoction, or an essential form of some well-known


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 17


medicine. The choice of the magical substance is
the secret of the medicine man, and he alone decides
what magical substance and what “ medicine ”’ to
mix together in order to obtain the result desired by
the man or woman who wants the fetish. Like
modern physicians in England and Europe, each
medicine man has his own particular methods in the
making of fetishes, and there are fetish specialists
in Africa as there are specialist physicians in Harley
Boptect.

mie medicines used by the medicine man
are substantially the same as those mentioned in
Egyptian Medical Papyri, and medical tablets
written in cuneiform, and in Arabic and Ethiopian
Books of Medicine. One of the most complete lists
of such medicines is given by PECHUEL-LOESCHE,
who enumerates :—Leaves, flowers, juices, fruits,
roots, rinds of fruits and vegetables, bushes, trees,
and climbing plants; the gall, whiskers and dung
of leopards, the gall of the crocodile, heads of snakes,
frogs, lizards, turtles, and fish; crabs, scorpions,
and all kinds of reptiles, the eyes, brains, livers and
feathers of certain birds ; hides, hair, paws, and dung
of beasts which are swift, strong and courageous ;
teeth, horns and bones; resin, coloured earths,
spittle, salt, powder of red-wood, the milk of women
and the urine of virgins. No part of a man or a
pig is used in “ medicine ”’ for fetish purposes. The
substance possessing the magical powers may be laid
upon objects of dress, or placed in a purse or bag, or
laid up for safety in the figure of a man or animal ;
and it is believed that the ‘‘ medicine ’’ administered
will be more efficacious if it also contains the personal


strength of the medicine man himself.
B


18 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The objects with which the medicine man sur-
rounds himself or hangs upon his person are very
numerous, and among them may be mentioned :—
Mussel-shells, talons of birds and claws of animals,
teeth, horns, feathers, locks or tufts of hair, strips
of leather, cords, string, rags, bags, pieces of earth,
balls of resin, leaves, fruits, plates, dishes, bottles,
pots, chains, baskets, stumps of wood, rolls of cloth,
bits of sacking, boxes, images made of wood, metal,
bones, ivory, figures of apes, leopards, serpents,
crocodiles, hippopotami, elephants, men, etc. Many
of the fetishes on the west coast of AFRICA are
decorated with pieces of looking-glass or mirrors,
which are placed on the body, back or front, or on
the face, and sometimes mirrors take the places of
eyes in the large fetish figures. . Mirrors were
introduced into’ the country by “the Christian
EUROPEANS, and the natives at once associated
them with “ white man’s magic,” and made use of
them in the way here stated in order to increase
the power of their own magic. Another form of the
fetish figure also seems to be due to the missionaries
who brought with them pictures of the Crucifixion.
On the coast of LoANGo the natives made a wooden
figure in the form of a man, and drove nails into it.
until the whole body was covered with nails and
fragments of iron; one such “ nail-fetish ’’ mentioned
by Seligmann had a crown of thorns fixed on its
head, and small box-shaped attachments in which
the “medicine” was placed. Some authorities
think that the medicine man who made such figures
borrowed the idea of the box-shaped attachments
from the reliquaries of the Roman Catholic mis-
sionaries.


UNIVERSAL? USE (OF “AMULETS 19


Tees ORIGIN “AND DEVELOPMENT OF. THE AMULET.


The amulets worn by primitive men and women
were made of simple natural substances, and at
first were chosen simply because they were of
unusual form and colour, or because their substance
was new to them. The oldest amulets were the
objects which roused man’s curiosity, or excited his
wonder and admiration, and his natural love of
possession led him to make them his own. property,
and to take them to his dwelling. Among such
objects were leaves of unusual form and colour,
berries, nuts, and fruits, and the seeds and roots of
trees and plants. Any strange vegetable growth,
é.g. mandragora roots, always possessed a strong
fascination for him. In the same way stones of
unusual colours, or having markings on them, or
veins of different colours running through them,
é.g. the marbles and the agates, or containing
pyrites, or having striae in them, were promptly
taken possession of by him, and carried home. A
stone which had- become perforated naturally was
especially prized by him, and to the first man who
threaded such a stone on grass, or on a thong cut
from the skin of some animal, and then hung it
round his neck, belongs the credit of having intro-
duced the wearing of amulets into the world. The
perforated stone suggested to him the boring of
other stones which he used as amulets, and which
he could then hang on his body, and next the per-
foration of the beads which his women up to that
time had attached to their bosoms by means of mud.
At a very early period the properties of rock-salt,


rock-alum, and rock-crystal would add to the
B 2


20 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


attraction of their appearance, and the sparkle in them
probably suggested dimly to him that they possessed
life lhke himself. The portions of their bodies with
which animals and reptiles slew their prey also
attracted his attention, and hence the horns, claws,
teeth and tails of animals, and the skin of serpents,
were used as amulets at a very early period. The
dwellers on the sea-coast, and on lakes filled with
fish, made amulets of shells and parts of fishes ;
and little fingers, toes, eyes, phalli and hair of
human beings have been regarded as powerful
amulets in many countries. Objects coloured white,
blue, red and yellow have more often been chosen
as amulets than those which were grey or brown or
black. As soon as man learned the art of working
in metals he made many amulets, in many forms,
in gold, silver, copper and iron. When he had learned
to write figures of men, animals, birds, fish, trees and
plants cut in stone or wood, or drawn upon some sub-
stance which served as a writing material, were also
used by him as amulets ; and at length large stones
covered all over with inscriptions, pyramids, the
walls of the corridors and chambers of which were
covered with hundreds of lines of text, tombs, inscribed
coffins and rolls of papyri, volumes of sacred writings,
obelisks, colossal stone figures, etc., were considered
as amulets, and were expected to protect in one way
or another those who caused them to be made.

We shall never know accurately what primitive
man expected his various amulets to do for him,
or how he thought they worked for his good, but
it is quite clear from the number and variety of
them that there was no one amulet which he believed
to be capable of protecting him from every danger.


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS at


We may divide amulets into two classes:
(1) PERSONAL and INDIVIDUAL, and (2) GENERAL.
The most important of the personal class were those
which protected a man from sickness and disease,
and preserved and increased his natural strength
and virility, especially in the procreation of children.
Another important group comprised those which
protected the pregnant woman and preserved her
from miscarriages, and gave her easy delivery, and
a full and regular supply of milk when nursing her
children. The male child was protected by amulets
either attached to his neck or hidden in some portion
of his apparel, and the female child by amulets laid
upon or tied to various parts of her body. Special
dangers, e.g. plague, pestilence, sun-stroke, death
by lightning and the attacks of wild beasts, scorpion
stings, snake-bite, wounds inflicted in battle, drown-
mig. etc., had’ to be guarded, against by special
amulets. [he mariner carried amulets to preserve
him from shipwreck and death by sea-monsters, the
business man relied on amulets to give him success
in his trafficking, and in amulets the caravan man
sought safety for himself and his asses or camels.
The crops of the farmer were protected by amulets
placed either in the earth or hung above them, and
amulets were attached to the horns or foreheads
of prominent beasts in his herds, and amuletic

signs were marked on certain members of his flocks
to frighten wild beasts away from them. It was
necessary for every amulet to be powerful enough
to overcome the influence of the Evil Eye, and every
attack of the evil spirits which were regarded as the
instigators of every sickness, disease, accident, mis-
fortune and calamity.


22 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Among GENERAL AMULETS may be _ included
those which were hidden in the walls of houses or
under them, and those which were placed at the
entrances to the villages, and in certain parts of
them. Primitive man judged the potency of an
amulet by results. If, having adopted a certain
object as an amulet, his affairs prospered and
he remained in good health, his belief in it was
increased and he regarded it as a precious possession,
and his neighbours congratulated him on his good
fortune. But if his affairs did not prosper and
trouble came upon him, his belief in the amulet
ceased, and he abandoned it in favour of another.
Amulets might be lost or stolen, and in such
cases, it, seems, they either lost them beneficent
powers or withheld them from their finders or new
owners.

Why certain objects were chosen as amulets is
quite clear in some cases, but in others we can only
guess at the reasons. Thus a man carried the claws
and teeth of hons and tigers and other savage and
powerful animals because he believed they would
add to his strength in fighting wild beasts and human
foes. He thought that the feathers of birds would
add to the rapidity of his movements, and swiftness
in attacking man and beast, and make his eyesight
more keen. An amulet of serpent skin would add
to his craftiness and cunning in the chase and so on.
Some amulets may be described as HOMOEOPATHIC,
for “ medicine’ made from yellow coloured plants
and flowers, and water in which yellow stones had
been washed, was given to patients suffering from
jaundice, and red stones were worn to stop bleedings,
blood fluxes and wounds from bleeding overmuch.


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 23


In other words, it was believed that there was some
intimate connection or relationship between the
yellow plant and stone and the yellow colour of the
body afflicted with jaundice. Similarly, the red
colour of the stone and blood were thought to be
connected, and so on. Various explanations of
the use of homoeopathic and other amulets by
Savages and semi-civilized peoples have been given
by scientific anthropologists, but none of them can
be made to explain the use of all the known kinds of
amulets, and it is more than probable that all are
wrong. |

Whe struith seems, to be that primitive, man
believed that every object which he used as an
amulet possessed, either as a result of its natural
formation or through the operation of some super-
natural spirit which had incorporated itself in it, a
power which to him was invisible. It was this
power, which existing in everything, animate and
inanimate, turned every object into an amulet,
and as such it became a prized possession. ‘This
power was, so to speak, brought into activity or
operation by the person who carried it, and then
it performed his wish and will. The amulet was
no longer merely passive matter, but an operating
force. This force or power is called by the Mela-
nesians and Polynesians “‘ Mana,’’ and the greatest
authority on magic and religion in the Pacific,
the Rev. R. H. CoODRINGTON, describes it thus:
“Mana is a power or influence, not. physical, and
in a way supernatural ; but it shows itself in physical
force, or in any kind of power or excellence which
a man possesses. This Mana is not fixed in any-
thing, and can be carried in almost anything ; but


24 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


spirits, whether disembodied souls or supernatural
beings, have it and can impart it, and it essentially
belongs to personal beings to originate it, though it
may act through the medium of water, or a stone, or
a bone”’ (The Melanesians, Oxford, 1891, p. I1Q).
It works to affect everything which is beyond the
ordinary power of men, outside the common pro-
cesses of nature, it 1s present in the atmosphere of
life, attaches itself to persons and to things, and is
manifested by results which can only be ascribed
to its operation. Wizards, doctors,weather mongers,
prophets, diviners, dreamers, all alike, everywhere
in the islands work by this power (zbid., p. 192).
“Mana is the stuff through which magic works ;
it is not the trick itself, but the power whereby the
sorcerer does the trick ” (E. CLODD, Magic in Names.
London, 1920, p. 3).

From the practical point of view Mana may be
used either for good or evil, and healing medicine
and poison are alike regarded as Mana. In
short, all traffickings with the unseen and occult,
whether licit or illicit, involve Mana. As regards
the meaning to be attached to Mana from a
scientitic point ol: view, “Dre Kk. Io MARETI sas
“There is no reason why, for the general purposes
of comparative science, Mana should not be taken
to cover all cases of magico-religious efficacy,
whether the efficacy be conceived as automatic or
derived, 1.e. as proceeding immediately from the
nature of the sacred person or thing, or mediately
because a ghost or spirit has put it into the person
or thing in question”’ (Hastines’ Encyclopaedia,
Voly Vill. ep: 13774 cole°2).  Wermnay shen) sayenian
every effective amulet was believed to possess Mana,


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 2


>|


which re-acted to the Mana and will or wish of its
possessor, and that it is this belief, whether formu-
lated or not, which has induced man in all ages to
rely upon amulets for protection and _ assistance.
This belief was the outcome of men’s fear of
unseen evil spirits and their works, and the Evil
Eye, and this fear is as real and powerful in some
countries at the present day as it was in primitive
times.

We may rest assured that as soon as the medicine
man, or magician, saw that his fellow men needed
amulets, he promptly took means to supply them,
and that he spared himself no pains in proving to
them that he alone was able to supply them with
“ genuine”’ amulets, t.e. those which contained
Mana and were able to fulfil their owner’s desires.
He claimed that he himself was filled with Mana,
which had been incorporated in him by his ancestral
spirits, that he was able to hold converse with every
kind of spirit, good and bad, and that he knew their
wills and was able to influence their actions; and in
addition to this he claimed to have special knowledge
of the various natural objects which contained Mana,
and how to add to that Mana the Mana which
was inherent in himself. And when the medicine
man, or magician, died his colleagues or successor
proclaimed that magic could be worked not only
by parts of his body, but also by his apparel and
possessions, and even by the earth or dust from
the place where he was buried. In fact, each and
every object that had belonged to him or was con-
nected with him possessed Mana, and was a powerful
amulet. It is this belief that makes the boatman
on the NILE in NuBia tie a little bagful of dust


26 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


from Kussau Ipris to the bows of his boat to save
him from shipwreck in the Third Cataract. The
Nestorian caravan-men at MOsUL and in its neigh-
bourhood carry with them dust from the tomb of
Rabban Hormizp at A1t-KOosuH, and the Jacobites.
seek protection in the dust from the tomb of MAR
Mattal. The Persian Muslims carry away dust
from the tomb of their saints at KARBALA, and the
Arabs make amulets of the dust from the tomb of
MuHAMMAD the Prophet. The cult of the relics of
saints springs from the belief that their bodies,
whether living or dead, possessed Mana, and in
the Middle Ages at least men did not seem to care
whether the relics were genuine or “ faked.’’ This.
is proved by SELIGMANN, who states (op. cit., p. 40)
that the praeputium Christi 1s shown in Rome,
CHARROUX, ANTWERP, PARIS, BRUGGE, BOULOGNE,
BESANCON; “NANCY, Mrtz7, Le Puy, Conoupes
HILDESHEIM and CALCUTTA, and is venerated as a
genuine relic.

The Mana which existed naturally in objects
which were chosen for amulets was, so to speak,
increased and “fixed” by the formulas or spells.
which the magician pronounced over them. In
other words, the spell itself was Mana, and if the
objects were without Mana before its utterance, from
the moment the words were spoken they became
“ working ’’ amulets. Words, like blood and hair,
and saliva, contained Mana and without the utter-
ance of the formula or spell no “‘ medicine ’”’ had
or could have any good, still less full, effect. When
this qpricst, Wins COlice), Of tier .uperceq ec meade
magician, the prayer superseded the spell. The
spell was a command, the prayer an entreaty. We


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 27


are justified in assuming that spells were transmitted
orally from one generation of magicians to another
for many centuries, and even after men learned the
art of writing the conservative magician would cling
to the methods of his predecessors and refuse to make
use of the new-fangled invention. But at length
he realized that his spells were made permanent
by the written characters, and the inscribed amulet,
fie ©CHARM,. aS it is often called, came into
being.

The SUMERIANS, BABYLONIANS and ASSYRIANS
wrote their spells on clay tablets, which were often
baked in furnaces; the EGYPTIANS wrote them on
papyri, slabs of calcareous stone, potsherds (ostraka),
and figures of wood, stone and wax, and cut them
on wooden tablets and on large stone stelae, e.g. the
Metternich stele ; the JEws wrote them on parch-
ment and, in the Middle Ages, on paper and on
terra-cotta bowls; the GNOSTICS and GREEKS cut
them on semi-precious stones; the PERSIANS and
ARABS! cut them on tablets of agate, onyx, carnelian
and schist, and wrote them on the skin of the un-
born gazelle and on parchment and paper; the
JAPANESE burnt them into wood; the CHINESE
wrote them on silk paper ; and the INDIANs inscribed
them on plates of copper and wrote them on
palm leaves and bark paper. Copies of magical
texts are now multiplied by means of the printing
press, and the ordinary paper of commerce has


1 The Arabs wrote copies of some of the Strahs of the
Kur’an on the flat bones of sheep and oxen, and fine examples
of these, with legible Arabic inscriptions on them, are preserved
in the British Museum (in the Department of Oriental
Manuscripts).


28 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


superseded parchment, wood, palm leaves and
bark paper.

The INK which the ancient writers of magical
formulas used was generally black or red. In copies
of the Egyptian Book of the Dead, which are written
in hieroglyphs, the instructions concerning the per-
formance of rites and ceremonies which follow
certain Chapters, and are usually called “ Rubrics,”
are written in red ink. In the Book OF OVER-
THROWING ApEpP it is ordered that the name of this
fiend is to be written in green ink.


AMULET GASES:


In many countries the possessor of an amulet
carries his treasure in a box made of precious metal,
or in a little bag: made of silk, or linen, or cloth
or leather, his idea in the first place being to protect
it from injury and contamination, and in the second
place to keep it out of the sight of evil spirits and
men and women possessing the Evil Eye. This is
also the case when a book containing magical or
sacred texts was regarded as an amulet. The
Egyptian inserted his papyrus Book of the Dead
in a painted wooden figure of the god Osiris,
and a short extract from it in the wooden bases of
figures of PraH-SEKER-AsAR; gold figures of the
gods when worn as amuletic pendants were enclosed
in cases ol) silver sor "Some other metaly ame
extracts from the Kur’an, which were written on
long strips of paper and were worn by Persian
women as pendants on their necklaces, were inserted
in oblong silver cases inscribed with amuletic texts.
The ARABS and PERSIANS, whether nomads or
dwellers in towns and villages, always keep their


UNIVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 20


Kur’ans in cases, some of them being studded
with jewels, and the ABYSSINIAN wraps up
nis). Psalter, and his’ Book of the Praises of
Mary, and his amulets in many thick sheets of
leather.

Modern Oriental authorities on amulets impress
upon their clients the necessity of possessing many
amulets, for according to them an amulet should
only be expected to protect its owner from one
danger. Certain kinds of amulets should always be
in contact with the skin, and should only be worn
on parts of the body where this is possible. These
may be placed on the scalp, or forehead, or fastened
to the ears, or set in necklaces and pectorals which
he on the breast, or fixed by cords over the umbilicus
and genital organs, or tied on the upper part of the
left arm, or on the wrist, or at the base of the spine,
or on the leg below the knee. Amulets of a more
general character may be carried in the turban, or
fastened to the ¢arbish or to the hat of the European,
or in a pocket or stitched into some part of the
apparel near the heart. The latter class may be
used with advantage for the protection of the house
or of any special chamber in it by hanging them on
the walls. If they be tied to the bed of a sick man,
or placed in some position where he can see them,
they will bring about his recovery. It is good for
a sick man to drink the water in which they have
been dipped or washed. Tied to a pole set upin
an orchard they will increase the fruit-bearing power
of the trees, and prevent the fruit from being eaten
by birds and slugs and caterpillars ; if a pole with
the proper kind of amulets tied to it be set up in a
field where crops are growing, the crops will ripen


30 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


satisfactorily, To. protect horned?, cattle (ie gaan
amulets to the horns, or fasten them in holes drilled
in the horns; to protect sheep, goats and pigs, tie
the amulets to their heads, or to that part of their
bodies where the tails join the back. Amulets
intended to avert the Evil Eye from aninaicee,
children must be large, and either made of some
bright coloured substance, or painted a bright colour.
In the bazars of Catro and TaAnrtaH large blue-
glazed pottery beads, fully half an inch in diameter,
used to be sold to caravan men, who made bandlets
of them and tied them to the foreheads of their
camels before they set out on their journeys across
the desert. The natives believed that the baleful
glances of the Evil Eye would be attracted to the
beads, and averted from the animals; strips of
red and green cloth and bits of polished brass are
often used as amulets against the Evil Eye instead
of the blue beads. It is tolerably certain that
the brass bosses and ornaments which decorate
the harness of cart horses and_ shire-stallions
were, like the great brass horns which rise
from their collars, originally intended to protect
the animal from the Evil Eye; but this fact has
been forgotten, and amulets have degenerated into
mere ornaments. Similarly the long fringes and
tassels which are now fastened to saddle-bags as
ornaments in the East, represent the long, knotted
thongs of leather which were tied to the saddle-
bags so that the sound of their striking together
when the horseman was riding fast might frighten
away evil. spirits: In thése, as in many “othep
cases, the true meanings of the ornaments have
been forgotten.


UNTVERSAL USE OF AMULETS 31


FAKED AMULETS.


It follows from the nature of the case, that in
countries where everyone wishes to possess an
amulet of one kind or another, or many amulets,
that the magician must often find it difficult to
meet all the demands made upon him. It is then
that the pseudo-magician finds his opportunity,
and he makes and sells what the natives call “‘ dead ”
soers. All over the East forged amulets are
common. In PERsIA and ‘[RAK we find forged seal-
cylinders and engraved stones, inscribed divining
bowls and tablets and reliefs, and in Egypt forged
scarabs, rings, figures, jewellery, gems, papyri, etc.,
have been made and sold to both natives and
@eaveliers’for the last 150 years. ..During the
rebellion of the Mahdi in the Sadan thousands of
his soldiers bought amulets purporting to con-
tain magical texts from the Kur’an, and magical
prayer which, they believed, would protect them
and give them victory. The writer has seen many
of their leather cases cut open, and they contained
nothing but carefully folded blank sheets of
paper, wrapped in an outer sheet inscribed “ Bis-
Tian, 2.€. © in, the Name of God.” And the
Abyssinian peasant is often cheated in the same
way.

In connection with amulets may be mentioned
a series of objects which are regarded as bringers of
luck and are known as “ Mascots.’ The word ‘is
also applied to men and women who are supposed
to be lucky in themselves and to bring luck to others ;
it is derived from the French mascotte and is pro-
bably cognate with the Provencal masco, “ witch.”


32 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


It came into general use through the Comic Opera
of ANDRAUS called ‘‘ La Mascotte,’ where we have
the following :—


Un jour, le diable, ivre d’orgueil :
Choisit dans sa grande chaudiére
Des démons qu’avaient l’mauvais oeil
Et les envoya sur la terre !
Mais le bon Dieu, not’ protecteur
Quand il l’apprit, créant de suite
Des anges qui portaient bonheur,
Chez nous les envoya bien vite !

Ces envoyés du paradis.

Sont des mascottes, mes amis,

Heureux celui que le ciel dote

D’une mascotte !
(Quoted by Seligmann, op. cit., p. 30.)


Nearly every large motor car is provided with a
mascot fixed on the bonnet of the radiator, and
nearly every famous regiment has its mascot, a goat,
or a bear, etc. The TEDDY-BEAR is also regarded
as aluck bringer. It made its first appearance in an
American toy factory, and was called “ Teddy ”
in honour of ROOSEVELT, then President of the
American Republic.


GraAk Bike EY:


Press AND PERSIAN AMULETS AND TALISMANS;


The Arabs in all periods of their history have
worn amulets and talismans to protect their bodies
and cattle and houses from the attacks of evil
spirits, and especially against the Evil Eye. The
amulets of the primitive Arabs, 1.e. those who
lived before the Christian Era, were made of stone,
wood, and probably bone, and were, it would seem
from the few scattered notices about them which
have come down to us, uninscribed. The pagan
Arabs of the first six centuries of our Era followed
the example of their ancestors and wore and made
use of many kinds of amulets and talismans, but they
associated with them ideas which were borrowed from
Hebrew, Egyptian, and Gnostic writings. Muhammad
himself sanctioned such borrowings, and in the Kur’an
passed on to his followers the history of Solomon as a
magician, and a belief in the magical names of Allah.

The simplest form of amulet worn by the Arabs
and Persians in modern times consists of a piece
of paper on which is written a short prayer, or
spell, or verse from the Kur’an, or a magical name
or names. The inscription must be written by
a holy man of some kind, on material chosen by
him, with black ink. The Cairenes and others
prefer to have the inscription written with ink
made in France’ or England because it “ bites ”’
into the paper deeply. Native ink, charcoal and


water, or burnt sheep’s wool and water, washes off
C


34 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the paper easily. When written upon the paper,
which is believed to have acquired the magical
qualities which the native to this day associates
with writing, is folded up and laid flat in a card-
board, or cheap leather, case. A cord is attached
to the case, which is either tied under the left arm
or hung round the neck. People of means and
position cause the magical texts, even Stirahs from
the Kur’an, to be written on gazelle skin, preferably
on the skin of the unborn animal, and in such cases
the amulet is rolled up and carried in a metal tube,
made usually of silver. A portion of a very elab-
orate amulet written on the skin of an unborn kid
is reproduced on Plate I, No. 1; the onginalicam
my possession. The upper end is illuminated in
bright colours, in the style of the early nineteenth
century. The blocks of text are Strahs of the Kur’an,
written in red and black, with their titles in blue.
No. 2 on the same plate is a reproduction from the
first part of a paper amulet which was rolled up and
carried in a silver case. This amulet was written
in Persia and, judging by the paper, some time in
the second half of the XVIIth century. Though
small, the writing is very clear and the floral design
is well executed. Mirza Khan, a Persian diploma-
tist, for some years resident in London, from whom
I purchased both amulets, said that he had never seen
a finer specimen of amuletic calligraphy.

Amuletic texts, or talismans, were sometimes
written on thin sheets of lead which were folded
up flat and carried in metal cases, but examples of
such are very rare. Fragments of such amulets
have been found among the ruins of Babylon, side
by side with thin leaves of lead inscribed in Greek.


Bia we


Now r No. 2:
Amulet made of the skin of Amulet made of paper.
an unborn kid.


Ge


ELDASE Et


Silver amulet case inscribed on both sides with a series of short texts from
the Kur’an. (From Baghdad, XVIIth century.)


AKAB AND* PERSIAN AMULETS 39


The cases in which girls and women wear their
amulets are often of a very elaborate character
and a good, characteristic example is shown on
Plate II. Here we have a silver amulet case,
the outside of which is covered with texts from
aie ikur an, and. the long chain by which’ it
was suspended from the neck. The owner of the
case withdrew the amulet and kept it as a means
of protection for himself, but he sold the case
willingly! On Plate III is a necklace with two rows
of ornaments. In the upper row are twelve hollow
silver plaques, joined by rings, each of which con-
tained a small piece of paper on which a magical
name was written. The lower row consists of twleve
small silver cases, pointed at both ends, which are
attached by rings to the twelve plaques above
them, and have silver pendants, some two and some
three. Each tube originally contained a small roll of
paper inscribed with verses from the Kur’an. Each
roll of paper was supposed to afford protection to the
wearer during one month, andas the necklace contains
twelve rolls, she was protected during the whole year.

The inscriptions which are found on Arab amulets
to-day may be divided into two classes: (1) those
which are composed of characters borrowed from
the Hebrews, Egyptians and Gnostics, and of which
the phonetic values and meanings are unknown.
The following are examples of these :—


23 ll Alpitiras
Sr de 03 3 [TF


Both these are given in the autographed book of At-BONi, from whom
they are quoted by Douttté, pp. 155, 158.


40 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


(2) Inscriptions which consist of series of unknown
signs or characters, series of letters of some known
alphabet, rows of figures or numbers, magical
names, names of the planets, names of the days of
the week, names of -angels, devils, tends eves
names of -God, ‘and Sutrahs ‘of the Kunaneee a
example of the amulet in which both classes of
inscriptions appear is given by DouTTe in his Magve
et Religion dans l'Afrique du Nord, Algiers, 1908,
p. 154. This is known as the “ SEVEN SEALS,” and
appears in the form of a rectangle containing 7 x 7
Squares, arranged in seven lines, and each line has
in it seven signs, or letters, or names. The first line
has these seven signs :—


L iv SFE WN Soe


Now the First of these is the well-known pentacle
which is frequently confounded with the hexagon


ay ,and is a design which is said to have been


cut on the bezel of King Solomon’s ring. But the
pentacle is many centuries older than the hexagon,
for it is found drawn on pots from ancient Baby-
lonian sites. The pentacle and the six other signs
in the first line are the Seven Seals in the amulet,
and they either’ represent the great Names. or
Symbols of God.

The SECOND line contains seven letters of the
Arabic alphabet, Woe Pe Suet ape ZA, kot
and Z. These are the seven letters which do not
occur in the seven lines of the first Strah of the
Kur’an, and they begin the seven names of God


Pie bier hh


‘ue INy, 94} WOIF Sosi


(‘YeTITE, wr01,7)
OA YIM POqTIOSUT ST[OI OTJojNUIe [Tews P[OY O} soeqn} pure sonbejd YIM s0eTYyOoU JOATIS


ARAB AND: PERSIAN AMULETS 43


which we find in the THIRD line of the amulet :—
moar. Gabbar, .ohakuir: Thabit, Zahir; Khabir;
Zaki.

The FOURTH line contains the names of seven
angels, viz. Ruikyail, Gabriel, Samsamail, Michael,
Sarfyail, ‘Anyail, and Kasfyail. The names of all
these angels, or rather archangels, are of Hebrew
origin.

Miearind Heline-contains, the names olvthe- Seven
Kings of the Genii:—Mudhhib, Marra (?), Akhmar,
Buskan, Shamhtrash, Ibyad and Mimtm. These
names are of Arab origin, and some of them seem
to describe the outward appearances of the kings,
Pewiie White One, the Golden One, the Ked One,
the Lightning One.

The sixTuH line contains the numbers of the days
of the week, the first, the second, etc., and the
SEVENTH line gives the names of the five planets—
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, and the
Sun and Moon. Thus we see that the amulet of the
Seven Seals was believed to carry with it the pro-
tection of God, by whatever name called, and of the
archangels, and the kings of the spirits, the Jinn and
the Jann, and the five planets and the sun and moon,
and the days of the week, and the seven letters.
In fact, the wearer of the amulet was believed to be
protected by God and His creation generally. he
seven letters, each written seven times and arranged
in seven lines containing forty-nine squares, also
form a powerful amulet. The wearer is even more
protected if it be written on some part of the wearer,
which seems to suggest that the figures and signs
which men had tattooed on their bodies carried
with them some magical protection. The “ tribal


44 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


marks’’ which are seen on the faces of Arabs at the
present day are probably the remains of amuletic
signs or names.

Groups of LETTERS of the apnee play a promi-
nent part in amuletic inscriptions. lhe earlier
magicians arranged them in an order, which was
not necessarily alphabetic; to some of them they
assigned meanings or symbolisms, but of others they
regarded the meanings as incomprehensible to the
human understanding. The twenty-eight letters are
connected directly with the twenty-eight stations
of the moon, and with the heavenly bodies, and the
Signs of the Zodiac. and) the; Dekans> (Letters are
the early Hebrews were the essence of things and,
as Doutté has observed (0p. cit., p. 172), the Romans
described all human knowledge as “ letters,’ using
the word as the peoples of the North used “ runes.”
The Arabs, like the Hebrews, attributed greater
powers to some letters than to others, and a proper
knowledge of the use of these formed a separate
branch of the study of magic. Each letter had its
special powers, and a single letter might be developed
into a design which would in itself form an effective
amulet.

The powers of the LETTERS are intimately associated
with NUMBERS, for each letter in the Arabic alphabet
has a numerical value: No, 1 = God, Novia
important because it is said in the Kur’an, “And
of everything have we created two kinds” (Strah,
li, verse 49) [t.e. male and female, heaven and earth,
sun and moon, light and darkness, plains and
mountains, winter and summer, sweet and _ bitter,
JALAL UD-DIN}. No. 3 is important. No. 4 is very
important, for there are 4 archangels, 4 chief devils,


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 45


4 elements, 4 seasons, 4 cardinal points, and an
Srmulet must be a square. No. 5 has always
possessed a special significance, perhaps of com-
pleteness. The Arabs pray 5 times daily, and they
have 5 fundamental dogmas, and 5 “‘pillars”’ of
religion. No. 6 has no special importance. No. 7
plays a very prominent part in Arab magic. Of the
amulet of the Seven Seals mention has already been
made. God created seven heavens, seven earths,
seven seas, seven hells with seven doors, the seven
members of the body used during the ceremonies
of prayer, the seven periods of life, the seven Climes,
the seven days of the week, and the seven Prophets
who preside over the seven days of the week, viz.
Moses, Jesus, David, Solomon, Jacob, Adam, and
Muhammad. No. 8 is divisible by 2 and 4, both
Meportant numbers, No, 98 + 1 and 3 x 3, and
3 18 a specially magical number. Nos. 10, 12, 40
50, 100, 110 and 1,000 have their magical powers
increased by adding or subtracting I.

Now, as letters possess magical powers and have
numerical values, amuletic inscriptions can be com-
posed of letters only or numbers only ; both letters
and figures are often arranged in lines, each con-
taining three or four letters or figures, and three or
four lines form a MAGICAL SQUARE, Here is a
simple square, quoted by Doutté, containing the
Miaipers. 1, to’ 9. Whether these are added up


perpendicularly, or horizontally, or diagonally, the
total is always 15. An example of the four-lined


46 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


square, each line containing four numbers, is here
given; the numbers given are 1-16. Whether


414/15) 1
eee tyes ah
5 |11|10| 8
16/2) 3 |13


these are added up perpendicularly, or horizontally,
or diagonally, the total is always 34. The know-
ledge of arithmetic required by those who con-
structed such squares was considerable, and it
seems to have formed the foundation of the Arab
science of mathematics. The Arabs thought that
the magical powers of some of the 28 letters were
greater than those of others; thus Alf, the first
letter of the Arabic alphabet, is also the first letter
of the name of Allah, and as its numerical value
was one it represented Allah the One God. The
names of God, the Archangels, etc., might be written
with letters or with the numerical values of the
letters which formed the names, and in either form
they made a protective amuletic inscription.

Many. amulets contain the Hebrew names of God
and the Archangels, but the names which the Arabs
believe to possess the greatest magical power are
the names of the attributes of God. The title ALLAH,
the meaning of which is unknown, is called “‘ Ismu
az-“Lat, 1.e. the “essential name,’ and jthece
attributes are known as “ Asmau as-Sifat.’’ In
alluding to them Muhammad the Prophet spoke of
them as “ Al-Asmau al-husna,”’ 7.e. the “ Beautiful
Names * (Kuran, Strah vi. verse 170),.andsae
this day they are known as the “ Beautiful or


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 47


Excellent Names of God.” Abu MHurairah said
that the ‘‘ Names of God were ninety-nine in number,
and that he who recites them shall enter Paradise.”’
The commentators say that Muhammad had no
intention to limit the names of God to ninety-nine,
and that all he wished the orthodox Muslims to do
was to recite this number daily. The lists of the
names given by the traditionalists do not agree.
Some lists begin with the name ALLAH and others
end with it; and some begin with AL-AHAD, 1.e.
“the One,” and others end with it. The following
list of the Ninety-nine Names is that of TIRMIDHI
(see DOUTTE, op. cit., p. 200) and HuGues (Dret.


Islam, p. 141) :—


1. Ar-Rahman The Merciful.
2. Ar-Rahim The Compassionate.
3. Al-Malik .. The King.

4. Al-Kuddts The Holy.

5. As-Salam hesbeace,

6. Al-Mu’min The Faithful.
7. Al-Muhaimin dines Protector
8. Al-‘Aziz The Mighty.

g. Al-Jabbar The Repairer.
10. Al-Mutakabbir The Great.

mie Al-Khahk The Creator. ©
noel Bari ae. The Maker.
13. Al-Musawwir The Fashioner.
14. Al-Ghaffar The Forgiver.
15. Al-Kahhar The Dominant.
16. Al-Wahhab The Bestower.
17. Al-Razzak The Provider.
18. Al-Fattah The Opener.
1g. Al-Alim The Knower.
20 The Restrainer.


. Al-Kabiz ..


48


AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


J AL Basit

. Al-Khafiz..
, Ar-Rafi

. Al-Mu‘izz

» AleMiuzil)4:
. AAS-Sami 2.
..Al-Basir ..
, Al-Hakim

. Al-‘Adl
wens eeati bee
. Al-Khabir
. Al-Halim
Ale Azim
. Al-Ghaftr

. Ash-Shaktir
. Al-‘Ali
Al Kabiow.
. Al-Hafiz ..
 AlMukit =.
AZ ELasip ee
. Al- Jalil
. Al-Karim
AT Rakip

. Al-Mujib ..
- Al-Wasi...
. Al-Hakim
. Al-Wadtd
. Al-Majid ..
. Al-Bais

. Ash-Shahid
a Alektakk 5s
. Al-Wakil ..
. Al-Kawi ..
. Al-Matin ..


The Spreader.
The Abaser.
The Exalter.
The Honourer.
The Destroyer.
The Hearer.
The Seer.

The Ruler.
ihe fuer

The Subtle.
The Aware.
The Clement.
The Grand.
The Forgiving.
The Grateful.
The Exalted.
The Great.
The Guardian.
be Streusthencr
The Reckoner.
The Majestic.
The Generous.
The Watcher.
ihe wpprover;
The Comprehensive.
The Wise.

The Loving.
The Glorious.
The Raiser.
The Witness.
The Truth.
The Advocate.
The Strong.
The Firm.


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 49


. Al-Wali

. Al-Hamid

. Al-Muhsi ..
. Al-Mubdi

. Al-Mu'id ..
. Al-Muhyi

. Al-Mumit..
. Al-Hayy ..
. Al-Kaiyim
. Al-Wayjid

. Al-Majid ..
. Al-Wahid..
. As-Samad

Sosa eA CaVelhe ey
. Al-Muktadir
. Al-Mukaddim
. Al-Mu’akhkhir
. Al-Awwal

pA Alchize .
7 AZ-Zanir *.

. Al-Batin ..
. Al-Wali

. Al-Muta‘ali
. Al-Barr

. At-Tawwab


. Al-Muntakim

» Al-‘Afiw ..

eeAt- haut .:

. Malik ul-Mulk

. Dhu’l-Jalah_ wa’l-


Ikram


_ Al-Muksit
_ Al-Jami‘


The Patron.

The Laudable.

The Counter.

The Beginner.

The Restorer.

The Quickener.

The Killer.

dhesbivine:

The Subsisting.

The Finder.

The Glorious.

The One.

The Eternal.

The Powerful.

The Prevailing.

The Bringer Forward.

The Deferrer.

The First.

The Last.

The Evident.

The Hidden.

The Governor.

The Exalted.

The Righteous.

ihe Accepter- of Ke-
pentance.

The Avenger.

The Pardoner.

The Kind. [dom.

The Ruler of the King-

The Lord of Majesty
and Liberality.

The Equitable.

The Collector.


50 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


87. Al-Ghani .. .» . Che Independent;
88. Al-Mughni a ~ Lheseinrigher;

89. Al-Mu'ti .. op Lhe Givers

go. Al-Mani’ .. .. The Withholder,
Ole WAZ-Zatr |e .. . LheDistresser:
92. An-Nafi’ .. a Phe shrative rs

93. An-Ntr .. va hess

94. Al-Hadi .. Ae a eee Cru eles

g5. Al-Badi‘ .. .. The Incomparable.
96. Al-Baki .. 2. Ube Hndumng:
97. Al-Warith ve here:

98. Ar-Rashid a ces imecror

gg. As-Sabtr we Lhe Patient.


Muslim sages have agreed that God has one
great and exalted name, which is above all others.
Muhammad himself declared that it was to be found
in the Second or Third Strahs of the Kur’an, and
as the only names of God given in these are Ar-
Rahman, Ar-Rahim, Al-Hayy and Al-Kaiyim, it
should be one of these four names. The importance
of the Ninety-Nine Names of God from a magical
point of view is that when God is adjured by any
one of them He is bound to fulfil the wish or prayer
of the person who addresses Him by it. The idea
that the great and ineffable name of God has only
been known to the high priests is borrowed from the
Jews, who believed that it was known only to Moses
and his successors who used it only once a year, when
they went into the Holy of Holies to plead for for- —
giveness for Israel. Most of the names of God are
taken from the Kur’an, and every large amulet
is inscribed with several of them. ‘These were
carefully chosen by the man or woman for whom the
amulet was made, and they give the attributes of


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 51


God which endear Him to him or her, and to which
it was thought He would certainly make answer.

As so many of the texts found on amulets are
taken from the Kur’an, or are based upon it, the
following description of that famous work may be
found useful.

AL-KuR’AN, or “ The Kur’an,’’2.e. “ the-reading ”
or “ what ought to be read,’ is the name given by
the Muslims to the collection of “ revelations ”’ or
“instructions”? which Muhammad the Prophet
declared had been sent to him from God by the hand
of the Archangel Gabriel. These revelations were,
during the Prophet’s hfetime, written upon skins,
palm leaves, slices of stone, and bones of sheep and
oxen. Specimens of, these inscribed bones are
preserved in the Department of Oriental Manuscripts
in the British Museum. At the suggestion of ‘Omar
in the year 633 all these “revelations ’”’ were col-
lected by Abu Bakr’s orders into one book, and a
fair copy of them was made by Zaid ibn-Thabit, a
former secretary of Muhammad, who knew both
Hebrew and Syriac. “Omar gave this copy to his
daughter Hafsah, who was one of the widows of
Muhammad. Extracts and copies were made from
this, but so many mistakes and interpolations
crept into the text that the Khalifah ‘Othman
ordered Zaid and three scholars of the Koraish tribe
to make a new Recension of the Kur’an. This was
done, and copies of it having been sent to Ktfah on
the Euphrates, Basrah on the Shatt al-‘Arab, Damas-
cus, Cairo, Makkah and Madinah, every other version
of every “‘ revelation ’’ which could be found was ruth-
lessly burnt. Subsequently even Hafsah’s copy was
destroyed by Marwan, the governor of Madinah.

D2


29


52 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Learned Muhammadans assert that the Kur’an
existed in heaven from all eternity in a form which
they call the “‘ Mother of the Book” or the.” Pre-
served Tablet,’ which is a part of the essence of
God, who was its Creator. A copy of this was made
on paper in heaven and it was bound in silk and
ornamented with the gold and precious stones of
Paradise. This was committed to the care of the
Archangel Gabriel, who revealed it to the Prophet
piecemeal, but allowed him to see the complete
book once a year. The Kur’an contains 114 sections,
each of which is called a Sirah. Some were revealed
at Makkah, others at, Madinah, and others partly
at Makkah and partly at Madinah. The number of
verses in the whole book is given as 6,000, or 6,214,
or 6,210, or 6,225, or 6,226, or 6,236 ; ‘the number-on
words in it is 77,639, or 99,464 ; and the number of
letters -1s 323,015; “Or §330,113: » Each *secuioguae
introduced by the words “‘ In the Name of Allah,
the Merciful, the Compassionate.”” The Arabs regard
the Kur’an as the source of all knowledge and
wisdom ; they think its language is the purest Arabic
in the world, and the most beautiful, and that its
eloquence is incomparable. In spite of all the care
which the Arabs have lavished on the preservation
of the text, a few slight variations in it exist, but
these are held to be due to the fact that the “ revela-
tions were made to the Prophet in seven distinct
dialects of Arabic. At one time a woman was not
allowed to possess a copy of the Kur’an, and when
a man died his copy was buried with him. . But when
I was in the Tiyaré district on the Persian border,
I bought several copies wrapped up in earth-stained
pieces of linen, and reeking with damp, and even


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 53


mildew, which starving women dug up out of their
husbands’ graves and were only too thankful to
find a purchaser.

The Arabs regard the whole Kur’an as a powerful
amulet, and many of them never travel without it
In recent years miniature copies of it have been
made by photo-lithography and enclosed in small


The Kur’an Amulet, which is frequently carried or worn by the members
of the caravans which travel from Persia to Hillah, Kifa, Karbala and
carry dead Shiah Muslims to the last-named city for burial.


metal cases (with rings for attachment to necklaces,
etc.), in one side of which little lenses have been
fixed to be used as magnifying glasses. The whole
book measures I inch x ? inch x ¥% inch, and the
little lens in the case is sufficiently strong to enable
the traveller to read his favourite chapters by the
light of the camp fire. A photograph of the amulet
and its case is given above.


54 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


But although the whole Kur’an is regarded as a
powerful amulet, there are certain chapters in it
which the Arabs have always considered to be of more
importance than the others, and these are frequently
written upon skin or paper, or engraved on semi-


Ayat al-Kursi.
precious stones of a special shape. One of the most
beautiful passages, which Muhammadans greatly
admire and recite in their prayers and wear as an amu-
let, is the following extract from Stirah 11, verse 256 :—
‘Gop! there is no GoD but HE; the living the
self-subsisting ;


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 55


Neither slumber nor sleep seizeth Him ;

To Him [belongeth] whatsoever is in heaven,
and on earth,

Who is he that can intercede with Him but
through His good pleasure ?

He knoweth that which is past, and that which
is to come unto them ;

And they shall not comprehend anything of His
knowledge, but so far as He pleaseth.

His throne is extended over heaven and earth,
and the preservation of both is no burden
unto Him.

He is the High, the Mighty.”


(Sale’s translation.)


This beautiful passage is known as AYAT AL-Kursi,
fe-the ~~ Throne Verse.” The word“ Throne ”’ is an
allegorical description of the Divine Providence which
sustains all creation and is incomprehensible to
human beings. |

There is another very important text which is
also known as a Throne Verse, and is called AYAT
AL-"ARSH. It is formed by the two last verses (Nos.
129 and 130) of Sirah x, and reads:


“Now hath an apostle come unto you of our
own nation, an excellent [person];

It is [grievous] unto him that ye commit
wickedness. ;

[He is] careful over you, [and] compassionate
and merciful towards the believers.

If they turn back, say, God is my support:

There is no GoD but HE.

On Him do | trust~ and “He is -Lord of the
Magnificent Throne.’ (Sale’s translation.)


56 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The Magnificent, or Sublime, Throne here referred
to is the Imperial Throne of God, on which He sits.
It is situated in the heavens high above the Kursi.

More important still as an amulet is the Strah of
the Kur’an which is the “ Beginning of the Book.”
This is the famous “ Fatihat,’’ which is a prayer
and which is held in the greatest veneration by
Mushms all over the world. It is to them what the


Ayat al-‘Arsh.


Lord’s Prayer and the Sign of the Cross are to
Christians. It stands by itself at the beginning of
the Book, and is always carefully and beautifully
written. It is often enclosed within decorated
borders full of rich designs and colour, and lavishly
ornamented with burnished gold. The general cha-
racter of the designs and the elaborate decorations
which are found in modern manuscripts of the
Kur’an are well illustrated (except in the matter of


IV


Pie


yoTNure


U


‘ic


ve


Inyj s


‘


ueyy ZIT


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 59


colours) by the reproduction of the two first pages
of a small copy which was obtained for me from
Persia by Mirza Khan. The Mullah who paid for the
production of the book carried it as an amulet in an
elaborate gold case. ‘This later he was obliged to sell to
obtain money to enable him to return to Persia when
the war broke out in 1914 (Plate IV). The titles of the
Strahs are written in red upon gold. Every column


ESS xb ig,
= IT yso aa : 2


The Fatihat al-Kitab.


of text is enclosed within a gold border, and there is
a line of gold under every line of text. Each column
of text contains 21 lines. This copy measures
4 inches x 2% inches x 3 inch, and is dated Anno
Piet 200A. D, 1872.) ‘The paper is thin and
very tough and is parchment-like in colour.

The Fatihat, like every other Sirah or Chapter
except the ninth, is preceded by the words, “ In the


60 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate,’
and may be thus translated :—


I. Praise be unto Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

2. The Merciful, the Compassionate.

3. King of the Day of Judgment.

4. Thee do we worship, of Thee we entreat for
help.

5. Direct us in the path which is straight.

6. The path of those on whom Thou hast shown
favour.

7. Not of those with whom Thou art angry.


Nor those who wander (1.e. stray from the
Straight Path).


The prayer in lines 5~7 has been much discussed
by commentators, both Muslim and Christian. Sale
translated it: ‘‘ Direct us in the right way, in the
way of those to whom thou hast been gracious ;
not of those against whom thou art incensed, nor
of those who go astray.’’ Al-Zamakhshari renders
lines 6 and 7 thus: ‘“‘ The way of those to whom
thou hast been gracious, against whom thou art
not incensed, and who have not erred.’ In other
words, he makes the three lines apply wholly to
Muslims, whilst Sale thinks that “those to whom
God had been gracious ’’ were the Prophets, and that
“those against whom he was incensed’’ were the
Jews, and “ those who go astray ”’ to the Christians.

There are several shorter extracts from the Kur’an
which are very popular as amuletic inscriptions, and
among these of special interest 1s the short Sirah
(No. CXII), which contains the declaration of the
Unity of Allah.


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 61


In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Com-
passionate.
ieoay ele Allahslis| One:
2. Allah the self-subsisting.
3. He begetteth not, and He was not begotten.
4. And there is no one like unto Him.
The recital of this Stiirah is supposed to confer
upon a man the decree of merit which he would
acquire if he recited one-third of the whole Kur’an.


The Sarah of the Unity of God.


It is held in great veneration by the Muslims and,
naturally, detested by Christians.

The following are Stirahs directed against witch-
craft and the Devil :—


I. SURAH CXIII. THE CHAPTER OF THE DAYBREAK.
In the Name of God the Merciful, the Com-
passionate.


Teody,:sclptiy stor refuge to the Lord~of ‘the
Daybreak.
2. From the evil things which He hath created.


62 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


3. And from the evil of the night when it hath
come.

4. And from the evil of [women who] are
blowers on knots.

5. And from the evil of the envious man when.
he hath envied.


Il. SURAH ‘CXIV. “THE CHAPTER OF MAN


In the Name of God the Merciful, the Com-
passionate.


1. say..¢ Lily. tor teluge to the Lord:otam rw

2. The king of men.

oye-bhe (odaal inen:

4. From the evil of the whisperer who slyly
withdraweth.

5. Who whispereth evil words into the breasts
of men.

6. From the genn and men.


The words “ blowers on knots ”’ refer to magicians,
male and female, who recite incantations which are
intended to do harm to the fellows whilst they tie
knots in a string—in other words, “ weave spells.”
These two Sdrahs were revealed to Muhammad at
the same time, and must be regarded as forming
one whole; and the Prophet used them for a very
special service. ‘The commentators say that a Jew
called Lubaid and his daughters bewitched Muham-
mad by tying eleven knots in a cord which they hid
in a well. The result was that the Prophet fell
seriously ill and would undoubtedly have died had
not God intervened. He sent down these Strahs to
him, and also instructed the Archangel Gabriel to tell
him how to use them, and where the cord was


PLA TI.


(pepyseg wor,


)


‘ECIII‘H'V pojyed


‘UL INS] OY} WIOIJ $}X9} YYIM POTIOSUI Jo[NUIe 9}eS8V ULISIOg


SOOO OOS
ss é Ge
CM ae lie maT, NS o eas


x
hos)
: cxf
ort 4
‘3 * ea
¥


Camb 505,


fs
bre,


a
wee


oe, OS hs
we

eet
a


?


= ee


. = : ae. et


See 2 -aats ee, e
¢
’


*
a“
.
?
i


eo &&0 “S,;


PEATE Vi


oy} Ur soyour


$


€


(‘sozerydngy oy} uO veqiey Woy) ‘poyepugq ‘yredysoprm
‘UB,INS OY} WOIF $}X9} YIM PoqrtIOsUT yo[NWIe 9}ye8e UISIOg


Z SI pue SUOT soyour Fst [eurs110 oY],


2 a


% ee eens
Ra ae


7


ARAB AND PERSIAN. AMULETS 67


hidden. Muhammad sent ‘Ali to fetch the cord,
and when it was brought he recited over the eleven
knots the eleven verses in the two Sirahs, and as
he recited each line one of the knots untied itself ;
as soon as the last knot was loosed Muhammad
was freed from his bewitchment, and recovered his
normal health.

In the Arabic treatises which deal with amulets
and talismans and supply the reader with magical
texts, we find that little drawings or vignettes are
mingled with the texts. These are of many kinds,
Thus we find grotesque figures of men and animals,
figures of archangels, the Signs of the Zodiac, the
Sun and Moon and the five planets, mythological
beasts, linear designs and geometrical patterns,
and very frequently the human hand stretched out
flat with the fingers well apart, or all close together.
All these drawings are borrowed from the Egyptians,
Copts, Gnostics and Hebrews, for the Arab is a
better borrower of such things than inventor. The
Sunni Arabs, or traditionalists, only employ some
Sma iese, but the Shiahs, or “ free thinkers’’ adopt
themall. Asarule, Persian amulets are more artistic
than those of the Arabs. Two of the finest Persian
or Shiah amulets known to me are reproduced on
Plates V and VI.

The first is a rectangular slice of Persian agate
bevelled at the corners. And it seems to have been
made in the year 1113 of the Hijra, 7.e. A.D 1701.
It was made for a follower: of “Ali) the son-in-
law of the Prophet, and to him the text in the
Pentre, written in large Arabic letters, refers. . At
each corner is a circle containing a divine name,


and the first border, 7.e. that with diamond-shaped
E 2


68 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


ornaments, contains forty-eight of the ninety-nine
“Beautiful Names’ of. God. The =second=amms
fourth borders, which are separated by an ornamental
border, contains extracts from the Kur’an, viz. the
Fatihah, and the Throne Verses, the Declaration
of ‘the unity of.God, étc.: The texts; ‘decorated
border, etc., were inscribed on the stone by the
fumes of acid and are therefore very difficult to
read, even-in the reproduction which is Teary
double the size of the original. And the manner
in which the scribe found it necessary to break
up the words increases the difficulty. This amulet
formed the centre-piece of a very elaborate necklace
of amulets, and was mounted in a heavy silver
frame. It is in fact a “‘ House-amulet.”’ The second
amulet is in the form in which the Shiahs or free-
thinking Mushms of Karbala prefer to make their
amulets. It was set in a silver frame and was
hung on the wall of a house in Karbala on the
Euphrates by means of a chain which passed
through the projection on the upper edge. The
texts anscribed ion ‘the edge are the Fatiuhah aid
the Throne’ Verses. The decorated” centre \iicwiam
an unusual character, for the field is filled up
with annules, circles divided into 4, or 8, or 16
sections, and circles surrounded with annules or
filled with crosses.

From what has been said above it is clear that the
wearing of amulets bearing texts from the Kur’an
may be regarded as a religious exercise, for their
sole object is to put the wearer into communication
with Allah, so that He may afford His protection.
And most Arabs regard the practice of. wearing
amulets of this kind not only as harmless, but even


“ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 69


as meritorious, and the science of them is a branch
of White Magic.

In Arabia and Mesopotamia and Syria the common
words for amulet are Tamiman and ‘Upzau and
TA‘WIDZAH, and in Egypt and North Africa KHURZA.
The stones used for amulets are usually choice agates
across which run white bands, or the dark grey
semi-transparent agates which are brought from
Miaiae Lhese are carefully cut into the required
shapes and highly polished, and then the inscrip-
tions are either cut with a lapidary’s wheel or a
gravers tool. As engraving on. stone is a very
costly matter, even in the East, another method of
inscribing the stone amulet has been found. The
slice of agate, or carnelian, or chalcedony having
been chosen, the amulet maker covers it all over
with a thin layer of wax. Care is taken that the
wax touches the surface of the stone everywhere,
and that there are no air bubbles between the wax
and the stone. The waxed stone is then handed over
to the skilled scribe, who writes the inscription in
the wax with a sharp-pointed graver, taking care
that the tool touches the stone as each letter of
the inscription 1s written. The waxed stone is then
exposed to the fumes of hydrochloric acid, which
eat into the stone wherever its surface has been
laid bare by the scribe’s graver. When the fumes
of the acid have done their work, the stone is cleared
of wax, and the inscription stands out clearly on
the stone. The writing lacks the beauty and char-
acter of that cut with a wheel or graver, but the
cheapness of amulets which are made in this way
brings them within the reach of many who cannot
afford those which are engraved. Among the


70 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


officials of the great mosques at Baghdad, Kazmain,
Karbala, Damascus, Cairo, and Persia there were
men who specialized in the making of amulets, but
during the last forty years these men, and their
successors, have devoted themselves to making
imitations of Persian and Babylonian antiquities,
which they sell to travellers and the uninitiated:
The amulets bought in the mosques, and those
which were specially made there for private in-
dividuals, were usually blessed by a Mullah. The
engraver on stone, or the scribe who wrote on paper
or leather, began his work by pronouncing the words
“Bism. lllah’’” 2.er “aim the Name of Goda aay
the Name of God was regarded as God Himself, the
engraver or the scribe were sure of God’s help when
he pronounced His Name. These words are said
to have been written on Adam’s side, and on the
wings of Gabriel; and on the seal of Solomon,
and on the ‘tongue of Jesus (see Doutte, opr
p. 211). The ink used by the scribe was sometimes
perfumed with musk, or oil of roses, or extract of
saffron, and sometimes sticks of incense were kept
burning whilst he was copying certain texts.

Though the greater number of Persian and Arab
amulets are made of agate and carnelian because
of the magical power which was believed to exist
in these stones, other substances were often used
by amulet manufacturers in places where limestone
formations did not exist. Thus on the coasts of the
Red Sea and in Palestine amulets made of mother-
of-pearl shell are found. Examples of such are
reproduced. on. Plate VIL) Nos: rand 2: jNowm@
is inscribed in Arabic with a prayer. that “the
wearer may be defended from internal troubles and


PLATE Vit


.


uepio[ oy} Fo


Sp10.J oy} 7° FYUSNOg
at


IV


‘S[II8 polizewun Aq uI0M JoOTNUIY


‘ystydeq oy} uyof Aq ueprof oy} ur ystuyD jo wsydeq oyL


ad-jo


JoyjOU FO spew szo[NUy


.


I


lod


re)


PUA BeaN DS PERSTAN AMULETS 73


has a pierced projection by which it was hung by a
cord from the neck ; its owner was a little girl who
was wearing it over the umbilicus. I obtained it
ae suez. Ihe Christians in- Palestine and Syria
also wore, and still wear, amuletic plaques made
of mother-of-pearl shell, and a good example of
meerclass is reproduced on: Plate VII, No.2. ‘lhe
scene cut on this plaque represents the baptism
of Christ by St. John the Baptist, who stands
upon a stone in the Jordan. He holds a long cross-
headed staff in his right hand and pours water on
the head of our Lord with his left hand. Above is
a dove symbolizing the Holy Ghost descending
. through an opening in the clouds. On the right
is an angel.

The ancient Egyptians appear to ‘have used
large shells from the Red Sea as amulets, and
these were held to be more effective when the
nomens and prenomens of kings were cut upon
them. Thus we have in the British Museum
shells inscribed with the nomen and prenomen of
Usertsen I (XIIth Dynasty), and the prenomen
of Amenemhat II (XIIth Dynasty), and the pre-
nomen of Rameses II the Great (Nos. 15423, 20744,

29434, etc.).

The Muslim soldier has always felt that he needed
the protection of amulets, and he always provided
himself with as many as he could get before he set
out on the march. The commonest military amulet
is a strip of paper inscribed with an extract from
the Kur’an, or with the Name Allah, and the names of
Muhammad and ‘Ali, and those of some or all of the
Seven Archangels. Sometimes the strip developed
into a long roll of paper, which was tied to the


74 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


breast or body of the warrior. The Turkish soldiers
who during the reign of ‘Abd al-Hamid fought
in Southern Arabia wore amulets made of stone
and metal. Aspecimen of a brass amulet is given
on Plate VIII, No. 3. This is a curved, rectangular
shield-shaped’ plaque with rounded corners and
two pierced projections by which it was sewn
to the tunic of the soldier: On the upper part is
an extract from the Kur’an,; and below this are
two magical designs with conical tops and two
magical squares. On the back of a similar
plaque in my possession is a magical square filled
with numbers which represent the names of celestial
beings. The desert Arabs in the Yaman regarded
these brass amulets as objects of very great value,
and there is no doubt that they murdered many of
the Turkish soldiers in order to cut the brass amulets
from their jackets: An amulet which was taken
from the left arm of a Turkish officer is shown on
Plate IX. It is formed of three oval agate plaques,
mounted in thick silver cases, and inscribed with
texts from the Kur’an; viz: the declaration of the
Unity of Allah; the opening prayer, etc. On the
stone to the right is the name of Muhammad, which
is here regarded as a word of power. The cord by
which these stones were fastened to the left arm of
their owner 1s made of silk, and the eyelets at ts
ends of the cord are bound round with wire.

Among objects which are believed to carry with
them magical protection must be mentioned what
may be called the ‘“‘ Dust Amulet,” the dust being
earth, or sand, or dust taken from the tomb of a
saint. For many centuries the pilgrims to Makkah
(Mecca), the birthplace of Muhammad the Prophet,


BEAT EAV EL


Miscellaneous amulets in silver and brass.

1 and 2. Silver amulets worn by Indian Muslim women who are about to become
mothers. (From the west coast of India.)

3. Brass shield-shaped amulet from the strap of the left shoulder of a soldier who
fought in the Yaman. On it are inscribed two magical squares of figures and
passages from the Kur’an. (From Aden.)

4. Hebrew amulet inscribed with the hexagon of Solomon, and Shaddai, a name
of God.

9 and 6. Silver amulets inscribed in Arabic with prayers for the well-being of
their wearers, who were women about to become mothers. (From the Sidan.)


. Ls ee my ee. en 5 ms he .s a ¥ = — 7 a" ra OR Af my . ‘


‘i ~
j
‘
+
'‘
r . - :
i i
ted
t
.
: .
%
A
. 4
‘
=
: , &
. <
!
‘
a
5 ae
ye peering
oth om
~*
7
‘
- ad J
i : \
; =
Fax
’
}
,
5
s
: 2
,
:
-
‘
}
; t
=
. 2
.
* +
ca
‘ N
i
: =
.
. :
- *
:
= 7 ,
.
: - “
.
4 *
‘
'
*
‘
nas . }
- ‘
.
.
HY
‘
<< é o
a !


1D.<


BEALE


‘qery.-[e d4eys oy} uo


(2)


yeuinyy ye punoj ‘speroumnu orqery fo AT[OYM pow OF UOTZdTIOSUT [BOISeW % YIM POqTIOSUT JSo[NWIe 93R[S °*Z
‘Teuey ZONS oy} UO YeiejuULy-[e je sqery
OIFIeUIS 94} YIM WYSY e SuLINp JoOuFO YsTyINT e JO Wie Jo, oY} UO pUNOF sem YOIYM joTUIe OTYZeTNUTY “|


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 79


have carried away from the mosque pinches of dust
which they tied up in little bags and hung round
their necks. The boatmen on the Nile above the
Second Cataract tie little bags containing dust
from the tomb of Kubbah Idris, a famous Mur-
ghani shaikh, in the belief that it will procure them
a safe passage through the Cataract. And when I
visited the Monastery of Rabban Hormizd at
Alkésh I saw men scraping up the dust from the
ground close to the Saint’s tomb, to carry away
with them in little bags and boxes as a protection
against the dangers of the desert.

Here for convenience sake may be mentioned the
string of ninety-nine beads, and a“ pillar,”’ which
is commonly called the ““Muhammadan Rosary.”’
It must not be confused with the string of 165 beads
which Christians use in keeping count of the Aves,
Paternosters and Glorias of the form of prayer which
constitutes the “‘ Rose-garden [of Mary].’’ Early
Christian monks and anchorites were in the habit
of repeating the Lord’s Prayer a great number of
times daily, and the story of Paul the anchorite
shows that some of them kept count of their prayers
by means of pebbles. The monk Paul collected
three hundred pebbles in his gown, and when he
finished a prayer he threw out a pebble; when the
pebbles came to an end, he knew that he had said
the full number of prayers. There is no evidence
that the monks used stvings of pebbles, and when
the Christian and Muhammadan rosaries first came
into use is not known. The Arabs have a tradition
that the early Muslims counted the praises of Allah
by. means of pebbles, or on their fingers, but they
think that Muhammad did not use a rosary. The


80 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Buddhists used a rosary containing 100 or 108 beads,
and carried it on their wrist like a bracelet, or wore
it as a necklace (see WADDELL, The Buddhism of
T1bet, London, 1895). On the whole its/seemm
probable that the Muslims borrowed the rosary
from the Buddhists, and that the Crusaders borrowed
it from the Saracens and introduced it into Europe.
Some think that it was introduced into Christendom
by Domenic, the founder of the Black Friars, about
A.D, 1221,-with the sanction ol Pope Piussy.

The Muhammadans call their Rosary “ SUBHAH,”’
because it is used for the “ praise ”’ of Allah. -Each
of its 99g beads is associated with one of the “ beautiful
names ~ of Allah, and the “ pillar” or elongated
bead which completes the I0o is reserved for the
ineffable Name of God. Dividing marks, made
usually of bone or ivory, are placed after the 33rd
and 66th beads, so that the devotee may rest at
these points. The beads are usually made of wood,
acacia-sycamore, sunt-wood, shaj-wood, and sandal
wood, but coloured glass beads are very popular
among the fallahin, or peasants. Beads are also
made of ivory or bone and the grey, smoke-coloured
agates found in Arabia. The beads of the rosaries
carried by men are small, but on days of festival
the girls and women wear rosaries made of large
wooden beads coloured ted. Large numbers of
these are brought from Makkah by pilgrims who
have made the /ajj or journey to the sacred city of
the Muslims. - Before colouring the beads are dipped
in water from the holy well of Zemzem, which was
shown to Hagar by the angels, and from which she
gave her son Ishmael to drink. And a subhah
which has been blessed by a holy man is supposed


ARAB AND PERSIAN AMULETS 81


to bring a blessing on the user of it. A tassel made
of some brightly coloured stuff is generally attached
to the cord on which the “ pillar” is strung, and
Egyptians have told me that it is intended to keep
off the Evil Eye, and that evil spirits dislike tassels
and fringed objects. The leather fringes attached
to saddle bags are said to serve the same purpose,
especially when the animal carrying them is in
motion. In ancient Pentateuch rolls some of the
letters have fringes attached to them, presumably
with the same object.


GEYER Ti haiide


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS.


The literature of the Sumerians and Babylonians
which has come down to us proves that the peoples
who occupied Mesopotamia from about 3000 B.C.
downwards attached very great importance to magic
in all its branches, and that they availed themselves
of the services of the magician on every possible
occasion. This is probably true also of the pre-
Sumerian inhabitants of the country, but as they
had not acquired the art of writing, we have no
means of knowing exactly what they thought or
believed. The Sumerians invented and developed
a system of writing, and the inscriptions which they
wrote on tablets of clay and stone suggest that they
lived anxious lives and were in perpetual fear of the
attacks of hosts of hostile and evil spirits which
lost no opportunity of attempting to do them harm.
To protect themselves against these they employed
charms and spells and incantations, and in order
to destroy the operations of the Evil Eye they wore
amulets of various kinds, both inscribed and un-
inscribed. And to protect their houses they buried
little clay figures in the foundations or embedded
them in the walls. We will consider first the
AMULETS in the forms of animals, birds, fish, etc.
Among the early amulets in the British Museum
the following are of special interest, for they are
ArcHaAic, that is to say they were made _ before
2500 B.C. (Plate X).


PA Ea


*sjornuie uelidssy pur


uvluojAqeg ore


yory


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 85


1. The fore-parts of two animals (bulls or lions ?)
united [No. 116709] ; symbolic of two-fold strength.
[Compare the two Lion-gods of Yesterday and To-
day, seated, back to back, supporting the horizon.
moo of the Dead Papyrus of Ani, sheet 7. The
double Lion-god mentioned in Chapter III = Shu
end -lefnut.| All animals.were thus treated, and
the device persisted through the ages.

2. Ihe frog, symbolic of fertility, as in Egypt,
in glazed clay [No. 116913].

3. Two fish, side by side, aati of fertility
[No. 120089]. These may represent the Sign of the
Zodiac, Pisces, and possess an astral significance.
[Compare the Egyptian mythological fishes, the
Ant and the Abtu.]

feet he bully Symbol “oO strength and. virility
iyo. 116711|,, Compare the Eeyptian royal title
“mighty bull.”’

5. The sow (?), probably symbolic of fecundity
[No. 118529]. Compare the Egyptian figure of a
sow with young in the British Museum [No. 11976]
and the figures | Nos. 1700 and 1795].

Deenie tam symbol of virility (No. 118530].
Compare the Ram of Amen and the Ram of Mendes.

ee bird of prey (?)- Signification unknown
[No. 118020].

©. A sacred bull (No. 116355]. Sometimes the
figure is marked on the forehead with a triangle.
Herodotus says (iil. 28) that the Apis Bull has on the
forehead a white triangle, and in the bronze figures of
Apis, or sacred Bull of Memphis, this white blaze 1s
represented by a triangular piece of silver inlaid in
the forehead. This figure is of the shape of an Apis
Bullmummified. Its exact signification is unknown.


86 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


g. Alion’s head, symbolic of strength [No. 118527}.

10. A horse: symbolism unknown [No. 118019].

The ape. The oldest known specimen of
this amulet is made of gold and was found at Ur
of the Chaldees. It probably symbolized virility
and fecundity. Amuletic figures of the goat and
calf are fairly common, and a civet-cat is cut on a
seal in the possession of Captain Spencer Churchill.


No. 118529. No. 118527.


No. 118530.


Figures of animals which were used as amulets
were sometimes engraved on their bases with pro-
tective designs, animals, men, etc. Examples of
these designs are given above. On No. 118529 is the
figure of a man, on No. 118527 are scorpions (?) and
on No. 118530 are three animals.

Amulets in the form of CYLINDER-SEALS are a
large and important class, and these are of special
interest. The cylinder-seal was made of precious


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 87


and semi-precious stones, eé.g. agate, amethyst,
carnelian, chalcedony, crystal, emerald (root of),
haematite, jade, jasper, lapis lazuli, marble, onyx,
eand, steatite, topaz, etc. There is little doubt that
each kind of stone was believed to possess qualities
peculiar to itself, and to have the power to protect
the wearer from certain evils and troubles. This is
proved by a text to which Mr. C. J. Gadd has been
so kind as to call my attention (No. 185 in Ebeling’s
Keilschrift texte aus Assur, religiosen Inhalts). From
this we learn that a seal made of KA-GI-NA stone
(haematite ?) will help a man to destroy his enemy.
A seal made of lapis lazuli will possess a god, and
seis. sod’ will rejoice) in him.” ‘A’ seal made of
DU-SHI-A, 2.€. rock crystal, will extend the posses-
sions of a man, and its name is good, 7.e. auspicious.
A man possessing a seal made of TU-UD-ASH stone
will walk in joy of heart. Wheresoever a man
carrieth a seal made of ZA-TU-MUSH-GIR, 1.e. green
serpentine, “ blessing and blessing shall be given
to it. And he who possesses a seal made of GUG
stone, 1.¢. red jasper or carnelian, will never be
separated from the protection of his god.

The cylinder-seal was used both as a seal and as
an amulet. When used as a seal it was rolled over
the moist clay of the tablet in a space which was
provided for it. When this was done the design
on the seal and the name of its owner stood up
above the surface of the tablet in relief. The wit-
nesses to the contract, which was written both on
the clay case and the tablet inside it, affixed their
seals to the document, and on some of the “ case-
tablets ’ in the British Museum as many as ten or
a dozen impressions of the seals of the contracting


88 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


parties and their witnesses will be found. The


designs on cylinder-seals were cut in outline by a
metal graver, and a drill was used in producing the


deeper parts. There seems to be little doubt that
the cylinder-seal was introduced into Egypt from
Babylonia at a very early period, and the hiero-
glyph ©) shows that it was attached to a cord
or chain by which it might be hung round the neck.
In Egypt the cylinder-seal was made of wood,
bronze or copper, bone or ivory, blue glazed porce-
lain, etc. Its use ceased in Egypt before the rise
of the New Kingdom, and in Babylonia before the
conquest of Alexander the Great took place. The
names cut on cylinder-seals are of various kinds,
and the common scene of the type usually called
“ Gilgamish and Enkidu fighting beasts ’”’ almost
certainly represents the combat of good genii against
the assault of evil and hostile monsters.

The series of typical cylinder-seals reproduced
on Plate XI may now be described.

1. Cylinder-seal of Adda the scribe, about 2500
B.c. The scene represents the Sun-rise, and was
intended to relieve the wearer from fears of the
powers of darkness. The Sun-god is rising between
two mountains on one of which grows the sacred
tree. On the right stands Ea, the Water-god, with
the river of fish flowing about him. On the
left is the goddess Ishtar, who is helping Shamash,
the Sun-god, to emerge from the mountain. On
the right and left are attendant deities [No. 89115].

2. Scene from a cylinder-seal representing the
Judgment of Zu (?) before Ea. An ancient legend
says that Zu coveted the sovereignty of Enlil, and
that one morning when Enlhl was taking his seat


-. = '


Babylonian cylinder-seal amulets.


103317


op)


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 91


on his throne, he seized the Tablet of Destiny of the
Gods, and carried it off to a mountain where he
hid himself. The gods were in great distress at the
theft, and Anu, the Sky-god, entreated them to
select a champion and to send him forth to punish
Zu and recover the Tablet. The god Adad was
chosen, but he refused to fight, and several other
gods did the same. The text describing the end
of the matter is wanting, but it seems that Zu was
captured and brought before Ea, who pronounced
judgment upon him. The value of this seal as an
amulet depended upon the moral teaching of the
myth. About 2500 B.c. [No. 103317].

3. Scene from a cylinder-seal representing early
heroes fighting wild animals. It was also used to
drive away from a man the demons which produce
sickness and disease. Archaic period [No. 89538].

4. Scene from a cylinder-seal representing the
gods fighting the gods of evil and the slaughter of
the demon-gods, whose skulls are being smashed by
the divine maces. Period doubtful [No. 89119].

5. Scene from a characteristic cylinder-seal of the
Kassite Period. On the right is a figure of Shamash
the Sun-god, seated, and before him is a rosette.
Above this is a form of the Kassite Cross. The
inscription is a prayer to the Sun-god for the life
and prosperity of the owner [No. 89128].

6. Scene from a cylinder-seal of the Archaic
period, with a representation of a row of horned
animals with an eye above them. The eye sym-
bolized divine protection [No. 107390].

7. Scene from a cylinder-seal of the Kassite period,
representing nine frogs. The frog was a fertility
amulet [No. 89490].


92 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


8. (See below.) Scene from a cylinder-seal repre-
senting the adoration of a god by a worshipper who 1s
accompanied by a priest and an attendant bringing an
animal as an offering. Before the god are the solar
disk and crescent moon, symbols which were adopted
by the Himyarites, and later by Arabs and Turks,
and behind him is a naked goddess or woman whose
presence is difficult to explain. The following illus-
tration is made from a plaster cast of the seal in the
British Museum.


Sometimes the cylinder-seal was engraved with
a wholly religious scene and a prayer, e.g. that of
Shuanishuria (B.M. No. 89001), which reads, “ O
Marduk, thou [great] Lord, thou Ruler of the Judg-
ments of Heaven and of Earth, unto Shuanishuria
thy servant who feareth thee, may thy countenance
be favourable.’’ A fine selection of cylinder-seals
is exhibited in the British Museum, and descrip-
tions of them will be found in the Gude to the
Babyloman and Assyrian Antiquities, 3rd edit.,
VGnd oun 22-2234.

As examples of inscribed stone amulets of a later
date may be mentioned :—


1. A memorial tablet in the form of: an amulet
inscribed with the name and titles of Esashaddon,
King of Assyria, about 680 B.c. It was worn to
give protection from the demon Lamashtu, of which


PLATE XII


on


417725


118713


113864


119437


Sumerian, Babylonian and Assyrian amulets.


XII


IAC


spornure


uvluoyAqreg
G


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 97


more will be said later. Whether the name of the
king was regarded as a “‘ word of power,” or whether
the king himself was held to be a magician, like
Solomon, is uncertain ; in either case it is interesting
to find him associated with Lamashtu [No. 113864,
Pavers SLI No.1) Amulets in this form, with
the names of gods upon them, and belonging to
Minaean times are found in South Arabia.

2. A limestone amulet similar in shape to the
preceding. On one side is the figure of a goddess
seated on a throne with her feet resting on the back
of ananimal. She has astar on her head, and holds
a circular object in her right hand ; above her is a
disk, solar or lunar, and before her an offering
stand (?). The inscription is an invocation to her
(NO: 22404, Plate XIII, No. 1].

3. Amulet inscribed on one side, with an incanta-
tion to the female devil Lamashtu. On the other
is a figure of Lamashtu, who is standing on the back
of a wild ass. She is grasping a serpent in each
hand, and is suckling a jackal and a wild pig
or 11 7750, Plate XIII,-No. 2].

4. A house-amulet. On the upper half are cut
in outline figures of four gods, who are probably
Marduk, who is standing on a magical beast, Ishtar,
Nabt, who is standing on a magical beast, and
Tashmetum [No. 118796; see page 98].

In addition to the amulets in the form of animals,
cylinder-seals, tablets, plaques, etc., the Sumerians,
Babylonians and Assyrians sought to protect them-
selves and their houses from sickness and evil spirits
by the use of PROPHYLACTIC FIGURES of gods and men,
goddesses and women, animals, reptiles, etc. That


they did so has been known for many years, for
G


98 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITFIONS


George Smith tells us in his Assyrian Discoveries
(p. 78) that he found a brick box below a late pavement
containing six terra-cotta figures which he described
as having human bodies, and the heads of lons and
large wings. The five small terra-cotta dogs, with
their names inscribed on their left sides, which have


118796


been exhibited in the British Museum for the last
forty years (see Guide, p. 221, Nos. 65-69), were for
long thought to be models of the hunting dogs of
Ashur-bani-pal.’ But we now know that the


' One of these dogs is figured on Plate XII, No. 2. His
name was “‘ Dan-rigishshu,”’ 2.e. the ““ Loud-Bayer ”’ [No. 30005].


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS Jo


Assyrians were in the habit of burying figures of
dogs of different colours under the thresholds of
their houses, so that the spirits of the dogs might
repel the attacks of such evil spirits as tried to make
an entry into the houses. The number of figures
of dogs buried under a house was usually ten, and
they were arranged five on each side of the door-way.
Dr. Koldewey found under the pavements of buildings
at Babylon small unbaked clay figures of gods, and
groups of statuettes lying in small brick boxes. |
In 1924-26- Mr. C. Leonard Woolley found at
Ur of the Chaldees among the ruins of a building
which probably dated from about the middle of the
VIIth century B.c. a series of boxes formed of three
bricks of the plano-convex type, one of the four
sides of the square being open. The cover of each
box was a pavement brick. In each box was usually
a single figure or statuette. The boxes were lined
up all round the rooms against the walls, the open
side of each box facing towards the centre of the
chamber; the figures stood in their boxes like
sentnies and guarded the area of the room. With
the figure in each box were found remains of food-
stuffs, such as grain and the bones of a pigeon or
some small bird, and generally a broken fragment
of pottery. All the figures were made of unbaked
clay, and were covered with a thin layer of lime,
on which details of the form and dress were roughly
sketched in black. A large number of these pro-
phylactic figures have been discussed and figured
by Mr. C. L. Woolley in his article, “ Babylonian
Prophylactic Figures,” in the Journal Royal Asvtatic
socrery, “October, 1926, p. 6891. In: this paper
are included several translations from cuneiform
G 2


100 AMULETS “AND SUPERSTIPIONS


inscriptions which explain the use of these figures by
Mr. Sidney Smith of the British Museum. These
prove that the figures were used in rituals in order
to avert evil hap, sickness, disease, and calamities of
all kinds. The selection of these figures for illus-
tration in this book was made for me by Mr. Sidney


No. 90996. No. 91837.


Smith, and the principal types are reproduced by
the illustrations here given.

i. Human figure wearing a fish skin robe. The
head of the fish forms a high pointed cap, and the
body of the fish hangs down behind. The special
function of this figure is unknown [B.M., No. 91837].


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 101


2. Bearded male figure wearing a horned head-
dress and a long plain garment reaching to the feet ;
the Papsukkal type of Koldewey [B.M., No. 90996].

3. A human figure naked down to the waist, with
the feet and claws of an eagle, and wearing a horned
eerie M. No. 118713], Plate XII, Nos:


No. 118714. No. 103225.


4. Bear standing on its hind legs. The right arm
is raised, and the club which was in the hand is
broken away [B.M., No. 118714].

5. The Sirrush or Mushrush, an animal con-
quered by Marduk ; it was buried under floors or
affixed to walls. A large figure of this animal was


102 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


found on the Ishtar Gate at Babylon [B.M., No.
103381] (see below). For another example see
Plate XII, No. 4 [B.M., No. 91499].

6. Figure of a being, half man and half animal,
holding a magical staff; figures of this being were
placed behind walls to repel the attacks which devils
might make on the building [B.M., No. 103225].

7. Plaque with figures of two men fighting, and
two men beating a drum; it was used to repel the
attacks of devils [B.M., No. 91906].


THE SrrRuUSH, No. 103381.


8, A fish which was dedicated to a god during the
recital of a ritual [B.M., No. 102986].

g. Figure of a monkey, in blue glaze with black
lines ; its significance is unknown [B.M., No. 117725],
Plater Nor.

10. Plaque with a figure of the goddess Ishtar
standing on a lion and astral symbols [B.M., No.
110437|) Plate XTLeNo..6.


BABYLONIAN AND? ASSYRIAN AMULETS 103


11. Plaque with a figure of a scorpion-man to
avert the attacks of demons [B.M., No. 86262],
Bate.) INO:.7,

12. Figure of a bird-headed winged being holding
a pot similar to the beings represented on the sculp-
tures of Ashur-nasir-pal. This class of figure was


No. 91906.


buried under the floor of the Kummu, or room in the
temple in which the sick were tended [B.M., No.
po005|, Plate XIIT, No: 3.

13. The wild boar. “On the 29-feet level among
fragments of the painted Jemdal Nasr pots there
was found a steatite figure of a wild boar, 4$ inches
long and carved in the round. The whole character
of the crouching brute is rendered with amazing


104 AMULETS AND SUPERSITIIONS


skill, but more marked than the realism of the work
is its curious style. It is the oldest piece of sculpture
that we have from Ur, and it implies the apprentice-
ship of many generations’ (Woolley, in The Times,
February II, 1930, p.. 13).

14. Bronze plaque used for averting the attacks
of devils. On one side is a figure of the devil
Pazuzu, and on the other the head of Nergal. In
the third register a sick man lying on a couch is
represented, and above and below are rude figures
of the animals which it was the object of the priest
to placate by means of prayers and offerings [B.M.,
No. 108979], Plate XIV. The finest known example
of this class of amulet is described in the followin
paragraphs. |


LABARITU, ORALAMASHTLO.


Among all the devils and fiends of which the
Mesopotamians lived in terror, the one that seems
to have been the most dreaded was Labartu (or, as
the name is now read, Lamashtu), a she-devil, and
the daughter of the great god Anu. She lived in the
mountains, and deserts, and cane brakes in the
marshes, and the magicians composed a whole series
of incantations and spells against her. She attacked
pregnant women and young children with such
dire results to them that people were terrified at the
mere mention of her name. Many texts of the
Lamashtu Ritual have been published by Campbell
Thompson, Myhrman and Thureau Dangin, but it
seems that the whole of the series has not come
down to us. Stones played a very prominent part
in the ritual, and it is clear that each kind of stone
possessed its special magical powers ; and many of


XIV


PAs


["6L6801
*OSIOADY


[6Z6801)


"ON


Ce


sn


e


wig]


‘onberd [esi10N-


NZNZed IZUOIG


‘OSIOAGO


PLATE. XV


Labartu or Lamashtu plaque.


(Obverse.)


Reproduced from the Catalogus of the De Clercq Collection
(vol. ii. plate xxxiv).


‘=


Fae, et
¥
! ong .
it
‘ P a
j y ¢


ia
ty


FS hs ceed
‘a rey EAE f '


. :
ALY a ;
iH


am
(a ee
eth
245
v4
a
+
Wa
ly if
5 4


4
r


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 109


the stones used were in the form of cylinders.
Some stones were male and others female. They
were tied to various parts of the body by knotted
cords of different colours, and sometimes had to
remain in position for lengthy periods, even 100 days.
The goddess Lamashtu was a violent, raging devil
of terrifying aspect. In form she resembled a
leopard (?), her face was that of a lion, and her feet
were like those of the Storm-god Zu. With her
hair tossed about wildly, and her breasts uncovered.
she burst out of the cane brakes lke a whirlwind
and chased the ox and the sheep and thrust her
hands into their flesh and blood. She glided like
a serpent into the houses, and went in and came out
at her own good pleasure. All miscarriages among
women, and all droppings of their young by animals,
were attributed to her and her baleful influences
operating through objects animate and inanimate.
Lamashtu is figured on a series of plaques in metal
and stone which have, for the most part, been dis-
cussed by Karl Frank (see his Babylonische Besch-
worungs reliefs) and Thureau Dangin in Revue
Pedssy7vologie, vol. xviii. No. IV, p. 171f, “ Rituel
Steamuleites contre Labartu.§ Jhe finest example
of these is reproduced on Plates XV and XVI. _ It is
a rectangular bronze plaque measuring 5} inches
in height by 34 inches in width. It was bought in
Syria in 1879 by M. Pérétié, and was acquired by
De Clercq, and published by Clermont Ganneau in
the Revue archéologique (‘‘ L’enfer Assyrien ’”’), Decem-
ber, 1879, and republished in the Catalogus De
Clercg (vol. 11. Plate xxxiv). On the back of the
plaque is the figure of an animal demon, standing
upright with the two fore-paws resting on the


110 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


upper edge of the plaque, which also supports the
head of the monster, which is in the round. The
face looks down on the figures, etc., on the front of
the plaque. The body is that of a lion, and
is covered with scales and has four wings. The
head has a pair of ram’s horns, which lie flat on


Pazuzu, son of Hanpu, King of the air devils.


the sides of the head, the eyes are round jand
fierce, and the shape of the mouth shows that the
lion is supposed to be roaring. His tail is a scorpion,
and the phallus, which lies along the lower part of
the belly, terminates in a snake’s head. His hind
legs have the claws of a bird of prey instead of feet,


Pie Ey


Labartu or Lamashtu plaque.


(Reverse.)


Reproduced from the Catalogus of the De Clercq Collection
(vol. ii. plate xxxiv).


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 113


and they rest on the lower projecting border of the
plaque. The name of this animal demon is PAzuzu.
An inscription published by Thureau Dangin (Revue,
p. 190) makes him say, “ [I am Pazuzu, the son
of Hanpu, king of the evil spirits of the air; I go
forth from the mountains raging like a whirlwind.]’’
The British Museum possesses several heads of
meures of Pazuzu, chiefly in stone. The one in
bronze, No. 93089, has been published by Layard ;
No. 22459 (stone), by L. W. King, Babylonian |
Religion, p. 189; and Nos. 91873-91876 (stone),
by Campbell Thompson, Devils, vol. 1, Plate IT.

The front of the plaque is divided into four registers,
the largest of which is at the bottom. REGISTER I
contains ten emblems which are, beginning on the
left side, viz. (1) a cylindrical crown with several pairs
of horns; (2) a ram-headed staff; (3) a thunder-
bolt ; (4) a lance; (5) two reeds bound together ;
(6) an eight-rayed star on a disk ; (7) a disk with the
wings and tail of a bird; (8) a crescent; (9) seven
globes ; (10) a lamp.

REGISTER II contains figures of seven demons,
each facing to the right and wearing a long fringed
garment held in position by a belt round the
waist,  lheir right arms are raised; and their
clenched hands, ready to strike, are behind their
heads, and their left arms are extended a little in
front of them, the hands being clenched. The
first has the head of a panther, the second the head
of a lion, the third the head of a wolf, the fourth the
head of a ram, the fifth the head of an ibex, the sixth
the head of a bird, the seventh the head of a serpent.

REGISTER III: Here we see a draped man lying at
full length on a cushion, with his right arm raised

H


114 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


and the palm of the hand turned towards his face.
The cushion rests on a bier with one end rounded
and bent upwards ; the legs of the bier are round and
are fastened together by cords. At each end of the
bier stands a bearded man wearing the skin of a
fish, the head of which serves as a covering for the
man’s head, and the tail reaches the ground behind
him. The right hand of each man is raised, and in
his left he holds a small vessel or bucket ; his right
leg is extended in front of him, On the left is a
lamp which rests on a flat tablet which is tied to a
tripod. On the left are two lon-headed beings
facing each other, with legs terminating in the claws
of birds of prey. Each wears a short tunic which
is held in position by a fillet and a belt, and has a
dagger in his belt. Each grasps the clenched left
hand of the other, and the right hand of each is
raised behind his head. The last figure in this
Register has his face turned away from the bier,
He is bearded, and wears an ordinary head cloth
and a short tunic with a belt. |

REGISTER IV: Here we have represented a river
bank with reeds and a stream in which five fish
are swimming to the right. The central figure is
that of a devil with a woman’s body which is
covered with hair; her head, which is cased in
a rounded cap (?) of unusual shape, is that of
a..froaring lioness, Her arms are rfaisedji@ana
in each hand, which is on the level of her face, she
holds a two-headed serpent. A small dog is
sucking at her right breast and a pig at her left
breast ;. and her legs terminate in the claws of a>
bird of prey. She kneels on the back of an ass with
her right knee, and her left claw rests on the ass’s


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 115


head. In the space between her legs and the back of
the ass is a scorpion. The ass is placed in a boat,
the bow of which ends in the head of a serpent, and
the stern in the head of a bull. The ass has one
hind leg fastened by a rope to the boat or the bank
of the stream. Standing on the bank to the left is
a hairy monster with his arms in the same position
as those of the beings in the Second Register. He
is perhaps the king of the evil spirits Pazuzu. In
the space to the right are nine objects which are
difficult to identify.

The general meaning of the group of scenes
depicted on this bronze amulet is quite clear. The
female devil in the boat is Lamashtu, whose home
is the infernal regions whence she comes when she
arrives on the earth to carry out her campaign of
slaughter and death. The only way to stop her
from carrying out her baneful plans is to get her
back again in the Underworld, and it is necessary
to coax her to leave this earth by promising to give
her gifts. What these gifts are is duly set out in
the incantations which are engraved on Lamashtu
amulets, and they include jewels, a spindle, a cloak
for her journey from earth to hell, provisions of
various kinds, e.g. cakes of bread baked on hot
cinders, malt, bread soaked in beer, drink necessary
to keep her from thirsting, a flask of choice oil,
sandals which will not wear out on the journey,
roasted grain packed in four leather bags, and all
these are to be stowed in four clay vessels. In short,
she must be provided with oil to anoint herself,
apparel in which to dress herself, water and grain
with which she can make beer, and means of trans-


port, viz. a suitable boat and receptacles for her
H 2


116 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


provisions. The texts go on to say that she is to
set out on her westward journey through the desert
to hell at a certain time before the sun sets, and that
she must go direct to the place of sunset. She
must then make her way over the mountains which
block the road to hell, and when this is done she
must cross the river of hell, which is no other than
the great World-Ocean NAR MARRATU.

The scenes on the Lamashtu amulets and the texts
of the incantations agree closely, and the following
prayer, which was published by L. W. King (Baby-
lonian Magic, Plates 67 and 68) and translated in full
by Thureau Dangin, shows that men really carried out
the regulations concerning offerings to Lamashtu :
“OQ Shamash, the etsmmu devil which terrifieth me,
who hath clung to me for several days past, and will
not leave me, who doggeth my steps by day, and
terrifieth me all night long, who maketh the skin
of my body to rise up, and the hair of my head to
stand up, who constraineth my forehead, and maketh
my face feverish, and drieth up my palate, and
poisoneth my flesh, and parcheth all my members,
whether it be a ghost of my family and of my
ancestor, or the ghost of some man who hath died
a violent death, or whether it be a homeless ghost—
it may or may not be one of these. O Shamash,
in thy presence, I have sought for a garment with
which to clothe it, and sandals for its feet, anda
belt of leather for its waist, and a pot of water from
which it may drink, I have given it the flour of
malt, and I have supplied it with food for the
journey. May it depart to the West; may he be
committed to the care of NE-GAB, the great gate-
keeper of hell; may NE-GaB, the great gatekeeper


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN, AMUOLETS ey)


of hell, keep him in strict custody. May his key
lock fast the lock.”

The following are specimens of the shorter incan-
tations :—


I.—(1) INCANTATION: (2) Lamash, daughter of
Anu; (3) Whose name has been uttered by the gods ;
(4) Innin, queen of queens; (5) Lamashtu, O great
lady ; (6) Who seizes the painful Asakku; (7) Over-
whelming the ‘A/a; (8) Come not nigh what belongeth
to the man; (9) Be conjured by Heaven; (10) Be
conjured by the Earth; (11) Be conjured by Enlil;
(12) Be conjured by Ea.


Il.—(1) INcAanTaTIOoN: Lamashtu, “ Daughter of
mou --(2)is thy firstname. The second is, “ Sister
Mievire cods of the streets” ; (3) The third is, ““ Sword
Peichosplitteth the skull” > -(4) The fourth is, “ She
muomkindleth a fires’; (5) The fifth is, “ Goddess
[the sight] of whose face causeth horror’’; (6) The
sixth is, “‘ Committed to the hands.”’


Returning to the figures which were used as
amulets and the incantations which were recited
in connection with them, a specimen incantation
may now be given :— |


7. INGANTATION, that a... demon-and an evil
demon (utukku ?) may not [dwell] in the house of a
man.


2. RiTuaL.—On seven figures of the apkallu
(1.€. the teachers who lived before the Flood) made
of the wood of the bay-tree (?) which are crowned
with the head-dress proper to each of them, and wear
the apparel proper to each of them.


118 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


3. And carry in their right hand a [piece of] bay-
tree (?) wood which has been burned in the fire at
the top and bottom and place their left hands on
their chests.

4. Write their names on their left hip. On the first
image, covered in red paste for its outer garment,

5. Write, ~ Day of lite, born’ of .Ur>] (Ome
second, covered in gypsum,

6. Write, “‘ Day of plenty, gracious son of Nippur.”’
On the third, covered in gypsum and with water
drawn on him in black wash,

7. Write, “ Day of delight grown up in Exidim
On the fourth, covered with black wash, write,
“ Fortunate day, created in Kullah.”’

8. On the fifth; covered with Im-Katr-La: write,
“ Day of bright face, nursling of Kesh.’ On the
sixth, covered in green paste,

g. Write, “ Lucky day, exalted judge of Lagash.”
On the seventh, wearing IM- KAL- of carnelian (?), —

10. Write, “ Day that has given life to him who is
smitten protection of Shuruppak.”’


1r. Bury at the head of the bed. Recite before


them the incantation, “‘O you seven eldest (or,
leading) APKALLU.”’


12. Seven clay figures of the apkallu, which have
faces of birds and wings fitted, and carry a mulilu
(cleansing implement ?) in their right hands.

13. And a wooden bucket in their left hands,
covered in gypsum, cloaked with a bird’s wings on
the tegett.


_


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 119


14. Bury in the second pavement of the house
sieaibe head of the bed. Kecite before them the
incantation, “‘ You are the figures of the guardian
apkallu.”’


15. Seven clay figures of the afkallu, covered in
gypsum, cloaked in the skin of a fish of black paste,
carrying in their right hands the same thing, and in
their left hands the same thing,


16. Bury in the frieze on the wall of the kummu
chamber. Their incantation as before.


17. Seven clay figures of the apkallu, covered in
gypsum, cloaked in the skin of a fish, grasping in
their right hands the date-spathe, with their left
hands


18. Their breasts, bury facing the door behind
the chair. Incantation as before.

19. Seven clay figures of the apkallu, covered in
gypsum, cloaked in the skin of a fish,

20. Carrying in their nght hands the urngallu
reed (standard ?), grasping their breasts with their
left hands, bury in the middle of the house in front
of the chair.


21. Seven tamarisk figures of the divine Seven,
crowned with the head-dress proper to each of them,
wearing the apparel proper to each of them,

22. Standing on a base of p(b)uridu (reed matting),
covered with red paste, carrying in their right hands a
kultu of copper,


120 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


23. In their left hands a copper dagger, their
waists girdled with a band of copper, caps of copper
on their heads .

24. With horns of copper fitted, bows and quivers
stand at their sides,

25. Bury opposite the figure of tamarisk. Recite
before them the incantation, ““ You are the figures
of the divine Seven, the great gods.”


The text then goes on to speak of a tamarisk
figure of the goddess Narudu which is to be buried
in the kamu gate (t.e. the principal gate), seven
figures of weapon-men or “ club-bearers ’’ which
are to be buried in the same gate behind the dagger-
bearers ; a tamarisk figure inscribed “ Over-thrower
of evil deeds’ and “ Introducer of the good shedu
and good lamassu’’; a tamarisk figure of the god
of the house; clay figures of the Fish-man ; of the
Scorpion-man, male and female; of Latarak in
green and black paste; of the Lion-man; of ten
dogs. The figures of the dogs, which were to be
painted in different colours, were to be buried in the
kamu gate. For the complete translation from which
the above extracts are taken, see Sidney) Smit
Journal Royal Asiatic Society, 1926.

Some details of the Ritual of prophylactic and
evil-averting figures are supplied in the following
extract published by Zimmern, No. 54, and rendered
into English by Sidney Smith (Journal Royal Astatic
SOCIEIV BOZO ap 205).

INCANTATION: For the raising up of their arms
I have stretched out a red cloth above, I have hung
a spotted cord round, in their hands I have set


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 121


the date-spathe. .I have made the usurtu perfect,
I have put a wash of gypsum round them. At the
head of the seven of them, of those with terrible
wings, I have set Nergal. I put Nusku at their
head in the furnace. Two figures, twins, bound
together, whose form is complete ‘“‘ overthrowers of
wicked devils,”’ I set at the sick man’s head, right and
left. The figure of LuGAL: Gir: Ra: who has no equal,
Mecet On the viksw of the house: the figure’ of
Suit-HAM:TaA-E-A- who has no rival, the figure of
Narudu, the sister of the great gods, I set at the
bottom of the bed. That nought evil might
approach, I set Latarak and Latarak in the gate.
To drive away everything evil I set up a hulduppu
opposite the gate. Fighting twins of gypsum I
drew on the door. Fighting twins of the enclosure,
of bitumen, I set up in the gateway wings, right and
left. Two figures of the guardians of Ea and Marduk
I set up in the gate, right and left. The incantation
is the incantation of Marduk. The magician is the
figure of Marduk. Repeat for so-and-so the son of
so-and-so, whose god is so-and-so, whose goddess is
so-and-so, in whose body there is sickness, the incan-
tation, ““When the cattle come home, when the
cattle go out, do you, offspring of the sweet water,
holy sons of Ea, eat what is good, drink honey,
may nought that is evil approach the place you
guard.”’


When you have recited this before the seven
figures of those with wings, in front of whom Nergal
stands, recite the following before the seven figures
of the divine Seven, made of wood of the bay-tree (?)


122 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


which carry clubs. INCANTATION: “ Beating down
the evil vabisu, sparing life, exercising force, turning
back the breast of the evil, preserving the oracular
utterances of Enlil, fire that overwhelms the un-
iniendly dagger that overbears fate +. ~) that
lights up mankind, divine Seven that destroy the
wicked.”

The following illustrates the symbolism of the
objects which were used in the Ritual :— —


14. The gypsum and bitumen which they smear
on the gate of the sick man’s house.


15. [he gypsum is the god Ninurta, the bitumen
is the utukku demon. Ninurta pursues the utukku
demon.


16. The two ztsurru which surround the sick
man’s bed are the gods LuGaL-Gir: Ra: and
SHIT*HAM: TA‘ E- A;

17. The three meal-heaps which are thrown
down are Anu, Enlil and Ea.

18. The usurtu which they drew in front of the
bed, that is the net; it surrounds everything bad.


19. The skin of the gugallu; and the URUDG.
NIG-KAL-GA which they .-) . at the head’oniim


SICK lal.


20. The skin of the gugallu is Anu, andiipie
URUDU-NIG-KAL-GA is Enlil; the urigallu reeds.


21. Which are set up at the head of the sick man
are the divine Seven, the great gods, the sons of
Ishara.

22. The hulduppu goat which is set at the head
of the bed of the sick man is the god Nin. AMASH>»
KU:-GA: |


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 123


23. The shepherd of Enlil. The censer and torch
which are put in the sick man’s house.


Zoe wiiercenser is the god Ku-Bu- the torchis
Nusku. 7


Sec sidney omith in jf ournal Royal Asiatic Society,
O20; p. 205 I.


CYLINDER-SEALES AS VOTIVE OFFERINGS.


In the observations on the cylinder-seal printed
above we have only dealt with it as an amulet ;
but it seems that the cylinder-seal was sometimes
used as a votive offering, and was laid before the
god, and was thereafter regarded as the property
of the god. Sidney Smith has called attention
(Journal Royal Asiatic Society, 1926, p. 444) to the
fact that among the large number of cylinder-seals
now known, whilst the greater number of them show
marks of hard wear, and cleaning and of being worn
as amulets, many are in such an excellent state of
preservation that they look as if they had only just
left the hands of their makers. Basing his opinion
on a tablet in the British Museum (No. 117666),
Siiewininks’ that this is due to the fact that
cylinder-seals which were “ before’ a _ divine
statue or symbol would not be continually used,
and that they were thus enabled to retain
their pristine clearness. The tablet to which
he refers, and the text of which he translates, is
inscribed with a royal command in which an
official is ordered to search for a certain cylinder-
seal, and to take it and bring it tohim. The correct-
ness of this view is proved by two cylinder-seals
which were found at Babylon, the one bearing


124 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the image of Marduk, and the other that of Adad ;
both seem to have belonged to the “ treasure of
Marduk.”’


THE CYLINDER-SEAL.IN ASSY RIA; SPE RSE
PHOENICIA.


The Babylonians of the late Empire used cylinder-
seals in the same way as the early Babylonians,
but as a rule they are much smaller, though the
traditional scenes and figures are found on them.
The Assyrians also used cylinder-seals and intro-
duced on them the characteristic figures of their
gods, and figures of men grouped about the sacred
tree. The Cappadocians and Hittites also adopted
the cylinder-seal, but the scenes found on them are
arranged differently from those found on Babylonian
cylinder-seals. Figures of gods standing upon lions
appear for the first time. The Phoenicians borrowed
Assyrian designs for their cylinder-seals, but wrote
the names of their owners with Phoenician letters.
About the time of the downfall of the Assyrian
Empire after the destruction of Nineveh (612 B.C.),
the place of the cylinder-seal for sealing clay tablets
was taken by CONE-SEALS, in sard, carnelian, agate,
chalcedony, etc., and they were used for this purpose
throughout the Persian Period down to about 350 B.C:
The favourite stone for seals of this period was
chalcedony, and on these were cut symbols of the
gods Shamash, Sin, Adad, Marduk and Nabi;
mythical beasts and winged demons ; men standing
by the sacred tree above which is the symbol of the
god Asshur; scenes from the Gilgamish legend ;
man-headed  goat-fish, man-headed birds, cock,
crescent ; hunting scenes, etc. The scenes on two


BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN AMULETS 125


chalcedony cones are here reproduced. In the first
(B.M., No. 115604) we see three bulls’ heads created
in a disc formation. This device was magical, and
it appears in many forms during the Achaemenian


No. 115604. _ No. 119919.


Period, and after down to the Middle Ages. In the
second (B.M., No. 119919) we see a mounted horseman
engaged in conflict with some animal; perhaps the
foundation of the legend of St. George and the
Dragon.


SASSANIAN AMULETS AND SEALS.


Here for convenience sake may be mentioned the
large class of amulets and amuletic seals which were
used in Western Iran or Persia during the period of
the rule of the Sassanides, 2.e. from about A.D. 226—
632. They are commonly known as “ Pehlevi
gems,’ because the inscriptions upon them, which
are usually the names of the owners or gods, are
written in Pehlevi characters. These characters
were derived froma‘ Semitic alphabet, which was
probably Syriac. Pehleviseals are made of different
kinds of stone, agate, lapis lazuli, sard, carnelian,
chalcedony, and variegated hard stones. The larger
specimens are rounded and pierced and were
threaded on string or wires and carried like cylinder-
seals, or attached to the body like amulets; the
smaller ones, which are flat, formed the bezels of


126 AMULETS AND .SUPERSTITIONS


rings. On the largest of them, which resemble
oval plaques, we find busts of governors and women.
Favourite representations on them are :—Palm
branches and flowers held in hands, animals, especi-
ally the winged horse (Pegasus ?), birds, reptiles,
mythological creatures, and elaborate linear devices.
Six characteristic specimens from the British Museum
Collection are here given. (1) ‘Three (nite mies
and an indeterminate object; this scene is very


No. 119382. No. 119351. No. 119392.


No. 119979. No. 119983. No. 119971,


common and probably illustrates some legend
[No. 119382]. (2) Three lions’ heads in. disesform
FNo.., £1935n-8 (3) A. palm. branch ‘and’ jagmee
worshipping a star and the crescent moon [No.
119392]. (4) A symbol which was probably sup-
posed to possess magical powers [No. 119979].
(5) A semi-human figure grasping the symbols of
the Beginning and the End; between his legs is
the figure of an animal (mouse ?) [No. 119983].
(6) A hand with the thumb and index-finger touch-


ing [No. 119971].


CEO Pik iy.


COPTIC ANULE TS.


According to the Life of. St. ANTHONY, the Great,
of Egypt, the Egyptians were in the habit of embalm-
ing the bodies of the saints and martyrs, and of
placing them not in graves but in their houses so
that they might do honour to them. ANTHONY had
entreated the bishops to order the people not to do
this, but the custom continued. When he was
dying he commanded those who were about him,
payines ) Die a-grave then, and bury me_therein,
and hide my body under the earth. And let these
my words be observed carefully by you, and tell ye
no man where ye lay me; [and there I shall be] until
the Resurrection of the dead, when I shall receive
[again| this body without corruption ’’ (BUDGE,
Paradise of the Fathers, Vol. i. p. 72). This passage
makes it quite clear that the Egyptian Christians
continued to mummify their dead long after their
conversion to Christianity, and the tombs of Egypt
of the early Christian period support ANTHONY'S
statement. Anthony died about A.D. 360, and
thus it is certain that the Egyptian Christians had
been mummifying their dead for at least 260 years,
for the introduction of Christianity into EGypT
cannot be placed later than about A.D. 100. There
is no satisfactory evidence showing under whose
auspices the Christianizing of Egypt took place,


128 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


though it is generally attributed to St. MARK, who
began to preach in Alexandria about A.D. 69.
Though the form of the Egyptian Religion which
was in use between 200 B.C. and A.D. 100, with its
doctrine of a Last Judgment and its fastings and
prayers and asceticism generally, was an excellent
preparation for the reception of Christianity by the
Egyptians, when once their conversion was effected,
they determined to break absolutely with the old
pagan religion and its cults. They discarded the
hieroglyphic, hieratic and demotic scripts, and for-
mulated an alphabet for themselves, which included
the Greek alphabet and a number of conventional
forms of old Egyptian characters; in this mixed
alphabet they wrote the Coptic version of the Scrip-
tures: They rejected the spells and the) Vignemms
of the Book of the Dead, and abandoned the use of
the funerary amulets of the ancient Egyptians, and
all their amuletic symbols save one, viz. the sign


5 ankh which means “ life, living.’”’ What object


this sign represented cannot be said, but as to the
idea which both pagans and Egyptians associated
with it there is no doubt. Gods and goddesses, and
men and women, are seen holding it, and it seems
that the life of every being, divine or human, depended
upon his or her possession of it. From first to last
the gods are seen carrying it in their nght hands,
and they gave life to their kings and servants pre-


senting it to them. It has been suggested that a
is a conventional representation of some organ of
the human body connected with procreation, and


this view is probably correct. But be this as it
may, the Egyptian Christian adopted it as an


f

‘ 4
7

J


COPTICVAMOLETS 129


equivalent of the Cross of Christ, and it symbolized
to them life everlasting. On the stele of ABRAHAM


(B.M., No. 1257) we have it in this form i


with the letters & and 9. On the stele of PLEINOs
(B.M., No. 679) we have the ordinary Greek cross


bo “ and two ankh crosses i i 3


On the stele of Sapinos (B.M. 1352) we have Ne


i JNGmoaeanG OomOn another stele are .cut


figures of doves holding + (Bev 36327). “NAVILLE


found a mummy with the suwastika fs drawn on


the left shoulder (see Dezr el-Bahart, 1, p. 5), but
there is no proof that the mummy was that of a
Christian. Thereisin the British Museum (No. 54051)
amummy of a child of the early Christian or late
Roman period ; the hands are crossed over the breast,


and in one he holds a Cross L | I and in the other


a flower (lotus (?) which suggests that the mummy
is that of agirl). Ona portion of a mummy swathing
found at LycopotLis is painted a Christian cross


(No. 55056). On avery rare amulet which
was given to the British Museum by Sir RIDER


, HAGGARD, the Birth of Christ is represented


130 AMULETS “AND SUPERSTITIONS


(No. 469); Mary is seated under a tree and she
holds - in one hand ; on the reverse is the sign i


and the legend, “One God in heaven.) Aeguie
woman is seated under a tree and not in a cave, it
has been suggested that it is the birth of the Buddha
which is represented. |


The amuletic signs + and N which are seen


on Coptic monuments older than the time of Con-
STANTINE the Great, have not been found in the
form of amulets. Attempts have been made to


show that the sign M is derived from me but


they appear to the writer to be unsuccessful. The
sign is found woven into textiles from


Akhmim. From the excavations of Coptic sites at
AKHMinM and elsewhere the following amulets have
been recovered :—


i; [he Cross, .both in» the; Greek and Copme
forms, made of bronze, sometimes inlaid with paste
or stones, bone, ivory (?), mother-of-pearl, iron,
glass.


2. The Dove, symbolic of the Holy Ghost, in
mother-of-pearl.


3. Pendants in mother-of-pearl; significance
unknown.


4. Bone figures of the VirGIN MAry seated in a
shrine.


COPTIC AMUEL TS 131


5. Bone plaques carved with figures of ST. GEORGE
spearing a dragon; the spear is cross-headed, and
the saint holds a cross in his left hand.


P
6. Plaques of shell inscribed 4+ and 5.


Saint George of Lydda.


7. LTerra-cotta bottles stamped with a cross.


8. The Fisu, a symbol of Christ. The fish became

a very popular amulet when it was pointed out

that the letters of tvs = “Incous ypiaros Geov vios

cwiyp, “ Jesus Christ, son of God, the Saviour.”’

The cross resting on a fish, and a cross with a fish on

each side of it are found cut upon gems. See FORRER,
Reallextkon, Strassburg, 1907, p. 427, Tafel roo.
I 2


132 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


g. Terra-cotta oil flasks from the tomb of ST.
MENAS, on which are stamped figures of the saint,
camels, etc. See BupcE, Texts relating to Sant
Ména, London, 1909, p. 33 f. The dolphins which
protected the saint’s body at sea are often sculptured
on funerary Coptic stelae.

10. Large crosses made of lead and stone, which
were used as funerary monuments. (See B.M., Nos.
46708 and 1339.)

Among the Copts the amulets which were intended
to protect the dead took the form of sheets of
inscribed papyrus ; many of these are preserved in
the British Museum. One contains a copy of the
apochryphal letter of King Abgar to Christ, and the
first words of each of the Four Gospels (Oriental
4919 (2)). Another is inscribed ‘‘ Lord God
Almighty help me!” and a third is inscribed with
some of the vowels, each seven times repeated and
in ‘separate lines (Crum, Catalogue, p. 175).


© EPA PALE Ba Ve


EGYPTIAN AMULETS.


The Egyptians in all periods of their history were
lovers of amulets, and they placed them under and
in their houses and tombs, and set them up in their
temples, and wore them when living, and caused
them to be placed on their bodies when dead. They
made them of many kinds of stones, both common
and semi-precious, various kinds of wood, gold,
copper, silver-gold, ivory, bone, shell, wood, wax,
faience, etc. The common word for amulet inthe


dynastic period was mk-t, A Gan he which means ~


Beprotector  ,. a. Synonym, frequently. used in-the
. . ¥ @) ° . .
texts is udjau, » | ST 1.€. “the thing which


Peeps tcdic, athe | strengthener, ~§ Many of the
substances of which amulets were made were believed
to possess influence or properties which could be
absorbed by the wearers. Amulets with names of
gods or words of power inscribed upon them were
held to be more powerful than those which were
uninscribed, and those which had been “ blessed ”’
by the magician, and therefore contained a portion
of his spiritual power, were the most powerful of
all. Most of the Egyptian amulets known have
come from the tombs of Egypt, and were “ pro-
tectors ’’ worn by the dead ; it is probable that they
are identical with those which were worn by the
living.


134 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The oldest amulets from Egypt belong to the
Neolithic period. Among them are figures im flint
of the crocodile, some horned animal (goat ?), the
head of a cow with a woman’s face (the goddess
HATHOR ?), the hippopotamus, the cuttle-fish (?),


and the objects Ne and yar the first of the two


objects may be the Kef-pesh, an instrument used
in connection with birth ceremonies, and the second
may be a feather. All these were worn to give the
wearers virility and fecundity, and the last two
mentioned are probably models of some human


The great amulet of the Sun-gods of sunrise and sunset in the form of a
lion with a head at each end of his body.


organ of generation. The flint arrow heads were
also used as amulets. To the same period belong
the green slate models of tortoises or turtles, rams,
stags, bears, birds (bats ?), which are exhibited in
the British Museum (see Guide to the 4th, 5th and
6th Egyptian Rooms, p. 281 f).

The oldest AMULETIC SIGN used by the dynastic
Egyptians is C. to which they assigned the
phonetic value of a@nkh or ang. What object it
represents is not known, but it was probably some
part of the human body which the Egyptians
believed to be intimately connected with generation


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 135


and with the maintenance of life. The meaning of
the word a@nkh is “life,” “ living,’ in fact “ ever-
lasting life” and the “life which cannot die.”
Every god and goddess and divine being possessed
fieeand by it) their lie was maintamed.. They
bestowed it on kings and also on the souls who were
acquitted in the Hall of Judgment, and those


who received it lived for i. i.e. “one hundred


thousand millions of years.’’ When the Egyptians
emraced Christianity in. the Ist “century they


adopted the sign te though of pagan origin, and


its meaning, and it appears on funerary monuments
side by side with the: Christian Cross. The amulet


if was made of wood, wax, metal, stones of various
femaceiaicnce, etc. :. this*tact.. proves that the
Egyptians did not know what object the sign i.
represented. The principal funerary amulets were :

I. The SCARAB, scarabaeus sacer, oe one of the


class of the dung-eating beetles. This beetle collects
a mass of dung, lays in it one egg, and then kneads
the dung together and finally makes it into a round
ball about 2 inches in diameter. This done, it turns
its head away from the ball, and with its hind legs
rolls the ball along the ground into some sunny
place, where under the influence of the heat of the
sun, the egg is hatched, and the little beetle lives
and flourishes on the excrement with which the egg
has been surrounded. For a naturalist’s description
of the beetle, see J. H. FABRE, The Sacred Beetle and
others, London, 1919. From the earliest times the
Egyptians associated this beetle with the god of
creation, and its egg-ball with the sun ; the god was


136 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


believed to roll the ball of the sun across the sky
even as the beetle rolled its ball over the ground.
And heat and life came from the sun, just as the
larva of the. beetle, hatched in the egg-ball and
nourished on its substance, proceeded from the egg-
ball. The god who rolled the solar ball across the
sky was called Khepera, 1.e. “the Roller,” and in
the Book of Ammi Tuat we see him pushing the
sun into the sky at dawn. The Egyptians wore
models of the beetle when living to give them the
life and strength of the god of creation. They
placed in their mummies models in green stone or
black basalt or haematite of the Goliathus Ailas
beetle, to effect the RESURRECTION of their dead
kinsfolk. These are the well-known “ heart sca-
rabs,”’ on which copies of Chapter xxxd of pee Book
of the Dead are inscribed.

Colossal models of the scarab were set up upon
pedestals in the temples, e.g. the example which was
found by Legrain in the temple of Amen-Ra at
Karnak, and was made in the reign of Amenhetep III.
The largest known temple scarab is in the British
Museum (Central Saloon, No. 965). It is uninscribed,
is 5 feet long, 3 feet wide and weighs over two tons ; it
was brought from Constantinople by Lord Elgin.
Amenhetep III had many hundreds of large scarabs
made, and recorded on them the events of his reign
which he deemed noteworthy, viz.: 1. His marriage
with the lady Ti. 2. His Wild-Cattle Hunt in the
second year of his reign, 3. The genealogy of Queen Ti.
4. The slaughter of 102 lhons when hunting during
the first 10 years of his reign. 5. The digging of a
lake in Western Thebes. His son Amenhetep IV
(Aakhunaten) also made use of large scarabs to


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 137


commemorate important events (see B.M., No.
51084). For texts describing these events and
translations (see BupDGE, The Mummy, 2nd edit.,
p. 298). Scarab amulets were made of almost every
kind of material, and they vary in length from
half an inch to 2 inches. They did not come into
Peneral use until-the XIth or XIIth Dynasty,
and their vogue ceased about 550 B.c. They have
been found in Elam, Persia, Babylonia, Syria,
Phoenicia, Palestine and in nearly all the countries
round the Mediterranean. In Egypt many of the
scarab amulets were also used as seals. Those who
wish to study the scarab amulet should examine
the unrivalled collection in the British Museum.

2. The TET (or DED) was associated with the
backbone, or certain of the lower vertebrae, to which
it gave strength and stability in life, and renewed
power to the back after death. See Chapter clv of
the Book of the Dead.


pane LET, A GCoOptCm Omer On) tTOOmen | Xt


amulet which was commonly made of some red
Substance, ¢.g. red jasper, red glass, .red. wood,
red porphyry, red porcelain, and carnelian, or sand, (s¢-//)
or reddish agate ; examples in solid gold are known,
and in gilded stone. The Tjet is a conventional
form of the genital organs of the goddess Isis (see
BuDGE; Osiris, vol. 1. p. 276; vol. ii. p. 280), and
it was supposed to bring to the wearer, living or
dead, the virtue of the blood of Isis’. Itand the Tet


1 The Coptic makes it clear that this amulet was intended to
represent the vulva or matrix of Isis. The forms ooTe, Of
and “TOTE are the equivalent of the hieroglyphic w =
it Oe open ati-t.


138 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


are often seen in the hands of statues and on coffins,
and armed with these all-powerful divine amulets,
the deceased was ready to enter the Judgment
Hall of Osiris. The text of Chapter clvi of the Book
of the Dead is often found cut on the Tet.

4. The Urs, or head-rest or pillow, as an amulet
is usually made of haematite, and is rarely inscribed ;
when it was intended for use as an article of funerary
equipment, it was made of wood, and ivory, and
stone of various kinds, and wooden and ivory
examples are usually inscribed with Chapter clxvi
of the Book of the Dead. The large pillows were
placed under the necks of mummies to “ lift up the
heads ”’ of the deceased persons in the Other World,
and to prevent the ‘‘ decapitation of their heads.”
‘Their enemies shall have no power to cut off the
heads of the deceased, but the deceased shall cut
off the heads of their enemies,’’ says the text.

5. The Ap or HEART amulet was made of many
kinds of red stones, red jasper, red glass, red porcelain,
red paste and red wax, and it was inscribed in the
breast of the mummy in place of the heart which
was mummified separately. The upper part of it
was sometimes made in the form of a human head.
The heart was, to the Egyptians, the source of all
life and thought, and it was believed to be the seat
of the Ba, or what may be termed the “ heart
soul,” 2.e. the soul of the physical body. It was
connected in some way, which is, at present, not
clear, with the Ka, or “ double,’’ which was perhaps
the sub-conscious vital power. The texts show
that the heart was supposed to contain the soul of
Khepera, the self-created and self-existing god, and
it was therefore immortal. The Book of the Dead


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 139


contains several spells and prayers for the preserva-
@omeot the heart, viz: Chapters xxvi, XXvil, Xxvili;
XX1X (3 versions), xxx (2 versions). The text most
commonly found on models of the heart is Chapter
xxxb, which, according to one Rubric, is as old as
MEN-KAU-Ra (MyceERINUus), a king of the IVth
Dynasty, and according to another, as old as SEMTI,
a king of the IInd Dynasty. The other spells gave


T= StS aa TM
ae Ot Eo PRES 2 ee =


=e ES its js Mye


tS
SaaS SWE)


The Prayer-spell inscribed on Heart-scarabs. It was in usein Egypt for
more than three thousand years, and is perhaps the oldest complete prayer
in the world.


the deceased powers in the Other World, but Chapter
xxx6 enabled a man to obtain the verdict of “ Truth-
speaker ’ in the Judgment Hall of Osiris. It may
be rendered, “ Heart of my mother! Heart of my
mother! Heart of my being! Oppose me not in
my evidence (or testimony). Thrust me not aside
before the Judges. Fall not away from me before
the Guardian of the Balance. Thou art my Ka
in my body, Khnemu making sound my members.


140 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Come thou forth to the place of happiness (or
felicity) whither we would go. Make not my
name to stink with the Assessors, who make men,
during my existence. Make good a good bearing
with joy of heart at the weighing of words and
deeds. Utter no falsehood concerning me in the
presence of the Great God. Assuredly thou shalt
be distinguished rising up as a speaker of the truth.”

6..The VULTURE, NER-T, made ‘of scolammeiga
inscribed with Chapter clvii of the Book of the Dead,
when tied to the neck of the mummy, gave the
deceased the strength and fierceness of the goddess
Isis, when she was wandering about in the papyrus
swamps in the Delta in the form of a vulture. The
use of this amulet is not older than the XXVIth
Dynasty, say 650 B.C.

7. The COLLAR or PECTORAL, USEKH-T, made of
gold, and inscribed with Chapter clvii of the Book of
the Dead, when tied to the neck of the mummy,
gave the deceased freedom from all possible fetterings
about the neck. The use of this amulet is not older
than the XXVIth Dynasty.

8. The PAPYRUS SCEPTRE, UADJ, was made of
mother-of-emerald, and inscribed with Chapter clix
of the Book of the Dead ; when laid on the neck or
breast of the mummy gave the deceased renewed
youth and virility, and all the qualities of the
growing papyrus plant. It was worn as a pendant.
Usually this amulet has the form of a budding
papyrus shoot, but it is also found sculptured on a
small rectangular plaque made of the neshmet stone.
In the Papyrus of NEBSENI (early X VIIIth Dynasty)
we see in the Vignette to Chapter clx of the Book of
the Dead the god TuortHu, ibis-headed, who is called


EGYPTIAN: AMULETS 14]


the “‘ Great God,” presenting to NEBSENI a plaque
whereon a papyrus shoot is sculptured. The text
which was supposed to be cut upon it brought to
the deceased the protection of the “ Words of Thoth.”’

g. The UpjaT, a word which means literally
“Eye,” was an amulet made in this form *&;;
it typified good health, soundness, safe protection,
and physical comfort and well-being generally.
The twin Udjats <#*& represent the Eye of the
sun and the Eye of the moon, 7.e. the two Eyes of
the very ancient Sky-god HER; they are found


Arent


Fie ee S| |


The Baboon, the associate of Thoth, restoring the Udjat or Eye to Aah,
the Moon-god, after it had Pate ea by Set, who was made to
painted on coffins as early as the VIth Dynasty,
and they were painted on articles of funerary equip-
ment throughout the dynastic period. An ancient
legend stated that the powers of evil succeeded in
blinding the Eye of the Sun-god Ra during an
eclipse or prolonged storm, and that THOTH came to
the god and healed his Eye, and restored it to his
face. Another legend stated that SET, the Devil,
when prowling in the sky one evening saw the


142 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


crescent moon, and swallowed it, but one of the
gods, presumably THOTH, came against him quickly,
and speared him, and he was obliged to vomit the
crescent moon from his body. Chapter clxvii of the
Book of the Dead contains a spell the recital of
which would cause THOTH to bring the Udyjat to the
deceased during his journey to the kingdom of
Osrr1is. The Rubric of Chapter cxl says that that
chapter (which was to be recited during the longest
day of the Egyptian year) was to be said over two
Udjats—the one made of lapis lazuli or mag stone
plated with gold or set in a gold frame, and the other .
of amethyst or carnelian. The second Udjat, if
placed on the mummy of a man, would procure for
him: a..seat in the* Boat of “Ra, and makeshim
become a god.. The Udjat amulet was made of
gold, silver, copper, many kinds of semi-precious
stenes, wood, wax, and faience, glazed in various
colours. The enormous numbers of Udjats which
have been found in the tombs prove that this amulet
possessed unusual importance in the minds of the
Egyptians, and that it fulfilled a very special
service. My belief is that the Egyptians, like the
Chinese, were terrified by their fear of the Evil Eye,
and that the Udjat was worn or carried universally
as a protection against it.

10. The CoW-AMULET, AHAT, was a figure of a cow
wearing the solar disk and plumes between her
horns, and made of gold, which was tied to the neck
of the mummy. This was used in connection with
the HYPOCEPHALUS, which was placed under the
back of the head of the mummy, and was formed
of a series of circular layers of linen gummed together,
and covered with a thin layer of white plaster. This


EGY PEIAN AMULETS 143


amulet was intended to represent the pupil of the
Eye of Ra, and on it were drawn in outline figures
of solar gods, e.g. Horus-Sept, Khepera, the sons of
fiorus,, etc. “Around these figures ran the text of
Chapter clxii of the Book of the Dead. The Egyptians
believed that if this amulet was placed under the
head of the mummy it would emit heat and keep
warmth in the body of the deceased until he arrived
in the Kingdom of Osiris. The chief god was Par,
but in order to obtain his assistance it was necessary
to appeal to him by his secret magical names which
the text supplies, viz. Haqa-haqa-herher, Aulauaa-
qersaanglebati, Khalseran and Khalsata. An
ancient legend stated that when Ra was about to
set for the first time, the Cow-goddess, fearing that
he would lose all his heat during the night, caused
him to be surrounded with beings of fire, which kept
him warm until he rose again in the sky. The
amulet AHAT was supposed to do for the deceased
what the Cow-goddess did for Ra.

11. [The FroG amulet is usually made of gold,
hard stone, steatite and glazed faience, but examples
of it in gold are not common. It carried with it
the help and protection of HEQIT, the goddess who
presided over conception and birth, and who may
be described as the “ midwife goddess.’’? She was
supposed to be present at the birth of every king of
Egypt, and she assisted Isis in resuscitating OSIRIS
and in making effective her union with him. The
general idea associated with the frog amulet was
fecundity and fertility, and among many of the
tribes in Central Africa the women eat both the
frog and the beetle, so that they may have large
families. The little green tree frog appears in large


144 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


numbers a day or two before the rise of the Nile,
and the natives regard it as a symbol of new life
and prolific generation. The Copts, probably having
in mind the phases of the physical development of
the frog, adopted it as a symbol of the Resurrection,
and it is often seen sculptured on monuments in the
catacombs of Alexandria side by side with the
Coptic Cross. On a bronze object in the British
Museum a frog appears at the end of a phallus.


12. The NEFER amulet j was frequently made


of carnelian, or sand, or some semi-precious red
stone, but very large numbers were made of glazed
faience, and were pierced at one end so that they
might be strung with beads on necklaces and pec-
torals. The object represented by the amulet was,
probably, in the late period a lute or some other kind
of stringed musical instrument; but originally it
seems to have been the heart with the wind pipe (?).
Whatever the object was it is pretty clear from the
texts that the amulet was supposed to give to the
wearer youth, joy, strength and happiness, and good
luck generally. The word NEFER means good, to
be good, beautiful, gracious, pleasant, and the like.


Toeuhe = DAG amiiiled \ was in the form of a


man-headed hawk wearing a beard. It was sup-
posed to represent the heart-soul, but it seems to
be more probable that it was a symbol of the vital
strength of a man, and the hawk-portion of it
suggests its relationship to Horus. At all events,
the root ba means “strength,” to be powerful.
After death the Ba was believed to visit the body
whence it came in the tomb, and in graves narrow
passages were left in the pits so that the soul might


EGYPTIAN AMULETS > 4 145


find its way there. In the Pyramids of Meroé open-
ings were left in the stone covering near the apex
so that the BA might enter them, and a ledge was
placed beneath each opening for it to stand on. In
the Vignette to Chapter lxxxix of the Book of the
Dead the Ba is seen visiting its body, to which it
presents the symbol shen ©, symbolic of eternal
life. The final union of all souls with their bodies


The Cat (Ra) slaughtering the Serpent of Darkness (Apep) symbolic of the
triumph of Law, Order and Goodness over Chaos, Wrong and Evil.


was believed to take place in the heavenly ANU
HELIOPOLIS. Small figures of the Ba made of
gold and inlaid with semi-precious stones, and large
figures of it, with outspread wings, were laid on the
breast of the mummy, probably with the view of
preserving the body from decay. Some think
that such figures, under the influence of the spells
in the Chapter mentioned above, flew to the place
where the gods gathered together, and represented


K


146 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the person whose body lay in the tomb. And others
take the view that the soul when it came to the tomb
took up its abode in the Ba figure. A very fine stone
Ba, with pendent breasts, from Nubia, 1 Bee
in the British Museum (No. 53965). he Copts
adopted the Ba, and it is found sculptured on their
funerary monuments (B.M., No. 16051).


14. The SMa amulet ¥ was buried in the folds of


the linen swathings of the mummy, or in the body
of the deceased, in order to give him the power
to breathe ; it is usually made of dark basalt or
some brownish-black coloured stone.

15. The AAKHU amulet. (represented the
disk of the sun rising on the eastern horizon,
and was worn so that it might give a man the
strength and power of Horus or RA; it was sym-
bolic of renewed life after death and resurrection.
This amulet was made of red stone and red glass or
paste.

40. The Sur amulet iS fl represented the


two feathers, symbolic of light and air, which are
seen on the heads of RA, Osiris, and AmEn-Ra&.


WiewAtER plumes Us , which are the )spécial


characteristic of OsirRIS and PTAH-SEKER-ASAR,
appear to be associated with the resurrection. This
amulet was made of gold and semi-precious stones
of various colours.

17. [The SHEN amulet © seems to have sym-:
bolized eternity, or perhaps a very large but in-
definite number of years, and the space embraced
by the all-encircling power of the Sun-god. The
hieroglyph is thought to represent the end of a
cylindrical seal-cylinder which is either resting on,


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 147


or is being rolled over, a piece of clay to makea seal.
On the other hand, it may well be a picture in out-
line of a ring with a long bezel attached to it.

18. The REN or name-amulet. In some inscrip-
tions the name of the king is enclosed in what
seems to be a piece of rope tied in a sort of double
knot at the end of the name. As has been said
elsewhere, the name of a god, or man, was regarded
as his soul, and the knotted cord was intended to
preserve it from evil magical influences and to
maintain and prolong his life. The ordinary form
of the REN is co, and it is commonly called a
ercartouche..

aon Lhe» SERPENTS head: camulet, which - was
made of red stone or red glass or red faience, was
regarded as a protection against the bite of the
cobra and other venomous snakes. It was worn
by the living and the dead, and the texts from the
xxxivth and xxxvth Chapters of the Book of the
Dead which are inscribed on the amulet show that
it was intended to prevent the mummy from being
devoured by the snakes and worms of the Tuat.


20. [he MENAT == l las Cy amulet consisted of


a necklace or collar to which was attached the
curiously shaped pendant shown in the deter-
minative of the word given above. This amulet
was worn by the gods and goddesses, e.g. Hathor,
Pie Ptal and Osiris,'who in the minds of the
Egyptians were associated with virility and fecundity,
birth and new life, and also the resurrection. It was
buried with the dead with the view of preserving
in them the sexual desires which they had possessed
in life, and providing them with the means for giving
effect to them. As an amulet for the living and the
K 2


148 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


dead it was made of lapis lazuli, and, when intended
to be attached to statues, of bronze or copper. It
was suspended over the back of the neck, through
which it exercised its influence on the spinal column.


21. [The LADDER amulet, maq- a ins . pro-


vided the deceased with the means of ascending
from earth to the floor of heaven, 7.e. the sky am
ancient legend says that OsIRIS wished to ascend to
heaven, but had not sufficient strength to do so.
RA seeing his difficulty provided the ladder, and he
and Horus standing, one on each side of OsIRIS,
helped him to ascend. A variant text says that the
helpers of Osiris during his ascent were Horus and
SuTI, or SET. Models of this ladder in stone and
wood have been found in the tombs, and a picture
of the Ladder is given as a Vignette in the Papyrus
of Ami (Plate xxii). - [he legends referred=tommarne
text in the Pyramid of Pepi I, lines 192 f, 472. and 473,
and in it we are told that it was the “ two fingers
of the Lord of the Ladder” which helped Osiris
to ascend to the sky. The Egyptians presumed that
the deceased might not be able to obtain the assist-
ance of the “ two fingers,’ and they made the amulet
described in the next paragraph to take their place.
The Hebrews also conceived the idea that a ladder
reached from heaven to earth. See Gen. xxviliy 12)


22. The Two-FINGERS amulet, =) | aan dje-


baut, 1.e. the index and medius fingers, was made of
green stone, or black basalt, or obsidian, and was
placed sometimes loose in the coffin and sometimes
among the swathings of the mummy. It was
intended to take the place of the two fingers of the
god who helped Osiris to ascend the Ladder of Ra.


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 149


23. Among the primitive inhabitants of the Nile
Valley models of the HEAD of HATHOR were worn
as amulets by women who wished to become mothers
of large families. This amulet had two forms, viz.
the head of a cow and the head of a woman whose
ears were large and flat like those of a cow; both
forms were cut upon plaques and scarabs which were
worn as pendants of necklaces. The cult of the
cow probably originated in the Stdan, in the regions
which are inhabited by the Bakkara or “ Cattle-.


>?


Meme at the present time:
24. The KEF-PESESH amulet if was used in the


ceremonies connected with the Liturgy of ‘‘ Opening
the Mouth,” and was supposed to restore to the
jawbones the power of movement which had ceased
owing to mummification. A couple of amulets
were used in connection with the KEF-PESESH, the
exact significance of which is unknown. Each has


two forms, namely, 1 and 5], and is made of


different kinds of iron ore. They were inserted
among the linen swathings of the mummy, and
brought to its protection Horus, god of the South,
and SET, god of the North.


25. The STEPS amulet S “| Khet, was made of
(BS


faience, greenish-blue or white, and symbolized the
support on which SHu stood when he separated
the earth from the sky above it, and also the double
steps, which resembled the Step-Pyramid of Sak-
KARAH in form, on which the god KHNEMU stood,
when acting as a creator god.

Among other less well-known amulets may be
mentioned the APER signifying ‘‘ abundance,” “ pros-
Pertty ; the SHUTTLE, NERT (NET), the symbol


150 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


of the goddess Neith; the SOLAR DISK on the
horizon, the MASON’S MEASURE, the CARPENTER’S
SQUARE, the WHITE Crown, the RED CrRowy, the
HELMET, the VULTURE and UrRaeEus (NEBTI), the
Knot, the HAND, clenched and open; the OFFERING-
TABLET, the KA, and the FuLL Moon between horns.

For drawings of about fifty of the commoner
Egyptian amulets see pages 172-170.

The PECTORAL tablet as an amulet was in the
form of the side of a funerary chest, and its cornice
was decorated with drawings of feathers. The
following are the principal scenes found on the sides :
1. The Beetle of Khepera in a boat being adored


@-ll)<g—— see


The Vulture Goddess Mut, holding in her talons emblems of eternity
and the plumes of Upper and Lower Egypt.


by Isis and Nephthys. 2. ANUBIS on a pedestal,
with the deceased praying or making an offering


to him. 3. The Beetle between il and th. 4. RA


and OsiRIs seated facing each other. 5. The deceased
adoring the Cow oF HATHOR, or OsIRIS. |

The OFFERING-TABLET, or Table for offerings, as
an amulet took the form of a thin rectangular plaque
of stone or faience, with a projection on one side to
represent the spout or drain of the full-sized table
which was placed in the chamber for sacrifices in
the tomb.

Like the Sumerians and Babylonians, the Egyptians
made many of their amulets in the forms of ANIMALS.
Among these may be mentioned the Bull (Apis,


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 151


Mnevis, Bacchis, and the Black Bull), the Ram, the
Crocodile, the Hippopotamus, the Lion, the Lynx,
the Cat, the Dog-headed Ape and the smaller apes,
the Jackal, the animal the head of which appears
on figures of the god Set, the Pig, the Shrew-mouse,
the Hedgehog, the Ichneumon, the Hare, etc. Very
few animal amulets are found in the tombs of the
Old Kingdom. Under the New Kingdom the use
of such amulets became commoner, and it is from


The Divine Goose, or “‘ Great Cackler,’’ which laid the Cosmic Egg. Its
descendants flourish at Gizah at the present day.


its tombs and buildings that the large collections
of amulets which are exhibited in the great National
Museums were obtained.

The amulets in the form of BIRDs are comparatively
few. The commonest are :—The Bennu (Phoenix ?),
the Vulture, the Hawk, the Heron, the Swallow, the
Goose, the Ibis. The commonest amulets in the
form of REPTILES and INSECTS are :—The Turtle, the


152 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Cobra, the Viper, the Scorpion, the large Snake,
the Apshait (a kind of beetle), the Abit (Mantis ?),
the Grasshopper, the Frog (see p. 143), and various
kinds of the dung-feeding varieties of Beetles. ©
Amulets in the forms. Of. FISHES’ are Not. very
common. Some of them probably represent the
Astu fish and the ANT fish, which are mentioned
in the Book of the Dead. They were supposed to
swim one on each side of the Boat of Ra, and to
drive away every evil creature that came to attack
the god. A few amulets in the form of the fish
with the wide, large mouth which is seen on the heads
of figures of the goddess Hamehit are known, but
which of the fishes mentioned by Strabo (xvi. 2, 4) it
represents, has not yet, I believe, been decided. The
AB or “ Fighter” fish, and the Oxyrhynchus Fish,
which was supposed to have swallowed the phallus
of Osiris when his body was mutilated by Set, were
held in great reverence. The small wooden figures
in the form of worms which are found from time to
time may represent the Phagrus fish, or EEL.

One of the largest classes of Egyptian amulets is
formed by figures of the gods, goddesses, and lesser
divine beings. Some of these were prophylactic in
character and belong to the same class as the figures
which the Sumerians buried under the floors of their
houses and under the floors of the chambers in which
men lay sick, to protect themselves and their pro-
perty from the attacks of devils of every kind. Some
may be compared to the Teraphim of Laban which
Rachel stole and carried away in her camel’s saddle,
and to the Penates of the Romans. To this class
also belong the long series of wooden figures, painted
black, which I saw in the great hall of the tomb of


BGYPTIAN, AMUEETS 153


Thothmes III in the Valley of the Tombs of the
Kings in Western Thebes. In Egypt the tomb had
to be protected from evil spirits and devils as well
as the house, and this was effected by placing figures
of the gods in the mummy chamber of the tomb,
and by burying amulets in the four walls. Thus
under the XVIIIth Dynasty a crude brick, with a


i facing the west mounted upon it, was inserted


in the west wall; a crude brick, with a figure of
Anubis resting on a tablet of incense mounted upon
it, was inserted in the east wall; a crude brick,
with a reed dipped in bitumen mounted upon 11,
was inserted in the south wall; and a crude brick,
with a figure like a shabu, seven fingers in height,
set upon it, was inserted in the north wall. On
this figure the ceremony of “‘ Opening the Mouth ”
had to be performed. Even so, to thoroughly protect
the tomb, it was necessary for a man who was cere-
monially pure to perform the magical ceremony
of the “four blazing torches.’ The torches were
made of atma cloth smeared with sacred unguent ;
and each torch was to be placed in the hands of
man who personified one of the Four Sons of Horus.
When (or before ?) the texts were recited each son
of Horus was to extinguish his torch in a clay trough,
over which incense had been sprinkled, which was
filled with the milk of a white cow. Tradition
declared that this ceremony was performed by Her-
tataf, the son of King Khufu (Chedps). See the
Rubrics to Chapter cxxxviia of the Book of the Dead.
A set of four crude bricks, with the amulets mounted
upon them, can be seen in the British Museum (Nos.
41534-41537). The bricks are inscribed with the
texts that form the Rubrics of the Chapter, and the


154 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


whole set was made for a priestess of Amen-Ra at
Thebes, who flourished about A.D. 1040. This set
is probably unique.

Of the prophylactic figures placed in the tombs
two varieties are known, viz. OSIRIS FIGURES and
PTAH-SEKER-ASAR (Osiris) FIGURES, and they are
usually made of wood. Osiris appears in his usual
mummied form and wears the Crown of the South,
and his figure stands on a long, flat pedestal of wood.
The figure and its pedestal are usually inscribed in
hieroglyphs with a prayer to the god in which he
is entreated to provide funerary offerings for the
deceased whose name appears on the figure or
pedestal. Many Osiris figures were made hollow,
and rolls of papyri, inscribed with prayers, etc.,
from the Book of the Dead, were placed in them.
The papyri of Hunefer and Anhai in the British
Museum were found in Osiris figures.

The PraH-SEKER-ASAR was a modification or
development of the Osiris figure. There is a painted
and inscribed wooden figure fixed in a wooden
pedestal, also painted and inscribed, but the figure
has on its head a pair of horns, with a disk resting
on them, and above these rise two plumes. The
figure represents Ptah-Seker-Osiris, the tri-une god
of the Egyptians. In some figures there is a cavity
in the pedestal, and in this a mummified portion of
the body of the deceased and a little roll of inscribed
papyrus were placed. In others a painted wooden
model of a sarcophagus takes the place of the cavity,
but in fine large examples the cavity is covered by
the model of the sarcophagus. The idea underlying
the use of such figures was that the body of the
deceased was under the protection of Ptah, one of


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 155


the gods of the Creation, and Seker, a god of the
tomb, and Osiris the god-man who had risen from
the dead, and would effect the resurrection of the
deceased, and give him unending life.

Every large collection of Egyptian antiquities
contains a great number of small figures of the
principal gods and goddesses made of stone, faience,
wood, etc. These are usually perforated, t.e. have
eyelet holes, by which they can be strung on thread
and so form necklaces. On the same string with the:
figures of the gods we often have animal amulets
and bird amulets and the commoner amulets like
the Ankh, Nefer, Tet, etc. The NECKLACE, like the
PECTORAL, was an amulet, even when it consisted of
beads only, and beads made of garnets, sand,
carnelian, crystal, mother-of-emerald and haematite
were believed to be specially protective. To describe
in detail all the figures of the gods and goddesses
which were worn by the living as amulets and were
buried in the mummies of the dead would need more
space than is here available. But the reader will
gain a good idea of the forms in which they are
known to us, both as actual figures and in drawings
of them, and of their characteristic heads and
head dresses from the series reproduced on pages
156-158. I prepared this list for my Gude to
Egypt and the Sudan, published by Messrs. Thos.
Cook and Son, and it was reproduced with slight
variations in my Guide to the Egyptian Collections
in the British Museum, London, 1909, p. 123 f.

In the early dynastic period the Egyptians placed
in each tomb with the mummy a figure of a man, or
woman, which at a later period was called SHAWABTI
or SHABTI or UsHABTI. Usually it had the form of


156 AMULETS. AND SUPERSTITIONS


Amen-R§, King of Tbe God Amsu, Amset,or Mestha,or The Goddess Anit.
the Gods. or Menu. Gcitha (son of Horus).


The Goddess Antat. The God Anpu The Goddess Anget. The God Asar
(Anubis), (Osiris).


Los


The God Asar Asar-Hap (Serapis). The Goddess Ast The God Atmu. The God Bennu
(Osiris). (Isis). (z.2., the Soul of
Osiris).


Tht


Hpi (son of The God Heru Heru-pa-khart
orus). (Horus). (Harpokrates).


%


Tfipi, the Nile-
God.


Thal a


The Goddess: The Goddess The Goddess The God Geb. The Goddess Ketesh,
Hatbor. Hathor. Hathor,


The God Bes.


Amuletic figures of Egyptian gods and goddesses.


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 157


a


The God The God The God ., The Godd
° es a
Khepera, Khnemu. Khensu. Maat. : be Pree e
The God Mert, Goddess of The proadess The Goddess Nebt- The Goddess N ebt-
Mentu-Ra. the Inundation. Mut. het (Nephthys). het (Nephthys).
The God Nefer- The Goddess The Goddess “7 he Goddess The God Ptah.
Temu. Nekhebet. Net (Neith). Nut.


The God Ptah- Qebhsenuf (Son The God Ra- The Goddess
Seker. of Horus). Harmachis. Renenet.
The God Reshpu. The Goddess The God Sebek. Sefekh-Abiu, The God Seker
Satet. ; or Sesheta.


Amuletic figures of Egyptian gods and goddesses.


158 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


‘The Goddess The Goddess The God Set. ‘The Goddess Vet. 4 form
Sekhmet. Serqet. Ya-urt (Thoueris). of Osiris.


‘Tuamutef (Son The Goddess The Goddess
(Thoth). of Horus). Uatchit. Upt-Hekau.


Amuletic figures of Egyptian gods and goddesses.

a mummy, and the name of the deceased with whom
it was buried was written upon it. This seems to
suggest that the Shabti was originally intended to
represent the deceased. Whether the use of the
Shabti was borrowed from the predynastic Egyptians
in the Stidan, or whether it was invented by the
priests of Egypt is uncertain. Authorities differ as
to the meaning of the name, but it is clear that the
Shabti was intended to benefit the deceased in some
way, and it must be regarded as a magical figure.
Some have thought that originally it represented the
Ka of the deceased or his slave.

Ushabtiu were made of many kinds of hard
stone, sandstone, limestone, faience, wood, etc.,


and they have been found in tombs of all periods —


between the VIth Dynasty and the Roman Period.
The earliest form’ of the Shabti is. thateotee:
mummy, with its arms folded across the breast,
and the inscription contains nothing but the titles


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 159


and name of the deceased and that of his father
or mother. Under the Middle Kingdom, a prayer
for funerary offerings is sometimes found inscribed
Gomuic back Oi the figure. Under the New
Kingdom, in addition to the name and titles of the
deceased, it bears a text which is identical with that
of Chapter vi of the Theban Recension of the Book
of the Dead. The Shabti then represents a fallah, or
peasant servant or farm labourer, and it holds in
each hand a digging tool and, slung across its back, .
it carries a loosely woven basket in which sand or


DeSuetis Annan © = = ao


earth was carried. The name of the deceased for
whom the Shabti was made was cut (or painted)
upon it, and also the spell which explains the use
and object of the figure under the X VIIIth Dynasty
and later. The spell is supposed to be spoken by
the deceased himself and it reads, ‘‘ In the event of
my being condemned to spread dust (1.e. top-
dressing) on the fields in the Tuat (7.e. the Under-
world), or to fill the channels with water [by clearing
out the canals and channels and working the machine
for lifting up water on to the land or to reap during
the harvest], such work shall be performed for me by


160 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


them and no obstacle to doing so shall be put in
thy way. Below this spell was written the answer
with which the Shabti was supposed to reply, viz.
‘“ Wheresoever thou callest me, verily I shall be
there present.’’ The idea was that when the spell
was uttered the figure would become alive and do
whatsoever was necessary.

The Shabti of a king had the same form as that of
the Shabti of the peasant, and the king was willing
to perform the work of the Shabti in the kingdom of
Osiris. Kings and nobles and priests often had large
numbers of Ushabtin buried with them. Belzoni
found over seven hundred in the tomb of Seti I, and
it is probable that the full number buried with the
king was seven hundred and thirty, 1.e. two figures
for every day in the year. One-half of these would
be expected to work by day and the other half by
night. A few examples of the Shabti are known
(see British Museum Guide to the IVth, Vth and
VIth Egyptian Rooms, p. 6), on which the spell
written on the figure is a prayer for funerary offer-
ings, and Chapter xxxb of the Book of the Dead,
instead of Chapter vi. A rare example (B.M., No.


29403) holds ie the symbol of Osiris, in one hand
and h. the symbol of Isis, in the other, and the


soul of the deceased S~ is seen nestling on the
breast of the deceased.

Among the amulets which were held to be of
special importance by the Egyptians were the
Vignettes which are found in the Book of the Dead.
It is possible that they may have been added merely
as illustrations of the various texts in that work,
but I believe that, like the drawings of the Bushmen


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 161


which are found in caves in South Africa, they were
drawn and painted with an object which had nothing
to do with artistic ideas or development. That
object was to benefit the dead by magical means.
When the priest ordered the scribes of the temple
to draw or paint Vignettes in which the deceased
is represented as acquitted of the charges brought
against him at the judgment of the dead, and
declared to be a “truth speaker,’ and received by
Osiris, and rewarded by him with a homestead in.
the kingdom of Osiris, and eating celestial food,
and drinking celestial waters, and consorting with
the righteous, and adopted by the gods, assuredly he
believed that these Vignettes would operate in such
a way that the deceased would attain to the freedom
of beatified souls, and an unending life of ever-.
lasting joy and happiness in the company of Osiris.
And it was the same with the Vignettes which repre-
peated) the, deceased;as seated in the “| Boat of
Millions of Years’ of the Sun-god, living upon the
light of the god and arrayed therein.

Of all the inscribed Egyptian amulets known to
us the large collection of funerary texts which is
commonly known as the “ Book of the Dead”’ is
the greatest. Under the Old Kingdom a Recension
of these texts was cut in hieroglyphs on the walls
of the corridors and halls of the pyramids of Unas,
Teta and other kings. The funerary ceremonies
connected with the ‘‘ Opening of the Mouth” and
the presentation of the canonical offerings on which
the Kavu of the deceased kings were supposed to
live, were, even in the third millennium, very old.
The dominant god in the earlier copies of this
Recension was the Heliopolitan god Ra, but in the


iL,


162 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


later copies he was superseded by the indigenous
god Osiris of Tetu. Under the XIth ande2¢iiin
Dynasties another Recension of funerary texts was
inscribed on the sides of sarcophagi and tomb
chambers. Texts unknown in the earlier Recension
appear, and a group of them formed the “ Book of
the Two Ways [to the Kingdom of Osiris].”’

The great collection of texts adopted by the Theban
theologians was called by them “‘ PER-T EM HRU,” a
title which means something like “ Appearance in
the day” ory’;Coming out into (or-by)"day.ajat
contained a large number of ancient spells and incan-
tations, and some beautiful prayers to Osiris and
Ra; and one section of Chapter cxxv (which is
generally known as the “ Negative Confession ~
because each of the forty-two declarations made
by the deceased before the forty-two Assessors of the
Judgment Hall of Osiris begins with the words
‘“T have not ’’) contains what we may regard as the
religious and moral CobDE of Osiris. Though a few
of the sections which are found in the texts of the
Old Empire are retained, the Theban Recension is
practically a new edition of the principal texts
which deal with the hfe and conditions under which
‘the souls of the dead exist in Amenti and the Tuat.
Two great and important features of it are the
Vignettes, which are sometimes drawn in outline
and sometimes coloured, and the Rubrics, which
describe the magical ceremonies which have to be
performed by the priest or the son of the deceased
during the recital of the texts.

The Saite Recension is based on the Theban,
and it contains texts which illustrate beliefs which
are probably of Stidanf origin. The Books of


4


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 163


the Dead of the Graeco-Roman Period contain
a hymn or two and one or more of the sections
of Chapter cxxv. which deals with the Judg-
feeniae All othe spells swhich we. find’ in. the
Theban and Saite Recensions are omitted, pro-
bably because the Egyptians had, under the
influence of Greek thought and influence, ceased
to believe in their efficacy. The Theban Recension
is found written in hieroglyphs on roll of papyrus
which are sometimes 70 or 80 feet long ; the Papyrus
of Nesi-ta-nebt-Ashru, which is written in hieratic,
is about 130 feet long. The roll was placed in the
coffin or in a separate box in the tomb, or between
the legs of the deceased, or in a niche in the wall of
mies tomb, | lhe Papyrus of Nu and the: Papyrus
of Ani were tied round with papyrus cord and
sealed with mud seals. Other funerary works which
were used as amulets were: “ The Lamentations of
Isis” ; “ The Festival Songs of Ists and Nephthys ”’ ;
“ The Litantes of Seker’’; the book, “May My Name
Flourish” ; “ The Book of Traversing Eternity ”’ ;
The Book of Respirations’”’ (or, Breathings), 1.e. the
SHAI-EN-SINSINU.

The Egyptians made amulets of a colossal size,
probably with the view of protecting a whole com-
munity. On February 22, 1908, Mr. Legrain exca-
vated a colossal stone BEETLE (scarabaeus sacer) at
Karnak. It was mounted on a pedestal which had the
shape of an ordinary Egyptian altar and stood at the
Merui-west corer of the Sacred Lake, A_ still
larger beetle in green granite was acquired by Lord
Elgin at Constantinople, and is now in the British
Miseum |No,. 865 (74)].. It is 5 feet long, 3 feet


wide, and weighs over two tons. The greenstone
Wg


164 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


models of the TURTLE which have been found in pre-
dynastic graves were undoubtedly amulets in the
ordinary sense of the word, but not the large stone
turtle (now in the British Museum), which was too
large to wear and could not be easily carried about.
It was probably set upon a pedestal which stood
within the precincts of some temple. Another
colossal amulet was the UMBILICUS which Legrain
found at Karnak and is now in the Egyptian Museum,
Cairo. Whether we should include among amulets the
great granite obelisks of Heliopolis and Karnak and
Tanis and the smaller stone obelisks which are found
in tombs of the Old Empire is doubtful. But small
stone obelisks, which are small enough to be strung
on necklaces, have been found together with other
amulets and beads in the tombs of the New Kingdom,
and they were laid among the swathings of mummies
of this period. As the obelisk was at that time a
symbol of the god Amen, and the name of that god
was written with the hieroglyph of an obelisk, it is
possible that the little models had no magical
significance.

The spells which are found in the religious texts
of periods of Egyptian history show that the fear of
serpents, scorpions and reptiles of all kinds was
universal among the Egyptians. These noxious
creatures were believed to be forms or incarnations
of evil spirits which, whenever possible, attacked the
dead as well as the living. The gods were, generally
speaking, held to be immune from these attacks


because they possessed the “ fluid of life ”’ Y ! +
sa en ankh, which was the peculiar attribute of


divine beings. But it must not be forgotten that
the mighty Sun-god Ra very nearly died from the


EGY PITAN AMULiIs 165


bite of a reptile which had been fashioned by Isis,
and that Horus, the son of Isis, did actually die
through the sting of a scorpion. But Horus was
restored to life by means of certain magical formulas
which Thoth imparted to Isis, and the Egyptians
had these formulas engraved on stone stelae and
wooden tablets, which they placed in their houses
and tombs to protect them against the attacks of
Seilespitits in the form of deadly reptiles. These
stelae are called “ Cippi of Horus ’”’ and are usually
made of hard, black stone, and have rounded tops,
and they may be described briefly thus: On the
front of the stele is a sculptured figure of Horus the
Child (Harpocrates) in relief. He stands on two
crocodiles, and he grasps in his hands serpents,
scorpions, a lion and a horned animal (ibex ?), all
of which represented associates of Set the god of
Evil. Resting on the head of Horus is the head of
“the Aged ” god, which is somewhat like that of Bes,
and the figure of Horus and the head together
symbolize the old god who renews his youth and
strength perpetually. By the side of Horus the Eyes
of Ra, z.e. the Sun and figures of solar gods, are placed.
The base of the stele and the reverse are covered
with magical texts and spells which averted evil
from the house or tomb in which the stele was placed.
Many good examples of this amulet are to be seen
in the British Museum.

The largest and most important of such amulets
is that which is commonly known as the “ Metter-
nich Stele,’ and it was given to Prince Metternich by
Muhammad ‘Ali Pasha. It was found in 1828 by
workmen who were digging out the site for a
reservoir in a Franciscan Monastery in Alexandria.


166


AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


sATcoK 491K Y Eas


a]
=|" ‘a
4b,
FS
>


SNe}


[eas ill


fo}
=


3-1. 0893150.


Ga
D


roa


The colossal Cippus of Horus, which is commonly known as the
““ Metternich stele ’’ (Obverse).


EGYPTIAN AMULETS


a es
A > y


res
alg
OD,
Ss poQ
-—>
ge


AVA Yall
Te OW Che BARS
TW DAH Ces CSUrvS RSI sAE Jake
Soft (+h thas Sts? as
MHIZ? TRAE [2 Sate Pie ma ee RA BUI SUSYSILK


aati LA&


FStHel sl MSs MaKe A oer sae ons


=
Ilz= eo oo —


he i ae Erbe 2S SIT CS SIs


VoL TARE RUSE LSM PUT RSTE aN SRA
Ae ME ENOL ESL SPST aE AIS AS
Lee RUE Se PASTS

Aine VIER EG Seal Ses
rea etl oa ee a


The colossal Cippus of Horus, which is commonly known as the
““ Metternich stele ’’ (Reverse).


167


168 AMULE TS SANDS SUPE RST MUIONS


According to a statement in the text (1. 87) it was
made for Ankh-Psemtik, son of the lady Tent-Het-
nub, prophet of Nebun, overseer of Temt and scribe
of Het, who flourished in the reign of Nekht-neb-f,
who reigned from 378 B.c. to 360 B.c. Drawings of
the obverse and reverse of: the monument are given
on pages 166 and 167. The texts make it clear that
the monument was intended to protect the inmates
of some building, perhaps a temple, from the attacks
of scorpions. “On; the obverse, réversesandmercde
the figures of nearly three hundred gods, and celestial
beings, and sacred animals, and atropaic symbols
are cut. As some of the gods had several forms,
we may assume that there were on the stele a
sufficient number of gods to provide a special pro-
tector of the building in which it stood for each of
the 365 (or 366) days of the year. These protectors
included the Companies of the Gods of Heaven,
Earth, and the [uat; the Year-god sandeerie
seasons of the year, and the gods of the months and
days and hours of the day and night; the gods of
the Planets and stars, and the Signs of the Zodiac
and the Dekans; the gods of the nomes and great
cities and towns; and many local polytheistic
deities. On the rounded portion of the obverse is
a solar disk in which appears Khnemu, with four
rams heads. The eight spirits of the dawn acclaim
him ; and below them are five rows of gods. In the
relief below them stands Harpocrates with his feet
on crocodiles. In each hand he grasps a serpent,
a scorpion and a Typhonic animal. Thoth and ka,
each standing on a serpent of many coils, adore him.
Behind Ra stands Isis. On the reverse we have a
polytheistic winged figure which stands on an oval


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 169


containing figures of the incarnations of the Seven
Powers of Evil. And below these are five rows of
gods. The hieroglyphic texts contain the following :—


I. Spell to destroy Apep, a huge serpent, which
“resembled the intestines’ (compare the Sumerian
Khumbaba). Horus recited the spell over Apep,
and the monster vomited forthwith. Said over a
man who was bitten or stung by any reptile, it
would make him vomit the poison and save his life.

eer peli to destroy the ‘work of the CAT, 7.¢e. a
baleful form of Isis, daughter of Ra. Every member
of her body contained a god or goddess ; she could
destroy the poison of any and every reptile, and could
also through her immense magical powers poison
whom she pleased.

pa biisecpelaish till: of diticulties.. It retérs. to
some mythological event in which Ra was invoked
to make Thoth turn back Set, the god of the “ Stink-
ing Face.’’ Horus is summoned to the help of his
father Osiris, and there is an allusion to the cries of
grief which Isis uttered when she came to the quay
at Netit, near Abydos, and saw her husband's
dead body lying there. Osiris was slain by the
machinations of Set, who seized Isis and shut her
up in a strong tower intending to make her marry
him and so legalize his position as king of Egypt
which he had usurped.

4. The narrative of Isis, who was with child by
her dead husband, and who, with the help of Thoth,
succeeded in escaping from her captivity. Accom-
panied by Seven Scorpion goddesses, she set out on
a journey to the Reed Swamps, where she intended
to hide herself until her child was born. She applied
at a house for lodgings for the night, but the


170 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


landlady shut the door in her face. One of the Seven
Scorpion goddesses forced her way into the woman’s
house and stung her child to death. The mother’s
grief was so bitter that Isis uttered a spell over the
dead child, and the poison of the scorpion ran out
of his body, and he came to life again. The words
of the spell are cut on the stele,.and were treasuied
by the Egyptians as an infallible cure for the stings
of scorpions. |
Soon after this Isis was obliged to leave her hiding
place for a few hours, and to leave her son Horus
alone. The terrible scorpion Uhat, seeing that the
child was unprotected, attacked him and stung
him, and when Isis returned she found Horus lying
dead on the reeds. She examined the body of the
child and found the mark of the sting of the scorpion
which had been sent by Set, and then she burst
forth in such heartrending laments that men and
gods were compelled to sympathize with her. Her
sister Nephthys came with Sergit, the Scorpion-
goddess, and advised her to appeal to heaven for
help. . [hen Isis, cried out to, heaven, ;andmathe
sailors in the Boat of Millions of Years ceased to
row and the boat of the Sun-god stood still. From
it Thoth, the author of spells and words of power,
descended, and he had with him the Worp which
all heaven and earth and hell had to obey. After
some talk with Isis he uttered the mighty spell
which transferred a portion of the “ fluid of life ”’
from Ra to the body of Horus, and the poison left
the child’s body forthwith and he breathed again
and lived. Thoth promised that he would protect
Horus, and he would defend him in the Hall of
Judgment in Anu, and would give him power to


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 171


repel every attack which might be made upon him
and ensure his succession to the throne of Egypt.
At the same time he declared that it was the spells
pronounced by Isis which had brought about this
happy result, for it was she who had caused the
Boat of Ra to stand still, and it was her magical
power which had forced him to descend to earth
and to do her will.

Such is a summary of the contents of the magical
texts which are inscribed on the Metternich Stele.
The text is in places manifestly corrupt, and many
of the allusions in it are obscure, and at present
inexplicable, because we have no knowledge of the
details of the system of magic which was in the
IVth century B.c. an integral part of the Egyptian
Religion. The compositions on this Stele prove
that, notwithstanding the whole-hearted belief of
the Egyptians in the power of Osiris, whenever they
were in serious difficulties they turned to the ancient
magic of their country to help them.


172 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


: TT TU


fore SRR |


EGYPTIAN AMULETS.


10.


LI.


12.


13.


14.


EGY PTTAN AMULETS 173


EGYPTIAN AMULETS.


. A helmet and part of the head-gear of a soldier.


The SHapti figure (plur. Shawabtiu) holding implements used in
agricultural work, digging, planting, etc.


The Crown of the North (Net or Teshert), the Red Crown,


The Crown of the South (Hedjt), the White Crown. The two crowns


were united thus f and the sign was read SEKHEMTI.


. The Ankh, the symbol of life everlasting. It is perhaps an old form


of the Tjet, or symbol of Isis.


et


. The right hand with the fingers closed over the palm.
. A knot (?)


. The Vulture-goddess and the Uraeus-goddess, the divine protectresses


of Upper and Lower Egypt respectively ; the phonetic value is
“NEBTA,”’ and must not be confounded with “‘ NEBu!,” the phonetic


value of i WI , the Two Lords being Horus and Anubis.
SEZ


. Common form of the pectoral, viz, that of a pylon. The scene


represents Isis and Nephthys adoring Khepera the Creator and
Generator in his boat.


The two fingers (djebaui) of Horus, who by means of them assisted
Osiris to mount the Ladder when he ascended into heaven.


The open hand, symbol of liberality and generosity; the hand of
Fatma is probably a development of this amulet.


The full moon on the 16th day with horns.
The breast and two arms and hands, symbolic of the vital power of
a being, the Ka. Later the word was symbolic of what maintained


the vital power, 7.e. food, victuals.


The tablet for offerings which was placed in a tomb.


AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


174


Vsti


i?


EGYPTIAN AMULETS.


6.


e


EGYPTIAN AMULETS 175


EGYPTIAN AMULETS.


. The Tjet, a conventional representation of the genital organs of Isis.
. The Tet, a portion of the backbone of Osiris.


. The Heart, with a portrait head of the owner of the amulet.


The Heart ; commonest form.


Two plumes resting on a pair of horns of the Kudu (?); a special
crown.


The two plumes of Amen ; later the Atef Crown.


The Papyrus Sceptre.


7A. The Eye and eyebrow of Horus, specially symbolic of strength.


8.


10.


iz


13.


14.


15.


16.


U7;


18.


19.


The Pillow or head-rest which was used by the living and was placed
under the necks of mummies.


. The quadruple Eye of Ra in the four quarters of the world.


The Udjat or Eye of Ra.


. The Udjat or Eye of Aah, the Moon-god. As the two Eyes of Heaven


they appear thus = oe


The solar disk on the horizon; an amulet for both morning and
evening.


The Sma, 7.e. the lungs ; it was supposed to assist the breathing.


The Nert, shuttle or an instrument used in weaving; symbol of the
goddess Neith; or two bones of the spine (?).


The Aper or tassel; perhaps a decorated pendant symbolic of happi-
ness.


The solar disk on the horizon with plumes rising from it.


The Name-amulet (Ren) commonly known as the Cartouche. It was
originally made of rope or cord.


The Mason’s angle measure.


The Carpenter’s square.


176 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


is


EGYPTIAN AMULETS.


(ee horere: Baboon. 4. Ape. 5. Sow with young. 6. Lions united.
7. Ram of Amen. 8. Apis Bull. | 9. Lion. 10. Singing Ape. 11. Frog.
12. Hedgehog. 13. Jackal. 14- Crocodile. 15. Cat.


GHAR LER: VI.


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS.


The early history of that section of the “ black-
visaged ’’ peoples whose home was the country in
north-east Africa now known as Abyssinia is lost,
if it ever existed, and of the superstitions and religion
of the primitive Ethiopians there is nothing to be
said. A black stone Cippus of Horus, which was
imported into Ethiopia from Egypt, and was dis-
covered by the great traveller Bruce, proves that
there lived in the country during the [Vth or IIIrd
century B.c. people who were acquainted with,
and who probably practised, the “ Black Magic ”
of Egypt. The Arabs who invaded Ethiopia in the
Xth century B.c. introduced Sabaeism, or the cult
of the sun, and moon, and stars, and sky, and earth,
into the country, and the Hebrew traders who
settled in Ethiopia several centuries before Christ,
of course took with them their religion of Yahweh
or Jah. One thing is quite clear ; up to the beginning
of the IVth century A.D. the Ethiopians were pagans,
Magicians were their priests, and every branch of
magic flourished. The conquests of the Egyptians
in Upper Nubia in the second millennium before
Christ were known to the peoples of Northern
Ethiopia, and they learned from the Egyptians many
kinds of magic, and the use of Egyptian amulets.
But of the native amulets of that period we know
nothing. Whilst king ‘Ez4na, king of Aksim, was


M


178 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


fighting on the Island of Meroé his soldiers captured
a priest who was wounded in the fight. They took
from the priest a £eddda of silver, and a hekat of
gold. The hegat of gold was, undoubtedly, a magical
box or case in which was placed the £eddda of silver,
which was probably a figure of some object which the
priest carried about with him to give him magical
power over the enemy against whom his lord was
fighting. (See my History of Ethiopia, vol.1. p. 256,
Le20;) |

In the first half of the [Vth century of our Era
Ethiopia was ruled by the mighty king ‘Ezana, the
Aizanes of the Greeks, and before the close of his
reign he renounced paganism and made Christianity
the official religion of his empire. The crescent and
the star, the symbols of SABAEISM, which was brought
into Ethiopia by the Arabs, were replaced by the
Christian Cross at the beginning of his inscriptions.
It does not by any means follow that his subjects
throughout the country abandoned their pagan
cults and amulets, but there is no doubt that among
such of them as embraced Christianity the Cross
became the first and greatest of all amulets and
protective symbols. Pictures of “the (Cro-saeane
nailed to the walls of houses to protect them from
evil spirits, and they are often laid on the bodies
of sick persons, old and young, to annul the evil
influences which are causing the sicknesses. The


commonest form of the Cross is , but several


other forms are known, and the group of six crosses
figured on p. 179 are characteristic examples. These
are taken from a magical Book of the Dead in the


a


Tracings of the magical forms of the Cross found in an Ethiopian Book of
the Dead called ‘‘ Lefafa Sedek ’’ (Brit. Mus. MS. Add. 16204).


M 2


180 AMULETS AND SUPEKSTITIONS


British Museum, in which they served as Vignettes.
Each belonged to a section of the work, which was
called “‘ Lefafa Sedek,’ or the “ Bandlet of Right-
eousness, ’ and each was supposed to possess a special
power.

The commonest amulet in Abyssinia appears in
the form of a strip of parchment (sheep skin), which
varies in length from a few inches to. fivevonesm
feet, and in width from two to six or seven inches.
These strips are sometimes folded flat and sewn up
inside leather coverings which are attached to cloaks
and inner garments, and sometimes they are rolled
up and enclosed in cylindrical leather sheaths which
often resemble cartridge cases. When cords are
attached to them they hang from the neck or are
tied to the left arm.

All such amulets have INSCRIPTIONS written on
one side in Geez, 1.e> Ethiopic; the; old siterms,
language of Abyssinia. The written letters were
held in great reverence, and were themselves sup-
posed to possess magical powers. This was the
case in Ee@ypt. A remarkable example of this
fact is supplied by the Papyrus of Nesi-ta-neb-
ashru in the British Museum. All the chapters of
the Book of the Dead are in this papyrus written
in the hieratic characters, but the “ Negative Con-
fession’’ (Chapter cxxv), a most important text, is also
given in hieroglyphs, which were believed to have
been invented by the god Thoth.

The inscriptions on these amulets include: (1) the
various names of God, e.g. Addnai, Elohim, Yah,
El-Shaddai, etc. ; (2) the names of archangels, e.g.
Michael and Gabriel; (3) the magical names of
Christ ; (4) the names of the fiends and devils which


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 181


produce sicknesses and diseases in the human
body ; (5) strings of letters arranged singly or in
groups of three—spells which cannot be translated,
e.g. the ancient palindrome, SaATOoR AREPO TENET
OPERA Rortas; (6) traditional “‘ words of power,”’
ome those used) by Christ, ~~ Asparaspes!~ and
*Askoraskis!”’ and those used by SOLOMON,
Sebotham!<'7and ~ Mahtelon!” ~(7).. Legends of
our Lord and St. Stsenyés the.martyr.

On many of the longer amulets there are drawn
or painted FIGURES of some of the Seven Archangels,
e.g. Michael and Gabriel, who are usually represented
in the form of knights of the Byzantine period, and
figures of saints, e.g. Stsenyds, the martyr, and
St. George of Lydda. The saints sometimes appear
on horseback, and they are generally provided with
a long spear with which they are spearing either the
‘dragon,’ or some prostrate fiend. Side by side
with these we find series of MAGICAL DRAWINGS
which were supposed to protect the wearer of the
amulet. These are as important as the figures of
angels and saints and the actual texts. The
Ethiopians and their descendants the Abyssinians
wore their amulets for the material benefits which
they believed would accrue to them through them.
Women believed that they would give them fecundity
and conception, and immunity from miscarriage, and
safety during the period of gestation, and a safe
delivery and healthy children; and they expected
them to protect their children from the Evil Eye.
Men wore them to give them virility and strength,
and both men and women expected them to preserve
them from the attacks of the devils which cause
sickness and disease.


182 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The greater part of a good typical amulet is
reproduced on Plate XVII. It was written about the
end of the XVIIth century for a woman called
“’Absara Dengel,” 7.e. the Virgin hath sent her
as a ‘‘ glad tiding.”’ At the top is the figure of an
archangel or angel, with a halo from which emerge
rays of ight. He is arrayed in voluminous flowered
garment, and holds a sword in his right hand. The
inscription begins with the usual formula, “ In the
Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, One God.” Then follows a prayer. that
‘Absara Dengel may be saved from miscarriage and
a series of sicknesses of various kinds, and from the
demon who attacks children when they are suckling
at their; mothers’ breasts. » Next” we whaveseuae
Legend of Stseny6s, who was martyred in the reign
of Diocletian. According to this, Werzelya, the
sister of the saint, had union with the Devil, and
the saint slew her. Stisenyds married, and his wife
bore him a man child, who was killed by Werzelya.
Stsenydos then mounted his horse and, taking his
spear in his right hand, went forth to slay Werzelya.
An old woman told him where she was, and he went
into a garden and found her sitting under a tree,
with a company of devils grouped about her. The
saint dismounted and knelt down with his face to the
earth and prayed for strength to kill Werzelya, the
murderer of children, and the closer of the wombs of
women. Then he remounted his horse, and took
his spear in his right hand and drove it through the
right side of Werzelya. As she was dying she swore
by the Seven Ranks of the Archangels that she
would never again go to any place [or person] where
the name of Sisenyds was found. Therefore the


PLATE OVil


Portion of the amulet of ’Absara Dengel. Vignette: St. Michael the Arch-
angel. Text: The legend of Sisenyos, who slew the devil-woman
Werzelya, his sister.


i
.
ey
’
‘
a

3
ch
7
' 2
cs
4

,

’
‘

‘
NeW i
'
wy i y

. -


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 185


woman who has hung on her person an amulet
on which the name of Sfisenyés and the story of his
life are written was held to be safe from the attacks
of Werzelya, and her child also, when suckling at
her breast. After Siisenyds had slain Werzelya he
became a martyr, and the prayer which he prayed
in the garden before he speared her was regarded
as a spell of very great power.

The fear of the Evil Eye always has been, “snl still
is, common in Abyssinia. The pagan Ethiopians,
like the Egyptians, wore stones, beads and other
objects to attract the Evil Eye away from their
persons, but the Christians used other means, and
miied to avert it by the use of a spell. This spell
took the form of a legend, which we find written on
many parchment amulets, and which may be thus
summarized: Our Lord and His disciples were
walking by the Sea of Tiberias and they saw an old
woman of most foul appearance and terrifying aspect
sitting upon a seat of filth. Her eyes shot out rays
of yellow light like the glitter of gold, her hands and
her feet seemed to be like wheels, or to move about
like wheels, and flashes of fire sixty-eight cubits
(z.€. over one hundred feet) came forth from her
mouth. The disciples said to Our Lord, “ What
Pic thine, O Lord? And He replied, :‘‘ This
is the Eye of Earth, evil and accursed. If a glance
of it falls on a ship at sea, straightway that ship
sinketh. If its glance followeth a horse, both horse
and rider are cast down. If its glance falleth on a
cow which is being milked, the milk goeth sour
and is turned into blood. When this Eye looketh
upon a woman with child, a miscarriage taketh
place, and both child and mother are destroyed.”


186 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Then our Lord pronounced the two words of power
‘“’Asparaspes ”’ and “ ’Askoraskis,’’ and the disciples
took the Eye of Earth, which was called “ ‘Aynat,”’
and they burned the old woman and scattered the
ashes of her to the east and the west, and to the
south and the north. An amulet with this legend
written upon it was supposed to keep away any
trouble from the eyes of its wearer.

Some of the best-written and oldest amulets
contain prescriptions which are sheer nonsense.
Thus in the amulet of Walatta Kidan the wearer is
told to recite seven times the sounds—

Shar, ‘Shar “Shar Shar. Shar) chan (juan

Diag Diar= “Diar, Djarey Dar Dian Gee

Te Tye COTE TRS 2 ee ee
_ This formula is said to have been given by God
to “Adernaha’él, who was instructed to make it
known to men who suffered from colic and stomach
ache. And in another amulet we are told that evil
spirits and diseases of all kinds may be kept away
from a man by reciting the formula—

Yalbed Yalbed Yalbed Yalbed Yalbed Yalbed Yalbed

Nor Nor Nor Nor Nor Nor Nor

Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha

Ka Ka Ka Ka Ka Ka Ka

Ae Ae ne Ne Ae Ne Ae

Ao Ao Ao Ao Ao Ao AO
A most curious and interesting example of the
Ethiopian amulet folded andin book form was brought
-to me in the British Museum several years ago for
description by the late Father Pollen, S.J. After
his death I asked Father Thurston, S.J., if he knew
what had become of it, and he informed me that it
“belonged to the Convent of the Sacred Heart at


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 187


Hammersmith, and advised me to make further
enquiries of the Lady Superior. I did so, and the
Abbess very kindly sent it to me for further examina-
tion. How the amulet got to England is not known,
but it was probably brought home by one of the
Roman Catholic missionaries a generation or two
ago, and either given by him or a brother missionary
fo, the Convent. “After a iturther’ examination of
the amulet I told the Abbess that I should lke to
.write about it, and after a short correspondence I
made a modest offer to buy it, and my offer being
accepted I became the possessor of the amulet
and am now able to describe it. The amulet is in
the form of a book and measures 4+ inches by
3+ inches. It consists of one long strip of parch-
ment 14 feet 4 inches in length, which is formed of
several short strips neatly sewn together. This
strip is covered on both sides with columns of
Ethiopic text written in black ink and arranged in
page form, the titles of the various compositions,
and the names of saints and the Virgin Mary, and
the name of the owner of the amulet being in red
ink. Many pages are water stained, and in a few
places, where the text has been rubbed away or
otherwise destroyed, patches of vellum inscribed
‘with the missing portions of lines have been added.
The little book can be drawn out like a concertina.
The oldest parts of the text were probably written
mine XVITth century. . The name of. -the first
owner of the book was Batra GiwArcis, 1.e. “ staff
of George,’ but in two places at least we find the
-hame WALDA MaAryAM.

Perhaps the most interesting feature of this amulet
is due to the fact that it throws considerable light on


188 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the Ethiopian’s views about religion. If we begin at
one end and turn over folio after folio we find that the
texts written on one side of the long strip of parchment
(which we have already said is over 14 feet long) are
taken from the Homilies of Severus of Antioch on
St. Michael the Archangel, and the Miracles of the


The Divine Face surrounded with the Eight Aeons or Emanations, and
the Seven Astrological Stars.


(From the amulet of Batra Giwargis.)


Virgin Mary. All very right and proper for an
orthodox Ethiopian Christian. But when we turn
the book over and from the other end of it read the
texts on the other side of the strip of parchment,
we find series of spells and charms, and magical
prayers and drawings which were beloved by the


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 189


pagan Ethiopian. The one strip of parchment was
thus able to supply both of the spiritual wants of
BATRA GiwArcis, and illustrates the character of the
product of the religious views produced by fusing
Christianity with paganism and its religious magic.

The magical drawings in the book are of consider-
able interest. The first of them is painted in crude


Magical Drawing representing the Chariot of Elijah.
(From the amulet of Batra Giwargis.)


colours and purports to represent the Divine Face
(see page 188). A human face, with large prominent
eyes, is seen set in a rectangle, from each side of
which two right-angled triangles (?) project. Above
and below the square are three “‘ heavens,” or aeons,
or aspects of the Deity, and on each side of it is one


190 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


heaven. The seven symbols, each formed of two
interlaced crescents, the horns of which terminate
in small circles, represent the Seven Planets. These
last are found in Greek and Coptic magical papyri.
The whole scene probably represents the heavens by

day, for immediately following this vignette is a


Magical Drawing representing the'Net in which Solomon caught the fiends
and devils.


(From the amulet of Batra Giwargis.)
somewhat similar central face and figure which
symbolizes the heavens by night ; a star is attached
to the ends of the ight projections from the rectangle
containing the features of a man. Several pages in
the little book are filled with drawings of various
forms of the Cross, groups of four eyes, and human


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 19]


heads which probably represent Christ and the Four
Evangelists. No explanations are given of the
linear designs which appear in large numbers,
but their significations must have been well
known of the owner of the amulet, for the name
of Batra GiwArcis is found on nearly all of them.


Solomon with his wife.
(From the amulet of Batra Giwargis.)


Some of the drawings are of special interest, for I
have found them in no other Ethiopic manuscript.
Among these may be mentioned the SARGALA ’ELyAs
Ome Chariot of Elijah” (page-189), the -object
of which was to give Batra GiwArcis the means
of ascending into heaven when his soul left the
earth.


192 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Traditions extant in Hebrew, Syriac, Arabic and
Ethiopic all agree in stating that King Solomon
was a master magician, and that he had authority
over all the fiends of Hell, which he caught in a
net like fishes, as he had over all beasts and birds.
The Ethiopian Christian wished to possess this


Adam and Eve, who holds up a serpent, sitting in the Garden of Eden.
(From the amulet of Batra Giwargis.)


authority, and we find in the amulet of BATRA
GiwArGis a picture of the MARBABETA SALOMON
or ‘Net of Solomon” (page 190). Many Ethiopian
historians, accepting the legend of Solomon’s union
with MAKEDA, the Queen of Sheba, have regarded
Solomon a the true founder of their kingdom. As


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 193


BATRA GiwArGis wished to obtain the benefit of
his protecting magic, and this could be best secured
by drawing a picture of him, together with his potent
spells, on his amulet, we find there the scene repro-
duced on page Ior. Here we see King Solo-
mon seated in a sort of shrine, with his long hair


The Cross with the Divine Face.
(From the amulet of Batra Giwargis.)


falling on each side of his head. By his side is seated
a woman who is covering her mouth, in the well-
known Oriental fashion, with a portion of her outer
garment. She is wearing shoes with pointed turned
up toes. A little above the king’s head on his
right is the crescent moon, and a little above the


woman’s head, on her left, is the sun. This scene
N


‘194 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


is described: as ‘“‘ Sal6m6n mesla be’esiti,”’ “ Solo-
mon with his wife,’ the wife here represented being
the Queen of Sheba. |

Another drawing, which is very rarely found in
magical texts, is that which is reproduced on


The Cross of “Abt Fara.
(From the amulet of Batra Giwargis.)


page 192. Here we see Adam and Eve, who are
both naked, seated in the Garden of Eden. Eve
is holding up with her right hand a long serpent,
which appears to be speaking to her. The
Ethiopic description of the scene is “Za kama


‘ashataé kayst la-Héwan,” 7.e. ““ How the serpent


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 195


seduced Eve.’’ The tree with the forbidden fruit
is on the left of Eve, and the object on the right
of Adam is perhaps the mandragora. The object of
including this picture among the Vignettes in the
amulet is not clear.

Another remarkable drawing is reproduced on
page 193. Here we have on the right a variant
form of the Divine Face which forms the centre
of across. To the left of it isa cross drawn on a
cross-shaped background, and on each of the four
arms is an eye. Below are fifteen small panels on
which are drawn groups of four eyes, pairs of eyes,
and X-shaped crosses. This drawing was regarded
as a very special protection against the attacks of
fiends and devils and the Evit EYE, and it was
intended to show that the Face of God dwelt in
the cross and in figures and drawings of it. Finally we
may note the very elaborately decorated cross which
is reproduced on page 194. Above it is written in
Ethiopic ‘‘ Deliver thy servant Batra Giwargis,”’
and below are the words “‘ tebab za ’Abiifara Seltana,”’
which may be rendered the ‘“‘ wisdom (or, medicine)
of Abii Fara (?) our Sultan.”

The inscriptions which are found on Brciinent
amulets, 7.e. prayers, spells, magical names and
names of the Deity and angels are generally derived
from Jewish, Christian (t.e. Gnostic and Coptic)
sources, and these are comparatively easy to identify.
There are however some which are of pagan origin,
and words, names and formulas are found in them
which are inexplicable. Occasionally we meet with
a mixture of paganism and Christianity in the
inscriptions, and among magical writings of this


class Speci mention must be made of a little work
N 2


196 AMULHISCANDE SUPE KS LITTON S


entitled “(LEFAFA. SEDEK “’- or the ~*" bandlemmon
Righteousness.’’ The rubrics in it claim that if a
man carries a copy of it on his person it will make
his business in this world to prosper, and give him
health and strength and preserve him from attacks
of sickness caused by demons, and help him to come
forth uncondemned by the Great Judge in the Hall
of Judgment, and to escape punishment in the River
of Fire in Hell. The preliminary narrative states
that the author of the book was God, who dictated
it to our Lord, who wrote it down and gave it first
to Mary, His Mother, and subsequently to the Arch-
angel MICHAEL, who made its contents known in
due course to the Apostles and others. It is further
stated that when God heard from His Son of the
tears and distress of the Virgin Mary when she
thought of her parents and kinsfolk being punished
in the River of Fire, He dictated the book to His
Son so that the happiness of the Virgin in heaven
might: not be idestroyed. The Lefatas sede
constructed on the same plan as the Egyptian
Book of the Dead, and is a veritable Ethiopian
Book of ‘the Dead. > But the author, who was.
Christian, substitutes God for Ra, Christ for Thoth,
and the Virgin Mary for Isis. The magical names of
the Persons of the Trinity, and the names of the
Archangels and other celestial beings take the places
of the names of Egyptian fiends in the spells which
were believed to preserve the dead body intact,
and to ensure its remaining in its grave,,and to
enable the soul of the dead man to find its way
through the earth to the dread Hall of Judgment,
and <to save it from ‘*the-River ofbire? Vines tem.
in the Lefafa Sedek were written on a strip or sheet


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 197


of linen which was wrapped round the body of the
dead, just as a sheet of papyrus inscribed with copies
of Chapters of the Book of the Dead was often
wrapped round the body of the dead Egyptian.
The belief in the existence of a Hall of Judgment
and a River of Fire was borrowed from the
Egyptians, and it is possible that some of the magical
names given in the Lefafa Sedek are transcriptions
of the names of Egyptian devils. The Ethiopic
text with an English translation and a commentary
are published in my Bandlet of Righteousness, London,
Bozo (Luzac Ss Series).

The Ethiopians believed that Moses, Solomon,
Christ and His Apostles and Disciples were all
magicians, and therefore the Books of the Old and
New Testaments and copies of them were often
regarded as amulets. The “ Book OF THE MIRACLES
OF THE VIRGIN Mary” and the ‘“ WEDDAsSE
MaryAm’”’ or “ Praises of Mary ’”’ were also con-
sidered to be sources of magical protection. The
Book of Psalms formed a very favourite amulet
among those who could afford to pay for a copy of
it to be made. And certain native Ethiopian books
are regarded with very great veneration throughout
Abyssinia, and upon the possession of the most
famous of these, the KEBRA NaGast, or “ Glory of
Kings,”’ the stability of the kingdom was at one time
supposed to rest. It will be remembered that when
the British Army captured Makdala, the strong
fortress in which Theodore, the mighty Abyssinian
king, had established himself with his army, the
great collection of about goo Ethiopic manuscripts
which Theodore had collected fell into the hands of
the British. These were brought to the British


198 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Museum in 1868, and the late Professor William
Wright, who catalogued the collection, found among
them two fine copies of the KEBRA Nacast. He
printed full descriptions of them in his Catalogue of
the Etlnopic -MSS.,- London, 1877, No. -CCGXCE
p. 297, and in the Zestschrift der Deutschen Morgen-
landtschen Gesellschaft, Bd. XXIV, pp. 614, 615.
On August 10, 1872, Prince Kasa, who was sub-
sequently crowned as King John IV (December 14,
1872), wrote to Earl Granville thus :—

“ Again, there is a book called KIVERA NEGUST
(1.e. KEBRA NAGAsT), which contains the Law of
the whole of Ethiopia, and the names of the Shims
(1.e. Chiefs), Churches, and Provinces are in this
book. I pray you will find out who has got this
book, and send it to me, for in my Country my
people will not obey my orders without it.” In
short, King John IV says that without this book
he cannot rule Ethiopia. A copy of this letter
was sent to the British Museum, and the Trustees
decided to grant King John’s request, and the manu-
script was restored to him on December 14, 1872.
M. Hugues Le Roux, a French envoy from the
President of the French Republic to Menyelek II,
King of Ethiopia, applied personally to the king for
permission to make a translation of the KEBRA
NaGast. The king was most willing for the book
to be translated, and he replied in words which
M. Le Roux translates thus: “‘ Je suis d’avis qu'un
peuple ne se défend pas seulement avec ses armes,
mais avec ses livres. Celus dont vous parlez est la
jfierte de ce Royaume. [The italics are mine.] Depuis
moi, l’Empereur, jusqu’au plus pauvre soldat qui
marche sur les chemins, tous les Ethiopiens seront


ETHIOPIAN (ABYSSINIAN) AMULETS 199


heureux que ce livre soit traduit dans la langue
frangaise et porté a la connaissance des amis que
nous avons dans le monde. Aiunsi l’on verra claire-
ment quels liens nous unissent avec le peuple de
Dieu, quels trésors ont été confiés a notre garde.
On comprendra mieux pourquoi le secours de Dieu
ne nous a jamais manqué contre les enemis qui nous
attaquaient.’”’ The manuscript was fetched from
Adis Ababa for M. Le Roux to use, and he found
written on the last folio the words, ‘“ This volume
was returned to the King of Ethiopia by order of the
Trustees of the British Museum, December 14, 1872.
J. Winter Jones, Principal Librarian.’’ M. Le Roux
adds the following most ‘interesting facts :—
“C’était le livre que Theodoros avant caché sous
son oreiller, la nuit ow il se suicida, celui que les
soldats anglais avaient emporte a Londres, qu'un
ambassadeur rendit a l’Empereur Jean, que ce
meme jean feuilleta dans so tente, le matin du
jour ou il tomba sous cimeterres des Mahdistes,
celui que les moines avaient dérobé”’ (Chez la Reine
de Saba, Paris, 1914, pp. 120-121).


Glas Wat FA BS hee AYA I


GNOSTIC AMULETS.


“ Gnostics ’’ is the name usually given to a group
of religious sects which flourished in WESTERN ASIA
and EGypt between 250 B.c. and A.D. 400. One
and all claimed that they possessed yvaous, 1.¢.
“ knowledge,’ but that “ knowledge ’”’ was of a
highly spiritual nature, and was transcendental,
supernal and celestial in character. According to
some of the Gnostics, that knowledge was obtained
by a series of revelations which were made by the
One great God, Who was the Creator and Sustainer
of the universe, to men who had fitted themselves to
receive them by self-abnegation, fasting and prayer.
The oldest history of the Gndsis and the tenets of its
followers will be found in the work of HIppoLyTus
(died or was martyred in the first half of the IIIrd
century A.D.), Refutation of all Herestes. Another
history written a couple of centuries later is the
“ Panarion’”’ of EpipHANiIus. The Coptic works,
“ Pistis Sophia ”’ (z.e. Faith-Wisdom) and_ books of
I~0 provide us with a great deal of original first-
hand information,. The. tenets of some, Ofte
Gnostic sects were derived primarily from INDIA,
and they travelled westwards through PERSIA
to SYRIA, PALESTINE, EGYPT and GREECE with
the Buddhist envoys to the SELEUCIDAE and the


GNOSTIC AMULETS 201


PTOLEMIES who were sent thither by the kings of
India in the IIIrd and IInd centuries B.c. Modern
research has shown that the pictographic writings
of the Indians and Sumerians were almost identical
in character, and it may be that there is Sumerian
influence in Gnosticism. The astrological element
in Gnosticism, of which so many examples are
found on Gnostic amulets, certainly came from
Babylonia, the home of astrology. (See the Section
on the Signs of the Zodiac.) And it is tolerably
certain that many of the curious linear signs
which represent the sun, moon, planets and
other stars, are garbled copies of early Sumerian
pictographs.

The remains of the Gnostics now available for
study show that, viewed as a whole, their Gnosis
or “ knowledge ”’ was influenced by the teachings of
the ZEND-AVESTA, the cult of Miruras, Manichaeism, —
the popular form of religion current in Egypt during
the Graeco-Roman period, Hebrew books like the
Book of Enoch, the Jewish Kabbalah, and early
Christian Literature. The Church during the Ist and
IInd centuries condemned Gnosticism unsparingly,
but in the end it was recognized that a Gnostic
might also be a good Christian. For the noblest part
of the Gnostic’s religion proclaimed the conquest
of Darkness by Light, and of Evil by Good, and
it was taught esoterically; but many of those who
proclaimed themselves to be Gnostics never plumbed
the depths of its fundamental truths. A work like
the present is no place to describe the Gnostic
system and the tenets of the various sects who
taught it; those who wish to study it will find much
information on the subject in MATTER, HISTOIRE,


202 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Critique du Gnosticisme, 2 vols. and plates, Paris,
1828; C. W. Kina, The Gnuostics and their Remains,
London, 1864; Lipsius, Der Gnosticismus, Leipzig,
1860; and MANSEL, The Gnostic Heresies, London,
1875.

The Gnostics, in common with the peoples
among whom they lived, adopted the use of amulets,
and as far as the inscriptions and figures on them
can be understood, aimed at securing by their
means knowledge of a celestial character, and
the protection of the Great God Who was ONE
and Who embraced ALL within. himself, both in
this world and in the next. The amulets are
made of various kinds of semi-precious stones, é.g.
blood stone, iron ore or haematite, green jasper,
nefrite, agates of various kinds, sard, carnelian,
crystal, chrysoprase, beryl, chalcedony, obsidian,
lapis lazuli, nicolo, onyx, plasma, granite, etc.
Some of these stones were believed to possess the
powers and influences of the planets, and to confer
upon the wearer wisdom, health, strength, shrewd-
ness, and the ability to absorb transcendental
knowledge. They have various shapes—triangular,
square, oval, etc.—and vary in size from half an
inch to three inches in length. The most popular
stones are black and green in colour, and it is
probable that these were supposed to possess
medicinal properties. The inscriptions on nearly
all Gnostic amulets are in Greek uncials, but a few
are known which are inscribed in a sort of
pictographic script. Quite nine-tenths of the Gnostic
amulets now known were found in Egypt, and it is
therefore not surprising that they bear on them
figures of Egyptian gods and goddesses, and Nilotic


“GNOSTIC AMULETS 203


creatures and symbols. The Egyptian Gnostics
rejected many of the pagan cults of the early
dynastic Egyptians, but they regarded Ra, Horus
and Harpokrates as forms of their ‘“‘One God of
heaven,’ and they connected Isis with the Virgin
Mary, Osiris and Serapis with Christ, and Hathor
with the naked woman who was the symbol of
wisdom according to the latest form of Gnosticism
in the [Vth or Vth century.

The Gnostics attached great importance to the
NAMES of God and of the archangels. The name of
God. appears as !AW, which represents the Hebrew
Y[A]H or Yah (Jah), but sometimes the god referred
to seems to be MITHRAS or even ORMAzD. Other
names of God are ZTABAWO SaBAOTH (from the
Hebrew word meaning “ hosts’’) and AAONAEI
(from the Hebrew ApONAy). IA6 is described as
W WN “the Existing,’ and the TPIMOP%E EEO
“ three-form God,’ and the name is often written
between Alpha A and Omega QMEFA. The names
of many of the archangels appear on these amulets,
é.g. MICHAEL, GABRIEL, PANIEL, RAGUEL, URIEL,
SURIEL, and RAPHAEL. Of the Patriarchs MOSES
and SOLOMON are mentioned, but the pentacle
_ which contained the ineffable name YHWH is rarely
represented. The name of Moses appears because
he was connected with the setting up of the brazen
serpent (Num. xxi. g), and SoLomon because his
seal worked miracles ; it is possible that the OPHITES,
the object of whose cult was a serpent, regarded
Moses as the founder of their sect. Considerable
importance was attached to the Seven Vowels,
and they are found in various forms of com-
bination on many Gnostic amulets. Thus we


204 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Y
have AEHIOYW, eae YOIYHIYHIYHI, and


sometimes they are grouped so as to form a triangle,


bialiss =
A


EVE
HHH
Je ea Ma
OO00O0
DLA Ge HO Bos f
WW WWW WW


Though all the Gnostic amulets known to us are
post-Christian in point of age, the figures and
symbols cut upon them are far older, being chiefly
of Egyptian origin. And originally such figures
and symbols were believed to give the wearer of
them health, strength, virility and prosperity, and
had a much closer relation to magic and medicine
than to religion. It was the Gnostics who by
adopting them gave them their religious significance.
All the animal figures found on the amulets represent
strong virile beasts, and the birds and reptiles and
insects represent those which are notorious for their
swiftness and strength, and fecundity. And it 1s
the rising and not the setting sun, and the crescent
and not the full moon, which are depicted. One of
the most important creatures is the AGATHODEMON or
“ Good Genius,”’ a type of the Sun-god. He appears
in the form of a huge serpent with the head of a
lion on which is a crown with 7 or 12 rays. He is
usually called CHNOUBIS, or CHNOUPHIS, or CHNOUMIS,
but the form CHOLCHNOUBIS also appears. One
of his titles is SEMES EILAM (Heb. Shemesh ‘olam),
1.e. the SuN of the Universe, when his crown has
seven rays which represent the Seven Heavens; to


GNOSTIC AMULETS 205


each is attached one of the vowels of the Greek
alphabet AEHIOYQ. The serpent CHNOUBIS, like the
brazen serpent of MosEs (Num. xxi. 9), was regarded
as a god of healing, and the renewer of life, for the
serpent renews its life by sloughing its skin. The


magical sign GEC. which is often found on the


back of Chnoubis amulets, is probably a garbled
form of the serpent and
staff which AESCULAPIUS
Gained, and which im
their turn were borrowed
from the SUMERIANS (see
BupDGE, Divine Origin of
the Craft of the Herbalist,
p. 14). According to the
writer HEPHAESTION and
others Chnoubis was the
name of one. of the three
Dekans in the Sign of the
Chnoumis Breau cchie altar. Zodiac CANCER, and it
Berton cn the mkt oa was set in the breast of
aaa oe een eae LEo, and therefore was
believed to be efficacious
for the cure of all diseases in the chest and stomach.
The two following inscriptions on Chnoubis amulets
confirm these statements :—In the one is the prayer,
~ Protect the stomach of Proclus ”’ (KING, Gnostics,
p. 223), and in the other, “‘ Place the womb of such-
and-such a one in its proper place, O circle of the
sun (MATTER, Gnosticisme, Plate ii C, No. 4).
Another group of Gnostic amulets, which is called
by Kine “ Abraxaster,’’ reproduces a number of
figures of gods, goddesses and symbols which, though


206 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


derived from Egypt, are not as old as CHNOUBIS.
The chief god among these is the jackal-headed god
ANUBIS, who, in.addition to his own head, also has
the head of a man. In ancient Egyptian theology
Anubis led the souls of the dead to the kingdom of
OsiRIs ; but in the Gnostic System he was supposed
to lead them along the paths of the planets to the
Pleroma. He possessed the words of power which


1. Anubis, holding a sceptre and standing on an open left hand, the
symbol of justice. The inscription behind him is the palindrome
“ Ablanathan,’’ of doubtful meaning.

.2. The goddess of Truth (the Egyptian Maat), standing on a figure of an
internal organ of Isis. The inscription behind her means “the Sun Ever-
lasting ”’ or the Sun of the World. (From Kina, Plate F, No. 5.)


enabled him to pass through all the gates of heaven,
and to overcome the resistance of any and every
god who would oppose him. He presided over the
weighing of the hearts of the dead like THotu, but
the Gnostics identified him with CHriIstT.

Another old Egyptian god figured frequently on
Gnostic amulets is Her-pa-Khart or HARPOKRATES,
1.e. Horus the Child, a form of the newly risen
Sun-god. He is represented in the form of a child,


GNOSTIC AMULETS 207


with a lock of hair on the right side of his head; a
finger of his right hand is in his mouth, and he holds
@eilait in his left hand. He is seated on ‘a lotus
flower, in a boat, one end of which ends in the head
of an ass and the other in the head of a bird. He
is called 1!AQ, as is ABRAXAS himself. With him
are seen two hawks and the sun and moon. The
goddesses Isis and HATHOR appear either as figures
or symbols, a circle often typifies the Sun-god, as


Horus the Child (Harpokrates) seated on a lotus in the magical boat of

Tao, one end of which terminates in an ass’s head (Anubis) and the other

in the head of a hawk (Horus). In the field are the morning star and a
crescent moon. (From KIn«c, Plate C, No. 3.)


in Egyptian hieroglyphs, and THOTH symbolises
CHRIST.

OsIRIS appears sometimes in the form of an
aged man, with his hands crossed on his breast
like those of a mummy.

On gems of this class we find figures of PRIAPUS.
He is represented as an ithyphallic man, four-
headed, four-winged, and four-handed, holding four
sceptres, and he has the tail of a bird of prey;
an inscription found on the reverse of such figures
is the palindrome ABAANA@ANAABA.


208 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


We now come to the ABRAXAS or ABRASAX
amulets, none of which is older than the second
century A.D.; in fact, it is commonly believed that
they were invented by Basilides himself. According
to some the name of ABRASAX represents the Hebrew
words “‘ Habbérakah,”’ literally “the blessing,” but
it is far more likely to be a garbled form of the name


I. 26


I. The god Abrasax, with the head of a cock, and a human body with a

bird’s head and legs, formed by two serpents. He bears a shield on

his left arm and brandishes a mace with his right hand. In the field are

five stars representing the Five Planets, and below him is the thunderbolt.

The above figure is found cut on the obverse of a copper disk found in
France. (From Kine, Plate A, No. 3, obverse.)


2. The three-headed Hecate, the Queen of Hell, but only four feet are
represented. In the hands of the lower pair of arms she grasps two
serpents, the thunderbolt and a club; in the hands of the upper pair
of arms are knives. This figure is cut on the reverse of the copper disk
which has Abrasax on the obverse. (From Kine, Plate A, No. 3,
reverse.)
of some god, Egyptian or Indian. The total of the
numerical values of the letters of his name is 365,
thus :—A =I, = 2). P = 100) A =a eee
A =1,and#Z=6o0. And the total of the numerical
values of the letters in the name of MITHRAS
(Meithras)—-M = 40, E= 5, |=10, 6 =9, P = 100,
A =1andC = 200—is also 365; and, according to
some, ABRASAX and MITHRAS were one and the


GNOSTIC AMULETS 209


same person. The Gnostic Marcus, who founded
his whole system, which was borrowed from the
Hebrew Kabbalak, upon these numerical deductions,
discovered that the numerical values of the 24 letters
of the Greek alphabet added together form a total
of 888, which is the same as that of the letters in the
name of JESUS, IHELOYE—1! = 40, E = 8, LC = 200,
i 70,,Y — 400, G= 200. | ABRASAX represented
the 365 Aeons or emanations
from the First Cause, and
as a Pantheus, 2.e. All-God,
he appears on the amulets
with thesnmead of a cock
(PHG@BUS) or of a lion (RA
or MiturRas), the body of a
man, and his legs are ser-
pents which terminate in
ScCOUplonsa. types ).of * the
Agathodaimon. In his
right hand he grasps a club,
or a flail, and in his left isa

- round or oval shield. He is
A god in the form of Osiris as a


mummy, with the Seven Stars, called by all the names of
Pie, omen et the God of the Hebrew,

Plate H, No. 5.) namely YAH, ADONAI,
and SABAOTH. The palindrome ABLANATHANALBA
feasaiad to mean ~ [hou ‘art our father,’ but this
can hardly be a correct translation.

Many of the Gnostic amulets which were cut in
the IInd century have long inscriptions on their
edges and backs, and nearly all of them are un-
translatable. This is due to the fact that each
letter is the initial of a word, and no keys to these
lengthy formulas have been found. Such inscriptions

O


210 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


are due to Jewish mfluence, and are of Kabbahistic
character. An interesting example of this influence
is given on page 209. Here we have a figure of am old
man with his hands crossed on his breast. Around
him are seven stars symbolising the planets, the
celestial globe, the Pentacle or Solomon’s seal,
and some  wumdecipherable
signs. He represents the 365
Aeons, all of which were sup-
posed to be contained within
him. He is a form of the Adam
Kadmon of the Kabbalists and
the Primal Man whom God
made in His own image. The
second Adam. of the OPHITES
was conceived to have the
same form. A drawing of the
Primal Man according to the
Kabbalists, reproduced from


The


Arch-demon Set or


Typhon-ass-headed. He has
four wings, and he holds by
its tail a scorpion in each
hand. Above his head is a


beetle with outstretched

wings. Close to his neck are

the cresent moon and the

morning star.

amulet against scorpions and

other reptiles. (From KING,
Plate: G,, No, 2...)


This was an.


Ginsburg’s work on the Kab-
balah, will be found in the
section on the Kabbalah.
Many of the amulets which
are commonly called “Gnos-
tic’? have nothing to do with
the doctrines of the true


Gnésis, and are merely charms which were intended
to protect the wearer from ailments of the body,
and to procure them material prosperity. A typical
example of such charms, which is a charm against
the bites of scorpions, is given above. And the
amulets made of iron ore or haematite were probr
ably worn with the view of giving virility to men
and fecundity in women. Dr. Campbell Thompson


GNOSTIC AMULETS 211


has shown that this substance was used with a
similar purpose in Babylonia and Assyria; see his
emcicie in. an tor january, 1928, p. 13: . The
following is an example of the drawings of amulets
which are found in Greek magical papyri.


te
£
4
6 q
6 |
vV
a
Ww |
jv
t=
t
7 UE
£
&


Amulet in a magical papyrus of the [Vth or Vth century. In the upper

part of the border is the well-known palindrome Ablanathanalba ; in

the lower part is the spell a: an Aa Aew rasw. On the right and left are

two series of Greek vowels, and in the centre is the word of power

Akrammachamarei. Some of the magical signs are symbols of the heavens

and the sun, moon and stars. (From KENyon, Greek Papyri in the British
Museum, London, 1893, Papyrus CX XIV, p. 122.)


02


CHAPTER? Vibe


HEBREW AMULETS.


The prehistoric Hebrews, like the nations round
about them, made use of uninscribed amulets to
protect them from the Evil Eye, and from hostile
influences of every kind. Such amulets were made
of semi-precious and precious stones, stones which
possessed peculiar shapes or forms or were marked
in some way naturally, berries of trees and plants,
and grain of various kinds. According to Bischoff
(Die Elemente der Kabbalah, ii. 190) animals could .
be protected from the assaults of devils and the
Evil Eye by a fox’s tail or by patches of some white
substance placed between the eyes. A special stone
was attached to the body of a pregnant woman to
prevent miscarriage, and knotted cords or bands
were tied to the new-born babe to preserve it from
allevil. The prehistoric Hebrews probably possessed
a far-reaching system of magic, but we do not know
much aboutit. Itis, however, quite clear that many
of the magical practices which are made known to
us by the Hebrew Bible were of very great antiquity,
and were winked at by the lawgivers and prophets
because it was impossible to put an end to them.
Moses himself was so great a magician that he
defeated Pharaoh’s magicians in their own arts,
and when necessity demanded it he set up the brazen
serpent, the belief in the power of which was un-
doubtedly of pagan origin. The Hebrews inherited


HEBREW AMULETS 213


much of their magic from the Sumerians and Baby-
lonians, and many details of it survived among the
Jews and others even after the Middle Ages. We
read in the famous Epic that Gilgamish succeeded in
obtaining speech with the spirit of his dead friend
Enkidu through the good offices of Ea and Nergal,
and Saul, the Lord’s anointed, had recourse to the
witch of Endor, who must have enjoyed a great
reputation as a raiser of the spirits of the dead to
obtain speech with the spirit of Samuel.

Among the different kinds of Hebrew amulets
which are made known to us by the Bible may be
mentioned. :—


1. [The SAHARON, which was probably made of
metal and had the form of a crescent, 7.e. the
crescent moon. It was worn by women (Isa. iii. 18),
and by kings (Judges viii. 26), and was tied to the
necks of camels (tbid., verse 21) to protect them
from the Evil Eye. The crescent was a favourite
amulet among many peoples of Western Asia, and
it represented to them the strength and protection
of the waxing and not the waning moon. The Him-
yarites and other peoples of Arabia added a star
to the crescent, and the Abyssinians adopted both
as sacred emblems, as at a later period the Turks
did also.

2. The TERAPHim. These were small figures of
men or of gods in the forms of men, presumably
made of clay generally, but some were probably
made of semi-precious stones if they were intended
to be worn on the body. They seem to have been
of the same character as the so-called ‘‘ Papsukkal ”’
figures which have been described in the section on
Babylonian amulets. We first hear of them in


214 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Gen. xxxi. 19, 30, where we read that Rachel,
the daughter of Laban, stole the teraphim of her
father and went away with them when she accom-
panied her husband Jacob when he fled from Laban’s
house. The respect in which Laban regarded these
figures is evident from the fact that he calls them
“my’ gods’’; and they must have been easily
portable, for Rachel hid them in her camel’s
saddle. See also Judges xvi. 24. It 1s clear that.
although many men kept teva@phim in their houses,
e.g. David (1 Sam. xix. 13), and Micah, who had
a “house of gods” and made an ephod and
teraphim (Judges xvi. 5), they were regarded
as profane things and were associated with the
heathen practice of divination. Before Jacob went
to Bethel to present himself before Yahweh he made
all his people to hand over to him their “ strange
gods’ and ear-rings (7.e. crescent-shaped amulets),
and he hid them under the oak which was in Shechem
(Gen. xxxv. 4). There were apparently several kinds
of teraéphim, i.e. some were kept in the house or tent
and were regarded as household gods, like the penates,
some were hung on the bodies of animals, and some
were used for purposes of divination. The last-named
class was condemned by the prophets (1 Sam. xv. 23),
and |Josiah put them away with familiar
spirits, and wizards and idols (2 Kings xxii. 24).
Ezek. xxi. 21 describes the king of Babylon using
teraphim for divining purposes, and in connection
with the shuffling of arrows and inspection of the
liver of the slaughtered animal. . There is no doubt
that the Hebrews derived the use of the teraphim
from the inhabitants of Lower Mesopotamia, where,
according to a tablet translated by Sidney Smith,


HEBREW AMULETS 215


the prophylactic and atropaeic figures in a house
were regarded as house property, and were sold
with the house.

3. LenAsnim. The singular of this word lakash
was applied to any object or ornament which was
associated with the whispering of incantations, spells
charms, prayers, etc., and which was used as an
amulet. The plural is found in fsa. nu. 20 f,
when the jewellery and ornaments and attire of the
daughters of Jerusalem is criticized and condemned.
Among the objects enumerated are ear-rings, arm-
chains, stepping-chains, girdles, finger-rings, brace-
lets, armlets, scent tubes, mirrors, etc. To describe
these is impossible, for no pictures of the luxurious
garments and ornaments worn by rich women of
the time of Isaiah are extant. Among them were
certainly many lehadshim or “ amulets,” and it is
very probable that every article of apparel possessed
an amuletic character.

4. Betts. These were attached to the skirts of
the vestments of Aaron the high priest (Exod. xxviii.
33), and their tinkling sounds were intended to
drive away evil spirits. Isaiah (iii. 16) suggests that
women attached bells to their skirts “ making a
tinkling with their feet.” The ancient Egyptians
wore bells as amulets, and their descendants, the
early Copts, followed their example, and used them
to drive away evil spirits during the celebration of
the Eucharist. A bell of the Assyrian period
decorated with figures of animal-headed deities is
preserved in the Berlin Museum (figured by MEISSNER,
Bab. und Assyr., No.142). And in modern caravans,
horses, asses and camels frequently have bells tied
to their necks to drive away evil spirits,


216 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


5. Figures oF Gops. The Babylonians, Assyrians
and Egyptians all wore figures of gods as amulets.
Now the Hebrews, being monotheists and worshippers
of Yahweh, of whom no figure could be made, when
they wished to do as the heathen did, and wear or
carry into battle figures of gods as amulets, they were
obliged to have recourse to heathen deities. Thus
when Judas Maccabaeus and his company went out
to bury the bodies of the dead with their kinsmen in
their fathers’ graves, they found under the coats of
every one that was slain “‘ things consecrated to the
idols of the Jamnites, which was forbidden to the
Jews by the Law.” Judas decided that ‘‘ this was the


cause wherefore they were slain ”’ (2 Macc. xii. 39, 40). .


The Philistines apparently carried figures of their
gods with their army when they went forth to fight,
but when David defeated them at Baal-perazim they
dropped them and fled, and David ordered them to
be burned with fire (1 Chron. xiv. 12).

6. TOTAPHOTH, or Phylacteries, 7.e. frontlet bands
which were worn between the eyes; see Exod. xii.
g; 16; Deut. vi 8; xi 18: Phey wetemmadeson
skin of some sort and were inscribed with special
formulas; eg.) Hear; ‘O: Israel::) The orp mons
God [is] one Lord: And thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,


and. with all thy might” (Deut. vi: 4; 5), Hilletss


or bandlets thus inscribed were to be worn either
between the eyes or on the hand.

7. MeztzAu. This word means a “ gate-post ”’
or a “ door-post’’. and was given to a strip of
leather which was inscribed with the verses from
Deuteronomy quoted above, and then attached to
the door-post ‘of the house. See Deut. vi. 9; xi. 20.


HEBREW AMULETS 217


Celie sisitneors: tassel,” or ~ lock’. [of hair},
or “ fringe.’ This was made like the phylactery
and meztiizah by Divine Command :—And the Lord
spake unto Moses, saying, “‘ Speak unto the children
of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes
in the borders of their garments throughout their
generations, and that they put upon the fringe of
the borders a ribband of blue’ (Num. xv. 38).
“Thou shalt make three fringes upon the four
quarters (or wings) of thy vesture wherewith thou
coverest thyself’ (Deut. xxii. 12). There is no doubt
that the Tétaphéth, Meztizah and the Sisith were
amulets, and that the use of them goes back into
prehistoric times. Originally the T6taphéth were
precious stones which invariably possessed the
power of driving away evil spirits, and therefore
had no need of inscriptions.

Though there is no proof that the Hebrews in
general under the Mosaic dispensation used amulets,
it is tolerably certain that the pagan belief in their
efficacy was tacitly and unofficially adopted by them,
especially when, after they had learned to write, they
could inscribe the Great Name of God, and the names
of His angels, and passages from their sacred books
on them. The pagan amulet was made efficacious by
the words (1.e. the charm or incantation) which were
pronounced over it by the magician, or priest, or
physician of the time, but the words were profane,
and represented a belief in the power of the devils
which the monotheistic Hebrew could not accept. But
the object itself, whether it was a strip of leather,
ot a stone or metal plaque, might be used by him
provided the words pronounced over it or written
upon it were derived from the Hebrew Scriptures.


218 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The true history of the use of Hebrew amulets
is, I believe, only to be derived from the Kabbalah,
a very ancient work which deals with Jewish
mysticism in theory and practice. Assuredly those
who assert that the Kabbalah is not older than
the Xth century of our Era are in error. For
internal evidence contains proofs that its authors
borrowed many of their beliefs from Babylonian and
Egyptian sources which became available to them
through the works of writers in Greek in the Ist
and IInd centuries. The early compilers of the
Kabbalah tried, as Dr. Gaster says (Hastings Lcyc.,
vol. 11. p. 454) to adopt and to adapt many elements
from other sources and to mould them in accordance
with the fundamental principle of the Unity of
God and of the limited power of evil spirits. Popular
beliefs know no rigid dogma, and much of that which
is held to be strong and efficacious among other
peoples is taken over in the belief that it would be
beneficial. Many popular books have been written
on Kabbalah, but they are untrustworthy because
the writers make it evident that they have never
read the literature of practical Kabbalah, which, as
Dr. Gaster rightly points out, is still mostly in MSS.
He goes on: “It is found among the medical
recipes as a recognized part of the medical practi-
tioner, who would use drugs and amulets indis-
criminately or conjointly, for the use of the amulet
is as widespread as that of any other medicine.
There is nothing for which one or more amulets
could not be prescribed, and the practice goes even
further, for by means of amulets such results could be
obtained as the drug alone could not effect ....
The subduing of evil demons through the invocation


HEBREW AMULETS 219


of the aid of good spirits is only a materialization
of higher spiritual truths. Faith is the underlying
principle.”

The principal classes of INSCRIBED AMULETS sanc-
tioned by Kabbalah have been grouped by Bischoff
in his Elemente der Kabbalah (p. 191 f.) and may be
briefly described. The simplest of them contained
miercly “extracts irom the Bible, eg. “I will put
none of these diseases upon thee, which I have
brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the LorpD
miamenecalcth thee «(EP xod.’ xv. 26). Another
favourite extract was “‘ Thou shalt not be afraid
for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that
flieth by day; nor for the pestilence that walketh
in darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth
emeenooncdy 9. (bs. xci7 5,6), The KErtres ‘or
“noonday devil’’ was greatly feared, and the
words rendered by “error by night’ and “ pesti-
maces, were the names of terrifying devils that
caused sickness. The text of Psalm xcvii was often
written on leather in the form of a seven-branched
candlestick, and worn as an amulet, and the beautiful
Psalm cxxi was often copied for amuletic purposes.
Sometimes the text on an amulet contained a play
on words, ¢.g. “‘ Joseph is a fruitful bough by a
well’ (Gen. xlix. 22). The word ‘ayim means both
meeye and ~ well)” and the verse is intended to
say that Joseph was victorious over the Evil Eye,
and that every descendant of his shall be also.
Other very favourite texts for amulets were “ Hear,
O Israel: The Lorp our God is one Lord ’”’ (Deut.
vi. 4), and Aaron’s Blessing, ‘‘ The Lorp bless thee,
and keep thee ; the Lorp make his face shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lorp lit


220 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace ”’
(Num. vi. 24-26).

The inscriptions on amulets were sometimes
intended to cure one particular sickness or disease.
Thus the formula SHEBRIRi was used to heal any
disease of the eye, and also to counteract the effects
of the Evil Eye. It was written in this form :—


abhi pale hy wh sett


The patient began by pronouncing the whole
formula: the next time he. dropped: adettemmand
the following time another letter, and so on till
there was no. letter left. to ' pronounces Asma.
formula diminished so the sickness would diminish,
for the patient said “‘ Shebriri, Briri, Rirt, Irt, Ri, 1.”

The formula ABRACADABRA, which was intended
to heal a man suffering from fever, belongs to the
same class. This formula is said to have been
invented by Serenus Sammonicus, the physician of
the Emperor Caracalla, but it seems to me that the
formula is based upon something which is much
older, and that in any case the idea of it is derived
from an older source. Many attempts have been
made to find a meaning for the formula, but the
explanation put forward by Bischoff in his “ Kab-
balah ’”’ (1943) is the most likely to be correct. He
derives the formula from the Chaldee words NT3N,
N172 ¢.ec. ABBADA KE DABRA, which seem to be


HEBREW AMULETS 221


addressed to the fever and to mean something
like “‘ perish like the word.”’ This cryptic utter-
ance becomes clear when we see the form in which
the formula had to be written on the amulet in
Hebrew letters, viz. :—


Die re oli UNE es ON
Ed cy ie coe cages lay
Se pe SCN ly eo
Sy paampiNc hi) yal N
meee ANG Tsuna oN
Ne agoalt ass
aera )3 Gian
aX
N


The patient, or some one on his behalf, recited the
formula thus :—


Abracadabra, Abracadabr, .Abracadab, Abracad,
Abrac, Abra, Abr, Ab, A; in other words he dropped
one letter of the formula each time he repeated it,
and as the formula diminished the fever became less.
One point, however, needs elucidation ; why is the
third letter of the formula R and not D? We may
note that the letters are nine in number, 7.e. 3 X 3,
and that both 9 and 3 had a mystic and magical
significance ; also that the formula is repeated when
reading the terminal letters diagonally from the
bottom of the triangle to the top on the left-hand
side. The repetition of the Aleph, the first letter of
the Hebrew alphabet, nine times may have had a
magical significance.


Here too must be mentioned the formula against
fever which Dr. Gaster has translated from one of his


222 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


own manuscripts. It is of special importance
because it is accompanied with careful directions
as to the manner of writing it, and these illustrate
the implicit faith in the efficacy of the amulet of
those who used them. The formula reads :—


Ab Abr Abra Abrak Abraka
Abrakal Abrakala Abrakal
Abraka Abrak Abra Abr Ab.


“And the people called unto Moses and Moses
prayed to God, and the fire abated ” (Num. xi. 2)-
‘““May healing come from heaven from all kinds of
fever and consumption-heat to N son of N. Amen.
Amen. Amen. ‘Selah... Selah>°~Selah~ “Hemme
the perfect Hebrew amulet which contains (1) The
magical NAME Abrakala; (2) The TExT from the
Bible ; (3) The PRAYER, which is the equivalent of
the pagan incantation; (4) [The THREEFOLD AMEN
and the THREEFOLD SELAH. Dr. Gaster (Hastings’
Emeyc., vol. i. p. 455) has translated the directions
for writing this amulet. The Name must be written
exactly as it is written in the scroll of the Law on
specially prepared parchment. It must be written
with square or “ Ashtri’’ letters so that no letter
shall touch the next, z.e. there must be a free margin
round each letter. It must be written in purity
and whilst fasting. It must be wrapped in leather
or in some soft rag, and be wrapped round with a
piece of clean leather. It is to be hung on the neck
of the patient without his knowing it or when he is
asleep, and he is not to look at it for the next twenty-
four hours. The lines for the writing must be drawn
on the hairy side of the parchment and the writing
is to be done on the flesh side, and in the name of the


HEBREW AMULETS 223


patient. The parchment must be cut and the lines
drawn on it in the patient’s name. When the writer
dips his pen mto properly prepared ink he must say :
“In the Name of Shaddai who created heaven and
earth. I, N, the son of N, write this Kemz‘a for X,
son of X, to heal him of every kind of fever.’’ And
then he must say the blessing of the Kemz‘a as follows :
Seblessed. art Thou, O Lord our: God, Who hast
sanctified Thy great Name and hast revealed it to
Thy pious ones, to show its great power and might
in the language [in which it is expressed]. in the
writing of it, and in the utterance of the mouth.
Blessed art Thou O Lord, holy King, whose great
Name be exalted [Codex Gaster, xxxvui. fol. II.
‘The Etshada‘ath of Elisha of Ancona ’ of 1536.”

Another formula, which is directed against fire,
is written in connection with the so-called “ shield
of Solomon,” z.e. the well-known hexagram


xX


In the centre Gi this are written the four letters
bon, that is to say, the initial letters of four
Hebrew words which are translated, “‘ Thou art
mighty for ever Adonai.” By the six sides of the
two triangles are written in magical order the names
of God, YH and YHWH. On the front and back
of the parchment on which the “ shield ” is written,
we have

Bb, cin <3
Wee i Sel
yp w
Sle
5


224 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


This formula WATTISHK‘A, literally “ and it (7.e. the
fire) dwindled” is found in Num. xi. 2, where the
story is told of the fire which broke out in the
camp of the Israelites, at the place which Moses
subsequently called “‘ Tab‘érah.’’ This amulet was
believed to possess very special powers because
the formula was associated with the “ shield ’”’ of
David.

Amulets to protect pregnant women and women
in child-bed were as common among the Hebrews
as among pagan nations. They were written upon
parchment, and also upon the door and walls of the
chamber wherein the woman lay. And if they were
to be really effective, the texts had to be written
in ink in which holy incense had been mixed, and
even the copyist had to be a man ceremonially
pure and a believer. One of the most important
and powerful child-bed amulets is reproduced on the
opposite page from the British Museum copy of the
rare Hebrew work generally known as the “‘ Book of
RAziEvL.”’ In the section to the right we have three
figures, inexplicable to me, but according to the
inscription above the first two represent Adam and
Eve, and the third the Night-devil Lilith, who was
a spirit wife of Adam before God gave him a wife
of flesh. Above are the names of the angels Senoi,
Sansenoi, and Samangeloph. In the section to the
left are the three seals of these three angels, the
first protecting Adam, the second Eve, and the third
Lilith. The Hebrew text below the drawing says
that the woman will be protected by the Name
EHYH (i.e. God) from all the evils and calamities
which are enumerated therein. This amulet had
a double purpose. ‘he three figures of the angels


229


HEBREW AMULETS


RIZEY JO YOog ,, oy} wor yornury


WACIELE NCLUS IGN CAGAL GML AAG WWM VLD CCL LMM CLIC LINGLE st Nt. cacdl ivy util ial
UGLY Ga EY GUI iQui.gk AIQl QU GN Cd IG COG GN CUNCGG (ge Ca@UO GN CLNAM IGN COCO IGN CM ONLY NLC
und xuL (ge NU COUCUL ina@uul iq ocg a. Max aciuagcl caciud (CUULG LICUIE.2 aut xecacdl ou cucu aacult age uwidy xu


ward agl wil craic cao aux incl icad agau agence aagu uslecacgl iagal cx. ua iattu qua cadia QucKN aca aux


@ can NEL LN WUN NN CEC NL GNC NNN A


5


alge arate aera


NLO Guu! ot Gqu


_ > ey
ICLNG MG LONG, Thatg CLiNg, NUCH, \\
LL OC ENG ENG ULL LER, KUL GOGLY Muy Cac CULE dele ci, GOAL Wie, Cues
CUES eG LLG RAM ALEGNG LUNG OLOKL LULA LAO, Lite, OC, MLL, \CILUR,
CLA H, ACCU CONG NLLNG UEC, RUNG CQENG Achat, LUGE, hiciat, ducing dung, ucts, Lexy duane, feng diva UceN,
CLENG KCL LENG CLI CLG AQENG KLM, TLING UIQ UCL RK LONG UG, GMT CHG ULL, GUNG UNG LUCA


226 AMULETS\ AND SUPERSTITIONS


and their names and seals protected the newly born
babe and its mother. And the text warded off
any and every evil which Lilith, who was kept in
captivity on an island in the sea, might attempt
to do to either. The five lines of text above
the drawing contain the names of the Seventy
Great Angels whose protection is secured by this
amulet.


TACTIC SAVE Oa) | Xe
PO FIRN RY ay
mw opm Sot
qom3


>) 8p Np ows
yD pb


RSVCUL Woe
. A
yy


Amulet from the ‘‘ Book of Raziél.’’


Two other interesting and rare amulets from the
“Book OF KAziEL’ ‘are here. reproduccedigm ms
the four ‘corners of the first are the namesvor. im.
four rivers of Paradise, Pish6n, Gihon, Prath and
Hiddekel, “Inside -two- concentric. circles@iseiis
Hexagram, or so-called ‘‘ Shield of Solomon ”’ and
fourteen groups of three letters and the words, “ Go


HEBREW AMULETS


N
a |


forth thou and all the people who are in thy train,”’
and permutations of the initial letters of the Hebrew
words for “‘ holiness and deliverance.”’ Between the
circles are the names of Adam, Eve, and Lilith,
Khasdiel, Senoi, Sansenoi, and Samangeloph, and
the words “He hath given his angels charge
concerning thee, that they may keep thee in all thy
ways. Amen. Selah.’’


bs |
en
3\
3
Z
18;
g,

sf

wy


et
Src cb Gel


Amulet from the ‘‘ Book of Raziél.’’


At the four corners of the second amulet are the
mames>of the rivers of Paradise. In the centre are
the two triangles of the Hexagram arranged base to
base, and the words which occur in-the centre of the
first amulet. Ihe magical letters are “ K and P,”’
meee houmess tand deliverance.” Inthe outer
circle are the words “ He shall give his angels,”’ etc.,
and in the inner circle are fourteen groups of three
letters which have esoteric significations,

Pg


228 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


A third amulet here reproduced from the Book
of Raziél was intended to give the wearer success in
business. It was written on parchment and was
worn on the left arm. Here we have the word
SLHi “make to prosper’ in four permutations
and: the ~Name of God YH ‘(= YHWH),

Sometimes the inscriptions for the amulets were
written in the Kabbalistic forms of the letters of the
Hebrew alphabet, and specimens of three of these
are reproduced, below. The first is intended to
secure for the wearer the favour of both God and


An amulet to give the wearer success in business.


man. It was written on a strip of clean hart’s skin,
and the text reads: ‘‘ May thy favour, O YHWH,
be with so-and-so, the son of so-and-so, even as it
was with Joseph the righteous man,” even as it Is
written, ‘‘And the Lorp was with Joseph, and
covered him with grace, and made him to obtain
favour in the sight of all those who saw him,” in the
name of Michael, Raphael, Uriel, and the other
angels.

The second was intended to secure for the wearer
love and friendship. It was written with a copper
pen upon a strip of parchment, with ink made from
lilies and crocuses. The text was Psalm civ in its
entirety.


et to protect the wearer aga foes an rom


HEBREW AMULETS


Ge
| HES KEK
ee NAD


r with God and man


TESHPTECHL
2 Ff KLAUS UXA IS HOR
CX PBL PLL LEW


Amulet to procure for the wearer love and friendship.


eed nteler 702 %


mae LIE T AGA CISDSPDO
S come ty LU 2ER HEE
ee IPS


230 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The third was intended to protect the wearer from
violence of every kind, and was written upon a
strip of clean hart’s skin, and worn on the neck. At
the end) of “line 2 are six. Hebrew jlettersaammaan.
- Square > character “(MSMSITH) “andy undermine
penultimate character of line 3 are three more
(KTZ) ; I can find no explanation of these. Below
the four lines are three hexagrams, or “shields of
Solomon.’ In the centre of each is SHADDAI, a
name of God, and in four of the angles are the letters
of the ineffable Name YHWH. Below these is a
third hexagram in which is written YHWH. The
three signs to the right of it are the Hebrew letters
Shin, Daleth and Yud, 7.c. Shaddai. The character
to the left of the lowermost hexagram has nothing
whatever to do with the Cross of the Christians,
for ‘it represents the ~ Tree: of Lite: 2) Picwe ran
small circles and the ten short lines which support
them are explained to refer to: the sephirotiaicec
page 370). |

An interesting group of amulet seals given by
Cornelius Agrippa (De occulta philosophia pp. ccxxx
and ccxxx1) is reproduced on page 232.

On the obverse of No. 1 we.have in the® centre
the word “ Araritha,’ with a dot over each letter to
show that it is the initial of a word in the inscription
which encircles it. On the reverse are four names of
God arranged in a square and encircled by the words ©
“ YHWH our God is YHWH One.” Rabbi Harna
directs that these words be cut on a plate of pure
gold, or written upon parchment with incense
water, by a man who is a true believer and [is
ceremonially pure]. He quotes it from the Book
of Speculation.


HEBREW AMULETS 231


In No. 2 was an amulet which was intended
to protect the wearer from earthquakes, and
from baleful devils and wicked men. On the


Henry Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, physician and magician,

Secretary to the Emperor Maximilian J, and the author of the famous work

De occulta philosophia. He was born at Cologne on the 14th of September,
1486, and died on the 18th of February, 1535.


one side we have the letters BWWWW and on the
other SMDBH (read SMRKD), that is to say the
initial and final letters of the first five verses of the
Book of Genesis.


AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


232


HEBREW AMULETS 233


Nga M5. sole course, ‘ac Christian. “amulet, the
general style of which was copied by Hebrew
amulet writers.

No. 4 gives the pentagram, not the hexa-
pei,..or so-called ;“ shield of Solomon,” The
inscription round it consists of five Greek letters,
viz. vyipa meaning something lke “‘ wholesome,’
“good for the health.”’ The pentagram is found


Three forms of the Pentagram with circles at the angles. By the angles

of the first are the names of archangels, Michael, Gabriel, Hananiél, etc. ;

in the centre of the second are the words “‘ Sheehimah of YHWH.” From
a manuscript of the Kabbal4h in the British Museum (Oriental 4596).


on early Sumerian pottery, and it is possible
that the hexagram is a later modification of
Dt |

im) the centre of No. 5 are four Hebrew letters,
MKBY, each with a dot over it; these are perhaps
intended to represent the name Maccabaeus. But
the dotted letters are the initial letters of the


234 AMULETSVAND SUPERS TPERIONS


Hebrew words which we translate by “‘ Who is like
unto Thee among the gods ? ”’

- Another very popular form of amulet was a stone,
or metal plaque, or piece of parchment inscribed
with a magical square of numbers, that is to say
with Heébrew letters inthe. “square ~ characte
The numbers were so arranged that whether added
up horizontally, or perpendicularly or diagonally,
the total was the same. The magical squares which
refer to the Seven Planets are given on pages 394 ff.
Magical squares were also constructed with the
letters which give the name of God in whichever
direction they are read. A good typical example
is given by Dr. Bischoff (Die Elemente, vole
p. 126), which is here reproduced. A magical
square containing the Name FELouim is written
thus :—


Be o3
SS Ts
mT 5>x[5)n
S|m Sime
2) ES eiodleay he


In, this: case the initial ‘letter or“ keyo7 ice
alebh in the middle of the third line. The name
Elohim is obtained by reading upwards or down-
wards and sideways, but not horizontally. In the
same work Dr. Bischoff gives a square of seventeen
lines containing the German rendering of the Hebrew
words meaning “‘ the Lord watch over thee, DER


HEBREW AMULETS


i)
ice)
a1


igekRe BEHUTE, DICH. The ‘key’ is the letter D
in the middle of line 9 :-— )


ees (pee te) Piet TE | Dil 1 GE
SMD Ee TivthibiB\|Elatoltlelpiiic
TI/DJ/E/T|U/H/E/B/R|B|E/H|U/T/E/D|t
DIE|T|GIHIE|/BIR/RIR/IBIElHIGITIE|D
E|T|C/H|/E/B/R|R/E|R/R/BlE|H/G|T/E]
T/U/H/E|B/R|R|E|H|E|R|R|BIlE H|U|T
GH El BiR/RIE|HIRIHIE RI Ri Blelalo
Hl/E|B/R|RIE/H/R|E|R/HIE R/R|B|E| a
E/B/R/|R/E|H|R|E(D)E/R|H|E|R|RIBIE
H/E|B/R|R/E|/H/R|E|R|H/E/R/R/B|E|H
U/H/E|B/R|R/E/H|R/H/E|R/R|BlE/H!IC
TiU/H|E|B/R|R/ElulelR RiBleElHlolt
E|/T|U/H/E|B/R/R/E|R|R/B/E|H/U/T|E
DIE|TIU/HIE B/R|R|R|B|E H/GITIEID
ep eit bie) HE he | R B/E|H U|T/E/D/1
Sm Die Tt) Ulan el BIE H|U|Tl|E|D|1|c
H/c|1(/D|E/T|/0/HlE|H/U|T\E|Dl|1/clu


The greatest of all the amulets known to the
Hebrews was, and is, the Book of the Law, the
TORAH or Roll inscribed with the Five Books of
Moses, or the Pentateuch. It is to them what the
PERT-EM-HRU was to the Egyptians, and the papyrus
volumes of the Scriptures to the Copts, and the
Kur’ AN to the Arabs, and the KEBRA NaGastT to the
Ethiopians or Abyssinians. Its power and might were
mvincible, both in the synagogue and the house.
It was the greatest of all the child-bed amulets. A
remarkable proof of this is given by Dr. Bischoff
(Die Elemente, vol. iii. p. 123), who has reproduced
from an old print a scene in the birth-chamber.


236 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


On a wall are written the names of Adam, Eve and
Lilith, and it was absolutely necessary to protect
the woman who was about to bring forth from the
last named, who was the she-devil wife of Adam
before God gave him Eve. On a table stands a
shrouded Roll of the Law, and on this the woman,
who is on the birth-stool, fixes her eyes and prays
for help in her hour of need. Many a wealthy Jew
keeps a TORAH in his house as a priceless treasure.
In Eastern Europe the Jews have had the Hebrew
text of their Scriptures reproduced by photography
in the form of an ordinary book from one of their
famous Rolls, and this miniature copy of the Book
of the Law measures only one inch in height and
three-quarters of an inch in width. It is provided
with a white metal case, with a ring for hanging
it round the neck, on one side of which is a small
magnifying glass which enables the wearer to read
the text with comparative ease. The general appear-
ance of the amulet is that of the Kuran which 4s
shown on page 53.

The silver Hebrew amulet here reproduced was
formerly in the possession of the late W. H. Rylands,
F.S.A., who obtained it from a friend who brought
it from Palestine. Mr. E, T. Pilcher publshedea
copy of the obverse and a transcript of the text, with
an English translation, in the Proceedings of the
Soctety of Biblical Archaeology, Vol. xxxii. (1970),
p..125.. But ‘he did: not’ recognize thane themre: =
consisted of a series of abbreviations which needed
completions, and contained a number of allusions
to Kabbalah, and the result was that his trans-
lation was incorrect in nearly every particular. In
the number of the Proceedings for May, rg1o, Dr.


NS


HEBREW AMULETS 23


Gaster published the text on both sides of the amulet
and gave a correct transcript of it, after completing
the abbreviated words and adding the words which
were wanting, and an English translation which


reads.


II’ R'A
INI RPIN

7I RP KAI
Ain ps5 4A '/ |
tay 1)
A wa IG.1 no


.


Obverse. Reverse.


Silver Kabbalistic amulet.


OBVERSE.


rt. In the Name of the Lord God of Israet
we shall do and prosper.


meiebescccumtuices by the. power).of the
greatness or Goad, the Lord of Hosts, the


God of Israel.

3. In the names of the angels of the God (of
Israel) I conjure you all

4. kinds of Lilin (7.e. night-devils), male and
female,’

5. and Demons, male and female,

6. by the power of the holy Name,


238


1H


yb


=<,


AMULETS “AND: (SUPERSTITIONS


. “Accept the prayer of thy people, exalt


them, purify them, O Thou Who art tremen-
dous,’’ combined with


its Toot (t.e. source) YHWH, that they
do not


REVERSE,


TeCIBECL LO IATLY


place where there be


in it ‘‘O mighty one, those who niesee
thee,’”’ nor shall touch


it at all, nor hurt by the power of


..the holy Name: thy nght hand shall


loosen the bondage.’’


. “Thy single ones, like the apple of thine


eye, guard them, combined with


. its root (1.e. source) ADNI, and with


the name of 26 (letters) (the Tetragram-
maton) ‘Accept our entreaty,/andmihean
our cry, Lord who knowest the hidden
PRIN Ss

“May the Lord preserve thy going out
and thy coming in from now and evermore.”
Amen. Selah.


CHAPTER IX.


MANDAEAN (MANDAITIC) AMULETS.


The MANDAEANS (MANDAYE), who are also known
as SABAZANS (7.e. worshippers of the host of heaven),
and MUGHTASILS (1.e. “‘ the washers,” because of the
frequency of their ablutions), and “ Christians of
St. John ”’ (because of their tradition that they are
descended from the disciples of St. John the Baptist),
are a Semitic people who live in Lower Babylonia
and on the banks of the Shatt al-‘Arab, and who speak
a dialect similar to that found in the Talmudh
Babhiz. Their ancestors before the Christian Era
were pagans, and practised magic, and believed in a
form of astrology which seems to have been of
Babylonian origin. ‘The Christian Mandaeans clung
to the belief in the magic practices of their ancestors,
and on it they welded many elements of belief which
tie, derived from the Gnostics, the Jews, the
Iranians or Persians, and Christians. They had
no Sabbaths and did not practise circumcision.
When they pray they do not turn towards Jerusalem,
but towards the north, where are the great mountains
from which flow the rivers Tigris and Euphrates.
The sources of these rivers is the world of ight where
mies UPREME Livy, 7.e. God, lives and reigns. | In
the waters of these they bathe morning and evening,
especially on Sundays and days of fasting. They
also observe a bathing festival in which whole
_communities go to the river and bathe ceremonially


240 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


under the direction of their priests, or according to
their private rules. They believe that through these
immersions in the “ waters of light’ they receive
a renewal of life from the Great Life, the Master of
the Universe, and all virtues. It would be impossible
for them to practise their religion in a region where
there were no rivers and streams, and it.is due to this
fact that they have always lived in the district
round about Kurnah, where the Tigris and Euphrates
unite to form the Shatt al-‘Arab. One of the names
by which they are known, viz. “ Mughtasilin ’ may
be rendered ** Baptists,” Theirtermior  baptemims
is masbutd, because with them the ceremony takes
place in “ living,’ z.e. flowing water. They despise
the Christian ceremony because they say that it is
performed in “ dead,” 2.e. still water. Their God,
“ Life,’ is the King of Light, and dwells with His
angels in a heaven which is high above the heavens
or spheres of the stars and planets and Signs of the
Zodiac. Below the starry spheres is our earth,
which is formed of matter derived from some of the
solidified water of the primeval World-Ocean. In
some portion of this Black Water dwells a great
she-devil called ROHA, and her husband ‘Ur, who
is also her son, and great armies of evilspirits. ‘Uris
the god of Darkness, and is the great antagonist of
the god of Light, Here we have a. cosmogon@
derived from the ancient Sumerians, and Tiamat,
Kingu and Marduk under other names, and we may
regard the Mandaeans as the representatives of the
ancient worshippers of Ea, the great Water-god of
Eridu.

One of the books of the Mandaeans, the KoLAstTA,
contains a series of ill-drawn pictures which are


MANDAEAN ( MANDAITIC) AMULETS 241


supposed to represent the places at which the souls
of the dead alight on their way to heaven, and in
one part of it are drawings of the scales in which
presumably souls were weighed and the throne of
PeevPURs) | hese facts: seem to suggest that the
writer of the work had seen a copy of the Saite Recen-
sion of the Book of the Dead, and that he copied
some of the Vignettes of Chapter cli, and a part of
the introductory scene of the Psychostasia. On the
other hand, the Book ASFAR MALWASHA, which deals
with a system of astrology based on the Signs of the
Zodiac, seems to have been derived from the works.
of the later Persian astronomers, though these in
turn were based on the astrological literature of the
Babylonians.

The LANGUAGE of the Mandaeans is written in an
unusual script, one of the great advantages of which
is the fact that the vowels are represented by letters,
and the reading is not therefore confused by dia-
critical points. The LITERATURE is relatively small,
and the three principal works are the SIpRA RasBA,
or GINZA, and the SIpRA D’ YAHYA or Book of John
the Baptist, and the DrRAsHE D’ MALKE or DiIs-
COURSES OF KINGS, and the Ko LAstTA, which contains -
Hymns and Discourses regarding Baptism and the
Departure of the soul from the body. Some sections
of these works are as old as the Ist century A.D.,
and much of the rest was written before the rise of the
Arab kingdom in Mesopotamia in the VIIth century.
The Mandaeans, like the Babylonians, lived lives
of fear because they believed in the existence of
myriads of fiends and devils which caused sicknesses
and death to themselves and damage to their


material property. The priests of the Mandaeans
Q


a


242 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


condemned all magical practices, but in spite of this
the people clung to the use of amulets. Examples
of these are rare, and the two best known are in the
British Museum (Add. 23602, B, fol. 26, and foll. 26-
28). Portions of these are reproduced on Plates X VIII
and XIX. A transcript into Hebrew letters of the
left-hand column fol. 25 is given by WRIGHT, Cata-
logue of the Syriac Manuscripts in the British Museum,
vol, 11. p.. 1219.) But. the Mandaeansi liege
Syrians and Arabs, possessed a large collection of
charms and magical prescriptions, and when written
down they formed a real “ Book of Magic.” Two
leaves of such a codex are preserved in the British
Museum (Add. 23602, B, foll. 23, 24), and a note on
one of them says that the volume belonged to
Yahya bar Havva Simath (Wright, op. cit., p. 1218).
The texts on the amulets contain prayers, which
are to all intents and purposes incantations, and it
is clear that they were intended to produce magical
effects. The text on fol. 25 is accompanied with a
magical figure, part of which is still visible. This
proves that the Mandaeans copied the amuletic
scrolls of Western people, Egyptians, Gnostics,
Greeks, Syrians and others. For the history and
religion of the Mandaeans, see Petermann, Reisen
im Orient, Leipzig, 1860-61 ; N. Souffi, Etudes, Paris,
1880; Noéldeke, Mandatische Grammatik, Halle, 1875 ;
and Brandt, Die manddische Religion, Leipzig, 1889.
The two amulets mentioned above were worn
on the body or carried about by their owners, but
besides scrolls like these the Mandaeans had amulets
which they intended to protect their houses and
lands. from the attacks of evil spirits. These were
in the form of terra-cotta bowls which were placed


PLATE XVIII


uIngsnyl YS oy} Ul jo[nuIe URoepUL © WOIF JOVILXY


Q 2


PLATO AL


Extract from a Mandaean amulet with magical drawings
in the British Museum,


? } UID 5:02
‘ tee |
‘ , i ‘ ,
a r
i
é bs ;
'
7
' ee 7
9 t
bm ee
iy i
-
i
] ‘
{
|
‘ .
1
!
~
‘
. 1
ny
J '
¢
‘
\ -
, be
x
\
i
\
¢
1
i
4
,
j
i
% =
. Hi
‘
:
'
‘ ' heal
'
>
: ,
)
i
‘-
f i
int J *
*
1
= ‘ mm
. )
st
1 f,
;
¢ + .
’
.
; =
: < m 4 q
'
I
.
i
i *
1 * i .
'
i
+ ;
7
1 J
i .
od aa!
- 1
i! ~~ f
j t ,
& a
. ‘ f ‘ wis


i. is a © Aj Pe h es, 3


MANDAEAN (MANDAITIC) AMULETS 247


by or under the foundations of their houses, and
were inscribed with magical texts. See what is
said in the section on divination by water and
Babylonian bowls, page 445 f. During the American
excavations at Nippur a great many such bowls were
found, and a good monograph on them has been
written by Prof. J. A. Montgomery, entitled Avamaic
Incantation Texts from Nippur, Philadelphia, 1913.
In the introductory chapters of this work will be
found (1) a summary of the work done on the bowls
by the older scholars, Chwohlson, Wohlstein-Stibe,
Hyvernat, Ellis, Lidzbarski and others, and (2) a
discussion on the use and object of the bowls, demons
and evil spirits and kindred matters. These are
followed by a series of translations of the Mandaitic
and other texts on the bowls, with grammatical
and other notes, and complete transcripts of the
texts are given at the end of the volume. The general
character and contents of the inscriptions on the
Nippur bowls is illustrated by the two following
translations made by Prof. J. A. Montgomery.


THE AMULET OF EPHRA BAR SABORDUCH.


(MonTGomERY, No. I, p. 117.)


(1) This the amulet of Ephra (2) bar Sabdrdtch,
wherein shall be (3) salvation for this Ephra bar
-Sabérdtch and also (4) for this Bahmandtich bath
Sama, that there be for them (5) salvation, namely
for this Ephra bar Sabérdtich, and for this Bah-
mandtich bath Sama (6). Amen. Amen. Selah.

This is an amulet against the Liliths that haunt
the house of (7) this Ephra bar Sabérditich, and this
Bahmandtich bath Sama (8) I adjure you, all species


— 248 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


of Liliths in respect to your posterity which is
begotten by Demons (g) and Liliths to the children
of light who go astray ; WoE, who rebel and trans-
gress against the proscriptions of their Lord; Woe,
from the blast (zo) fast flying; Woe, destroying ;
Woe, oppressing with your foul wounds . . . who
do violence and trample and scourge and mutilate (11)
and break and confuse and hobble and dissolve (the
body) like water ; Woe, . . . ; and where you stand,
{12) and where you stand (sic) fearful and affrighted
are ye, bound to my ban,—who appear to mankind,
to men in the likeness of women, (13) and to women
in the likeness of men, and with men they lie» by
night and by day.

With the formula TWM (14) SH:SH GSH GSHK,
have I written against thee, evil Lilith, whatsoever
name be thine. We (15) have written. And _ his
name shall save thee, Ephra, for ever and ever.


AMULET OF ADAK BAR HATHOI AND AHATH BATH
| H ATHOI.
(MONTGOMERY, No. 6, p. 141.)


(1) A press which is pressed down upon Demons
and Devils and Satans and impious (2) Amulet
spirits and Familiars and Counter-charms and
Liliths male (3) and female, that attach” them=
selves to Adak bar Hathéi and Ahath bath
Hathdi—that attach themselves to them, and dwell
(4) in their archways and lurk in their thresholds,
and appear to them in one form and another, and
that strike and cast down and kill. And this
press (5) I press down upon them in days and in
months and in all years, and this day out of all days,


MANDAEAN (MANDAITIC) AMULETS 249


and this month out of all months, and this year (6)
out of all years, and this season out of all seasons.
And I come and put a spell for them in the thresh-
olds of this their houses, and I seal and bind them.
Fastened up are their doors (7), and all their roofs.

And this press I press down upon them by means
of these seven words, (8) by which heaven and earth
are charmed; in the name of the first Gishmzn and
Marbil ; of the second, Gishmin and Marbil; of the
third, Marbil ; of the fourth, Mashbar ; of the fifth,
Morah ;. of the sixth, Avdibal; of the seventh,
Kibshin (presses) with which is repressed (9) .. .
with them are repressed all evil Spirits and impious
Amulet spirits and Liliths male and female and
Familiars and Counter-charms and Words, that they
appear not to Adak bar Hathdi and to [Ahath bath
Fiathdi] (10) neither in dream by night nor in sleep
by day, and that they approach neither their right
side nor their left, and that they kill’ not ‘their
children, and that they have no. power over their
property, what they have (11) and what they shall
have, from this day and for ever.

And whosoever will transgress against this press
and doth nor accept these rites, shall split asunder
violently and burst in the midst. And the sound of
him shall resound with the resonance of brass in the
spheres of heaven, (12) and his abode shall be in the
seventh (?) hell of the sea, from this day and for
ey eatien,. Amen. Selah.


Citar Gh hea


PHOENICIAN, AMULETS.


Speaking generally the country of Phoenicia is
that part of Syria which extends from the Nahr
al-Kabir, 7.e) ‘the’ ~* Great. River {(Bleuthenns ams
the north to Mount Carmel on the south, but
Joppa was sometimes considered to be Phoenician
territory. The Phoenicians were Semites and
belonged to the Canaanite peoples, though they
and the neighbouring peoples called them “ Sidon-
ians.”’ The Greeks called them ‘“ Phoenicians,’
Motvikes, and their land “ Phoinike,”’ ®ovwikxy.
some “derive -~ Phoenician 3) tron? theme Gmeam
powds, “blood red,”’ and not from ¢owmé, the “ date
palm,’’ which does not grow readily in the country,
so the Phoenicians wereithe “red men? ~Unhkesie
Semites generally, the Phoenicians loved the sea,
and their ships on the sea and their caravans by
land carried the produce of Egypt and Babylonia
to the ends of the known world. The language of
the Phoenicians, like the Hebrew and the dialect
of Moab, was descended from the old Canaanite
language, and belonged to the Northern Semitic
Group of languages.

The Phoenicians were not a literary people, and it
is very doubtful if they invented the alphabet as Pliny
(v. 13, vill. 57) believed, for the letters which they
used are identical with those of the Siloam Inscription


PHOENICIAN AMULETS 251


and those found on the Stele of Mesha, king of Moab
(Moabite Stone, casts of both inscriptions can be
seen in the British Museum), andthe Zingirlt
inscriptions. The Phoenician alphabet underwent
many changes in the countries where it was adopted,
but it became the mother-alphabet of the Greek and
Latin, and eventually of the modern European
alphabets. It is possible that the Phoenicians
possessed a native religion, but very little is known
of their theology. Their cosmogonies and many of
their legends and myths were borrowed from the
Babylonians, the Egyptians and the Greeks. They
were well acquainted with the names of many of the
gods of these peoples, and their names often con-
tained the names of foreign gods, e.g. Bél and Béltis,
Ishtar Tammiz, Isis, Osiris, Hathor, Horus, Thoth,
etc.

- Their views about the survival of the soul
after death were similar to those of the Hebrews,
but they buried their dead with great care. One
of their chief native gods was Eshmun, the god of
medicine, who was identified with the Greek god
Asklepios. In times of trouble they did not hesitate
to sacrifice their first-born children, and they slew
their prisoners of war on the altar before their
tabernacles (Diodorus, xx. 14). And women sacri-
ficed their virginity in the sanctuaries of Astarte
fecoesme Kingssxiyv. 24) “A large. proportion of
the Phoenician population devoted themselves to
making the purple and fine linen which were so
much admired by the ancients, and to working
in metal. The gold came from Egypt and the
Stidan, and iron and copper came from Cyprus.
Thus some members of a family produced the


252 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


vases, bowls, and pots which the other members
of it carried off in their ships and sold in Europe,
or “Asia, “or Africa, or India, 7 Ino this waver
commission of the middle man was saved. The art
of dyeing was derived by them from Babylon and
glass blowing from Egypt, and it seems that the
Phoenician invented very little in literature or in
the arts and crafts, but dus” work: was icareiy
accurate and refined. Witness.the inscribed and
embossed copper bowls from Nimrtd which are now
in the British Museum. And the bronze lon
weights in the British Museum prove that he intro-
duced into his own country, and also into the
neighbouring countries, a system of weighing with
accurate weights.

The small collection of PHOENICIAN AMULETS in
the British Museum is of considerable interest.
It shows that the Phoenicians adopted the seal-
cylinder of the Babylonians and Assyrians, and the
cone-seal of the Persians, and the scarab of the
Egyptians. The devices engraved upon these
objects are Assyrian and Egyptian in origin, but
they are treated in a manner which is characteristic
of Phoenician work in metal and stone. The line
engravings are carefully executed, and the work
is of a more delicate character than that found on
purely Babylonian or Assyrian and Egyptian seals
and scarabs. On the oldest of. them, which pro-
bably date from about 500-400 B.c., the influence of
Persian Art is very marked. The scarabs made of
hard stone were undoubtedly used as seals, but there
is no evidence that the Phoenicians held the same
religious views about the scarabaeus sacer as the
Egyptians. The group of scarabs in steatite and


PHOENICIAN AMULETS 253


paste from Umrit, which were exhibited in the
same case as the Phoenician scarabs in the British
Museum, are native imitations of Egyptian scarabs
and were made in Phoenicia about 300-200 B.C.
The Phoenicians believed that’ they could hold inter-
course with the dead by dropping little rolls made
of thin sheets of lead with inscriptions upon them
into the tombs, but it is doubtful if these are to be
regarded as amulets.

The following reproductions of cylinder-seals with
Phoenician inscriptions on them have been made
from casts supplied by Mr. Augustus Ready of the


1


British Museum ; all the originals are in the British
Museum (Department of Egyptian and Assyrian
Antiquities) :—


I, Cylinder-seal engraved with the figure of a
king or hero who is grasping with each hand a fore
leg of a mythological beast. Each beast is winged
and the head of the beast on the right is provided
with a pair of horns. Above the male figure is the


254 AMULETS: AND SUPERSTITIONS


symbol of a god (Ahuramazda or some Assyrian
god), the lower part of whose body is the winged
circle with projecting claws and a tail. The
inscription reads, “SEAL .OF PRSHNDT,) ison mon
ARTDIN” JOITON8 V2 Ww oN. Height
of seal 13 inches.

2. Cylinder-seal engraved with a bearded figure of
a king with two pairs of wings, who is grasping in
each hand a foreleg of a beast with the head and


wings and claws of a bird, and the body of a rampant
striped animal. The inscription reads ‘“ HRTKL”’ (?)


Son 7m. Height of seal r} inches.


3. Cylinder-seal inscribed with: (1) The sacred
Tree. (2) Iwo Scorpion-men supporting a winged
disk from which two divine figures emerge. (3) A
worshipper (royal ?). (4) A priest carrying a small
horned animal to offer up as a sacrifice. In front


PHOENICIAN AMULETS 255


of him is the sign ©” which some have identified
with the pudenda muliebris, and behind his head
is a star. The inscription reads ‘ Belonging to


PLTHAN ” snonopd. Height of seal % inch.


4


4. Cylinder-seal inscribed with a figure of a man
who is standing 1n worship before a symbol (lightning
or thunder-bolt ?), above which is a winged disk
with a lion’s head. On each side of the symbol
is a priest wearing a winged garment. The


256 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


inscription, reads ** YRPAL. ‘the.“son".openr pone
Pp ;


ci be Bon rp Son pe Sep. The name Yrpel is written
twice. Height of seal 13 inches.


5. Cylinder-seal inscribed with a figure of the
sacred tree under a winged disk. On one side of the
tree is a sphinx with the lunar crescent above it,
and on the other is a goat. Two men are performing


6


areligious ceremony. _ The inscription reads “‘Belong-
ing to SRGD”’ sp. Height of seal % inch.


6. Cylinder-seal inscribed with figures of two
scorpion-men standing, one on each side of sacred


PHOENICIAN AMULETS 257


tree (?), and supporting a winged disk from which
project the heads of three divine beings. A priest
and aworshipper are performing a religious ceremony.
On the left is the figure of a god holding a gazelle,


or goat, under each arm. The inscription reads


“ Belonging to MDBRG”’ saat. Height of
cylinder ;¢ inch.


7. Cylinder-seal inscribed with three human
figures, which was dedicated to the god Hadad.
The inscription reads “ Belonging to AKDBN, the
son of GBRD, the eunuch, which he offered to Hpp ”’


Sag? 2090 WN DID 7722) 72 1D7DN°.


Height of seal 14 inches.


GEA Bi het:


SAMARITAN: AMULEES:


Less than twenty years ago had I been asked,
“Have the Samaritans amulets, and, if so, what
are they like? ”~ my answer. would “have sbeeu,
“There are no Samaritan amulets, and if there are
I have never seen any. But thanks tomUr a
Gaster, that lacuna is filled up now, and it is possible
as the result of his researches to tell the reader
a great deal about Samaritan amulets. This gentle-
man discovered that the Samaritans of Nablts
possessed, among other literary treasures, a number
of Samaritan amulets, or, as he calls them, “ phy-
lacteries,’’ and he took steps to open up intercourse
with them with the object of acquiring some infor-
mation about them. At first, like all other Orientals,
who possess ancient manuscripts, they pretended
to know nothing about such things, but after some
years of friendly relations with Dr. Gaster they
admitted that they had among them a number of
phylacteries. After from twelve to fifteen years of
constant communication and patient negotiation,
he succeeded in obtaining from them all the phy-
lacteries they had, some fourteen in number.
Besides these he obtained photographs of two others,
one in the British Museum (Add. 27456) and the


other in the possession of Mr. D.S. Sassoon. Having ~


worked for some years on this entirely new branch
of Semitic literature, he published the results of


SAMARITAN. AMULETS 259


his labours in several articles in the Proceedings of
the Society of Biblical Archaeology (March, May and
ine, 1015; Peb., ror6, and. Feb., 1917). ~These he
has reprinted in his Studies and Texts, in three
velumes, London, 1925-1928 (vol. 1. p..387f). The
main facts about Samaritan phylacteries which are
given below I owe to his invaluable work.

Of the early history of the Samaritans nothing is
known. One tradition says that their great ancestor
was SHEMER, who sold the site of his city, which
was called Samaria after his name, to Omri (1 Kings
petee24)-- the dwellers in the city were called
‘“SHOMRONIM,’” a name which is once mentioned
in the Bible (2 Kings xvi. 29). Originally a Samari-
tan was a dweller in the city of Samaria or in the
country of which it was the capital, but after the
King of Assyria (Shalmaneser IV or Sargon II)
transferred there natives of Babylon, Cuthah, Arva,
Hamath and Sepharvaim (2 Kings xvii—xvili), any
one of them might describe himself or be described
as a Samaritan. The original Samaritans were
pagans, but between the time of the settlement of
foreigners on a large scale in their city by the king
of Assyria, and the birth of Christ, they adopted in a
great measure the Jewish religion, although they
clung to their idols and magical practices. And
they held that Mount Gerizim (see John iv. 20),
and not Jerusalem, was the true seat of God's
worship. About the great schism which converted
the Jews and the Samaritans into bitter enemies
of each other this is not the place to speak, and
it is sufficient to say that the Samaritans were
regarded as an independent sect in the time of
our Lord. They accepted the monotheism of the

R 2


260 AMULETS AND. SUPERSTITIONS


Jews, and the Law, and believed that a Messiah
whom they called “ laheb~: was to come?™ Their
phylacteries show that on a very large number of
points their beliefs were identical with those of the
Hebrews.

The first thing to note about the Samaritan phylac-
teries is that they were not the equivalents of the
TEPHILLIN, or prayer scrolls, or “ frontlets,’’ but real
AMULETS which, as Dr. Gaster says, “‘ would be worn
constantly, and they were also looked upon as super-
stitious practices, used not only by the Jews, but
by almost every other nation of antiquity ”’ (p. 387).
They were in their oldest. and simplest formcgime
outcome of pagan magic, and they were made and
worn notwithstanding the fact that the use of them
was forbidden under the penalty of death. The
Samaritans added Hebrew beliefs to their own
native beliefs, and then tried to observe both,
and they neither rejected nor abolished any of their
own indigenous views or practices. The phylacteries
came into being probably during the Ist or IInd
century of our Era, but none in the possession of
Dr. Gaster is older than the, Xth or X]th *centum
The Samaritans who lived in Egypt borrowed ideas
from the worshippers of Ra and Osiris, and from the
various sects of Gnostics, and probably also from
the Babylonians, whose magic and religion were
being made known by the Greeks who had lived
in Babylon and had studied the ancient cuneiform
records in the Libraries of Babylon.

The Samaritans regarded the ineffable names of
God as “‘ words of power,” and held them to be the
foundation of all the virtue which their phylacteries
possessed. They thought that the Tetragrammaton


SAMARITAN AMULETS 261


could not be pronounced, and some of them sub-
stituted forit “ Elohim.” The letters of the names
of God are treated as mathematical figures, and thus
mathematical calculations are derived from the names
of God and from the various permutations and sub-
stitutions to which that name has been subjected,
and the Samaritans seem to have known the very
name by which these manifold operations was known
pin@e@e the Jews, 7.¢. “Gematria.” .Dr. Gaster
thinks that Gematria is a mistake for ‘‘ Grammata,”’
me. writings, and that for the “ Ephesia Gram-
meta ’’ of Greek mystical literature we should read
Aphasia Grammata, 7.e. “ineffable writings.’’ In
the phylacteries we find every one of these mysterious
names, forms, symbols, changes, and permutations
iully represented. And the two names of God
EHYH and YHWH are intertwined.

The Jews were commanded by Deut. vi. 9 to write
certain “‘ words ’”’ on the lintels and door-posts of
their houses, but they did not carry out the command
literally. They wrote the words of Deut. vi. 4-9
and xi. 13-21 on strips of parchment and fastened
them to the door-posts. These are called mezzuzéth.
The Samaritans acted differently, for they cut the
“words ’’ on the stones of their houses. Moreover,
by the “words” they understood the “ ten words,”’
1.e. the Ten Commandments, and these, as well as
other verses from the Bible, are cut on their monu-
Mients. (see. Dr, Gaster's list on p. 400.) . There is
in the British Museum (Semitic Room No. 556) a
stone inscribed in Samaritan with two verses from
Deuteronomy, and though it formed part of a wall,
it is in truth a phylactery. On some stones the Ten
Words of Creation are given instead of the Ten


262 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Commandments. These are the fundamental ‘‘ words
of power,” the real Locos. Among the character-
istics of Samaritan phylacteries is one which is of
considerable interest, for it is a testimony to their
great antiquity—I mean that of the PALINDROME.
' Certain verses of the Bible, expecially Exod:
I5, 16, are written backwards, starting, as it were,
with the last word of verse 16 and going backwards,
the order of the words, not. of the mlettersmpem,
reversed. similarly ‘Exod. x1v. “1Qei= eee
are written in the form of Palindrome”’ (Gaster,
Pp. 405).

dhe “Samaritan -name ‘tor the »phylacten ase
AKHTABA, but in Codex, Gaster B, the variant
FLKTRA is given, which, of course, represents the
Greek dvdaxrnpia. The phylactery is not to be con-
fused with the prayer scrolls (Tephillin) which were
only put on during times of prayer, for it was
an amulet in the true sense of the word, like the
kami of the Jews, and is, probably, equally as
old.

The Samaritan phylactery appears in several
forms :—1. As a square sheet of parchment,
which practically represents a whole skin of a goat.
One in the possession of Dr. Gaster is between 17
and 22 inches in height, and another is 27 inches
wide. 2. As a scroll which varies in length and
width. 3. Asa booklet, which was probably carried
in a-case. 4. As scrapS of paper. 5,-AS a metal
disk, like a coin or medal. 6. As inscribed stones.
The one Samaritan phylactery in the British Museum
(Add. 27456) is a large sheet of parchment which
was folded several times and carried in a metal case.
A section of the text is reproduced on Plate XX


‘ PILATE Os


Extract from a Samaritan phylactery in the British Museum (Add. 27456).


. PLATE AX


The metal case which held the phylactery in the British Museum.


ae 4 ‘ oh) OU, We Bee ‘ha 4 eo ees
“ 7 : .
ihe, poy ‘ | , : {fii Veag
5 a ‘| sad
: 7 Ki - j
5 » "
f . ‘
‘.
-)
t
.
+ his i]
‘
i}
a j
4
. it
i " sa F
t : ’
: }
‘
i ‘
"
A q
Uy ‘
44
f {
7 Cr
i
, Fi i
* x S .
wt
PS ‘
\ } I.
<n ni
¢ ‘
Ih
@
{ i
¢
‘ ay
‘
; <4 ee)
rs rh
J! 5 r
‘ f j
a
i
” f *
' ed
u A
me
1 i
. i
:
j A ' ‘ a ¥
;
* 4
if
f ; x
i ; ;
af 1 “4
A 4 ,
; ; 4
‘ if ad . ut
+ y eA :
a j : ’ '
. , we. sy : .
: ¥ sf? : ;
y, eu = er = al ;
7 ' a) ts ol ey r ; ; ‘ a ee
. : ire A ry SR OAS asf)
Teas SORE OR SBT age Pees Np kM 8)
hy PP bee oi hie J ea Te ea ee | 5 eee, 214


SAMARITAN AMULETS 267


and a full-sized view of the case on Plate XXI. The
case has a tightly fitting cover with flanges, and on
the edges are a series of rings through which a cord
was passed, and it probably hung as a pendant on
the breast of the wearer. Each side is embossed
with a rectangular geometrical design. Around
these designs run lines of Samaritan text, and one
begins “In the Name of El-Shaddai YHWH.”’
Uiemstollows a passage from Exod. xiv. 14, “The
Lorp shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your
peace.’ The official Catalogue assigns this phy-
Ieeichy to tne, wy th’ century. The parchment is
much damaged through folding it, and all the phy-
lacteries known have suffered in this way ; with one
exception there is only one complete phylactery
_known. |
Two kinds of ink were used, both presumably
made from lamp-black; the one when dry is pale
eidgetie Other. 1s, very, black and ‘shiny, as if
gum had been mixed with it. But the pale ink has
“bitten ’’ deeper into the parchment than the very
black ink. The writing is apparently on the fleshy
piacesoi the skins ~ Ihe skin 1s divided into: seven
SOUMiismOl equal “width (3 inches). These are
separated one from the other by a space of # inch,
which has not been left blank. These seven columns
are surrounded on all four sides by two lines of
writing, of which one is a Palindrome of verses from
Exod. xiv. 16 ff and xvii. 8 ff.. This writing is then
continued in single lines filling up the blanks between
the columns. In order to insert these lines, the
scribe has turned the skin to the left, and starting
from the bottom he wrote parallel to the side line.
In the same manner are the other lines written. . . .


to


268 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


In these lines round and between the columns one
may detect the oldest form of illumination, the verses
and the letters preceding floral and other archi-
tectural illustrations’’ (Gaster, p. 411). Cursive
writing is never found on the phylacteries. Neither
the name of the writer nor that of the owner of any
phylactery is given upon it, and therefore it could
be worn by any one. The text on the scroll is
written vertically, not from right to left, but
from top to bottom, the whole text forming one
single column.


nm on? fy Ry AS eee
#28 RSE4d 73 FF
FIARLSESAACS
i cae

RANE YY PH AGS


THE HEBREW AND SAMARITAN ALPHABETS.
The Hebrew letters are given in lines 1, 3, 5, and their Samaritan equiva-


lents in lines 2, 4,6 below them. (Reproduced by permission from GASTER,
Studies and Texts, Vol.i. p. 611.)

The phylacteries in the form’ of strips om paper
contain short formulae, accompanied sometimes
by mystical diagrams, which are taken from
the old, large phylacteries. The smallest for-
mulae are found on the silver-gilt medals which
are worn by children at the present day to pro-
tect them from the Evil Eye. ~All these manifold
phylacteries “ have an ancient mystical tradition,
which in its essence and fundamental principles is un-
distinguishable from the Jewish cabbalistic tradition.”


SAMARITAN AMULETS 269


By the help of the Samaritan phylactery ‘‘ some
hitherto inexplicable features in Greek magical
texts find a satisfactory explanation ; and, finally,
that one of the oldest forms of the real phylacteries
has been preserved by the Samaritans in their
SHEM HAMITFARESH ”’ (Gaster, p. 420).

Iiiedicmoidiesmana Lexis (voli.i. sp. 425 1) Dr.
Gaster gives a complete translation of a phylactery
(Codex D 1105), from which the reader will see how
Bible history, prayers, lists of magical names, the
letters of the alphabet, etc., are welded together
to form a’ most powerful amulet. From it the
following extracts are taken :—


This writing is good for every man who is clothed
with it. Amen. ... And the magicians could not
stand before Moses, and so may they also not stand
before those who are clothed with Thy name, O
Hordampemt male or female... .-May it not be
exterminated, and pray thee it may not turn back,
may every man who is clothed with this good phy-
lactery (phtkitra = philktra) be free from every
demon and every spirit, and every wicked one, and
from every harm and from every beast. Amen
feeiics) wtvise, Ollord) “Return, O Lord, to him
who is clothed with these writings. Save him from
every bad thing. Pishon, Gihon, Dkl and Perat
miewtour vers of Paradise) For |.am the Lord
that healeth thee. Keep me, ©O God of the holy
Tabernacle. Keep me, © God -of the sanctuary.
Keep me, © vodvot the Prophet. Keep me,.O God
of Mount Garizim. Keep me, O god of the priests.
Keep me, O God of the holy ones. Keep me on the
way upon which I walk and do not pass over my
prayers, for this reward me and save me from all


270 AMULEDS AND. SUPERSTITIONS


evil, | Then ‘comes the‘name|.YHWH ten timesias:
Whosoever wears this writing, may the fear of You
and the trembling before You be upon all the beasts
of the land and all the birds of heaven. . . He who
rideth the heavens, my Master, the holy God, save
me trom-all evil, YHWH.> (5 times) Godvoigeeds;
enlarge me from all stress and anguish and remove
iroin us’ the:snake \~.".’ YH WH. (to times)e Sarina!
Flohim, YHWH (3 times), Elohim YHWH Elohim
YHWH Elohim, Adam; Noah; Abraham yeisase
Jacob,, Joseph, Levi, a “Kehath; Amram, Moses:
Aaron, Eleazar, Ithamar, Pinehas, Joshua, Kaleb,
the Seventy Elders [Mystical letters] ANGDKNH.
Master, be. good “unto (ine, “Master sb yams
names.

Thou art the Lord, our God, the honoured one
A.a.aA. * Found in all places Thou’ seestjoutiare
not seen: Thou hast made the luminaries and stars
that they may shine through Thy goodness upon the
whole earth. Mayest Thou be praised for ever! In
the name of, the’ Cord; the’ Lord, the Lords gem.
day and night we bow down to Thee, O high God,
and we bow down and we pray to [hee, and we
exalt Thee for there is none like Thee, our God and
the God of our fathers. Grant us help from thee
and send an angel by Thy goodness, and bless us in
everything and keep us from our enemies and our
adversaries by Thy goodness, the mighty God of
spirits of all flesh. Master of Masters, do not forsake
us AHYH (twice ro times), high God, King, merciful,
awtul.


17.e¢. AHYH ASHR AHYH (Exod. iii. 14). Rendered in our
Bible I Am THAT I AM.


SAMARITAN’ AMULETS 271


Lines 569-578 form a square composed of the
Hebrew words, “ The Lord, great God,” in ten lines
of eleven letters each, so arranged that the top line
and the two vertical lines contain exactly the same
words. Moreover, the first and last letters of each
line are identical, and each line, vertical and hori-
zontal, contain the same letters. The square is also
divided like the preceding alphabet (lines 539-560)


o : >) y) wv
owt
red
a
— iw
Tie wt
A is oO
; oO
4 Co
u AAS
| ie
= |
i ee eee orn asin aries en j=
~~
Sw ee
=
x g
=Jj 4
— io
u
wy me |
—s
<-> @ 3
Ain


—w— wT
Magical square from a Samaritan phylactery. (Gaster, Codex D 1105.)


(Reproduced by permission from GASsTER, Studies and Texts, Vol.iii. p. 128,
and see Vol. i. p. 441.)


into two triangles by the letter L. Each letter is
enclosed in a square. The square is flanked right
and left by two lines written vertically :—

May be exalted this great Name !

May it be hallowed and uplifted !

May it be beautified and honoured !

May it be praised and declared mighty !


CAAP PEL:


Sha LAC A MEL Ss


We owe our knowledge of the existence of Syriac
amulets almost entirely to a small volume entitled
“The Little Book of Protection,’’ which is written
in Syriac and has been edited from four manuscripts
and translated by Sir Hermann Gollancz (The Book
of Protection, London, 1912). Two of the manu-
scripts are in the possession of Sir Hermann; the
third is in the University Library, Cambridge (see
Wright, Catalogue of the Syriac Manuscripts pre-
served in the Library of the University of Cambridge,
rgo1), and the fourth is in the British Museum
(Oriental, No. 6673). In this little work we have
“a collection of charms,’ which was probably
written for or compiled by a native of the country
which lies to the north of Mésul. The owner of the
book was a Christian and it was possible that he was
priest or some kind of officer of the Nestorian Church
to whom men made application for bans or spells,
and incantatory prayers, and formulae of blessing
to help them spiritually and physically and to pro-
tect their flocks and herds and possessions generally.
The source of the power which underlies all these
amuletic texts or “charms” is the ineffable Name
of God YHWH and His other Names AH YH (Asher)
AHYH, El-Shaddai, Adonai, and El-Sabaoth (Lord
of Hosts), and the Ten Words of God the utterance


6¢


SY KLAG-AMULETS 273


of which produced the universe. In this matter
the Syriac ~ charms” are idéntical with, those of
Hebrews in their Kabbalah, the Egyptian Christians,
the Abyssinians, the Samaritans and the Arabs.


Facsimile of a page of the Syriac MS. of the “ Book of Protection ”’ in the
British Museum (Orient., No. 6673.)


The written Name of God was God Himself, and so
were all the Names formed by the changes and
permutations of the letters of His Name.

As to spells or bans the mightiest of all spells was


the Lord’s Prayer(1), and after this come the Prayers
S


274 AMUEETS “AND SUPERSTITIONS


of Adam and the Holy Angels (2 and 3), and the
Gospel (4). In the spell against fear and trembling
comes the name of St. George the Martyr (of Lydda),
whose prayer is quoted (5). The spell of Jesus
(16) destroyed the power of engines of war, guns,
catapults, etc., used by any enemy. The spellmon
Solomon cured lumbago (10) ; the spell of St. Thomas


The angel Gabriel mounted on a white horse driving his spear into the
body of the devil-woman ofthe EvilEye (From Brit. Mus. MS., Orient.,
No. 6673.


73.)


expelled the Spirit of Lunacy from a man, and freed
the 366 members of his body from it (12) ; the spell
of the Crucifixion destroyed the power of swords,
daggers, arrows, etc. (9g). [hen we have spells against
sickness of every kind (11); headache and the 72
aches in ears, eyes, etc. [in this spell Gannus and
Sloonus are mentioned] (13) ; chattering teeth (17) ;


SVAEAC  ANULETS 279


cramp [mention of Mar Awgin], 20 ; spiders ? (19) ;
dogs (21) ; apparitions (22) ; the Evil Eye on men
(23) ; colic and chill (25); cattle disease (26) ; mad
dogs and wild beasts (27) ; fevers (28); distracting
noises and sounds (33) ; wolves (35); lying dreams
Ol cel penis 437) 3 scorpions (33); Evil Eye on
Sauilem30)eersotcere:s (42) the Evil Spirit (46) ;


Mar George (of Lydda) spearing the Great Dragon. (From Brit. Mus.
MS., Orient., No. 6673.)


sparrows and insects which devour crops (47) ; crops
catching fire (48) ; bleeding of the nose (49) ; crying
children (50) ; bewitchment (51); the wiles of
devils (52) ; boils (Aleppo “ button,” Baghdad boil,
etc.), and the itch (53).

Interspersed with the spells we have incantatory
prayers for the huntsmen and fishermen who wish

$2


276 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


for success (14) ; for those who wish for the posses-
sions of this world and riches (15); for peace in
general (19); for peace in the household (30) ; for
those who travel by night (32); for those who are
travelling on business (31); for favour with all
men (40) ; for women in travail (43) ; and formulae
for making the cow docile (24) and for keeping her


King Solomon spearing a devil. (From Brit. Mus. MS., Orient., No. 6673.)


milk sweet (44); and formulae for blessing crops
and vineyards (29), and blessing the house (34).
Two sections (6 and 7) contain prayers which a
man is to use when he is compelled to appear before
kings, governors, judges, and other dignitaries, for
they will cause him to have an “‘ open and winning
countenance ”’ before them, and impress them favour-
ably on his behalf. In No. 6 mention is made of


SL RtAG sAMULETS 277


Alexander the Great and the garment in which he
was arrayed and with which he subdued the whole
earth. Tradition says that Alexander built a gate
or door behind which he imprisoned Gog and Magog
and a large number of filthy nations. The name of
Alexander also appears as a word of power in
Ethiopic spells.


Elijah (right) and Enoch (left) eating the fruit of the Tree of Lifein Paradise
(From Brit. Mus. MS., Orient., No. 6673.)

Codex C (section 3) shows that the compiler of the
Little Book of Protection, like the Hebrews in Kab-
balah, Samaritans, and Ethiopians, believed firmly
in the power of a spell cast in the names of the Arch-
angels and Angels, and the list he gives of them 1s
instructive. For we find grouped Gabriel, Michael,
Ariel ; Michael, Azriel, Shamshiel, Harshiel, Sarphiel,
Nuriel ; and following the ineffable Name of God,
we have Shamshiel, Susniel, Shamiel, Hiniel,


278 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Zadikiel, Prukiel, Sahariel, Zakiel, Diniel, Eshiniel,
Takifiel, Gabriel, the mighty one, Shamshiel, Sahariel,
Makiel, Yomiel, Cukbiel, Shufiel, Mariel, Mehalalel,
Zatriel, Umiel, Hshahshiel, Tariel, Aziziel, Maniel,
Samiel. ““ By these holy names I bind, ban, stop the
mouth and tongues of evil men, jealous and wicked
judges, emirs, satraps, governors, men in authority,


€


Mar Daniel, the prophet, as an equestrian knight, spearing the “‘ wolf
which liethin wait for the sheep.”’ (From Brit. Mus. MS., Orient., No. 6673.)


rulers and chiefs, executioners, prefects, the foreigner,
the gentile, the infidel.’’ A spell or ban formed of the
names of Christian saints is given in section 52 of
Codex A.

The Legend of the Evil Eye and Mar ‘Abhd-
Ishd‘ is of great interest, for it is different from the
version usually given in Ethiopic amulets (see
Budge, History of Ethiopia, vol. 1. p. 592). The


> VRIACTAMULETS 279


Evil Eye appeared to the saint, and called him and
wished to consort with him; thereupon he bound
her and cursed her and tied her up, and made her
tell him hernames. She mentioned six, 7.e. Miduch,
Edilta, Monelta, Lilita, Malvita, and Mother, strangler
of boys. Later she declared that she had twelve (s7c)
other names, viz. Géos, Edilta, Lambros, Martlos,
Yamnos, Samgos, Domos, Dirba, Apiton, Pegogha,


Thaumasius, the martyr, as an equestrian knight, spearing the “ spirit of
the daughter of the moon.’ (From Brit. Mus. MS., Orient., No. 6673.)


Zarduch, Lilita, Malvita, and Mother, strangler of
boys. Section 19 of Codex C enumerates the various
kinds of the Evil Eye and of the men who possess
it. Here we have mentioned the eye of the seven
evil and envious neighbours, the eye of all kinds,
the eye that woundeth and pitieth not, the eye of
the father, mother, foreigners, gentile, man, woman,
old man, old woman, and infidel, and the dark-grey


280 AMULETS “AND “SUPERSTITIONS


eye, and the jealous eye, and the caerulean eye
are grouped together. In connection with the
caerulean or blue eye we may note the Arab descrip-
tion of the Frank: “ Yellow of hair, blue of eye;
and black of heart.’ Some of the (charmceaare
very homely in character. Thus we have a “ charm”
to keep the ox from falling asleep whilst ploughing


Rabban Hérmizd as an equestrian knight spearing ‘‘a lion or a mad
dog.’ (From Brit. Mus. MS., Orient., No. 6673.)


(C. 5), and one to prevent boys from crying (A. 50),
with an allusion to the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus
who slept in a cave for 377 years without waking.
Legends about the powers of King Solomon as a
magician are numerous, and thanks to various
passages in the Bible, the Talmtdh, the History of
Josephus and the Kur’an are tolerably well known.


SYRIAC AMULETS 281


The ring with which he worked miracles is said to
have been made of pure gold, and in it was set a
single beautiful shamiy stone (diamond ?) on which
was engraved the four letters of the ineffable name
of God, or the pentacle to which the names “ shield
of David ”’ or “‘ shield of Solomon ”’ have been given.
The vignette given in Codex A, p. 54, suggests that


Portraits of the Four Evangelists—Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.
(From Brit. Mus. MS., Orient., No. 6673.)


the stone was in the form of an eight-rayed star,
with a smaller four-rayed star cut on the face of it.
Between two double concentric circles are written
the following seven names :—


eleolh il rRY Rie PPMRY!T HLPT AYLPT BEY PY


The text, however (section 41, ed. Gollancz, p. 26),
says that there were other names [twenty-nine in
number] on the ring, and we can only assume that


282 AMULETS AND ‘SUPERSTITIONS


these were engraved on the gold ring itself. These
names are :—


HKKPS PRIN LMPS DKST PSDMST
SHHLT RHMT WHLYPT LMSTMPS SHKLLT
TWRSP eG sh bd DMEST TE: PSiEe
HSPT eis hl eA AR TYR Ee yee oar, DMPS
BRWEADS HRY), TRKLT PP PRYSHD
Dl bi" DE PPA YOUNG ny SiR YES? PLISHY


I can no more explain these names than Sir H.
Gollancz can. They may be names formed by a sort
of cypher arrangement of the letters which compose
the names otf.,,God, -YH,’ YHWH: AH YHivang
ADONAI, or of some words or verses of the Hebrew
Bible, or permutations of the names of the attributes
of God. Buton the other hand they may be a string
of quite meaningless names such as we find in
Egyptian and Greek papyri, and Coptic magical
texts. The repetition of them in the Names of the
Persons of the Trinity formed a charm against
pains and sicknesses, and gave him that carried them
a “‘ frank countenance ”’ before kings and judges.

All four of the Codices used by Sir Hermann
contain Vignettes, and he has published several of
those found in A and B. All the Vignettes seem
to be the work of one man or one school of illus-
trators, and for comparative purposes I have repro-
duced the several Vignettes from the Codex in the
British Museum. These are given in the preceding
pages and have not been published before.


Ora Pan Ro XII:


pAb LONIAN  TEnRRA-COLTA, DEVYIL-TRAPS.


The Hebrews who lived in the various quarters
of the eastern half of Babylon, and in the western
suburbs of the city where the town of Hillah now
stands, buried under the four corners of the founda-
tions of their houses and other buildings inverted
terra-cotta bowls inscribed with magical texts.
The Hebrews who lived at Cuthah and Niffar and
other places did the same thing, and they all did
so with the idea of shielding their houses and homes
and themselves from the attacks of all kinds of
evil spirits, and from the baleful influences of earth-
inhabiting demons. These bowls were to the
Hebrews what the prophylactic clay figures which
have been described above were to the Sumerians and
Babylonians (see page 97f). The British Museum
possesses a very large collection of such bowls,
which have been obtained from excavations made
in Babylonia and Assyria by Layard and several
officers of the British Museum between 1850 and
1906, and from native dealers. Some of these are
inscribed in the Hebrew language with the “ square ”
Hebrew characters, and others in the dialect of the
Targims in a species of cursive Syriac characters,
and others in Mandaitic (t.e. a Semitic dialect
similar to that found in the Talmiudh Babhit) in its
own special character. The oldest of these bowls,
those with Hebrew inscriptions inside them, date


284 AMULETS AND SUPERS LIDIONS


from the. Ist or IInd century 8.c., and the most
modern are not older than the VIth century A.D.
The reproductions of four of the bowls in the British
Museum Collection which are given in this Chapter
illustrate the palaeography, and the following


5 4y,
Dyes Y


—


een


I.—Terra-cotta Devil-trap, with a magical spiral inscription in Hebrew
letters, written for the protection of the house and estate of Bahran
and Bathniun against the power of Lilith, Yspandarmid, Bahr of the
desert and other devils. The inscription begins in the centre and

ends at +. (British Museum, 51-10-9, 96.)


paragraphs will give an idea of the contents of the
inscriptions.

The text on the first bowl (No. I) begins with a
statement that the spell or incantation written
below is intended to drive away the Devil, the


BABYLONIAN TERRA-GOTTA DEVIL-TRAPS 285


Spirits, Satan, Niriek, Zariah, Abttr-Tura, Dan
and Lilith from the ground of Bahran, and Bahr
of the desert and Yspandarmid from the ground
Or Bbathniun, and from all the house. O Thou
eternal Good God, crush the power of the Devils
and the spirits of the Fiends, the great power
of Lilith... I drive you away from the neigh-
bourhood of Bahran’s house, and from the house
of Bathniun, and from all the regions round
about them. As the devils write bill of divorce
and cast away their women who never again
approach them, so do ye accept [this] your bill of
divorce, and receive your dowry which is [here]
written, and get ye gone, betake yourselves to flight,
make haste to depart, and forsake the house of
Bahran and the house of Bathniun in the Name of
the Eternal God. Get ye forth into the darkness,
away from the man of power, and sealed with his
ring, in such wise that every man may know that
ye are no longer there. And then shall be there a
Bead lieht, “Amen. Amen. Amen. Selah. Fora
discussion on the text see the literature quoted
Baccnwab in Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch. for April,
1890.

The text on the second bowl (No. II) is a long
cursing formula which is directed against spirits, and
demons, and devils of every description, both male
and female, which bring diseases and sicknesses
upon men and women, and against magicians of
every kind, both male and female, who by word, or
curse, or ban, or act do harm to men. This formula
will make the curses and incantations of evil spirits
and demons to have no effect, and it will make the
magical ceremonies of the sorcerer to be innocuous,


286 AMULETS AND: SUPERSTITIONS


It will make even the stars and the planets to turn
back in their courses if their powers have been
invoked and employed by the magician in his
nefarious work. And it will make the “curse of
the woman to end in smoke.” Moreover, this


y
, Q <
DURE e aap prox tis ow ¥ Ce
i Bro 8 B02 PE NI a
nS 3.5 Se 3Z Ke W339 ZZ.Z/ 4
Faz LEER SAAR d xo £547 38
EA {CAL en As$ Eee |
a6 b485 OA CEE RIESALLES
Led Ye Ryko lioa aCe voy Self Teh
FEE SCA Seat On BEL I UE
¢ ~


Il.—Terra-cotta Devil-trap, with a magical spiral inscription in Hebrew
letters containing a comprehensive curse on all devils and magicians,
male and female. The recital of it secured for a man the help of the
stars of heaven. (British Museum, 51~-10-9, 100.)


formula carries with it the protection of the good
angel who has eleven names. This text 1s very
involved and is most difficult to translate, and
Zenker, Halévy and Schwab, who have studied it
and published it, differ very considerably in their


BABYLONIAN TERRA-COTTA DEVIL-TRAPS = 287


renderings and translations of it. And though the
general meaning of most of the text is clear, there
are in it certain passages which have not as yet been
satisfactorily explained.

The text of the third bowl (No. III), which begins


I1I.—Terra-cotta Devil-trap, with a magical spiral inscription in Hebrew
letters containing a spell which was intended to protect Bar-Hayy,
the son of Lala, and his property from all evil. (From Haleévy,
Melanges, p. 229.)

on the edge and ends in the centre, was first published

by Halévy, and republished by Schwab (Proc. Soc.

Bibl. Arch. for April, 1890, p. 310). It shows that

the bowl was regarded as an amulet, and that it

was written for Bar-Hayy (?), the son of LALA.


The following rendering will give an idea of the


288 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


inscription: “ Let all the evil sorcerers, and violent
attacks and cursings, and vows, and undertakings,
and speech (hasty words or threats ?), whether near or
far, by night or by day, by men or by women, which
it is possible to be directed against BAR-Hayy (?),
the son of LALA, or his son or his property, let all
these things, without any exception, be cursed, and
banned, and driven away, and rent asunder, and
expelled, and utterly destroyed away from the
bodies of the children of BAR-Hayy (?), the son of
LALA, and the bodies of their sheep and cattle,
and from the habitations of each of them on the
road of Hosi. O thou star, who art the mightiest of
all the stars in the world, from thee cometh health,
O thou who art the queen of all those who work
sorceries, in the name of KARMEsisin, that great
and ineffable name. Amen. Amen. Selah.”

The text of the fourth bowl (No. IV) has been pub-
lished by Layard and Halévy and studied by Schwab
(op. cit., p. 314). In the opening words it is distinctly
stated to be an amulet (Aami‘h) of divine origin
inasmuch as it.came from the water of heaven,
wherein it was sealed and hidden. It was specially
prepared by means of the water to protect its owner
and his kinsfolk who live with him, and to deliver
him from banning, and baleful visions, and sorceries,
and cursings, and water which is stagnant, and water
which is impure, from fouled wells (?), from every
kind of evil worker, active or passive, from evil
spirits, whether male or female, from the Evil Eye,
and from sorceries practised by men or women.
The names of the two mighty angels who are in-
voked to make the amulet operative are BABHNE‘A
and MAmBE‘A. After a mutilated passage in which


BABYLONIAN TERRA-COTTA DEVIL-TRAPS.~ 289


d)


“ darkness, fog and mist ’’ are mentioned come the
words, Amen. Amen. Selah.

On another bowl in the British Museum is a Hebrew
inscription written not in spiral form but in con-


IV.—Terra-cotta Devil-trap, with a magical spiral inscription in Hebrew
letters containing a spell which was intended to protect its owner
from all evil spirits and the Evil Eye. (British Museum.)


centric lines. It reads: The health of the heavens
to set life on the threshold of Ashir Mehadiud, and
to him that is under the sight of it in the Name of the
Eternal, the Holy One, the great God of Israel,


Whose word as soon as it is uttered is fulfilled.
ap


290 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Behold the bed of Solomon is surrounded with sixty
of the mightiest of the mighty men of Israel.

May God bless thee and keep thee; may He
make His face to shine upon thee and be gracious
unto thee; may He make bright His face on thee
and. give. thee peace.- “Amen. Amen’. Sela aaa
is the famous blessing with which Aaron, by the
command of God given through Moses, was com-
manded to bless the children of Israel. . I have not
found it on any other inscribed bowl.

The words which follow are from Isa. xliv. 25,
but..“are. incorrectly wiitten, / The text tensa hie
bowl is of special interest because there is visible in
it an attempt to unite the paganism which permitted
the use of such devil-traps with the religion of the
Hebrews, which forbade all trafficking with magical
ceremonies and spells and incantations. In this
text passages from the Hebrew scriptures take the
place of native pagan spells.


GHARERER: XD:


THE RING AMULET.


When and where and why men first began to
wear rings cannot be said, and the fundamental
ideas which they held about them can only be
guessed at. They probably associated the ring with
the solar disk and believed that it therefore possessed
strength and power and continuity and wore it as
an AMULET.. Whether made of metal or stone
matters little, but if made of gold or some semi-
precious stone, which was credited by them with
the possession of some magical property, its invisible
power would be increased. The Sun-god Shamash
represented on the famous “ Sun-god Tablet” in
the British Museum holds a ring and a staff, and in
the well-known relief on which Marduk is seen in
royal attire and armed as a warrior, he holds a ring
and a staff in his left hand. We thus see that the
ideas of divinity, sovereignty, strength, power, and
protection were associated with the ring in very
early times, and long before it was turned into a
signet of seal or had a bezel attached to it. The
gods themselves may have needed a ring as an
amulet, and in any case it represented their authority
and dignity, and was a part of their regalia. The
Greek mythologists invented a fable to account for
the origin of the finger-ring. Jove, upon loosing the
Titan Prometheus from the bonds to which he had


been condemned to eternity, obliged him as a
Tee


292 AMULE TS (AND SUPERS EITIONS


perpetual penance, as an equivalent to his original
sentence, to wear for ever upon his finger a link
of the chain enchased with a fragment of the Cau-
casian rock of torture. Thus ornamented, Catullus
introduces him at the Wedding of Peleus (1. 295).
“Came wise Prometheus ; on his hand he wore
The slender symbol of his doom of yore.”
(See C. W. King, Engraved Gems, p. 12.)


The goddess Nekhebit presenting the two Egypts united and the sovereignty
of the whole earth to the King of Egypt.

At an early period men began to have their names
cut upon their rings, but they soon found that it
was necessary to widen and thicken that part of the
ring which was intended to bear the name. This
resulted in the formation of the SIGNET RING, which
was well known in Egypt in the Archaic Period, and
is seen in the annexed illustration. Here we see
the Vulture-goddess Nekhebit holding in one claw
the symbol of the union of Upper and Lower Egypt,


THE RING ‘AMULET 993


and in the other the symbol of the circuit of the
earth ruled by the sun in the form of a signet ring.
Within this are written the hieroglyphs B and SH,
z.e. the consonants of the name of Besh or Bash,
a king who is now generally known as KHA-SEKHEMUI.
This inscription is found on a stone vase which
Mr. Quibbell excavated at Hierakonpolis, a very
ancient city of Upper Egypt.

Two forms of the signet ring are here shown. In
A the bezel-and ring form one whole, and in B we
have an example of the splayed bezel.


We should naturally expect the oldest form
of the signet to be found in Babylonia, but such
isnot the case, for, as: already said, the Baby-
lonians and Assyrians had their names cut upon
cylinders of stone which are commonly known
as “ cylinder-seals.’’ These were perforated through
their length and were threaded on a string, by which
they were suspended from the neck or tied to the
arm or wrist. Impressions of them were made by
rolling them on the clay tablets, and some think
that the hieroglyph © represents a cylinder-seal
being rolled on a tablet of moist clay. The cylinder-
seal was adopted by the Egyptians at a very early
period, and many examples which were made under
the old kingdom are to be seen in the British


294 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Museum. One of the most recent cylinder-seals
known is here represented. It is made of white
fatence and is inscribed with names and titles of
Sebek-neferu-Ra, a king of the XIIIth dynasty.
To the same period may be ascribed the blue glass
cylinder-seal, mounted in gold, which forms the


1. Cylinder-seal of Sebak-neferu-Ra in the British Museum.
2. Inscription on the seal of Sebak-neferu-Ra containing the King’s
official names.


bezel of the ring here shown (A); in B a scarab
forms the bezel, and both it and the cylinder are
attached by wire to),the rings: See Hall) Hiaks
Catalogue of Egyptian Scarabs [Cylinder-Seals], etc.,
in the British Museum, London, 1913.


Jae RING, AMULET 295


A considerable number of rings made of red jasper,
red fazence, and red glass have been found in the
tombs of Egypt; all are uninscribed and all have
a gap in them. How and why they were used is
not known, but a recent view about them is that
they were worn as amulets by soldiers and by
men whose work or duties brought them into conflict
with their enemies, to prevent them from being
wounded, or if wounded, to stop the flow of blood.
It is possible that they were worn by women to
prevent bleeding.

The Hebrews, like the Egyptians, used the signet
ring. Thus when Judah asked Tamar what he
should give her as a pledge she replied, “ Thy
signet ring (khéthdm) and thy cord [to which it is
Btiacned| and thy staff’ (Gen. xxxvil. 18). From
this it is clear that Judah’s signet ring was attached
to a cord, and that it hung suspended from his neck
@rrrieceto Mismwiist. “And in Gen. xl. 42, 1t is said
that Pharaoh removed his signet ring (¢abba‘ath) or
seal from his hand and placed it on Joseph's hand,
and so transferred his authority to him and the
right to affix the king’s seal on all documents. The
bezel of that Pharaoh’s ring was undoubtedly in-
scribed with the pre-nomen or nomen, perhaps both,
and his principal titles, and the Egyptian royal
rings in the British Museum indicate the general
appearance of the ring. Ahasuerus, too, used a
signet ring which he first entrusted to Haman
and, having withdrawn it from him, gave it to
Mordecai (Esther iii. 10; viii. 8, 10). So much
has already been said about Solomon’s famous
magical ring that no further description of it here
is necessary.


296 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The finest collection of rings known, viz. those of
the British Museum (which includes the Franks’
Collection) and the Victoria and Albert Museum
(Lord Londesborough’s collection) show that the
ancients made rings of many kinds of materials—
gold, silver, bronze, iron, lead, glass, alabaster,
steatite, limestone, terra-cotta, carnelian, sand,
chalcedony, agate, ivory, bone, amber, jet, crystal,
glass, etc. And in some rings both gold and silver
are used, probably with a view of increasing their
amuletic powers. The RING-AMULET was made more
efficacious if the bezel was made of a certain kind of
stone, or in a certain form, on which some magical
symbol was engraved. The gold ring with a frog
bezel, described by Mr. F. H. Marshall (Catalogue
of the Finger Rings, p. xxiii), and the rings with
phalli engraved upon them were undoubtedly fer-
tility amulets, and the silver rings with gold studs
inserted “in * them were’ intended to \protecumunme
wearer against the Evil Eye. The rings on bronze
models of hands were doubly powerful amulets.
The early Christians attached great importance to
amulet-rings or charm-rings, and they adopted the
views of the pagans and Gnostics as to their value
as protections against the Evil Eye. Provided that
the ring and its bezel were made of materials possess-
ing the magical qualities desired, and the symbol,
or figure, or inscription, 7.¢. word of power, engraved
upon the bezel was correct, the wearer of the ring
believed that he was protected from every calamity,
accident and harm which the Evil Eye and its
baleful influences could bring upon him.

Among the RELIGIOUS AND ECCLESIASTICAL RINGS
described by Mr. O. M. Dalton (Franks’ Bequest,


THE RING. AMULET 297


Catalogue of the Finger-Rings, London, 1912) may
be mentioned those which are inscribed ‘‘ Ave
Maria gratia plena Dn (= Dominus tecum) ;
Mater Dei mamanto (No. 696); Qui pjro] aliis
ring with an inlaborat”’ (No. 205); the nun’s
orat p[ro] se inscription which is translated, “‘ This
Peete ting. oi chastity., .[ am the spouse of
Meeus, Christ. (No. 712); the massive-gold band
engraved with the figure of Christ in the tomb,
the Cross and Instruments of the Passion, with
the Five Wounds at intervals, which are des-
iipede ds the well oi pity, the well of mercy,
mee well+ol comiort, the well’ of grace, and the
Pei or sevetiastinge -liie, Inside is engraved :
“Wulnera quing dei sunt medicina mei pia crux
et passio Xti sunt medicina michi jaspar melchior
baltasar ananyzarta tetragrammaton’”’ (“ jaspar
mrecmMOnbaltasan, are.,the Three Kings of
eloene) (No, 718),; the silver hoop inscribed
“S.M. Magdalena = ora pro m{e]”’ (No. 773); the
_ ivory signet inscribed “In hoc signo vinces”’ (No.
778) ; the gold ring inscribed “‘ Dignare me Laudare
te Virgo Sacrata ’’ (No. 778) ; and the DEATH RINGS
inscribed “‘ == Mors bonis grata”’ (No. 813) ; “‘ Death:
sy ‘myn= Eritag’’ (No. 814), and ‘dye to live”
(No. 815). lps

Mediaeval and modern AMULET-RINGS.—Many of
the rings described by Mr. Dalton have inscriptions,
but some of them are untranslatable and are clearly
magical formulae, e.g. GA|GNO|OIT|OIP|AN etc.
(No. 864) and AAELA-AEAA-GELA-GHOTIS


+GVT+G2222 (No. 866). These are probably charms


bys
7
RSE


against sickness. The first word of the last formula


298 AMULET TS -ANDZoULERSBITIONS


AGAA is said to be formed of the initials of four
Hebrew words, and to stand for—


oN ody> ma) TAN


‘“Thou art the «mighty one tor ever, Adena.
The ring No. 870 was an amulet which protected
a man from epilepsy or the “ falling sickness"
(Ananizarta). The ring-amulet inscribed Jesus
autem transiens was believed to protect travellers
by land and sea from the attacks of thieves
and robbers. Many ring-amulets are inscribed
with the name of JrEsus, or Ihesus Nazarenus
Rex-Judelorum], and many with Jaspar, Baltasar
and Melchior, the names of the Three Kings of
Cologne, who were three of the Magi who went to
Bethlehem to worship: the Infant’ ~Christss tie
first brought myrrh, the second gold, and the third
frankincense. On some we find the pentagram, on
others words from the Service of the Mass (e.g.
AGIOS+O@EOS+ATANATO, “ Holy [is} God Im-
mortal’’ (No. 892), or the names of archangels,
e.g. Sadayel, Raphael and Tiriel (No. 894). Gold
and silver rings set with a TOADSTONE (crapaudina,
bufonius lapis, batrachites) were supposed to guard
their wearers against diseases of the kidneys, and
the stone itself was regarded as a special protection
of newly-born children. Prof. Ray Lankester has
shown that the “‘ toadstones ”’ are not stones at all,
but the palatal teeth of a small ganoid fish called
Lepidotus, and that they derive their coloration
from the iron salts present in the rock. Rings set
with pieces of horn or of an ass’s hoof were supposed
to save the wearers from attacks of epilepsy. The


THE -RING. AMULET 299


ring No. g1g is inscribed with a formula which is
probably of Gnostic origin and reads—


ARXENTEX NOC CONN
OY XEPICAPXAMNEP
XMANOCOPNW4PIOC


Posy-Rines and FEDE-Rines.—Any ring which
bears a motto or verse of an amatory nature is a
posy (“ poesy ) ring. The “ Fede’’-Rings or Be-
trothal Rings are in origin Roman, and they received
this name from the two hands clasped in truth,
which they always have in a conspicuous position.
The following typical inscriptions on FEDE-RINGS
are taken from Dalton, Catalogue (p. 161 f) :—
Ave Mana gratia plena; Jesus Nazarenus Rex ;
Dulce-domum:fides, P-N-Sola:-F-A:AMA; Je suts
1c1 en lieu dam , God help; Be true in heart Tho
farr apart.

On Posy-RINGS we have :—


I. A+ FRIND + to + the + end +
2. A vertuous wife preferveth life
eeauelreiute and thee L chufe
ee cam OMnNe. 5 lite can be.
5. As God hath knit to hartes in one
6. So none shall part but death alone.
7. As this Ring tells twas Bedwin Bells.
8. Afke + and + Haue
g. By god alone wee two are one

TOme be TREY LE: VE SHALL: TRYE*ME

_ -- BY: TYME: YE: SHALL: SPYE: ME
+ SO*-FYND:SQ:SET*BY* ME
II. ERAM * NON * SVM


300 AMULETS SAND -SUPERSEMIONS


I2. GOD CONTINV LOVE IN US.
13. God did forefee wee fshould agree
14. God did forefee whats beft for me.
15. I dare not {show the love I owe.
16, I loue you
17. If loue you bare thif forr me ware.
18. IN LOVE LINKT FAST WHILE LIFE DOH LAST.
19. Many are thee stars I see
Yet in my eye no starr like thee.
20. NOT: TEE:GYFT- BVT: THE*GEVER
21. Our [hands] and [hearts] with one consent
Hath tied this [knot] till [death] preuent.
22. Since god hath joynd us two together
Let us liue in love and serue him ever.
23. Y°AM* YOYRS: FOR: EVER.


There is a good collection of Jewish Marriage-
rings in the British Museum (see Dalton, op. cit.,
p. 189 f.) and many bear the inscription Mazzal tobh


alc Sry “Good luck.”” They were never worn in
daily life and were only placed by bridegrooms upon
the fingers of wives during the ceremony ; they were
therefore only symbolical.

Rings were also worn aS MEMORIALS, and those
which are inscribed “ Memento Mor’’ must be
classed as such.

As the ring has been from a very early period
the symbol of sovereignty and authority we have
Royal-Rings, Coronation-Rings, Papal-Rings, Archi-
episcopal- and Episcopal-Rings, Investiture-Rings,
Serjeants-Rings, etc. Among Fancy RiINGs must
be grouped rings set with diamonds which their


THESKING “AMULET 301


wearers used for writing on glass; the Du1at-
RINGS which were used for making astronomical
observations; the Sphere-Ring with the Signs
Binie ZOciac, Planets; etc.; the Puzzle-Ring,
the Trinity-Ring (made of three interlacing hoops
turned from the solid, by Stephen Zick); Car-
nival-Rings, Key-Rings, Poison-Rings, in which
the poison was placed in the bezel of the ring
under the inset gem; Perfume-Rings, in which
choice perfume was placed in the bezel, and escaped
when the gem above it was pressed ; Cramp-Rings,
Gift-Rings, given to beloved persons and friends ;
Bow-Rings, Votive-Rings, laid up in temples;
Funerary-Rings, which were offered to the dead
and are found in graves ; Reliquary-Rings, Medical-
Rings, 2.e. those which were worn to cure the
“falling sickness’ or epilepsy, or applied to the
eyes to cure ophthalmia or to the body generally
to cure the bites of vipers, scorpions, serpents, etc. ;
and Holy-Rings—viz. those which had been blessed
by saints or martyrs.

The Mizpau Rinc.—This was made of a tolerably
deep plain band of gold with flanges. Between the
flanges the word MizpaH appeared, either engraved
on the ring itself or ona band of enamel. The word
Mizpau is derived from the Hebrew MispAu \TOS!o
and means ‘‘ watch-tower’”’ or ‘‘ place for keeping a
look-out ’’ and was given as a name to many hills in
Palestine. The giver and the receiver of the MIZPAH
Ring cared nothing for the meaning of the name,
but regarded it as a witness between them remem-
bering only Laban’s words in Gen. xxxi. 49, “‘ The
LorpD watch between me and thee when we are
absent from one another.”


302 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Among Orientals when the ring is not used as a
seal, the name of the owner being cut on the bezel,
it is worn as an amulet. The metals gold and silver
carry in them the influences and powers of their
planets, and the stones of which the bezels are made
add to these their prophylactic, atropaeic and
medicinal powers. On the bezels of Arabic rings
we find the name of Allah and Muhammad His
Prophet, and the Declaration of the Unity of God ;
Persian rings often bear the name of ‘Ali and Hasan
and Husain. We find on the bezels of some Arabic
rings squares containing numbers, e.g. No. 2298 in
the British Museum. On the octagonal bezel of
this ring is cut the following :—


The total of each row of figures whether added
up horizontally or perpendicularly is 36. Now, the
letters of the Arabic alphabet have numerical
values, and sometimes these magical squares contain
nothing but letters, and the numbers in the squares
above ‘probably have a direct connection with the
letters which have their numerical values. Taken
together these letters will represent some words
from the Kur’4n or some sacred name, which is
regarded as a word of power. Here is an example.
One of the great names of God is Musawwir, ‘“‘ He
who fashioneth.’’ Now the numerical values of the
consonants inthis name are M=—=40,;,5=- 90. ae,
and R= 200, total 336. These are taken and made


THE RING AMULET 303


into the first line of a four-lined magical square,
and to these are added a series of numbers which,
when added up horizontally or vertically or diago-
nally, make 336, thus :—


[But it is clear that misprints have crept into
Doutte’s copy. |] :

Doutté says (op. cit., p. 194) that this square was
used as a amulet and was believed to make a barren
woman become a mother. It owed its efficacy to
the Name of God represented by figures.

On another ring described by Dalton (No. 2304)
is the following magical diamond of figures—


The Zop1ac-Rinc.—This consists usually of a
flat hoop, plain or ribbed, of gold on which the Signs
of the Zodiac, made of gold wire, are soldered ; above
and below are soldered plain or scrolled flanges.
Few, if any, of them are older than the XIXth
century. The metal workers of the Gold Coast
used to come to travellers and make these rings
in their presence. Having obtained two or three
sovereigns from the traveller they melted them
with a blow pipe and fashioned a ring from them.
In the ’fifties and ’sixties of the last century several
were brought to Liverpool where they found a ready


304 AMULETS* AND, SUPERSTITIONS


market. The forms of the signs were taken from
Arabic manuscripts and appear thus :—


Ve BO EP 8025) RO a ae


There is no doubt that the custom of wearing
finger-rings has been continuous. Both Mr. F. H.
Marshall and Mr. O. M. Dalton have in their Cata-
logues of the Finger-Rings in the British Museum
devoted several paragraphs to discussing how they
were worn. In ancient times they were usually
worn on. the-fourth finger, next the first “imeem
Rings were not generally worn on the middle finger
—the digitum infamis. The fourth finger was usually
chosen first for reasons of convenience, and next
because there was a popular belief that a nerve
ran straight to it from the heart. Betrothal and
marriage rings were usually worn on the third finger,
which was perhaps the most favoured for the wearing
of rings generally. Down to the XVIth century a
ring was commonly worn by both men and women
on the thumb. The signet-ring was often worn
on the first finger, and episcopal-rings on the first
or third. Rings were also strung round the neck
and «threaded on the cords of hats.: Mr. Dalter
points out (p. xxiv) that ladies sometimes wore as
many as ten rings on the fingers, and men six.

The reader who wishes to study the history of the
origin and development of rings, especially the
ornamental varieties, should examine the collection
of 4,183 rings in the British Museum, all of which
are described, and some hundreds of them illustrated,
in the Catalogues written by Messrs. Marshall and
Dalton. And he should consult the following works :
—Dalton, O. M., Catalogue of Early Christian


THE? RING, AMULET 305


Antiquities, London, rgo1 ; King, C. W., Antique Gems
and Rings, 2 vols., London, 1872 ; and his Handbook ©
of Engraved Gems, London, 1866; Middleton, J. H.,
The Lewis Collection of Gems and Rings, London,
1892 ; and the article Annulus in Smith, W., Dict. of
Greek and Roman Antiqmties, London, 1890. A
great amount of information concerning rings is
given by Kirchmann, J. (De Annulis liber singulars,
Lubecae, 1623), and Fortunius Licetus (De annults
antiquis, Utiari, 1645), who collected and printed
a large number of references and allusions to rings
from the works of classical writers.


CHA PTE Raps


STONES AND THEIR PROPHYLACTIC AND THERA-
PEUTIC QUALIDIES.


AGATE.—Several kinds of agate are known, and
all of them aré used extensively in the East. The
red agate, which is mentioned by PLINy (Hist.
Nat., Xxxvil. 54) and known as “ blood agate,’’ was
a protection against the large spiders and scorpions.
The so-called “ green agate ’’ is potent in quelling
disease of any kind in the eyes. The brown agate,
or “tawny agate,’ is the most powerful of all
and the most popular, for it makes the warrior
victorious, protects a man against every kind of
poisonous reptile, gives a lover favour in the sight
of his lady, the sick man who holds it in his hand
recovers, and gives a man riches, happiness, health,
and long life. It also increases a man’s intelligence.
It drives away fevers, epilepsy, and madness; stops
the flow of rheum in the eye, reduces menstruation,
disperses the water in dropsy. In ITALy and PERSIA
it protects the wearer against the “ Evil Eye.” The
triangular agate amulets worn in SYRIA on the neck


66


1 The best authorities on this subject are :—Groth, Grundriss
der Edelsteinkunde, Leipzig, 1887; Lorenz, Die okkulte
Bedeutung der Edelsteine, Leipzig, 1915 ; Pachinger, Glaube und
Oberglaube im Steinreich, and of course many of the sections
in the works of Dr. S. Seligmann on the Evil Eye (Der bése
Blick, Berlin, 1910; and Die Zauberkraft des Auges und das
Berufen, Hamburg, 1922).


STONES ANDG THER QUALITIES 307


keep away intestinal troubles. Black agate, with
white stripes, is greatly prized, but green agate is
also greatly treasured ; for if a woman drinks the
water in which a green agate ring has been washed
she will never be sterile. The amulets of grey agate
which are common in Egypt, and are worn on the
neck, prevent stiff-neck and ward off colic and
diarrhoea.

Moss-AGATE.— This beautiful stone with markings
in it resembling trees and vegetation is much prized
by the husbandman, who wears a moss-agate on
his right upper arm, and places one in the right
horn of each of his oxen, so that he may have an
abundant harvest.

ALUM.—In PERSIA, SYRIA, PALESTINE, EGYPT, and
westwards along the whole of the northern coast of
AFRICA alum is the favourite means of protection
against the Evil Eye; its therapeutic powers were
well known to PLiny (Hist. Nat., xxxv. 52). In
Morocco both Jewish and Arab magicians use it,
mixed with salt, on their patients, the former calling
upon the names of ABRAHAM, ISAAC, JACOB, and
EvisHa, and the latter reciting the CXIIth Strah
of the Kur’an, which declares the absolute unity of
Gop. Pieces of alum, or sticks of alum, are used
as house amulets, and in Persia, TURKEY, PALES-
TINE, and Ecyrt mothers place bits of alum in one
or other of their children’s garments, or tie them
inside their head-coverings or caps.

ALATUIR.—See AMBER.

AMBER.—Ornaments made of amber were worn
by women in the earliest periods of the history of
many of the peoples of Asta, AFRICA, and EUROPE.


When men discovered its electrical properties, which
Ene,


308 AMULIGIS SAND SUPERSTITIONS


were known to THEOPHRASTUS, they began to make
amulets of it, and men, women, and children wore
them on their necks. Amber dust was sometimes
mixed with honey and oil of roses and given as a
medicine to those who were suffering from ear-ache
or failure of sight; amber dust when taken in water
relieved pains in the stomach, and helped the kidneys
and liver and the larger intestines to perform their
functions regularly and effectively. The smell of
burnt amber helped women in labour, and an amber
ball, if held in the hands, kept a man cool during the
hottest days of summer, and reduced the heat in a
man suffering from fever. A model of the phallus
made of amber was regarded as a most powerful
protection against the Evil Eye and any and every
attack of evil spirits. Beads made of amber pre-
served the wearer against rheumatism, toothache,
headache, rickets, jaundice, and every kind of
internal ailment; a piece of amber placed on
the nose stopped excessive bleeding, and an amber
amulet tied to the neck made the largest goitre to
disappear. In many European countries amber is
worn as a protection against witches and warlocks,
and even ill-luck. The Arab physicians used amber
powder largely in their medicines, and in addition
to the diseases and ailments mentioned above, it
was given to pregnant women to prevent miscarriage,
and to a patient suffering from ulcers, boils, car-
buncles, etc. In Eastern Asia amber amulets are
made in the form of lions, hares, dogs, frogs, fish,
etc., and these are believed to add to the virility
of men and the fecundity of women.

AMETHYST, from the Gr. duévaros “ not drunken, ”
‘‘ without drunkenness.’’ This beautiful stone was


SDONES AND THEIR QUALITIES 309


believed to possess many qualities valuable to man,
and was greatly prized as an ornament and as an
amulet. Some of the ancients thought that it was
called “amethyst ’’ because it was the colour of
violet wine, and protected men from drunkenness ;
but Priny (Hist. Nat., xxxvil. 40) does not believe
this, and thinks that the stone and the wine have
no connection. He mentions that the magicians
declared that if the names of the sun and moon were
written: upon an amethyst, and that if it was tied
to the neck with peacocks’ hairs and the feathers
of a swallow, it would protect a man against sorcery.
The man who placed an amethyst under his tongue
might drink the contents of a large vessel of wine
without becoming intoxicated, and he who drank
wine out of a vessel made of amethyst might drink
all its contents with impunity. Worn as an amulet
it cured a man of gout; placed under the pillow an
amethyst gave the sleeper pleasant dreams, and it
improved his memory, and made him immune from
poison. Some believed that the wearer of the stone
became gentle and amiable through its influence,
and that by it he was preserved from outbursts of
temper and wrath. Its presence in the ring of a
bishop was thought to be helpful to the wearer and
also to the devotee who kissed it. |

ANTIPATHES was either black coral or jet, each
of which was supposed to keep the wearer from
suffering.

ASBESTOS preserved a man from sorcery and the
Byvil Kye.

ASPHALT, or bitumen, miiméyd, was much used in
medicine, and that which was taken out from the
skulls of Egyptian mummies was believed to possess


310 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


special magical powers. It preserved a man from
sprains, fractures of the bones, blows, fallings down,
headache, epilepsy, dizziness, palpitation of the
heart, etc. A cross made with asphalt on a man or
beast protected it from witchcraft and the Evil
Eye. The AZTEKs tie little bags containing asphalt
to the necks of their children to keep away sickness
from them.

BERYL protected the bearer against the helplessness
caused by fascination. The green variety was used
in treating diseases of the eye, and the yellowish-
green stone for jaundice and diseases of the liver.
It tsoften called the ‘stoneiot St \Uhomas«

CARBUNCLE.—This stone protected the wearer
against fascination.

CARNELIAN is called a “ blood stone,” because it
acted on the blood, and prevented it from rising in
excess to the head. It repressed fluxes of blood,
and restrained superfluous menstruation, and stopped
bleeding at the nose. A carnelian ring made a
man peaceful and slow to anger. Carnelian makes
the skin healthy and removes blotches, pimples,
and sores. Throughout the Middle Ages it was
believed to protect men from fascination, and to this
day Jews, ARABS, TURKS, GREEKS and many other
peoples on the shores of the MEDITERRANEAN wear
amulets made of it as a defence against the Evil
Eye. The opaque variety of carnelian is called SARD.

CATER’S EYE, a dull red stone with a white mark
in it, which is supposed to represent the pupil of a
cat’seye. It hasan evil reputation, and in WESTERN
ASIA is regarded as a provoker of strife; the man
who sees his wife wearing the stone expects domestic
trouble.


SLONES AND THEIR. QUALITIES 311


Cats EYE as an amulet is supposed to protect a
man from witchcraft and death. The Arabs assign
to it a property which caused its wearer to become
invisible in battle. Mr. Anderson states that when
a man in KorpDoFAN doubts his wife's fidelity, and
is about to go on a journey, he makes her drink
milk in which a cat’s eye has been washed, so that
if after his departure she commits adultery, there
shall be no children of the union.

CATOCHITIS, a Corsican stone which sticks to the
hand like gum, was supposed to guard a man from
fascination (PLIny, Hist. Nat., xxvu. 56).

CHALCEDONY was used in medicine in cases of
fever, and was supposed to render the passage of
gall stones easy. It was supposed to give a mana
peaceful and equable disposition, and protect him
from the Evil Eye.

CHALK and other white stones, or plaster of Paris,
in Germany and neighbouring countries are regarded
as a protection against evil. Crosses made on
objects with chalk, and the initial letters of the names
of the Three Kings, C. M. B., written with chalk
on the doors of houses on the day of the Epiphany,
protect them from witchcraft and the danger from
fire. C=Caspar, M=Melchior, B=Baltazar.

CROSS-STONES (Staurotides) protect children and
others from sicknesses caused by witchcraft. They
are worn in little bags attached to the neck or in the
pockets. In ITALy, the stone is called pfuetra della
croce, and in Finisterre it is worn as an amulet
against shipwreck.

CRYSTAL (ROCK-cRYSTAL).—-According to PLINY
(Hist. Nat., xxxvii. 9, 10) the ancients believed that
crystal was petrified ice. It was used as a burning-


312 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


glass in medical operations, and in powder was
administered as a medicine for scrofula, swellings
of the glands, diseases of the eyes, heart disease,
Iever, and intestinal pains. Mixed with honey it
increased the milk of the mother who was suckling
a child. Little balls of crystal, set in metal bands,
are found all over EUROPE, and in ENGLAND and
IRELAND ; where and why these were made is not
known, but they were probably used as amulets.
Crystal was held in high esteem by the early Chris-
tians who regarded it as a symbol of the Immaculate
Conception. And KING, in his Hzstory of Gems
(pp. 104-8), describes a ball of crystal on which was
engraved the Gnostic formula ABAANAOANAABA.
Crystal has always been greatly prized in Scotland.
Several of the Clans possessed crystal balls which
were regarded as “‘stones of victory,’ and water
in which they were washed was given as medicine
to sick men and cattle. Crystal amulets protected
their wearers against the Evil Eye, and saved them
from bad dreams; he who drinks from a crystal
vessel will never suffer from dropsy, and a piece of
crystal laid on the cheek will drive away toothache
and will give relief, in any case, to the sufferer.
Some of the Mexican Indians believe that the souls
of both living and dead pecple dwell in crystal.
And among some of the tribes in AUSTRALIA and
GUINEA the magicians by means of it produce rain,
for crystal is the rain-maker par excellence.

CorAL.—An amulet against sterility, and it pro-
tected its wearer against the Evil Eye. ° Powdered
coral was used in medicine.

DiamonpD. — According to PLiny - (Hust. Nat..
XXXVil. 15) the diamond rendered all poisons


STONES AND THEIR QUALITIES 313


innocuous and drove away madness, and it was
believed to protect a man against fascination, and
to keep away from him night spirits and evil dreams.
Wine and water in which a diamond was dipped
preserved the drinker of it frem gout, jaundice, and
apoplexy. A diamond worn on the left arm drove
away wild beasts, demons, and devils, and evil
men, and by its excessive hardness it overcame the
Devil himself. It cured every kind of sickness and
disease, fortified the mind, and strengthened the
body. The water in which the great K6OH-I-NOR
diamond was dipped when in INDIA was believed
to heal every sickness. As an amulet the diamond
protected a man against plague, and pestilence, and
une: Byil Hye.

EMERALD.—In ancient times the emerald was
believed to cure diseases of the eyes, and later it
was worn as an amulet against fascination and the
Evil Eye, and epilepsy. The sight of an emerald
struck such terror into the viper and cobra that
their eyes leaped out of their heads.

EYE-STONE.—A name given to quartz and the
eye-agate.

FELDSPAR.—A hard greenstone which was much
used in Ecypr for amulets of various kinds. The
natives of Kordofan attach a piece of it to their
necks to preserve them from sunstroke, headaches,
and bleeding of the nose during sleep.

GAGGITIS, so called because it was first found at
CAGGryin  LypiA: the name first appears in
NIKANDER, Theriaca, v. 37. See JET, GALAKTITE.
See MILK-STONE.

GARNET.—An amulet of garnet protected a man
from evil and terrifying dreams, and when worn


314 AMULELTS AND SUPERSTITIONS


on the body prevented skin diseases. When danger
approached it lost its brilliance and became dull.
The ITALians call it fretra della vedovanza, “ the
stone of widowhood,’ because widows wear neck-
laces made of garnet beads, and hairpins ornamented
with garnets. The garnet assures to its wearer love
and faithfulness, and freedom from wounds.

HAEMATITE, or BLOODSTONE.—The_ blood-red
powder scraped off this stone was used freely as a
medicine by the ancients, and was believed to stop
bleedings of every kind, whether external or internal.
It cleared blood-shot eyes, and dried up rheum in
the eyes, and provided a cure for snake-bite, and
stopped bleedings in the lungs, and uterus, and
gave relief to sufferers from urinary troubles. The
Greeks believed that the stone had fallen from
heaven. Many modern peoples of EUROPE wear
bezels of bloodstone in their rings, and hold the
same views as the ancients as to its curative powers ;
in parts of the Sadan bloodstone amulets are sup-
posed to protect their wearers from sunstroke and
headache, and many of the Mediterranean peoples
wear it as a protection against the Evil Eye. The
name of BLOODSTONE is also applied to red coral,
red agate, red marble, red jasper, carnelian, and
HELIOTROPE.

HyAcIntTH.—Amulets made of this were worn
on the neck, and bezels in rings assisted women in
childbirth, drove away from men evil spirits and
bad dreams, protected them against fascination and
lightning, strengthened the members, fortified the
heart, restored the appetite, suppressed flatulence,
produced sleep, and banished grief and melancholy
from the mind.


STONES AND THEIR QUALITIES 315


IRON PyRITES.—Sir HENRY YULE found that the
sailors on the [RAWADDy river in Burmah wore this
substance as an amulet against crocodiles.

JADE, also known as NEPHRITE, AXE-STONE,
KIDNEY-STONE and GREEN JASPER.—Amulets made
of this hard and very beautiful stone assisted
women in childbirth, and were regarded as ren-
dering unfailing help to those who were suffering
from intestinal troubles. Many powers were attri-
buted to this stone. Green jade was a bringer of
rain, and drove away wild and evil beasts and
spirits. It cured dropsy, abolished thirst, made a
man victorious in battle, protected from lhghtning,
and relieved palpitation of the heart. The use of
jade as an amulet in WESTERN AsIA dates from
the IVth millennium sB.c., and is very common
among the TurKs, ARABS, and ARMENIANS at the
present day. In CHINA, jade is worn on the neck and
breast, and the business man when carrying out a
weighty transaction holds his amulet in his hand
and seeks counsel from it. Nephrite is found in
abundance in TEwAHI PUNAMU in NEW ZEALAND,
and on the west coast it is called ““ Punamu Stone.”
The Maoris wear figures of their ancestral gods in
Nephrite, suspended from their necks. The smooth,
S0it»vatiety of \jade,-er Nephrite, is known as
JADEITE.

JASPIS, or JASPER, 7.e. the green variety of it
is almost indistinguishable from Nephrite ; when
there are flecks of red in it, as we see in Gnostic
gems, it is called HELIOTROPE, or Bloodstone. The
red variety is often found in amulets. It was sup-
posed to possess many magical qualities, and when
powdered it was used in medicine, and we find it


316 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


as an ingredient in the preparations made up for
women. Like Nephrite, both the red and the jaspis
were employed against fascination and the Evil
Eye, and they were supposed to increase the milk
in women who were suckling children, to drive away
night devils, and to help pregnant women. The
Egyptians associated red jaspis with the blood of
Isis (see page 137), and throughout the Middle Ages
it was always used to staunch the bleeding of the
nose and of wounds in general, and in cases of ©
excessive menstruation.

JET (GAGGITIS).—Many ancient writers attribute
numerous powers to this stone. Burnt in the pow-
dered form it drove away snakes and reptiles ; and
healed sufferers from epilepsy, toothache, headache,
and glandular swellings in the neck; and helped
women in labour (if they held a piece of it in their
hands); and nullified spells and charms; and
alleviated pains in the stomach and assisted the
dropsical. In ancient times it was held in high
esteem in the BriTiIsH ISLES, where it was believed
to protect people from thunderstorms, devils, poison,
demoniacal possession, internal disease caused by
devils, witchcraft, failure in bodily strength and
snake bite. The Irish housewife burnt jet during
her husband’s absence to ensure his safety. In
ITALY a jet beetle was a protection against the Evil
Eye, and the amulet MANO CORNUTA was, and still
is, often made of jet. The Sardinian amulet PINNA-
DELLU is also made of jet, which because of its
black colour is supposed to be baleful for the Evil
Eye. The HEART of jet inscribed with a Latin
Cross, and a Cross of jet were two amulets which
were held in high esteem among Christians a century


STONES AND THEIR QUALITIES 317


or two ago. The little disks of jet which have been
found in Inp1IA and Eeypt also probably served as
amulets against the Evil Eye.

Lapis Lazuyi.—Ihis beautiful stone was highly
prized by the earliest inhabitants of INp1IA, PERsIA,
(IRAN), and MrEsopoTAmiéA, and kings and queens
and high officials in the last-named country had
their cylinder-seals, or seal cylinders made of it.
Many very fine examples were discovered by Mr.
WOOLLEY at UR of the Chaldees, and some of them
are to be seen in the British Museum. Memorial
tablets and other objects were made of lapis lazuli ;
see Brit. Mus., No. g1013 (tablet of LUGAL-TARSI),
No. 91452 (mace-head), No. 174 (pupil of an eye;
see the Guide, p. 238). The Egyptians distinguished
two kinds of lapis lazuli, the real and the artificial,
which was a sort of paste made from the powder of
the stone. The real lapis lazuli was used for making
scarabs and figures of gods, and beads were made of
the blue paste. The SUMERIANS believed that the
wearer of a lapis lazuli amulet carried with him
the veritable presence of a god, and a text says “ his
god will rejoice him ”’ (Mr. Gadd’s translation). In
a powdered form it was administered to patients
suffering from gall-stones, melancholy, sleeplessness,

and fever. The lapis STAMATOPETRA amulet, 1.e.
_ “ Stop-stone,”’ in use in MACEDONIA at the present
time is supposed to prevent miscarriage and abor-
tion, and to ward off calamities of every kind.

MAGNETITE.—Primitive man firmly believed that
the magnetic power in this stone was caused by
some living being. It possessed the strength of
haematite, and dispelled melancholy, and relieved
pains in the hands and feet, and assisted women in


318 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


labour, and (when attached to the neck) improved
the memory, and was a protection against fascina-
tion. The MEXICANS carry it in their belts so that
it may give them success in their undertakings, and
according to SELIGMANN prostitutes prize it highly.
The stone is regarded as a living thing, and needs
food and drink. It is placed in water on Friday
so that it may drink, and it is then laid in the sun
and given iron filings to eat. If a man pollutes it
he dies. Ifaman rubs a magnetite knife it becomes
poisonous, and he who is wounded by it will assuredly
die. As the devil lives in it a man must not carry
it when he goes to Mass, and as it attracts lightning
it must not be carried during a storm. It heals the
body when laid on a wound, but it will not cure
sores in the head during rainy weather. Dr. Camp-
bell Thompson has shown that the Assyrians called
Magnetite shadanu sabitu, 1.e. the ‘ haematite
which attracts, grasps.’’ Before sexual intercourse
the man mixed the magnetite with oil and rubbed
himself with the mixture. The woman rubbed herself
with parzillt, 1.e. iron powder to increase her power
of attraction for) the man: Séeey MAN) “Jangare
RO2ZS ae

MALACHITE.—Amulets made of this stone are
common both in the East and the West, and when
attached to the necks of children, whether in the
cradle or out of it, the stone protects them from the.
Evil Eye, and eases their pain when cutting their
teeth. In some parts of EUROPE people believe that
if a piece of malachite be tied over the umbilicus of
a woman in labour it will facilitate the birth of her
child. In ITALy, under the name of fpretra del
pavone, it is supposed to cure diseases of the eyes.


SLONES AND THEIR: QUALITIES 319


MARBLE.—Amulets made of a kind of limestone
like zoned alabaster are, in INDIA, believed to pro-
tect the wearer against the Evil Eye.

MELITITE.—Ball-shaped amulets made of this
stone are tied to the garments of children to ward
off infantile diseases.

MILK-STONE (GALAKTITE).—According to some
ancient writers the milk-stone obtained its name
because milk flowed from it. Others believed that
when taken in the form of a powder mixed with
honey it assisted the secretions and flow of milk
in women. If the stone was dipped in sea water
and rubbed on the backs of sheep it produced abund-
ance of milkin the ewes. Asan amulet it protected
children from the Evil Eye, and women wore it
when suckling their babes; it relieved toothache,
and protected the wearer against witchcraft. Light-
coloured agate is used as a milk-stone in ITALY. And
as the people associate the name of the stone with
that of AGATHA, the martyr, whose breasts were
cut off, it 1s supposed to possess extra protective
and beneficent powers; for this saint is regarded as
the patron of all mothers who are giving suck, and
to assist in regularizing all the functions in the bodtes
of women. In SyRIA and PALESTINE, both Christian
and Muslim mothers, when they fear a shortage of
milk, dissolve little cakes made of earth taken from
the “ Milk Grotto’’ near BETHLEHEM, and bearing
the seal of the Holy Sepulchre, in water and drink
the mixture, believing that it will increase the
secretion of milk in the breasts. They do this
because of their faith in an ancient legend concerning
the Virgin Mary. According to this, on the night
of their flight to Egypt, JosEpH and Mary and the


320 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


CHILD took refuge in the cave, which is now called
the ‘‘ Milk Grotto,’’ and there she suckled our Lord.
As she was doing this a drop of her milk fell on the
ground, and from that night to the present time the
dust from the Grotto has been used as a sure means
of increasing the secretion of milk in women and
regulating the supply of the same. Beads made from
the dust and worn on the neck have the same effect.

MoonstTonE.—Amulets made of this stone pro-
tected men against epilepsy, and when hung upon
fruit trees produced abundant crops of fruit. It is
generally regarded in the East as a “ lucky ”’ stone,
and like moss agate it assisted all vegetation.

NEPHRITE. See JADE.

ONyx.—Opinion is divided as to the influence of
this stone. The onyx is generally declared to be
an unlucky stone, and many people, in the East as
well as in the West, look upon it with disfavour.
Those who hold this view say that it incites to strife,
and causes contention between friends, and gives
the wearer broken sleep and terrifying dreams, and
causes pregnant women to bring forth their children
prematurely. On the other hand, many INDIANS
and PERSIANS wear it as an amulet to protect them
against the Evil Eye. Those who give the stone a
good name say that an onyx stone placed near or
on a woman in labour reduces the pains of child-
birth, and conduces delivery.

OpaL.—Ancient traditions Seif inves to this re-
markable stone a two-fold quality, that is to say, it
possesses the baleful influence of the Evil Eye, and
also the power to relieve the pains of those who are
suffering from diseases of the eye. And some say
that as an amulet it makes the wearer immune from


SLONES AND - THEIR QUALITIES 32]


every disease of the eye, and that it increases the
powers of the eyes and the mind. As the brilliant
colours of the ruby, and carbuncle, and garnet, and
emerald and amethyst are seen in its depths, ad-
mirers of the stone say that the opal possesses all
the prophylactic and therapeutic powers of these
stones. The so-called BLAcK OPAL is highly prized,
and every friend who has possessed one has assured
me that it was the “ luck stone ”’ of his or her life.

PeRIDOT, PERIDOTE, PERIDOTO,—A word of un-
known origin, but probably a corruption of some
oriental name for OLIvINE. In colour it closely
resembles CHRYSOLITE, but its yellowish-green colour
is much deeper than that of chrysolite. It was
much prized by the ancients, and in modern times
by the French jewellers, who probably obtained it
inom EHGypr. Ancient writers called the stone
TOPAZ, and it is now known that it comes from the
Jazirat Zabigat in the Red Sea, which some have
identified with the Topaz Island of Greek writers.
The peridot is a comparatively rare stone, and
many of those found’ in shops have been taken
from old rings and crosses. One of the finest known
is to be seen in the shrine of the Three Kings CASPAR,
MELCHIOR and BALTHAZAR in Cologne Cathedral.
As an amulet the peridot is said to possess all the
virtues of the topaz. Worn on the left arm it
protects the wearer against the Evil Eye and because
of its yellowish-green colour it was regarded as a
palliative for diseases of the liver and dropsy, and
it was said to free the mind from envious thoughts.

PUMICE STONE is used as a birth amulet, and is
carried by women who are anxious to secure easy
labour.

Xx


322 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


KktuBy.—As an amulet it was believed to protect
a man from witchcraft of all kinds, plague, pestilence
and famine. The water in which a ruby had been
washed was administered as a stomachic, and ruby-
powder was one ingredient in medicines that were
intended to check a flux of blood.

SALT (Rock SALT).—Strictly speaking salt should
not be included among precious, and semi-precious,
stones, but on account of its colour and its pre-
servative qualities many people have regarded it, if
not as a holy, as a sacred substance. Its operations
were regarded as both prophylactic and therapeutic.
Since salt was acceptable to the gods as an offering,
it was held in detestation. by the spirits of evil,
though from the point of view of its destructive
effects on vegetation, it aided them in their wicked
deeds. Salt warded off the Evil Eye from a man,
and its efficacy was greatly increased if it were
heated and sprinkled on human beings and cattle,
and if it was mixed with pitch. In the Egyptian
Aphrodite mysteries salt is associated with a phallus,
which was also a warder-off of evil. Throughout
Europe salt was, and probably still is, regarded as a
protection against evil spirits and witchcraft, and
animals and the farms they lived on were sprinkled
with it, no man doubting its efficacy. In many
places it is still believed that it is unlucky to spill
salt, and the spiller at once takes care to cast a little
over his left shoulder. How old this superstition is
cannot be said, but it probably dates in the West
from the time of the imposition of a salt tax in
England, France, and other countries. Why the
‘spiller of salt must cast a little over his left shoulder
is obvious. The evil spirits congregated on the


SPONES AND THEIK ‘QUALITIES 323


left side of a man, and the salt drove them away and
so averted the evil which they are ever ready to
dotoman. The Kabbalah regards the Hebrew word
for salt, MLH, as a sacred word, for the numerical
values of its letters 40 + 30 + 8 = 78 is the same
as the numerical values of the letters in the great
name of God, YHWH, 2.e. 10 +5+6++5 = 26
multiplied by 3. Seligmann has shown by the number
of examples which he has collected in. his book that
among all the peoples of the world, both ancient
and modern, salt has played a prominent part in
all the rites and ceremonies connected with birth,
circumcision, initiation, marriage, death and private
and public worship. And it has always been believed
that it protects both the living and the dead. When
Muhammad the Prophet advised ‘Ali “‘ to begin with
the salt, and end with the salt, for in it lies the means
of healing seventy diseases,’ he only described
briefly the experience of all the savage and civilized
peoples of the world of whom we have any knowledge.
We may note in passing that in Abyssinia salt has
very special importance, for slabs of rock-salt at
one time formed the currency of the greater part of
the country. The Abyssinians call the slab of salt
which takes the place of a coin ’AMOLE. It is from
10 to 12 inches in length, and in width and thickness
from 14 to 24 inches ; its weight is about 17 ounces.

SAPPHIRE.—To what stone this name was given
by ancient writers is not certain, for some of them
seem to, have confounded it with lapis lazuli, the
turquoise, and the HyacintH. In INDIA and ARABIA
it is worn as a health amulet, and as a protection
against the Evil Eye, and plague and pestilence.


The healthier the body the least chance have the evil
ae


324 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


spirits to doit harm. The amulet also conduced to
equability of minds.

SARD.—This stone, often confounded with car-
nelian, was supposed to help women in labour and
assist an easy delivery.

SARDONYX.—This stone was regarded as a pro-
tection against witchcraft, and removed rheum from
the eyes, and prevented premature childbirth.

SELENITE (MOONSTONE).—Was believed to assist
the growth of .trees and plants in orchards and
gardens, and to protect a man from wandering of the
mind, insanity and epilepsy.

ScHIsT.—This. stone was much used in making
amulets by the EGYPTIAN and was supposed to
possess magical properties similar to those of
haematite. 7

SERPENTINE.—This stone owes its name to its
similarity to the green, speckled skin of the serpent,
and amulets made of it were worn against the bites
of serpents, and the stings of noxious reptiles
generally, and poisons. It was believed that if a
poisoned drink was given to a man in a vessel made
of serpentine, the outside of the vessel would burst
into a sweat. On the other hand a serpentine vessel
increased the effect of medicines drunk from it. It
regulated the supply of milk in nursing mothers.

STALAGMITES.—Small stones, or perhaps petrified
earth, which are found on the floors of stalactite
caves; they were carried in lttle bags and were
believed to protect the wearer from witchcraft.

SULPHUR.—Pieces of sulphur have been regarded
as amulets against colds, rheumatism, and pains
in the body caused by witchcraft, and when powdered
and mixed with wine or water it was supposed to


-
a


STONES AND THEIR QUALITIES 325


protect the drinker from every kind of evil influence.
Fumigation of animals, and dwellings, was supposed
to protect them against fascination.

Topaz (CHRYSOLITE). See PERIDOT.

TRAVERTINE, the Italian TRAVERTINO (from the
Latin tzbertinus lapis, “ Tibur stone’’), is a yellowish
deposit formed by springs, which in Italy children
wear as amulets in little bags to protect them from
witchcraft.

TURQUOISE, 7.e. the “‘ Turkish ”’ stone, is highly
prized all over AstA and in many parts of AFRICA,
not only for its beautiful greenish-blue colour, but
for its prophylactic and therapeutic qualities. The
ARABS call it Fayriz and Firtizaj, 1.e. the “ lucky
stone,’ and have no doubt about its benevolent
action. It is mounted in rings, and necklaces and
ear-rings, and head-ornaments, and when carried
as an amulet it protects the wearer from poison,
the bites of reptiles, diseases of the eye, and, accord-
ing to information received in Arabia, it warns him
of the approach of death by changing its colour.
Many Orientals carry it to ward off the Evil Eye.
In the Stidan the water in which it has been dipped
or washed is administered as a palliative to those
Mio suiter from retention-of the urine. The
Buddhists associate it with the Buddha, because
of the legend in which a turquoise stone enabled
him to destroy a foul monster.


CHAPTER AT,


THE IMPORTANCE OF COLOUR, SHAPE, AND FORM IN
AMULETS:


Now the prophylactic and therapeutic qualities
which men have attributed to amulets are not the
only things which they have looked for in amulets,
for certain shapes, forms, and colours have been
considered almost of equal importance. Thus a
certain VIOLET stone is in some countries hung on
the necks of children, and it is supposed not only
to protect them from sicknesses, but to make them
docile and obedient to their parents. It is formed
of the crystallized tears which EvrE shed when she
was separated from ADAM. GREEN stones, ¢.g.
nephrite, the emerald, green jade, Amazon stones,
etc., are connected with luxuriant vegetation and the
rain that causes it, and fertility in man and beast,
and virility and strength generally. YELLOW stones
assisted men who suffered from jaundice and other
diseases of the liver. RED stones were used to
stop blood fluxes and the bleeding of wounds,
whether caused by the surgeon or by the enemy’s
weapons, and to protect their wearers from fire and
lightning. Brown stones warded off sicknesses.
BLack stones were protections against the Evil
Eye. WHITE stones averted the Evil Eye and
carried with them the protection of heaven, whence
they were said to come. Stones that sparkled and
rock crystal defeated every kind of witchcraft, and
those which were marked either by Nature or art


IMPORTANCE OF COLOUR, SHAPE, AND FORM 327


with bands of a different colour, circles, etc., were
greatly esteemed. Water-worn stones, and stones
with holes or cavities in them made effective amulets,
and circular, semicircular, and triangular stones
have been almost universally chosen as means of
protection against evil spirits.

It seems that in some countries amulets made of
precious stones were held to be more effective than
those which were made of commoner materials,
because it was thought that the evil spirits were
pleased with the sight of rare and beautiful gems,
and that their attacks were in consequence less
malicious and less deadly. Groups of nine and five
precious stones are still regarded in INDIA as pro-
tections against the Evil Eye, and the twelve stones
in the BREAST-PLATE OF AARON were, no doubt,
intended to avert the attacks of the evil spirits
from the high priest. According to Exod. xxviii.
17-20, the stones were arranged in four rows, thus :


ODHEM PITDHAH :
Es : BEREKETH
carnelian or topaz or
emerald
sard peridot
Zz NOPHEK SAPPIR YAHALOM
ruby or sapphire or jasper or
carbuncle lapis lazuli onyx
oe LESHEM SHEBHO AHLAMAH
jacinth agate amethyst
a: Seen SHOHAM YASHPAH
ae chrysolite jasper
yellow jasper


ial


328 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


On each stone was engraved the name of one of
the tribes of Israel, which, added to the natural
powers of the stones, turned the breast-plate into
a most powerful amulet.

The Hebrew héshen ywn, a word of unknown


meaning, but rendered ‘“ breast-plate ’’ above, is the ©
name given in the Bible to the SACRED RECEPTACLE
which was attached to the ephdédh of the high
priest Aaron, and was known as the HOSHEN
MISHPAT, 1.€. “‘ breast-piece of [divine] decision ”’
or ‘‘ breast-piece of judgment.’’ Aaron wore it on
his breast when he brought the tribes before God
during his ministration in the Holy of Holies. It
was made of linen, and was in size one span square,
and it was fastened to the shoulders of the ephdédh
by gold chains passing through gold rings, and to
the lower part of the ephédh just above the girdle
by a blue ribbon passing through other gold rings.
Exod, xxviii. 22-29. But it seems from Judges
vu. 26f that the ephddh was a sort of idol or image,
for Gideon made an ‘‘ephédh”’ of the. gold rings
taken from the Ishmaelites and Midianites and that
he set it up in Ophrah. The 1,700 shekels of gold
of which it was made represent nearly £3,800 of our
money. Whatever this kind of ephédh may have
been it certainly formed some part of the apparatus
used at that time. in: divination.’ “In” the wimem
‘‘ breast-piece ’’ which Aaron wore the two objects
which were used in divining the will of God were
placed (Exod. xxviii. 30); these objects were
called the “’Urim and the Tummim ”’ DVI)


DIN or, as some read the “UORim and tee


TAmim.” What these objects were like is not


IMPORTANCE OF COLOUR, SHAPE, AND FORM 329


known, for, curiously enough, the Bible does not
give any directions for making them ; and the exact
meaning of their names are unknown. As they
were to be kept in the breast-piece, which was only a
span square, they must have been small in size, and
we can only assume that they were small plaques
or tablets made of stone, wood, bone or ivory. It
is very probable that they were two small natural
stones, precious or semi-precious, and perhaps of
different colours. There is no doubt that like the
SORTES of the Latin peoples, they were used in
drawing or casting lots. Whether the ’Urim and
Tummim (not Thummim) were inscribed cannot be
said. As these lots were only two in number only
one question could be put at a time, and the answer
was Yes or No. Or it might be arranged before-
hand what ’Urim was to indicate and what Tummim,
as we see from I Sam. chap. xiv., where Saul asked
God to indicate the guilt of himself or Jonathan by
‘Urim and that of the people by Tummim. It is
clear that the lot ’Urim must have had a form or
shape or colour by which it was distinguished from
Tummim, or perhaps one was labelled ’Urim and
the other Tummim. The custody of ’Urim and
Tummim was in the hands of the high priest, whose
duty it was to manipulate the lots for those who
enquired of them, and to regularize this form of
divination. There is no doubt that the custom
of casting lots with the view of discovering the
designs of God is very ancient, and that the lots
‘Urim and Tummim were used in connection
with some kind of idol, or the ephddh figure, long
before the ephédh became a linen garment for the
high priest, with a front inlaid with precious stones.


330 AMULETS AND, SUPERSTITIONS


The two tablets of shéham stone, each of which
was engraved with the names of six of the tribes of
Israel, which were to be fastened to the shoulders
of the ephédh (Exod. xxviii. 9), were also powerful
amulets. And we may note that the “ five smooth
stones’? which Davin took out of the brook before
he went to fight Goliath (1 Sam. xvil. 40) were
believed by him to possess magical power. The
number five is significant.


(Che ae Sa eB


THE SWASTIKA OR SVASTIKA.


The amuletic sign Ln, which is known as


9d 66


‘“ swastika, gammadion,’ “fylfot’’ and “ croix-
pattée,”’ 1s one of the oldest known, and was prob-
ably invented by the primitive Aryans. The
native Indian name of the sign is, of course, ‘‘ swas-
tika,’’ which the philologists tell us means something
Pike HOntipate.. Or, lucky. * it 1s derived. from
sy, well,” and asi, “ being, .—[he name “ gam-
madion,’ 7.e. the cross with Gammas, was given
to it because the short lines at right angles to the
arms make each resemble Gamma, a letter of the
Greek alphabet. Some of the early Christian mystics
saw in the two lines at right angles a symbol of
Christ as the corner-stone, and the architects and
designers of the Middle Ages used the Gamma freely
in their reliefs and patterns. Thus four of them
grouped with their angles towards each other made
afk

allie:

Many writers consider that the fylfot and the
swastika are one and the same sign, but some
doubt it. The Oxford Dictionary says that the
fylfot is an ‘‘equal-armed cross of which each
arm is continued rectangularly, all clockwise
or all counter clockwise,’ and adds “ name
based on ancient direction for design of painted


the form of the Greek cross


332 AMULETS AND OSURERSIDPIONS


window in which f may mean either the particu-
lar pattern or something to fill the foot of the
window.” Those who regard the gammadion and
the swastika as one and the same sign have con-


founded the simple cross --. which was used in


the West by pagans long before the coming of
Christ, with the swastika, which is a purely Aryan
symbol and, of course, of pagan origin. As the
swastika is found on monuments in the catacombs
(HULME, Symbolism, p. 219) it is clear that the
Christians of the early centuries of our era used it
sometimes: as’ the ,equivalent. of the: cttoss syO@mmn
may be that they knew the meaning and significance
of the swastika, and wished to indicate by its use
that they thought the dead were ‘‘ fortunate.”

The home of the swastika seems to be undoubtedly
India, but Mr. Greg believed that both it and the
fyHot has a very ancient common origin and mean-
ing. But what is the meaning? Max Miiller
thought that the swastika, with short lines pro-


jecting to the right ne ,  representedsthemvet.


nalsun, and that the sauvastika, with short arms pro-


jecting to the left L. was the symbol of the


autumnal sun.’’ Another view is that the swastika
represented Ganesa and the male principle, and the
sauvastika the goddess Kali and the female principle.
Another authority says that the common sign for


forked lightning was Si and says that if this


sign be crossed by another of the same shape the


AAS aR oe


THE SWASTIKA OR SVASTIKA *" 333


result will be the swastika | : . Yet another


authority thinks that the swastika in its simplest
form represents the two pieces of wood which were
used in making fire, 7.e. fire-sticks. The generally
accepted view now seems to be that the swastika
is a solar emblem, and that the short lines at right
angles to the arms indicate gyratory or wheeling
motion. :

It has been suggested that the four arms repre-
ecitethe tour quarters of the heavens or éarth,
and also that the whole sign is an emblem of INDRA,
or DYAUS, or ZEUS, or JUPITER, or THOR. In his
article on the sign in Archaeologia (vol. xlvin. Lon-
don, 1885, p. 293 f.) GREG sums up by saying that


is “an Aryan special emblem of the Supreme


God.”’ He is probably correct, but it is impossible
to be certain, for we shall never know exactly what
idea was connected with the sign in the minds of the
Asiatics who first used it, some thousands of years
ago. The JAINSs, a Buddhist sect, adopted it as a
symbol of the Buddha, and introduced it into
China about 200 B.C.

The Chinese name for the swastika is LEI WEN, 1.€.
“thunder-scroll,’’ a fact which shows that the sign was
associated with phenomena of thesky. The circle in
which the swastika is sometimes seen suggest that the
smaller lines of the sign developed into the circle, but
sometimes the circle is shown independently, thus


d


and on one of the coins from Indian


334 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Scythia figured by Greg we have So
pottery the swastika is often shown with four dots


Sometimes the four short lines are


\
made into circles, thus DG . On a terra-cotta


ball found by Schliemann at Troy a row of swas-
tikas arranged between two rows of dots runs round
the middle thus :—


020; 0'00)' 0-0 020, 080


ae


© O10 On© 50; On GO One.


And on coins of Mesembria in Thrace the swastika
follows an abbreviation of the name of the place,


thus MEX oe (PERCY GARDNER, in Numismatic


Chronicle, Part 1, 1880). On another coin figured
by Greg (plates xix and xx) we have the signs


—S


in a group. This shows that the swastika and the
cross were entirely different signs; the second sign


represents the Egyptian sign for “‘ life,’’ a


Much light has been thrown upon the use and
meaning of the swastika in CHINA and JAPAN by


THE SWASTIKA OR SVASTIKA 335


T. WiLson, who in his book, The Swastika (Wash-
ington, 1896), seems to have collected all the available
information about the sign. He says that it is
cut upon the pedestals of statues of the Buddha,
and that it is found also on the breasts of figures of
the Bodhisattvas, 1.e. those who will one day
become Buddhas. As a character among the
Chinese hieroglyphs it means “ prosperity, good
Micke wealth and “long lie.” The Empress
Wu (A.D. 684-704) ordered that it should be used
as a sign for the sun, and so revived the meaning
which it had in India several centuries before Christ,
M. GOBLET D’ALVIELLA asks the question if the
gammate cross can be assigned to a single birthplace,
and says that its two most ancient known habitats
are Hissarlik and the terramares of North Italy. He
thinks it possible that both of these districts bor-
rowed it from the valley of the Danube during the
Bronze Age, and that it was regarded both as a solar
symbol and a sign of life or blessing ; it may have
spread both into Western Europe and into India,
China, and Japan by way of the Caucasus. But it
seems to the present writer, judging from the illus-
trations published by de Mortillet, that it is the
cross which is found on the pottery, etc., from the
terramares and not the swastika.


tke Paw KGS


(bebe he VITA


THE SCROSS,


One of the oldest amuletic signs in the world,
perhaps even the oldest, is the crass, that is to say
the figure which is made by two straight lines which


bisect each other at right angles a This is


what is commonly understood by the word “ cross,”’
and not the single wooden pillar or pole to which
malefactors condemned to death were tied, and
which is spoken of by some writers as the crux
simplex. It was at one time believed by many
writers on ecclesiastical symbols, relics, etc., that
the cross was entirely of Christian origin, but such
is not the case, for it was in use among the pagan
peoples of Western Asia and Europe many centuries
before the death of Christ. That the pagan cross
symbolized something quite different from that
which the Christian cross commemorated hardly
needs to be said. But judging by what we think we
know of the symbolism of the pagan cross we are
justified in regarding it as a forerunner of the
Christian cross. On the other hand, the pagan
cross may have been used as a simple ornament,
and it may have symbolized nothing, or modern
writers in discussing it may have been influenced
by their Christian beliefs and traditions, and attri-
buted to it a meaning and symbolism which it never
possessed.


PAE CROSS 337


The commonest form of the cross used by pre-
Christian peoples is that in which all four arms are
of equal length, and which is known as the Greek
or equilateral cross. One of the oldest known
examples of it is found on an inscribed cylinder-
seal in the British Museum (No. 89128) which was
made during the Kassite period. The Kassite
Dynasty began with Gandash (1746 B.c., and ended
with Ellil-nadin-ahé, who ceased to reign in 1171),
so then the cylinder-seal was made in the second
millennium B.c. Itis reproduced on Plate XI, No. 5.
On the right is a figure of the Sun-god, seated,
holding some object in his right hand ; before him is
a rosette of unknown meaning. In the field above
is an equilateral cross within a line border. The
cuneiform text contains a prayer to the Sun-god,
which has not yet been fully translated. Another
example of the cross within a line border is pub-
lished by DELAPORTE, Cyl. Onentaux, Plate xx,
No. 297. A third example, but without the line


border f- is published in the Catalogue of


fhespr CLERO Collection, I, Plate xxxii, No. 363.
This last cross is cut in the field just before the head
of a winged Centaur who is hunting in the desert, and
behind him is the crescent moon —~. Other forms


of the Kassite cross are and oul :


On a wall-painting from a tomb at Thebes in the


British Museum we see two small figures wearing
-


338 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the equilateral cross on their breasts, and another
example is published by RosELLini (Monuments
Stor, tav. Ixx.). The objects from which these
examples are taken date from the period of the
XIXth’ Dynasty, civca 1250° B.C. Tor themseeond
millennium B.C. also belong the examples which are
described by GABRIEL DE MortiL1et, Le Signe de
i Croix, Paris, 1866, p. 162 f., and are reproduced
ere :


2 © O


500
O05
ae)
| ° 00 8
9000000000
Toe, 9909990000
O Clone
\e) re)
re)
eo) O
0806


On some Assyrian sculptures we find what may
be described as a solar or radiated cross, which is
nothing more than the disk of the sun from which
proceed four arms and four rays of light; the
arms, according to some, represent the four quarters
of heaven over which the god Anu presided. Another
form of the Cross is seen on the stele of the Assyrian
king. SHamsHI-Apap VI (824-810 B.c.), in the


THE CROSS 339


British Museum, viz., ae ; this is commonly


known as the Maltese or Coptic or rayed cross.
The equilateral cross is found on many of the smaller
objects dug up by SCHLIEMANN at Troy, and on
vases and bronze weapons found in SCANDINAVIA,
_GERMANY, AUSTRIA, SWITZERLAND, FRANCE and
ENGLAND (see MORTILLET, op. cit., p. 158, and A. W.
FRANKS, Horae ferales, Plate xxx, fig. 49). That it
at first symbolized the heavens, or some power in
them, seems to be certain, and later the cross itself
may have been regarded as the sign of divine pro-
tection and prosperity, riches, and life. We read
that CoLuMBus and his sailors were amazed to find
the cross in America, and they attributed its exist-
ence there to the teaching of the Apostle THomas,
who visited India and worked there as a carpenter.
But the authorities on Peruvian and Mexican
archaeology say that these crosses are “ wind
crosses,’ and that originally they represented the
four main directions whence came the winds and
rains, and that at a later period they were assumed
to possess a solar or stellar character.


The Tau Cross sige or Crux Commissa, which is
found in the Catacombs of Rome and on monuments
elsewhere of the Christian period, is sometimes
called the ‘‘ anticipatory cross,” or “‘ type cross,”
the cross of the Old Testament.1 Writers on the
Christian Cross say that it was the symbol of eternal
life with the ancient Egyptians, but it never was.
The well-known symbol and hieroglyphic for “ life,”


1 The Tau cross is the special emblem of St. Anthony.
ie


340 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


eternal or otherwise, was + Anku, which has nothing


to de *with the Tau. Gross: and “never hadmane
phonetic value of Tau. Wilkinson made the mistake


of thinking that rr was to be read Tau, and even in


the last edition of his great work (iu. p. 364) he calls
the sign Tau, adding “‘ the origin of the tau I cannot
precisely determine.” In saying that the “ early
Christians of Egypt adopteed it in lieu of the cross ”
he states a fact which has been well known to the
Fathers of the Church from the IInd century down-


wards. It is wrong, too, to call the sign ce CYUX


ansata, the “‘ handled cross,’’ for whatever object
the hieroglyph may represent, it was certainly
not a cross or anything like it.


Writers have assumed that 3 represents a Tau
cross with a loop added, just as they have assumed
that J or j NEFER (which is aconventional picture of a


musical instrument) represents a Latin cross with an
oval added to its lower extremity. Asa hieroglyphic


i undoubtedly means “life ’’ and there is no good


reason for doubting that it is a conventional repre-
sentation of one of the principal organs of the human
body used in the process of generation or coition
(see page 134). The Tau cross is said by some to
represent a cross-headed yoke or gibbet and by
others the hammer of THOR; on the other hand
Lipsius believed it to be of Phoenician origin (De
Cruce, 1.7). Asa matter of fact no one knows what
object it represented, or what meaning exactly the
pagans, who invented it and used it, attached to
it. If it be of Egyptian origin the Tau may be


THES CRGSs 341


a form of the hieroglyph T which represents a female


organ of generation, and is used as a determinative,
DigeeDiitime anda therefore) hfe’ In Ezek. ix, 4
we read that the prophet was commanded by God
to go through JERUSALEM and to “ set a mark upon
the foreheads’ of certain men, presumably as a
sign of their exemption from judgment. Now the
Hebrew word which is translated “‘mark’”’ is taw
(hithwitha taw), and some have identified the sign
taw with the Tau cross. TERTULLIAN in commenting
on the passage says of the sign “ipsa enim litera
Graecorum Tau, nostra autem T species crucis ”’
(Adversus Marcian iil. 22). This identification seems
to be fanciful, as also is the view that the mark
made with the blood of the paschal lamb on the
houses of the Israelites before they left Egypt was
ties Lau cross (Exod. xii.7):

We have now to consider the CHRISTIAN CROss.
The New Testament makes it quite certain that
our Lord was not crucified on a single stake (crux
simplex), but on a patibulum or gibbet formed of
two bars of wood, one fastened across the other.
Some have held the view that He was nailed to the
cross whilst it lay on the ground, and that the
cross was then lifted up and set upright. Another
view is that He was made to ascend a ladder, and
was then nailed to the cross. This ladder is repre-
sented in some of the mediaeval pictures of the
Crucifixion, and from the XIIth century onward
the ladder appears on wood carvings and in stained
glass together with the other ‘“ Passion symbols,’
viz., the dice, the seamless robe, the cock, the spear,
the sword, the 30 pieces of silver, the pincers, the
three nails, the hammer, the pillar of scourging,


342 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


scourge, the reed, the sponge, the vessel of vinegar,
and the crown of thorns. Four forms of the cross were
used in the early centuries of our era, viz., the Greek


cross, the four arms being equal in length = Pat lic


Latin cross (crux wmmissa or crux capitata), in which


the lower limb is longer than each of the others ,


the crux decussata, or St. Andrew’s cross XG and


the crux commissa or Tau cross I - At the same
time we find that the so-called monogram of Christ,


M , was in general use among Christians.


The Latin cross was best known and most used
because the cross on which Christ was crucified is
believed to have been of this form; the Latin cross
is also known as the “ Cross of Calvary’ and the
“Passion Cross.’ The cross which is sometimes seen
in the hands of the risen Lord is known as the
“Cross of the Resurrection,’ and a flag or banner
is usually attached to it. Sometimes the cross has
the form of a tree, or of a series of branches of trees;
and some pictures of the Crucifixion suggest that each
of the two thieves suffered on the Tau cross or on
trees:

The cross did not become the supreme emblem
and symbol of Christianity until the 1Vth century,
i.e. until after the “ Finding” of the Cross by the


THE’ CROSS 343


Empress HELENA on May 3, 328. The true cross is
said to have been found during the reign of TIBERIUS,
when ST. JAMES was bishop of Jerusalem, and if
this be so the Empress can only have rediscovered it.
But the Coptic narrative of the Empress’s labours
shows that her excavations were carried out on a
very large scale, and we are driven to conclude that
she found something which had never before been
brought to light. According to this she found
three crosses, but she did not know which of the three
was that on which our Lord had suffered. At length,
either as a result of her own cogitations, or acting
under the advice of the devout priest who was with
her, she had the body of a dead man brought and laid
upon one of the crosses. As contact with that cross
had no effect upon the dead man, she had him placed
on the second cross, and that also produced no effect
on the dead man. Then she had the body removed
and placed on the third cross, and the dead man came
to life immediately. She sent a part of the Cross to
Constantine, and the portion of it which he transmitted
to the Pope is still preserved in Rome ; she reburied
the greater part of the Cross in the church which she
built over the site of GotcoTHa. The Latin cross
is often seen with two cross-pieces thus,

and in this form it is the cross of Lorraine

and of the Knights Hospitallers. And


sometimes, especially among Oriental


Christians, we have three cross-pieces thus.
The upper cross-piece was suggested by the
scroll which was nailed to the cross, and
was inscribed in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.


344 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The original scroll was found by the Empress, together
with the nails, but for some centuries nothing was
heard of it and it was generally believed that it had
been destroyed. It was discovered by accident in
the church of St. Croce at Rome in 1492, and Pope
Alexander IIT published a bull in which its authen-
ticity was certified.


Silver Host-case in the form of a Cross. (Obverse: The Crucifixion.)


The early Christians assigned to the cross in any
form magical powers, and they took pleasure in
making the sign of the cross over themselves on
every occasion possible, both because they received
spiritual help from the act, and because it enabled
them to prove to the onlookers that they were
Christians, and to make themselves known to
each other. It is said that this custom became
common about A.D. 110. The cross was marked


PEA Dio


A group of Crosses in gold, steel and Limoges enamel.


THE’ CROSS 347


upon cattle, and traced on the walls of houses,
and models of the cross are said to have worked
miracles. To all intents and purposes the presence
of the cross carried with it the presence of Christ,
and as in Egypt the Tet pillar was regarded
as Osiris himself, so in Egypt and Palestine and
Europe the cross was considered to be Christ Him-


Silver Host-case in the form of a Cross. (Reverse: The Ascension.)


self, and was actually worshipped as such. Even


the so-called monogram of Christ = XpwoTos,
. P


or xe =the wiitials ot “Iyoovs Xpioros, or ~ |


= chi-r0, cut on wood or stone, or written
or painted on parchment, was believed to carry


348 AMULETS “AND SUPERSTITIONS


with it the almighty power of the Blood of the
Son of God. The custom of wearing amulets of the
cross became common at a very early date, but the
widespread cult of the cross did not begin until
after the Vth century. On this point and on the
history of the cross generally the reader should
consult Gi’ DE MORTILLET, ‘Le Signe "de aecCror,
avant le christianisme, Paris, 1866 ; BRock, MOURANT,
La Croix paienne et chrétienne, Paris, 1881 ; Lipsius,
De Cruce Christi; BLAKE, W. Wiison, The Cross
Ancient and Modern, New York, 1888; ANSAULT,
Le Culte de la croix avant Jésus Christ, Paris, 1889 ;
Hume), F. E., Symbolism in Christian Art, London,
1908.

The group of pectoral crosses figured on Plate XXII
are in my private possession. The cross in the top
right-hand corner is of pure gold, and was made
during the last century in West Africa for a native
who had embraced Christianity. He had been a
believer in Juju practices and a firm believer in the
‘“medicine”’ of the native magician. But though
he became a good Christian he could not cast away
entirely his belief in native astrology, and in order
to unite his old belief with his new one, he had the
Twelve Signs of the Zodiac attached to the Christian
cross which he then regarded as a powerful amulet.
The cross below has the upper and lower bars and was
made in Russia. The cross in the centre is a good
specimen in Limoges enamel. The cross in the left-
hand top corner is a Russian priest’s cross decorated
with Biblical scenes. The cross below it is made of
steel and is beautifully ‘““ Damascened ”’ in gold on
both sides; the legend AEI, also in gold, means
“gor “ever, * “to all eternity.” \-lv was" madegam


Jade CROSS 349


Russia. The silver cross reproduced on pages 344, 347
is really a case in which the wearer carried some
relic or reserved the sacramental bread. The two
halves are joined by a hinge at the top, and the
ring behind shows that this amulet was worn on the
breast. On the one side: we have Christ on the
Cross in relief, and on the other Christ triumphant
ascending into heaven. The emblems of the Four
Evangelists and the other scenes are in low relief.


‘CHAPTER XIX.


THE CRUCIFIX.


The cross, as we have seen, was used in private
devotions by Christians during the Ist century of
our era, and was cut upon the tombs in the IInd
and IIIrd centuries, but it did not become a public
symbol or badge of Christians until Constantine
had it placed on the shields of his soldiers and
removed the Roman eagle from them early in the
TVth century. The CRUCIFIXs was “the naturar
development of the cross, but this development did
not take place until the cross had become a sign of
triumph and glory instead of a stumbling block
and a symbol of ignominy. Representations of
Christ on the Cross are found on crosses, etc., already
in the Vth century, but they did not appear in
churches until the VIIth or VIIIth century. Until
the XIth century the body of Christ on the Cross
was always clothed, and in a drawing reproduced
by HuLME (op. cit., p. 45) He is represented as the
Great High Priest. Afterwards the clothing becomes
less and less, until it becomes a species of loin cloth.
In the same way until the XI Vth century Christ the
Babe was always depicted clothed, but after this
period, as a result of the decadence of Christian art,
He is represented naked, or nearly so. In Hulme’s
drawing the Figure wears a crown of radiatory
bars, and above this, on a title are, Aand Q. Itis
thought that this representation is as old as Charle-
magne. In all the other ancient examples (the


THE CRUCIFIX 351


Crucifix of John VII, the Crucifix of. Charlemagne,
given to Leo III) Christ wears a long tunic. In the
picture of the Crucifixion given in the Syriac Evan-
geliarium in the Medicean Library the two thieves
wear waistcoats (see ASSEMANI, Cat. Bibl. Medic.,
Florence, 1742, tavola xxili.). The NIMBUS, which is
so often found on early scenes of the Crucifixion, is
of pagan origin, and it seems to have been originally
a symbol of power rather than of holiness. It
possibly represented at first the rays of the sun,
and it was assigned not only to God, Whose symbol
was the sun, but to men of might and power like
Moses and Muhammad, and even to Satan! The
nimbus came into general use in the VIth century.
Early nimbi were circular. The square nimbus
was introduced in the [Xth century and the trian-
gular form of it in the XIth. The nimbus with a
cross within it is always assigned to the Deity.


Hk SIGNS OF THE. CROSS.


To what extent amulets of the Cross were worn
by the early Christians cannot be said, but there are
many proofs that they made the Sign of the Cross
over themselves when in trouble or difficulty. Of
this fact the Paradise of PALLADIUS contains many
examples. When Satan, in the form of an Indian,
came to attack St. Anthony the saint made over him-
self the Sign of the Cross, and ceased to tremble, and
the Enemy saw the Sign of the Cross, and straightway
was terrified. Anthony did the same thing when
a demoniacal animal came to him, and as soon as he
adjured the creature in the Name of Christ, it took to
flight and fell down and burst asunder. A certain
monk, when about to eat some food over which oil


352 AMULETS “AND SUPERSTIEIONS


of radishes had been poured, made the Sign of the
Cross over himself to protect himself from any un-
toward effect which the strong, coarse oil might have
upon him, And the monks of ScETE worked
miracles by the Sign of the Cross. A youth whose
face had been turned behind him by Satan was
brought to ABBA POEMEN, and when the saint made
the Sign of the Cross over the young man all dis-
tortion of his features vanished. The Devil hid
in a pot of water, and a certain holy woman suspect-
ing his presence there made the Sign of the Cross
over the water, and Satan fell from the pot in a
flash of fire. JoHN of Lycus made the Sign of the
Cross over some oil and gave it to a blind woman
to smear over her eyes ; she did so three times and
three days later she recovered her sight. Andee
Fathers of the desert said: “ The devilssteamgana
tremble not only by reason of the Crucifixion of
Christ, but even at the Sign of the Cross, whereso-
ever it be made apparent, whether it be depicted
upon a garment, or whether it be made in the air.”
The pagan sorcerers seeing the wonderful effect
produced by the Sign of the Cross promptly adopted
it in their own magical dealings, and with such
success that some of the Christian Fathers com-
plained that even laymen could drive away devils
by uttering the Name of Christ and making the
Sign of the Cross. And what the magician did in
those days the BAGANDA of the SUDAN do in our
own, for the medicine-men of that country when
about to work magic, take a strip of leather, and
having stamped on it the Sign of the Cross, they
sew nine kauri shells to it, and it is ready to produce
“strong magic.”


THE CRUCIFIX 353


TALISMANS, OF THE VIRGIN MARY,


The following is a description of a Talisman of
the Virgin against fire, pestilence, the Evil Eye, and
all other magical influences. The ‘“‘ Mappa’”’ is
reproduced in Villiers, Amulette, Berlin, 1928.

In the centre is a heart on which is laid the Cross
of St. Anthony of Padua, inscribed ALPHA, OMEGA.
On the right is the Virgin’s Cross inscribed with
A Qand the great Name of God YHWH and emblems
of the 72 great names of God, and two crosses TT.
Below is written: “Signum S. Crucis integritas
B.V. Mariae. Custodia sanctorum Angelorum, nec
non suffrageo SS. Trium Regu. Salvatoris nostri in
Cruce sit triumphalis quotidie inter nos et inimicos
nostra Visibilis et invisibilis.”” In the middle of the
Mappa or talisman are a crowned heart and a figure
of Christ on the Cross. Below are C. M. B., the
initials of Caspar, Melchior and Balthasar, the three
kings who presented gifts to the Babe, and figures
of the Virgin and St. Anthony of Padua. On the
left is a cross inscribed with the name M.K.B.I.
(Maccabaeus) in Hebrew letters and the great
Name YHWH (Yahweh or Jehovah). Below is
written :—Ecce Crucem Domini. Fugite partes ad-
Versae. Vicit Leo de-fribu Juda, Radix Dauid.
Alleluia. O >¥4 Christi, adjuua nos. O > Christi
defende nos. O >§ Christi, libera nos, ab omni
Peceato,. a siuletire, et tempestate, et a morte
perpetua.


CHAR TE Rigg


iE Vite ye


Of all the things which have driven man in all
ages to invent and to use magic, the most potent
isthe “Evils ye,” or the” Evil Look? sae Anderae
reason for this is that the various races of men who
have peopled the earth for several thousands of
years were convinced that certain men and women,
certain beasts and reptiles, and even apparently
inanimate objects, possess the power of causing by
a mere glance of the eye or a look, or by a mere
aspect or appearance, injury to their fellow-
creatures, and to their flocks and herds, and to
their crops and orchards, and in fact to any kind
of property whatsoever. This baleful look or glance
of the eye has always been thought to be especially
injurious to children, and to women who were
about to become mothers, for it threatened the
very existence of the human race. The look which
the eye casts upon some person or thing in wonder,
or astonishment, or surprise can be made to produce
an evil effect on that person or thing by means of
words which the owner of the eye may utter at the
the same time. If the words are contemptuous or
disparaging they, operating in connection with the
look, will produce an evil effect on the person or
thing which the eye is looking upon. And the
same bad effect can be produced by the look or .
glance of the eye of the man who, while uttering
words of praise or congratulation, makes a mental


THE: EVIL, BYE 355


reservation whereby he produces the exactly opposite
effect to that which his words seem to wish to make.
Primitive man seems to have understood these
facts quite well, though he was totally unable to
describe the exact connection between the glance
of the eye and the spoken words or the secretly
made mental reservation. Many educated people
in many parts of the world still share this belief
with him, and cannot explain how the eye exercises
its magical power and produces sickness, calamity,
and death. Certain it is that in many parts of the
Fast, if a customer “runs down,” or speaks dis-
paragingly or abusively of an object which a merchant
wishes him to buy, that object is at once removed
lest ill-luck or injury come upon it. And the same
is the case if it be a person or an animal that is
cried down or laughed at ; the person’s friends will
hustle him away, and the owner of the beast will
drag it away with him from the place.
Anthropologists and others have endeavoured to
find out whence the eye obtains its power to inflict
evil on the persons and things which make it to
wonder or surprise it, and some have concluded that
the Evil Eye is produced by the mind itself, or by
some quality or power which it possesses. And
some eminent and most experienced oculists have
told me that the eyes are integral parts of the mind.
Bacon says in his Ninth Essay, “‘ Of Envy there be
none of the affections which have been noted to
fascinate or to bewitch, but love and envy; they
both have vehement wishes, they frame themselves
readily into imaginations and suggestions, and they
come early into the eye, especially upon the presence


of the objects which are the points that conduce to
Z. 2,


356 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


fascination, if any such there be. We see likewise
the Scripture calleth envy an evil eye. Of all other
affections, it is the most important and continual
, +. for itis ever) working upon ‘some omsotiem
It is also the vilest affection and the most depraved ;
for which cause it is the proper attribute of the
Devil, who is called, ‘ The envious man that soweth
tares among the wheat by night’ ”’ (Matt. xili. 25).
In this extract Bacon uses the word fascination
as an equivalent for the Evil Eye ; modern writers,
as ELwortuy observes (Evil Eye, p. 2), render it by
* ‘animal magnetism... -Chesbeliehtinvitssextreme.
must be set down as representing one of the here-
ditary and instinctive convictions of mankind.

We may then accept the view, which is based
on the general experience of mankind, that ENVY
can, and does, impart to the eye some quality which
emanates from it and works evil upon the person
or thing on which it falls. But there is something
else which will produce the same effect as envy,
that is to say JEALOUSY, “ before which who can
stand ? ’’ as the Book of Proverbs (xxvu. 4) testifies,
and the Song of Songs (viii. 6) in the words “ jealousy
is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are Coals’ of
fire [which hath] a.vebement flame’* ~ Envy
jealousy. and the Evil Eye are inseparably con-
nected ; and when joined to words is the origin
of the evil spirits which work sickness, disaster,
ruin, and death in the world. Evil spirits and the
Evil Eye have from time immemorial been regarded
as one and the same, and it is for this reason that
among many peoples, both in the East and the
West, the Evil Eye has been regarded as a being
with a form and a personality. Sometimes it takes


THE EVILZEYE 357


the form of an animal, e.g. a goat or an ass (see
PALLADIUS, Paradise, vol. i. p. 113), or an Indian
(2btd.. vol. 1. p. 11), and in the Life of ANTHONY we
read: ~ Itis very easy for the Enemy to create
apparitions and appearances of such a character
that they shall be deemed real and actual objects ;
and phantoms of this kind caused a phantom earth-
quake, and they rent asunder the four corners of
the house, and entered therein in a body from all
sides. One had the form of a lion, and another had
the appearance of a wolf, and another was like untoa
panther, and all the others were in the forms and simili-
tudes of serpents, and of vipers and of scorpions ”’
(ibtd., vol. 1. p. 14). Frequently the form chosen is
feminine, aS we see from TIAMAT, and ancient
Sumerian personification of evil and Liriru, the
night-hag of the Hebrews. But the Evil Eye is often
depicted in magical writings as an eye, but in no
drawing of it do we see a representation of the “ little
man in the eye’ with which primitive man was well
acquainted. In the Egyptian Liturgy of Funerary
Offerings (ed. Budge, p. 136) the priest says to the
deceased when he presents the ninety-eighth offer-
ing: “ Osiris. Unas, the child which is in the Eye
Pimbioms=e hata been presented unto thee.” The
‘little man in the eye.’ is mentioned in Deut.
Pe eitLO) | Prov vile 2, and the Arabic version
translates rightly insdn al-‘ayn. The “daughter of
the eye”’ (bath ‘ayin) occurs in Ps. xvu. 8, and
is correctly rendered bint al-‘ayin and binta ‘ayin
in Arabic and Ethiopic respectively. Among some
peoples the belief is common that the “little man of
the eye,’’ z.e. the figure seen in the pupil of the eye,
can leave a man and enter another person and do


358 AMULETS AND. SUPERSTITIONS


harm to any person or thing he pleases. Others
again hold the view that the Evil Eye has a dualistic
character, and that it uses one form to perform one
class of evil works, and the other to do things which
have no evil effects. Various conclusions have been
arrived at by those who have studied the why and
the wherefore of the Evil Eye, but in no part of the
world is it doubted that its influence exists and the
belief in it is beyond all doubt primeval and uni-
versal. Moreover, every language, both ancient and
modern, contains a word or expression which ts the
emi dient of 7 Evil vee

The oldest mentions of the Evil Eye are found
in the texts which the Sumerians, Babylonians, and
Assyrians wrote in cuneiform upon clay tablets ;
the Sumerian texts date from the third millennium
béfore Christ, and they. form the base =cijaai cs
Babylonian and Assyrian magical literature. The
Assyrians were, apparently, unable to read easily
the non-Semitic Sumerian originals, and they there-
fore added interlinear translations in their own |
Semitic tongue. The Sumerian words IGI-HUL,
literally “ eye evil,’ are translated by the Assyrian
words 1-1 la-mut-tum (see R. C. THompson, Devils and
Buu Spirits, Tablet V- yol.tip. 173)... Inethissexiaas
is said :-—“‘ The roving Evil Eye hath looked on the
neighbourhood and hath vanished far away, hath
looked on the vicinity and hath vanished far away,
hath looked on the chamber of the land and hath
vanished far away, it hath looked on the wanderer and
like wood cut off for poles it hath bent his neck.”’

Against this Evil Eye the great god Ea went
forth, just as did the archangel Gabriel in the
Christian legend published by Prof. GoLLANcz


THE EVIL EVE 359


(Book of Protection, plate facing p. 18). The Evil
Eye is represented in the form of a human skeleton,
with very long hair standing upright on its head.
The Hebrews were well acquainted with the Evil
Eye and its dire effects, but it is not mentioned in
the Old Testament, although it is clearly referred
PenneoUchepassases eas Deut. oxv. 9,-and Ps. cx. 4.
On the other hand we have: “ Eat not the bread
of him that is evil of eye (ra ‘ayin), neither crave
fiomehis dainty meats’ (Prov. xxi. 6).- Still
more direct allusions to the Evil Eye are found in
the Wisdom of Solomon, “for the bewitching of
naughtiness doth obscure things that are honest ”’
(iv. 12), and in Ecclestasticus xiv. 8, where the Greek
has zovnpos 6 Backawwrv 6>Gahy.o. Our Lord seems to
Poictaorthe Hyvil Pye im Mark vil. 22 and in Matt.
Xx. 15 when He speaks of the é6¢0ahpos wovynpds, and
St. Paul most certainly does when he says to the
Galatians (111. 1): ““O foolish Galatians, who hath
bewitched you?” (rts buas éBacxavev). An inter-
esting account of the views of the later Hebrews
concerning the Evil Eye will be found in the Jewish
Encyclopaedia, vol. v. p. 280 f.

The Arabs have believed in the influence of the
Evil Eye in all periods of their history, and one of
their commonest names for it is the “‘ eye of envy ”
‘ain al-hasad ; curiously enough they sometimes
call it, being afraid of incurring its evil effects,
‘Ain al-Jaméal,”’ z.e. the ‘‘ beautiful eye.” Muham-
mad the Prophet was a firm believer in the Evil Eye,
and Asma’ bint ‘Umais states that when she asked
him if she might use spells on behalf of the family
of Ja‘far he replied: ‘‘ Yes, for if there were any-
thing in the world which would overcome fate it


360 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


would be an evil eye” (HuGuHEs, Dict. of Islam,
p. 112). And Stirah cxii of the Kur’an is often
written on scrolls or cut on agates and carried as a
protection against the Evil Eye. No prudent
caravan leader will set out on a journey unless
every beast has attached to it a blue bead or some
amulet to protect it from the Evil Eye; and usually
every man of the caravan carries an amulet either
secreted in his clothes or turban or attached to his
body.

How far exactly the ancient EGYPTIANS believed
in the influence of the Evil Eye cannot be said at
the present time; to think that they were ignorant
of the belief in it which was current among the nations
round about them is impossible. The original
inhabitants of the Valley of the Nile probably
feared the Evil Eye as much as the Stdani peoples
did, but it seems to the present writer unlikely
that the worshippers of Horus the ilder and Ra
paid much heed to it. The Sun and the Moon were
the eyes of Her Ur, the primeval Sky-god of the
Egyptians, the Sun ruling the day and the Moon the
night. No evil person or thing could resist the
power of the Two Eyes, or exist where it was.
Throughout the Dynastic Period the Two Eyes,
Udjatti <#<—;, were painted or cut upon coffins and
sarcophagi and other articles of funerary equipment
and they were painted on the bows of boats. Besides
this we have the thousands of amulets of the Eye
of the Sun and the Eye of the Moon which are to
be seen in our Museum to prove that from the Vth
dynasty onwards the cult of the Sun-god was pre-
dominant among the upper classes of Egypt. The
use of the Udjat amulet seems to have been universal,


Ee VLC io 361


and this may have been the case because the belief
in the influence of the Evil Eye was also universal,
and because the Egyptian set the influence of the
Eye of the Sun-god against that of the Evil Eye.
The curious fact is, if this be so, why there is so little
mention of the Evil Eye, or what is supposed to be
the Evil Eye, in ancient Egyptian literature. It is


quite clear that ivi-t ban-t ~~ ie lene ‘S= means


the Evil Eye, and it is “raf clear ne tHe text on
the wall of a chamber in the temple of Eprt that
books of spells, which were intended to destroy its
existence, were recited in the temple. Finally the


word sihku Og hoe


eo ime tal
mean fascination, or the influence of the Evil inves


That the Copts, or Christian Egyptians, believed
in the Evil Eye there is no doubt, for there are many
allusions in the texts to those who possess it, and
to those who make use of it; the word actually
used is Boon or Bon, and the professional magician
who works evil by it is referred to in the Coptic
version of Deut. xviil. 10 (see also SPIEGELBERG,
Kopt. Handworterbuch, p. 17).

The Ethiopians or Abyssinians have always held
Mew vil Lye, which they call “‘ AYENAT,” in great
fear, and their amulets are filled with pictures of the
eyes of the Persons of the Trinity, which they expect
to protect them from its influence. According to a
legend our Lord and His disciples when walking
by the sea of TrspEeRIAs saw the figure of an old
woman sitting on a filthy seat. Her appearance was
frightful and terrifying. Her eyes glittered like
gold, and her hands and her feet were like wheels,
and flames of fire sixty-eight cubits long went forth


seems undoubtedly to


362 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


irom her mouth. ‘The disciples’ said’) Whatwrs
this thing, O Lord’’? And our Lord said unto
them: “ This is the eye of earth, evil and accursed.
When its glance falls upon a ship sailing on the sea,
that ship sinks suddenly ; when it pursues a horse,
it casts down that horse and its rider; when it
looks upon a cow that is being milked, it curdles
the milk, which turns into blood; when it looks
upon a woman with her child, it separates them and
destroys them.’’ And the disciples took this eye of
earth, evil and accursed, and burnt her body in the
fire, and scattered the ashes to the winds—east, west,
south and north—so that the memorial of her might be
blotted out from the earth. One form of the legend
says that Christ uttered the two words “‘ Asparapses !
Askoraskis!’’ and that it was they that slew ee
After that the burning of her body was a simple
matter (BUDGE, History of Ethiopia, vol. il. p. 592).

The Greeks believed in the existence of the Evil
Eye and their word for it is BASKANOS (Sackavos)
and the amulet to be used against it is PROBASKANION
(tpoBacKkamov). All the ancient authorities, C. FRoM-
MAUND, N. VALLETTA, POTTER, and others say that
the Latin word fascinatio is derived from Baskanos.
This also is the view of the late Bishop LIGHTFOOT
(Epistle to the Galatians, p. 1331.). Among the
Greek writers who have discussed and attempted
to explain the Evil Eye may be mentioned HELIo-
DoRUS, who flourished early in the IIIrd century
after Christ. and says: ‘‘ When one looks at what
is excellent with an envious eye he fills the surround-
ing atmosphere with a pernicious quality, and
transmits his own envenomed exhalations into what-
ever is nearest to him ”’ (Thea. i. 140).


Den VES EYE 363:


The belief in the Evil Eye has existed in every
country of EUROPE and still exists. In GERMANY it
is called «bel ougen or bédse Blick; in HOLLanp,
booze bik; in POLAND, zte oko; in ITALY, oculi
maligm, mal’ occhto, and jettatura ; in SARDINIA,
ogu malu ; in CORSICA, tmnocchiatura ; in SPAIN,
mal de ojo; in FRANCE, mauvats ceil or mauvais
vegard ; in NORWAY, skjoertunge ; 1n DENMARK, et
ondt oye; in ENGLAND, evil eye; in . IRELAND,
droch-shuil. bad eve, wll eye ; in SCOTLAND, wll Ee.
In SYRIA it was, and still is, called ‘ana bisha ; in
PERSIA, aghasht ; in ARMENIA, paterak; in the
VEDAS, ghoram caksuh ; in HUNGARY, szemverés ;
in CHINA, ok ngan or ok, st, and the belief in tae
Evil Eye is common in SIAM, BuURMAH, TIBET,
KOREA, MALAY, MALACCA, SUMATRA, TAHITI, SAMOA,
GREENLAND, ALASKA, NICARAGUA, MEXICO, BRITISH
GUIANA, BRAZIL, PERU, the lands of the BANTU
peoples, and the BUSHMEN and PyGmIEs, parts of
AUSTRALIA and NEw GUINEA. The facts given in
the last paragraph are derived from Die Zauberkraft
des Auges, Hamburg, 1922, by Dr. SELIGMANN. This
learned authority shows that the peoples who have
no special word for the Evil Eye make use of a number
of words which convey the idea of fascination,and thus
show that they were, and still are, well acquainted
with the baleful operations of the Evil Eye.

In all ages man has believed that certain of his
fellow-creatures possessed the Evil Eye, and as he
made his gods in his own image he attributed to
them, and to supernatural beings of all classes, the
power to work evil upon him and his works by their
looks whenever their envy or jealousy was aroused.
Among all the early races of mankind the view that


364 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


envy and jealousy and the Evil Eye were one and
the same thing. Concerning the Hebrew God YHWH
we read: ‘‘ They provoked him to jealousy with
strange [gods]; with abominations provoked they
him to anger“) (Deut xxx. 165))a, Kings xiv.g2 2
And when David in his pride took a census of his
people YHWH sent a plague which destroyed 70,000
of the 1,300,000 men of Israel and Judah (2 Sam.
chap. xxiv.). In Egyptian we find that the EYE oF
Horus, «which .gave life to: “OsIRisi= Ismiediica
“Slaughterer of the enemies of Horus.’”’ And Plu-
tarch tells us (De Iside, cap. xvii.) that Isis killed
the son of the King of ByBLos by a glance of her
eye. And several of the Forty-two Assessors in
the Hall of Judgment of Osiris had names which
show that they could kill with their eyes and the
fire which came from them, e.g. Ariti-f-em-tes, ““ Eyes
like flint knives,” and Hepti-she, ‘““Embracer of Fire.”
And it has been generally assumed throughout the
world that every kind of evil spirit possesses the
Evil Eve.

Certain passages in the Bible suggest that some
of the men described therein were believed to possess
the Evil Eye. Thus inthe caseiof SAuU were
“and SAUL eyed (‘6yén) David from that day and
forward’ (I Sam. xvii. 9), and it 1s impossible to
think that the king looked upon the young warrior
with kindly feelings. And though BALAAM ex-
claimed : “‘ How goodly are thy texts, O Jacob, and
thy tabernacles, O Israel’’ (Num. xxiv. 5), it is toler-
ably clear that the words did not express his inner
feelings, (Coming down to -our sown timesmlas
SELIGMANN mentions a number of distinguished
men who were credited with the possession of the


tents


EE Vin EYE 365


Evil Eye. The most famous and most feared
“jettatore ’’ in Rome was His Holiness Pope Pius
IX (died 1878). The aged Pope LEo XIII was held
to be a “ jettatore ’’ because of the great number of
the cardinals who died during his pontificate. The
Italians always believed LorpD Byron and the
Kaiser William II to be endowed with the Evil Eye.
And the same view has been held concerning
NAPOLEON III.


CHAPTER XXI.
KABBALAH.


The word Kabbalah is mentioned frequently
in books which describe amulets, charms, and
talismans, but it is important to make it clear to
the reader that among the early Kabbalists the use
of magical stones and spells was unknown. The
word Kabbalah means dradoy7, and denotes TrRa-
DITION (zapadodcs) regarded from the point of view
of RECEPTION, 1.e. Kabbalah is something which
has been handed down and is RECEIVED generally
(C. Taylor, Sayings of the Jewish Fathers, Cam-
bridge, 1877, p. 120). At first Kabbalah was under-
stood to refer to the teaching of the Térah, 7.e. the
Pentateuch, or Five Books of Moses. Later the
other Books of the Bible were joined to these, and
Kabbalah was regarded as the exposition of a great
secret, and mystical and religious system of philo-
sophy, which was supposed to deal with and explain
the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
dealings of God with the human race. The names
of the founders of Kabbalah and the date when they
lived are unknown, but they were certainly mystics,
and they were, in the writer’s opinion, Semites,
probably Hebrews who were, and they still are, great
idealists. The foundations of Kabbalah are very
‘ancient, and they were laid by men who believed that,
by means of the system which they were putting to-
gether, they could bring themselves into a special
relationship with God, and make Him protect them
against every calamity and misfortune which can


KABBALAH 367


come upon man. The Kabbalah of the Middle Ages
represents a mass of beliefs and traditions which the
Hebrews adopted from the Egyptians, Babylonians
and Assyrians, Syrians, Zoroastrians, Gnostics,
Greeks, Arabs, and even European peoples. And,
whilst readily accepting new beliefs and theories
they abandoned nothing.

Dr. Ginsburg’s summary may be quoted as giving
the root of the matter: “‘ The cardinal doctrines
of the Kabbalah are mainly designed to solve the
grand problems about—I. The nature of the Supreme
Ponies (he cosmogony.. Iilz:The creation
of angels and men. IV. [he destiny of man and
the universe. V. To point out the import of the
Revealed Law, and assenting and consenting to
the declarations of the Hebrew Scriptures about the
MNGi ol Gobi xod. «xx. 3; Deut.iv..35,30; vi. 4;
peodieoO)s. is-LNCORPOREITY (Exod. xx: 4; Deut.
ioe ave TOuws ich TERNIZY (Exod. 11. 14;
Wem. "40m, lsciah> xl de xl, 10; xliv. 6;
xivii 12). His ImmMurasimiry (Mal. :ii. 6). His
PeRuBemiON (Dette <xXkti.. 4 7 2 Sam. xxi. 31; Job
evel ero exvill, 31),. His INFINITE GooD-
Me we One mrp bo xxVvenlOs XXXII. 55 C. 5;
cxlvy. 9), the CREATION OF THE WORLD in time
according to God’s free will (Gen. i. 1); the moral
government of the universe and special providences ;
and to the creation of man in the image of God
(Gen. I. 27). The Kabbalah seeks to explain the
transition from the infinite to the finite; the pro-
cedure of multifariousness from an absolute unity,
and of matter from a pure intelligence ; the opera-
tion of pure intelligence upon matter, in spite of
the infinite gulf between them; the relationship of


368 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the Creator to the creature, so as to’be able to exercise
supervision and providence ; how the Bible gives
names and assigns attributes and a form to so
spirited a Being ; how the existence of evil is com-
patible with the infinite goodness of God, and what
is the Divine intention about the creation” (The
Kabbalah, p. 86).

Among the things which the Kabbalists borrowed
from the Gentiles was the use of amulets, charms,
and talismans, although several of their Rabbis
denounced their use, and proclaimed them to be
vain and impotent things. A work lke the present
volume is no place in which to attempt to give a
description of the philosophy and doctrines of the
Kabbalah as a whole, and it will be impossible for
anyone to do this until the original Hebrew texts,
which, as Dr. Gaster says, exist chiefly in manuscript
and are unprinted, have been published with
commentaries by competent Hebrew scholars. The
following paragraphs are only intended to give the
general reader an idea of the way in which the older
Rabbis and their successors employed letters and
numbers as a means of interpretation. This will be
readily understood when the reader remembers that
the Hebrews possessed no numerical signs before the
Christian era, and that they were obliged to use the
letters of their alphabet as numbers. An interesting
account of the permutations and combination of
letters and numbers will be found in GINSBURG, C.,
The Kabbaléh, London, 1865. Those who wish to
study the original Hebrew texts should consult the
S£FER YESfiRA, the text edited with a translation
by M. GrossBErRG, London, 1go2. This is the oldest
of the Kabbalistic books, and is thought to have


KABBALAH | 369


been written about A.D. 600, but it is tolerably
certain that the substance of it was in existence
several centuries earlier. The sections of it which
deal with the permutations of numbers should be
read with the Book of RAzffr. This angel was
believed to have been instructed in Kabbalah by
God Himself. The most interesting and, perhaps,
the most important book of the Kabbalists is the
great collection of commentaries, written in Aramean,
and generally known as SEFER ZOHAR, 1.e. the
“Book of Splendour.”’ To all intents and pur-
poses it is the foundation of Kabbalah from the
XIVth century onwards. Translations of extracts
from it have been given in many books, and a
French translation by PauLy, Le Livre des Shlen-
deurs, appeared at Paris in 1894. For the literary
history of the work see GASTER’S article in HASTINGS’
Encyclopaedia, vol. xii. p. 858.

On the Kabbalah generally see ROSENROTH,
Kabbala Denudata, Sulzbach, 1677; FRANCK, La
Kabbala, Paris, 1889; WaAITE, Doctrine and
Literature of the Kabbalah, London, 1902; and the
important article in the Jewish Encyclopaedia.

The following paragraphs, which deal with the
names of God, the angels and fiends, the planets
and their influences on men and on human affairs,
magical squares, etc., all belong to what is commonly
known as “ practical Kabbalah.’’ The diagram of
the so-called “‘ Kabbalistic Tree,’’ which represents
the arrangement of the Ten Sephiréth or ‘‘ Spheres,”
strictly speaking belongs to “‘ theoretical Kabbalah, ”
but it is so often referred to in books that it 1s
necessary to reproduce it here from Ginsburg’s


work (p. 100). The Spheres are a development of
2A


370 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the Theory of Emanations, which was probably
borrowed partly from the Gnostics and partly from the
Neo-Platonists. The Kabbalists used a great many
kinds of amulets, inscribed and uninscribed, some to
ward off the Evil Eye, others to protect and preserve
them from calamities and give them success in busi-
ness. But to all intents and purposes the Kabbalists
were as superstitious as the Gentiles, whether pagan
or Christian. Some account of their amulets will be
found in the section dealing with Hebrew Amulets.
In the drawing here reproduced (see page 371) we
have a representation of the so-called “‘ Kabbalistic
Tree.” At the top are the words ‘ EN S6puH,” which
mean something like the “ great original, everlasting
First Cause of Causes.’’ Below are the TEN SEPHIROTH
(SPHERES) or EMANATIONS from this Cause, which
are connected by channels and form one complete
whole which is permeated by the might of God.
The Emanations are called :—
I. KETHER, 1.e. the Crown, or Supreme Emana-
tion.
(Da‘aTH), 2.e. the link between Wisdom and
Understanding.

2. CHOCHMAH = Wisdom (theoretical).

BinAu = Understanding (practical).
4. GEDULLAH == Greatness — Love, Mercy, Pity

(Var. Tiesep =) Mercy).


=


5. GEBHURAH = Strength (Var. PAHAD =
Justice): :
6. TIPHERETH = Majesty, Sovereignty, Beauty.
7. NESAKH = Conquest, Victory, Permanence.
8. Hép = Fame, Glory, Spendour.
g. YESOD = Foundation, Base.
10. MALKOTH = Kingship, Kingdom.


KABBALAH 371


7D )R


THE ENDLESS


(ge |
Intelligence
3


The Kabbalistic Tree.


bd
ee
bo


AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


ayD TON
THE EW OLESS


7 oT 520d


G/ gy
YB | AL
4
; i,
WP


) i
Ne
Seat | ess
INTELLICENE,
UO ui, Ce Wi, Sa
Bred nen ‘
OLA /
Za |
iy \ M \
Tor she
os CP ! ‘ 3 ASUST ICE
Sats ere
Sa Hake
ay \ ;
Xt
\a aa
SOUNDS TION
xX >
\
nn 3 “an


DAWES: CG ;


|


~Sy139 09


ANiVvt DOM


Drawing of the Archetypal or Perfect Man of the Kabbalists,


showing the seats of the influences of the Ten Sephiroth
in his body.


KABBALAH 373


The TEN Names of God which correspond with
the Ten Sephiréth are :—1. Ehyeh (Exod. iii. 14).
2. YH (YAH). 3. Jehovah (YHWH) (Isa. xxvi..4).
4) El, the Mighty One. 5. Eloah. 6. Elohim.
7- Jehovah Sabasth. 8. Elohim Sabaoth. 9. EI
Hayy, the Mighty Living One. 10. Adénay, the
Lorp.


) Nd WwW
Hane tK 72 159


on


The Ten Sephir6th arranged in ten concentric circles. (From the edition
of the Book of Yesivah, published at Mantua in 1562.)


The TEN CLAssEs OF ANGELS which correspond
to the Ten Sephiréth are:—r. Hayydth, oor.
2. Ophannim, kwyo.s. 3. Arélim (Isa. xxxiil. 7).
4. Hashmalim (Ezek. i. 4). 5. Seraphim (Isa. vi. 6).
6. Shinanim. 7. Tarshishim (Dan. x. 6). 8. Sons
of God (Gen. vi. 4). 9. Ishim (Ps. civ. 4).
10. Chertibim.


374 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The TEN MempBers of the human body which
correspond to the Ten Sephiréth are :—1z. Head.
2. Brain. 3. Hearts. 4. RightArm.) 5.) Weta
6,1Chest.” 7. Rightiless 8. eft Lee sq uveenie
Organs. 10. Union of the whole Body. Thus the
Ten Sephiroth represent and are called the Prim-
ordial or Archetypal Man, and the Heavenly Man.
See page.4 72.


In the drawing given above the EN SopH is represented as a small circle,
like the hub of a wheel, and from it the Ten Sephiréth radiate like
the spokes of a wheel. This arrangement has been called the “‘ Sephi-
r6th Star’ and the “‘ Sephiréth Wheel.’’ (From BARON von ROSEN-
ROTH, Kabbala Denudata, Sulzbach, 1677.)


In the Book oF YEsirA En Sdph is represented
as a circle, and the Ten Sephiréth are arranged
round it in concentric circles. A drawing of this
arrangement is given in the editio princeps and is
reproduced above.

Each of the Sephiréth has a divine name, viz.:
1, (HHEVEX: (Exod. in. 14), 2. WAH (lsamixxviceay


KABBALAH 375


3. YHWH. 4. EL. 5.ELOAH. 6. ELoHimM. 7. YHWH
SEBAOTH. 8. ELOHE SEBAOTH. 9g. EL-KHAvy.
10. ADONAI. The first Sephirah is a heaven of
mre; the second is the “first -motion’’.;. -the
third 1s the Firmament or the Zodiac; the fourth
is Saturn; the fifth is Jupiter; the sixth is Mars
or the Sun; the seventh is the Sun or Mars; the
eighth is Venus; the ninth is Mercury’; the tenth
is the Moon.

According to Kabbalah the Great Name of God
is God Himself.

The Four Angels who direct the Four HEAVENS
- are :—MICHAEL, RAPHAEL, GABRIEL and URIEL.

The Seven Angels who rule the earth are :—URIEL,
RAPHAEL, RAGUEL, MICHAEL, SURIEL, GABRIEL and
YERACHMI EL; these appear to have been identified
with the seven planets of the Babylonians.

The PRINCEs over the powers of Nature, according
to the old Rabbis, are :—MICHAEL (snow), GABRIEL
(fire), YORKAMI (hail), RacHAB (the sea), RIDJAH
(rain), and BEN NrEz (wind). According to the later
Rabbis they are :—GALGALIEL (the solar disk),
OPHANIEL (the lunar disk), KocHBIEL (darkness),
REHATIEL (the planets), SHAMSHIEL (daylight), Lay-
LAHEL (night), BARADIEL (hail), BARAKIEL (lightning),
MATHARIEL (rain), SHALGIEL (snow), RUCHIEL (wind),

SA’AMIEL (storm), SIKIEL (sirocco), SAWAEL (whirl-
wind), Sa’APHIEL (hurricane), RA’AMIEL (thunder),
and Ra’ASHIEL (earthquake).

The Underworld was peopled by Orders of evil
spirits similar in number to the Sephiroth, but
besides these Kabbalah taught that the air round
about was peopled with spirits. In Mark v. 9, they
are called “ Legion,’’ because they are so many.


376 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


They fly about in the air of this world like birds,
and they discharge their arrows of evil at us as they
please. Their precise dwelling-place is the space


3


=
~


Specimen of the magical Letter-wheels and Circles which are found in
Kabbalistic Manuscripts (The above are reproduced from Brit. Mus.


Oriental, No. 4596, which is described in Margoliouth, Catalogue of
Hebrew MSS., London, 1909.)


between the clouds of heaven and surface of the
earth 7 Compare. -Ephi vert and 225s) P ae
demons called. by the Rabbis SHED{im are chiefly


KABBALAH 377


fallen angels and their offspring, which their inter-
course with men has produced. They have wings
and fly about and have a knowledge of the future.
Among them must be reckoned ASHMEDAY (As-
MoDIUS) and LiLitu, who according to the Rabbis
was ADAM’S first she-devil wife. The demons called
MAssIkim are evilly disposed and seek to destroy ;
they are the causes of sicknesses- and diseases.
Another group of demons is called Rucuim or (fem.)
RucHOTH, and many of them appear to be the souls
of dead men.

Kabbalah treats of the names of God at great
length. The greatest of all His names is YHWH
(IVI), the so-called TETRAGAMMATON, which is
sometimes confounded with the “‘Shém hammit-
phorash,”’ z.e. “ the Name which is separate or, to
bey distinguished from every other name” (see
Buxtorf, Lexicon, s.v.). The pronunciation of the
name YHWH is unknown, but it is vocalized by
adding to it the vowels of the word for “ Lord,”
1.€6. ADONAY; hence the: form of the name
“ Jehovah ” in our Bibles.

The title “Shém Hammitph6rash’”’ is applied
to three other Names of God, which are often used
instead of the unpronounceable Name of four
letters (consonants) YHWH. These Names contain
Twelve, Forty-two, and Seventy-two letters (con-
sonants) respectively.

The Name composed of TWELVE LETTERS (con-
sonants) is formed of the names of the first three
Sephiréth and reads :—

KTRHHMHTBWNH.


A variant form of the Name is HHMHTBWNHD AT
which omits KTR and adds D’AT.


378 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The Name composed of FORTY-TWO LETTERS
(consonants) contains the names of all the Sephiréth
and reads :—

KTRHHMHTBWNHGDWLHTPERT
GBWRHNSHYSODHODMLKWT
This Name was. believed to possess great mystical
and magical power.

The first part of the name of SEVENTY-TWo letters
consists of the Name of Forty-two letters ; preceded
by the letters Avnsop (En Soph), and the last part
is formed of the consonants of the Hebrew word
KDOS repeated thrice, “ Holy, Holy, Holy,” and of
the Hebrew words KONHSMIMWARS, 1.e€. possessor
of heaven and earth” (Gen. xiv. 19). Thus the
name of Seventy-two letters reads :—

AYNSOPKTRHHMHTBWNHGDWLHT
PERTGBWRHNSH YSODHODMLKWT
KDOSKDOSKDOSKONHSMIMWARS


It is said traditionally that it was by this Name that
God brought the Israelites out of Egypt. Another
tradition says that God brought Israel out of Egypt
by means of a Name which consisted of Seventy-two
Names. These, according to Dr. Bischoff, are :—
I-I0 WHW* YLY-SYT:’ LM: MHS*LLH-“K ‘- KHT-


HSY°*‘ LD:

11-20 L‘ W*HH ‘* YSL’MBH: HRY*HKM°L'‘ W° KLY>
LWW: PHL: :

21-30 NLK: YYY*MLH:HHW: NTH°H ‘‘: YRT°’S‘H°-
RY.Y WM *

31-40 LKB: WSR‘ YHW:LHH*KWK*MND:‘ NY'H’ M°
RH :YYS:

41-30 HHH:MYK*WWL:YLH°‘S‘L:’ RY: SL*MYH°
WHW:DNY:-

51-60 HHS*’ MM: NN ‘:-NYT: MBH: PWY:NMM: YYL-
HRH*MSR*

61-70 WMB:YHH:’ NW°-MHY:DMB:MNK°‘ Y ’:HBW:
R‘H*YBM:


71-72 HYY*MWM:


kK ABBALAH 379


(For the Hebrew letters see GINSBURG, Kabbalah,
p. 136.) ,

The form of the Name of Seventy-two names given
above was probably composed during the Middle
Ages, but it seems to be based upon a very ancient
form which was evolved by the early Hebrew
theologians who deduced it from various passages
in the Pentateuch, which they manipulated in the
manner with which we are familiar from the later
Kabbalistic writings.. On the other hand, the 72-
named Name may have been invented by the
Kabbalists, who were skilled in dealing with
permutations of letters and their numerical values.

The great Name of God, YHWH, commonly
* called the Tetragammaton, which was never pro-
nounced and only written, was associated with the
Twelve Tribes of Israel, the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, and the Twelve months of the year, which
were divided into four groups of three names each
and arranged under the four letters YHWH respec-
tively. Thus we have :—


etter.) bribe: Zodiacal Sign. Month.
¢ Judah. Ram. Nisan.
Nie lssachar. Bull. Iyyar.
(Zebulon. — Twins. Sivan.
( Reuben. Crab. Tammuz.
en. olneon. Lion. Ab.
(Gad. Virgin. Elul.
(Ephraim. Scales. Tishri.
W_ < Manasseh. Scorpion. Marchesvan.
(Benjamin. Sagittarius. Chislev.
Dan. Capricornus.  Tebeth:
Ey ASHer, - Aquarius. Shebat.
|Naphtali. Pisces. Adar.


CARE PA Biles


ASTROLOGY:


From the earliest times men have firmly believed that
the stars exerted controlling influences on themselves
and their affairs, and in every age they have tried to
find out what those influences were and how and by
what means they are exercised. As far as we know
the earliest astrologers were Asiatics, and among
these the Sumerians and Babylonians occupied an
important place. The Kabbalists made a system of
Astrology of their own, but judging by the evidence
now available, the foundations of their science were
of Babylonian origin. The starry Rulers of their
system were the SEVEN ASTROLOGICAL PLANETS
which “ruled ’’ the twenty-four hours of the day, and
the seven days of the week, and the twelve months of
the year, and the years, and the cycles of years. The
Seven Astrological Planets, the sun being included
and the earth omitted, were represented thus


The Sun by a circle and point ©.

SATURN by a cross with a half of the line circle
attached hk.

Moon by a crescent of the waxing moon ).

Mars by the solar disk anda ray 6.

VENUS bya cross surmounted by the solardisk ? .

Mercury by the symbol of Venus with a pair
of horns attached &.

JUPITER by three solar disks united in a mystic
figure, which is supposed to represent fire


and aether fo Or.


A A I


ASTROLOGY 381


The following table, which was compiled by Dr.
Bischoff, shows how the planets rule the hours of the
day and night on each day of the week. It begins
with zero on Sunday evening.


DAYS Ol? THE WEEK.


ik We. Fo 2s
MeO eevCUine s Ou )ede Yoo Ye Fh
2E7—-8 > s, epee yikes OY
SeOsO: 5; OR ee | Vd
we Q-10 - ,, Damn ae of ieee Ie ©
BR JO-1T. -,, Cece re 6 Se Of. FS
Hallo. ah, Ve ey, On EY 8 oY
7 12-1 night ee er ee OD
Seer 20, bo Cm cess se Leh
Sh aS » " ie) ) g res
oS eaeey eo 2h . yg
iE SES aks ero ee ue ke ©
BAes Oo" 5, POP eet oO If?
Peon olor evens i © jy gs &
14 7-8 f ee OD.) D
15 8&9 * Cpe Se eb
16 g-IO_,, ee ee ee
17 IO-II ,, ae Oe, Ded
ips) Vie eee en eee eer eee RO
HOomecteaiternoomebe Gy ¢ ° G-. yg
20 I-2 < Pees ernie Oo yrds R
2I 2-3 3 eo ee a Oo?
22 3-4 , Cree ey ee ek
23 4-5 a Pies Ne (Ste oo a Uf
24 5-0 My en eee ee he Gh. Pg


The Rabbis believed that the character and
physical characteristics of a man were influenced
by the planets which “ruled” the hour and the


382 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


day during which he was born. The man born
when the Sun “ruled ” the hour acquired fame and
honour, riches, independence, and absolute freedom
of thought and action. He would possess naturally
wisdom, sagacity and shrewdness, clear judgment,
dexterity and eloquence of speech; he would be
magnanimous, and possess a noble pride and ardour
of disposition, and he would find favour in the sight
of great men.

The influence of VENUS gave a man riches, great
ability, a lovable and loving disposition, the love of
beauty and Art, amiability towards his fellow-men,
proneness to confide in people and credulity ; on
the other hand he would have little strength to
fight against Fate and resist temptation, and be
frivolous, vain, pleasure-loving, unmoral, impetuous
but irresolute.

The influence of MERCURY gave a man a fine
memory, skill in writing, readiness and capability
in dealing with the various circumstances of life,
artistic and scientific ability, eagerness, capricious-
ness, dependence on the opinions of others, and
proneness to consider immediate results more than
lasting effects.

The influence of the Moon produced much variety
in the affairs of a man and in his characteristics,
causing both success and failure. Usually his
domestic relationships are happy. It makes a man
rather a dreamer than a worker, religious, kindly,
considerate, communicative, but yet secretive, in-
dustrious and persevering, but also capricious.

The influence of SATURN produces slowness and
heaviness of disposition, and the habit of pondering
deeply on affairs, and of forming numerous plans


ASEROEOG Y 383


and schemes, the results of which are usually un-
important. It makes a man learned, energetic,
hard-working, and trustworthy, and increases his
dignity, and enables him to attain success ultimately.

The influence of JUPITER makes a man _ honest,
and gives him a deep and strong moral sense. It
gives him great prudence and makes him reserved
and sometimes suspicious of his fellow-men. It
gives him great mental energy and strength of will
and character, and great ambition, and leads him
to results which are usually satisfactory, but which
do not always bring happiness to him.

The influence of Mars incites a man to do mighty
deeds, and to perform works of valour which often
terminate in the shedding of blood. It makes him
reckless, and gives him an iron will and a bellicose
disposition, and prompts him to do deeds of violence
and to commit sins, but it often drives him on to
wictony. lt -frequently- destroys in a man the
benign influences which the other planets have
had upon him.

If the hour and day of a man’s birth be ruled
by the same planet, the influence of the planet on
his physical and mental attributes is greatly
strengthened.

The seven astrological planets travel through the
regions or “‘houses”’ of the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, and they rule the Signs just as they rule the
days of the week. The Sun rules the house of the
Lion, and the Moon the house of the Crab. Mercury
rules the houses of the Twins and the Virgin ; Venus
the houses of the Bull and the Scales; Mars the
houses of the Ram and the Scorpion ; Jupiter the
houses of the Fishes and Sagittarius ; and Saturn


384 AMULETSVAND SUPERSEMIONS


the houses of the Water-bearer and Capricornus.
Each of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac corresponds
with one of the Twelve Months. The Kabbalistic
astrologers did not reckon by the lunar, but by the
solar, year, which they assumed roughly to consist of
305 days.


THE TWELVE “ Houses OF HEAVEN.”’


y. The House of Life. 7. The House of Marriage.

2. The House of Wealth. 8. The House of Death.

3. The House of Brethren. g. The House of Charity.

4. The House of Kinsfolk 10. The House of Glory (Honour).
(Relatives). iz. The House of Peace

5. The House of Children. (Happiness).

6. The House of Slaves. 12. The House of Hatred.


The Rabbis divided the heavens for astrological
purposes into twelve “ houses,’ which the Kabbal-
ists of the Middle Ages placed in the positions shown
in the accompanying diagram.

The Rabbis believed that God created seven
worlds, and that these occupied the upper half of


ASTROLOGY 385


the universe, which, as we see from the drawing
below, was circular; the lower half formed
“Okeanos,”’ the World Ocean. This drawing is
reproduced from the Book of the Angel Raziél—a
comparatively late work—but it represents the views
of the Rabbis of the early centuries of our era, and
is clearly based upon ancient Babylonian statements
or drawings, and perhaps upon both. The first or


%
fm
eZ
rn |
i
Q


The Seven Worlds, the Earth and the World-Ocean.


lowest semicircle represents the Earth, and above
it are the Seven Worlds, viz., the world of the Moon ;
the world of Mercury; the world of Venus; the
world of the Sun ; the world of Mars; the world of
Jupiter ; and the world of Saturn.

In the astrological system of the Kabbalist the
Signs of the Zodiac were nearly as important as the
Seven Astrological Stars or Planets, and in the

2B


386 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Book of Raziél they are represented as a series of
twelve circles which overlap. In each circle the
name of the Sign is given in Hebrew, the translation
of the names being made from the Greek or Latin
(see p. 387). As will be seen later each Sign of the
Zodiac has its special symbol, but the Kabbalists

and others drew up a series of symbols for other
stars. A selection of these is given here from the
quarto edition of Cornelius Agrippa, published in
1531. When these symbols were invented is not


Venus. Mercury. Mars. Saturn. Jupiter.
The Egyptian Gods of the Five Planets.
known, but it is difficult, judging by their appear-
ance only, not to think that they were derived from
the signs for these stars in Sumerian.


According to another authority (The Boox oF
ARB‘AT’AL) the firmament and the kingdom of heaven
wherein the various hosts of spirits live is divided
into 196 provinces or districts which are ruled over
by seven supreme angels, each of whom was served
by subordinate officials and servants. Each angel
had a seal or symbol which the Kabbalists and
magicians wrote on amulets and used in working
magic, and they are reproduced on p. 389, Nos. 1-7.

ARATRON, the first Angel, ruled 49 Provinces. He
could change beasts or vegetables into stones, and


ASTROLOGY 387


transmute metals, and possessed all the powers
and knowledge which his transcendental knowledge
of magic gave him: He ruled 49 Kings, 42 Princes,
35, Satraps, 28 Dukes, 21 servants, 14 councillors,
and 7 envoys, and he commanded 36,000 legions of
spirits, each legion containing 490 beings.

BETHOR, the second Angel, ruled over 42 Pro-
vinces. He possessed the powers and attributes of


The Circles of the Signs of the Zodiac, according to the Book of Raziél.
The names are to be read from right to left: Group I. Ram, Bull,
Twins, Crab. Group II. Lion, Virgin, Balance, Scorpion. Group
III. Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces.


Jupiter. He ruled 42 Kings, 35 Princes. 28 Dukes,
2I councillors, 14 servants, seven envoys, and
29,000 legions of spirits.

PHALEG, the third Angel, was the War lord. He
ruled over 35 Provinces.

OcH, the fourth Angel, presided over solar matters.
He was famous for his wisdom, and perfected the
science of medicine, and could change everything
into gold and precious. stones. He commanded

2B 2


388 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


36,536 legions of spirits, and they all served him.
He ruled over 28 Provinces.

HacitH, the fifth Angel, ruled over all matters
which were connected with Venus. He could trans-
mute gold into copper, and copper into gold. He
commanded 4,000 legions of spirits. He ruled over
21 Provinces.


S}— Caudaurfe, }} th Caput Algol,
) ; C2 Ala corui, it Ls Pleiades,


Spica, <e Aldebaram,
Alchameth, Da Hircus,


x ree: : /* HH Canis maior,
uo CorScorpii, YY Canis minor,


f


Vultur cadens, | | | Cor leonis,


Cauda capricorn,


Symbols of stars and constellations in use by the Kabbalists according to
Cornelius Agrippa.


OPHIEL, the sixth Angel, dealt with everything
which related to Mercury.. He could transmute
quicksilver into a white stone. He ruled over
14 Provinces and he commanded 100,000 legions
of spirits.

Puut, the seventh Angel, ruled over 7 Provinces,
and directed everything which appertained to the
Moon. He could transmute anything and every-
thing into silver, and cure dropsy, and destroy the
[evil] spirits of the water.


ASTROLOGY 389


®
2 Seal of Aratron, the alchemist, who
commanded seventeen millions six
hundred and forty thousand spirits.


Seal of Bethor, who commanded
2 twenty-nine thousand legions 'of
spirits.


Kt Seal of Phaleg, the War-lord.


® *
Seal of Och, the alchemist, physician
and magician,


Seal of Hagith, transmuter of
i = metals, and commander of four
thousand legions of spirits.


Seal of Ophiel, who commanded one
6 hundred thousand legions of spirits.


Seal of Phul, lord of the powers of
the Moon and supreme lord of the
waters.


The Seals of the Seven Angels who rule over the 196 provinces of heaven.
(From the collection of ancient magical books published in the
German edition of Cornelius Agrippa’s works, IVth edition, vol. v.,
Berlin, 1921, p. 111 t:)


CHAPTER Sxtits


THE KABBALISTIC NAMES AND SIGNS, AND MAGICAL
FIGURES, AND SQUARES OF THE SEVEN ASTRO-
LOGICAL STARS OR PLANETS.


We have already summarized the influences which
the planets were believed to exert on the characters of
men and we may now describe briefly the means which
the Kabbalists used to obtain for their purposes
the most favourable of these influences. They gave
various significant names to each planet, and devised
for each four signs, which they wrote on metal or
parchment ; these last-named indicated the various
entities which were in it and those which were
connected with it. These signs were followed by
magic squares, containing a series of numbers
which the Hebrew Kabbalists wrote in Hebrew
letters and the Arabic Kabbalists in Arabic letters.
The Kabbalists used magical squares as amulets,
and they gave them a peculiar character by asso-
ciating them with the seven astrological stars, and
with certain metals. When and where the signs
of the entities or spirits of the planets and the
magical squares were invented is not known, but
it is almost certain that they are of Sumerian or
Indian origin. The material on which they are
based in its earliest form is undoubtedly very ancient,
though the forms in which we now have both signs
and magical squares are not. The Kabbalists call
the magical square ‘‘ Kamé‘a,” which Buxtorf


KABBALISTIC NAMES AND SIGNS 391


V VE


SATURN. Its spirit. Its demon. Position in Zodiac.
| | :
Weg
JUPITER. Its spirit. Its demon. Position in Zodiac.


Mars. Its spirit. Its demon. Position in Zodiac.


The SuN. Its spirit. Its demon; Position in Zodiac.


THE KABBALISTIC SYMBOLS OF THE ASTROLOGICAL PLANETS AND THEIR
SPIRITS AND DEMONS AND POSITIONS IN THE ZODIAC.


392 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


nO GN


VENUS. Its spirit. Itsdemon. Positionin Zodiac.


In some lists of these symbols


Venus is given a second spirit.


MERCURY. Its spirit. Its demon. Position in Zodiac.
The Moon. Its spirit. Its demon. Position in Zodiac.


The older lists add a second spirit and a second demon, thus :—


PRN


Spirit. Demon.


THE KABBALISTIC SYMBOLS OF THE ASTROLOGICAL PLANETS AND THEIR
SPIRITS AND DEMONS AND POSITIONS IN THE ZODIAC.


KABBALISTIC NAMES AND SIGNS 393


translates by pittaciwm and amuletum, and he says
that the Kamé‘a was hung on the neck or breast
(From Kamé‘a comes caméo (French and Italian) and
our word cameo.) The signs and squares for the
planets have been published in many books, e.g.
CORNELIUS AGRIPPA, Magische Werke, Bd. II. p. 128 f.;
PoinsoT, Encyclopédie des Sciences Occultes, Paris
(no date); SEPHARIAL, The Book of Charms and
Talismans, London (no date), etc.

The forms reproduced on pages 391 and 392 are
Daeeo upon the work-of Dr. E. Papus (Jvatté de
Magie pratique, Paris). In each set of drawings the
first symbol is the sign of the planet itself, the
second represents the spirit or intelligence of the
planet, the third its demon, and the fourth the posi-
tion of the planet in the Zodiac, which is indicated by
the undecipherable characters which occur within it.

Each planet had several divine names, and each
name had its number; the numbers and names of
the spirits of the planets and their demons are as
follows :— |


Planet. Spirit. Demon.


SALURN: -Agiel (45). Zazel (45).

JUPITER Yophiél (136). Hasmaél (136).

Mars .. Graphiél (325). Barsabél (325).

SUN a eeNakiel. (Pir): Sérath (666).

VENUS.. Hagiél (40). Kedemel (175).

Mercury Bne Seraphim (1252). Taphthartharath
(2080).


Moon  .. Malkabethar- 1. Shédbarshe-
shesim (3321) moth  Shar-
thathan (3321).


2. Hasmdday(369)


394 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The Moon has two demons, one subordinate to
the other.

The Magical Squares of the seven astrological
planets are :—


1. THE KAmE‘A of LEAD (SATURN, 3 columns),


4|9
rage fa)
Sir al


m| 1]


Whether these nine figures are added up vertically,
horizontally or diagonally the total is 15, or in
Hebrew letters YH, the shortened form of the
Tetragrammaton YHWH. The total of the three
columns of figures is 45, 1.e. the expanded Tetra-
grammaton . YWD-.HA-WAW.-HA. When used as
an amulet this square was cut upon a sheet of lead.


2. THE KAME‘A«of SILVER ‘or TIN (JUPITER;
4 columns).


4 | 14] 15] 1
917) 6 {12
5/11/10] 8
16/2) 3/13


Whether these sixteen figures are added up
vertically. horizontally or diagonally the total is
34,/or in Hebrew letters D = 4 and L’= 30. These
letters form a part of the Hebrew word for tum. The
total of the four columns of figures is 136, which is
the number of the Spirit and of the Demon of the


KABBALISTIC NAMES AND SIGNS 395


planet. When cut upon coral this square protected
the wearer from sorcery.


3. THE K’amEé‘A of IRON (Mars, 5 columns).


Whether these five times five figures are added
up vertically, horizontally or diagonally the total is
Gy wousie hebrew letters, A.— 1, D —4,. N = 50 and
We 102.c, “ADONAY, a name of God. The total
of the five columns of figures is 325, which is the
number of the Spirit and Demon of the planet.


4. THE KAME‘A of GOLD (the Sun, 6 columns).


| 7 |11/27/28! 8 | 30 a Gh eee


ne | cm ee | ee | ee


PAoseo. | Goa 2 Ol


The total of the addition of these thirty-six figures
in each of the three directions is III, 2.e. the total of
the numerical values of the consonants zahab paz,
“refined gold.” The total of the six columns of
figures is 666, which is the number of SORATH, the


396


Demon of the Sun.


AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


A variant square of the Sun


as a lion is given by Dr. Bischoff (op. cit. p. 146).


5. THE KAmf&‘a of COPPER (VENUS, 7 columns).


47 135 | 4


115) 29


36


37


30


45


40 34 28


mg = —— | —_—- nnn ess . _s_ee| ee —


PNT [m3 ja [or |
ris 1) | ab) Naas


The total of the addition of these forty-nine figures
in each of the three directions is 175, 2.e. the total of
the numerical values of the consonants in sodh-Mny,
“secret council of the goddess Mény” (Venus).
The total of the seven columns of figures is 1,225,
which is the number of the Spirit or Intelligence of


the planet.


6. THE KAmE‘A of QUICKSILVER (MERCURY,


8 columns),


n


ae


MJ |)


——— | —


AD lea


ee


ae


es
———— EES ee | eee


ES eee | eee | ee ee


wok = aaa
nD a ae INDRED


—_—_—o— rw a


ee et


KABBALISTIC NAMES AND SIGNS 397


The total of the addition of these sixty-four figures
in each of the three directions 1s 260, 2.e., the total of
the numerical values of the consonants in kokab
kesef hayyim, “ star of living silver ”’ (7.e. quicksilver).
The number of Tfrfet, the spirit of the planet, is 260.
The total of the eight columns of figures is 2,080,
which is the number of the demon of the planet,
TAPHTHARTHARATH. Asanamulet the square should
be written upon a sheet of tin or quicksilver.


7. THE KAME‘A OF SILVER (the Moon, 9 columns).


37 | 78 | 29 | 70:| 21 | 62 13 54 5
6 | 38/79] 30 7) 22 63 | 14| 46


47| 7 |39|80131| 72/23/55 | 15


16 | 48| 8 | 40 81/32] 64] 24! 56


S749 WO Ad 73 33 | 65 | 25
26 | 58 | 18 50. [491141347 66


67 | 27| 59/10/51) 2 | 43/75 '35


36 68/19/60 11/52] 3 44 76
77 | 28|69| 20/61) 12/53) 4 45


FOL esata


—_——.


“45 Ind |


Note the arithmetical progression in the central
diagonal column of each square.


398 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


The total of the addition of these eighty-one
figures in each of the three directions is 369, i.e. the
total of the numerical values of the consonants in
keren ha-zahab, “‘ golden horn.” The total of the
nine columns of figures is 3,321, which is the number
of the supreme Intelligence or Spirit of the Moon
and also of the demon thereof.


ek CHARACTERES LVNAE,
we ASB


CHARACTERES MERCVRIEL


Tl fi zt ye tae
OX AY
“4 ORAY ©


The above symbols of the Moon and Mercury are reproduced from the
quarto edition of Cornelius Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia.


For those of the Sun and the other planets see the opposite page.

According to CORNELIUS AGRIPPA it 1s necessary to
be careful, when using a magical square as an amulet,
that it is drawn when the sun, or moon, or the
planet is exhibiting a benevolent aspect, for other-
wise the amulet will bring misfortune and calamity
upon the wearer instead of prosperity and happiness
(see Part II. chap. 22).

It has already been said that in the Hebrew texts
of the Kabbdéléh the numbers given in the magical


Ab uid,


0000


KABBALISTIC NAMES AND SIGNS 399


CHARACTERES VENERIS,


waite [FT XA KEIRA ©)
me QREVVY


CHARACTERES SOLIS.


um BEY VW OY
st GAAAASA


29 08 VAOS
om BBS


Charatteres capitis Drscords


EY YVVY


Charadtereseaude Dracovts,


FAA AAA «3


400 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


squares are expressed by letters of the Hebrew
alphabet. These letters are taken from certain
verses of the Bible, e.g. Exod. xiv.. 19-21, which
contain the three Pillars of the Sephirdéth and the
Divine Name of 72 words. The letters are then
arranged in three squares, and from these a fourth
Square is made which contains the Divine Name of
72 letters (see GINSBURG, Kabbalah, p. 133 f.). The
Kabbalists made use of a system of dealing with
numbers as represented by letters which is called
GEMETRIA or GRAMMATYA = ypappareia. In this
system: I. Every letter of a word is reduced to its
numerical value, and the word is explained by another
of the same numerical value. II. Every letter of a
word is taken as an initial or abbreviation of a word.
III. The initial and final letters of several words
are respectively formed into separate words. IV.
Two words in the same verse may be joined together.
V. The letters of words are changed by way of
anagram and new words are obtained by PERMUTA-
TION. The alphabet of 22 létters is divided¥inte
two equal parts, and one part is put over the other,
and by changing alternately the first letter or the.
first two letters at the beginning of the second line
22 commutations are produced, e.g. :—


J ABGDHWZHTYK \

‘LitseKsP‘Asnm S
OT

J AGDHWZHTYKL |

st RKsP‘asnm S


The first of these anagramic alphabets is called
ALBATH, from the first words, and the second
ABGATH and soon. As the texts of some Kabbalistic


THE KABBALISTS AND THE HUMAN HAND 401


and other Hebrew amulets are reproduced in this
book, the Hebrew alphabet and the names and
numerical values of the letters are here given.


_ Final
form.


Hebrew
letter.


eite Cs A Ve Chale (Se US sp oh


Phonetic
value.


toleph ecke
won.
ae) gu8) (oe


ON
- sie


a
=.


“


se
oy


OA nO NA eo AK
©
ce


Hebrew name.


Aleph
Béth
Gimel
Daleth
Hé
Waw |
Zayin
Chéth
Téth
Yodh
Kaph
Lamedh
Mém
Nin
Samekh
‘Ayin
Pe
Sadhe
Koph
Résh
Sites =|:
Shin Sf


aw


Numerical
value.


‘al.


CFS * Cort Oy U1 te Cor


oO". CONT “Ovi BG hb Ho
ee ee eh er terier vie,


I0O
200


300


400


THE KABBALISTS AND THE HUMAN HAND.


We have already seen how the Kabbalists asso-
clated the Sephiréth or Emanations of En Sdph
with the various parts of the body of the “ Primal ”


ZC


402 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


or ‘‘ Perfect Man ”’ (see page 372), and the following
diagram shows which astrological star “rules ”
each part of the human hand. Venus “rules” the


thumb, Mars the palm of the hand, the Moon the
heel of the hand, Jupiter the first finger, Saturn the
second finger, the Sun the third finger, and Mercury


the fourth finger. See Cornelius Agrippa, chap.
xxvii. (vol. ii. of the German translation, p. 160,
Berlin, 1922).
KABBALISTIC SYSTEMS OF WRITING.
The KABBALISTS adopted certain well-known
alphabets, Hebrew, Chaldean, etc., in writing their
works, but they modified the forms of the letters and


KABBALISTIC SYSTEMS OF WRITING 403


made additions to them, and then they attributed
esoteric meanings to them which were known and
understood by the initiated only. It seems too that
they assigned additional phonetic values to them.
They probably borrowed the idea of doing this from
the Egyptians, for already in the XIXth dynasty
we find examples of hieroglyphic writing to which
the name of “ enigmatic ’’ has been given. Speci-
mens of the Kabbalistic alphabets have been given
in Cornelius Agrippa (chap. xxix) in discussing the
letters and seals of the spirits, and the examples on
page 404 are reproduced from his work. No. 1 is said
to have been invented by Honorius, a Theban, and to
have been handed down by Peter of Apono. No. 21s
derived from the old “‘square’’ character Hebrew
letters with which the Térah is written. Whether, as
Cornelius says, this character was used bv Moses
and the Prophets is doubtful, for from the analogy
of the Stele of Mesha, King of Moab (Moabite Stele),
they probably used Phoenician letters. This writing
is called the “ Writing of heaven.’ The small
circles which are attached to the letters have pro-
bably a magical signification. No. 3 is called the
| Writing of the Angels * or the “ Writing of the
Kings,’ 2.e. the Royal Script. No. 4 is the “ Writ-
ing of the Crossing of the River.”’ I cannot explain
the allusion.

The Kabbalists also divided the Hebrew alphabet
(the twenty-two letters and the final forms of
five of them) into three classes, each containing
cer leticlhomim ietemitst, nine = represented. the
numbers 1-9, and the nine divisions of the
world which are ruled by nine orders of angels.
The second nine represented the numbers 10-90 and

22


404 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


{OAR BOR CPD LE OR NGt are ee


bh L LAS YR ee


oe)
NSO" Pe Or Re Se. eT iV) oka ny ae


1 a aly a a
a


UM TT xx
2 “OVUNNSDA ©
PLD ON
VANITY US
oo NP DOK UE
VU e XO
Gh cate ir1.c) 3) Ge
4 aia eS “al cal’
ae VES E


pecimens of Kabbalistic Scripts.


KABBALISTIC SYSTEMS. OF WRITING 405


the things which are in the nine circles of heaven.
The third nine contained the four last letters of the
alphabet and the final forms of K. M. N. P and S.
The four letters represented the numbers 100-400,
and the four elements earth, air, fire, and water,
and the five final forms symbolized the five unions
of bodies. Each of the three divisions of nine letters
was subdivided into three divisions and arranged
between lines thus :—


wa | Da] DN


OD) | Jam | nn


V8ro ) DT) [vt

From & the lines which enclose the groups of three

letters the nine following figures were constructed—
ECVE le Cen Ba oe


The alphabet arranged in this way formed a very
powerful amulet.


GENT EK: Soxve


THE. STARS -OR SIGNS QF THE ZODIAC AND THEIR
INFLUENCES, THE HOUSES OF HEAVEN AND IE
DEWAN;


The SUMERIANS and BABYLONIANS believed that
the will of the gods in respect to man and his affairs
could be learned by watching the motions of the
stars and planets, and that skilled star-gazers could
obtain from the motions and varying aspects of the
heavenly bodies indications of future prosperity
and calamity. They therefore caused observations
to be made and recorded on tablets, which they
interpreted from a magical and not astronomical
point of view, and these observations and _ their
comments on them, and interpretations of them,
have formed the foundation of the astrology in
use in the world for the last 5,000 years. According
to ancient traditions preserved by Greek writers,
the Babylonians made these observations for some
hundreds of thousands of years, and though we
must reject such fabulous statements, we are bound
to believe that the period during which observations
of the heavens were made on the plains of Babylonia
comprised many thousands of years, During that
period the star-gazers collected unwittingly a large
number of facts of pure astronomy—and but
for the ban laid upon their work by the all-


SienS Oh SIGNS OF THE. ZODIAC 407


powerful magicians, they would have developed
into good astronomers. The magician desired the
maintenance and extension of his own craft, and the
personal benefits which accrued to him therefrom
to the unremunerative increase in the scientific
knowledge of the heavens.

It is now a well-ascertained fact that during
Piessrule. of the kings of the Ist. Dynasty of
BABYLON the star-gazers were able to calculate
astronomical events with considerable accuracy,
ema, to reconcile’ the solar and lunar years
by the use of epagomenal months.” They had
learned to distinguish between the planets and
the fixed stars, and some think they had recognized
the existence of the circumpolar stars which never
set. They had assigned “stations” to the moon
and planets, and garbled forms of the cuneiform
characters which represented them are preserved
in the famous De Occulta Philosophia of Cor-
NELIUS AGRIPPA of NETTESHEIM (1486-1535).
Whether they were the first to formulate the
ZODIAC cannot be said, but they had good know-
ledge of it.

In the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series (line 2)
the Signs of the Zodiac are mentioned under the
name of “ Lumashi,’ and from lines 121 ff. we learn
their names, 7.e. :-—


1. UMMU-KHUBUR, 1.e. TIAMAT, a female mon-
ster and the origin of all evil. She possessed
the Tablet of Destiny.


2. KINGU, her husband.


2. The VIPER.


408 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


. The SNAKE.

. LAKHAMU.

. [he WHIRLWIND.

. [The RAVENING Doe.

. The SCORPION-MAN.

. The HuRRICANE.

10. The FIsH-MAN.

11. The HoRNED BEAST (CAPRICORN).
12. [he WEAPON (THUNDERBOLT ?).


Oo CON DAMN


All these Twelve were powers of evil, and under
the leadership of T1AMAT and KiINGu they set to
work to defy the great gods who were beginning the
work of the Creation, 7.e. of putting an end to
Chaos and Disorder. The god put forward Marpuk,
the son of Ea, as their champion, and he defeated
and destroyed TIAMAT and her allies and created the
heavens and the earth and made man to appear on
the earth. He set in heaven the Stars of the Zodiac,
which are the likenesses of the great gods, he fixed.
the year, and divided it into twelve months, to rule
over each of which he appointed three stars, and
he established the Moon-god. The Signs of the
Zodiac set up by MARDUK were different from the
old ones, which he had disbanded, and the three
stars which he appointed to each month we now
know as the THIRTY-sIx DEKANS. The following is
a list of the Stars or Signs of the Zodiac taken from
the tablet in the British Museum (No. 77821), with
a list showing the month that was associated with
each star in the Persian Period. For the cuneiform
characters see Babylonian Legends of the Creation,
p. 68 (British Museum). :


STARS OR] SIGNS OFTHE ZODIAC 409
MontH. NAMEOFSTAR. TRANSLATION. MODERN
EQUIVALENT.
Nisannu ... Agru > The Labourer Goat.
Airu Kakkab u. ‘che Star.and the, Bull:
Alap shame Bull of Heaven
Simanu Re‘u kinu TheFaithfulShep- Twins.
shame u herd of Heaven
Lowe aim-e and the Great
Rabuti Twins
Duuzu Shittu Tortoise ... En Giaaley
Abu Kalbu rabu Great Dog (Lion) _ Lion.
Ululu Shiru Virgin with ear of Virgin.
corn
Tashritum Zibanitum ... Fe = Scales.
Arahshamna Akrabu The Scorpion Scorpion.
Kishmu PA-BIL-SAG The god Enurta Bow.
Tebetum .... Suhur-mash The Goat-Fish ... Capricornus.
Shabatue ...  Gula The Great Star .... Water-bearer.
Addaru Dre GAN uy The Star. . and The: Fishes.
rikis nuni the Band of


Fishes


ZODIAC CIRCLE (fwduaxds KvKXos), 1.€. the circle


of little figures of animals (Cwd.0v), is the name
given to the imaginary circular zone of the heavens
in which the sun, moon, and planets have their
courses. It is divided into Twelve Signs or
sections, each of which has its special sign and
is marked by twelve constellations. The twelve
sections dwdexarnudpia, contain 30 degrees, and are
reckoned from the spring equinox in the direction
in which the sun makes its progress through them
in a year. The whole Zodiac moves westwards at
the rate of one degree in seventy-two years. The


410 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


cA


l. Aries.


9. Sagittarius.


Fil


11. Aquarius. 12. Pisces.


a
=


ae


Dupe SIGNS OF THE? ZODIAC.


These were drawn by the late Mr. Anderson, a draughtsman in the
British Museum, from an Egyptian coffin of the later period in the
British Museum.


STARS OK SIGNS: OF: SHE ‘ZODIAC 411


Twelve constellations and the symbols which repre-
sent them are :—


CONSTELLATION. SYMBOL.

ARIES, the Ram ste v2 a ram’s head.

TAURUS, the Bull ee: 8 a bull’s head.

GEMINI, the Twins... [I conventional representation of
two children joined _ to-
gether.

CANCER, the Crab oS two figures of nine.

LEo, the Lion Q the solar disk with sperma-
tazoa attached (?).

VirGO, the Virgin Wp ?

LiprA, the Balance ~~ a sign of equilibrium.

SCORPIO, the Scorpion Mm or a flash of lightning with a

. AAA A scorpion’s tail attached.

SAGITTARIUS, the Archer >> an arrow.

CAPRICORNUS, the Goat vp ?

AQUARIUS, the Water- loose waves on water.

bearer
PIScES, the Fishes ... } two fishes joined. Not to be


confounded with Gemini.


The EGyptians borrowed the Zodiac from the
GREEKS, as the GREEKS had borrowed it from the
BABYLONIANS, and the most authoritative form of
it was found originally in the second room of the
Temple Roof at DENDERAH in UPPER EGYPT.
Fortunately it was removed from its dangerous
position and is now preserved in the Bibliotheque
Nationale in Paris. The Egyptians made certain
changes in the forms of the Signs. On the back of
TaAuRuS they placed a lunar crescent with the full
moon rising fromit. GEMINI was represented by the
god SHu and the goddess TrEFNur. A_ beetle
(scarabaeus sacer) took the place of a crab in CANCER.
The lion of LEo stands in a sort of boat, and a


412 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


goddess is grasping his tail and shaking a whip at
him. VrRGo is represented by a woman holding:
an ear of wheat. LIBRA is represented by a pair
of scales, but between them is a picture of the disk
of the sun resting on the horizon; within the disk is
a figure of Horus the Child (Harpokrates). SAcit-
TARIUS becomes a centaur, with two faces, one to the
front and one to the back, drawing a bow. The body
of the animal is winged and has two tails, one being
that of a scorpion, and the hawk of Horus or Ra is
perched on the tip of one of the wings. The fore
paws of the animal are in a boat. The fore part
of the body of CAPRICORNUS is that of a goat, with
two goat’s legs; the hind part is that of a fish
with fins. AQuARIus is the Nile-god, Hapi, who
holds in his hands two overflowing libation vases,
which symbolize the Nile of the South and the Nile
of the North. The god has on his head a cluster
of Nile plants. In Pisces we have two well-drawn
fish, swimming, one on each side of a lake or stream.

The PERSIANS, ZOROASTRIAN and others, adopted
the Zodiac and used it in their religious systems,
and from IRAN it passed into Inpra. The knowledge
of the Zodiac entered CHINA with the Buddhist
missionaries, and in that country it became a valuable
instrument of the astrologers. The Chinese appear
to have had a sort of indigenous Zodiac, the Signs
of which were represented by the Rat, Ox, Tiger,
Hare, Crocodile, Serpent, Horse, Sheep, Monkey,
Hen, Dog, and Pig. - The order of the Signs is
different from that of the Sumerian Zodiac, and this
suggests that the native Chinese Zodiac was horary
in character, and was not employed for astronomical
purposes. It was used largely in Central and Eastern


STARS OR. SIGNS: OF THE ZODIAC 413


China and Japan, and according to some authorities
the Aztecs had some knowledge of it. Every
civilized nation in the world seems to have made use
of the Zodiac in some form or other, and chiefly for
astrological purposes.

It is interesting to note that the Egyptians
attached much more importance to the Thirty-six
Dekans than to the constellations of the Zodiac.
Histo Ot them are found in ‘the royal Tombs at
THEBES, ¢.g. those of SETI I and his son RAMESES
II, and figures of the Dekan gods are cut on the
Zodiac from DENDERAH. This importance was
probably due to the fact that each Dekan ruled
one-third of the month, 2.e. ten days, and the
Egyptian week contained ten days. Reproductions
of the gods of the Dekans and their names in hiero-
glyph and Greek will be found in my Gods of the
Egyptians, vol. il. p. 312 f. The Signs of the Zodiac
were employed in the decoration of Egyptian coffins,
and a well-preserved set may be seen inside the
coffin of SOTER, an Archon of THEBES, in the British
Museum (No. 6705). On the coffin of HERU-
NEDJ-TEF-T also we have the Signs of the Zodiac,
accompanied by figures of the gods of the planets
and the Dekans (No. 6678). This coffin was made
in the 1Vth century B.c., and the other astronomical
vignettes appear to have been copied from the walls
of the royal tombs at THEBES.

The Signs of the Zodiac are found in cathedrals and
churches in Italy and France, and also in a few chur-
' ches in England ; see Miss A. M. Clerke’s article in the
Ency. Brit., vol. xxviii. p. 998. The Twelve Apostles
are at times associated with the Signs of the Zodiac,
and in a curious little theological work the Christian


414 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


Life is compared to a Zodiac, and the twelve virtues
which form it, the Inner Light, Readiness for death,
Sacramental Confession, Abnegation, Patient Endur-
ance, Hearing the Word of God, etc., are described
at length. The Zodiacus Christianus is followed by
an Horologium auxiliaris tutelaris Angeli.

Among the descendants of the Arab tribes who
settled in NoRTH AFRICA the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac were written altogether on pieces of paper
which were carried as talismans by caravan-men and
dwellers in the desert. The natives of the Gold
Coast, especially the workers.in metal, wore metal
rings round which the Signs, made of gold wire,
were soldered. Travellers were in the habit. of
employing the native jewellers to make “ Zodiac
rings ’’ for them, and a great many exist in England
at the present day. The natives who were converted
to Christianity by the Portuguese missionaries
adopted the Cross, which they regarded as a Christian
fetish, with enthusiasm, and wore it on their persons.
On plate X XITis figured a gold cross, which came from
the CAMEROONS, and was made specially for a pro-
minent native Christian who wore it regularly. But
the symbol of his new Faith inits simple state did not
content him, and he had some doubt as to its power
to save him; after much thought he took his cross
to the bazaar, and ordered the jeweller to add to it
the symbols of the Signs of the Zodiac. When this
had been done he felt that his cross was a real fetish
with “strong medicine ’”’ init, and wore it proudly.

1 The full title is Zodiacus Christianus locupletatus seu
Signa XII Divinae Praedestinationis. Totidem Symbolis explicata


ab Hierem Drexilio é Societatis Jesu. Col: Agrippinae Apud
Comel: ab’ Eemond Cl). : IC). xx XT


STARS OR SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC 415


Another interesting amulet from the Gold Coast is
figured below. This is a gold boss 13 inches in
diameter. In the centre is a circular hole which is
intended to represent the sun’s disk, and all round
it are zigzag lines suggesting the rays of ight which
shoot up from it. Over the hole is the Sacred Heart


Sacred Heart surrounded by the Signs of the Zodiac.
in gold, with a geometrical border and annules,
and ranged round this are the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, carefully worked in gold wire and soldered
down on an embossed ground. This amulet was
intended to be worn as a pendant on the breast, but
a wire-work chain and fastening were attached to it by
its last owner and it can now be worn as a bracelet.


416 AMULETS AND “SUPERSTITIONS


The periods of the rule of the Signs are as follows :


Spring—
Ram March 21—April 19.
LeSEUN EDO Soe April 20-May 20.
Twins ... May 21—June 20.
Summer—
Cancer ,,, June 21-July 22.
Leo July 23—-Aug. 22.
Virgo Aug. 23—-Sept. 21.
Autumn—
Balance sept, 22-Octazn,
Scorpion Oct. 22—Nov. 20.
Sagittarius Nov. 21—Dec. 20.
Winter—
Capricornus Dec. 21—Jan. 19.
Aquarius Jan. 20-Feb. 18.
Pisces =e, Feb. 19—March 20.


All these dates are inclusive. The astrological
year begins with the Spring, and the Signs are
enumerated in the direction opposite to that of
the figures on the dial of a watch. Three Signs
were associated with each of the Four Elements :
with Earth, Bull, Virgin and Capricornus; with
Air, Twins, Balance, and Aquarius; with Fire,
Ram, Lion, and Sagittarius; with Water, Cancer,
Scorpion and Fishes. The influences of the Twelve
Signs, astrologically, may now be enumerated.

RAm.—His ruler is Mars; his day is Tuesday ;
his colour is red; and his stone is amethyst. If
his entrance into the year is delayed his influence
is for evil during his whole period of 30 days. He
rules the emotions, instincts, and energies of those
born under him, and gives them a dominant will,
swift perception, ample vital power, a quick temper,
generosity and an affectionate disposition. On the


STARS OR SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC 417


other hand, they will probably have domestic
differences, few or no children, a varying fortune
and many enemies. Mars exercises a benign influ-
ence over them.

BuLL_.—His ruler is Venus; his day is her day,
Friday ; his colour is green; and his precious stone
is agate. He presides over the crops, directs labour
and the profit made from it, and makes the steady
worker to prosper. Venus gives to ‘those born
under him a cheerful and amiable disposition and
prolificness. The Bull specially controls the neck,
and makes a man stiff-necked, obstinate, reserved,
slow to forget an injury, slow to abandon cherished
beliefs and things. Usually a man born under the
Bull enjoys a long, quiet life and has a large circle
of acquaintances.

The Twins.—Their ruler is Mercury; their day is
Wednesday ; and their stone is beryl. They rule
all the affections and emotions of love in men, and
they symbolize union, which is the origin of strength.
Mercury controls the arms and shoulders of those
born under him, and gives them knowledge and
understanding of the Arts and Sciences, and the
spirit of adventure, coupled with a certain instability.
Their lives are usually full of ups and downs, and
periods of trouble.

The Cras.—His ruler is the Moon; his day is
Monday; and his stone is the blue emerald. Men
and women born under him have delicate constitu-
tions and abilities of a limited order, which they
use with discretion. They are somewhat arrogant
and presumptuous, and inclined to paradox, and
they are swayed by the last speaker on any subject.


They are precise in manner and are easily moved to
2D


418 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


mirth. The Crab controls the lungs, breast and
stomach of those born under him, and they have
a predisposition to cancer and phthisis; but the
women are usually fertile. Good fortune attends
them in the latter years of their lives.

The Lion.—His ruler is the Sun; his day Sunday ;
and his stone the yellow ruby. Those born under
him are bold, courageous, generous, devoted, faith-
ful, not easily moved, and sentimental, and they are
ambitious, autocratic, greedy of honours, quick-
tempered, and lovers of money and pleasure. Their
passions are strong, and they express their opinions
forcibly. Their gains are tempered with unexpected
losses. The Sun rules their heart and back, and they
are predisposed to pleurisy, palpitations, fever,
rheumatic pains, pains in the joints, and disease
of the bladder. They have many acquaintances
and enemies who cannot injure them.

The Vircin.—Her ruler is Mercury; her day
Wednesday ; and her stone grey jasper. She makes
those born under her to be sympathetic and gives
them prudence, tact, intuition, skill in directing the
house and business affairs generally, and a love for
the Arts and agriculture. They have skill in the
acquisition of property, are given to illicit affections,
and their love affairs cause trouble in their families.
The Virgin rules the belly, the intestines and the
genital organs.

The BALANcE.—His ruler is Venus; his day is
Friday ; and his stone is the green emerald. The
period of the Balance brings days which are compara-
tively equal in length. Those born under it possess
equable and just dispositions, but they lack initiative
and boldness, and refuse to take risks. They possess


SIAR SO SIGNS? OF; THE: ZODIAC 419


artistic instincts, and the women are addicted to
love-making. The Balance rules the kidneys.

The Scorpion.—His ruler is Mars; his day is
Tuesday ; and his stone is the reddish topaz. He
presides over a period of the year which is prolific
in sicknesses. Those who are born under him are
bold and persistent, but also malicious and jealous ;
he is the star which is the symbol of fightings and
quarrellings and strife of all kinds. He controls the
genital organs and the womb, and makes men lable
to fistula.

SAGITTARIUS.—His ruler is Jupiter; his day is
Thursday ; and his stone is blue turquoise. As
governor of the period when men go a-hunting, he
directs the thighs of huntsmen and causes them to
fall from their horses. Those who are born under
his rule possess dispositions hard to understand,
but they are full of energy and of love for the arts
and sciences. The influence of Jupiter produces in
men wisdom, honour and sagacity, humility and
timidity, simplicity of manner and cheerfulness.

CAPRICORNUS.—His ruler is Saturn; his day is
Saturday ; and his stone is black onyx. Those born
under his rule are weak-kneed, delicate, and of
meagre appearance, but their apparently humble
impassiveness is only a cloak for their ambition, and
wish for honours, and egoism and their propensity
for double dealing. They usually marry more than
once, but have few children; their affections are
characterized by inconstancy. They have a tend-
ency to suffer from rheumatism and diseases of the
skin, and brittle bones.

AQuaRIus.—His ruler is Saturn; his day is Satur-
day ; and his stone is the dark sapphire, Aquarius

2D2


420 AMULETS ANDYSUPERSITTIONS


gives to those who are born under him thoughtful-
ness inclining to mysticism, prudence, fidelity, love
of the arts, a strong will, patience, capacity for
work, a courteous disposition, and strong, enduring.
passions. They have weak shoulders and legs, and
suffer from cramp and convulsions. This Sign
affords no protection to those who travel by sea.
The Fisnes.—Their ruler is Jupiter; their day
is Friday; and their stone is the blue chrysolite.
This Sign is especially malignant and has been called
the ‘“‘ hell of the Zodiac.” It controls the feet, and
those who are born under it are liable to pustules
and arthritis. It makes them weak, cowardly,
lazy, shuffling, and it portends for them calamities,
misfortunes, losses, dishonour, ruin and death. On
the other hand some think that they may obtain
positions of trust and importance, and enjoy the
friendship of powerful and wealthy friends.


THE TWELVE HOUSES OF THE SKY;


In Astrology the course of the sun is divided into
twelve portions or “‘ Houses,’ which correspond to
the twelve months and the twelve Signs of the
Zodiac. Each “‘ House’ exercises a certain influence
on men, and on all the affairs of their lives. These
influences are indicated by the names of the Houses.


rt. House of Life. 7. House of Marriage.
2. House of Riches. 8. House of Death.

3. House of Kinsfolk. 9g. House of Religion.
4. House of Parents. 10. House of Dignities.
5. House of Children. 11. House of Friendship.
6. House of Health. 12. House of Enemies.


Allthe Signs of the Zodiac pass through these Houses
in turns taking their own special influences with them.


STARS: OR’ SIGNS. OF [THE ZODIAC


the month), hence the name Dekan.


THE DEKANS.


To each Sign of the Zodiac the god Marduk
attached three stars or constellations.
of three Dekans rules the month of 30 days, and
each Dekan rules a ten-day week (7.e. one-third of


421


Each group


The following


table shows the period of the rule of each Dekan in
each Sign of the Zodiac, and gives the name of its
planetary regent.


SIGN.


RAM


BULL


TwINS ..


CANCER


LION


VIRGIN


BALANCE


SCORPION


SAGITTARIUS


Com NCO Ne eCOn Ne COON Conus) et ICo IN el Co NS Co Net Co ON)


DEKAN.


PERIOD OF RULE.


Mar. 21—Mar. 30


» 31-April 9
Aprilio-#s) 19
” 20— ” 30
May 1-May 10
poe She i 748)
Spy Ve ote trae
» 3i-June 9
June 1O=7.5) 4.20
ee CAS a
AIA 2 areas
» IZ ,, 22
» 23-Aug. I
USA Zane ger ET
» IZ ,, 22
23 ept i
De Dewien es yew T
So) AE ia 7h
~ 22-Oct.~ I
Oct 2-2 h AIT
Si a ea ee BE
a Ea 95 31
Nov. 1—Nov. 10
Soe ey e48)
ae er ge OO
Dec. 1-—Dec. 10
fe La ys). 20


PLANETARY
REGENT.


Mars.
See
Venus.
Mercury.
Moon.
Saturn.
Jupiter.
Mars.
Sun.
Venus.
Mercury.
Moon.
Saturn.
Jupiter.
Mars.
Sun.
Venus.
Mercury.
Moon.
Saturn.
Jupiter.
Mars.
Sun.
Venus.
Mercury.
Moon.
Saturn.


422 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


SIGN. DEKAN.

I

CAPRICORNUS i 2
3

(<2

AQUARIUS Vee
L3

i

PISCES a. au 2
eo


PERIOD OF RULE.


. 21-—Dec.
31—Jan.


LOS". 55


20= by
30—Feb.


Oe ”
LOr ”


T—Mar.


alae 5/3


PLANETARY
REGENT.


Jupiter.
Mars.
Sun.
Venus.
Mercury.
Moon.
Saturn.
Jupiter.
Mars.


CHAPTER XxXYV.
THE STONES OF THE PLANETS AND THEIR INFLUENCES.


The old astrologers believed that precious and
semi-precious stones were bearers of the influences of
the Seven Astrological Stars or Planets. Thus they
associated with the—

Sun, yellowish or gold-coloured stones, e.g. amber,
hyacinth, topaz, chrysolite.

With the Moon, whitish stones, e.g. the diamond,
crystal, opal, beryl, mother-of-pearl.

With Mars, red stones, ¢.g. ruby, haematite,
jasper, blood-stone.

With MERcuRY, stones of neutral tints, e.g. agate,
carnelian, chalcedony, sardonyx.

With JUuPITER, blue stones, ¢.g. amethyst, tur-
quoise, sapphire, jasper, blue diamond.

With VENUS, green stones, e.g. the emerald and
some kinds of sapphires.

With SaTurRN, black stones, ¢.g. jet, onyx,
obsidian, diamond, and black coral.

The astrologers believed that each stone possessed
a sort of living personality, which could experience
sickness and disease, and could become old and
powerless and even die. As has been shown in the
section on Babylonian amulets, superstitions of
this kind were common in Babylonia in the third
millennium B.c., and the Rubrics in the Book of the
Dead prove that the same was the case in Egypt.
Thus chapter xxx B must be written on a scarab of
green stone, and the text of the Isis amulet on


424 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


carnelian, and that of the Tet of Osiris on gold.
The Shamir gem (diamond ?), which was set in the
magic ring of Solomon, was regarded as a living power
which preserved him from all harm, and kept him
on his throne. To the early Christians the diamond
was the symbol of our Lord, and they regarded it as
an antidote to both physical and moral evil. Both
the pagan astrologers and Christians held the
sapphire in high esteem, the former associating it
with the planet Venus, and the latter with the Virgin
Mary. It was a type of virginity and chastity.
Some stones were credited with many powers. Thus
the jacinth gave a man health and happiness and
wealth and protected him from lightning and the
thunderbolt. The turquoise, emerald, and root-of-
emerald preserved a man from every kind of accident,
and the emerald especially was supposed to stimulate
the mental powers. But authorities on such matters
did not always agree as to the effect which was pro-
duced by certain stones. Thus some thought that
an amethyst preserved its wearer from drunkenness,
whilst others believed that it made him dream many
dreams. Red stones, the ruby, carbuncle, and red
jasper were generally believed to make a man strong
and sturdy ; some, however, regarded it as a healer
of wounds. To stones used in medicine specific
qualities were ascribed.


THE SYMBOLISM OF GEMS AND SEMI-PRECIOUS STONES.


AGATE (black).—Courage, boldness, victory in
games, prosperity. Agates with unusual markings
on them were greatly prized, and special value was
attached to them.


SYMBOLISM OF GEMS 425


AGATE (red).—Calm, peace, protection against the
bites of snakes, scorpions, and other insects, and
against lightning and the thunderbolt.

AQUAMARINE.—Youth, hope, health. Worn in
earrings 1t gained affection and love for the wearer.

AMBER.—Preserved children from fits.

AMETHYST.—Peace of mind. It prevented its
wearer from getting drunk and, if the circle of the
sun or moon was engraved on it, from death by
poison.

BERYL.—Hope.

Cat's Eyvr.—Protection against the Evil Eye.
Long life.

CARBUNCLE.—Determination, assurance, energy,
Physical well-being.

CARNELIAN.—Friendship. A cure for depression
and pessimism.

CHRYSOLITE.—Wisdom, discretion, prudence.

CHRYSOPRASE.—Gailety, Joy.

CoRAL (red).—Attachment, devotion, protection
against plague and pestilence. It loses its colour
when a friend of the wearer is about to die.

CoRUNDUM.—Stability of mind.

D1AMOND.—Candour, sincerity, fidelity and affec-
tion.

EMERALD.—Faithfulness, unchanging love. Helps
the wearer to forecast events.

GARNET.—Energy, devotion, loyalty. Promotes
sincerity.

HAEMATITE.—Alertness, ay, sexual impulse,
success 1n litigation.

HYACINTH (JACINTH).—Fidelity.

JADE (white).—Quiets intestinal disturbances.

JADE (black).—Strength, power.


426 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


JASPER.—Joy, happiness, relief from pain.

JET.—Grief, mourning.

LaPIs LAZULI.—Capacity, ability, success, divine
favour.

LoADSTONE.—Honesty, integrity, virility.

MAGNETITE.—Sexual impulse.

MOONSTONE.—See SELENITE.

OLIVINE.—Simplicity, modesty, pleasure, happi-
ness.

ONyx.—Destroys nightmare and bad dreams.
Perspicacity.

OpaL.—Fidelity, religious emotion, prayers, assur-
ance.

PEARL.—Chastity, purity.

Preripot.—Thunderbolt. An aid to friendship.

RuBy.—Love, passion. An aid to firm friendship.
Beauty. -

SAPPHIRE.—Innocence, truth. A giver of health
and a preserver of chastity.

SARDONYX.—Brightness, vivacity. A guide to
honour and renown.

SELENITE.—Good Luck.

Topaz.—Love, affection. An aid to sweetness of
disposition. |

TURQUOISE.—Courage which leads to fulfilment
and success.

TURQUOISE (black-lined).—Love, and a winner of
love.


Clee Ve


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS AND THEIR MYSTIC AND
SACRED CHARACTER.


Many ancient nations seem to have held the view
which PyTHAGORAS (born B.c. about 580) enunciated
to the effect that “ all things are numbers ”’ and that
the elements of numbers are the elements of all
things. The Pythagoreans thought the numbers
which were only divisible by themselves, or by
unity, to be of more importance than the others,
and among these may be mentioned 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, II,
P3973 09,°23,/29, 31, 41, 43,47; 53; 59, 61, 67, 71,
73, 79, 83, 89, 97. The mathematical tables found
at NIFFAR in Babylonia prove that the SUMERIANS
and their kinsfolk were skilled reckoners, and there
seems to be no good reason for doubting that the
Greeks and many later peoples have borrowed many
of their beliefs as to the mystic and sacred character
of certain numbers from them. They were in fact
the founders of the science of mathematics. In
BABYLONIA the numbers from 60 to I were reserved
for gods, ¢g. 60 -(the soss) = ANU, 50 = BEL,
40 = EA, 30 = SIN (Moon-god), 25 MARDUK, 20 =
SHAMASH, I5 = ISHTAR, 10 = RAMMAN (JASTROW,
Religion, p. 465). The greatest sacred number in
BABYLONIA was 12,960,000 (= 60% or 3,600’, 2.¢. the
sar squared). It has been shown to be the “ number
of Plato” (Apam, Republic of Plato, p. 2641.).
When related to time 12,960,000 days = 36,000


428 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


years, each containing 360 days, and is fundamental
in astronomy and in astrology. It governs the
universe and also man’s life, especially the period
of gestation, for 216 days(?), the period of the seven
months’ child, and 270 days the period for the nine
months’ child, inaugurate a lucky birth, for both
are divisors of 12,960,000. Every number which
is a divisor of 12,960,000 is a lucky number, and
therefore 7, 11, and 13 are unlucky (W. CRUICKSHANK
in Hastines’ Encyclopaedia, vol. ix. p. 417), accord-
ing to some authorities. The numbers 3, 4, 5, 7;
IO, I2, 40, 70, and 100 were sacred among many
ancient peoples, and of these 3 seems to be the most
popular mystic number. It represents the perfect
number -2-plus r.- In Vedic literature 3, 7, 219555,
77 and gg are magical numbers. In the Story of
the Buddha 7 occurs very frequently, and in Iranian
(Pehlevi) texts 3 and 7 play very prominent parts.
The GREEKS and RoMANS regarded 3, 9, and 12 as
magical numbers, and it is clear that they borrowed
12 from the BABYLONIANS and SUMERIANS, who had
a duodecimal-sexagesimal system. The fundamental
cyphers of it were 5 and 7; 5+7=12and 5 X 12
= 60; the Sumerian soss = 60, the ney = 600, and
the sar 3,600. The numbers 3 and 9 were favourites
with the CELTs, and 3, 9, and 7 with the Slavs.
OnE.—The number 1 represented God. The
Egyptian declared in his Hymns to Ra or ‘Amen, or
‘Amen-Ra, that he was the ‘“‘ one ONE,” or perhaps
‘the only Ong.” Moses said, “ Hear, O Israel,
the Lord our God [is] ONE” (Deut. vi. 4; Mark xii.
29). The PYTHAGOREANS made 1 = the, Deiyg
indivisible and embracing all things. The Muslim
says ‘‘ Say God is ONE God” (Kur’an, Sirah cxii).


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS 429


The Babylonians considered I, 2, 6, 10, II, 12, 13
to be unlucky numbers.

Two.—The number 2, the perfect number, is the
sign of duality, and was regarded as the origin of
evil, and the emblem of matter which is divisible :
it is a symbol of a revolt against unity. The
Egyptians had an amulet in the form of two fingers,
their country consisted of two parts, and their king-
ship was dual. Christian priests raise two fingers
_ in blessing.

THREE.—The Babylonians considered 3, 4, 5, 7,
15 to be lucky rumbers. The number 3 was said to
symbolize birth, life, and death ; beginning, middle,
and end; and childhood, manhood, and old age.
As symbolic of the Trinity it was most sacred. In
BABYLONIA and EGypT we have triads of gods,
pen, Ha, and Bel; Khepera, Shu, and Tafhut ;
Amen, Mut, and Chonsu, etc. The Babylonians
spoke of heaven, earth, and underworld, and the
‘Egyptians of heaven, earth, and the Tuat. The Old
and New Testaments contain many instances of the
use of 3 as a symbolic or perfect number, e.g. God
called Samuel three times, Our Lord asked Peter
if he loved Him three times, David bowed before the
Lord three times, Christ fell down three times on
the road to Golgotha. In classical mythology we
have the three-headed Cerberus, the 3 Fates, the
3 Furies, the 3 Graces, the 3 Harpies, the 3 Gorgons,
etc. The Magi were 3 in number (according to one
legend they were twelve), CASPAR, MELCHIOR, and
BALTHAZAR. MAN consists of 3 parts: body, soul,
and spirit. The Church distinguishes 3 sections in
the Other World, heaven, hell, and purgatory; in
Church Architecture we have the three-light window,


430 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


and in Christian Art the trefoil or triangle usually
symbolizes the Trinity. Authorities on dreams
assert that a dream thrice repeated ‘‘ comes true,”
and that the man who does not obey an order given
to him in a dream three times will suffer great
material loss. And the dimensions of solid bodies
are 3 in number. |

Four.—In Egypt (as in Babylon) we have the
4 quarters of the earth, and in the hieroglyphic
texts the number 4 is symbolic and complete. Thus
we have the 4 sons of Horus, the 4 altars, the 4
Birthplaces in Abydos, the 4 cardinal points, the
4 doves of heaven, the 4 winds, the 4 rudders, the
4 nems vases, the 4 vessels of blood, the 4 vessels of
milk, the 4 glorious gods, the 4 spirits, the 4 lighted
lamps, etc. In the Bible we have the 4 rivers of
Paradise, the 4 days lamentation (Judges x1. 40),
the 4 barrels of water (1 Kings xviii. -33), the beasts
with 4 faces and 4 wings (Ezek. 1. 3), the 4 men in
the fire, the 4 beasts, the 4 kings, the 4 horns, the
4 carpenters (Zech. 1. 20), the 4 anchors (Acts xxvii.
29), etc. We have also the 4 Elements—Earth,
Air, Fire, and Water, the 4 Evangelists, and the
4 temperaments of men (according to HIPPOKRATES).
A name of God YH, contains two letters, but the
Great and Most Holy Name, YHWH contains four.
The Kabbaldh adds many other examples of the
use of the number 4.

Frv—E.—The number 5 is most holy and lucky,
according to some writers, and it is symbolic and
a sign of completeness. In Egypt 5 men formed a
gang of workmen, and among the Hebrews 5 men
formed a household. In the Bible we read of the
5 righteous whom ABRAHAM hoped to find in Sopoo ;


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS 431


the altar had to be 5 cubits long and 5 cubits wide ;
5 were to put to flight a hundred (Lev. xxvi. 8);
the peace offering was to be 5 rams, 5 goats, 5 lambs ;
5 kings were slain, 5 kings hid, 5 kings were hanged
on 5 trees; the golden emerods were 5, the golden
mice 5; David chose 5 smooth stones from the
brook ; there were 5 loaves and 2 fishes ; 5 sparrows
were sold for 2 farthings; 5 of the virgins were
wise and 5 were foolish; the pound (Luke xix. 18)
- gained 5 pounds; the Samaritan woman had had
5 husbands, etc. The Pentacle of the Templars,
the so-called “‘ Solomon’s Seal’”’ was five pointed,
and it was regarded as a great and mighty protection.
Our senses are 5, the skull is formed by 5 bones,
the metacarpal bones are 5, and the. metatarsal
bones are also 5. Those who play games of chance
look upon 5 as the heart and governor of the figures
1-g. In the Casino it is called the “ protector of the
house,’ for it is thought to reduce the chances of
those who have the numbers 1, 3, 6, 8 and those
who have 2, 4, 7, 9 to an equality, and in any case
the chances are in favour of the Bank.

Stx.—tThe figure 6 is said to be a perfect number,
because the days of creation were 6. It is holy
because it contains the first even number (2), and
the first odd number (3), the former representing
the male member, and the latter the mulebris
pudenda. The Egyptians celebrated a festival
piyOoalheseBible= speaks of (6 cities of refuge
(Numb. xxxv. 6). JONATHAN slew the giant of
Gath, who had 6 fingers on each hand, and 6
toes on each foot (2 Sam. xvil. 20, 21); the height
of GOLIATH was 6 cubits and a span (I Sam. xvii. 4)
and the breadth of the image of gold was 6 cubits


432 AMULETS AND. SUPERSTITIONS


(Dan. iii. 1). The frequent use of 6 in measure-
ments is significant.

The ADAMITES represented the Creation in 6 days
by the HEXAGRAM thus :—


Day |
Cancer


Capricorn


Each of the 6 small triangles should have in it
the Sign of the Zodiac indicated by the name in
English letters.

Day 1, or Period 1, represents the time of the
crustaceans and molluscs.

Day 2 = the period of fishes.

Day 3 = the period of reptiles.

Day 4 = the period of small mammifers and birds.

Day 5 = the period of the great mammifers.

Day 6 = the period of human beings.

Those who believed in the physical significance of
the Hexagram taught that communication between
the living and the dead was possible, and adopted the
dogma of REINCARNATION. The Hexagram is often
called the Pentacle or Solomon’s Seal, but it is a
mistake to do so; the true form of the Pentacle


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS 433


is here given ; i it is to all intents and


purposes a five-pointed star. It is first seen on
pottery from Ur of the Chaldees.

SEVEN.—The number 7 is specially sacred, sym-
bolic, perfect and mystic, and it has always been
so. Indians, Persians, Sumerians, Babylonians,
Assyrians, Egyptians, and the Teutonic, Celtic, and
other peoples of Europe have all considered that it
possesses a special significance. In that it is in-
divisible it has been compared to God. In the
Vedic and Buddhist Literatures it plays a very
important part. In Babylonian we have the 7 gates
of the Underworld, the 7 evil spirits of heaven, the
7 evil spirits of earth, the 7 stages of the Tower of
Babel, the 7 tablets of Creation, the Seven-fold
deity, t.e. the children of ENMESHARA, etc, In
Egyptian we have the 7 Asits, or halls of Osiris, the
7 forms of Osiris, the 7 Hathors, the 7 cows and their
bull, the 7 great Spirits, the 7 cobras (Uraei), the
7 hawks, the 7-headed serpent, the 7 scorpions of
Isis. The Bible supplies many examples of the
use of 7. Thus we have the 7 kine of Pharaoh’s
reali 7 cats. Olecorp, 7 sabbaths, the, 7 altars,
7 oxen and 7 rams of BALAAM, 7 trumpets, 7 locks
of hair, 7 pillars of wisdom, 7 steps, 7 cubits, 7 weeks,
7 shepherds, 7 eyes, 7 lammps,i7 baskets, 7 loaves,
7 devils, 7 deacons, 7 churches in Asia, 7 candle-
sticks, 7 stars, 7 plaques (Rev. xv. 1), 7 golden
vials, 7 years, 7-fold vengeance, etc. Jacob bowed
7 times, the priest sprinkled blood 7 times. Naaman
was told to wash in the Jordan 7 times, silver is


purified 7 times, and the erring brother is to be
aud


434 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


forgiven 70 times 7. God rested on the 7th day ;
Christ spake 7 words on the Cross. The Jews have
7 holy days in the year, and their golden candlestick
had 7 branches. The 7th day of the 7th month
was holy, and Israel feasted 7 days and remained
in their tents 7 days. We have the 7 Sacraments,
7 deadly sins, 7 penitential psalms, the 7 sorrows,
7 joys and 7 glories of the Virgin, 7 virtues, 7 gifts
of the Spirit, 7 Councils of the Church, 7 sprinklings
of the Christian altar ; 7 champions of Christendom
(St. GEORGE, ST. ANDREW, ST. Davip, ST. PATRICK,
St. JAMES (SPAIN), St. DENYS (FRANCE), ST.
ANTHONY (ITALY) ) ; the 7 wonders of the world, the
7 sages of Greece, the seven before Thebes, the 7-headed
Hydra, the 7 hills of Rome, the 7 Archangels, the
7 colours of the rainbow, the 7 planets, the 7 notes
of music, the 7 ages of man, the 7 metals of the
Alchemists, etc. In the Middle Ages the altar ina
church was decorated with 7 precious and semi-
precious stones, viz. diamond or crystal = strength ;
sapphire, or some blue stone = wisdom; emerald, or
some green stone = skillin adaptability ; topaz =
knowledge ; jasper or agate = splendour, beauty ;
ruby, carnelian or garnet = submission or devotion ;
amethyst = prayer and adoration.

Ercut.—One of the oldest Companies of gods in
Egypt, that of THotH of HERMOPOLIs, contained
8 deities, z.e. four gods and four goddesses; the
gods were frog-headed, and the goddesses serpent-
headed. The number 8 seems to have had no
special significance among the E@yprians, but the
Sovereign Chiefs in the Tuat were 8 in number;
8 gods bore the Boat of the Earth, the Shemti
serpent had 8 heads, 4 at each end of his body.


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS 435


Hulme calls it the ‘“‘number of regeneration ”’
because most of the old baptisteries and fonts are
octagonal. The Pentateuch lays it down that a
male child 8 days old is to be circumcised, and in
connection with a measure used in building it seems
to have had a special meaning. Thus there were |
to be 8 boards and sockets of silver (Exod. xxvi. 25),
stones of 8 cubits were used in the foundations of the
temple (xr Kings vil. 10), the going up in Ezekiel’s
building had 8 steps and 8 tables were provided for
the slaughter of sacrificial animals (Ezek. xl, 31, 41).

NINE.—Among many ancient and modern nations
the number 9 has been thought to be as important
and complete as 3. As representing 3 x 3 it has
been called a triad of triads 7.e. each person of a
triad was expanded into a triad. Hence g is a
triply sacred and perfect number. The Companies
of the gods of heaven, earth and the underworld
of Egypt contained 9 gods, and Osiris had 9 Watchers
and g Mourners. The devouring Worms of hell
were g in number (Book of the Dead, chap. 1B), and
we have the g repellers of Apep. The number g is
mentioned rarely in the Bible, but we may note
that the bedstead of Og, the King of BASHAN, was
g cubits long (Deut. i. 4). Then we have the 9
Muses, the g Archons of Greece, the g orders of
angels, the 9 orders of devils, the g-fold gates of
Hell, the 9 days during which Satan and his angels
fell from heaven, Christ appeared to His disciples
g times after His death. The period of human
gestation is g months. In classical and mediaeval
literature we have :—g earths, g heavens, 9 spheres,
g fairies of ARMORICA, 9 rivers of hell, LARS PORSENA


swore by 9 gods, g Gallicenae priestesses, the ark of
de 2


436 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


DEUCALION sailed for 9 days before it rested, g crowns
in heraldry, 9 kinds of crosses, 9 points of the law,
Dryden’s 9g worthies (3 Jews, 3 Pagans, and 3
Christian knights), 9 days’ wonder, 9 tailors (tellers ?)
make a man, a cat has 9g lives, the cat-o-9-tails whip,
to see 9 magpies is unlucky, the witches in Macbeth
repeated their spell 9 times, the Crown offered as a
prize by King Arthur had 9 diamonds in it, 9 knots
in a piece of black wool cured a sprained ankle,
a smartly dressed person is “‘ dressed up to the
nines,’ a person or thing was as nice as a silver
Q-penny piece, leases were granted for 999 years,
and are still granted for 99 years, toasts three times
three were formerly very common. The results of
certain multiplications of 9 reproduce the same
figures :—


OX 02 Osa Oe 0 uso

ORK 2 eo 7 AON 2

OoX vA == 20%dndso~ aia 70R

OV 45 dds 4 Oa
Tren.—There seems to be nothing mystical about
10, but there is no doubt that it was regarded as a
complete and perfect number. The Papyrus of
Ani makes the Pylons in the kingdom of Osiris to
be I0 in number, but some of the later Recensions
of the Book of the Dead make their number larger.
The Kabbalists regarded it as a perfect number, for
the Sephiréth or Emanations from EN SOPH were
to; their names will be found under the section
Kabbalah. And we have, of course, the Ten Com-
mandments. In the Bible 10 appears often as a
number indicating completeness, ¢.g. Io camels,
10 shekels, ro asses, 10 pillars, 10 bullocks, 10 women


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS 437


who baked bread, 10 men, Io concubines, 10 men
slew ABSALOM, I0 knots, ro lovers, ro leaves, ro
tribes, 10 chariots, 10 pounds gained by one pound,
etc., and we may note that DAvin’s harp had ro
strings, and that the seven-headed dragon had 10
horns. Mr. Hulme (Symbolism, p. 15) mentions the
10 petals of the passion flower as representing 10 of
the twelve Apostles, Judas, the betrayer, and Peter,
the denier of our Lord being unrepresented.

ELEVEN.—There seems to be nothing mystic
about the number 11, and he who dreams about it
is said to be about to suffer some loss or misfortune.
A company of Egyptian gods sometimes contains
II members, and Mr. A. B. KEITH says that the
gods of the Rigveda are often given as 33, and
consist of 3 groups each containing 11. The Muslim
rosary, when complete, contains 99 beads, 1.2. 3 x
II X 3; and a marker is inserted at the end of every
Bom cadcm( ot < ir). to, enable; the ‘reciter, of the
99 Beautiful Names of God to rest. At the present
time many rosaries are sold containing only 33 beads,
and in every one which the writer has bought there
was a marker at the end of the first and second I1,
and the “ tower,’ which represents ALLAH, at the
end ‘of the third 11.

TWELVE.—The number 12, like Io, II, etc., was
held in Babylonia to be unlucky, and modern
writers on numbers accept this view ; but 11 seems
to have no symbolic meaning. The Zodiac originated,
it seems, in Babylonia, and its Signs were 12, and
the months of the year were 12, and the whole day
contained 12 kasbu or double hours. The night-
realm of Osiris was divided into 12 parts. and in the
Book of Gates we have ;—12 gods of the funerary


438 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


mountains, 12 gods of Amentt, 12 gods in shrines
in the Tuat (Underworld), 12.gods of the Lake of
Boiling Water, 12 gods with their doubles, 12 gods
of the Lake of Life, 12 gods before and 12 gods
behind the shrine, 12 gods of the measuring line,
12 gods of hidden arms and hands, 12 gods of stakes,
12 gods who control the serpent Seba-Apep, 12
Djadjau who provide the bread of Maat, 12 casters
of spells, 12 gods of the stars that never set, 12 god-
desses of the hours, etc. In the Bible we have :—
12 sons of JACOB, 12 wells in ELIM, 12 precious
stones, 12 cakes, I2 oxen, 12 stones from JORDAN,
12 Apostles, 12 baskets of fragments, 12 legions of
angels, a crown with 12 stones, 12 gates, the r2 kinds
of fruit of the tree of life, etc. HERCULES performed
12 labours, Roman Law was written on 12 bronze
tablets, 12 pence = one shilling, and 12 inches make
one foot. In Kabbabah the number 12 represents
the Philosopher’s Stones.’ And we may‘note that the
144,000 mentioned in Rev. xiv. 3 = 12 times 12,000.
THIRTEEN.—According to some, 13 is an uwun-
lucky number, and according to others it is lucky.
The superstitious dislike to be one of 13 at dinner
is derived from the Last Supper of our Lord with His
Twelve Disciples. The number 13 is associated
also with the fee of 13 pence which the hangman
was paid for each execution at Tyburn ; the payment
actually made was 134 pence, but the halfpenny
was regarded as the price of the rope. The value of
the Scots mark was fixed at 134 pence, and was
sometimes alluded to as “ hangman’s money.”’


1 As a matter of fact the Philosopher’s Stone was a red
powder which the alchemist used in getting rid of alloys or
impurities in metals,


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS 439


In the Haxey Hood Game 13 has a special sig-
nificance. The Lord of the Hood wears a red coat
and a hat wreathed with flowers and carries a wand
made of 13 willows tied 13 times with willow bands
(The Times, Jan. 4, 1920, p. 15, col. 6).

FouURTEEN.—A mystic number connected with the -
14th day of the moon when it is full.

FIFTEEN was a sacred number to the Kabbalists
because it represented the numerical value of the
two Hebrew letters YH, which form one of the names
of God.

SIXTEEN, according to the PYTHAGOREANS, who
regarded it as a perfect number, was of special
importance, because it represented 4 X 4.

TWENTY-ONE, 1.¢. 3 X 7, each a perfect number,
indicated completeness and majesty ; the salute of
21 guns probably represents an ancient ceremonial
in which the number 21 played a prominent part.

TWENTY-TWO, 4.6. 2 X II, iS a sacfed number
because the Hebrew alphabet contains 22 letters,
and the Books of the Old Testament are 22 in
number.

TWENTY-EIGHT, a mystic number connected with
the 28 days, 1.¢. 7 X 4 of the moon.

TuirTy, an accursed number, because JUDAS
betrayed our Lord for 30 pieces of silver ; another
view is that it is lucky because JEsus began to
preach His Gospel in the 30th year of His age.

THIRTY-THREE, 1.€. 3 X II, has been held to be
a mystic number, because JESUS was 33 years old
when He was crucified ; and ALEXANDER the Great
was poisoned at Babylon when he was 33 years of
age.

THIRTY-NINE.—It was laid down in Deut. xxv. 3,


440 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


that a man might be punished by a beating of 40
stripes and no more, and St. PAvL says that he
received from the Jews 40 stripes save one, 1.€. 39
Stripes; 3x s1.

Forty seems to be nothing more than a round or
general number. The IsRAELITES ate manna 40
years, and wandered in the desert 40 years ; SOLO-
MON, JEHOASH, and JOASH each reigned 40 years;
Moses was on the mount 40 days; JONAH preached
in Nineveh 4o days; our Lord fasted for 40 days,
and remained in the tomb 40 hours, etc. Quaran-
tine lasts 40 days; the period of sanctuary was
40 days, and many people still believe that if St.
SWITHIN’S day be wet 40 wet days will follow. And
40 shilings is a well-known fine in our days.
It is probable that in many cases 40 was originally
AD Meere7 OO,

Forty-Two.—tThe Assessors or Judges in the Hall
of OsIRIS were 42 in number, each one representing
a nome. '

Firty.—The Law was given to MOSES on SINAI
50 days after Israel came out of Egypt, and the
Holy Spirit descended on the Apostles 50 days after
the Resurrection. 50 is said to be the number of the
Holy Spirit. 50 honorific and great names were
bestowed upon MArpDukK after he had reconsituted
the heavens and the earth.

FIFTY-FIVE, 1.€. 5 X II appears as a magical
number in Indian spells.

Sixty.—In Southern Babylonia the sexagesimal
system was in general use in texts of a mathematical
character.

SEVENTY appears to have been used, like 40, as
a round or general number, and many instances


THEORIES ABOUT NUMBERS 44]


its usedreto pe found in the Biblewwe.g. ~ the
days of our years are three-score years and ten ”’
(eommxc 2 O)G in alter, these: things -the Lord
Aopomted another oO. .alsow (buke* x; 1)... It is,
however, tolerably certain that the actual number
of disciples sent out was 72, and this view is sup-
ported by the statements of ecclesiastical writers.
We refer commonly to the ancient Greek version
Umeene Old“lestament: as the © Seventy (LXX),
but the Book of the Bee and other Syriac works say
that the translation was made by 72 men, 6 from
each of the Twelve Tribes, and give their names.
And one of the great Kabbalistic names of God
contained 72 and not 70 letters. The Egyptian
priests composed a Hymn of Praise to AMEN-RA,
in which the god was addressed by each of his great
names and attributes. In the papyrus of NEsI-
KHONSU, in Cairo, the god himself says that he has
had the Seventy Addresses to Ra recited on behalf
of the princess (Budge, Book of the Dead, 1923;
p. 660). But in the edition of the Egyptian text
published by NAVILLE the Addresses are SEVENTY-
FIVE in number; for a translation see my Gods of
the Egyptians, vol. 1. p. 339 f. The words of our
Lord in Matt. xvuli. 22 indicate the completeness
ofthe number 70 <x 7-— 400.

NINETY-NINE.—The “ beautiful names” of God,
according to the Arabs, are gg in number, and the
beads in the Muslim rosaries are 99, 1.€. II X 9}
these are divided into groups of 33, 7.e. II X 3.

ONE HUNDRED AND TEN.—The famous Egyptian
writer PTAH-HETEP, the Wazir of King Assa (about
3200 B.C.), lived to the age of 10 years, and several
Egyptian officials are known to have reached this


442 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


great age. Why IIo years were regarded as the
limit of human life is not clear.

The Kabbalists advised their followers to under-
take no business on the following days of the month :
ai Pie We elms ie Yon @, Var Re Pece te)

The following were favourable days for business :
Wile 75L0, Lora es 7 LO ee 21, 22, 27, 23.


CEE Wine V LT,


DIVINATION.


The word ‘“ Alchemy,” 7.e. the “ Black Art,” or
rather the “ magical craft of the Black Country,”’ is
derived from one of the names of Northern Egypt,
which was called the ‘‘ Black Country ”’ because of
the brownish-black colour of the soil in the Delta, as
opposed to the “ Red Country,” which was given
to Upper Egypt because of its reddish-yellow sand.
We might thus think that Egypt was the oldest
home of divination known to us, but such is
not the case, for the literature of Egypt contains
neither mention nor allusion to any of the numerous
kinds of divination which were practised in Sumer
and Akkad in the third millennium B.c. Until the
Ptolemaic period divination by earth, air, fire, and
water was practically unknown among the indigenous
peoples of the country, and there is little doubt
that they only became acquainted with these
branches of the art of Magic through the Greeks who
borrowed many of their magical practices from the
Babylonians. That Joseph used the divining cup
does not prove that divining by water, or wine, or
oil was common in Egypt, for Joseph was a Hebrew
and his people borrowed the art from the Baby-
lonians.

The object of divination, no matter what the means
used were, is to find out what is the Will of God, and
what the course of future events is going to be,
whether they concern an individual or a people.
The methods of divination used by primitive or
uncivilized peoples were of a simple character, but


444 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


among such highly civilized people as the Sumerians
and Babylonians they represent much thought and
reasoning powers, and some of them were almost
scientific in character. The Sumerians developed a
great system of omens, and the cuneiform texts show
that the omen-lists were revised carefully from
time to time and added to, presumably as the result of
new experiences. The priests derived omens from
dreams, whether dreamed by the priest or a private
individual, from the planets and stars, from eclipses,
from the movements of animals, from the flight of
birds, from the appearance of snakes at certain
places, from locusts, lions, the actions of dogs, the
direction of the winds, the state of the rivers, from
peculiarities in newly-born children and animals,
from the birth of twins, from accidents that may
happen to men, from deformities in children, from
the birth of monstrosities, from the symptoms which
occur in diseases, etc. According to the Sumerians
and Babylonians everything that happened to the
king, and to men and animals and birds and reptiles,
portended something, and the priest was expected
to tell the enquirer what that something was. The
enormous number of omen-tablets which have been
found in Babylonia and Assyria prove that the
priests kept strict account of the events which
followed every happening that came to their notice,
and it would seem that their tablets of omens,
e.g. the Book of the Illumination of Bel, con-
tained the results of the experiences of an untold
number of generations of priests. For further details
and translations of a number of typical omens see
the chapter, “‘ Oracles and Omens,” in Jastrow, The
Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, 1808, p. 328 f.


GEA PH ey LT:


DIVINATION BY WATER:


The ancients attached special sanctity and power
to water, and in many countries, ¢.g. in Egypt,
water was declared to be the “ father of the gods.”
The Babylonian and Egyptian cosmogonies make it
to be the original home of the gods, and the primeval
watery abyss was the dwelling-place both of the
powers of light and darkness. The Copts said that
water and the wheat plant and the Throne of the
Father stand in one category, and they are the equals
of the ‘“‘Son of God” (Budge, Coptic Apochrypha,
p. 246). And the Ethiopians believed that the
three Persons of the Trinity lived im name only in
the primeval World-Ocean until They pronounced
their own names, when they became Persons. The
Babylonian Water-god was called Ea, his name
meaning the “house of water’; he lived in the
subterranean deep which surrounds the earth,
and he was the source of wisdom and _ learning
and the personification of all knowledge. It is
therefore easy to understand why the Baby-
lonians made divination by water, and why omens
derived from the state and appearance of the rivers
of their country were held to be of supreme import-
ance. As the god of wisdom and knowledge he
was able to inform the enquirer into the future better
than any other god. The early Egyptian texts
make Nu or NENu the god of the World-Ocean,
but it was Hapi, the Nile god, the incomprehensible


446 AMULETS“ AND SUPEKSTITIONS


and unknowable god, whose form could neither be
delineated nor described, who was the Egyptian
equivalent of EA.


DIVINING CUPS AND: BOWLS:


The cups or bowls which the Babylonians used
as drinking vessels and as instruments of divination
were probably made of gold or refined copper, and
the same was the case in Egypt. Some of the gold
bowls which Mr. Woolley found at Ur, and some of
the Egyptian electrum bowls in the British Museum,
were probably drinking vessels. According to Gen.
xliv. 2, the cup from which Joseph drank, and by
which he divined, was made of silver. Whether it
was inscribed with any magical text is unknown,
The use of magical bowls was perpetuated by the
Hebrews who lived at Babylon and in Lower Baby-
lonia in the centuries immediately preceding and
following the birth of Christ, and large numbers of
terra-cotta bowls inscribed with magical texts
written in the “square ’’ Hebrew character, Syriac
and Mandaitic have been found at Abu Habbah, Tall
Ibrahim (Cuthah), Derr, Niffar, Babil, Birs-i-Nimrtd.
Jumjumah, etc. A large collection of them is in the
British Museum. When the first specimens of these
were found by Layard the natives regarded them as
ancient bowls which the magicians had used when
deciding cases or administering draughts of medicine.
They supposed that they were filled, or partially
filled, with water which the litigants drank, and
that the magicians were able to tell which of them
was telling the truth by the effect which the water
had upon him, for the Water god would make the
truth known. But the perfect state of the writing


DIVINATION BY WATER 447


in many of these bowls suggest that they were not
used for divining purposes. Moreover, they were
found at the four corners of the foundations of houses,
both singly and in pairs and inverted, and the latest
view about them is that they were placed there to
serve as traps to catch devils and evil spirits.

When the Orientals at the present day use the
divining cup, or bowl, water is poured into it up
to the brim, and the magician tells the enquirer to
repeat the question to which he wants an answer
and to look into the water. As he is doing this the
magician exercises the magical power which he is
supposed to possess, and so causes a scene to appear
on the surface of the water, which gives the enquirer
his answer, whether favourable or unfavourable to
him. Sometimes the cup is filled with black water,
or ink, when the scene on the surface of it becomes
very plain. When no cup or bowl is available the
enquirer is made to “cup” his hand and ink is
poured into it. The magician walks round the
enquirer a number of times repeating passages from
the Kur’an as he goes, and the enquirer sees on the
surface of the ink what, presumably, the magician
intends him to see.

The following instance of divination by water
occurred at Kharttim a few years ago. A native
who was going to Cairo deposited with a friend
a sum of money and asked him to use it for the
benefit of his wife if he did not return; the friend
accepted the trust and received from his friend
a gift of money for his service. The owner of
the money went to Cairo, and returned safely to
Khartam. When he asked his friend to return to
him the money which he had deposited with him,


448 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


the friend denied all knowledge of the matter
and swore by Allah that the traveller was mis-
taking him for someone else. An angry altercation
followed, and at length the man who had deposited
the money went to the Kadi and told him his story.
The Kadi summoned the other man, and having
heard from him an absolute denial of the charge
brought against him by his friend, determined to
elicit the truth by means of a bowl of water. He
took a sheet of paper and wrote upon it certain
verses from the Kur’an, and then having filled a
clean earthenware bowl with water, he put the
inscribed paper into the water and held it there
until all the ink which was still wet on the paper was
washed off from it into the water. He then told
each man that he was to drink one-half of the
water, and solemnly warned them that the judgment
of Allah would fall upon the liar after he had drunk
his half of the water. Each man drank, and the
Kadi put the bowl on the ground, and then suddenly
the man who had received the money fell backwards
and died forthwith. Some of his friends and kins-
folk who had been watching the men drink cried
out that he had been poisoned, and fetched the
police. When they arrived they hauled the other
man off to prison and set a guard over the house of
the Kadi, whom they believed to be in league with
him. In due course he was charged-with poisoning
his friend, and the British authorities were inclined
to believe him guilty. But so many representations
were made to them by the Muhammadan authorities,
who declared that the death of the man was due to
effect of the words of the Kur’an which were dissolved
in the water, that at length the case was remanded,


DIVINATION BY WATER 449


nBdarnes Matlets Was sreretredy 10. Lord Cromer. in
Cairo, who was asked to give a judicial decision.
With the fairness and open-mindedness which were so
characteristic of him, he sent for some of the Mullahs
of the Al-Azhar University in Cairo, and laid the
matter before them, and said that he would abide
by their decision. The Mullahs made full enquiry
into the case, and their unanimous verdict was that
the man who fell back dead was a liar and a thief,
and that it was Allah Himself Who had killed him
by means of the holy words of the Kur‘an which
had been dissolved in the water in the bowl. They
exonerated the Kadi from all blame and commended
him for his fearless behaviour. Lord Cromer accepted
their explanation of the cause of the man’s death,
and the accused man, who had been kept in prison
whilst his case was being discussed in Cairo, was
released.


CHA Pal Rexel Xe


DIVINATION BY MEANS OF THE LIVER OF AN
ANIMAL,


Among the Roman Aruspices, or Haruspices, 7.e.
the diviners who made known to the people the
will of the gods by means of their arts, was a class
of experts who specialized in the art of prognosticat-
ing by the appearance of the entrails of the animals
which were offered in sacrifice. This class of men
was called ExTispices and the art of divining by
means of the intestines of animals was known as
extisprcvum (Cicero, De Divinatione, 11. 11). This art
was introduced into Rome by the Etrurian envoys
who were sent to the city on the business of the
Government, and according to Cicero (De Div. 11. 23)
was invented by the Etruscan Tages. And the
Haruspices of Etruria were sent for from many
distant places to interpret the sacrifices and the
oracles of the, gods (Livy, voit, (09 secevil eames
There is, however, now reason to believe that
extispiclum was not an indigenous art in Etruria,
but was introduced there as a result of the well-
known connection between Etruria and the East |
which existed in prehistoric times.

In the Book of Ezekiel (xxi..21) we have a de-
scription of the King of Babylon consulting his
diviners as to the probability of making a successful
campaign against Jerusalem. The prophet says:
‘For the King of Babylon stood at the parting
(7.e. mother) of the way, at the head of the two


DIVINATION BY MEANS OF LIVER OF ANIMAL 451


ways, to use divination: he made [his] arrows
bright, he consulted with images (TERAPHiM), he
looked in the liver.”” The TERAPHim have already
been discussed (see page 213). The arrows used for
purposes of divination were kept in a case, which,
unless the king had his own private apparatus, was
produced by the priest. Usually the arrows were
two in number, but sometimes a third was added.
When there were two, one had a mark upon it,
meaning ‘“‘ Yes,’’ and the other a mark meaning
Not om pethird was blank. and, this’ arrow in-
dicated that the enquirer must do as he pleased, and
that the oracle passed no opinion on the question of
the enquirer, and neither approved nor disapproved.
Enquiry by arrows was known as “ Telomancy.”’
We now come to the prophet’s words, “ he looked
iimtiesiver, and they seem to indicate that the
king was an expert in extispictum. In any case
they show that the art of divining by the liver of a
sacrificial victim was practised in Babylon as early
as the VIth century B.c. That it was practised in
Nineveh a century earlier is proved by the clay
model of a liver inscribed with omens which was
found during the excavations at Kuyinjik, and is
now in the British Museum (No. Rm. 620; see
Guide, page 211).

The excavations made at Boghazkéi have also
brought to light a considerable number of clay
models of an animal’s liver inscribed in cunel-
form, with remarks in the Babylonian and Hittite
languages. It was from this region that the art of
divination by the liver passed westwards into
Eastern Europe and Etruria. The famous Etruscan
bronze liver which is now at Piacenza is described

2F 2


452 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


in the Mitteilungen of the German Archaeological
Institute at Rome, Section xx. And see the
remarks of Boissier in his Note sur un document
babylonien se rapportant a lextispicine, 1899. The
rough drawing here given indicates sufficiently
well its shape and appearance. But the true
home of the art of divination by the liver of an
animal is Babylonia, and the Babylonians declared
that it was not invented by them but by the gods.
The Sun-god was believed to have arranged the


Model of an animal’s liver in bronze at Piacenza.


entrails of the sacrificial lamb in such a way that
they would indicate to men the will of the gods,
and, moreover, that he set marks upon them which
could not; be mistaken by the “skilled ~extispex;
The omen-tablets show that Sargon (Sharrukin) of
Agade, the first king of the Dynasty of Akkad
(2637-2582 B.C.), and Naram-Sin, son of Manishtusu
2557-2520 B.c.), made use of omens derived from the
livers of sheep, and it is probable that there was
never a time when the extispex did not exist in
Southern Babylonia. Each generation of extispices
added to the collection of omens which they had


DIVINATION BY MEANS OF LIVER OF ANIMAL 453


inherited from their predecessors, and these already
in the second millennium B.c. formed a very large
section of Babylonian literature. The series of the
omens which were copied for Ashurbanipal, King
of Assyria (668-626 B.c.), and were stored in the
Royal Library, and those which were made for the
Library of Nebo in Nineveh, were counted by the
score, perhaps even hundreds, and without the
catalogues which the king had made the expert
would have found it impossible to consult them.

The Babylonians believed that the seat of all
passions and emotions was not the heart, but the
liver, and that each passion, emotion, and feeling
had its own special section in the liver, and the
extispex based his prophecies on the appearances
whiche these) sections exhibited. It is clear. that
different extispices might read these appearances
in different ways, and therefore the priesthoods of all
the great temples took care to make provision for
the training of expert extispices. Therefore models
of livers were made in clay, and squares were marked
on them, and inscriptions added. By means of these
models young men were taught the art of divination
by the liver, but it is very probable that real livers
were sometimes used by the expert to illustrate his
teachings in the lecture room.

The oldest clay model of a liver which was used
for teaching purposes, or perhaps in actual magical
ceremonies, is that which is preserved in the British
Museum (No. 92668, Guide, page 120). I purchased
this in Baghdad in 1888 from a native of Mosul
called Dawtd Khalaf, who said that it was found
at Abii Habbah where the Trustees of the British
Museum were at that time carrying out excava-


454 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


tions under the direction of the late Mr. Hormuzd
Rassam. For some time the opinions of authorities
were divided as to what the object represented, but
the matter was decided by the late Canon Isaac


OBVERSE.
Baked clay model of the liver of a sheep in the British Museum:


Taylor, Rector of Settrington, who unhesitatingly
declared it to be the model of a human liver, because
its general characteristics resembled those of the
Etruscan bronze liver which he had seen and examined
at Piacenza during a recent visit to Italy. A photo-


DIVINATION BY MEANS OF LIVER OF ANIMAL 455


graphic facsimile of it was published in Cuneiform
Lexts from Babylonian Tablets in the British Museum,
Part VI, London, 1898, together with a transcript
Cigthestexts) pon both sides, ofsit. by Dr. TG.


REVERSE.
Baked clay model of the liver of a sheep in the British Museum.


Pinches. In the Preface it is remarked that the
texts inscribed upon the unique object (Bu. 98-4—26,
238), which has been thought to represent a human
liver, probably refer to Babylonian magic. The
first published study of the liver model was by


456 AMULETS AND, SUPERS ERMIONS


Boissier, Note sur un document babylonien se rapport-
ant a Vextispicine, 1899. Another description of it
was made by M. Jastrow, Religion Babylomens und
Assyriens, Bd. I. pages 218, 221, and he published a
reproduction of it in the Bildermappe which accom-
panied .that work (Nos. 102, 103). It was again
reproduced by Klauber, Polttische-religidse Texte,
-xxxi. f, and see Ebeling, Ketlschrifttexte aus Assur
religid sen Inhalts, No. 444.

There is now no doubt that this model represents
the liver of a small ruminant, probably a sheep.
It shows the organ as viewed from behind. It in-
dicates the four lobes into which the liver is divided,
and the most distinctive features, viz., the processus
pyramidalis (1.e. the pointed projection) the gall-
bladder, and the small excrescence called processus
paprelaris. The surface of the model is divided
into about 50 squares and other compartments,
inscribed with significations, 7.e. the supposed
consequences of the appearance of certain marks
which might be observed on the indicated parts of
the liver, though there is nothing to show what
these marks were. Presumably this model was
used to explain only one particular kind of mark,
according to the position in which it occurred, and
this would be known to the user, though it is no
longer ascertainable. The other side of the model
is but little inscribed, and obviously the mark in
question was less frequently observed there.

In recent years Mr: ©. J; Gadd, ‘of the Bntm@
Museum, has made an intensive study of the models
in connection with his work on the omens, and he has
discovered several important facts connected with
the construction of the model which have been


DIVINATION BY MEANS OF LIVER OF ANIMAL 457


generally overlooked. He has found that there are
three channels bored in the thickness of the clay ;
all these meet in the deep angle or cavity at the base.
From these the first emerges in the middle of the
large left lobe, and perhaps, therefore, represents
the ductus hepaticus. The second runs straight up
through the model and emerges just above the ex-
crescence which represents the processus papielaris,
while the third emerges just to the left of the pointed
projection, and no doubt represents the vena portae.

According to the style of the writing this model
belongs to the period of the Ist Dynasty of Babylon
about 2050-1750 B.C.


CHAP Thi ae


THE “INSCRIBED BRONZE) DIVINING (DISK. OL
PERGAMON.


This very important object was discovered at
_ Pergamon in Asia Minor in 1899, and is preserved
in the Museum in Berlin. It is in a good state of
preservation, (and, its diameter 1S 0-12) emia


INSCRIBED BRONZE DIVINING DISK 459


formed a part of the apparatus which the magicians
of Pergamon used for purposes of divination and
for obtaining Oracles in the first half of the third
century of our Era. The inscriptions on the convex
side are arranged in concentric-circles and contain
a large number of magical hieroglyphs, but among
them are several letters of the Greek alphabet, and
a whole circle of Greek vowels, the Egyptian hiero-
glyph for B, the symbols of the sun and moon, etc.
The system employed by the magician is unknown.
It has been carefully described by Dr. R. WUNscH
in the Jahrbuch of the German Archaeological
Institute, Erganzungshaft, No. 6, 1905. <A drawing
of the complete apparatus, which consisted of ten
parts, has been prepared by ProF. CONZE of Per-
gamon, and see Abbildung 13 in Dr. T. HOPFNER,
Griechisch-Agyptischer Offenbarungszauber, Leipzig,


1924, page 140.


CHAPTER XXXI.


DIVINATION BY EARTH OR SAND (GEOMANCY).


Geomancy was common among many of the peoples
of Africa and Western Asia,* and. it is practised
at the present day in several towns and villages in
both continents. The magician made the enquirer
into the future to sit down upon the ground and to
throw handfuls of dust or sand up into the air, and
when the dust or sand had fallen on the ground, the
magician inspected the little heaps or ridges and
proceeded to identify them with some of the astro-
logical symbols of the seven planets, and the Signs
of the Zodiac, and certain important stars, and
according to their shapes and positions he decided
what the course of future events were to be. At
the present time the sand is spread over a square
board or flat stone, and the enquirer takes up
handfuls of it at random and throws them up
into the air. When the sand has fallen the
magician examines the shapes and forms which
it has taken and makes his deductions as to their
meaning as before.

Another form of enquiry by earth is made in the
following way: the enquirer sits upon the ground,
and taking a dry reed in his right hand prods the
earth with it several times in all directions, and
then the magician examines the holes and groups
them in such a way in his mind that they seem to

1 Mr. Sidney Smith has found among the fragments of the
Kuyanijk Collection a portion of a tablet with a series of
numbers of holes arranged in the same kind of way as those
shown on page 462.


DIVINATION BY EARTH OR SAND (GEOMANCY) 461


NOMEN. ELEMENTVM. | PLAN ETA,


FIGVRA.


Populus
Congregatia


Comiunfio
Cosdunutio


* *
* bal H Carerr
* * Conftritis


Fortunamator
Auxilium main,
Tutclaimcrans


Fortuna mmor
Auxilium minus
Tuteld extens


RA
** *


# #] kK


*


Acquifitio
Comprehenfum intus,


ot


Amifio
Comprehenfum extra,


* ¥1* *


4%


* *


Letitia


a * * Ridens
* + Sanus
* * Barbatue,


* * Triftitis
* * Damnatis Terra
i ba Tranfuerfus
+ Puells
sas aN ie
Puer


Flauus
unberbis


Aqua


Caput
Linen imtrans
Linten fuperius


Terra


| ok * OK
 * x | x
He [oe ok


Cauds
Limen extens
Limen inferius


Ignis


:


Table of geomantic signs with their meanings and the Planet and Sign
of the Zodiac, and Element with which they were associated.


462 AMULETS “AND SURP RS PELRIONS


form figures of the magical symbols of the planets
and stars. Though the enquirer makes the holes
in the earth apparently at random, it was believed
that the reed with which he made them was
directed and guided by the spirits that lived in the


Geomantic signs on the fragment of ‘a terra-cotta tablet in the
Kuydnjik Collection in the British Museum.


earth ; and that they made them into groups which
the magician was able to interpret, and from which
he could deduce omens. Sometimes the enquirer
made a number of points on paper with the reed or
a: pen. Thus if the enquirer made fotr, holes: in


DIVINATION BY EARTH OR SAND (GEOMANCY) 463


the ground or four points on paper § the magician


interpreted them as meaning a “ road ’”’ or a “ way.”
With this group was associated the element Earth,
the planet Moon, and the Sign of the Zodiac Leo.


With the group 009 meaning “ great good fortune,”
were associated the element Earth, the planet Sun,
and the Sign of the Zodiac Pisces. With the group


© © greediness ’’ were associated the element Air,


the planet Jupiter, and the Sign of the Zodiac
Nercury..) Several. Other, examples. are given on
page 461, where a list, compiled by Cornelius Agrippa,
is reproduced from page cxc of his De Occulta Philo-
sopmia. Following this is an important list of the
characters representing the seven astrological stars
which are formed from geomantic figures (see above,
page 388) ; itis reproduced from page cxcv of the
second part of Agrippa’s work.


CHAPTER XXXII.


LUCKY AND UNLUCKY “DAYS.


The ancient astrologers and magicians kept among
their archives careful notes of the times of the
day and of the days themselves on which striking
or important events happened. In due course
they tabulated the results of their experience, and
were able to state definitely which days were lucky
and which unlucky. According to one tradition the
Babylonians possessed records of calculations which
extended over a period of 720,000 years! The list
of lucky and unlucky days was the forerunner of the
Calendar, and it served as a Calendar until about
2000 B.C., when the Babylonians and Assyrians
divided the year into twelve months, each contain-
ing 30 days. As the months were lunar their position
in the Calendar changed from year to year, and
every few years an intercalary month was added
to restore the months to their normal places in the
Calendar. Tablets inscribed in cuneiform with a
list of the lucky and unlucky days are exhibited
in the British Museum.

The Egyptians also divided their year into twelve
months, each containing 30 days, which was based on
a list of lucky and unlucky days throughout the year.
A copy of this list is written on the back of the Papyrus
of Amen-em-apt in the British Museum (No. 10474),
and a portion of another is given in the papyrus
Sallier IV. In these lists the word lucky is repre-


DUCIEY AND, UNEUCKY* DAYS 465


sented by j (literally “good ’), and unlucky by


° (literally “bad ’’).. The day is. supposed’ to. be


divided into three portions, each containing four
or eight hours. Certain days were lucky throughout,
and others unlucky throughout. Sometimes only
one or two-thirds of a day were lucky or unlucky,
and the list in papyrus 10474 distinguishes clearly
which they are, and whether they are in the morning
or afternoon of the day. In some parts of Upper
Egypt I have seen natives using calendars compiled
by Copts, in which certain days are indicated as
being unlucky for sowing or reaping or performing
agricultural labours generally, and on comparing
several of these with the ancient Egyptian list I
have noticed that they were also held to be unlucky
by the dynastic Egyptians.

The teaching of the astrologers of the Middle
Ages was that the Lucky Days of the week were :—


Monpay, or Moon’s day, a day of peace and
happiness.

WEDNESDAY, or Mercury’s day, a day of success
in business.

THURSDAY, or Jupiter’s day, a day for courage.

SUNDAY, or the Lord’s Day, a day of happiness
and rest.


The Unlucky Days were :—


TUESDAY, or Mars’s day, a day for quarrels,
litigation, and discord.

FRIDAY, or Venus’s day, the Passion of Christ.
Cessation of all work.

SATURDAY, or Saturn’s day, a day of danger and
death.


PAR TEY


466 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


LUCKY. AND? UNLUCKY HOURS.


eUCKY, | UNLUCKY.

S 3, pinetO 4.30°p.m, (4.30 pm, to;Ojpam
M 3p 10,3" alll. 730 pan, tO;Oe ie
Ip 12 noon tO3.30 p.m... 3 p.m, to 4reOrpanr
Wi” Osa m0 2r2 noon, 12 noon to 1.30 p.m.
Thur. 9 a.m. to 10730:a,m.” 1.30 p.m. to 3>pam
PCIE (78a i ena 10 a.m. to I2 noon.
Sat,» (O-acn,.10'7. 30 am. O7anIy LOL On eaae


The lucky and unlucky days of the week, accord-
ing to the Arabs, are :—


SUNDAY.—A day for planting and building,
because on this day God created the 7 spheres, the
7 planets, the 7 shells) the 7 earths, the co. ana.
7 members of man, and the 7 days of the week.

Monpay.—A day for business and _ travelling.
Idris went up to heaven. Moses went to Sinai.and
on this day the Unity of God was revealed.

TuEsDAY.—A day of blood. This day Eve first
menstruated. Cain killed Abel; and John the
Baptist, Zachariah, and George (St. ?) were killed.

WEDNESDAY.—A day of calamity and catastrophe.

THurRspAY.—A favourable day for business. On
this day Abraham obtained the freedom of Sara from
Pharaoh. On this day Pharaoh’s butler entered the
prison of Joseph, and Muhammad returned to Mecca.

FripAY.—A day for marriage. On this day the
Prophets married and Adam consorted with Eve,
Joseph with Zuleikha, Solomon with  Balkis,
Muhammad with Khadija and ‘Aisha, and ‘Ali
with Fatimah.

SATURDAY.—A day for fraud and trickery. On this
day Joseph’s brethren sold him to the Ishmaelites.


OEE hit hie Xx XT


THE HAND OF FATIMAH.


In all ages and among all peoples, the hand has
been a symbol of strength and power, and a picture
of it has been regarded as a representation of God.
In the Egyptian text of the Book of Gates on the
alabaster coffin of Seti I in Sir John Soane’s Museum,
the “Great Hand’ means the supreme Power
which rules heaven and earth. And in the Vignettes
which illustrate the text we see this ‘‘ Great Hand ”’
grasping the chain to which the Four Sons of Horus
are fastened, and which fetters the serpents of the
Underworld and Apep the god of Evil and everlasting
enemy of Ra the Sun-god. In mediaeval pictures
the Supreme Being is represented by a hand which
projects from the clouds. Sometimes the hand is
open, and rays of light issue from the fingers, but
it is often seen in the act of benediction, 7.e. with
two fingers raised. In the Bible the raising of the
hand to a god is regarded as an act of worship (see
feecrxix) LO "| Ob-xxxl. 27, etc.),. The Assyrians
used a collection of prayers to which they gave the
name “ Nish kati,” 7.e. “‘ the lifting of the hand ”’
(King, Babylonian Magic and Sorcery, London, 1896).
In Western Asia the act of raising the hand was
universally regarded as symbolical of invocation
to a deity, whether in attestation of an oath, or in
offering up prayer and supplication. And the


26%


468 AMULETS AND SUPERSIILIONS


words “ lifting of the hand ” actually introduces the
actual prayer of Nebuchadnezzar II to Marduk in
the East India House Inscription. Little models
of the outstretched hand have been found in many
countries, and these were used as amulets ; figures of
the hand were attached to royal sceptres and spears
_ and other weapons, always with the idea of con-


The hand of -Fatimah.


ferring power on the holders of the sceptres and the
users of the weapons. In pictures a hand with the
thumb and the third and fourth fingers closed, and
the first and second finger outstretched, indicates
“blessing ’”’; but a closed hand with the first and
fourth fingers outstretched represents the “ horns of
the Devil.’ Nevertheless models of such a hand
were worn as amulets. A closed hand with the first


THE HAND OF FATIMAH 469


finger alone outstretched was in some countries
regarded as a sure protection against the Evil Eye.
Among the Arabs and Abyssinians the right hand is
held to be the “ hand of honour ” and the left the
“hand of dishonour,’ because it is used in the per-
formance of acts which, though necessary, are
regarded as unclean. The hands must be washed
before prayers and before meals. And note the
words in Ps. xxvi. 6: “I will wash mine hands in
innocency.”’

Among the Arabs figures and drawings of
tieetighteehand: of ther lady PFatimah,.’7.e. the
“Weaver,” were held to be powerful amulets.
Fatimah was a daughter of Muhammad by his first
wife Khadijah, and she married ‘Ali, the cousin
of Muhammad, by whom she had three sons, Hasan,
Husain and. Muhain:* Shevis called “ Al-Zahra,”’
the “bright blooming’”’ (a name of Venus), and
Al Batil’ 9 7-e. ~clean maid*’ or: * Virgin,’’ even
after her motherhood. Muhammad held her to
bes one, oi the four perfect women, the - other
three being his wife Khadijah, Asia, the wife of
Pharaoh, and the Virgin Mary. According to the
commentators the hand of Fatimah represents the
whole religion of Islam and its fundamental duties,
viz., to keep the Fast of Ramadan, to make the
pilgrimage to Makkah, to give alms to the poor,
and destroy the unbelievers, and to perform strictly
andpeteniiary «they prescribed sablutions.. Her
hand too symbolized the family of Muhammad,
the thumb represented the Prophet himself, the
first finger Fatimah, the second finger ‘Ali her
husband. the third and fourth fingers their sons
Hasan and Husain. And the fourth finger also


470) AMULETSUAND SUPERSTITIONS


symbolized many spiritual and moral excellencies
and good qualities.

The illustration on page 468 shows how the right
hand of Fatimah was drawn in mediaeval manu-
scripts. In each division was a letter of the alphabet
andanumber. To find the character, disposition, and
qualities of an individual by means of it the enquirer
wrote down the letters which formed his name.
He then wrote down under them the numbers
which were written in the divisions from which the
numbers were taken. Thus if the letter was N he
wrote by it 40; if it was C he wrote 3, and so on.
He then added up the figures, and the total repre-
sented the special number of the individual. To find
out what this number signified the enquirer then
consulted along list of numbers to each of which was
attached some characteristic or quality, thus :—


3 Mysticism, contemplation, love of the divine.
15 Affection for what is beautiful and idealistic.
21 Brutality, violence, harshness.

36 Large-mindedness, endowed with great ideas.


70 Love of science.


If a man wishes to find out if he is going to be
successful in any undertaking, or if he is going to
vanquish a rival, he must write down the baptismal
names of himself and his rival in letters and the
numerical value of each letter below it according
to the values given by the Double Zodiac. He
must then add up each group of figures and divide
each total by 9. He must then consult the table of
numbers of which extracts have been given above,
and the number which is the same as that remaining


THE HAND OF FATIMAH 471


over after the divisions of totals of the name number
by 9, will tell him whether he or his rival will be
successful. A list of numbers in the table will be
found in the Encyclopédie des Sciences Occultes, Paris
(no date), p. 523. The Introduction to this volume
ismpy 1 bl.,G. Poinsot.;, Lhe Hebrews: also had.a
magical hand in which permutations of the ineffable
Name of God, etc., were written, see Seligmann,
Dr. S., Die Zauberkraft des Anges, Hamburg, 1922,
Deo.


CHAPTER XXXIV.


CONTRACTS WITH THE DEVIL.


The magical literature of the Middle Ages contains
many legends of men who in order to obtain wealth
or power or possession of a certain woman, made a
contract with the Devil who, having given them
what they coveted, came at the end of the period
agreed upon and seized them and carried them off
to hell. The contract was said to be written on
parchment or paper with the blood of the man who
applied to the Devil for assistance, and when he
had signed his name the Devil carried off the docu-
ment and placed it among his archives. That men
could and did make contracts with the Devil was
commonly believed in the East and in the West, for
it was argued that if men could obtain their heart’s
desire from the Archangels of God, why should
they not be able to do so from the Devil himself,
or from his chief ministers ? Usually the man who
made the contract paid the penalty and the Devil
got his due, but a few instances are known in which
certain Christian saints have succeeded in cheating
him out of his prey. For when the powers of evil
were carrying away his soul to hell, the saints inter-
vened and snatched it from their hands (or paws),
and conveyed it elsewhere. Few, if any, of the
mediaeval legends make the Devil give back the
bond or contract and release the man from his
obligation to him, probably because no one believed
that the Devil would act like a charitable creditor.


CONTRACTS WITH: THE: DEVIL 473


One interesting instance of the Devil’s charity in
this respect is on record, and that is found in the
Ethiopian SENKESAR or Book of Saints of the
Ethiopian Church.. The Ethiopians, lke the
Egyptian Christians (Copts), believed in a personal
Devil who was able to take any and every form or
shape at will, and who could travel with equal ease
through earth, air,and water. In the pictures which
illustrate their manuscripts he is usually represented
as a huge black man, with large fiery eyes and terrible
teeth, with an enormously long body and long thin
legs, and paws with claws. On his head is a pair
of horns, and he has a long tail. The lesser fiends
who perform his will have animals’ heads and also
tails; they, like their master, possessed an over-
poweringly filthy smell, by which their comings and
goings could be detected. But the Devil, whether
called Diabolos, or Satan, or Mastéma, took form of
a man at will, and possessing great cunning and
skill in trafficking and bargaining with men frequently
succeeded in buying their souls from them.
According to the SENKESAR (month of Maskaram,
day XIII, Budge’s translation, vol. 1. p. 46) a certain
young man fell in love with his master’s daughter,
and as, apparently, his suit was not favoured by
her parents, he consulted a magician and asked him
Peomenttedt) ata stO7eive bin the maiden. [he
magician agreed to do this, and having written a
petition on a piece of paper, he gave it to the young
man and told him to go to the cemetery of the pagans
at midnight, and to stand by one of the tombs there,
and to hold up his right hand with the paper in it.
The young man obeyed these instructions, and a
Satan appeared and took the paper out of his hand


474 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


and conducted him to the Satan-in-chief, who said :
‘Dost thou believe in me, O young man? Wilt
thou deny thy Christ and not turn again to Him
after I have fulfilled thy desire ?”’ The young man
promised to do what the Satan told him, and then
the Satan said to him: “ Write with thine own
hand on the piece of paper that thou wilt do this,”
and the young man wrote and denied Christ.

Then Satan began to work on the heart of the
maiden, and he filled her with lust so completely
that she said to her father: ‘“‘ If thou wilt not give
me in marriage to thy servant then assuredly I will
kill myself.’ Fearing that she would carry her
threat into execution the father consented to the
marriage and the couple were married forthwith
and set up housekeeping together. Then the parents
of the maiden wept sorely and they entreated God
to remove their sorrow, and Christ heard their petition
and showed the maiden that the man whom she
loved was not a Christian. Presently she noticed
that he never partook of the Sacrament, and when
she pressed him to go with her to the Table of the
Lord, he refused and told her of what he had done
in order to obtain possession of her, and how he had
denied Christ and given a bond to the Devil. Then
was the young wife filled with grief, and she blamed
herself and went to Saint Basil and told him her
story and asked him to save her. Basil sent for the
young man and having heard his version of the
story asked him if he wished to repent and return to
Christianity. The young man said that that was
his wish, and Basil rephed: “ Be of good cheer, and
fear not.’ Having made the sign of the Cross over
him Basil took him to his cell and lodged him in a


CONTRAC PS WITH THES DEVIL 475


small chamber and told him to pray for three days.
At the end of this period Basil went to him and asked
him what had happened during the three days.
The young man replied that he had suffered greatly
through the Satans who threatened him with loud
cries and showed him the paper which he had signed.
After speaking words of encouragement to him
Basil gave him bread and water and took him back
to the chamber and prayed overhim. After a further
period Basil visited him, and the young man told
him that he had been hearing the cries of the devils
round about him, but had not seen them. Basil
continued this treatment of the young man for forty
days, and visited him every third day. When the
forty days were ended the young man said to Basil :
““O my holy father, last night I saw thee waging
war against Satan on my behalf, and thou didst
vanquish him straightway,’’ and the holy man
rejoiced exceedingly, for he knew that his own
prayers and those of the young man, which were
coupled with repentance, were having great effect
on the devils. He then summoned all the monks
from all the monasteries of Caesarea and Cappadocia,
of which places he was the bishop, and all the priests,
and they prayed for the salvation of the young man
-all that night. On the following day he brought
the young man to his church, and the people of the
city came there also, and he commanded all of them
to lift up their hands to heaven and to pray and make
entreaty to God and say: ‘“‘ Have mercy upon us ”’ ;
and they all did as he commanded them. And they
continued to cry out and to say: “ Lord have mercy
upon us,” and at length the piece of paper on which
the young man had denied Christ and promised


476 AMULETS: AND, SUPERSTITIONS


allegiance to Satan and signed with his name fell
down from the roof in the presence of all the people.
Then Basil went and took up the paper, and unrolled
it, and read what was written upon it in the presence
of all the people. And he blessed the young man
and administered the Sacrament to him. And he
called the wife of the young man and blessed them
both and they departed to their home rejoicing and
exulting in their salvation. And they praised God
and thanked Saint Basil, who by his prayers had
delivered the young man from the thrall of Satan.

Another section of the same book (p. 76) tells
the story of a young man of Antioch, who applied
to Cyprianus the magician for help in a somewhat
similar case. But the magic of Cyprianus was
unable to stir up lust in the maiden Justina, for
when the Satans went to her they always found her
praying. The Satans tried to deceive Cyprianus, but
he discovered their imposture, which disgusted him
so much that he burnt his books of magic and was
baptized by the Archbishop of Antioch. He became
a monk, and was made a deacon and then a priest,
and finally he became Bishop of Carthage, and made
Justina abbess in a house of virgins. Decius ordered
them to worship idols, but they refused to do so, and
after they had suffered severe tortures the Emperor
had the bishop and Justina beheaded.

The Book of the Miracles of the Virgin Mary
contains many stories which show that Our Lady
not only had the power to rescue souls from the
Satans when they were carrying them to hell, but
that she frequently used it. In the large richly
illustrated Codices of her Miracles we see her fighting
with the Satans for the possession of the souls of


CONTRACIS WitTH THE. DEVLE 477


those in whom she was personally interested, and
according to the Vignettes she was in such cases
always successful. The Virgin did not interfere
in the case of the unrepentant sinner, as we see from
drawing No. 1. Here we see the dying man lying
on his rope bed, with one devil seizing his wrists
and another his feet, and as soon as he dies they will
carry his soul off to hell. In No. 2 we see two devils


carrying away the souls of two men which they had
wrenched from their bodies. But whilst they were
doing this the Virgin appeared, and grasping the
two souls, who are given human forms, she delivered
them from the claws of the devils. The text makes
it clear why she exercised her power on this occasion.
The two souls were the souls of two brothers who
were scribes, and who at one time of their life
had made a copy or copies of her Book of Miracles.


478 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


They had fallen into sin subsequently and on their
death, the devils seized their souls as their lawful
possessions. But Mary, because they had written
her Book of Miracles, could not allow them to be
destroyed, and she therefore rescued them. Nos. 3
and 4 illustrate the story of the cannibal of Kemer,
who was a strong and a very cruel and brutal man.
He killed and ate his wife and children and all his
servants, in all seventy-eight people. Now he was


a Christian. Then he set out to find other victims,
and one day he saw a beggar and determined to eat
him ; but when he came up to him he found that
he was a leper. The leper begged for water in the
Name of God, and in the names of martyrs, but the
cannibal laughed at him. — Finally the leper begged
for water in the name of Mary, and the cannibal
handed him his water bottle, but before the leper
could satisfy his thirst, the bottle was snatched from


CONT RACIS WI “RHE: DEVIL 479


his hands by the cannibal. In due course he died
and the devils appeared and seized his soul and
took it to Satan. Mary, remembering that the
cannibal had given the leper half a drink of water
in her name, tried to snatch the soul from the devil,


but failed to secure it (No. 3). Then she appealed
to the Father, and begged for the salvation of the
soul of the cannibal because he had given water to
the leper. The Father ordered an archangel to


weigh the draught of water against the seventy-
eight people whom the cannibal had killed and


480 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


eaten. The Scales of Justice were brought forth,
and the merit of giving a draught of water to the
leper was weighed against the sin of the murders of
the seventy-eight people whose heads are seen pro-


=_—
—_


jecting from the right pan of the Scales. When the
archangel held up the Scales it was found that the
merit of the cannibal outweighed his sins. There-
upon his soul was given to Mary, and in No. 4 we
see her sheltering 1t within her cloak.


Og ED OU XEN


ENVOUTEMENT.


This word, which is often used in French books
on magic, means the act of making a figure of wax
of a certain person as exact as possible as regards
face (the Latin am + vultus) and form and special
characteristics, with the intention, after having
performed upon it certain baleful acts and cere-
monies, of making the person represented by the
wax figure to suffer all the pains and indignities
which the magician inflicts on the wax figure. Whilst
the magician is attacking the wax figure he repeats
spells and incantations which effect the transmission
of aches and pains and sufferings to the human
being wheresoever he may be. Thus, if a needle
was thrust through the knee joints of the wax figure
the human being which it represented would suffer
agonies in his knees ; if a needle was thrust through
the heart of the wax figure the human being would
die. But envotiitement could be practised with a
good as well as a bad object. For there is on record
the case of a seaman who during a fight at sea was
shot in the eye with an arrow, and as a result he
suffered indescribable agony. But his friends made
a figure of him with the arrow in his eye, and took
it to a famous shrine of the Virgin Mary in Syria.
The figure of the Virgin drew the arrow out of the
eye of the figure, and at the same moment the
arrow which was in the eye of the seaman, who was
still on the sea, fell out from it, and the pain ceased
from that moment.

2H


482 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


One of the oldest examples of the use of wax
figures for the purpose of injuring a human being
is found in a papyrus inscribed with the account
of a conspiracy hatched against Rameses III (see
Déveria, Le Papyrus Judiciare de Turin, Paris, 1868).
The king had become unpopular, and several of the
Court ladies and the higher officials wished to get
rid of him and to appoint in his room one Pen-ta-urt.
They took into their service a certain magician called
Hui, who was famed for his knowledge of the occult,
and having put into his hands a Book of Magic
from the Royal Library at Thebes, they told him to
bring about the death of the king and his friends.
Hui made figures of the king and his officials in wax,
and, presumably, wrote their names upon them, and
he made amulets on which he inscribed words of
power, and he cast a spell on a certain man and made
him take these things into the palace, where they
were expected to influence adversely the king’s
health. But the plot became known, and the ring-
leaders of the conspiracy were arrested and tried for
high treason by eleven judges. Ultimately about
forty men and six women were executed, and
several other conspirators were permitted to
commit suicide.

Another interesting example of the use of the wax
figures is given in the Papyrus of Nesi-Amsu in the
British Museum (ed. Budge, Avrchaeologia, vol. Ii).
In order to overthrow Apep, the god of evil and the
everlasting enemy of Ra the Sun-god, a series of
chapters of spells and curses had to be recited, and
certain ceremonies performed. The rubrics order
that a figure of Apep be drawn in green ink upon a
piece of new papyrus, and that a wax figure be made


ENVOUTEMENT 483


of Apep, and his name was to be inscribed upon it in
green ink. This figure, wrapped round with the
piece of new papyrus, is to be thrown into a fire made
of a special kind of herb, and whilst burning is to
be kicked with the left foot four times, and when
burnt its‘remains are to be mixed with excrement
and thrown into another fire. Figures of Apep were
to be burnt in this manner at frequent intervals
during the day and night, and another rubric says:
“Thou shalt act thus when tempests rage in the
eastern sky, to prevent the arrival of red clouds
Mictes anasto. prevent rain.or storm: © To: burn
Apep was a meritorious act, for the rubric con-
tinues: “It is good for a man to do this, good for
him upon earth and in the Underworld. Power
will be given to him to attain to honours which are
beyond him, and he will be, in truth, delivered from
all evil things.”’

And wax figures of the king’s enemies were made,
and their names were written upon the wax with
green ink, and then they were placed in cases and
burnt. During this process they were to be spit
upon, and trampled upon and defiled with the left
foot, and gashes were to be made in them with a
knife ; after this they were to be thrown into a fire
made with special herbs, and the fire was to be
quenched with the urine of a crocodile.

To destroy the fiends which were the servants of
Apep figures of four serpents were made in wax.
One had the face of a cat, another the face of a duck,
another the face of a white cat, and the fourth the
face of a hawk. They were tied up and fettered,
knives were stuck in their backs, and then they were


cast on the ground and treated in the same manner
2H 2


484 AMULETS AND: SUPERSFITIONS


as the wax figures of Apep. This monster had about
thirty distinct forms, and each had its own name,
and in the ritual. was cursed with terrible curses.
Besides that of a crocodile Apep was given the form
of a serpent, which had its tail in its mouth, and a
knife stuck in its back. The ceremony of burning
the waxen Apep was performed many times during
the month by day and by night in the great temple
of Amen-Ra at Thebes, and it is quite certain that
the Egyptian priesthood, as well as the people,
believed that the frequent repetition of the “‘ Book of
Overthrowing Apep’”’ was of vital importance for
the well-being of Egypt and her people. Now there
was another aspect in which Apep was regarded.
He was the arch-enemy of Ra the Sun-god, but
the king of Egypt was the “son of Ra”; therefore
Apep was the arch-enemy of Pharaoh, and all the
fiends and devils who served Apep in the Under-
world, and all the evil men and rebels who served
him on earth were also enemies of Pharaoh, and wax
figures of them were made and burned and cursed as
were the figures of Apep.

A wax figure of a man which was made for a
magical purpose was found in Egypt a few years
ago and is now in the British Museum (No. 37918) ;
the wax casing encloses a lock of human hair and a
piece of inscribed papyrus. Figures of the Four
Sons of Horus were also. made in wax, and either
laid on the coffin or inserted among the swathings
of the mummy. Some are in white wax (B.M.,
No. 15563, etc.) and some in red (B.M., No. 8889,
etcys

As we have seen wax was used in working White
as well as Black Magic, but sometimes a piece of


ENVOUTEMENT 485


paper was used instead of wax. Thus the Muslim
who wants to harm or kill a man when he has no
wax takes a piece of paper and draws on it the figure
of the person he wishes to injure, and he writes the
name of that person either on or by the figure. He
then nails the paper to a door or wall upside down,
and proceeds to recite over it certain verses from the
Kur’an. The recitation over he takes an iron needle
and makes it red hot in the fire and stabs the paper
with it, taking care that the hole made by the needle
is in the breast of the figure. At the same time he
pronounces a spell or incantation and says to the
needle, ““ Pierce his body even as this needle pierces
this paper, and take away sleep from him.” There-
upon the person whose figure is on the paper feels
the stab in his body, coupled with the burning pain
caused by the red-hot needle, and suffers agony as
long as the needle remains stuck in the paper. As
soon as the needle is withdrawn from the paper
the man finds relief, but if it is left there indefinitely
he dies. Carra de Vaux in HAsTINGs’ Encyclopaedia,
SO leatibpeAOO.

The use of wax figures for magical purposes passed
from Egypt via Greece and Italy into England, and
in the Middle Ages much harm was wrought by
their means, and people were terrified at the thought
that sickness and even death could be inflicted on
them by foes a long way off. It will be remembered
that much alarm was caused in London during the
reign of Queen Elizabeth because a wax figure of
Her Majesty, with a pin stuck in the breast, had
been found in Lincoln’s Inn Fields. As no one had
any doubt but that harm to Her Majesty’s person
had been planned by some villain, Dr. John Dee


486 AMULE TSX ANDSSUPERSIINIONS


(1527-1608), the famous astrologer, and as some
said magician, was summoned to the Queen’s presence
to deal with the matter. For modern instances of
the use of wax figures with diabolical intent see
Elworthy, Evil Eye, London, 1895, pp. 53-56.

That the Hebrews at times used envotitement is
proved by the following passage from the magical
- book entitled ‘“‘ The Sword of Moses ”’ (see Gaster,
Studies and Texts, vol. 1. p. 324, No. 68).

“Tf you wish to kill a man, take mud from the
two sides of the river and form it into the shape of a
figure, and write upon it the name of the person,
and take seven branches from seven strong palms,
and make a bow from reed (?) with the string of
horse-sinew, and place the image in a hollow, and
stretch the bow and shoot with it, and at each
branch (shot) say the words of No. 68 (sic); and
may NN be destroyed.”


Or Ar Ke OVI


MISCELLANEOUS.


I. METALS identified with the Planets :—Gold
with the Sun, Silver with the Moon, Iron with Mars,
Mercury with Mercury, Tin with Jupiter, Copper
with Venus, Lead with Saturn.

2. CoLouRS identified with the Planets :—Gold
with the Sun, Silver with the Moon, or colour which
changes (shot), Green with Venus, Red with Mars,
Blue with Jupiter, Black with Saturn.

3. Colours identified with the Signs of the Zodiac :
Fire with the Ram, Dark green with the Bull,
Chestnut with the Twins, Silver with Cancer, Gold
with the Lion, Variegated with the Virgin, Water-
green with the Balance, Vermilion with the Scorpion,
Sky-blue with Sagittarius, Black with Capricorn,
Grey with Aquarius, Sea-blue with the Fishes.

4. Good CoLours.—Violet symbolizes  intelli-
gence, knowledge; Blue, chaste affection; Green
hope, confidence ; Rose, sweetness of disposition ;
White, purity, truth and joy; Red, ardour, health
and strength ; Amaranth, constancy, fidelity ; Lilac,
freshness, first-born ; Violet and Green and Yellow,
triumph.

5. BAD CoLouRs.—White and black, death,
sorrow; Black, sadness, grief; Orange, luxury ;
Yellow, falsity, treason, ambition, avarice; Brown,
penitence and grief; Purple, pomp, pride; the
colour of dead leaves, grief, decay, ruin.

6. THE APPARATUS OF THE MaciIcrAn.—One of


488 AMULETS AND SUPERSTIEEIONS


the stories told in the Westcar Papyrus (Berlin,
p. 3033) shows that the Egyptian magician Ubaner
kept the materials. which he used in working magic
in a box made of ebony and white gold, and that
one of the substances which he used was wax. His
servant brought this box to him one day, and he
took wax from it and made the model of a crocodile
seven spans long, and he recited over it magical
words which gave it the power to turn into a living
crocodile. The servant took the model and threw
it into ‘the river, and it became a monstrous and
hideous crocodile which devoured the lover of the
magician’s wife when he went to bathe at dawn.
The Egyptian king Nectanebus made models of ships
and men in wax, and set them in a tank of water.
Then he took an ebony rod in his hand, and having
uttered certain magical formulae in the name of
Amen of Lybia the models of his own ships and men
would begin to move about, and attack and sink
the models of the ships of his enemies. The powers
of the rod of Moses which destroyed the rods of the
Egyptian magicians and gave victory to the Israelites
is too well known to need description. It had the
power of the rod of the water diviner, for when
Moses struck the rock with it water gushed forth.
The medical magicians also used a rod during the
performance of their cures, and their god also used a
rod, a drawing of which is given on page 489. Thisis
copied from a vase in Paris which was dedicated by
Gudea, king of Babylonia about 2350 B.c., to the
Sumerian god Ningishzida, the son of Ninazu, the
Master-physician. This rod probably had two
serpents carved upon it, or perhaps figures of two
serpents in bronze were coiled about it ; in any case


MISCELLANEOUS 489


it is the symbol of the great guild of physicians in
England at the present day. The snake sloughs its
skin annually, and so suggested the ideas of renewed
life and immortality to the ancients.

7. MAGICAL PLANTsS.—Many of the
ancient herbalists knew that the
juices of certain plants possessed
properties which produced extra-
ordinary effects when introduced into
the human body, and that some might
be used as aphrodisiacs, and others
as narcotics, and others as stimulants.
And the magicians when they were
acquainted with them naturally used
them in their lotions and philtres
to produce both good and evil
effects. Certain plants were associ-
ated with the planets and were sup-
posed to supplement or strengthen
the influences of the Seven Astrologi-
cal Stars, but they were probably
more useful to the physician than —

The rod of
the astrologer. Ningishzida.

8. MAcicAL Mirrors were, and are to this day,
made of vessels filled with clear water drawn from a
well or river; sometimes the mirror is made with
ink held in the hollow of the left hand of the enquirer
into the future, who must be seated. The magician
walks round him several times repeating spells as
he walks, and at intervals he bids the enquirer look
steadily into the ink. When he had done so for some
few minutes small ripples pass over the surface of
the ink, and when these have died down the scene
required makes itself visible. The Kabbalists used


490 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


seven metal mirrors, each of which bore the name of
one of the planets ; thus the mirror of the Sun was
made of gold, z.e. the solar metal, and could only
be consulted with advantage on a Sunday, 7.e. the
day of the Sun. The mirror of the Moon was made
of silver and could only be consulted with advantage
on Monday, and so on for the other days of the week.
_ The five other metals were iron (Tuesday), mercury
(Wednesday), tin (Thursday), copper (Friday), lead
(Saturday).

9. MANDRAKES (LOVE APPLES).—These are men-
tioned in the Bible (Gen. xxx. 14), and there is no
doubt that ancients used decoctions of the plant
both as aphrodisiacs and as narcotics. The roots
assume extraordinary shapes and forms, and fre-
quently resemble the legs of men and women and
phalli. The magicians used it largely in making
their love philtres, and the modern Cairene drug seller
gives it to young couples who are going to be married
and who wish to have large families of boys. For-
merly little figures made from mandragora roots
could be bought in Baghdad, where they found a
ready sale, and they were worn as amulets which
stimulated virility and fecundity, and made their
wearers prosperous. For a remarkable series of
drawings of the roots of the mandragora, see
Mr. C. Singer’s article on the “ Juliana Anicia Codex ”
in the Journal of Hellenic Studies, vol. xlvii (1927),
p. 4ff. The plant has a foetid and somewhat
nauseating smell.

10. DIVINATION By THE DrEAD.—Probably the
oldest instance of divination by the dead is found
in the Epic of Gilgamish, the King of Ur, whose one
quest in life was to find the secret of immortality.


MISCELLANEOUS 49]


He had failed to find it on earth and he tried to
find it in the kingdom of the dead. He applied to
the priests, but they one and all failed him, and
he thought that if only he could hold converse with
_ his beloved friend Enkidu, he would be able to find
out what he wished to know. He appealed to Bél
and Sin to raise up the spirit of Enkidu for him, but
each god refused. Then he appealed to Ea, who
ordered Nergal, the god of war, to produce the spirit
of Enkidu. Nergal opened a shaft in the ground
through which the spirit of Enkidu passed up into
this world “like a breath of wind.’ Gilgamish
began to question the spirit of Enkidu but he gained
little information from him and certainly no satis-
faction. What the spirit of Enkidu was like we
shall never know, but Gilgamish must have seen
something, or he could not have asked his questions.
The priest of Nergal was probably a medium, who
burnt incense and by suggestion or hypnotism made
Gilgamish see some kind of figure. The witch of
Endor also was probably a medium and used the
same means as the priest of Nergal, and showed
Saul a figure of Samuel in the smoke of the incense.
It is something of this sort which is done to-day in
parts of North-east Africa where men, and women,
in difficulties, seek for information from their dead
kinsfolk. And necromancers like Cecrops, Apol-
lonius of Tyana, Jamblichus, Porphyry and others
who made divination by the dead probably used a
similar method.

Ir. Parmistry.—The art of obtaining information
about the future from the palm of the hand is very
old, and the modern form of it which is now in use
in the countries of the Near East and in Europe is


492 AMULETS AND SUPERSTITIONS


based upon the systems which were formulated by
the Chinese and Indians. (See Prof. H. A, ‘Giles,
Palmistry in China,” in the Nineteenth Century,
1904.) Two phases of the art are known, and these
are called “ Chirognomia’”’? and “‘ Chiromantia,’’
the latter dealing with the hand from an astrological
point of view. Some have attempted to show that
the art is of divine origin, relying on the words
ol Job. xxxvii, -7,;° He-sealethy up. the hanemecs
every man; that all men may know his works.”
Many of the older'palmists attached special import-
ance to the shape and form of hands, of which some
seventy varieties were enumerated, and their readings
differed very considerably from those obtained from
the lines and prominences of the inner side of the
hand. All agree that the thumb is the most import-
ant part of the hand, and say that the first phalange
symbolizes will-power and the second logic; the
ball of the thumb is called the Mount of Venus. The
line round about the thumb is the line of life. Every
phalange of the four fingers symbolizes some quality,
physical or mental. The mount of Jupiter is at the
base of the first finger and symbolizes arrogance,
haughtiness, pride, and the like. The mount of
Saturn is at the base of the middle finger, the digitus
infamis of the Romans, and symbolizes fate, destiny.
The mount of Apollo is at the base of the third
finger and symbolizes art, music, easy circumstances
in life, etc. The Mount of Mercury is at the base
of the fourth finger and indicates learning. The
mount of Mars and the mount of the Moon are on the
heel of the hand, and symbolize violence and lght-
mindedness respectively. The line of the heel joins
the line of life under the first finger ; parallel to it


MISCELLANEOUS 493


is the line of the heart ; the line of fate runs up the
centre of the hand, and parallel to it, on the heel side
of the hand, is the line of fortune. The curved line
from below the fourth finger to the base of the first
toecalleds, the girdle of Venus.” The left hand is
usually chosen for examination by palmists, but
neither the left nor right hands of any two persons
are identical as far as their lines and mounts are
concerned. Expert palmists attach great importance
to the little crosses and triangles and markings which
appear in many hands, and to the lines which are
found on the phalanges of the four fingers, and very
few agree about the qualities which they think they
indicate. Many think that the lines and ridges on
the back of the hand are important witnesses as to
character and disposition, and some deduce much
information from the lines on the wrist. Mediaeval
writers based their works on Hartlieb, Die Kunst
Ciromantia, Augsburg (XVth century), but modern
writers like Desbarolles, D’Arpentigny, Frith, and
Allen seem to have borrowed largely from the section
of the work of Cornelius Agrippa which deals with
Palmistry. A fresh impetus was given to the study
of Chiromancy by Mr. Cheiro, who gave many
lectures and published a cheap, popular book on the
subject.

12. LUCKY STONES OF THE TWELVE MONTHS OF
THE YEAR.—January, Garnet ; February, Amethyst;
March, Bloodstone; April, Diamond ; May, Emer-
idee june mas.cate)) July. lurquoise; August,
Carnelian ; September, Chrysolite ; October, Beryl ;
November, Topaz; December, Ruby. The stones
specially fitted for amulets for the twelve months
are: January, Onyx; February, Jasper; March,


494 AMULETS AND: SUPERSTIPIONS


kuby ; April, Topaz; May, »Carnehan ; > —Jime
Emerald ; July, Sapphire ; August, Diamond ; Sep-
tember, Heliotrope; October, Agate; November,
Amethyst.;) December, Beryl. But- several other
lists are known. See Villiers and Pachinger, Amu-
leti€é, Dp. 92, 93.

13. AMULETS MADE OF PARTS OF THE HUMAN
- Bapy.—These were the phallus, the pudenda mulie-
bris, the hand, the little finger of the right hand,
one other finger. BONE DUST was used in medicine
and food, and bone-ashes were mixed with water
and drunk. Human fat was used as ointment in
Black Magic, and SKULLS were used as drinking
vessels. HUMAN skin was nailed on seats of judg-
ment, and at one time cigarette cases made of it
could be bought in Paris.


IN DEX.


’


woes


=)


INDEX


In the transliteration of Oriental proper names and words,
H represents a sharp but smooth gutteral aspirate; r is a


strongly articulated palatal T ;


S is a strongly articulated s,


something like ss in Wiss; K isa strongly articulated gutteral
K; an apostrophe before a letter (e.g. ’A) is the spiritus lenis
of the Greeks, and an inverted comma (e.g. ‘A) is a strong
gutteral, like the Hebrew ¥, which is unpronounceable by


Europeans.


A.a.A = AHYH.asher.AHYH,

270;

Aah, the Egyptian Moon-god,
141.


Aakhunaten, z.e, Amen-hatep
IV, 136.

maron,. highwpriest, 215, 270;
CID BOLO.


Aaron, the great blessing of, |


219.

Ab, the month, 379.

Ab, a mythological fish, the
Fighter, 152.

Ab Abr Abra formula, 221.

Abattr, the throne of, 241.

"Abbada Ké Dabra (Abra-
cadabra), 220.

“Abd alHamid, ex Sultan: of
Turkey, 74.

Abel, brother of Cain, 466.

‘Abgar, his letter to Christ, 132.

"Abgath, the alphabet of, 404.

‘Abhd Ish6‘, 278.

Abit, the praying mantis, 132.

Ablanathanalba, palindrome
(2)5-206, 207, 209,211; Sh2.

Ablutions of Mandaeans, 239.

Ablutions of Muslims, 469.

Abortion, amulet against, 317.

ABRACADABRA formula,
220).

Abraham, 270, 430, 466.

Abraham, Isaacand Jacob, 307.

Abraham, Stele of, 129.


| Adar, the month, 379.


Long vowels are marked by a circumflex.


Abrakala "222.

Abrasax = 365, 208f.

Abraxas, 208f.

Abraxas IAQ, 207.

Abraxaster amulets, 205f.

Absalom, 437.

"Absare Dengel, amulet of, 182.

‘Abtu Fish, 85, 152.

Abttr-Tura, 285.

Abu, 409.

Abu Bakr and the Kur’an, 51.

Abt Fara (?), 195. :

Abu Habbah, 452, 446.

Abu Hurairah, 47.

Abydos, 169.

Abyss, the primeval, 4.

Abyssinia, 177, 197, 323.

Abyssinians, 213, 235, 469.

Adadeol 124:

"Adak bar-Hathoi, 248.

"Adak bath-Hathoi, 248.

Adam, the first man, 195, 270,
274, 326, 377, 466.

Adam, creation of, 10; Bis-
millah written on his side, 70.


| Adam, his seal as a magical


sign, 224, 226, 227.
Adam Kadmon, 210.
Adam and Eve, 194.
Adam and Eve and Lilith, 236.
Adam of the Ophites (Gnostics),
ARM
Adamites, 432.


a |


498 INDEX


Adda, the seal of, 88.

Addaru, 407.

"Adernaha’él, 186. .

’Adis ’Ababa, 199.

Adni, 238. |

"Adonai, ’Adonay, 180, 223,
12287, 298, 3/3, olf:

Adultery, 311.

Aeons or heavens, the Eight,
[88.

Aeons, the three hundred and
sixty-five, 210.

Aesculapius, 205.

Aether, the, 380.

Africa, 252, 325, 491; North,
414; West, 348.

Agade, 452.

A SACS O27 a nenOlack aa OLOOce
ETCCH, (elev) einOscng ered.
tawny, 306, 307.

Agates, amulets of, 19, 69.

Agatha, Saint, 319.

Agathodaimon, Agathodemon,
204, 209.

‘Agiél, 393.

Agru, 409.

Ahasuerus, King, 295.

Ahaf, 142.

Ahlamah, 327.

Ahuramazda, 254.

PY A Pay i) 227072282.

‘Ain al-Jamal, “ Beautiful
Fve,7 B50:

Air, 463.

Air, Zodiacal Signs of, 416.

Airu, 409.

“Aisha, 466.

Aizanes (‘E:zana), 178.

AKDBN, 257.

Akhmar, 43.

Akhmim (Panopolis), 15, 130.

Akhtaba, 262.

Akhrammachamarei, 211.

Akkad, 443, 452.

‘Akrabu (Scorpion), 409.

"Akstim, 177.

Al-‘Adl, 48.


Al-‘Afaw, 49.
Al-Akhir, 49.
Al‘Ali, 48.
Al-Alim, 47.
Al-Asmau al-husna, 46.
Al-Awwal, 49.
Al-‘Azim, 48.
Al-‘Aziz, 47.
Al-Badi’, 50.
Al-Bais, 48.
Al-Baki, 50.
Al-Bari, 47.
Al-Barr, 49.
Al-Basir, 48.
Al-Basit, 48.
Al-Batin, 49
Al-Battl, 46.
Al-Bani, 39.
Al-Fattah, 47.
Al-Ghaffar, 47.
Al-Ghafir, 48.
Al-Ghani, 50.
Al-Hadi, 50.
Al-Hafiz, 48.
Al-Hakim, 48.
Al-Hakim, 48.
Al-Hakk, 48.
Al-Halim, 48.
Al-Hamid, 49.
Al-Hasib, 48.
Al-Haiy, (Al-Hayy), 49, 50.
Al-Jabbar, 47.
Al-Jalil, 48.
Al-Jami, 49.
Al-Kabir, 48.
Al-Kabiz, 47.
Al-Kadir, 49.
Al-Kaiyim, 49, 50.
Al-Kalhar, 47.
Al-Kantarah, 77.
Al-Karim, 48.
Al-Kawi, 48.
Al-Khabir, 48.
Al-Khafiz, 48.
Al-Khalik, 47.
Al-K6sh, 26, 79.
Al-Kuddts, 47.


Al-Latif, 30.
Al-Majid, 48.
Al-Majtd, 49.
Al-Malik, 47.
Al-Mani‘, 50.
Al-Matin, 48.
Al-Mu’akhkhir, 49.
Al-Mubdi, 49.
Al-Mughni, 50.
Al-Muhaimin, 47.
Al-Muhsi, 49.
Al-Muhyi, 49.
Al-Mu ‘id, 49.
Al-Mu‘izz, 48.
Al-Mujib, 48.
Al-Mukaddim, 49.
Al-Mukit, 48.
Al-Muksit, 49.
Al-Muktadir, 49.
Al-Mu’min, 47.
Al-Mumit, 49.
Al-Muntakim, 49.
Al-Musawwir, 47.
Al-Muta‘ali, 49.
Al-Mutakabbir, 47.
Al-Mu'ti, 50.
Al-Muzil, 48.
An-Nafi', 50.
An-Nir, 50.
Ar-Rafi‘, 48.
Ar-Rahim, 47, 50.


Ar-Rahman, 47, 50.


Ar-Rakib, 48.
Ar-Rashid, 50.
Ar-Ra ut, 49.
Ar-Razzak, 47.
As-Sabiar, 50.
As-Salam, 47.
As-Samad, 49.
As-Sam1'‘, 48.
Ash-Shahid, 48.
Ash-Shakitr, 48.
At-Tawwab, 49.
Al-Wadid, 48.
Al-Wahhab, 47.
Al-Wahid, 49.
Al-Wajid, 49.


INDEX” 499


Al-Wakil, 48.

Al-Wali, 49.

Al-Wali, 49.

Al-Warita, 50.

Al-Wasi'‘, 48.

Az-Zahir, 49.

Az-Zahra, 469.

Az-Zamakhshari, 60.

Az-Zan, 50. —

Alabaster, zoned, in amulets,
319.

Ala corut, 388.

Alaska, 363.

Alatuir, 307.

Albath Alphabet, 400.

Alchameth, 388.

Alchemists, 434.

Alchemy, 443.

Aldebaran, the constellation,
388.

“Aleppo button,” a running
sore common in Western
Asia, 275.

Alexander the Great, 88, 277,
439.

Alexander III, Pope, 344.

Alexandria, 128.

“Ali, son-in-law of Muhammad
LnemsErOpiiet,. G7, °/d,1 302,
466, 469.

Allan, GOD, 10, 33; 46; 52,.60,
13, 19) 302:

All-Good, the, 309.

Almsgiving, 469.

Altar, 434.

Ald, 117.

Alum, 307.

Alpha, 203. _

Alpha and Omega, 129f.

Alphabet, 250.

Alphabet, Hebrew, 22, 401.

Alphabet, Hebrew and Samari-
tan 268,

Alphabet, Phoenician, 251.

Alphabets, anagramic, 400.

Amaranth = constancy, 487.

Amashkuga, 122.

ae Bs


500


Amber, 12, 296, 307.

Amber, ball of, 308.

Amber, burnt, 308.

Amen, the threefold, 222, 285.
Amen of Egypt, the “ hidden ”

god, 164.

Amen of Egypt, the ram of, 85.
Amen of Libya, 488.


Amen-em-hat II, shell amulet ©


OL 7a:
Amen-Ra (= Amen of Thebes
and ka of Heliopolis), 9, 136,


146, 154, 441, 484; temple |
_Amulets and Talismans, their


Ole!

Amen-hetep III, King of
Egypt, 136.

Amen-hetep J IVs puheteticew


King of Egypt, 136.


Amen-em-apt, Papyrus of, 464. |
| Amulets, Coptic, 127.
| Amulets, Egyptian, 133.


Amenti (Underworld), 438.
America, 339.
Amethyst 308.300 mdz 7 SCO


be placed under the pillow, |


309.


’Amolé, a slab of rock salt, 323. |
| Amulets, Mandaitic, 239.


Amoletum, 13.

Amram, 270.

Amset, 156.

Amulet (Amulétum), deriva-
tion of the word, 11f ; origin
and development of the, 19 ;


reason why use of universal, |
| Ananizarta, 298.
| Ancona, 223.
| Andraus, 31.


ibe

Amulet cases, 28f.

Amulet rings, 297ff.

Amulet seals, 230.

Amulet spirits, 249.

Amulets, General and Personal,
1-32:

Amulets, the wearing of, a
religious exercise, 68.

Amulets, homceopathic, 22.

Amulets, “ living”’ and “dead,”
Sl pr working,” A260. eiialoss
or stolen they lose their
power, 22.

Amulets, “ faked,’’ 30.


INDEX


| Amulets, the engraving of, 68 ;


to be worn next to the skin,

| 28); their colours, forms and

Y shapes, 20s326)

- Amulets, neolithic, 134; mili-

PA ATV oe

Amulets made of human skin,
etc., 494.

Amulets for the sick bed, 29 ;
for the ‘genital organs, 29;
made of dust, 74.

Amulets in squares of figures
and letters, 272f.


differences and uses, If.


_ Amulets, Arab(Muhammadam),


33.
Amulets, Assyrian, 82.
Amulets, Babylonian, 82.


Amulets, Ethiopian
sinian), 177.

Amulets, Gnostic, 200.

Amulets, Hebrew, 212.


(Abys-


Amulets, Minaean, 97.


| Amulets, Persian, 33.


Amulets, Phoenician, 250.
Amulets, Samaritan, 258.
Amulets, Sassanian, 125.

ATMUetS) Syilacw ag:


Andrew, St., Cross of, 434.

Angel of the Face (Michael), 10.

Angels, the Four of the Four
Heavens, 375.

Angels, the Seven supreme;


386.
Angels, the Seventy [two]
Great, 226.


Angels, the Nine Orders of, 10.
Angels, the Tenth Order, 10.
Angels, writing of the, 403.


Anhai, Papyrus of, 154.


INDEX


Ani, Papyrus of, 85, 148, 163,
436


Animal of Set, 151.

Animals, amulets of, 150.

Animals, creation of the, 8.

Anit, 156.

Ankh amulet, 128, 134, 340.

Ankh-Psemtik, his house
amulet, 168.

Anpu (see Anubis), 156.

Angqet, 156.

Anshar, 4.

Ant, mythological fish, 85, 152.

Antat, 156.

Paenony, St. of Egypt, 127,
BOD, 301307, 434;

Anthony, St., of Padua, 353.

Anticipatory Cross, the, 335.

Antioch, 476.

Antipathes, 209.

Antwerp, 26.

Anu, Sky-god, 4, 91, 104, 117,
2 138:

Anu, 60 his number, 427.

Anu (Heliopolis in Egypt),

_ 145, 170.

Anubis (Anpu), 150, 153, 156,
206.

Anubis identified with Christ,
206.

‘Anyail, 43.

Ape amulets, 18.

Ape amulet from Ur, 86.

Apep, the Egyptian Crocodile-
devil, 8, 145, 169, 435, 467,

_ 482, 484.

Apep, never destroyed, 8.

Apep, the thirty forms of, 484.

Apep, Ritual of, 9.

Apep, burning of wax figures of,
9


Aper amulet (abundance), 149.
Aphasia Grammata, 261.
Aphrodisiacs (vegetable), 489.
Aphrodite, Mysteries of, 322.


152.


501


Apiton, 279.
Apkallu, the Seven, 117, 118,
119.


| Apocrypha, Christian, 10.


Apollo, the mount of the hands,
492.

Apono, 403.

Apoplexy, amulet against, 313.

Apostles, the Twelve, 413.

Apparatus of magicians, 487.

Apparitions, devilish, 275, 357.

Appetite, destruction of, 314.

April, amulet and stone of the

_ month, 493, 494.

Apshait; 152:

Apst, the primeval abyss, 4.

Aquarius, 410, 411, 416.

Aquarius, his influences on
men, 419, 422.

Arabiae69, -/45 S00 97, 213.
323, 411.


| ATADS, 27,.20;,d0°92, 241, 310,


315, 367, 469.

Arabs, the traditionalists, 67.

Arabs, the Sinaitic, 77.

Arabs, their lucky and un-
lucky days, 466.

Arah shamna, 409.

Araritha, 230.

Aratron, 386.

Archangels, the Seven, 181.

Archiepiscopal Rings, 300.

Archons, the Nine, 435.

Ardibal, 249.

Arélim, 373.

Ariel, 277.

Aries, 410, 411.

Aries, his influences on men,
ANG i471

Ariti-f-em-tes, 364.

Arm chain, an amulet, 215.

Armenia, 363.

Armenians, 315.

Armlets, 215.


| Armorica, 435.
Apis, the Bull of Memphis, 84, |


Arrogance, 492
Arrow, 219.


502


Arrow-head amulets, 134.

Arrows, divination by means
of, 214, 451.

Art, 492. aS

Art. Persian. 252;

ARTDTN, 254.

Arthritis, amulet against, 420.

Arthur, King, 436.

Arts and Sciences, 417.

Aruspices, 450.

Arva, 259.

Aryans, 331.

Asar (Osiris), 156.

Asar Hap (Serapis), 156.

Asakku, 4117:

Asbestos, 309.

Asfar Malwasha, 241.

Asher, 379.

Ashir Mehadiud, 289.

Ashmeday (Asmodius), 377.

Ashur-bani-pal, 98, 453.

Ashur-nasir-pal, 103.

Ashiri letters (Hebrew), 222.

Asia 202 8a07. O10; lsc 3205
336.

Asia, wife of Pharaoh, 469.

Asiatics, 333.

Asklepios, 251.

*Askoraskis, 181, 186, 362.

Asnia abint —OUmats 309.

Asmau as-Sifat, 46.

Asmodius, 377.

Asparaspes, 181, 186, 362.

Asphalt, 309.

Ass, the wild, 97.

Ass, the, and Lamashtu, 114.

Ass, hoof of as an amulet, 278.

Assa, King of Egypt, 441.

Assessors, the Forty-two of
Osiris, 140, 162, 364, 440.

Assyria, 259, 444.

Assyrians, 27, 997, °293, 358,
367, 467.

Assyrians, cylinder seals of 124.

As-t (Isis), 156.

Astarte, 251.

Astrology, Mandaitic, 241.


INDEX


_ Astrology, Babylon the home


of, 2Ol.
Astrology, 380f., 406.
Astronomy, 406.


| Astronomers, Persian, 241.


Atef Crown, 146.
Atma cloth, 153.


_ Atmu, the god, 156.
| Attributes of God, the Ninety-


nine, 46.
August, amulet and stone of
_ the month, 493, 494.


| Aulauaagersaanqlebati, 143.


Australia, 312, 363.
Austria, 339.
Awgin, Mar, 275.
Axe Stone, 315.


| Axe-bearers of Satan, 10.


Ayat al-‘Arsh, 55.

Ayat al-Kursi, 54.

‘Ayenat, ‘Aynat, 361 ; the Evil
Eye personified, 186.

Aziziel, 278.

Azriel, 277.

Aztecs, 310, 413.


Ba, the heart-soul, 138.
Ba, amulet of the, 144.
Ba, stone model of, 146.
Baal-perazim, 216.
Babe, the (Christ), 353.
Babel, Tower of, 433.


Babhne‘a, 288.

 Babil, 446.

| Baboon and Thoth, 141.

| Babylon; 34; ,102, 123) 42525


259, 407, 439, 446, 450.
Babylonia, 137, 201, 239, 427,
_ 488.
Babylonia, evil spirits of, 4.


Babylonians, 3, 27, 82, 88, 97,


124, 150, 213, 241, 250, 260,
283, 293, 318, 367, 380, 406,
ad.

Babylonians, unlucky numbers
of the, 429.


INDEX


Babylonians, their observa-
tions of stars for 720,000
years, 406-464.

Bacchis, the Bull, 151.

Bacon quoted, 355.

Baganda, 352.

Baghdad, 70, 453, 490.

Baghdad boil, a running sore,
aS:

Bags for amulets, 18.

Bahmandich bath Sama, 243,
248.

Bakkara in the Sadan, 149.

Babran> 285:

Balaam, 364, 433.

Balance, the Zodiacal Sign,411. |

Balance = Venus, 418.

Balance in Judgment Scene,
139.

Balkis, Queen of Sheba, 466.

Balls, crystal, 312.

Baltasar, Balthasar, 298, 321,
Bo)

Bandlet of Righteousness, 180.

Bandlets between the eyes, 216.

Band-of-fishes, 409.

Banner of the Cross, 342.

Bantu, the, 363.

Baptism (Masbuta), 240, 241.

Baptism of Christ, 71.

Baptists, Mandaitic, 240.

Barachiel, 375.

Bar Hayy, 287, 288.

Bark paper, 27.

Barsabil, 393.

Basalt. black 4136.

Base, an emanation, 370.

Bbashara4 35,

Pastiee ster 74. 4/5:

Basilides, 208.

Basilisk, 12.

Baskainein, 15.

Baskanion, 15.

Baskanos, 362. _

Baskets—amiulets, 18.

Basrah, 51.

Bat, amulet of the, 12.


503


Bats, green stone, 130.
Bathing, ceremonial and reli-
gious, 240.


| Bathnium, 285.

| Batra Giwargis, 187.

| Bay tree, 117, 118, 122.

_ Bead, the blue, an amulet, 360,


Beads, 155, 308,
amulets, 30.
Beads, origin of, 19.


314; as


| Beads, the 165, for prayers, 79.


Bear, 101. :
Bear, green stone amulet, 134, ,


| Beasts, wild, 275.


“ Beautiful Eye” = the Evil
Eye 1309:


| Beauty, the emanation of, 370,


Beautiful Names of God, the
Ninety-Nine, 68.
Beer of Lamashtu, 115.


| Beetle, 411 ; in jet, 316.


Beetie, the coloured, 163.
Beetle of Khepera, 150.


Beetles, dung-eating, 135.


Beginning and End, symbols
of, 126.

Bel, the Earth-god, 4, 251.

Bel, 50 his number, 427.


| Bell, an Assyrian, 215.
| Bells, 215.
| Belly, 418.


Belt, magical, 116.


| Beltis, 251.


Belzoni, 160.
Benjamin, 379.


| Ben Nez, 375.


Benna, soul of Osiris, 151, 156,
Bereketh, 327.

Berries, amulets of, 19.

Beryl, 202, 327.

Bes, the god, 156, 165.


- Besh, King, 293.


Besancon, relic at, 26.
Bethel, 214.
Bethor, 387.


| Bethlehem, 298, 319.
- Betrothal rings, 299.


504 INDEX

Bewitchment, 275; of Mu-| Bloodstone, 202, 310, 314,
hammad, 67. 315.

Bezels of rings, origin of, 293. Blotches, 310.

Bezels for perfume and poison, | Blows, 310.


301.

Biang, 16.

Bier, 114.

Binah, emanation, 370.

Birds, man headed, 103, 124.

Birds, amulets in the forms
Ob 7G0;- Lol.

Birth amulet, 321.

Birth of Christ on amulet, 130.

Birth chamber, 235.

Birth, premature, 320.

Birth-stool, 236.

Birth, symbol of, 341.

Birs-1-Nimritd, 446.

Bischotis Dr, sZl97 220" 234"
378, 381, et seq.

Bism-11lah, 3k;

Bism-Illah written on Adam’s
side, 70.

Bitumen, 121, 153, 309.

Black, sign of grief, 487.

Black = Capricorn, 487.

Black Art, 443.

Black Bull, 151.

Black Country, 443.

Black Friars, 80.

Black Magic, 484.

Black Opal, 321.

Black Paste, 119.

Black stones, magical, 326.

Black Water, 240.

Bladder, disease of the, 418.

Blaze on forehead, 85.


Bleeding of nose, 275, 308, 310. |


Bleeding of wounds, 326.
Bleedings in general, 22, 314.
Blessing of Aaron, 219.
Blood, excess of, 310.

Blood, the Mana of, 26.
Blood amulets, 23.

Blood red, 256.

Blood of Christ, 348.

Blood of Isis, 316.


Blowers on knots, 62.

Blue, symbol of chaste affec-
tion, 487.

Brutality, 470.

Bné Seraphim, 393.

Boar, the wild, 103.

Boat, the phantom, 7.

Boat of the Earth, 434.

Boat of Millions of Years, 161,
170i

Boatiot Ra 14241527

Boat, the Gnostic, 115.

Bodhisatvas, 335.

Bodies, the five unions of, 405.

Body, the ten Sephiréth mem-
bers of, 374.

Boghazkoi, 451.

Boil the Baghdad, 275.

Bose Blick, 368.

Boils, 275, 308.

Boissier quoted, 452.

Booze Blk, 363.

Bone ashes and dust, 494.

Bones 1n medicine, 17.

Bones, brittle, 419.

Bones, amulets of, 18.

Book of Amm TJuat (Egyp-
tian), 136.

Book of Arb‘at’al (Hebrew),
386.

Book of the Bee (Syriac), 441.

Book of the Dead (Egyptian),
28, 85, 128, »136, 137, 138;
139, 140, 142, 143, 145, 147,
152, 153159" 1G04 Gi ae
-423, 436.

Book of the Dead, Recensions
OIG), a1 G2;

Book of the Dead (Ethiopic),
196.

Book of Enoch (Ethiopic), 201.

Book of Gates (Egyptian), 437,
467.


INDEX


Book of the Illumination of
Bel (Assyrian), 444.

Book of John the Baptist
(Mandaitic), 241.

Book of the Law (Hebrew),
235, 236.

Book of Magic (Egyptian),
242, 482.

Book of Medicine (Syriac), 17.

Book of the Miracles of the
Virgin Mary (Ethiopic), 476.

Book of Overthrowing Apep
(Egyptian), 28, 484.

Book of the Praises of Mary
(Ethiopic), 28.

Book of Protection (Syriac),
UN ye Bo aye)

Book of Proverbs, 356.

Book of Psalms as amulet, 197.

Book of Raziél, 224, 369, 386.

Book of Respirations (Egyp-
tian), 163.

Book of Saints (Ethiopic), 473.

Book of Speculation (Hebrew),
230.

Book of Spells at Edfii, 361.

Book of Splendour (Hebrew),
369.

Book of Traversing Eternity
(Egyptian), 163.

Book, ‘ot “the . Two
(Egyptian), 162.

Book of Yesirah (Hebrew), 373.

Bottle amulets, 18.

Bottles stamped with the Cross,
131.

Boulogne, relic at, 26.

Bow of Marduk, 5.

Bow (Zodiacal), 409, 412.

Bow, 486.

Bow Rings, 301.

Bowl, the divining, 446.

Bowls in terra cotta (Baby-
lonian), 27, 247, 284f.

Bowls, the Nimrtid copper, 252.

Bowls, Phoenician, 252.

Box amulets, 18.


Ways


505


Bracelets, 215.

Brains of birds; 17:

Brazen serpent of Moses, 203,
DADA

Brazil, 363.

Bread of Maat, 438.

Bread of Lamashtu, 115.

Breast piece of Judgment, 328.

Breast plate of Aaron, 327, 328.

Breath amulet, 146.

Bricks, plano-convex, 98, 99.

Bricks, the Four crude, 153.

British Isles, 316.

Bronze, Phoenician, 252.

Bronze Age, 335.

Brown = penitence, 487.

Brown stones, 326.


- Bruce of Kinnaird, 177.


Brugge, relic of Christ at, 26.

Bucket, 118.

Buddha 13025320; (333,330;
428.

Buddhists, 80, 325.

Buddhists, Envoys of the, 200.

Bull of Heaven, 409.

Bull amulet, 85.

Bull of Memphis (Apis), 85.

Bull, Zodiacal Sign, 411.

Bull-gods, united, 85.

Bulla amulet, 14, 15.

Burial, Phoenician, 251.

Burmah- 315,363:

Burning glass, 312.

Bushmen, drawings
1GORTO1275.

Business, amulets for, 21.

Buskan, 43.

Butler of Pharaoh, 466.

Buxtorf, his lexicon, 39.

Byblos, 364.

Byron, Lord, 365.


of the,


Caesarea, 475.

Cain, 466.

Cairo OU no 70), 447.
Calamity, 466.


506


Calcutta; nelic at, 26:

Calendar, origin of the, 464.

Calendar, agricultural, 465.

Calf, amulets of the, 86.

Cameo, derivation of the word,
393.

Canaanites, 250.

Cancer, Zodiacal Sign,
410, 411, 416.

Cancer, its influences on men,
AN] Ae

Candlestick, amulet of the
seven-branched, 219.

Canis Major, 388.

Canis Minor, 388.

Cappadocia, 475.

Cappadocians, cylinder-seals of,
124.

Capricorn, Zodiacal sign, 408,

>, 409: AIO Alia):

Capricorn, its influences
men, 419, 422.

Captivity, the, 10:

Caput Algol, 388.

Caracalla, the Emperor, 220.

Caravan amulets, 21.

Carbuncle, 308, 310, 321, 327.

Cardinal Points, the Four, 45.

Carmelhan-~7/0) 67/7, %310" 43245
So ALA.

Carnival Rings, 301.

Carpenter's square,
150.

Carthage, 476.

Cart-horses, 30.

Cartouche, 147.

Cases for amulets, 28.

Case-tablets in the
Museum, 87.

Caspar, the Magician, 321, 353. :

Gat =a 145:

Cat sis 160;

Cat's Eve; 310.

Catacombs, 332, 339:

Catapults, 274.

Cataract: tie we iiidyecDs

Catastrophe, 466.


205,


on


amulet, |


British


INDEX


Caterpillars, amulet against,
ae

Catochitis, 311.

Catullus, 292.

Cattle disease, amulet against,


279.


| Cattle Hunt Scarab, 136.


Cattlemen, the, 149.
Caucasuswcoo:

Cause of Causes, 370.
Cauda Capricorni, 388.
Cauda Ursae, 388.
Cecrops, 491.

Celts, 428, 433.

Censer, 123.

Centauc wade

Centaur = Capricorm e443
Cerberus, 429.

Chain amulets, 18.

Chain of Prometheus, 292.


Chalcedony, 69, _ 124592025
Bila

Chaldees, 86, 317.

Chalks i.

Chaos, 4.


Charcoalead,

Chanot of Ehyjah, 189 sn9i1s
Charioteers of Satan, 10.
Charlemagne, 350.

Charm Rings, 296.
Charms; 270

Charroux, 26.

Chastity, amulet for, 426.
Chastity ring, 297.


| Cheiro the Palmist, 493.
"Cheops, 153.


Cherubim, 10, 373.

Childbirth, 314, 315, 320 ; pre-
mature, 324.

Child-bed, amulets for, 224.

Children, House of, 420.

Chill, amulet against, 275.

China, 315, 333, 334; 335, 3629
AN

China, palmistry in, 492.

Chinese, 142, 412, 492.

Chi-Ro, the sign, 347.


INDEX 507


Chirognomia, 492.

Chiromantia, 492.

Chnoubis, 204.

Chnoumis, 204, 205, 206.

Chnonphis, 304. |

Chochmah, an emanation, 374. |

Cholchnoubis, 204. |

Christ as a magician, 197 ; His |
magical names, 180; His
words of power, 181; as
corner stone, 332.

Christians, 60, 316.

Christians, Egyptian, 127, 361.

Christians of St. John the
Baptist, 239.

Christianity in Egypt, 9, 127,
135.

Chrysolite, 321, 325, 327.

Chrysoprase, 202.

Church of St. Croce, 344.

Church of Golgotha, 343.

Churchill, Capt. Spencer, 86.

Chwohlson, 247.

Cicero, 450.

Cippus of Horus, 165.

Cippus of Horus found in
Abyssinia, 177.

Circle of the swastika, 333.

Circle, the Winged, 254.

Circle, the Zodiacal, 387, 409.

Circumcision, 239.

Ciwcular marks in stones, 327.

Cities, gods of, 86.

- Civet cat, 86.

Claws of animals amulets, 18,
2s
Clay figures in walls as pro-
tectors, 82.

Clerke, Miss A. M., 413.

Clermont Ganneau, 109.

Climes, the Seven, 45.

@loakvor Vamashtu, Ld:

lodge Nit. 6b, 24

Cloth amulets, red and green,
18, 30.


Club-bearers, the Seven, 120. |
Club of Marduk, 5.


CM AB} = Caspar, Melchior,


Balthasar, the Three Kings
of Cologne and Magi, 311.


t Cobray(Uracus), 152,313:


Cocky 124,209.
Cock of the Passion, 341.


| Code of Osiris, 162.


Codrington, Rev. R. H., 23.

Coffins with pictures of amu-
lets, 20.

Colds (Chills), 324.

Colic, 186, 275, 307.

Collar amulet, 140.

Cologne; 231, 321.

Cologne, the Three Kings of,
298.

Colossi as amulets, 20.

Colours, symbolic of good and
evil, 487.


' Colours of amulets, 326.


Colours, as symbols of the
planets and the Signs of the
Zodiac, 487.

Columbus, 339.

Commandments, the Ten,
436.

Commutations of letters, 400.

Companies of gods, 434.

Conception, the Immaculate,
SUA

Cone seals, Persian and Pheo-
mician, (24253:


| Conques, relic at, 26.


Conquest, emanation of, 370.

Constantine, 130, 343.

Constantinople, 136, 163.

Constellations, symbols of the,
388.

Convulsions, 420.


| Copper, 251; plates of, 27;


transmuted into gold, 388 ;
magical square of, 396.


_ Copper amulets, 20.


Coptic Version of Scriptures,
128.


I Copts) 15, 67,1144, 146, 360,


~ 445, 465, 473.


508


Cor Leonis, 388.

Cor Scorpi, 388.

Corales12 black 2309:

Cord amulets, 18.

Cord of amulet, 13.

Cord of cylinder seal, 88.

Cord of signet ring, 295.

Cord, spotted or striped, 120.

Cornelius Agrippa, 230, 282,
389-393, 402.

Cornelius Agrippa, portrait of,
25)

Coronation Rings, 300.

Corsica, 363.

Cosmic Egg, 151.

Cosmogony, 367.

Counter charms, 249.

Courts of Law, spells for

-’ thosecin, 276,

Cow, white, 153.

Cow amulet, 134, 142.

Cow-goddess Ahat, 142, 143.

Cow-goddess Hathor, 150.

Cows, spells for, 276.

Crab, Zodiacal Sign, 409, 411.

Cramp, 275, 420.

Cramp rings, 301.

Creation, acts of the, 4, 408.

Creation, . the- Six * Days of,
AS2:

Creation, the Three Divisions
of, 429.

Creation, Hexagram of the, 432.

Creation, Legend of the, 3f:

Creation,
407, 433.

Crescent Moon, 113, 124, 207.

Crescent Moon amulet, 213.

Croce, St., Church of, 344.

Crocus ink, 228.


Crocodile, Zodiacal Sign, 134,


412.
Crocodile, amulets against, 18,
S13
Crocodile, gall of, 17.
Crocodile in wax, 488.
Cromer, Lord, 449.


Seven Tablets of,


INDEX


Crops, amulets against fire
and insects, 21, 275; spells
for blessing, 276.

Cross, the pagan, 297, 336.

Cross, the Kassite, 91, 337.

Cross, the’ Christian, °1355230:
336f.

Cross, the, a Christian fetish,
414.

Cross, the Seven Words on,
434.

Cross, finding of the, 342.

Cross, the Coptic and Maltese,
129, 130, 144, 339.

Cross, the Greek, 331, 342.

Cross, the Latin, 3167 342,

Cross, the Abyssinian, 178 ;
with Four Eyes, 190; with
Divine Face, 193.

Cross of Christ raises dead
man to life, 343.


Cross"as'Christ.347.


Cross, the Tau, 339.

Cross, the anticipatory type-,
339.

Cross, the gammate, 335. _

Cross, the equilateral, 337.

Cross pattée, 331.

Cross, the rayed or radiated,
338.

Cross of St. Andrew, 342.

Cross of Calvary. 342.

Cross of Light, 11.

Cross of the Resurrection, 342.

Cross of the Virgin, 353.

Cross of asphalt and jet, 310,
316.
Cross, Sign of the, 344, 351, 474.

Cross, amulets of the, 341.

Cross-bearers of Satan, 10.

Cross stones, 311.

Crosses excavated at Jerusa-
lem, 343.

Crosses on hands, 493.

Crosses with chalk, 311.

Crosses, pectoral, 348.

Crossing of the River, 403.


INDEX”


Crown of thorns, 18, 342.

Crown, the horned, 113.

RUGS “GO0,13 1;

Crucifixion; 342, 352; picture
of the, 351 ; spell of the,,294.

Crucifixion amulets, 18.

CrunimMt. Web 32.

Crusaders and the rosary, 80.

Crux ansata, 340.

Crux caputata, 342.

Crux commissa,.339, 342.

Crux decussata, 342.

Crux immissa, 342.

Crux simplex, 336, 341.

Crystal, 311.

Crystal powder and honey, 312.

Cukbiel, 278.

Cup, the divining, 443, 446.

Cuthah, 259, 283, 146.

Cuttle fish, 134.

Cyclamen, 12.

Gyiindemeseals,( +86, 88, 293;
317 ; as votive offerings, 123.

Cyprianus, 476.

Cyprus, 251.


Da ath, emanation, 330.

Dagger of Apkallu, 120.

Dagger bearers of Satan, 10.

Dalton; Mr. O. M., 296, 297,
303, 304.

Damascus, 51, 73.

Danie285, 379.

Daniel, Mar, 278.

Dan-rigushshu, 98.

Danube, 335.

Darkness, 1, 219.

Darkness, (‘Ur), 240.

Darkness, Prince of, 375.

Date palm, 250.

Datespathe; 119; 121.

Daughter of the eye, 357.

David of Israel, 216, 330, 364,
437.

David, Shield of, 224.

David. st... 404,


Dawn, spirits of the, 168.

Dawtd Khalaf, 453.

Day established, 8.

Days, gods of the, 168.

Days of the week, the Seven
Prophets of, 45.

Days, lucky and unlucky, 442,
464.

Daybreak, Lord of the, 61.

Daylight, Prince of the, 375.

Dead, divination by means of
the, 490.

Dead, intercourse with, 253.

Dead, rings offered to, 301.

Death, House of, 420.

Death rings, 297.

Decapitation, 138.

December, stone and amulet of,
493, 494.

DevClerq, 109,337.

Dee. Dr. John, 485.

Delaporte, 337.

Dekans, 44, 168, 406, 408, 413,
AON,

Delivery of women, amulets to
hel 2022 Ly

Delta, 140.

Depression, 425.

Demoniacal possession, 316.

Demons, belief in, 1, 3f.

Demons of the Planets, 393.

Demons, the Seven animal-
headed, 113.

Demotic script, 128.

Denderah, 411.

Denmark, 313.

Denys, St., 434.

Derr, 446.

Destiny, 367.

Destruction, 219.

Deucalion, 436.

Devil, the, never destroyed,
17) described, 473:; in -a
pot of water, 352.

Devil woman, 274.

Devil-worshippers, 11.


| Devil, the Noonday, 219.


510


Devil, combats with the, 472f.
Devils, 3f. ; and gods, 4.
Devil traps, 283.

Devils, the Four chief, 44.
Dhw'l-Jahah-wa’l-Ikram, 49.
Diabolos, 473.

Dial Rings, 301.

Diamond) 312, 313,


Diamond represents Christ ,424. |
| Drawings, magical, on amulets,


Diarrhoea, 307.

Dice, 341.

Digitum infamis, 304, 492.

Dignities, House if, 420.

Dkl (Hiddekel), 269.

Dilgan, 409.

Diniel, 278.

Diocletian, 182.

Dirba,,279:

Diseases caused by devils, 181.

Discourses of Kings, 241.

Dishes amulets, 18.

Disk, Winged, 113, 237.

Disk, Lunar and Solar, Prince
OL ole:

Disk, bronze, used in divin-
ing, 458.

Divination and diviners, 24,
443.

Divination by means of dust,
490.

Divination by earth, 460.

Divination by ink, 447.


Divination by the liver of an |


animal, 450.
Divination by water, 449.
Divination, apparatus for, 328.
Divorce, Bill of, to devils, 285.
Dizziness, 310.
Docility in children, 326.
Dog, Zodiacal Sign, 412.
Dog and Lamashtu, 114.
Dog, black, gall of, 12.
Dogs, 2/708 models Vor f 273;
placed under houses, 79.
Dogs, the Five terra cotta, 98.
Dogs, the Ten, 120.
Dogs of Ashurbanipal, 98.


INDEX


Dogmas, the Five, 45.
Dolphins on stelae, 132.


' Domenic of the Black Friars,


80,
Domos, 279.
Door-posts, amulets for, 216.


| Double dealing, 419.
| Doutté quoted, 39, 40, 44, 45,


303.


ied f


_ Dove, symbol of the Holy


Ghost, 130.
Doves and ankh, 129.
Dozy quoted, 13.
Dragon, the Great, 275,
Drashé @ Malké, 241.


_ Dreams, evil, amulets against,


DAT Sop 0) Wag oN eo Ro,
Dreamers, 24.


| Drill, the engravers, 88.


Dropping of young, amulet
against, 109.
Dropsy, 306, 312, 315, 321, 388.


Drowning, amulets against, 21.


rim O2:


Drunkenness, 308, 309, 425.
Duality, 429.


| Ductus hepaticus, 457.


Dung of beasts as medicine, 17.

DUSHIA stone (crystal), 87.

Dust of amber, 308.

Dust~ from™@ tombs
hope’

Duuzu, 409.


amulets,


| Dyaus, 333.


Dyeing, art of, 252.


| Ea, Water-god, 4, 5, 88, 117,


121, 122-213" 2403308. 740e8
445.

Ea, fashions man, 6.

Ea, Forty his number, 427.

Eagle, 101.

Ear of wheat, the Zodiacal
Sign Virgo, 409, 412.


INDEX ~


Ear-ache, amulets against, 274,
308.

Ear-rings, 214, 215.

Earth resting on World Ocean,
385.

Earth-god, 4, 463.

Earth, Zodiacal Signs of, 416 ;
divining by, 460.

Earth amulets, 18.

Earthquakes, Prince of the, 375.

Earthquakes, amulets against,
Tals

Earths, the Seven, 45.

Ebony, magician’s box and
rod, 488.

Ecclesiasticus, 359.

Eclipse, 141.

Edfa, 361.

Edilta, 279.

Eel, 152.

Egg-ball of the beetle symbol
of the Sun, 135.

Egypt, 3, 6, 88, 200, 250, 307,
4 Wires ie

Egyptians, 3, 9, 27, 39, 67, 219,
235, 242, 367; borrow the
Zodiac from the Greeks, 411.

BAY Hi261 373:

Eight, the number, 434.

Hl37o:

ff lame 137:

Elders, the
2

Eleazar, 270.

Electricity in Amber, 307.

Elements, the Four, 45, 405,
430; their Zodiacal Signs,
416.

Elephants amulets, 18.

Eleutherus, 250.

Eleven, the number, 437.

Eleven Allies of Tiamut, the, 5.

Elgin, Lord, 136, 163.

El-Hayy, 373.

Elim, 438.

Halse .27 7 ;


Seventy-[two ?],


his chariot of


fire, 189, 191.


Elisha, 307.

Elisha of Ancona, 223.

Elizabeth, Queen, and
figure, 485.

Hihs.Hebraist.24/.

Ellil-nadin-ahé, 337.

EOS OVO:

Elohim, 180, 234, 373.

Elohim. Sabaéth, 373.

Elpheia, 388.

’"El-Sabaéth, 272.

"El-Shaddai, 180, 267, 272.

Elul, the month, 379.

Elworthy, quoted, 356, 486.

Emanations, the Ten of En
Soph, 370, 401, 436.

Embraces of Fire, 364.

Himeralde G13) 326)--32/.°) a
mental stimulant, 424.

Emerods, 431.

Endless; the, 371.

Endor, the witch of, 213.

Enemies, House of, 420.

England, 312, 322, 339, 363 ;
use of magical wax figures
in, 485.

Enkidu, 2, 88, 213, 491f.

Bn Seal l/ L 22, ' 23:

Enmeshara,the sevenfold deity,
433.

Enoch, 201,277.

En Soph, 370f., 378, 401, 436.

Entrails, God of the, 2.

Enurta, 409.

Envy, terrible power of, 355,
364.

Envoutement, 481f.

Ephesus, Seven Sleepers of,
280.

Ephodh, 328.

Ephra bar Sabordtch, 247, 248.

Ephraim, 379.


Wax


| Epilepsy, 298, 301, 306, 310,


313, 316, 320, 324.
Epiphanius, 200.
Epiphany, 311.
Episcopal rings, 300.


512


Equinox, the spring, 409.
Erech, 2.

Eridu, 118, 240.:
Esarhaddon amulet, 92.
Eshiniel, 278.

Eshmun. 25

Eternity amulet, 146.
Ethiopians, 235, 473.
Ethiopic language, 180.
Etimmu, 116.
Etruna.4ol-
Etshada-ath<223;
Fucharist 215:
Euphrates, 51, 68, 239, 240.


Europe, 307, 312, 314, 335,
336.

Fvangelists, the Four, 191,
281, 430.


Evangeliarum, 351.

Eve, 194, 326, 466 ; menstrua-
tion of, 466; seal of, 224.
Evil never destroyed: by the

gods, 6. 8.
Evil personified in Tiamat, 4.
Byvil Bye, ier eal © loves:
33; 815982)" 142, 8l) 18s;


195, 2122213219) 26872740)


275, 278, 288, 306, 307, 308,
309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314,
316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321;
B21 ToL KOZ ITOLO, Oa) Odo:
355f., 370.


Evil Eye, various kinds of, |


279; names for, 363; rings
against, 296 ; amulets
against, 30.


Evil hook, 354.

Evil Spirits, universal belief in,
Lik: ;
Evil Spirits, the Ten Orders of,

SO:
Existing, the, 203.
Extispex, 450, 452.
Extispicium, 450, 4951.
Eye, the little man in, 357.


Eye, diseases of the, 220, 306, |


312, 318.


INDEX


Eye, the bloodshot, 314; eye-
ache, 274.

Eye amulets, 20, 141.

Eye agate or eye stone, 313.

Eve of Earth, 1859362:

Eye of Envy, 359.

Eye of Horus, 357, 364.

Eye of the Moon, 141, 360.

Eye of Ra, 143.

Eye of the Sun, 141, 360.

Hye ona seal 917

Eyes of birds medicine, 17.

Eyes of flint knives, 364.

‘Ezana.tl/7, 1/8?

Ezekiel, 435, 450.


Fabre; Mr Je EH ykso.


Face, the Divine, 188.

Face of God, 195.

Faience, red, 295.

Faith, the underlying power of
all amulets, 219.

Faithfulness, 314.

Faithful Shepherd of Heaven,
409.

Faith-Wisdom, 200.

Fallah (Shabti), 159.

Fallahin, 80.

Falling sickness, 298, 310.

Fame, an emanation, 370.

Familiars, 249.

Famine, 322.

Fancy rings, 300.

Fard, 43.


| Fascination, 310, 311, 313, 314,*


316, 318; 325) 356, 3617304.
Fascinum, 14, 19.
Fast days, bathings on, 239.
Fat, human, as ointment, 494.
Fate, line of, in hand, 493.
Fates, the, 429.
Father of the gods, 4495.
Faticanas 15:
Fatihat,<06, o94Gs:
Fatimah, Fatma, haul of, 466f.
Fayrtz, 325.


INDEX...


Feathers, amulets, 18, 22, 146.

Feathers as medicine, 17.

February, amulet and stone of,
493.

Fecundity in women, amulets
for, 86, 308, 490.

Fede (Betrothal) Rings, 299.

Fektra (phylactory), 262.

Feldspar, 313.

Female Principle, 332.

Fertility, rings for producing,
296.

Festival Songs of Isis
Nephthys, 163.

Betish, 14f.; the natural.and
artiticials 16,

Fetish, derivation of the word,
1D:

Fetish specialists, 17.

Fetishism, 16.

Fevers, amulets against, 275,
306, 308, 312, 317.

Fifteen, the number, 439.

Fifty, the number, 440.

Fifty-five, the number, 440.


and


Figures, evil-averting and pro- |


phylactic, 120.
Fillets on the hands, 216.
Finger, little, of right hand,
494.
Finger, Ist, under Jupiter, 402.
Finger, 2nd, under Saturn, 402.
Finger, 3rd, under the Sun, 402.
Finger, 4th, under Mercury,
402.
Finger amulets, 20.
Pimeer rings, 215%
Zoe
Finisterre, 311.
Finite, the, 367.
Fire, 326, 380.
Fire, amulet against,
Fire, the Heaven of, 375.
Fire, Prince of, 375.
Firesticks, 333.


Fire, Zodiacal Sign (Ram), 416, |


487.


origin of, |


513


First born, sacrifice of, 251.

First Cause, 307, 370.

Firaizaj, 325.

Fish amulets, 152.

Fish for dedication, 102.

Fish “ medicine,” 17.

Fish skin figure, 100, 119.

Fish, the symbol of Christ, 131.

Ershiman 120:

Fishes, Zodiacal Sign, 409, 411.

Fishes, amulet of, 35.

Fishing, spells for successful,
279.

Fistula, 419.

Pitss 415,

Five, a holy and lucky number,
430.

Five Books of Moses, 235, 366.

Five names of Lamashtu, 117.

Five Planets, the, 208.

Five month stones, 327, 330.

Five Wounds of Christ, 297.


| Flag of the Cross, 342.


Flatulence, 314.

Flood, the, 117.

Fluid of Life, 164, 170.
Fluxes of blood, 22, 310, 326.
Fog, spell against, 289.
Fonts, octagonal, 435.

Fords of the Jordan, 71.
Forgeries of amulets, 31.
Forms of amulets, 326.


_ Fortune, 463.


Fortune, line of in hand, 493.
Fortunatus Licetus, 306.
Forty, the number, 440.
Forty-two, the number, 440.
Foundation, an emanation, 370.
Four, the number, 430.
Four Quarters of earth and
heaven, 333.


| Fox, tail of as amulet, 212.


Fractures of bones, 310.
Frankincense, 298.
France, 322) 339,360.
Franks, Sir A. W., his collec-
tion of rings, 296, 339.
ek


o14


Freethinkers, 67.

Fringe; 217.

Fringes amulets, 30.

Fringes of letters, 81.

Fringes of saddles, 81.

Friday, 417, 418, 420;
lucky, 465.

Friendship, House of, 420.

Friendship, amulet for secur-
ing, 228.

Frog, 1525. seaten to- produce
fertility, 143.

Frog, the green tree, 143.

Frog, a fertility amulet, 85,
91, 143.

Frog, bezel of ring, 296.

Frog, symbol of the Resurrec-
tion, 144.

Frontlets, 260.

Fruits, amulets to ripen, 18, 19.

Fumigation with sulphur, 325.

Funerary Rings, 301.

Fylfot, 331.


un=


Gabbar, 43.

Gabriel, 43, 251552.0625 180;
277. 278 300 2 a Dismmnalion
written on his wing, 70.

Gad, 379.

Gadd, Mr.-C: .].4°877317, 456.

Gagge, 313.

Gaggitis, 313, 316.

Galatians, 359.

Galaktite, 313, 319.

Galgaliel, 375.

Gall bladder, 456.

Gall stones, 3117317.

Gall pot sblack> dog; "12.;— “ot
crocodiles, 17; of leopards,
Ly

Gammadion, 331.

Gammas, 331.

Gandash, 337.

Ganesa, 332.

Gannus, 274.

Garden amulet, 324.


INDE


Garden of Eden, 194.

Gardner Prot; Palos.

Garnet, 313, 1314°321"

Gaster, Dr., quoted, 218, 221,
237, 258, 368, 486.

Gate of Alexander, 277.

Gate-post amulet, 216.

Gate Keeper of Hell, 116.

Gazelle, skin of the unborn
used for amulets, 27.


| GBRD, the eunuch, 257.


Geb, the Egyptian god, 156.
Gebhtirah, emanation of En-
Séph, 370.
Gedullah, emanation of En-

Sdph, 370.

Gé‘éz language, 180.

Géos, 279.

Gematria, 261, 404.

Gemini, Zodiacal Sign, 410,
411; their influences on
men, 417, 421.

Geni, the Seven Kings of


the,
43. |


| Generator, 7.
| Genesis, Book of, 231.


Genital organs, amulets for,
418.

Gentiles, 370.

George, St:, 125, 131, 181) 274;
275, 434, 466.


| Germany, 311, 339, 363, 460.


Grey, symbol of Aquarius, 487.
Gibbet, 341.


| Gift Rings, 301.
SGihons2264269"


Gilgamish, 2, 88, 124, 211, 490.

Ginsburg, Dr!,, quotedy 21s:
BG7s

Ginza, 241.

Girdle of Venus, 493.

Girdles, 215.

Gishmin, 249.

Gizah, geese of, 151.

Goat, Zodiacal Sign, 409.

Goat-fish, Zodiacal Sign, 409.

Goat-fish, man-headed, 124. .


INDEX


Goat, amuletic figures of, 86.

Goblet d’Alvielle, 335.

God, His ineffable name
YHWH, His Attributes, 367 ;
His Names, 180 ; His Names
as words of power, 260.

God, the Ten Names of, 373.


God, His Name of 72 Names,


378. .

God, His Name of 12 letters,
olin. Ol (427 letters. 379);
of 72 letters, 373.

God, the Aged (Ancient of
days), 165.

God-man, 155.

Gods, the ancestral, 315 ; frog-
headed, 434. |

Gods, figures of the, 216.

Gods, the Three Companies of,
168. .

Goddess, the naked, 92.

Goddess, serpent-headed, 434.

Gog and Magog, 277.

Goitre, 308.

Gold, Egyptian and Sudani,
251, 298; white gold, 408 ;
ephodh of, 328.

Gold, Magical Square of, 395.

Gold, colour of, symbolic of
the lion, 487.

Gold, amulets of, 20, 230.

Golgotha, 343, 429.

Goliath; 330, 431.

Goliathus Atlas beetle, 136.

Gollancz, the late Sir H., 272,
358.

Good Genius, 204.

Good Luck, 300.

Good Luck Rings, 333.

Good Spirit, 205.

Goose of Amen, 151.

Gorgons, the Three, 429.

Gout, 309, 313.

teat. bife. the — (2:2,
240.

Glands, swellings of the, 312,
316.


God),


915


Glass, red, 295; blue bezel,
294 ; writing on, 301.

Glass blowing, 252.

Globes, the Seven, 113.

Glory, emanation of En-Sdph,
3/0.

Gnosis, 200.

Gnostics, 27,39, 67, 239,242)"
200% 307) 5520s aimilets: Of
the, 200; rings of the, 296.

Gnosticism from India, 200;
the various influences in, 200.

Graces, the Three, 429.

Grain of Lamashtu, 115.

Grammata, 261.

Grammatya, 400.

Granite, 202.

Granville, Earl, 198.

Graphiel, 393.

Grasshopper, 152.

Graver, 69.

Great Cackler, 151.

Great Dog, the Zodiacal Leo,
409.

Great Hand, 467.

Great Judge, 196.

Great River, 250.

Great Star, 409.

Great Twins, 409. :

Greatness, emanation of En-
Séph, 370.

Greece, 200, 434 ; wax figures
in, 485.

Greediness, 463.

Greeks, 27, 242, 260, 310, 314 ;
magical numbers of the,
428 ; borrow the Zodiac from
the Babylonians, 411, 443.

Green colour, symbolic of hope,
487.

Green, dark, symbol of Aries,
487.

Green jasper, 315.

Green paste, magical, 118.

Green stones, magical, 326.

Greenland, 363.

Greg, Mr., 332.


A ees


516


Grigri, 16.

Gudea, King, 488.

GUGSTONE, 87.

GUGALLU, 122.

Guiana, 363.

Guinea, 312.

Gula, 409.

Gypsum, 118, 121; symbolic
of Ninurta, 122.


Hadad) 257.

Haematitic; 87,210, 314, 318;
beetles of, 136.

Hafsah, widow of Muhammad,
on.

Hagar, 80.

Haggard, Sir R., 129.

Hagiél, 393.

Hagith, ruler of Venus, 388.

Hail, Prince of the, 375.

Hair of beasts as “ medicine,”
JP

Hair, the mana of, 26.

Hairpins, 314.

Hajj, the, 80.

Halévy, Mr., quoted, 286.

Hall, the late Dr. H. R., 294.

Hall of Judgment of Osiris,
135, 170, 196, 364.

Haman, 295.

Hamath; 259.

Hamehit, 152.

Hammer of the Passion, 340,
341.

Hand, models of the human,
468 ; use of in blessing, 468 ;
outstretched, 67; thumb
and index finger touching,


126; amulets of the, 150,
494.

Hand of honour and dishonour,
469.


Hand, Kabbalistic views, 401f.
Hand symbolic of God, 467.


Hand, the “ raising of the “=
prayer, 467.


INDEX


| Hand of Fatma, 467, 468.
| Hands, washing of the, 469.


Handled cross, the, 340.

Hanpu, 110, 113.

Hapi, the Nile-god, 156, 412,
445.

Hapi, the son of Horus, 156.

Haqa-haqa-herher, 143.

Hare, 151.

Hare, Zodiacal Sign, 412.

Harna, Rabbi, 230.

Harp of David, 437.

Harpies, the Three, 429.

Harpocrates, 165, 16879202;
2063, 207 -Al2;

Harshiell 277

Hart, skin of used for amulets,
228, 230.

Haruspices, 450.

Harvest amulet, 307.

Hasan, 302, 469.

Hashmalim, 373.

Hasmaeél, 393.

Hasmdday, 393.

Hat-cord rings, 304.

Hathor<l34a02515:
woman, 203f.


as naked


Hathor, the three forms of
woman, cow and ristrum,
1505100:


Hathor amulets, 149.
Hathors, the Seven, 433.
Haughtiness, 492.

Hawk of Ra and Horus, 432.
Haxey Hood Game, 439.


Hayyéth, 373.


Headache, 274, 308, 310, 313,
314, 316.

Headrest, 138.

Health amulet, 233, 323.

Health, House of, 420.

Heart, Sacred, 415.

Heart, amulets of, 138, 316.


| Heart, disease of, 312.
Heart, scarabs of, 136.


Heart, line of the, 493.
Heart-soul, 144.


INDEX


Heart, spells for the, 139.

Heaven, 326.

Heavens, the Four, 375.

Heavens, the Seven, 45.

Heavens, the Houses of, 406.

Hebrew amulets, 212f.

Hebrew letters and language,
250, 283, 403.

Hebrews, 39, 67, 148, 212, 213,
Cae IAL DO 283,307;
359, 366, 367, 368, 430, 446,
471; theirmagical figures 486.

Hecate, the three-headed, 208.

Hedgehog, 151.

Heel of the hand, line of the,
492.

Heel of the
Moon, 402.

Heka = Magic, 7.

Helena, the Empress, 343.

Heliodorus, 363.

Heliopolis, 145, 164.

Heliotrope, 314, 315.

Hell, the Gates of, 435.

Hell of the Zodiac, 420.

Helmet amulet, 150.

Hells, the Seven, 439.

Hen, Zodiacal Sign, 412.

Hephaestion, 205.

Hepti-she, 364.

Hegqit, Frog-goddess, 143.

Her, the two Eyes of, 141.

Hercules, 438.

Herd amulets, 4. ©

Hermopolis, 434.

Herodotus, 85.

Heron, 151.

Her-pa-khart, 156, 206.

Hertataf, 153.

Heru-nedj-tef-f, 413.

Her-ur, 8. :

Hesed, emanation of En-Sdph,
370.

Het, 168.

Hexagram, the, 223, 226, 230.

Hexagram of Creation, 432.

Hiddekel, 226.


hand and the


Hides as “‘ medicine,” 17.

Hierakonpolis, 293.

Hieratic writing, 128.

Hieroglyphic writing, 128.

Hijrah, 67.

Hildesheim, relic at, 26.

Pilla oorZa3.

Himala? 13:

Himyarites, 92, 213.

Hiniel, 277.

Hippolytus, 200.

Hippopotamus, 18, 134.

Hircus, 388.

Hissarlik, 335.

Hittites, 451.

Hittites, cylinder seals of, 124.

Héd, emanation of En-Sdéph,
370.

Hofler, 13.

Holland, 363.

Holy of Holies, 328.

Holy Rings, 301.

Holy Sepulchre, 319.

Holy Spirit, nimbus of, 440.

Honey, 308.

Honorius of Thebes, his system
of writing, 403.

Hoof of ass in rings, 298.

Hope, 425.

Hopfner, Dr. T., 459.

Horizon amulet, 146.

Homnizd, Rabban, 79; . dust
from his tomb an amulet, 26.

Horn, amulets made of, 18;
set in rings, 298; used as
“medicine,” 17.

Horns of the apkallu, 120.

Horns of the Devil, 468.

Horologium auxiliaris, 414.

Horse, Zodiacal Sign, 412.

Horse, sinew of, 486.

Horsemen of Satan, 10.

Horus the Child, 146, 206, 207,
251, 412; god of the South,
149; killed by Scorpion,
1654.0 Cippi off 165; One
God of Heaven, 203.


318


Horus and the Ba, 144.

Horus, the Four Sons of, 467;
figures in wax, 484.

Horus the Elder, 360.

Horus-Sept, 143.

Hoshen mishpat, 328.

Host-Case, Cruciform, 344, 349.

Hours, gods of the, 168; the
planetary Rulers of, 381.

Hours, lucky and unlucky, 466.

House amulet, 15, 68, 97, 307.

House, blessings for, 276.

House of water, 445.

Houses of the Sky, the Twelve,
420.

Houses of the Zodiac, 383.

Hr‘dd, seal of, 256.

Hrtkl, seal of, 254.

Hshahshiel, seal of, 278.

Hui, the magician, 482.

Hulduppu goat, 121, 122.

Hulme Miter oi, equoted.
332, 348, 350, 437:

Humbaba, face of, 2.

Hundred-and-ten, the number,
441.

Hunefer, Papyrus of, 152.

Hungary, 363.

Hunting, spells for, 275.

Huntsmen, 419.

Hurricane, the Zodiacal, 408.

Hurricane, Prince of the, 375.

Husain, 302, 469.

Hyacinth, 314, 323.

Hydra, the Seven-headed, 434.

Hydrochloric acid, 69.

Hymns to Ra, 428.

Hypnotism, 491.

Hypocephalus amulet, 142.

Hyvernat, Prof., 247.


Tamblichus, 491.
JIAO, 203.
Ibex, 113.
Tbis; Sho):
Ibyad, 43.


INDEX


Ice, *petrinede srs

Ichneumon, 151.

Idris, 466.

IGE eo Ule353:

Image amulets, 18.

IM KALLA, 118.

Immaculate Conception, 312.

Immortality, quest of, 491f.

Incantations < -to. “iameasneu.
IBETAE

Incense 1n ink, 70.

Incense water, 230.

India, 69; 2005 2524313 so 10.
319 2323, 3d2,, 000.0008 lan

Indians, 27, 201, 320, 492.

Indians, Mexican, 312.

Indra ;-333:

Ineffable writing, 261.

Infinite, the, 367.

Ink, 3% black, of two kings:
Zor

Ink, green, 28, 482.

Ink, perfumed, 70.

Ink of lilies and crocuses, 228.

Ink with incense in it, 224.

Innin, 117.

Insanity, 324.

Inscriptions on amulets, 39,
275 ; spirit, 287.

Investiture Rings, 300.

Invisibility in battle, 311.

eirak ys le

Eran eb25, o/s Le

Iranians, 239.

Irawaddy, 315.

Ireland, 312, 363.

Im-t ban-t, 361.

Iron, 251; amulets of, 20.

Iron filings, 318.

Iron ore, 149, 210.

Iron powder, 318.

Iron pyrites, 315.

Iron, Magical Square of, 395.

Tsaac #220)

Tsaiahye2ro.

Ishim, 373.


| Ishmael, 80.


INDEX


Ishmaelites, 328, 466.

feta = com Oe S02 O25)
Fifteen her number, 427.

Ishtar Gate, 102.

Isis, 143, 165, 196, 251, 364.

Isis, blood of, 137, 316.

Isis, her wanderings in the
Delta, 140, 169.

Isis and Nephthys, 150.

Islam, 469.

Island of Meroé, 178.

Ismu az-Zat, 46.

Israel, Tribes of, 328, 330, 364.

Israelites, 224, 341, 378, 488.

Issachar, 379.

Tray 306, 311.316, 335, 363 ;
Wax figures in, 485.

ftieh; the,:275.

Ithamar, 270.

Ivory amulets, 18.

Iyyar,. 379:


Jackal, 151.

Jacinth, 327, 424.

Jacob, 26, 270, 364, 433.

Jacobites, 26.

Hades lo,,320,-326,

Jadeite, 315,

Jafar, 359. 5

YAHWEH SABAOTH, 372.

Jains, 333.

Jalal ud-Din, 44.

James, St,. 343, 434.

~ Jamnites, 216.

Jann, the (evil spirits), 43.

January, its stone and amulet,
493.

Japan, 334, 335, 413.


TDD OA ES collar tue yAu me
Srecig cle va lCUe oO (alas
yellow, 327.


Jastrow quoted, 444, 456.
Jaundice, 23, 308, 310, 313,
326; amulets against, 22.

Jawbones, 149.
Jazirat Zabigat, 321.


|


519


Jealousy, 364 ; the awful power
of, 356.

Jemdah Nasr, 103.

perusdieine 2lon2301 2oug OFF,
343, 450.


| Jesus, the spell of, 274.


Jesus, the tongue of, 70.

Jesus, 888; the total of the
numerical values of the.
letters of His Name, 209.

Jesus Rings, 298.


plete 0G 4309.37 «heart or,


316.
Jettatore, 3657
Jettatura, 363.
Jewels of Lamashtu, 115.
Jewish Encyclopaedia, 369.
Jews; 27; 50; 60,213, 216, 2389,
259, 260, 310, 440.


_ Jinn, the (devils), 43.
| John the Baptist, 71, 241, 466.


John of Lycus, 352.

John, St., Christians of, 239.

Nonna LieCracitic of, So1-

John IV, King of Abyssinia,
198.

Jonah, 440.

Jonathan, 329, 431.

Joppa, 250.


| Jordan, 71, 433, 438.
| Joseph the Patriarch, 219, 228,


270, 443, 446; the selling of,
466 ; in prison, 466.
Joseph and Zuleikha, 466.
Josephus, History of, 280.


| Joshua, 270.


Josiah, 214.

Hove 29 by,

Judah, 295, 364, 379.
Judas, 437, 439.

Judas Maccabaeus, 216.


| Judgment of Zu, 88.


Judgment Hall of Osiris, 138,
142.


| Juju Cult, 165, 348.
| July, stone and amulet of,


493-4.


320)


Jumjumah, 446.

June, stone and amulet of,
493-4.

Jupiter, 43, 333,375, 380, 463,
465; its spirit and demon,
391; stones influenced by,
423; his influence on men,
383 ; cistine, 394.

Jupiter (Bethor), 386.

Jupiter, ruler of the first finger,
402.

Jupiter, the Mount of, 492.

Jupiter (Pisces), 420.

Jupiter (Sagittarius), 419.

Justice, emanation of En-Sdph,
370.

Justina, 476.


Ka, the Egyptian genius, 130.

Ka amulet, 150.

Kabbalah, 201, 218, 236, 273,
309, 323, 366f.

Kabbalah, Practical and Theo-
retical, 369.

Kabbalah and_ Astrology ;
magic mirrors, 490

Kabbalah and _ the
Hand, 401f.

Kabbalistic Tree, the, 369, 371.

KAGINA stone (haematite), 87.

Kakkab u Alap shame, 409.

Kalbu rabu, 409.

Kaleb, 270.

Kali, 332.

Kamé‘a, Kami’ (Cameo), 262,
390.

Kamé‘a of copper, 396.

Kamé‘a of gold, 395.

Kamé‘a of iron, 395.

Kamé‘a of lead, 394.

Kamé‘a of quicksilver, 396.

Kamé‘a of silver, 396.

Kamé‘a of tin, 394.

Kamu gate, 120.

Karbalan26..00,-0) 00.70);

Karmesisih, 288.


Human


INDEX


Karnak, 136, 163, 164.

Kasa, Prince, 198.

Kasbu, 437.

Kasfyail, 43.

Kazmain, 70.

Kebra Nagast, 197, 198; as an
amulet, 235; surrendered
by the British Museum, 198.

Kedemél, 393.

Kef-pesh, 134, 149.

Kehath, 270.

Keith, Mr. A. B., 437.

Key Rings, 301.

Kemer, the cannibal of, 478.

Kemia, 223:

Kesh, 118.

Keteb, the mid-day devil, 219.

Ketesh, goddess, 156.

Kether, emanation of
Sdph, 370.

Khabis, 43.

Khadijah, 466, 469.

Khalsata, 143.

Khalserau, 143.

Khatdiel, 227.

Khartim (Khurttim), 447.

Kha-sekhemu1, 293.

Khepera, 7, 8, 136, 138, 143,
to7,

Khnemu, 139, 149, 157, 168.

Khufu (Chedps), 153.

Khumbaba, 169.

Khurza, 69.

Kibshin, 249.

Kidneys, amulets
308, 419.

Kidney stone, 315.

King, Dr C.cEly We 2028 30o.
S12,

King, Mr., 113, 116, 467.

King of Light, 240.

Kingdom \ emanations

Kingship f{ from En-Sdph, 370

Kingu, son and husband of Tia-
mat, 5, 240, 407; defeated;
5 y-siaime ©:

Kinsfolk, House of, 420.


Fn-


fOr aeZoS.


INDEX


Kirschmann, Dr., 306.

Kishar, 4.

Kislimu, 409.

Knights Hospitallers, 343.

Knot, amulet of the, 150.

Knots, blowers on, 62.

Knots, the Eleven, 62.

Knowledge, transcendental,
200.

Kochbiel, 375.

K6oh-i-Nar, 313.

Kolasta, 240.

Koldewey, Dr., 99-101.

Koraish tribe, 51.

Kordofan, 311, 313.

Korea, 363.

Kubbah Idris, 25, 79.

Kota 61-53;

Kullah, 118.

Kummu, the sick room of a
temple, 103, 119.

Kur’an, 31, 34, 44, 280; as
amulet, 235; materials on
which written, 27, 51 ; num-
ber of letters, verses and
words in, 52.

Kur’an amulet cases, 28.

Kournah, 77, 240:

Kitiytinjik, 451.


abane (52, 214-30)-

Labartu, 104ff. See Lamashtu.
Labour, women in, 318, 324.
Labourer, 409.

Ladder of Jacob, 148.

Ladder of Ra, 148.


Ladder of the Crucifixion,
341.

Ladder amulet, 148.

Lagash, 118.


Lake of boiling water, 438.
Lake of Life, 438.

Lake, Sacred, at Karnak, 163.
Lakhamu, 408.

Lala, 288.

“La Muscotte ”’ Opera of, 31.


oZ1


Lamashtu, the devil-woman,
Geo, A104, 172 amulets
of, 116; bribes of, 115; her
five names, 117.

Lamassu, 120.

Lamb-parchment, 341.

Lambros, 279.

Lamentations of Isis, 163.

Lamp, 113, 114.

Lamp-bearers of Satan, 10.

Lankester, Prof. Ray, 298.

Lapis lazuli, 87, 317, 327.

Lapis lazuli, artificial, 317.

Lars Porsena, 435.

Last Judgment, 128.

Bararak 120rT2b.

Law, the Hebrew, 260; the
Revealed, 367.

Law, Roman, 438.

Layard, sie Hi; 113;/283, 288)
446.

Laylahel, 315.

Lead, amulets, of, 34.

Lead, inscribed sheets of, 253.

Lead, magical square of, 394.

Learning, 492.

Leather amulets, 18.

Leaves, amulets of, 18.

Wefaiaa- sede... 190 ;
irony, «1'79)

Legend of the Creation, 3.

Legion (Devils), 375.

Legrain, M. G., 136, 164.

Lehashim (amulets), 215.

Leo, Zodiacal Sign, 205, 410,
411, 463: his influences on
men, 418, 421.

Leo ITI, Popé, 351.

Leo, XITK, Pope, 365.

Leopard, 109; gall of, 17.

Leopard amulets, 18.

Lepers and cannibal, 478.

Lepidotus fish, 298.

Le Puy, relic at, 26.

Le Roux, M. Hugues, 198, 199.

Leshem, 327.

Letter Circles and Wheels, 376.


CrOSSes


922


Letters as essential things, 44 ;
as mathematical figures, 261;
numerical values of, 44;
Phoenician on cylinder seals,
124. See Hebrew.

Levi, 270.

Libation vases, 412.

Libra, Zodiacal Sign, 410, 412,
416; his influences over
men, 418, 42].

Library, Medium, 351.

Libraries of Babylon, 260.

Lidzburski quoted, 247.

Life, the Great, 240.

Life, House of the, 420.

Life, line of in hand, 430, 467,
468, 492.

life} the: Supreme;; 239)

Life, symbol of, 339.

Light, creation of, 8.

Light, Waters of, 240.

Lightfoot, Bishop, 362.

Lightning, 314, 315, 318, 324 ;
326 ; forked, 332.

Lightning, amulets, 21.

Lightning, Prince of the, 378.

lahta®.278:

Lilac, symbol of freshness, 487.

Pihingo7:

Lilith, desert wife of Adam,
D224 247 2892307001 ts

Lily ink, 228.

Limestone, 296, 319.

Limoges enamel, 348.

Line of Fate, 493.

Line of fortune, 493.

Line of the heart, 493.

Line of the heel of the hand,
492.

Line of life, 492.

Linen of the Breastplate of
Aaron, 328.

Linen, Phoenician, 251.

Lion, symbol of strength, 86.

Lion, Zodiacal Sign, 409, 411.

Lion-god, double, 85.

Lion-man, 120.


Livers of birds as


INDEX


Lion heart-scarab, 136.

Lion-weights, 252.

Lioness-headed woman, 114.

Lipsius on Gnosticism, 202,
340.

Litames of Seker, 163.

Liturgy of Funerary Offerings,
S57:

Literature, early Christian, 201.

Liver, 308.32 1773526:

Liver, divination by, 214, 451 ;
diseases of the, 310.

Liver, model of sheep's, 10
clay, from Babylonia, 451 ;
from Nineveh!” 45) iam
bronze, from Piacenza, 451,
452.

“medicine,”

aa


| Loango, 18.


Lock of hairy 207,°21/7¢34001—
lets, 18.

Lofham, 18. -

Logos, the real, 262.

Long life, 335.


_ Londesborough, Lord;_his col


lection of rings, 296.
Lord of Hosts (Salaéth), 272.
Lord of the Ladder, 148.
Lord's Prayer, the, 56, 79yea
spell; 273.


_ Lords, a clan of Angels, 10.


Lorraine, Cross of, 343.

Lots, drawing of, 329.

Lotus, 129; and Horus, 207.

‘““ Loud-bayer,”’ a dog, 98.

Love, emanation of En-Sdéph,
370.

Love amulets, 228.

Love apples, 490.

Love, power of, 355.


| Love making, 419.


Lubaid, the Jewish magician,
62.


| Lucky stone, 325.


EUGAGy Gin INAS! ieee.
Lugal-Tarsi, 317.


INDEX


Lumashi, 407.
Lumbago, 274.
Lunacy, spirit of, 274.
Lungs, 314.
Lycopolis, 129.
iycus, do2:

Lydda, 181, 274, 275.
Lydia, 313.

Lynx, lol:


Maat, goddess of Truth and
Law, 157, 206.

Macbeth, 436.

Maccabaeus, 233, 353.

Macedonia, 317.

Mace-head, 317.

Madinah, 51, 52.

Madness, 306, 313.

Magi, the, 298, 429.

Magianism, 15.

Magic, 1, 443; White, 484;
Black, 494 ; in Mesopotamia,
82; of the white man,
18.

Magicians, 3; in Babylonia,
407 ; their apparatus, 487.
Magical Squares of letters, 234.

Magnetite, 317.

Mahdi, 31.

Mahdists, 199.

Mahfeloén, 181.

Majesty, emanation

Sdoph, 370.

Makdala, 197.

Makéda, 192.

Makiel, 278.

Makkah (Mecca), 51, 52, 80,
469.

Malacca, 363.

Malachite, 318.

Malay, 363.

Male principle, 332.

Malik ul-Mulk, 49.

Malka Betharshism, 393.


of En-


Malktth, emanation of En-
Séph, 370. |


923


Malt of Lamashtu, 115.


| Malvita, 278.
_ Mambi‘a, 288.
| Man, creation of, 367, 408;


from the blood of Kingu, 6;
man in the eye, 387.

Man, the Archetyphal, Primal,
Primordial, Perfect, Heavenly,
374, 402.


| Man and the Sephiroth, 372.


Mana, 23; fixing and reaction
of, 26.
Manasseh, 379.


| Mandaeans, 239f.

| Mandaitic language, 283.

| Mandayi, 240.

| Mandragora roots, 19, 195.
_ Mandrakes, 490.


Manichaeism, 201.

Maniel, 278.

Mano cornuta, 316.
Manishtusu, 452.

Maoris, 315.

Mappa (talisman), 353.
Marbabeta (net) of Solomon,
192.

Marbil, 249.

Marble, 319.


| March, stone and amulet of,


493.

Marchesvan, 379.

Marcus the Gnostic, 209.

Marduk, his five weapons, 5;
creates the heavens, 6; his
conquest, 7, 25 ; his number,
427; his magical beast,
ips

Marduk, 92, 101, 121, 124, 240,
291, 408, 421, 440.

Marett, Dr. R. R., 24.

Mariel, 278.

Mariners’ amulets, 21.

Mark iiots,ob2c:

Marra, 43.

Marriage, 466.

Marriage, House of, 420.

Marriage rings, Jewish, 300.


524


Mars, 43, 375, 380, 465; its
spirit and demon, 391; its
influence on men, 383;
and on stones, 423.

Mars and the palm of the hand,
402.

Mars, Mount of, 492.

Mars (Iron), 395.

Mars (Aries), 416.

Mars (Scorpio), 419.

Marshall Mrs BP. AH. 304.

Martlos, 279.

Marwan, 51.

Mary the Virgin, 130, 191, 319,

424, 469.

Mary and Isis, 203.

Mary amulet, 130.

Mary, Book of Praises of, 28.

Mary, Miracles of, 188.

Mary, Rose Garden of, 79.

Mary, Talisman of, 353.

Mary Magdalene, 297.

Masco (witch), 31. .

Mascots, 31.

Mashbar, 249.

Maskaram, 473.

Mason’s measure, 150.

Mass, Service of the, 298, 318.

Massikim, 375.

Mastéma, 473.

Master Physician, 488.

Mathariel, 375.

Mathematics, 427.

Matrix of Isis, 137.

Mattai, Mar, 26.

Matter on Gnosticism, 201, 202.

Maximilian I, 231.

May, stone and amulet of, 493,
494.

May my name flourish, 163.

Mazzal tobh, 300.

Meal, 122.

Measuring line, 438.

Mecca, 466.

Medical papyri and tablets, 301

Medical rings, 301.

Medicine, 251.


INDEX


Medicine man, 25.


“Medicines,” fetish, 16, 17,
117, 348.

Mediterranean, 137, 310.

Medium, 491.


Mehalalel, 278.

Melancholy, 314, 317.

Melanesians, 23.

Melchior, 297, 298, 321, 353.

Melitite, 319.

Members of the body, the, 366,

274.

Memory, amulet for, 318.

Memphis, 85.

Men and women, the tears of
Khepera, 8.

Men created to serve the gods,


Men, figures of, as amulets, 18.

Menas Sus l32:

Menat amulet, 147.

Mendes, 85.

Menhet, 157.

Men-kau-Ra, 137.

Menstruation, 306, 310, 316,

A66.

Mentu-Ra, 157.

Menu, 156.

Meny, 396.

Menyelek II, 198.

Mercury, the planet, 43, 370,
378, 386, 388, 463, 465;
influence on stones, 423 ;
demon and spirit of, 392.

Mercury, its influence on men,
382.

Mercury and the fourth finger,
402.

Mercury, magical square of,
396.

Mercury, Mount of, 492.

Mercury (Gemini), 417.

Mercury (Virgo), 418.


Mercury (quicksilver), 396;
transmutation into stone,
388.


Meroé, 145, 178.


INDEX


Mert, goddess, 157.

Mesembria, 334.

Mesha, King of Moab, 251, 403.

Mesopotamia, 3, 69, 82, 104,
DIAS DAT O17.

Messiah, 260.

Mestha, 156.

Mesu Betshu, 7.

Metals, transmutation of, 387.

Metals, identified with planets,

aot

Metal working, 251.

Metternich stele, 27, 165-171.

Metz, relic at, 26.

Mexicans, 363.

Mexico, 363.

Mezuzah, 216.

Micah, 214.

Michael, 11, 43, 180, 196, 228,

DOT 371S:

Michael the ~ angel “ot the

Hace. srl (0):

Michael, Homilies on, 188.

Middleton, Prof. J. H., 305.

Midianites, 328.

Miduch, 279.

Midwife-goddess, 143.

Milk in women, 17, 312, 316,
319.

Milk, Amulets producing, 21.

Milk in ewes, 319; in white
cow, 153.

Milk Grotto, 319.

Milk Stone, 313, 319.

Mimtim, 43.

Mind, wandering of the, 324 ;
equability of the, 324.

Mind, the, and the opal, 321.

Miracles of the B.V.M., 197.

Mirrors; 18,215.

Mirrors, magical, 489.

Mirza Khan, 34, 59.

Miscarriage, amulets against,
21, 212, 308, 317 ; caused: by
Lamashtu, 109.

Mist, spell against, 289.

Mispah, 301.


525


Mithras, 201, 203: numerical
values of the letters of his
name = 305.208.

Mizpah Rings, 301.

Mkissi, 16.

Mk-t (amulet), 133.

Moab; 250, 251.

Moabite Stone, 251, 403.

Monda, 15.

Monday, a lucky day, 417, 465.

Monelta, 279.

Monkey, 102, 412.

Monogram of Christ, 259, 342.

Monotheism of the Hebrews,

259.

Month, the intercalary, 464.

Months, gods of the, 168.

Months, the Twelve and the

Tetragrammaton, 379.

Months, the epagomenal, 407.

Months and their lucky stones,
493.

Montgomery, Prof. J. A., 247.

Moon, the, 375, 380, 388, 463 ;
its spirit and demon, 392;
its influence on men, 382;
on stones, 423; creation of,
8; crescent, 337; devoured
by Set, 142; day of the, 465.

Moon amulet, 150.

Moon and heel of the hand, 402.

Moon, the 28 stations of the,
44.

Moon, Eye of the, 360.

Moon, Mount of the, 492.

Moon (Cancer), 417.

Moon (quicksilver), 397.

Moon-god, 408.

Moonstone, 320, 324.

Morah, 249.

Mordecai, 295.

Morning Star, 207.

Morocco, 307.

Mortillet, G. de, 335, 338, 339.

Moses, 50, 197, 203, 212, 217,
299 IAS SO R21, LOO geo le
403, 428, 440, 466, 488.


526


Moses and the brazen serpent,
205.

Moss agate, 307.

Mosul, 26, 272, 453.

Mother (Evil Eye), 279.

Mother-of-pearl, 70.

Mother-alphabet, 251.

Mother-of the Book, 52.

Mother of-everything (Tiamat),
+


Motion, the First, 375.

Mount Carmel, 250.

Mount Gerizim, 259, 269.

Mount of Apollo, 492.

Mount of Jupiter, 492.

Mount of Mars, 492.

Mount of Mercury, 492.

Mount of the Moon, 492.

Mount of Saturn, 492.

Mouse (?), 126.

Mueller, Max, 332.

Mughtasils, 239. 240.

Muhain, 469.

Muhammad the Prophet, 26,
3346, Dl. J32 79. 4002, Oly
359, 466, 469; bewitched,
67.

Muhammad ‘Ali Pasha, 165.

Muhammadans, 10.

Mulilu, 118.

Mullah, a blesser of amulets, 70.

Multifariousness, 367.

Mim ya, 309.

Mummies, Egyptian, 309.

Mummu, envoy of Ea, 4.

Mummy of Apis, 85.

Musawwir, 302.

Muses, the Nine, 435.

Mushrush, 101.

Music, 434, 492.

Musk in ink, 70.

Muslims, 56, 60, 68, 80; of
Persia, 26.

Mussel shells, 18.

Mut, goddess, 150, 157.

Mutonium, 15.

Mycerinus, King, 139.


INDEX


Myrrh, 298.
Mysticism, 420, 470.


Naaman, 433.

Nablts, 258.

INA DUG Lee

Nahr al-Kabir, 250.

Nail-fetish, 18.

Nails, the Three, 341.

Nakiél, 373.

Name, the, equivalent of God
Or man, 7.

Name, the Essential, 46.

Name amulet, 147.

Names on ring of Solomon, 281.

Names, Gnostic, 203.

Names, the Ninety-nine Beauti-

ful 7

Nancy, relic at, 26.

Naphtali, 379.

Napoleon III, 365.

Naram-Sin, 452.

Narcotics, 489.

Nar Marratu, 116.

Naruda, goddess, 120, 121.

Nassat Dies):

Neb-er-djer, 7.

N

N

N


Nebo, Library of, 453.
Vebseni, Papyrus of, 140-41.
ebtshet, 157.

Nebti amulet, 156.
Nebuchadnezzar II, 468.
Nebun, 168.

Neck amulets, 306.
Necklaces, 155.

Necromancy, 213.
Nectanebus, 306.

Nefer amulet, 144, 340.
Nefer-Tem, 157.

Nefrite, 202.

NE-GAB stone, 116.

Negative Confession, 162, 180.
Neith, 150, 157.

Nekhebit, 157, 292.
Nekht-neb-f, 168.


| Nenu, 7, 445.


INDEX


Neolithic amulets, 134.

Neo-Platonists, 370.

Nephthys, 157, 170.

Nephrite, 320, 326.

Ner, a number, 428.

eres lOO S121 3213,

Nert, 149.

Nesakh, emanation of En-

Soph, 370.

Neshmet stone, 140.

Nesi-Amsu, 482.

Nesi-Khonsu, 441.

Nesi-ta-nebt-Ashru, 163, 180.

Nestorius, 26.

Net (Neth), 157.

Net, 122, 149.

Net of Marduk, 5.

Net of Solomon, 190, 192.

Netit, 169.

New Guinea, 9.

Nicaragua, 363.

Nicolo stone, 202.

Niffar (Nippur),
446.


Night established, 8.
Nie peebrance:ot the, 375,
Night, terror of, 1.
Night devils and spirits, 312,
oO
Nikander, 313.
Nile, the, 25, 79, 144, 412.
Nile-god, 412, 445.
Nimbus, 351.
Nimrtd, 252.
Nine 22:
Ninazu, 488.
Nine, ane number, 435 ;
ies ae).
Ninety-nine, the AWE ae 44],
Nineveh, 124, 451, 453.
Pe Ninttua.. 122.
Nippur, 118, 247.
Niriek, 285.
Nisan, 379.
Nisannu, 409.
Nish kati, 467.
Noah, 270.


283, 427,


nine


Noises, disturbing, 275.

Nomes, gods of the, 168.

Noonday devil, 219.

Nophek, 327.

North, god of, 149.

Norway, 363.

Nose, bleeding of, 313.

November, amulet and stone

of, 493, 494.

Nu, Water-god, 7, 445.

Nu, Papyrus of, 163.

Nubia, 25, 146.

Number of rejuvenation, 435.

Number, the greatest sacred,
427.


_ Numbers, permutations of, 368.


Numbers as applied to letters,
44.

Numbers, their mystic and

sacred character, 427.

Numbers of theyspirits and

demons of the planets, 393.


| Nun, the ring of the, 297.


Nuriel, 277.
Nuski 121, 123.
Nut, goddess, 157.
Nut amulets, 19.


Oath, attestation of, 467.

Obedience, 326.

Obelisk amulets from mummies,
20, 164.

Obsidian, 148, 202.

Ocean, see Nu.

Och, ruler of the Sun, 387.

October, amulet and stone of,
493, 494.

Odhem, 327.

Offering tablet amulet, 150.

Og, 435.

Oil of roses, 308.

Oil of Lumashtu, 115.

Oil flasks of St. Menas, 132.

Okeanos, 385.

Olivine, 321.

‘Omar, Whalita, ol,


528


Omega, 203.

Omens, 444 ; lists of, 444.

OmrZoo.

One = God, 61, 428.

One One = God, 428.

Onyx; 202,320, 327.

Opal, 320.

Opening the Mouth, Liturgy of,
149, 153, 161.

Ophaniel, 375.

Ophanim, 373.

Ophiel, 388.

Ophites, 203, 210..

Ophrah, 328.

Ophthalmia, 301.

Orange colour,
luxury, 487.

Orchard amulets, 29, 324.

Ormazd, 203:

Osiris, 143, 251, 260, 264, 435.

Osiris identified with Christ,
203.

Osiris, Code of, 162.

Osiris, Judgment Hall of, 137.

Osiris, the seven forms and
seven halls of, 433.

Osiris and the Ladder, 148.

Osiris figures, 152.

Osiris, amulet case of, 28.

Ostrakaia 27):

‘Othman, the Khalifah, 51.

Ox, Zodiacal Sign, 412.

Ox amulet, 307. °

Ox, the sleeping, 280.

Oxyrhynchus fish swallows
phallus of Osiris, 152.


symbolic of


PA-BIL-SAG, 409.

Pacific Ocean, 23.

Paddle, hawk-headed, 7.

Padua; 353.

Pahad, emanation of En-Sdoph,
370.

Pains in hands and feet, 317.

Palestine,’ 670) 137.2200; 5236;
301, 307, 319, 347.


Razzi.


INDEX


Palindrome, 101, 207, 262, 267.

Palladius i3olnoo7:

Palm leaves, 27.

Palm of the hand and Mars, 402.

Palmistry, 491, 492.

Palpitation of the heart, 310,
315, 418.

Panarion of Epiphanius, 200.

Paniel, 203.

Panther, 357.

Pantheus, 309.

Papal Rings, 300.


Paper for amulets, 34; magic
figures on, 485.
Papyri, 27; , amuleticueOs


Egyptian Medical, 17.
Papyrus codices, 235.
Papsukkal figures, 101, 213f.
Papus, Dr. E., 393.

Par, 143;
Paradise47.52:
Paradise, the Four Rivers of,

226.

Paradise, Book of, by Palladius,

Solos
Parents, House of, 420.

Paris, 26 ; plaster of, 311.
Parzilli (iron), 318.
Passion, the, 465 ; symbols of,

341.

Passion, instruments of the,

297:

Passion, Cross of the, 342.

Passion flower, 437.

Paste, black, green, 120.

Paste, scarabs of, 252.

Paternosters, 79.

Patibulum, 341.

Patrick, St., 434.

Pauls St., 309,430:

Paul the anchorite, 79.

Paws of beasts as amulets,
iP

son of Hanpu, a
devil, 104; 110;:113 Mito:

Peace, spells to maintain, 276.

Peacock, hairs of the, 309.


INDEX


Pebbles for counting prayers,
79.

Pechuel Loesila, 17.

Pectoral. 155: “amulet, 150:

Pectoral, the Egyptian, 140.

Pegasus, 126.

Pegogha, 279.

Pehlevi language, 428.

Pehlevi gems, inscribed, 125.

Peleus, wedding of, 292.

Pen, copper, 228.

Penates, 152.

Pepi ls 148: 7

Pempacles thet 40> 281, 431,
432, 433.

Pentacle with the Tetragram-
maton, 203.

Pentagram, 209, 233, 298.

Pentateuch, 81, 235, 366, 379,
435.

Pentaurt, 482.

Perat, 269.

Reretie, MS 109:

Perfume-Rings, 301.

Pergamon, divining disk. of,
458.


Peridot, Peridote, Peridoto,
S213 27.

Permanence, emanation of En-
Soph, 370.


Permutations of letters and
numbers, 261, 368, 400.

Bepsiomol 1337-00, 09-70) 125,
17-200) 3065 317; 320; 363.

Persians, 27, 28, 252, 412.

Personality in stones, 423.

Persons of the Trinity, 301.

Pert-em-hru, 162, 235.

Peru, 363.

Pessimism, 425.

Pestilence, 219, 322;
against, 21.

Peter St., 437.

Peter of Apono, 403.

Phagrus fish, 152.

Phaleg, 387.

Phalli on rings, 296.


amulets


329


Phallus and Phallic Amulets,
15, 20, 308, 322, 490, 494.
Phallus of Osiris swallowed by

artishy 51;

Phallus with frog, 144.

Phallus with snake’s head, 110.

Phantoms, 357.

Pharaoh, 433, 469; his butler,
466; his magicians, 212;
his royal ring, 295.

Philistines, 216.

Philosopher’s Stone, 438.

Philtres, love, 490.

Phoebus, 209.

Phoenicia, 137, 250.

Phoenicians, 250f; cylinder
seals of, 121; letters of the,
403.

Phoenix, 151.


| Phul, 388.


Phylactery, 12; the Samaritan
name of, 262.
Phylactery, metal case for, 265.
Phylacteries, Hebrew, 216.
Phylacteries, Samaritan, 258 f.
Piacenza, 451, 452.
Pictographs, Indian and Su-
merian, 201, 202.
Pretra del pavone, 318.
Pietra della croce, 311.
Pietra della vedovanza, 314.
Pig. lol; not used in ‘medi-
cime, 17 + the wild, 97.
Pig, Zodiacal Sign, 412.
Pig and Lamashtu, 114.
Bilchernahkeve wl. 236,
Pilgrimage, (the Hajj), 469.
Pillar of scourging, 341.
Pillar of the Muslim Rosary,
The) ai)
Pillars, the Five, 45.
Pillars of the Sephiroth, 400.
Pillow (headrest) amulet, 138.
Pimples, 310.
Pincers, 341.
Pimches? Dre 13.G7, 455.
Pinehas, 270.
VARY


930


Pinnadellu, 316.


Pisces, 85, 410, 411, 412, 463 ;


their influences on men, 420.
Pishon, the river, 226, 269.
Pistis Sophia, 200.
Pitch:and:salt; 322.

Pitdhah, 327.
Pittacium, 393.
Pity, emanation of En-Sdph,

370.

Pius V, Pope, 80.
Pius IX, Pope, .365.
laces oes oly

against, 21.
Planets, the Five Astrological,

436/.

Planets, the Seven, 190, 380;

Prince of the, 375; their


amulets


divine names and numbers |


-and signs and squares, 390 ;
metals associated with them,
487; the colours identified
with them, 487.

Planets, Egyptian gods of the,
386. ;


Plants amulets, 20.

Plaque, 313.

Plaster of Paris, 311.

Plaster amulets, 18.

Platos427,

-Pleiades, 388.

Pléinos, Stele of, 129.

Pleroma, 206.

Pleurisy, 418.

Pliny 123 9135) 200, 53067-2307,
BOO Fold ole.

PLTHAN, seal of, 255.

Plutarch, 364.

Poemen, Abba, 352.

Poinsot, Mr. C., 393, 471.

Poison, poisons, 313, 316, 425.

Poison-Rings, 301.

Poland, 363.

Pollen, Father, S.J., 186.

Polynesians, 23.

Porphyry, 491.

Posy-Rings, 299.


INDEX


Pots amulets, 18.

Potsherds, 27.

Pottery, Sumerian, 233.

Power (Order of Angels), 10.

Powers innate in amulets, 22.

Praebia, 14.

Praeputium Christi, 26.

Praises of Mary, Book of the,
197:

Prachy22is

Prayer, the five lines of, 45.

Prayer supersedes spells, 26.

Prayer scrolls, 260.

Prayer towards the North, 239.

Prayers to Osiris and Ra, 162.

Pregnancy amulets, 21, 224.

“ Preserved Tablet,” the, 51.

Principalities (Order of Angels),
10.

Primal Man, the, 210.

Prisoners, massacre of, 251.

Probaskanion, 15, 362.

Prochus? 205.

Processus papielaris, 456.


| Processus pyramidalis, 456.


Prometheus, 291 ;
292.

Prophets, 24.

Prophets of the’ days) ofsthe
week, 45.

Prophylactic Figures, 97.

Prosperity, 335.

Prostitutes, Mexican, 318.

PRSHNDT, seal of, 254.

Provinces of heaven, the, 196,
386.


and ring,


| Prukiel, 278.


Psalter, the
amulet, 28.

Psychostasia, 241.

Ptah, 154, 157.

Ptah-hetep, 441.

Ptah-Seker, 157.

Ptah-Seker-‘Asar, 146 ; figures
of, 154; cases for, 28.

Ptolemies, 201.


Abyssinian, an


| Pudenda muliebris, 255, 294.


INDEX-


Pumice stone, 321.

Punamu stone, 315.

Pupil of the eye, 317.

Puredu matting, 119.

Purple linen, Phoenician, 251.

Purple, symbolic of pomp and
pride, 487.

Pustules, 420.

Puzzle-Ring, 301.

Pygmies, 363.

Pylons of Osiris, 436.

Pyramids, 20.

Pyramids of Meroé, 145.

Pyrites, 19, 315.

Pythagoras, 427.

Pythagoreans, 428, 439.


Quarantine, 440.

Quartz, 313.

Oebhsenut, 157.

Queen of Sheba, 191, 194.
Quibbel, Mr., 293.
Quicksilver, 397.


Raves, 147,146, 161. 196,260,
360, 467 ; Addresses to, 441 ;
secret name of, 9; is poisoned,
165 ; Casts spells on Apep, 8.

Ra, the One god of heaven and
the One One, 203.

Ravand-1sis,/ 168.

Ra-Harmachis, 157.

Reabistie ht 2.

ka amiel, 375,

Ra‘ashiel, 375.

Rachel and the Teraphim, 152,
214.

Raciaw.3/0:

Rags amulets, 18.

Raguel, 203, 375.

Rains. O26:
487.

Rain, Prince of the, 375.

Rainbow, 434. —

Rainmakers, 312, 315.


531


Rainstorms, amulets against,
SLO}

Ram, Zodiacal Sign, 409-411.

Ram of Amen, 85.

Ram of Mendes, 85.

Ram amulet, 85.


| Ram-headed staff, 113.


Ramadan, Fast of, 469.
Kameses II, shell amulet of, 73.


| Rameses III, 482.
| Ramman and 10 his number,


427.


| Raphael the Archangel, 203,


228, 298, 375.


iwasran wire 1122454.


Rat, Zodiacal Sign, 412.
Ravening Dog, the Zodiacal,
408.


Vieaziel oor. Of 225, 226. 227,


369, 385.
Ready, Mr, A., 253.


| Reception (Kabbalah), 366.


Red, symbolic of wisdom, 487.


| Red agate, 314.
| Red carnelian, 314.
| Red cloth, 120.


Red jasper, 314.
Red Country, 443.


| Red Crown amulet, 150.
| Red men (Phoenicians), 252.


Red Paste, magical, 118.

Red Stones, amulets of, 22, 326.
Red wood powder, 17.

Red Sea, 70, 321.


| Red Sea shells in Egypt, 73.
| Reed amulet, 153.


Reed of the Passion, 342.


| River Swamps, 169.
| Regalia, the god’s, 291.
_ Regents, Planetary and Zodia-


cal, 421, 422.


_ Rehatiel, 375.
and fine colour, |


Reincarnation, 432.
Relics of saints, cult of, 26.


| Religion, House of, 420.


Religion, the Samaritan, 259.


| Reliquary-Rings, 301.


Aas 1s


532


Reliquaries in Loango, 18.

Renenit, 157.

Reptiles ie leans.
fortmio1) WoL:

Reshpu, 157.

Resin, 17; balls of as amulets,
18.

Resurrection, 127, 440 ;
lets, 146.


amulets


amMu-


Resurrection, Egyptian, 136; |


Christian, 144.
Reuben, 379.
Re‘u Kinushame, 409.


Revelations of Muhammad, 51. |
amulet


Rheum, 314, 324:
against, 306.
Rheumatism, 308, 324, 419.


in |


Ribband, Ribbon, blue, 217, |


328.


Riches, spells for obtaining, 226.


Riches, House of, 420.
Rickets, 308.

Ridjah, 375.

Rigveda, 437.

Rikis Nunt, 409.


Ring, the, as an amulet, 291 f, |


296.

Ring-signet, 291.

Ring and solar disk, 291.

Ring and staff, 291.

Ring of Ahasuerus, 295.

Ring of Pharaoh, 295. ©

Ring of Solomon, 281, 295, 424.

Ring-Finger, 291.

Rings, Collections of, 296;
materials used in, 296; on
hat cords, 304; with gaps
in them, 295.

Rings:

Anticipatory Rings, 300.
Bow Rings, 301.
Carnival Rings, 301.
Coronation Rings, 300.
Cramp Rings, 301.
Death Rings, 297.

Dual Rings, 301.
Ecclesiastical Rings, 296.


INDEX


Episcopal Rings, 300.
Fancy Rings, 300.
Fede Rings, 299.
Funerary Rings, 301.
Gift Rings, 301.
Holy Rings, 301.
Investiture Rings, 300.
Jewish Marriage Rings, 300.
Key Rings, 301.
Medical Rings, 301.
Memorial Rings, 300.
Mizpah Rings, 301.
Oriental Rings, 302.
Papal Rings, 300.
Perfume Rings, 301.
Poison Rings, 301.
Posy Rings, 299-301.
Puzzle Kingss30 1
Reliquary Rings, 301.
Royal Rings, 300.
Serjeants’ Rings, 300.
Signet Rings, 292.
Sphere Rings, 301.
Trinity Rings, 301.
Votive Rings, 301.
Rings blessed by saints, 301.


| River of Fire, 196, 197.


River of Sunrise, 88.


| Rivers of Paradise, the Four,


226.


| Robe, the seamless, 341.


~ Rock alum, 19.


Rock crystal, 19, 311, 326.
Rock Salt, t9"322:
Rod of Moses, 488.


‘Rod of Nectanebo, 488.


Rod of Ningishzida, 488.

Roll of the Law, 235, 236.

Roller, z.e. the Sun, 136.

Romans, 152; magical num-
bers of, 428.


| Rome, 26, 339, 343, 450.
| Rome, the Seven Hills of, 434.


Roosevelt, President, 32.


_ Rope, the knotted, 147.


Rosary, the Buddhist, 80.
Rosary, the Christian, 79.


INDEX -


Rosary, the Muslim, 79, 437.

Rose-colour, 487.

Rose Garden of Mary, 79.

Rosellini, Signor, 338.

Roses, oil of, in ink, 70.

Rosette, 91, 337.

Royal Script, 403.

Royal, Library at Nineveh, |
ASS: |

Royal Library at Thebes, 482.

Rubrics, 28, 162, 423:

Ripy, 321) 324, 327; pow-
dered, 322¢ water of, 322.

Ruchiel, 375.

Ruehim, Ruchéth, 377.

Ruikyail, 43.

Ruiha, she-devil, 240.

Rulers (Order of Angels), 10.

Runes, 44.

Russia, 348.

isdands vir. W. Hy 236,


Sabzeans, 239. -

Sabaeism, 177.

Sabaéth, 201, 209.

Sabbaths, the Seven, 433.

Sabbath not observed by the
Mandaeans, 239.

Sabinos, 129.

Sacking cloth amulets, 18.

Sadayel, 298.

Saddle-bag amulets, 30.

Saffron, extract of, in ink, 70.

Sagittarius, Zodiacal Sign, 410; ©
411, 412, 416; his influence
on men, 419, 421.

Sahariel, 278.

Sahar6n amulet, 213.

Sakkarah, 149.

Sale translator of the Kur’an,
60.

peliva, mana of, 26.

Salt as medicine, 17, 322.

Salt, rock, as currency, 323.

Samangeloph, 224, 227.


Samaria, 259.


933


Samiaticanor 255.6 250 -
Egyptian, 260.

Samgos, 279.

samiel, 278, 375.

Samoa, 363.

Samsamail, 43.

Samuel the Prophet, 375, 491 ;
his spirit raised up, 213.

Sand, divining by, 460.

Sandals or Lamashin, 185:


the


| Sandal wood, 80.


Sansenor.227, 229.


| Sa phiel; 375.


Sapphire, 323, 327.
Sappir, 327.

Sar: 428.

Sarde 400:


| Saracens, 80.
Woon LON eA 327-


Sardinia, 316, 363.
Sardonyx, 324.


oarsah Elyas, 191:


Sargon I, 452.

Sarco Il 250:

Sariyail, 43.

Sarphiel 277.

Sassanides, 125.

Sassoon, Mr. D.:S., 258.

Satan, 10, 285, 351, 435, 473.

Satamistia, lil

SateEelor

Satnaél, 10.

Sator Arepo Tenet Opera Rotas,
181.

Saturday, 419; an unlucky
day, 460.


| Saturn, 43, 375, 380, 402, 465 ;


his spirit and demon, 391 ;
his influence on men, 382;
on stones, 423.

Saturn (lead), 394.

Saturn (Aquarius), 419.

Saturn (Capricorn), 419.


| Saturn, Mount of, 492.
| Satyrica signa, 15.


Saule213) 49); his: evilveye,
364.


534


Sauwastica, 332.

Scaevola, 15,

Scales (Libra), 12, 409, 410.

Scales of Judgment, Egyptian
and Mandaitic, 241, 480.

Scandinavia, 339.

Scarab (Scarabaeus saucer), 135,
16335252, 41 Ve 7homs opal:
Scaraps,. as. bezels, (294 was
sealser137~) colossal, 136%

found in all countries, 137.

Scarabs, Phoenician, 252.

Scarabs of Amenhetep III,

Se bob:

Scent tubes, 215.

Sceptre amulet, 140.

Scete, 352.

Science, love of, 470.

Schist,)27,°324:

Schliemann, Dr., 334, 339.

Schwab, Dr., 286.

Scorpion, #L15)- 152.1270, d0G,
357 ; amulets against, 21.
Scorpion, Zodiacal Sign, 409,
411, 416, 419; its influence

on men, 419-421.

Scorpion-man, 103, 120, 256,
408.

Scotland, 363 ;
in, Siz.

Scourge, 342.

Scrotulas3st2:

Scroll with bilingual inscrip-
tion, 343, 344.

Scythia, 334.

Sea, the Seventh Hell of, 249 ;
water of, 319; sea blue
(Pisces),- 487; amulets of
monsters of, 21.

Sea, Prince of the, 315.

Seas, the Seven, 45.

Seal-cylinders as amulets, 87 f,
sal

Seal of Aratron, 389.

Seal of Bethor, 389.

Seal of Eve, 224.

Seal of Hagith, 389.


crystal-gazing


INDEX


Seal of Holy Sepulchre, 319.
Seal of Lilith, 389.

Seal of Och, 389.

Seal of Ophiel, 389.


| Seal of Phaleg, 389.
| Seal of Phul, 389.


Seal of Solomon, 203; with
Bismillah written on it, 70.
Seals, amuletic, 230; Sassa-
Mian 25,

Seals, the Seven, 40.

Seasons, the Four, 445; gods
of the, 168.

Seba-Apep, 438. |

Sebek-nefern-Ra, 294.

Sebete, 157.

Seeds amulets, 19.


| Sefekh-Abiu, 157.


Séfer Yesivad, 368, 369.

Séfer Zohar, 369.

Seker, 155, 157.

Sekhmit, 158.

Selah the threefold, 222.

Selenite, 324.

Seleucidae, 200.

Seligmann, Dr., 13,
32, 363, 471.

Semer Eilam, 204.

Semites, 250, 366.

Semti, 139.

Senkesar, 478.

Senol, 224.0227.

Sepharial, 393.

Sepharvaim, 259.

Sephiréth, 230, 378, 440; the
Ten and their Divine Names,
369, 374; the Star and the
Wheel, 374.

September, amulet and stone
of, 493, 494.

Serapis, 156.

Seraphim, 10, 373.


18326;


| Serapis = Christ, 203.


Serenus Sammonicus, 220.
Serjeants Rings, 300.
Serpent, Zodiacal Sign, 412.
Serpent, cat-headed, 483.


INDEX 5395


Serpent, the two-headed, 114.

Serpent, the seven-headed, 433. |

Serpent, head of an amulet, |

_ 147; skin of an amulet, 22:

Serpent and Eve, 194, 195.

Serpent-staff of physicians, 200.

Serpents amulets, 18.

Serpentine, green, 87, 324.

serqit, 158, 170.

Sesheta, 157.

Set, the Devil, 8, 141, 145, 158,
168, 210 ; devours the moon,
142; kills Horus, 170 ; muti-
lates Osiris, 152.

Seti I. ushabtin figure of, 413,
467.

Seven, a very sacred number,
433

Seven Angels, 43.

Seven Apkallu, 118.

Seven branches of palms, 486.

Seven Heavens, 204.

Seven Kings of the Genii, 43.

Seven metal mirrors, 490.

Seven Powers of Evil, 169.

Seven Scorpion goddesses, 169,
170.

Seven Seals, 40.

Seven Sleepers of Ephesus, 280.

Seven Sons of Ishara, 122.

Seven Stars, 209.

Seven Vowels, the, 203.

Severus of Antioch, 188.

Seventy, the number, 440.

Seventy Angels, the, 226.

Seventy Diseases, the, 323.

Seventy Elders, the, 270.

Sexagesimal system, 440.

Sexual desire, amulet, 147;
impulses, 425, 426;  inter-
course, 318.

Shabatu, 409.

Shabti, 155,.156; 158:

Shabti, spell of the, 159.

Shadanu sabitu, 318.

Shaddai. 223, 230.

Shafiel, 278.


Shati-en-Sinsin, 163.

Shaj wood, 80.

Shakir, 43.

Shalgiel, 375.

Shalmaneser IV, 259.

Shamash) .91; 116 1945. 99T
AQT),

Shamiel, 277.

Shamhirash, 43.

Shamir stone, 281, 424.

Shamshi-Adad VI, 338.

Shamshiele277,.278, 375.

Sharrukin, 452.

Shatt al-’Arab, 51, 77, 239, 240.

Shawabti, 155, 156.

Sheba, 192.

Shebat, 379.

Shébk6, 327.

Shebriri formula, 220.

Shechem, 214.

Shédbarshemoth, 393.

Shédim, 376.

Shedu, 120.

Sheep, Zodiacal Sign, 412.

Sheep, model of liver of, 456.

Sheep’s wool, 33.

Shell amulets, 30, 70.

Shemer, 259.

Shém hamnutphorash, 377.

Shembi serpent, 434.

Shepherd of Enlil, 123.

Shiahs, 53, 67.

Shield of David, 281.

Shield of Solomon, 223.


| Shield-bearers of Satan, 10.


Shinanim, 373.

Shipwreck amulets, 21, 311.
Shiru, 409.
SHIT-LAN‘TA:‘E:A, 121, 122.
Shittu, 409.

Shoham, 327, 330.
Shomronim, 259.
Shrewmouse, 151.

Shu, 8, 85, 149, 411.


' Shuanishuria, 92.


Shuruppak, 118.
Shuttle amulet, 149.


536


Siam, 363.

Sick-bed amulets, 29.

Sidonians, 250.

Sidra d’ Yahya, 241.

Sidra Rabba, 241;

Sight, failure of the, 308.

Sigh of the Cross, 56, 3519352,

Signet ring of Judah, 295.

Signet Rings, 292.

Signs, geomantic, 461.

_ Signs of the Zodiac, Periods of
Rule of, 416.

Signs of the Zodiac, Circles of,
387.

Sihu, 361.

Sikiel, 375.

Siloam Inscription, 250.

Silver, 388 ; amulets, 20, 236 ;
the 30 pieces of, 341; magical
square of, 377.

Silver Colour = Cancer, 487.

Simanu (Sivan), 409.

Simeon, 379.

Sin, Moon-god, 124; his num-
ber 30, 427.

Sinai, 427, 440.

Sirocco, Prance ot, 315.

Sirrush, 101.

Sisitha 2 t75

Sivan, 379.

Six, the number, 431.

Sixteen, the number, 439.

Sixty, the number, 440.


Skin, human, 494 ; diseases of, |


314, 419.
Skin of serpents, amulets of,


Skull of Tiamat, 5.

Skulls, 494.

Sky-blue (Sagittarius), 487.
Sky-god, 4, 91, 360.

Slavs, 428.

Sleep, broken, 320.
Sleep-producing amulets, 314.
Sleeplessness, 317.

Slingers, Satan’s, 10.

Slugs, amulets against, 29.


INDEX


Smith, Mr. George, 98.

Smith, Mr. Sidney, 2, 100, 120,
460.

Snake, the Zodiacal, 408.

Snake bite amulets, 21, 314,
316.

Snakes, 152, 316 ; sloughing of
the skin of, 489; heads of
used in “‘ medicine,’”’ 17.

Snow, Prince of the, 375.

Soane, Sir John, 467.

Sodom, 430.

Solar disk amulet, 180.

Soldiers, amulets of, 73, 74.

Solonion, 33,97, 197, 2037; 2336
295; a magician, LO2ASGe
his words of power, 181.

Solomon, Bed of, 290.

Solomon and Balkis, 466; his
wife, 191.

Solomon, ring of, 40, 424.

Solomon, shield of, 223, 226.

Solomon, spell of, 274.

Song of Songs, 356.

Sons of God, 373.

Sons of Horus, 153.

Sons of Ra, 484.

Sérath, 393.

Soreness, 275.


| Sores, 310, 318.


Sortes, 329.

Soss, 428.

Soter, the Archon, 413.

Souls of dead men, 377.

Souls live in crystal, 312.

South, Crown of the, 154.

Sovereignty, emanation of En-
Soph, 370.


| Sow amulet, 85.


Spain, 363.

Sparkling stones, 326.
Sparrows, 275.

Spear of the Passion, 341.


| Spear of Marduk, 5.


Spells, materials on which
written, 27 ; transmission of,
26.


INDEX-


‘spheres, the Ten ;
hirdth.

Spheres of stars, 240.

Sphinx, 256.

Spica, 388.

Spiders, 275, 306.

Spiegelberg, 361.

Spinal cord amulet, 148.

Spindle of Lamashtu, 115.

Spirit in amulets, 23.

Spirit-boat, 7.

Spirit of the daughter of the
moon, 279.

Spirits, disembodied, 23.


see Sep-


Spirits, evil, their hideous
forms, 4. |

Spirits, good, have human
forms, 4.


Spirits of the planets, 393, 394.

Spitting, ceremonial, 12.

Spittle medicine, 17.

Spleen rings, 301.

Splendour, emanation of En-
Soph, 370.

Sponge, the Passion, 342.

Sprains amulets, 310.

Square the true form of an
amulet, 45.

Square character Hebrew, 403.

Square of Hebrew words, 271.

Squares, magical, 45f; of
letters and numbers, 234;
Arabic and Hebrew, 390 ; of
numbers on rings, 302.

Squares of the Seven Planets,
394.

Srgd, 256.

Stalagmites, 324.

Stallions, 20.

Stamato petra, 317.

Star and Crescent, 213.

Star, eight-rayed, 281.

Stars, 8, 409; circum polar,
407 ; symbols of, 388.

Stations of the moon and
planets, 311, 407.

Steatite,.252;


937


Stele of Mesha, 403.

Stepping chains, 215.

Steps amulet, 149.

Step-pyramid, 149.

Sterility amulets, 307, 312.

Stiff-neck amulet, 307.

Stimulants, 489.

Striking Face (Set), 169.

Stomach-ache, 186, 308 ; amu-
let, 205.

Stone amulets, 19 ; green stone
beetles, 136.

Stone of St. Thomas, 310.

Stone of widowhood, 314.


Stones, inherent qualities in,


87; male and female, 109;
pierced, 327; of variegated
colours, 327 ; circular, semi-
circular, triangular, 327; of
victory, 312; their prophy-
lactic and therapeutic pro-
perties, 306 ff.
Stones, semi-precious,
bolism of, 424.


sym-


| Stop-stone, 317.
| Storm-god, Zu, 109.


Storm, Prince of the, 375.
StrabosilszZ.
Strange gods, 214.


| Strangler of boys, 279.


Strength, emanation of En-
Séph, 370.

Strength, failure of, 316.

String amulets, 18.

Subhah, 80.

Sadan, 27, 31, 158, 314, 352.


SUEZ: 7:


Suez Canal. 77.

Suhur-mash, 409.

Sulphur, 324.

Sumatra, 363.

Sumer, 443.

Sumerians, 3, 82, 92, 150, 201,
905, 213,246, 258, 283, 317,
380, 427, 444; their duo-
decimal and sexagesimal sys-
tems, 428.


538


Sun, creation of, 8; autumnal
and vernal, 375, 380, 382,


463; his demon and spirit,
391; stones influenced by,
423; his influence on men,
382 ; connection with third
finger, 402.

Sunday, 418, 465; bathings,
289.


sun, Eye of the, 360.

Sun-rise, 88.

Sun (gold), 395.

Sun (Leo), 418.

Sun-of-the-Universe, 204.

Sun-god, 8, 88, 161, 202, 337,
482. stands still: 170:

sunstroke? 21, 2912313;314,

Sunt wood, 80.

Supreme Life, the, 239.

Surahs, the, 52, 114.

Suriel, 203.375.

Survival of the soul, 251.

Sisenyos, St., Legend of, 181,
182.

Susmieleos /

Suti, 148.

Suwashtika, or mummy, 129.

Svastika, 331.

Swallow, 151, 309.

Swastika, 331; equivalent to
the Cross, 332. ;

Swithin, St., 440.

Switzerland, 339.

Sword of Moses, 486.

Sword of the Passion, 341.

Symbols of the Sun and Moon,
398 f.

sya, 69, 1257137, 173, 200;
242, 250, 306, 307, 319, 363.

Syrians, 367.


Tablet of Destinies, 45, 91, 407.

Tablets, astrological and
mathematical, 406, 427.

Tages, 450.

Tahiti,,.363:


INDEX


Taheb, 260.

Tails of animals amulets, 20.

Takifiel, 278.

Talisman, meaning of the word,
ll, 13, 14; against Evil
Hye, 353.

Tall Ibiahim, 446.

Talmtdh, 280;
283.

Talons of birds amulets, 18.

Tamat,.295:

‘Tamarisk 120:

Tamim, 328.

Tamimah, 69.

‘Fammuz co la foe

Tanis, 164.

Tantah, 30.

Taphtharthareth, 393.

Tarbtsh, 29.

Targims, 283.

Tariel, 278.

Tarshish,-327«

Tarshishim, 3/3.


Babhh, 239,


| Tashmetum, 97.


Tashritum, 409.

Tassel: 81, 217.

Tattooing, 43.

Tau. Cross, 342.

Taurus, Zodiacal Sign, 410, 411,
416; his influence on men,
AV] 2A 2K.

Ta-urt, 158.

Tawidzah, 69.

Taylor, Canon Isaac, 454.

Tears of Khepera, 8.

Teb‘érah, 224.


| Tebeth, 379.


Tebetum, 409.

Teddy-bear, 32.

Teeth, chattering of the, 274 ;
cutting the, 318; as “ medi-
cine, . Lv.

Teeth amulets, 18.


| Tefnut, 8, 85, 411.
| Tehuti, 158.


Telomancy, 451.
Tempests, prevention of, 483.


INDEX


Temt, 168.

Ten, the number, 436.

Ten Words of Creation, 261,
272:

Ten Commandments, the, 26].

Ten Spheres, the, 369.

Tent-Het-nub, 168.

Tephillin, 260, 262.

Teraphim, 152, 213, 451.

Terramares, 335.

Jerror, the night, 219.

Tertullian, 341.

ometite bilatee Osiris) (los,
347,424.

Tet amulet, 137.

Teta, 161.

Tetu, the home of Osiris, 162.

Tetragrammaton, 238, 260,297,
B/ i304 and trbes of
Israel, 379.

Teutons, 433.

Tewahi Punamu, 315.

Thabit, 43.

Thaumausius, 279.

mhebes; 9, 337, . 434, .482:
tombs at, 413 ; Western,136,
Rote 7

Theodore, 197.

Theophrastus, 308.

Theory of Emanations, 370.

Thieves, the’ Crosses of the
two, 351.

Thirteen, the number, 438.

Thirty, an accursed number,
439 ; the 30 pieces of silver,
341.

Thirty-nine, the number, 439.

Thirst destroyer, 315.

Thomas, St., 274, 339; stone
of, 310.

Thompson, Dr. R. C., 100, 113,
ZAQ, 318,330, 040,1300:

Thoth, the god, 142, 165, 170,


TSOR 1196, 206s al ey, his
Company, 434; words of,
140, 141. :


Thoth, the soul of Ra, 9, 168.


939


| Thoth identified with Christ,


207.

Thothmes III, 153.

Thoucris, 158.

Thrace, 334,

Three, the number, 429.

Three-form God, 203.

Three Kings of Cologne, 298,
Sule

Three nails, the, 341.

Throne of the Father, 445.

Throne, the Sublime, 56.

Throne Verses, 55, 68.

Thrones (an Order of Angels),
10.

Thumb, 492.

Thumb and Venus, 402.

Thumb Rings, 304.

Thunder, Prince of the, 375.

Thunderbolt, 113, 208, 255,
408.

Thunder-scroll, 333.

Thunderstorms, 316.

Thursday, a lucky day, 419,
465.

Thurston, Father, S.J., 186.

Thureau Dangin, 100, 109, 113,
BiG:

Ti, Queen, 136.

Tiamat, ‘“‘ Mother of Every-
thing, 4, 5, 357, 407.

Tiberias, Sea of, 185, 361.

Tiberius, Emperor, 343.

Tibet, 313.

Tibur stone, 325.

Tiger, Zodiacal Sign, 412.

Tigris, 239, 240.


| Tin, magical square of, 394.


Tiphereth, emanation of En-
Séph, 370.


|-Tiriel, 298, 397.


Tirmidhi, 47.
Tishri, 379.
Tiyari, 52.

Tjel amulet, 137.
Toadstone, 298.


_ To-day, 85.


540 INDEX


Toes amulets, 20.

Tombs, the prehistoric Egypt-
ian, 153.

Tongue, amethyst under, 310.

Tongue of Jesus, Bismillah
written upon, 70.

Toothache, 308, 312, 316, 319.

lopazy 321,320,327)

Topaz Island, 321.

Doran, 235, 236:°356 y403.

Torch (Nusku), 123.

Torch-bearers of Satan, 10.

Torches, the Four, 153.

Tortoise, Zodiacal Sign, 409.

Tortoise (green stone), 134.

Totaphoth, 216, 217.

Tower = Allah, 437.

Towns, gods of, 168.

Tradition, 366.

Traditionalists, Arab, 67.

Transformation of beasts and
plants, 386.

Transmutation of metals, 387.

Travellers, rings for, 298.

Travellers, spells for, 278.

Travertine, 325.

Tree, the Kabbalistic, 369, 371.

Tree of Life, 230.

Tree, the sacred, 88, 124, 254,
256; with forbidden -fruit,
195.

Trees, amuletic figures of, 20.

Triad, the first, 8.

Triads of gods, 429.

Triangles of the Hexagram, 227.

Triangles on the hands, 493.

Triangular blaze of Apis, 85.

Tribal marks, 44.

Tribes of Israel and the Tetra-
grammaton, 379.

Tunity, the, 429. the First, 3),
the Three Persons of the, 17.

Troy, 334, 339.

Truth, goddess of, 206.

Truth speaker, 139, 161.

Tuame Rabuti, 409.

Tuat, 147, 159, 168, 434, 438.


Tuamutef, 158.

Tuesday, 416, 419; unlucky,
465.

Tufts of hair amulets, 18.

Tummim, 328.

Turkey, 307.

Turkish stone, 325.

Turquoise, 325.

Turks, '92) 164, 213 s310 43.

Turtle 1517:


| Turtles, green stone, 134; as


“ medicine,’ 17.
Tuudash stone, 87.
Twelve, the number, 437;
stones, 327.
Twins, the fighting, 121.
Twins (Gemini), 409, 411;
their influence on men, 417,
AD
Twenty-one, the number, 439.
Twenty-two, the number, 439.
Twenty-eight, the number, 439.
Two, the perfect number, 429.
Two Eyes, 360.
Two Fingers amulet, 148, 149.
Two-faced Centaur, 412.
Tyana, 491.
Tyburn, 438.
Type Cross, 339.


Uatchit.wlos:
Ubaner, 488.

Ubel ougem, 363.
Udjatti, 360.

Udjau (amulet), 133.


| ‘Udzah, 69.


Uhat (scorpion), 170.
Ulcers, 308.

Ululu, 409.

Umbilicus, 29, 73, 164, 318.
Umiel, 278.


Ummu-Khubur, 407.


Umer, 253"
Unas, King, 161, 357.
Uncials, Greek, 202.


| Understanding, 370.


——e


INDEX


Underworld, 115, 467, 483.

Unguent, sacred, 153.

Union of bodies and souls, 145.

Umty, 367 5 of God, 60; 218 -
vanity of Allah revealed, 461.

Universe, its circular form, 385.

Upt-hekau, 158.

Ur, of the Chaldics, 118, 317.

Ur of the Chaldees, 86, 99, 104,
118, 317, 446, 490.

‘Uc husband’ of Ruha,’240.

rtel=2035 228 375.

Urigallu reeds, the Seven, 119,
122:

Urim, 328, 329.

Wrne. ban retention of, 325.;
of virgins (as “ medicine ’’),
TP

Urinary diseases, 314.

URUDU: NIG: KAL‘GA, 122.

Usertsen I, shell amulet of, 73.

Wonabti. Ushabtiu, 155, (157,
158.

peur aiet) 1205122,

Mrerice 11 /. 122) 314,

Weak kt, <1) 17.


Valley of Tombs of Kings, 153.

Variegated
487.

Vedas, 363.

Vegetation amulets, 320, 326.

Venus, 43, 335, 380, 388, 465,
469; demon and spirit of,
392; her influence on men
382 ; Girdle of, 493; Mount
of, 492 ; stones influenced by,
423.

Venus and the thumb, 402.

Venus (Libra), 418.

Venus (Taurus), 41.

Venus (Copper), 396.

Venus (sapphire), 424.

Vermilion, 487.

Vineyards, spells for blessing,
276.


colour = Virgin, |


54]


Victory, emanation of En-
Séph, 370.

Vignettes, magical, 67, 160;
in the Koldstd, 241.

Village amulets, 22.

Vinegar, 342.

Violence, 492.

Violet symbolic of intelligence,
487.

Violet + Green + Yellow
triumph, 487.

Violet stone, 326.

Vipew,.o27313% Zodiacal sien,
407.

Virginity, 251.

Virgins, urine of, 17.

Virgo, Zodiacal Sign, 409, 411,
412, 416; influence on men,
AZ\.

Virility amulets, 86, 308, 326,
490.

Virtues, the Twleve, 414.


| Votive Rings, 301.


Vowels, the Seven, 203.
Vulture, cadens, 388.

Vulture amulet, 140, 151.
Vulture and uraeus amulet,150.
Vulva. oflksis, 137.


Waddell, Dr., 80.

Waite, Mr., 369.

Walatta Kidan, 186.

Walda Maryam, 187.

Walls, amulets for, 22.

Warlocks, 308.

War Lord (Phaleg), 387.

Washers (the Mandaeans), 239.

Water, spouts of evil, 388;
stones worn by, 327.

Water, Zodiacal Sign, 416.

Water, divination by, 445, 488.

Water, living, 1.e. flowing,
240; water, dead, 7.e. still,
240.

Water, the Black, 240.

Water of crystal, 312.


942


Water of Lamashtu, 115.

Water of turquoise, 325.

Water, green = Libra, 481.

Waters of light, 240.

Water-bearer (Aquarius), 409,
411; his influence on men,
420.

Water-god, 4, 88, 240, 446.

Wattishk‘a, 324.

Wax, 27.7488" white, 484¢
used in engraving amulets,
Gor neures*0f 482 h.

Wax figure of Apep, 9

Wax, figure of Queen Elizabeth
in, 485.

Wealth, 325.

Weapon-men, the Seven, 120.

Weather mongers, 24.

Weaver, the (Fatimah), 469.

Weaver of spells, 62.

Wedddasé Maryam, 197.

Wednesday, 417; lucky, 465.

Week, the Egyptian, 413.

Weights, accurate, 252.

Well of Zemzem, 80.

Wells of pity; mercy, etc., 297.

Werzelya, who married the
Devil, 182.

Westcar Papyrus, 488.

Wheat plant, 445.

Wheel, the lapidary’s, 69.

Whirlwind, 109, 113;
Zodiacal, 408.

Whirlwind, Prince of the, 375.

White = purity and truth, 487.

White and black = death, sor-
row, 489.

White Crown amulet, 150.

White Magic, 69, 484.

White stones, 326.

Widowhood, stone of, 314.

Wild beast amulets, 21.

Wiles of devils, 275.

Wind, Prince of the, 375.

Wind crosses, 339.

Wine, violet, 309.

Wilkinson, Sir G., 340.


the


| Writing, art of, 27;


INDEX


William II, Kaiser, 365.


| Willows, the Thirteen, 439.


Wilson, Mr. T., 335.

Wisdom of Solomon, 359.

Wisdom, emanation of En-
Soph, 370.

Witch, Witches, 3, 15, 308.

Witch of Endor, 213.

Witchcrait,310, SPE 3i6s3ro:
O22:

Wizards, 24.

Wolfell3,.275 7357.

Womb, the, 419.

Womb amulet, 205.

Womb of Tiamat, 5.

Women, pregnant, 316; spells
for women in labour, 276.

Women and the Kur’an, 52.

Wong, 16.

Wood amulets, 18.

Woolley, Mr. C. L., 99, 104, 317,
446.

Word, the Almighty, 170.

Word-god, 9.

Words on lintels and doorposts,
261.

World of Jupiter, 388.

World of Mars, 388.

World of Mercury, 388.

World of Moon, 388.

World of Saturn, 388.

World of Sun, 388.

World of Venus, 388.

World Ocean, 5, 116, 240, 385,
445.

Worlds, the Seven, 384, 385.

Wounds, amulets prt yal,
OS Ae

Wright, Dr. W., 198, 242.

inventor

of, 9.


_ Writing, enigmatic, 403.
_ Writing, Kabbalistic, 228, 402.


Writing, Sumerian, 82.


| Writing of the angels, 403.


| Writing of the Crossing of the


River, 403.


INDEX.


Writing of heaven, 403.
Writing of the kings, 403.
Wu, the Empress, 355.


Yah,.180, 203.

Vahalom, 327.

Yahweh, 216. |

Yahya bar Havva Simath, 242.

yaa (4,

Yanirios,. 279.

Yashpah, 327.

SES WARGIICS a BE

Year, lunar and solar, 384, 407.

Year-god, 168.

Yellow flowers amulets, 22.

Yellow stones, 326.

Yellow = falsity, 487.

Yerachmé’él, 375.

Yesodh, emanation of En-Sdoph,
370.

Yesterday, 85.

ore GUN 4 230, 238,261, «|
C10 LI 2 O00+;004, O11,

Yomiel, 278.

Yophiél, 393.

Yorkami, 375:

YRPAL, seal of, 256.

Yspandarmid, 285.

Aver sirer e015.


Zachariah, 466.
Zadikiel, 278.
Zahir, 43.

Zaid ibn-Thabit, 51.


Zaki AS

Zakiel, 278.

Zardush, 279.

Zarian,-285.

Zatriel, 278.

Zatumushgir stone, 87.

Zazeél, 393.

Zebulon, 379.

Zemzem, Well of, 80.

Zend-Avesta, 201.

Zenker, 286.

Zeus, 333.

Zibanitum, 409.

Zicks stephen, 301

Zie oko, 363.

Zimmern, Dr., 120.

Zingirli inscriptions, 251.

Zi-surru, the Two, 122.

Zodiac, 44, 67, 168, 240, 241,
301348; 375, 406, 437, 460.

Zodiac, the oldest, 407; the
second, 408, 409; Hell of
the, 420; the double, 470;
the IZ signs ruled by the
planets, 383 ; the Sumerian,
412; horary, 412; Chinese,
AAs

Zodiac amulet, 414.

Zodiac of Denderah, 411.

Zodiac and the Tetragramma-
ton:3 /9:

Zodiac Rings, 303, 304.

Zodiacus Christianus, 414.

Zoroastrians, 367, 412.


Zu, 109 ; judgment of, 88.


Zuleikha, 466.


PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HIS MAJESTY.


e — 7 ra
' Tas omy Rit S
id Ae nd te
‘ t ba 7 -
’ is Pe, a 9
: 7 at .
a Cle
i's


HARRISON AND SONS, LIMITED,


44-47, ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 2.


a4


BF1411 .B92
ulets and superstitions; the original
Princeton Theological Seminary—Speer Library


a | ai
O
yD Los
U | 3

| | >
ris | pat
- im
S we)
U | c

m

: |
=
S
few


: A ia re had, ale, q A } ‘ At
(as Ui i at 4 : ; co
Ney ee
Ua ane gee al a
7 - aa oa Ane ao Ae |
ae a & Aon ey hy


rr


’ , * % R A ‘a Occ


PROM AMON aye.’ week A? Tea
be AY ab ee Ah ae ya Oe LEY CP AAAIED, MOto yadlebi ied


7
(ed ry ihe


tapeb at iets
4


Vy 0%
fyttes


Warhtpetes


| L
Ce ene Ts ae
