DENIZENS OF THE DEEP
By Frank T. Bullen — New York: Fleming H. Revell Company, 1904
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1904 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier denizensdeep00bullgoog). The 1904 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete.

========================================================================

Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



7HEDLEP


X


1

TRATSliC

T.
BULLEK m


ft^


.-X l-l


fc^



I: • rat-"


E


r"'



DENIZENS OF THE DEEP



K


vi x\\L


5' 'XA. vK '



' .•; '



.'' / I '..'-..



> ■


Denizens of the Deep



By
FRANK T. BULLEN F. R. G. S.

Author of «« Thi Cruue of Thi Cachalot** etc.



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY

CHARLES LIFINGSTON BULL
THEODORE CARRERAS


New York Chicago Toronto

Fleming H. Revell Company

London and Edinburgh



Gipyright, i90>-i9C4, by
FRANK T. BULLEN



Cop^Tight, 19G4, by
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY


New York: 158 Fifth Avenue
Chicago: 63 Washington Street
Toronto: 2^ Richmond Street, W
London: ai Paternoster Square
Edinburgh: >o St. Mary Stieel



CONTENTS



I.


iKTHODUCTlOlff


.


.


f


II.


Thi Autobiography of a Spirm Whali 13


ni.


The Mysticetus, or Right Whale • 39


IV.


The Humpback Whale ....


51


V.


The Rorquals


.


59


VI.


SiRENIA


t t


1


73


VII.


The Walrus, Morse, or Sea-


HORS]


I


77


VIII.


The Sea Elephant


> 1


«3


IX.


Seals


» 1


90


X.


The Shark ....


» 1


97


XL


The Turtle . . . ,


» i


114


XII.


The Cuttle-Fish or Squid


» «


■ "7


XIII.


Debp-Sea Chimjbras


■ i


. 146


XIV.


Sea-Serpents .


• i


. i6s


XV.


The Albacore


• <


. 182


XVI.


The Bonito


•


. 204


XVII.


The Flting-Fish .


• <


221


XVIII.


The Dolphin


•


. 238


XIX.


The Mackerel


•


$


. 256



?;LoiO



Contents



XX. Cod 274

XXI. Thi Hirring 291

XXII. Thi Barracouta . .310



THE BIRDS OF THE SEA



XXIII.

XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.

XXVIII.



The Albatross

Cape Pigeons and Whale BiRot

The Petrels

Boobies and Penguins

The Frigate Bird

Seaweed

Index . . .



33 »
350
368
386

417
423



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



mm



FACXirO rAOB

"Thb Shark Passed undbr thb Broad Bilge

OF THB Ship" Title

"Rose Perpendicularly with Some Palely

Glowing Mass Between His Jaws" . i8

"Deeper than I Had Ever Dreamed of,
Skirting the Black Bases of a Mighty
Mountain Range" a a

"He Writhed Round and Enwrapped Me" . 24

"A Strange White Monster" . . . . a8

"The Ocean Boiled with Our Efforts" . 36

"Of All Land Walking Animals None can
Compete with the Walrus for Clumsi-
ness" 78

"We Were Suddenly Startled Stiff by a
Most Tremendous Roaring as of a Troop
of Lions" 86

"As Each Onb Reaches the Rocks She is
Pounced upon by a Roaring, Frenzied
Mob of Males" 9a

"Therb Are More Varieties of the Shark
Family than of any Other Fish Family
Living" 106

A Pair of Turtles Lay Basking in the Blaz-
ing Sunshinb 114

"All the Hungry Sea People Make Respect-
ful Way for Her" 118



List of Illustrations

FAdMO rAGB

'*OCTOPODIA ARB TrUB ScAVBNGBRS, EaTINO

Anything Eatablb Which Comes in Their
Way" 130

Whbrb Nature Has Outdone Herself in the

Fashioning OP Strange Monsters . . 150

The Females Settled Down upon the Smooth

Patches op Sandy Sea-Floor . - . 202

I Have Seen the Sea-Surpace Suddenly
Broken into Foam by Myriads op Flying
Fish 334

Sometimes He is Taken Opp His Guard and

Falls a Prey to a Shark . . .252

Garpish and Horse Mackerel Swimming Se-
dately IN Front op the School . •. 260

The Pollock is More Elegant in Shape than

THE Chiep op His Tribe • • • • 289

"Looking Down into the Limpid Depths, I
Saw Several Barracouta Stealing
Along" 320

The Water Greeted Me with a Roar and a
Dash that Flung Me Gasping Back upon
the Sand •«••.•• 342

A Bos'uM Has Opten Kept Me Pleasant Com-
pany ........ 3S^

I Always Shared Any Delicious Morsel with

Her • • 382

The Penguins Gazed at Him prom the Rocky

Ledges • • 398



Denizens of the Deep



CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

THERE has of recent years grown up a very
pleasant practice with certain writers, notably
the lamented Richard Jefieries, the inimitable
Kipling, and Ernest Thompson-Seton, not to go further
in cataloguing names, of supplementing the standard
works on Natural History with intimate personal details
of the every-day lives of wild animals from the highest to
the lowest, not excluding insects. I said pleasant practice,
but would add profitable to the reader of whatever age,
for I think no one except some dry-as-dust, blear-eyed
professor, groping amid the dry bones of his museum all
his life, would fail to agree that a story like Kipling's
White Sea/, for instance, must convey to the average
reader, whether young or old, more retainable knowledge
of the creatures it treats of than a whole weighty volume
of dry facts mostly in dead languages, even supposing it
was read. Of course, the desideratum is that the infor-
mation presented in this narrative form shall be correct,
that where the imagination is called in to supply the
absence of exact data it shall not be allowed to commit
indefensible extravagances, and that the stories as a whole

9



lo Denizens of the Deep

shall, if not stamped with the same hall-mark of geniui '
as the White Seal, at least endeavour to be as readable in
their degree.

With this object before my eyes, I now essay a series
of lives of some Denizens of the Deep based very largely
upon personal observation, buttressed by scientific facts
and decorated by imagination. I well know how am-
bitious the task is, but I feel that I have some small
qualifications for the work, and 1 know too how much
room there is for a book of the kind. A minor difficulty
confronts me at the outset. In justice the place of
honour at the commencement should — I felt, must — be
given to the undoubted Monarch of the Deep, the
stupendous Whale. But I have written so much, so
exhaustively about him (as a ship is " she " to sailors, so
a whale is " he" to whalers), that it must be impossible
to avoid some repetition (for which I trust I shall be for-
given) of what I have published before. And it would
naturally appear as if I had deliberately chosen to place
the Whales first because of my peisonal predilection for
their gigantic company, and more extended acquaintance
with them as regards their cvery-day life. But that is
not so. I would gladly put a much smaller denizen of
the deep sea forward first if I might with propriety do so.
However, I feel that to be out of the question, so the
Whale comes first.

Again, I beg to observe that this series of life-histories
will possess no orderly sequence of species or genera. I
intend to keep mammals, fish, and birds, each in a section
of their own, but apart from that, I wish to keep the
work as unlike an orthodox natural history as it is
possible to make it. Of necessity, these will be selected
lives, since there are so many species of deep-sea folk of



Introduction 1 1

which man, by reason of his limitations, can know prac-
tically nothing. But I do hope to include all the fauna
of the sea likely to make interesting and popular studies
— no, not studies. I want to dissociate the idea of study
from the book altogether. If it smells of the lamp I
shall be greatly disappointed, and so will my readers. It
should read like a series of intimate biographies of tried
and trusted friends, whose lives, though passed on a
different plane from ours, are no less full of interest.

A high and solid wall of division separates us from the
full fellowship with the lower animals which many of us
feel would add a new zest to life. Now and then it gets
low and thin, as in the case of the dog, the horse, the
elephant, the cat ; but even with these domestic friends
there always meets us the baffling barrier, preventing the
contact of our minds with what fills the same function in
the animal. And if this is so in regard to those closely
associated creatures, how much more is it in regard to
the wild ones, and how immeasurably greater in the case
of those interesting beings of whom we only catch fleet-
ing glimpses as it were. Here imagination aided by
experience is the only interpreter. It may mistranslate,
it may fail to understand many things at all, but on the
other hand it may — it has, it often does — hit upon the
exact truth as to the inner lives of its subjects, at any rate,
in far greater measure than any statistical compilation
can ever do.

To conclude this brief introduction, let me say that in
some cases I feel it will be preferable to make the sketch
an apparent autobiography as it were — to let the creature
written about tell his own story in our language, but from
his point of view. This, I feel, would hardly be appro-
priate to all the life-histories of the sea-folk, but in some



14 Autobiography of a Spenn Whale

Rawing breaxlths of colour ever changing in obedience
to some m3r5terious law. I lay, happiest of the happy,
by my mother's side, my blmit nose protruding from
the water about a foot, the teat in the angle of my jaw,
in n^ch the inmiature teeth were just sprouting, and
the rich milk streaming sweetly down my throat quite
unmixed with any sea-water. You see, we have a
most exquisite contrivance in our gullets, which without
any effort on our parts, takes in the food and shuts out
the lea, even at enormous depths. But just how it
does it I cannot explain, nor do I think that anybody
can. I looked a queer little creature, with my head,
the biggest part of me, like a tadpole's, and my long
thin lower jaw sticking out in front of me almost as if
a big splinter had run into my face and remained there.
But my mother did not thii^ so ; she was very proud
of me, and we both lay upon our beautiful couch,
supremely happy.

All around us lay the rest of the school, thirty or
forty cows, eight or ten yotmg bulls, and father. Ah,
never shall I forget when I saw him first. He was
going round the family to see that aU was well, as he
did some six times a day, and he passed quite dose to
where I nestled at my mother's side. He was one of
the mightiest of our mighty race, with a head like a
promontory and a length of over seventy feet. And
as he surged slowly up behind me on the surface of the
quiet sea, I saw the whole of him clearly and trembled.
(You must understand that we can only see behind us
owing to the position of our eyes, which are placed a
little below where the shoulders are in a man and almost
in the middle of the body's breadth.) He just glanced
at me as he glided by, a glance as it seemed to me of
perfect satisfaction. My mother quivered with delight,
as, sheering in towards her, he touched his forehead to



Pleasant Days at Home 15

lieis, grackiiislf, as became a monarch towards his
adoring consort, with whom he was well pleased.

For many days we remained in this mid-ocean
soUtude, chosen by onr wise ruler as being where none
of the hateful monsters of man's making ever came,
a place not too far from rich plateaux not too deep,
whose intricacies swarmed with our proper food, where
the sea-streams ran warmly and the stm rose and set
continually with never a cloud, a place where we alone
of all the sea-folk had no foes to fear. This proud
pre-eminence above aU our fellows had not long been
ours. In our hasteless chronology it seemed but a
short time past since in every part of the sea we were
liable to pursuit, harassing wounds, and death at the
hands of men. Alone among the tribes of earth and air
and sea we feared them, for we knew by bitter experi-
ence that our utmost rage, strength, and courage
availed nothing against these feeble ones, ^o neverthe-
less were so wise that they were bound to overcome
us. True, we did them terrible damage on occasions,
and some of our warriors, notably the head of my family,
had invariably come out of conflicts with the earth-
people without deadly injury, although bearing all
over their vast body-surfaces wide white scars where
the cruel wounds dealt them by men had healed. And
each of them had a long roll of victories to his credit.
Yet this did not make them tyrannous or over-bearing,
it but added to their wisdom, and ability to command
the yotmger generations.

Now I am not so arrogant as to suggest that all
this knowledge was mine as soon as I was bom, I do
but tell you these things as a sort of introduction to
my family, of which I am mightily proud, yet not more
so I think than they deserve. No, like all young
creatures, for the early days of my life I was content



l6 Aotobiography of a Sperm Whale

to be alive and full of joy. Everjihing was new,
everjrtfaing was entirely delightful. I was very soon
weaned, for among our people, the Sperm Whales,
there does not exist that intensity of maternal afifection
which characterises the other kinds of whale, with only
one exception. We really do not need it, for food is
easy to obtain, and of a nature entirely fitted for a mere
baby to eat. So that when I was less than a month old
I had taken my place in the school as one of its ordinaiy
members, and my early relations with my mother were
entirely forgotten — ^in fact I knew no difference between
her and any other member of the school or family. But
during all that period I had been learning by closest
imitation, as well as by 5delding to my strange inward
promptings impelling me to do that which I had never
done before, in emulation of the feats I saw being
performed by those around me, and when I became
independent I was, although quite an insignificant
member of the school, fully capable of doing all that
they did in respect of swimming, diving and obtaining
food.

I am now getting old, the waves and storms of half
a century have rolled and thundered over my head,
but vividly as on that first day do I remember when by
my mother's side closely following her every movement
I sank into the cool, translucent, and darkling depths
for the first time. I shrank closely in to my mother's
bosom as we left the warm stmshine in which we had
been basking. I noticed with youthfid wonder and
admiration the stately graceful way in which my mother
arched her back, lowered her head and elevated the
broad fans of her tail into the air as she descended, and
then all else was swallowed up in admiration. Slowly
we sank through the increasing coolness of the sea,
ler and dimmer grew the light from above, until,



I. Earn Experience



17



after what seemed a day, but could only have been a
few minutes, we stopped our descent and began to
move horizontally.

At first I was dreadfully distressed. I felt as if I
was being squeezed flat, I wanted to breathe, but I
found that my nostril was as securely sealed as if it
was never to be opened again, certainly I could not
open it. My lower jaw hung down, leaving my mouth
wide open, and presently a delicious quivering morsel
went gliding down my throat, giving me a most ex-
quisite feeling of satisfaction. The gloom which had so
troubled me at first gave way to a tender, greenish light
shed abroad by myriads of shining things that glowed
and faded as they floated about apparently without any
will of their own. The cold, too, which at first had felt
unbearable, chilling my blood and making it feel as if
it was thickening so much that it could not flow,
became less unpleasant. And presently, tiny as I was,
I realised that this was my proper realm, that here
our people were supreme, and that of all the m3rriads
of diverse creatures in the sea we were the undoubted
heads and leaders. All other sea-citizens but ourselves
preyed upon and were preyed upon by other denizens of
the deep, we alone took toll where we would, ourselves
secure from all assault by any of the sea-folk. It was a
high and elevating thought to feel oneself a lineal
descendant of such a mighty and ancient line of ocean
royalty.

All around me glided in utter silence amid the
varying gleams, like vast shadows, the members of
the school. Occasionally in hasteless. dignified fashion
one would rise perpendicularly with some palely
glowing mass between his jaws, and reversing his
position, let the great saw of his lower mandible
divide whatever it was he held into sizeable fragments



k.



i



l8 Atitobiograpliy of a Spenn Whale

for swaDowing. These pieces were vpotk flie same
colossal scale as himself, and sli|^ied down his gullet
with an easy celerity that was pleasant to see. No
one was selfish^ The prey of one was the prey of all,
and a certain gigantic courtesy prevented any in-
dividual from appropr i ating more than his actual
share. But suddenly into the midst of these mys-
terious delights there thrust itself an imperative
command to seek air. We can and do remain in the
depths for as much as one hour, according to our sixe,
but the length of time we stay down is always care-
fully calculated according to the need of the youngest
member of the party. Ah ! the swift rush upward,
impelled seemingly by the whole weight of the ocean
beneath. Ah ! the blissful emergence into brightness
most dazzling, and the simultaneous opening of all
fpirades. Oh! the sweet rush of heaven's air through
tiie quivering nostrils into the labouring lungs. Indeed,
it is good to endure privation of air for a season if only
to realise how lavish of His choicest gifts is the
Power that sways us all.

Then to lie basking again, feeling that sweet breath,
the true essence of life, coursing through every artery,
tingling in every muscle, making one feel as if nothing
but action, swift, tremendous, exhausting, could
satisfy the exuberant needs of the body. Oh ! the
delight of just being alive. Is it any wonder that
even our majestic chief, yielding to the overmastering
needs of such an influx of life, suddenly forgot his
dignity, rushed like a tidal wave along the glowing
surface of the ocean, and hurled his whole vast bulk
towards the sky by the exercise of a force beyond
calculation. After that one stupendous exhibition
of power all lay in almost utter quiet, content so to lie.
The sun went down, the moon rosenp and the pleasant



Exuberant Youth



19



Stars peeped out from the purple curtain of the night.
No ripple of wave or querulous wail of wind disturbed
the mid-sea quiet. £ven the deep sigh of a waking
whale but punctuated the soft stillness of the restful
scene. All Nature was at ease around us, and above
as below there was perfect peace.

The foregoing was just a typical evening as I
remember it during my babyhood. But one morning
there was communicated to all the family by that
subtle interchange of thought, independent of speech,
which we possess, the chief's order to proceed north-
ward, following him. No one so much as thought
of questioning his authority. He was our law and
its only exponent. As well have questioned our
ability to obey as hts right to command. So as the
great sun flooded the horizon with golden flame as if
overflowing, we formed into ranks and at a uniform
speed of about six miles an hour, departed from that
spot of ocean where I first knew life, I had no senti-
mental regrets, the whole wide sea was my home.
Nay, more ; I felt an absorbing desire to know more
of this apparently illimitable realm of waters which
had given me a place of birth in one of its tiniest eddies.
So I gambolled gaily along in the wake of the young
bulls of the school, restraining with difficulty my
desire to leap after the manner of the chief, and
revelling in the cool depths to which we periodically
descended in search of food. When I come to think
of it with the calmness that befits my age, I feel
impelled to assert that in those days I had but two
overmastering desires, the desire to eat, and the desire
to dissipate the abundant strength that my eating
gave me. But withal, I knew how to obey, or rather
shall I say, I knew not how to disobey the guidance
of my leader. Like all young things I felt independent


A



20 AutobioKraphy of a Sperm Whale

promptings to strike out a way ot my own, but one
glance at him quenched all such aspirations and made
me feel how good it was to be permitted to follow so
great a guide.

Very pleasantly passed a space of six days and
then a whole wide area of new pleasures met my
delighted senses. Whither we were boimd I did not
know, but now I can tell you that we made the Bab-el-
Mandeby no gate of tears to me, but a veritable portal
of joy. During that short passage, so rich in life are
the tepid Indian Seas, even my small body had become
quite encrusted with parasitical growths, bamades
and moss and tiny limpets. They worried my tender
skin, they fretted me beyond bearing, and so, when
I saw the jagged surfaces of coral at the gate of the
Red Sea, I rushed as did my fellows, to chafe my
irritated body along those gratefully corrugated
summits of the edifices below. Ah! another joy;
to drag oneself luxuriously over those myriad needle-
points of coral, every touch sending a thrill of delight
from fluke-edge to spiracle — ^yes, indeed, it was worth
all the miserable da)^ of annoyance preceding it to
know the sweetness of the relief.

And then the food. Here was found in fullest
abundance all that the sea had to offer us. Massy
shoals of lazy fish that, needing no inducement, just
swam serenely down the gaping caverns of our jaws,
cuttles of medium size but soft and sapid, that without
any attempt at resistance allowed themselves to drift
gelatinously into the warm haven of our stomachs.
Ah' the Red Sea is a good place. Yet one serious
drawback we all found. By reason of our bulk (I may
say 'our ' now I have attained perhaps the maximum
size allotted to the Sperm Whale) we were often com-
pelled to give the shallow shores a wide berth. But



Happy Days 21

in the mid-sea there was no peace. From the mcessant
churning up and befouling of the water there was no
escape. Methinks that all the land-driven monsters
using the sea as their highway did concentrate there.
And when I saw one of them strike the black scarp of
Jebel Zukur and fall apart in shards I was gravely
content. Why should aU the sea be given up to the
business or pleasure of those who rule all the land ?
thought I, nor did I give one jot of mental effort to
the problem of why it was that we, the seed-royal of
the sea, were now no longer hunted by men. Like
most of my fellows, I was all-content to take the good
as it came, never to anticipate evil unless compelled
by instinctive prescience, but to Uve and enjoy the'
passing day, taking no thought for what might be
coming.

Here in this pleasant sea we remained for many
months. Nought of harm, of annoyance came near
us so long as we kept to east or west of a well-defined
line drawn down the middle of the sea. We lay and
luxuriated in the rich sea-pastures within the sheltering
reef-barriers, fearing nothing and fattening upon the
never-failing stores of rich food around us. We had
but to lie still, open wide our mouths and let them fill.
What wonder that we all grew fat and slothful, all,
that is, who had attained their full growth. The other
youngsters and myself grew amazingly, for not only
did we eat all that we felt inclined to, but like all young
things, rejoicing in our perfect life and full freedom,
we gambolled, we raced, and did all that the abundant
vitahty within us prompted us to do, and there were
none to say us nay. And so the happy days passed,
none taking count of them, all too intent upon enjoy-
ment of the present to think of the future, until one
morning our great chief gave the gathering signal.



22 Autobiography o{ a Sperm Whale


roiqfl



and was instantly obeyed. For with ns there is no
half-hearted or unwilling obedience. We choose our
chiefs for their ruling qualities, and having chosen
them it never occurs to us to disobey them or grumble-
at their orders. We know that they are fit to rule
and we delight to obey. And when they are, by reasoo'
of advancing age or sickness or any infirmity, unfit to
maintain their proud position any longer, we depose
them unhesitatingly. We know we must be led, must
have a chief, but we know that he must be best of the
very best. Nor can he hold his position one day after
he has fallen from our high standard.

In a close compact body, we left the pleasant'
purlieus of the Red Sea, and without deviating fri
our direct course, except to clear Sokotra, we m:
our way southward. Now I began to feel the benefit
of our long stay in the abundant waters we had just
quitted. Because here there was almost nothing for
us to eat. True, as we passed through the blue depths
in stately ranks an occasional shoal of fish would swim
down our gaping throats, or a passing school of por-
poises find permanent shelter in the vast maws of our
elders. But these were incidental only. Nothing
like the rich banqueting day after day, which had
been our lot in the teeming sea behind us. But if
we could feast when occasion offered, we could
fast when need arose. And need was laid upon
now. None but our chief knew whither we went,
yet we followed him unfalteringly through those
almost barren seas ; barren, that is, so far as we
were concerned.

Without haste, yet resting not day nor night, we
pursued our journey southward through the mighty
silences of the sea. Once, and only once, did we see
anything to give us pause, and that was, as the water



it if I

ala«a
1 11^



d



I Meet Man



23



^^ curi<
Kay

^" Btini



b^an to chill, when we met one of those mighty fabrics
made by men and driven by fire across the ocean. We
had been so long immune from pursuit, or indeed
interference of any kind, that we took Httle heed of
her except just to avoid her great onward rush, and
the deai^y swirl of her tail. Full of curiosity to see
what this wonderful surface-monster might be, I rose
behind it, and putting forth all my vigour swam after
it to get a good view of it, when suddenly I heard a
h curious noise almost like the sound we make on a calm
lay when, lying upon the surface, we strike the water
rith our tails, and immediately I felt a burning,
^ stinging pain run through me. I swerved in my
course, and sought my companions, all of whom as
I joined them put on their utmost speed in our original
direction. For a time it seemed as if they avoided
me, but, gradually, as the healing of the sea exercised
its benignant effect upon the place in my side where
I felt the pain, they closed in upon me again and I was
no longer shunned.

Later, as we slowed down, our great chief deigned
to halt near me and tell me what had really happened.
He said that idle men and women (how I wondered
what they were !) on board of these land-monsters
or ships, possessing deadly things able to kill a long
way off, did not hesitate to try and deprive of life, just
for amusement, any of the sea-folk they saw. At which
I wondered very much ; for the earliest knowledge I
absorbed was, never to kill but for food, and the news
tliat there were creatures who killed for amusement —
for pleasure — was very terrible to me.

However, although the memory of that encounter

has never left me, my wound healed so rapidly that I

^_ never once faltered in our southward rush, feeling

HMtronger and more fit every day, as the good sea gave

L



24 Autobiography of a Sperm Whale

me of its strength, and the long feasting in the Red Sea
came to its predestined and proper effect. The waters
around me cooled and brought hunger — fierce, gnawing
hunger. Yet there was little or nothing to eat. Our
speed increased ; without faltering or straggling we
held steadily on, until one day, following our chief,
we settled down, down, down. Deeper than ever I
had dreamed of we went until, skirting the black bases
of a mighty mountain range, we found our prey.
Hundreds upon hundreds of enormous cuttle-fish,
helplessly, slimily crawling about on the rocky floor
or chnging with their myriad tentacles to the pillars
of the earth, as with their huge eyes they saw us ap-
proaching. There was no escape for them. Alone
among the inhabitants of the deep seas, we were their
masters and they our legitimate prey.

We fell upon them in a body, and tore them limb
from limb, feeling exquisite satisfaction as the quivering
succulent morsels glided down into our craving
stomachs. I had devoured one huge fellow whose head
had been bitten off by a big buU close to me, and was
almost satisfied. Not quite, though ; and with fresh
ardour I flung myself into the fray, seizing a vast cuttle
by the middle. He writhed round and enwrapped me
with his far-reaching arms so that I could not get my
mouth open. But my tail was free, and exerting all
my strength I rose through the murky water dragging
him with me. Fortunately, he had not had time to
anchor himself to one of the rock bases. We reached
the surface in a welter of foam, and there by my side
was the chief, who, ranging up closely, seized some
outlying tentacles of my prize, causing him to unclasp
those that bound my jaw, and next moment the strong
salt air of the sky was sending thrills of renewed life
through my body.



renewea iiie h



Feeling Power



25



Many dangeioas crises have been encountered~by

me since then, but in none of them have I felt so near

Bany end as on that occasion. Had it not been for my

Vchief, I must have been drowned, I, the chUd of the

l^eep sea, bom to sport with the wild waves in their

■utmost fury, or sink far beneath them into the darksome

■profundities of ocean caverns — I should have been

Irowned t But I was not, and when in the sweet

^moonlight all our company foregathered on the surface,

1 {nil fed, to lie in peace, lulled by the gentle rocking

I of the wavelets, I no longer regretted the peaceful

lepid waters of the Red Sea. I had learned the

delights of struggle and conquest. And I had been

noticed by the chief !

Thenceforward I grew with amazing rapidity.
I felt the gigantic power twisting the cable-like sinews
of my flukes, knitting the columnar masses of my
vertebrjE, and piling up the cushions of muscle around
my bones. A great joy filled me. I needed an outlet
for it. To show what I could do, to hurl myself venge-
fully into the closely packed mass of advancing enemies,
to lead the ranks of my fellows. . . . Why, oh why,
was all the accumulated wisdom of my thousands of
ancestors surging in my brain, but to impel me to
great deeds ? And here, frantically, I hurled myself
out of the sea thirty feet into the air, unable longer to
control the raging forces within. When I fell back
into the foaming vortex beneath, I was relieved, yet
still with that sense of superiority over all living things
surging within me. Perhaps it was the bracing effect
of that chill sea. For we were now well south, on the
outskirts of the beautiful isles of New Zealand, and
every nerve in our bodies was strung tense with the
springing of new life. Day broke and showed us the
towering precipices of the South Island, against which


26 Autobiography of a Sperm Whale

the monstrous rollers of the Southern Ocean hurled
themselves vainly, retiring sullenly in clouds of spray
and leagues of foam. It was a place of strife farUiest
removed from the languorous peace of our last resting-
place that one could possibly imagine, yet inexpressibly
grateful to me, who felt in all my members the need
for vigorous action. This stem sea, those chill winds
that howled over the whitening expanse of waters,
sent the life bounding through my arteries, and I felt
myself growing with abnormal rapidity, longing to test
my strength, eager to fight.

Up out of the boiling foam there sprang a mighty
mountain top, a pinnacle of rock that, reaching down
into the darkening depths of that stem ocean, soared
into the air as far again. And around it we circled
feeding, for here food was even more abundant than
within the Bab-el-Mandeb, my only standard of com-
parison. The storm raged higher and higher, the great
waves hurled themselves headlong from their world-
encircling journey against the mountain base and
whitened its summit with spray, but still, all unheeding
their strife, we made our rounds feeding, ever feeding.
For we had only to sink a few yards to be in profoundest
peace, no tumult of wind and sea affected us, except
favourably, in that the agitation of the whole oceanic
mass in these comparatively shallow waters stirred up
the creatures upon which we fed and made them
easier to obtain. Gradually it dawned upon me that
our ranks were being augmented by many strangers.
Whales I had certainly never seen before rubbed
shoulders with me, but communicated no sign. Until
when the next morning broke bleakly and cheerless
over the foaming surface of the straits there were
hundreds of our kind gathered, as if at some pre-
amuiged rendezvous for some definite purpose. I



I Mystery and Added Prowess 27

felt a great pride at being one of this mighty concourse,
this assemblage of the mightiest creatures living, and
I had some dim idea that maybe I might distinguish
myself in some manner among them ; for I was now
getting well grown, though far behind our noble chief
in his gigantic majesty.

It was a premonition full of truth, for on the third
day after our arrival while in company with some
hundreds of my fellows I lay basking in the clear sun-
shine, the warning signal passed through me, telling
of terrible danger very near. How it is communicated
I cannot tell you ; neither by speech nor sound of any
kind are we apprised of the presence of an enemy,
but in every fibre of our bodies we suddenly feel that
danger is near. Only we do not know from whence
it is coming. We are intensely on the alert, but that
is all. I lay like most of my fellows upon the shining
sea surface, my columnar head half out of the water,
my body slightly arched and my tail quiveringly
playing from side to side as if seeking to test the vibra-
tions of the water. Suddenly an unfamiliar tremor
ran through me (I heard nothing because with us
hearing is almost a lost sense) and immediately I
felt a sharp stinging pain shoot through my right
side. Filled with rage as well as alarm, I sprang
forward, feeling as I did a drag at the wound in my
side. Instinctively I dived, turning a somersault
beneath the water, and coming up with a furious rush
about twenty yards astern of my former position. As
I did so, I caught a glimpse of a strange wliite monster,
long and narrow, with two slender legs on each side,
and throwing my tail high, delivered a blow at it with
all my force. I felt my stroke take effect, saw as I
came to the surface again a quantity of strange frag-
ments floating, but beyond all I felt the smarting,



k



I



28 Autobiography of a Sperm Whale

burning pain of my wound, and without seeking turtherj
revenge, sank down, down, into the cool depths where^
I knew no enemy could ever come.

My fellows were all scattered far and wide ; all
cohesion or discipline seemed to have ended. What,
then, could this dreadful calamity mean ? Was there
an enemy before which even our splendid leader
trembled and fied ? And I felt full of fear and wonder
as the dread possibilities of a supremely powerful foe
having overtaken us surged through my brain. I
remained down to the full hmit of my endurance,
seeing nothing of any of my companions during the
time. But when I reached the surface again, I felt
the rallying signal vibrating through my body, and
hurrying in the indicated direction soon rejoined the
school. Then I learned that the strange monster I
had destroyed was a boat with men in it, who were
armed with terrible weapons, compared to which our
jaws and flukes were but clumsy and almost useless.
They had wantonly attacked us for some reason of
their own, and had succeeded in slaying two of our
number, who, paralysed with alarm at the sudden
onslaught, had made but a poor defence, and had
fallen comparatively easy victims. Me the great
chief singled out for high honours. He told me that
I had begun well ; that having once realised my own
power, and been successful in repelling this savage
attack, I should be far more formidable to man than
any whale could be who had never been assailed.
For my wound was after all but a trifle, only a long
trailing thing behind it made it gall me. My chief,
however, advised me to take no heed of it. It would
soon cease to annoy me, for either the tooth imbedded
in my blubber would be dragged out by the trailing
weight behind, or the weight would drop off and leave



1



A



A Land of Ic£



29



1 buried i



/ body, wlicn the healing s



B weapon I
would soon close up the \

Then, feeling that such a neighbourhood was nn-
pleasant to remain in, our chief led us farther south,
to where a group of mountains just raised their heads
from the tremendous depths to a little above the
surface. Here, he said, he had never known man come
even in the days when few haunts of our people were
secure. Yet here we had almost all lost our Uves
through a singular misfortune which befell us. We
had entered a little bay scooped out of one of the
mountain-sides, with a very narrow neck, not much
larger than would admit one of us at a time. At the
entrance it was shallow, but within it widened and
deepened so much that it was an ideal place to rest in,
while from the surface on either side the steep walls
of cliff rose sheer for a great height. And it was
literally crawling with huge cuttles, our natural and
greatly-loved food.

Here we were feeding in perfect content, and I had
almost forgotten my recent adventure, when suddenly
a chill struck through my very marrow ; I felt as if
my vital forces were about to cease their duties. We
all felt it at the same time— that dread cold which is
the horror of the Sperm Whale, and makes him avoid,
as if it were a plague-spot, the vicinity of ice. But,
the first shock of alarm over, we sought the cause, and
found to our dismay that the narrow entrance was
entirely blocked by a monstrous iceberg, which had
drifted in there and become jammed between the jaws
of the pass. So were we all prisoners, and at the mercy
of the cold, nor could our instincts tell us how great
the danger was or what were our chances of escape.
My first impulse was to dash wildly at that great white
wall that blocked the way to liberty ; but, fortunately,


30 Autobiography of a Sperm Whale



I restrained myself, and following the example of my
chief, went on feeding, instinctively realising that
much food was needed to keep out the effects of the
cold.

So for several days and nights we remained in this
prison, eating throughout every waking hour. I kept
returning to the icy barrier, much as I hated and feared
it, and even forced myself to try and wriggle beneath
it. And at last, as I was burrowing like a sand-groper,
I felt a sudden trembling of the whole vast mass above
me, and with a crash as if of an earthquake I was hurled
forward full twenty times my own length and lay
stunned, bleeding, and helpless. I slowly rose to the
surface without any volition of my own, and feebly
spouting, felt my senses coming back to me. I was
presently joined by my companions, whose admiration
of me now was greatly increased, for they attributed
their deliverance to me. But I had been so sadly
ill-used by that tremendous blow that, had it not been
for the stored-up energy of all the food I had been so
plentifully devouring lately, and an exceptionally
powerful physique, I should certainly have been un-
able to keep up with the school, and should probably
have died quietly or been slain by order of the chief.
Our mighty race tolerates no weaklings or cripples.
Putting forth all my powers, I accompanied the
school to the Crozets, where another rich feeding-
ground awaited us, and by the time we quitted there
I was not only fully restored to my usual vigour,
but was rapidly approaching the dimensions of our
leader.

Now in a community like ours there are just three
ruling motives, each causing us to exercise all our
powers. First, the desire for food. Instinct assisted
by training teaches us whales to find it, and to that


Pride of Race



31



ardi everything is subordinated. Our vast bodies re-

I quire so much nourishment, and that of a certain kind,

I that we must place this need before all others. More-

I over, we are, as compared with the smaller denizens

T of the sea, upon many of which we might feed were it

I possible to catch them, very slow and clumsy in our

j movements. The gigantic cuttle-fish alone, which hides

' its mighty gelatinous bulk in the submarine caves at the

roots of the mountains is capable of satisfying our

enormous appetites and of being fairly easily obtained.

Creatures of smaller bulk and lesser prowess than ours

it does not fear. They become its comparatively easy

prey. But we are invincible, invulnerable ; against

our onslaught no cuttle-fish can defend itself when we

*re full grown.

This then is our primal need, as indeed it is of most
[ creatures that hve, although many are able to subordin-
I ate it to other needs for long periods at a time, notably
the seals. Next comes the love motive, the intense
over-mastering desire to have wives and children, and
coupled with it, really a consequence of it, the desire for
supremacy over our fellows. These two last only apply
to the males ; our females are almost like beings of
another race, so inferior to us are they in size, in agility,
in ferocity. The full-grown Sperm Whale cow never
exceeds in size half the dimensions of the full-grown
biill, and is, moreover, a gentle, timid creature whose
one object is to keep near her lord, to obey his lightest
sign, and who will cheerfully remain by his side and die
with him if he be in danger of death. As I have before
hmted they are not fond mothers, taking the earliest
possible opportunity of shaking off the yoke of maternal
cares, but they endeavour to make up for this by their
absolute devotion to the head of the family.

The young bulls are in an anomalous position. For


32 Afitot>iograp&7 oi a Sperm Whale

a long tune tney are mere nobodies. They are of the
family, bat iiave nothing to do with it but obey the
lead of the chief. All the privileges of his leadership
are theirs, also the lore which he has accumulated
gradually passes to them as they follow him about the
oceans of the world. They cannot help learning, for
imitation is one of the primary laws of their being, which
they can no more disobey tiian they can help feeling
hungry. And all they have to do is to eat and grow ;
love affairs do not trouble them until they are full-
grown. Then, when instinct compels them to cast
amorous glances upon the yoimg cows of about their
own age, another instinct warns them that before love
must come war. And so it comes to pass that at a
certain period in the life of the school there are furious
battles between the young buUs, battles that sometimes
result in the death of one or both of the OMnbatants,
and sometimes in that terrible disablement and dis-
figurement known as twisted jaw, where the bone of the
long mandible-like lower jaw is wrenched to one side,
at right angles to the line of the body. Then the
sufferer is thrust out of the school, never again to know
the fellowship of his kind, but to wander unsatisfied
and lonely until his life's end. The victor in the battle,
upon which the great chief of the school looks gravely
and with perfect impartiality, may then form a school
of his own. He proudly selects for himself wives from
among the young cows and departs to use for himself
the wisdom he has learned during his adolescence.

So the making of new families goes on imtil finally
there arises a young bull who, seeing that the leader is
not so fierce or so agile as of old, feels called upon to
put his headship to the test and haply succeed in driving
him from his place and filling the same himself more
efficiently. Then a tremendous fight ensues lasting



My Ambitions



33



s from the ]



) the s



! of the E



; setting (

And the outcome is often that the old king is beaten,
deposed, and driven forth to wander solitary, it may be
for many years, through the wide oceans where once he
ranged as an ocean monarch, leader of a greiit family,
but now doomed to finish his journey alone.

Now in this long digression I have sought to show
the customs of our people as regards family life, for the
reason that to me was rapidly approaching the time
when I must needs do battle with my peers for the right
to lead. I had no choice, nor did I desire any. I felt
keenly eager to fight, the more so because my two
exploits had already brought me fame, as it is under-
stood by us, and also because there were several win-
some cows who looked lovingly upon me. They kept
near me in the school when we were on our passages,
in spite of the jealous efforts made by the other young
bulls to edge between us. Many attempts were made
to provoke me to fight, but I disregarded them all.
Mine was a loftier aim, a higher ambition. I aspired
to leadership of the school, although there was no sign
visible that our chief was growing too old to lead. All
the more glory I felt, for me, if I could overcome him
and take his place.

Consequently battle after battle took place among
my young fellow-bulls, and several new families were
founded and led away, as we journeyed about the oceans
of the world. One battle royal took place in the Indian
Ocean, near where I was bom, and a contemporary of
my own, bom three days after me, led off four young
cows triumphantly. Another founded a new family
on the coast of Japan, another off the Sandwich Islands,
another in the North Atlantic, where a great ship-full
of men and women paused to view the fight and held
their breath to see how fiercely strove the monarchs

3


I



34 Autobiography of a Sperm Whale

of the deep, tliough knowing nothing of the cause of^
quarrel or of the prize of victory.

Still I bided my time, to the wonder of my compan-
ions, until a younger generation were fast approaching
the time when they too would attain to full whalehood
and free citizenship of the ocean. Meanwhile, I always
kept close to the chief, watching his every movement,
noting all his wise ways, and absorbing all that he had
to teach, until at last, as we fed around the bases of that
lonely rock in mid South Atlantic, Inaccessible Island,
while the furious southern storm raged around us and
lifted its vast waves towards the sky, I calmly chall-
enged his supremacy. He had given the signal to
depart northwards in consequence of the inclemency
of the sea. And I questioned his wisdom. I pointed
out that here was abundant food, that the storms did
not affect us, that all were well content to remain here
but he, and that it appeared as if the leadership of such
a school as we were was becoming a task beyond his
powers. Other family matters I touched upon which
need not be enlarged about here, such as the dwindling
numbers of our new calves, quite insufficient to supply
the waste of departures. And I concluded by offering
to contest the headship with him at once.

During all this time the rest of the school lay in a
wide circle of which we two were the centre, their huge
black bodies almost motionless, like wave-beaten rocks
protruding above the surface of the foaming sea. He
and I lay nearly head on to each other without move-
ment, not seeing each other, but that mysterious sense
of ours, which I have before mentioned, in full activity.
Well was it for me that 1 had waited so long, and had
rehearsed to myself all possibilities of his behaviour
when I should challenge him. For suddenly, as if
hurled by a stupendous wave, he launched



1



imcbed himself at J



I Win the Headship



35



me — and missed me by a yard, for I had felt him coming
and given one tremendous sweep with my flukes that
had carried me forward and downward withal. Keeping
just beneath the surface I felt for him cautiously, every
sinew tense for the blow I meant to deal when I should
touch him. But I had for an adversary one of the
wiliest as well as mightiest of Sperm Whales, and my
only hope of victory, apart from the chances of accident,
was to copy his tactics with that rapidity of learning
which is our birthright, and trust to my superior youth
and consequent vigour to put them into practice for
his defeat.

So we circled around each other warily, he occasion-
ally making one of his awful rushes either under or
above water, according to our position at the time, for
while life remains to us we must obey the irresistible
call of our lungs, and rise or sink in accordance there-
with. I kept strictly on the defensive, husbanding my
strength for the first sign of my old ruler's weakening,
and so, without harm done to either, the long fierce
day rolled slowly on. Then I noticed that his rushes
were not so vigorous, he was losing his caution, and also
his temper, for every silent taunt that we know so well
how to convey without making a sound, he was now
using profusely.

Suddenly I saw my opportunity ; he was lying in
such a position that he could not see me, and his vast
lower mandible hung down temptingly, a gleaming
white bar against the deep blue of the sea. Without
making a rippte I arched my body nearly double, then
releasing the tension sprang forward at hira, turning
withal an"! gripping his jaw in mine. The ocean boiled
with OUT efforts, he to free himself and I to hold on. At
last came a rending crack, I felt the jaw give in mine,
and knew that I was victor. Releasing my hold I


36 Autobiography of a Sperm Whale

sprang to the surface and awaited his coming. As soon
as he appeared I rained blows upon him with my tail
until all motion on his part ceased, and he lay, except
for the gentle wash of the waves about his limp body,
quite supine. I immediately mustered the school, gave
the signal of command, and in a compact body we all
sped away, leaving our late chief to enter into a new
sphere of usefulness in the bodies of the myriad scaven-
gers of the sea already hastening to the enormous
banquet I had spread for them.

Thenceforward I led the school triumphantly
through the various oceans for many years. But I
never allowed a young bull to linger when it was time
that lie should go. If he refused the combat I would
drive him out ; I would have no one wait for me as I did
for my chief, although I had little to fear, for I had
become even a mightier monarch than he, and wiser by
far, I knew. Yet never did I get an opportunity to
show my wisdom's ripe?t fruitage until one day off the
old Solander again, where I first felt the touch of that
horrible barbed weapon : I knew that there were
enemies about, I ordered all my tribe to make full
speed to the westward, while I remained to guard their
retreat ; and wonderfully they obeyed me. In the
space of three spouts they had disappeared, gliding
along beneath the sea at top speed. I lay as if asleep,
but by an almost imperceptible motion of my flukes
gradually turning, turning, so that when three of the
white monsters I remembered so well rushed upon me,
I, seeing them coming, suddenly turned a full somersault
and fell among them. One was crushed to fragments,
the other two strove to escape, but I hurled myself
after them, as the dolphin after the flying-fish, and
presently they had both fallen into morsels under my
furious blows. Then, calming down at once, I followed



A



My Serene Adolescence yj

in the wake of my family, sedately satisfied, but resolved
never to tempt my fortune and that of those dear to
me, by venturing on the Solander Ground again.

And now I think I must conclude my story. I am
still in the full-tide of vigorous life, not yet more than
half a century old, and probably destined to lead the
school for another quarter of a century. Then it may
be my fate to be ousted by one of my family and roam
solitary for many seasons more. But I hope not. I
would fain end my splendid career in battle at the jaws
and flukes of one of my sons, who should be a worthy
successor. Very pleasant my life has been to me, the
few really dangerous meetings I have had with enemies
having only served to heighten the delight of hving.
I have been, and am, fondly loved ; I have always been
hungry, and always found food in abundance. I have
traversed every sea, and been respectfully greeted by
every form of sea-folk — they have even saluted me
when about to enter the vast cavern of my stomach.
My thick coating of creamy fat, the huge reservoir
of oil I carry in my head, has grown richer and richer,
until now I am wealthiest of my people : never have
I seen one of them that would dare measure his might
against mine.

I inherit the pride of my splendid race, I know that
we are the oldest of living created things, as well as the
mightiest, and I rejoice to know that the persecution
we once endured at the hands of the big-brained insects
of the land is over now, or practically so. Every hour
of my life is a delight. The swift, irresistible rush along
the raging sea, or the soft gliding through balmy waters
lit up by mellow sunshine, the sudden change as we
sink into the cool, translucent depths, and the thrill
as we seize the musky mollusc in his lair and, dragging
him upwards, tear and devour his juicy, succulent flesh.


38 Autobiography of a Sperm Whale

The long, steady journey of thousands of miles, straight
as the dolphin leaps, without molestation, with only
the happy company of our own people, and the long,
pleasant days when, free from the necessity of watchful-
ness, we take our fill of love, of food, and of sportive
gambols : ah ! these are the things that make our life
in the deep, the beautiful sea, thrice happy.

There be many things about us that none can ever
know but ourselves ; our sickness, which produces
matter treasured by the greedy earthmen ; our length
of days ; our small brains, but great intelligence — ^these
are of the deep-sea secrets that pigmy man shall never
understand. But to you, my friend, because you have
loved us and striven to do us justice, I have revealed
thus much, in the hope that the knowledge may bring
you joy. And so, farewell I



CHAPTER III

THE MYSTICETUS, OR RIGHT WHALE

PARTLY because my acquaintance with him is so
much less, and partly because I know that his
intelligence is of a much lower order than that of
the sperm whale, I shall not permit this huge creature
to tell his own story. Indeed, I could not ; for there is a
secret connected with this particular whale which has
never yet been revealed, nor, although it is a bold thing
to say, does there seem any prospect that it will be.
Briefly, it is, what does he do with himself during the
long night of the Arctic regions, when open water,
absolutely necessary to him as to other sea-mammals,
is not obtainable, all the Polar Seas being locked under
many feet of ice ? Nothing can well be more certain
than that he does not come south. He has never been
seen in temperate waters, not though the enterprising
whale-fishers, driven south by the encroaching ice at
the approach of winter have sought him with infinite
care. Where, then, does he spend the long months of
the Arctic winter, utterly dark but for the Northern
Lights (Aurora Borealis), utterly unnavigable by any
ice-breaker known ?

Some have formulated a theory of an open Polar
Sea, whither birds and mammals retire during this
bitter time, but the idea is chimerical, untenable for
a moment. If there is anything firmly settled con-
cerning the Arctic regions it is that, whether any

S9



40 The Mysticetus, or Right Whale

explorer reaches the Pole or not, we know exactly the
conditions which obtain there. In any case, only six
hundred miles or so separate the farthest north of the
explorer from that apex of the earth known as the
North Pole, which when it is reached will certainly be
just the same dreary dismal expanse of hummocky ice
or frozen snow-covered land that we already know so
weU.

Where, then, does the Right Whale go in the winter?
We do not know, but an easy and plausible assumption
is that he hybemates beneath the ice as does the
alligator in the mud, the bear in his hollow tree, the
marmot, and the dormouse, not to speak of other
hybemators or winter sleepers. As an assumption
this must pass until we know, which does not seem
at all a likely thing to happen.

The Right Whale of the Arctic Seas, Bowhead of
the North Pacific, is probably, individual for individual,
the largest of all God's creatures. But there is some
little doubt as to his being larger than the sperm whale,
because whalemen calculate the sizes of their gigantic
victims by the number of barrels of oil they yield.
Now the sperm whale, ranging temperate and tropical
seas, does not need, and therefore does not carry, a
great thickness of blubber over his flesh. True, the
reservoir of spermaceti in his head does something to
equalise this, but not enough. The greatest yield of
oil and spermaceti from any sperm whale that I have
been able to obtain any information about was sixteen
tons, while I have heard of several cases of Bowhead
in the Behring Sea trying out nearly twenty-five,
blubber alone, since they have no spermaceti. Yet
I feel sure, judging by experience, that the sixteen-ton
sperm whale would be bulkier than the more thickly
clad Bowhead. However, let it go, it's a moot point,


The Easeful Whale



41



and whalers generally seem to be agreed that there is
not much to choose between these monsters in point
of size. That is as regards one sex, but the females
of the Mysliceiae are, as a rule, larger than the males,
while, as I have before said, the sperm whale cow never
exceeds half the size of the bull.
I Their lives, by a curious contrast with the sperm-
I whale, are spent in slow-going, easy fashion. In spite
of their terrific surroundings of crashing ice-bergs,
ice-fields heaving under the tremendous pressure of
the storm wave, and bitter blighting winds laden with
death to any alien intruder into that stern domain,
the Right Whales are placid, quiet, peaceful ; with
an appearance of great content with their surroundings.
The Almighty has ordained that these vast denizens
of the frozen Northern Seas shall be at no pains to
secure an abundant supply of food, and by one of those
paradoxes that Nature seems to delight in, that food
L for the supply of the largest of created things is made
I up of the accumulated myriads of ocean's smallest
denizens, that is, of those actually visible. From the
crow's-nest of a whale-ship on a clear day the watcher
may see the ocean lined out in parti-coloured bands
of red and blue, strangely regular and extending to
the horizon's verge. A draw-bucket plunged into
one of the red bands a hundred feet in breadth will
bring up a motley collection of minute shell-fish, a
crawling, clinging mass of life that has its basis of
subsistence in the unseen fauna of the fecund sea.

These tiny Crustacea in their myriads await the
advent of the Right Whale, who ranging lengthwise
along the red bands, inhales his food without an effort
nntil the enormous cavity of his mouth is filled with
ontold thousands of tiny shell-hsh quite unconscious
of their transition. Then the wonderful apparatus


J



42 The Mysticetus^ or Right Whale

developed by this great cetacean comes into play.
He bears dependent from his upper jaw a series of
broad plates of gristly substance, the 'whalebone*
of commerce (though nothing could be less like bone).
These blades, like those of a scythe, depend by their
broad ends from the upper jaw, leaving their taper
extremities swinging free in the great scoop of the
lower jaw. Their outer edges, like the back of the
scythe-blade, are thickish, their inner edges are fringed,
hair-like ; and interlacing each other, they form together
a perfect natural sieve. Between their rows at the
bottom of the lower jaw lies an immense mass of fat
of nearly two tons weight in the full-grown subject,
the tongue. And, the mouth being full, this great
tongue slowly rises and forces out the water through
the sieve, until there remains only a heap of tiny
creatures out of their element and sliding gradually
down a pipe of one and a half inches in diameter, the
gullet of the Right Whale, which has led to so many
strange errors as to the swallowing capacity of whales
in general.

As the Right Whale, alone of all the sea-mammals,
feeds in this marvellous way, so he alone of all whales
has this strangely constricted gullet, a curious contrast
again with the sperm whale, who can swallow morsels
of truly heroic size, at least six feet cube in the adult.
One point more in this connexion ; it used to be sup-
posed that the Right Whale, having filled his mouth
with food, pumped the water out through his spiracles
or blow-holes, imtil it was discovered that the breathing
apparatus of all sea-mammals is entirely unconnected
with their mouths, and that it is an absolute impos-
sibility while they live for any water to gain access to
their breathing channels. The real process is as I have
described.



The KiUcr Whale 43

As with the sperm whales, so among the Right
Whales the school or family obtains, but in far smaller
numbers, and, indeed, it is not imcommon to see a
bull, two cows, and two calves comprising the whole
family. Moreover, there is none of that fierce com-
petition for the headship of the school so characteristic
of the great mammal of the tropical seas. Fights
between Right Whale bulls are unknown, at least to
man ; indeed, they seem far too ponderous and sluggish
in their movements to indulge in such violent exercise
as fighting. Placid, timorous, and slothful are their
lives, and even while being done to death by whale-
hunters they seem incapable of retaliation or even
escape, unless indeed some friendly floe is near, some
ice-field beneath which they may dive, and haply
through carelessness on the part of their aggressors,
drag the latter after them to a swift but horrible end
beneath that frozen covering. This sluggishness or
hdplessness is partly due to their shape and immense
hampering of fat, in many cases two feet in thickness
over the greater part of their bodies. But it may be
more reasonably referred to their food costing them
no effort to obtain it, and so abundant that they are
never found, except in extreme old age or sickness,
suffering from any lack of fatness.

A typical instance of this may be found in the ease
with which the fierce Orca gladiator ^ or killer whale,
attacks and overcomes them. He is rarely one-
hundredth of their vast bulk, but he has enterprise,
and teeth in both jaws. So he, with half-a-dozen
companions, will fall upon a huge Mysticetus, and in
a few minutes reduce him to a helpless island of flesh
with drooping lower jaw. Through that vast opening
of his mouth the pirates enter fearlessly and devour
the succulent tongue, disturbing for the first time a



44 The Mysticetus, or Right Whale



a
a

1



whole tribe of suckers [Remora) who have up till
then had free warren in the roof of the whale's mouth,
true parasites, without aught to strive for or a need
unsatisfied. Then the vast victim, his agile slayers J
gone, becomes the prey of ocean's tribes of scavengers,!
ever ready anywhere in that mighty so-called waste f
of water to attend to their duty of keeping ocean
sweet. Birds above and fish below labour furiously
at the task of ridding the sea of its incubus, and in a
very short time they succeed, the immense framework J
of bone slowly disintegrating and sinking into those 1
silent, unknown depths.

Nor is the Orca the only sea foe, as distinguished
from man, that the Mysticetus has to feax. The
swordfish (Xiphias), a huge species of mackerel, with
a short sturdy shaft of bone protruding from his upper
jaw, which is capable of penetrating six inches of solid
oak when the two to six-hundred-pound body behind
it gathers its full momentum, attacks the Mysticetus
with almost maniacal fury, although it cannot do an
adult much harm except by way of worry. For the
shortness of the sword (lance it ought really to be called
from its shape) does not admit of its penetrating beyond
the blubber of an adiilt Mysticetus, except in non-vital
parts. Still, the swordfish is a valuable ally to the
killer, with whom he often joins forces, while to the
young calves he is destruction itself. It is a sight not
easily to be forgotten : the long lithe body of the
swordfish gliding through the sea with incredible
swiftness, like a streak of light of deeper blue than
the surrounding sea, and, meeting the body of a three-
months calf, enter it as if it were thin air. A dexterous
twist of the broad tail and the weapon is withdrawn.
A gush of blood stains the water brown, and amid the
murky surroundings the repeated stabs of the lance,



J



A Huge Victim



45



the writhings of the victim, and the frantic tearing of
masses of flesh from its body, are hidden, or only
revealed by a few hurried glimpses.

Yet another enemy has the unfortunate Right
Whale ; really unfortunate, since it does not prey
upon its fellow-citizens, except in the same sense in
which we prey upon the animalcule in our drinking-
water — the 'thresher' shark {Alopecias vulpes). Here
I am aware that I am upon higlUy controversial ground,
since very eminent professors of natural history deny
that the thresher does attack the whale. They say,
with what warrant I fail to understand at all, that
what the sailor has mistaken for the attack of the
thresher on the whale has been the antics or gambols
of the hump-backed whale, which has long arms
(fifteen feet or so), and is fond of waving them in the
air and bringing them down upon the water with a loud
smack. They are entirely wrong. The hump-backed
whale I have watched very many times at his play,
and though he does wave his arms he does not smack
the water with them but with his tail. Also, I have
seen the thresher shark attacking the whale at dose
quarters, so close indeed that every movement of the
shark and his victim was plainly visible, and I can
hardly imagine any one mistaking the gambols of the
whale for this curious attack. The shark appears to
balance himself upon his head in the water, with the
whole of his enormous flail-like flukes in the air at
the moment of striking ; then, when the blow has been
deUvered there is a quick descent and return, Uke
the lashing of a gigantic whip, while the blows are
audible for two miles on a calm day. So heavy are
they that strips of blubber are cut by them from the
back of the hapless whale four to six inches wide, and
I two to five feet in length. Here, again, it is the worry


46 The Mysticetus^ or Right Whale

that kills, not the wounds, which are quite superficial
and probably cause little actual pain. In fact, the
death of the whale is seldom compassed by thresher
or swordfish alone, but nearly always in active asso-
ciation with a group of killers.

Seeing, then, how he is begirt with enemies, and
how for his valuable spoil men have always hunted
him into the farthest navigable recesses of his habitat,
it appears almost miraculous how he has survived until
the present day. Yes, and it is even more marvellous
when one remembers that, as compared with all the
other species of whales, his range is exceedingly limited.
The Arctic seas when freest from ice form but a very
small portion of the watery surface of the globe. Small,
that is, comparatively ; yet large enough to admit
of these gentle monsters eluding their many enemies
sufficiently to perpetuate the race, even through the
fierce war made upon them all through the last two
centuries, when ships from all the Northern European
nations frequented the Arctic seas in search of them.
Here, probably, came in the saving power of that
mysterious winter disappearance. For at least six
months of each year the Mysiicetae enjoyed a close
season that man, at any rate, was unable to break into,
and it is highly probable that their other enemies also
departed south. Be that as it may, we are confronted
with the remarkable fact that, incapable of effective
flight or of self-defence, eagerly sought after by man
and agile sea enemies, confined to one little comer of
the earth periodically frozen solid, the vast Right
Whale still exists, and as recently as the year 1900
was so numerous that ships in the Pacific actually
took but the baleen of the whales they caught and let
the blubber go, since they had so many fish they could
not possibly flench them.



The Whale's Early Days 47

Like the sperm whale, the Right Whale is an in-
different parent, and the young one learns as soon after
birth as possible to attend to its own requirements.
It grows with great rapidity, absorbing a prodigious
quantity of milk from the mountainous breasts of its
mother, milk as thick as the richest cream and yellowish
in colour. At this period of its life the young whale
is slender and almost graceful in shape, agile and full
of play as all young creatures are ; but it soon settles
down into the ponderous stately movements of the
elder whales, and becomes like them a snug abiding-
place for hosts of external parasites, such as barnacles,
limpets, and whale-lice — creatures somewhat like the
garden wood-louse, but larger, and with tenacious
barbed claws, whereby to hold on to the slippery body
of their huge host. One of the greatest pleasures in
life for them is to chafe their bodies — irritated, one
would think, unbearably — against the rugged sides of
some mass of ice. Occasionally they may be seen
doing this beneath an icefloe ; then, when the need
comes upon them for breathing, they calmly rise and
break a hole with the crown of their heads where the
double openings of the spiracles or blowholes are
situated. They remain under water for as long as an
hour and a half, and must remain above for a corre-
sponding time, no matter how great their peril — from
man, for instance. A certain number of breathings
is an imperative necessity to all whales, and no irre-
gularity or lessening of their number can be endured,
no^matter what the circmnstances may be, while life
lasts.

In these days the life of a Right Whale is fairly
placid and uneventful. True, there are a few, but a
very few, ships that still enter the icy seas each year
and catch some Right Whales ; but compared with a



48 The Mysticetus, or Right Whale

century and a half ago, when hundreds of vessels
eagerly searched every nook of those otherwise lonely
northern seas, and populous wooden towns sprang up
where the blubber of the whale was boiled down, for
transshipment by vessels chartered for the purpose,
the Arctic regions are now deserted. Soon, very soon,
they will revert to their primitive condition before
whaling became an industry at all, and the great
Greenland Whale will peacefully roam his quiet
waters unmolested by any save his natural enemies.

Closely akin to the Right Whale of Greenland is
the Southern Right Whale, or Balaena australis.
There are a few unimportant differences as regards
outline, the Southern Whale being somewhat slenderer,
slightly more 'clipper built,' as sailors say. Structur-
ally the two are almost identical, but as regards habitat
exceedingly different. Unlike his northern congener,
the Southern Right Whale not only does not stick
closely to the vicinity of the ice, and to all appearance
hide beneath it all the winter, but he really seems to
prefer the waters outside of the Antarctic Circle, and
is found in large numbers as far north as the Cape of
Good Hope. His best-loved region would appear to
be, roughly, the vast stretch of ocean between 30° and
65° S. He is especially fond of the vicinity of land,
and half a century ago, in addition to a goodly fleet
of vessels, mostly French, cruising in those regions in
search of him, there were many shore whaling stations,
established at some point where there was good har-
bourage and facility for dealing with the gigantic
prizes. The crews of these stations were usually a
motley, hard-bitten crowd, co-partners, fierce, and
careless of risk to lite or limb. They chased the whale
from shore in their boats, and having killed him had
a herculean task to tow him back, Tlie



I



Kuiea mm naa ^
e work both of H



lilor 49



terrific, and it

ite idleness, when

I acked, or for some

I there was a savage

i to those rough repre-

■l apparently it pleased

.jjpalling dangers, terrible

...irds.

i; connected with the haunts
■ iiale is noteworthy, as showing
alist or observer the sailor is.
:c expedition of the eighteenth
■^-keepers, with the exception of
who was a whale-fisher, were enthu-
j)orts of the enormous number of valu-
\ight and Sperm Whales are repeatedly
i those tormented seas during the southern
Xow the fact is, as one or two whaling
s have discovered to their cost, that the
.,ale is never found south of the Antarctic
ud the Right Whale hardly ever. These two
s\r. . .:■->, practically the only ones commercially valuable
-. ': .^h to warrant the outfitting of ships for an ocean
vi.yage in order to catch them, prefer to avoid those
stern regions, and the whales seen and repeatedly
logged by the crews of the ' Erebus ' and ' Terror ' were
of a totally different and almost valueless species, such
as no ships are sent long voyages after. It would seem
as if life in those tremendous regions adjacent to the
eternal barrier of Antarctic ice, and the great southern
continent, was altogether too strenuous for a leisurely
monster like a Right Whale, even though the southern
Mysticetus is so much smarter both in appearance and
agility than his great northern congener. There, where
the awful sea of the south, unhindered in its world-



50 The Mysticetus, or Right Whale



engirdling sweep, makes flie ice-islands toss and
like chips in a mill-race — ^where, even in summer,
the weather is more severe than in onr worst winters,
and gale follows gale with a monotony of fiiiy that is
amasing — ^there is no place for either men or animals
except those fully equipped for, and indifferent to, the
hardest weather on our planet.

Little more remains to be said of the MysUcetug.
In greater measure than his brother of the north, the
Southern Right Whale is unmolested; indeed, it is
doubtful whether a dozen individuals are taken in the
course of a year, and those more by accident than
design. Consequently their numbers are increasnig
rapidly, and as their favourite haunts are becoming less
and less disturbed by the passage of ships they are
gradually, after two hundred years of terror, reverting
to their primitive condition of peaceful seclusion from
all foes except the three natural ones already mentioned,
so that in a few years it will be possible to sail, if
yachtsmen are venturous enough, into great silent
spaces of sea embracing many thousands of square
miles that are never furrowed by any ship's keel, where
the great mammals of the deep sea roam in immenfie
herds fearlessly, because all unused to molestation, and
live their ordered, happy lives out to their full extent
without any interference from man whatever.



CHAPTER IV
THE HUMPBACK WHALE

BEAUTIFUL beyond the power of description, the
islands of the Tonga group lay set in a sapphire
sea under an azure sky flooded with golden sun-
light ; a little breeze blew, just sufficient to raise tiny
wavelets fringed with snowy foam and sparkling as if
set with millions of diamonds. Over the fringing coral
barriers they curdled with a drowsy himi as of infinite
content, as if they knew they were perfectly beautiful
and perfectly fulfilling their appointed way. Only where
the prevailing swell came thundering shoreward, fret-
ting at finding its three-thousand-mile course hindered,
was there any sign of the stress of elemental forces.
There, with every recurring billow as it reached the coral
barrier, rose a long thundering roll of breakers twenty
feet high, dazzling white in striking contrast to their
bases of deepest blue, and looking as if they would
overwhelm the whole group of islands. Higher and
higher they rose until, drooping, dejected, they owned
their limitations and recoiled hissing, to make way for
the next arrival.

Towards this fierce barrier there hurried nervously
a mother Humpback Whale. She was of moderate
size, about forty-five feet long by thirty in girth, with
flattened head and mouth fringed with scanty whale-
bone. On her back she bore a dorsal erection like a
dumpy fin, whence the trivial name * Humpback.'

51



52 The Humpback Whale

But her chief visible peculiarity differentiating her from
sperm and right whales, was the length of her arms.
Unlike the almost rudimentary pectoral appendages of
the cachalot and Mysticetus, her arms were nearly one-
third of her length, justifjdng the Greek title bestowed
upon her kind of ^ great wings ' (megaptera), A dose
observer, had any such been at hand, would have noted
that, as she swam straight for the reefs, she kept one of
these long arms tightly pressed to her side, as if holding
something of value. Stay, there were dose observers,
hungry denizens of the deep sea following her and
watching with ravenous eyes. They knew the nature
and value of her treasure, and, given but the slightest
opportunity, would have despoiled her of it. But she
well knew both of their unwdcome presence and their
sinister designs, and sought a haven of safety where
they dared not come.

Close to her side she hugged her newly bom son, a
slender dolphin-like creature about nine feet in length,
full of vigour and impatience of restraint, who struggled
fiercely to get free. Since his birth she had not known
a peaceful moment, for the Creator had endowed her
with so large a proportion of maternal love that the
mere feeling of ought happening to her offspring was
agony almost unbearable to her, while at the same
time instinct warned her that the surrounding sea
simply swarmed with hidden enemies, ready at any
moment to deprive her of the joy of her life could they
but find her momentarily unwatchful. Therefore had
she forgotten her lord and leader, her fellow mother^,
hersdf , all her being was centred upon the young one
by her side and how to protect it from death.

Closdy escorted by at least half-a-dozen inunense
sharks, she reached the Barrier Reef, sounded, and
swam along its base until she came to an opening wide



I



Delights of Motherhood 53

enough to admit her. She dashed through and wound
her way among the mazy interstices of the scattered
reefs inside in the smooth placid lagoon until she
reached a sort of natural little dock, where, with just
sufficient water to float them, she and her baby might lie
in perfect peace and security beyond the reach of those
blood-thirsty creatures who had never left her since her
little one came. Sweet, passing sweet it was to lie and
bask in the full sun-glare, to feel the joyous gambolling
of the youngling all around her, varied by an occa-
sional tugging at her bounteous breast, to exhale lazy
spoutings and watch the pretty tuft of vapour from
the spiracle of her offspring, to lie, in short, so perfectly
at peace as to forget that ever a danger existed.

One drawback there was which she hardly felt — the
lack of food. To feed it was necessary for her to go
into deeper waters and that she dared not do yet.
But this want, in spite of her enormous bulk, troubled
her scarcely at all, she was quite content to starve
awhile for the sake of her young one, who she knew
would gain so rapidly in vigour every day spent in that
calm retreat as to be able, before her supply of milk ran
short through lack of nourishment, to accompany her
Jar enough to find food in safety, to cruise among the
islands and between the reefs where in deep water she
could obtain the necessaries of life. All that, however,
was matter that did not immediately concern her.
For the time she was supremely happyinthe conscious-
ness of safety for her young one, in the knowledge that
she was where none of her enemies could ever come.

Poor thing, the limitations of her instinctive appre-
hension of danger did not, could not warn her against
man, the universal destroyer, man, whose skilful hand,
active brain, and unscrupiUous ferocity when directed
against the lower animals, makes him their most terrible



k



n



54 The HumplMurk Whaie

foe. So it came aboat that oo flie secaond day, jist as
the pearly dawn was brealdi^ and a faint binsh was
tingiiig the sommits of the somfafe greea hills, she lay
as usual peacefully giving suck to her yoim^ing, while
the ood dimjdes of the water softly lavtd the happy
pair. Suddenly she became oonsdoos of the dose
piaximiiy of danger, stiffened all her nnsdes while her
tail vibrated slovdy and her kmg arms reached out in
agitated fashion to draw the young one into her side
for shelter. Too late ; a guttering haipooo flew over
her back, aimed at her, but mhmig its maik and
transfixing the calf, which instantly died.

By some strange process of dedoctton, quick as
thought, she knew the full extent of the calamity ¥7hich
had befallen her, and raising her mighty tail on high
made sea and shore resound with the thunder of her
blows. So sudden was her tranation from utter peace
to the intensest fury of revenge, that the crew cl the
boat which had stolen up behind her through the narrow
reef channd had no time to retreat. Bewildered by the
rapidity and vUAence of the blows, and blinded by the
spray, they leapt overboard and climbed with torn
hands and feet up the jagged surfeu^e of the reef, only
about two feet under water. There they were safe
from the whale, but in imminent danger should the sea
rise of being dashed to fragments upon those myriad
needlepoints of coraL Fearfully they behdd their
infuriated victim frantically da5;hing their devoted boat
into minute fragments, pausing momentarily at short
intervals as if to listen for their whereabouts, if haply
she might by any means compass their destruction also.

Finally, after an exhibition of power and ferocity
amazing to witness in one habitually so gentle, one also
who would suffer her last drop of blood to be drained
rather than retaliate whSLt her calf was ahve, in case



Retribution



55



tbeuioald accidentally do it any injury, she slowly
milled roimd and headed seaward, stopping every few
yards as if most reluctant to quit the scene of her loss,
and manifesting in every movement the acutest grief
at her great bereavement. At last, with accelerated
speed, she left the reef and made for the open sea, where
^e speedily rejoined the school she had left and com-
municated to them the fact of her great sorrow and its
attendant circumstances, I cannot actually say that
she received their condolences, but I am absolutely
certain that all took solemn warning by her calamity,
and as the best preventive against any similar accident
to themselves all the prospective mothers determined
to avoid the Tonga group as a place of refuge. But
as it was a splendid feeding ground, they remained in
its immediate vicinity, sometimes cruising among the
reefs and between the islands for the shoals of small fish
and molluscs abundant there.

One day the youngest bull of the party was suddenly
attacked in the same mysterious manner as the hapless
mother had been. But it was where the steep shores of
the main island shelved away abruptly into a depth of
a thousand fathoms, and that young bull, as soon as he
felt the goad, inverted his body and plunged for the
depths at a most terrific pace. The men in the boat
above, realising too late that their victim was of the
wrong sex and, moreover, was in the wrong place for
them, just held themselves clear of the hissing line,
which in two minutes had run out the whole length of
its three hundred fathoms and disappeared with a snap
like a stockman's whip.

The youngster, galled unbearably, and unable to
L tell what had happened to him, went at top speed as
■ deep as a whale may, that is, to about five hundred
■^thorns, then essayed to rise to the surface once more.


%



56 The Humpback Whale

But spent with his tremendous downward rush, and
held down by the great weight of the rope he was
dragging against the water, his struggles becajme fainter
and feebler, until at last, with a sudden collapse of his
great heart, his struggles ceased, and turning over
he slowly sank, akeady the prey of innumerable sea-
scavengers, attracted to the spot by their infallible
instinct warning them of the presence of their par-
ticular form of food. So died this promising young
bull needlessly, since he could not by any possibiUty
have been caught in those deep waters, and should
never have been attacked.

But perhaps it is wrong of me to give these two sad
misfortunes forward first, as if they were typical of the
daily hfe of the Humpback. Nothing could well be
more untrue than such a suggestion. There be few
creatures in earth, air, or sea, that lead a happier life,
or enjoy it with a greater zest than the Humpback.
In the pleasant waters where they roam, that is to say,
practically all round the world between 20® N. and
40® S., wherever there is sea to swim in there is almost
always abundant food. They are not so restricted either
in their dietary as their cousins, the right whales. Quite
sizeable fish, and cuttles of all kinds up to eight or ten
poimds in weight, form their staple support. They are
fond, too, of showing their joy in life, like the porpoise.
They indulge in titanic gambols which fill the spectator
with amazement, as he watches them roll and leap and
prance about the sea-surface as if they only weighed
as many ounces as they do tons. There are few more
interesting and pretty sights than to watch a family
of Humpbacks, bull, cows, and calves, all engaged in
their play, the great leader vying with his youngest
consort or her tiny calf in his efforts to show by hia
sportiveness how very happy he is.



The Drawbacks of Ease 57

True, their enemies, which are practically the same
as those of the right whale, do occasionally overtake
and destroy them ; but unlike their gigantic cousins,
they have great speed and agility, and consequently
are far better able to defend themselves, to do so, in
fact, most successfully in numbers of cases. Like the
right whales, too, like all whales, in fact, they are
grievously afflicted by many parasites, and it has even
been suggested that their almost frantic gambols are
indulged in in the hope of ridding their skins of these
irritating hangers-on. But that I do not believe. When
the Himipback finds his load of barnacles, limpets,
and slimy sea-grass unbearable, he hies him to the
nearest rocky bottom of coral reef, and there drags his
vast body dowly to and fro over the spiky surface,
chafing ofi a great number of his unwelcome guests and
no doubt experiencing many a delicious thrill from that
superlative scratching while doing so.

In one particular, however, he is handicapped in
gettmg rid of his parasites. His belly blubber is
divided into longitudinal folds, or rugae, lying closely
and tightly together, and with a depth in these grooves
of over a couple of inches. Limpets breed in these snug
places, and there, secure from dislodgment, since the
folds cling so tightly together that the hand can hardly
be forced between them, they reach a size unknown
elsewhere. I have repeatedly seen limpets as large as
a horse's hoof in the rugosities of a Humpback's belly.
But these, after all, are minor evils, not for one moment
to be weighed against the many joys of the Humpback's
life. Amiable, fondest of parents, content to play
about the beautiful shores of the most beautiful islands
in the world, and immune from the attack of man
everywhere, except among the shallow reefs, when
the mothers seek them for protection. EvCT that



58 The Humpback Whale

danger is now almost non-existent, for reasons given
before.

So that the joyous Humpback is practically free
to enjoy his life, to eat and love and play in the vastest
playground given by God. Even those ills to which he
is inevitably subject trouble him not at all beforehand ;
like the rest of the himibler creation, although he knows
fear, he knows not anticipation. For him the immedi-
ate present is his all, whether it be of pain or pleasure ;
and it is pleasant to remember that his pleasures out-
number his pains by at least a thousand to one. In
concluding this brief sketch of the Himipback's life,
I would explain that where any apparently essential
details are omitted, it may be understood that they
are substantially the same for the Humpback as for the
right whale, previously described ; the important
differences of habit have, I think, all been fully dealt
with.



CHAPTER V
THE RORQUALS

THIS enormous class of whales, embracing many
varieties, is often held by whalemen to include all
whales that are unfit for merchant's purposes by
reason of their scantiness of blubber or overcoating of
fat, the absence of marketable baleen or whalebone,
and lastly their exceeding speed and agility, rendering
them practically uncatchable. This distinction has the
merit of being entirely unscientific, yet near enough to
the truth to be easily understanded of the people to
whom the cumbrously minute, yet entirely necessary,
definitions of science are so repugnant.

The study of whales, or cetology, is a most fas-
cinating one, as indeed, I think, is all study dealing
with the fauna of the deep sea, but in the very nature
of the things is so difficult to attain to any degree of
accuracy in, that it is simply pedantic, in writing on it
for popular reading, to speak in terms of an exact
knowledge concerning a creature of whom we can
only see passing glimpses during life, and who when
dead becomes corrupt so quickly, and to so great an
extent, that he is an intolerable and pestilential
nuisance at once.

In the three great classes of which I have already
spoken, there is some approach on the part of those
who have hunted them, like myself, to actual know-
ledge of their mode of life, their habits and customs ;

59



6o The Rorquals

but in the Rorquals this advantage disappears almost
entirely. For, except in certain places and under
certain conditions, such as obtained on the coasts of
Newfoundland, Labrador, and Norway, the Rorqual
is not, cannot be, hunted successfully. And so there
are proportionately less opportunities for observing
these clippers of the whale tribe, which are to be found
in some of their varieties in every sea beneath the sky.
Nevertheless, owing to the fact that instinct has taught
the Rorqual that he has nothing to fear from ships,
it is possible occasionally for a patient observer on
board a sailing ship to have a fairly long opportunity
of noting the behaviour of Rorquals.

One thing is exceedingly noticeable about them,
their solitary proclivities. During my wanderings
over all the seas, I have never seen more than two
Rorquals together, and that on only three occasions.
Nearly always it is one that comes from out of the
great void, and, as if feeling his loneliness, makes friends
with the becalmed ship and remains constantly atten-
dant upon her, until an upspringing breeze hurries her
away. I well remember the awe and fascination that
one of these monsters bred in me during my first East
Indian voyage. It was in the Indian Ocean, near the
Equator, and on one lovely but moonless night I was
lolling over the rail during a stark calm, gazing into
the inscrutable depths below, where occasional flashes
of green light made the surrounding darkness more
impressive. Dimly I wondered what those lights were,
and why they shone, when presently I became aware
of a great glare far down, which was slowly brightening
as it neared the surface. As it rose higher and higher
I saw that the centre of this brilliancy was a long black
oval growing larger and larger. And presently,
paralysing me with fright, the rising mass broke the



A Mighty Visitor



6l



surface, there was a sound like a million sighs rolled
into one, and a column of vapour rose in ghostly fashion
against the deep violet of the sky. Then, though my
heart still thumped violently, I recognised a whale

I and was somewhat comforted.

' Still I had my doubts of his intentions ; he was far
too near, about four feet from our side, to be pleasant
company. What if he should suddenly object to our
presence there and assault us furiously ? And I
thought, with the cold fear curdling my young blood,
of the awful depths beneath us, separated from us
only by two or three inches of soft pine plank, I did
not know then how sociable and good-natured is the
'Finback,' one of the best known of the great Rorqual
family, one also who, like the sperm whale, but with
even a greater range, may be found in nearly all the
navigable seas of the world. For some few minutes
after rising he lay leisurely by the ship's side appar-
ently considering her appearance and occasionally
spouting softly. Then he slowly settled down, and
presently the whole ship vibrated as if grating over
rocks, but with far less violence. And peering over
one side from the main yard-arm I saw the halo round
our visitor glowing beneath our keel, and reaUsed that
he was rubbing himself against us, as cattle rub against
a fence. The calm lasted with brief intervals of light
airs from all quarters for four days, during the whole
of which our visitor never left us. Fasting too, as far
as we could see, although it is hardly safe to say that
nothing entered that capacious throat of his, because
we could not see it. But we had splendid opportunity
for observing his every movement, the exercise of all
his powers, as closely as if he had been cased in an
aquarium and we just standing peering through the
glass.


62 The Rorquals

Many times since I have had opportunities of
watching, not only the Finback, but other Rorquals
in all parts of the world from this well-known habit
of theirs of consorting with becalmed vessels, but never
better than on that early and well-remembered occa-
sion. Yet, strange to say, I have never seen a Rorqual
calf, nor have I ever met a whaleman who has. Whether
some deep maternal instinct warns the Rorqual cow
that at such a time she cannot exercise her normal
powers of flight in case of aggression, or what it is, I
do not know. But I believe that she does have an
instinctive desire to hide herself during the time of
nursing, and succeeds in so doing.

Fortunately for the Rorquals they are far less
valuable commercially than any other whale. Their
blubber is very thin, their baleen very scanty, and as
I have before noted, their strength and agility are such
that, except under such conditions as obtain in the
fishery of the places I have mentioned, it is almost
impossible to kill and secure them. I couple the two
terms because the Rorquals almost invariably sink as
soon as dead, and in deep water such a habit is fatal
to any chance of securing them. A sinking whale
cannot be stopped from doing so by any means known
or available to whale-fishers. Not only have they
these commercial drawbacks, but living advantages,
for the resultant oil is exceedingly poor in quahty and
low in price.

Yet the thrifty, hard-bitten Norwegians, able to
wrench a living from their iron-bound shores where
men of lesser endurance, strength, and perseverance
must inevitably starve, have devised a way of capturing
and making commercial use of the Rorqual. It is
brutal and utterly unsportsmanlike, but one cannot
consider the claims of sport where hungry mouths are



Whaling for Bread



63



damouring for bread. Briefly, small steamers, like
the ' jackal ' tug-boats of the Thames, of full power
and good sea-endurance, are fitted out. In the bows
they carry a cannon designed to fire a massive harpoon
instead of a shot or shell. To the harpoon is attached
a stout rope, far stouter than ordinary whale-line,
which is one and a half inches in girth. A powerful
steam windlass is fitted in the bows also. When the
signal comes from the watchers on the hills that whales
are near, the steamer slips her moorings, where she has
been lying with banked fires, and puts out to sea,
guided by certain flag directions from the headland
where the look-out is stationed. Presently coming
up with the whale, who is quietly gulping down a
multitude of cod and other succulent dainties of a
fishy nature, the gun is fired, the great harpoon buries
I itself in the quivering body of the monster, sometimes
' indeed with a small bomb in its head. He plunges
seaward, dragging the steamer after him and severely
testing the value of harpoon and line. But, as a rule,
with scarcely any exception, once the harpoon has
found its mark the fate of that Rorqual is sealed. The
wound is so deep, the strain is so great, that in a short
time he succumbs and sinks dead.

The water is not very deep, so, although he must
needs be allowed to sink while he is sinking, he is no
sooner at the bottom than the windlass is started and
the great body begins to rise again. As soon as it is
at the surface, measures are taken to secure it by the
head for towing, and off goes the steamer harbourwards,
dragging her giant quarry. Arriving at her station,
the huge carcase is handed over to eager butchers and
boilers, who not only strip off the blubber, rip out the
^H scanty baleen, and tear every vestige of fat from within
^K to swell the tale of oil barrels, but even chop up the



1

I



1



64 The Rorquals

bones and stack them after boiling for transportation
as manure. The living thus gained is precarious and
poor, subject to frightful perils and no recognition,
but it is not quite so bad as the similar industry carried
on across the Atlantic, by the tremendously handi-
capped citizens of Newfoundland and Labrador.
However, enough of this fishery, which I have only
briefly alluded to, to show the one way in which the
Rorqual is molested by man.

One species of Rorqual {Balaenoptera sibbaldii sul-
phureous) has the distinction of being the longest of all
species of whale. The whalemen call it the 'Sulphur
Bottom,' all the underpart of the body being of a bright
yellow. It is a harmless, amiable monster, following
the usual custom among giants, notable as being always
more docile than lesser folk. But its terrific capa-
bilities in the way of speed cause it to be left severely
alone by whale fishers, and consequently it is fairly
plentiful and attains its extraordinary length of
sometimes one hundred and fifty feet. It has another
peculiarity differentiating it from all other whales — the
height of its spout. Optical illusion and the angle of
vision may possibly vitiate my statement, but I feel
sure I have seen a Sulphur Bottom spout as high as
our main yard, forty feet. These are the free lances
of the sea. None molest them ; even from the spiteful
attack of the grampus or Orca they are free — ^no Orca
would dare attempt an attack upon so swift an animal.

But the chief characteristic of these great sea-
mammals (the Rorquals generally) is their omnivorous-
ness with regard to fish. As long as they confine their
attentions to such wonderful deep-water nurseries of
edible fish for man as the Newfoundland Banks, the
Agulhas Banks (off the Cape of Good Hope) and the
Rockall Bank, fishermen only feel slightly aggrieved.



The AU^Dcvouring Rorqual 65

They know that the harvest of the sea is so abundant,
so entirely fitted for all the varied needs of its popu-
lation, that the surplus which man may dip into
without any fear of diminishing the supply by one
scale is always there, that no danger of exhaustion is
ever likely to arise at sea, whatever may be the case
ashore. Yet their complacency receives a severe shock
when Rorquals are found haunting the Channel of Old
England, and the Irish and North Seas during the
herring and mackerel seasons, relays of fish-devouring
giants whose appetite is insatiable, whose digestion is
that of a flour mill. Then do the fishermen wail. Is
it to be wondered at ?

Patrolling with perfect ease those prolific coasts, the
Rorqual calmly swims through thousands of pounds'
worth of nets, shovelling down into his vast maw boat-
loads of herrings or mackerel at each gulp. The
gossamer of the nets he does not heed, they do not
even annoy him, so slight and trivial are they. So, his
appetite growing by what it feeds upon, this mighty
denizen of the deep sea comfortably wallows in the
shallows near our shores, feeding, ever feeding, upon
the coxmtless myriads of fish which should have been
awaiting the fishermen, but are, by reason of this awful
visitation among them, driven into deeper waters and
smaller companies to avoid him. Meanwhile he, the
subject of our interest, enjoys himself, all unknowing
and unheeding of the maledictions of the fishermen
and the panic of the fish, devouring continually, always
hungry and always eating, until change of season sends
the herring or mackerel to sea again, and he must needs
follow or pursue some new line of food-procuring ; they
axe all well known to this deep-sea denizen.

It would be a comparatively easy task, but I feel
one that would not be received with any enthusiasm.



66 The Rorquals

to prolong this section almost indefinitely, for really
there are so many kinds of whales, each with well-
defined peculiarities, and methods of living that are
interesting to note, that a very big book might be
written about them alone.

But I have to remember that there are very many
other deep-sea people claiming notice, and consequently
must be as brief as I can in dealing with those I have
left to the tail of this Rorqual section. The smaller
Rorquals, such as the Bottle Nose (how is it, I wonder,
that so many landsmen seem to have a nodding ac-
quaintance with the Bottle Nose Whale ? Perhaps
because captains generally, upon a whale being sighted,
and a passenger asking its name, usually reply non-
chalantly, *0h, that's a Bottle Nose*), the curious
Beluga or white whale which furnishes our ^porpoise *
hide boots and boot-laces, the ca-aing whale, the
porpoises, the dolphins (Ddphinidae), each and every
one of these has a family history of its own, very
interesting to read ; but one may have too much of
cetology, if so xmdignified a chat as mine about them
can be dignified by so stately a title. Therefore I
will only make a few references to some of the smaller
whales by way of amends to them for devoting so much
time to their gigantic relatives, before passing on to
another great division of the population of the sea.

Who that has ever been a sea passage, however
short, and kept his eyes open to his surroundings, has
not seen a Dolphin, or more Ukely many of these
interesting little whales, which in some branch of their
enormous family have the widest sea range of any of
the cetacea ? And not only sea-range, but in spite
of the fact that they are true denizens of salt water,
are continually found far inland pre3dng upon the finny
population of rivers, and in a few cases presenting us



The ' Happy ' Whales 67

with the only vegetarian examples that we nave among
the sea-folk except some turtles and that strange
monster the sea-cow. But few people outside the ranks
of scientiiic naturalists have any idea of the great
number of varieties there are among the Dolphin. It is
probable that in their zeal for minute classifications,
naturalists have named many as distinct species which
were really the same but having shght variations in
foriD, colour, or even structure, due merely to Nature's
abhorrence to turn out two exact copies of the same
creature.

When due allowance is made for this, however, it
remains certain that there are at least forty different
species of Dolphin, subdivided from nineteen genera,
ranging from the Orca, or grampus, of twenty feet long
down to the little porpoises of the Eastern seas, with
a maximum length of four feet, and rejoicing in a
scientific designation of extraordinary proportions.
Most of them, however, are known to seafarers by the
generic name of Porpoises, with the certain exceptions
of the killers, the white whales [Beluga), narwhals, and
Black Fish, For the seafarer has a curious rooted
exception to calling what he considers a Porpoise a
Dolphin, many generations of use having fastened
the latter name upon tlie beautiful Corypkcena, of
whom much by-and-by.

These diminutive whales are decidedly of intense
interest to naturalists, as it is possible to keep them
in captivity and study their habits. Moreover, in a
slow-going ship one may spend majiy a pleasant hour
watching them as they gambol about the bows keeping
her strict company. Their motions are probably more
graceful than that of any living thing, while their
activity is astounding. No other creature would seem
to have so much superabundant vitality to throw o£[


68 The Rorquals

or to be so filled to overflowing with the sheer ddi^^t
of living. Rest seems impossible to them, and there-
fore, while a swift steamer of say fomteen to sixteen
knots will soon lose their company, a vessel going only
four or five will not keep it long, the one because it
is impossible for them to continue playing their pranks
around and about her at that speed for more than a
few minutes, the other because she does not permit
them to get as much exercise as they need. A speed
of six to ten knots suits them very well, and I know
of few prettier sights than, when going at that speed
on a clear moonless night, is afforded by a troop of
these agile cetacea gambolling under the bows in mazy
whirls of glowing green light, or spreading out fan-wise
in broad bands of lambent flame as they rush towards
the horizon and in a minute or two converge upon
the ship again like a series of blazing torpedoes bent
upon her destruction.

They seem, more perhaps than any other of the
sea-folk, to have a wonderful prescience as to the
weather. This peculiarity is noticed in Shakespeare
(Pericles, Act ii., Scene i).

yd Fisherman : * Nay, master, said I not as much«
when I saw the Porpus how he bounced and tumbled ?
They say they are half-fish, half-flesh ; a plague on
them ! they ne'er come but I look to be washed.'

All seamen realise that the abnormal activity of a
creature always extraordinarily active presages a storm ;
indeed, it would be impossible to pass the matter
without notice. To see a school of Porpoises some
thousands strong rushing at amazing speed across
the foaming sea with a roar like that of billows breaking
upon a reef during a landward gale, and to notice that,
even in that mad and apparently objectless race, in-
dividuals are here and there hurling their quivering



Amenities of Porpoise Life 6g

t twenty feet into the air, as if it were impossible
em to be violent enough in their exercise, is to
10 matter how dull one may be, that something
out of the common must be going to happen. The
theory of some great enemy being in pursuit is un-
tenable, for these stupendous stampedes are always
succeeded after a few minutes by a like period of steady
easy-going, except that here and there some excited
member of the family will be seen indulging in a solitary
leap or so. Then there will be another race, and so on.

Life is pleasant for the Dolphin in all his varieties.
The amazing fecundity of the sea supplies abundant
food — fish of many sorts and the smaller cuttle-fish
being obtainable in vast numbers wherever the Dolphin
frequent, from Antarctica to Jan Mayen. Enemies
they have, of course ; as we descend the scale of size
we find the struggle of life grows fiercer, but they axe
far better off than the Mysticetae. For their vicious
relative the grampus must put on top speed to catch
them, as must also the sword-fish, except in the case of
cow porpoises with young. Like the humpbacks and
Rorquals generally, they are devoted parents, taking
the utmost care of their young, and defending them at
cost of their own lives. The young are very docile —
many times it has been only by the closest observation
that I have detected the tiny calf, looking not much
bigger than a large trout, apparently glued on to the
side of its mother, so closely did it follow her every
movement, however rapid and erratic.

One habit obtains among the smaller Dolphins
which is not practised by any other of the cetacea. It
is the cannibalistic one of immediately tearing in pieces
and devouring any one of their number which happens
to get wounded. Many a time have I seen one slip off
the harpoon, with a great rent in his side from which


mmmmmm



yo The Rorquals

the blood was spirting in jets. Immediately the whole
school would close in upon him, rending him with their
keenly anned jaws untQ in a few moments there was
no trace of him to be seen ; the disrobed skeleton had
simk, to be finally polished by the minute scavengers
of the sea ere its deposit on the silent m}^terious floor
of the ocean.

They are of Uttle value commercially, owing to the
small amount of blubber they carry, although there is
a legend among whalemen of the oil from the Porpoise's
jaw being worth a guinea an ounce for watchmakers'
use. But I do not know how far this is justified — I
should say it was just a yam. They used to be valued
as food, but now I do not think anybody but sailors
would eat them, and sailors only in the absence of
anything more palatable. Their flesh is like very dark,
fine-grained beef with a strong flavour of fish.

The strangest member of the Dolphin family is
undoubtedly the Narwhal, that curious cetacean which
has one or two teeth so abnormally developed that they
have been utilised for bedposts ; most people have seen
pictures of this bizarre-looking whale, with the long
twisted yellow horn of ivory sticking straight out from
his nose. There is very good reason to suppose that
the idea of the unicorn as shown in our royal arms may
have been taken from this extraordinary Dolphin ;
much more reasonable one would think tiian that it
should have been taken from the ungainly rhinoceros.
It is restricted in its habitat to the Arctic regions, and
is supposed by a great many of the natives to be the
male of the Beluga, or white whale, a supposition which
is worthy of some credit, owing to the similarity of
structure, other than the horn, between them. Only
the Beluga does not confine itself to feeding in the sea,
but on the Alaskan coast pursues the salmon far up



The Confiding 'Black Fish' 71

the rivers, a feat which the Narwhal has never been
known to perform. He contents himself with groping in
the muddy or sandy bottoms of shallow Arctic waters,
stirring up sluggish fish, and transfixing them with his
horn prior to pushing them off and swallowing them.
This may sound fantastic, far-fetched ; yet it was the
opinion of so good a man and close observer as Captain
Wilham Scoresby ; and after all it is precisely what the
sword-fish does, on the evidence of many observers,
myself among the number. And what the sword-fish
does I am sure the Narwhal can do, being quite as agile
and certainly more intelligent.

The Black Fish {Globicephalus) is a miniature sperm
whale to all appearance, having a huge square head,
and much spermaceti in it. It feeds in the same
regions as does the cachalot, but sometimes in enormous
numbers. It is one of the largest of the Dolphins, for
I have seen individuals weighing over six tons, and
yielding three to four barrels of excellent oil. While
not nearly so sociable as the Porpoise, using the word in
its sailor sense, it is a confiding beast, permitting a boat
to approach closely enough to harpoon it without
manifesting any alarm. And when one of the school is
harpooned the other boats may pull up and harpoon as
many as they list, for an insatiable curiosity seems to
seize upon all the family to see whatever had befallen
their friends, I have often seen as many as a dozen
of these bulky creatures secured by four boats at one
lowering, and the utmost difficulty experienced in
getting through the assembled crowd of survivors,
which, however, made no attempt to avenge their slain
comrades.

Like the rest of the dolphins, the Black Fish appears
to be very happy. Since the decline of the whale
fishery to its present exceedingly low ebb it would seem


72 The Rorquals

as if the worst of tiis enemies are removed, for he is too
agile to be caught, and too large to be gobbled up if
caught, by his fierce cousin the Orca. If one could
judge of the mental condition of animals by their facial
expression, it would be quite natural to suppose that
the Black Fish was a creature of sunny disposition and
one whose lines had fallen in pleasant places, for he has
an innocent smiling expression, owing to the pecuhar
shape of the mouth and the profile that is almost ludi-
crous to see. But I confess that when first I saw it I
did not think it ludicrous, I rather felt that it was a
shame that such a jolly-looking animal should be chased
and killed for the sake of getting a few gallons of oil out
of him.



CHAPTER VI

SIRENIA

IT seems meet to dose these observations on whales
generally by a few remarks upon what is really the

connecting link between the whales and the seals»
between those mammals who spend all their time in the
water — cannot live out of it — and those who, while
Uving entirely on the produce of the sea and perfectly
at home there, can yet make shift to live ashore for a
while, settle their love affairs there, and produce their
families. Such a link is found in the strange creatmre
called trivially the Sea Cow, but scientifically the
Manatee and Halicore. They are both riverine and
coastal mammals, feeding upon algae at the bottom,
perfectly harmless and almost helpless creatures, almost
unable, in spite of their great size, to keep from be-
coming extinct. In fact, one species (Rhytina), once
plentiful on the shores of Behring Straits, has become
extinct — its enemies had Uttle difficulty in removing it
from the list of extant animals.

Most readers of Kipling's fascinating sea idyll. The
White Seal, will remember Kotick's meeting with Sea
Cow, and his following them to the wonderful beaches
where man never came. Like all the work of this great
writer, his description of the Dugong and Halicore is
marked by scientific accuracy, and points out clearly
the remarkable structure of this connecting link

7$



Hi



74 Sirenia

between land and sea animals. In every way they are
a compromise ; but a study of them is of the utmost
value as showing how the transition from land to sea
of all the whales took place. A careful examination
of them shows various characteristics almost identical
with those of seals, such as nostril-shaped blowholes,
large, expressive eyes, and whiskers on the muzzle,
while scattered about the body are many bristly hairs,
evidently a survival of the hairy covering of a land
animal being replaced as the sea-life is taken to by a
coating of blubber beneath the skin.

But the grand peculiarity about the Sirenia is their
vegetarianism. Some of the Ddphinidae do eat algae,
those, that is, whose habitat is some great river like the
Amai on or Ganges, but even with them it is certain that
they are not exclusively vegetarian, from the contents
of their stomachs, and there is even a doubt in some
minds whether the presence of vegetable matter in
their stomachs is not a matter of accident rather than
preference. But the Manatee and Halicore are, un-
doubtedly, exclusively vegetable-feeders, which at once
places them upon a plane apart from all their fellows
in a rigidly carnivorous conunimity. Is it any wonder
that one species {RhyHna) has become extinct ? They
are too gentle for their stem world ; as much out of
place in it as a herd of antelopes in a jungle peopled with
tigers.

Tlic first sight of the Dugong as it lifts its queer head
above the surface is startling. Although upon a close
examination it would be impossible to trace any resem-
blance whatever to the human form divine, yet, from
the peso of the head and remembering the suddenness
with which it pops up, perhaps on a brilliantly moonlit
night» one can find some excuse for its scientific generic
MmOi SinniMt some justification for the old seafarers



The Faithful Sircnia 75

who, from its appearance, wove their fabulae concerning
mermen and mermaids. Only, hke all the whales, not
even excepting the Beluga ^ it has no voice. Any sound
it makes, or any whale makes, is due to the rushing of
the air through the spiracle or spouthole, and not to any
laryngeal exercise. The Manatee and Dugong, more-
over, have an aditional claim upon our notice, and a
proof of their close connexion with the higher land
intelligence, in that they have been tamed.

The late lamented superintendent of the London
Zoological Gardens once trained, or, rather, took over
the training, of a young Manatee in Surinam, which
would come to him as he waded into its pond and permit
him to hold it in his knees while he gave it suck from a
feeding-bottle. And there is a record of one of these
strange anomalies being kept as a pet by a Spanish
South American governor for twenty-six years, during
which it behaved itself quite as sensibly as any ex-
clusively land animal could have done, even to the
extent of allowing the boys of the household to ride it
round its lake.

After this, it is not surprising to learn that its
fondness for its young is as strong as that possessed by
any of the cetacea, not excepting the humpback,
although its power of defending its offspring is exceed-
ingly limited, for the Manatee has a tail like a beaver
and not at all hke a whale, which member, though
useful enough to swim with, is of scarcely any value as
a weapon.

Another marked feature of this strange animal's
life is its conjugal love. It has one mate, to which it
faithfully cUngs, nor will it leave its spouse even under
the extremest pressure of fear, preferring death to
separation. Thereby it is at once lifted on to a plane
in our estimation far above that of any other sea-



76



Sirenia



mammal or amphibious creature, all of which have
vety elastic habits as regards their comnubial associa-
tions. I leave the Sirenia with regret as being at once
one of the most interesting and one of the strangest of
all the denizens of the Deep Sea.


THE WALRUS, MORSE, OR SEA-HORSE



FROM the Sirenia to the Walrus is one of the easiest
steps, for Sea Vitch, as Kipling calls the latter, is
ugly and uncouth enough to be one of the very same
family as the dugong, although in truth he is nothing
of the sort. But at the outset I feel impelled to enter
a stem protest against the gross libel upon that beauti-
ful animal the horse, perpetrated by calling the Walrus
a sea-horse and the hippopotamus a river-horse. What,
in the name of common-sense, have either of these moat
ungainly brutes in common with one of the most elegant
and beautiful of all known animals ? Not that I would
rashly call any of the Creator's wonderful designs ugly
— I do but speak after the manner of men. But there
does appear to me to be such an utter lack of apprecia-
tion of similarity in the conferring of titles like the
foregoing. Nor is the manatee any more like a cow ;
6til), there is not quite the same jar to our sensibiUties
in the comparison, since the cow is not what one would
truthfully describe as graceful, either in outline or
movement.

Perhaps of «11 land-walking animals, not even the
Myrmecophagtu, none can compete with the Walrus
for clumsiness. He has a gigantic body — in the fullest-
grown adult about a ton in weight — and about as
unsymmetrical as a leathern bag of oil or the body of a
hippopotamus. It is covered with a tough gnarled



yS The Walrus, Morse, or Sea^Horse

Ude, scantily dothed with coarse brown hair, very
patchy, in fact not at all unlike one of those old hair
trunks we used to see occasionally. The fore flippers
are very short, and the hand-like members are planted
flat at almost right angles to the body, while the hind
flippers have no legs to them, being apparently just
an ornamental appendage to the body in lieu of a tail.
Gmsequently he who can watch the progress of a
Walrus over land or ice and not laugh must be quite
devoid of humour or any sense thereof, for it is certainly
one of the most droll-looking methods of progression
conceivable.

But, as Dr. Johnson is reported to have said of the
dancing dog, the wonder is not that he should perform
so strangely, but that he should perform at all. For
the body in an adult will weigh about a ton, and the
road over which the creature ordinarily travels is one
of the most rugged or slippery imaginable : a floe with
a surface like a mirror, or a mass of rough huounocks
where the ice has been broken up by the sea, and, coming
together again, has conglomerated and congealed in the
most fantastic shapes. At the upper extremity of this
oblong mass of flesh is the head, ludicrously small as
compared with the body. It looks almost as if the
body had suddenly tapered to a slightly elongated
point. And where one naturally looks for the brain,
at the top of the skull, there is apparently no room for
one, only a flat solid-looking mass of bone. The skull,
however, is abnormally powerful, as it need be, for
depending from it at right angles are the characteristic
tusks, like a pair of pickaxes. With these the Walrus,
suddenly rising from the bottom, hooks on to an ice-floe,
and with an almost incredible exhibition of strength
hauls himself up out of the water and into the berth he
has selected for his sun-bath or doze. With the same



■


^ ^^™


■


1


^^^^^^^^^^'^^w


^ rii


i


^^ JP^


1


-i>l. M.[. i.AMi \VAI.K!N(; ANIMALS Nom: i\\

ii:n: with the walihs |-ii:; cm m.sim.ss


1



The Gentle Walrus



79



sks, too, he digs in the sea-bed for his food, which is
principally shell-fish, although he does not disdain the
ofial of a dead whale, or indeed anything else of an
animal nature, so long as it does not involve the chase
of the object.

Pursuit is not at all in the programme of the Walrus,
except under certain circumstances to be alluded to
presently. The stomach of a Walrus that I once
examined {caught on a floe in Behring Straits) looked
like the contents of an oyster-dredge just hauled up.
Curious shetlhsh of many kinds and in several cases
alive ; stones, sand, mud, shrimps, worms, and other
things ; it was a queer collection. Yet it seemed — if
soch was his regular diet, and I have no reason to
suppose that it was not — to have suited the Walrus
very well indeed, for he was so (at that out of his
wounds exuded almost as much oil as blood.

As might be supposed from the nature of its food,
the Walrus is a gentle and inoffensive creature. Here,
again, a sense of extreme incongruity is aroused in one
at the sight of a Morse suddenly popping up from under
the sea. Its appearance is savage in the extreme ; no
painted Indian ever succeeded in making himself look
more terror-striking than the Walrus, and his bristling
whiskers, each hair almost as thick as a porcupine quiU
and completely hiding the setting of the tusks, serves
excellently to heighten his appearance of ferocity.
Yet, generally speaking, at the sight of man he will
flee as fast as he can, with every appearance of earnest
desire to get away. The exceptions to this rule are
found during the breeding season, among both males
and females, the former in defence of the latter, and the
latter in defence of their young. And as they are very
sociable creatures, loving to herd in hundreds, an at-
tacking boat suddenly finds itself surrounded by a



8o The Walrus^ Morse, or Sea^Horse

herd of infuriated Walrus, each armed with the for-
midable weapons before noted.

Contrary to the expectation aroused by its appear-
ance, the Walrus has a large and fully-developed brain,
although it is not especially notable for intelligence.
But then the study of the brain is so far from being well
advanced that we do not yet know why the elephant
with its comparatively insignificant brain should be
so much more intelligent than the ox, one-eighth of the
elephant's bulk and with a brain almost as large. Or
why the sperm whale should be so intelligent, with a
brain about the same size as the ox and a body one
hundred times larger. Perhaps in the latter instance
there is a distribution of brain at points along the spinal
coliunn, so that messages from outl3dng parts of the
body should not have so far to travel. I do not here
try to be funny but only state what has been seriously
suggested by naturalists.

In one respect, at any rate, the Walrus is the equal
of any of the higher intelligences. That is in the
parental quaUty. No animal cares for its offspring
so long or more lovingly. No animal will willingly
undergo more suffering and privation for the sake of
its young. There can be no doubt that the female
Walrus suckles its young, and provides other food for
it as well during the latter part of the period, for two
years. This has been, I think, abundantly proved
by observation, and, moreover, the great canine teeth
which develop into the formidable tusks characteristic
of this anim^, and without which it is impossible for
it to live, do not show more than an inch or two until
it is two years old. But the mother never seems to
weary of her huge burden, the baby, if it be a male,
often reaching its mother's proportions before it is
weaned. With infinite, devoted patience she cares



Defence, not Defiance 8 1

for it, watches over it, defends it with her own oody,
and. one is tempted to say, loves her burden so much
that she is grieved when she must lay it down.

However that may be, it is certain that the Walrus
for all their imcouth appearance, and extraordinary
method of living (so totally different from all other
sea mammals whatever), enjoy their lives to the full
in the best sense of the term. In one respect, indeed,
they are extremely fortunate : with the exception of
man, they have no enemies. The great Polar bear
does not lightly engage in a combat with * Awuk,*
since he knows that in those formidable tusks he has
opposing weapons that are quite a match for even his
tremendous claws and teeth, while the hide of the
Walrus is so tough and thick as to be almost impene-
trable to even the onslaught of the great white terror
of the Arctic seas. Consequently, the Walrus lives
a fairly peaceful life among his fellows. He does not
prey upon them, and Nature has so equipped him that
they cannot prey upon him.

But man has wrought terrible havoc among the
Walrus. Even as far back as 1327, it is recorded in a
receipt preserved at Bergen that the Greenlanders
paid their tribute to the Crusades in Walrus tusks.
And all along the Labrador coast as well as the Gulf
of St. Lawrence, where a Walrus now would be almost
as great a curiosity as a seal on the English coasts,
they were a century ago so numerous that hundreds
were slaughtered in a day. Various causes have,
however, reduced the hunting of the Walrus to an
insignificant matter chiefly confined to the Eskimo,
who are entitled fairly to the produce of their hunting,
since they are sportsmen in the best sense of the term.
They do not kill for the sake of killing, but for their
very Ufe, and the Walrus is one of their chosen objects

6



82 The Walrus, Morse, or Sea^Horse

of the chase for his succulence (from an Eskimo stand-
point), from his lack of speed, and from his love of
shallow waters, where he finds the humble molluscs
upon which he feeds. Such gaps as the Eskimo make
in the ranks of the Walrus will do no more than preserve
the natural balance necessary. If only civilised man
will let the Walrus alone, having found that the hunting
does not pay, there will soon be as many as ever there
were to people, if not exactly to beautify, the lonely
Arctic regions.



CHAPTER VIII

THE SEA ELEPHANT

AS far as size goes, this giant seal could probably give
points to the walrus, but he is certainly not so
ferocious-looking. Except for the curious nose
(whence his Greek name) he is just a big black seal fairly
agile in the sea, and clumsy ashore, like all his kind.
Again, but for his partly-developed proboscis, he should
be called sea hippopotamus, rather than Sea Elephant.
He is about the bulk of a hippopotamus of the same
age, although more hirsute and with a less extensive
opening of the jaws. His proboscis is just an extension
of the skin of the nose, which usually hangs down
limply before the mouth for about a foot, and is inflated
when the animal is enraged or excited. The young
ones and females are destitute of this appendage —
one cannot call it an ornament. He holds among
seals the unique position of being common to both
hemispheres, although from the ardour with which he
has been hunted, very few specimens exist now north
of the Equator.

Like every other sea mammal which I have hitherto
dealt with, he ^^as now a respite, and is consequently
increasing in numbers rapidly. He forms practically
the only population of many an otherwise lonely series
of barren rocks in the Southern seas, finding in the
inclement waters washing their bases the hiunble food
he desires (for like the walrus, and for the same reason,

8s



84 The Sea Elephant

lack of speed and agility, he cannot feed upon swift-
moving creatures). Once they abounded in immense
herds upon all the islands in the Antarctic Ocean,
notably Kerguelen's Land and the South Shetland.
To those barren spots vessels repaired with crews that
were ready for any fate. These men were landed upon
those awful solitudes, just bare rocks set in a roaring
desolate sea, without a green thing to gladden the eye,
and with the almost perpetual rage of the ocean en-
deavouring to daunt them. They had only the most
impromptu shelter, their food was of the coarsest,
intoxicating drink was imknown among them, and in
this forlorn condition they lived for six months at a
time, without seeing other faces or hearing other voices
than those of their own Uttle company. In the chase
of the Sea Elephant, they ran terrible risks, endured
incredible hardships, and their reward after a successful
voyage worked out at something like los. per week.
Only the hide and blubber were sought, the Elephant
Seal having no fur.

My own recollection of this miserable business is
a brief one, but quite lengthy enough to make me
thankful that I shall never repeat the experience. In
an evil hour I engaged to proceed from New Zealand
to the Auckland and Campbell Islands in search of Sea
Elephants, being assured that it was not only exciting
sport, but a very pleasant pastime. Alas, for the
depravity of hiunanity ! Could anything be less
worthy of the title of pastime than that ? And
yet I am sure that, as compared Wich similar work
upon such terrific rock-bound islets as the South
Shetlands or South Georgia, it might even be called
sport or pastime. For the Auckland and Campbell
Islands in summer have a garment of vegetation, and
there are many flowers. There are also trees, and



Compulsory ' Sport '



85



considering the high southern latitude, the place is
almost habitable for an Anglo-Saxon in fair comfort
But the weather is vile when the storm-fiend is abroad,
which is about every other day, Such is the force
with which those mighty southern waves strike these
lonely mouTi tain-peaks rising from the sea right in the
track of their world-engirdhng sweep, that the whole
atmosphere is full of spray, and walking abroad, one's
hair and beard become encrusted with salt. Also
much of the land-surface is bog, exceedingly dangerous
to traverse, and, with the frequent dense fogs which
prevail, almost impossible to avoid.

These islands being a favourite haunt of the Sea
Elephant, we went there in search of them, and set
up our try-works on the promising spot. Provisions
and materials for building huts having been landed,
the ship sailed away ; it was no place for a vessel to
linger at anchor. Better by far face the utmost fury
of the open sea. We watched her departure with a
pang, for now we felt desolate indeed ; but our thoughts
were rudely interrupted by the curt orders of our
officers, who wanted to know if we thought we had
come there for a picnic. So we plunged into work of
the hardest in order to get things a bit ship-shape ;
but before we had been toiling an hour we were all
suddenly startled stiff by a most tremendous roaring,
as of a troop of lions newly landed. Our hesitation
was but momentary, for our two officers, recognising
the sound, bade us grasp our clubs, sheath our knives,
and follow them. We did so, and presently, coming
across a ridge of rock into view of a little exposed bay,
we saw at least a hundred of these huge seals emerging
from the broken water and lumbering shorewards.

We watched them with intensest interest, feeling
grateful for the rest, and also (I speak for myself) most


i



86



The Sea Elephant



curious to know what sort of a reception these monsters
would give us when we burst in upon them armed
only with clubs. True, we had been told repeatedly
that aU we had to do was to smite them fiercely on the
nose, and they would fall an inert mass at our feet,
when we were to cut their throats immediately. But
somehow a sight of them did not seem to inspire us
with much confidence in our ability to carry out these
simple orders to the letter. They looked so awe-
iospiring in that limiinous haze. There wtis a gentle
drip drip of moisture from the rocks around distinctly
audible between the long, sullen, thunderous roll of
the breakers, and the occasional hideous roaring of tlie
seals, and to my excited fancy it seemed as if it were
the ticking of the clock of my life almost run down.
For natural scepticism asserted itself, and I did not,
could not, believe that our enterprise was as free from
danger as I had been so repeatedly assured.

At last, after what seemed an interminable time of
waiting, during which my hand got quite glued to my
club from the nervous energy of my grip upon it, the
last of the mighty family slowly heaved his huge bulk
out of the surf and waddled after the rest inland. He
had hardly put a dozen yards between himself and the
water-line, when, in a low, hissing voice, our chief
said : ' Now, then, spread yourselves along the beach
between 'em an' the sea. Remember, a good bang
where the trunk joins the head and then a clean swipe
across the neck with the knife as hard as you can cut.
Don't do nothing but that to as many as you can,"

Off we all rushed, he leading us, without a sound
save the patter of our feet on the sand until we were
all between the Elephants and the sea. Then we raised
a yell, startling and vigorous enough to dominate the
boom of the breakers. I saw the hindmost monster


A



A Fearsome Fight



87



rele;



stop and look about enquiringly, I noted that the herd
had also paused, their dim forms swaying to and fro,
as they endeavoured to find out by sight or scent the
cause of their alarm. Presently another yell completed
their undoing, and they turned and made for the sea
again. Now I do not pretend to any daring whatever,
but if I did, I tliink I should have been justified in
wishing to be elsewhere then. The charge of that troop
of monsters down upon our little band, entirely un-
versed in this warfare, and armed only with clubs not
much heavier than a pohceman's truncheon, was a
severe test of nerve and faith.

But our chief saved the situation. He faced the
leader and smote him so felly upon the spot he had
indicated to us, that the vast mass of the body collapsed
like a burst bladder and spread itself upon the ground.
That fired us, and immediately we were all doing
likewise, yelling like demons at the same time. Why,
I do not know, but so it was. But we were not to come
off scatheless. One man missed his blow and his
footing at the same time, and putting his left arm out
to save himself from falling thrust it into the monster's
gaping jaws. Now the Sea Elephant can crack pebbles
as large as goose-eggs like nuts, and does do so, ap-
parently for sport, so that when we drew Sandy from
underneath his fallen foe, and prising open the jaw,
released his arm, it looked more like some shreds of
rag than anything else. Some rude * first aid '
applied, and the work of slaughter went on.

The upshot of the raid was twenty-one elephants
killed, of which I know our chief was responsible for
ten. And we were a study in ruffianism — ' gaumed '
all over with blood and grease, stumbling over the
smaUest stone from very weariness after tlie reaction
had come, yet compelled to toil on with only a few



k.



88 The Sea Elephant

minutes' rest at long intervals all through the night at
the unfamiliar work of skinning those great beasts,
then securing the masses of fat-laden hide to a rope,
dragging the greasy plunder over the intervening space,
of a roughness hardly conceivable. Yes, it was a crude
experience, and remembering the triviality of the
reward, I am filled with wonder at our folly for ever
undertaking it. But we did not know, nor did we
take the trouble to enquire. I must not forget to
mention before I leave this uninviting part of my
subject that Sandy did not lose his arm. In spite of
the bones being broken, nay almost ground to pulp in
several places, and the extensive laceration of the flesh,
also the exceedingly primitive surgery, he was able to
use the arm again in six weeks, and long before that
was assisting as best he could in the work with one
arm.

Strangely enough, I could put no heart in my work,
for I could not help feeling all the while that I was in
the position of the unprovoked aggressor, and that
whatever happened to me, I should deserve all I got.
And that is no frame of mind to go a-whaling or
a-sealing in. But perhaps I had better not extend my
personal recollections of the Sea Elephant any farther,
or I may convey quite a wrong impression of him. It
is true that by accident he or she, as the case may be,
does inflict serious injury upon the aggressor. But
this is quite accidental. I am persuaded that the Sea
Elephant, except among his fellows at the mating
season, and even then in far less proportion than the
common seal, is harmless. As his diet will testify,
he is no insatiable hunter after higher organisms.
Cuttle-fish, those snaky, imcanny things, that seem
to have been created in order to provide food for a
foil half of the sea manunals, and the lower moUusca,



Contented with Little 89

yes, even so small as mussels, are the daily food of the
Sea Elephant and, like the walrus, very satisfying he
seems to find them. Secure in his impervious coating
of fat and hide, he loves to lie upon the battered and
bare rocks with the spindrift hissing over him, as cosy
as a cat upon a hearthrug before a blazing fire. Loves
to watch the gambols of the pups learning to swim in
the boiling surf, and to nuzzle in the ooze at the bottom
of the sea for the succulent morsels which cannot escape
him. Altogether it cannot be denied that the All- Wise
One has given to the Elephant Seal a high and enviable
place among the sea mammals ; and now that man's
desire for his particular products has been satisfied by
other and more easily and cheaply obtained substitutes
his lot will be as near being perfect as any animal's
can or ought to be. For he has no enemies other than
man.



A Living Miracle



91



irough the sea and grips his finny prey when fleeing
at top speed. And he has need ; for the Seal has,
like the shark, a tormenting liver. Not in the direction
of indigestion, but of digestion. Its secretion of
digestive juices is so abundant that hardly is the
stomach filled before it is empty again. And who
can wonder at it after witnessing the amazing ex-
penditure of energy by one of these beautiful creatures
during one bright morning, say off the Pribyloff
Islands ?

Yet there is one feature of the Seal's life that is
truly miraculous, not to be accounted for by any
known hj^aothesis whatever. For ten months of the
year the ' old man ' Seal needs, and gets, fully one
hundredweight of fish per day to keep him fit. During
the other two months he fights, makes love, never
sleeps, never drinks, and never eats. Behold here a
natural miracle. Many animals there be who fast
through longer periods, but all their natural forces
are quiescent, dormant ; the waste of tissue is in-
finitesimal. The Seal only, throughout the most
strenuous period each year of his intensely strenuous
life, neither eats nor drinks nor sleeps for two months
on end.

There are many things in the lives of animals, even
those closely associated with us, which are difficult
to understand, but this little matter of the Seal's
abstinence from nourishment and rest during the time
of his greatest activity is, I think, the most marvellous
and non-understandable of all. Like other animals,
normally gentle at every other period of the year,
except the mating season, the male Seal is then trans-
formed from the soft-eyed amiable amphibian, harmless
as a dove to everything, except the fish upon which
he lives, into a furious beast with bristling moustache,


A



93



Seals



bared teeth, and glaring eyes, ever spoiling for a fight,
and as often as not covered with torn and gory wounds
from head to foot. These do not seem to cause him
any inconvenience, or allay his fierce desire for battle.

Not that he is guilty of fighting for fighting's sake
alone — I would not do him that injustice. First of
all, upon arriving at the breeding- place to which the
colony of Seals he belongs to resort each year, each
male selects a spot where he and the mate or mates
who will presently arrive {for the Seal is not mono-
gamous) may lodge. It should be as near the sea as
possible, and also near a beach, but its location is
preferred among the roclcs or rough ground. Having
selected a spot about ten feet square, the thing is to
retain it against the ever-arriving Seals from their
oceanic wanderings, each eager to eject some already
established landholder. So it is iight ajid watch day
and night to hold their own.

By-and-by the female Seals arrive, each a mother
elect, and then the scene simply bafRes description.
It says volumes for the vitality of the poor females, that
they not only survive the terrible treatment they re-
ceive, but actually seem little the worse for it. As
each one reaches the rocks she is pounced upon by a
roaring frenzied mob of males, seemingly bent upon
tearing her limb from hmb. Not only is she bitten and
torn most shamefully, but she is banged upon the rocks
as if she were a mass of india-rubber rather than a
living thing. Finally, she becomes the prize of the
most vigorous, who seizes her with his teeth by her
neck, drags her off to his reservation, and dumps her
down there. Then having fought to obtain her, he
must now fight to keep her, and in between-whiles do
a little skirmishing, if haply he may acquire an extra
wife or so.


Seal Domesticities



93



Now the happy proprietor of a harem must keep close
and careful watch, less prowling Lotharios should steal
one of his hardly won wives, or lest any discontented
spouse should venture to creep away. But even the
tremendous endurance of the male Seal has its limits,
and it frequently happens that, exhausted by his priva-
tions and exertions, a husband will find some cunning
rival come in and eject him, Then there is nought
for him to do but to go to sea again and endeavour by
steady attention to hunting to make up for the stamina
he has dissipated in the late riots.

Meanwhile, the baby Seals arrive. They receive
little attention from their mothers, who listlessly allow
them to gorge themselves on the rich milk and thrive
amazingly. As for the males, they take no notice of
the pups whatever, seem indeed to be unaware of their
presence. By-and-by the young Seal or floe-rat must
be taught to swim — another amazing thing about this
wonderfully interesting creature. Ml land animals,
except man, swim instinctively if flung into water even
when just bom. But the Seal, than whom no more
graceful and enduring swimmer Uves in or out of the sea,
must needs learn laboriously how to comport himself in
the water. And his mother teaches him. Of course,
he is an apt learner, as all young animals are of what
their mother has to teach them.

As he grows older he and his thousands of comrades
get away from the colony by themselves and play,
gambollmg about all day long, only journeying from
the playground to the sea and back. What they live
upon after they are weaned until the whole colony goes
to sea again is not known. Those that are killed and
examined never seem to have anything in their stomach
but stones. And it has been well established as a fact
that, upon the arrival of the colony at their ' rookeiy.'



L



94



Seals



all the fish in the neighbourhood take the hint and go
away. But at last there comes a time when a general
move is made seaward, and soon that densely thronged
patch of land, where the noise had been so deafening
that one can only liken it to the noise of two express
trains passing one another in the tunnel, is wrapt in
primeval silence, only the occasional sullen boom of a
breaker, or the scream of a lonely sea-bird, punctuating
the stillness-

Now begins the truly happy time of the ScliI's life.
That stormy four months ashore for the parents, and
incidentally for the young ones also, has passed hke a
hideous nightmare, and the beautiful free life of a deep-
sea denizen is before them. They roam singly whither-
soever they will all over the free ocean, feeding, ever
feeding from the bounteous store provided for them.
When weary they sleep upon the surface, and I have
often in the North Pacific passed them so sleeping,
rocked in the embrace of the curling waves, hundreds
of miles from land. No one really knows how far they
go, how wide their range is during the eight months
they are away from their birthplace. But it seems
difficult to believe that they ever pass through the
tropics, having such a rooted objection to warmth.
Of course, there are several kinds of Seals who freqi;cnt
the temperate zones, notably the protected rookery
on the Farallone Islands, so near the city of San
Francisco that one of the attractions offered to visitors
at the Ocean House is that they may sit on the verandah
and watch the free gambols of the Seals.

Of course the Seal has enemies, stealthy and
voracious. The killer whale, for instance, has an
uncanny habit of slipping up upon a sleeping Seal and
•wallowing him at a gulp. One grampus, indeed,
'trandcd upon the Califomian coast, and cut up by a



Sealing Horrors



95



party of 'longshoremen, was found to have a nice little
family of fourteen full-grown Seals in his capacious
maw. And it is highly probable that he came to
grief through chasing another one which fled ashore
on a falling tide. Sharks, too, are apt to take toll of an
unwary or sleeping Seal, turning noiselessly beneath
them and taking a huge bite out of them, as they
are wont to do out of a fish. Btit when it is remem-
bered that the Seal is gregarious only while ashore
or on the ice, it will at once be seen that the toll
taken of them by these voracious sea monsters is
after all very small. The white bear gets a few
L Seals too, but not many compared with the enor-
mous numbers of them that may be seen lying about
[on the ice.

The one enemy which counts is man, I do not
fpropose to harrow my readers' souls by describing the
[method of slaying Seals for market, not only for the
aluable seal skins which adorn our ladies in winter,
lut for the oil and leather. It is a sordid, horrible
nisiness, which cannot be written about nicely. There
is a grim and bloody reality about it that horrifies.
For my part I shall never forger Bum-Murdoch's cry of

horror in his book, Edinburgh to Ike Antarctic, where

^H^he speaks of the newly flayed Seal lifting itself redly

^^Vtowards heaven in the glowing sunshine as if asking its

^^P'Haker why this thing should be. The seal-fishery

is, no doubt, apart from its horrible and unnecessary

brutality, a terrific business for man to engage in.

Whether in the howling Antarctic, among those stem

rocks of South Georgia or South Shetland, or in the

Arctic among the ice-floes, it is a test of man's

capacity to endure that has probably no equal. Every

^^K day death in his most awful forms must be faced. Filth,

^^^htench, hunger, and blighting cold must be met as part



06



Seals



of the day*s work, untU the very meaning of the word
comfort is forgotten.

And the pay ? Ah, well, as it always is unfailingly,
the rewards go to those who have done nothing but loll
easily at home in luxury. Lady, with the hundred-
guinea seal-skin coat, know for a certainty that the
men who looked death between the eyes and brutaUsed
themselves lower than the shark to wrench that coat of
yours from its rightful owners got less than a hundred
pence for so doing. The bulk of that money went to
city magnates and full-fed speculators who never gave
its origin a second thought.

Of late years the indiscriminate slaughter of Seals
having threatened to exterminate them entirely, a good
deal of diplomatic intervention has taken place for the
purpose, first, of giving the Seal a close time, and,
secondly, of protecting the immature Seal. But it is
a difficult thing to control men who become so lawless
as seal-hunters do from the nature of their calling, and
I fear that as far as the fur Seal is concerned, at any
rate, the day of his extinction is not far off.

Remains only to note the extreme intelligence and
teachability of the Seal. Most of us are familiar with
this beautiful creature in Zoological Gardens, where
its restricted quarters cannot conceal its wonderful
grace. Some of us too will recollect a group of trained
Seals taught to perform on musical instruments, play
football, etc. But none of us who have seen the Seal
at home, and have revelled in Kipling's inimitable
story of Kotick's career, will need any reminding that
in the Seal, no matter of what kind, we have one of the
most wonderful, amiable and intelligent of all God's
creatures, whether ashore or in the deep sea.



CHAPTER X

THE SHARK

PASSING from sea mammals to fish proper is a mo-
mentous step, and merits a little introduction, in
any case. But when one must begin the fish
section with Sharks the introduction becomes impera-
tive. For the Shark is in some respects a sort of con-
necting link between the mammal and the fish. A true
fish, the Shark has yet the family or parental instinct
of which nearly all other fish are destitute, a notable
exception being the stickleback of fresh water, which
does love its young. Another curious characteristic
of the Shark family throughout its numerous branches
is that it has no bones. Only cartilage. From the
Basking Shark as big as a grampus, down to the
skate, not a bone among them.

Another peculiarity of the Shark tribe is the stigma
attaching to them, whereby the word Shark has become
a synonym for a murderous thief, a creature without
feeling or honour or repentance. I hold no brief for
the Shark, but justice is justice, and certainly the Shark
has had meted out to him nought but injustice through-
out the years. Whether at this time of day it is not
a forlorn hope to expect justice to be done to the Shark
is another matter, and one upon which I express no
opinion. I only know that amid the many fantastic
Shark stories extant, based upon utter ignorance of this
wonderful citizen of the Deep Sea, his habits and his

97 7



98



The Shark



usefulness, it seems well worth while inserting a little
truth. Which is what I propose to do.

Let it be admitted at the outset that the Shark is
not beautiful. In colour, no matter what branch of the
Squalidae may be represented, there is always an absence
of any tint pleasing to the eye. A dirty grey or dirty
slate colour alternating with livid white is the prevailing
shade of the Shark, and even the stripes of the Tiger
Shark are not, as one might suppose, of the deep rich
colour of the animal from which the name is taken.
As to shape, the same strictures may apply. Unbeauti-
ful in any case must be the verdict, most emphatically
so when we come to the Raiidae, or Skate branch of the
great family.

Then all Sharks have a sinister, villainous appear-
ance from the shape and position of their jaw, and the
cold deadly expression in their eyes. Especially is this
the case with the least known of the famUy such as the
Thresher, and the Sawfish [Pristis). One of the most
awful-looking of ocean monsters, although I believe
quite harmless to man, belongs to the Raiidae, the
Giant Skate or ' alligator guard ' of the Mexican Gulf,
known locally by the sinister sobriquet of Piscau del
Diablo, or devil-fish. And as if all these disadvantages
were not sufficient to load the poor creature with,
hundreds of yams have been invented, published, and
incorporated in authentic natural histories concerning
the Shark, of which it is only stating the barest fact to
say that not one per cent, of them have a grain of truth
in them.

Let it be admitted also as part of the indictment
of the Shark, that he is an eater of human flesh, and
does not always wait until the subject is dead. But
what fish is not ? It cannot be too clearly understood
that all fish are omnivorous as regards flesh or fish.



Justice for Sharks



99



nothing comes amiss to them, any of them. But to
single out the Shark for opprobrium on this head is
absurd, as absurd as is the invention of such idiotic
stories as the Shark following a ship at sea because on
board there is one sick. Much better to recognise in
the Shark an evidence of the eternal wisdom of God,
Who has here provided a race of large creatures in the
sea possessed of an amazing appetite and absolutely
indifferent to the quality of the food they eat, except
that it must be flesh or fish — living or dead matters
nothing. And in the agony of hunger, for agony it
must be, they do not always stop to make sure that
what they are swallowing is succulent flesh. I have
seen a Shark swallow a bag of cinders flung overboard
purposely. Consider how great must be the torment
of an appetite that can thus drive a carnivore to so
bitter and unsatisfying a morsel.

Now, having stated briefly what can with truth and
honesty be said against the Shark, let us consider him
a little more closely. And in order to do this it will be
necessary, I think, to use a Uttle imagination, yet
imagination restrained by fact.

At the base of that great mountain in the South
Atlantic, whose summit is named on the charts Fern-
ando do Noronha, there lay side by side in the cool
gloom of that depth two ordinary Sharks. Male and
female, husband and wife, they had enjoyed each other's
society as only monogamous creatures can, and now
the time had come that they must part. For the rule
of the Shark tribe is solitary hunting, or if crowds
gather at a banquet, all ties for the time are merged
in the v ~.e overmastering desire for food. Whether
they would ever meet again troubled them not at all —
we are the only creatures of God's great family who are
troubled about the future — but they felt bitterly the


100



The Shark



present paiig of parting. They lay side by side all
silently, with fins and tails gently vibrating and con-
veying all that they needed to express between them.
Suddenly the male Shark gave one great sweep of his
tail and was gone. Yet not so swiftly but that a bright
blue spot behind him had darted forward and taken up
its station just above his broad snout as he steadily
plunged southward toward the roaring forties.

Only a little time elapsed, and then, sedately as
became a matron with growing responsibihty, the lady
Shark got under way also and proceeded due east.
And in like manner as at the departure of her husband
a tiny blue form shot out from the shadows behind her
and took up its station over her broad nose. She was
a fine specimen of the Common Shark, about nine feet
long with a dark grey skin and a dorsal fin (gafftopsail
of the sailor) that when she neared the surface stood
up nearly a foot out of the water. Her head was
eighteen inches across and the upper lobe of her tail
was nearly two feet long, with an au.xiliary fin on it six
inches deep. She was six years old, and had been
round the Cape of Good Hope as many times as she had
years of age, and yet she was entirely dependent upon
the goodwill, fidelity, and skill of that tiny blue thing
which kept its position above her nose without any
apparent movement as she steadily made her way to
the east.

It was a * pilot ' fish, one of the most beautiful as
well as one of the smallest of the Scombridae, the great
mackerel family, unique, however, in its strange love
for the society of the Shark and its self-constituted
pilotage of that great fish. Here, in parenthesis. I
would remark upon the strange way in which men's
minds are constituted. The fantastic tales about
Sharks before noted will be accepted without a boggle



r



A Strange Companionship loi

by the very men who will scornfully reject absolute
facts concerning the pilot fish's relation to the Shark,
do not know why, nor do I think any one does. For
there are thousands of facts in natural history as well
authenticated as sunrise and sunset, far stranger than
is this bond between Shark and pilot-fish, concerning
which I shall only use facts of my own observation, and
none whatever of hearsay.

The strangely assorted pair proceeded in symme-
trical order for some hours upon a course as definite
as if laid down on a chart and steered by compass.
And while they were thus wending their way together
so harmoniously let us consider briefly the pilot-fish,
since apart from his association with the Shark he has
little interest for us. A beautifully shaped little fish,
marked with transverse bands of blue and gold — the blue
of that intensity seen only in fish and tinted to show
against the blue of the sea. A pair of golden-rimmed
eyes keep unwinking watch ahead, and the golden fins —
dorsal, pectoral, ventral, and caudal — seem as if frozen
stiff, so rapid are their vibrations. A fish built for
speed, but one of the feeble folk of the deep sea, for
he is only about eight inches long. But why, oh why
does a pretty creature like that attach itself to the
Shark ? As the Spaniards are so fond of saying,
Quien sabe ? Here the answer is, must be, that nobody
knows, nobody can know. We must take the facts as
we find them, and be as contented as we can.

Suddenly, hke a flash of blue light, the little fellow
has left his station. So swiftly has he sped that the
eye can hardly follow him. He reaches a huge mass
of seaweed, goes round it, and returning, visits first
one side of the Shark's face and then the other, then
resumes his station just over the nose. Now, during
the time of the pilot's absence the Shark has never


3



102



The Shark



swerved from her course, has neither accelerated nor
diminished her speed. Apparently she has perfect
confidence in her little blue attendant. And who,
possessing any observation whatever, can doubt that
on his return from his scouting journey the pilot has
in some mysterious way conveyed a message something
like this : ' I smelt something good ; went and had a
look. Nothing but a bundle of seaweed with a few
miserable httle fry in it. No use to you.' I have
always felt sure upon seeing such a manoeuvre per-
formed that in some way or another, I know not nor
can I speculate how, a conversational message like
that has passed from pilot to piloted.

On, ever on, by day and by night, through the clear
sea not far from the surface, the strangely assorted pair
proceed with occasional deviations on the pilot's part
in chase of the tiny organisms upon which this little
chubby mackerel hves. But, alas ! for his huge friend,
times are indeed hard. No corrupting mass of offal in
the shape of some dead sea monster is found ; nothing
at all to eat for two days with the demon of himger
savagely gnawing at that massive liver and goading
the starving creature to frenzy. A floating log covered
with parasitical sea growths and attended by a swarm
of fish of many kinds, but principally dolphin, cory-
phaena, and skip-jack — another species of mackerel —
is passed within a mile or so. Pilot sets off at top speed
to reconnoitre. Shark, unable to wait, follows, and
reaching the object, launches herself fiercely at it tearing
at the solid wood as if she would compel nutriment to
spring from it. The attendant fish vanish affrightedly ;
there is no danger of any of them feeling those lethal
jaws, being in speed and agility far superior to any
Shark.

In a little while her rage moderates, a considerable



The Hunger Search 1 03

quantity of gelatinous matter, mostly foot-stalks of
barnacles torn off the log, have gone down into her
aching maw, which it appeases, though it does not
satisfy. When suddenly the little pilot, which has
been flitting about at a little distance from its principal
agitatedly watching her manceuvres, darts off to the
southward, followed closely by the Shark. By what
amazing powers of intuition or of sight this little
creature knows that some miles away there hes a
ship I do not know, I only know that such powers as
enable it to be assured of such a presence at that
distance it does possess. That it should know of
the peculiar quality ships have of shedding choice
morsels in their wake may be merely a matter of
memory, such as most deep-sea pelagic fish have,
making them seek and keep the company of slow-
moving or stationary ships for many days at a time.
Presently they come up with the vessel and pass under
the shade of her broad bilge, snifiing at the smell she
gives forth of something. Several of the Shark's poor
relatives, the semi-parasitical Rcmorae or suckers,
hastily detach themselves from the ship and dart
away into the depths, compelled to action for once
by the knowledge that otherwise they will immediately
be devoured. Round and round the ship they go,
the pilot, in a high state of excitement, darting to and
fro between Shark and ship as if carrying perpetual
messages, while the Shark's cold greenish eyes never
cease their steadfast gaze upon that vast shadow
which may presently yield something to eat.

Meanwhile, some of the sailors aloft have caught
sight of that stealthy form gliding along beneath
them, and, in spite of their modernity, feel cold chills
creeping down their spines as they view the messenger,
as they think, of evil. We are heirs of the ages.


104



The Shark



inheriting their wisdom, but, alas I how many of us,
partially instructed or careless of learning, and devoid
of that most uncommon of all qualities, common-sense,
find that we hold in mortmain an awful legacy of
superstition and cruelty that has come down to us
untinctured by any spirit of love, of mercy, or of
progress ! So these sailors do really believe that the
presence of that Shark means that one of them will
presently fall sick and die, or that one of them will fall
overboard and be devoured, and that the Shark knows
this, and has come purposely from he knows not what
part of the ocean for this terrible bequest. And one of
those sailors, a young man, awfully ignorant, steeped
to the lips in superstition, which in the ignorant nearly
always takes the place of Christianity, whether in a
religious form or otherwise, trembles so that he misses
his footing and, with a mad clutching at vacancy,
falls a hundred feet or so into the sea. There is a wild
running to and fro, a frantic tearing at boats' gripes
rusted firm by months of disuse ; but before the boat
is freed from her trammels, it is remarked that, calm
though the sea is, our shipmate is nowhere to be seen.
And the boat is not lowered — there is no need.

Far beneath the surface, the Shark is finishing her
meal, the first really satisfying one she has had for
three days ; and who shall say that she does not feel
grateful to some invisible, non-understandable Power
who has provided it ? But in the hearts of all on
board there is a dull, solemn feeling of hatred for the
unconscious scavenger of the deep sea who happened
to be on the spot at the right time to eat a man who
fell overboard and was killed by the impact of the
water. So that when, next morning, again hungry,
the Shark cruises around, great preparations are made
to prevent this hideous, man-destroying monster from



I



Maternity v. Hunger 105

committing any more crime. A four-pound piece of
pork is stuck upon a great hook riveted to a foot of
stout chain, which is secured to a rope strong enough
to lift a ton. This is lowered over the stem and then
splashed up and down once or twice. In a moment
the little pilot is there, quivering with excitement,
nosing the meat, darting off a little way and returning,
with a curious undecided air. At last he vanishes,
returning in another minute with the Shark following
slowly. She comes up to the bait, turns slowly on
her back, sinking slightly until the bait is just entering
the glistening cavity of her mouth, and then the second
mate, who hfis been watching her movements with
almost feverish anxiety, being young, makes a grab
at the rope, and the bait leaps out of the water.

The anxiety of the pilot at this strange phenomenon
is almost painful to witness. He seems to know that
all is not well, and his passing to and fro between the
Shark and the newly lowered bait is like the glinting
of summer lightning. For some time the Shark
hesitates — that compact mass of pork is so tempting
— but at last, as if suddenly making up her mind,
Mistress Shark turns at right angles to the ship and
hastens slowly away. A greater power than even
htmger has called her, and next morning, at daybreak,
sees her lying quietly upon the waves at the surface
of the sea surrounded by sixteen Sharklets, among
whom the pilot moves with a comical air of proprietor-
ship. And they, the new-comers, take no heed of
the busy, friendly little creature until, with a leap
like that of a dolphin, he herds the lively group to-
gether and leads the way down the Shark's gaping
mouth into the haven of refuge she provides for her
young. It was only the advent of a hungry male
Shark, a lithe sinister brute, who, to the mother,


io6



The Shark



loomed large as a veritable demon of destruction to
her offspring, for, strange as it may appear to most
people, the Shark is a most loving parent, and although
she can only shelter her young within her body, not
knowing how to protect them by fighting for them,
she is nevertheless torn by anxiety on their behalf.

Now for many days she has no rest at all. With the
solicitude of a mother-hen for her chicks, she watches
over that group of Sharklings, shepherded by the pilot,
whom they are rapidly outgrowing, sheltered in her
bosom and fed ; yes, fed, though often the mother
feels as if vultures were tearing at her liver, until at
last there comes a day when the youngsters, having
grown sufficiently to take, and make, their own way
through this watery world, leave her one by one and
melt into the void, to lead henceforward an indepen-
dent existence in that great ocean world, and the
deserted mother seeks another mate who may provide
her with a new family to sufier for and be deserted
by in their due turn.

In the few preceding pages I have dealt with the
Shark as if there were only one kind, although I did
carefully mention the fact that there were others of
the same family. But, as a matter of fact, there are
more varieties of the Shark family than of any other
fish family living, with the possible exception of the
mackerel. I have never twen able to reckon up how
many Sharks there are of distinctly different cha-
racteristics, but an enormous number there certainly
are, all characterised by the one feature, that of
enormous eaters of garbage. Sharks with wide mouths,
armed with seven rows of teeth, each an inch long, and
with triangular edges saw-toothed, finer than any
surgical instrument ever made. Sharks with wide
mouths, armed with fifty rows of needle-like teeth,



I


I



Curious Sharks



107



the use of which one can only conjecture, and Sharks
whose vast jaws are lined within with a sort of curious
mosaic of pearly surface, as if the mouth were a mill

■ in which could be ground or triturated the most
obstinate substances. Indeed, the arrangement of
these palatal and labial plates in some of the Sharks
is a matter for profoundest admiration. Nothing
like it can be seen in any other animal in the wide
world.

Then there is the wondrous Saw-fish {Pristis), a most
amazing Shark, abounding in Eastern seas, who has
grown from his skull, right out before him, a flat mass
of stiff cartilage edged with ivory teeth, set at regular
intervals of about three quarters of an inch. For
some strange reason, which I do not pretend to fathom,
this curious weapon has come to be confounded with
the sword of the Sword-fish {Xiphias), which I have
already described, and in country houses where there
are one or two specimens hanging in the hall, the visitor
is calmly invited to view the weapon with which ships
are sunk ! No one seems to consider that even if the

■ saw (not sword) were made of tempered steel, instead
of stiffened cartilage, it would be impossible for any
force behind it to drive it into anything tougher than
fat, because there is no point to it ; a sort of snout,
slightly turned up at the end, terminates it ; and
again, the saw-like arrangement of the teeth on each

■ side of it preclude the idea of its being a piercing
weapon. No, its function, though gruesome enough,
is not that of sinking ships by perforating their bilges.
This particular shark has a wide mouth, lined with
from forty to sixty rows of infinitesimal, needle-like
teeth. He is a specialist in food, and although not
^^m averse to mumbling decaying carrion, should it come
^H his way, has a pleasant little fashion of disembowelling



fish by a push of his saw beneath them, and then
nuzzling in the soft entrails, the only food that he really
cares about. These Sharks grow to a length of fifteen
feet and weight of a ton.

Then there is the Thresher Shark, with which I
have dealt pretty fully in the chapter on the Mysticetus,
the sole peculiarity of which is the abnormally long
upper lobe to his tail, used as a sort of flail wherewith
to beat the hapless mammal. Sharks of weird aspect
but of no large capacity of mouth abound also in the
great depths of the sea, and are only brought to the
surface in a more or less mutilated condition, owing
to the tremendous change of pressure during their
passage upward.

But one of the most interesting of the Shark tribe
is the parasitical or semi-parasitical Remora. This
small shark (seven pounds weight is about their
maximum) has an extraordinary arrangement on the
top of its head (which is perfectly flat) whereby it can
attach itself so firmly to any floating body as not to
be detachable by any force applied except at the cost
of rending the fish asunder — unless one knows the
trick which the fish itself uses, in which case the creature
is detached in a moment without difficulty, and darts
off at a high speed to find some other host to which
it may attach itself. A ship or a whale matters little,
— its object is to be carried along in the immediate
vicinity of food which it may obtain by merely opening
its mouth and closing it at intervals. I have already
noted the suckers' delightful quarters in the mouth of
a right whale, adhering to the palate with its head
pointed in the direction from whence the whale's food
enters, so that it easily receives tithe of all without
the slightest effort on its part to obtain it. So you
«hall fijid a whole family of Remorae attached to one



^H Appetite Extraordinary lOQ

whale — outsiae or inside matters little — all contented
and happy in their utter dependence upon their gigantic
host. Even certain huge specimens of their own race
find them shelter occasionally, for Dr. Giinther records
an instance of a huge Shark of a harmless kind whose
teeth were covered with membrane and who gave
shelter in its mouth to a whole colony of Remorae,
To this very queer fish he gave the name of Rhinodon
typicus.

Of the voracity of the family generally I have
already said a little, but I feel impelled to return to
the subject for a brief space, because it is one that can

■ hardly be realised by shore people at all. Let me try
and express my meaning as simply and briefly as pos-
sible. We once caught a humpback whale in Vau
Vau which sank as we were preparing to tow it to the
ship, i.e. passing a rope through its lips. The sun
had set and the swift tropical twilight had descended,
so that we saw it was useless to attempt the long weary
task of raising our spoil from the coral bed on which
it had settled before daylight next morning. So one
boat lay by the carcase all night — it was only twenty-
five fathoms down — and watched with crawly sensa-
tions the brilliant bands of green light beneath, showing
■ where the great scavengers came and went. It was
a very long night, and many an inaudible prayer was
put up during those hours of darkness, I know. At
last day dawned and work commenced immediately.
I need not describe the tedious process of raising a
whale from the bottom by the aid of a couple of boats
— it is a weary job. At last, however, we were gratified
to find the great weight beneath becoming lighter and

lighter until at last, with almost a bound, the huge

^^L body reached the surface. It was the centre of a host
^^m of ravenous Sharks, some of them as long as one of our



no



The Shark



whaleboats, and all of them were tearing at the body
as if they had fasted for years and their first meal was
now about to be taken from them. It had only been
at their mercy for about eight hours ; and it was half
gone ; that is to say, in that brief time these useful
sea-scavengers had eaten about thirty tons of meat,
blubber, and bone, and were now apparently as un-
satisfied as ever. We started to tow, feeling that it
was hardly worth while, and accompanied by an
uncountable horde of the devourers, but after towing
for an hour were compelled to let go, because we were
drifting on to a reef. And I was right glad. I felt
sure that by the time we arrived at the ship — another
six or eight hours — we should have had only our labour
for our pains.

A whole wealth of literature lies in the discussion
of the Raiiae, those homely, shark-like creatures whose
flesh is so higlUy esteemed by the London poor, where
fried skate is a morsel to be delighted in when served
up in penn'orths with crisp fried potatoes. The terrible
Sting Ray of tropical seas, whose tail is a flexible rod
set with razor blades secured diagonally, and is used
as an instrument of correction by the South-sea trader
upon his wives,^ and the no less terrible Alligator
Guard of the Mexican Gulf, a fearsome monster s
sixty square feet in area and with a peculiar twist
for leaping out of the water after dark. One hardly
knows where to draw the line in dealing with this
extraordinary family of universal rangers of the deep
sea ; the feeling will force itself in that not a chapter
or so is needed, but a whole volume each, to describe
the beings and doings of one fish family.

I dismiss as utterly unworthy of any notice what-
ever all the stories that have been told of Ihe Shark's
■ Vida Louis Becke, By Reel "i^ Palm.



A Plea for the Shark III

innate ferocity and calculating devilishness. As I
have often had the pleasure in saying, the Shark eats
man, not because he loves man to eat» but because man
when he falls overboard is usually easy to get. If the
man be a good noisy swimmer, no Shark will venture
near, for they are, though tormented with hunger^
a most nervous and timid race, and, indeed, always
seem to me to lose a great many opportimities through
diffidence. I do not love the Shark in any of his
varieties, but I do love justice, and so, in spite of my
predilections against the Shark, I have endeavoured
to write of him (or her) fairly, as I would wish to be
written about myself if I were a Shark. I am very
glad I am not.

A very large section of the Shark family live at
inmiense depths. So it has been discovered of late
years by the indefatigable labours of such men as
Messrs. Goode and Bean, of the Smithsonian Institute
at Washington, and the Italian professors who have
made oceanic ichthyology their special study. But,
unlike most of the deep-sea fishes, as opposed to the
surface or near-the-surface fish, the Sharks do not
confine themselves to the profundities. They ap-
parently seek those mysterious depths to breed —
many of them deposit their eggs in carefully adapted
purses of toughened membrane so arranged that they
will open of themselves at the right time, then, having
provided for the continuation of the species as far as
they are concerned, they return to the surface. Others
again spend all their time in the depths, except when
the family is coming, at which time they ascend into
the upper and warmer strata. For it cannot be too
carefully noted that below a depth of about a hundred
fathoms the temperature of the sea is the same every-
where from Pole to Pole. The exceptions to this rule



112



The Shark



are the bursting-up places where boiling springs arise
from subterranean fires and of necessity raise the
temperature of the surrounding sea ; or the outlets
of submarine volcanoes fiercely struggling to assert
their destructive power against the unthinkable mass
of superincumbent water. Apart from these excep-
tions, the temperature of the sea below one hundred
fathoms is about thirty-one degrees Fahrenheit, or
just above the freezing-point of salt water.

But we are neglecting our Sharks, who, with an
adaptability shown by no other fish, come and go
between the surface and depths of four to five thousand
feet. Especially the Rays, who in all their varieties
are great travellers up and down, being found at all
depths from ten to one thousand fathoms. And
unlike the usual deep-sea denizens they do not acquire
any very great alterations of physique ; to be sure,
the ordinary Skate is suificiently hideous for anything.
I vividly remember, when second mate of the ' Har-
binger ' in Table Bay, some twenty-two years ago,
fishing for craw-fish with an improvised net made of
spun yam netted on to a big iron hoop. Feehng a
great jerking at the rope, I called for help, and we
hauled to the surface a Skate fully six feet across
from tip to tip of his ' wings.' He was far too large
and heavy to be hauled on board like that, so we
harpooned him, and aiter a long struggle succeeded
in getting him aboard.

He laj' on deck, a thing of utter hideousness in form
and colour, so much so that after gazing upon him for
a little while, the repulsiveness of the creature made
me feel quite ill. And the great mouth lined with
teeth just like ours, opening and shutting convulsively,
looked appallingly human. I was roused from my
shuddering fit by the sight ol one of the boys just



I


An Object ^Lesson 113

offering to put his finger in the mouth. I pulled him
away, and holding him by the arm, inserted a stick
of wood an inch square into that quivering cavity.
Instantly the jaws dosed, there was a grinding sound,
and the stick fell in two halves, bitten through as
cleanly as a horse bites a carrot. The boy had learned
his lesson. That Skate became the prey of the sailors,
who much appreciated him fried, and although we
had a fairly large crew there was enough meat on his
wings to give them a good supper and breakfast.

Here we will leave the Sharks; for, although I
have said practically nothing of the Dog Fish, I fed
that there is not really sufficient distinction between
them and the usual Shark to warrant any detailed
remarks about them. The Dpg-fish is just a small
shark.



CHAPTER XI
THE TURTLE

HERE we come upon a deep-sea denizen that occu-
pies an almost unique position among his fellows,
in that he has no enemies but man. The exceptions
4 being the sperm whale and the sea elephant, as I have
before noted. This freedom from the fear of instant
death at the mouth of a feUow-citizen is so unusual
among the deep-sea people that when an exception
comes it makes itself noticeable. But not only does the
Tiutle commend itself to us as unique in this respect, it
is also one of the strangest of all the amphibia. The
whales must come to the surface frequently to breathe,
and we know fairly well upon what they feed. The seal
cannot remain beneath the sea nearly as long as the
whale, and his food is very well known ; but the Turtle,
in all his varieties, in all his ways, is mysterious beyond
the power of superlatives to express. It does not seem
to matter to him whether he stays beneath the surface
for an hour or a week, nor does it trouble him to spend
an equal time on land, if the need arises. He is neither
fish, flesh, nor fowl, yet his flesh partakes of the charac-
teristics of all three. Eating seems a mere superfluity
with him, since for weeks at a time he may be headed
up in a barrel (with the bung out) and emerge at the
long last apparently none the worse for his enforced
abstinence from food, from light, and almost from air.
His range is restricted to the temperate and tropical

X14



The Turtle Pair 1 15

seas, and is extended or contracted according to the



■
■



And, finally, as a close to this brief intrcxluction,
it may truly be said that of all the higher, warm-blooded
organisms, there are none so tenacious of life as the
Turtle. Injuries that would be instantly fatal to fish
ever leave the Turtle apparently undisturbed, his
power of keeping death at bay being nothing short of
marvellous. Also, it is a matter for very great wonder
how closely he is allied to the tortoises of the land,
leading lives totally different to his, yet in all but a
few minor details precisely the same in structure.

However, we must leave generalities and come to
particular instances. There are two varieties of Turtle
which furnish us with our most interesting examples,
and it is with one of these that I wish now to deal, the
Spharga cortacea, a common ocean Turtle frequenting
the North Atlantic and Pacific, even as far north
occasionally as the coast of Britain, and attaining a
weight of one thousand pounds. A pair of them lay
basking in the blazing sunshine of the northern tropic,
nearly midway between Africa and America. Their
broad carapaces shone in the sun's glare like burnished
gold, and occasionally they hfted their heads out of
the sea and gazed around as if in search of something.
But the fact is that they were ill at ease.

The female felt the need laid upon her of making for
a familiar spot she knew of to ease herself of that load
of eggs she carried, and the male, while hating to part
with her, felt an almost equally strong desire to remain
where he was. Such food as he needed was abundant,
passing ships were few, and they were the only things
he felt any fear of, so with the usual selfishness of the
male he found a grievance in that his partner must
leave him. Their communication of ideas and views


ii6



The Turtle



lasted all night, though to the human eye they were just
a pair of sluggish Turtle lying side by side in profoundest
silence, and without a movement, save that imparted
to them by the tiny wavelets of that quiet sea. As the
dawn broke she turned her head westward as if by some
irresistible impulse, her four broad flippers swayed with
a rhythmical motion, and she darted forward, trans-
formed instantly from an image of slothful ease into an
embodiment of superabundant energy, cleaving the
blue waves at the rate of about eighteen miles an hour.
No one who has not seen the Turtle in a hurry can
possibly understand how so apparently clumsy a
creature can cleave the waves at such a rate. It is a
revelation of the methods of Mother Nature.

But she is gone, and Mr. Spharga remains basking
alone. We can only guess at his feelings at being thus
deserted, knowing nothing of the imperative maternal
claims swaying the movements of his spouse. Hour
after hour passes, and still he Ues motionless, his
back just awash, and his head sunk beneath the sur-
face, his eyes closed, and his four broad paddles
hanging down motionless.

' Captain James, there's a fine Turtle asleep just a
little on the port bow. We're hardly movin', don't
you think we might lower a boat and see if we can't get
him ? I know just the trick of it. I've harpooned lots
of 'em in the South Pacific when I was whalin' there.'

' All right, Mr. Smith ; go ahead and wish you luck.'

The fine old barque is rounded to (there's hardly
enough wind to do it) and the brisk young second mate,
infecting the members of his watch with his own en-
thusiasm, gets the boat in the water in about ten
minutes. He takes the harpoon which he has properly
bridled long ago and whispers instructions to his crew
how ;o paddle quietly and obey the wave of his hand.



I



Homeward Bound



117



I



They creep up behind the dozing, listless, and deserted
Spharga, the second mate rises stiffly to his feet, raises
his iron and crash ! it has pierced calipee and calipash,
nor can any struggling on the part of the impaled one
release him from that awful barb. A considerable
wrestling ensues before the massive prize can be hoisted
into the boat, but it is effected without a capsize, and
presently, flushed with his triumph, Mr. Smith reports
himself to his skipper and the treasure is handed over to
the cook.

Meanwhile the fleeing spouse is making record time
towards her objective. Swimming just beneath the
surface she makes no ripple above, only a broad band
of lightmarks her passage, and all the hungry sea-people,
attracted by the glare, make respectful way for her.
They are ravenous, but she is invulnerable. The
broad fans of her paddles beat upon the sea with a
regularity akin to that of the propeller of a steamship,
and apparently as untiringly, until on the second morn-
ing she reaches the shining beach on one of the Grena-
dines which she has all along been aiming at, guided by
that mysterious homing instinct of which mere humans
knownothing. Atinysurf curdles round the snow-white
sand, a golden globe hangs in the sapphire sky, when
alone, and amid a perfect silence the great Turtle drags
herself cumbrously up just beyond high-water mark.

This is one of the secret places of the Almighty.
Far from all the iniquities of man's devising, here is
only beauty and peace as at the dawning of creation
when first the new-made earth arose from the enlight-
ened sea. Only a few timorous little birds watched the
upward progress of the Turtle, and expressed their
disapproval of her intrusion in quavering notes hardly
^^1 audible. Suddenly stopping, she changed from a
^^1 lethargic weariful attitude to one of furious activity.



I



ii8



The Turtle



The four flippers fling themselves as they did on the
passage, the sand flies around in a dense shower, almost
like a fog, until the central toiler is hidden from view.
When at last the smother subsides she is down in a pit
of her own digging and the work of egg-laying has begun.
It lasts for two days, and then carefully clarabering out
of that sandy hole where snugly lie one hundred and
fifty round white eggs, the weary mother devotes her
remaining energies to filling in the pit, burying her
treasures beneath a foot of loose sand, This completed
she lumbers painfully down to the sea and launches
herself into sublime peace on the bosom of the universal
mother, her task well done, her rest well won.

Day by day the great sun sheds his hfe-giving beams
upon that spot where, covered in beneath undistinguish-
able sand, lie the family of the Turtle Does she wonder
what has become of them ? Do the fish who shed their
roe in uncountable millions ever feel a pang of maternal
care ? Who can tell ? The mystery of motherhood
is so profound that one does not care to speculate.
For instance, I have a hen who has just hatched a brood
of ducklings. As best I can I have isolated her in a
spacious wire-fenced run from the many enterprising
chicks which are running loosely, about a hundred of
them. In spite of all my care these chicks do get in
with the ducklings and the mother-hen, generous
creature, forbids them not, allows them to share her
food, and when I drive them out, sets up an outcry as if
they were her very own. But one day last week one of
the ducklings got out, how, I cannot imagine. I went
at once to put it back, but, oh, the agony of the parent-
hen ! With widespread wings and gaping mouth she
hurled herself at the wire fencing where I was picking up
the squeaking flat-footed alien she had been cajoled
into nursing. Had she been free, I know she would



I


1



^^ The Beginnings of Turtle 1 19

have flung herself upon me with heroic carelessness as
to the result. And the youngster was not merely not
her own, but belonged to a totally different species !
Oh, the wondrous mystery of motherhood ! Who dare
attempt to define its limitations ?

Many days the sun shines upon that patch of sand,
until one morning there is a series of shiny upheavals,
little cones erected on the smooth surface. And
presently there emerges from the broken-up level a tiny
black Turtle about an inch across. Perfect in every
detail to the eye, but if yon handled him you would find
his shell quite soft. With amazing swiftness and
guided by God-given instinct he scuttles down to the
sea. A gentle wavelet greets him, lifts him to its bosom
and he is launched. No weight of family ties oppresses
him, he does not know his brothers and sisters swarming
after him along the same road, but he does know what
his first duty is — to seek adequate shelter. In his little
brain there is implanted a streak of caution, based upon
the fact that up till a certain period his protecting
armour is soft, no defence against hungry fish. What
then is he to do in order to live ? He has no one to
teach him, no parents to guide. Here instinct, that
amazing principle which I prefer to consider the guid-
ance of an omnipresent God in all His creatures, comes
into play. Closely clustered around these shores the
gulf-weed (Fucus naians) grows in tropical profusion,
holding within its branching fronds an astounding
abundance of marine life. And our little Turtle, feeling
his defencelessness, hies him into the heart of one of
these weed masses, being presently joined by some of
his relatives whose instincts have led them close after
him I
^M Here for a bUssful season the baby Turtles, all un-
^H. tended save by the all-knowing Intelligence, gather



120 The Ttirtle

and grow~ Here they feed unmolested, and knoir fiiat
their armour is hardening apace. Outside the httk
patch of weed-endosed sea they know that there is a
hoide of hungry monsters waiting for them. But they
care not. Never until fully protected by their natural
armour do they knowingly leave those cheerful f oodful
precincts. Yet it is true that occasionally stiajnng
too near the thin edges of the submarine forest, a baby
Turtle does get gobbled up by a hungry fish. And why
not? Paucity of imaginative power alone jnievents
me from depicting the reign of terror inaugurated in
that scanty weed-space among its smaller denizens.
How can we Uve, I can imagine them crying, when deep
down in our most cherished fastnesses come these tdack
ravenous interlopers devouring us ?

Here we must pause a moment to remember that
in the sea the interdependence is absolute, direct.
Every creature lives upon some other creature below
him (above in some few cases as }ret but vagudy
determined), and we are horrified to see the incessant
warfare that is waged. But, to use an historic
phrase » * let us clear our minds of cant.' Is not this
just as much a feature of the land as of the sea ? Do
not all living things of food value compulsorily contri-
bute their bodies to our upkeep ? Excepting of course
the vegetarian members of society, who prefer to take
their animal food-contribution at second hand. But
we stray from our Turtle. Presently he finds out that
his carapace is hard, and constitutes a perfect shdter
against all enemies, save those whose mouths are large
enough to take him in entire. And so ere long he bids
good-bye to the little weed-patch which has shdtered
him so long, and starts upon his voyage of life over the
trackless ocean.

Now it does not appear with any degree of accuracy



Mysteries of Growth I2l

what the Turtle, the Edible Turtle, lives upon during
his adolescence. There be Turtle who are known to
live upon strange foods, but in every case they are a
sort of compromise between Turtle and tortoise, or even
Turtle, tortoise, and lizard. Of these are the Emysaura
serpentina, dwelling in and around Oriental lakes and
rivers, and living indiscriminately upon small fish,
reptiles, and even small birds. The Gymnaptis of
African rivers feeds, dear creature, upon young croco-
diles, and evolves from that uncanny diet most delicate
flesh, which, albeit it is strongly flavoured with musk,
is most highly prized. But the Thalassians, or true
Sea Turtles, may eat fish alive or dead, or they may eat
certain kinds of weed ; all we can say is, that we do not
know what they eat nor how long they can fast, except
that from the time a Turtle has been ' turned,' say, on a
Jamaican beach until it has been converted into soup
for a Lord Mayor's banquet in London, it eats nothing,
and does not seem any the poorer for it.

Being of a lethargic habit, of course there is not
much waste of tissue. Having assisted at the butchery
of many Turtles just from the sea, and examined, as
was always my wont, the contents of their stomachs,
I have never found anything identifiable therein, ex-
cept a few stones and cuttle-fish beaks, which latter
looks as if the Turtle, like nearly all other sea fish and
mammals, eats cuttle, but is not proof positive. And,
beside, the squid is so plentiful in some weed-covered
spots of ocean, that if the Turtle grazed upon the weed
he could not help eating many cuttles at the same
time.

But, whatever our young friend eats, and wherever

he eats it, one fact emerges ; it agrees with him im-

^L mensely. He grows apace, his horny covering growing,

^B too, since he does not cast it like the Crustacea ; he leads



I



123



The Turtle



an exceedingly pleasant life, basking in the tropical
sun, or cruising leisurely in the cool depths free from
all danger, when once he has attained a weight of about
five-ajid-twenty pounds, which is within the first year
usually. After, no fish or mammal, however ravenous,
however well armed with teeth, interferes with the
Turtle ; he is the chartered libertine of the ocean.
When once he has withdrawn his head from its position
of outlook into the folds of his neck between the two
shells, intending devourers may struggle in vain to
make an impression upon him, but will always fail.

Now, this being the case, and considering the fecun-
dity of the Turtle {I counted over eight hundred eggs
once in the ovary of a Turtle turned by us in the Gulf
of Mexico), it seems strange at first sight that they are
not almost as plentiful as cod. So I believe they would
be, but for the fact that they lay their eggs where they
do, covered with a comparatively thin layer of sand, and
exposed to the ravages of many creatures, notably rats
and birds and crabs. Many a rich banquet do these
burglars have upon the fat mound of eggs deposited
by Mother Turtle, and it would be unpardonable over-
sight on their part to leave even one egg. This, of
course, accounts for a great many. As for the toll that
man takes, as in the case of nearly all deep-sea fish, it
may be neglected in taking into account the number
of Turtle which do not die of old age. It may be taken
for granted that what man gets of any deep-sea fish,
by comparison with what is eaten by the sea-people
themselves, is but as the crumbs of the banquet, the
skimming of the pot. But, by the operation of Nature's
own laws in thinning out any superfluity of any creature
anywhere, the Turtle is kept from becoming too niuner-
ous, harmless as he is. No one really knows how large
4 Turtle roay grow, but certainly there does not appear



I
i


Turtle as Food 123

to be muclT, if any, exaggeration attached to the
statements of Pliny and Strabo, who, describing the
Chelonophagi of the Red Sea, say that they utilised
the shells of the Turtles they had eaten as roofs to their
huts, and boats for their feeble voyages.

Strange to say, the handsomest Turtle, the Hawk's-
bill variety (Chelone imbricata), furnishes the worst
flesh, being so strongly flavoured with musk as to be
almost uneatable. This peculiarity would seem to
point to a diet of squid, since these mollusca are ex-
ceedingly musky. But it may not be out of place to
remark here that Turtle flesh, even of the best sorts

^is not nice. As Sam Weller's pieman hoarsely whis-
pered, ' it's the seasonin' as does it.' A diet of Turtle
steaks, or of hashed Turtle, or of Turtle soup, au naturel,
would soon sicken any one but a savage. For sixpence,
or its equivalent, in most of the West India Island towns
one can get a heaped plate of Turtle steak, with bread
or yams or sweet potatoes ad lib. But I never knew
even a hungry sailor that wanted more than one meal
a week of it, for all its cheapness.

The fact is that, in the cult of Turtle soup, we are
following (a long way off, it is true) the example set by
the Chinese, who love gelatinous soups, and pay fabu-
lous prices for the nests of the sea swallow, the Holo-
thuria, or sea-slug, and sharks' fins, simply because of
their gelatinous qualities. Yet, strange to say, they
do not put the same value on the Turtle as we do.
Turtle are many in number on the Chinese coast, and
the guileful Chinese fisherman has developed a splendid
plan for securing them with httle trouble to himself.
He captures some Remorae, those little sharks that are
so lazy that they have developed a sucking arrangement
on the top of their heads, whereby they may, and do,
attach themselves to anything that is likely to float


124



The Turtle



them into the vicinity of food to be obtained without
efEort. Carefully he welds a ring round their tails in
such wise that it cannot be pulled off, and to it he
attaches a thin, strong line ; then, putting out to sea
with six or seven of his unwilling helpers attached to
the bottom of his sampan, he gets a good offing, and
waits patiently for the appearance of a Turtle asleep
upon the sea. As soon as his keen eyes have detected
one, he paddles noiselessly in that direction until,
getting near enough, he ships his paddle and,with a long
bamboo, pushes off one or two or more of his Remorae.
Now all he needs to do is to keep them from fastening
on to the canoe again, for they speedily discover the
Turtle and attach themselves to him. When they have
done so, the quaint yellow fisherman in the boat needs
but to haul in, for you may, by pulling upon a Remorae
from aft, tear him in two pieces, but you cannot make
him let go his hold. And so despite his struggles, the
poor turtle must come, and presently yield himself to
be made soup of for the delectation of some ' number
one ' mandarin. This is also the method pursued by
some of the coast tribes of Eastern Africa, whose
appearance would seem to give the lie to any suggestion
of such a standard of intelligence as would utilise the
Remorae in so ingenious a way.

Our method, if I may call it so, of capturing the
Turtle is much less elaborate. Certain places are known
to be favourite haunts of the Turtle for egg-laying
purposes. Then all that is necessary is some safe
reservoir where the captured creatures may be kept
awaiting shipment, and a band of labourers who do not
object to night-work. When there is a good moon,
not necessarily full, we hide ourselves in convenient
quarters adjacent to the beach, and wait more or less
patiently until we see the first broad back, glistening in



\



A



Turtle Turning



125



the moonbeams like a silver shield, emerge from the
waves. The excitement becomes intense ; one feels
one's muscles crawling, as it were, so eager are we to
pounce upon our prey. But we must not, yet. The
first arrivals have fallen to digging and surrounding
themselves with a halo of fine sand, and others are
coming every few minutes, on the same errand bent.
At last, when the long stretch of beach is fairly covered
with the toiling Chelones, each in her own pit, labouring
to make the receptacle sufliciently deep for all the eggs
she has brought, our chief gives the signal, and, like
a band of brigands, we all rush forth betwtien the Turtle
and the sea, and halting one by one at the pits, strive to
turn the Turtle over by a dexterous twisting of the
hind flippers. Sometimes, and that not seldom, we
get hold of a Turtle that it would take three men to
turn over, and, holding on frantically, we are dragged
down through the blinding sand to the sea marge,
where we must let go or be drowned. Presently the
captured turtle, lying with feebly waving flippers on
their backs quite helpless, are towed by ropes attached
to them to our reservoirs or ponds, where they await
shipment to London. And from thenceforward, until
the chef draws his knife across their leathery throats,
the Turtle fasts. Never has he been known to eat in
captivity.

One point more in connexion with the Turtle before
we close this all-too-brief memoir. It is his amazing
vitahty. Most of the deep-sea folk possess this quality
of tenacious hold on life in a high degree, but none, as
far as I know, to nearly the same extent as the Turtle.
Without endorsing any such foolish remark as that
' they cannot die until the setting of the sun,' I can
truly say tliat I have seen the flesh cleared out of a
turtle-shell and bung upon a tree, where for hours the


126 The TtJrtIc

- »

qoiveriiig, convulsive movement of the mnsdes went
oa. Not only so, bat on one occasion only the head
and tail were left attached to the shell. Some time
had elapsed since the meat had been cat oat of the
carapace, and no one coold have imagined that any
life remained in the extremities. Bat a yoang Dane,
noticing that the down-hanging head had its month
wide open, very foolishly inserted two fingers between
those homy mandibles. They closed, and oar shipmate
was two fingers short, the edges of the Tartle's jaws had
taken them off clean, with only the mascalar power
remaining in the head. Then another man tried to
cat the homy tail off, bat as soon as his keen blade
touched it on the anderside, it carled ap and gripped
his knife so firmly that it was nearly an hoar before
the blade coald be withdrawn. Yes, the vitality of the
Tartle is imiqae, and bat that it has been so firmly
established and frequently experimented apon, stories
of it would have to be listened to with an utter in-
credulity. Signor Redi once cut a Turtle's head off,
and noted that it lived for twenty-three days without
a head ; and another, whose brains he removed, lived
for six months, apparently imconscious that it had
suffered any loss. This points to a very low order of
being, since such indifference to pain and deprivation
of members is characteristic of the lowest organisms.
Yet the turtle is a highly developed creature.



CHAPTER XII
THE CUTTLE-FISH OR SQUID

WE now come to the consideration of one of the
most widely distributed, most useful, and withal
most extraordinary of all the denizens of all the
seas, the curious shell-less mollusc known generally as
the Squid. For some strange reason, which I do not
pretend to fathom, an enormous number of otherwise
well-read people profess knowledge of him imder the
name of Octopus. Now it should be known that the Oc-
topus is a very humble member of this great molluscan
family, never growing very large, and entirely indebted
for his fame to the splendid but fatally inaccurate
pen of Victor Hugo in the * Toilers of the Sea.* If
high art in fiction be to clothe the utterly impossible
as well as improbable in such fascinating language
that the reader shall be crammed for the rest of his
life with absurdities, then Victor Hugo was indeed
the greatest fictional artist that ever lived. But
inaccuracy of statement is a peculiarly French cha-
racteristic, as most dabblers in science know very
well. However, I do not wish to be ungrateful, and
I will at once admit that, utterly imreliable as Victor
Hugo is in any matter of fact, the fascination of his
work is its own ample justification.

The hall-mark of all the Cephalopoday or head-
footed ones,' is hideousness, and their chief character-
istics, voracity and onmivorousness. To begin with



128 The Cuttle-fish or Squid

the Octopoda, or eight-footed ones, is to introduce at
once to the friendly reader's notice a mollusc he is
probably well-acquainted with by sight in some
aquarium, one that he has often shuddered over. In
truths even when very small, there is something ghastly
about the appearance of an Octopus. The sombre
brown of its body, the pustular skin, the eyes in which
a whole inferno of hatred of everything living seems
to be concentrated, the palpitating orifice at the top
of the head which is the entrance to its body, opening
now and then sufficiently to show the parrot-like beak
common to all the race, these are grisly features, but
the eight arms, writhing, curling, dinging like a
Medusa's hair, are the features of the Octopus which
hold the imagination captive.

My first experience of the Octopus was in a little
bay in Stewart Island, New Zealand. A small river
flowed into this bay, notable for its fine floimders,
and we (the crew of the ship in which I was then a
sailor) soon discovered an easy way of catching these
succulent fish. It was to wade about on the fine sandy
bed with bare feet, the water being only up to mid-
thigh, and when you felt the flat body wriggling under
your soles, tread firmly and stoop, groping in the sand
imtil you had your flounder safe between finger and
thumb, when you could raise him and put him in the
bag strapped across your shoulders.

By-and-by we discovered that the nearer the sea
the finer the flounders, and so one sunny afternoon
I was wading in the bay near the rivulet's mouth and
picking up some fine specimens. Suddenly, I trod
upon something like a blob of jelly. Fearing a sting,
for most jelly-fish {Medusae) sting like nettles, I made
to step off, only to feel both my legs gripped in several
places by something that clung as if it would eat into



I



I The Horrible Octopus 129

■the flesh. I stooped and felt a long whip-like tentacle
twisted round my right leg. I tore it off, a feeling of
nausea making me quite giddy. But no scxiner had I
removed one snaky thing than another held me, and
another and another. It is true the water was shallow,
only reaching to my hips, but I began to feel as if I
must be dragged under, drowned, and devoured by
this horrible thing, whatever it was.

Fortunately I retained some presence of mind,
and drawing my sheath-knife, I reached down cau-
tiously to where I felt the main body of the thing, and
avoiding my bare feet I stabbed steadily into the
central part of the beast, the body, as I supposed.
And I was quite successful, for presently I felt the dutch
of the tentacles round my legs relax, I saw the water
all distained with something which I then thought
was blood, but now know as sepia, and I smelt the
strong odour of stale musk, which all cuttle-fish have
if you meddle with them. Also I felt strangely sick
and ill. All a-tremble, at which I felt much ashamed,
and more so when, on forcing myself to pick up the
body of the thing, I saw that it was quite insignificant
in size. Its body proper was not much larger than
my two fists, while its eight tentacles were about
twenty inches in length. But the whole creature
looked so diabolical, an appearance which its colour,
a hght brown splashed with reddish spots, materially
helped. And I felt quite certain, too, that, had I been
laid hold of in water out of my depth by one of these
creatures, only a miracle could have saved me from
drowning.

Fortunately it is not the practice of the Octopus

lo swim about in mid-water, but only to crawl clammily

^^L about the bottom, dragging itself along by its quivering
^^B clutching arms, which stick to everytliing they touch



130 The Cuttlc'fish or Squid

with a grip that only the tearing off of the sucker will
release in many cases. Like the sharks, the Octopoda
are true scavengers, eating anything eatable which
conies in their way, but unlike the sharks they also
manage to get a good deal of living food, quite large
fish being often found in their clutches undergoing
process of demolition. In common with all the
moUusca, and more or less with fish generally, their
digestive powers are amazing, the food, a fish for
instance a foot long, being digested almost as it descends
into the maw. They are nearly all stomach and
tentacles, the other organs being insignificant. But
again, like all their near and distant relatives, they
pay a heavy penalty for their inability to grow a back-
bone, and incidentally for their succulence consequent
upon their appetite. No food is so much loved by
all fish of whatever kind in the sea as the flesh of the
Cephalopoda. Having no bones, and in most cases
no external armour to protect it, it falls a ready prey
to fish large enough to withstand the pressure of its
clutching arms and the onslaught of its tearing beak.
And although, like fish, it is oviparous and extremely
prolific, it does not increase in numbers to any extent,
from the fondness of other fish for the immature
Octopod ; and it has, like fish, no idea of maternal
care.

Now I would gladly, if I could, say a good word
for the Octopus on my root-principle of justice for
all. But I admit that it is very difficult. I do not
see, cannot see, why the Octopus is, except for the
purpose of providing abundant succulent food for
shapely fish prowhng along the shallow sea-bed. But
that remark only goes to show the depth of my
ignorance, common to all of us who study the fauna
ti the sea, of the real conditions of their ~



I



iy the fauna h
r lives. One fl


J



I

I

■



The Octopus of Fiction 131

thing, however, I do know, and that is that the many
sensational pieces of fiction which have been built up
Jules Verne and Victor Hugo fashion, are not worth
wasting thought over.

For first of all the Octopus does not grow to any
great size as far as we know, and certainly from the
fact of its habitat being invariably shallow waters,
we are in a far better position to know the facts as to
its limitations of growth than of any other Cephalopod.
Its limit of size, as far as at present ascertained, is
body about the size of a football, tentacles four feet
in length. Quite big enough to drown two or there
men at once, if only it got the opportunity, but how
far removed from the fearsome monsters of the French
novelists. To sum up, the Octopus is like the rest
of his appalling family, a fellow of whom no one can
conscientiously say much that is good ; but as with
the alligator, the mosquito, and the louse, since the
Lord has seen fit to create him and place him in his
present position, it does not become short-sighted man
to question that Supreme Wisdom.

Yet there is one point in the economy of the Octopus
which we may well admire, the wonderful arrangement
of sucking discs or acetabulae upon the inside of each
of his arms. Their number runs into hundreds, and
each of them is a perfect miniature receiver of an
air-pump, acting automatically. In one experiment
I made, I found that a sucker less than half an inch
across lifted a tin dish weighing over a pound, and held
it suspended in the air for several minutes. At this
time the Octopus had been some time out of water,
and was not far from death, so that Iiis power of suction
by means of his aceiabulae was very much diminished.
Finally, it may be laid down as a fact that the Octopoda
do exhibit an intelligence and a ferocity in attack upon


132 The Cuttle-fish or Squid

what they regard as a prey or an enemy, that is quite
disconcerting to observe in an invertebrate. But,
after all, what do we know of the intelligence of the
invertebrata ?

The Octopoda, however, form but one small branch
of the amazing family of the naked Cephalopods,
whose home is in the deep sea, and whose breeding-
place is no one knows where. Their divisions are as
numerous as the range in their size is wide, and that
is from the tiny Loligo of a couple of inches in length,
to the gigantic Cuttle-fish, whose limit of size is un-
known, but of which specimens have been seen as big
as an adult sperm whale. Now these Decapods, or
ten-armed ones, are, though of the same family as the
Octopods, of widely different habits, and are also widely
divergent in shape. For instance, the Octopus has
a body very nearly globular in form, without a sugges-
tion of taper to it, while all the Decapods have a
cylindrical body, at the apex of which, or that part
remote from the head (which yet we can hardly call
a tail), is a sort of vane like that on a ship's patent
log just above the propeller.

This vane has a definite purpose, now to be ex-
plained. It is obvious that no creature shaped like
the Cephalopoda, i.e., with a crown of long anns
branching out from the top of its head, can ever pro-
gress with any rapidity frontways, because the arms
would all spread out fan-wise, and prevent such a
manoeuvre. But the Squid or Decapod has that
matter arranged for. Its head wobbles loosely in
a wide collar of gristle, in one side of which there is an
orifice from which the creature can eject a jet of water.
When, therefore, it is necessary for a Cuttle-fish to
hasten away from the spot where it is, this
jet is put in motion, and the ejected water



I



I



his hydraulic M
er comes out H



The Use of Squid



133



with such force as to hurl the creature backward with
great speed, its ten arms trailing along in a compact
pointed bundle. Also that jet is stained with sepia,
so that the enemies following hard after may not be
able to see whither the chased has gone. Of course this
method of progression varies in its speed according
to the size of the creature, the smallest Squid being
able to leap out of water on to a ship's deck, where
every sailor has found them at some time or another
in low latitudes. The largest ones, that is, those
uiKjn whom the sperm whale browses, cannot, I should
say, move very fast ; but then all their movements are
shrouded in the deepest mystery.

The range of the Decapods is enormous. They
are found in some of their varieties in all the seas of
all His world, and there is no doubt that they form
the greater part of the food of all the higher vertebrate
fish. In certain seas it is hardly too much to say the
water is thick with the smaller kinds, and ttiis is of
course the case where there are shoals of fish, such as
cod, to be fed. For this is the use of the Squid. There
are few civilised people who care to eat Squid, although
they are really not bad-tasting, but there are no fish
that do not love this sapid mollusc, who has no pro-
tection whatever against their sharp teeth, no speed
to speak of, and no bones to hinder digestion.

In dealing with the numbers of the sea-folk, one
does not dare to compute, one can only deal in vague
generalities, but I well remember once catching a fish
we sailors know as a skip-jack, a kind of mackerel
smaller than a bonito, and averaging four pounds in
weight. There were many thousands around the
ship, all busily leaping after Squid. I baited my hook
with a piece of white rag and flicked it about from the
jib-boom until I hooked my fish. Taking him in, I


The Cuttle-fish or Squid

opened him and found within him twenty-four Squid,
packed as tightly within his maw as if they had been
forced down, yet he was ready for just another one,
or he would not have taken my bait. What countless
myriads of these small cuttles must be bred then, to
supply the needs of the millions of hungry fish hke my
skip-jack 1 J

On what are all these molluscs fed ? Here we mus»
leave them, for it is quite impossible to go lower than 1
them with any degree of certainty. That they are
all fed, are all fat and well-liking, is absolutely certain,
but the character of the individuals upon which they
feed is just beyond our ken, as is the answer to the
question of how do they enjoy their lives, being only
apparently bom to be chased and devoured. Yet
that last is presented by so many other members of
the animal kingdom that it almost ceases to excite
our wonder. It must be, we feel, that the absence
of prevision, of the power of anticipation, except
instinctively, is the compensating factor in all such
cases, preventing these myriads from dreading death,
and making them enjoy present life to the full. More-
over, lingering death, the slow agony of coming
dissolution, which humanity is so hable to, is almost
unknown among these lower intelligences. As a
rule, their transmutation, via the stomach of some
higher organism, into another form of being is swift
and painless, so much so, indeed, as to be almost
unnoticeable.

Ascending the scale of the deep-sea Cephalopoda,
we now come to a very different state of affairs. Not
only are the individuals larger, but they are better
armed, of higher intelligence, and fairly well able to
hold their own against fish very much their superiors
in size. In consequence, they are not nearly so prolific,


■
■



Insatiable Nightmares 135

although their numbers must be enonnous. Some
of them (I do not quote the appalHng nomenclature
given them by scientific naturalists) are amazingly
hideous in colour, in outline and disposition of armour
over their gelatinous bodies. So well are they protected
that it is exceedingly doubtful whether any animal
smaller or less well armed than the cachalot can ever
successfully interfere with them, while it is very certain
that, in addition to preying upon all or any of their
own kind inferior to them in size, they are terrible
enemies to the large fish who chance to stray within
the gloomy circle where they lie in wait, surrounded
by sepia-coloured water diffused from the natural
reservoir of that murky fluid.

In order that they may more fully and freely cany
out their nefarious designs, they possess eyes larger
and more powerful in proportion to their size than
does any other creature, not excepting insects with
their thousand-faceted eyes. These great optical
mirrors, black as an inkfwol and lidless, not even a
nictitating membrane shielding their all-embracing
glare, are set one on each side of the cylindrical head,
on which they occupy so much space that their side
edges nearly touch. And as the head itself is borne
upon a column of soft, gristly, boneless substance so
that it can turn every way, with a universal balt-and
socket-joint movement, it must be impossible for any
object to escape that devouring purview.

The adjuncts to the eyes are the restless tentacles,
a living, palpitating network, never still, always
quivering like the petals of a sea anemone, which most
people have watched in an aquarium, Then these
Cephalopoda have an additional weapon granted them
in that each one of the curious acetabular sucking discs
or air-pump receivers, whatever we like to call them.


136 The Cuttle-fish or Sqtsid

which h'ne the inside of each of the eight tentacula
and the ends of the two long ones, has a row of daws
like those of a tiger's set round its inner edge. And
when a victim touches one of those tentacles the suckers
cling and automatically the claws begin to tear, so
that a speedy journey down the gulf in the centre of
the group of arms must come as a sweet relief from the
sensation of being devoured by many mouths at once.

In the matter of food they are, like most of the
deep-sea folk, without any \nilgar prejudices. What-
ever they get that is eatable is the thing they want,
nor do they waste time and trouble in selection.
Presumably, though the study of these curious creatures
bristles with difficulty, different species inhabit different
depths, but nearly all the larger kinds prefer deep
waters, sav one hundred fathoms or so, while the small
ones like the Octopoda keep near the surface.

Coming to the largest of all, the gigantic Cuttle-
fish, several very curious facts present themselves at
once. The first is that as far back as the day of
Aristotle, Pliny, and iElian, the gigantic Cuttle-fish
was fairly well known and described. Pliny, indeed,
tells a story which, knowing what we know of the
habits of the Cuttle-fish as distinct from the Octopoda,
savours of the incredible. While he was consul in
Spain, he says, one of these monsters acquired the
bad habit of coming ashore by night and plundering
the salt-fish warehouses. It came once too often,
and was slain. Being brought under Pliny's notice
he conceived a joke. He caused the head to be cut
off, and a cask of fifteen amphorae capacity was filled
with it (somewhat larger than a sugar hogshead, we
must suppose). This he sent to his friend Lucullus
in Sicily to grace one of his memorable banquets,
adding that he knew his love for fish. He also adds



Cuttle-fish Yams 1 37

a few detaUs, such as that the arms were thirty feet
long, and so thick that a man's arms could hardly
meet round them at their bases, these arms being
provided with acetabulae large as basins holding four
or five gallons. Now, with the sole exception of the
burglarious habit of this Cuttle-fish, which if true has
certainly been discontinued by the creature's descen-
dants, these details are not very wide of possible and
probable truth, and indeed, well within the truth as
regards size of many that have been seen and described
of late years.

But coming down to medieval times, such writers
as Paulinus (who thinks that the great Cuttle must
be a vast crab), Bartholinus, Athanasius Kircher,
Olaus Magnus, and Pontoppidan, Bishop of Bergen,
we find quite a different style of writing, and a steep
descent into utter inaccuracy. Not being gifted with
either the literary ability or the judicial restraint of
the pagan writers, these Northern littiraieurs launched
into the wildest fables, and supplemented their literary
fancies by such outrageous caricatures that ordinary
minds very justly recoiled from them, feeling that
they could not be true. For instance, Pontoppidan,
though a bishop, was the author of a monstrous tale
built up from the simple story of some fishermen, who
imdoubtedly did come across the body of a vast
Cephalopod in the North Sea, and related their ex-
periences to him. No doubt they exaggerated, that
was only natural in them, but Pontoppidan's story is
wild as the Avatar of the Fish from the Mahabharata.

Very briefly his version was this : that a fleet of
ships while at sea sighted an island where no island
should be, and determining to explore this strange
land, anchored their vessels and landed. When
suddenly, to their horror, there arose around the island



138 The Cuttle-fish or Squid

k • • •

a multitude of serpent-like arms taller than the masts
of the vessels, which embraced the ships and collected
the crews until, with a horrible whirling of the whole
ocean, island and ships and men disappeared for ever.
And he does not even explain to us whence he derived
his information.

This creature is undoubtedly the Kraken of old
Norse legends, sufficiently awe-inspiring in its supreme
hideousness and its vast size to excuse the wildest
tale told by a shuddering eye-witness of its prowess
in those far-off days ; yes, even sufficiently terrible
to account for its being considered the originating
cause of the maelstrom off the Lofoden Islands, around
which so many hair-raising tales have clustered.

But what does seem incomprehensible to me is
that, after so many indisputable glimpses of the great
Cuttle-fish during those early years, the exaggerations
of the historians should have been able to cause such
a revulsion of feeling as to make people disbelieve
in the existence of such a creature at all. Yet that
is exactly what happened, in spite of the fact that very
many authentic records exist of appearances of the
creature. It is true that at the same time many fables
were current anent the appearance of the great sea-
serpent, most of which were doubtless due to hurried
glimpses of the gigantic Cuttle-fish in his conflict with
a sperm whale. But why stories of the mythical
sea-serpent should have been accepted, and accounts
of the real mollusc have been rejected, it is impossible
to say. It must, I suppose, remain a mystery.

An added wonder comes from the fact that the
American sperm whale fishery has existed for well over
a century, and during the whole of that time every
officer, to say nothing of the men, must have known of
the very real existence of the great Squid, since scarcely



Squid Superstitions



139



I



a sperm whale can be killed without first ejecting from
his stomach huge fragments of this popularly believed
by seamen to be the largest of all God's creatures.
Not only so, but in every book which has been written
about the sperm whale fishery some allusion to the
great Cuttle-fish will surely be found, although it must
be admitted that so much superstitiously childish
matter is usually mixed up with the facts as to make
the latter difficult of belief. For instance, Herman
Melville's wonderful Moby Dick, or the White Whale,
which is, and must remain, the classic up>on this subject,
both from the magic of its style and the accuracy of its
descriptions, has the following ; —

' Almost forgetting for the moment all thoughts
of Moby Dick, we now gazed at the most wondrous
phenomenon which the secret seas have hitherto
revealed to mankind. A vast pulpy mass, furlongs (?)
in length and breadth, of a glancing cream colour,
lay floating on the water, innumerable long arms
radiating from its centre, and curling and twisting
like a nest of anacondas, as if blindly to clutch at
any object within reach. No perceptible face or front
did it have ; no conceivable token of either sensation
or instinct, but undulated there on the billows an
unearthly, formless, chance-like apparition of life.
As with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared
again, Starbuck, still gazing at the agitated waters
where it had sunk, with a wild voice, exclaimed :
" Almost rather had I seen Moby Dick and fought
liim, than to have seen thee, thou white ghost."

' " What was it, sir ? " said Flask.

* " The great live Squid, which, they say, few whale-
ships ever beheld and returned to their ports to t^l
of it." '


140 The Cuttle-fish or Squid

Now this excerpt is typical of the way in which
appearances of the Squid were treated, and may
possibly account for the scepticism, in an age growing
with enlightenment, with which such stories were
received. But why, in the name of patience and
common-sense, visions of fragments of the animal
should be regarded as usual and natural, while to
view the entire beast portended the most awful
calamities, passes the wit of man to understand.
Certain it is that many of the old whale-men be-
lieved the Squid upon which the sperm whale feeds
to be one unthinkably vast animal sprawling upon
the sea-bed, and renewing with amazing facility
and kindliness such portions of his anatomy as the
hungry whales were continually biting off. But
probably this is more than enough of such fantastic
fables.

The plain facts about the gigantic Squid which
are well authenticated are few but substantial. First,
his habitat is certainly within the limit of five hundred
fathoms' depth and in places where there is much food
suitable for him, that is, fish of goodly size and smaller
members of his own species. And it would seem that
having found such a spot he is not willing to leave it,
being, although amazingly strong, of a sluggish,
lethargic habit. He does not pursue his prey ; he
waits like some unimaginable spider in the centre of
his web of far reaching tentacles, with his huge eyes
piercing the surrounding sepia-stained waters until
a quiver from one of the outlying arms sets the abysmal
mouth agape, the mighty parrot-like mandibles clashing
as the struggling victim is conveyed inwards. He has
no care, no difficulty of providing food. All he needs
comes to him, and what an all that must be ! I have
myself seen a creature of this species in the act of being



Squid Mysteries



141



devoured by a sperm whale, whose length could not
have been much less than sixty feet, exclusive of the
tentacles, and whose girth would be about fifteen or
twenty feet, Tlie devouring capacity of such a
creature must be of fabulous dimensions, since, as
before noted, while all the sea-folk have amazing
digestive powers, the Cephalopoda are pre-eminent
in this direction. Their bodies may roughly be de-
scribed as bags of digestive juices which dissolve the
food as it comes in, and like the parabolic daughters
of the horse-leech, the cephalopod's stomach, that is
to say, almost his whole body, is ever crying ' Give,
give,' and never says ' Hold, enough.'

Since evjn this vast mollusc's very existence has
been strenuously denied up till quite recent years by
scientific naturalists, it follows that we have but few
details concerning him. Some things, however, we
may know by inference, and amongst them are the
following. The gigantic Cuttle-fish must be very
prolific. He is the principal food, the main support
of the sperm whale, and as this vast mammal's numbers
are incalculable, and each individual needs, at the
very lowest computation, a ton of food per day to keep
him going, the numbers of the mollusca upon which he
feeds must be proportionate. As to the numbers of
the sperm whale I may say, in passing, that it has
several times been my lot to witness an assemblage of
cachalots, all of the largest size, covering an area of
ocean as far as the eye could reach from the masthead
of our ship in every direction. That is to say, we were
the centre of a circle of vision thirty miles in diameter,
and wherever the eye rested in that circle it saw sperm
^^ whales spouting. Only to think of the amount of food
^^L required for that stupendous host makes the mind
^H^ reel.



I



142 The Cuttlefish or Squid

Next, he must grow very rapidly. As I have
before stated, I think, it is the almost invariable habit
of the sperm whale to eject the contents of his stomach
just before death. All that I have seen die did so with
one exception, and that one died so suddenly that he
did not even go into the usual ' flurry,' or death agony.
And all the fragments ejected were of enormous size,
showing conclusively that they had been bitten from
monstrous Squid. What is more remarkable is that
1 never saw entire ones vomited up, although I cannot
but believe that they, the cachalots, must swallow a
great many of medium size, say from six to ten feet
long or so, entire. I did once see a fairly comprehensive
collection of Cuttles and vertebrate fish in the stomach
of a stranded whale, and I see no reason to suppose
that there was anything singular about him ; but
with regard to the ejecta from the whale's stomach
while dying, in my whole experience it is as I say,
they were fragments of mollusca of the most heroic
size.

Another fact, and that one of the most curious
connected with this strange creature, is the scent of
musk which he exhales. Most of us know that sepia,
the artist's sepia, bought in tubes or cakes, is musky
to the smell, but few connect it with the natural odour
of the Cuttle-fish. It shares this odour with the
alligator, musk-rat, and musk-deer, wherein is con-
cealed another mystery of Nature. But it must be
admitted, I think, although I do not know what
perfumers would say on the point, that none of the
musk obtainable from these animal sources has the
sweetly delicate scent of the Mimulus tnoschaius, or
garden musk, which makes oiu" gardens so fragrant
after a shower of rain. Such as it is, however, the
■cent of the Cuttle-fish undoubtedly gives its valuable



I



I


Musk and Marriage 143

qaality to that strange substance, ambergris, which
is secreted by the sperm whale alone. It always
smells faintly of musk and always has Cuttle-fish
beaks imbedded in its substance. But its properties,
apart from those fantastic attributes which Arabian
superstition has attached to it. are not those of a
perfume, but of a power that accentuates, heightens
the quality and pungency of any distillation of perfume
to which it is added. Surely a strange product of
such a weird monster brooding in the depths of the
sea.

These few facts almost exhaust what we know of
the gigantic Cuttle-fish. It is credited with other
qualities, whicli we need not place too much faith in,
namely, that it can introduce one of its tentacles into
its stomach and withdraw from thence any substance
which is causing it uneasiness ; that it can, if bereft
of a limb, set to work at once and reproduce the lost
member ; and that when food runs short below it
can come to the surface, and finding a becalmed ship,
lay her aboard and collect from her cabin, forecastle,
and rigging, every member of the crew. Strange
enough in all conscience, but no stranger, surely, than
the fact I reserve for the last. The gigantic Cuttle-
fish has no mate, at least none that he ever knows.
But at certain seasons he grows an additional tentacle,
a curious, dwarfed, club-headed thing, which looks
strangely out of place among the ten ordinary ones. In
due time this extra tentacle matures. It then detaches
itself from the crown of its source and floats away.
In due time it finds the predestined spouse, to which
it immediately attaches itself. And in this extra-
ordinary fashion is the gigantic Cuttle-fish reproduced
— surely the strangest in all natural history and only
comparable to the grafting of fruit-trees. But the


144 The Cuttle-fish or Sauld

latter is not nearly so wonderful, seeing that it is
most carefully carried out by the hand of man and
with all the resources of his intelligence.

With this I complete these all-too-brief sketches
of the sea mammals, Sharks and Cuttles. All of
these creatures are so sufficiently interesting, and have
so many anecdotes clustering around them, that they
might well claim a book to themselves. But, in
pursuance of the original idea of these sketches I have
sternly resisted the temptation to *pad' them out,
feeling sure that the scantier the information given'
consistent with interest, the better will it be retained.
We now come to the fish of the deep sea. I do not
suggest that the shark, already dealt with, is not a
fish, but he is a fish in a distinct category by himself.
I have noted most of his peculiarities, and feel sure
that my readers will agree with me when I say that
he must be kept apart from what most of us under-
stand as fish. Wholesome fish with scales and fins,
that is ; fish that we can all recognise as such, whether
they swim the deep sea or frequent the rivers and
ponds.

Not, be it undertsood, that I would cast any
reflection upon a fish because he was not beautiful,
as say a mackerel or a red muUet. That would be
unfair, especially as I remember a fish I was once
acquainted with in Hobson's Bay, called locally the
* flat-head.' It was simply hideous, and its colour
that of dark mud. Moreover, the only way to get it
oflf a hook without the certainty of getting a poisoned
wound, that would certainly incapacitate one for a
week or two, was to fling it down and stick a knife
through the base of its head, and so, holding it impaled,
to extract the hook. Yet as food it was in every way
superb, white and sapid in flesh, and in flavour de-



Beauty versus Utility I45

licious. Some of the most brilliantly beautiful fish
I have ever known have been the most dangerous to
man because of their poisonous qualities. And con-
versely, some of the most ungainly, dull, and quaint-
looking fish, such as all the flat fish undoubtedly are,
are the most useful, the most valuable. With fish
as with us, beauty is but skin deep, and is but little
index to the deeper and more lasting qualities.



10



CHAPTER XIII
DEEP^EA CHIMERAS

IN this chapter it becomes necessary for me to depart
ahnost entirely from my usual practice of drawing

upon personal experience, for very obvious reasons.
The extraordinary creatures of which I am about to
write I have called chimaeras, since their aspect is quite
ouirS and startUng, even horrible, enough to justify the
epithet fully. And, fortunately for the peace of mind
of sailors, the latter very rarely come in contact with
them. They have their abode in varying depths of
the dim and silent sea, and only of comparatively late
years has any study of them been possible.

The epoch-making voyage of the * Challenger '
furnished much of the material for Dr. Giinther's
magnificent work on deep-sea fishes, and since that
time other nations, notably and principally the Ameri-
cans, have been canying on the same deeply interesting
work. One striking result of oceanic investigation
has been the establishing as a certainty that fish, highly
developed and normally organised fish, can and do
exist at great depths, but what those depths are cannot
in the nature of things be determined with any accuracy.
For the net in which these fish are caught is open all
the time both descending and ascending, and con-
sequently fish which are well known to be surface
dwellers have been drawn up, much distorted, from a
depth of two thousand fathoms or more.

X46



Deep' Sea Mystery



147



Also it follows from the method necessarily employed
in their capture that great and extraordinary as are the
varieties of deep-sea fish now known, there must be a
very great number more who, by reason of their agility
or their size, have never been, and can hardly be ex-
pected to be, caught. Still, of shell-fish or slow-moving
species of shell-less fish a goodly harvest has been
gathered from all depths, even to the greatest, so that
it is now known that in the most profound abysses of
ocean, such as that vast chasm in the South Pacific on
the north and east of New Zealand, where a measured
depth of nearly thirty-one thousand feet has been
plumbed, there is abundant life at the bottom, although
it is, as far as is known, of a low order.

In these days of amazing strides in science it is
extremely risky to prophesy of anything that it can
never be fully investigated, but if there be one thing of
which it seems safe to predict that our knowledge has
almost reached its limit, it is that of life at great sea-
depths. For one thing, and that an exceedingly im-
portant one, such investigation can promise no great
commercial or even scientific gain. Its pursuit can at
the best be only rewarded by the acquisition of much
curious, out-of-the-way knowledge of a side of life at
present involved in deepest mystery. But just because
it is so mysterious, because the conditions of living at
those vast depths, under those amazing, almost unthink-
able pressures, is almost as difficult for our sense-
perceptions to apprehend as those of life in Jupiter or
Saturn or the Sun, so ardent seekers after new truth
will undoubtedly be irresistibly attracted by what I
should like to call Oceanology, the term Oceanic
Ichthyology being to my mind far too cumbrous for

^m ordinary use.

^H It has several times been my privilege (not at all



150 Deep-Sea Chimeeras

the deep sea during this last quarter of a century. The
salient note of these chJmferas strikes me as being
paradox. You shall find one fish of normal shape with
enormous eyes, which will strike one as being indicated
as necessary at those dim depths. But the next one,
apparently of the same species as far as outline goes and
depth of habitat, has but the rudiments of eyes, mere
pin-points of black on each side of the head. Again,
two fish are brought up from apparently the same
depths. One has an enormous body, with corre-
sponding stomach, and a mouth which will barely admit
the little finger ; the other has a body Uke a whip-thong,
or, say, a small eel, tapering to a vanishing point, and
a mouth hke a peUcan's exactly. One fish will have a
stomach large enough to contain a fish as big as himself
(the stomach expanding, of course) in the usual situa-
tion for that organ ; another has a maw equally large,
but it is on the back ! for all the world like the hump
of a deformed camel. Other fish have immense tail fins,
while close relatives have absolutely none, their bodies
tapering off to nothing, without the vestige of a fin.

Now I am fully aware that all this sounds like
the rioting of a luxuriant imagination, but the illustra-
tions are taken from life, and I do not think they
will lead any one to believe that I have exaggerated
at all. And it should also be remembered that those
specimens that we have, picked up as they have been
in widely separated areas of ocean and at various
times, are not hkely to be even representative of the
strange sub-oceanic life. They only afford a glimpse,
as it were, into this secret realm of Nature where she
has outdone herself in the fashioning of strange mon-
sters. One other remark must be made before pro-
ceeding to particularise some individuals ; it is con-
cerning light.


Self Illuminators



151



Most of us know well how in the marvellous economy
of Nature the sea is illuminated, and that brilliantly
too, by the presence of myriads of infusoria emitting
phosphorescence. The slightest agitation in the sea
causes these marine glow-worms or fire-flies to shed
all the light they are capable of, and thus the passage
of one fish is made exceedingly obvious to another,
who may be pursuing him or desirous of avoiding him.
But this illumination varies in degree from differing
causes, and sometimes the sea is almost totally devoid
of any light. It may be, too, that as this natural
Ught is affected in degree by certain causes operating
near the surface or horizontally, so it is affected by
vertical position. We do not know. What we do
know is that many deep-sea iish have, as it were,
their own electric light installation, row upon row or
group after group of tiny incandescent lamps, glowing
and fading at the will of their owner, rendering him
invisible at will or lighting up the surrounding sea so
that none of his intended victims may be hidden.
These tiny glow-lamps are arranged along the sides
and head of the iish in strangely regular rows or groups,
each differing species that possess this system of
self-illumination having them different.

One thing more. In dealing with these fearsome
denizens of the vasty deep I must perforce use the
no-less appalling nomenclature given them by natu-
ralists, since other names they have none. For
this I hope, under the circimistances, I shall be
forgiven.

It is a commonplace with naturalists in dealing
ith dee|>-sea fish that several of their most interesting

!cies have come fortuitously to hand. No amount
of care or scientific appliances could have secured
them, and but for the accident of their coming to the



lorg
fcritl


152 Deep-Sea Chimacras

surface occasionally under the stress of some com-
pulsory circumstance of which we know nothing,
we should never have known of their existence. Of
such is the Regalecus or Oar-fish, so called from the
fact that it has the two ventral fins, which spring
from the throat, if you please, just beneath the pectorals,
enormously elongated, slender and with paddle-shaped
terminals, as if, indeed, it had developed two oars to
assist its progress through the water. But its chief
claim to our notice lies in the fact that it has undoubt-
edly furnished forth the materials for many a sea-
serpent story, as will be seen in the chapter on sea-
serpents.

It has been found stranded in many places round the
world, in places as widely separated as England, India,
and New Zealand. Dr. Giinther records nearly fifty
instances of its being found and carefully examined,
so that its existence admits of no doubt. It has been
found twenty feet in length, by about eighteen inches
in depth, but very narrow in proportion. And it is
more than probable that it grows very much longer
than this in its mysterious haunts in the deep sea.
It has a large dorsal fin extending the whole length
of its body, developing at the front end into nine
spines, from twelve to eighteen inches in length,
which branch out diagonally forward over the creature's
nose, but curve backward towards the tips. Its head
is insignificant compared with its body, and its curiously
small mouth, not at all unlike a sturgeon's, is destitute
of teeth, showing its absolute harmlessness.

For some reason difficult to understand it has
been called by fishermen the King of the Herrings,
Perhaps they connect its appearance with large catches
of that useful fish, but one would have thought that
the title must belong of right to the tarpon, which



I

I



A Possible Sea'Serpent 153

is a bona fide herring and sometimes scales in the
vicinity of two hundred pounds.

It will, I think, be readily understood that a great
serpentine fish Uke this, totally unlike any other
fish with which the ordinary fisherman or sailor is
acquainted, appearing with sinuous, stealthy gliding
along the sea-surface, say in the early twilight of
morning, might very easily give rise, with a little
quite excusable exaggeration, to a story of a sea-serpent.
It will be remembered too, that, in many sea-serpent
yams, the monster is represented as having a mane
and oar-like fins. Here in Regalecus the conditions
are favourable to such a description — the extraordinary
dorsal development and the oar-shaped ventrals
midoubtedly lending themselves to such a conclusion.
As with the rest of the deep-sea chimaeras, nothing
is or can be known of the habits of the Regalecus.
We can only say that it has an enormous range of
habitat, lives in deep water upon small organisms,
and is sometimes constrained to come to the surface,
when, if near shore, its feeble powers of locomotion (I
have omitted to state the tail fin is entirely absent)
are not sufficient to enable it to keep off the land.
In colour the Regalecus is a silvery grey, with a few
darker spots near the tail. Deep-sea fishes do not
run to elaborate colourings.

The next monster down for notice is a very good
specimen of the deep-sea chimtera, Chiastnodon niger.
It is a veritable nightmare in appearance, being entirely
black in colour, with a mouth that cleaves the head
asunder laterally for its whole length, so that vulgarly
speaking, when its mouth is wide open it has no profile.
This immense mouth is furnished with equally effective
r .teeth, which are not only found in the jaws but on the
[ palate also. Its front teeth are hooked and piovable,


154 Deep-Sea Chimaeras

so that while they may be pushed inward to admit of
the entrance of prey, they effectually prevent it from
coming out. This peculiarity is explained by a slight
examination of the creature's feeding habits. It can
and does swallow entire fish actually larger than itself — •
which sounds impossible, but it is not. For the belly
of this atrocious glutton is like an india-rubber bladder
which may be expanded amazingly. And consequently
by dint of pereeverance Ckiasmodon can and does draw
himself on to the body of another fish, as it were, until
the visitor is snugly coiled away in that expanding
bag, which being transparent, shows plainly from the
outside the position of its occupant.

In other respects Chiasmodon is rather an elegant
fish, quite normally fish-like, which one would hardly
expect, considering the great depths from which it
has been brought. The ' Challenger's ' trawl brought
up one in mid-Atlantic from a depth of one thousand
five hundred fathoms, or nine thousand feet. Another
specimen was brought up from a depth of three hun-
dred and twelve fathoms, near Madeira. But several
have been foimd floating upon the sea-surface, having
succumbed to a very natural disaster considering
their habit of gorging, namely, they have burst !
And the tissues becoming inflated with gas have
rapidly raised the dead mass from the immense depths
in which it has lived to the revealing glare of day,
to become the wonder and awe of us beings of the
surface. This extraordinary creature is one of the
best known and most fully described of all the abyssal
fish, as it is certainly one of the most wonderful.

Two very peculiar httle fish next demand notice
from the fact that, although very similar in size, in
outline, and in depth of habitat, they have in certain
respects the most widely marked differences imaginable.



I



I


Sea Paradoxes



155



They are black, chubby creatures, with enoimous
mouths compared with their length, which in the
specimens given is from four to five inches. And they
are called Rondelelia and Celomimtis. Now Rondeletia
has an eye, of which the diameter is one-sixth the
length of the head, or about twice as large in proportion
to its size as is the human eye. Cciomimus has an
eye which is but a point hke a pin's head, its diameter
being one twenty-third the length of the head, or less
than the sixteenth of an inch. Rondelelia has no trace
of a lateral line, that general characteristic of fishes,
but Ceiomimus has double lateral lines, the two parallels
being joined here and there by bands much hke the
ladder tape of a Venetian bhnd. The depths from
which these strange little fish have been taken vary
from one thousand to one thousand five hundred
fathoms.

As an instance of the diversity obtaining between
deep-sea fish, scarcely any specimens could be found
more appropriate than Simenchdys and Eurypharynx,
whose amazing names are really justified by the
queeiness of the fish. Simenchelys abides anywhere
from one to five hundred fathoms down. He is black,
a dirty black, as are most of the deep-dwelling fish,
and has a comfortably stout body, much hke that of a
stalwart eel. But his mouth gives great occasion
for wonder as to how he can possibly obtain food
through such a tiny opening. It is the most insignifi-
cant orifice imaginable, comparable only (and pro-
portionately) to a hole made in the end of a sausage
with a flat skewer. But presently it is found that
this queer fish is really a sort of gigantic leech. He
attaches himself to the bodies of the larger, fleshier
fish, such as the halibut, and by sheer force of suction
and boring withal works his ravenous way right into


156 Deep'Sea Chimasras

their bodies, at what misery to his involuntary hosts
can only be imagined.

It 18 curious and instructive to compare him with
Eurypharynx, well sumamed Pdicanoides, who, with
a body like the thong of a stock-whip, has a head about
thrice its body's bulk, and jaws opening exactly like
the mandibles of a pelican. This amaadng mouth
splits the big head right in two lengthways, and the
eyes are situated right at the end of the upper jaw,
looking indeed like tiny nostrils, for they are mere
points. Yet for all its fearsome appearance this is
evidently one of the most harmless of fish. It appears
to live upon the tiniest marine organisms, which in
some unexplainable way it collects in its chasm of a
mouth from the surrounding sea. It has no teeth, a
tail tapering off like the lash of a whip, and for all
sign of fins a series of spines protruding from its back
and belly without any membranes between them.

A deep-water fish akin to Chiasmodon, and found
at a depth of nine hundred fathoms, has an even wider
mouth, but no teeth in the lower jaw. Its only fins
are a pair of rudimentary pectorals with the gill-slits
behind them. About fourteen inches of its body is
mainly stomach, through the walls of which transparent
organ may be seen calmly reposing the body of a
large fish which has been induced to take up its per-
manent abode there. But the rest of the body, four
feet or so, is like a whip-lash. In the specimen before
me there appears to be one fish going ahead and another
going astern, two heads on the same body, for the head
of the swallowed fish seems about to emerge from the
rear of the stomach and swim away. It is a very quaint
beast indeed, and rejoices or suffers under the euphoni-
ous epithet of Saccofharynx fiagellum.

Alepisaurus ferox is the name given to a fish that



A Swift Glutton



157



I



at nrat sight is not at all unlike the gigantic mackerel
called the sword-fish. Its body is certainly somewhat
slenderer, and it has no sword protruding from its
upper jaw, but in contour of body, arrangement of
fins, and especially the huge sail-hke dorsal, it is very
similar. This List extraordinary member is hke the
upper third of a circle, cut off horizontally. In the
centre it is twice as high as the body is wide, and its
limits fore and aft are from the neck to a few inches
forward of the tail. Its head is ferocious-looking
enough to justify its Latin title, even if its fierce
voracity were not known by the contents of its stomach,
one having been found with twenty-seven specimens
of the spiny lump-fish within its maw. It has not
many teeth, but they are large and fang-like, also they
point backwards into the mouth, obviously to prevent
the wriggling outwards of living prey. Like several
other predatory fish whose attacks are characterised
by swift directness, this creature has the lower jaw
longer than the upper, reminding one strongly of the
pike. Altogether A . ferox is an elegant warlike- lookiTg
fish, whose appearance is not at all ouiri, even though
it does frequent great depths.

Its range is very great, specimens having been found
in the North-Western Atlantic, in Austrahan seas,
and in the Northern Pacific, But this may safely
be predicated of nearly all deep-sea fishes, the tempera-
ture below a thousand feet being everywhere the same,
except where submarine geysers send their boihng
waters up into the superincumbent ocean. And as
the composition of the ocean waters is practically
the sam« everywhere, it may be reasonably inferred
that denizens of waters below the fixed temperature
line will be found all the watery world over wherever
the ocean is deep enough, which, indeed, has so far



^



15^ Deep^Sea ChimaBras



proved to be the fact wherever the number of in-
dividuals caught admits of distinction of habitat.

The chief wonder about this fish, however, is its
extreme fragility. It is so brittle that hanHling it is
almost an impossibility without breaking it. It is
quite impossible to preserve an entire specimen
without some portion of its fins being damaged, and
should it be let fall it would shiver like glass. Dr.
Giinther says that ' this is a condition consequent upon
their withdrawal from the pressure of the water to
which they are exposed in the depths where they
dwell. When within the limits of their natural haunts
the osseous, muscular, and fibrous parts of the body
will have that solidity which is required for the rapid
and powerful movements of a predatory fish.' This
is indeed a curious state of things, that a creature
too fragile to endure handling at the surface can
indulge in fierce, relentless warfare in those awful
depths, where pressures are so great as to force water
through the pores of cast steel. But there is no doubt
about the fact, for some of the lightest shells known,
a species of Janihtna, more like a soap-bubble than
anything stronger, have been dredged up from enormous
depths, and, lying upon the laboratory table, an
incautious breath has shattered them.

I judge from this peculiarity on the part of deep-sea
fish that a curious fish, often found after the cold
weather lying upon the beaches in various parts of
New Zealand, must be a deep-sea fish. It is locally
called a Frost-fish. It is very long, five feet or so,
and narrow, only about four inches wide by two inches
thick. It has a very large mouth and quite insignificant
fins, tail included, but dorsal fins running the whole
length of its body. Lying upon the beach in the
moonlight, it looks like a riband of silver, and running



A Deep'Sea Beauty



159



I



incautiously up to one once, I found to my astonishment
that as I lifted it by the middle it broke into four
pieces as if it had been a bar of lightly frozen snow.
It is a fish much prized by New Zealand folk for the
table, but it is never caught except when it gets
stranded as I have described. It is almost if not quite
identical with Benthodcsmus Allanltcus, found in the
stomach of a halibut caught on the Grand Bank of
Newfoundland, also in the West Indian Seas, South
Pacific, and coast of Japan.

A fish of only quasi deep-sea habits, whose name,
bestowed by naturalists, boasts of eleven syllables,
Lopholalilus chamaeleonliceps, was a quarter of a century
ago an object of deepest interest and discussion among
that hardy and most enterprising class, the American

■ deep-water fishermen. In 1879 it is recorded that
the ' Wm. V. Hutchings,' while setting trawl-lines
for cod on Nantucket shoals, caught several hundred
specimens. It was entirely unlike anything ever
known in American waters, and as it weis large, averag-
ing three feet long by ten inches high and four inches
through, it was thought and hoped that a discovery of
great commercial value had been made. And the
first thing done was to give it a handy name, without
regard to any fitness of application. So it was called
the Tile-fish, from the fourth syllable of its hybrid
Grsco-Latin name Lopholatitus.

■ Most unusually. Dr. Goode, who describes it, goes

into something very like a rapture over it, even to
the length of using superlatives. In addition to the
usual notes upon structure, etc., he says: "The
colours are very beautiful, and in general appearance
when taken from the water it is one of the loveliest
^H fish we have ever seen, no exception being made in
^H favour of the brilliant parrot-fish or angel-fish of the



i6o


^^*^p^. ZHOCKZSIXL. C2223)C7K iJiFOn^h JMljilA-flBBB aod



ts> rcET-«sis bdov, and aflly-wiiite
tsnrar& isie nrdam lizie <£ i^ bcSr. ^ead rosjr.



Tiocias, ssd izader-^ide cf ibe bead pcBdp-«3xite» with
JB ttcosafOBal tiot oi ksioQ-TcBow, tins nost pn>-
flABBoed 23 froEit of ibe ^^w-ii^^ sad <ai tiie anterior
porboD cf vestrsl fis. Back vidi xoBeroos macula-
txtts cif birJig^iit kazkOQ gt galdeai. Aail fin pmpIWi,
vsfh Uae astd rose tints, ixidescaent. Maig^ of anal
fr& ndb pjrplisb-Uiae; irkifsnffnt lake tiie nost beantzfnl



tibe vbck; fin, vlikii has laige ydlov
The knrer border s ros^^xiloarBd like die bdtjf, and
the base of the fin also partakes of this genenl hoe.
Dashes of milk-wfaite on the base id the anal fin
between the rajrs. Pectocals septa-coloared with rosy
and poiplish indescenoe.'

There is not reallv much wonder that the learned
6rjct*jr shc/uld go in for word-paintiag like this, es-
pecially as the subject of his remarks is beantifol in
torm as weU as colour, and nearly all the fishes he had
hith-erto been describing are black, leaden-grey or
liv'id toad-belly white. But apart from the ^endour
of this nsh, its brief historv as one of the American
fo<>d &shes is a marvellous object-lesson in the
climatic infiuences afiecting fish. In 1S79 the first
catch of a large number was reported as noted
above, and throughout the years 1880-82 the
governmental fishery vessels were busy examining
the sea for the limits of the new (?) files' feeding-
^ound and experimenting on the best way of
catching them,



A Gigantic Holocaust i6l

But early in 1882 vessels amving at the North-
Eastera American ports reported passing large numbers
of dead or dying fish floating over an area of many
miles, of which the majority were Tile-fish, It very
soon became apparent that an awful destruction of
fish had taken place, for vessels reported having sailed
through floating fish for forty, fifty, and sixty miles.
And in one case, the schooner ' Navarino ' reported
having sailed for one hundred and fifty miles through
w&ters covered from horizon to horizon with dead
and dying fish. There were no signs of disease on
the victims, or deadly parasites, and conjecture was
busy as to the cause of this wholesale destruction of a
newly discovered and valuable food-fish ; whether
submarine volcanoes, with their concomitants of heat
and poisonous gases, or a sudden fall in the temperature,
was responsible. Finally, through the researches of
Professor VerriU, it was decided that owing to the
prevalence of heavy northerly gales and the presence
of much coast ice in the north, the normaUy high
temperature of the Gulf Stream and its vicinity had
been suddenly lowered, bringing death to countless
millions of its sensitive inhabitants. And this theory
pressed for acceptance, as there had been no indications
of any submarine volcanic disturbances.

So complete did the destruction of the Tile-fish
appear to be, that a chapter was devoted to it by
I Mr. Lucas in the Report of the National Museum
[- (Washington) for 1889, on ' Animals Recently Extinct.'
For all attempts made by the Fishery Commission
vessels to obtain even a single specimen were fruitless.
But in 1892 several specimens were obtained in its
old haunts, from a depth of between seventy and
eighty fathoms of water, thus restoring the Tile-fish
to its place on the lists of existing fish of the American



^



l62 Deep^Sea Chlmasras

coasts, and it is hoped that in doe time it may once
more attain to its former abmidance.

In concluding this notice of the Tile-fish, I fed
that an apology is due to him for classing him at all
mider the heading of chimaeras, from which catq^ory
his beauty both of form and colour should certainly
keep him distinct. The same feeling prevents me from
going into details concerning the haUbut, various sorts
of flounders and soles, and gurnards also, all of whom
are found in very deep waters, but are none of them
chimaeras in any sense. It seems a pity that, now
the narrow seas have been so well fished for soles and
flat-fish generally that the price of them is becoming
prohibitive, there could not be devised some means
for fishing those greater depths, in which it seems
fairly certain huge supplies of them are to be found,
apparently awaiting the coming of usefulness to man-
kind.

From the foregoing pages many very queer fish
have been excluded because of their trivial size. For
in tiny creatures both of land and sea we are accus-
tomed to see strange developments of form and colour,
and they excite no wonder. If, however, we could
find a creature as large as a horse developed into the
similitude of, say, an ant, or a bull into a beetle, our
wonder would be almost beyond bounds. For this
reason I have not mentioned the marvellous genus
of fishes in the profundities of ocean who carry their
own installations of electric light as it were. They
are truly amazing, yet not more so than the fire-fly
or the glow-worm, and they are all of insignificant
size, say from four to six inches long. There is just
this difficulty though about dealing with them ; it
may very well be that the larger ones are too swift
and too wary to be taken in the trawls of the fish-



Little Freaks of Nature 163

commission vessels. They may grow in those un-
known depths to a very great size for all we know,
but we never see them, nor does it appear that we are
ever likely to. Unless indeed it were found possible
to use a large form of fish-trap, a wicker or wire con-
trivance, into which fish of quite large size can squeeze
their way after the bait it contains but cannot get
back again. The entrance is set round with long,
flexible, sharp-pointed wires directed inwards and
converging to a very small space. The fish, however
sluggish, can easily squeeze through, but if he attempt
to withdraw, the points of the wires effectually prevent
him.

One small species of fish I feel must not be neglected,
for several reasons. I say ' one species ' although
the funny creatures have amazingly differing titles.
But they all look very much alike, are all a kind of
angler fish, having their mouths apparently cut down-
ward into the head from the top at the front, and
possessing a long spine protruding from the back of
the neck, with a tassel or a bulb depending from the
end of it, which is either a lure for prey or a sensitive
organ to warn the owner when buried in the mud.
its favourite place, of the approach of a victim. The
type is quite familiar to readers of good Natural
Histories.

The special characteristics of this fish, however,
are well worth noting. First, the enormous depths
at which it lives, a specimen having been brought up
in the ' Challenger ' trawl from a depth of nearly
fifteen thousand feet. And in this case, as Mancalias
Uranoscjpus is essentially a bottom fish, there could
have been no possibility of it having entered the trawl
on its way down. It was three and a quarter inches
long. A larger specimen of a similar fish, though


164 Deep'Sea Chiiticeras

branded with the epithet Corynolophus Reinhariiii,
comes from the deeps off the Greenland coast, but is
a more respectable-looking creature, fourteen inches
long.

But Melanocetus Joknsonii is really an object of
terror, although only four inches in length. When
closed, its lower jaw is vertical like the others, but
when open it droops below a right angle — the whole
front of the fish is, as it were, opened out. And it looks
exactly as if the back of its head had expanded into
a belly. But that useful organ, having to contain
very often a fish much larger than its owner, is a loose
sac attached by a cord, which floats about and ajK
parently allows its contents to escape into the body
as they are needed for its up-keep. Of course its colour
is a uniform black.

Liocetus Murrayi is extremely similar to the fore-
going, or would be if the body, apart from the mouth,
had not apparently been turned round. Briefly, it
looks as if Melanocetus had its belly on its back and
Liocetus in its usual position.

These few selections may briefly serve to indicate
what manner of monsters abide in that mysterious
world beneath the waves, a world of darkness and
uniform cold, but, we also know, a world teeming
with strange life. It gives only just a subject picked
here and there from the enormous mass of matter
available, but it must be remembered that it really
is to that matter what the latter is to the creatures
sttU roaming in their sea-solitudes unknown and, save
for one another, unmolested.



I


CHAPTER XIV
SEA-SERPENTS

AVERY simple way of dealing with the subject of
this chapter, and one entirely in accordance with
my own feelings upon the matter, would be that
said to be adopted by the Irish student who was set
to write an essay upon snakes in Ireland, and did so in
the sentence, ' There are no snakes in Ireland.' But
whatever my ideas in this connexion may be, I find
it impossible to ignore or set aside contemptuously
the vast amount of hterature upon the subject, much
of it doubtless written by very well-informed and
entirely honest persons, who were only anxious to
disseminate the truth concerning sea-serpents.

It is hardly possible for any sensible person at all
acquainted with the fauna of the sea and literature
generally to approach the subject of Sea-serpents
with an open mind. It is like the matter of ghosts,
one that is mixed up so much with pure superstition,
personal bias, human weakness of mind and credulity,
that it seems impossible to get a reasonable account
at all. And this, setting aside entirely the intentionally
mendacious literature on the subject, stuff written
falsely from a diseased or riotous imagination with no
other object in view than that of creating a sensation,
not seldom with the full knowledge that there is always
an immense number of otherwise sane and sensible


1 66 Sea^Serpents

persons, wfio really believe anything they read in print
which is not admittedly fiction.

As an instance in point I may quote an experience
of my own. Some years ago I wrote a little yarn,
which was published in the Wesiminster Gazette^ entitled
* Up a Waterspout.' As I had no intention of gulling
anybody, I purposely wrote in a ridiculously inflated
style, describing my experiences while being sucked
up from the sea surface into the clouds and my subse-
quent sudden descent. It never even occurred to me
tiiat any one could believe the story, it was so obviously
absurd. Yet to my intense amazement, when it was
included in a volume of sketches I afterwards published,
one critic gravely discussed it as if it were true, and
descanted upon the unique advantages of such an
experience. Now the critic may have been joking
ponderously and with *' deef eeculty/ but I do not think
he was.

This, however, only by way of introduction to a
very difficult subject. Difficidt, because it is dis-
tinctly unpleasant to realise, as one must do who takes
up the Sea-serpent question, how great is the number
of people who will, out of sheer wantonness, lie and
perjure themselves about some perfectly immaterial
matter like this. Any interest possessed by the Sea-
serpent, if it exists, can only be either scientific or
romantic ; it has never even been suggested that the
creature is dangerous or commercially valuable. Yet
an enormous mass of writing can be collected, written
by people of almost every European nation, and especi-
ally by Americans, whose authors have either admitted,
after the sensation caused by their statements has
died away, that they were lying for fun, or else all
trace of them has been lost, they having invented
names and authorities as well as the serpent.



H 'Evidence' of Sea-Serpents 167

Another large amount of printed stuff has been
contributed by persons urgently in need of something
to do, who have compiled their amazing stories from
hearsay. Many of these contributors are clergymen,
and it is no exaggeration to say that their stories,

■ having only some casual remarks of a careless seafarer
for text, surpass in wildness of elaboration even the
yams invented with intent to deceive.
Then comes a much smaller quantity, the evidence
of those who have seen something, and earnestly desire
to record what they have seen truthfully, but from
inability to describe accurately, or deficient power of
observation, or imagination heightened by alarm, or
all these reasons (and more) combined, only succeed
in misleading. A splendid instance of this is given
in the report of a Sea-serpent (?) seen off Portland
Light, New Zealand, on August i, 1891, from the deck
of the s.s. ' Rotomahana,' Peter Nelson, a quarter-
master, says that the head was hke that of an eel. It
rose thirty feet out of water. It had fins about ten
feet long, situated on either side of the body (which
bulged about there) twenty feet behind the snout. It
was the colour of an eel on the back, but the belly and
^^ fins were pure white.

^K I have condensed the very prolix report, but this

^H is the substance of it. And I believe that Peter Nelson

^V was a perfectly honest and truthful man who described

as best he could the ' breaching ' or uprising half-way

out of water of a humpbacked whale {Megaptera), an

exceedingly common sight on that coast. He says

indeed that it was nothing like a whale, but if his

description is as accurate as I believe it is, what he

^^ saw exactly represents the behaviour and appearance

^^L of a humpback gambolling on the sea-surface as usual.

^^^ Yet because of the lack of previous observation on



k



i68



Sea' Serpents



the part of himself and others, this Sea-serpent stoiy
goes round the world and is published in many news-
papers. It is also used truimphantly by Professor
Oudemans, Director of the Royal Zoological Society
at The Hague, as a convincing proof of the correctness
of his theory of Sea-serpents.

There lies before me as I write a portly volume of
six hundred pages, with many illustrations, compiled
with amazing industry and perseverance by this learned
gentleman, apparently for the sole,and to him sufficient,
purpose of buttressing his theory as to the nature and
character of the Sea-serpent, of whose existence, by
the way, he has no doubt. Only, the creature he has
evolved for his own satisfaction from the mass of
material he has so carefully collected is not a serpent
at all, but an amazingly developed mammal of the sea
tribe, a Pinniped, to which he boldly assigns a length
of two hundred and fifty feet. If it were not for the
many instances given in this volume of the amazing
credulity displayed by scientific men when in the
presence of some extraordinarily gifted romancer
(vide the British Association and M. Grien's stories
of flying wombats, saw-fish in inland lakes, turtle-
riding, etc.), I should feel disposed to be quite
contemptuous about Dr. Oudemans' ' conclusions.'
But apart from his scientific credulity, he displays a
really touching anxiety to extract from the mountain
of lies, absurdities, and superstitions he has collected
with so much labour, a sufficient number of grains of
truth for the putting together of his pet sea monster.
As to his rejection of other scientific theories of the
Sea-serpent, I make no account of that. He only
deals with rival theorists after his kind. It seems to
be rather a feature with scientific men of a certain
class to build a theory first, then mould the evidence



I



I



J



Orig:in of Sea-Serpent Stories 169

or suppress it to fit the theory, and ignore utterly any
other explanation but their own.

The list of what Dr. Oudemans calls * would-be
Sea-serpents ' is a fairly large and comprehensive one.
Seals, cuttlefish, sharks, porpoises, fossils {Zcuglodon
and Basilaurus), and even albacore ; the physalis,
a rorqual, and a supposed marine plesiosaurus are
among the Uving (?) creatures, while sea-weed and
floating tree-trunks are among the inanimate simu-
lators of the great snake. But he evidently does not
relish the idea that any of his contributors have called
upon their imagination to stimulate pen and pencil,
except where confession of detection has exposed the
fraud. This may seem harsh, but what else can be
said of a scientific zoologist of the present day, who
deliberately quotes Olaus Magnus, Archbisiiop of
Upsala, and Pontoppidan, Bishop of Bergen — two
clerics remarkable for nothing greater than their most
amazing credulity and riotous imagination ? A quo-
tation from our author must be given as showing the
position he takes up with regard to the latter of these
two ancient fictionists.

' We see the Bishop weighing and considering
whatever he heard, and not accepting everything
for truth. We think that Pontoppidan is right in
giving no credit to the narrative that the Sea-serpents
made themselves guilty of sinking ships and eating
men. . . . Pontoppidan further tells us that the Sea-
serpent sometimes encloses ships by laying itself round
them in a circle, that the fishermen then row over its
body there where a coil is visible, for when they reach
the coil it sinks, while the invisible parts rise. Further,
that the Serpent swims with an incredible velocity,
and that the fishermen, who are much afraid of it,
when seeing that it follows them, throw any object.


170



Sea'Serpents



for instance a scoop, at it, when the animal generally
plunges into the deep. But most fishermen are in
the habit of taking castoreum with them, for the
Serpent cannot abide the smell of it. . . .' And in
his tenth paragraph, trying to answer the question
why those larger serpents only frequent the northern
seas, he says : ' To this question I answer that the
Creator of all beings disposes of the dwellings of His
creatures in different places by His wise intentions,
which are not known to us. Why won't the reindeer
thrive anywhere but in the high and cold mountains ?
Why do the whales frequent oidy the North Pole ? (!!)
Why are India and Egypt almost the only countries
where men have to fear crocodiles ? No doubt be-
cause it pleases the wise Creator ! ' Here Pontoppidan
takes leave of the Sea-serpent, and begins to treat of
the large snakes mentioned by Plinius and other
ancient authors, and we too will take leave of our
honest and trustworthy bishop, who has so often been
laughed at for what he relates in his chapter on mon-
sters. And yet two of his monsters, the mermaid
and the kraken, being unmasked, why cannot his third
be accounted for ?

It should not be forgotten that the date of this
delightful book is 1892 ! The author quotes, with
evident approval, Olaus Magnus writing in 1555 —

'They who, either to trade, or to fish, sail along
the shores of Norway, relate with concurring evidence
a truly admirable story, namely, that a very large
Serpent of a length of upwards of two hundred feet,
and twenty feet in diameter, lives in rocks and holes
near the shore of Bergen ; it comes out of its caverns
only on summer nights and in fine weather to devour
calves, lambs, and hogs, or goes into the sea to eat
cuttles, lobsters, and all kinds of sea-ccabs. It has



I


I



Superstition and Sea^Serpents 171

a row of hairs of two feet in length hanging from the
neck, sharp scales of a dark colour, and brilhant flaming
eyes. It attacks boats and snatches away the men,
by raising itself high out of water, and devours them ;
and commonly this does not happen without a terrible
event in the kingdom, without a change being at hand,
either that the princes will die or will be banished, or
that a war will soon break out.' The only criticism
of this amazing yarn which the Professor permits
himself is — ' We consider its devouring hogs, lambs,
ajid calves, and its appearance on summer nights on
land to take its prey, to be a fable. The eating of
squids, cuttles, crabs, and lobsters may be a fiction or
it may have been truly witnessed, the animal chewing
them with its head above water, as seals and sea-hons
dn (!!). The story of snatching a man away from the
ships is evidently confounded with another tale. . . .
It of course refers to gigantic calamaries which occa-
sionally attack boats and snatch away one of the
crew. Its being covered with scales must be fictitious
too, for they who saw a Sea-serpent at a short distance
are unanimous in stating that it had no scales, but a
smooth skin.' A fine example of the gnat and camel
parable, surely.

The list of accounts of the seeing of the Sea-serpent
fills nine pages and a half of our author's book, and
date from 1555 to 1888. Apparently no yam, how-
ever wildly absurd, is excluded or refused rank as
evidence, unless it has been exposed as an indubitable
fraud. Even then Dr. Oudemans cannot help adopting
a regretful tone, as if he only wished that the story
was true, or that it had not been discovered to be false,
so that he might have the luxury of believing it. But
of all the amazing stories collected by the learned
Doctor, none attain such a magnitude as the following.


1 72 Sea^Serpents

In 1845 Dr. Albert C. Koch exhibited a bige
•krlr toil of a fossil animal under the name of Hyi/rmniko%
SiUimiMnni, the latter half of the portentous name being
In honour of the learned editor of The Americmm JammMl
of Si'i0nc0 dni Arts^ Professor Benjamin Silliman, wdl
known hvc his affectionate regard for the Sea-serpent.
The nonmins consisted of a head and vertebral ccdumn,
nieMii\U'in|i in all one hundred and fourteen feet, of a
(ew ril^n attached to the thoracic portion of the ^ine,
and iHnne |Hirts of supposed paddles. Of course the
iK'ienttt\c journals took up the discussion of this won-
derful ilitKH^very with avidity, and a few months after-
wartln rr\4essor Wyman, in The Proceedings of the
Hw^li^n >WiWy 0/ NnUmtU History, had the courage and
aklll to |H^nt out that * these remains never belonged
to one and the same individual, and that the anatomical
character of the teeth indicates that they are not those
of a reptile, but of a warm-blooded mammal.' In the
next nu>nth'» l^Vi^^Jings of the same Society, Professor
K(H^>t>^ (Hnnts out that, according to the form and
str\icture of sinne U>ose bones, the skeleton must be
of at least two individuals of Basilaurus, a fossil
monster allied to the soiUs and whales, which Professor
Owen termed /tufih>don. In the next month's issue
Dr. Koi^h informs the public that the bones had been
found together and were arranged in the precise order
in whicli they were discovered. But a Dr. Lister wrote
to say that he knew that Dr. Koch had dug up the bones
in different places in Alabama.

However, the yam was not killed, hardly scotched,
and the * fossil Sea-serpent ' still yielded a plentiful
harvest of dollars. And in The Illustrated London News
of October 28, 1848, Professor Silliman ventures to
state, in the hope apparently that the previous con-
tradictions would be forgotten., * that the spinal column



I



' Professor '

belongs to the same individual, that the skeleton
differs, most essentially, from any existing or fossil
serpent, although it may countenance the popular
(and I believe well-founded) impression of the existence
in our seas of huge animals, to which the name of
Sea-seipent has been attached,'

Now the facts of this case undoubtedly were proved
to be as follows : —

Dr. Koch was a collector of fossils, but entirely
unscrupulous in the use he made of them. He was
a basiness man first, and a scientist afterwards (a
long way). Not satisfied with the real scientific value
and interest of the wonderful collection of American
fossils he really possessed, he, seeing what a valuable
show it would make, deliberately faked the said
serpent out of bones of several Zeuglodon, made a
head and claws to suit, and then having hitched his
fraud to Silliman, put it on public exhibition. And
no doubt his enterprise was considered to be a real
smart one, an evident token of high business capacity,
quite unusual in a scientific professor.

Sober investigators, like Dr. Andrew Wilson, Mr.
Lee, Eind Mr. Gosse, all being gifted with sound common-
sense, as well as having high scientific attainments,
do not waste time over the many obvious absurdities
and palpable fabrications which are so plentifully
quoted in Dr. Oudemans' book. But they have given
much time and careful investigation to such stories
as bore the stamp of truth, in so far that it was manifest
that the observers had seen something out of the
common, but had quite naturally in their excitement
gifted the vision with some extraordinary attributes
which it never really possessed.

Of these stories the most interesting is that told
1^ the captain and crew of the ' Pauline.' Captain


174



Sea' Serpents



Drevar stated that, when in lat. 13" S., long. 35° W.,
they observed three very large sperm whales (I may
here note, in passing, that I have never yet met with
a seaman other than a whaleman who knew a sperm
whale when he saw it, or could distinguish between
any one whale and another of a different species),
and one of them was gripped round the body with two
turns, by what appeared to be a huge serpent. Its
back was of a darkish brown, and its belly white,
with an immense head and mouth, the latter always
open ; the head and tail had a length beyond the
coils of about thirty feet ; its girth was about eight
or nine feet. Using its extremities as levers, the serpent
whirled its victim round and round for about fifteen
minutes, and then suddenly dragged the whale down
to the bottom, head first. The other two whales,
after attempting to release their companion, swam
away upon its descent, exhibiting signs of the greatest
terror.

On July 13 this or another sea-serpent was again
seen, about two hundred yards off the stem of the
vessel, shooting itself along the surface, forty feet
of its body being out of the water at a time. Again
on the same day it was seen once more with its body
standing quite perpendicularly out of the water to a
height of sixty feet. This time it seemed determined
to attack the vessel, and the crew and officers armed
themselves with axes for self-defence. In another
version of the same story he, the captain, speaks of
the serpent ' looking angrily ' at the ship.

Now, eight or nine years ago I wrote a paper for

[ Nature on ' the Sperm Whale and its Food,' in the

course of which I described a spectacle I witnessed

of a huge cachalot devouring a very large cuttle-fish

or squid upon the sea-surface in the Straits of Malacca.



I



The * Pauline ' Sea'Serpent 175

Dr. Andrew Wilson upon reading this story immedi-
ately remembered the yam of the captain of the
* Pauline,' and very naturally, and I think inevitably,
knowing the man, came to the conclusion that it was
based upon a similar sight. The Doctor wrote to me
asking me for further details, which I gladly supplied,
and embodied his reflections in his Science Jottings'
column in the next issue of The Illustrated London
News.

Up to a certain point everything that Captain
Drevar states, and swears to, is easily explainable, on
the hypothesis that he saw a sperm whale devouring
a huge calamary. But then the embellishments
arrive, several of them not to be ascribed to exaggera-
tion through nervous excitement, but obviously put
in to round off and complete a good story. For
instance, what were the signs of greatest terror ex-
hibited by the two attendant whales ? Certainly
no whaleman could tell. How could the serpent, even
assuming it to lie,' as the captain does, one hundred
or one hundred and seventy feet long, raise its body
perpendicularly out of the water to a height of sixty
feet ? It was such a pity to spoil a good story by
trying to improve it in such a foolish way, that even
Dr. Oudemans feels compelled to take 33J per cent,
off the sixty feet.

But before leaving Captain Drevar another example
of his powers must be given : ' The body (of the whale)
disappeared from our view, going down head foremost
to the bottom, where no doubt it was gorged at the
serpent's leisure ; and that monster of monsters may
have been many months in a state of coma, digesting
the huge mouthful.' Oh, Captain Drevar ! A huge
mouthful indeed for a serpent eight or nine feet in
girth to gorge a whale thirty or forty ; for a snake


lyd



Sea- Serpents



of, say, at the outside, twenty tons in weight, to swallow
a morsel of eighty or one hundred tons ! Indeed we
might well expect him to lie many months in a state
of coma. In truth, Olaus Magnus or Pontoppidan
never bettered this yarn, though they were far from
being amateurs at the task. And it was sworn to.

There are also the stories of the ministers who saw
the Sea-serpent in the Sound of Mull and estimated
its length at sixty feet. They did not exp)ect to be
believed, and said so, only they felt that any explana-
tion of what they saw except that it was a great Sea-
snake was impossible to accept. But the most difficult
story of all to account for is that told by Captain
McQuhae of H.M.S. ' Daedalus,' and his officers, which
in 1848 created so great a sensation in England. Very
briefly, the story is that, in lat. 24° 44' S., and long, g"
22' E,, an enormous serpent was seen, its head and
shoulders some four feet out of water, and quite
sixty feet of its body on the surface. It passed rapidly
without any undulatory movement, so close to the
ship that the gallant captain says he could have dis-
tinguished a man's features at the distance. It had
no fins, but something like seaweed washed about its
back.

Now it is not fair to suppose that the captain
and his officers stated anything that they did not
believe to be true, yet no less an authority than
Professor Owen in a long letter to The Times of Novem-
ber II, 1848, points out that the captain's observations
and his conclusions do not fit at all, finally giving
it as his (the Professor's) opinion that the thing seen
was a great seal or sea elephant ; much to the captain's
annoyance, who replies very warmly to the great
paleontologist's letter. Another authority
as his opinion that the creature was a huge



irity gives it J
huge basking H



Incredulity of High Authorities 1 77

shark, such as another well -authenticated serpent
stranded at Stronsa and given as sixty to eighty feet
long was proved to be and reduced in length by about
one-half. For myself, I believe tliat the officers of
the ' DEedalus,' being, like most sailors, very careless
and casual observers of marine fauna, did see a huge
sulphur- bottom whale (Balaenoptera sulphureus), which
is slender, has a comparatively small head, attains
a maximum length of one hundred and fifty feet,
and a speed of sixteen knots.

But any attempt to show that the tellers of some
Sea-serpent stories were truthful and honest, according
to their lights, only seems to arouse animosity among
those curious savants who appear to think hfe would
not be worth living without belief in a gigantic snake.
They will not hear of any natural explanation of
the strange sights reported by veracious seamen,
and entirely ignore Professor Owen's calm dictmn,
that had Sea-serpents of the dimensions so often given
existed, some remains must have been found, for
such creatures would be often on the surface to breathe
and could not fail to have deposited relics of themselves
on some shore or other. Only one joint of a vertebra
would have been sufficient, says the Professor, to have
established the Sea-serpent's identity scientifically.
But that illuminating fragment has never been forth-
coming.

It has been assumed that the Zeuglodon is not
extinct, although a recent specimen has never been
found, and the fossils are found in the tertiary deposits.
It is also assumed that the creature may be a Plesio-
saurus, which has survived the lapse of ages in that
mysterious realm, the depths of the sea. But certainly
none of the Sea-serpent stories, honestly told, are
insusceptible of feasible logical explanation by those
12


1 78 Sea^Serpents

acquainted with our laiiger sea mammals and othor
&iuna not usually seen.

Are there then no Sea-serpents ? Certainly there
are, very many, and exceedingly dangerous ophidians
they are, being highly poisonous. The largest of them
is almost as thick as a man's leg, and from eight to
ten feet long. They abound on the Indian coasts,
and in the Eastern Archipelago I have often seen them
pursuing their devious way along the calm surface.
They all have a flattened end to their tail, instead of
its coming to a point, as does that of all the land snakes.
I have heard, on good authority, they are responsible
for the deatl.8 or many Lascars in the country vessels
of India, climbing up the coir hawsers with which
the vessels are anchored, through the hawse-pipes
and biting the sleeping men.

But these are not the Sea-serpents whose character-
istics, as seen by latter-day chroniclers, all bear the
stamp of Olaus Magnus or Pontoppidan. The
enormous length, serpentine shape, mane of hair,
side paddles, etc., all bespeak a common origin. Now
it would ill become any one, least of all those knowing
something of the fearsome creatures that have of late
years been found to inhabit the great depths of the sea,
to say that we shall never find or see any terrific mon-
ster upheaved from the ocean floor. Only, if such there
be, it will not be a serpent, or a mammal such as
Professor Oudemans believes in, a sort of Zeuglodon
two hundred and fifty feet long. Because these
creatures are essentially of the surface, they cannot
even descend to any great depth, in consequence,
first, of the increasing pressure upon their bodies,
and next, of their need of air breathed direct from
the atmosphere.

I firmly believe myself that cuttle-fish lurk in the



I



Sea'Serpents and Religion 179

darkling caves of ocean, a sight of which would justify
any Sea-serpent yam, however Munchausenhke, and
I should not like to question the existence of enormous
individuals of Regalecus or oar-fish, of which Dr. Goode
says that ' it seems quite safe to assign to this group
all the so-called Sea-serpents which have been described
as swimming rapidly near the surface, with a horse-like
head raised above the water, surmounted by a mane-
like crest of red or brown.' But from a Regalecus
of twenty feet long to a Sea-serpent capable of carrying
his head sixty feet out of water is so long a step that
I do not think we shall ever take it.

The great difficulty about our acceptance of Sea-
serpent stories to-day is the aroma of medieval
superstition which surrounds them. We cannot help
remembering that there belongs, as of right, to all Sea-
serpent stories of the Olaus Magnus order, a relation-
ship to serpent worship, to the hideous old mj'thologies
of the past, having, if not their origin, at least their
early history enveloped in a mist of blood and human
agonies. We may interest ourselves in serpent lore
connected with religion as much as we will, and find
it terribly interesting, if only from the fact that almost
ail early religions have some trace of it. That in the
case of peoples who knew the sea the fabled Sea-serpent
should become of vast and awful size and aspect, was
perhaps only natural, since the connexion of it with
the sea, itself a place of superhuman dread and
mystery, became perhaps inevitable. The avatar of
the fish from the Mahabarata of the Hindus is a
case in point, elaborated with all the fulness of gro-
tesque detail that these ancient people love, as well
as a boundless exaggeration. The puny efforts of
our romancers must recede into obscurity before the
tale of a Sea-serpent a million leagues long, and


i8o



Sea'Serpents



with a stupendous hom reaching from its forehead to

the clouds.

There is another thing which does not seem to
strike believers in Sea-serpent stories, such as the
learned Professor from whom I have quoted so largely.
And that is, that of the Sea-serpent so often described,
which I must caJI, for want of a better term, the Olaus
Magnus, or conventional Sea-serpent, no trace has
ever been supplied to the examination of naturalists.
Certain remains have been found, as, for instance,
those of the Animal of Stronsa in Orkney, about which
so furious a controversy raged nearly a century ago.
It was discovered in October 1808, on the rocks in
Rothiesholm Bay ; its measurement in length was
solemnly sworn to by three witnesses as having been
proved by themselves at fifty-five feet, and anatomical
details were given at great length to prove that it was
a veritable Sea-serpent.

Mr, Everard Home, then the greatest living osteolo-
gical authority, went to Orkney at once and examined
the remains in the interest of science. His report
was clear and distinct enough to satisfy the most
exact seeker after truth, and considering the status
of the gentleman making it, who could have no other
interest in the matter than that of arriving at the facts,
it should have settled the controversy. He gave his
evidence unhesitatingly that it was a Squalus maximus,
or great basking shark, which did not exceed thirty-five
feet in length, and presented no difficulty even in an
advanced stage of decomposition in the determination
of its character.

After sufficient time had elapsed the whole question,
which had been thought to be finally settled, was
again raised. Mr. Everard Home's scientific testimony
was thrown overboard, and the evidence of the illiterate


^Thc' Sea^Serpent Noii'^Existent l8i

fishermen who had measured the body with a one-foot
rule, and had made all manner of wild statements
about it having six legs, both ends alike, etc., etc.,
was reinstated, and gravely discussed de novo by
quasi-scientific gentlemen who should have known
better.

In conclusion, although it is not necessary to give
a list of all the various appearances which have simu-
lated the Sea-serpent for excited observers, it may be
stated with the utmost plainness that none of the
reports of Sea-serpents made yet have been such as
would stand a cross-examination without reveaUng
their true explanation or their true origin as fiction
pure and simple. And this may be truly said, without
in the least den)dng that the civilised world may one
day be startled by the appearance of some vast and
hitiierto unknown monster from the depths of the
ocean.



CHAPTER XV
THE ALBACORE

THE subject of the present chapter is a very king of
fish. Without controversy, he is the head of the
vast mackerel family, the Scombridae, of which
our well-beloved mackerel is perhaps the best-known
exponent in the whole world. But, perhaps, it would
be better, seeing how variea are the Albacore's ad-
ventures, how vast is his range of habitat, and how
different are the names by which he is known in vari-
ous parts of the world, to let him tell his own story,
after a very brief description of his majesty's person.
First, tiien, imagine if you can, a mackerel who,
by some extraordinary process of development, has
attained a length of say six to eight feet. But, in
doing so, he has not retained that slender elegance of
outline characteristic of the common mackerel ; he has
put on a disproportionate girth, so that given a length
of seven feet he will often be five feet in circumference.
In colour he is a steely blue with lighter shadings, until
on part of the belly the colour is almost that of burnished
silver. His fins, which are almost exactly the same
shape as in the common mackerel, but proportionately
larger, are golden in hue, and glitter in the sunshine
when he is near the surface with an almost intolerable
brilliancy to the eye. On both sides of the body,
commencing at the pectoral fins and about midway
between back and belly, is a wavy line, almost black

X89



The King Mackerel 183

for the anterior third of the body, then gradually deve-
loping into a series of conical horny protuberances,
as if the fish were developing an armour-plating like
the sturgeon. All mackerel possess this curious line
of scaly excrescences, and all mackerel, although not
absolutely without scales, have very few of them, and
what they have are covered with a fine, tough, and
transparent skin. Most of the scales are plated around
the shoulders of the fish, where, too, the hues are
deepest.

The head is of an almost ideal shape for a fish, of
perfect curves, and with a clean-cut, tightly closing
mouth, whose bony jaws, apart from the rows of
needle-sharp teeth, are,-quite as effective in dealing
with prey as the snap of a pair of tailor's shears would
be, operated with lie same force that this vigorous
fish can exert. The eyes are two splendid orbs,
averaging two inches in diameter, and so set in the
head that they give an almost perfect range of vision,
being also slightly prominent and entirely unshaded
by lids, brows, or membrane. Their colour I am not
quite sure of, but to the best of my recollection it is an
intensely dark blue for the pupil, with a surrounding
rim of gold.

The food of the Albacore is living fish of any kind,
not too large for his devouring, but is principally
composed of the leaping squid {LoHgo) and flying-fish.
It is in pursuit of these latter that he exhibits that
amazing agility for which he and the coryphaena are
famous, an agility almost incredible to witness. I am
quite unable to assess the rate at which an Albacore
can tr3.vel, but I should certainly say that when I
have seen him darting along just beneath the surface
of the sea, following a flying-fish cleaving the air
overhead at top speed, that it has not been kss than


i84



The Albacorc



thirty miles an hour. And that he maintains that
speed for distances of over a thousand yards broken
into several different directions, as the flying-fish
changed its aerial course in order to try and dodge
its deadly foe. Also, I have repeatedly witnessed
its dash into a school of its smaller relatives, the skip-
jack, like a flash from the mouth of a gun, and, zig-
zagging back and forth so rapidly that the eye could
scarcely follow it through the bewildered school, leave
the sea over a large area befouled with blood and
fragments of mangled fish, which the survivors, imme-
diately upon their enemy's departure, bestirred them-
selves to devour.

Paucity of food it apparently never suffers or can
suffer from, its natural prey being so wondrously
abundant wherever it roams. And in consequence
a poor, thin, and weak Albacore is never seen. Perhaps
such an one would be promptly devoured by its ex-
traordinary ravenous congeners. The strength of the
Albacore is as amazing as its speed. I have seen a
strong man's arms completely paralysed in one minute
through trying to hold a very small one, only twenty-
five pounds in weight, with his fingers clutching its
neck and his thumbs thrust into the gills. The hot,
black-red blood hterally boiled out of his hands as
the dying fish's vibrations shook him like some great
galvanic battery. And for hours after he was unable
to use his arms in any way.

Its extreme limit of size is, of course, indeterminate,
but there are fairly authentic records of individuals
having been taken off Sicily of tweh'e hundred pounds'
weight. In the world-renowned tunny fisheries of
the Italian and SiciUan coasts, where they are known
as the Tunny, they are probably found larger than
anywhere else. As the Tuna, they are well known



I

I


A Great Fighter



185



on the Californian coast, and afford perhaps the acme
of angling sport, testing the angler to the extreme
limit of his endurance. But I never heard of one
larger than eight hundred pounds' weight being caught
there. In the deep sea, as far as my experience and
information go, they are seldom seen larger than say
a quarter of a ton, but that is perhaps because the
largest specimens do not consort with ships as the
ordinary sized ones do.

The lai^est one I ever had intimate acquaintance
with was in Carlisle Bay, Barbadoes, where I was
fishing for flying-fish in one of the locally owned craft.
We had been most busily employed baling up the
swarming Exocelae, and had betweeu two and three
thousand of them in the boat, when there was a blaze
as of silver sheet lightning in the water, followed by a
swiftly passing shadow, and the water was absolutely
void of fish where a moment before there had been
millions. The skipper of the boat, knowing well the
cause of this sudden flight, snatched up a stout line
that lay ready coiled on the after-thwart, impaled
a flying-fish on the big hook, and, tossing it overboard,
gave the boat a sheer off the light air that was just
ruffling the surface, and we began to gather a little
way, the line streaming astern. Hardly a minute
had elapsed before there was a yell from the helms-
man, and looking aft we saw the Hne taut as a harp-
string. The boat began to move astern against the
wind, and we all tailed on to the line. But as we
could not get an inch of it, we led it to the bow and
secured it there, in order that our fish might tow us
properly. We had no fears for either line or hook.
So for an hour that big mackerel towed our ten-ton
sloop whither he would, winding up his tremendous
- exertions by a splendid fighting end in the n))d^e



1 86 The Albacorc

of the bay amongst the shipping. We could not
get hini on board, so we secured him by a double
bight of the line round his tail, and towed him into
the harbour, where, by the aid of a cargo-crane, we
landed him on the quay. He scaled four hundred
and seventy pounds, making a goodly sum for the
poor fishermen who peddled him roimd the town on
a truck. The gallant struggle he made for life and
liberty has often been recalled to my memory in
reading angling experiences with the Tufia in California.
What must be the prowess, endurance, and skill of an
angler who, in a small boat with one assistant, a slender
rod and a fine line, can succeed in seciuing a monster
of the deep like that.

To my great chagrin I have never succeeded in
catching an Albacore. Many times, when fishing
for bonito from the jib-boom of a ship, I have hooked
Albacore weighing from forty to over a hundred pounds,
but never succeeded in pulling them up high enough
to drop them in the gaping sack. And I was never
quite sure when I had them on the hook whetlier I
would rather get them up or see them drop off, seeing
what formidable creatures they are to manipulate
when in their full vigour, even on deck. Astride on
that slender spar twenty feet out ahead of the ship, I
had always a feeling that the holding of one would
most likely result in the swift descent of the pair of
us into the seething bow-wave ahead of the ship.
Once I hooked one in almost a flat calm by dangling
my hook with a piece of polished tin for a lure from
the jib-boom. He was so heavy that I could not lift
him, so I played him until I was quite exhausted,
and then, bitterly disappointed, had to hand him
over to others. He was eventually secured when fagged
out by a man being lowered over the side and slipping



A Mighty Traveller 187

a running bowline over his tail. He weighed one
hundred and twenty pounds — a mere infant.

The range of the Albacore, Tunny, or Tuna, is
over all the oceans and seas having access to them
within the temperate zones. The farthest north that
I have ever seen one was 40° ; but, like the other
pelagic deep-sea fishes, their range north and south
within certain limits depends upon the temperature.
I saw flying-fish in 1902 in 48° N. while cross-
ing the Atlantic from Liverpool to the Gulf of
St. Lawrence in August, and was much surprised,
for I had not hitherto beheved it possible for the
Exocclus to exist so far outside the tropics. Unlike
the majority of the deep-sea pelagic or surface fishes,
the Albacore's places of spawning, for the Atlantic
at any rate, are very well known. It is in the Eastern
Mediterranean and the lEgean Sea, for which purpose
the Albacore migrates thither in countless thousands,
and by so doing supplies a large proportion of the
Provencal, Italian, and Sicilian coast population with
profitable employment and cheap food, while Tunny
tinned in oil as a luxury of the table is sent to the
whole of the civilised world at a fairly high price. And
now, having thus introduced my interesting friend
collectively, let him tell his life-story as an individual.

Very lovely and comfortable were the surroundings
in which I first emerged from the pearly round egg,
one of many millions deposited in the same area by
our parents. It was off the northern shore of the rocky
island of Khelindromi, on the western side of the
blue jEgean Sea. You know the place, perhaps ;
that is, above water — know it for one of the most
picturesque spots in the archipelago. But you cannot
know — ^you never will know — how exceedingly beau-
tiful is the scene below, about the bases of those quaint


i



i88



The Albacore



rock masses, whose summits are crowned by ejme-
like villages, accessible only to goats and island moun-
taineers, who descend from these amazing fastnesses
for the fishing with as much caution to-day as they did
when every village of the kind was a pirate stronghold
whose denizens preyed upon any neighbour with strict
impartiality.

Moreover, you do not, cannot know of the treasures
lying hid in those dim depths, you can ouly faintly
guess. But a thousand years of warfare and piracy
carried on in the vicinity of the richest and most
artistic nations of the old world has made almost every
foot of the sea-bed within a few miles of land a veritable
storehouse of wonderful wealth in precious metals
and almost equally precious artistry. Around groups
of marble and bronze statuary, amid heaps of gold,
silver, and gems, twine the beautiful red, pink, and
black coral, palpitate the masses of living sponge,
at such depths as no diver has yet reached to return
living.

And amidst all this splendour, on cunning little
plateaux of silvery sand in level nooks floored with
powdered lava, in alcoves paved with coral fragments
ground small by the never-ceasing attrition of the
waves alone, I and some millions of my fellow Albacores
were bom. I did not then know, as I have learned
since, that in this spot as in every other where fish are
hatched, there were hosts of the baser sort of fish,
yes, even as low as the Medusae, those backboneless
masses of jelly that can hardly be said to live in the
sense that we higher organisms do, waiting to devour
us as soon as we had attained an independent existence,
all hampered as we were by the sustaining yelk attached
to our waists during the first two days of our lives.
We had no protectors ; if our parents had been there



1



1


I



Early Training

they would have devoured us with as great if not
greater rapidity than our present foes did ; but we
had one safeguard, had we but known it : our in-
numerable numbers. It was impossible for the most
energetic, the most voracious of our enemies to destroy
us, not merely all but more than half of us. And this
law, if I may so call it, of superabundant supply, is
what really prevents the utter annihilation of many
species in the sea.

So it came to pass in due time that, evading the
destroyers in company with some millions of my
brethren, I grew and waxed strong enough to eat in my
turn, not only the yoimg of other fish which swarmed
in our deep retreat, but any of my own family that
happened to be less agile or weaker than I was. For
in me, as in my fellows, but one principle, one law
held sway, and guided as yet all actions. It was to
live, and in order to live, to eat, never mind who or
what, so long as it was eatable. Our one aim, our one
duty, was to grow and get big ; we did not know why
or how, but we obeyed the overmastering law.

In due time we began to stray farther and farther
from our birthplace into deeper and deeper water,
always under the same mysteriously compelling im-
pulse, until at last, having grown into a si/eable fish
of about three pounds in weight, 1 headed a goodly
company of my fellows in a straight course westward
out of the Middle sea, nor rested until we found our-
selves out in the vast expanse of the Atlantic Ocean.
How we rejoiced in our new-found freedom from the
constant terror of enemies ! Here they hardly troubled
us at all, or if they did we felt easily able to elude
pursuit, being so agile and cunning from our early
training. Several times, however, I had narrow
escapes through falling in with adult individuals of



1



igo



The Albacore



our own race, who sought to devour us without giving
us a chance of escape. Many of my fellows who had
braved the innumerable dangers of infancy with me
fell victims on these occasions. So we gradually
separated, some were eaten, more strayed away,
independently gathering their livehhood from the
abundant sea, but all who survived were growing with
astounding rapidity, and preparing to take their place
in the royal ranks of the great Albacore.

Could I but detail to you the events of the next
two years, they would fill a goodly volume of hair-
breadth escapes and amazing travel. I cannot claim
to have visited any profound depths, for our people
are essentially surface-fish and do not descend deeper
than one hundred fathoms. But within that limit
I have, I think, explored most of ocean's fastnesses,
braved most of the dangers that await our people.
Many days did I linger about the base of St. Paul's
Rocks in the North Atlantic eating my fill continually
of all species of deep-water fish smaller than myself,
who were utterly unable to escape the clash of my
unerring and lethal jaws, Here I learned to avoid
the fearful toils of the brooding cuttle-fish, having
torn myself free from the deadly touch of an arm of
one of these monsters crouching in a darksome cave.
Here, too, by a turn of my body, almost as swift as
light, did I avoid the thrust of a giant relative of mine,
a sword-fish, whose weapon grazed my body along
its entire length, leaving a wide white weal whereby
I became known and identified in after years, not
merely by mine own people but by men.

But I escaped all these dangers, as did many of
my fellows bom at the same time in the jEgean, and
ranged the waters of Mid-Atlantic as being in my
rightful realm, a veritable sovereign of the sea.


Adult Joys



191



skirted the vast masses of myriad-tenanted weed that
go to make up the curious ocean eddy known as the
Sargasso Sea, and many a quaint fish found its way
down into my ever-ready stomach as I prowled around
ready for stragglers, yet not daring to venture too
far into that dense entanglement, sacred to the up-
bringing of an irjcalculable number of young sea crea-
tures, because of its security against such sturdy
marauders as I had now become. I learned that ships
might be safely consorted with, and usefully too,
because of their pleasant habit of scaring up the smaller
creatures upon which I loved to feed, but on several
occasions I very narrowly escaped destruction, by
missing a lure let down before ray dazzled eyes by
some hungry miscreant on board one of these floating
things.

But I shall never forget an experience I had, which
I think did more to round my girth and stilTen my
sturdy frame than any other. It was in the North
Atlantic too, on the south-western verge of the Sar-
gasso Sea. I had been hungrily pursuing a vast school
of flying-fish, and occasionally snapping up a straggler
or two that only served to make ray hunger more
acute, when I suddenly darted into a vast black shadow
(it was blazing noon), in the cool of which it seemed
that all the edible fish imaginable were congregated,
I swam leisurely to and fro, and lilled my maw almost
to bursting, then languidly surveyed my surroundings.
I found that I was beneath a wooden ship, deserted
of her crew for long, yet so buoyant by reason of her
cargo that she could not sink. Upon her sheltering
planks had clustered an immense mass of sea-growth,
weed, barnacles, limpets, and so forth, and of course
these had attracted to themselves, as offering easily
obtained food, an enormous number of flsh, both



192 The Albacore

vertebrates and Crustacea. These in their turn had
invited the attendance of larger fish like m3^elf , imtil
the whole area of sea around that nearly submerged
hull was literally alive, and all the population were busy
feeding upon one another. It was a delightful time
for me, for I was very nearly immune from pursuit
by any of the others, being so large. But I narrowly
escaped annihilation here one day. Prowling leisurely
about, sucking in dainty morsels to titillate an already
overcharged stomach, I saw shining before me a white
cavern, down which many fish were swimming eagerly
as if in chase of some prey. I was minded to follow,
and but that I was lazy with repletion would have
done so. However, I turned away carelessly, just
in time to note that the cave turned almost as if upon
an axis, the entrance closed, and a vast black mass,
the body of a sperm whale, ascended to the surface.
A very narrow escape indeed, but one that did not
affect me at the time any more than it would have
affected me had I been one of the visitors to that
cavern.

Many a ship did I interview on my long cruise in
the North Atlantic, but to none did I adhere closely,
for it is not the custom of our people. I loved to follow
the ships and swim round them, for I saw how they
stirred up the squid and flying-fish upon which I loved
to feed, but it was exceedingly seldom that I came
near enough to one of these floating masses to discern
its outlines, much less to incur any danger from held-
out lures. I was not yet old enough to be so venture-
some. In due time I went round the Cape of Good
Hope, forgathering as I did so with a multitude of
queer fish on the great Agulhas Banks. In sooth,
that was a goodly time. None of those fat cod and
steinbrass had any fear of me, or seemed to regard



I



Tropical Experiences 1 93

me as an enemy, the while I scooped them into the
profound and never-to-be-satisfied cavity of my
stomach.

I was well-minded to make that my home, deeming
it best in all the seas I had yet visited, but I could
not endure the cold, the deadly chill that, creeping
up from southward, seized upon me and made me
helpless when I would fain have been most helpful
to myself. So I bade farewell reluctantly to ray
good friends and hosts who had fed me so bountifully
upon themselves, and made my quiet way northward
across the Indian Ocean. Ah, that is a pleasantly
prohlic sea ! For growing fish like myself there is
none better, if one does but keep a wary eye lifting for
the sword-fish and the grampus, who alone of all the
fishy kind can give such as I am an uneasy moment.
Many months I lingered in those quiet waters, feeding,
ever feeding, and growing apace, so that I began to
wax prideful, and wonder if in all the wide sea there
was ever seen an Albacore like me.

Presently I won to tlie intricacies of the Eastern
Archipelago, which queerly reminded me of ray
birthplace except for the strange currents that roared
and eddied round about those clustering isles and reefs.
But for food ! They simply swarmed with all that
I needed or desired, and I fed me full and grew lazily
fat, as if in all the seas I alone was being fed, I alone
had a claim upon the Power whose provision had
arranged for the sustenance of His humblest creatures.

Throughout the whole of that vast network of
reefs, submerged volcanoes, and island bases, I roamed
with never a care. Always I kept the same watchful
outlook for mine ancient enemy the sword-fish, whom
alone, of all the deep-sea folk, I now dreaded ; always
I bore in mind that to enter any cavern, however
13



194 The Albacore

enticing its opening seemed to be, might very possibly
mean that out of it I should never come again, since
it might be the throat of a sperm whale, or it might
contain in its deep recesses a network of living arms,
from which I could in no wise escape. And I grew
so fast, girth and length increased amazingly, and as
for my strength, I did not know its greatness, except
that I could, and often did, hurl myself high into the
sunblaze after a fleeing flying-fisb» descending swiftly
with him between my jaws, full of exultation at my
own achievement.

Here I met with almost all that our levels of the
ocean hold of strange sea monsters, and held my own
among them with utmost pride, for I feared none.
Indeed, T was almost too haughtily careless, for,
despising the prowling Pristis, or saw-fish, I once
almost allowed a vast creature, three times larger than
myself, to rip me asunder from beneath, as, swiftly
gliding Uke a black shadow he changed from the dull
attitude of lethargy he was assuming as I passed him
so carelessly. Thenceforward I held a strictly wary
attitude to him and his like imtil, feeling an irresistible
call upon me so to do, I left those pleasant food-full
waters and set out for my long journey across the
Northern Pacific. I say long to suit your meagre
comprehension ; to me its length was a mere matter
of indifference, for the exercise of my powers were
as spontaneous and natural to me as the gyrations
of birds in the air above, there being no consciousness
of effort.

I would I could recall for you the incidents of that
trip from China to California. Tell you of the voyagers
like myself whom I met and exchanged greetings with
in the Middle sea, of the myriad wonders that to me
became commonplaces. Make you understand the



Pride of Power



195



■
I
■



all-compelling power that, implanted in me and in those
I met with in all my journeyings, made us employ
our vigour in the way we did, and fill ourselves with
the sheer delight of clean, abounding life. Describe
to you the splendour of the midnight sea, the brilliantly
illuminated waters, lit beyond all man's imaginings,
and yet ever assuring us that beyond our powers of
investigation were splendours far greater. Never a
hungry moment, never one instant when I felt that I
ought never to have been, as I know you humans do
feel ; ah ! how much I have lived ! Once I measured
ray speed against a mighty steamship in company
with many porpoises. I easily outstripped them
all, easily swam round her as she did her best, and
when under her bows crossing, was rewarded for my
magnificent exhibition of strength and endurance by
just escaping a brutal downward thrust of a weapon
with fine barbed points. One did plough a deep
furrow in my side ; but I did not mind that ; wounds
far deeper and more serious are healed at sea, and the
receiver of them cares not nor bears malicious remem-
brance of them.

In due time (what do I know of time divisions
such as bind you ?) I arrived at Puget Sound. It
was high summer, and those pellucid waters were full
of fish. Never before had I tasted the joys of biting
into the body of a twelve to twenty pound salmon,
of chasing a school of immature salmon into an estuary,
where I could devour them at my leisure. I spent
here a perfectly satisfying holiday, daily adding to
my girth and other powers. Then I thought I would
go sout' . or, rather, the initial impulse was com-
municated to me by that outside force of which we
know nothing, but that we all acknowledge its power,
and I sidled southwards reluctantly.


ig6



The Albacore



That was a premonition of disaster, had I but
known it, for on the second day of my arrival on the
Califomian coast I was lifting myself lazily, with a
fall stomach, to a passing squid, a tiny creature not
worth my attention, when I felt a sharp pain shoot
through my jaw and a slender yet annoying, pull at
my head. In rage I started seaward, r^arding not
the sting among my teeth ; furiously I wondered who
had dared attempt this outrage upon me. I do not
care to say how dire was the distress I felt when,
owing to the skill of the man-thing in the boat, behind
the rod and at the end of the line that had hooked
me, I could not get free. I only record that from the
rising to the setting of the sun that man fought with
me, and was drawing me so near to his boat that I
felt almost hopeless of ever seeing blue water again,
when I made my supreme effort. I dived seaward
at utmost power, and almost immediately knew that
I was free. But I bore with me a souvenir of my
encounter in the shape of a barbed piece of steel
imbedded in my lower jaw, which galled me terribly.
It had struck through a piece of plated bone, and could
not work out. Still, after awhile it ceased to annoy,
and I grew quite immindful of its presence,imtil at last,
when it did drop out, I knew not of its going. Is it
necessary for me to say that I left those inhospitable
shores in haste ? I had no idea that men would himt
for me in such a fashion, no prevision of any danger —
but I must not anticipate. Out on the blue, wide,
free sea I bore, and, resuming the glad, free life of my
deep-water fellows, soon forgot my perilous adventure.

Now, had I realised it, I was beginning a terrific
journey without any such halt as I had before enjoyed
in the cool recesses of the East Indian Archipelago.
The need was laid upon me to go westward, ever



Homeward Bound



197



I
I



westward and southward, for, although I did not know
it, my God-given instinct forbade me attempting the
passage of Cape Horn, where the cold would certainly
have stricken me dead. But these things being hidden
from me, I fared leisurely on my way, taking bright
sea and gem-hke clusters of islets in my way as they
came, like a philosopher. Indeed, I felt myself one
now. i had seen almost the whole world, and none of
its wonders had any power to move me. Only, I did
feel an intense longing for, a mighty drawing to, the
waters of my birthplace, so very far away. I did not
in the least know where that birthplace was, but what
of that ? As the magnet draws the needle, so I was
being drawn, and though only dimly conscious of it,
as quite content to be guided. Time did not matter
— we do not reckon the hours in our beautiful home
beneath the sea. We are content to fulfil the law of
our being, without regard to how long or short a time
it takes — in fact, for us, time has no meaning. We
Uve in a timeless state, in what you call Eternity,
except that we are so frail, so continually passing from
one shape to another.

So gradually I worked my way round the watery
world towards the Cape of Good Hope, quite unmolested
by anything or anybody, but forgathering on my way
with many of my congeners, all bound in the same
direction. And the strange thing about all our joumey-
ings was that none of us knew why we were going —
we only felt that we must go, and also were sure that
we should arrive at our destination unless — but then
we never anticipated any cessation of being, we just
went on living our life with all our might. Gradually,
surely, I worked my way round the Cape, wondering
as much as we can wonder at the numbers of my fellows
I fell in with. Having led quite a solitary life for so


igS



The Albacore



many months, it became almost irksome to me to meet
so many of my kind at one time. And when I found
the numbers of my friends daily increasing, I fdt
ahnost a panic fear lest the supply of food should fail
ns. How little, for all my experience, did I yet know
of ocean's resources ! Presently I found myself
swinmiing in the van of quite a large school of huge
Albacore, making steadily northward up that pleasant
sea of the south-east trades towards the Line.

We overtook a ship — ^a great white-winged ship
—whose crew never molested us, and whose passage
through the quiet waters stirred up for us quite an
abundance of savoury food, such as squid and fLying-
fish. But she proved a treacherous guide, a dangerous
friend. We followed her docilely into St. Helena Bay,
and when we got over the shock of her anchoring,
played about her as we had done aforetime. Then
the natives came with spears and hooks and slew
amongst us to their hearts' content, as we basked in
the sun or sought the shade of what we had grown to
consider our great friend and protector. It was an
awful massacre, the first I had ever seen of my own
kind, although I suppose that my inroads upon the
schools of skip- jack would be looked upon by those
victims in the same light. But it may well be asked,
why did we not by a few flashes of our tails speed
seaward and downward, where nought of man's
harmful devising could touch us to do us hurt ? I
do not know ; I can only record facts and say that at
the onslaught of the fishermen we just rushed aimlessly
about in the blood-stained water, as do the skip-jack
or bonito when we suddenly make a raid upon them.
Were I given to speculation upon any subject, I
should suppose that it was a providential suspension
of our usually acute faculties for tl e benefit of mankind,



A Great Slaying



199



I



who would otherwise have no chance whatever to
obtain our flesh for food.

But when the slaying ceased, and the boats laden
almost to sinking with dead Albacore had returned
to harbour, our panic ceased also and, closing up our
scattered ranks, we resumed our journey northward.
The great catch granted to the islanders at St. Helena
really seemed to have made no perceptible difference
to our numbers, which, it must be remembered, were
continually being added to by recruits from all sides.
So that when we reached Ascension, that lonely rock
in the middle of the wide Atlantic, whose shelving
sides beneath the sea swarm with all that an Albacore
need use, we were an army of great fishes swimming
in close order covering nearly a square mile, and in
many places ten fathoms deep. Our descent upon
Ascension must have caused an awful panic among
its submarine population, all of whom, with the excep-
tion of some vast cuttle-fish that inveigled a few of
our members, paid delicious tribute to us, satisfying
our himgry needs, as far as they ever are satisfied, in
a most enjoyable way.

To say that we swept the rock bases bare would
be exaggeration, but we certainly did find on the
second day of our visit that the juicy morsels which
had been so plentiful were scarce and hard to come
by. So we simultaneously moved off without any word
of command, any leader, any directing impulse, save
the one unerring instinct. And how fully sufficient
it was ! Just after departing, however, we suffered
considerable diminution of our forces, a really notice-
able lessening of our vast numbers, compared to which
the slaying at St. Helena was not worth mention.
We encountered a vast school of sperm whales whose
mighty bodies lay end-on to our path, and all their



200 The Albacore

cavernous jaws were wide agape. Down into those
enticing interiors our people plunged eagerly, silently,
without thought or, had they known it, hope of return.
As I have already said, I knew those pleasant-looking
but deadly entrances too well to be taken in by them ;
80 carefully avoiding them I swam on, steadily on,
through the black ranks of the monsters so busily
entombing my companions by hundreds. That was
all any of us needed to do, just to avoid the gaping
throats, otherwise we were perfectly safe from molesta-
tion at the mouth of any whale that ever swam.

So we fared on, our diminution more than made
up in a few hours by the recruits constantly closing
in upon us from every side, and passed through those
quiet waters between the Trades in very leisurely
fashion. For they are very rich in the food we love,
and we were all singularly voracious even for us.
Instinct warned us that, where we were going, food
would be far from plentiful, while duties of reproduction
would require us to be in the very best of condition.
So, in spite of the magnetism drawing us ever onward,
we neglected no opportunities for feeding, and must
surely, for a short time at least, have rendered the path
taken by us through the Atlantic almost bare of food
for the lower members of our family. But that I
cannot positively say ; I never missed food. Although
I was always hungry, there always happened to be
food near my mouth, and the way I continued to put
on girth and strength was truly wonderful.

At last we drew near the Straits of Gibraltar,
millions of us in a compact body, swimming steadily
forward now, without thought of eating, in a triangle
some miles in area. No human being knew of our
coming, because we swam at a depth of ten fathoms
or thereabouts, nor ever rose to the surface. Our



Our Welcome Home



201



goal nearly gained, the drawing power over us that
had so mysteriously brought us from the furthermost
ends of the earth seemed to have suddenly increased
its force, accelerated our speed, and overcome our
desire for food. So we swept up the centre of the great
Middle sea as far as Pantellaria, when, as if actuated
by a sudden impulse, the mighty wedge of steadily
swimming fish parted in two irregular portions,
each portion immediately closing up its disarranged
figure into triangular shape again. The lesser triangle
kept on eastward, bearing over towards the African
coast, but the larger one swerved sharply to the north-
ward for the Sicilian shores.

Again, I cannot tell why no instinct warned us of
our awful danger ; but I swam, being one of the largest
of our giant members, at the head of this great body
until we came right up to the rock bases of Sicily,
and sphtting up into numerous small bodies swarmed
along the shores of Italy and Sicily, and through the
Straits of Messina. All had been prepared for our
visit, although it had been quite unheralded by any
advanced guards, the humans on land depending
entirely upon our faithfulness and constant adherence
to our regular customs. In places where we had
always come hitherto, that is, our ancestors, great
corrals of netting had been prepared with long passages
into which we must swarm to get to the regular spawn-
ing-grounds. And many boats full of men lay quietly
waiting to harass, with shouting and splashing, any
idea of returning with a rush that we might have.
In this way an enormous number were captured and
slain ; for once within these barriers of netting, and
the way out again barred, we were driven farther and
farther into shallower and narrower places, where
savage men armed with spears slaughtered our helpless


202 The Albacore

membera to their full content. And we had come
all round the world for this ! The terrible massacre
was proceeding at many places with the utmost fury,
and in mid-sea queerly rigged feluccas were luring
individuals with huge rods and stout lines ; an easy
task, for we were all so ravenous that a fluttering piece
of rag was at once mistaken for a fl}ring-fish or squid,
and eagerly snapped at.

Oh, it vras a black and awful time for us, and yet
in spite of the elaborate preparations made everywhere
for our capture, and of our utter want of forethought
or attempt to avoid those deadly shores, it is certain
that only the mere fringes of our great host were cap-
tured. But those of us who escaped could claim no
credit for superior wisdom or greater skill in avoiding
danger. We survived, because for one thing the sea
is so wide and so deep, even the Mediterranean, that
man is closely limited in his powers of destruction,
and because, there being so many of us, all could not
get inshore at once to where the traps were laid for
us. Also, the majority of us were bound farther
eastward to the iEgean, to those quiet spawning-beds
where I was bom, and where in due time I arrived
again after visiting all the tropical and temperate
parts of the oceans of the world down to a depth of
one hundred fathoms.

Then commenced the all-important business of our
visit. The females in long ranks settled down upon
the pleasant smooth patches of sandy sea-floor in all
the sheltered nooks so well remembered, and deposited
with utmost care and regularity their burdens of
pearly eggs in long, level rows. Behind them swam
the males, steadily, methodically distributing milt
and spreading it evenly with quiet wavings of broad
tails, at the same time keeping a wary eye open for


^^h THE f



J



Unnatural Appetites 203

the possible advent of marauders. But no sooner was
tlie important part of the business accomplished than
our hunger often tempted us to devour this treasure
we had come so far to deposit, and I here at once
avow that the greatest enemies of our own ova were
ourselves. Why we did not render the race extinct
I know not, unless that in many, nay, most cases,
the eggs had been so cunningly hidden that we could
not find them ourselves. Nor do I know how long
the business lasted. Only one day, impelled by the
fiercest pangs of hunger, and by an uncontrollable
desire to get out where food was plentiful, I started
westward at a furious rate of speed, and escaping
every lure, soon found myself once more in the Atlantic^
recommencing my world-wide wanderings.



CHAPTER XVI
THE BONITO

ONE of the first of the deep-sea people to greet the
young deep-water sailor after the porpoise, is the
gay, chubby, and brilliant fish whose name stands
at the head of this chapter. It was thus called by the
early Spanish voyagers, the word meaning * beautiful.'
But I do not thhik they thus named it for its colours
or its grace of movement, since in both it is greatly
the inferior of the Cotyphcena. Rather I think it was
so called from its edible quaUties, combined with its
friendliness and amenability to capture. It is a far
more frequently seen fish than either the albacore or
dolphin, and is also much more sociable than either
of them. Moreover, it is gregarious in its habits, and
swims in very large companies, so large, in fact, that
I have often in light winds, when the sea has been
comparatively smooth, been unable to look in any
direction without seeing Bonito busily leaping about
after their terrified prey.

It is certainly a mackerel, a poor relation, so to
speak, of the albacore, which it greatly resembles,
though with several important differences. For in-
stance, the brilliant gold colour and imposing size
of the albacore's fins are greatly modified in the case
of the Bonito, as are also the curious bony processes
along the medial line near the tail. Its colour, too,
a dark blue, is not so pronounced, so transparently

ao4



The Amiable Fish



205



I
I

I



handsome, as is that of the albacore. In fact, it
belongs to the rank and file of the sea, a conunon,
every-day sort of a deep-sea denizen, while the albacore
and dolphin are rather the aristocratic leaders of sea
society, after the whale tribe. This commonness of
character, coupled with what it is only a slight stretch
of language to call affability of demeanour, is what
has endeared the Bonito to sailors generally, although
alas, from the same cause as before noted, i.e. the decay
of the sailing vessel, there are many sailors afloat who
have never, and probably never will, see one.

There is another, and still more important reason
why the Bonito is the sailors' best-loved fish — the
ease with which he may be caught. The handling
of the albacore from a ship's bowsprit is a task
demanding much more powerful tackle and strength
of arm than any ordinary man can give to it ; in fact,
it is very seldom that one takes a sailor's hook and is
afterwards secured. During all my voyages I have
only seen four actually brought on deck, but I do not
remember how many, only that it was a very large
number, that I have seen hooked and get away.

Once while fishing for Bonito from the flying
jib-boom end (my favourite place) I was vigorously
flicking my lure, when a dark shadow shot upward
from beneath the ship and sprang into the air, revealed
as a superb albacore. I frantically jerked my Une
upward as I saw him coming, but in vain ; he seized
ray bait in mid-air and got well hooked. He was so
heavy that I could only lift him with both hands to
the line at once, yet I succeeded in bringing him within
six feet of my perch. Then the long-suffering Une
parted and he fell back into the foaming head wave
with a stupendous splash ; and I reaUsed with a
shudder from what I had escaped, for how could I, on



206



t giddy e



The Bonito

e dealt v



^ eminence, have dealt with such a monster ?
; would certainly have paralysed my grip with his
struggles and shaken me off the boom. The dolphin,
too, is a iish that is seldom caught, not because it will
not take a hook voraciously when the circumstances
are favourable to its being deceived, but because it
is not so sociable in its instincts as is the Bonito, and
consequently does not give the sailor so many oppor-
tunities of becoming closely associated with it.

But the Bonito is essentially the sailor's friend. In
a slow-moving ship with a light breeze, I have known
a school of Bonito keep company with the vessel for
three days at a time. Apparently they took it in
turns to escort her by proceeding steadily in orderly
rows under and around the bows, while the rest gam-
bolled about, hunting ahead, abeam and astern. And
I have often seen three lines going among them at
once, fish after fish taking the upward journey, until
two or three dozen have been caught, and never a
sign of alarm among those below, unless one of the
booked ones got off and fell back among his fellows
with a loud splash, and with blood streaming from
his gills. Then indeed there would be an instant
disappearance of the whole school, only sometimes a
quick eye could catch a departing leap or two some
distance away. That, of course, was due to the smell
of blood, or whatever sense it is in fish which takes
the place of smell, apprehending that there was blood
about. Any fish thus wounded among his fellows
in the deep sea has no suffering — he is torn in pieces
and devoured instantly. And in none was this more
noticeable than in the sharks, for whenever one met
his death by the blow of a blubber spade, which was
about every five minutes, while we were cutting in
the whale, his companions fell upon him and tore lum


A Life of Peril



207



in fragments before he had time to sink, and instantly
returned to their furious occupation of tearing at the
whale.

In considering the life of the Bonito, we must
remember that we are descending the size scale, and
that consequently the number of his enemies appre-
ciably increase. The largest Bonito I ever saw scaled
only twenty-eight pounds, and I feel sure that he was
a great exception to the general rule, the average size
being eight or ten pounds. Owing to their habit
of swimming in large schools, and of crowding together
as if for mutual protection, when instinct warns them
that enemies are about, they fall a comparatively easy
prey to such voracious enemies as the grampus, the
albacore, and the sword-fish (Xiphias), while, of course,
they themselves prey quite as furiously upon the
younger members of their own family. But they
must be an amazingly prohfic fish, judging from the
enormous schools met with and the ease with which
they may be captured by their enemies.

As to their place of origin, there is perhaps more
mystery about that than about any other of the pelagic
fish. Whether they imitate their giant relative, the
albacore, and make periodical visits to comparatively
shallow waters in order to spawn, or as the dolphin
do, deposit their ova upon and among floating masses
of sea-weed, is a point not easily settled. But two
things are certain, and they are, that, like the dolphin,
the Bonito is never seen near land except that be
very abrupt in its rise from the sea-bed, like St. Helena,
and being essentially a surface-fish frequenting the
deepest ocean areas, he cannot go to the bottom to
spawn. And when we have stated that, we have ex-
hausted our knowledge of this creature's family habits.

I have caught them in the North and South Atlantic,


208



The Bonito



In the Indian Ocean, in the North and South Pacific
Ocean, nearly always remote from any land, and
I have many times noticed the female roe bursting
ripe. But where they had proposed to go to spawn
was always a problem far beyond my ken, or ability
to elucidate. Indeed, there is a great deal to be done
for oceanic ichthyology, in spite of the wonderful
work of the American Government expedition in that
direction. It has accomplished an immense amount
of valuable work, but one feels that only the fringe
of the subject has yet been touched. The Natural
History of the sea calls for the unpaid work of en-
thusiastic amateurs lil;e the Prince of Monaco, who,
with great wealth at his disposal, refuses to waste
his life in the idiotic dissipations of European capitals,
choosing rather the absorbingly interesting (and much
less expensive) pursuit of studying the deep-sea fauna
in his beautiful yacht, the ' Princess Alice.'

Even the study of so essentially a surface-fish as
the Bonito is attended by many apparently insur-
mountable difficulties ; what then must be the case
with fish who rarely, if ever, rise to within a hundred
fathoms of the sea-surface of their own accord ? And
then one of the greatest incentives to close investigation
of the habits of any creature is entirely absent in the
case of deep-sea fish, i.e. that of commercial gain.
While there are many of them, and especially the more
accessible ones, fairly good eating, they flourish remote
from markets of any kind, and they are never likely
to be taken in any quantity. Moreover, tliey take
far too kindly to salt, as do indeed all the mackerel
tribe. American salted mackerel is a thing of horror
to most of us who like salt in moderation. To my
mind it tastes hke solidified brine, with a
fish. And no amount of soaking or parboil



I



a flavour of J
boiling seems H



The Fish that Won't Keep 209

capable of modifying to any appreciable extent its

malignant salinity.

The Bonito is, if anything, still worse. Mourn-
fully do I remember how, having a field day among
Bonito just on the northern side of the Equator in
the Atlantic, homeward bound in a very slow ship,
the steward proposed that, as the weather was quite
cool, he should be allowed to salt about thirty fine
fish, or in the neighbourhood of four hundred pounds
weight, so that our miserable rations of putrid beef
and pork might be eked out in a little more Christian
fashion. The idea was jumped at, and I, having
considerable experience in cleaning fish, spent my
watch below eviscerating and boning the fish ready
for the pickle.

The job was eminently successful, not a trace of
taint appearing in the pickled fish. In high glee we
welcomed the first mess of salted Bonito, but alas,
we were most cruelly disappointed. Hungry sailors
can eat almost anything, but that terrible fish was
beyond us. It scarified the mouth as the eating of
pure salt would do, all trace of fish as far as flavour
was concerned seemed to have fled, and yet it had
been steeped all night and parboiled in two waters.
Various schemes were tried, such as soaking it in
vinegar, drying the salt out of it in the sun (when it
became Uke a piece of alabaster), but all to no purpose.
And most tantalising of all, it retained a singularly
appetising smell. The whole mass was dumped over-
board, much to the gratification, no doubt, of a school
of sharks, which was following us. But even they,
I should think, must have wondered what the new
and strange food was which they had gulped down
so readily, if, as is somewhat doubtful, the shark has
any discrimination in matters of taste at all.

14


210 The Bonito

The flesh of the tunny or albaoore, which is most
dosdy akin to that of the Bonito, is treated very
sparingly with salt, and is preserved by boiling it
in oil and sealing it np in tins, which makes it a delicacy
that keeps for an indefinite period. No doubt if the
Bonito could be caught in easily accessible positions,
it could be manipulated in the same sensible way,
and might become an article of considerable com-
mercial value. But of that there is not the slightest
prospect, so that the Bonito will doubtless be left to
pursue his jovial way in peace.

Moreover, there is no blinking the fact that, in spite
of the bitter cry of starving multitudes on shore, the
incalculable wealth of the sea in food laigdy goes
a-begging. Only let the fishermen be a little more
than ordinarily successful, and immediately our souls
are saddened by reading of many tons of succulent
food being carted away for manure, or left upon the
shore to poison the pure air with putrid exhalations.
Nay, more, there are not wanting many grave and
specific accusations levelled at market magnates, who
for fear of a lowering in price, deliberately prevent
the distribution of this excellent food, thereby com-
mitting the triple crime of robbing the fishermen of
their due, keeping from the poor their food, and wasting
the precious gifts of God. It is a terribly sad thing
to Imow, and sadder still perhaps to be unable to
suggest an effective cure for such a gigantic evil. And
if this be the case with the harvest of the sea so easily
garnered near shore, how much more is there the
greatest unlikelihood of any new fishery being opened
up farther afield, and of fish that will not keep ?

Bonito are foimd wherever albacore and dolphin
are, only more so. For instance, they appear to be
more enterprising, readier to respond to the slightest



Deep' Sea Swarms



211



rise in the temperature of the water outside their
usual limits, so that I have caught them north of the
forty degree line and almost as far south as the Cape
of Good Hope. In the great, wide areas of loneliness
to be found in the Pacific and Indian Oceans, they
are, as might be expected from their habits, very
plentiful, but I think that the largest number of them
I have ever seen at one time was in the South Atlantic,
well east of St. Helena and Ascension, in that vast
and almost unvisited stretch of abysmal ocean known
*o geographers as the ' West African Basin,' where
the depth varies from sixteen to eighteen thousand
fathoms, and the sea literally swarms with life.

On the eastern verge of this immense depression
the south-east Trades, affected by the proximity of
the African land, fail and falter, falling almost to a
calm. Then the belated ship, alone in the centre of
a vast expanse, becomes a point of interest to the
wandering population of the sea who visit her and ex-
hibit themselves in many a curious evolution.

Here, where no sailing-ship ever ought to be found,
I have seen, as mentioned in the opening lines of this
chapter, the Bonito so plentiful that I was unable
to look in any given direction without being aware
of thousands of them leaping after their ever-abundant
food. And at night, when the sea was lit up by its
natural fires of phosphorescence, the scene was ineffably
grand, the mild effulgence being stirred continually
into bright mizy patterns of glowing light, while
the happy fish, apparently contemptuous of rest,
came and went on their ceaseless errands.

Here, too, we witnessed a scene that impressed
itself upon the minds of everybody on board, as being
past all their experience. It was at high noon, with
but a light upper air stirring the sails, and wafting


212 The Bonho

the old brig along so gently over the glassy sea, whidi
was untouched by the descent of the slightest air, that
sitting oat upon the jib-boom end one could look
down into the translucent depths as through a pane
of g^iass, and watch the gambols of the sea-creatures
at a depth of several fothoms.

So quiet had been the weather for several days,
and so little did the passing of the ship disturb the
sea-folk that there was almost as great a variety
around us, ranging from the tiny silveiy fry playing
hide and seek among the deadly fringes of the mush-
room-like Medusae, to the mighty albacore, as one
would have expected to see in the most representative
aquarium. Only that here there was no suggestion
of bounds to that vast play and feeding ground.
Suddenly there came from the fore-to*-gallant yard
a cry of * breakers ahead, sir.*

' What's that ? ' sharply queried the * old man.*

The man repeated his information.

' Nonsense ! * angrily snapped the skipper, * the
nearest land ain't less than three hundred mile off,
and there ain't any bottom here less than eighteen
thousand fathom. Pop up aloft, Mr. Jones (to the
mate) an' see what that galoot's a-gittin off his chest.'

Up went the mate on the instant, taking the
glasses with him. Presently he shouted : * I can't
make it out, sir ; it looks just like a line of breakers
extendin' from west to east, as far as I can see with
the glasses. But it ain't breakers, 'cause I can see
nothin' but just the single line, and beyond it the
water's smooth as 'tis here. Looks like a tide rip,
only I never see one so monstrous as that.'

By this time the phenomenon, whatever it was,
had arrived within a mUe of us, and was evidently
travelling at the rate of about six miles an hour. A



I
I
I
I



A Mysterious Concourse 213

deep roaring as of the distant voice of many waters
was heard, gradually growing in volume. All hands
came uncalled on deck, and watched with considerable
anxiety the approach of this uncanny roll of white ;
it drew nearer and nearer, until presently we passed
through it with only a very slight motion of the vessel,
for by an optical illusion it appeared a great deal
higher than it really was. The width of the line of
foam was about sixty feet, and in it could be seen an
amazing variety of sea debris, while it also seemed
to be alive with fish of all kinds.

But the chief wonder was a few cables' length
behind the strange line of white. It proved to be
on nearer inspection, a mass of land vegetation con-
sisting of several huge trees inextricably entangled
by their branches and snake-like convolutions of
giant creepers. It looked like a floating island, but
— all alive. So wonderful did it appear, so full of
movement, that a boat was got out in order that the
skipper might go and examine it, and while I live I
sh^ never forget the amazing sight it presented upon
a dose view.

Long before we got to it, the boat's way was im-
peded by the vast numbers of Bonito converging upon
it and making the sea appear as thick with fish as it
does in the middle of a herring shoal. We pressed
on, however, noticing how every stroke of the oars
was followed by a crimson stain melting into brown,
until we reached the central mass. It was so densely
crowded with fish, large and small, with sea-snakes,
with crabs, with creatures for which one could find
no name, that it seemed like one vast mass of living,
writhing forms. At a distance one could see the shapes
of the trees and their interlocked branches ; alongside
all seemed alive.


214 The Bonito

Now there was not the slightest suggestion of
danger ; for the sharks, of which of course there were
many, had such abundance of easily gotten food about
them that even had one of us fallen overboard, I do
not believe we should have been molested at all.
But in the presence of that seething mass of life, all
self-subsisting, ever devouring, ever unsatisfied and
inexhaustible, a positive sense of fear came over us
all, and when the skipper said : ' Stem, boys, and let's
get out o' this, I don't like it,' we felt that he had aptly
voiced our own sentiments. So we returned to the
ship, feeling quite relieved to get on board again, and
place something more substantial between us and
those hungry hordes than the thin shell of a boat. I
know it was foolish, but that is how we all felt.

One peculiarity of the Bonito I must notice with
some diffidence, because I know that I shall find myself
in opposition to naturalists generally. It is a common-
place that a fish is a cold-blooded animal, and it is,
generally speaking, true. But the Bonito has blood
as warm as our own, and I know it experimentally.
The first Bonito I ever caught was when I was barely
fourteen, and small for my age. I bestrode the fljdng-
jib and locked my legs inside the jib-guys and rovmd
the boom-end. Still the stout, slippery, chubby form
of the fish (he was about fifteen pounds weight), aided
by his extraordinary vibrations, made it impossible
for me to hold him by cuddling him tightly to my
bosom. So in a fit of desperation I jammed my fingers
into his gills, and must, I suppose, have ruptured
his heart, which is very close to his gills, for imme-
diately a miniature torrent of hot blood flowed all
over me, much of it running down my bare chest
inside of my shirt, which as usual, had no buttons on
the front. Then, finding my strength fast going, I



Troubles of an Observer 215

bundled my prize up in the folds of the flying-jib,
which was lying loosely furled upon the boom. The
state of that jib when hoisted procured me a painful
interview with the bos'un, which I do not care to
recall, and my positive assertion that the fish's blood
was warm obtained me another hiding from the sail-
maker, for what he called contradicting.

Singularly enough, such frequent disasters at these,
consequent upon my stating what I had discovered
for myself, while they naturally made me very reticent
in the presence of my elders on all debatable subjects,
have had the effect of making me loth to state my
experiences to anybody in a superior or authoritative
position — until the last few years, when, tired of feeling
so cowardly, I ventured to maintain opinions based
upon practical knowledge against ideas builded upon
theory. After that unpleasant day, I always noticed
how warm the blood of a Benito was, but have only
once before stated it in print, when I was promptly
taken to tttsk by an old and dear friend, a shipmaster,
who, while admitting that he had no recollection of
ever feeling a Bonito's blood in his life, was sure that
it could not be warm, as the Bonito was undoubtedly
a fish, and all fish were cold-blooded.

The Bonito is peculiarly liable to the attentions
of parasites, both internal and external. I do not,
therefore, mean to hint that other fish have none,
only I have not been able to see them, whereas in
dissecting a Bonito it is impossible to avoid noticing
them. There are minute hangers on, something
Uke tiny limpets, in such snug places as behind the
pectoral fins, or between the ventrals, or on the ' run *
of the fish, where the body slopes away rapidly from
its central fulness to the fine lines of the tail. The
presence of these may account for the apparently



2l6



The Bonito



aimless peq>endicular leapings of the fish, quite
different from his dash into the air after a flying-fish
or squid. It is easy to imagine that the irritation
caused by these vemnin must sometimes become
well-nigh intolerable. And they cling so tightly that
I have never been able to tear one off the freshly
caught fish, without bringing a portion of skin with it.

Inside the mouth, and often nestling among the
branchiae of the gills, will be found one or more white
crustaceans, much like an exaggerated wood-louse,
but not so flexible in the body, being incapable of
rolling themselves up in a ball ! They have eight or
ten hooked legs, by means of which they attach them-
selves firmly to the mouth, or throat, or gills of their
host, and thenceforward lead a placid, well-fed, and
uneventful existence at their host's expense, being
apparently quite exempt from the almost universal
law of eating and being eaten in turn, I do not see
what can ever disturb them except the death of the
fish. When that happens they release their hold
and crawl out of the mouth or gill-openings, seeking,
I suppose, a fresh host, able to provide for their needs,
having doubtless realised that no more board and
lodging is to be expected from their late benefactor.
In like manner does the tenacious clutch of the outside
parasite become relaxed, and he falls oi¥ when the last
quiver of the flesh has ceased, and the fish is dead.

A much more unpleasant form of parasite is one
which burrows into the muscular tissue, sometimes in
such numbers as to make it impossible to eat the
meat, unless the eater be something of a savage, either
from hunger, or place of origin. It is just a fat white
maggot, not so well formed as those seen in fly-blown
meat, but a clumsy grub, which slowly eats its con-
tented wav through the fish's muscles, leaving behind



I



The Involuntary Host 21/

it a tube to show how it has bored its way to where
it is found. I have also found several curious living
things in the Bonito's maw, but have never been able
to determine whether they were regular lodgers or
just visitors in the ordinary course, but being possessed
of greater vitality than the other creatures upon which
the fish has fed, had not yet succumbed and become
subject to the digestive process.

A very instructive study is that of the contents
of the stomachs of deep-sea fish, for they are by no
means (as might be supposed) composed of merely
flying-fish and squid. There are often to be found
small fish of shape quite unknown to us hitherto, and
certainly never seen by sailors. Fish, we must assume,
that live within the eater's range of depth, but never
come to the surface voluntarily.

Of the many services rendered by Bonito to ship-
wrecked people at almost the last gasp for want of
food, there is no need to speak ; it will be at once
understood that so plentiful, sociable, and easily
allured a fish as the Bonito, must often have furnished
a meal to people who would otherwise have starved.
And no one, who has not been driven to it, can know
how nice a Bonito collop, cut off the quivering body
and laid upon the almost scorching wood in the full
blaze of the sun, until it curls up and turns quite
black, can taste. Only of course, it presupposes
strong teeth and wolfish hunger.

There is a sort of poor relation to the Bonito,
yet resembling much more closely the great albacore
in the contour of its body and the arrangement of its
fins, to which sailors have given the trivial name
of ' Skip-jack.' Scientifically it is termed Tkynnus
sarda, and has even been found as far north as the
mouth of the Esk. Only one speciiueu though. It


2l8



The Bonito



is an elegant little fish, never growing heavier than
about five pounds, and exceedingly succulent as to
its flesh, which is much superior to either that of
bonito or albacore. It is not at all unlike the blue-
fish of the American coast, and I think its flesh is
superior to that, highly as the latter seems to be
esteemed in American restaurants.
' Its usual range of habitat is, I should say, co-
extensive with that of the bonito, but being somewhat
capricious in its appearance it is not nearly so often
seen. It has earned its trivial name by its pecuhar
habit of doing continually what the bonito only does
occasionally, that is, making short vertical leaps into
the air for no apparent reason, except perhaps jote
de vivre. It is a pretty and at the same time a peculiar
sight to see a large school of Skip-jack all busily
springing out of water, as if their very existence
depended upon their doing it rapidly and regularly.
They feed on the same food as do the bonito, but I
have no doubt that now and then some of their smaller
members fall victims to the hunger of the larger
bonito. The Skip-jack and the bonito do not associate,
they keep well clear of each other, as do all the different
varieties I have hitherto named, unless one is chasing
the other for a meal.

They are by no means beloved by sailors, for the
simple reason that unconsciously they are very tan-
talising. Few things are more annoying to a half-
famished crew than to see, on some delightfully quiet
afternoon, the smiling surface of the sea dotted all
over with circles caused by the upspringing of thousands
of succulent fish, not one of whom will come near
enough to the ship to be tempted, or if he did would
be persuaded into the belief that a bit of white rag
was a flying-fish or squid.



I



I


I



The Unsociable Sklp'jack 219

Sociability, in the sense that most of the pelagic
deep-sea fish have it, they do not possess, and although
large numbers of them are often seen at one time
they always preserve a certain individuality, an
aloofness from each other, like that of the dolphin.
As to accompanying a ship in the same way that
dolphin, albacore, and bonito will do, in varying
degrees of closeness of course, that will they never.
And yet they may — who knows— derive some sort
of satisfaction from being, as it were, within hail of
her. They are, more than any of the true pelagic
fish, independent vagabonds of the sea, roaming each
for himself whithersoever they list, and keeping their
family haunts enwrapped in deepest mystery.

I remember with great saitsfaction, two occasions on
which, by the purest accident, I succeeded in catching
Skip-jack, and subsequently examining them closely.
I may say in passing, that they were the only Skip-jack
I ever did see caught, and must admit that the capture
was almost purely accidental. I had been fishing
for bonito almost unsuccessfully, having only caught
one, and the sudden tropical twilight fell before I was
aware of it. But the evening was so lovely, the dying
tints of the sunset so exquisitely tender, that I lingered
on my quiet perch, loth to leave the contemplation
of so much peaceful beauty. The line hung down
almost straight, the bait just clear of the water, and
occasionally I jerked it mechanically, my thoughts
far away. Suddenly I felt a tug at it, and a weight
upon it. Instantly called to present realities, I
hauled up swiftly, to find a Skip-jack upon the hook,
a fine specimen of about four and a half pounds, at
which I was mightily astonished, as were my shipmates
when I took bun into the forecastle to show them.

The other occasion was at the front end of the



22Q The Bonito

day, as a French chum of mine used to term the
dawn. I had been watching some stripes of light
in the water alongside and ahead before daybreak,
and determined that I would put in the time between
daybreak and 'turn-to/ six o'clock, seeing whether
I could not invite one of the fish causing them, to
breakfast with me. So, hastily swallowing my coffee,
I seized my line and ran out to the flying-boom end,
wbeie I started to unroll just as the first crimson
streamers in the sky began to be reflected in the darkling
bosom of the deep. The moment my bait touched
the water it was seized, and by another Skip-jack,
much to my delight. But though I stasred till the
last minute possible before *tum-to* and forfeited
my well-beloved smoke, never another came near
enough for me to see him, much less to be enticed
on to my hook. So I fed sure that in both cases my
capture was due to pure accident, and that ordinarily
the Skip-jack does not come dose enough to a ship
to be caught, or if he does, fights shy of any lure the
fisherman may dangle over his head.



I
I



CHAPTER XVII
THE FLYING-FISH

THE subject of this chapter is undoubtedly one of
the most interesting in the long list of the
great fauna of the sea. It has been the occa-
sion for much heated discussion, which seems to be
never ending ; so-called authorities never appear able to
agree upon the much vexed question of leap or flight.
Quite as much nonsense has been talked about the
Flying-fish as about the whale, and that also by
people whose position in the natural history world
imperatively demanded of them accurate information,
Moreover, there has been more sympathy wasted upon
the Flying-fish than upon any other sea creature.
Its hard lot is bewailed because that, fleeing from its
many enemies in the sea and soaring into the tiir,
it is there seized by hovering birds, who doubtless
regard its habit of flight as one that might most
advantageously be followed by all the other small fish
in the sea.

Now in what follows, as in almost all I have already
written, I wish it to be clearly understood that only
personal obser\'ation has been used as a basis for the
remarks made, and consequently I am fully prepared
for much contradiction. As a sample of the kind of
thing all first-hand observers of little-known creatures
must expect, I quote an experience of mine six years
ago, I had written an article for a popular magazine.



The Flying'fish



222



in which I casually alluded to the minor fact well-
known to all deep-water sailors, of the small cuttle-
fish or LoHgo leaping high enough to be carried on
board during rough weather, and in consequence
often being found upon a vessel's decks. Shortly
afterwards the editor forwarded me a letter from
a gentleman, who stated that, although not a sailor,
he had been round the world in sailing ships six or
seven times, that he had never heard of the ' leaping '
squid, and that it was perfectly ridiculous to say that
such a clumsy creature as a cuttle-fish could leap on
board a vessel. Consequently it was obvious that
I was knowingly making an extraordinarily idiotic
misstatement, etc. To which I replied (to the editor
only) that the matter was one that could be tested
any day by asking the first half dozen sailors met
with at Green's Home, or any similar place, and that
it being so well-known a fact to all seafarers, I did
not think it worth while to answer the gentleman's
letter.

But in the case of the Flying-fish I readily admit
that an observer may have an honest opinion based
upon casual observation, or misconstruction of terms.
The difference between leaping and flying may be
narrowed down until some sort of an agreement be
possible, and yet neither party feel that they have been
worsted in the field of argument. However, I must
bring the Flying-fish himself forward. As in the case
of several other deep-sea fish, naturalists have been
gradually compelled to treat ni'nor differences in
individuals as accidental, and not as constituting
differing species, until at last they have most sensibly
reduced the Flying-fish family (Exoceius) to two
species : E. volitans and E. nigricans.

The first named, and the smaller of the two, has the



I



His Characteristic



223



I



same amazing rajige of ocean as the Bonito, and is
affected in precisely the same way by warm seasons,
which induce it to venture farther north or south than
it normally does, according to the time of the year.
Its hmit of size is about twelve inches in length by
four inches in circumference at the thickest parts
of the body. In shape it is exceedingly like a grey
mullet, especially as regards the head ; the body is
perhaps a thought squarer than a mullet's, more
like that of a gar-fish. In colour it is blue on the
head and back, silvery on the abdomen, and it is
covered with scales hke a mullet or a herring. And
herein Ues one of its great claims to our notice— that
almost alone among the pelagic deep-sea fish, it has
not the slightest connection with the great mackerel
family, being indeed much more allied to the denizens
of shallow seas in its general characteristics, with one
exception, and that is, its power of flight.

With the exception of the pectorals there is nothing
remarkable in the fins of the Flying-fish except that
the lower lobe of the tail is half as long again as the
upper. But the pectoral fins, or rather wings, are
nearly as long as the fish, and spread at their widest
to full three inches. When the fish is in the water
they fold with great neatness into the side of the body,
which at the thickest part is slightly grooved to receive
them. When the impulse comes upon the fish to fly,
they spring into the air in a diagonal direction, their
wmgs spreading with a flash as they leave the water,
and vibrating with such rapidity that the eye cannot
follow their movements, except to note that they are
vibrating.

Now it is obvious that if this manceuvre of the
fish were a leap, its direction, either vertically or hori-
zontally, could not change, except that its trajectory


$24 '^hc Flying-fish

would be more or less flattened according to the
distance leaped. That much, I think, will be admitied.
But if we see the fish leave the water, pursued, say, by
an albacore, five hundred yards on the starboard
side of the ship, and heading towards her, perceiving
the great obstacle in its way, change its course to one
at right angles to its original direction, we ought to
assume that it is flying. Especially if, as constantly
happens, it rises at the same time twenty feet or more
in the air, and crossing the bows turns again sharply
in a new direction.

Nor is this all, for I have repeatedly seen a Flying-
fish, after changing its course three or four times and
its elevation more frequently than that, after having
flown at least a thousand yards, be about to drop,
apparently exhausted, into the sea. But at that
moment the gaping jaws of one of its enemies has
protruded from the water, and it has shot vertically
into the air again and sped away in yet another new
direction. I am absolutely convinced that the only
thing that compels the Exocctus to cease its flight
is the drying of its wing membranes, when, of course,
the vibration would spUt them to shreds. This,
of course, does limit the aerial evolutions of the Flying-
fish ; but I have repeatedly seen it fly in varying
directions for over a mile without once touching the
water.

Now the Exocetus does not fly for pleasure. When-
ever it leaves the water it is in a state of alarm, it is
seeking safety from some of its numberless enemies, or
it is disturbed by the passing near it of a ship's ked.
There are few prettier sights to be seen at sea than
is visible when, on a fairly calm night, with the smooth
water highly phosphorescent, a school of Flying-fish
are disturbed. Like a galaxy of meteors they may



Rapiplty of light



225



be seen streaming along very swiftly just beneath
(he surface, each leaving behind it a broadening
track of light, until, as if at one impulse, the whole
company suddenly leave the water, the points of their
multitudinous exit gleaming in tiny showers of diamond
spray. But sometimes in the dark, bewildered, they
take the wrong direction, and may be heard striking
the ship's side with a series of sounds like hammer
taps, and occasionally a straggler, flying higher than
the rest, strikes against a mast or a sail and falls on
deck dead. I have sometimes seen blood and scales
on a lowermast about twenty feet above the deck,
proving not only the height to which the fish had
risen, but the impetuous velocity of its flight. And
it is quite a usual thing to find Flying-fish (where there
is no cat on board) in the morning lying on deck, with
their heads battered into shapelessness by the force
of their impact against some solid part of the ship.
Poor puss, however, whose lot on board ship is always
a rather rugged one, learns with amazing swiftness
that fresh fish are occasionally to be found in obscure
comers about the decks at night, and when she does,
very few of these succulent morsels find their way into
human mouths.

The strangest instance, proving the velocity of a
Flying-fish through the air, which ever came undei
my notice was on board of the barque ' West York '
in the North Atlantic, homeward bound from Portland,
Oregon. It was a lovely night, and with a favouring
breeze the vessel was making about five knots an hour.
Keeping the look-out upon the small deck forward,
wnich is known as the top-gallant forecastle, was
a loutish A.B., who from his laziness, stupidity, and
uncleanness, was no favourite on board, all the rest
of the chaps being pretty smart. He was sitting
15


>



226 Tiie Flylng^ffsli

iip(m the c^kBtan when last I saw him» doai^
from the podticm of his head. Suddenly, as the
watch below and the unoccupied portion of the watch
on deck were chatting, prior to the former * turning
ittt* * Cockney* rushed into the forecastle howling
like a spanked hrat, and holding both hands to the
side of his face, from niduch the blood was trickling
through his fingers. He caused quite a sensation
amongst us, for it looked as if he had been seriously
assaulted, and he, as soon as he could speak, plainly
declared that he had been, by the skipper's son,
^dio was second mate. He said that he was looking
out on the starboard bow, when the second mate came
up behind him and struck him so heavy a tdow with
Us fist that it knocked him off the capstan.

As soon as he had recovered he rushed in to tell
us, and he expected us to go aft inunediately and
make a row about it. But while he was thus expending
himself I examined his temple, finding indeed the marks
of a very heavy blow, blood and bruised flesh, and
also two or three fish-scales I Saying to my ship-
mates, * Hold on a minute,' I rushed up on to the
forecastle head, and sure enough, underneath one
of the stowed anchors, beside the cat-tail, I found the
aggressor, a splendid Flying-fish, about a pound and
a half in weight, with its head almost driven into its
body. And, as a salve for his grievous wound, I gave
it to the ' Gxkney ' for his breakfast.

In order that the Exocetus may indulge easily in
these aerial excursions, it is provided with a very
much enlarged SMom-bladder, which, when inflated,
fills the whole cavity of the abdomen. There is also
in the mouth another bladder, which is filled with
air through the gills, and both these inflations are
performed automatically at the moment the fish leaves



Domestic Haunts of Exocetus 227

the water. The bladders, of course, are kept full
of air while the fish is on the wing, but the moment
it touches the water they are deflated, allowing the
fish to plunge as rapidly as it wishes to the limit of
its depth, which is not very great. These bladders
are an excellent substitute for the air cells within the
bones of birds, and make of the fish a veritable bird
while on the wing.

The spawning place of the Exocetus, in the North
Atlantic, at any rate, is among the floating weed in
the Sargasso Sea, the breeding place of so many sea
denizens. Here I have often seen masses of ova
large enough to fill a flour-barrel, and looking exactly
like bunches of white currants, colour, size, and trans-
parency all lending themselves to the illusion. No
doubt whatever can attach to this statement, because
the tiny fry with the yelk fastened to it still by the
umbilicus were also often hauled up, and even to the
naked eye were recognisable at that early stage as
Flying-fish. But I am quite conscious that the question
of the breeding-places of the Indian Ocean and Pacific
Flying-fish is still a moot point. No one can imagine
the Flying-fish migrating such vast distances as would
be necessary if all of them bred in the North Atlantic.
I should, however, suppose that they find, in all oceans,
submarine forests of seaweed in the immediate vicinity
of steep-to land where they can spawn, and amid
whose dim intricacies their young descendants may
be reasonably safe from the majority of their enemies.
This sheltering of young fry is undoubtedly one of
the chief ends, if not the chief end, subserved by sea-
weed all around the world. Without such shelter it
is hard to imagine how any of the helpless fry would
survive the attacks of their countless voracious enemies,
the worst, perhaps, being their own relatives.



228



The Flying'fish



The Flying-fish is probably one of the most prolific
of all fish, not even excepting the herring. For it
must be remembered that it is the staple food of all
the larger pelagic fish, albacore, dolphin, bonito, and
skip-jack, while undoubtedly it preys upon its own
species more ravenously than do the strangers. I have
caught a Flying-fish with another nearly half its own
size jammed in its throat, and the greedy rascal had
eleven smaller ones, ranging from one to three inches
long, distending its maw. This fact of its exceeding
voracity soon modified ray feelings of compassion
towards it. Like most people, I felt sorry for the poor
persecuted fish, which appeared to know no moment
of security, whose hfe was one long series of hair-
breadth escapes ; indeed, I often wondered how it
was that any escaped at all. For, the attack of the
dolphin, for instance, always seemed to me unerring,
I never saw a Flying-fish missed by a dolphin, often
as I have seen them chased, and numberless times
have I seen the graceful sea-birds swoop down into
the midst of the fleeing school and take easy toll of
them while on the wing. But when I saw how ruthless
they were themselves, and also how, in spite of the
amazing numbers eaten by the larger fish and birds,
there never seemed to be any diminution in the quan-
tity of those remaining, I ceased to criticise the ar-
rangements of the Creator, and reassured myself
that the Flying-fish was as perfectly happy and as
well provided for as are all the rest of His creatures.

The other species of Flying-fish, which I have not
yet alluded to at length, E. nigricans, is quite an
imposing fish. He has two pairs of wings, the ventrals
being extended like the pectorals, only of course,
less so. It is a handsome, if sombre-looking fish,
its markings being black and silver instead of blue



I



I


The ' Guineaman '



229



and white, while its fins are also black, with a trans-
verse band of silver. I feel some little hesitation in
speaking of the principal hue of this fish as black,
because it is by no means a jet black, or even an ink
black. But it certainly cannot be called anything
else but black, since it is neither very dark blue nor
deep brown. It is really a dull black, almost rusty,
but of course when it is wet it is brightened somewhat.
It grows to a length of twenty inches, and a weight
of over three pounds, but it is very seldom seen of
those dimensions by sailors. I believe its habitat
to be but a small strip (comparatively speaking) of
the North Atlantic, and I know that when one is
caught at Barbadoes, the irrepressible negroes always
allude to it affectionately as ' ole Guineaman,' showing
their belief in its origin being the Gulf of Guinea.
Whether that is so I do not know, having never been
there, and not being able to find any allusions to the
matter in books of Natural History, which, indeed,
contain very little reliable information about the
habits, etc, of deep-sea fish, however minute the
anatomical details they may afford about specimens
which have been captured, preserved and brought
home.

There is a deeply rooted notion among seamen,
from whence arising nobody seems to know, that
in various parts of the world, regular fisheries of the
Exoceius are carried on, but in a most peculiar manner.
It is assumed that a glare of light is an attraction
irresistible to the Flying-fish, and, in consequence,
this failing of his is made use of to lure him to de-
struction. Boats go out at night, the darker the
better, propelled by paddles, as being the most noiseless
method, and having a net set like a sail upon a yard
hoisted upon the usual mast, with its foot also spread



230



The Flying fish



out. A lantern is hoisted to the middle of this net,
at the sight of which the fish fly towards it, strike
the net and fall down into the boat. It is therefore
considered to be the easiest form of fishing known.
Unfortunately, in spite of the precise details of this
description and the matter-of-fact way it is, or used
to be, regularly told to the young deep-water sailor,
it is nothing but a yam. No such fishery is carried
on anywhere, nor has ever been, although I do not
doubt that every retailer of the story beheves it.
There is, however, a regular Flying-fish fishery carried
on at one place in the world, and only one, systemati-
cally. Such few instances of Flying-fish being caught
among some of the South Sea Islands do not count,
as they are more or less accidental and not at all
planned out.

At the beautiful island of Barbadoes in the West
Indies there has been established for over a century
a regular Exocetus fishery, which is carried on all the
year round, with great average success. It furnishes
the inhabitants of Bridgetown and Speightstown
and the coast villages with their staple food ; in
fact, it is often said in jest that the 'Badians do not
feel fed unless they have Flying-fish with every meal.
It is almost universally cooked in the same way, that
is, the bones are removed, and the fish not fried or
boiled, but sautS in gravy — not nearly so pleasant a
method, in my opinion, as grilling or frying. But
that is purely a matter of taste. The price fluctuates
much, according to the catch, but happily there is no
' ring ' in Bridgetown market. If the boats all return
loaded to the gunwale, as they sometimes do, the
price falls at once so low that the very poorest negro
can get a meal for hall a dozen hungry people for a
tup, three halfpence, while next day the s



I



y people for a ■
le same money H



I



The Barbadoes Fishery 231

may only purchase one small fish. But none of the
fish is wasted because there is a glut. It must all
be disposed of rapidly, for in that torrid chmate a
very few hours will turn it putrid, and it would be
a sin to throw it away, in the simple darkies' creed,
so what is unsold is distributed gratis to the poor.
At least, I am now quoting what was the practice
twenty-three years ago. By the law of compensation
it usually happens that when Flying-fish are scarce,
albacore, dolphin, bonito, or jew-fish are plentiful,
all these abounding in the deep-blue waters which
come up so close to the island shores.

The method pursued in this fishery is even more
simple than that described in the yam already given.
The only gear needed are a few nets made on hoops
some three feet in diameter, of about half-inch mesh,
and with scarcely any ' bag * to them, two or three
stout lines and hooks, for possible big fish, and a set
of granes. The boat is usually sloop-rigged, and
from three to ten tons, carrying the usual boat's gear,
but always undecked. A few Flying-fish kept from
the previous day's catch are the bait, very strong
in odour and oozing with oil. Thus equipped, the
boats put forth just before dawn, so as to be on the
ground at the time of calm or nearly so. More for-
tunate than their northern brethren they are always
sure of their weather ; they have no need to consult
the tides, and their season lasts all the year round.
Moreover, there is scarcely any change in the hour of
daybreak, and the weather is always wann, so warm
in fact, that the fisherman's sole garment is usually
a flour sack with three holes cut in it for head and
arms.

Upon leaving the harbour the boats make all
possible speed to a distance of about three miles oS



^H Upon leaving

^H possible speed to



9



232 The Flying^fish

the land, where the water is the intense blue of mid-
ocean. Having arrived, the peak of the sail is dropped
and the tack hoisted; in sea parlance, the sail is ' scan-
dalised,' and the boat allowed to drift. By this time
the gorgeous tropical sunrise is imfolding its ineffable
glories, and great splashes of radiant hue appear and
disappear upon the placid face of the sea. But the
fishermen have no eyes for celestial beauty now.
Bending over the side they knead and squeeze the
semi-putrid bait in the water until it is broken up into
minute fragments, which sink very slowly, and the
exuding oil glazes the sea-surface until it is like looking
down through a plate of dear glass.

Presently a few swiftly moving specks appear
beneath. They increase in number rapidly, until
the vast depth seems alive with them, oftentimes
appearing just a mass of fish. Grasping the hoops
of their nets on each side, the fishermen lean as far
over the boat's gunwale as may be, and with the
utmost caution to make no sound, pass the lower
edges of the nets into the water as far out as they can
reach. They press them downwards and draw them
inwards, at the same time lifting them with their
inner edges touching the side of the boat until they
can pour their load of Flying-fish into her hold.

If the school be large and the work skilfully done,
it is not uncommon for the boat to be loaded in an
hour from one school, without appreciably diminishing
its numbers. But it is exhausting work, and exciting
withal, so that it often happens that an incautious
move is made, a slight noise produced, and with one
great flash of innumerable turning silver bellies, all
close together, the school has disappeared. This may
occur a dozen times in the course of the morning,
or say from six o'clock until nine, the fish being so



Good Sport



233



I



immerous and so very timid. Or it may be that for
some unaccountable reason scarcely any fish are seen,
and the fleet has to return practically empty.

But the most usual form of scare for the fish is
the appearance of some of their natural enemies,
bonito, albacore, or dolphin. Then the nets are put
away, the lines are unrolled, and some real sport is
indulged in, which, pace those lovers of high angling
art who cannot see any fun in fishing except with a
rod, and who glory in beguiling the mighty tuiia or
tarpon by means of a rod and line no thicker than
ordinary grocers' twine, has much to recommend it to
people whose chief aim is to earn a living, but who
have no earthly objection to a little sport thrown in.
And so, taking it all round, this old-fashioned fishery
of one of the least known, least understood sea people
in the ocean, goes merrily on in a satisfactorily suc-
cessful way, supplying the islanders with an abundance
of wholesome food of high quality at nominal cost
as a rule. For the average price is, or used to be,
about four or five a penny, each as large as a good-
sized herring. Guineamen, of course, fetch more,
but they are very seldom caught.

Possibly because Barbadoes is so far to windward
that these deep-sea loving fish do not fear to frequent
it, it has a monopoly of the fishery, none of the other
islands seeming to care for establishing a similar enter-
prise. I am inclined to think that from its position,
so isolated and far out in the Atlantic, also its steep-to
shores, the Exocetus has come to regard Barbadoes
very much in the light of a ship which they can with
safety approach quite near to. Certainly I know of
no other island or mainland in the world where Flying-
fish are found in such abundance at so reasonable a
distance. Not even Ascension or St. Helena, although


234 Th« Flylng-fish

1x>tfa are in the heart of Flying-fish territory, and both
are greatly frequented by all those larger fish which
feed on the Exocetus. Barbadoes alone possesses the
&cilities for catching them, and the requisite eneigy
to do so.

Fl3dng-fish are also found in the Mediterranean,
but not in any great numbers. Also in the Red Sea
and Persian GuU they are to be seen, but they are
by no means plentiful. It would really seem as if
the Fl3ring-fish feels that nothing but the widest
breadths of ocean give him ample verge and room
enough, so that, although he is tempted occasionally
into the narrow seas, he never feds at home there,
and is anxious to get out to the vast playing-grounds
of old ocean. There, in spite of the hosts of his enemies,
he leads a life of perfect freedom, his numbers, despite
the amaring tax upon them, apparently never de-
creasing. But, as with all the other fish I have dealt
with, he cannot be studied, his society cannot be
enjoyed from the deck of tiie swift steamer. It is
necessary to be in a leisurely sailing ship to realise,
first, what the Fl3dng-fish is; secondly, what he
is capable of performing in the way of flight; and
thirdly, how vast are his numbers.

Very vividly come to my mind the many occasions
when I have seen more than a square mile of smooth
sea-surface suddenly broken into foam by the upheaval
of myriads of Flying-fish, who sped through the lucent
air like an imdulating wave of molten silver, and
with a musical murmur like the hum of far-off bees.
How often have these wonderful little fish, like the
bonito, come just in time to save precious lives adrift
in boats or on rafts I When all hope has fled, the
last crumb, the last drop has been expended, there
has fallen into the midst of the perishing ones these



I



Bizarre Flying-Fish 235

succulent morsels, as if dropped from heaven. It is
doubtful whether, of aU the sea-people who do their
best to show the sailor the infinite populousness of
the sea, there are any for which he feels a greater
regard than he does for the Flying-fish ; although,
of course, it grieves him to think that, owing to cir-
cumstances over which neither of them can exercise
any control, he does not see as much of his little friend
at table as he would dearly like to.

Under the head of Flying-fish I must treat of
another interesting denizen of the deep sea, which
is in very truth a Flying-fish, if far inferior in powers
of aerial locomotion to the Exocelus. Two species
of this strangely built, but exceedingly pretty fish
as regards colour, are quite familiar to dwellers in our
own towns, being often seen on the fishmongers'
slabs.

The first is the Red Gurnard {Trigla cuculus), so
called as to the second half of its pedantic title, be-
cause it emits a sound when captured much like a
cuckoo. But it certainly is not fair to call it a deep-sea
fish, since it is only found in comparatively shallow
waters, on the bottom, where it feeds on Crustacea.
It is abundant on our coasts, and in consequence of
its cheapness, is not thought nearly as much of as the
excellence of its flesh entitles it to be.

The second is the Sapphirine Gurnard {Trigla
hirundo), as quaint in appearance as the first, but
even more beautiful as regards colour, a quantity of
blue being interspersed with its deep red.

Now between these two, common as they are in
our waters, there is one essential difference ; the
second is a ' flying-fish,' the first is not. The first,
as any one may test for himself, at a good fishmonger's,
has its beautiful fins quite normal in size, the second


236 The Flylng'fish

has the pectorals greatly lengthened, enabling it to
skim akmg the sea sorface for quite thirty or forty
feet. But this is evidently only a prolonged leap,
making of the outspread pectoral fins a sort of para-
cfaote to buoy them up. Again, an inspection of these
fish, which may often be made at the fishmonger's,
win at once show this, the weight of them running
up as high as five pounds, and the comparatively
small area of the pectoral fins forbidding the idea of
flight, in the conunonly accepted sense.

There are, however, two other species, Dactylop-
tents volUans and Z>. OriaUalis, which approach much
more nearly to the idea of true flight, although even
they never perform the feats which the Exocdus is
capable of. The first is common in the Mediterranean
S^ where it affords abundant sport to the homeward
bound tunny or albacore. But, from a cursory glance
at this Gurnard, one is compelled to wonder of what
material the fish's throat must be lined, who ventures to
swallow him. His head is armed with bony plates, whose
edges are spiky and razor-sharp, his back is liberally
furnished with dorsal spines, the anterior ones very
long and sharp as a cambric needle, and even his sides
bristle with keen-edged or pointed weapons. His
armament therefore is such as to make him a most
dangerous fish to handle, and the fact that he can be
swallowed by albacore and bonito without inflicting
any deadly injury upon them would seem to argue,
first, that their throats must be armour-clad, and
secondly, that digestion is with them a very powerful
function.

The colours of these curious fish are very diversified.
Brown, red, pink, grey, black, and blue are distributed
over its body in tasteful markings, and when observed
closely during its flight in the sunshine, the effect is



A Splendid Fellow



237



very pleasing, all the colours being rich and bright
as those upon a butterfly, and further accentuated
by being wet and shiny. In these species the pectoral
fins are very large, much larger in fact, proportionately,
than those of the Exocetus, at least apparently. But
on closer examination it is seen that the body of the
Gurnard is much more stocky, and consequently
heavier than that of the Exocetus, while the buojong
up bladders are very small and ineffective. Apart
from this knowledge it would be very difficult to under-
stand why the Gurnard should not be a much better
flyer than the Exocetus. For the wings, instead of
tapering off towards the end, like those of the Exocetus
(which much resemble a swallow's wings) actually
broaden out, being considerably wider at the tip than
at the junction with the body. They are also fantas-
tically decorated with long protruding spines at the
sides and ends, the ribs of the parachute, as it were,
produced beyond the membrane, perhaps for protection
but apparently for decorative purposes.

The second of these volatile fish is a denizen of
the Arabian sea, Persian Gulf and Bay of Bengal,
never being seen very far from land. It is practically
unknown to sailors, but is often caught with hook
and line by the hardly bestead native fishermen on
the Coromandel Coast, who pursue their calling upon
a wretched contrivance of their logs lashed side by
side, with a few turns of coir spun-yam, on which
they can only maintain a kneeling position, and from
which they are continually being swept by the sea
when it is at all rough. They are there greatly es-
teemed as food, and credited with much greater powers
of flight than they really possess.



^CHAPTER XVin
THE DOLPHIN

WHEREFORE, or when, or how sailors as a dass
agreed to call the lovdy fish which is the sub-
ject of the present sketch a Dolphin is and
must remain a mystery. It is the source of endless
confusion, this mixing up of mammals and fish by
calling them the same name, yet, such is the intense
conservatism of the seafarer and the perfect continuity
of tradition as regards nomenclature, that it seems im-
possible that the Coryphaena should ever be called by
the saflor anything but a Dolphin, or the Dolphin
{Delphinidae) anj^thing but a porpoise, or indeed any
of the smallest mammalia of the sea with the exception
of the seals.

Sailors are as a dass exceedingly unobservant and
cardess in their dassification of the most familiar
fauna of the sea, but once a fish or bird has a name
given it, that name, however absurd,, is bound to stick,
and no amount of light shed upon the creature's habits,
etc., will ever cause it to be altered. Perhaps after
this small explanation I may be permitted the privilege
of an old sailor, and call my subject, in defiance of
scientific rules, the Dolphin. It is an easier name at
any rate than Coryphaena.

The principal characteristic of this marvellously
beautiful denizen of the deep sea is its iridescent
colouring, of blue and gold principally, but so modified
and changeable by each passing mood or pose of the

2S8



The Dying Dolphin 239

fish, or play of sunlight, that all splendid hues known
to man seem to be reproduced on its body. It flashes
through all the colour-schemes imaginable with in-
credibly swift and dazzling effect, then as swiftly all
the colours seem to blend into one dull silver grey,
which renders the fish almost invisible amid the bright
blue of the sea.

It has long been an article of poetic faith that the
dying Dolphin is more splendid in his colour changes
than he ever is during life ; but from this, after long
experience, I must emphatically dissent. It is true
that when a Dolphin suffers sudden and violent death,
such as being transfixed by the granes or five-pointed
fish-spear in common use on board ship, his body does
exhibit a series of swiftly changing colours, fairly
vivid. But they are never so brilliant as those shown
by the living fish, when in the height of his activity he
hurls himself in arrowy flight after his prey, or springs
perpendicularly into the sunshine, the spray falling
from him like a shower of diamonds, and his glorious
hues flashing in the glare of the sun, with an effect
beyond the power of any artist to depict or pen to
describe.

When, however, the Dolphin is caught with a hook
and laid on deck to die, the kaleidoscopic changes
are still apparent, but oh, so faint and dulled compared
with those shown by the hving fish, or even with the
speared creature. And some time before he dies a
dull leaden shade comes over his gaudy body, and
never goes away again. It is permanent and beautiful,
for some reason which I do not understand. Nothing
in Nature I should say can give more pleasure to a
colour-loving eye than the sight of a number of Dolphin
on a sunny day, when the sea is smooth enough to
I observe aU their motions properly. Not even the


240 The Dolphin



Ikmasingly beantiful tints and shadings of a flock of
humming birds can vie with the marvellons splendour
of this wonderful fish.

A cursory examination would lead one to suppose
that the Dolphin was a scaleless fish, as indeed is
neady true of the mackerel, with whidi the Dolphin
has undoubtedly some afi&nity. But a little search
win show that minute scales do exist all over the body,
covered by a fine skin, and that around the shoulders
the scales are foirly large and thickly set, so thickly
indeed that in removing them it is possible to run the
fingers beneath them, and tear of! several square inches
at a time, in a large specimen. And quite dose to the
head the scales blend in so dosdy with the bony plates
of the skull that, if sufGident force be used, some of the
latter may be torn aS without being separated from the
scale-sheets.

Like most other sea fish, the Dolphin has a medial
line extending from the middle of the head to the fork
of the tail, but unlike aU the S^^offfAniotf or true niadcerd
family, this line is not composed as to its posterior
third of homy conical processes like rudimentary
armour, but is merdy a dark line drawn as if with a
lead pencil, as in the whiting, haddock, and cod. Ana-
tomically this line is an elongation of the fifth nerve
of the brain, but its use who can tell ? It is probably
a survival of some daborate organ which had lost its
usefulness, and so became atrophied and disappeared
according to Nature's inexorable decrees.

The fins of this elegant fish are in keeping with
his other beauties. On his back, from the crojyn of
his head to within two or three inches of his tail, he
wears a dorsal fin half as wide as his body. In colour
it is burnished yellow gold, and its contrast with the
dazzling peacock blue of the back inunediatdy



Elegance and Colour 241

beneath it is exceedingly striking as well as pleasing.
It is always carried erect, but sometimes, as when the
fish makes one of its immense parabolic leaps after
prey, such as a flying-fish, it seems to stand much
higher than usual and to glow with greater intensity.
It gives the fish a grand appearance and adds greatly
to its apparent size. The caudal fin is very large also,
deeply forked, and most elegant in shape. When the
fish is in haste, its vibrations are so rapid that it seems
to take an entirely new shape, and if the sun is shining
it appears like two rays of flame branching out in the
fish's wake, being of the same metallic hue as the dorsal
fin. The pectoral, ventral, and anal fins are com-
paratively insignificant, as indeed is usual with what
I hke to call normally shapen fish. Only o«/«-shaped
fish have these minor fins fantastically and hugely
developed.

The general shape of the Dolphin is excellently
adapted for speed. His head is high in front, almost
rectangular, but presenting a sharp bow. The body
behind does not thicken very much, the largest speci-
men I ever caught being, although six feet long, only
six inches through, It was more than a foot wide
though, and its mouth was a horizontal gash in its
head that opened wedge-shaped and large enough
to admit a fish six inches in diameter. Also it was
well-fumished with exceedingly sharp teeth, in closely
set rows, but quite small.

The female is precisely similar in appearance to the
male except in the contour of the forehead, which
recedeg with a beautiful curve from the upper jaw,
instead of being high and rectangular like that of the
male. In colour she is quite as gaudy as her spouse,
but in size, as usual, inferior.

Now with regard to their breeding-places, they
16


242 The Dolphin

are, like those of most deep-sea pelagic fish, wrapped
in mystery. But although I would not care to be too
&)gmatic upon the subject I feel sure that the Dolphin
deposits its ova in masses of floating weed such as the
gulf-weed or Sargassum bacdferum of the North
Atlantic Even that, however, does not explain the
breeding.places of those Dolphin who inhabit the Pacific
and Indian Oceans or the Mediterranean, unless
we may suppose that, like the albacore, the Dolphin
circumnavigates the globe, in order to return to his
favourite spawning-places. One thing is certain,
they do not spawn at any depth, for they are an
essentially pelagic or surface-fish. And they are never
seen in the vicinity of land, except as in the case of such
mountain peaks as St. Helena, Ascension, St. Paul's
Rocks, etc., which, rising almost sheer from great
depths, have bold, steep-to, precipitous shores, around
which the Dolphin may be seen plasong quite close to
the rocks, apparently regarding them as a new and
curious kind of ship. At least that is the impression
made upon a sailor accustomed (in a sailing ship that is)
to be accompanied in ocean's remotest solitudes by
these wonderfully friendly and beautiful fish.

The habitat of the Dolphin is almost co-extensive
with that of the sperm whale and albacore. But being
apparently more intolerant of cold than either of these
sea denizens, he is seldom found so far north or south
as they range. Only when an exceptionally warm
smnmer heats the sea-surface considerably above its
usual temperature does the Dolphin extend his wander-
ings into unfamiliar regions, following his natural
food, the fl3dng-fish and sqtiid, who, being like himself
true pelagic fish, love to roam as far as they can out
of their usual regions when the unwonted warmth of
the water invites them to do so. I have seen them as



I



Modern Sea Disabilities 243

far north as the Azores and have heard of them being
seen in the Bay of Biscay ; but, while I do not feel
able to deny that this can be true, I feel sure that the
conditions must have been abnormal in the extreme.

Now it may be considered an ultra -refinement
of description thus to dwell upon the peculiarities of a
creature which is quite unknown to the majority of
people, and from the circumstances of the case Ukely
to remain so. For not only is it a very small fringe
of the population that goes or can go to sea far enough
to see a Dolphin, but even sailors are being precluded
from making the acquaintance of Deep-Sea People
by reason of the passing away of the saihng vessel.
There are very many sailors to-day who have done
an enormous amount of voyaging to all parts of the
world, yet have never seen one of these fish, which
used to be among the most familiar objects to seafarers,
because these essentially social sea inhabitants do
not Hke the throbbing of the propeller or the swift
rushing of the steamship. Much as they would like
to forgather with a ship, they find it impossible so to
do, unless she is propelled by sails. And so it comes
to pass that the deep-sea fish are losing that intimate
touch with man, which they have maintained for
countless generations, to the exceeding benefit of
the sailor.

My first acquaintance with the Dolphin was made
at a very early age. It was on my first voyage, from
London to Dem^rara, in British Guiana. The weather
was exceedingly fine, and the trade winds quite Ught.
As we crossed that weed-covered vortex in the
North Atlantic so widely known as the Sargasso Sea,
we were often hardly able to force a passage through
the hay-coloured masses, so feeble was the impetus
given to our bluff-bow^d old craft by the laggard



244 ^^^ Dolphin

breeze. ' Occasionally we came to a great dear space
in the midst of the surrounding aggregations of weed,
wherein it seemed to my excited fancy there moved all
the embodiments of my most fevered dreams» such
weird shapes as only seemed possible of materiali-
sation in a kind of waking trance. But suddenly,
while moving slowly through one of the smooth water-
gladesy we came upon a large school of fish, numbering
some thousands I should think, who swam in a compact
body, as if moved by one conunon impulse.

When they all turned simultaneously, the flash
given off by their bodies was as if a gigantic mirror
had suddenly revolved, focussing the sun upon my eye.
I was fascinated, spellbound. It had never before
occurred to me that all over the great and wide sea
we should meet with fish ; like so many other people,
I had imagined the sea to be a barren waste of bitter
waters. Breathlessly I sought the only sailor on
board from whom I was ever able to get any information
and, full of excitement, led him to the rail, where I
pointed out the school. * Wha — what are they ? *
I gasped. He gave just one look, jerked out the word
* Dolphin,' and rushed away, leaving me wondering
whatever was the matter.

He dived into the forecastle, emerging in a minute
with a fishing-line, to the end of which was attached
a stout hook and a burnished piece of tin. Running
out to the bowsprit end he began to jerk the line up
and down, allowing the shining lure to touch the water
intermittently. In a minute he had a fish, the whole
school having moved on to a spot just beneath him.
And I had the privilege of fetching liis catch in while
he tried for another. He caught them so fast that I
had no time to stop and examine them until the school
shifted, which was not before he had caught eight.



I



A School of Juveniles 245

Then the school having temporarily disappeared,
he came in, and we gloated over the catch together.
I of course, who had never hitherto seen a fish caught
larger than a stickleback in the Serpentine, was full
of amazement at their size, being about eighteen inches
long and averaging three pounds weight each. But
Joe told me that they were very young ones and were
seldom met with like this, usually keeping concealed
somewhere until they were much larger. And when
he told me how large they really grew, I confess that
I felt very doubtful of his veracity.

For the rest of that day I had no relief from my
desire to see more of these pretty fish. I kept as careful
a watch for them as if my life depended upon discovering
them. But it was not until I accidentally glanced
down the rudder trunk — a curious-shaped opening
in the after-part of the quarter-deck which admitted
the rudder-head, and down which there was plenty of
room for a slim man to fall by the side of the rudder into
the sea — that I discovered the school all closely
packed under the ship's bottom, as if they were
magnetically held to her sides. Whereat my wonder
was again excited ; but as my chum was now asleep
I had to watch, and see if I could find out for myself
why they thus clustered about us. It could not be
for food, I reasoned, for the vessel had been newly
sheathed with yellow metal just before leaving, and
there were as yet no sea-growths, either animal or
vegetable, upon her. And as I watched and wondered
it was suddenly revealed to me why these fish gathered
so closely about us. It was for shelter, for pro-
tection.

All at once there darted into the midst of their
close-packed masses one of their own kind, but very
much larger, one at least six feet in length and


246 The Dolphin

proportionately wide. I saw them scatter, but aim-
lessly, as if they knew not whither to flee. And indeed
they did not, for if some security could not be found
hugging the underside of the ship, it most assuredly
would be absent from the open spaces of the clear
sea. The aggressive cannibal could for a brief space
be dimly discerned as he darted to and fro amidst the
frightened youngsters, and then the water became so
foul with blood and floating fragments of fish still
quivering with recent hfe, that I could not see more
of the fray for a little space. When, however, we
had passed beyond that befouled area and the trans-
parent blue beneath enabled me to notice what was
occurring, I saw that the aforetime sohd mass, was,
although still endeavouring to cling to the shelter of
the ship, broken up into many httle groups, which
continually shifted their position, as if demoralised
by fear.

Thus they remained with us until we again pene-
trated the mass of floating weed, when we lost them,
for there they found better shelter than the ship cotdd
afford, besides what they must have needed badly,
an abundance of suitable food. I have never been
able to see a school of Dolphin younger than those
were, although I have many times seen them in large
schools of individuals somewhat more developed, but
still clinging together, as if for mutual protection.
I once boarded a derelict in mid-Atlantic which
contained a large number of these small Dolphin,
They had evidently, in rushing from the attack of
one of their numerous enemies, plunged headlong
into the gaping captivity of the main-hatch, which
was completely uncovered and had its port coamings
quite under the sea, the vessel being nearly on her
beam-ends. The fish darted about between the tum-



Adult Immunity



247



I'



bling logs which composed her cargo as if they were
quite at home amid their strange surroundings ; but
I could not help thinking that many of them must
have got crushed to death down there.

The aggregate numbers of Dolphin in the ocean
must be very great, but still quite insignificant, I
should say, compared with the incalculable hosts of
I the better-known sea fishes, which frequent shallow
■ waters and are of such value as food. For, except
when they are quite immature, and, swimming together,
appear to invite the onslaught of their enemies, who
are of many kinds, they are never even seen in groups,
much less in shoals. All their hunting is done in-
dividually, and although one seldom sees one Dolphin
without others being near, they do not appear to
fraternise at all. Perhaps in the presence of a common
danger, like the attack of an albacore or a sword-fish,
they might revive the memories of their youth and
draw together for mutual comfort, but I very much
doubt it. I beheve instinct teaches them that the
more widely separated they are, the more opportunities
will be afforded them of making good their escape.
Indeed, I am at a loss to imagine how any lish could
possibly overtake the Dolphin to do him any harm
except by stratagem, his amazing speed enabhng
him to distance easily any other enemy when un-
hampered by the company of many friends. I really
believe that when once the Dolphin attains his or her
full growth, which, owing to the systematic devouring
of the younger ones by their congeners and other deep-
sea fish, is only the case with about five per thousand
of those hatched, he or she is practically immune from
destruction by any enemy except man. And, as is
iij the case with so many other of the deep-sea folk,
JHviwing to the steady displacement of sailing ships by



248 The Dolphin

steamers^ man does not now often get a dianoe to
do them any harm.

The food of the Dolphin, as before hinted at, is
flying-fish and squid, with an occasional feast upon
the yomig of his own species, or any other species
that come in his way. I have, on several occasions,
found in the maw of a Dolphin that I have caught,
specimens of small fish that were quite unknown
to me, fish that sailors never see except under similar
conditions. So that the Dolphin is like most other
fish, he has his special predilections ; but almost any-
thing that is eatable in the sea he will eat. However,
I fiimly believed that he only ate living fish, that it
was impossible to lure him with anything but an ap-
parently Uving bait, and that, if the play of the bait
were allowed to cease for an instant while he was
near, he would immediately retire disillusioned, and
no amount of coaxing would bring him back again.

But it so happened that one day, when the ship
was lying as still as a ship can be at sea, it being a
stark calm, several Dolphin paid us a visit. One came
near enough to be transfixed by the granes skilfully
hurled by the boatswain, but the others took the
pointed hint and kept out of harm's way. The jerking
about of a piece of polished metal fastened to a hook
dangled from the jib-boom end quite failed to attract
any of them. They kept at a reasonable distance
from us when on the surface, and only drew near to
us about the keel when they settled down into the
depths.

The fish that had been caught was handed to me
as usual for dissection, and in its maw I found some
flying-fish that had been quite recently swallowed,
and not at all injured. One of these I fastened on
to a hook, and lowered it quietly into the translucent



Luring Dolphin



249



^B water under the stem, paying out line until the flying-

^H fish gleamed like a silver spot about five fathoms deep.

^H Presently a Dolphin came stealing out from beneath

^H the ship, where he had been lying in the shade, and

^H leisurely neared my bait. I saw him put his nose

^f t<^ iti I watched him turn and take it in his mouth,

and when it had entirely disappeared I struck as hard

as I could, and caught the largest Dolphin I have ever

seen, whose weiglit was forty pounds. By using the

■ same means, I, that afternoon, caught three more
large Dolphin, and fully established the fact that the
moving lure was not essential. Afterwards I caught
Dolphin with a piece off one of their own bodies, cut
in the shape of a fish from the under side, where there
is a silvery sheen upon it. I shall not soon forget

■ the joy there was in the forecastle over that first catch.
No one expected if, but every one was hoping for a.
breeze, in order that they might get an opportunity
to catch some. For we were almost at starvation
point, the provisions being so bad, and, moreover,
scurvy was just beginning to show its awful symptoms
upon some of us. The arrival of my fish changed
all that, for all hands had three meals of fresh fish,
and that by far the most sapid and succulent of all
the deep-water fish, with the possible exception of the
flying-fish, the latter being never caught at sea except
by the accident of its flying aboard.

■ Unlike the albacore, bonito, skip-jack, and sword-

fish, the flesh of the Dolphin is white and full of flavour.
Boiled, it is better than cod, only it has the drawback of
being occasionally poisonous. Why or how it becomes
so I do not know, nor have I ever heard any theory
worth mentioning to account for it ; but a curious
^H belief of sailors in connection with it is interesting.
^H They firmly believe that if a piece of silver be boiled



250 The Dolphin

with the fishy and the latter is unfit to eat, the silver
win torn black ; but since the presence of a trace of
sulphur in the water would produce the same effect,
I fear it is not a very reliable test. Moreover, as fish
caught at sea by sailors is nearly always fried or baked,
even that doubtful test cannot usually be applied,
and in consequence the hungry seafarer has, as he
vulgarly puts it, to *go it blind,* and hope that he
will not wake up with swollen head, distorted and
discoloured features, and an acute sense of pain all
over his Ixxty, these being the more evident sjnnptoms
of fish poisoning. It must gratefully be admitted
that instances of poisoning by Dolphin are rare, and
by bonito and albacore practically non-existent. It
18 only, as a rule, the curiously shaped and coloured
fish caught in out-of-the-way harbours that are
dangerous to the eater. None of them are deadly,
except the patient be in a very poor state of health,
or unable to apply the simple remedies indicated.

For some curiously finical reason the Dolphin has
been supposed to have several different branches in
his family ; but like so many other creatures of the
sea that have been credited with many ramifications
of species, careful investigation has so reduced the
supposed varieties that the most eminent ichthyo-
logists now only credit Coryphaena with two branches,
C. hippurus and C. equisetus. It may well be that
even this last distinction will break down upon closer
scrutiny, and only one variety be foimd to obtain all
the world over. Still, it is very easy to understand
how this opinion as to differing species may arise,
owing to the fact that the young differ widely in their
fin shapes and contour of head, also the colour arrange-
ment is much modified as they grow older.

But a great difficulty confronts the museum



Sucking'fish Parasites 251

naturalist in the study of the deep-sea fauoa. He is
so greatly dependent upon stray specimens brought
home for his observation, he cannot, in the nature
of things, bring personal experience to bear, and he
must theorise largely. Which of course tends to error,
since it is, to a great extent, working in the dark.
I have had a curious instance of this while preparing
the present chapter.

In previous pages I have described the Remora,
or parasitical sucking-fish, under the head of sharks,
because every specimen I have seen, and they run
into hundreds, have possessed all the well-known
characteristics of the shark. The curious leaden
and white hue of the body, the long upper lobe of the
tail fin, the strange eye full of sinister expression,
the scaleless shagreen skin, making a very good sub-
stitute for sandpaper, and the gill-openings, just shts
in the side of the neck, instead of one large free opening
spreading wide and admitting the water to the blood-
red feathery branchiae inside ; all these marked my
suckers and stamped them as sharks. Only there
was superadded the curious oval sucker on top of the
head, by means of which the lazy creature attaches
itself to its host, whether it be living or dead. Now
I am told that the Remora is not a shark at all, but
a mackerel. Of course, I can fully understand that
there may very well be a species of Remora which is
a mackerel, but that I have only seen the kind which
has the shark characteristics I have absolutely no
doubt whatever.

I cannot understand why so familiar a fish as it
is, being certainly much more frequently seen at sea
than the species which I do not know, should be un-
known to the authorities. There is, therefore, all the
more credit due to them for having rejected all the


252



The Dolphin



fine-drawn theories about the varieties of Dol]
and reduced them to two, which is certainly all
varieties there are.

The life of the Dolphin must be an exceedingly
happy one, ranging as he does the free breadths of
all the oceans without hindrance of any kind. He
knows none of the binding hamperings of a fixed;
abode, and even when the irresistible claims of tin
perpetuation of his race are upon him he still knows no
restriction, is not compelled to go where traps and
nets are laid by man for his destruction, as is the case
with the albacore. Such enemies as he has he is well
able to outpace, to elude, and, although it is certain
that Dolphin are occasionally found in the stomach
of a sperm whale, there is no doubt that their presence
in that vast receptacle of all kinds of ftsh is almost,
if not quite, due to overwhelming curiosity on the
part of the Dolphin, resulting in his swimming down
the gaping cavern of the whale's throat, whence he
never emerges. Sometimes, too, he is taken off his
guard and falls a prey to a shark or an albacore, but
that I think occurs but seldom, for he has cultivated
in a remarkable degree the faculty of keeping a bright
look-out for the soundless approach of an enemy
large enough to bite him in half and swallow hiin
whole.

I once witnessed a case in point. It was in the
Pacific Ocean on a perfectly calm day, when from
my perch at the mast-head all that was going on in
the blue serene beneath, illuminated as it was by the
fierce vertical rays of the tropical sun, was most clearly
visible through a pair of powerful binoculars. Quite
close at hand floated a huge log of timber, the
upper part of which was clean and fresh-looking,
altiiough wave-washed. Underneath,



1



id fresh-lookmg, H
, though, it waul



A Movable Feast



253



I



just a haven of refuge for a veritable host of deep-sea
folks, all attracted to it by the harbourage it gave to
such creatures as were capable of supplying them with
food.

In the first place, it was closely covered with bar-
nacles, those curious shell fish which abound everywhere
at sea, being seemingly evolved out of nothing, so
quickly do they appear upon any sea-washed substance,
such as a ship's bottom or a floating log. They
are attached to their home by a gelatinous footstalk,
at the end of which their white shells, almost hke
those of a miniature mussel, except in colour, grow.
Normally these footstalks are very short, or only
about an inch in length, as when the barnacle is at-
tached to a swiftly moving object. But on this log
they averaged two feet in length, looking curiously
like an immense mass of large-sized boiled macaroni
growing out of the log and waving about with graceful
undulations. This great tangle of living filaments
was densely populated by all sorts of small fish,
Crustacea of various kinds, etc. Outside, but very
close to, were somewhat larger fish, eating their fill
of the bountiful feast provided. And a Uttle farther
off still, coming and going with stealthy nishings,
were several Dolphin, busily engaged in filling their
maws with the smaller fish. It was a splendid exposi-
tion of the chain of interdependence subsisting in
the sea, only of course we could not follow that chain
far, the base of it being among the creatures invisible
except to a high-power microscope.

But while I watched I saw a splendid Dolphin,
his coat flashing its sapphire and gold under the rays
of the sun, passing with leisurely tail-waving the side
of the log nearest to me, apparently satiated with food.
A dim shadow emerged from beneath the log just


254 ^^ Dolphin

bdiind him, shot upward, there was an eddy and a stain,
and the gorgeous sea dandy was in two halves, one of
which had disappeared down the throat of the lurking
and crafty shark, who had so successfuUy stalked his
degant prey. Of course the second half rapidly
followed the first down the shark's curious crescentic
mouth, when he immediately concealed himself again.
Three times did I watch the shark perform that
manoeuvre successfully, exercising an amount of
patient self-restraint that was wonderful to behold,
remembering how cruelly he was being tormented by
the cravings, of that enormous liver of his.

This was indeed the only occasion upon which I
saw a Dolphin outwitted by a shark; as to being
caught by so slow a fish as the shark is, the thing
is unthinkable. I do not imagine, however, that the
Dolphin is very intelligent, for I once saw a whole
group of them, seven in number, caught one ofter
the other from a fljdng-fish boat in Barbadoes Bay,
We had been catching a goodly number of Exocetus,
when the vast shoal from which we had been dipping
out fish until our backs were nearly breaking suddenly
vanished like the breath off a mirror. And then we
saw the aforesaid group prowling around quite slowly,
as if bewildered by the sudden disappearance of what
they doubtless considered their food supply. A couple
of stout hooks attached to heavy lines were each
furnished with a still Uving flying-fish and flung over-
side, streaming away astern in the gentle ripple of
our wake ; for we were just moving a knot or so an
hour. In five minutes the whole seven of them were
inboard, each coming up to take the place of the com-
rade he had seen depart so hastily, without exhibiting
a trace of any knowledge that there was danger to
his life in the proximity of the boat.



St* Helena Beef 255

Commercially the Dolphin may be neglected.
Except to sailors in sailing vessels, the only places
where he is an object of any interest at all for food
or sale are Barbadoes and St. Helena. At the former
place he fetches a fairly good price, his flesh being
held in high esteem and greatly prized as a change
from the everlasting flying-fish, while in St. Helena
he shares the privilege of being chased by the extra-
ordinarily mongrel fishermen with the bonito, the
albacore, and the horse-mackerel, the three being
classed under the generic term * St. Helena beef.*

To the poorly and monotonously fed seamen of
long-voyage sailing ships he is, of course, always
welcome, and some of my pleasantest recollections of
old sea-days are associated with his capture. Seated
aloft on the flying-jibboom end, with my line tipped
with a piece of white rag blowing in a graceful curve
just beyond the roll of foam roaring from under the
advancing bows, it was exquisitely deUghtful to see
a lithe gorgeous shape spring suddenly upward, seize
my lure, and commence its useful journey to the
hungry stomachs of my appreciative shipmates.
To the joy of capture, of successful sport, was thus
added the comfort of doing a kindly act, and I could
even imagine the Dolphin sharing my satisfaction.



CHAPTER XIX
THE MACKEREL

DIFFICULT as it is to speak dogmatically upon
such a subject, especially in view of the some-
what chaotic condition of our knowledge of
oceanic ichthyology (hateful term), I feel fairly con-
fident of my position in calling the Mackerel family
the largest in the world of fishes. That is, I believe
that there are more varieties of Mackerel than of any
other kind of fish, and wider distribution of them,
imaided as it is by the same set of conditions which
permit many species of fish inhabiting the profound
depths of ocean to be almost universal as regards the
sea. I do not know of any members of the family
who frequent rivers or lakes.

The head of the family, and from point of size
the very king of fishes, the albacore, tuna, or tunny,
I have already exhaustively dealt with, as also the
bonito, the skip-jack, and the pilot-fish. So that in
the following remarks these members of the great
Mackerel family will, except for by-allusions, be left
severely alone. But even so, there still remain such
a sufficient number of fairly well-known varieties to
be dealt with, as to make it necessary to condense
the information greatly in order to keep it within
bounds.

Naturally the place of honour falls to the Mackerel,
whose name is a household one among us, and who
is always quoted fondly (but with what truth I do not

256



The Most Delicate Fish 257

know) as being the subject of special Dominical legisla-
tion, in common with milk. It is an article of faith
that milk and Mackerel may be sold on Sunday without
breaking the law, on account of their non-keeping
properties ; but judging from the scenes always to
be witnessed in the poorer quarters of London on
Sunday, where whole streets are given up to vociferous
trading in any and every kind of article, it would
seem that laws against commercial Sabbath-breaking
have been allowed to fall into desuetude. And the one
article that I can confidently aver that I have never
seen sold in London on a Sunday is fresh Mackerel.
The kippered Mackerel of course is sold, with bloaters,
haddocks, and other merchandise of the ' wet and dry '
fishmonger of poor neighbourhoods.

This may perhaps be accounted for by the extreme
proneness of Mackerel to go ' bad.' No fish is more
liable to sudden taint and the development of ptomaines
than the Mackerel ; under certain atmospheric con-
ditions two hours are quite sufficient from the time of
its capture to render it dangerous for eating purposes,
And what is a great deal worse, the Mackerel may be
quite unfit for food, but its conditions be unknown
to even the most careful observer until it is cooked
and tasted. Then indeed there is no concealment,
for the taste is horrible and the flesh has become of a
putty-like consistency.

It is rather difficult to understand how or why
the Mackerel as an edible fish has attained to its present
undoubtedly high degree of popularity among our
workers. In point of flavour it is far surpassed by
many other fish, notably by the much cheaper herring,
a fact which is distinctly referable to its rapidity in
getting stale. A Mackerel freshly caught and cooked
is a delicious morsel, bearing no resemblance whatever
17


258



The Mackerel



to its neighbour appearing on some inland table twenty-
four hours later. But it is certainly a most beautiful
fish in appearance on a fishmonger's slab, its lovely
colours remaining even when it is stale, although the
bright red of the gills has changed to a dull maroon.
But its flesh is firm and easily separated from the bones,
a great virtue in fish among people who have no cooks
to prepare their food, and see that there is nothing
to do to it at table but to put it in the mouth. It
says much for the superlative excellence of the herring,
that it remains in such high esteem in spite of its
multitude of small bones, which are most dangerous
if they get into the throat. Whatever the cause,
the fact remains that, in spite of its comparatively
high price and lack of flavour, the Mackerel is ex-
ceeding popular among our workers, and a joy to the
costermongers, whose ability and energy in distri-
buting perishable goods among the consiuners is
unimpeachable.

But apart altogether from the commercial aspects
of the Mackerel, he is an exceedingly interesting fish
in his ways, his mode of life. Ferocious in the extreme,
he spares nothing that he can swallow, and few items
of his prey can escape him, owing to his great swiftness,
due to his elegant shape. Moreover, the colouring
of the Mackerel is more perfectly adapted for con-
cealment than that of any other fish. It is perhaps
fairly well known that the reason why nearly all fish
are dark-coloured above and light-coloured below
is for purposes of concealment, for looking down upon
them from the light the dark shade blends with the
dark blue of the sea, while looking upwards to the light
the silvery belly matches the water, which is almost
colourless when looked through from that position ;
but the wavy transverse bands of light green and rich



Ferocity of Mackerel 259

blue on the Mackerel's back blend so admirably with
either green or blue sea that they render him almost
invisible from above, while the iridescent sheen on
the silvery underside of the fish makes an even more
perfect combination with the glittering sea, as looked
through from below. Consequently he plays a terribly
destructive part among the smaller fish, such as the
young of herrings, pilchards, etc.

Fortunately he does not attack in schools ; if he
did, a school of Mackerel would probably * absorb '
a school of herring, leaving not a ' wrack behind,'
No, when in the amazing hosts of the school, although
ferociously carnivorous as ever, the Mackerel seems
to keep his predatory instincts in abeyance for the
time, as if under strict discipline. Even then I
imagine it would fare hardly with any straggling
creature, helpless and edible, that fell in the way of
that multitudinous march. Do I not remember
vividly a story I was told as a child, of a man who,
swimming out from Brighton, became surrounded by
a school of mackerel, and was seen holding up his arms
for succour, with scores of the ravenous creatures
clinging to his flesh. The story went on to its gruesome
climax of the recovery of the skeleton almost strippwd
clean, an hour after the man's motions for help were
first seen, I cannot say that I place implicit reliance
upon the story, but I have seen a school of Mackerel
round the carcase of a dead bullock, and bear witness
to the savage energy with which the fish in their
thousands tore at the fetid mass of flesh. And so
I would rather not go swimming in the midst of a
school of Mackerel.

In common with his larger congeners, the Mackerel
is strictly pelagic — he has no use for the bottom at all.
It is even said by naturalists that the Mackerel spawns



26o



The Mackerel



in the open sea, which hardly seems credible, even in
view of our ignorance as to where the Coryphaena and
bonito perform this most indispensable fimction, I
have assigned to them the Sargasso weed as a spawning-
place for several reasons, chief among which is the
vast amount of varied spawn which is to be found in
it ; but to credit a fish hke the Mackerel, which
appears in such illimitable numbers, with casting its
ova haphazard upon the ocean with its ever-shifting
currents, seems a stretch of the scientific imagination
quite unreceivable. Moreover, while it might be
imaginable of, say, the Coryphaena, whose numbers
are not great as compared with other fish, and who
never frequent shallow waters, it is not, it cannot be,
so of the Mackerel, which is never seen at any great
distance from land, and has its pick of all the most
favourable spawning grounds as near the surface as
it needs.

Unlike the herring, who never comes near the land,
except in the multitudinous companionship of the
school, the Mackerel are fond of roaming about quite
independently, as if at times the restraint of the school
galled them, and they needed to run loose for a little
while, chasing their prey on their own account. These
independent Mackerel give splendid sport, biting
readily at a hook baited with a piece of red rag or a
strip of the silvery skin of a Mackerel's belly, towed
through the water at a brisk rate behind a boat,
A fairly heavy lead is necessary to keep the bait
sufficiently deep; if towed along the surface, the
fish will not bite. There is no need for skill in baiting
the hook, if the strip of skin be two inches long and
half an inch wide, it is sufficient just to hang it on the
hook by piercing one end, the fish being so ravenous
as to gorge hook and all in its spring. These fish


The Mackerel Guide



261



taken with the hook always command a higher price
than those caught in nets, for some curious reason
which I do not pretend to understand.

So magnificently beautiful is the appearance
of a school of Mackerel on a calm day when they rise
to the surface in brilliant sunshine, that even the
most hardened fisherman is moved by it, and if the
unshaded eye should catch the reflected radiance of
the congregated millions as they turn, it will feel a
spasm of pain — the sight is too vivid for comfortable
vision. Over those closely packed masses range, in
screaming fussiness, flocks of sea-birds, busily looking
for smaller fish fleeing before the Mackerel, for it
must be but a very small individual that can be
effectually dealt with by a gull or even a cormorant.

Swimming sedately in front of the school may often
be seen a quaintly shaped fish, called by the fishermen
the ' Mackerel Guide,' or Gar-fish. It is a long, slender
creature, attaining in its full development a length of
nearly four feet, and a thickness of a man's fore-arm.
Its skin, while without the Mackerel markings, has
the same sheeny iridescence and almost entire absence
of scales, which seems to mark it, in spite of its dis-
similarity of form, as one of the Mackerel family.
But its chief peculiarity is its long, slender bill, hke
like that of a snipe, but furnished with closely set
rows of needle-like teeth.

For all its elegance it is but a poorly flavoured
fish, and though frequently seen in fishmongers'
shops is little in demand except as a curiosity. Another
strange possession of this fish is its blue bones, which,
when the fish is cooked, contrast most strangely with
the white flesh. Its association with the Mackerel
must be pure coincidence, for I have seen it in parts
of the world where, although some members of the


262



The Mackerel



Mackerel family were to be found, as is the case almost
everywhere, there were certainly none of the fish
from which the whole family takes its name. I have
caught the Gar-fish in the West Indies, in Madagascar,
where there is to be found a curious variety, having
only one long mandible, with the mouth on the upper
part of it in the head, hke a little trap-door in the head.
The largest specimens I have ever seen were in Zanzibar,
where, around the guardship ' London,' they would
lie lazily sunning themselves, perfectly secure from
molestation, because the crew were strictly forbidden
to meddle with fish of any kind, for fear of cholera or
poisoning.

The old naturahsts believed that the Mackerel
roamed as far afield as does the albacore, very much
as they imagined the herring to do ; but it has been
found that, as with the herring, the Mackerel only
retires into the deep water off shore for feeding purposes
at certain seasons of the year, whence it comes in
such amazing numbers during the summer. Occasion-
ally there are found swimming amicably with the
ordinary fish a number of much larger individuals,
known as Horse-mackerel, which are so coarse and
poorly flavoured as to be almost unfit for food. These
have also a very bad reputation, with what reason as
far as our coasts are concerned I am unable to say,
for being poisonous, as has also the delicate little
fish known as the Lady Mackerel, a creature pretty
enough to be made a pet of, like goldfish. The Horse-
mackerel of St. Helena and certain West Indian ports
is, I know, poisonous, and should never be eaten ;
but this must be attributable to its food.

I would here remark in passing that, while all raw
fish and meat is susceptible of being poisoned by the
direct rays of the tropical moon, the Mackerel family



I


The Baleful Moon



263



are exceptionally so. I have known, for instance,
a bonito hung up under a boat where the moon's
rays could not possibly have reached it for more than
an hour, to become utterly unfit for food, having a
most foul taste, while it smelt as fresh as ever. This
poisonous action of the moon upon raw flesh or fish is
derided by some as being a fable, as also is the painful
affliction known to seamen as moon-blindness ; but
there are certainly no two facts better known to,
or more firmly established among, deep-water sailors
than these.

The Mackerel is fairly plentiful on the American
coasts, though not in such amazing numbers as over
here. Not that they need it, having such stupendous
abundance of other fish.

It is there salted down in kits and sent all over
the country, but salted Mackerel needs an American
palate, educated to the flavour of brine, to appreciate
it, I have before noted how greedily all the Mackerel
family absorb salt, making it almost impossible,
once the salt has entered the tissues of the fish, to
extract it again so as to make the fish eatable. But,
after all, that is purely a matter of taste, and it is
certain that salted Mackerel are in high favour with
our cousins oversea.

And now we come to the consideration of the
giant Mackerel known as the Sword-fish, or Lance-fish,
as he should more properly be called, since the bone
of the upper jaw which is elongated into a weapon is
rounded and tapering to a point, much more like a
lance than is the flat weapon known as a sword. It
is somewhat of a relief to take up the history of a
creature with some individuality, after dealing with
fish that congregate in countless millions like the
herrings and mackerel, and certainly among all fish



264



The Mackerel



there are none whose lives are more romantic than that
of the great Xiphias. It must be premised that there
are several varieties of Xiphias ranging the oceans of the
world, but the one I am best acquainted with is the
Indian Ocean variety, of which a splendid specimen
may be seen in the fish gallery at the Natural History
Museum at South Kensington.

The Sword-fish, whose catching is quite a recognised
industry on the New England Coast, is a dull-hued
monster, ranging from one to two hundredweight,
and frequenting those waters in fairly large numbers.
He is taken by harpooning, the striker standing in
a little ' pulpit ' erected on the extreme point of the
bow. It is good sport, if a bit rough, but a hard and
precarious way of getting a living. As far as I am
aware this is the only part of the world where the
pursuit of the Sword-fish is engaged in regularly and
systematically, everywhere else the giant mackerel
being left severely alone, to pursue his triumphant
way among the sea people, inspiring a terror among
them which he can never feel, for there are none to
make him afraid.

By reason of the terrible weapon he carries before
him, and his amazing speed and dexterity in using
it, he has always been the veritable ruler of all deep-sea
fish, and the ruthless slayer of even the sea-shouldering
whale. Only the sperm whale proves too doughty a
foe for him to attack lightly, although I believe there
are instances on record where he has successfully
attacked cachalot cows. Before passing on to a brief
consideration of the career of a typical Xiphias, I
would like to say that my reason for calling the albacore
the king of the deep-sea fish was on account of his
size, as well as number and universality of range.
There is no doubt that in courage and agility the



J



The Birthplace of Xiphias 265

Xiphias is master of even the albacore, though in
average size much inferior. The shark again, while
far superior to the albacore in point of size, is in the
first place hardly to be classed with fish proper, being
rather an intermediary between mammal and fish.
At any rate I still hold the albacore the king of all
fish, while purposing to do full justice to the claims
of the Xiphias.

To a sheltered nook of the Maldive Island reef
bases there entered on a day a little company of Sword-
fish, and sauntering inquisitively around, seemed to
survey with deepest interest every cranny of the
wonderful place. It was a triangular area of dazzling
white sand, almost exactly level, about two acres
in extent and buttressed on all sides except just at the
apex of the triangle, by almost vertical walls of live
coral. Its floor was about twenty fathoms below
the surface, which, shut in from the breakers by massive
ramparts of rock, received, as if on a sapphire mirror,
the rays of the tropical sun, and transmitted them in
all lovely hues down to the silvern floor. Only a few
small fish flitted stealthily to and fro over the smooth
sand, or dodged in or out of the interstices of the coral,
on the never-ending hunt for food. But when they
saw the majestic forms of the Sword-fish come gUding
in they fled, anywhere out of that dread com-
pany, whose presence spelt death to them if they
remained.

The new-comers were twelve in number, ten females
and two males, and having completed their leisurely
survey of the place and finding it apparently well
suited to their purpose, they glided gently over the
bottom, waving their broad pectoral and ventral fins
gently, as if they were still further smoothing the
wtiite sand. Having apparently settled matters to


266



The Mackerel



their liking, the deposition of the ova began, and -was
carried on intermittently for the best part of two days,
the male fish apparently keeping severe guard, and
maintaining a strict supervision over all the proceedings.
At last the task was over, the females languidly made
for the exit, while the males lingered over the spots
which the females had quitted, as if loth to leave them,
until, as if alarmed at the prospect of losing touch
with their consorts, the two great fish gave each a
sweep or two in the clear water with their tails, and shot
through the entrance between the towering bastions
of rock as arrows flee from the bow.

In an hour they had rejoined the females, guided
by unerring instinct in their track, and placing them-
selves at the head of the little company sped onward
in search of food, their long fast having made them
furious with hunger. Presently they fell in with a
great school of bonito, who, taken by surprise, became
utterly demoralised with fear, and huddling together
in one compact mass permitted the ravenous monsters
to dash again and again into their midst, with such
velocity as to split sometimes four bodies into fragments
at one blow. Such fragments were not immediately
devoured, but when the slaughter was over the Sword-
fish swam hither and thither, gorging themselves in
leisurely fashion upon the dismembered bodies of
their cousins, until, surfeited, they turned away and
left the befouled area to a shoal of small scavengers,
which had during the great meal kept respectfully
at a distance.

But now let us return to the spawning ground.
There upon the speckless floor of sand lay evenly
spread countless thousands of eggs, each large as a
marrowfat pea, and almost invisible by reason of their
pearly transparency. The dark spot in each, that



I



I


I



The Perils of the Ova 267

should have made them visible, was in every case in
the lower half of the pearly globule, which was half
hidden in the soft sand. Very gently the warm current
glided over them, so gently that no ripple, even the
faintest, disturbed their repose or the fecundating opera-
tions going on within them. But here and there a
tiny fish almost matching the sand in colourlessness
swam invisibly along the pearly rows, culling here
and there a delightful morsel in the shape of an ovule
a httle plumper than its neighbours. And though
these ghostly visitors were very small their appetite
was amazingly developed, for each of them was
responsible for the disappearance of some dozens of
eggs in the course of an hour or two's swim, which,
considering that none of the depredators were more
than six inches long, was evidence of extreme voracity.
Now and then a bright shadow would glide phantom-
like through the clear space, apparently just evolved
out of nothingness, there was a moment's contact
between it and one of the egg-eaters, and, presto,
the latter had disappeared, as does a bubble when it
bursts. And thus the balance of Nature was adjusted,
for this is only a specimen of the constant interchange
of commodities going on.

The enemies of the hatching eggs were, indeed,
so numerous even in this sequestered spot, that as the
days went by their numbers dwindled to such an extent
that it seemed almost an impossibility that any of
them should survive till the emergence of the fry.
Even the tiny crabs, which are ubiquitous, although
some of them were less than half an inch across the
carapace, were continually employed in lugging away
the savoury morsels to their home crannies beneath
the rocks, hke ants carrying away provender for
storage. They were frequently sucked in, egg and all.


268



The Mackerel



by wandering fish during these predatory journeys,
but their exit from one stage of usefulness into another
was so sudden and easy that no one could connect
any idea of tragedy with it.

Still, in spite of all the influences that were arrayed
against them, and as a proof of their amazing numbers,
there came a day when thousands of tiny fish suddenly
appeared, as if at a given signal, each carrying with
it attached by a cord the yolk of the egg it had just
quitted, upon which it would subsist for the next
forty-eight hours. And never during its career was
the fish in such danger of sudden extinction as now,
when, about in full view of hungry enemies, the attached
yolk added to its conspicuousness and hampered its
movements, and it seemed a manifest impossibility
for it to escape. Certainly the thinning out ol the
young Sword-fish now reached its most acute stage,
for not one in a hundred survived. Yet all this
selection and survival of the fittest had been arranged
with unerring wisdom and accuracy — not one of those
tiny creatures was devoured without its going being
according to plan.

In what out-of-the-way holes and comers the
young fry spent their early days, upon what tiny
morsels of food they fed and grew strong, and what
amazing and multitudinous hairbreadth escapes they
had before attaining to the moderate size of one foot
in length — all this proportion of their life history is
hidden from us. When next we meet with them they
have grown sturdy, predaceous and swift. Although
only a foot or so long, they have all^eady developed
many of the qualities which will presently make them
the undoubted rulers of the fishy world, yet at this
age they have, allied to their undoubted
a large amount of caution which prevents



I

I
I
I



ibted ferocity, M
prevents them I



I



The Young Warrior 269

allowing another species of fish larger than themselves,
and therefore a possible enemy, to come too near.
Already they have taken to that semi-independent
mode of life which is the preparation for their full-
grown loneliness — they do not associate with one
another closely, although there are usually a goodly
company of them within communicating distance of
each other. Henceforward their progress towards
maturity is rapid. Each day sees them essaying
some new feat of endurance, some fresh act of aggression
towards other fish, which gains for them, besides
accelerated growth, increasing confidence in their own
wonderful powers, such as nothing but the exercise
of those powers can give.

It is now time to single out one splendid young
specimen from the flock. He is a yard in length,
exclusive of his sword, which protrudes from his upper
jaw about nine inches. Every fibre of his comely
body is surcharged with nervous energy — to watch
him balanced in the still blue, every fin extended but
without a suspicion of movement, even of life, save
in the glare of the brilliant eyes or the glowing hues
of the body, is to gain a great idea of latent power.
No ancient warrior was ever uplifted with haughtier
pride in his battle plumes than Xiphias in his magnifi-
cent dorsal-fin, which stands erect, blazing with
brightest blue, from his head to his tail. It will be
noticed that now he has entirely forsaken, as disdaining
it, the shelter of intricate reefs, no longer does he
creep warily, at several fathoms' depth, from one point
of refuge to another. No, at last he has come out in
the open prepared to assert his position before all
his world, impelled thereto by an innate force, of which
he knows nothing save its effect upon him.

As he hes there apparently immobile, there is


270 The Mackerel



communicated to him by a series of vibrations fhe
presence near at handof some creatares,almost certainly
enemies, but possibly victims. An almost impercepti-
ble flash of the beautiful tail, a quiver of all the fins,
and like a gleam of light he has sped forward to see.
It is a little band of porpoises, perfectly harmless to
fish like himself, but the native blood-thirst is awak-
ened, the lithe tail sweeps sc3rthe-like from side to
side, and in a moment he has launched himself at the
flat Uack flank of a sea-pig, in which his sword buries
itself up to his eyes nearly . With a perfectly indescrib-
able movement he stems dear, describes a great
dide, and, in spite of the great speed of the terrified
and deeply wounded mammal, again buries his weapon
deep in its vitals. But then, upon the slackening of
the porpoise's speed consequent upon the tremendous
drain of blood, the rest of the sea-pigs swarm round,
made ravenous by the smell, the sight, the taste of
Uood. And soon there is a horrible cannibal feast
going on, brother tearing brother into fragments,
while like some destroying demon the infuriated
Xiphias wheels and stabs incessantly without obtaining
any of the spoil, for himself, except a taste of the blood,
which only seems to increase his hunger.

That onslaught was a great mistake, involving
as it did such a waste of energy without any
resultant reward. But the young Sword-fish can
only learn by the action of the twin teachers of ex-
perience and instinct, and the lesson just received
is in nowise lost. In future, except for sherr love
of destruction, he will not attack such creatures as
he cannot devour. So for a long time he ranges the
warm tropical seas proudly slaying and devouring all
that he needs to assist him in his rapid development,
until at last we behold him, eighteen feet long, with a



The Thirst for Blood 271

weight of four hundred pounds and a sword nearly
two feet in length.

He is now practically immune from piu^uit or
damage by any of the deep-sea folk, unless he sleep
and let the wily shark slip up from beneath and snatch
a ghastly mouthful from his middle. Or the saw-fish
glide along and rip him from end to end. But while
these dangers are very real, they are seldom experienced.
As a rule, the watchfulness and wakefulness of such
a sea denizen as the Sword-fish secures him from
surprise. And the shark, no matter how hungry,
must be quite sure of his prey before venturing his
cowardly carcase in such an enterprise.

As the Xiphias grows to his full size he becomes
aggressively valiant. Unlike most of the sea people,
who only hunt for food, and that obtained keep peace,
the Sword-fish longs, apparently with irresistible
desire, for some foe worthy of his attack. This it
is that impels him to launch himself like some hving
torpedo at the vast bulk of the whale, for the sheer
savage delight of stabbing viciously again and yet
again at the yielding living mass before him, even if,
as in the case of the enormous bowhead, with its two
feet thickness of blubber, he cannot draw blood.
To bear away, impaled by one swift and terrible blow,
the newly bora calf from beneath its mother's pro-
tecting arm is a supreme delight, and one too that
yields solid results in the shape of food, for the tender
body of a young whale is easily divided by repeated
blows of the sword.

But this fiercely aggressive spirit has its drawbacks
too. As, for instance, when the Xiphias attacks a
sperm whale, and, meeting the impervious mass of
the head, rebounds helplessly, to be caught before
recovery between the huge mammal's lethal jaws


•H—


.HI



1 II I



called the Pomfret or Bkama, has ahn;s been an
cipectal Uvuuiite of nnne- The pecnbnty about
tben is that tfa^ cMify make their appeaiaace near
a vessd in a cabn. In the pnrfooDdest solitndes
and depths of ocean these esscntiaOy sociable bttk
fish, having suddenly been mataialised as tt veie
oat of the ^nrm nnHitig ^ipaicntfy vacant bhie, will
presently be discovered Hinging clos^ to the side
of the ship, generally about the ran and anxmd the
rudder. They win occasioaally va i tiire alongside
as far as the bow, if the ship be making no headway
at an and the sea be hlie glass, bat &ey exhibit the
utmost onwiUingness to leave the side of the ship
for a nn^ moment.



The Most Sociable Fish 273

Whether they come for protection, or food, or both,
I have no means of knowing, but their appearance
so far from land and over such profound depths is
certainly very curious. They take a bait of meat
readily and are very sweet eating, although I never
caught one larger than half a pound weight. In
shape they resemble a perch, but, as with mackerel,
there is an almost total absence of scales and, as with
the albacore, there are some homy conical little plates
arranged along the posterior third of the lateral Une.
All around Australasia there are to be found congeners
of this little fish, called by sailors Cavall6. They grow
to a large size compared with the Brama, being often
caught twenty-five pounds in weight. Also many of
them are more shield-like — wider, that is, in proportion
to their length. They are almost entirely silvern in
colour, and the effect when, in hauling one up on a
brilliantly sunny day, it suddenly turns its broadside
to the sun is perfectly dazzling to the eyes. They
are a splendidly game fish, as well as being very good
eating.

Of the Echineis Remora, or Sucking-fish, of the
mackerel tribe, I cannot speak positively. I have
never seen one, although of the shark-like sucking-
fish I have seen many hundreds and caught mEiny
scores. According to ichthyologists, however, it is
fairly plentiful and acts in precisely the same way
as does the Remora, of which I have written before
at considerable length.

It must not be imagined, because of the con-
clusion of this chapter, that I have dealt in any way
exhaustively with the Scombridae. As I premised,
only a few fairly well-known specimens could be dealt
with in the space at my disposal, while the family is
the largest of all known in the mighty ocean.
18


CHAPTER XX



T



COD

HE Cod family of the Deep-Sea People is, wiflr"
scarcely a doubt, the most valuable to mankind
of any. Whether we consider its readiness to
be caught, in spite of the deep and stormy seas which
it inhabits, the vast range of its habitat, which is
almost co-extensive with the shores tenanted by the
white race, the ease with which it may be cured for
keeping, and the esteem in which it is held by the
dwellers in all Roman Catholic countries, or study
the romantic character of the fishery, we must find
the natural history of the Cod of absorbing interest.
And that in spite of the fact that the Cod itself is by
no means a romantic fish. He is not beautiful by
any means, his fiesh, though white and flaky, and
under proper treatment sufficiently firm, has not the
flavour possessed by many other of our edible fishes.
His habits are regular, he is most accommodating in
the matter of food, and as to what he will take as bait
on a hook — I have caught Cod in New Zealand for
experiment with a lump of coal tied to a piece of spun
yam. On all of which accounts the Gadidae famUy
have claims upon our notice, which are not surpassed
by those of any other inhabitants of the deep and
wide sea. Dr. Hartwig ranks the Cod next in impor-
tance to the herring in its importance to man, but
one may be permitted to disagree with him, without
questioning his great authority and wide research.
a74



I



The Chief Food Fish 275

At any rate, I have ventured to put the Cod first,
and firmly believe that I am justified in so doing.

To the Cod family belong also the Haddock, the
Whiting, the Ling, the Pollock, and the Rocklings,
all valuable food fishes, but especially the Haddock,
which, in its smoked form, runs the smoked herring
very closely in its hold on popular favour in our own
country. Naturalists also include the Hake, and
I suppose they are right, although for my part I fail
to see anything about a Hake which can give him a
claim to any relationship with the Cod, and therefore
shall refuse to say anything about him here.

The principal and most valuable characteristic
of the Cod is its amazing fecundity. It has been
calculated that a single fish will deposit nine millions of
eggs, a number which in its vastness simply bewilders
ns, for we cannot at all realise what such a mighty
host means. Yet so numerous are the natural checks
placed upon the too rapid increase of the Cod, that
there are never too many for the seas they frequent
to contain and provide for ; in fact, it is safe to guess
that out of those nine millions of eggs probably not
more than as many tens attain to maturity. Around
the British coasts are favourite breeding grounds
of the Cod, where in comparatively shallow waters
he runs the gauntlet of his countless foes, escaping
in such numbers as to make the Cod-fishery a lucrative
form of the fishing industry.

But nearly all Cod and codlings caught on our
coasts come to market to be sold fresh, except in Passion
Week, when every fishmonger's shop becomes suddenly
full of wet salted Cod temptingly folded inside out
and garnished with lemons. The Cod lends itself
amicably also to keeping fresh on ice, although it
must be admitted thai between Cod freshly caught



276



Cod



and Cod that has been kept fresh in ice for some days
there is a vast difference, even if people who have
never been in a position to taste both are exceedingly
sceptical of the fact. H

Judging from what we are peimitted to see olfl
his manner of Uving when young and in shallow waters,
the Cod passes a very pleasant, peaceful time of it.
He is troubled by no problems of life, nor does he
ever need to exert himself to obtain food. Plenty of
it always seems to come his way, and when one kind
is exhausted he turns to another, or leisurely strolls
off, a few bilhons at a time, to another feeding ground.
On the South Coast of England during the autumn
codling are very plentiful ; fishing in the most primitive
sailor- fash ion, I have caught off the North Foreland
in an afternoon twenty dozen, every one of which
had its maw literally crammed with little crabs, making
me wonder at what I could see must be the amazing
numbers of these well-known cnistacea.

But sporting fishermen disdain the Cod ; he gives
no sport. No finesse is needed to hook him, rather
considerable delicacy of touch and quickness of striking
is required unless the fisherman does not mind ex-
tricating his hook from the bottom of every fish's
stomach. So voracious are they that they just gorge
the bait, hook and all ; they do not nibble. And when
they are hooked, except for a heavy, lumpish pulling
as they are hauled upward, they make no play, which
is just what renders them so welcome to the fisherman
with his long-lines, trawl-lines, or bulters, as they are
indifferently called, according to the place where they
are used.

As the fish mature they move off shore into deeper
water, until fishing for them becomes heavy labour.
It is a severe tax upon the strongest physique to be


Most Easily Caught 277

continually hauling up heavy fish from depths of from
two to four hundred feet. And therefore the long-
line system of fishing is welcomed. It consists in
having a line, say, a thousand feet in length, with a
hook snooded on by a short tail about every three
feet. These hooks are all baited, and the line is paid
out from a boat which is rowed slowly along until
the line is stretched along the bottom, both ends
being held in position by a buoy at the top of the
water and an anchor or sinker at the bottom. After
a certain time has elapsed, which varies according
to circumstances, the line is hauled in and the hooked
fish, who, apparently finding themselves tmable to
get away, have just accepted the situation with philo-
sophic calm and ceased to struggle, are disengaged
and dropped into the boat. Then the line is re-baited
and set again, while the boat hurries back to the smack
to get the catch packed in ice so that it shall not spoil.
But in spite of the marvellously prolific character
of the Cod, and the great extent of sea around our
coasts which is exactly fitted to its needs, there are
many and bitter complaints heard among the fisher-
men of the grave falling off in supply, and a general
idea that legislation is needed to conserve the fish
or it will be exterminated. Now it ought to be, I
think, perfectly clear that, in the case of such fish as
Cod, herring, or mackerel, the utmost efforts of which
man is capable can have no appreciable effect in re-
ducing the numbers of the fish available for catching.
Especially when it is remembered what incalculable
myriads of these fish are eaten by their natural enemies
in the sea, numbers to which man's paltry toll are
but as it were the stragglers from the main anny.
That the scarcity of Cod around our coast is not,
cannot be, due to over-fishing seems so certain as to


278



Cod



hardly require stating, yet the fact remains of the
scarcity, and it needs to be accounted for in some
other ways, although most probably if we did accoimt
for it we should find ourselves powerless to prevent
its increase.

On the other hand, judging by what is to be seen
on any morning at Grimsby or Billingsgate during
the season, the supply of Haddock, first cousin to
the Cod, shows no sign whatever of diminution. The
Haddock comes to London almost direct from the
sea, whence he is netted by trawls in immense numbers,
in such a manner as to make one feel on witnessing
the arrival and dispersal of a consignment as if they
never wished to taste the fish again. It is, like all the
Cod family, of a naturally slimy character, almost
as much so really as the eel, but on its first appearance
from the sea, multitudinously squirming in the pouch
of the great trawl net, shows no trace of unpleasant
appearance. But then it is dumped into the hold
of the vessel and almost at once loses its cleanly grey
and silver, exchanging it for a dull, greasy-looking
neutral tint. Transferred from the hold of the vessel
into iron tanks each holding a couple of tons or so,
two of which just fit on a flat railway truck, it is whisked
off at full goods speed to Billingsgate, undergoing
on the journey a further process of deterioration,
aided by the melting of the rough dirty ice with which
it is plentifully mixed.

At Billingsgate it is sold by auction in the open
street outside the Custom House to crowds of waiting
fishmongers. Immediately a purchase is made, men,
who are hardly distinguishable, by reason of filth
and slime, except by their size, from the fish they
stand knee deep in, shovel the mass of fish into the
buyer's cart which is backed up to the wain bearing



The Great Home of the Cod 279

the tanks. When the cart is loaded {it looks a singu-
larly disgusting cargo) the purchaser rattles off with
it to his shop, and in due time the dreadfully dirty
mass of fish passes through a series of operations
in back premises, often mere hovels a few feet square,
and reappears in windows of bright ' smoked 'addicks *
on the sloping boards of the front shop. But the
intennediate process does not bear thinking about,
if we would ever eat smoked Haddock again in
comfort.

But to find the Cod in all his glory it is necessary
to cross the Atlantic. On the north-east coasts of
the United States and right along the Nova Scotian
littoral are found great areas of comparatively shallow
sea, the broad Atlantic here allowing the land to rise
to within less than a dozen fathoms of the surface
in many places, and in one, the terrible Sable Island,
which has well been named an ocean graveyard, a long
snarling bank rises some few feet above the surface
and constitutes one of the chief dangers of the stormy
Nova Scotian coast. These banks vary in area from
a tiny patch of some ten or fifteen square miles to the
immense breadths of the Grand Bank off Newfound-
land, as large as that great island, and at one spot
culminating in the world famous Virgin Rocks which
break in a gale of wind, so nearly do they approach
to the surface. I do not know that any calculation
has ever been made of the aggregate area of all these
North American banks, but it must be some thousands
of square miles. And over the whole of them, varying
of course according to season, roam the placid Cod in
almost undisputed possession of the greatest and most
prolific fishing grounds in the whole world. Of course
other fish are found around there too, the lordly halibut
for instance, but as the proportion of any other fish



28o Cod

to Cod is only about one in a thousand it is too small
to be taken into account.

Now the Cod is manifestly not an adventurous
fish. Like some domestic animals, he conceives it
to be his primary duty to get fat, and to that duty
he gives all his powers. But getting fat presupposes
an abundance of easily obtained food. And here, if
anywhere in the world, it is to be found. Squid;
how could I ever have asked the question : * Why
the squid ? * As well ask why grass, hay, mangolds,
or any of the herbs and roots upon which our domestic
animals raised for food are fed. But their food has
to be provided for them by us, and sometimes the
providing thereof presents a very serious problem
when the elements are unpropitious, necessitating
the operations of commerce on a gigantic scale. But
the squid, at certain seasons, appear from their mys-
terious breeding places in the unsearchable recesses
of ocean in numbers like the grains of sand on the sea-
shore for multitude, and spread their countless myriads
over these ocean banks just where the Cod can gulp
them down at its leisure. Also, and incidentally, the
squid provides the fisherman with his best bait, for
a piece of tough tentacle properly impaled upon a
hook is not easily dislodged, and in the hands of an
experienced fisherman such a bait will serve for the
capture of several fish, no mean advantage in point
of time when the Cod are biting well.

But so vast are the armies of the Cod that even
that mass of squid is presently devoured, all except
those who are, one would say, miraculously preserved
to reproduce the needed supply for next season. Long
before the pinch of hunger can be felt by the Cod,
however, comes the capelin, beautiful little fish (Salmo
arcticus) which appear to be the fry of some large



Marvels of the Unseen 281



I



fish that is so prolific that its surplus billions must
needs come here to be disposed of, lest they should
become too numerous and create a famine in the sea.
Moving in almost solid masses across the banks in
certain given directions, feeding themselves upon the
myriads of minor creatures with which the sea is
everywhere teeming, they are met by the Cod, who
quietly work their way through the shoals eating,
eating, ever eating.

What a wonderful sight it must be, could anybody
but witness it, that mass of life, those square miles
of closely arrayed food fishes moving slowly from
point to point over the swarming surfaces of those
submarine plateaux ! Conceive, if you can, how in-
finitesimally small, in comparison with the area in-
habited by the Cod, is the space occupied by the whole
of the fishing fleet, would be the room taken up by
all the fishing fleets of the world could they be collected
there. As for the diminution in their numbers made
by man, it is so trivial by comparison with those
numbers, nay by comparison with the toll levied upon
them by enemies of their own sphere, that it is not
worth taking into account. For the area covered
by the hosts of fish is so great, and the point fished
by even a fleet of vessels is so infinitely small by com-
parison, that the capture of any at all shows how closely
crowded they must be down there in the unseen.
And if the united catch of all the fleet for one year
were put together it would probably be less than the
number of fish swimming at any given time during
the season within the area of one square mile.

The ' Bank ' fishery, as it is called, is an intensely
romantic, highly dangerous and terribly hard calling.
Readers of Captains Courageous will probably have
realised that to the full, as far as reading vivid descrip-



28a



Cod



tion of a thing can make it real to one's senses. But
I very much doubt whether it is possible to make
any landsman reahse what it means to ride at anchor
in the open ocean far out of sight of land, groping in
the unseen by the aid of what becomes, as in Disko
Troop, a real instinct, for a dearly won livelihood.
How can comfortable people ashore realise what it
means to be shut up in a tiny vessel, anchored out at
sea in the track of the swift, mighty, ocean-going
steamships ? Even on the clearest, most beautiful
night the httle schooner, with her glimmering riding
light in the fore rigging, is such a tiny speck upon
the great lonely sea. But when the dense white veil
of the fog closes down in eddies of thickest cloud, so
that the bow of the Uttle craft is not visible from her
stem, the sense of loneliness and of danger becomes
almost unbearably heightened.

And strangely enough, whereas when it was clear
the ocean looked so wide that the chances of one vessel
meeting another to do her harm, seemed almost
impossibly remote, in the smother of the fog it is
almost equally impossible to avoid the conclusion
that your vessel, like a magnet, will draw the ocean
greyhound down upon you, and sweep you in one
age-long minute of agony out of the world of being.
Yes, it is an adventurous life, and a splendid set of
men are those who lead it.

I have never been more astonished at the difference
between my preconceived notions and the reality,
than I was when, on a visit to Gloucester, Massachusetts,
the metropolis of the Cod-iishing industry, I saw the
fishennen ashore. Clean, well, even fashionably
dressed, gentlemanly, stalwart men. Perhaps I was
fortunate in coming across a picked lot, but there
they were, looking as unlike the conventional f '



I



ot, but there h
inal fishennan H



The Vast Export of Cod 283

as possible. One could hardly picture them groping
through the growling waves in their tiny dories on the
banks while laying their trawls, or covered with
blood and slime, knee-deep in Cod at the gutting
and splitting, or down in the stifling hold, dimly lighted
by one feeble lamp, packing the cleaned and boned
fish in layers of salt, so closely that when full she rides
almost as deep as if coal-laden.

For these Cod are not caught for immediate use,
nor is the fisherman's toil confined to luring them
from their deep-sea feeding grounds into the well of
his vessel or her ice-boxes. He must needs prepare
his catch for the first stage of their long journeys
ere they reach their legitimate goal in people's stomachs
all over the world. Time was, and that not so very
long ago, when the Cod on reaching port were dried
and sorted according to size and quality, then sent
to their various destinations packed in barrels or even
in loose crates.

From this method there was no change. It pro-
duced the bacallao beloved of the Spanish-speaking
people and sent to them all over the vast continent
of South America as well as to the mother country
of Spain. It found great acceptance, even in poor
Italy, whose hungry masses can ill afford to buy
imported food except at very low rates. The smallest,
meanest of the catch, little fish of half-a-pound to
two pounds, went to the West Indies to be bought in
pennyworths by the negroes. Some even came to
Ireland, with the Atlantic rife with fish at her doors.
So great was the export trade in dried salt Cod.

But now a cleaner, tastier development of the
traffic has sprung up. Instead of making the succulent
fish look like slabs of dirty wood, high-smelling and
salt as brine itself, the fish is taken from the hold of



ha


Tvessel, washed, dried so that H does not di^;

that is all. It is carefully freed from booe (tbe sea
process only ridding it of the main bones), cot into
neat squares of meat that have no sidtt or any particle
of uneatable matter attached to tiiem. A number, say
sue, of these squares are pressed together, aie neatly
&stened with string, packed in a pretty pared and,
behold, the clean, newly cau^it, fi^tfy aalted Cod
is ready for transportation among the se v e nty million
people of the United States, most of wboin are exceed-
' ingly fond of ' Cod-fish balls ' (made of fish and potato
and fried brown) for breakfast. So that now only
the inferior fish not considered good enoo^ for home
consumption is exported.

Practically noUiing is wasted of the Cod. Even
tihe ofial whidh is flimg overboard goes to nomidt those
that remain to be can^t perchance some oUier day,
•0 that it cannot be said to go nnntilised. Bat sodi
an immensely vahtaUe product as cod-4iva' di needs
only mentioning as one of the greatest gifts the ocean
makes to ailing mankind — a specific in wasting dis-
eases that has no equal. Even the swim bladders
and tongues of the fish are saved, and, salted down
in ' kits ' (little tubs), are sent all over America. They
look, before cooking, like pieces of wet white kid, and
when ready for table are tumps of glutinous jelly,
which need some getting used to by strangers before
they can be eaten with comfort. But th^ are highly
esteemed in America, and with reason, for they are,
without doubt, a most nourishing and economical
food. They are much too salt for British palates,
but the average American loves his food as salt as
brine, and so Ibey just suit.

It may seem unfair of me to have made no mention
of the great share which Canada and Newfoundland



The Southern Cod Banks 285

have in this amazing harvest of the sea, but no neglect
is intended or imagined. It is one of the principal
businesses in many small coast towns, and without
the Cod no one can guess what would become of the
hardly used Newfoundland fishermen. That much-
neglected colony of ours has many grievances, but
one of the chief is that, situated in the very middle
of the most valuable fishery in the world, she sees
the best part of it taken away from her by others,
and she is compelled to bear upon her flanks the open
sore of a French colony, whose reckless inhabitants
are a positive menace to her interests, whose behaviour
is of the worst, and who apparently cannot be removed
by any international amenities whatever.

It is a far cry from Newfoundland to the Cape of
Good Hope for us, but not for the distribution of fish.
For off the Cape of Agulhas (which is the southernmost
point of Africa, and not, as is popularly supposed,
the Cape of Good Hope) and to the eastward of it,
there is a plateau rising from the sea-bed to within
thirty and sixty fathoms of the surface, nearly ten
thousand square miles in area. This is known as the
Agulhas Bank, and is the chosen resort of Cod almost
exactly similar to those caught on the Grand Bank
of Newfoundland.

But whereas one place is the scene of one of the
most lucrative fisheries in the world, the other is turned
to no account whatever. When people talk as they
do occasionally about the populations of the world
outgrowing the food supply, they really should pause
and think a little while. It is interesting to see how
little comparatively of the world's possibilities in the
way of feeding mankind have yet been dealt with, and
also how prodigally man wastes Nature's bountiful
gifts. Here, in this easily accessible portion of the



386



Cod



sea, where the weather is far more temperate than
off Newfoundland, although the gales and waves are,
if anything, more severe, there are fish enough to
feed the whole of the European population once or
twice every week of the year.

And they are absolutely unmolested by man.
We really cannot take into account the infrequent
sailing ships briefly becalmed on the bank, whose
crew hurriedly snatch a sample of this ocean wealth
as they drift homeward. I vividly remember the
last time but one that I rounded Cape Agulhas, when
I was second mate of a large Liverpool ship, the
* Britannia.' We were crossing the bank when, during
my watch, from midnight till 4 a.m., it fell a stark
calm. In anticipation of its doing so I had bent three
hooks on to the deep-sea lead line, to which I had
attached the hand lead of seven pounds, I baited the
hooks with fat pork, and as soon as the vessel's way
ceased I dropped the line. I got bottom at sixty-five
fathoms, and only five minutes after felt a splendid
tugging at the line. The night being very cold I
had a heavy coat on, but before I got my fish on board,
I was streaming with sweat. For I had two fish,
one weighing twenty-four pounds and the other twenty,
while the seven pounds of the lead brought the load
to nearly half a hundredweight to be hauled up through
nearly four hundred feet of water.

I dropped my prizes with a crash on deck just over
the captain's head, and he, a most enthusiastic fisher-
man, was up with a couple of lines in two minutes.
The deep-sea lead-line was discarded and proper
tackle used, with the result that in an hour we had
forty splendid fish, none under fifteen pounds in weight.
And the most singular part of the business was that
those fish most obligingly followed our lines up, or



I



I



I turn Fisherman Indeed 287

else, which is hardly thinkable, they were thick all
the way down, for the last few we caught nearly at
the surface, having decreased the depth to which
we sunk our hooks at every cast. Then came the
breeze, to which we made sail and departed from that
wonderful iishing-ground.

The coasts of Australia and New Zealand abound
in fish, but especially Cod, Rockling, or, as they are
there called, Rock Cod. They are of two kinds, the
red and the blue, both, I think, superior to the grey
Cod of our own seas, but the blue is reckoned by far
the best. In fact, it fetches nearly double the price.
They move in shoals as our home Cod do, following
their food, whatever it may be, far up into land-locked
bays and estuaries, as they do in Newfoundland and
Nova Scotia, where I have seen one of the huge native
dogs dive off a pier and emerge with a fine Cod in his
mouth, which he proceeded to devour in leisurely
fashion.

This habit of theirs resulted in my making an
extensive acquaintance with them once — the only
time in my life that I was ever a ' professional ' fisher-
man. Whaling, of course, is excluded. I was stranded
in Port Chalmers, moneyless and unable to get a ship.
Lounging miserably on the wharf one day, an old
boatman of my acquaintance came up and said :

' Why don't you go fishing ? The Cod are in the
harbour, and Jinamy the curer round the flagstaff
point wUl give you eighteenpence a dozen for all
you catch.'

' But I've no boat,' said I, ' nor money to hire one.'

* I'll lend you a boat,' he replied, ' and charge you
half-a-crown a day, which you can pay me out of your
earnings.'

I thanked him, and started ; fortunately I had



288 Cod

lines and hooks ; I was seldom without them during
my seafaring days. In an hour I was well down
the bay and had joined a little flotilla of boats, whose
occupants were all busy hauling in Cod. In five
minutes I was as busy as they, but sorely handicapped
by the lealdness of my craft, which necessitated me
baling with one hand and fishing with the other.
Nevertheless, fish were so plentiful, and I was so
fortunate, that by sunset — ^I had gone out at i p jn. —
I had cau^^t a gross of fish, whose average weight
was four pounds. I took them to the smokehouse
and received eighteen shillings for them, at which I
was mightily [deased.

Altogether that week my fishing brought me in
four pounds, and I felt as if I were on the high road
to fortune, when the Cod, who had only, I suppose,
been on a visit, departed again, and my occupation
was gone, for within the bay, where alone my boat
was of service, I could not find a sing^ Cod. On the
last day I caught but a singjie fish, and that was a
huge lean Ling.

This curious relative of the Cod seems to be a com-
promise between a Cod and a conger eel, and there are
not wanting those fishermen who believe that it really
is a hybrid. Its head and shoulders are exactly like
a Cod, colour, barbels on the lower lip (a kind of feelers)
and all. But the body tapers away just like an eel's
with a dorsal fin that runs almost round where the tail
fin should be, and continues along the belly as a long
ventral. The one I caught was nearly six feet in
length, but so attenuated that he did not weigh more
than twenty pounds. I foimd on this occasion, that
the habits of the southern Cod were far less regular
than those of the Cod of our own seas. They appear
to have no settled banks, feeding grounds where



I



Varieties of Cod



289



I



one may always find them at stated seasons, but wander
in fairly large companies wherever food is plentiful.

Before leaving this subject finally, I would like to
say that Rock Cod are not confined, as are the grey
variety, to temperate and cold waters. I have caught
them in so torrid a climate as that of the Gulf of
Mexico at a depth of seventy fathoms. But I suppose
that the rule of low temperature at certain depths,
making fish who affect those depths almost world-wide
in their habitat, will apply to Cod, even though he
is not, I should say, ever found at a greater depth
than a hundred fathoms. That, however, is quite
deep enough for the standard temperature (about 31"
F.) of the deep sea.

Avery interesting little member of the Cod family,
well-known to all of us, is the Whiting. It is caught
in great quantities round our coasts and off the shores
of Holland. It is essentially a fish to be eaten fresh,
the delicacy and whiteness of its flesh being entirely
spoiled by any attempts to cure it. More than that,
much as it is prized on account of its delicacy of flavour
and appearance, it is not too much to say that no
one who has not tasted it within three hours of its
capture can have any idea how dehcious it really is.
The same thing, of course, apphes practically to all
fish, no animal food growing flavourless and stale so
quickly, but the probability is that of all the fish we
eat there are none which it is so imperatively necessary
to eat fresh if we would really have them in perfection
as the Whiting. It is a small fish, being rarely caught
above three pounds weight and averaging about a
pound.

The Pollock is another member of the Cod family
of rather better flavour than the chief of his tribe,
as well as more elegant in shape and not so slimy.
19


290 Cod

But he is much scarcer and more sdect, always being
regarded by fishermen as a far superior fish to the Cod.
He is found of a goodly weight. I have myself caught
Pollock in the Bay of Fhndy weighing from seven to
ten pounds. They are highly esteemed in Nova Scotia
and New Brunswick, where I have seen them exposed
for sale after being smoked, haddock fashion, and very
delicious eating they were.

But none of the allied members of the Cod attain to
any comparison with his great size, which sometimes
runs up to dose upon eighty pounds, except the Burbot,
a true Cod, almost indistinguishable from his celebrated
congener, but an inhabitant of fresh water, and, as
&r as is known, never going near the sea. In the rivers
of this country, such as the Trent and the Cam, where
he is to be found, his average weight is only two pounds,
but in the great streams of Europe and America he
attains a weight sometimes of over twenty. There
18 another species of Cod found on our coast known
as the Coal-fish, but it does not call for any special
remark here.



CHAPTER XXI
THE HERRING

STRICTLY speaking, the subject of the present
chapter should not be allowed to enter this
honourable company at all, since it is to com-
prise only deep-sea people, to which so great an
authority as Dr. Gunther emphatically says that
the Herring does not belong. It has long been ima-
gined that the Herring, our common Herring that is,
from whom over fifty different species derive their
title, spawns in the Arctic regions, and at stated
periods pursues its way in unimaginable numbers
through the deep sea until it strikes our coasts, when
it rises to the surface and is thus brought within reach
of the fisherman. But this idea is now scouted by
ichthyologists. They tell us that the Herring never
goes far from its spawning grounds, which are in shallow
waters. That the immense shoals of Herring from
which our fishermen take their toll have come up
from deeper water a little farther off shore where they
have been feeding and getting plump in order to spawn,
which accounts for the fact that the Herring in full
season is always full of roe or milt, and when they have
spawned they are no longer fit to be eaten. Any one
who has ever tasted a Herring in the latter condition
will cordially endorse that statement as an indubit-
able fact.

The romance of the Herring is a most fascinating



292



The Herring



one. Although there may be some doubt as to which
is the most valuable from a statistical and financial
point of view, the cod or the Herring fishery, there
can be no doubt at all as to which is the most ancient
and, as far as Europe is concerned, most popular.
The Herring has often been proudly dubbed the king
of fish, but the name is inappropriate. The Herring
is a vulgar fish, beloved by the people, who sniff its
fragrant aroma, as, in the guise of the bloater or kipper,
it splutters on the gridiron, with lively anticipations
of a savoury meal. A fashionable fish it cannot be,
because of its cheapness and because of the aroma
aforesaid, which, in the eyes or rather the nostrils
of poor folk, is one of its chief recommendations.

The Herring is almost the only fish which the
selfish autocrats of our great fish markets allow to
be retailed cheaply, and it is no uncommon thing to
see fresh Herrings not twenty-four hours from the
sea being sold in London streets by the poor man's
purveyor, the costermonger, at four and even six a
penny, or at less than a penny a pound. And even
at that rate there is considerable room for profit
between the catcher and the eater. When one boat
in a night sometimes draws from the sea over a quarter
of a million fish, and could, but for her limited capacity
and the fear of brealdng the nets, take more than
double the quantity, it is easily seen how cheap
the fish may be, especially when it is invariably taken
near shore. Another thing, although the Herring dies
almost instantaneously upon leaving the water, it
does not become stale very quickly — that is, there is
less difference between Herring just out of the water
and those twenty-four hours landed than there is .
noticeable in almost any other fish under < ~
conditions.



u uiou lime IS ^_

under the sama'^f



Good in Every Way 293

Moreover there is no fish which lends itself so easily
to cheap curing, or which when cured has a flavour
greatly superior to that of the fresh fish. Salted
cod is good fish no doubt and has great value, but
compared with the fresh fish it is vastly inferior in
point of flavour. But delicious as is a fresh Herring
fried or grilled, a bloater or a kipper is certainly far
more savoury, although perhaps a trifle too rich for
delicate stomachs. And they have the advantage
of keeping for a long time if not allowed to dry. The
high dried Herring, ' ham-cured ' Herring, or ' Glasgow
Magistrate,' as irreverent people call it, is a great
favourite with the poor, but it is intensely salt, and
certainly has its demerits as a thirst provoker, leading
to an increased consumption of beer, which among the
class with whom it is a favourite is quite superflut

The salt or pickled Herring is not at all in favour
in this country, but in America and on the continent
of Europe is greatly liked, especially in Holland and
Germany, where it is eaten raw. I well remember my
disgust when, while discharging a cargo of mahogany
in Rotterdam, the foreman of the stevedores stopped
a Herring vendor and purchasing half-a-dozen fish
from him, tendered one to me. I smiled and said
I had eaten my breakfast, and anyhow there was no
means of cooking the fish. ' Oh,' said Hendryk,
* cooking would spoil them ; we eat them hke this.'
And taking one by each lobe of its tail, he ripped it
asunder lengthways, skilfully ejected the backbone,
and devoured the fish with great gusto. Prior to
that the ordy people I had ever seen eat raw fish were
the South Sea Islanders, and I had fancied it a savage
accomphshment.

But whether salted, smoke-dried, or eaten fresh, the
Herring as an article of food fills a position quite out



294



The Herring



of all proportion to its size, but entirely corom e nsuratc
with its incalculable multitudes. The Herring fishery
has the exceeding merit of antiquity, and the distinction
that, as the centuries have rolled by, it has grown in
popular favour instead of waning, although it has lost
its place at the tables of the wealthy, where ' bacon'd *
Herring used to be accounted a great dainty. The
chronicles of Evesham Abbey of the year 709 made
mention of the Herring fishery as being even then
established, the Herrings, I suppose, being brought J
from the Bristol Channel by way of the Severn and!
Avon into the heart of Worcestershire. 1

Yarmouth, the Herring metropolis, has been
famous for its fishery since the days of Norman William,
the shallow J sandbanks lining the coasts of Suffolk
and Norfolk having ever been a favourite resort of
the valuable little fish, and one that, capricious as they
often are in their movements, they seldom fail to
visit in vast numbers. To-day, although Yarmouth
has gradually changed from being one of our principal
fishing-ports to the less romantic but far more pro-
fitable position of a great favourite seaside resort,
during the Herring season it is a scene of the greatest
activity, quite an immigration of Scotch lasses,
expert at dealing with the Herring in the way of
preparing them for curing, taking place.

Yarmouth, however, can in nowise claim a mo-
nopoly of the Herring fishery, for all round our coEtsts,
except Cornwall and Devon, the pleasant fish is found
in varying numbers according as they feel inclined
to visit this, that, or the other place. The reasons
for this capriciousness are not at all understood,
whether it is a question of food, or gales, or temperature.
But the telegraph keeps the smacksmen advised as to
the movements of the fish, and no place can be visited


I



Dutchmen and Herrings 295

by them without the prompt arrival of the fishennen
in pursuit.

All round the sea coasts of Northern Europe the
Herring is to be found in its season, from the North
Cape to Ushant, but of all these countries where the
Herring is known and loved and caught, Holland
may probably claim the pre-eminence in antiquity
and importance. There was a time when the fisher-
men of the Netherlands supplied the whole of
Europe with Herrings from their sandbanks, which
axe a characteristic feature of the Dutch coasts. Nay,
Holland itself is )ust a series of sandbanks wrested
from the sea, which is only kept from resuming its
ancient sway over the country by unceasing care,
and watchfulness over the dykes. Thus the Herrings
were, so to speak, at the Dutchmen's back doors,
and right profitable advantage did the sturdy Nether-
landers take of the fact.

In the early days their method of curing for
export was rough and rude in the extreme. They just
piled the fish in heaps and sprinkled salt upon them.
And the condition of those fish in a week or so must
have been horrible. But people were not fastidious
then, and disregarded the laws of health pretty much
as they listed, being almost entirely ignorant of
them, though it must be admitted that the Dutch
were far in advance of any other nation in that
respect.

But in process of time a great genius arose, William
Beukelaer, of a village near Sluys, who discovered
that by pickling Herrings in barrels they might be
really preserved from decay, be more portable, and
incomparably cleaner and more wholesome. It seems
to us now but a trifling and very obvious improvement
upon the old method, but such as it was it had a most



296



The Herring



mighty influence in the moulding of Europe. For
upon that apparently insignificant basis arose the
Dutch Republic, which successfully resisted the
infernal domination of Spain, and dealt one of the
deadliest blows at the truly Satanic Inquisition that it
ever received, making it, in fact, possible for Britain
to finish the good work so weU begun. Alas ! that
before doing so we should have been compelled to
destroy the splendid fisheries and oversea trade built
up by the strenuous Dutchmen.

First the Herring, then the whale. These two
sea-folk brought great prosperity to Holland, but
note well, not a prosperity based upon luck, or accident,
or coincidence, but sheer hard work, dogged perse-
verance, and undaunted courage. Faithful to their
first great success, the Dutchmen always spoke of the
Herring as the 'great fishery,' of the whale as the
•small,' having reference, of course, to the relative
importance of the two industries and not at all to the
size of the creatures taken.

Truly the Herring fishery was a great undertaking
— in 1606, when it was at the height of its prosperity,
it gave employment to two hundred thousand men.
Three thousand smacks were employed and treble
that number of schuyts and galliots were engaged
in the transportation of the spoil of the sea. Then
came the unhappy quarrel with England arising out of
the partisanship of the States General for the Royahst
party. Cromwell and his great admiral, Blake, dealt
such disastrous blows at the sea business of the Nether-
lands as practically crippled them. Then, when
they were struggling doughtily to recover from their
great misfortunes, they found the hardy Northmen
already in possession of the bulk of the trade, and to
crown all their misfortunes, they fell at last between



I



An Immense Industry 297

the upper millstone of Napoleon and the nether mill-
stone of England, wliich completed their ruin. But
such a people could not long be kept down, and ac-
cordingly towards the end of the first half of the
nineteenth century they began to recover again, and
have now built up a fine trade once more.

All this time we were too busy fighting and de-
veloping in other directions to pay much heed to the
Herring fishery, but at last, having destroyed the
Dutch fishing fleet, we began to feel the need of estab-
hshing a much larger fishery for the supply of our
own increasing wants. And this impetus given to
the business has lasted until now, the greatest develop-
ment, however, having shown itself among the Scotch,
who boast that their Loch Fyne Herring are the finest
in the world.

On the coast of Newfoundland and as far North
as Labrador, there is a considerable amount of Herring
fishing carried on, the fish being of a larger and fatter
kind than are found over here. But the business is
so dwarfed by the great cod fishery that we hear very
little of it. There is, however, a rather importajit
fishery carried on farther south, off the New England
coast, that of the ' Menhaden.' a species of Herring
which is so rich in oil as to be hardly eatable. It is
caught in immense quantities for the purpose of ex-
tracting the oil, which fetches a good price, and the
dried fish remaining is used for manure.

But one of the most peculiar facts in connection
with the Herring is the persistent way in which one
branch of the family, the Pilchard {Clupea pilchardus),
remains faithful to the south-western comer of England,
the counties of Devon and Cornwall being thus favoured
to the almost total exclusion of any other part of the
country. In this they differ greatly from the Herring



298



The Herring



proper, which is notable for its fickleness in viHt!
various places around the coast. Fortunately I have
avoided making mention of the unaccountable numbers
of the Herring, for great as they are, one must reserve
all the superlatives at command for the Pilchard.

I remember hearing fromsomeSt. Ives fishermen how
one season, when the fish were even more numerous than
usual, how it occurred to some enterprising net owners
that it would be a good thing to stretch a strong fleet
of nets across the narrow entrance to a tmy bay, a
mere pond of less than an acre in extent, at high water
when it was practically alive with Pilchards. They
did so, and when the tide ebbed they were appalled
at the magnitude of their haul. They sent word
hastily to all the population round about to come
and take their fill of the spoil, to fanners that they
might bring their waggons and cart off the fish for
manure, to everybody, in fact, who could in any way
lessen the heap of fish. But in vain. Nothing seemed
to make any impression upon it, for there were thou-
sands of tons. And the foolish greed of the originators
of this wholesale plan of capture was punished by an
epidemic which, begun in that mountain of putrefying
fish, devastated the neighbourhood.

Only by remembering that in the ordinary course of
the fishery ten thousand hogsheads have been landed
in one port in a single day, roughly twenty-five millions
of fish, can we imagine what that gigantic haul shut
in the little bay must have been. The fish run so
thick in the schools that a pitchfork will stand upright
in them, as if stuck into a hogshead full. And it is
usual when a shoot of nets has been laid round a portion
of a school like that for boats to be loaded from the
inside of the circle as from a tank, and only take
ashore as much at a time as can conveniently



I



I



ind only take ^B
inveniently be ^|



The Savoury Pilchard 299

dealt with. By this means the fish are kept from
spoiling.

Apart from those that are consumed locally, there
is not much British trade in the Pilchard. It is too
rich for most tastes. So it is salted and packed in
hogsheads for the Continental market, whither it is
sent after a period of pressure upon the fish in the big
casks for the purpose of expressing as much of the
oil as possible.

But for some obscure reason, of which I know
nothing, it seems impossible to spread the sale of
this rich and tasteful little fish farther than its present
somewhat restricted distribution. Many attempts
have been made to do so, serious and well-managed
efforts which deserved success at any rate. Lightly
cured and of a bright golden colour, Pilchards in bundles
were for some time to be seen on almost every fish-
monger's show-boards in poor neighbourhoods. They
were not only appetising in appearance, but of really
delicious flavour, besides being as cheap as the London
workman insists upon having his food, that is to say,
cheaper than food can be bought of the same kind and
quality in any other city in the world.

But I am afraid that they came into competition
with the herring too severely, and so brought down
upon themselves, or rather their owners, the enmity
of the great herring factors, for I have noticed that
for some time past they have hardly been procurable.
Or perhaps the people for whose benefit they were
intended would not encourage their sale. The poorest
classes, of London especially, those that is who work
and support themselves, are tremendously conservative,
clinging tenaciously to old ways, old styles of food, in
a wonderful manner. But if by perseverance some
new food is at last brought into their favour its success



300



The Herring:



is assured, they will rush for it in hundreds of thousands,
while at the same time remaining loyal to their old
loves. And perhaps some day they will appreciate
fresh Pilchards as much as they now do fresh herrings,
and bloatered Pilchards also.

A great deal of capital and energy has also been
expended in the attempt to utilise the Pilchard as
a ' Cornish sardine,' which is retailed at a very modest
rate, but has certainly not been able to do any harm
by its competition to the sale of sardines at nearly
double the price. They are good and very whole-
some, the utmost care is taken in their preparation
— but even the most careless person would never
take them for sardines, the delicacy of flavour, scarcity
of bones and succulence of flesh being altogether
in favour of the sardine. A much better idea has
been that of preparing Pilchards in oil as Pilchards,
putting them on the market under their own name
and trusting to their own good quaUties to make a
lucrative sale for them. They can be obtained at
nearly all respectable grocers, and I am sure only
need a trial to become favourably known.

Whether a largely increased sale for them or for
any other fish that can be sold very fresh is likely
under the present market conditions of England
generally I do not know. But I fear not. It is a
thing to be remembered in this free trade country,
how coolly, how frequently, the price of necessaries of
hfe is raised, how persistently the cheapening of food
is opposed by the dealers in these commodities, and
how utterly helpless the consumer is to alter this
tyrannical state of affairs. Nowhere is this more
marked than in the distribution of fish. But for the
costermongers and their energy in clearing away a i
* ^ut ' of fish from the market, when 1



leanng away a '^m
n by some uii>^|



The Vulgar Sprat



301



foreseen hitch in the middle-men's plans such a thing
happens, it is not too much to say that most of the
very poor would never know the taste of fresh fish
at all. But perhaps this is more than enough of the
economic side of the Pilchard, which, at any rate,
is much beloved in what may be called his native
comity of Cornwall, however difficult it may be for
him to get just appreciation in the rest of England.

Following on after the pilchard in point of sixe,
but almost as universal in their British habitat as
the herring, comes the Sprat, dear to Londoners.
Indeed, they are the whitebait of the poor, and so
well-flavoured that it can scarcely be doubted that
but for their amazing numbers and consequent cheap-
ness they would be quite as much in favour with the
wealthy as the delicate little fish which used to be
sacred to the ministerial end-of-the-session dinners
at Greenwich. Very graciously this little herring
comes upon the scene immediately after the herring
season is over, and in immense numbers.

But it is much to be feared that the catching of
them does not afford anything like adequate remunera-
tion to the fishermen. And the demand, though
undoubtedly large, is strictly limited. If the quantity
brought ashore at all oversteps that limit, this beautiful
little fish goes off in its myriads for manure. And I
have often seen Sprats being sold in London at one
penny for two pounds. Here, at any rate, the com-
plaint against the middle-man keeping the price up
can hardly be maintained. But as far as I know it
is almost the only fish of which the same thing can
be said.

Also the Sprat lends itself most amicably to curing,
somewhat after the style of the kippered herring,
except that it is not, of course, split open. It is cured



3^2 The Herring

ligr smddng, having veiy Utile salt added, and b tlim
tM up in little bundles of ten, wbidi axe nsoalty
•old tluee for twopence or one hali^)enny eadh Ibst
doHdoos and delicate they are in flavoor, too, only
tiiat they have the &tal plebeian stamp of plenty and
dieapness. But even the poor do not, I think, appre-
ciate them as thqr should. Not neaily as mudi, for
instance, as they do sudi shdl-fish as the periwhiUe
and the appalling whdk, whidi is a mirade <rf tooe^mess
and indigestibihty.

Following up a theory very largdy hdd that the
hecring, the Sprat, and the ssurdine, are one and the
same fush, serious attempts have been made to serve
%iiats in tins k la sardine. But no one of the slightest
discrimination can fail to detect the difEerence at once.
There is no doubt that an enormous number of Sprats
are preserved in inferior oil sudi as cottcm-seed <nl,
and sdd as sardines at fourpence to sixpence a tin,
sardines of undoubted genuineness costing at the
same time (me shilling and twopence per tin of the
same size, and there is equal certainty that people
who have grown fond of fish preserved in oil do eat
and enjoy these tinned Sprats in the belief that they
are sardines, utterly oblivious of the fact that they
are paying from eight to ten times more than they
need for the dainty little fish, which when smoked,
may safdy challenge the whole fish world in point
of flavour, but does not take kindly to preservation
in oil, as do the sardine and anchovy. But, except
for the fact that these Sprats are sold as sardines
when they are not, this is nobody's business but the
sellers' and the buyers' ; I mean, that no one is done
any great harm to, and so it is not necessary to interfere.
It is perfectly certain, however, that the name ' Sprat *
has so low and vulgar a soimd that, if these tinned



Providential Habits



303



Sprats were offered for sale as such, no one would be
found to purchase them at all.

The habits of the Sprat as far as they can be known
are identical with those of the herring. Both feed
in their incalculable hosts in the deep water off our
coasts, affording In their turn food to a mighty army
of larger fish of many species. Then when the time
draws near for them to spawn they come shorewards,
drawing closer together until they appear like a solid
wall of fish many yards thick and hundreds of yards
long, all moving by one common impulse towards
whatever spawning ground they may happen to be
seeking. They have no leaders, and it passes the wit
of man to understand why they vary their spawning
places : whether it is the weather, the temperature
of the sea, or the quantity of food to be found which
actuates them. The amazing thing is that every
individual of the countless miUions feels the same
impulse, obeys it at the same moment, and needs no
other guide.

For the sake of the humans who depend upon them,
it is a wonderfully valuable dispensation of Providence
which compels them to seek the surface and the com-
paratively shallow waters near the shore to spawn,
since otherwise it would be perfectly impossible to
catch them. No other means could be devised which
would be so effectual in garnering this rich harvest
of the sea as that universally employed and invented
in who knows what dim, far-off age of the world's
history.

And yet the method is not, as might be supposed,
imiversally understood. Very briefly it is this ; of
stout well-tarred twine a net is constructed about
twenty feet wide and in one hundred and twenty feet
lengths, making up for one boat about two hundred



304



The Herring



fathoms. At the top and bottom are stout ropes,

the lower rope being slightly weighted with sheet
lead lapped round it in places and the upper buoyed
with pieces of cork. The meshes are made just large
enough for the herring or Sprat, as the case may be,
to get its head through. Then it is caught, for the
pectoral fins and swell of the body will not allow it
to go any farther, while the opening of the gills prevent
it from moving backwards. When tlie nets are shot,
as it is tenned, they oppose to the passage of the
army of herrings an invisible fence through which
it is impossible to pass, but which is, of course, at-
tempted. Presently an enormous number of fish
are entrapped by the neck, but so lightly are they
held that when the net is hauled into the boat a gentle
shake is quite sufficient to dislodge them, and they
fall into the boat dead, for the herring dies almost
at once upon leaving its native element.

Meeting this invisible barrier throws the school
into terrible confusion, and it breaks up, its units,
no longer homogeneous in mass, rushing aimlessly
hither and thither. A catastrophe has taken place in
their world far greater than the swift passage through
their mass of a whale with vast jaws widespread
swallowing many thousands of them at a gulp, or
the incessant incursions of the porpoises and sharks.
But the barrier once removed and its goodly load of
victims transferred to the boat, they soon re-form
again and, obedient to that compelling impulse,
resume their steady march towards their objective.

Much to the discomfiture and loss of the fishermen,
it does occasionally happen that a whale in pursuit
of his prey comes gliding on to where the nets stretch
right across his path. As the fishermen can easily
see his approach, even on the darkest night, it is an



I
I

I


Trials of Herring Fishers 305

anxious time for them, and all manner of strange
devices are resorted to for the purpose of turning
him from his course. For should he pass through
the nets, while he would hardly feel them, it would
be iiothing short of a disaster for the poor men earning
their hard and precarious livelihood. It might con-
vert a fairly prosperous season into one in which a
dead loss was made, for those nets are costly, and
a whale can easily carry away a whole flight.

Scarcely less destructive are the sharks and dog-
fish and porpoises, all of which are far too strong,
ravenous, and reckless, to be safely hindered by the
envelopment of herring nets. Also it is not an un-
known thing for a ship to blunder through the nets,
and cause much damage, so that, apart altogether from
the chances of severe autumnal weather, the herring
fisherman's life is a very anxious one, and he deserves
all the efforts that are being made by good people
ashore for the furtherance of his spiritual and material
welfare. These fishermen are, taking them all round,
a splendid race of men, and entirely worthy of our
deepest regard.

The tiny species of herring known as Whitebait
{Clupea alba) is taken in small bag nets just beneath
the surface of the water in the estuaries of our rivers,
principally in the Thames, in spite of the pollution
which has robbed the beautiful river of most of its
fish, even in the high reaches. But the tiny wanderers
only come in with the flood-tide, getting out again,
those that are not caught, before the poisonous matter
brought down by the ebb has had time to overtake
them. The catching of them is a very small but
fairly lucrative industry, there being always a brisk
demand for them at high prices, since they are what
may be termed a fashionable fish. Yet, as I have
20



3o6 The Herring

said before, there can be scarcely any question but
that the vulgar Sprat is of much better flavoury
although it must be admitted that the Sprat is a
trifle rich for delicate stomachs to deal with. There
is little doubt but that other young fry are frequently
brought to market and sold as Whitebait, or that
they are just as good, no one but an expert ichthyo-
logist being able to tell the difference between them
and the Whitebait. So that the substitution may be
quite innocent, and in any case does not matter.

The Sardine, while a veritable herring, is a very
well-marked variety, having distinct quahties of its
own, and keeping rigidly away from the shores of
Britain. It is caught at various places along the
coasts of France westward from the bay in which
are the Channel Islands, but the chief fishing port
is UOrient on the northern shore of the Bay of Biscay
in Brittany.

But of late the Sardine fishery has fallen upon evil
days. The natural enemies of the little fisii, such
as whales and porpoises, have increased so greatly
that the shoals no longer come near enough to shore
to be caught ; indeed, there do not seem to be any
shoals of Sardines at all, and the poor Breton fishermen
are in such dire straits that public help has been asked
and obtained for them. And a paternal government
has, at the request of the fishermen, granted the use
of torpedo boats to hunt and destroy the porpoises,
in the hope that thus will the drain upon the supply
of Sardines be stopped.

But it seems very doubtful indeed whether such
measures are of the slightest use. Except for some
terrible submarine calamity, such as a sudden lowering
of the sea temperature, or a volcano suddenly becoming
active, the numbers of such a fish as the Sardine would



A Sardine Famine



307



not be affected. The natural checks placed upon their
increase in the sea by the Creator will never do more
than they should do, when unmolested by man. It
is only when man thrusts his hands into Nature's
work that any great unbalancing of natural resources
takes place. The Sardines have just moved on a little,
that is all, and will, I hope, be as plentiful as ever
round the Breton shores again soon.

The dainty little fish is also found in the Mediterra-
nean on the coast of Africa and about the islands of
Corsica and Sardinia, but in tliese localities is more
a matter of local consumption than of preparation
for export. This seems strange too, seeing that from
the latter island it takes its name, and its plenty there
is beyond question. But the Bretons have made the
Sardine fishery peculiarly their own, and nothing
apparently but a continuance of the present dearth
can take from them their premier position as the
world's purveyors of the finest brands.

The Anchovy is also a Mediterranean fish of world-
wide reputation as an appetiser, its piquant flavour
and the rather large quantity of salt considered
necessary to its preservation making it a much desired
adjunct to other fish in the shape of sauce. Its
peculiarly coloured flesh, too, helps it for this purpose,
the dark red of the Anchovy contrasting well with
the white flesh of cod, turbot, etc. In this respect
it differs widely from all of its congeners, and except
for the assurance of those who have made fish their
social study, I should hesitate to accept the statement
that it belongs to the herring family at all. In any
case it is but a distant relation, for the prefix Clupea
is dropped, and a totally dissimilar one, Engraulis,
is given. The principal fisheries are along the Riviera,
where the fish are pickled in tiny barrels and sent else-



3o8



The Herring



where to be made into sauce or paste, or eaten au naturd
as the Dutch eat the pickled Herring. But the fish
frequents the whole of the adjacent coasts eastward,
being caught all down the Italian shore as far as Sicily
as well as on the African shore.

Of the Large Herring frequenting the inclement
shores of Labrador, alluded to in the early part of this
chapter, there is very httle to say, except that, like
the Menhaden, they are far too full of oil to be relished
by us, even if it were worth while to send them over,
which it emphatically is not. They are, however, in
great demand in America in their pickled or salt
condition, and are to be found all over the interior
of the United States and Canada. Scattered members
of the herring family are found in many pari:s of the
world, none calling for comment but the Fresh-
water Herring of some Austrahan rivers. Many of
these I have caught with a hook and hne from the
wharves on the Clarence River, and do not remember
that they presented any essential difference from the
herring caught in the British seas. But then I did
not attach any importance to the fact that I was
catching them in fresh water, a point which should
have claimed my attention even at that early age.

I have left to the last the mighty and majestic
Tarpon, beloved of wealthy anglers and frequenting
the shores of the Gulf of Mexico and adjacent islands.
He is undoubtedly a herring ! But such a herring !
Specimens have been caught weighing two hundred
pounds, and the sport of landing such a monster as
that with an ordinary salmon rod and line calls for
the highest skill, strength, and patience on the part
of the angler. It is such a splendid game fish too,
leaping high into the air like a huge bar of silver when
hooked, and endeavouring to shake the galling hook



The Majestic Tarpon

out of its mouth. In tliis it very often succeeds,
much to the chagrin of the fisherman, whose utmost
skill is powerless to prevent such an accident unless
by great good fortune the hook should have penetrated
the only vulnerable part of the jaw.

One night in Barbadoes, fishing with ordinary
tackle, I hooked Tarpon over twenty times, and lost
them before I had gathered in half a dozen fathoms
of the line. For whenever they sprang into the air,
which they did as soon as they felt the hook, they
leaped towards the boat at the same time, and my
hooks being of a very inferior type and not at all like
the keen slender hooks sold for Tarpon-fishing, they
would not hold, especially as I could not keep a strain
on the line. But at last I did succeed in catching one
(he fell off the hook the moment he entered the boat),
and immediately examining his mouth I found it
apparently entirely devoid of any place where a
hook could enter except the edge of the lip. It
seemed to be all solid, pohshed bone. I thought
I had never seen a more beautiful fish. Its eyes
were very large and full, and its scales, each as big
as a crown piece, were just like planished plates of
mother of pearl. Of the quality of its flesh I can say
nothing, as I sold it, and so did not assist at the eating
of my prize.


CHAPTER XXII
THE BARRACOUTA

IN dealing with this fish, the last upon my list, I have
one great advantage : knowing him very well, in-
deed personally, I am not hampered with what I
may call musemn details. Strangely enough, the Barra-
couta, in spite of the large extent of his range, his great
numbers, usefulness as a food-fish, and other strongly
marked qualities, has been much neglected by ichthyo-
logistSy Messrs. Goode and Bean's monumental work,
for instance, having no mention of him. Lydekker
mentions the name, spelling it * Barracouda,' as being
indifferently applied to the genera Thyrsites and
Sphyroena. But that does not shed a dazzling light
upon the habits of a most interesting deep-sea fish, and
one that is found in nearly all tropical and temperate
waters around the world. I should like though to
say at the outset that, in my experience, the Barra-
couta of the West Indies differs in very important
respects from the fish known by that name around
the South African coast and in Australasia ; yet the
habits and contour of the two are so exactly similar
that I am convinced they are very closely related, and
the difference probably due to climate and habitat.

My first acquaintance with the Barracouta was
made in the small reef-protected harbour of Falmouth,
Jamaica. A native fisherman brought one on board
for sale, and the steward, after some little haggling,

310



A Dangerous Neighbour 3 1 1

bought it and hung it up beneath the boat on the
skids. Being at that time of an age when inquisitive-
ness is the normal frame of mind, i.e. about thirteen,
I soon found an opportunity of examining it. It was
about three feet long with scarcely any bulge to its
body, which was about eight inches wide and five
inches thick, tapering off very Httle to the tail. Its
head was very much like a pike's, with a lower jaw
considerably prolonged beyond the upper one, an
enormous gape and cruel-looking canine teeth. Indeed,
but that it was more symmetrical, it reminded me very
much of the head of a crocodile. The eyes were very
large and well situated for seeing in every direction,
being set prominently, one on either side of the widest
part of the wedge-shaped head. The fins were rather
small for the size of the fish, all except the caudal or
tail-fin, which was large, fleshy and lightly forked,
having a very wide area of propelling surface. The
body was covered with medium-sized scales, which
were easily detached, showing in a marked degree
its difference from the mackerel family, whose scales
are very feu and most firmly attached to their bodies.
Its colours were simple, a dirty brownish black above
and livid white below, the two meeting at the lateral
hne. It was long afterwards when I first saw a hake,
a very common fish around our south-western coasts,
and I was immediately struck by the great resemblance
between it and a Barracouta — so great that I feel
sure they must belong to the same family, although
I do not beheve the hake has anything like the ferocious
character of his great southern congener.

While I stood studying the contour of this, to me,
new and strange fish, the cook, an elderly negro
belonging to the island, sauntered up, and after
handling the fish, began in an impartial sort of way



313



The Barracouta



to tell me anecdotes about the Barracouta, I regret
exceedingly that I am unable to reproduce them here
in detail. I can only say that, if true, and the narrator
evidently believed them to be so, they stamped the
Barracouta with a malignancy of character in its
relations to man compared with which that of the shark
is personified amiability. It must suffice to say that,
according to cook, the vicinity of a Barracouta to
a swimmer meant death, death by hngering torture,
since the terrible fish only took one bite, but that a
diabolically efficient one. No wonder, believing what
they did, that the negroes should have called the
Barracouta the ' devil-fish,' one among the many
denizens of the deep sea to which this grisly name
has been given,

A few days later I had an opportunity of seeing
how firm a hold this belief had upon the darkies.
By accident a pair of can-hooks had been dropped
overboard, and although the water was forty feet
deep, such was its transparency that they could plainly
be seen resting upon the smooth white sand. There
were several sharks prowling around as usual, but the
offer of a shiUing to whoever would dive for those
can-hooks was quite sufficient to bring forward in-
stantly half-a-dozen eager candidates, who cared
no more for the presence of a shark than they did for a
sprat. One by one they went overboard, making first
a bit of a splashing to keep the sharks at a respectful
distance, and then swimming down to the bottom.

But the can-hooks proved too heavy to lift to the
surface, although several divers tried, and at last a man
was going down with a hook on the hand lead-line to
attach to the chain of the can-hooks when suddenly a
cry of 'Couter,' 'Couter' was raised. There were at the
time eight negroes in the water gambolling i



I
I



>re were at toe h
ng about and fl



My First Barracouta 313

taking as little heed of the fact that there were many
sharks in the vicinity as of one another. But at that cry
there was a frantic rush to get out of the water. De-
mented, they tore at one another for the possession of
ropes that were flung over, and for a few moments it
looked as if a tragedy were imminent. But, fortunately,
all got safely on board, although their demoralised,
panic-stricken condition was painful to witness. And
their discussion of the situation afterwards savoured
more of the proceedings of a bevy of Bedlamites than
anything else.

The vessel was wrecked on leaving the port for
home, coming to grief about two miles outside the
harbour, and consequently I had an opportunity
of studying shore life among those cheery amiable
darkies. One day four stalwart ebon friends of mine
forgathered on the beach, and I, coming up with
them, learned that they were going Barracouta
fishing. I asked if I might come too, and was immedi-
ately made welcome, nay more, I was allowed to sit
in the stem of the canoe and hold the line, a stout
cord about sixty yards long with one two-inch hook
baited with a whole fish about six inches long, of what
kind I do not now remember. I sat upon the gunwale
right aft and held the line, which had been allowed to
run out about half its length, while my four friends
plied their paddles with all their might, making the
canoe fly through the water, the object being to make
the bait appear alive.

It was most exhilarating for me, although the
exertion under that blazing sun must have been most
exhausting to my friends. For some time no fish
came, as we careered to and fro across the bay, and
presently taking a couple of turns round my hand
I looked forward at my energetic paddlemen. Suddenly


314 The Barracoota

I described a confused sort of somersault, and struck
the water far astern of the canoe. For me tiie rest (rf
the episode, uitil I fouid myself again in tibe canoe,
vomiting gallons of sea-water, as it seemed, was one
hmly-burly of noise and rushing waters. I was tdd
that in their haste to rescue me the men had capsised
the canoe, which was but a trifle to these an^iibia,
but had dela)^ things a bit. However, as soon as
I began to take an interest in mundane matters again
I felt considerable pride (although none of the credit
was mine) in seeing a Barracouta nearly five feet long
lying in the bottom of the canoe. And I learned with
deep satisfaction that evening that he had made 45. hi.
for my fishermen, who had peddled him around the
town. From thenceforward, however, I was rigidly
debarred any participation in the chase of the Barra-
couta, earnestly as I pleaded for another opportunity.

My next passage was to Kingston in a small schooner,
when a great deal depended upon our being aUe to
catch a Barracouta, for our provisions ran out, and we
were becalmed a long way off the land. But whether
it was owing to the light wind not giving the schooner
way enough through the water, or our clumsy attempts
to lure them, I know not, never a Barracouta could
we get hold of, although we saw many swimming
in their stealthy manner round and round our vessel.

The only fish we caught was a shark, which was
immediately cut up and cooked. And although my
hunger was fierce, I have a vivid recollection of the
nauseating quality of that food — I can recall its horrible
flavour now, although it is thirty-three years ago
since I reluctantly ate it. After we had been in to
Savanna le Mar and replenished our stock of provisions,
and consequently had no need of fish, we caught
several fairly large specimens of Barracouta, by trailing



Eastern Specimens 315

& line astern when the schooner was ninning with a
fresh breeze.

From Kingston I went to Port au Prince in Hayti,
and in that wonderful harbour watched the sharks
and the Earracouta prowling ravenously about, taking
never-ending toll, the former of all that fell from the
ship, the latter of all sorts of fish. It was like watching
a continual battle, and, indeed, the warfare of the
submarine world is unending, whether we can see it
or not.

Then I returned home, and after a season in
Liverpool sailed for the East Indies in a ship where
my fishing experiences were widely extended. The
strangest of them was in the Indian Ocean some dis-
tance out of sight of Mauritius, to the eastward of it.
The mate had been unsuccessfully trolling for dolphin
with a piece of red bunting, the ship sailing about
four knots an hour. And to mjr great delight he
permitted me to attend to his lini, while he went to
' take the sun.' I sat on the wheel grating holding
the line, as happy as I could be, and fuUy expecting
to succeed where the mate had failed (I had done so
before), but without any success until eight bells, when
the mate went below to work up the ship's position.
He had hardly disappeared when I felt a tremendous
tug at the line, and springing to my feet I hauled
with all my might. But my surprise was too great for
words, when, on landing my fish, I found it to be a
goodly Barracouta of about ten pounds' weight,
and identical in appearance with those I had been
acquainted with in the West Indies.

Fearful lest I should be superseded in my pleasant
task, I unhooked my prize as quietly as possible, got
the relieved man from the wheel to take it forward,
and resumed my fishing, landing two others in quick


3i6



The Barracouta



succession. When the mate returned to his line he
was astounded to see what kind of fish I had caught,
having no idea that they were a deep-sea fish. Much
to his chagrin no more were caught, either then or
afterwards. Not only so, but that was the only time
I have ever seen or heard of them being taken far at
sea. But, of course, I do not suppose ours was a
unique case. They must be a pelagic deep-sea fish,
only scarce in number, and consequently seldom seen.
After all, the opportunities that ordinary sailors have in
sailing ships (they have none in steamers) of becoming
acquainted with deep-sea fish are very scanty. And
if a man has no liking for natural history study he
may be like a man who sailed with us in the ' Cachalot '
the whole voyage, and as he asserted afterwards,
owing to his being short-sighted, never saw a whale !

After that well-remembered encounter with the
Barracouta in the Indian Ocean, it was eighteen months
before I saw another. The next time was while I was
lamp-trimmer in a small steamer called the ' Helen
McGregor,' running between Sydney, N.S.W., and
Grafton, Clarence River. I had been told by a fellow
' lamps ' who was in another ship of the same company,
the ' New England,' that if I got a long stout hne and
good hooks I might get fish on the coast sometimes
by trolling, especially between the North and South
Solitary Islands. Always enthusiastic about fishing,
I obtained the requisite tackle at the first opportunity,
although I felt very sceptical as to any fish coming
near enough to the wake of our screw.

However, that next passage, having secreted a
httle white and scarlet bunting from the store in Sydney
I mounted the poop when the vessel was off Port
Stephens just after daybreak one morning and started.
To my great satisfaction after only a few minutes'


Australian 'Couters



317



waiting I caught a fine fish, not a Barracouta, but a
much more elegant and beautiful creature, called
trivially a ' yellow tail,' from the bright gold colour
of its fins and tail. I was delighted at my success,
and as soon as I had disposed of my prize to the cook
(strangely I never cared what became of my fish after
I had caught them and gloated over them for a little
while), I tried again, shortly afterwards capturing
a fine Barracouta.

But now I was sorely puzzled. There was between
this and all other Barracouta I had ever seen one
radical difference, it was practically scaleless, at
least as much so as a mackerel, while the others had
been all completely clad in scales. In every other
respect, as far as I could see or remember, they were
identical. This, however, was so great a difference
that I could only account for it by supposing that they
were a different species. Certainly they were both
known as Barracouta, and no one has seemed to notice
that there was any difference.

While I remained in that small steamer I caught
many, caught them right up to the turbulent edge
of the Clarence River Bar, and I have no doubt might
have done so in the salt estuary of the river itself,
but that once inside the Bar I was always too busy
with other matters for fishing. I noticed, or I thought
I did, that these naked Barracouta were finer-flavoured
than the West Indian variety, but that may have been
fancy.

Then I left the Northern Australian trade and went
south, where, though I doubt not Barracouta were
plentiful, especially between Wilson's Promontory
and Queenscliff, Port Philip Heads, I was not allowed
to fish over the taffrail, and was compelled to limit
my sport to ordinary bottom fishing while still in



3i8



The Barracoota



Hobscm's Bay or Auddand Harbour, fbe latter tiie
most imdific place for fishing in fbaA I have ever
known.

But getting tired of good living, good pay, andl^^
work, I shipped for England via Bnrmah, and havkg
pot into Port Elizabeth on the way home, we coasted
round Cape Colony, at no great distance from the
land an the way. And for an ordinary merchantadiip
we caught a surprising number of Barracouta, * &ioek,*
as they are called locally, which I found were imked
of scales like those of Australia. This was very stiai^e
to me, as those caught in the Indian Ocean off Mauritiiffi
were identical, as far as I could see, with the West
Indian variety, certainly in point of scales thqr were.

These South African Barracouta, or Snodc, were
tremendously voracious. I have known them to snap
at the bare hook, and I have little doubt bat that
they are responsible for the frequent losses of patent
log-propellers, the small f our-bladed fon th4t revolve
on a patent log, faster or slower acccHrding to tte
speed of the vessel behind which it is towed, and
registers the number of miles travelled on diab.

My next experience of Barracouta was in the
•Cachalot,* where, indeed, I made the acquaintance
of many new kinds of fish, and vastly enjoyed the
pleasure of noting their habits, apart altogether
from the joy of making many a good meal when
without them we should have gone hungry. On the
coast of New Zealand, the Maories taught us a novel
plan of catching Barracouta, but only possible to any
extent where the fish were as plentiful as they were
there. In no other place have I seen the Barracouta
swim in shoals of hundreds of thousands, almost as
closely packed as mackerel. But then I do not believe
that there is any sea in the world so full of fish as that



Maori Fishing



319



which washes the shores and fills the harbours of New
Zealand, the beautiful Britain of the South.

All around the coasts of the Middle and South
Islands, according to the season of the year, the
Barracouta swarm, in great schools as I have said,
and the orthodox method of entrapping them, invented
by the Maories, is as follows : — Take a stout rod,
say eight to ten feet in length, or rather a pole, fairly
rigid and tough, but not too heavy. To the end of
it secure a piece of strong fishing line five or six feet
in length. To the free end of this line attach a lure
made as follows : A piece of red pine (rimu) four
inches long, one inch wide and half an inch thick, is
scraped smooth and bright so that it will glow crimson
when wet. Through one end of it is driven a two-inch
nail, which is carefully bent upward and filed sharp.
Then this lure is fastened to the line in such a manner
that, in case of the splitting of the wood, the fish shall
not be lost. Now the boat, in which two fishermen
sit to windward facing forward, is sailed briskly to
and fro, the fisliermen meanwhile whipping the water
occasionally until a Barracouta snaps at the bait, and
with a dexterous swing is flung into the boat where,
as there is no barb on the hook, he immediately falls
off. At the same time the peak halyards are let go,
BO that the boat's way is deadened and the fishermen
ply their poles energetically.

If they have struck a school, the fish rise and fall
into the boat with a rhythmical regularity, eveiy
sweep of the bait into the water securing its fish. So
rapid is the process, that I have seen thirty dozen fine
fish, none under six or seven pounds in weight, shipped
in an hour, and but for the fact that the fisher-
men's arms refused duty and imperatively required
a little rest there was no reason why this wholesale



320



The Barracouta



capture should not have gone on. Before, however,
the wearied arms had rested sufficiently the school had
moved off, nor were any more caught that day. But
as the fishermen sold them to curers at an all-round
price of eighteenpence per dozen, the catch, forty-five
shillings worth, could not be called a bad afternoon's
work. We, however, found our whaleboat scarcely
handy enough for this fishing, and, moreover, as
bottom fishing was so good, and the fish caught in
that way were mucli superior to the Barracouta,
we did not trouble them very much.

As with the dolphin, I discovered that after all
it was not absolutely necessary to have a moving
bait in order to catch Barracouta. It so happened
that, during our stay in Stewart's Island (Port William)
I was made night watchman, and it was my pleasant
pastime every morning to watch for the first breaking
of day, and begin fishing. While it was yet dark not
a nibble would be felt, then as the first tender streamers
of colour spread over the heavens, a stray tug or so
would be felt, and by the time the sun himself appeared
fish could be hauled up at a tremendous rate.

One morning, for some reason unknown to me,
the fish were slow at beginning to bite, and I determined
to let them have plenty of time. So, leaning far over
the taffrail, looking down into the limpid depths.
I saw several Barracouta steahng along. For several
minutes I watched their stealthy movements with
great interest, until suddenly I saw one of them swim
to a piece of fish I had dropped overboard and swallow
it. I was much surprised, but immediately reasoned
that as he would swallow a still morsel, there should
be no reason why he would not take a quiet bait with
a hook in it. So I hastened and got a strip of fish,
put it on a hook, and let it drift slowly astern with the



A



Love's Labour Lost



321



little ebb that was gliding past us. In very leisurely
fashion one of the fish swam to it, smelt it, tasted it,
but when I struck he opened his mouth and I pulled
the bait out. Ch.ngrined, but still hopeful, I slacked
away again with the same result three times. Then
I thought I would let him swallow it, and I waited to
see if he would do so. But no, he waited quite two
or three minutes to see, apparently, whether I would
pull it out of his mouth again. Finding that I did not,
he turned round to swim away, and I liad him. And
by pursuing the same tactics I secured the whole
party in less than an hour, eleven of them, all over ten
pounds weight each.

While in New Zealand I heard of an exploit on
the part of the Barracouta which filled me with sym-
pathy for the persons affected by it. It gives one
a very fair idea of the rapacity of these fish, and also
of the numerous hindrances with which public-spirited
individuals have often to contend in their efforts to
do good to their fellow-men generally. For very
many years it had been the object of Iceen desire on
the part of enthusiastic pisciculturists to introduce
the salmon and trout to the beautiful rivers of New
Zealand. Strangely enough, while the engirdling
seas of those lovely islands produce such a variety
and bountiful supply of fish as could be excelled by
no other waters in the world, the streams, eminently
fitted to be the homes of such valuable food fishes as
salmon and trout, were almost destitute of fish, at
any rate there were none worth taking any account
of, either for sport or food. So, at very great cost
and with an immense amount of care, quantities of
salmon and trout ova were shipped from home and
brought to New Zealand.

In these days of swift colonial-going steamships
21



^ The Barracouta

ersallv fitted vilh refrigerators, the •

iHra. sdcntificaDy padced m tz^s of wet moss to

Antipodes is a rawmwraliwly easjr Bntter, tnt ra

dqn flC wlikli I wiil^ becmse of flie difficulty of

jiog flte ova at a iiiiilniiidy low ttinpc rating^ not

sDiow as to kin tile fife^enn^ and nirt so hjf^ as to

kuldi o(A ftMB by lamuiiuidy, it vas oo mcomiDoa

tttac for a iriiale hs u j i^ i i ii m iiI of auay ^ ■■ ■■Hr * '^ ^ of

Ipstirfed. And n ai^ case tiie coosigiiBcs were over-
joyed if Hiey were aUe to piaoe m coloBial watera ten
per cent, of flie liviiig ova idiidt had been de^atdied
to UMm.

Thai came die long and patient- deve l opment of
flie ova mto fry and of flie fry mto maluie fish, a
Irak iHudk ooold only be miiied out soccessfolty by

0^ tiie boaniess. Sodt a woik had been snooess-
foSy canied oot in tike upper readies of tte pnAty
fittle nver Qatha in OtagOw Step by stqi flie oiibiyo

salmon had progressed until they had reached, a goodly
company of them, the * pair * stage of their career.
Then, following their natural instincts, they journeyed
towards the sea, and in doe couise reached the estuary
of the river, which was guarded by a bar, as indeed
are most if not all the liveis of New Zealand.

Gaily the juvenile salmtm disported themselves
in the salt water before making their exit into the
vast Pacific smiling without. Then there crossed
the bar into the river a school of Bazracouta, thdr
long lithe bodies darting hither and thither in quest
of prey. They met the young salmon, and, oh the
pity of it, in a few minutes not a sotitaiy parr was
left to reward the patient watchers up the river with
the sight of a fell-fed young salmon letoimng to his



Not Knowable at Home 323

birthplace from the fattening sea. The destruction
was complete, almost instantaneous, and was indeed
a heavy blow to the high hopes that had been raised.
Of course the Barracouta were not at all to blame,
They did but obey their predatory instincts, but it
certainly was most unfortunate that they should have
fallen in with so helpless and withal so valuable a
company of young fish, when there were myriads
of others in the sea just as pleasant to their taste, and
that would never have been missed by anybody.

Of the life history of the Barracouta there is little
to teU, for the usual reason — utter inability to get at
the facts. But there is considerable ground for believ-
ing that in Australasia and South Africa at least,
the scaleless variety follow much the same routine
of domestic arrangements as do the mackerel at home.
Only of course in vastly reduced numbers. For it
must not be lost sight of that so voracious is the Barra-
couta, and to such an imposing size does he grow, that
his numbers must be kept down, or he would speedily
depopulate the seas which are his favourite resort.
Compared with the dolphin, bonito, and albacore,
I should not call the Barracouta a swift fish, I
consider him, for instance, no match for the flying-fish
in point of speed, and I think if he were driven to feed
upon flying-fish alone, his numbers would speedily
dwindle. But there is always to be found in the
ocean for such fish as the Barracouta a never-failing
supply of squid, and upon these unhandsome but
most useful molluscs the Barracouta of the deep sea
must largely depend.

Those which we caught in the Indian Ocean had
their maws fairly full, but not of flying-iish. They
were small fish about the size of a sprat, but evidently
belonging to some variety of the mackerel tribe, and


. Evidently our visitors had been in no ^

arving. But that is perhaps a superfluotts o"

since it would be hard to point out any fish that

J vast and universal is the provision made by the

*or for their supply. Along the Sooth African

it and in its spacious harbours, the BaiiaooDta

I in an infinite abundance of food, siqiplying

dl in tiie enormoos qnantites at 1^ own young

Out needs of oUun. And incidentally feeding

idf of course ainoe lite all otho* deep-sea fish,

pt the sharii, it makes not the sB^test dtfEerence

im lAidi he eats, his own yoong, at anotho's.

Ae Barracoata of the West Indies and the GdU

of Uexioo, like the hake of our own coasts, is a com-

paiativdy scanty specks. Not only is he distinctly

different frnn the Sontium Bairaoouta by reasm

ol his aziwnir of scales bnt also In hfai halnts and

amnbers. Like the riiark he is an apparently morose,

aolitaiyfish. Very seldom indeed are two seen together,

as if they could not bear to share any spoil, needing

all they can obtain for their own capadoos stomachs.

And it is abundantly evident that they do not breed

in such numbers either, since shoals of them at any

age are never seen. Also the great size to which they

attain is not even approached by the scaleless Barra-

couta, which firom a comparison of their habits is just

what might reasonably be expected. Like resUess

phantoms they roam those beautiful seas, bringing fear

and destruction with them both for their own kind

and man. But whether the terror in which they are

held by the latter has any foundation in fact I have

been quite unable to learn.

There are several varieties of Barracouta inhabiting
the deep sea, that is to say, living at very considerable
depths, but naturally they are seldtan seen. Such



Good'bye to the Fish 325

specimens as there are to be found in museums present
all the ferocious characteristics of the West India
variety, but in none is this more marked than in a
species to which the appellation of Thyrsitops violaceus
has been given by the American ichthyologists,
Drs. Goode and Bean. The type-specimen, however,
was caught as far north as the Le Have Bank, off
the New England coast, at a depth of one hundred
and twenty-five fathoms, which goes to show that
the range of this fish is quite as extensive as that of
the mackerel, with which, indeed, it is said by some
naturalists to be allied. And with this brief allusion
to the deep-sea varieties of the Barracouta we will
bid the whole predatory family farewell.

With this chapter I conclude my sketches of deepi-
sea fish. Not, as it will be at once observed, because
of the exhaustion of the subject, but because of the
limitations of space. There are a number of other
fish inhabiting the deep sea with which, when they
have ventured near the surface or the shore, I have
had the pleasure of acquaintance. Chief among
them, in my estimation, is the magnificent Halibut
or gigantic flat-fish, which inhabits the North Atlantic
and has been caught at the immense depth of two
thousand five hundred feet. There are few more
satisfactory sensations at sea than that of finding
one of these splendid succulent fish on one's line,
and after a quarter of an hour's most serious toil
bringing the great buckler-like body, despite its
dogged pulling against you, to the surface and trans-
ferring it to the ship.

These are the events from which the amateur
fisherman reckons. How far down in the ocean's
valleys the flat fishes really wander no one knows
with any degree of certainty — that they have been



326



The Barracouta



brought up in the trawl from immense depths is well
known. And not outre forms either, Uke the majority
of the deep-down fish, but famihar flat fish such as
soles and flounders. It would seem as if the peculiar
shape exactly fitted them for the strange conditions
of pressure and the necessity for concealment which
certainly are characteristic of profound ocean depths.
But it is not to be expected that, however valuable
as food the fish may be, any fishery can be profitably
carried on which necessitates the working of the
gear at such great depths. It is altogether too tedious
and expensive to be profitable. Therefore the in-
habitants of ocean's profundities are likely to remain
undisturbed by man until the end of things, although
it be unsafe to prophesy.

I conclude my remarks on fish by a short account
of an extraordinary day's sport I once had on the top
of a mountain (a submerged one, of course) in the
middle of the South Pacific, as showing how colonies
of fish are formed in apparently the most unlikely
oases, if one may call them so, of ocean. This particular
place was well to the north of New Zealand, and some-
where in the deepest part yet discovered of the ocean.
I do not know its exact position, but I heard the
skipper say that it was part of a mountain range
to which the Himalayas must yield place for height,
and so I suppose it must have been part of the
Kermadec Group.

One afternoon, as we sailed gently along before a
very light breeze, we suddenly noticed a change in
the colour of the water, an infaUible sign of shallowing
or of a shoal of fish. And as we entered upon the
discoloured area of sea, which came so abruptly that
the edge of the deep blue was very plainly marked,
the wind died away to a flat calm. The deep-sea



A Glorious Haul



327



lead was cast and gave us sixty-five fathoms, sand and
shell bottom. The skipper, being a great fisherman,
produced a hne, and baiting the hooks with a piece of
fresh beef (we were only three days out from Auckland)
dropped them overboard. The moment it touched
bottom he began to haul up in the greatest state of
excitement, calling at the same time for any and
everybody who had any suitable fishing tackle to get
to work fishing. At which there was a great rush,
intensified when the skipper pantingly hauled on
board two magnificent fish of a kind I have never seen
before or since. They were like a glorified perch,
superbly coloured and weighing over twenty pounds
each. The mate, who had his line down next, ex-
ultingly hauled up a pair of Kauwhai, the huge New
Zealand mullet, of about ten pounds each. And then
all hands except two joined -in the fun.

Such a variety of fish I never saw at one time.
There were all the well-known New Zealand favourites
except the barracouta and the rock cod. Snapper,
cavaJl^, groper, the last a monster with a mouth like
the opening of a coal sack, but in all other respects
like a huge cod, except that he had big scales and
a cod has small ones. Yellow-tail there were and
trumpeter, and at least as many more species of
whose names I have not the least idea. We were
becalmed for about three hours and we caught at
least ten hundredweight of fish in a shallow area of
certainly not more than a square mile in extent,
which was the summit of a mountain that rose
almost sheer from the sea bed for over thirty
thousand feet.

The event was a fruitful topic of conversation
among us all the rest of that voyage, for none of us
had ever known of the like before, and we could not



3a8



The Barracottta



Im^ wondering and wcmdering how so vast a number
ol io many different kinds of 6aih could have gatheied
im that kmely spot of shallow ocean in the midst of
Aosemic^ty depths.



THE BIRDS OF THE SEA



CHAPTER XXIII
THE ALBATROSS



NO bird that flies is more rightfully entitled to the
proud name of King of theSea Air than is the beau-
tiful subject of the present story. Nor are there
any of the inhabitants of the air whose home is about
the raging billows to whom more mystery, more poetical
personality, can be attached than the Albatross. There
is something about him which differentiates him from
all other sea birds, yes, from all other birds that fly-
Principally because, in spite of his great size, he is at
home only on the wing, and does not seem to require
rest. In this latter particular he is even surpassed
by the tiny stormy petrel, but one can hardly compare
the little untiring flutterer that skips so blithely from
crest to crest of the waves with the great calm bird
that hovers majestically in raid-air, needing not to
give one single flap of his wide-spreading wings in
order to maintain his position against the utmost
force of the storm.

Nothing can be better calculated to impress the
beholder with the marvellous wisdom of the Creator
in fitting His creatures for their position in the world
than the sight of an Albatross bearing a ship company
in the lone Southern Ocean. Let the vessel, handled
by the most courageous and skilful captain, put on
what speed she may before the tremendous thrust of



332



The Albatross



the westerly gale, level with her mizenmast head and a
little to windward is poised her snowy companion,
apparently motionless, except for an almost imper-
ceptible bending of the wings or tail for steering
purposes. The bird seems to be held in the vicinity
of the ship by some non-understandable magnetic
force, for in no other way does his effortless main-
tenance of station appear possible in relation to the
ship while the latter is fleeing over the ocean at the
rate of from fifteen to seventeen miles an hour.

And then, if aught be dropped from the shipr]
the great bird gives a sudden swerve, sometimes
rearing in a horizontal position and, stretching forward
his wide-webbed feet, descending almost straight
upon the spot where his piercing eye can see something
that may be eatable. If that something has sunk,
the Albatross will dive, despite the hampering of his
huge wings, and by great exertions swim downward.
Then, when the food has been secured, or whatever is
there found to be eatable, the bird takes off from
the crest of a wave, just melts into the air as it were,
without any exertion, and although the ship by this
time may be out of sight, an inappreciable portion of
time serves to bring her attendant into station again.

Or in the midst of his steady accompanying of
the vessel he will suddenly swerve to one side or other,
as the case may be, and disappear, so swiftly yet so
easily that the eye can barely follow him. The time
pEisses, there is a sense of loss, for indeed in those
latitudes during a heavy gale, their normal weather,
the sea seems very lonely ; when presently, behold
our friend is visible in his old station, his beautiful
snowy head with its dark solemn eyes turning gravely
from side to side in keenest watchfulness. As he went
so he returns, so he remains, without efiort, and



i


At Home Only in Air 333

mind grows bewildered in the attempt to understand
how he can, apparently with such consummate ease,
resist the fury of the wind.

Not that it would be correct to say that the Alba-
tross never does flap his wings. When rising from
the sea, if the latter is calm, it appears necessary
for him to put forth all his undoubtedly great strength
in order to effect his purpose. Spreading his wings
wide, he commences to run along the sea-surface,
the beating of his feet against the water being audible
a long way off on a calm day. At the same time the
great wings flap heavily as do a pelican's, until, by
one supreme effort, the body is lifted into the air,
and immediately assumes its normally calm pose,
that makes it appear as if the bird by the slightest
alteration in the plane of his wings and tail were able
to make the air bear him whithersoever he wishes to
go, even in the teeth of an on-rushing storm.

But before we go any further, a little description
of the bird is necessary, for I have discovered long
since that it is not wise to take for granted that readers
know the appearance of even the commonest of sea-
birds, although almost every good general museum
possesses one. The Albatross is about the size of a
medium goose, but not so ' stockily ' built, and with
a much shorter neck. The beak is pale yellow in
colour, from eight to ten inches in length, with nostrils
on the upper mandible about two inches from its root.
This upper mandible has a formidable-looking hook
at the end, which curves down over the point of the
lower mandible to a length of one and a half inches
and tapers to a very keen point. At the junction
of the mandibles with the head they are capable of
great expansion, permitting the bird to swallow
masses of food, such as blubber, at least four inches



334



The Albatross



square, although I beheve I have seen them swaDoir
larger pieces than that.

But the peculiarly distinctive feature of the Alba-
tross is its great pair of wings. They have three
joints, and when wide-spread the front edges make
almost perfect right angles with the body. And
their extent from tip to tip is sometimes as much as
sixteen feet, or over five yards. Their breadth from
front to back is about eight inches, but at the last
joint they begin to taper off to a point. The colour
of the upper part of the wing is invariably a dark
brown, which often extends across the back, while
that of the rest of the body is pure white.

The feathers are very thick and deep, and beneath
them there is a coating of the softest down, as fine
as the best of that obtained from the eider duck.
But I regret to say that this pure soft white flufl
is the home of a multitude of parasites, from which
none of the birds are free. The flesh of the bird is,
as might be expected from its habits, exceedingly
tough ; in colour it is nearly black, becoming quite
so after a brief exposure to the air. Also it has a
very rank oily flavour of stale fish, making it quite
uneatable to the ordinary person. French sailors,
however, with the culinary aptitude of their nation,
hang it until it is nearly putrid, and then make stews
of it, which they profess to find excellent.

The Albatross seldom obtains a meal of fresh fish,
his movements in or near the water not being smart
enough to secure them. Consequently he is confined
to feeding upon offal. And sudi offal ! The carcase
of a whale a few days after death as it floats upon
the sea is extraordinarily offensive, but whenever
one is found it is always the centre of a clamorous
multitude of sea-birds, and when this happens to be



Unsatisfiable



335



ihe Saunts of the Albatross, these birds are always
in the majority, for they angrily drive away all others.
It seems rather a pity that so splendid a creature
should be such a foul and greedy feeder, but so it is.
It never seems to have had enough, even though it
should have so loaded its stomach that it cannot rise
from the water. It sits there almost helplessly,
now and then giving utterance to a harsh scream,
as if of rage at its inability to eat any more. And
very often it may be seen to disgorge a quantity of
what it has swallowed, and immediately rush upon
the carcase again as if eager to renew its rapacious
devourings, at the same time dealing savage blows
right and left at its neighbours. It seems to think
that none have any right to be at the great banquet
but itself.

Dr. Hartwig says that the Albatross alights in
considerable numbers upon the body of a dead whale
and there tears its food from the giant carrion. But
this is wrong. In the southern hemisphere, where
alone the Albatross is found, the only bird that can
and does alight upon the body of a whale is the evil-
smelling fulmar, or giant petrel, an ugly bird as big
as an ordinary duck and armed with a dirty greenish
beak, with which it tears and rends the blubber, to
the envious disgust of the other birds who cannot
perform the same feat.

I would not like to assert that the Albatross has
a superior development of the senses to other sea-
birds, but I believe that he has. At any rate, in
common with all soaring carrion-eaters, he possesses
the power of discerning, either by sight or scent, or
some other sense unknown to us, food at immense
distances. Again and again I have noted when whaling
in the Southern seas that during the chase there has



been scarcely a bird visible anywhere, even from
crow's-nest. But by the time the whale was dead
the number of Albatrosses around the ship was count-
less. They drifted towards las out of the vast void
and settled upon the water until oftentimes we seemed
to be the centre of a great snow-field. And there
those feathered hosts awaited patiently, silently, the
preparation of their banquet. Yet in this prompti-
tude of arrival they were far behind the sharks, who
appeared upon the scene from the solitude of ocean
directly the flow of blood had tainted the water,
and, as soon as the whale was dead, began to tear at
the limp body of the huge mammal.

But when once we began to cut at the carcase the
eagerness of the birds could no longer be restrained.
With hoarse shrieks they crowded over one another,
even under the blows of the sharp spades, and I have
several times seen a man, who with a bowline round
him has been lowered down upon the whale in order
to insert a blubber hook into its throat, overwhelmed
by a rush of Albatrosses borne by an incoming sea
right upon him, and he has had to grab armfuls of
the ravenous birds and hurl them away from him
before he could accomplish his task. But unless by
an accident, such as the piercing of the case and the
consequent leakage of the spermaceti, which Soated
astern Uke cakes of wax, the hungry hordes never
got more thsin an occasional scrap or so until we had
done with the body.

The Albatross is never seen alive north of the
Equator. Up to a certain latitude he can venture,
but he is essentially a cold-water bird, and no sooner
does he find the temperature rise above a moderate
degree of warmth than he retires south again into'
his well-beloved regions of cold and storm Thi



The Faithful Albatross



337



heat of the tropics would be at once fatal to him,
Mai]y attempts have been made to bring one of these
wonderful birds home alive, but all have been failures ;
because for one thing it is impossible to induce the
Albatross to take food on board ship, nor if he did
eat could he retain what he had swallowed. The
first thing done by the captured Albatross when landed
on deck is to eject the total contents of his stomach,
as if the motion of the vessel, even on the calmest
day, was sufficient to make him violently sea-sick.
Other sea-birds are liable to the same disability, but
none in so marked a degree as the Albatross,

As a spouse he occupies a high place, except that
he only pairs for the season, and the constant com-
panionship of the male and female is pretty to see.
He seems to realise his position of protector and
provider in the highest degree, and not until the
incubating period is over does this loving union cease.
The female lays but one egg, about as large as that
of a goose, apparently in the first suitable spot she
finds upon the island where she was bom. But she
does not bother with nest-building any more than
do the majority of sea-birds, a httle hollow in the
sand or a ledge of rock suffices, and there she sits
upon her single egg, fed and kept company with by
her ardent spouse, until the day when from that egg
there appears a funny little ball of snowy down with
two intensely black beady eyes and a gaping beak
that seems to split its head in two halves.

The father now departs, disgusted apparently at
the sight of this rival in the affections of his wife.
She then devotes all her energies to feeding the baby,
no easy task, one would think, where there are often-
times several thousands of her own kind, to say nothing
of mvriads of other sea-birds, close at hand. But


The Albatross



she succeeds so well that after nz weds or bo fhs
youngster is bulkier than herself, lodra. in fact, like
a large and almost sh^>eless, except for tlie head,
bundle of down, which retains its {nistine snowy irtiite-
ttess so ^s to be slmost dazzlinf-

AH this time it is almost heli^ss fnxn its fatness
and the wealoffiss of its legs. But {sesen^ wh^
begin to sprout ai^ feathers to aj^iear. Soon it is
nedy for its first lessons in flight, and tremfalinc^,
with tottering steps, it toddles after its mother to
^nb sea. No socaier is it lanndied upon this dement
than it seems to lose its nnpainliniHgf ci oatliii^ and
to develop with amazing rapidity those cbaractoistics
lAich win present i^se it so far above the other
demxens of the free heavens. At last it has learned
to soar into its jmipei dement, the s^ ; fully fledged
and strong-winged, it takes its place among its ttSmn,
and its mother, her woric do^ spreads her mi^ty
wings and departs, to meet it knowin^y no mote.

Hitherto I have spoken entirdy of Ike Albatross,
the head of the family, but now we come to the other
two species with which I am acquainted. I do not
know the scientific names for them, have never been
able to ascertain them, but to sailors frequenting
the Southern Seas they are both very well known
by the names of MoUjmiauks or ' Mallemucks, and
Cape Hens. The first is an exceedingly beautiful
bird differing scarcely at all from the albatross, except
in point of size and a little more variety of marking.
It is also much more active, flapping its wings far
more frequently than does the albatross, and rising
from the water with much less effort and consequently
greater rapidity.

I have been told that it is sometimes found in the
Far North, but I have never seen it there, so that



The Lively Mollymauk 339

I cannot say whether the statement is a fact or not.
Personally, I should be incUned to say that it is not
found any farther north than its great relative. It
is exceedingly plentiful in the ' roaring forties,' being
far more often seen by ordinary merchantmen than
the albatross. It is a constant attendant upon ships
for the sake of the scraps thrown overboard, but
except in a gale it does not keep anything like so stately
a poise about them. It is continually on the go,
wheeling about the ship, darting away and returning,
and oftentimes it may be seen snatching a morsel from
beneath the very feet of a descending albatross, which
drops into the water with an angry protesting cry
and watches grimly the quick fluttering away of the
interloper. It rarely exceeds six feet in the breadth
of its wings, and they do not stand out quite so
straightly from the body as do those of the albatross.
It is so rapid in its movements that it is often caught
while the vessel is going as much as four knots an
hour through the water, when it requires almost a dead
calm to catch an albatross, the latter being so very
deliberate in his movements.

The plan usually adopted, but entirely repre-
hensible, is to take a sail-hook, which has a long
stem, a straight jaw and no barb, and fasten it to
a long fishing-line. A strip of fat pork, raw, with
the rind on, is then fastened to the hook in such a
manner than the bow of the hook, though concealed,
is quite free from being hampered by the tough fat.
The bait is tied up the shank of the hook, so that
when the line is towing the hook shall be first seized
by a would-be devourer of the pork. The moment
the bird is seen hovering overhead, the bait is flung
out and the line let lun as rapidly as possible. Thus
until the whole of the line is run out, the bait is nearly



340 The Albatross

ititioiimy in fhe water, exoqpt fhai it In AidBg.
As soon as the bird sees the bait fflill he drops Into
flie sea and dives for it : fhe moment he seises it fiie
ftiiennan hauls m, and in nmm cases out of ^^ w i ttie
s^Miook catches in the hook of the beak. The faiid
sptesds its wings wide, thiusts its feet forward against
tte water and shakes its head vigoroody, but to no
purpose ; the steady strain is kqst up, and prasen^r
ftm beatttifol creature is landed on deck, all its graoe-
foinefls gone. It is a hdipless arrival in a sttaiigs
tqpheie surrounded by ruthless enemies. Then it
is slain, but so that the snowy whiteness of the dda
may be bq>t mwofled, the poor bad is usually sfarang^
or beaten on the head with a belaying<-pfai, boili of
wliidi barbarous methods of treatment have to be
persevered in for some time in <»der that the leil
pupose may be effected, as the bird is very tenacious
of life.

The Cape Hen is a busy brown albatross wiiii
a dirty v^te beak, exceeding^ plentiful hi the same
habitat as the albatross and mollymauk. It has
no relieving tint at all, its sober plumage seeming
quite out of place among the snowy gatherings of
its far more beautiful comrades. In fact, I should
say that among the many aerial tribes of ocean it is
the most dingily dad. The sailor of old used to know
it very well, for it came much more readily to his
hook than the other birds, and the long hollow bones
of its wings made him excellent pipe-stems. So of
course did those of the albatross and moU3anauk,
but they were much less easily obtained than those
of the Cape Hen.

Another fad of the sailor was to fashion a tobacco
pouch out of the feet of these birds, a task demanding
much patience, and the resultant bag being by no



His Story



341



means serviceable. In fact, it was on a par with
the shark's backbone walking-stick over which so
many weary hours used to be spent, the product
being neither useful nor beautiful. The membraneous
covering of a sea-bird's feet is double, and if the foot
is cut off at the knee-joint by careful manipulation
the bones may be withdrawn, all but the nails at the
extremities, which are left for ornament. Then the ad-
hering webs may be gently separated, and so the foot
becomes a bag, the sides having a natural join which
does not require a seam. But it does seem a trivial
purpose for which to slay a beautiful inhabitant of
the sea. Moreover, I can say with certainty that I
have never seen one used for canying tobacco.

And now, as I have done before in the case of
Deep-sea Folks, let me endeavour to sketch for you
the career of the young Albatross. He whom we
saw but lately hatched out upon an outlying spur
of the ' Crozets that tusk the Southern Pole.' Let
him tell his own story :

How well I remember following clumsily my
mother down to the sea. Until then I had never
stirred from the little hollow of sand which was all
my world. I was not even conscious that of my own
kind there was an enormous company near me. All
my sensations centred in one, hunger and its satisfying.
I felt myself growing, of course, and every now and
then would stretch out stumpy, down-covered wings,
but hunger was my only real feehng. My mother
fed me continually, as it seemed to me she had hardly
left me before she was returning, but even so I was
angrily squawking for her before she reached me.
And no sooner had the food slipped down my wide
gullet than I was ready for more. It was my sole
object in life.



342 The Albatross

Bat when the moment came that she called me
to come, and the great oatside wodd broke upon
my astonished gase, I instinctively obeyed her, feeling
in every mnsde of my body a sommons to actioo.
It was a nigged way we traversed, b es tiewa with
youngsters like myself, many of ¥diom were boimd
on tte same errand, bat it all seemed in some coiiou
way familiar. When, however, we reached the sea^
margin and my mother fondly led me in, the water
greeted me witii a roar and a dash of white foam that
flnng me gasping and kicking back apon the sand.
Yet I felt qaite onaUe to qoit the attempt and wait
lor a more propitious occasion. Again and again
I made a trial, encouraged by the easy way in which
my mother rode over those insolent bredcers in absolute
supremacy.

And of course at last I succeeded. A smaller
breaker than usual let me pass, and I found mystU
in the midst of a wide blue heaving idain, my mother
by my side, drinking the salt water with great relish.
And then to my horror she spread her great wings
and ran along the water away from me. Suddenly
she bounded into the blue above and circled over me
with infinite grace, gently wooing me to join her with
softest sounds of love. But I dared not. The imi-
tative instinct within me was very strong, but I could
not for some time obey it. When at last I did try
to run along the water after my mother, I only collapsed
in a draggled heap. But that experience, instead
of daunting me, seemed to string up my nerves, and
I tried again almost immediately. Indeed, I could
not help doing so, for there was within me a power
pushing me forward irresistibly. At last with one
great effort I soared into the air. Ah ! the delight
of it, the imspeakable joy of finding oneself master



I



Elementary Education 343

of his own element ! I circled round and round slowly,
my breast swelling with the pride of life, and my mother
hovering by my side gave utterance to low, gentle
sounds of joy. Together we returned to my birth-
place, my first lesson well and fully learned. I settled
down upon the familiar spot, and my mother went
back to the sea to forage for us both,

I went away no more that day, but on the next
morning awoke and stretched my new wings crying
clamorously for food. But my mother was already
on her painful way down to the sea, and, except for
a reproachful look in my direction occasionally, paid
no heed to me. So I followed her quickly. I wanted
food, and I felt that I might get some sooner if I made
an effort myself. We launched ourselves together,
this time without any difficulty on my part, for I
had learned how to bear myself in relation to the water.
No longer were the smoothly rolling waves as they
swelled in upon the beach able to fling me, a much-
bedraggled bunch of patchy fluff with ungainly wings
and gaping beak, back upon the sand.

And moreover that morning we had only flown
a short distance when the beautiful form of my mother
gliding along before me suddenly stopped, her feet
shot out before her, and down she came, I following
her. The water was alive with squid, and all that
we needed to do was just to scoop them in as fast
as we would. The other birds of all kinds saw us
drop, and before we had been eating a minute the air
was dark overhead with them hurrying to the feast.
My mother dealt fierce blows at any intruder that
came within reach, and I followed her example in-
stinctively, not that there was any need to drive
others away, for the supply was vast enough for an
enormous host of our fellows, but because it is natural



344 "^^ Albatross

for OS to sappose that there will not be sufficient
for OS.

Presently I found that by no possibflity coold
I squeeze in one more delidoos morsel, and after
angratefolly meditating awhile upon the corioas
discoveiy that while I still desired to eat, I had no
storage room, I essaj^ to rise and fly homeward.
Bttt that too I found out of the question. And my
mother was in a like condition. Do not think us
greedy — ^if we do eat voraciously, and grumUe that
we can hold no more when food is so abundant, it
is because we know so well how often we must go
for days and days without anything at all to sustain
us but a sup or so of the bitter brine beneath us. I
did not know this ex perimentally, of course, but the
sense of its possibility was there, inherited from my
parents.

As we sat gently rocking upon the smooth sweD,
surrounded by struggling, shrieking birds of all sea-
Idnds common to those isles, there was a sudden rushing
away of the nearest of our neighbours, a great shadow
came between us and the sun, and a mighty Albatross
of purest white descended gracefully by my side.
He made a careless limge at me with his enormous
beak, which I only just evaded by a desperate effort,
for I could hardly move, and then leisurely folding
one vast wing after the other went on feeding, dis-
daining any notice of his fellows. None of them came
near, they seemed to have far too great a regard for
their safety to venture within his reach, so that he
had quite a large area of sea to himself.

I was terribly alarmed, but helpless to get away
as the others had done, being so much overloaded
with food. But he took no further notice of me,
although I was so close, and I kept as stiU as possible



Parental Amenities



345



lest he should. Presently he too had eaten his fill,
and I noted with terror that he was swimming steadily
towards my mother, who swam away, it is true, but
not with any vigour, although I could see her glancing
apprehensively over her shoulder at him. Presently
he was by her side, and laying his great beak across
her neck he caressed her gently, at the same time
uttering a pleasant little musical sound entirely ujilike
the usual strident shriek of our people. What it
meant I did not know. Curiosity overcame my fears,
and I swam heavily towards the pair to see, if I could,
what this behaviour meant, when to my horror the
new-comer suddenly turned and, rushing at me, struck
me so heavy a blow with his hooked beak that the
flesh was torn ofE a portion of my back and my snowy
plumage became red. I tried to escape, but still could
hardly move, until suddenly the impulse came upon
me to disgorge a portion of what I had eaten. As
I did so, I felt easier and was able to rise. With all
the strength at my command I fled away, nor even
looked behind until I regained the old spot where I
had been hatched. There I waited, full of miserable
apprehensions lest that terrible bird should come
and destroy me. Had I only known it, or my fears
have allowed me to look back during my headlong
flight, he was not pursuing me — I was altogether
beneath his notice, except when I came too near
him.

The day passed slowly away, but my mother
did not return. I became hungry, but I was afraid
to move. Flocks of my neighbours returned from
their labours and settled down on their respective
spots, inquisitive little birds and cunning crabs ran
all about me, but I was entirely alone. In vain I
strained my eyes longingly seaward, until the sudden



346



The Albatross



dusk fell, the stars peeped out, and only a few white
gleams in the gloom around me showed where restless
birds were still unable to settle down. Presently,
in obedience to a compelling need, I tucked my hnilj
into the cosy underside of my wing and forgot m^B
new trouble and loneliness in a sound sleep.

Morning broke in storm, and with heavy driving
snow blotting out all sight of the surrounding land
and sea. I huddled closer down upon the sand,
shivering in spite of my warm garment, and missed
my mother. I was very hungry, and that fierce
sensation was driving me forth to seek food. But
when even the old birds were loth to leave their nests
what could a fledgeling hope to do ? Oh, how I longed
for the strong tender guide and careful provider that
I had lost ! Never again was I to know her, and
presently, hardly knowing what I did, I gathered all
my forces and rushed down to the sea. A huge breaker
caught me, hurled me high on its crest in a smother
of blinding spray, from which I took ofi into the snow-
laden air, stretching my wings with a sense of power
that was exhilarating and uttering a long shrill cry
bom of hunger, anger, and defiance.

So I soared aloft and at right angles to the wind,
using it in that mysterious unexplainable way that
we have to speed me forward, but whither I did not
know, could not recognise the sense of direction I
possessed, yet I knew I was going right. And presently
a delicious scent, the strong odour of a decaying whale,
greeted me, and, with a prompt lowering of my pinions
and extension of my feet, I went down, down into
the midst of a great company of my kind engaged
in a mighty banquet. It was a stupendous scene,
for it seemed as if it were a gathering of all the tribes
of air and sea. The storm thundered, the birds



A



I Take my Place



347



screamed, the waves of the sea were all torn and boiling
with the myriads of hungry fish who were seeking
their share of the feast, and in the midst of it all
lay solemnly still, majestic in death, the body of
the feast. Heedless of passing blows, only lunging
back at the givers, I fought my way into the middle
of the tumult and found food, fat ; delicious, satisfying
food. I ate and fought and shrieked with the rest,
all the time feeling sensible that I was now a free
citizen of the ocean, henceforward able to hold my
own among my kind.

My hunger satisfied, I drifted away from the tre-
mendous clamouring crowd, and quietly rocking upon
the mighty billows which swept up from the South
Pole like walls of water, I slept as peacefully as I
had ever done beneath my mother's sheltering wing.
I was not in the least disturbed by the incessant
coming and going of multitudes of birds, any more
than I was by the uproar of the storm or the hissing
of the spindrift about me ; I was in my own rightful
realm, and fully conscious that it was so. No necessity
was laid upon me to rise from my rolling couch, so
that the mass of food I had eaten was fully digested,
and when I at last became conscious that it was time
to seek more food I felt splendidly grown and fit for
action. I rose on the wing and returned to where,
very greatly reduced but still enormous, the body of
the whale floated surrounded by vociferous birds as
thickly as ever. The sight invigorated me, and with
a long scream of triumph and defiance I again took
my place at the great meal.

Another feast, another rest, and I began my long
roaming. I followed one ship for many days, easily
keeping up with her at her utmost speed, in fact my
motion was so easy though so swift that I was barely



348



The Albatross



coDscious of any effort, except to restrain rayself from
shooting past her. I got to know the appearance of
the creatures on deck, as they certainly got to know
me, for often I would poise rayself quite low down to
windward and gaze with full, unwinking eyes upon
their faces, while they in turn stared most curiously
at me. I grew quite to like them, especially as they
fed me bountifully, although I grieve to say that 1
was often shamelessly robbed by the small fry that
clustered in the vessel's wake and because of their
insignificance were able to descend and arise very
much quicker than I could. For the same reason
they were able to evade my righteously angry attempts
to deal with them as they deserved.

Then a horrible thing happened. The wind died
away until the ship lay almost motionless, and because
there was no use in flying continually around her now
that she was still, and as I was loth to leave her, I sat in
quiet dignity on the water near her. Presently T saw
a beautiful piece of fat floating near me, tugged at by
some Cape pigeons who were unable to rise with it for
some strange reason. I drove them away, for how
dared they thus encroach upon my preserves ? and
seized it myself. No sooner had I done so than I
found myself being dragged through the water forward
by my head. In vain I spread my wings, shook my
head vigorously from side to side, held ray broad feet
out in front of me. I found myself lifted in air and
suddenly dropped upon a smooth white surface, very
hard to my feet. I became violently sick and ill, but
I was surrounded by the creatures I had so long seen
standing on the ship, and they only jeered at me.
Worse than that, one seized my beak, while another
riveted a small chain around my neck, and daubed
circles round my eyes with some red sticky stufi.


Fulness of Life



349



Then, having thus disfigured me, they flung me over
into the sea again, outraged, dishevelled, and be-
wildered.

Never again have I been foolish enough to eat
anything flung from a ship in a calm without closely
examining it ; indeed, I do not care to go near ships
at all. But alas ! I have never been able to rid myself
of that galling chain, which for a long while made me
an outcast among my kind. Fortunately we do not
crave company, having great powers of self-enter-
tainment. Also we feel our royal state, and do not
sufier the intimacy of those beneath us. At last,
however, I found me a beautiful consort, who rather
regarded my collar as an added adornment, singling
me out from all others of my family as one who had
seen and endured strange things not given to the
general to become acquainted with. Together we
roamed the round world, enjoying life to the full and
supremely happy in each other. Then we retired to
a lonely crag in the South Shetlands, whereon my
consort became the proud possessor of a beautifiU egg.
And I watciied over her, fed her, cheered her in her
weary period of sitting, wondering much in a dumb,
wistful way why she would not again come roaming
the wide sea with me. But she did not, could not,
and when presently a fluffy white ball with gaping
mouth appeared, she forgot me altogether, and I fled
angrily away.


CHAPTER xxnr

CAPE PIGEONS AND WHALE BIRDS

THE Pintado Fetrd, as the Cape Pigeon is some-
what pedantically called by the naturalist, is a
most deli^tful and cheeiy little bird, althou^
hil habitat is one of the loneliest known. If I dared.
I would say that the Cape Pigeon is the marine
omnterpart of the peewit or plover. But an unscien-
tific obstfver does get dropped upon so for a casual re-
mark like that, that pertiaps I had better go no farther
than to say that in odour, in fiif^t, and in vcrice; yes,
and in size also, there is a very distinct and striking
similarity between the pretty black-and-white citizen
of the great South Sea and the peewit of the newly-
ploughed land in our own dear home. In vivacity of
movement the difference is in favoiir of the sea-bird
— an overmastering energy seems to be continually
impelling it to action, and I should be quite prepared
to find that it does not sit quietly upon its eggs.

But perhaps before I go any farther I must try to
give a little description of this, to southern-going
seamen, exceedingly well-known bird, though to
naturalists hardly known at all. In size it is between
an ordinary tame pigeon and a wood-pigeon, not quite
so elegant in its outlines, and with a somewhat laxger
head in proportion to the size of its body. Like all
the petrds, it has a hooked beak, which is really an



Its Restless Vivacity 35 1

absolute necessity, considering the rapidity with which
it must seize its slimy food. Its plumage is just white
and black, white as regards the bulk of the body, breast,
neck, etc., with a curiously regular and conventional
pattern of black across the upper part of the wings
and body. Its head is like a ball of black velvet, its
feet are like the wings of a little bat, so silky and
nervously energetic are they.

Like all its congeners, and for the same reason,
it eats whatever it can get that is eatable — that is
to say, eatable in its very wide ideas of what constitutes
really edible food. It samples everything, rejecting
only that which is obviously impossible, like wood or
pumice-stone, of which latter produce of submarine
fires there is often abundance floating in Southern
Seas. But its chief characteristic is its cheery vivacity.
In lovableness I cannot give it the place of honour,
when I remember the little darling of all the wide
oceans, the Mother Carey's chicken, but it is a close
second. And I am filled with sorrow when I remember
how many I have seen caught or wantonly shot by
passengers for amusement. The necessity could never
arise, except in case of shipwreck and consequent
starvation, for these deep-sea birds are all practically
uneatable except when overpowering hunger compels.
Their flesh is rank, oily, and hard, the muscles being
indurated by their amazingly active life.

The Whale Birds, so-called from an utterly un-
founded superstition among the whale-fishers that
their appearance in large flocks heralds the approach
or the immediate vicinity of whales, are almost mys-
terious in their aloofness from man. Whereas the
albatross, the mollymauk. Cape hen, and Mother
Carey's chicken, with especially the Cape pigeon, act
towards passing ships as if they too realised intensely



;52 Cape Pigeons and Whale Birds


e grim loneliness of the vast Soathem Sea, the Whal<
r^ are content with their own company, bat tha
"^It always in large niunbers. Again, a great distinctioi
"Tfrran ail other Soathem Sea birds, who, w^iile rarel;
;-iU>idtDg in entire solitude as regards their own kind
-"almost always confine their companionship to one o
two chosen chums with whom to scorn* the wide fre
spaces of Antarctica, Whale Birds are ne^'ci seen ba
in flocks numbering some hundreds, and that onl;
when there is much food about. Yet I never saw then
feeding at such a time. I have often seen then
hovering about above the crowds of vociferous roy
sterers assisting at the demolishment of a dead whale
but it seemed a pure absurdity to imagine them de
■emdhig into that dnad aioia irifliiii readi o{ kttu
Inaks and mighty wingSt ^ot fbcy are tk^ bndi
■caicdy laiger ttiaa the atoaay petsd, and mov
clqpntly bttilL

The sasd^^er is, I tiilnlc, the neaieft of poasSil;
imiiliar birdt with nUdi I can ccanpare them. 'Vfldt
and dove ctAoax is thdr plumage, their main charac
teristic timidity, and their voice has a gently cooing
note in it, as if deprecating their enterprise in thn
apparently coming into serious competition with th
far more strenuous inhabitants of tha sea spaces. I
is principally for this reason that I liave called then
mysterious. I cannot at all understand how they ar
able to hold their own, to live and keep plentiful i
those stem regions.

In the particulars which follow I hope it will b
understood that I am describing entirely from memory
my mind must reach back a quarter of a century fo
detail unobtainable elsewhere. Imagine a thrush
almost pure white except across the wings and th'
top of the head, and with wings half as long again



Timid Sea Citizens



353



pointed almost like those of a swift. The beak is
straight and nearly white, the eyes, in common with
most sea-birds, full and dark. The legs are long in
proportion, and of a yellowish hue, feet small with
delicate webs, and tail slender and tapering. In spite
of the shape of its wings it does not fly with the darting
sweep of the swallow, nor has it the bold, decided
action of the thrush when on the wing. In company
with a band of its companions it flies slowly, almost
heavily for so slightly built a bird, the whole flock
rising and falling like a wave at a fairly level distance
of some thirty or forty feet above the sea. Their
movements are as unlike those of the ordinary sea-
birds as one can imagine, they appear to have no
objective, and to be so timid that they hardly dare
to descend and feed. Yet, as far as one can tell, there
is no ground for this excessive fear. They do not
appear to have any enemies, as indeed may be said
of most of the Southern Sea birds, among men or birds
or fish, so that when they die it is almost always by the
operation of some peculiarly natural force.

The only time that I can ever remember seeing
these tiny sea-wanderers feeding was once when landed
upon an outlying cay of the Loyalty Islands for wood
and cocoa-palm leaves for making brooms. We had
toiled very hard for some hours, and had at last been
graciously accorded a short rest for a smoke. I lay
separated from my shipmates under the shadow of a
great rock out of the fierce noon-day sun, dreamily
puffing at my pipe, and gazing over the dazzling stretch
of sand before me at the bold landward rush of the
mighty breakers. Suddenly there appeared a small
flock of Whale Birds gliding undulatory towards me
from seaward, and with many a graceful flutter,
settling and rising again, they finally folded all their
23



354 C^pc Pigeons and Whale Birds

pretty wings, and appeared content to remain. At
the first I took them for terns, but remembered thetr
flight and also their voices, which, instead of being
sharp and penetrating like the cry of a tern, were soft
and appealing ; to one's imagination they were de-
precating being alive at all. And then to my great
interest they began to feed. Mincingly, delicately,
they pattered about the sand near the sea-margin,
prying with the fine points of their beaks into crannies,
evidently finding much food of some sort, and that
greatly to their taste.

For an hour I lay and watched them until, with a
hurried scampering together, they rose in a little cloud
and swept away out to sea. It was a shipmate of
mine who, strolling leisurely along beachward, had
startled them, for which I felt I could willingly have
flung a stone at him. As soon as he saw me be asked
if I had seen the birds, calling them by the correct
whaler's name, Whale Birds, and when I grunted
assent he inflicted upon me a foolish tedious yam of
there being something supernatural about Whale
Birds. That they never ate and never rested because
they had no feet, and other skittles of the kind. To
which I replied that he might, had he used his eyes,
have seen them both eating and walking a few minutes
ago, and so have been able to enjoy the great pleasure
of putting anybody right upon the subject who came
to him with such a story. But he did not seem to see
any advantage in that.

There can be no question about the right of the
Whale Bird to be called one of the Deep Sea Peoide
proper, that is to say, as much so as the albatross or
stormy petrel, because it inhabits precisely the same
regions as they do, although not so frequently seen.
But there is a certain amount of mystery attadiing to



Apparently out of Place 355

the little wanderers, from their never being seen to
feed at sea or ever to alight on the water, although
their feet are delicately webbed as if for swimming
purposes. Added to all this is their apparently feeble,
undecided flight, which seems so unnatural in a bird
that is met with a thousand miles from land, and that
does not avail itself, as far as can be told, of the rest
afforded by the sea-surface. I have never been able
to imagine what becomes of them in a gale. In theory
they should be hurled along like dried leaves without
power of direction, whithersoever the storm-wind
chooses to carry them. But knowing what we do of
the truly marvellous way in which all sea-birds can
and do manipulate their pinions in the tremendous
presence of the tempest, it is utterly unwise to suppose
that even the feeble Whale Birds are unable to main-
tain their position and prosecute their mysterious
business, no matter how fiercely the gale may rage
about them.

As to their place of resort for breeding purposes,
I know no more certainly than that they frequent
at breeding time the same islets in the Southern Seas
as do the larger pelagic birds. Also that they are to be
found in warmer climates than the albatross and Cape
pigeon, being in this respect, indeed, more like the
dainty little Procellaria, which is equally at home on
the Equator or amid the table-topped icebergs of the
great lone Southern Sea. I should say, however, that
they would breed in colonies, as they are so very
gregarious, and that, judging from the httle I have
been able to see of their habits, they are as addicted
to polyg imy as is the domestic fowl, a circumstance
which differentiates them at once from all the other
really pelagic sea-birds.

Before we return to the Cape Pigeon, whom, after



356


kad. I aDode to Ae Tropic BM

wbick all saikn watd to kaov as Ae ' Bo*

ttejr said *he canies fas

Hut if m alfaBioo to the two

iriback slicaoi ost hrhiiiri tlic fairi as Ik fici^ ^ A^

vtOMk laffa, cut ptopciiy D6 appiyo to uk sijiwiy


along m aud-air. In siae it

DBt fli craoiir favoms niost sea fands \ff

dad in bbd^ grey and wfai tp wh ile as to the

neck» and bead, and grey yitted vitfi

back and up pe r surfaces of Ae

afe laige lor Ae siae of the bod. bet

They are rardy flapped by the bird, who,

wiA the albatross, prefers to float in Ae

that dement to propd it wherever it wishes to go by

dexterous steering, to the fossy fintterings of less

dignified citizens of the upper atmosphere. Its k^

are very short and its feet very small, which, taken

in conjoncticm with the length of its curioos and ddicate

tail^ has led to the assumption that it ^>ends most of

its time on the w^ing. Yet it is supposed by naturalists

that these birds make a point of visiting the rocks of

lonely islets which are their homes every night, and

this because they are not seen to feed at sea. That I

caimot believe, from the inmiense distances which I

have seen them from land, and also because on going

aloft to loose a royal on a fine night I have often heard

their peculiar low cry, and seen the shadowy creature

flit past like an uneasy ghost.



Aristocratic Aloofness 357

Bat I admit that I have never seen them feed.
In the crow's-nest of a whaler, when lazily turning to
and fro on the Line grounds, I have often been kept
pleasant company with by a bos'un, who just floated
near, suspended in the clear ether, apparently fully
engaged in the endeavour to decide what sort of strange
bird I was. All the two hours' spell he would remain,
hardly moving a feather, and when, after my four
hours' watch below had been spent and I mounted
to my lofty perch again, there he was still. I never
saw such a bird descend more than a few feet ; never
saw him manifest the slightest interest in anything
except the mastheads of the ship. And I have won-
dered, until my curiosity has been almost unbearable,
how the pretty solitary lived — in fact, despite com-
mon-sense and reasoning power, there would obtrude a
feehng of the uncanny, especially after gazing stead-
fastly into the deep dark eyes of the bird floating so
near that I could almost touch him with my hand.
I do not recall any instance where two of them thus
accompanied a ship, but I do remember that whenever
other birds came about the bos'un soon took his leave,
just floated away and disappeared, with a fine aristo-
cratic air of disliking any society but that which he
had chosen for himself, a suggestion of being perfectly
content with his entirely lonely life, and needing no
external aids to comfort or happiness. In the tropical
seas, however, at a distance from land, except for the
tiny petrel, bird-life is comparatively scarce, and
apparently this is just what the Tropic Bird desires and
enjoys, with an occasional calm and serene criticism
of the uncouth mortals who penetrate into his lonely
realm.

Except in calms or very light winds the Tropic Bird
is seldom observable from the masthead of an ordinary



35S Cape Pigeons and Whale Birds

merchant sailing ship, hardly ever from a steamer.
The first may be accompanied until the breeze freshens,
when the bird, apparently disliking the speed, quietly
melts into the vast emptiness around ; the second
poifons the surrounding atmosphere so vilely that any
bird, to say nothing of the dignified bos'un, would find
it an impossibility to retain even the semblance of
fellowship and live- Except of course those busy
birds that fly low, and keeping thus out of the befouled
strata of air are able for a time to gather a little of the
rich harvest of eatable scraps being whirled astern in
the foaming eddy of the propellers.

I am exceedingly loth to leave the Tropic Bird, as
he possesses for me a fascination greater than that of
any other of the deep-sea birds. But he docs so
persistently and successfully maintain his aloofness,
his mysterious independence of all those external aids
to living which we must look for in the creatures we
study, that unless I were to invent something about
him I must come to an end of my talk about his ways.
The question of how he breeds, and how — unless he
builds a nest in a tree, as suggested by some naturalists,
but which is to me a thing unthinkable of a sea-bird —
he protects that long beautiful tail of his from defile-
ment is an unsolvable mystery to me.

Undoubtedly there is a species of Tropic Bird
which breeds, petrel-like, in holes of the rocks, and while
ashore is gregarious, but it is not the species of which
I am now writing. Perhaps it is well that there should
remain even to-day some creatures of the upper air
whom the lonely sailor can meet and admire, whose
comings and goings are without observation, whose
habits can only be guessed at, and whose lives, as far
as may be seen, are from their beginning to their end
bound up in the enjoyment of perfect unmolested peace.



My First Offence



359



And now to return with some relief to my dear,

merry, busy little triend, the Cape Pigeon, or Pintado

Petrel, although I cannot feel at home with him under

any other name than the first. Shame upon me, I

first made his intimate acquaint.Tnce when outward

bound in the 'Western Belle' to Bombay, so many

years ago that recalling the date makes me feel quite

old. I had only known him to look at for a few days

when there fell a stark calm, in which he and dozens

of his kind flitted joyously about us, exhibiting every

graceful poise of their trim little bodies, and now and

then showing what they could do in the way of diiing.

I With wide-eyed wonder I watched a couple who had

j swooped upon a pork-bone I had flung overboard,

I pursue it down through the limpid blue, their wings

I widespread, flashing back the sapphire light, and a

I whole stream of turquoise bubbles ascending as they

I sped downwards. They rose unsuccessful, the prize

i they thought of securing was too hard, too heavy for

[ their efforts, but with hardly a pause they sprang into

[ the air again and recommenced their mazy whir! about

I US as if entirely unconcerned at the frustration of

I their keen desires. We have a monopoly, apparently,

I of the foolish occupation of fretting over what might

\ have been.

It was then that an evil counsellor whispered to
I me that I might, an I chose, catch one of thoie dear
I desirable birds and have it for my own. Not only
[ io, but he placed the means to do this ill-deed
I in my hand — a ball of roping twine, a little hook
j attached thereto, and a piece of fat. The poop was
I deserted save by the drowsy helmsman, the second
I mate (my bitter enemy) having taken advantage
I pf the skipper's Sabbath siesta and the utter absence
[ pf wind to go below and do something in his berth.



360 Cape Pigeons and Whale Birds

So I stole up on the poop, and leaning over the tafTniil,
cast my lure. It sank slowly but not out of sight
oi one of the busy little birds, which was presentiy
in my trembling hands. I took it down on the main-
deck and played with it, no doubt to its intense miserj-
and the bewilderment of our two big dogs. The only
excuse I can make for this cruel behaviour to one of
the free and essentially harmless people of the air
is thoughtless youth.

But the bird was presently avenged, for an elderly
American seaman, whom I only remember as Nat,
came noiselessly behind me, and seizing my ear m
one hand, took the pretty frightened creature from
me with the other, saying solemnly : ' Boy. hasn't
anybody told ye that the meanest and lowest thing
ye can do is to worry, annoy, and kill these lovely
feathered things ? They do no harm, they're not good
to eat. and they brighten up and make cheerful the
great ocean solitudes,' As he spoke he cast the bird
into the air, and giving my ear such a tweak that I
almost thought it had come off, stalked solemnly
away. He was a pretty good man, was old Nat. I
ran to the side arid peeped over to see what had become
of my late prisoner, and there within a biscuit's throw
of the ship sat my late captive calmly restoring his
feathers to their usual unruffled condition after their
disarrangement by my rough handling. I have never
molested another Cape Pigeon, although I have often
seen it done.

During a tremendous westerly gale the great
company of sea-birds which had so long followed the
lumbering, heavy progress of an old barque that
certainly should not have been sailing in those stem
latitudes at all, had gradually dwindled away until
ocdy one faithful pair of Cape Pigeons remained.


Comforting Companions 361

Usually, under such circumstances, the last birds seen
about a ship, nay, those that never desert her while
she swims, are the stonny petrels, but now these
Pigeons alone were left. As one by one the last
rent fragments of canvas flew from her yards and
disappeared into the deepening gloom like wisps
of cloud, the position of the barque became more
and more critical, and it was evident that unless
almost a miracle happened the enormous waves rolling
up so relentlessly from the westward must presently
overwhelm her, since she could not possibly under
bare poles keep ahead of the sea.

But the brave, bright spirit of the skipper never
faltered, and with great skill and coolness he succeeded
ill getting, by the aid of his good men, a tarpaulin
lashed in the mizen rigging. Then carefully watching
for the smooth after a ninth wave he let the old tub
swing up into the wind, which caught and brought her
into that comparatively easy position in a gale which
we know as being ' hove to.' And as she lay there,
sometimes almost head to the mighty waves, and
rising upon their crests until it appeared as if her
stem was about to be buried, or falling off into the
deep trough between two billows, until it seemed
as if she must be rolled bottom up, the two constant
attendants upon her, the pair of Cape Pigeons, hovered
about her as if they were guardian angels deputed to
preserve her from the destruction which seemed
imm'nent.

The old vessel now made such good weather of
it, considering, that the skipper's wife brought up
their little boy, who was very anxious to see what
made the naughty ship tumble about so. And the
first thing his bright eyes lighted upon was the pan
of pretty birds hovering easily to windward over the



362 Cape Pigeons and Whale Birds

broad, smooth eddies of the ship's sidelong drift,
and watching keenly for scraps as usual. He clapped
his hands with glee, and cried shrilly

' Dada, those little birds don't mind the storm
a bit, do they ? *

' No, dear,' said his father gravely, * the sea is
their home, don't you see ? '

The child meditated for a few moments, and then,
his face brightening again, he cried : * Well, dada,
it's ours too, isn't it ? ' Then, without waiting for his
father's reply, he said slowly : ' If Gentle Jesus can
keep those pretty little birds in the midst of all this
lot of water and big wind, of course He can keep us.
I did feel 'fraid down in the cabin, but I don't now.
I know what mutnma meant by the story about Gentle
Jesus and the five sparrows sold for two fardens.
Not one of them can fall in the sea without your
Father.'

The man at the wheel passed his oil-skinned
sleeve across his eyes to wipe away the salt spray,
the skipper turned away and cleared his throat, and
the mother, tightening her hold upon her boy, felt
a tear trickle down her drawn cheek ; but all three
realised the value of the message brought them by
the child, entirely independent of their knowledge
of the inexorable operation of natural forces. And
it is safe to say that thenceforward, in spite of the
walty state of the almost worn-out vessel, of their
sorely hampered condition for fighting the stem
elements in that rugged quarter of the globe, they had
all gained immensely in the essentials for %hting
the good fight which brave sailors are often called
upon to wage, and, as in this case, with, metaphorically
speaking, one hand tied behind them.

Within a few hours the gale blew



I



' itself out, andfl



Wedded Bliss



363



shifted capriciously with snarUng squalls round against
,the sun into the north-east. And this change seemed
to bring to the minds (or what fills that office in birds)
of the two Pigeons a duty that must be performed
without further delay. For no sooner had the old
barque been put upon the other tack, and all hands
set busily to work replacing such sails as were essential,
than they took two or three quick turns round her.
as if fixing her outlines in their memories, and then
mounting high in air, poised for a moment, and shot
off due south for Prince Edward's Isle. They reached
it before dusk, and a bleak, forbidding, storm-lashed
place it was, to all human ideas. But the pretty little
seafarers swept together into a sheltered corner between
two gigantic boulders quite out of reach of the biting
blasts and fitful showers of snow, and there for the
first time for many weeks they nestled down together
on the firm earth in closest companionship away
from the surface of the never-resting sea. Little
twitterings sounded contentedly through the gloom
of the place, and bright eyes twinkling from snug
crevices revealed the presence of many companions
here on the same conjugal and familiar errand. And
so the rugged savage rocks became beautified by the
presence of happy life, and their usefulness as a shelter
overtopped the sense of their exceedingly terrible
aspect.

That night the little visitors slept soundly and
unusually ; for it is a peculiarity of the lives of fish
and birds — at least sea-birds — that sleep, which is so
urgent a necessity to all land animals, is with them
a luxury which may apparently be dispensed with
for long periods without causing them any incon-
venience. At least in any reasonable quantity, for
one can hardly call the exceedingly brief snatches



364 Cape Pigeons and Whale Birds

of slmnber taken, say, by sea-birds on the wing, or
riding easily the surface of gale-tormented biDoivi;
by the sweet and restful name of sleep.

Morning broke coldly and drearily. The kw-
hanging sky was full of snow, the moaning of the wind
presaged storm, and the rocks bared their fangs like
Uack icebergs. But in the tiny crevice, <^)en to the
heaven above, though shielded from the direct blast
of the bitter wind, the two wee birds nesfled side by
side, cosy, content and warm. The beautiful gannente
of feathers and down wherewith Infinite Thought had
clothed them were impervious to outer cold and wet,
so long as fuel for the hot little body was forthcoming
in sufficient quantity. And they had each other, a
delightful companionship wherein every desire, every
intention coincided, not one jarring note or cranny
for unhappiness to creep in and kill peace. So since
there was no need as yet for active search for food,
they sat gently communing, in tinkling notes quite
milike their shrill cries at sea, and frequently caressing
one another with their beaks with a tender smoothing
motion.

Meanwhile outside, the tremendous elemental or-
chestra tuned up, until about noon the awful concert
began. The sea, outstripping the wind, as it often
does down in those latitudes, hurled itself mountain-
ously at those sullen rock-bases, sending sheets of
hissing spray hundreds of feet into the air, and uttering
a deep earthquake note more pervading than thunder.
Then the gale, angry, shrieking and searching, burst
upon the island, tearing the crests from the billows,
and drenching the whole area of land with briny spray.
And simultaneously the deep-keeled clouds, torn into
massy fragments by the frantic storm, cast forth
their burden of water, which, passing through the



A Strenuous Husband 365

bitterly cold air beneath, mingled with tne dying
sea-spray in the shape of large flakes of snow. By
niid-aftemoon the tempest was at its height, raging
with utmost fury. And the pretty little hen-bird,
fully occupied now with her maternal cares, looked
appealingly at her sturdy mate, who puffed out all
his feathers and chirped a brave response, as if he felt
honoured with the commission to provide for his
cherished one. Just a minute or two of careful
preparation by sleeking down the close-lying feathers,
a quick caress, and with a sudden fluttering spring
he was gone, passing out around the precipitous rock
barrier almost like a larger snowflake caught in a
returning eddy and whirled backwards out to sea.

Here he was in the very heart and tumult of the
itorm, and no flap of his wings was needed, only careful
and instinctive steering in order to keep in the right
place for the reception of the propelling force to carry
him whither he would go. It was a strange and
strenuous quest. Now poised awhile in mid-air so
thick with snow and spindrift that the seething ocean
only a few feet beneath was invisible, now darting
confidently along the green curve of a monstrous sea,
unheeding the curiing snowy crest above his head.
Anon a meteor-like dash into the creaming smooth
between the hollow of one sea and the broad roimd
shoulder of the next, a poise with swift fluttering
wings like those of a butterfly hovering over a flower
in the momentary calm, a sudden plunge into the
whirl, and forceful descent into peace, a delicious
mouthful and a triumphant return. And all the while
the keen black eyes never ceased their quest or grew
weary. Fsr over an hour this fierce search for needful
Jood continued at utmost strain, then suddenly the
brave little bird shot into the air from a wave-trough.



366 Cape Pigeons and Whale Birds I

a large squid squirming in the lethal hook of his beak.
Almost instantaneously he got his bearings, and l>ke
an arrow from a bow, with drooping wings, but dri^ien
by the full force of the gale he sped shoreward, round
the rock, and settled quietly by the side of his patient
mate. She gently opened her mouth, and into it
he dropped his prize.

And thus in the midst of storm and stress the tiny
pair took their annual vacation from sea-wandering,
and the stout-hearted little husband his delight in
ministering to the wants of his dear partner, at present
incapacitated from bearing her part in the ordinary
business of daily life. He was supremely happy,
for who can doubt that, at times like these, even what
we are pleased to call the lower animals realise fully
that it is more blessed to give than to receive ? And
she was happy too ; for clasped closely to her softj
warm bosom were four precious treasures, smooth,
rounded morsels of herself, upon which she gazed with
eyes humid with love, as she turned them so that the
sand beneath, though wanned somewhat by the overt
flowing heat of her maternal breast, should not chill
them and frustrate her fond hopes. The quiet hours
sped on, marked now and then by a heavenly day
of tender blue above and placid sea beneath, teeming
with easily won food. But whether fair or foul,
the sweet marital solicitude of the cheery husband
never failed, any more than the motherly patience of
the Uttle mother.

And then came the climax of joy, when four odd
little balls of down with wide-gaping throats suddenly
appeared, and demanded with one querulous voice,
' Food, food, food.' Indeed, the father, now somewhat
doubtful of the magnitude of his task, had all hia
work to do, and do as he would he could not quiet


Family Duties Completed 367

that hungry wail, except at night, for more than a
few minutes at a time. But gradually it became possi-
ble for his patient partner to accompany him for a
little while, then for longer, until finally the whole
family might have been seen out upon the restless
billows, the children being taught their life-lesson.
Then, as is right and inevitable in the lower animal
kingdom, the natural affection of the offspring waned
as the latter became fit to fight life's battle unaided,
and one fine morning the faithful pair flew north-
ward, while their children took independent paths
and went their several ways.


'^PERLY speaking, several members of this

great family of marine birds have already been

dealt with by me, under the heading of albatross.

t I am not a stickler for adhesion to any scientific

ision of birds into their varieties, and in considering

Petrels my mind is mainly fixed upon one species

, the tiny creature known as the Stormy Petrd,

lO sailors most affectionately and inconclusively

the Mother Carey's Chicken. Why Mother Carey

why chicken is a mystery. Who Mother Carey

y represent in the seafarer's mind I really cannot

dgine, unless she be Davy Jones's aunt ; but even

so, to compare the Stormy Petrel with a chicken,

either Ifother Carey's or another's, has always seemed

to me a great error of judgment. I know and love

chiclcens thoroughly, but between them and the Stormy

Petrel there is not one single point of resemblance,

except that they are both birds. For the chickm

is essentially a domestic creature, deUcate, full of

liabilities to ailments, needing great care and a snog

Toosting-place every night, if it is to be kept alive.

But the Stormy Petrd t Tiniest yet stmtliest
of all sea-birds, ranging all over the wide, wild ocean,
lilting fearlessly under the curve of a mighty Cape
Horn sea, or skimming swallow-like over the glassy
aur&ce of the Equatorial Current ; equally at home



1



A Lovable Sea'Bird



369



on the weather scarp of a frowning iceberg, or around
the pleasantly lapped beach of a coral atoll in mid
Pacific ; cheery, indomitable little waif, who with
a heart as big as a grain of mustard seed could help
loving you ? I could not wish the Bible other in any
respect than it is, but somehow I have always longed
that mention of the Stormy Petrel had been made
in it. I rejoice to note the gentle Saviour's reference
to the sparrow, to the dove, to the hen gathering
her chickens under her wings ; but I have never
seen the Stormy Petrel flitting between crest and
hollow of the mighty storm-waves in mid-ocean,
when the great ship was being tested in every fibre
of her build, but I have thought how much I should
have liked to see that dear wee brave thing mentioned
in the best of all books.

The Stormy Petrel (Procellaria felagtca) is a black-
and-white bird of about the bigness of a thrush. Its
wings are somewhat broader and sturdier than those
of the latter bird, and its legs are longer — very long,
in fact, in proportion to its size for a sea-bird. With
the tiny webbed feet attached, they look as if made
of black silk, and they are much more in evidence
than those of any of the other pelagic birds, from an
inveterate habit this Petrel has of stretching them
out one after another, and just touching the water
with them as it skims over the surface. For the Petrel
does not fly high ; no one ever saw a Stormy Petrel
twenty feet above the sea unless it had been taken
there, or was at its nesting-place, of which more anon.

Its principal characteristic is, I think, insuscepti-
bility to fatigue. It does seem to have solved the
secret of perpetual motion. In the course of fifteen
years' voyaging, scarcely a day of which while at sea
has passed without seeing these dear httle birds, I



370



The Petrels



have never seen ooc at rest. When feeding they do
not settle on the sea ; they hover over the wave and
peck at their food, whatever it may be, much as a
butterfly hovers over and sips at a flower. But the
idea of resting upon the sea-surface never seems to
occur to them, either by day or by night ; for on a
fine night in the middle watch — that is, from twelve
to four — I have often watched the little dark shapes
still flitting aroundj and heard, by listening closely,
their low, twittering cry. This faculty alone would
ill so small a bird have given them a mysterious
importance in the eyes of sailors, but in addition
to that there is the fact of their constancy to ships
everywhere. There are parts of the ocean where
no birds but these are ever seen by the sailor ; but
I have never sailed anywhere, from Behring Straits
to Antarctica, from Labrador to the Crozets, where
I have not seen these little nomads of the sea. Of
course, and I am rather tired of pointing it out, they,
like the dolphins and fish, cannot accompany a swift
steamship as they used to the leisurely wind-jammer,
and in consequence future generations of seafarers
will not know them at all — a very serious loss.

Naturalists declare that the Stormy Petrels in
one ocean differ from those in another, while at the
same time admitting that varieties from the Southern
Pacific have been seen in Britain. Common sailors
like myself prefer to believe that all this nice division
into sub-families, except for purposes of high science,
has no value, and, indeed, very often we know that
varieties have been tabulated between birds and
fish of exactly the same character on account of some
little peculiarity. One property of the Petrels, both
large and small, has often been noted, their peculiarly
musky smell, which extends to their eggs both outside


An Universal Scent



371



and in, and may be recognised, no matter how long
a period has elapsed since those hollow shells were
added to the collector's cabinet.

Here I feel that it may be pardonable to digress
for a few lines into considering the extraordinary
fact of the universality of the scent of musk. On
shore we are, of course, very familiar with it in its
most delicate and delightful form, namely, that
emanating from the pretty little plant, Mimutus
moschatus, which will, with such slight encouragement,
perpetuate itself year after year, and make the whole
garden fragrant on summer evenings, especially after
a light rain-shower. But for the needs of the per-
fumer the Himalayas are scoured in order to secure
the musk pods of a certain kind of deer, which are
so intensely odoriferous as to induce bleeding at the
nose in many people who take an incautious suiff.
The musk rat's tail, not even his scent sac, but his
tail, will suffice to perfume a drawer for a musk lover
for many years ; in fact, once that scent is diffused
it is improbable that the receptacle containing it
ever loses it again. The cruel and hideous saurian
that slimily awaits its prey at Indian village fords,
in South American creeks, and Australian back-
country brooks is redolent of musk, pungent, nau-
seating, and never-to-be-forgotten odour that it is.
The marvellous ambergris of the sperm whale, although
only faintly smelling of musk itself, has certainly
one quality amidst all the fabulous ones credited
to it, of enhancing tenfold the power of any perfume
to which it is added during the process of distilla-
tion. And any one who has ever had occasion to
use a tube of sepia or stick of China ink, has probably
tested its genuineness by smelling it, the faint yet
penetrating odour being immediately apparent.



372 The Petrels

Now as far as the genesis of musk in land animals
is concerned I am unable to offer any opinion. But
the power of ambergris, the scent of sepia, the muski-
ness of Petrels and their eggs, are only to be referred
to one origin — the squid or cuttle fish in all his varieties,
and how nimierous they are let Mr. Edgar Smith, the
erudite curator of the mollusca at South Kensington,
teU you — I cannot. Again and again I am conscience-
smitten at having ever said a word against the squid,
for at every turn in discussing the lives of the Deep-
Sea People aerial and marine, I find that without
the squid the other creatures simply could not be.
He is the basis, as it were, on which they are built.
This is most especially the case with regard to my
tiny friend the Stormy Petrel. So feeble, so small
is he, that any competition with the ordinary sea bird
in the universal struggle for food, or any capture
of fish in mid-sea, are alike out of the question. But
the languid Loligo, the little squid of an inch or so in
length, is always handy on the surface, easy of capture
by even so slight and weak a bird as the Stormy Petrel,
and in this way the latter little hungry creature is
fed. More times than I can remember I have seen
the little fellow in the midst of its dartings to and
fro in the wake of our flying ship, well on one side of
us, where it could not have been possible for anything
dropped from forecastle or galley to float, pause sud-
denly, and with fully stretched legs and quickly
fluttering wings reach down to the creaming surface,
and snatch something therefrom with a shrill cry
of satisfaction. That something was invariably a
little squid, a boneless succulent morsel created tQ
that end, without prevision or possibility of feeling
pain, and consequently perfectly happy even while in
process of transition into other forms of usefulness.



The 'Foul' Petrel



373



For a brief space, and before entering into the
family history and sea-going career of the tiny wee
wanderer I love so well, I must pay the compliment
of notice to an almost unique member of the family,
the Fulmar Petrel. Its front name indicates to those
conversant with Scottish idioms the prevalent cha-
racteristic of the bird, The word has been crudely
translated by the practical Americans into an un-
pleasant but entirely appropriate Anglo-Saxon equiva-
lent. Stinker. The reasons for this coarse cognomen
is self-evident ; the bird is really the skunk of the
feathered world ; and on the principle, I suppose,
that the more unpleasant the remedy the more certain
the cure, the blanders of St. Kilda seize the living
bird and squeeze from its throat a little oil, a table-
sjTOonful or so, which is considered to be an infallible
remedy for chronic rheumatism. I will not say that
the remedy is worse than the disease, but certainly
those using it deserve to get cured. It almost helps
one to understand the Chinese predilection for the
application of the moxa, a red-heated iron, to an
inflamed part for curative purposes. But Pennant,
that entirely unreliable but most delightful writer,
says, that no bird is of such value to the islanders
as this, It supplies them with oil for their lamps,
down for their beds, a delicacy {!) for their tables,
and a medicine for their distempers.

In the Southern Seas among whalemen it is
notorious as being the only bird which, in the midst
of waiting thousands, will fearlessly perch upon the
body of a dead whale, and begin tearing at the skin,
in the hope of getting an advance subscription to its
dinner fund. It comes down with a thud, and hence
the terriiic threat of the Yankee whaling officer ;
' I'll 'light on ye like a Stinker on a carcase.' Not



374



The Petrels



even the most enthusiastic of Nature lovers i
truthfully profess to see any beauty in a Fulmar.
Its colours are nondescript, dingy ; its beak huge
and cabbage-water green. In numbers south of the
Line it is to seek, only up north, in those untilled
regions of cold and stonn, does it flourish in vast
flocks, and provide a patent medicine for St. Kildians.
Among the almost inaccessible rocks of the Hebrides
it breeds, but nowhere in such numbers as at St.
Kilda, affording to the hardy lonely islanders, who
have long learned not to be fastidious, a never-failing
means of hvelihood. Although one would have
thought that a Fulmar's egg for breakfast would act
as a sure discouragement against any further experi-
ments in the direction of egg eating, from the ex-
ceedingly rank and inimitable odour thereof, these
dainties are so highly thought of by the St. Kildians
that the collecting of them forms the principal occu-
pation of the islanders. In it they continually risk
their lives, as the bird roosts in the most inaccessible
places, on ledges a few inches wide, worn in the faces
of perpendicular or overhanging precipices. In like
manner also do the islanders collect the live oil from
the bird's stomach ; just a few teaspoonfuls of clear
but intensely fetid oil, which the bird vomits when
seized, into a vessel held for the purpose. Bu^ all
this is a many-times told tale, and one perhaps which
is not strictly within the Umits of my subject. It is
exceedingly strange, however, that while the northern
Fulmar is so very abundant, and is, moreover, never
seen far from shore, his southern brother is a solitary J
bird as far as his own kind go, and is met with as facfl
from land as any bird can get. 1

And now, as it would only be tiresome repetition
to go over the small difference between the varieties



J



Perpetual Motion



375



of Proeellaria, and besides quite contrary to my usual
rule, I gladly return to the Mother Carey's Chicken
biographically, giving first of all some few details of my
own personal acquaintance with them, ever gratefully
remembered. How timidly on my first voyage did
I ask the mate, a big gruff Norwegian, what those
pretty little birds were. How could I tell that I was
committing a serious breach of etiquette ? He re-
plied very gruffly and unintelligibly, ' Stem Fitter.'
I ventured to say, ' What ? ' and was at once bidden
to ' shut up ' and look out for myself, as if he had
been insulted by my not understanding him. I took
the hint and asked no more, nor did I learn that ' those
little birds ' were Stormy Petrels for a very long time,
although, like other sailors, I of course knew them as
Mother Carey's Chickens.

But they were always a source of never-ending
delight to me while at sea, and of wonder too, for I
could not help feeling that they had indeed solved
the great problem of perpetual motion ; never needing
or desiring rest apparently, and always sticking to
the same ship to which they had taken a fancy in
calm or storm, whether flying before a gale or stag-
nating through many days of windlessness, as was
common with the old sailing-ships. I was glad to
see how the sailors generally regarded them as birds
of good omen, and in nowise to be meddled with.
Indeed, in my day not a few seamen really looked
upon them as the spirits of departed sailors, who,
never weary, flitted over the bright pure sea etemaUy.
But then many seamen thus rcga"ded the albatross
also, yet I never saw the same sincere reluctance
to do them harm as was always evinced towards
the Stormy Petrel.

Once I saw a man, a second mate, wearying for



37^



The Petrels


something to do, catch one of the pretty creati
by means of thickly-tarred roping twine attached
to a bait of pork, which was hooked on to the end
of a fishing-hne. The httle bird, fluttering over the
meat and continually touching the water with its
feet, as is its wont, got them entangled in the sticky
twine, and was hauled in all bedraggled, its bright
vivacity gone, and presently lay panting and helpless
in the grip of its silly tormentor. Fortunately the
captain coming on deck at an opportune moment,
saw the shameful deed, and gave that second mate
such a wigging as I hope did him good. It was the
only time in my life that I ever rejoiced to see a sub-
ordinate on board ship receive a public reprimand.

Even to the last day of my sea-service I was unable
to divest myself of the feeling, when watching the
movements of the wee Petrel in a gale, that they were
sent to the sailor as an object lesson of the all-per-
vading care of God. The mighty ship in a heavy storm
does look so insignificant in conflict with the ocean,
all man's skill and genius and courage count for such
a little against the immeasurable power of His sea,
and is so dependent upon the faithful co-operation
of all concerned, that it comes with a wonderful relief
to study the tiny wee seafarer alongside coquetting
with the wildest waves, and untroubled by the fiercest
storm, hi nothing, I think, under heaven is the
wisdom, love, and care of God more manifest than
in the behaviour of a Mother Carey's Chicken in a
tempest. But let us associate ourselves more in-
timately with a pair, for only by so doing can we realise
what a wonderful thing their life is.

That was a very lonely morning when I discovered
that my father and mother had both left me. Ever
since I first found myself in the cosy little rock tunnel



J



My Birthplace



377



in Kerguelen Island, my only sensation that of being
ravenously hungry, I had never been out of their
sight, one or the other of thera, for an hour by day
or by night. At first they used to come and go almost
continually, always dropping some delightful morsel
down my gaping throat, and scurrying away through
the tunnel again as if they had not a moment to spare.
And they would hardly be gone before I began again
loudly lamenting my lack of food.

But let me tell you about my home, for I never
forgot it in all my long joumeyings ; when the time
came at the fall of the year for me to return thither, I
did so over the thousands of miles of intervening sea
as straight as the wind blows over those mighty open
spaces. As perhaps you know, Kerguelen is, for those
people who use the land continually, just a desolate
mass of rock and sand, with hardly a sign of anything
growing but birds and seals, far down the slope of
the Southern Sea. At one place there is quite a moun-
tain rises straight up from the sea facing the south,
but this mountain is split in half ; right in the middle
of it there is a crack as wide as a porpoise that runs
through from the sea to a quiet little plateau beyond.
AU around this little flat patch, which is floored with
black sand, there are round holes in the rocks which
run in about ten times my length and widen out a.
little when you get as far in as you can.

Here, in this cosy shelter from storm and wind,
which I never felt the need of at any time after I
left it, I first knew I was alive. And when first,
after a long stay in that darkling warmth, I was lured
slowly along the passage by my gentle little mother
(I was so much bigger than she was) I trembled so that
I could hardly move. You see, I had never before
moved except in the tiny little hollow where I was



378



The Petrels



bom. But at last we reached the opening, and to
my amazement and fear ray mother floated away
into space, leaving me shivering there, and watching
her with starting eyes. Feebly I cried to her to come
back to me, but she replied with gentle twitterings
of invitation, in response to which I felt an earnest,
an almost fierce desire to do as she was doing, to join
her in those graceful airy circles that she was making.

Then my father flashed on to the scene. Where
he came from I did not see, but there he was joining
his entreaties to those of my mother, and every little
while caressing her with his beak. Oh, how patient
they were ! It does make me ashamed when I think
of the long time during which I resisted their invi-
tions to join them, to try those new wings of mine,
which indeed were working jerkily of their own accord
at my sides. How many false starts I made, until
at last, quite by accident it seemed, I found myself
in the air, full of fear, but working my limbs frantically
in obedience to some hidden, unknown, compelling
power.

It is all a blur, all full of mystery, that first flying
lesson. All I remember is that presently I found
mjreelf on the ledge at the mouth of the tunnel again,
with a new strange feeling of triumph all over me,
almost overcoming the trembling which had so dis-
tressed me. I was trembling still, but part of it was
due to joy. After that, I was coaxed again and again
to try those wings of mine, and no more food was
brought into the tunnel for me. I found myself
growing apparently stronger, lighter and lighter. I
did not know, of course, that the latter was really
the case, the mass of fat with which I was encumber^
when first I tried to fly having become absorbed i
my tissues, and muscle having taken its place.


My First Lesson



379



had been necessary in order to keep me warm when 1
did not move, but now as I needed it no more it had
gone.

So day by day I became stronger and more daring,
nntil, almost mithinkingly, I dashed out of the narrow
opening between those mighty rocks and was on the
glorious sea, my real, my splendid home. And in
that wonderful moment I felt all the joy of living,
the delight of being in my rightful place and master
of my surroundings. I felt eager to emulate my
parents, to do what they could not do, although in-
stinctively I followed their every movement. Another
surprise, and an essentially pleasant one ; as my father
swooped down the side of a wave, I saw him snatch
at a little white wriggling thing there and swallow it.
There was another by its side at which I dashed,
seized it, and gulped it down. Delicious first morsel,
how sweet it was to feel that I had gained it, and that
all this wide feasting ground was mine t

For a few days this finishing portion of my edu-
cation went on, I growing more and more impatient
of being taught, until one day my father and I hooked
our beaks into the same squid, a bigger one than usual,
and I fought savagely with him for the possession of
it. Unknown to me the parting of our ways had come.
From henceforth he was no more to me or I to him
than any two chance-met members of our family,
and although we returned to our home that night
it was for the last time together. I slept soundly
till dawn, then waking to instant activity, as is the
custom of all our people, sped outwards to sea to find
myself, as far as my two parents were concerned,
quite alone. As I have before said, for a little time
it was very lonely. But soon the natural adjustment
took place, pride in my ability to do as my parents



38q



The Petrels J



had done, even better than they, took the place of
my first sense of loss, and I went on with my task of
getting food whole-heartedly.

But now I felt no desire to return to that quiet
little nook which had hitherto sheltered me. I did
not feel the need of shelter at all. Nor did I feel the
necessity of companionship. Blithely I fluttered from
wave to wave intent on finding food, nor noting how
the grim peaks of Kerguelen were fading, even from
my keen sight. I felt as if I had just been released
for a long, long holiday, the mighty ocean for my
playground, abundant food at my feet, and the possi-
bility of weariness withheld. Ah, I was so happy!
I flew on and on, unheeding whither, taking note of
an occasional lordly relation, a huge albatross, or a
flight of Petrels of much greater size, but, as I noted
with satisfied pride, far less vigorous than I, only with
none of them did I speak or stay for one moment.
What had I in common with them — I , the self-
sufficient, the weariless one ? They must perforce
rest upon the waves now and again ; I, never. They
could not feed as I did, their great bodies disdaining
the tiny succulent morsels upon which I feasted so
royally, and I was glad, so glad.

When night fell and the sky darkened I still re-
joiced ; when the mournful wind began to wail over
the great spaces, and the waters snarlingly rose in
protest, I hovered twittering, content. I was satisfied,
why not they ? Steadily rose the wind, higher mounted
the waves, what cared I ? I was master of the whole
wild scene, the tumult of the elements was but a
lullaby, not to rock me to slumber, but to please my
delighted ear, as, unconscious of effort, I still sped to
and fro in the darkness of the great night.

By morning I was hungry, so eager for food that



Pride of Place



381



an other sensations lay waiting. The storm was at
its height, the sky nearly touched the sea. The waves
rolled long and sullenly, unable to rise to their desired
size, for the pressure of the wind held them down,
The air was full of wetness, it was hardly to b? known
from the sea itself. But I was shut in from it all by
a downy envelope, my body (you could hold three
in your hand at once), hot, fully sheltered, palpitating
with eager living. I skimmed along the hissing,
curdling surface of the sea, eating my fill in peace,
and utterly unheeding the war of wind and wave as
I did so. But when my hunger was appeased I felt
no slothful desire to fold my wings and sleep. Added
energy, ecstasy of movement impelled me, and filled
me with great content. The bliss of living possessed
me entirely, and although not another of my kind was
near, I felt no need of one. I was satisfied with myself
for company.

But presently I saw, looming up through the gloom
of the spindrift, a vast shadowy bulk which for the
moment gave me a strange sensation of dread. I did
not know it ; was it my island home that I had un-
knowingly come back to ? I drew nearer to it in spite
of my fears, and then suddenly knew that I had nothing
to dread. It was a ship, a great vessel being sorely
beateo and battered by the mighty sea. How proud
I felt as I saw that gigantic bulk straining to keep her
place, quivering to the summit of her tall masts, and
rolling in the seething smother tike a dying whale, that
I, whose body was almost as a grain of dust by her
side, was so absolutely safe, comfortable, and free from
all apprehension even of danger !

I saw men for the first time. Strange beings they
were, tottering about that great thing as I did ere I
learned to fly, evidently not at home, evidently very


382



The Petrels



much at the mercy of that vengeful sea, and ftiDy
conscious of the fact. Poor men ! I knew somehow
that they would not harm me, knew too that I should
here find food. Felt strangely certain that in some
mysterious way we had been friends for many genera-
tions : that is, ray forefathers had with theirs, and the
knowledge had come down to me. So I fluttered
about and about her, noting her every detail, and
especially the half-admiring, half-pitying glances cast
upon me by the men who stood clutching some support,
all over her.

As I hovered around her my liking for her increased,
and especially for the sweet, the delicious morsels
which continually floated away from her in the broad
smooth space she left as she drifted sidelong. I was
very busy, happy of course, but kept fully employed
because these morsels did not cloy, but rather tempted
my vigorous, healthy appetite. And besides I felt
prouder than ever, because I was sure that those strange
beings were continually admiring me, and wondering
at my familiarity with the terrible sea, which was so
threatening to them. And then suddenly there came
the great joy of my life. Had I been able to tell my
experience to any, I shoidd have said that my joy v
fuU, complete, but I did not know.

As I fluttered around her for the thousandth i
I met one of my own kind. For the moment I i
indignant. The ship was mine by right of discovery.
Who else dare intrude, and by what right ? And then
with a sweet, low voice the new-comer introduced
herself. Oh, the exquisite sound of it 1 I flew to her
side, I found her, she was mine. The climax to my
joy was reached, it was love ! First hunger, then fear ;
succeeded conscious effort, sense of power overcoming,
and now love. The sea, the sky, the ship, the food.



oy WM

'r4



i



it



■ I
I /

I m



I



^



!l '



My Partner



383



the power of oowearied flight were now all leading up
and accessory to this, the greatest of all forces, over-
brimming with dehghts, the all-embracing joy of love.
Henceforth our desires were entwined. Did I find a
delicious morsel ? it was hers, mine the exquisite
pleasure of seeing her enjoy it. Did she call me to a
new treasure of food floating by ? oh, the rapture
of sharing it with her ! And when a little boy on the
deck of the ship, the weather having moderated greatly,
said to his mother, standing by : * Oh, look, mamma,
I believe that dear little bird has found a wee wife t *
I could have screamed with delight, had it been in my
power to do so.

In due time we tired of the ship, for when the
breeze suited, and all her wings were spread again,
she went steadily, straightly forward, so last too that
it became irksome for us to flutter round and round
her, as we loved to. And besides, her company was
no longer to us the pleasantness it had been before
we became all in all to each other. Still, for long we
flew side by side in perfect content, visiting many ships,
seeing many new faces, and always happy, for we were
never afraid. Our world seemed inhabited only by
friends. We skimmed over seas that teemed with
life under the continual sun by day and the tender
violet of the sky by night, we saw many new lands —
and sheered of! from them — what needed we of the
land?

We lived and loved, and were happy because we
did. Until there came a day when we both, having all
feelings, not to say thoughts, in common, had the need
laid upon us to go south again. We were then trying
to be fond of a great ship that sped, unrestingly as our-
selves, through the sea with an everlasting whirlpool
behind that we did not hke — I cannot say we feared


384



The Petrels



jwn,
tiinr*



it. And with one accord we abandoned our pleasant
buttering to and fro. Side by side we stretched onr
wings and made haste, as never before, towards the
bleak South, nor ever paused until once more we darted
in between those mighty walls of rock, sheltering the
tiny nook where I was bom. As we did so I felt just
one doubt lest it should be preoccupied, but I need
not have done so. It was ready for us. My sweet
one crept in, I following her, until, settling down,
she cooed contentedly, invitingly, and I, nestl"
by her side, let all things slip away into dee]
f>eace.

When I awoke my dear partner did not stir. I
knew, and, caressing her, hastened away, intent upon
what I understood as love's privilege to provide for
her. Out between the rocks I darted, found what I
sought, and returned. It was another added joy.
Oh, I was so happy ! Of all the delights I have ever
known — and my little life has been overflowing with
them — there have been none like this. 1 worked
incessantly, untiringly to feed her, my patient love.
I did not know why, nor could I enquire. But she
sat in darkness waiting for some blissful event, 1 her
only sunshine, her only means of support, the one
whom she trusted, and with reason. I could have
wished that time to have lasted but for her. I did
feel the need of her sweet company out upon the sea.
And yet I was content, for I knew in some strange
manner that all was well. But when she rose to meet
me, as one morning I returned with full beak for her,
her Uttle velvety body swelling with conscious pride,
and I saw a strange gaping bunch at her side, I felt a
shock. Had I a rival ? Indeed I had, ray son. I
had no joy of him, for I felt he separated me from her.
She wftj all I needed, no third. Still, with her



Rewarded at Last 385

laboured to feed him, to teach him, to launch hun in
life. And at last I was rewarded, when, finding he
was well able to fish for himself, we two sped northward
again to renew our happy joumeyings to and fro upon
the lovely



25



CHAPTER XXVI
BOOBIES AND PENGUINS

UNLIKE any of the other birds of which I have
been writing, the subjects of the present chapter
are really not pelagic, that is, they are birds which
roust find a rest for the soles of their feet upon some-
thing hard every night, preferably at their proper homes,
although that is sometimes impossible. Ad almost in-
vidious selection has now to be made, but one entirely
necessary, since the varieties of such birds are very
numerous. And I have endeavoured to surmount the
difficulty by only taking those that are fairly familiar
to sailors in out-of-the-way parts of the ocean, and
almost unknown to the majority of landsfolk

First in my mind comes the Booby, whidi is a
Bpedes of gaimet, but varying in several important
particulars from the pretty, well-known gannets of
our own coasts. It has a reputation for stupidity
which I feel is hardly deserved, and is really only given
upon very sUght grounds. But in consequence of this
reputation it has obtained this somewhat opprobrious
name, first by the Spanish seamen who, trading in
the Gulf of Mexico, made its acquaintance, and con-
ceiving but a low idea of its intelligence called it ' Bobo *
or Stupid ; hence our word Booby, both words deriving
from the same root.

Perhaps the sole reason for the idea of the poor

3»



Stupidity ?



387



bird's stupidity arises from the fact that when it
alights upon any portion of a ship, as it often does
in the vicinity of its home, it will sit still and allow
itself to be taken, although it has only to tumble off
its perch to be free and far out of the reach of the
marauding hand of the sailor. But there it sits, with
its full dark eye staring full at its enemy, apparently
hypnotised into insensibility, and only when it is
grasped and its doom sealed does it begin to struggle
vainly to escape. Really the reason for this immobility
is fairly obvious, although I have never seen it stated.
Of all the sea-birds there are none that toil so tre-
mendously at their business of food-getting as the
gannets, and the Booby is no exception to the rule.
The big, somewhat ungainly bird, with his long straight
beak and his gawky wings flapping heavily and con-
tinuously, is, as I have said, a fairly well-known object
off our north-eastern coasts, and most observant
visitors have admired the wonderful way in which,
while flying in utmost haste along at a height of over
a hundred feet, he will suddenly fold his wings and
drop, beak first, with a tremendous splash into the
sea, emerging almost immediately after with a flsh in
his beak, and hterally fighting his way into the high
air again.

Now, no other sea-bird, not even the lively gull,
or the ungainly cormorant, labours like this for its
living. The poor Booby oftentimes finds itself far
afield and quite weary, when a tempting opportunity
for a perch presents itself, of which it takes advantage,
and having done so, seems quite unable to exert itself
further for some time, even in the presence of the most
imminent danger of capture. Why it should prefer
the yards or booms of a vessel to rest upon to the sea
at such times is a thing I do not pretend to understand,


388 Boobies and Penguins

but the fact is that it does do so in preference to resting
on the water ; a thing I never remember to have seen
one doing.

There is perhaps another and more convincing
reason for the Booby's apparent stupidity. The lonely
islets and cays which it frequents are seldom visited
by man. Being naturally of a con&ding nature, and
getting little opportunity of learning how unsafe it is
to place any confidence in the lords of creation, it is
unprepared for the danger of capture which attends
it upon alighting upon any place to which he has
convenient access. And why sailors should take the
poor birds I do not know, except that the temptatioD
to lay hold upon a bird that is unable or unwilling to
f!y away is almost irresistible to most men. For the
Booby, like all sea-birds, is anything but good eating,
being rank, tough, and oily ; while as a pet he is of no
use at all. And I am ashamed to say that all I have
ever seen taken on board ship were presently, after a
period of maltreatment, flung overboard, a piece of
cruel waste for which there can be no possible excuse.

My first acquaintance with the Booby dates back
to my first voyage, as a small boy in my twelfth year.
Of course, I do not know the exact part of the sea in
which we were cruising, but I know that we were at no
very great distance from land, for we were sailing — not
steaming — from Demerara to Santa Ana in the Mexican
Gulf. And one night, being becalmed, one of the men
pointed out to me a dark object on the cat-head clearly
outlined against the moonbeams on the sea. I don't
know why, but in those days any item of iniormatioo
conveyed to me in a whisper with an air of mystery
always made my heart pump furiously ; and my feeling,
though perhaps not exactly fear, was not at all pleasant
as Joe stole away from my side towards that dark



A Booby Farm



389



excrescence on the cat-head. I held ray breath as he
crept nearer to it, and was suddenly relieved to hear
a loud squawking, almost like that of a suddenly irri-
tated parrot. Joe returned to me, exhibiting to my
delighted gaze a large white bird pitifully struggling
to be free. Then the other men came around, and
there was a long and voluble conversation about the
bird, of which I wearied and went away to sleep. When
I again saw the captive it had been skinned, but to
my astonishment nothing was done with either skin
or carcase — after a short time they were both Sung
overboard.

Less than three months afterwards, in another ship,
I awoke one morning, to find by the strange sounds
and motions made by the vessel that she had run
ashore, and when morning dawned I saw that many
Boobies and men-of-war or frigate birds were hovering
about us, the former filling the air with their shrill
cries, and the latter calmly and apparently contemp-
tuously watching us. Two days after we all left the
wrecked vessel (she was broken in half) for good, and
landing upon the little sandy cay which formed the
apex of the vast coral reef upon which our ship had
been wrecked, we found almost the whole sandy area
in possession of these birds, Boobies. They did not
venture over to the rocky side, for reasons which will
appear later. It was a most surprising sight to us,
to me especially, a city-bred boy, to see the wide beach
covered with vociferous birds sitting on eggs lying in
small depressions in the sand, or going to and fro,
either waddling or on the wing, but none evincing the
slightest fear of us. It was an entirely new sensation
to have a bird as big as a duck, but with twice the
wing-spread, come flapping busily along and not
trouble to avoid one ; indeed, I was knocked down



390 Boobies and Penguins

twice, and afterwards opprobriously assailed by the
inluriafed bird for getting in her way when she was
hurrying back to her eggs. Of course the eggs were
a great treat to us — when did ever a sailor, rightly
constituted, feel indifferent to the sight of an egg ?—
and we started to gather them, careless of the feelings
of the mother Boobies. But if they lacked sense they
certainly did not want courage, and those of us who
had not sea-boots on. soon found that a trouser-leg
was but poor protection against a driving blow from
a Booby's beak. So the majority of us retired to look
for sticks (of course no such ridiculously sentimental
notions weighed with us as consideration for the
feelings of the parent birds), and meanwhile the din
was deafening. There were many thousands of birds,
and every one of them seemed to be protesting with
all the power of his or her lungs against this piratical
invasion of a peaceful and inoffensive colony. I know
that I felt as if I should never recover my hearmg again.
Presently, having armed ourselves with sticks, we
returned to the charge, and gathered many eggs ; at
least I say we, but I remember that being barefooted
I merely hovered on the outskirts of the war, and bore
the eggs away as others collected them whose feet were
better protected against the Boobies' beaks than mme.
I am sorry to say that in the struggle for the possessioTv^
of those eggs many of the protesting Boob^^ '^^e
killed. Their bodies were brought int. cs*^^ ^
flung down, a doleftd heap, for some \js "^^ ^_^

for eating. But as the heloU who ^^:v ''^ ■SS^'^

many unnecessary sea-compliments ^fe e,"^ ^!^

task sensibly observed, 'We've W ^^^^^^ j

grub, an' there's p\ej^«>? more »^

bother about getting ^^^^ '^^^^

eat?' So the« Was ir*'^'' "" '


Awakening Mom



391



gathered with so much loss of life {to the mothers),
were hardly eatable to men who could get other and
more tasteful food, as we certainly could then. There
were eggs on the island, delicious, plentiful, large, but
they belong to another story. Only the honour of
finding them was mine, and mine alone.

Next morning I was awake and astir before day-
break, not because I then loved early rising, but
because my sleeping-place was so miserably uncom-
fortable that I laid no minute longer than I could help.
Who would, wedged into a long row of men, as sardines
lie in a box, with a lump of coral the bigness of a man's
head in the middle of one's back, by no means get-at-
able because of the long cloth of canvas over it held
down by the bodies aforesaid. So I rose and strayed
along the beach, watching the tremulous shadings of
coming light in the sky, and listening to the murmur
of the wavelets against the sand and the low beginnings
of conversation among the birds. And then my
attention was divided between the glory of the new
day, a never-ceasing source of delight in the tropics,
and the strange sight afforded by the host of busy
birds, parents present and prospective. As it grew
lighter their cackling grew louder, until, when the full
day swung like a fanfaronade of silver trumpets
across the waiting concave of the heavens, they all
burst into a deafening chorus of cries, apropos of
nothing as far as I could see. Of me standing close
before them they took not the slightest heed. Those
with young ones hatched poked at and preened them
with their long beaks, preparatory to leaving them,
and those with eggs only just laid took a parting glance
or so at them, preened themselves, and flew — clean
over my head, with rapidly jerking wings towards their
free and common hunting-ground, the teeming sea.



Boobies and Penguins

was so fascinated by the busy scene that for long t
id not stir, and so was able to witness the return of
ime of the mothers, who had been almost iramediately
nKCessful, with quite large fish in their mouths, which,
opping among their screaming young, they proceeded
distribute, at the same time keeping a bright look-out
■on those conscienceless, lazy marauders who con-
■lually endeavoured to steal.
_ In an hour alter full day they were practically all
away, although, eis 1 have said, occasional stragglers,
having been rewarded with an early catch, came
dropping in with their prizes for their families. Then
came my shipmates, bent on egg-coUecting, but I was
glad to see that now they were a little more discrim-
inating than on the pre^nous day. They examined
the eggs to see whether they were edible or not, and
when they found a couple of helpless unfledged ones
in a hollow, they merely gave them momentary dis-
comfort by taking them up and examining them ;
they did them no hann. Together we took a thorough
survey of the great space occupied by the nesting
Boobies, and adinired the business-like way in whidi
the parents provided for the needs of their ofkpring,
also the ease with which the food was obtained. The
sea over and adjacent to the reefs literally swanned
with surface-fish just of a convenient size for the birds
to handle, and they, the birds, never seemed to flag
in their earnest endeavour to get their living and
provide for those dear to them. Of course they were
all very much alike, bat after a time of careful watching
I was able to single out those who were most enogetic,
finding that even here, where instinct ruled, thoe
were degrees in industry as well as among men.

The male birds had a reservation of their own, and
seemed to be held in considerable disfavour by both



The Pirate



393



hatching and nursing birds, as if they had contracted
themselves out of any right to occupy the same space.
They certainly did nothing towards the maintenance
of the families, being apparently fully occupied in
providing for their own clamorous needs. The mother
birds had their domestic cares to attend to as well a3
the providing, which led me to think more than scorn-
fully of the male Booby as regarded his affections,
especially comparing him with the deep-sea birds of
my acquaintance, but rather highly as regarded his
iniquitous cunning, which certainly did not justify
his contemptuous name. But there was one recurring
circumstance which I continually noted, about which
I have some trouble. It does not appear very clear
whether I should mention it here or in a later article,
but I do not see how I am to do the Booby full justice
unless I make some allusion to it at present, and so I
fear I must do so even at the peril of repeating myself
later on. I noticed repeatedly that as the mother
birds were returning at full speed to their nests with
a load of food (I say * nests ', although, as I have noted,
the eggs and young ones just lay on the open sand),
they often evinced signs of great alarm, and dodged
about at full speed, sometimes rushing right out to
sea again.

The reason was evident. High above the busy
birds fishing there hovered black wide-winged birds,
whose province it was apparently to live upon the
labours of others. And when they saw a homeward-
bound bird flapping heavily towards the land, one ot
them would by easy stages, yet with amazing celerity,
descend from his lofty plane, drawing nearer and
nearer to the labouring Booby like a kestrel descending
upon a pigeon, but in far more leisurely fashion, as
if perfectly confident of success.



394 Boobies and Penguins

The unhappy matron, foreseeing the sacrifice of
her toil and her fledgehngs' hunger, would strain every
nerve, her angular wings working furiously and her
whole body trembling with evident anxiety, in strildag
contrast to the calm fateful approach of the black
descending shadow. But dodge as the Booby might,
exert herself as she would, there would come a time
when, like a thimderbolt, the hovering thief would
descend, his wings nearly closed and his tail wide-
spread. Then, alas ! poor Booby, there was nought
that she could do but drop her treasure and flee for
her life. And the graceful villain with one great swoop
would catch the fish ere it touched the water, and soar
skyward again unconcernedly, as if it was part of the
appointed scheme of things that Booby should toil and
he should calmly reap the fruit of that toil. Booby
meanwhile was scouring the sea again in search of
the much-needed meal for her family, and with who
knows what ever-springing hope that next journey
she might evade the ravishers of her little ones' food.

Such a sketch as I have endeavoured to give of
the life of the Booby may be accepted as applicable
to all these birds wherever they live. They are never
to be seen very far from land and never exterior to
the tropics, for warm weather is a necessity to them.
Their homely virtues, as will be seen, are many, if their
beauty and intelligence cannot be rated very high.
And, principally I think from a fellow-feeling for
common-place folk, I have dared to strain a point,
and include the essentially homely Booby in this
record of the statelier denizens of the deep-sea spaces
to which truly it does not belong, but still cannot be
reckoned as one of the familiar sea-birds to any others
but sailors. And for reasons which I am tired of
reiterating, even sailors, by reason of the displacement



Miscellaneous



395



df sails by steam, will soon as a class know the fussy
homely Booby no more.

About the ei ceieras I have my doubts. One
class of birds, which I do not possess suf&cient
acquaintance with to make them the subject of a
separate chapter, I am leaving to the end of this chapter.
I allude to that curious tribe, the Penguins. But of
other truly deep-sea birds there are really none. The
great gull tribe in any of its varieties never venture
far from land in the comparative sense, the petrels
deserved (and have got) a section to themselves. Even
essentially land birds are often found at tremendous
distances from the shore, having been whirled away
most unwillingly from their course while journeying
from winter to summer lands, which would never
happen to sea-birds whose habits keep them in daily
touch with the land. Nay, and I do not think any
apology is needed for introducing the matter here, I
have actually seen, not once but several times, flutter-
ing about a ship becalmed in the centre of the broad
Atlantic, an ephemeral butterfly. The sight set all
hands a-wondering wJience the pretty waif could have
strayed so far, and some even broached the idea that
the chrysalis from which it came had lodged on board
in some convenient but inconspicuous place, and had
just been hatched out. But they were, as I think,
very properly laughed out of court. In mid-ocean
too, I have seen, and that where even the strenuous
gulls did not appear, a Uttle flight of swallows board the
ship, as a haven of rest in the midst of the wide and
to them inhospitable sea. I shall not soon or easily
forget how, coming weary and hungry from the
wheel one morning at 2 a.m., I went to the bread-
barge, which hung from a beam in the forecastle
for fear of the rats which swarmed among us, Jind found


596 Boobtes aad Penguins

1 tibo$ Hs edfB a dozen tiny birds. I ^and
, dJihrfinvfaig my sight for a moment, then
X Ovt I took one in my hand, and found that
it «u tt tind-oni HMb swift that had thus taken
g VMf and ^ fact moved me strangely.
Miny SDcb mif-visitnrs I have seen and in many
weUt bnt moit pti&Btk: of all I think was one during
a •trong nonioan in tbe China Sea. The sturdy ship
mder a heavy pnw at canvas was striving to get
aooM to llaidBa {ram Bong Kong. It was a bleak
dtanal day» and I ttood at the wheel, my whole atten-
tion takoi vp with the object of keeping the plunging
ve«el ae near the wind as possible without shaking
a du«d <rf her Mninlllg canvas ; when suddenly I
became aware o< a la^e bird that, with beaviiy-
flapping wii^s, was striving hard to get on board,
yet for iome obaom reason was afraid to trust itseU
to windward, lest, ^)parently, it should lose command
of itidf and be hkrnn against something that would
do it Injniy. Fot over an hour I watched its painful
labours alone, for the second mate was leaning over
the break of the poop in deep meditation, and it was
impossible under sea etiquette that I should call him.
I cannot tell you how I suffered for that poor Inrd.
He came so close that I knew him for a stork — I saw
his long neck and beak, and his slender legs tucked
closely beneath him. And I did want him safe. I
almost prayed for his deliverance, he made such a
gallant fight for life. But alas I he would not trost
himself to windward, he would persist in coming up
under the lee quarter, where the eddy from the spanker
poured down strongly enough to sweep away the most
powerfully winged bird that ever flew. I saw him
grow wedcer and weaker, stilt fighting vainly against
overwhelming odds, and at last in one of his swoofnngs



A Quaint Sea^Citizen 397

to leeward that fatal down-draught from the spanker
caught him, and whirled him, a dishevelled heap of
feathers, into the foaming sea sweeping past, and he
was gone. I felt as if I had been watching the painful
fighting for life of a dear friend, and I was scarcely
comforted, when, on going into the gloomy forecastle
at eight bells, I found a fluffy-feathered goat-sucker
perched on the edge of my bunk, who opened the wide
gape of his mouth at me, as I tenderly took him,
in voiceless supphcation to spare his feeble life. Need
I say that his request was granted ? I fed him on
cockroaches (we had plenty of those), and on entering
Cavite Bay I let him go, feeling siu'e he would soon
find a home.

But this is a digression hardly warranted by the
subject. It is very necessary on account of space to
pass on to the quaintest of all the feathered Deep-Sea
People really entitled to the name, although they are
never found at any great distance (as sailors count
distance) from the shore or islands of ice. I allude
to the Penguins, Their nearest counterparts in northern
seas are the auks ; but the latter are able to fly, the
Penguin is not. It is really a sort of compromise,
to all appearance, between a seal and a bird, and but
for the fact that the Creator has planted it in the
most lonely and inhospitable portion of the round
world, would certainly long ago have been exter-
minated. This sad fate has befallen the great auk,
whose eggs coming now and then into auction-rooms
command such fabulous prices. It unfortunately
inhabited places comparatively easy of access, and
consequently, though it was of little value commercially
and of none at all as food, it very soon became extinct
when rapacious man extended his sway to the fringe
of the Arctic Ocean.



in 01

1



398 Boobies and Penguins

The Penguin, however, has been preserved ft
this fate, because the Antarctic regions offer little
no inducement to searchers after wealth to come
them. And in the days when seal-oil was valual
and it was worth while to make expeditions to
barren shores of Antarctic islands in order to colli
it, the Penguins were only molested for edible purposes,
for they are just edible, with considerable culioaiy
manipulation. There are several kinds of Penguins,
varjnng in size from the diminutive Pygmy or Eudypttk
minor of a few inches high, to the Emperor Penguin oJ
as many feet. Most good museums furnish exam] "
But all possess the same general characterisi
First, their legs being very short and thick, and tl
webbed feet wide and strong, they ' sit up,' as it
It is really standing up like a duck stretching its
wings, but almost perpendicularly. And this is their
norma] pose. They carry their heads, with short,
pointed beaks, very erect, and their flippers, for the
wing in these birds is nothing but a seal flipper covered
with feathers instead of fur, hanging down in a ludi-
crously pathetic and helpless manner. Sir John
Narborough, an old navigator whose voyages make
most entertaining reading, says that their appearance
as he first saw them gazing at him from their rocky
ledges was that of rows of school children standing
very quiet with little white pinafores on. This
the closely set feathers on their breasts are
with tinges of beautiful shades of purple and gi
around the edges in the Emperors.

Their movements on shore are almost as ungainfy
as those of a seal ; compared with them a duck or
goose glides along with stately grace. For their land
promenades their flippers are perfectly useless, dangling
by their sides as if broken. Why they do not topple


r
f



Careful Parents



399



over I cannot think, although their webbed feet are
so large and wide, for their centre of gravity certainly
does fall far without their bases, and great muscular
effort must be necessary in order that the erect position
may be preserved. Yet they manage to climb
with astounding celerity the almost unscaleable icy
cliffs of Antarctica, and may be seen ranged along the
narrow rock -ledges in rows like vases on the shelves of
a china-dealer's shop, who has no idea of picturesquely
arranging his wares. In places where materials for
nests are to be found they build them or lay them
down (there is httle constructive work possible), but
where no vegetation is to be found, they just choose
a slight hollow and there deposit two eggs, one always
larger than the other, which has been supposed to
denote difference of sex. If so, how evenly the sexes
must be balanced ! What has puzzled many southern
voyagers is the way in which the hen Penguin, when
disturbed and fearful for her eggs, will manage to
convey one of them away. There is a little hollow-
ing of the body just in front of the space between the
legs, and in this it is supposed the mother carries the
egg, but how she holds it there is a mystery.

The Penguin in all his varieties has a very wide
range. All round the southern hemisphere, and as
far north as the Galapagos Islands on the South Ameri-
can off-shore grounds, Penguins are to be found, and
Hartwig says that Humboldt's Penguin, which is
frequently found in Callao Bay, is made a household
pet of by the Peruvians, who call it the pajaro nino.
This he translates ' little darling bird,' but the good
professor's Spanish is weak ; it only means ' baby-boy
bird.' The noble Castellano is splendidly furnished
with terms of endearment. At one time it seemed as
if the Penguin would be exterminated on all the


400

tempent^ rito a t e d idands, lAan ono6 ft wm £•-
covered that Oey nere so fat tint Ory wouUyUd
a certain qoantity ol saleable oO. But Z r^oioe to a^
that the danger no longer edits. On Kc^aiita, Ihe
Croiets, the Sooth Shetlands, and mdi jtaMta, vmy
down to Antarctica, the poor hondy Pengoin has inr
leave to live and fae ha^iy in tiiat state ot life vde
whidi it has pleaaed God to call lam. Aad ^a ii
the more to be desired, hecanae m the remote ngiaaB
of tlie aoQth ibe Pengoia ia really the only i tp waen-
tative ai land bona. Even tiie aeab are vcty law.
Bat the Fengoin congregates m hia thonsaiKla, v^
gainly, nurth-provoking in appeanaot, but happy,
and giving to those desolate regiona tiie one toocb
of life that ibey need to keep them from becafl»-
ing, in fact as wdl as in iqipearance, a land of



Now in the foregtmig I have qx^n, it maybe
thought, acnnewhat too sli^tin^y of one of God's crea-
tores became of its langhter^provoking q^ieaiance.

Why should our risible faculties be excited by any
creature perfectly fitted by its loving and all-wise
Creator for its life-work ? I do not excuse the laughter,
I only note it, and quite admit that to a sparrow, for
instance, if he possessed the power of laughter, a man
may be the most ludicrous figure on earth, especially
in a top-hat and holding up an umbrella. But though
I plead guilty to having laughed at the Penguin, I
have atoned. I have seen him in the water, and I
laughed no longer. For that top-heavy body, that
pathetically peering head, those feeble-looking flippers
had all come into play.

The first time I really knew the Penguin for what
he really is was when, making a compo^te great
drde track to New Zealand, we reached latitude



A Ballasted Bird



401



54' S., and, wonder of wonders, it fell a calm. Between
twelve noon and two I was at the wheel, listless and
cold, and gaping all around me at sea and sky, when
suddenly a Penguin popped up alongside, gave one
wide-eyed stare at the unfamiliar ship, and disappeared.
But he was not satisfied. Three times he came back
to look, and so clear was the water that I could follow
his every movement beneath it, note his exceeding
beauty and grace, and — mentally apologise to him
for ever having thought him ungainly or ludicrous
in any way. I should add that at this time we were
certainly about a thousand miles from the nearest
land, which perhaps will justify my inclusion of the
Penguin among the honourable company of the
Deep-Sea People.

The food of the Penguin is of course fish, with
which those remote seas are teeming. And this
explains his amazing agility under water, for who
would seize the living fish in his native element must
needs move with a rapidity and a sinuous grace, to
which the most splendid efforts of a human athlete
are very, very slow and clumsy indeed. But like most
of the seals, and for probably the same hidden digestive
reasons, the Penguin thinks well to burden his belly
with boulders. Sir James Ross notes that in the sto-
mach of onfi of them he found ten pounds weight of
quartz, granite, and trap. Well, the poor thing needs,
no doubt at too frequently recurring times, something
to impart a sense of fulness and stability to the
stomach. For that organ is not only of huge size
in proportion to the build of the bird, but has, in com-
mon with the seals and sharks, ay, the majority of
the Deep-Sea People, a flood of digestive juices capable
of dealing almost (as a sailor would say) with scupper
nails.

26



Of the domestic vktuet and daSjr dioce life dt1^
Bfl^goia I dexe not apeal^ is I hsAre no pttsdiial
]ttOfi1edge» sadmqr imsgiroitiiiii wooHs it flie ides d
eidtiimtiQg the Lsxes and fteatss on Hie etonal^
fee4xiiiiid dioras of Aataicticftt



CHAPTER XXVIt
THE FRIGATE BIRD



IN dealing with this, the last of my Deep-Sea People,
I have unfortunately to cut across, I will not say

many prevailing ideas, since the subject is not popu-
larly known, but many quasi-scientific ideas concerning
him. It is now many years since I read in a book
by Michelet, the French naturalist, a long rhapsody
on the Frigate Bird, most poetical, most beautiful
in diction, but alas, as is so common with French
scientists, pure imagination from beginning to end,
without the lightest substratum of fact. In spite of
my youth at the time and my innate reverence for the
written word, especially in a scientific treatise, I
knew that all Michelet said about the Frigate Bird
was wrong ; it would almost have been hyperbolical
to apply it to the wandering albatross, whose powerful
flight and endurance excel those of the Frigate, or
Man-of-War Bird, as much as those of the latter do
the powers of the sparrow.

But the pity of it is that, as in so many other
cases, Michelet 's absurdities have been perpetuated
in our own natural histories with that serene faith
in a writer's integrity manifested by Reingelder in
Yates's book, as described by Kipling in his wonderful
story of the German flag. Although warned by his
friend repeatedly, and his attention drawn to the
, viperine head of the snake he held in his hand, Rein-



The Frigate Bird

geldcr, secure in his knowledge of what Yates b»A
written of those snakes, and calm in his faith in the
great authority, proceeds to examine the snake alive.
He is bitten and dies, but with his latest breath he
moans : ' Yates haf lied in brint.' Very sad, but quite
understandable. A new series of books will presendy
deal with facts of natural history, wherein shall not
appear one single statement based upon the wild
romancings of the ancient naturalists, but all verified
by personal obser\-ation, with the names of the authors
given for easy reference.

Not that, except in the interests of truth, it matten
very much whether one speaks of the Man-of-War
Bird as subsisting on the wing through life and floating
calmly over hundreds of leagues of ocean remote from
land, or whether he be compared with the condor
of the Andes for power of vision and spread of wing,
or any other tale that might occur to so essentially
fanciful a raconteur as the romantic Michelet. Only
if we are to have facts, let them be facts ; if fiction,
let us understand and enjoy it as such. The Frigate
Bird is wonderful enough to excite all our admiratitHi,
without one scrap of fiction being tacked on to him,
elegant and withal rapacious enough to be called
the eagle of the sea, although his size is so small that
hawk would be the better synonym. In commtm
with multitudes of other sailors, I have had many
ample opportunities of being quite familiar widi
the Frigate Bird, and in what I have to say about
him 1 shall only state that which I know from personal
observation.

I first knew the Frigate Bird in the West Indies,
afterwards about Ascension, and after that again
all over the Gulf of Mexico and around its sandy
bays. And as I read Michelet's effusion after I had



Entirely Predatory



405



become well acquainted with the bird, I was the more
eager to substantiate my first observations, and by
enquiry among seamen, to get reliable information
from others.

First of all, as to the oceanic range of the Frigate
Bird. Three natural history books lie before me,
all ostensibly based upon authentic information.
One speaks of the Frigate Bird soaring over hundreds
of leagues of ocean, another of its being seen four
hundred leagues from land, and the third, of its calmly
resting on the wing one hundred leagues from land.
I have never seen a Frigate Bird more than fifty
miles from shore, nor ever heard of one being seen one
hundred miles from land. The latter, I am sure,
is about their limit, and for the best of all reasons.

The Frigate Bird is essentially a pirate, a robber,
who preys upon the earnings of honest birds. I do
not mean to say that he cannot fish at all for himself,
because I have seen him swoop down upon a flying-fish
in the air as a hawk does upon a small bird and carry
it off exultantly. But long, close watching has
convinced me that alone among all the sea-birds, the
Frigate Bird is unable to catch a fish under water
or feed upon the water. That they can swim, their
webbed feet will prove, although the webs are quite
rudimentary ; but I never saw one swimming, nor
saw one so much as touch the water.

And in this there is to my mmd something very
mysterious and wonderful. It seems to me that
these birds are really to the sea what hawks are to
the land, and this supposition is supported by the
testimony of a gentleman who has studied them
very closely, Mr. Palmer, the gentleman who made
the Hon. Walter Rothschild's wonderful collection
of sea-birds and their eggs. He records that at



k



The Frigate Bird



Laysan he many times noticed the Frigate Birds
snatch a young one from a nest and eat it. Sometimes,
he says, the parent bird would give chase, but the
matter always ended by one or other of them eating
the young bird. They would even take young birds
out of the nest that were almost fully fledged. Now
this is a truly diabolic characteristic, not shared by
any other sea-bird, and hardly to be surpassed by the
all-embracing voracity and ferocity of the \'ulture.
There can, I think, be but little doubt that the Frigate
Bird is a close relation of the pelican, but his habits
certainly entitle him to be called the vulture of
the sea.

But it is high time that I attempted a description
of the Frigate Bird, seeing that, although of so romantic
and extraordinary a character, he is little known to
the great majority of readers. The body of the Frigate
Bird then is, when full grown, about as large as that
of a raven, but more elegantly shaped, of course, for
its great power of flight. Its colour is rusty, not
glossy, black, in none have I ever seen a white feather.
Moreover, for some reason I do not pretend to fathcnn,
it does not keep its plumage in good order, the feathers
never lying neat and sleeked, as in other sea-birds.

Considering the size of its body, the wings of the
Frigate Bird may truly be called enormoas, bat to
speak of them as one naturalist of eminence does,
as being fourteen feet from tip to tip is just a wild
piece of exaggeration. I have measured a great
many, but never found one that exceeded six feet in
the breadth of its pinions, and it would indeed be an
extraordinary specimen that attained to a wing-spread
of eight feet. Even those I measured had the ends
of their wings extending when folded more than half-
way down the very long tail and overlapping one



A Living Balloon 407

another in t particularly awkward-looking way, as
if they were only meant to be kept expanded. The
tail is a little longer than the body, and composed
of a few strong feathers, which the bird, when on the
wing, manipulates in a striking way When hovering
high in air with wings wide-spread and motionless,
the tail is seen to divide in the middle, the two halves
separating widely and closing again to a point, exactly
as the blades of a pair of scissors do. In fact, if I had
been going to give this bird a trivial name based upon
his most noticeable characteristic, I think I should
have called him the ' scissor-bird.' The purpose
served by this peculiar movement of the tail is, I
think, obvious enough ; it is for steering purposes,
while the wings remain immobile.

The beak, as usual with raptorial birds, is long,
powerful, and hooked at the end. In colour it is a
dirty white, and the edges of both mandibles are
exceedingly sharp. Underneath the beak is a most
curious appendage of the colour of blood, glaring
against the dark background of the body. At first
sight it appears as if, like the pelican, the Frigate
Bird possessed a pouch for the holding of food, except
that the Frigate Bird's pouch does not commence
on the lower mandible or half of the beak, but just
below where the heak joins the head, on the neck.
Generally it is invisible, but while the bird is soaring
a watcher will see the crimson netlike bag suddenly
become inflated, until it looks almost portentous in
its size as compared with that of the bird. There
can be no doubt whatever that it is part of the creature's
provision for remaining in the air so still as it does
at great heights, just a bladder capable at the will of
its possessor of being &lled with air. And yet I cannot
help thinking that tiiere is some flaw in this argument,



I



The Frigate Bird

because I feel sure that some Frigate Birds do not cany
one of these bladders. In watching numbers of them
I have noticed that some had it, and some had not ;
but whether those without it were young ones or hens
I am unable to say.

Their legs are short and feeble, and although the feet
are webbed the webs are only about half way down the
toes. So that they are obviously meant to live practi-
cally on the wing. All naturalists agree that they
are never seen swimming, certainly I have never seen
one doing so, and as for walking on land it is almost
an impossibility with them. They are said to roost
npon the branches of trees, a most unusual thing for
sea-birds to do. and I will not deny the possibility
of this. But whenever I have seen them ashore,
they have roosted and laid their eggs and incubated
among rugged rocks, where, by the aid of their wings,
they could flutter heavily from one irregularity to
another. A flat surface to walk upon is usele^ fo
them. Their method of feeding again is peculiarly
hawk-like and different from that of all other sea-birds.

So great an authority and careful an observer as
Charles Darwin, while not stating explicitly that the
Frigate Bird snatches its food from the sea-surface,
says that if the offal, etc., which they desire sinks
more than six or eight inches below the ^irface it is lost
to them, as they cannot dive like any other sea-fovd.
He also notes, as I have done myself, that such is
their power of manoeuvring upon the wing that they
can, and do, snatch the just hatched turtles cm their
toddling way down the beach to the sea from the pit
where they were bom. To watch a Frigate Bird
poised, say, a thousand feet above the sea almost
motionless, except for the slow turning of the head
from side to side, and the wide-eyed glance of the



The Grace of Rapine



409



eye beneath, suddenly descend in a series of graceful
curves and snatch the hapless flying-fish as he rises
from the sea, is to realise how wonderful are the powers
given to these birds. It is an object-lesson in perfectly
graceful motion, even the snatch which secures the
finny fugitive being made with such swift alertness
that the eye cannot follow it, and the beholder imagines
that the bird has missed its prey. Rising into the
air again the fish is often dropped, probably because
it was not in a good position for swallowing, and with
one glorious swoop, made with apparent deliberateness,
but really with tremendous swiftness, the falling fish
has been caught again in the right position, and as the
bird soars once more, the observer may see it being
slowly degusted.

But, as I have been obliged to hint before, the
main business of life for the Frigate Bird seems to
be that of a robber. When the motherly boobies
leave their young and fussily flap out to the fishing
groimds, they do not see that floating, like black
specks in the blue above, the Frigate Bird is waiting
for their appearance. I use the singular, because
the Frigate Bird is most unsociable. He is often
seen in company with others of his own kind, that
is in the sense of propinquity, but there is no sort
of co-operation or apparent desire of association one
with another. Every pirate singles out his victim,
watches with keenest interest from his serene height
the labouring search, imperceptibly descending to
a lower plane until when at last the hard-working
mother, having secured the fish, starts for home,
there is a swift descent as of a black shadow, full of
ease, apparently effortless, yet restrained. It is no
more like the headlong plunge of the gannet than a
man running is like a bird flying,



k



410 The Frigate Bird

Poor booby becomes conscious of the presence d
her aggressor, as hasteless, fateful, he nears her ; Laboon
hardly, frantically to escape, screams moumfuHy
and dodges. As well try to dodge a lightning flasJi.
The pirate is in no hurry, secure of his prey he draw!
nearer, nearer, until with a wild scream of rage and
terror booby drops her fish and hurries to sea again
for more. On the instant, the wide wings, only
partially extended before, expand to their full spread,
there is a tremendous curve through the air, and the
falling fish is caught with ease and certainty, although
sometimes only just as it is touching the water, and
the graceful thief mounts again to his aerial point of
vantage.

The pathos of the whole thing seems to me that
it is invariably the hen boobies who are robbed, the
male birds devouring their fish as soon as they secure
it. But the mother needs her catch for the unBedged
youngsters at home, and is consequently precluded
from swallowing by (he power of her maternal instinct.
With such power of wing and ability to swoop upon
their prey it does seem a pity that the Frigate Birds
cannot confine themsdves to the work of catching
their own fish first hand. But then man is always <d
opinion that he is wiser and more merciful than God,
Who hath done all things well, tt is another Jnstance
of htmian arrogance, which indeed cannot be trusted
to interfere in any of Nature's work without doiiig
harm that he cannot again undo.

One peculiarity attaches to the Frigate Bird which
I found very pleasant. On the occasion of which I
spoke in the chapter on boobies, when the men made
a raid upon the boobies* nests (if their httle hdlows
in the sand could be thus designated), I, having no
boots, was compelled to stand aside or suffer grievous.



A Desert Home 411

harm to my feet from the powerful beaks of the birds,
which they drove right and left like lance-heads at
the legs and feet of their aggressors ; and those of
the eggs which were not addled or nearly hatched
were not, I must say, at all pleasant eating, especially
for me, for whom a duck's egg is too strong. So my
part was to carry the eggs into camp, but finding
out what they were like, I determined to absent myself
from the booby-egg-hunt next morning, and have an
expedition by myself.

Now the opfwDsite side of the island upon which
we were was of a totally different character to the
side where we cam pied, The island was divided
almost in half, our side being flat, sandy, and in many
places sparsely covered with a straggling sort of bind-
weed. The other side was composed of huge masses
of jagged rock hurled together in fantastic confusion,
as if they had been shot out of a chariot of the gods.
Over these tumbled masses I climbed with considerable
pain to my feet, which only the intense cunosity I
felt could allay, until suddenly I came upon a series
of hollows, in each of which were two large eggs, large,
that is, as a good-sized turkey's egg and much the
same in appearance. I was delighted, and immediately
very busy collecting these treasures until I had as
many as I could carry back in my cap. In the course
of my researches I saw many hen birds sitting on
their eggs, and while I took careful note of them,
watched them in fact with an almost painful intent-
ness, I am glad to say I never disturbed one of them.

May I say in passing that I hope my readers will
appreciate the almost painful delight that all this
was to me ? I had never known anything before this
but the sedate quiet of a London suburb, sheltered
from all outside influences in my aunt's quiet home,


The Frigate Bird

and afterwards the strange nomadic existence of flw
London streets, and here I was in fairyland. Ah.
there was nothing of the nil admirari about roc. Onlv
one thing was wanting, the coping-stone of all real
enjoyment, some one to share it with me. But b
this imperfect world the ideal is always just bej-cmd
our reach, and my already great happiness was by
just that much incomplete.

Another thing I noticed, the pathos of which com-
pletely reversed the severe judgment I had already
passed upon these birds for what I considered their
reaUy infamous behaviour towards the poor txwbies,
the mournful closing-in of their Uves- And as I have
never since seen any sea-birds under the same con-
ditions, the extreme characteristic impression still
remains with me, not to be obhterated or even altered
in any way. On many of the rock points around sat
Frigate Birds, whose active life was over. Some grim
disability had seized them, rendering them unable
any longer to soar on high in proud superiority,
monarchs of the tropical skies over the sea. There
was for them no help, none of their kind came to feed
them or sjmipathise with them, just contemptnons
neglect was accorded to them. They could not be
said to have any enemies ; yes, perhaps one, the
wonderful tenacity with which life clung to them.

Oh, the pity of it ; after such a life as theirs to sit
through the bright day and the sweet night doomed
irrevocably to die, but unable to reach that Uessed
change except through the long agony of waiting !
Their feathers hung limply down, their useless wings
trailed, the joints gleaming whitely through. Those
once piercing eyes were glazed, the proud heads
drooped, and only the slightest motion, a sort of
shudder, showed that they were conscious of my



A Welcome Contribution 4^3

presence and unable to resent or avoid it. And all
around them were the bones of those of their com-
rades who had in like manner sat and waited for death,
as if to assure them that although the way was long
the goal was sure. An added pathos came from the
fact that coming and going birds paid not the slightest
attention to these silent candidates for sympathy,
much less help. But neither would they assault
the helpless ones, and thus open the door of relief
to them. As I stood and gazed 1 felt the tears stream-
ing down, for, young as I was, the spectacle was
sufficiently sad to compel all my sympathy. But
it never occurred to me that I could do anything.

Very sadly I gathered up my eggs and took my
way back, my spirits rising as the distance between
me and the dying ones increased, until, when I reached
the camp and produced my find, I was quite ready
to be puffed up with a sense of my own great im-
portance to the community. It was nearly breakfast-
time, and my contribution was immediately put in
hand for cooking. They were boiled, those eggs,
and the first man to taste one shouted joyfully :
' Why, they're better than chickens' eggs.* I cordially
endorsed his statement. They were really delicious ;
and what is more, there was not an addled one among
them, which I attribute to the fact that I had not
disturbed any of the parent birds from their sitting.
The whole of them were eaten for breakfast, and
afterwards, since there were no immediate duties to
perform, all hands started for this new treasure field,
greedily intent upon rifling it completely, not at all
because we were in need of food, our store being very
abundant, but — well, because I suppose man is natur-
ally greedy.

But this raid was, in a little expected sense.


entirely beneficent. For when the men reached tlic
rocks and saw the monumental poses of the dying i
birds, they, forgetting for the moment the quest far
eggs, rushed upon them with sticks, and slew until
the last of the sufferers had been set free. It was
done in a very brutal and thoughtless way, but the ■>
result was entirely good. Still, I felt glad even tblS
I had no hand in it. so perfectly unmerciful may soiW
of our most merciful restraints be.

A great gathering of eggs was made, so great that'
the whole of the laying ground was completely cleared
of them, and also, with a wantonness for which Ii
cannot find sufficient condemnation, the eg^ upco
which the mothers were sitting were also taken,
none of them fit for food. So we had a grand feast
of eggs for two or three days, after which we had to
go without, for we could not go back to the rank
eggs of the booby with the fresh, sweet taste of the
Frigate Birds' eggs in our mouths. And then the mefl^
lamented, as usual too late, their extravagance. I
noticed, however, that every day one or two of tbe
men would go over to the rocks and have a bn^
search for a stray egg or so. Seamen are, of coune,
passionately fond of fresh eggs and v^etables, because
ihey come their way so seldom. So that their vorad^
may perhaps be excused.

I am loth to leave the Frigate Bird, because be
is the last of the Deep-Sea People with which I have
to deal. And jret, somehow, I do not feel able to
treat of his life in an idyllic fashion. Having stated
what I know about him, I fear I have left mysdf
Utile room or reason so to do. He seems to be entirdy
free from all those pretty traits characteristic of most
other sea-birds. So destitute of natural affectiMi
•ra they, even for their young, that it is no uncommm



A Comic Interlude



415



thing, I am told, for the hen and cock to fight furiously
over the body of the poor fledgeling until it is torn
to pieces, which pieces they devour with the greatest
avidity. Now there are sea-birds as well as land-birds
which will eat each others' eggs, but no sea-bird
except the Frigate Bird will ever devour the young of
even other birds, much less its own. It is a horrible
practice, but one, I suppose, that has become common,
owing to the birds' curious limitations in the way of
food-getting.

I may just say in passing that one of the most
comical natural history scenes I ever witnessed was
enacted among these rocks, under my very nose
almost. A bird was sitting, and for some reason
I did not understand, kept looking anxiously first
at me and then down by its side at a crevice in the
rocks. I stepped a pace or two nearer to see what
might be the matter, when the bird, apparently unable
to endure my presence any longer, soared away,
exposing two eggs. Immediately there appeared
over the edge of the hollow in which the eggs lay the
points of a row of claws, and a large crab hoisted itself
hurriedly by means of them. It at once embraced
one of the eggs, and turning to carry it off, tried to
trundle the other one after it by covering the eggs
with two of its feet. I had no stick, and a wholesome
dread of the nippers of a crab like that, so I stayed
where I was and watched the poacher's antics. They
were irresistibly funny. He tried to look at me and
where he was going at the same time ; he wanted
both of those eggs, and they hampered his movements.
While he was cuddling the front egg, he tried to keep
the other big claw ready for attack or defence, as the
case presented itself ; and on top of all his other
troubles I could see that he expected the proprietress



>



The Frigate Bitd



of them would be back again directly, and that sU
was much more to be feared than the featherlesi
biped that was watching him. The upshot of it
all was that he fell off the edge of the rock, a disUnct
of about four feet, on to a small boulder. There was
quite a smash, for when I looked after hitn I saw that
both eggs were split, some of his claws were damaged,
and there was a crack across his carapa.ce that looked
as if he would need a new one at oijce. But the tumble
did not seem to worry him. He was makii^ the
best of the time at his disposal loading his reservoir
with the contents of the eggs, while I watched him,
laughing more heartily than I had done for a long time,
I know that the recital of his adventures has Utile
humour about it, but bis antics were as comical u
those of any clown. j



CHAPTER XXVIU
SEAWEED



ND now, having come to the close of my pleasant
J^ task, I would like to take the liberty of saying a
few words upon a subject which, while not strictly
within the compass of my subject, is so closely allied to
it that I hope I shall be forgiven for alluding to it. It
is about Seaweed. I cannot pretend to have made the
growths of the sea a matter of study, although I am
well aware how fascinating the subject is; but I have
noticed very closely how important Seaweed is to fish,
and especially the fish of the Deep Sea. Not as a matter
of food, of course. With the exception of the manatees
and possibly the turtle, as far as I am aware, none
of the Deep-Sea People eat Seaweed, but use it for
purposes of shelter and breeding.

The most important of all, as well as, I think,
the most wonderful, is the beautiful sea-growth known
to sailors as Gulfweed or Sargasso Weed, and to
oceanologists as Fucus natans, because it floats and
grows, needing no settled abiding place or root-hold.
It is confined to the North Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico,
and is found in greatest quantities in the vast eddy
formed on the eastern side of that ocean between the
Gulf Stream and the Equatorial Current. A whole
series of romances might be buOt upon this wonderful
weed-covered port'on of the ocean. One or two have
lased on the supposition that the enormous
♦1? 27



1418



Seaweed



masses of closely knit weed are impenetrable by ships,
and that by some curious centripetal force the majority
of derelicts in the North Atlantic, unless destroyed,
find their way into its solitudes sooner or later.

I do not believe that it is anj'where packed suffi-
ciently closely to prevent a sailing sliip getting through
it, given sufficient wind. But then that part of lie
North Atlantic is subject to many calms and ligM
airs, and there is seldom a breeze of sufficient strength
blowing over it to enable a sailing ship to force her way
through. I have several times saUed through parts
of the region where the sea looked more like some
vast ripe cornfield than anything else, and no matter
what wind we had tliere were no waves, they simply
could not rise because of the weed. Steamers of course
give it a very wide berth, since the great masses of
weed hampers a propeller dreadfully, and that too
when so much more pwwer than usual is needed to
force the ship through.

The Gulfweed is, I think, the most beautiful of
all Seaweeds. It is of a light golden hue, with delicate
leaves and berries, both of the same colour^ and bearing
no resemblance in shape to the ribbon-like mack
of the coast. It certainly looks tempting enou^ to
eat, and it may be also that, unknown to us, some
(rf the sea creatures do eat it. But that is certainly
not its primary use. In it myriads of the deep-sea
fish breed, its close-knit fronds affording shelter to
the young fry when hatched such as they could gain
nowhere else in the sea. Not only shelter, but food
perfectly suited to their immature needs. It simply
swarms with life, and a bucket full of weed hauled
up almost anywhere would yield a splendid population
for a deep-sea aquarium.

It is the home too of myriads of crabs, ndiich I



Submarine Forests



419



do not think ever grow to any size. I certainly do
not suggest that the edible crab of our coasts breeds
there, and makes the long journey through mid-
ocean to get to where he may become of use to man.
Especially, as the crab cannot swim through the water
horizontally like other Crustacea, he must have a place
of some stability to walk upon, whether it be the
bottom of the sea, or a frond of weed, or the planks
of a derelict. No, I feel sure that the small crabs of
the Gulfweed are a small species, and do not grow
larger than, say, three inches across the carapace.
It is the breeding place of the marvellous flying-fish,
whose ova closely simulate its berries. It also affords
a spawning ground for those fish such as the dolphin,
which are the flying-fishes' fiercest enemies.

But as most of this has already been said in the
course of preceding chapters I will pass on, albeit
reluctantly, from the wonderful floating weed of the
North Atlantic to the gigantic ' Kelp,' as sailors
insist upon calling it, of the South Seas. Round
many of those isolated mountain peaks rising from the
lonely ocean plateaux two or three thousand fathoms
beneath, piercing the troubled surface of the almost
equally lonely sea, and towering another thousand
fathoms into the air there grows an extraordinary
plant. Its leaves grow to a length of six feet and
a width of a foot, being in colour and consistency
like wet leather. Their stems, as thick as a stout
man's arm, grow to lengths unknown, but certainly
over a hundred feet, grow up from the rocks beneath
until they reach the surface, a veritable submarine
forest whose limits are sharply defined by the
depths from which the plant can reach the water-
surface.

All around an island such a forest will grow to a


distance off shore proportionate to the steepness ^
the descent of the island's base. Within its limits
no sea can rise. The fiercest waves that ever r<dl
make no impression upon this natural breakwater,
whose piles are so flexible that one may tie them in
a knot, and so slender that they may be encircled by
a hand clasp. Through the dim recesses of this won-
derful forest the fish wander at their ease and in perfect
shelter from whatever it is that fish, surface fish that
is, disUke in a storm. In among its foliage they find
infinite stores of food, yet in its deepest confines there
is safe shelter for the young fry that would otherwise
soon be annihilated. And for the navigator it often
marks outlying rock points that would otherwise
be passed unobserved, although it certainly prevents
the sea breaking over them in a gale.

Occasionally immense masses of it are torn by the
violence of the waves from the root-holds on the out-
lying fringe of the forest and take a long, long journey ,
by the aid of the sea and current, carrying with them
a microcosm of fish life to breed and multiply in some
far-distant land from their original habitat. Whidi
may account for the prevalence of predsdy the same
fish in places so very widely separated. Take it
altogether, it is a curious plant, drawing no sustenance
through its roots, but merely anchoring in obedience
to some strange plant instinct for fear of being washed
away, and sub^ting entirely upon what it draws
direct from the limpid but bitterly salt waters of
the sea.

And lastly, not because of the exhaustion of the
subject, but because I can only deal with deep-sea
weed ; that wonderfully rapid growing weed which
appears as it were spontaneously in any part of the
ocean where there is a solid substance to which it can



¥



H The Slimy Sea Grass 421

attach itself. Kipling alludes to it in his fine poem
of the Derelict :—



' South where the corals breed,
The footless (loating weed
Folds me and Touls me, stiake on strike upcniwling.'



Its Spores must be universally diffused all over the
millions of square miles of ocean. For only let a
congenial surface be exposed to the action of the sea,
such as a wooden plank or a bare piece of iron (it
does not love the poisonous paint which is put on
the bottom of steel ships or yellow metal sheathing),
and in an incredibly short space of time the weed
will cover it with a bright green slimy veil which,
being scraped off and dried, looks like the very finest
grass. So rapidly does it grow that in wet ships,
as we call them, that is, vessels over whose decks the
sea is almost continually washing in heavy weather,
it is absolutely necessary to give the decks a good
hard scrubbing every two or three days to clear ofE
this weed growth, which is so extremely slippery as
to make it dangerous to walk about the decks.

It is a very curious sight to see a ship, a sailing
ship that is, that has been out a long while rolling
lazily in a calm with the long dank tresses of the weed
on her sides lying closely to her as she lifts, and floating
out all around her as if alarmed when she plunges.
But it looks exceedingly mournful upon a derelict,
which naturally gathers more upon it than a vessel
which is being handled, since it is obvious that the
quieter its host the more rapid its rate of growth.
It wUl there be found growing thickly all over her,
even in the cabins if the sea has easy access, and as
she wallows helplessly it spreads like a gloomy halo
worn by the genius of despair. Only upon closer



422



Seaweed



inspection it is seen to be somewhat enlivened by th*
presence of a multitude of living creatures, mostly
Crustacea or the spat of limpets and barnacles ; and
one feels that, instead of being in the presence of
death, he is in the midst of abundant joyful life.

My pleasant task is over, and for all apology- for
its many shortcomings I can only say that I have done
my best to put facts before the reader without being
tedious, so that if the instruction was slender the
interest might not flag. I need scarcely say that by
the aid of text books it would have been quite easy
to expand each one of these chapters into a book
as long as the whole of them. But that, I take it,
would have been to defeat the object for which 1
was commissioned to write these papers, and which 1
tried to foreshadow in the brief introduction to them.
If what has been here set down has in some degree
increased the reader's interest in and reverence for
the work of God in places far from his every-day ken
and made him feel that it is worth while to cultivate
a wide and sjrmpathetic outlook upon Uis wmld, I
shall be abundantly repaid.



INDEX



A6ULHA8 BahkSi the, 64

cod at, 385
Albacore, the, 182-203

description of, 182

food of, 183

size of, 184

fishing for, 185, 201

range o( 187

life-story of, 187-203

egg-laying, 202
AltMitross, 331-349

description of, 333

food ot 334

»nge ot 336

breeding of, 337

varieties of^ 338

life-stoiy of, 341-349
AUpuaurus ferox

description of, 156

range of, 157

fragility of, i$8
Alligator guard, 98, 1 10
Alopecias vulfies

the foe of right whales» 45
Anchovy, 307
Antarctic Circle, the, 49
Auckland Island, 84
Auks, 397
Autobiography of a sperm

whale, 13-38

Bacallao, 283
Balaena austroHs^ 48-50
Balaenoptera sibbtddU sulphur-

eaus^ 04
Baleen, 46
Bank cod fishery, 281



Barbadoes, albacore at, 185

flying-fish fishery at, 230-233
Barnacles, 353
Barracouta, 310-328

description of, 311

anecdotes of, 312

fishing for, 313-328

rapacity of, 321

life of, 323

difierences in, 324

varieties o( 324
Barrier Reef; the^ 53
Bartholinus, 137
Basilaurust i<$9
Basking Shark, 97
Bean, Mr., ill, 310^ 325
Becke, Louis, 1 10
Beluga, the, 66, 67, 70
BeuModesmus AUanti'cus, 159
Beukelaer, William, 295
Ber^ren, receipt at, 81
Bilhngsgate, nsh at, 278
Black Fish, 67, 71
Bonito, the, 204, 220

description, 204

fishing for, 305, 209

size of, 207

range of, 207, 3 10

warm-blooded, 314

parasites o( 315

as food, 217
Boobies, 386-39C

description ou 387

stupidity of, 388

anecdotes of, 388

hunting for, 389

foes oi; 393



4«3



424



Index



Batt1(^-noM Whale, 66
Bowhead Whale, 39-50
Brama, 373

BridKt^iowD, fljiog-Iish at, 330
•Britannia,' 386
Burbot. 290

Burn-Murdoch, cry of, 95
By Reef and Palm, 1 10

'Cachalot,' 318

Cani)jbell tslind, 84

Cape Hens. 338. 340

Cape Pigeons. 350, 359-367

Ca/ttainj CoMrageouf, ifli

Carlisle Bay. 185

CavBll«, 317

Cepkalirpuda, tI7. 13J, 134-136

Ctlamtmus. 155

'ChallenRcr,' the, 146, 1^4, 163

Chelon* imbricala. 113

Chelonophagt, 133

Ckinsmodon niger, IJ3

CbimcETas, Deep-Sca, 146-164

Regnltcus, I S3

Ckiasmoiion nigtr, 153

RoHdeietia, ijs

Cttomimus, 15J

SifuncMys, tJS

Euryphatynx, 155

PtUconoida, J 56

Sticcophcaynx fiagellutit, 156

AUpisaunu ferox, is6

Froat-iiah, i^S

Benlkodetmui Allanlimt, I ^9

Lopholatilui ekamaeltonticeps,
159

Tile-fish, 159

Afancctlins Urtmoscopui, 163

Coryitohphus Reinkardtii, 164

Melanoatus JohHsanii, [64

Liocetus Murray i, 164
Chinese fishermen, 133
Clupea alba. 30^
Clufiea pilckaraus. 297
" Cockney,' anecdote of, 236
Cod, 374-290

fecundity of, 27;

food of. 276, 280, a86

fiahing for, 376. 281, 33]

deciease of, 277



Cod — (OMJiMMAf)

numbers of, 380

cod-liver oil, 2S4

varieties of, 1Z7 '

site of, 290
CmyHoli>pMiis Reinkar^tH, 1(4
Cmyphaena, 67
Coryphaena e^uit^tui, 250
Coryphaerut hififiMrui, sjo
Crabs, 418

Crusades, tribute to. 81
Crustacea, liny, 41
Cuttle-fish, food for tgam

whales, 24

description of, 127-145

species of, 132

Pliny on. 136

stories of, 137-140

fecundity of, 141

their scent of musk, 14]

mode of reproduction, 143

DactylopUrut orUntaUs, 236
DactylopUrus valitans, 236
nadalus, the. 176
Darwin, Charles, on firigate \Kc\

408
Decapods, description o^ 132

ranee of. 133

food of, 134
Delphinidiu, 66

species of, 67

foes of, 69

cannibalism of, 69
DfTelid. quoted, 421
Dng Fish. 113
Dolphins, the, 66, 23S-255

species of, 67

fins of, 69

cajiDibalism, 69

description of. 238

colours of, 239

scales of, 240

medial line, 340

Sns of. 240

shape of, 341

breeding-places, 24!

ranf^c of, 242

fishing for. 344, 248, 3^

cannibalism of. 346



Index



425



Dolphins — (continMed)

numbers of, 247

food oi, 348

flesh of, 249

species of, 250

lUe oi; 253

as food, 25$
thew, Captain, on sea-aerpents,

173
Dugong, 73f 74

Eckimeis nmcra^ 273
Edmhtrgk to the Antarctic, 95
Elephant Seal. See Sea Ele-
phant
EmysoMra serpentina, 121
Engraulis, yjy
Eskimo, hunters of walruSf 81
EudyptUa minor, 398
Ewypkarynx, 155
Exocetae, 185
Exocetus nigricans, 228
Exvcetus volitans, 222

FnUf ANDO DO NORONHA, 99

Finback Whale, the, visit of, 60
Fishes, deep-sea, 146-164
Fishing, a grand day's, 326
Flat-fishes, 325
Flat-head, the, 144
Floating island, a, 213
Flounders, 326
Flying-fish, 221-237

powers of, 221

£, vciitans, 222

description of, 223

velocity of, 225

bladders of, 226

spawning place of, 227

fecundity of, 228

E. nigricans, 228

fishing for, 229-233

range of, 234

numbers of, 234
French whalers, 48
Fresh-water Herring, 308
Frigate Bird, 403-416

range of, 40S

character of, 405, 409

description of, 406



Frigate Bird—icontirtued)

eggs of, 411

old birds, 412

a comic scene, 415
Frost-fish, 158
Fucus natans, 417
Fulmar Petrel, 335, 373

Gadidae, 274

Gar-fish, 261

Giant Petrel, 335

Giant Skate, 98, no

Globicephalus, 71

Gloucester, Mass., fishermen of,

282
Goode, Mr., iii, 159^ 179^ 310^

325
Gosse, Mr., 173

Grampus, the, 67

Great Auk, 397

Greenland Whale. See Rij^t

Whale
Greenlander*8 tribute of walrus

tusks, 81
Grenadines, the, 117
Grien, M., 168
Groper, 327
Gulfweed, 417, 418
Giinther, Dr., on sharks, I09

on deep-sea fishes, 146

on oar-fish, 352

on herring, 291
Gurnard, red, 2^5
Gurnard, sapphirine, 23$
Gymnopus, 121

Haddock, 275, 278
Hake, 275
Halibut, 325
Halicore, 73

food of, 74
Harbinger, the, 1 13
Harp Seal, 90
Hartwig, Dr., on cod, 274

on albatross, 335

on penguins, 399

Hawk's-bill Turtle, li\
* Helen McGregor/ 310
Herring, 291-309

trade in, 292-294, 296



436

ptening — {roHtin utit)

[ntige of, 394
curing of, 19 s
Mtietiea of. 297-309
fishing for, J03
Hobrcn's Bay, 144
Holland, fisheries in. 396
Helotkuria, 123
Home, Mr. V.., on foEsD Etfh tto



a( «



Ittto


Kauwhai, 337
Kelp, 419

Kci^uelen'i Land, S4
Kh^indromi, 187
Killer Wbale, 43
King of the herringa, 153
Kipling, Budyard, 9. 73. 4o3. 431
Kircher, Athaaaaiua, 137
Koch, Dr. A. C, on tea-Mtpenti,
173



Lahck-fish. Stt Sword-fi^
Large Herring, 308
Lee, Mr., 173
Limpets on whales, 57
Ling, 11%, 388
Uocetut Murre^, 164
Lister, Dr., 173
Lofoden Islands, 138



T r I iiiJ \



\



Loligo. 133
' London,' 363
topkoiatilus

L'Onent, 306
Loyally Ulandi
Luc39, Mt., t6i
Lydckker, 310



Mahaiarata, th«, 179
Mackerel, 356-173

sold on Sundaj, 357

dangers of, 357

Ocsh of, 3sS

description of, 358

schools of. 359

numbers of, 360

range ot, 360

mackerel guide. 361

aclioR of moon upon, 365

use of. in America, 363

varieties of, 363-273

Sec also Albacore
Mackerel Guide, 36i
Magnus, Olaus, on the knk^
'37 -

on sea-serpenU, 170 m

Maldive Island, 365 ^

Mallemucks, 338
Man-of-wat Bird, 403
Manalees, 73-76

food of, 74

as pets, 7S

character of. 7;
Mancalius UroHOieapus, 163
Maori es fishery for BarracouU,

318
McQuhae, Captain, on sea-set-

Vpent, 176
tdusae, 128, tSS
MegapUra, 167
MiiaMOcetus Johnsonii, 164
Melville, Herman, quoted, 139
Menhaden, 397
Michelet, 403, 404
Mimtilus mosckatus, 143

unireraality of, icent

f. 37 i



Index



427



Monaco, Prince of; 20S
Monarch of the Deep, the, 10
Moon, action of, upon fish, 263
Morse, the. See Walrus.
Mother Carey's Chicken, 351,

368, 375
Mullet, New Zealand, 337
Musk, universality of, 371
Musk-rat's Uil, scent o( 371
Jkfyrmecopkagus, 77
Mysticetus, the, 39^50

Narborough, Sir J^ 398

Narwhals, 67, 70

Nature, 174

Nelson, Peter, 167

Nets, fishing, 303

New 2^ealand, salmon and trout

taken to, 331
Newfoundland Banks^ the, 64,

379

cod fishery of^ 385
North Pole, the, 40
Norwegian whalers, 63
Nova Scotia, 379

Oar-fish, 153

Ocean depths, life at, 147

OcUpoda, 128

Octopus, the, 137-145
description o( 128, 130
adventure with, 138
size o( 131
sucking discs of, 131

Otch, 67

Orca gladiahr, 43

Orkney, fossil in. 180

Oudemans, Professor, on sea-
serpents, 168-17 1

Owen, Professor, on sea-ser-
pent% 176

Paiaro nine, 399

Pauner, Mr., on frigate birds,

405
' Pauline,' the, 173
Paulinus, 137
Pelican4rides, 156
Penguins, 395

description of, 397, 398


Penguins — {amiimtud)

life ot 398

range of, 399

food of, 401
Pennant, 373
Pericles^ quoted, 68
Petrels, the, 368-385
Phaetam etherius, 356-358
Pilchard, 297

numbers of, 298

taste of, 296

trade in, 299
Pilot fish, 100-103
Pintado Petrel, 350
Piscan del Diablo, 98
PUsiosaurus, 177
Pliny, 123, 136
Polar Bear, the, 81
Polar Sea, the, 39
Pollock, 275, 289
Pomfrct, 272
Pontoppidan, Bishop, on Cepha-

lopods, 137

on sea-serpents, 169
Porpoise, the, 66, 67

speed of, 68

oil of, 70
Port Chahners, fishing for cod

at, 287
< Princess Alice,' 208
Pristis, 98, 107
Procellaria, 355, 375
ProceUaria pelagica, 369
Pygmy, Penguin, 398

Rauae, 98, no
Rays, 112
Red Gurnard, 235
Red Sea, the, 20
Regalecus, 152
Reingelder, 403
Remorae, 44, 103, 108

used as fi&hers, 123

true place of, 251
Rhinodon iypicus, 109
Rhytina, 73
Right Whale, 39-50

size of, 40

blubber of, 40

spermaceti, 40



Right Whtle — [eontitmed)

food of, 41

whalebone, 43

gullet of. 4a

action] a of, 43

slug)iiEhnc9B of, 43

enemies of, 4J-46

nnge of, 46

oumbeii of, 46

life of, 47

Bouthem, 4S-S0
Rock Cod. 2S7
Rockall Bank, the. 64
Rocklings, i?;, 187
Rogers, Ftafessor, on Bca-ser-

pCDtS, 171

RoDdeletia. IJS
, KorquaU, the, ;9-73

solitariness of, 60
, value oi, 6z

fishing for, 63

omnivorousneis of, £4

damage done by, 6j

species of, 66

speed of, 68
Ross. Sir J., 401
Rothschild, Hon. W., 405
' Rolotnahana,' 167

Sable Island, 279

Sauopkarynxflagellum, 156

Saddle- back Seal, 90

■St. flelcna Beef," IS3

St. Ives, pilchard fishing at, 39S

St. Paul's Rocks, 190

Salmo arcticus, zSo

Salmon taken to New Zealand,

Salting fish, 3o8-320
Sapphirine Gurnard, 23J
Sardine, 306

decrease of, 306

range of, 307
Sargasso Sea. 191, 3:7, 343
Sargasso Weed, 417
Sargassum bacd/tmm, 343
Saw-fiah, 58, 107
Scombridae. 100-103, 138
Sea, the tempetalure of. III

life at bottom of, 147-164



Sea Bear, go

Sea Cow, the, 73

Sea Elejibaat, the, 83-8}

description of, 83

nose of, 83

numbers of, 83

hunting for. 84-88

food of, 88

lot of, 89
Sea Horse, See Walna
Sea Hippopotamus, 83-89
Sea Leopard, 90
Sea Lion, 90
Sea Slug, 133
Sra Swallow, t33
Sea Turtles, 01
Sea Vitch, 77
Seals, 90-96

speed of, 90

life of, 91

abstinence of, 91

contcslaof, 91

young of, 93

range of, 94

enemies of, 94

hunliig for, 9;

iclclligencc ol, 96
Sea-serpent, the, I $3

various reports of; 165-181
Seaweed, 417-433
Se ton -Thompson, Ernest 9
Shakespeare quoted, 68
Shark, Thresher, tbe, foe of rig

whales, 45
Sharks, 97-113

have no bones, 97 ,

description of, 98

eater of human Qesh, 98 t

appetite of, 99

life-story of, 99-106 \

superstitions about, ID4 .4

fishing for, loj

young ol, 105

speKlcB of, 106

range of, 1 1 1
as tood, 314
Sicily, 184



Index



429



Sirenia, 73-76

vegetarianism of, 74
Skatc^ 98, 113

a gigantic, 112
Skip-jack, 102, 133, 217
Sleep of animals, 363
Smith, Mr. S., 372
Snapper, 327
Snoek, 318

Solander Ground, 36, 37
Soles, 326
South Georgia, 84
South Island, 25
South Shetlands, 84
Southern Right Whale, 48-50
Sperm Whale, autobiography o(

13-38
head of^ 14

school of, 14

eyes of, 14

parasites of, 20

wound of, 23

contest with cuttle-fish, 24

growth of, 2$

warning of danger, 27

chase of, 27

prisoned by iceberg, 39

food of, 30

sexes of, 31

battles of, 32-36

boats destroyed by, 36

life of, 37
Spermaceti, 40
Spharga coriacecL^ 115

life-story of, 115-I19
Sphyrotna^ 310
Sprat, the, 301

sold as sardines, 303

habits of; 303

fishing for, 303
Squalidae, 98
SpuUus maximuSt 180
Squid. See also Decapods.

facts about, 140
Stern Fitter, 375
Stewart Island, 128
Stickleback, 97
Sting Ray, no
Stinker, 373



Stork at ^oa, 396
Stormy Potiel, 368

desciiption o^ 369

musky smell of, 370

food of, 372

life-story of, 376-385
Strabo, 123
Stronsa, fossil in, 180
Suckers, 44, 103, 108
Sucking-fish, 273
Sulphur Bottom Whale^ 64
Sunday trading, 257
Swallows at sea, 395
Swordfish, the foe of ngfat
whales, 44

description of^ 263-373

fishing for, 264

powers of, 264

life-story of, 264-272

enemies o( 267

contests of, 270

Tarpon, 308

fishing for, 309
Thalassians, 121
Thresher Shark, the foe of right
whales, 45

description of the shait, 98,
108
nynnus sarda^ 217-220
Tkyrsites, 310
Thyrsitops violaceus, 325
Tiger Shark, 98
Tile-fish, 159-162
Toilers of the Sea, 127
Tonga, 51
TH^la cuculus^ 235
Thgla hirundo, 235
Tropic Bird, 356-358
Trout taken to New Zealand,

321
Trumpeter, 327
Tunny. See Albacore
Turtle, the, 1 14-126

description of, 114

range of, 1 14

life-story of, 1 1 5-1 19

egg-laying, 118

young of, 119

food of, 121



Index



'^^—{eoHtiHuti)

tundily of, ija
_ food. 113
nunliiig for, 1 33
vitality of, ta;

'Up a Waterspout," 166

Vau Vau, 109

Walrus, the, 77-83

description of, 77, 79

food of, 79

■lomach of, 79

brain of, So

parental love, 80

foea of, 81

bunting for, 81

decieasing numbers of. Si
Wcddeli, Ciiptain. 49
West Indies, the Barracouta at,

310
■West York,' 325
'Western Belle.'^slory of. 359
Watwansfer GatttU, 166
WhaJe Birds, 3SI

deacription of, 353

luge of, 3S5



WTtale, the, monarch of it-

Wliale, Bottle-Dose, 66
Whale, Humpback, 4;. 51-58
Whale, Kilter, 43
Whale, the Right, 39-50
Whale, Rorquals, 59-73
Whale, S|>eiTn, autobiography ot

'3-38
Whale, White, 66
Whale fishery, 46-48, 54-56, ti-fn
Whalebone, 41
H'kile Sea/. 9, 10. 73
White Wbale, 66, 67, 70
Whitebait, 305
Whiting, 37S, 3S9
Wilson. Dr. A.. 173, 174
•Wm. V. Hmchings,' 159
Wytnan, Professor, on lea-

serpents, 172
Xiphias, the foe of right whiles,
44i 107, 263-173

YARUotnit hening Sshoy, 39)
Yates, 403, 404
Yellow-tail, 337

ZtMghiUn, 169



if



I



I



i



I



tl



Hi


1 f

DwUMM 01 th« Map, "

fliffiiiifi


1


3 6105 031 191 401


1


\


•


STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004

(650) 723-9201

salcirc@sulmail, 5lantord.edu

All books are subject lo recall.

DATE DUE


\


^


JUfP»j im


%


\ ^
