Zanoni
========================================
Edward Bulwer-Lytton (1842) — Bulwer-Lytton's Rosicrucian novel — the occult fiction every 19th-century occultist cites, from Lévi to Blavatsky. Source: https://archive.org/details/zanoni0000edwa. Public domain.

: _ ZANONI

BY THE SAME AUTHOR,

UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME.

a

PELHAM.

FALKLAND, AND ZICCI,
DEVEREUX.

THE DISOWNED.

PAUL CLIFFORD.

EUGENE ARAM,

GODOLPHIN.

THE LAST DAYS OF POMPEII.

RIENZI.

THE LAST. OF. THE BARONS.

Volume I.

THE LAST OF THE BARONS.

Volume II.

LEILA, CALDERON, AND
PAUSANIAS.

HAROLD.
A STRANGE STORY,
ERNEST MALTRAVERS.

THE PILGRIMS OF THE RHINE
AND THE HAUNTED AND
HAUNTERS.

ALICE.

LUCRETIA.

NIGHT AND MORNING.
KENELM CHILLINGLY.
THE PARISIANS. Volume I.

THE PARISIANS. Volume II.
THE COMING RACE.

THE CAXTONS.

MY NOVEL. Volume I.
MY NOVEL. Volume II.
MY NOVEL. Volume III.

WHAT WILL HE DO WITH IT?
Volume I,

WHAT WILL HE DO WITH IT?
Volume II,

ZANONI pe

BY

THE RIGHT HON. LORD LYTTON

_— 2 er
j
— Ame

o1023se8 | sme

823.8 Bul :

bf

[  OUNIVERSITY |

' COLLEGE CHESTER ;

ee TLL OASO <i
LONDON

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, Limirrep
BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
1901

in 2024

https ://archive.org/details/zanoni0000edwa

Dedvicatory Epistle,
First Prefixed to the Edition of 1845.

TO
JOHN GIBSON, R.A.,

SCULPTOR.

Iw looking round the wide and luminous circle of our
great living Englishmen, to select one to whom I might
fitly dedicate this work,—one who, in his life as in his
genius, might illustrate the principle I have sought to
convey ;—elevated by the ideal which he exalts and serenely
dwelling in a glorious existence with the images born of
his imagination, —in looking round for some such man, my
thoughts rested upon you. Afar from our turbulent cabals
—from the ignoble jealousy and the sordid strife which
degrade and acerbate the ambition of Genius,—in your
Roman Home, you have lived amidst all that is loveliest
and least perishable in the Past, and contributed, with
the noblest aims, and in the purest spirit, to the mighty
heirlooms of the Future. Your youth has been devoted to
toil that your manhood may be consecrated to fame;—a
fame unsullied by one desire of gold. You have escaped
the two worst perils that beset the Artist in our time and
land—the debasing tendencies of Commerce, and the angry
rivalries of Competition. You have not wrought your
marble for the market—you have not been tempted by the
praises which our vicious criticism has showered upon ex-
aggeration and distortion, to lower your taste to the level

6 DEDICATORY EPISTLE TO ZANONI.

of the Hour; you have lived, and you have laboured, as if
you had no rivals, but in the Dead—no purchasers, save in
judges of what is best. In the divine Priesthood of the
Beautiful, you have sought only to increase her worshippers
and enrich her temples. The pupil of Canova, you have
inherited his excellences, while you have shunned his er-
rors :—yours his delicacy, not his affectation. Your heart
resembles him even more than your genius—you have the
same noble enthusiasm for your sublime profession—the
same lofty freedom from envy and the spirit that depre-
ciates—the same generous desire not to war with, but to
serve, Artists in your art; aiding, strengthening, advising,
elevating the timidity of inexperience, and the vague aspi-
rations of youth. By the intuition of a kindred mind, you
have equalled the learning of Winckleman, and the plastic
poetry of Goethe, in the intimate comprehension of the An-
tique. Each work of yours, rightly studied, is in itself a
criticism, illustrating the sublime secrets of the Grecian
Art, which, without the servility of plagiarism, you have
contributed to revive among us; in you we behold its three
great and long undetected principles,—simplicity, calm,
and concentration.

But your admiration of the Greeks has not led you to the
bigotry of the mere Antiquarian, or made you less sensi-
ble of the unappreciated excellence of the mighty Modern,
worthy to be your countryman,—though till his statue is
in the streets of our capital, we show ourselves not worthy
of the glory he has shed upon our land: you have not
suffered even your gratitude to Canova to blind you to the
superiority of Flaxman. When we become sensible of our
title-deeds to renown in that single name we may look for
an English public capable of real patronage to English
Art,—and not till then.

I, Artist in words, dedicate, then, to you, Artist, whose
ideas speak in marble, this well-loved work of my matured
manhood. I love it not the less because it has been little
understood, and superficially judged by the common herd.

DEDICATORY EPISTLE TO ZANONI. 7

It was not meant for them. I love it not the more, be-
cause it has found enthusiastic favourers amongst the Few.
My affection for my work is rooted in the solemn and pure
delight which it gave me to conceive and to perform. If
I had graven it on the rocks of a desert, this apparition of
my Own innermost mind, in its least clouded moments,
would have been to me as dear: And this ought, I believe,
to be the sentiment with which He whose Art is born of
faith in the truth and beauty of the principles he seeks to
illustrate, should regard his work. Your serener exist-
ence, uniform and holy, my lot denies—if my heart covets.
But our true nature is in our thoughts, not our deeds: and
therefore, in Books which ave his Thoughts—the Author’s
character lies bare to the discerning eye. It is not in the
life of cities—in the turmoil and the crowd; it is in the
still, the lonely, and more sacred life, which, for some
hours, under every sun—the student lives—(his stolen
retreat from the Agora to the Cave), that I feel there is
between us the bond of that secret sympathy, that mag-
netic chain—which unites the Everlasting Brotherhood, of
whose being Zanoni is the type.
Ee Bak;
Lonvon, May, 1840.

PREFACE

TO THE EDITION OF 1853

As a work of imagination, Zanoni ranks, perhaps, among
the highest of my prose fictions. In the poem of King
Arthur, published many years afterwards, I have taken up
analogous design, in the contemplation of our positive life
through a spiritual medium: and I have enforced, through
a far wider development, and, I believe, with more com-
plete and enduring success, that harmony between the
external events which are all that the superficial behold on
the surface of human affairs, and the subtle and intellec-
tual agencies which in reality influence the conduct of indi-
viduals, and shape out the destinies of the World. As
man has two lives—that of action and that of thought—so
I conceive that work to be the truest representation of
Humanity which faithfully delineates both, and opens
some elevating glimpse into the sublimest mysteries of our
being, by establishing the inevitable union that exists be-
tween the plain things of the day, in which our earthly
bodies perform their allotted part, and the latent, often
uncultivated, often invisible, affinities of the soul with all
the powers that eternally breathe and move throughout the
Universe of Spirit.

I refer those who do me the honour to read Zanoni with
more attention than is given to ordinary romance, to the
Poem of King Arthur for suggestive conjecture into most
of the regions of speculative research, affecting the higher
and more important condition of our ultimate being, which

10 PREFACE TO THE EDITION OF 1858.

have engaged the students of immaterial philosophy in my
own age.

Affixed to the “Note” with which this volume concludes,
and which treats of the distinction between type and alle-
gory, the Reader will find, from the pen of one of our most
eminent living writers, an ingenious attempt to explain
the interior or typical meanings of the work now before
him.

INTRODUCTION.

Ir is possible that, among my readers, there may bea
few not unacquainted with an old bookshop, existing some
years since in the neighbourhood of Covent Garden. I
say afew, for certainly there was little enough to attract
the many, in those precious volumes which the labour of a
life had accumulated on the dusty shelves of my old friend
D——. There were to be found no popular treatises, no
entertaining romances, no histories, no travels, no “ Li-
brary for the People,” no “Amusement for the Million.”
But there perhaps throughout all Europe the curious
might discover the most notable collection ever amassed by
an enthusiast of the works of Alchemist, Cabalist, and As-
trologer. The owner had lavished a fortune in the pur-
chase of unsaleable treasures. But old D—— did not
desire to sell. It absolutely went to his heart when a
customer entered his shop; he watched the movements of
the presumptuous intruder with a vindictive glare, he flut-
tered around him with uneasy vigilance; he frowned, he
groaned when profane hands dislodged his idols from their
niches. If it were one of the favourite sultanas of his
wizard harem that attracted you, and the price named
were not sufficiently enormous, he would not unfrequently
double the sum. Demur, and in brisk delight he snatched
the venerable charmer from your hands; accede, and he
became the picture of despair:—nor unfrequently, at the
dead of night, would he knock at your door, and entreat
you to sell him back, at your own terms, what you had so

12 INTRODUCTION.

egregiously bought at his. A believer himself in his
Averroes and Paracelsus, he was as loth as the philoso-
phers he studied to communicate to the profane the learn-
ing he had collected.

It so chanced that some years ago, in my younger days,
whether of authorship or life, I felt a desire to make my-
self acquainted with the true origin and tenets of the
singular sect known by the name of Rosicrucians. Dissat-
isfied with the scanty and superficial accounts to be found
in the works usually referred to on the subject, it struck
me as possible that Mr. D——’s collection, which was rich,
not only in black letter, but in manuscripts, might contain
some more accurate and authentic records of that famous
brotherhood—written, who knows? by one of their own
order, and confirming by authority and detail the preten-
sions to wisdom and to virtue which Bringaret had arro-
gated to the successors of the Chaldean and Gymnosophist.
Accordingly I repaired to what, doubtless, I ought to be
ashamed to confess, was once one of my favourite haunts.
But are there no errors and no fallacies in the chronicles of
our own day as absurd as those of the alchemists of old?
Our very newspapers may seem to our posterity as full of
delusions as the books of the alchemists do to us;—not but
what the Press is the air we breathe—and uncommonly
foggy the air is too!

On entering the shop, I was struck by the venerable
appearance of a customer whom I had never seen there
before. I was struck yet more by the respect with which
he was treated by the disdainful collector. “Sir,” cried
the last, emphatically, as I was turning over the leaves of
the catalogue ;—“ Sir, you are the only man I have met in
five-and-forty years that I have spent in these researches
who is worthy to be my customer. How—where, in this
frivolous age, could you have acquired a knowledge so
profound? And this august fraternity, whose doctrines,
hinted at by the earliest philosophers, are still a mystery
to the latest; tell me if there really exists upon the earth

INTRODUCTION. 13

any book, any manuscript, in which their discoveries, their
tenets, are to be learned?”

At the words, “august fraternity,” I need scarcely say
that my attention had been at once aroused, and I listened
eagerly for the stranger’s reply.

“T do not think,” said the old gentleman, “that the
masters of the school have ever consigned, except by
obscure hint and mystical parable, their real doctrines to
the world. And I do not blame them for their discretion.”

Here he paused, and seemed about to retire, when I
said somewhat abruptly, to the cct:ector, “I see nothing,
Mr. D——, in this catalogue which relates to the Rosicru-
cians!”

“The Rosicrucians!” repeated the old gentleman, and in
his turn he surveyed me with deliberate surprise. ‘ Who
but a Rosicrucian could explain the Rosicrucian mysteries?
And can you imagine that any members of that sect, the
most jealous of all secret societies, would themselves lift
the veil that hides the Isis of their wisdom from the
world?”

“ Aha!” thought, I “this, then, is ‘the august fraternity’
of which you spoke. Heaven be praised! I certainly have
stumbled on one of the brotherhood.”

“But,” I said, aloud, “if not in books, sir, where else
am I to obtain information? Nowadays one can hazard
nothing in print without authority, and one may scarcely
quote Shakespeare without citing chapter and verse. This
is the age of facts—the age of facts, sir.”

“Well,” said the old gentleman, with a pleasant smile,
“if we meet again, perhaps, at least; I may direct your
researches to the proper source of intelligence.” And with
that he buttoned his greatcoat, whistled to his dog, and
departed.

It so happened that I did meet again with the old gentle-
man exactly four days after our brief conversation in Mr.
D——’s bookshop. I was riding leisurely towards High-
gate, when at the foot of its classic hill I recognised the

14 INTRODUCTION.

stranger; he was mounted on a black pony, and before him
trotted his dog, which was black also.

If you meet the man whom you wish to know, on horse-
back, at the commencement of a long hill, where, unless he
has borrowed afriend’s favourite hack, he cannot, in decent
humanity to the brute creation, ride away from you, I ap-
prehend that it is your own fault if you have not gone far
in your object before you have gained the top. In short,
so well did I succeed, that on reaching Highgate the old
gentleman invited me to rest at his house, which was a
little apart from the village; and an excellent house it was
—small, but commodious, with a large garden, and com-
manding from the windows such a prospect as Lucretius
would recommend to philosophers;—the spires and domes
of London, on a elear day, distinctly visible; here the
Retreat of the Hermit, and there the Mare Magnum of the
world.

The walls of the principal rooms were embellished with
pictures of extraordinary merit, and in that high school
of art which is so little understood out of Italy. I was
surprised to learn that they were all from the hand of the
owner. My evident admiration pleased my new friend,
and led to talk upon his part, which showed him no less
elevated in his theories of art than an adept in the practice.
Without fatiguing the reader with irrelevant criticism, it
is necessary, perhaps, as elucidating much of the design
and character of the work which these prefatory pages
introduce, that I should briefly observe, that he insisted as
much upon the Connection of the Arts as a distinguished
author has upon that.of the Sciences; that he held that in
all works of imagination, whether expressed by words or
by colours, the artist of the higher schools must make the
broadest distinction between the Real and the True,—in
other words, between the imitation of actual life, and the
exaltation of Nature into the Ideal.

“The one,” said he, “is the Dutch School, the other is
the Greek.”

INTRODUCTION. 15

“Sir,” said I, “the Dutch is the most in fashion.”

“Yes, in painting, perhaps,” answered my host, “but in
literature—”

“Tt was of literature Ispoke. Our growing poets are all
for simplicity and Betty Foy; and our critics hold it the
highest praise of a work of imagination, to say that its char-
acters are exact to common life. Even in sculpture—”

“Tn sculpture! No—no! there the high ideal must at
least be essential!”

“Pardon me; I fear you have not seen Souter Johnny
and Tam o’Shanter.”

“Ah!” said the old gentleman, shaking his head, “TI live
very much out of the world, I see. I suppose Shakespeare
has ceased to be admired?”

“On the contrary; people make the adoration of Shake-
speare the excuse for attacking everybody else. But then
our critics have discovered that Shakespeare is so real /”

“Real! The poet who has never once drawn a character
to be met with in actual life—who has never once descended
to a passion that is false or a personage who is real!”

I was about to reply very severely to this paradox, when
I perceived that my companion was growing a little out of
temper. And he who wishes to catch a Rosicrucian, must
take care not to disturb the waters. I thought it better,
therefore, to turn the conversation.

“ Revenons & nos moutons,” said I; “you promised to
enlighten my ignorance as to the Rosicrucians.”

“Well!” quoth he, rather sternly; “but for what pur-
pose? Perhaps you desire only to enter the temple in
order to ridicule the rites?”

“ What do you take me for? Surely, were I so inclined,
the fate of the Abbé de Villars is a sufficient warning to all
men not to treat idly of the realms of the Salamander and
the Sylph. Everybody knows how mysteriously that in-
genious personage was deprived of his life in revenge for
the witty mockeries of his Comte de G'abalis.”

“Salamander and Sylph! I see that you fall into the

16 INTRODUCTION.

vulgar error, and translate literally the allegorical language
of the mystics.”

With that, the old gentleman condescended to enter into
a very interesting, and, as it seemed to me, a very erudite,
relation of the tenets of the Rosicrucians, some of whom,
he asserted, still existed, and still prosecuted, in august
secresy, their profound researches into natural science and
occult philosophy.

“But this fraternity,” said he, “lowever respectable and
virtuous—virtuous I say, for no monastic order is more
severe in the practice of moral precepts, or more ardent in
Christian faith—this fraternity is but a branch of others
yet more transcendent in the powers they have obtained,
and yet more illustrious in their origin. Are you ac-
quainted with the Platonists?”

“T have occasionally lost my way in their labyrinth,” ’
said I. ‘Faith, they are rather difficult gentlemen to un-
derstand.”

“Yet their knottiest problems have never yet been pub-
lished. Their sublimest works are in manuscript, and
constitute the initiatory learning, not only of the Rosicru-
cians, but of the nobler brotherhoods I have referred to.
More solemn and sublime still is the knowledge to be
gleaned from the elder Pythagoreans, and the immortal
masterpieces of Apollonius.”

“ Apollonius the impostor of Tyanea! are his writings
extant?”

“Impostor!” cried my host; “ Apollonius an impostor!”

“T beg your pardon; I did not know he was a friend of
yours; andif you vouch for his character, I will believe
him to have been a very respectable man, who only spoke
the truth when he boasted of his power to be in two places
at the same time.”

“Ts that so difficult?” said the old gentleman; “if so,
you have never dreamed!”

Here ended our conversation; but from that time an
acquaintance was formed between us which lasted till my

INTRODUCTION. Nts

venerable friend departed this life. Peace to his ashes!
He was a person of singular habits and eccentric opinions;
but the chief part of his time was occupied in acts of quiet
and unostentatious goodness. He was an enthusiast in the
duties of the Samaritan; and as his virtues were softened
by the gentlest charity, so his hopes were based upon the
devoutest belief. He never conversed upon his own origin
and history, nor have I ever been able to penetrate the
darkness in which they were concealed. He seemed to
have seen much of the world, and to have been an eye-
witness of the first French Revolution, a subject upon
which he was equally eloquent and instructive. At the
same time, he did not regard the crimes of that stormy pe-
riod with the philosophical leniency with which enlightened
writers (their heads safe upon their shoulders) are, in the
present day, inclined to treat the massacres of the past: he
spoke not as a student who had read and reasoned, but as
a man who had seen and suffered. The old gentleman
seemed alone in the world; nor did I know that he had one
relation, till his executor, a distant cousin, residing abroad,
informed me of the very handsome legacy which my poor
friend had bequeathed me. This consisted, first, of a sum
about which I think it best to be guarded, foreseeing the
possibility of a new tax ‘upon real and funded property ;
and secondly, of certain precious manuscripts, to which the
following volumes owe their existence.

I imagine I trace this latter bequest to a visit I paid the
Sage, if so I may be permitted to call him, a few weeks
before his death.

Although he read little of our modern literature, my
friend, with the affable good-nature which belonged to
him, graciously permitted me to consult him upon various
literary undertakings meditated by the desultory ambition
of a young and inexperienced student. At that time I
sought his advice upon a work of imagination intended to
depict the effects of enthusiasm upon different modifica-
tions of character. He listened to my conception, which

2

18 INTRODUCTION.

was sufficiently trite and prosaic, with his usual patience;
and then, thoughtfully turning to his bookshelves, took
down an old volume, and read to me, first in Greek, and
secondly in English, some extracts to the following effect:
“Plato here expresses four kinds of Mania, by which I
desire to understand enthusiasm, and the inspiration of the
gods.—Firstly, the musical; secondly, the telestic, or mys-

ra tic; thirdly, the prophetic, and fourthly, that which belongs

to love”

The author he quoted, after contending that there is
something in the soul above intellect, and stating that there
are in our nature distinct energies, Be the one of which we
discover and seize as it were on sciences and theorems with
almost intuitive rapidity, by another, through which high
art is accomplished, like the statues of Phidias, proceeded
to state that “enthusiasm, in the true acceptation of the
word, is, when that part of the soul which is above intellect
is excited to the gods, and thence derives its inspiration.”

The author then, pursuing his comment upon Plato,
observes that “one of these manias may suffice (especially
that which belongs to Love) to lead back the soul to its
first divinity and happiness; but that there is an intimate
union with them all; and that the ordinary progress
through which the soul ascends is, primarily, through the
musical; next, through the telestic or mystic; thirdly,
through the prophetic; and lastly, through the enthusi-
asm of Love.

While with a bewildered understanding and a reluctant
attention, I listened to these intricate sublimities, my
adviser closed the volume, and said with complacency,
“There is the motto for your book—the thesis for your
theme.”

“ Davus sum, non Gdipus,” said I, shaking my head,
discontentedly. “All this may be exceedingly fine, but,
Heaven forgive me—I don’t understand a word of it. The
mysteries of your Rosicrucians, and your fraternities, are
mere child’s play to the jargon of thea Platonists.”

INTRODUCTION. 19

“Yet, not till you rightly understand this passage can
you understand the higher theories of the Rosicrucians, or
of the stillnobler fraternities you speak of with so much
levity.”

“Oh, if that be the case, I give up in despair. Why
not, since you are so well versed in the matter, take the
motto for a book of your own?”

“But if I have already composed a book with that thesis
for its theme, will you prepare it for the public?”

“With the greatest pleasure,” said I,—alas, too rashly!'

“T shall hold you to your promise,” returned the old
gentleman, “and when I am no more, you will receive the -
manuscripts. From what you say of the prevailing taste
in literature, I cannot flatter you with the hope that you
will gain much by the undertaking. And I tell you before-
hand that you will find it not a little laborious.”

“Ts your work a romance?”

“Tt is a romance, and it is not aromance. It is a truth
for those who can comprehend it, and an extravagance for
those who cannot.”

At last there arrived the manuscripts, with a brief note
from my deceased friend reminding me of my imprudent
promise.

With mournful interest, and yet with eager impatience,
I opened the packet and trimmed my lamp. Conceive my
dismay when I found the whole written in an unintelligible
cipher. I present the reader with a specimen;

PI OV oe 8

3 WV ) and so on for 940 mortal pages in fools-

cap. I could scarcely believe my eyes; in fact, I began to
think the lamp burned singularly blue; and sundry misgiv-
ings as to the unhallowed nature of the characters I had so
unwittingly opened upon, coupled with the strange hints and
mystical language of the old gentleman, crept through my

20 INTRODUCTION.

disordered imagination. Certainly, to say no worse of it,
the whole thing looked uncanny! I was about, precipi-
tately, to hurry the papers into my desk, with a pious de-
termination to have nothing more to do with them, when
my eye fell upon a book, neatly bound in blue morocco,
and which in my eagerness I had hitherto overlooked. I
opened this volume with great precaution, not knowing
what might jump out, and—guess my delight—found
that it contained a key or dictionary to the hieroglyphics.
Not to weary the reader with an account of my labours, I
am contented with saying that at last I imagined myself
capable of construing the characters, and set to work in
good earnest. Still it was no easy task, and two years
elapsed before I had made much progress. I then, by way
of experiment onthe public, obtained the insertion of a few
desultory ‘chapters in a periodical with which for a few
months I had the honour to be connected. They appeared
to excite more curiosity than I had presumed to antici-
pate; and I renewed, with better heart, my laborious un-
dertaking. But now a new misfortune befell me: I found
as I proceeded that the Author had made two copies of his
work, one much more elaborate and detailed than the other;
I had stumbled upon the earlier copy, and had my whole
task to remodel, and the chapters I had written to retrans-
late. Imay say then, that, exclusive of intervals devoted
to more pressing occupations, my unlucky promise cost me
the toil of several years before I could bring it to ‘adequate
fulfilment. The task was the more difficult, since the style
in the original is written in a kind of rhythmical prose, as
if the Author desired that in some degree his work should
be regarded as one of poetical conception and design. To
this it was not possible to do justice, and in the attempt I
have, doubtless, very often need of the reader’s indulgent
consideration. My natural respect for the old gentleman’s
vagaries with a muse of equivocal character must be my
only excuse, whenever the language, without luxuriating
into verse, borrows flowers scarcely natural to prose.

INTRODUCTION. 21

Truth compels me also to confess that, with all my pains,
I am by no means sure that I have invariably given the
true meaning of the cipher; nay, that here and there either
a gap in the narrative, or the sudden assumption of a new
cipher, to which no key was afforded, has obliged me to
resort to interpolations of my own, no doubt easily dis-
cernible, but which, I flatter myself, are not inharmonious
to the general design. This confession leads me to the -
sentence with which I shall conclude—lIf, reader, in this
book there be anything that pleases you, it is certainly
mine—but whenever you come to something you dislike,
—lay the blame upon the old gentleman!

Lonpon, January, 1842.

N. B.—The notes appended to the text are sometimes by the
Author, sometimes by the Editor.—I have occasionally (but not
always) marked the distinction: where, however, this is omitted,
the ingenuity of the Reader will be rarely at fault.

Eo cite ost: Satta e

¢ : bray &. : Pa r
119 Sa) jae yee byl)

we es Sie
RAS Hire

as te et eqs

Sader ‘ier
seta aos
1D ben y : + DICER we agian
- ih Tellier OF Series, wore ge a rset

CONTENTS.

PAGE

DEDICATORY EPISTLE, ; ; : ; A 5 n Sako

PREFACE TO THE EDITION OF 1853, é 6 4 7 eK

INTRODUCTION, 7 ; ‘ ; ‘i : , é = “il

BOOK THE FIRST.

The Musician, . ‘ : ; F : , s : - 2
BOOK THE SECOND.

Art, Love, and Wonder, . : ; 2 ‘ ; 3 om Tt)
BOOK THE THIRD.

Theurgia, . : é : j ; é ; 5 : . 187
BOOK THE FOURTH.

The Dweller of the Threshold, : ‘ r é A . 281
BOOK THE FIFTH.

The Effects of the Elixir, . ; ; ‘ 2 : . 803

BOOK THE SIXTH.

Superstition Deserting Faith, . 2 : : 5 Ot . 383

24 CONTENTS.

BOOK THE SEVENTH.

The Reign of Terror,

ARGUMENT, ; A ¢ F

Norte, : : A 5 ;

ZANONI.

BOOK THE FIRST,
THE MUSICIAN.

“Due Fontane
Che di diverso effetto hanno liquore!” !
ARIoSsTo, ORLANDO Fur. canto i. 71.

CHAPTER I.

“Vergina era
D’alta belta, ma sua belté non cura >
* * * *
* * * *
Di natura, d’amor, de ’cieli amici
Le negligenze sue sono artifici.”’ ?
GERUSAL. Lin., canto ii. 14-17,

At Naples, in the latter half of the last century, a
worthy artist named Gaetano Pisani lived and flourished.
He was a musician of great genius, but not of popular
reputation; there was in all his compositions something
capricious and fantastic, which did not please the taste of
the dilettanti of Naples. He was fond of unfamiliar sub-
jects, into which he introduced airs and symphonies that
excited a kind of terror in those who listened. The names
of his pieces will probably suggest their nature. I find,

a —Two Founts
That hold a draught of different effects !

2She wasa virgin of a glorious beauty, but regarded not her
beauty. * * * * Negligence itself is art in those fayoured by nature,
by love, and by the heavens,

26 ZANONI.

for instance, among his MSS., these titles, The Feast of
the Harpies, The Witches at Benevento, The Descent of
Orpheus into Hades, The Evil Eye, The Eumenides, and
many others that evince a powerful imagination, delighting
in the fearful and supernatural, but often relieved, by an
airy and delicate fancy, with passages of exquisite grace
and beauty. It is true that, in the selection of his subjects
from ancient fable, Gaetano Pisani was much more faithful
than his contemporaries to the remote origin and the early
genius of Italian Opera. That descendant, however effem-
inate, of the ancient union between Song and Drama,
when, after long obscurity and dethronement, it regained a
punier sceptre, though a gaudier purple, by the banks of
the Etrurian Arno, or amidst the Lagunes of Venice, had
chosen all its primary inspirations from the unfamiliar and
classic sources of heathen legend; and Pisani’s Descent of
Orpheus was but a bolder, darker, and more scientific repe-
tition of the Huridice which Jacopi Peri set to music at
the august nuptials of Henry of Navarre and Mary of
Medicis.’ Still, as I have said, the style of the Neapolitan
musician was not on the whole pleasing to ears grown nice
and euphuistic in the more dulcet melodies of the day; and
faults and extravagances easily discernible, and often to
appearance wilful, served the critics for an excuse for their
distaste. Fortunately, or the poor musician might have
starved, he was not only a composer, but also an excellent
practical performer, especially on the violin, and by that
instrument he earned a decent subsistence as one of the
orchestra at the Great Theatre of San Carlo. Here, formal
and appointed tasks necessarily kept his eccentric fancies
in tolerable check, though it is recorded that no less than
five times he had been deposed from his desk for having
shocked the conoscenti, and thrown the whole band into
confusion, by impromptu variations of so frantic and start-

Orpheus was the favourite hero of early Italian Opera, or Lyrical
drama. The Orfeo of Angelo Politiano was produced in 1475.
The Ovfeo of Monteverde was performed at Venice in 1667.

ZANONI. 27

ling a nature that one might well have imagined that the
harpies or witches who inspired his compositions had
clawed hold of his instrument. The impossibility, how-
ever, to find any one of equal excellence as a performer
(that is to say, in his more lucid and orderly moments),
had forced his reinstalment, and he had now, for the most
part, reconciled himself to the narrow sphere of his ap-
pointed adagios or allegros. The audience, too, aware of
his propensity, were quick to perceive the least deviation
from the text; and if he wandered for a moment, which
might also be detected by the eye as well as the ear, in
some strange contortion of visage, and some ominous flour-
ish of his bow, a gentle and admonitory murmur recalled
the musician from his Elysium or his Tartarus, to the sober
_ regions of his desk. Then he would start as if from a
dream—cast a hurried, frightened, apologetic glance around,
and, with a crestfallen, humble air, draw his rebellious
instrument back to the beaten track of the glib monotony.
But at home he would make himself amends for this reluc-
tant drudgery. And there, grasping the unhappy violin
with ferocious fingers, he would pour forth, often till the
morning rose, strange wild measures, that would startle the
early fisherman on the shore below with a superstitious
awe, and make him cross himself as if mermaid or sprite
had wailed no earthly music in his ear.

This man’s appearance was in keeping with the char-
acteristics of his art. The features were noble and strik-
ing, but worn and haggard, with black, careless locks,
tangled into a maze of curls, and a fixed, speculative,
dreamy stare in his large and hollow eyes. All his move-
ments were peculiar, sudden, and abrupt, as the impulse
seized him; and in gliding through the streets, or along
the beach, he was heard laughing and talking to himself.
Withal, he was a harmless, guileless, gentle creature, and
would share his mite with any idle lazzaroni, whom he
often paused to contemplate as they lay lazily basking in
the sun. Yet was he thoroughly unsocial. He formed no

28 ; ZANONI,

friends, flattered no patrons, resorted to none of the merry-
makings, so dear to the children of music and the south.
He and his art seemed alone suited to each other—both
quaint, primitive, unworldly, irregular. You could not
separate the man from his music; it was himself. With-
out it, he was nothing, a mere machine! With it, he was
king over worlds of his own. Poor man, he had little
enough in this!—At a manufacturmg town in England
there is a gravestone, on which the epitaph records “one
Claudius Phillips, whose absolute contempt for riches, and
inimitable performance on the violin, made him the admi-
ration of all that knew him!” Logical conjunction of op-
posite eulogies! In proportion, O Genius, to thy contempt
for riches will be thy performance on thy violin! ‘

Gaetano Pisani’s talents as a composer had been chiefly
exhibited in music appropriate to this his favourite instru-
ment, of all unequestionably the most various and royal
in its resources and power over the passions. As Shake-
speare among poets is the Cremona among instruments.
Nevertheless, he had composed other pieces, of larger am-
bition and wider accomplishment, and, chief of these, his
precious—his unpurchased—his unpublished—his unpub-
lishable and imperishable opera of the Siren. This great
work had been the dream of his boyhood—the mistress of
his manhood; in advancing age “it stood beside him like
his youth.” Vainly had he struggled to place it before the
world. Even bland, unjealous Paisiello, Maestro di Capella,
shook his gentle head when the musician favoured him with
a specimen of one of his most thrilling scenas. And yet,
Paisiello, though that music differs from all Durante taught
thee to emulate, there may—but patience, Gaetano Pisani!
—bide thy time, and keep thy violin in tune!

Strange as it may appear to the fairer reader, this gro-
tesque personage had yet formed those ties which ordinary
mortals are apt to consider their special monopoly—he was
married and had one child. What is more strange yet, his
wife was a daughter of quiet, sober, unfantastic England;

ZANONT. 29

she was much younger than himself; she was fair and
gentle, with a sweet English face; she had married him
from choice, and (will you believe it?) she yet loved him.
How she came to marry him, or how this shy, unsocial, way-
ward creature ever ventured to propose, I can only explain
by asking you to look round and explain first to me how
half the husbands and half the wives you meet ever found
amate! Yet, on reflection, this union was not so extraor-
dinary after all. The girl was a natural child of parents
too noble ever to own and claim her. She was brought into
Italy to learn the art by which she was to live, for she had |
taste and voice; she was a dependant, and harshly treated,
and poor Pisani was her master, and his voice the only one
she had heard from her cradle that seemed without one tone
that could scorn or chide. And so—vwell, is the rest natural?
Natural or not, they married. This young wife loved her
husband; and young and gentle as she was, she might
almost be said to be the protector of the two. From how
many disgraces with the despots of San Carlo and the Con-
servatorio had her unknown officious mediation saved him!
In how many ailments—for his frame was weak—had she
nursed and tended him! Often, in the dark nights, she
would wait at the theatre, with her lanthorn to light him,
and her steady arm to lean on;—otherwise, in his abstract
reveries, who knows but the musician would have walked
after his Stren into the sea! And then she would so
patiently, perhaps (forin true love there is not always the
finest taste) so delightedly listen to those storms of eccentric |
and fitful melody, and steal him—whispering praises all the
way—from the unwholesome night watch to rest and sleep!
I said his music was a part of the man, and this gentle
creature seemed a part of the music; it was, in fact, when
she sat beside him that whatever was tender or fairylike in
his motley fantasia crept into the harmony as by stealth.
Doubtless her presence acted on the music, and shaped and
softened it; but he, who never examined how or what his
inspiration, knew it not, All that he knew was, that he

30 ZANONI.

loved and blessed her. He fancied he told her so twenty
times a day; but he never did, for he was not of many
words, even to his wife. His language was his music, as
hers,—her cares! He was more communicative to his bar-
biton, as the learned Mersennus teaches us to call all the
varieties of the great viol family. Certainly barbiton
sounds better than fiddle; and barbiton letit be. He would
talk to that by the hour together—praise it—scold it—coax
it, nay (for such is man, even the most guileless), he had
been known to swear atit; but for that excess he was
always penitentiaily remorseful. And the barbiton hada
tongue of his own, could take his own part, and when he
also scolded had much the best of it. He was a noble
fellow, this violin! a Tyrolese, the handiwork of the illus-
trious Steiner. There was something mysterious in his
great age. How many hands, now dust, had awakened his
strings ere he became the Robin Goodfellow and Familiar
of Gaetano Pisani! His very case was venerable ;—beauti-
fully painted, it was said, by Caracci. An English collector
had offered more for the case than Pisani had ever made by
the violin. But Pisani, who cared not if he had inhabited
a cabin himself, was proud of a palace for the barbiton.
His barbiton, it was his elder child! He had another child,
and now we must turn to her.

How shall I describe thee, Viola? Certainly the music
had something to answer for in the advent of that young
stranger. For both in her form and her character you
might have traced a family likeness to that singular and
spirit-like life of sound which night after night threw itself
in airy and goblin sort over the starry seas. . . Beautiful
she was, but of a very uncommon beauty—a combination,
a harmony of opposite attributes. Her hair of a gold richer
and purer than that which is seen even in the North; but
the eye, of all the dark, tender, subduing light of more
than Italian—almost of oriental—splendour. The com-
plexion exquisitely fair, but never the same—vivid in one
moment, pale the next. And with the complexion, the

ZANONI. ol

expression also varied; nothing now so sad, and nothing
now so joyous.

I grieve to say that what we rightly entitle education
was much neglected for their daughter by this singular
pair. To be sure, neither of them had much knowledge to
bestow; and knowledge was not then the fashion, as it is
now. But accident or nature favoured young Viola. She
learned, as of course, her mother’s language with her
father’s. And she contrived soon to read and to write:
and her mother, who, by the way, was a Roman Catholic,
taught her betimes to pray. But then, to counteract all
these acquisitions, the strange habits of Pisani, and the
incessant watch and care which he required from his wife,
often left the child alone with an old nurse; who, to be
sure, loved her dearly, but who was in no way calculated to
instruct her. Dame Gionetta was every inch Italian and
Neapolitan. Her youth had been all love, and her age was
all superstition. She was garrulous, fond—a gossip. Now
she would prattle to the girl of cavaliers and princes at her
feet, and now she would freeze her blood with tales and
legends, perhaps as old as Greek or Etrurian fable—of
demon and vampire—of the dances round the great walnut-
tree at Benevento, and the haunting spell of the Evil Eye.
All this helped silently to weave charmed webs over Viola’s
imagination, that afterthought and later years might labour
vainly to dispel. And all this especially fitted her to
hang, with a fearful joy, upon her father’s music. Those
visionary strains, ever struggling to translate into wild and
broken sounds the language of unearthly beings, breathed
around her from her birth. Thus you might have said that
her whole mind was full of music—associations, memories,
sensations of pleasure or pain, all were mixed up inexplic-
ably with those sounds that now delighted, and now terri-
fied—that greeted her when her eyes opened to the sun,
and woke her trembling on her lonely couch in the darkness
of the night. The legends and tales of Gionetta only served
to make the child better understand the signification of

32 ZANONI.

those mysterious tones; they furnished her with words to
the music. It was natural that the daughter of such a par-
ent should soon evince some taste in his art. But this de-
veloped itself chiefly in the ear and the voice. She was
yet a child when she sang divinely. A great Cardinal—
great alike in the State and the Conservatorio—heard of her
gifts, and sent for her. From that moment her fate was
decided: she was to be the future glory of Naples, the
prima donna of San Carlo.

The Cardinal insisted upon the accomplishment of his
own predictions, and provided her with the most renowned
masters. To inspire her with emulation, his Eminence took
her one evening to his own box: it would be something to
see the performance, something more to hear the applause
lavished upon the glittering signoras she was hereafter to
excel! Oh, how gloriously that Life of the Stage—that
fairy World of Music and Song, dawned upon her! It was
the only world that seemed to correspond with her strange
childish thoughts. It appeared to her as if, cast hitherto
on a foreign shore, she was brought at last to see the forms
and hear the language of her native land. Beautiful and
true enthusiasm, rich with the promise of genius! Boy
or man, thou wilt never be a poet, if thou hast not felt
the ideal, the romance, the Calypso’s isle that opened to
thee, when for the first time the magic curtain was drawn
aside, and let in the World of Poetry on the World of
Prose.

And now the initiation was begun. She was to read, to
study, to depict by a gesture, a look, the passions she was
to delineate on the boards; lessons dangerous, in truth, to
some, but not to the pure enthusiasm that comes from Art;
for the mind that rightly conceives Art is but a mirror,
which gives back what is cast on its surface faithfully only
while unsullied. She seized on nature and truth intuitive-
ly. Her recitations became full of unconscious power; her
voice moved the heart to tears, or warmed it into generous
rage. But this arose from that sympathy which genius

ZANONI. 33

ever has, even in its earliest innocence, with whatever feels,
or aspires, or suffers. It was no premature woman com-
prehending the love or the jealousy that the words expressed;
her art was one of those strange secrets which the psychol-
ogists may unriddle to us if they please, and tell us why
children of the simplest minds and the purest hearts are
often so acute to distinguish, in the tales you tell them, or
the songs you sing, the difference between the true Art and
the False—Passion and Jargon—Homer and Racine ;—echo-
ing back, from hearts that have not yet felt what they re-
peat, the melodious accents of the natural pathos. Apart
from her studies, Viola was a simple, affectionate, but
somewhat wayward child; wayward, not in temper, for
that was sweet and docile, but in her moods, which, as I
before hinted, changed from sad to gay and gay to sad with-
out an apparent cause. If cause there were, it must be
traced to the early and mysterious influences I have referred
to, when seeking to explain the effect produced on her
imagination by the restless streams of sound that constant-
ly played around it; for it is noticeable, that to those who
are much alive to the effects of music, airs and tunes often
come back, in the commonest pursuits of life, to vex, as it
were, and haunt them. The music, once admitted to the
soul, becomes also a sort of spirit, and never dies. It
wanders perturbedly through the halls and galleries of the
memory, and is often heard again, distinct and living as -
when it first displaced the wavelets of the air. Now at
times, then, these phantoms of sound floated back upon her
fancy; if gay, to call a smile from every dimple; if mourn-
ful, to throw a shade upon her brow—to make her cease
from her childish mirth, and sit apart and muse.

Rightly, then, in a typical sense, might this fair creature,
so airy in her shape, so harmonious in her beauty, so un-
familiar in her ways and thoughts,—rightly might she be
called a daughter, less of the Musician than the Music—a
being for whom you could imagine that some fate was re-
served, less of actual life than the romance which, to eyes

3

34 ZANONI.

that can see, and hearts that can feel, glides ever along with
the actual life, stream by stream, to the Dark Ocean.

And therefore it seemed not strange that Viola herself,
even in childhood, and yet more as she bloomed into the
sweet seriousness of virgin youth, should fancy her life or-
dained for a lot, whether of bliss or woe, that should accord
with the romance and reverie which made the atmosphere
she breathed. Frequently she would climb through the
thickets that clothed the neighbouring grotto of Posilipo—
the mighty work of the old Cimmerians—and, seated by the
haunted Tomb of Virgil, indulge those visions, the subtle
vagueness of which no poetry can render palpable and de-
fined :—for the Poet that surpasses all who ever sung is the
heart of dreaming Youth! Frequently there, too, beside
the threshold over which the vine-leaves clung, and facing
that dark-blue, waveless sea, she would sit in the autumn
noon or summer twilight, and build her castles in the air.
Who doth not do the same—not in youth alone, but with the
dimmed hopes of age! It is man’s prerogative to dream, the
common royalty of peasant and of king. But those day-
dreams of hers were more habitual, distinct, and solemn
than the greater part of us indulge. They seemed like the
Orama of the Greeks—prophets while phantasma.

——

CHAPTER II.

“Fu stupor, fu vaghezza, fu diletto!”!
GERUSAL. Lrs., canto ii. 21.

Wow at last the education is accomplished! Viola is
nearly sixteen. ‘The Cardinal declares that the time is
come when the new name must be inscribed in the Libro
d’Oro—the Golden Book set apart to the children of Art
and Song. Yes, but in what character?—to whose genius

1 “Desire it was, ’twas wonder, ’twas delight.” — WirFEN’s
translation.

ZANONI. 35

is she to give embodiment and form? Ah, that is the
secret! Rumours go abroad that the inexhaustible Paisi-
ello, charmed with her performance of his Nel cor piu non
me sento, and his Jo son Lindoro, will produce some new
masterpiece to introduce the débutante. Others insist upon
it that her forte is the comic, and that Cimarosa is hard at
work at another Matrimonio Segreto. But in the mean-
while there is a check in the diplomacy somewhere. The
Cardinal is observed to be out of humour. He has said
publicly—and the words are portentous—“The silly girl
is as mad as her father—what she asks is preposterous!”
Conference follows conference—the Cardinal talks to the
poor child very solemnly in his closet—all in vain. Naples
is distracted with curiosity and conjecture. The lecture
ends in a quarrel, and Viola comes home sullen and pout-
ing; she will not act—she has renounced the engagement.
Pisani, too inexperienced to be aware of all the dangers
of the stage, had been pleased at the notion that one at
least, of his name, would add celebrity to his art. The
girl’s perverseness displeased him. However, he said noth-
ing—he never scolded in words, but he took up the faithful
barbiton. Oh, faithful barbiton, how horribly thou didst
scold! It screeched—it gabbled—it moaned—it growled.
And Viola’s eye filled with tears, for she understood that
language. She stole to her mother and whispered in her
ear; and when Pisani turned from his employment, lo!
both mother and daughter were weeping. He looked at
them both with a wondering stare; and then, as if he felt
he had been harsh, he flew again to his Familiar. And
now you thought you heard the lullaby which a fairy
might sing to some fretful changeling it had adopted and
sought to soothe. Liquid, low, silvery, streamed the tones
beneath the enchanted bow. The most stubborn grief would
have paused to hear, and withal, at times, out came a wild,
merry, ringing note, like a laugh, but not mortal laughter.
It was one of his most successful airs from his beloved opera
—the Siren in the act of charming the waves and the winds

36 ZANONI.

to sleep. Heaven knows what next would have come, but
his arm was arrested. Viola had thrown herself on his
breast, and kissed him, with happy eyes that smiled through
her sunny air. At that very moment the door opened—a
message from the Cardinal. Viola must go to his Eminence
at once. Her mother went with her. All was reconciled
and settled; Viola had her way, and selected her own opera.

O ye dull nations of the north, with your broils and de-
bates—your bustling lives of the Pnyx and the Agora!—
you cannot guess what a stir throughout musical Naples
was occasioned by the rumour of the new opera and a new
singer. But whose the opera? No cabinet intrigue ever
was so secret. Pisani came back one night from the theatre,
evidently disturbed and irate. Woe to thine ears hadst
thou heard the barbiton that night! They had suspended
him from his office—they feared that the new opera, and
the first début of his daughter as a prima donna, would be
too much for his nerves. And his variations, his diablerie
of sirens and harpies, on sucha night, made a hazard not to
be contemplated without awe. To be set aside, and on the
very night that his child, whose melody was but an emana-
tion of his own, was to perform—set aside for some new
rival—it was too much for a musician’s flesh and blood.
For the first time he spoke in words upon the subject, and
gravely asked—for that question the barbiton, eloquent as
it was, could not express distinctly—what was to be the
opera, and what the part? And Viola as gravely answered
that she was pledged to the Cardinal not toreveal. Pisani
said nothing, but disappeared with the violin; and present-
ly they heard the Familiar from the housetop (whither,
when thoroughly out of humour, the Musician sometimes
fled), whining and sighing as if its heart were broken.

The affections of Pisani were little visible on the surface.
He was not one of those fond caressing fathers whose chil-
dren are ever playing round their knees; his mind and soul
were so thoroughly in his art that domestic life glided by
him seemingly as if that were a dream, and the heart the

ZANONI. 37

substantial form and body of existence. Persons much cul-
tivating an abstract study are often thus; mathematicians
proverbially so. When his servant ran to the celebrated
French philosopher, shrieking, “ The house is on fire, sir!”
“Go and tell my wife then, fool!” said the wise man, set-
tling back to his problems: “do J ever meddle with domes-
tic affairs?” But what are mathematics to music,—music,
that not only composes operas, but plays. on the barbiton?
Do you know what the illustrious Giardini said when the
tyro asked how long it would take to learn to play on the
violin? Hear, and despair, ye who would bend the bow to
which that of Ulysses was a plaything—* Twelve hours
a-day, for twenty years together!” Can a man, then, who
plays the barbiton be always playing also with his little
- ones? No, Pisani! often, with the keen susceptibility of
childhood, poor Viola had stolen from the room to weep at
the thought that thou didst not love her. And yet, under-
neath this outward abstraction of the artist, the natural
fondness flowed all the same; and,as she grew up, the
dreamer had understood the dreamer. And now, shut out
from all fame himself—to be forbidden to hail even his
daughter’s fame!—and that daughter herself to be in the con-
spiracy against him! Sharper than the serpent’s tooth was
the ingratitude, and sharper than the serpent’s tooth was
the wail of the pitying barbiton!

The eventful hour is come. Viola is gone to the theatre
—her mother with her. The indignant musician remains
at home. Gionetta bursts into the room—My Lord Cardi-
nal’s carriage is at the door—the Padrone is sent for. He
must lay aside his violin—he must put on his brocade coat
and his lace ruffles. Here they are—quick, quick! And
quick rolls the gilded coach, and majestic sits the driver,
and statelily prance the steeds. Poor Pisani is lost in a mist
of uncomfortable amaze. He arrives at the theatre—he
descends at the great door—he turns round and round, and
looks about him and about—he misses something. Where
is the violin? Alas? his soul, his voice, his self of self, is

38 ZANONI.

left behind! It is but an automaton that the lackeys conduct
up the stairs, through the tier, into the Cardinal’s box.
But then, what bursts upon him! Does he dream? The
first act is over (they did not send for him till success
seemed no longer doubtful), the first act has decided all.
He feels that by the electric sympathy which every one
heart has at once with a vast audience. He feels it by the
breathless stillness of that multitude—he feels it even by
the lifted finger of the Cardinal. He sees his Viola on the
stage, radiant in her robes and gems—he hears her voice
thrilling through the single heart of the thousands! But
the scene—the part—the music! It is his other child—his
immortal child—the spirit-infant of his soul—his darling
of many years of patient obscurity and pining genius—his
masterpiece—his opera of the Siren /

This, then, was the mystery that had so galled him—this
the cause of the quarrel with the Cardinal—this the secret
not to be proclaimed till the success was won, and the
daughter had united her father’s triumph with her own!

And there she stands, as all souls bow before her—fairer
than the very Siren he had called from the deeps of melody.
Oh! long and sweet recompense of toil! Where is on
earth the rapture like that which is known to genius when
at last it bursts from its hidden cavern into light and
fame!

He did not speak—he did not move—he stood transfixed,
breathless—the tears rolling down his cheeks: only from
time to time his hands still wandered about—mechanically
they sought for the faithful instrument-——-why was it not
there to share his triumph?

At last the curtain fell; but on such a storm—and dia-
pason of applause! Uprose the audience’ as one man—as
with one voice that dear name was shouted. She came on—
trembling, pale—and in the whole crowd saw but her father’s
face. The audience followed those moistened eyes—they
recognised with a thrill the daughter’s impulse and her
meaning. The good old Cardinal drew him gently forward.

ZANONI. 39

Wild musician! thy daughter has given thee back more than
the life thou gavest!

“My poor violin!” said he, wiping his eyes—“ they will
never hiss thee again now!”

CHAPTER III.

“Fra si contrarie tempre in ghiaccio e in foco,
In riso e in pianto, e fra paura e spene
L’ingannatrice Donna—” !
GERUSAL. LrB., cant. iv. 94.

Now, notwithstanding the triumph both of the singer
and the opera, there had been one moment in the first act,
and, consequently, before the arrival of Pisani, when the
scale seemed more than doubtful. It was in a chorus re-
plete with all the peculiarities of the composer. And when
this Maelstrom of Capricct whirled and foamed, and tore ear
and sense through every variety of sound, the audience
simultaneously recognised the hand of Pisani. A title had
been given to the opera, which had hitherto prevented all
suspicion of its parentage; and the overture and opening,
in which the music had been regular and sweet, had led the
audience to fancy they detected the genius of their favourite
Paisiello. Long accustomed to ridicule and almost to de-
spise the pretensions of Pisani as a composer, they now felt
as if they had been unduly cheated into the applause with
which they had hailed the overture and the commencing
scenas. Anominous buzz circulated round the house ;—-the
singers, the orchestra—electrically sensitive to the impres-
sion of the audience—grew themselves agitated and dis-
mayed, and failed in the energy and precision which could
alone carry off the grotesqueness of the music.

There are always in every theatre many rivals to a new

1 Between such contrarious mixtures of ice and fire, laughter and
tears, fear and hope, the deceiving dame—

40 ZANONI.

author, and a new performer—a party impotent while all
goes well—but a dangerous ambush the instant some acci-
dent throws into confusion the march to success. A hiss
arose; it was partial, it is true, but the significant silence
of all applause seemed to forebode the coming moment when
the displeasure would grow contagious. It was the breath
that stirred the impending avalanche. At that critical
moment—Viola, the Siren queen, emerged for the first time
from her ocean cave. As she came forward to the lamps,
the novelty of her situation, the chilling apathy of the audi-
ence—which even the sight of so singular a beauty did
not at the first arouse—the whispers of the malignant singers
on the stage, the glare of the lights, and more—far more
than the rest—that recent hiss, which had reached her in
her concealment, all froze up her faculties and suspended
her voice. And instead of the grand invocation into which
she ought rapidly to have burst, the regal Siren, retrans-
formed into the trembling girl, stood pale and mute before
the stern cold array of those countless eyes.

At that instant, and when consciousness itself seemed
about to fail her—as she turned a timid beseeching glance
around the still multitude—she perceived, in a box near the
stage, a countenance which at once, and like magic, pro-
duced on her mind an effect never to be analysed nor for-
gotten. It was one that awakened an indistinct haunting
reminiscence, as if she had seen it in those day-dreams she
had been so wont from infancy to indulge. She could not
withdraw her gaze from that face, and, as she gazed, the
awe and coldness that had before seized her vanished, like
a mist from before the sun.

In the dark splendour of the eyes that met her own there
was indeed so much of gentle encouragement, of benign and
compassionate admiration; so much that warned, and ani-
mated, and nerved, that any one—actor or orator—who has
ever observed the effect that a single earnest and kindly
look in the crowd that is to be addressed and won will pro-
duce upon his mind, may readily account for the sudden

ZANONL. 41

and inspiriting influence which the eye and smile of the
stranger exercised on the débutante.

And while yet she gazed, and the glow returned to her
heart, the stranger half rose, as if to recall the audience to
a sense of the courtesy due to one so fair and young; and
the instant his voice gave the signal, the audience followed
it by a burst of generous applause. For this stranger him-
self was a marked personage, and his recent arrival at Naples
had divided with the new opera the gossip of the city. And
then as the applause ceased—clear, full, and freed from
every fetter—like a spirit from the clay—the Siren’s voice
poured forth its entrancing music. From that time, Viola
forgot the crowd, the hazard, the whole world—except the
fairy one over which she presided. It seemed that the
stranger’s presence only served still more to heighten that
delusion, in which the artist sees no creation without the
circle of his art; she felt as if that serene brow, and those
brilliant eyes, inspired her with powers never known
before; and, as if searching for a language to express
the strange sensations occasioned by his presence, that
presence itself whispered to her the melody and the
song.

Only when all was over, and she saw her father and felt
his joy, did this wild spell vanish before the sweeter one of
the household and filial love. Yet again, as she turned
from the stage, she looked back involuntarily, and the
stranger’s calm and half melancholy smile sank into her
heart—to live there—to be recalled with confused memories,
half of pleasure and half of pain.

Pass over the congratulations of the good Cardinal-Vir-
tuoso, astonished at finding himself and all Naples had
been hitherto in the wrong on a subject of taste, —still more
astonished at finding himself and all Naples combining to
confess it; pass over the whispered ecstasies of admiration
which buzzed in the singer’s ear, as once more, in her
modest veil and quiet dress, she escaped from the crowd of
gallants that choked up every avenue behind the scenes;

42 ZANONI.

pass over the sweet embrace of father and child, returning
through the starlit streets and along the deserted Chiaja in
the Cardinal’s carriage ; never pause now to note the tears
and ejaculations of the good, simple-hearted mother . .
see them returned—see the well-known room, venimus
ad larem nostrum ‘—see old Gionetta bustling at the supper;
and hear Pisani, as he rouses the barbiton from its case,
communicating all that has happened to the intelligent
Familiar; hark to the mother’s merry low English laugh!
Why, Viola, strange child, sittest thou apart, thy face
leaning on thy fair hands, thine eyes fixed on space? Up,
rouse thee! Every dimple on the cheek of home must
smile to-night.’

And a happy reunion it wasround that humble table; a
feast Lucullus might have envied in his Hall of Apollo, in
the dried grapes and the dainty sardines, and the luxurious
polenta, and the old Ldcrima, a present from the good Car-
dinal.

The barbiton, placed on a chair—a tall, high*backed
chair—beside the musician, seemed to take a part in the
festive meal. Its honest varnished face glowed in the light
of the lamp; and there was an impish, sly demureness in
its very silence, as its master, between every mouthful,
turned to talk to it of something he had forgotten to relate
before. The good wife looked on affectionately, and could
not eat for joy; but suddenly she rose, and placed on the
artist’s temples a laurel wreath, which she had woven
beforehand in fond anticipation; and Viola, on the other
side her brother, the barbiton, rearranged the chaplet, and
smoothing back her father’s hair, whispered, “Caro Padre,
you will not let him scold me again!”

Then poor Pisani, rather distracted between the two, and
excited both by the Ldcrima and his triumph, turned to the
younger child with so naive and grotesque a pride, “I don’t

1 We come to our own house.

* “Ridete quidquid est domi cachinnorum. ”
CatuLy. ad Sirm. Penin.

ZANONI. 43

know which to thank the most. You give me so much joy,
child,—I am so proud of thee and myself. But he and I,
poor fellow, have been so often unhappy together!”

Viola’s sleep was broken; that was natural. The intoxi-
cation of vanity and triumph, the happiness in the happi-
ness she had caused, all this was better than sleep. But
still from all this, again and again her thoughts flew to
those haunting eyes, to that smile with which for ever the
memory of the triumph, of the happiness, was to be united.
Her feelings, like her own character, were strange and pecul-
iar. They were not those of a girl whose heart, for the
first time reached through the eye, sighs its natural and
native language of first love. It was not so much admi-
ration, though the face that reflected itself on every wave of
her restless fancies was of the rarest order of majesty and
beauty; nor a pleased and enamoured recollection that the
sight of this stranger had bequeathed; it was a human senti-
ment of gratitude and delight, mixed with something more
mysterious, of fear and awe. Certainly she had seen before
those features; but when and how? only when her thoughts
had sought to shape out her future, and when in spite of
all the attempts to vision forth a fate of flowers and sun-
shine, a dark and chill foreboding made her recoil back into
her deepest self. It was a something found that had long
been sought for by a thousand restless yearnings and vague
desires, less of the heart than mind; not as when youth
discovers the one to be beloved, but rather as when the
student, long wandering after the clue to some truth in
science, sees it glimmer dimly before him, to beckon, to
recede, to allure, and to wane again. She fell at last into
unquiet slumber, vexed by deformed, fleeting, shapeless
phantoms; and, waking, as the sun, through a veil of hazy
cloud, glinted with a sickly ray across the casement, she
heard her father settled back betimes to his one pursuit, and
calling forth from his Familiar a low mournful strain, like
a dirge over the dead.

“And why,” she asked, when she descended to the room

44 ZANONI.

below, —“ why, my father, was your inspiration so sad, after
the joy of last night?”

“T know not, child. I meant to be merry, and compose
an air in honour of thee, but he is an obstinate fellow,
this—and he would have it so.”

—————Ss

CHAPTER IV.

“F cost i pigri e timidi desiri
Sprona. ”!
GeERUSAL. Lrs., cant. iv. 88.

Ir was the custom of Pisani, except when the duties of
his profession made special demand on his time, to devote a
certain portion of mid-day to sleep; a habit not so much a
luxury as a necessity, to a man who slept very little during
the night. In fact, whether to compose or to practise, the
hours of noon were precisely those in which Pisani could
not have been active if he would. His genius resembled
those fountains full at dawn and evening, overflowing at
night, and perfectly dry at the meridian. During this
time, consecrated by her husband to repose, the Signora
generally stole out to make the purchases necessary for the
little household, or to enjoy—as what woman does not?—a
little relaxation in gossip with some of her own sex. And
the day following this brilliant triumph, how many con-
gratulations would she have to receive.

At these times it was Viola’s habit to seat herself with-
out the door of the house, under an awning which sheltered
from the sun, without obstructing the view; and there now,
with the prompt-book on her knee, on which her eye roves
listlessly from time to time, you may behold her, the vine-
leaves clustering from their arching trellis over the door
behind, and the lazy white-sailed boats skimming along the
sea that stretched before.

* And thus the slow and timid passions urged.

ZANONI. 45

As she thus sat, rather in reverie than thought, a man
coming from the direction of Posilipo, with a slow step and
downeast eyes, passed close by the house, and Viola look-
ing up abruptly, started in a kind of terror as she recognised /
the stranger. She uttered an involuntary exclamation, and ~
the cavalier, turning, saw, and paused.

He stood a moment or two between her and the sunlit
ocean, contemplating, in a silence too serious and gentle for
the boldness of gallantry, the blushing face and the young
slight form before him: at length he spoke.

“ Are you happy, my child,” he said, in almost x paternal
tone, “at the career that ties before Ta. From sixtéén to
thirty, the music in the breath of applause is sweeter than
all the music your voice can utter!”

“T know not,” replied Viola, falteringly, but encouraged
by the liquid softness of the accents that addressed her—
“T know not whether Iam happy now, but I was last night.
And I feel, too, Excellency, that I have you to thank,
though, perhaps, you scarce know why!”

“You deceive yourself,” said the cavalier, with a smile.
“Tam aware that I assisted>to your: merited success, and
it is you who scarce know how. The why I will tell you:

: checause I saw in your heart a nobler ambition)than that of ,

the woman’s vanity; it was the daughter that interested
me. Perhaps you would rather I should have admired the

~ singer?”

pao; on, nol”

“Well, I believe you. And now, since we have thus
met, I will pause to counsel you. When next you go to
the theatre you will have at your feet all the young gallants
of Naples. Poor infant! the flame that dazzles the eye can
scorch the wing. Remember that the only homage that
does not sully, must be that which these gallants will not
give thee. And whatever thy dreams of the future—and I
see, while I speak to thee, how wandering they are, and
wild—may only those be fulfilled which centre round the
hearth of home.” *

S

46 ZANONI.

He paused, as Viola’s breast heaved beneath its robe.
And with a burst of natural and innocent emotions, scarcely
comprehending, though an Italian, the grave nature of his
advice, she exclaimed:

“Ah, Excellency, you cannot know how dear to me that
home is already. And my father—there would be no home,
Signor, without him!”

A deep and melancholy shade settled over the face of the
cavalier. He looked up at the quiet house buried amidst
the vine leaves, and turned again to the vivid, animated face
of the young actress.

“Tt is well,” said he. “A simple heart may be its own
best guide, and so, goon, and prosper. Adieu, fair singer.”

“ Adieu, Excellency; but,”—and something she could not
resist—an anxious, sickening feeling of fear and hope—im-
pelled her to the question, “I shall see you again, shall I
not, at San Carlo?”

“Not, at least, for some time. I leave Naples to-day.”

“Indeed!” and Viola’s heart sank within her: the poetry
of the stage was gone.

“And,” said the cavalier, turning back, and gently lay-
ing his hand on hers—“and perhaps, before we meet, you
may have suffered ;—known the first sharp griefs of human
life;—known how little what fame can gain repays what
the heart can lose; but be brave and yield not—not even
to what may seem the piety of sorrow. Observe yon tree in
your neighbour’s garden. Look how it grows up, crooked
and distorted. Some wind scattered the germ, from which
it sprang, in the clefts of the rock; choked up and walled
round by crags and buildings, by nature and man, its life
has been one struggle for the light;—light which makes to
that life the necessity and the principle; you see how it is
writhed and twisted—how, meeting the barrier in one spot,
it has laboured and worked, stem and branches, towards
the clear skies at last. What has preserved it through each
disfavour of birth and circumstances—why are its leaves as
green and fair as those of the vine behind you, which, with

ZANONI. 47

all its arms, can embrace the open sunshine? My child,
because of the very instinct that impelled the struggle—
because the labour for the light won to the light at length.
So with a gallant heart, through every adverse accident of
sorrow and of fate, to turn to the sun, to strive for the
heaven; this it is that gives knowledge to the strong and
happiness to the weak. Ere we meet again, you will turn
sad and heavy eyes to those quiet boughs, and when you
hear the birds sing from them, and see the sunshine come
aslant from crag and housetop to be the playfellow of their
leaves, learn the lesson that Nature teaches you, and strive
through darkness to the light!”

As he spoke he moved on slowly, and left Viola wonder-
ing—silent—saddened with his dim prophecy of coming
evil, and yet, through sadness, charmed. Involuntarily
her eyes followed him,—involuntarily she stretched forth
her arms, as if by a gesture to call him back; she would
have given worlds to have seen him turn—to have heard
once more his low, calm, silvery voice,—to have felt again
the light touch of his hand on hers. As moonlight that
softens into beauty every angle on which it falls, seemed
his presence,—as moonlight vanishes, and things assume
their common aspect of the rugged and the mean—he re-
ceded from her eyes,—and the outward scene was common:
place once more.

The stranger passed on, through that long and lovely
road which reaches at last the palaces that face the public
gardens, and conducts to the more populous quarters of the
city.

A group of young, dissipated courtiers, loitering by the
gateway of a house which was open for the favourite pas-
time of the day—the resort of the wealthier and more high-
born gamesters—made way for him, as with a courteous
inclination he passed them by.

“Per fede,’ said one, “is not that the rich Zanoni, of
whom the town talks?”

“ Ay—they say his wealth is incalculable!”

48 ZANONI.

“ They say—who are they ?—what is the authority? He
has not been many days at Naples, and I cannot yet find
any one who knows aught of his birthplace, his parentage,
or, what is more important, his estates!”

“That is true; but he arrived in a goodly vessel, which
they say is his own. See—no, you cannot see it here,—
but it rides yonder in the Bay. The bankers he deals with
speak with awe of the sums placed in their hands.”

“Whence came he?”

“From some seaport in the East. My valet learned from
some of the sailors on the Mole that he had resided many
years in the interior of India.”

“ Ah, I am told that in India men pick up gold like peb-
bles, and that there are valleys where the birds build their
nests with emeralds to attract the moths. Here comes our
prince of gamesters, Cetoxa; be sure that he already must
have made acquaintance with so wealthy a cavalier; he has
that attraction to gold which the magnet has to steel. Well,
Cetoxa, what fresh news of the ducats of Signor Zanoni?”

“Oh,” said Cetoxa, carelessly, “my friend—”

“Ha! ha! hear him!—his friend—”

“Yes; my friend Zanoni is going to Rome for a short
time; when he returns he has promised me to fix a day to
sup with me, and I will then introduce him to you, and to
the best society of Naples. Déiavolo!/ but he is a most
agreeable and witty gentleman!”

“ Pray tell us how you came so suddenly to be his friend.”

““My dear Belgioso, nothing more natural. He desired a
box at San Carlo; but I need not tell you that the expecta-
tion of a new opera (ah, how superb it is!—that poor
devil, Pisani!—who would have thought it?) and a new
singer—(what a face—what a voice!—ah!) had engaged
every corner of the house. I heard of Zanoni’s desire to
honour the talent of Naples, and, with my usual courtesy
to distinguished strangers, I sent to place my box at his
disposal. He accepts it, —I wait on him between the acts, —
he is most charming,—he invites me to supper.— Cospetto,

ZANONI. 49

what aretinue! We sit late,—I tell him all the news of
Naples,—we grow bosom friends,—he presses on me this
diamond before we part,—it is a trifle, he tells me,—the
jewellers value it at 5,000 pistoles!—the merriest evening
I have passed these ten years!”

The cavaliers crowded round to admire the diamond.

“Signor Count Cetoxa,” said one grave-looking, sombre
man, who had crossed himself two or three times during
the Neapolitan’s narrative. “Are you not aware of the
strange reports about this person; and are you not afraid to
receive from him a gift which may carry with it the most
fatal consequences? Do you not know that he is said to be
‘a sorcerer—to possess the mal-occhio—to—”

“Prithee, spare us your antiquated superstition,” inter-
rupted Cetoxa, contemptuously. “They are out of fashion,
nothing now goes down but scepticism and philosophy. And
what, after all, do these rumours, when sifted, amount to?
They have no origin but this—a silly old man of eighty-
Six, quite in his dotage, solemnly avers that he saw this
same Zanoni seventy years ago—(he himself, the narrator,
then a mere boy)—at Milan. When this very Zanoni, as
you all see, is at least as young as you or I, Belgioso.”

“ But that,” said the grave gentleman, “that is the mys-
tery. Old Avelli declares that Zanoni does not seem a day
older than when they met at Milan. He says that even
then at Milan—mark this—where, though under another
name, this Zanoni appeared in the same splendour, he was
attended also by the same mystery. And that an old man
there remembered to have seen him sixty years before in
Sweden.”

“Tush,” returned Cetoxa, “the same thing has been said
of the quack Cagliostro—mere fables. I will believe them
when I see this diamond turn to a wisp of hay. For the
rest (he added gravely), I consider this illustrious gentleman
my friend, and a whisper against his honour and repute
will, in future, be equivalent to an affront to myself.”

Cetoxa was a redoubted swordsman, and excelled in a

4

50 ZANONI.

peculiarly awkward manceuvre, which he himself had added
to the variations of the stoccata. The grave gentleman,
however anxious for the spiritual weal of the Count, had
an.equal regard for his own corporeal safety. He contented
himself with a look of compassion, and turning through the
gateway, ascended the stairs to the gaming-table.

“Ha, ha!” said Cetoxa, laughing, “our good Loredano is
envious of my diamond. Gentlemen, you sup with me to-
night. I assure you I never met a more delightful, so-
ciable, entertaining person than my dear friend the Signor
Zanoni.”

CHAPTER V.

“Quello Ippogifo, grande e strano augello
Lo porta via. ”!
ORL, Fur., c. vi. 18.

AND now, accompanying this mysterious Zanoni, am I
compelled to bid a sort farewell to Naples. Mount behind
me—mount on my hippogriff, reader—settle yourself at
your ease. I bought the pillion the other day of a poet
who loves his comfort; it has been newly stuffed for your
special accommodation. So, so, we ascend! Look as we
ride aloft—look!—never fear, hippogriffs never stumble;
and every hippogriff in Italy is warranted to carry elderly
gentlemen—look down on the gliding landscapes! There,
near the ruins of the Oscan’s old Atella, rises Aversa, once
the stronghold of the Norman; there gleam the columns of
Capua, above the Vulturnian Stream. Hail to ye, corn-
fields, and vineyards famous for the old Falernian! Hail to
ye, golden orange groves of Mola di Gaeta! Hail to ye,
sweet shrubs and wild flowers, omnis copia narium, that
clothe the mountain skirts of the silent Lantule! Shall we
rest at the Volscian Anxur—the modern Terracina—where

' That hippogriff, great and marvellous bird, bears him away.

ZANONI. 51

the lofty rock stands like the giant that guards the lost
borders of the southern land of Love? Away, away! and
hold your breath as we flit above the Pontine Marshes.
Vreary and desolate, their miasma is to the gardens we
have passed what the rank commonplace of life is to the
heart when it has left love behind. Mournful Campagna,
thou openest on us in majestic sadness. Rome, seven-hilled
Rome! receive us as Memory receives the wayworn; receive
in silence, amidst ruins! Where is the traveller we pur-
sue? Turn the hippogriff loose to graze: he loves the
acanthus that wreathes round yon broken columns. Yes,
that is the Arch of Titus, the conqueror of Jerusalem,—
that the Colosseum! Through one passed the triumph of
the deified invader—in one fell the butchered gladiators.
Monuments of murder, how poor the thoughts, how mean
the memories ye awaken, compared with those that speak
to the heart of man on the heights of Phyle, or by thy lone
mound, grey Marathon! We stand amidst weeds, and
brambles, and long, waving herbage. Where we stand
reigned Nero—here were his tesselated floors; here

“Mighty in the Heaven, a second Heaven, ”

hung the vault of his ivory roofs—here, arch upon arch,
pillar on pillar, glittered to the world the golden palace of
its master—the Golden House of Nero. How the lizard
watches us with his bright timorous eye! We disturb his
reign. Gather that wild flower: the Golden House is van-
ished, but the wild flower may have kin to those which the
stranger’s hand scattered over the tyrant’s-.grave;—see, over
this soil, the grave of Rome, Nature strews the wild flowers
still!

In the midst of this desolation is an old building of the
middle ages. Here dwells a singular recluse. In the sea-
son of the malaria, the native peasant flies the rank vege-
tation round; but he, a stranger and a foreigner, breathes
in safety the pestilential air. He has no friends, no asso-
ciates, no companions, except books and instruments of

52 ZANONI.

science. He is often seen wandering over the grass-grown
hill, or sauntering through the streets of the new city, not
with the absent brow and incurious air of students, but with
observant, piercing eyes that seem to dive into the hearts of
the passers-by. An old man, but not infirm—erect and
stately, as if in his prime. None know whether he be rich
or poor. He asks no charity, and he gives none—he does
no evil, and seems to confer no good. Heis a man who
appears to have no world beyond himself; but appearances
are deceitful; and Science, as well as Benevolence, lives in
the Universe. This abode, for the first time since thus
occupied, a visitor enters. It is Zanoni.

You observe these two men seated together, conversing
earnestly. Years long and many have flown away since
they met last—at least, bodily, and face to face. But if
they are sages, thought can meet thought, and spirit spirit,
though oceans divide the forms. Death itself divides not
the wise. Thou meetest Plato when thine eyes moisten
over the Phedo. May Homer live with all men for ever!

They converse—they confess to each other—they conjure
up the past, and repeople it; but note how differently do
such remembrances affect the two. On Zanoni’s face, de-
spite its habitual calm, the emotions change and go. He
has acted in the past he surveys; but not a trace of the
humanity that participates in joy and sorrow can be detected
on the passionless visage of his companion; the Past, to
him, as is now the Present, has been but as nature to the
sage, the volume to the student—a calm and spiritual life ;—
a study—a contemplation.

From the Past they turn to the Future. Ah! at the close
of the last century, the future seemed a thing tangible—it
Was woven up in all men’s fears and hopes of the Present.

At the verge of that hundred years, Man, the ripest-born
of Time,’ stood as at the death-bed of the Old World, and

1 “ An des Jahrhunderts Neige, -
Der reifste Sohn der Zeit. ”
Dim KUNSTLER.

ZANONL. 53

beheld the New Orb, blood-red amidst cloud and vapour, —
uncertain if acomet or asun. Behold the icy and profound
disdain on the brow of the old man—the lofty, yet touching
sadness that darkens the glorious countenance of Zanoni.
Is it that one views with contempt the struggle and its is-
sue, and the other with awe or pity? Wisdom contemplating
mankind leads but to two results—compassion or disdain.
He who believes in other worlds can accustom himself to look
on this as the naturalist on the revolutions of an ant-hill or
of aleaf. What is the Earth to Infinity—what its duration
to the Eternal! Oh, how much greater is the soul of one
man than the vicissitudes of the whole globe! Child of
heaven, and heir of immortality, how from some star here-
after wilt thou look back on the ant-hill and its commotions,
from Clovis to Robespierre, from Noah to the Final Fire!
The spirit that can contemplate, that lives only in the in-
tellect, can ascend to its star, even from the midst of the
Burial-ground called Earth, and while the Sarcophagus
called Life immures in its clay the Everlasting!

But thou, Zanoni—thou hast refused to live only in the
intellect—thou hast not mortified the heart—thy pulse still
beats with the sweet music of mortal passion—thy kind is
to thee still something warmer than an abstraction—thou
wouldst look upon this Revolution in its cradle, which the
storms rock—thou wouldst see the world while its elements
yet struggle through the chaos!

Go!

54 ZANONLI.

CHAPTER VI.

“ Précepteurs ignorans de ce faible univers. ” !
VOLTAIRE.

“Nous étions 4 table chez un de nos confréres 4 1’ Académie,
Grand Seigneur et homme d’esprit.”—LA HARPE.?

One evening, at Paris, several months after the date of
our last chapter, there was a reunion of some of the most
eminent wits of the time, at the house of a personage dis-
tinguished alike by noble birth and liberal accomplishments.
Nearly all present were of the views that were then the
mode. For as there came afterwards a time when nothing
was so unpopular as the people, so that was the time when
nothing was so vulgar as aristocracy. The airiest fine
gentleman and the haughtiest noble prated of equality, and
lisped enlightenment.

Among the more remarkable guests were Condorcet, then
in the prime of his reputation, the correspondent of the
King of Prussia, the intimate of Voltaire, the member of
half the academies of Europe—noble by birth, polished in
manners, republican in opinions. There, too, was the
venerable Malesherbes, “lVamour et les délices de la
Nation.” * There Jean Silvain Bailly, the accomplished
scholar—the aspiring politician. It was one of those petits
soupers for which the capital of all social pleasures was so
renowned. The conversation, as might be expected, was
literary and intellectual, enlivened by graceful pleasantry.
Many of the ladies of that ancient and proud noblesse—for
the nodlesse yet existed, though its hours were already num-
bered—added to the charms of the society; and theirs were
the boldest criticisms, and often the most liberal sentiments.

1 Tgnorant teachers of this weak world.

* We supped with one of our confreres of the Academy, a great
nobleman and wit.

3 The idol and delight of the nation (so called by his historian,
Gaillard).

ZANONI. 55

Vain labour for me—vain labour almost for the grave
English language, to do justice to the sparkling paradoxes
that flew from lip to lip. The favourite theme was the
superiority of the Moderns to the Ancients. Condorcet on
this head was eloquent, and to some, at least, of his audi-
ence, most convincing. That Voltaire was greater than
Homer few there were disposed to deny. Keen was the
ridicule lavished on the dull pedantry which finds every-
thing ancient necessarily sublime.

“Yet,” said the graceful Marquis de --—, as the cham-
pagne danced to his glass, “more ridiculous still is the
superstition that finds everything incomprehensible holy!
But intelligence circulates, Condorcet; like water, it finds
its level. My hairdresser said to me this morning,
‘Though I am but a poor fellow, I believe as little as the
finest gentleman!’”

“Unquestionably, the great Revolution draws near to
its final completion—a pas de géant, as Montesquieu said
of his own immortal work.”

Then there rushed from all—wit and noble, courtier and
republican—a confused chorus, harmonious only in its an-
ticipation of the brilliant things to which “the great Revo-
lution” was to give birth. Here Condorcet is more eloquent
than before.

“Tl faut absolument que la Superstition et Je Fanatisme
fassent place 4 la philosophie.* Kings persecute persons,
priests opinion. Without kings, men must be safe; and
without priests, minds must be free.”

“Ah!” murmured the Marquis, “and as ce cher Diderot
has so well sung—

“ «Bt des boyaux du dernier prétre
Serrez le cou du dernier roi.’”?

1 Tt must necessarily happen that superstition and fanaticism
give place to philosophy.

2 And throttle the neck of the last king with a string from the
bowels of the last priest.

56 ZANONI.

“ And then,” resumed Condorcet—“ then commences the
Age of Reason!—Equality in instruction—equality in in-
stitutions—equality in wealth! The great impediments to
knowledge are, first, the want of a common language, and
next, the short duration of existence. But as to the first,
when all men are brothers, why not a universal language?
As to the second, the organic perfectibility of the vegetable
world is undisputed; is Nature less powerful in the nobler
existence of thinking man! The very destruction of the
two most active causes of physical deterioration—here,
luxurious wealth, —there, abject penury—must necessarily
prolong the general term of life.’ The art of medicine
will then be honoured in the place of war, which is the art
of murder; the noblest study of the acutest minds will be
devoted to the discovery and arrest of the causes of disease.
Life, I grant, cannot be made eternal; but it may be pro-
longed almost indefinitely. And as the meaner animal
bequeaths its vigour to its offspring, so man shall transmit
his improved organisation, mental and physical, to his
sons. Oh yes, to such a consummation does our age ap-
proach!”

The venerable Malesherbes sighed. Perhaps he feared
the consummation might not come in time for him. The
handsome Marquis de —— and the ladies, yet handsomer
than he, looked conviction and delight.

But two men there were, seated next to each other, who
joined not in the general talk; the one, a stranger newly ar-
rived in Paris, where his wealth, his person, and his accom-
plishments had already made him remarked and courted;
the other, an old man, somewhere about seventy—the witty
and virtuous, brave and still light-hearted Cazotte, the
author of Le Diable Amoureux.

These two conversed familiarly, and apart from the rest,
and only by an occasional smile testified their attention to
the general conversation.

See Condorcet’s posthumous work on the progress of the human
mind,—Editor,

ZANONI. 57

“Yes,” said the stranger, “yes, we have met before.”

“T thought I could not forget your countenance; yet I
task in vain my recollections of the past.”

“T will assist you. Recall the time when, led by curi-
osity, or perhaps the nobler desire of knowledge, you
sought initiation into the mysterious order of Martines de
Pasqualis.” ?

“Ah! is it possible! You are one of that theurgic
brotherhood?”

“Nay, I attended their ceremonies but to see how vainly
they sought to revive the ancient marvels of the cabala.”

“Such studies please you? I have shaken off the in-
fluence they once had on my own imagination.”

“You have not shaken it off,” returned the stranger,
gravely. “It is on you still—on you at this hour; it beats
in your heart; it kindles in your reason; it will speak in
your tongue!”

And then with a yet lower voice, the stranger continued
to address him, to remind him of certain ceremonies and

1 It is so recorded of Cazotte. Of Martines de Pasqualis little is
known; even the country to which he belonged is matter of con-
jecture. Equally so the rites, ceremonies, and nature of the cabalis-
tic order he established. St. Martin was a disciple of the school,
and that, at least, is in its favour; for, in spite of his mysticism, no
man more beneficent, generous, pure, and virtuous, than St. Martin,
adorned the last century. Above all, no man more distinguished
himself from the herd of sceptical philosophers by the gallantry and
fervour with which he combated materialism, and vindicated the
necessity of faith amidst a chaos of unbelief. It may also be ob-
served, that Cazotte, whatever else he learned of the brotherhood
of Martines, learned nothing that diminished the excellence of his
life and the sincerity of his religion. At once gentle and brave, he
never ceased to oppose the excesses of the Revolution. To the last,
unlike the Liberals of his time, he was a devout and sincere Chris-
tian. Before his execution, he demanded a pen and paper, to write
these words: “Ma femme, mes enfans, ne me pleurez pas, ne
m’oubliez pas, mais souvenez-vous surtout de ne jamais offenser
Dieu. ” *—Ed.

Vester ) ee ie eee
* My wife, my children, weep not for me; forget me not, but
remember above everything never to offend God.

58 ZANONIT.

doctrines, —to explain and enforce them by references to the
actual experience and history of his listener, which Cazotte
thrilled to find so familiar to a stranger.

Gradually the old man’s pleasing and benevolent coun-
tenance grew overcast, and he turned, from time to time,
searching, curious, uneasy glances towards his companion.

The charming Duchess de G—— archly pointed out to
the lively guests the abstracted air and clouded brow of the
poet; and Condorcet, who liked no one else to be remarked
when he himself was present, said to Cazotte, “ Well, and
what do you predict of the Revolution—how, at least, will
it affect us?”

At that question Cazotte started—his cheeks grew pale,
large drops stood on his forehead—his lips writhed. His
gay companions gazed on him in surprise.

“Speak!” whispered the stranger, laying his hand gently
upon the arm of the old wit. ;

At that word, Cazotte’s face grew locked and rigid, his
eyes dwelt vacantly on space, and in a low, hollow voice,
he thus answered: ?

“You ask how it will affect yourselves,—you, its most
learned, and its least selfish agents. I will answer; you,
Marquis de Condorcet, will die in prison, but not by the
hand of the executioner. In the peaceful happiness of that
day, the philosopher will carry about with him, not the
elixir, but the poison.”

“My poor Cazotte,” said Condorcet, with his gentle
smile, “what have prisons, executioners, and poison, to do
with an age of liberty and brotherhood?”

“Tt is in the names of Liberty and Brotherhood that the
prisons will reek and the headsman be glutted.”

1 The following prophecy (not unfamiliar perhaps to some of my
readers), with some slight variations, and at greater length, in the
text of the authority I am about to cite, is to be found in La
Harpe’s posthumous works. The MS. is said to exist still in La
Harpe’s handwriting, and the story is given on M. Petitot’s au-

thority, vol. i. p. 62. It is not for me to inquire if there be doubts
of its foundation on fact.—Ep. :

ZANONI. 59

“You are thinking of priestcraft, not philosophy, Ca-
zotte,” said Champfort.’ “And what of me?”

“You will open your own veins to escape the fraternity
of Cain. Be comforted; the last drops will not follow the
razor. For you, venerable Malesherbes,—for you, Aimar
Nicolai—for you, learned Bailly,—I see them dress the
scaffold! And all the while, O great philosophers, your
murderers will have no word but philosophy on their lips!”

The hush was complete and universal when the pupil of
Voltaire—the prince of the academic sceptics, hot La
Harpe—cried, with a sarcastic laugh, “Do not flatter me,
O prophet, by exemption from the fate of my compan-
ions. Shall Z have no part to play in this drama of your
phantasies?”

At this question, Cazotte’s countenance lost its unnatural
expression of awe and sternness; the sardonic humour most
common to it came back and played in his brightening eyes.

“Yes, La Harpe, the most wonderful part of all! You
will become—a Christian!”

This was too much for the audience that a moment be-
fore seemed grave and thoughtful, and they burst into an
immoderate fit of laughter, while Cazotte, as if exhausted
by his. predictions, sank back in his chair, and breathed
hard and heavily.

“Nay,” said Madame de G——, “you who have pre-
dicted such grave things concerning us, must prophesy
something also about yourself.”

A convulsive tremor shook the involuntary prophet ;—it
passed, and left his countenance elevated by an expression
of resignation and calm. ‘“ Madame,” said he, after a long

1 Champfort, one of those men of letters who, though misled by
the first fair show of the Revolution, refused to follow the baser
men of action into its horrible excesses, lived to express the mur-
derous philanthropy of its agents by the best bon mot of the time.
Seeing written on the walls, “Fraternité ou la Mort,” he observed
that the sentiment should be translated thus—“ Sods mon frére, ou
je te tue.” *

* “Be my brother, or I kill thee.”

60 ZANONI.

pause, “during the siege of Jerusalem, we are told by its
historian that a man, for seven successive days went round
the ramparts, exclaiming, ‘Woe to thee, Jerusalem, woe to
myself! ”

“Well, Cazotte, well?”

* And on the seventh day, while he thus spoke, a stone
from the machines of the Komans dashed him into atoms!”

With these words Cazotte rose; and the guests, awed in
spite of themselves, shortly afterwards broke up and re-
tired.

——— $$$ _——

CHAPTER VII.

“Qui donc t’a donne la mission s’annoncer au peuple que la divinité

n’existe pas?—quel avantage trouves-tu 4 persuader 4 l’homme
qu’une force aveugle préside a ses destinées et frappe au hasard
le crime et la vertu?” }—ROBESPIERRE, Discours, Mai 7, 1794.

Ir was some time before midnight when the stranger
returned home. His apartments were situated in one of
those vast abodes which may be called an epitome of Paris
itself. The cellars rented by mechanics, scarcely removed
a step from paupers, often by outcasts and fugitives from
the law,—often by some daring writer, who, after scatter-
ing amongst the people doctrines the most subversive of
order or the most libellous on the characters of priest,
minister, and king,—retired amongst the rats, to escape the
persecution that attends the virtuous,—the ground-floor oc-
cupied by shops—the entresol by artists—the principal sto-
ries by nobles, and the garrets by journeymen or grisettes.

As the stranger passed up the stairs, a young man ofa
form and countenance singularly unprepossessing emerged
from a door in the entresol, and brushed beside him. His
glance was furtive, sinister, savage, and yet timorous; the
man’s face was of an ashen paleness, and the features

1 Who then invested you with the mission to announce to the
people that there is no God?—what advantage find you in persuad-

ing man that nothing but blind force presides over his destinies,
and strikes hap-hazard both crime and virtue?

ZANONI. 61

worked convulsively. The stranger paused, and observed
’ him with thoughtful looks, as he hurried down the stairs.
While he thus stood, he heard a groan from the room
which the young man had just quitted; the latter had
pulled to the door with hasty vehemence, but some frag-
ment, probably of fuel, had prevented its closing, and it
now stood slightly ajar. The stranger pushed it open and
entered; he passed a small anteroom, meanly furnished,
and stood in a bedchamber of meagre and sordid discom-
fort. Stretched on the bed, and writhing in pain, lay an
old man; a single candle lit the room, and threw its feeble
ray over the furrowed and deathlike face of the sick per-
son. No attendant was by; he seemed left alone to
breathe his last. “ Water,” he moaned, feebly—“ water—
I parch—I burn!” The intruder approached the bed,
bent over him, and took his hand—“ Oh, bless thee, Jean,
bless thee!” said the sufferer; “hast thou brought back the
physician already? Sir, I am poor, but I can pay you
well. I would not die yet, for that young man’s sake.”
And he sat upright in his bed, and fixed his dim eyes
anxiously on his visitor.

“What are your symptoms, your disease?”

‘“‘ Fire—-fire—fire in the heart, the entrails—I burn!”

“ How long is it since you have taken food?”

“Food! only this broth. There is the basin, all I have
taken these six hours. I had scarce drunk it ere these
pains began.”

The stranger looked at the basin, some portion of the
contents was yet left there.

“Who admnistered this to you?”

“Who? Jean! Whoelse should? I have no servant, —
none! Iam poor, very poor, sir. But no! you physicians
do not care for the poor. Jam rich! can you cure me?”

“Yes, if Heaven permit. Wait but a few moments.”

The old man was fast sinking under the rapid effects of
poison. The stranger repaired to his own apartments, and
returned in a few moments with some preparation that had

62 ZANONI.

the instant result of an antidote. The pain ceased, the
blue ‘and livid colour receded from the lips; the old man
fell into a profound sleep. The stranger drew the curtains
round the bed, took up the light, and inspected the apart-
ment. The walls of both rooms were hung with draw-
ings of masterly excellence. A portfolio was filled with
sketches of equal skill; but these last were mostly sub-
jects that appalled the eye and revolted the taste; they
displayed the human figure in every variety of suffering—
the rack, the wheel, the gibbet, all that cruelty has in-
vented to sharpen the pangs of death, seemed yet more
dreadful from the passionate gusto and earnest force of the
designer. And some of the countenances of those thus
delineated were sufficiently removed from the ideal to show
that they were portraits; in a large, bold, irregular hand,
was written beneath these drawings, “The Future of the
Aristocrats.” In a corner of the room, and close by an old
bureau, was a small bundle, over which, as if to hide it, a
cloak was thrown carelessly. Several shelves were filled
with books; these were almost entirely the works of the
philosophers of the time—the philosophers of the material
school, especially the Encyclopedists, whom Robespierre
afterwards so singularly attacked, when the coward deemed
it unsafe to leave his reign without a God.*| A volume lay

1 “Cette secte (les Encyclopédistes) propagea avec beaucoup de
zéle l’opinion du materialisme, qui prevalut parmi les grands et
parmi les beaux esprits ; on lui doit en partie cette espéce de philo-
sophie pratique qui, reduisant l’Egoisme en systéme, regarde la
société humaine comme un guerre de ruse, le succés comme la régle
du juste et de l’injuste, la probité comme une affaire de gofit, ou de

bienséance, le monde comme le patrimoine des fripons adroits. ” *—
DIScOURS DE RoBESPIERRE, May, 7, 1794.

* This sect (the Encyclopedists) propagate with much zeal the
doctrine of materialism, which prevails among the great and the
wits; we owe to it, partly, that kind of practical philosophy which,
reducing Egotism to a system, looks upon society as a war of
cunning—success the rule of right and wrong—honesty as an affair
of taste or decency—and the world as the patrimony of clever
scoundrels.

ZANONI. 63

on the table; it was one of Voltaire’s, and the page was
opened at his argumentative assertion of the existence of
the Supreme Being.’ The margin was covered with pen-
cilled notes, in the stiff but tremulous hand of old age; all
in attempt to refute or to ridicule the logic of the sage of
Ferney. Voltaire did not go far enough for the annotator!
The clock struck two, when the sound of steps was heard
without. The stranger silently seated himself on the farther
side of the bed, and its drapery screened him, as he sat,
from the eyes of a man who now entered on tiptoe; it was
the same person who had passed him on the stairs. The
new comer took up the candle and approached the bed.
The old man’s face was turned to the pillow; but he lay
so still, and his breathing was so inaudible, that his sleep
might well by that hasty, shrinking, guilty glance be mis-
taken for the repose of death. The new comer drew back,
and a grim smile passed over his face; he replaced the can-
dle on the table, opened the bureau with a key which he took
from his pocket, and loaded himself with several rouleaus of
gold, that he found in the drawers. At this time the old
man began to wake. He stirred, he looked up; he turned
his eyes towards the light now waning in its socket; he saw
the robber at his work; he sat erect for an instant as if
transfixed, more even by astonishment than terror. At last
he sprang from his bed:

“Just Heaven! do I dream! Thou—thou—thou for
whom I toiled and starved!—TZhou !”

’ The robber started; the gold fell from his hand, and
rolled on the floor.

“What!” he said, “art thou not dead yet? Has the
poison failed?”

“Poison, boy! Ah!” shrieked the old man, and covered
his face with his hands; then, with sudden energy, he ex-
claimed, “Jean! Jean! recall that word. Rob, plunder
me if thou wilt, but do not say thou couldst murder one
who only lived for thee! There, there, take the gold; I

1 Histoire de Jenni.

64 ZANONI.

hoarded it but for thee. Go—go!” and the old man, who,
in his passion, had quitted his bed, fell at the feet of the
foiled assassin, and writhed on the ground—the mental
agony more intolerable than that of the body, which he had
so lately undergone. The robber looked at him with a hard
disdain.

“What have I ever done to thee, wretch?” cried the old
man, “what but loved and cherished thee? Thou wert an
orphan—an outcast. I nurtured, nursed, adopted thee as
my son. If men call mea miser, it was but that none might
despise thee, my heir, because nature has stunted and de-
formed thee, when I was no more. Thou wouldst have had
all when I was dead. Couldst thou not spare me a few
months or days—nothing to thy youth, all that is left to my
age? What have I done to thee?”

“Thou hast continued to live, and thou wouldst make no
will.”

“Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!”

“Ton Diew! Thy God! Fool! Hast thou not told me
from my childhood that there is no God? Hast thou not
fed me on philosophy? Hast thou not said, ‘Be virtuous, be
good, be just, for the sake of mankind; but there is no life
after this life?? Mankind! Why should I love mankind?
Hideous and misshapen, mankind jeer at me as I pass the
streets. What hast thou done to me? Thou hast taken
away from me, who am the scoff of this world, the hopes of
another! Is there no other life? Well, then, I want thy
gold, that at least I may hasten to make the best of this!”

“Monster! Curses light on thy ingratitude, thy-———”

“ And who hears thy curses? Thou knowest there is no
God! Mark me; I have prepared all to fly. See—I have
my passport; my horses wait without; relays are ordered.
T have thy gold.” (And the wretch as he spoke, continued
coldly to load his person with the rouleaus.) “And now,
if I spare thy life, how shall I be sure that thou wilt not
inform against mine?” He advanced with a gloomy scowl
and a menacing gesture as he spoke.

ZANONI. 65

The old man’s anger changed to fear. He cowered before
the savage. “Let me live! let me live!—_that—that—”

“'That—what?”

“T may pardon thee! Yes, thou hast nothing to fear
from me. I swear it!”

“Swear! But by whom and what, old man? I cannot
believe thee, if thou believest not in any God! Ha! ha!
behold the result of thy lessons.”

Another moment, and those murderous fingers would
have strangled their prey. But between the assassin and
his victim rose a form that seemed almost to both a visitor
from the world that both denied—stately with majestic
strength, glorious with awful beauty.

The ruffian recoiled, looked, trembled, and then turned
and fled from the chamber. The old man fell again to the
ground insensible.

CHAPTER VIII.

“To know how a bad man will act when in power, reverse all the
doctrines he preaches when obscure. ”—S.. MoNTAGUE.

“ Antipathies also form a part of magic (falsely) so called. Man
naturally has the same instinct as the animals ; which warns them
involuntarily against the creatures that are hostile or fatal to their
existence. But he so often neglects it that it becomes dormant.
Not so the true cultivator of the Great Science, ” &c.

TRISMEGISTUS THE FourtTH. (A Rosicrucian.)

Wuewn he again saw the old man the next day, the
stranger found him calm, and surprisingly recovered from
the scene and sufferings of the night. He expressed his
gratitude to his preserver with tearful fervour, and stated
that he had already sent for a relation, who would make ar-
rangements for his future safety and mode of life. “ForI
have money yet left,” said the old man; “and henceforth
have no motive to be a miser.” He proceeded then briefly

5

66 ZANONI.

to relate the origin and circumstances of his connection
with his intended murderer.

It seems that in earlier life he had quarrelled with his
relations—from a difference in opinions of belief. Rejecting
all religion as a fable, he yet cultivated feelings that in-
clined him—for though his intellect was weak, his dispo-
sitions were good—to that false and exaggerated sensibility
which its dupes so often mistake for benevolence. He had
no children; he resolved to adopt an enfant du peuple. He
resolved to educate this boy according to “Reason.” He
selected an orphan of the lowest extraction, whose defects
of person and constitution only yet the more moved his pity,
and finally engrossed his affection. In this outcast he not
only loved a son, he loved a theory! He brought him up
most philosophically. Helvetius had proved to him that
education can do all; and before he was eight years old,
the little Jean’s favourite expressions were—“ La lumiére
et la vertu.”* The boy showed talents, especially in art.
The protector sought for a master who was as free from
“superstition” as himself, and selected the painter David.
That person, as hideous as his pupil, and whose dispositions
were as vicious as his professional abilities were undeniable,
was certainly as free from “superstition” as the protector
could desire. It was reserved for Robespierre hereafter to
make the sanguinary painter believe in the Ztre Supréme.
‘The boy was early sensible of his ugliness, which was almost
preternatural. His benefactor found it in vain to reconcile
him to the malice of nature by his philosophical aphorisms;
but when he pointed out to him that in this world money,
like charity, covers a multitude of defects, the boy listened
eagerly and was consoled. To save money for his protégé—
for the only thing in the world he loved—this became the
patron’s passion. Verily, he had met with his reward.

“But I am thankful he has escaped,” said the old man,
wiping his eyes. “ Had he left me a beggar, I could never
have accused him.”

1 Light and virtue,

ZANONI. 67

“No, for you are the author of his crimes.”

“How! I, who never ceased to inculcate the beauty of
virtue? Explain yourself.”

“ Alas, if thy pupil did not make this clear to thee last
night from his own lips, an augel might come from Heaven
to preach to thee in vain.”

The old man moved uneasily and was about to reply,
when the relative he had sent for, and who, a native of
Nancy, happened to be in Paris at the time—entered the
room. He was a man somewhat past thirty, and of a dry,
saturnine, meagre countenance, restless eyes, and com-
pressed lips. He listened, with many ejaculations of hor-
ror, to his relation’s recital, and sought earnestly, but in
vain, to induce him to give information against his protégé.

“Tush, tush, Réné Dumas!” said the old man, “you area
lawyer. You are bred to regard human life with contempt.
Let any man break a law, and you shout, ‘Execute him!’ ”

“T!” cried Dumas, lifting up his hands and eyes: “ vener-
able sage, how you misjudge me! I lament more than any
one the severity of our code. Ithink the state never should
take away life—no, not even the life of a murderer. I
agree with that young statesman—Maximilien Robespierre
—that the executioner is the invention of the tyrant. My
very attachment to our advancing revolution is, that it must
- sweep away this legal butchery.”

The lawyer paused out of breath. The stranger regarded
him fixedly, and turned pale.

“You change countenance, sir,” said Dumas; “you do
not agree with me.”

“Pardon me, I was at that moment repressing a vague
fear which seemed prophetic—”

“ And that—”

“Was that we should meet again, when your opinions on
Death and the philosophy of Revolutions might be different.”

“Never!”

“You enchant me, cousin Réné,” said the old man, who
had listened to his relation with delight. ‘Ah, I see you

68 ZANONI.

have proper séntiments of justice and philanthropy. Why
did I not seek to know you before? You admire the Revo-
lution?—you, equally with me, detest the barbarity of kings
and the fraud of priests.”

“Detest! How could I love mankind if I did not?”

“And,” said the old man, hesitatingly, “you do not
think, with this noble gentleman, that I erred in the precepts
I instilled into that wretched man?”

“Erred! Was Socrates to blame if Alcibiades was an
adulterer and a traitor?

“You hear him! you hear him! But Socrates had also
a Plato; henceforth you shall be a Plato tome. You hear
him?” exclaimed the old man, turning to the stranger.

But the latter was at the threshold. Who shall argue
with the most stubborn of all bigotries—the fanaticism of
unbelief?

“Are you going?” exclaimed Dumas, “and before I have
thanked you, blessed you for the life of this dear and vener-
able man? Oh, if ever I can repay you—if ever you want
the heart’s blood of Réné Dumas!” Thus volubly deliver-
ing himself, he followed the stranger to the threshold of the
second chamber, and there gently detaining him, and after
looking over his shoulder, to be sure that he was not heard
by the owner, he whispered, “I ought to return to Nancy.
One would not lose one’s time;—you don’t think, sir, that
that scoundrel took away all the old fool’s money?”

“Was it thus Plato spoke of Socrates, Monsieur Dumas?”

“Wa! ha!—you are caustic. Well, you have a right.
Sir, we shall meet again.”

“AGAIN!” muttered the stranger and his brow darkened.
He hastened to his chamber, he passed the day and the
night alone, and in studies, no matter of what nature, —
they served to increase his gloom.

What could ever connect his fate with Réné Dumas? or
the fugitive assassin? Why did the buoyant air of Paris
seem to him heavy with the steams of blood?—why did an
instinct urge him to fly from those sparkling circles, from

ZANONI. ; 69

that focus of the world’s awakened hopes, warning him from
return?—he whose lofty existence defied—but away these
dreams and omens! He leaves France behind. Back, O
Italy, to thy majestic wrecks! On the Alps this soul
breathes the free air once more. Free air! Alas, let the
_ world-healers exhaust their chemistry; Man never shall be
as free in the market-place as on the mountain. But we,
reader, we too, escape from these scenes of false wisdom
clothing godless crime. Away, once more—

“In den heitern Regionen
Wo die reinen Formen wohnen. ”

Away, to the loftier realm where the pure dwellers are.
Unpolluted by the Actual, the Ideal lives only with Art
and Beauty. Sweet Viola, by the shores of the blue Par-
thenope, by Virgil’s tomb, and the Cimmerian cavern, we
return to thee once more.

EE ———

CHAPTER IX.

“Che non yuol che ’] destrier pit vada in alto;
Poi lo lega nel margine marino
A un verde mirto in mezzo un lauro e wn pino.”}
Oru. Fur., c. vi. 28.

O Musicran! art thou happy now? Thou art reinstalled
at thy stately desk—thy faithful barbiton has its share in
the triumph. It is thy masterpiece which fills thy ear—it
is thy daughter that fills the scene, the music, the actress
so united, that applause to one is applause to both. They
make way for thee at the orchestra—they.no longer jeer and
wink, when, with a fierce fondness, thou dost caress thy Fa-
miliar, that plains, and wails, and chides, and growls, under
thy remorseless hand. They understand now how irregular

1 Ag he did not wish that his charger (the hippogriff) should take
any further excursions into the higher regions for the present, he
bound him at the sea-shore to a green myrtle between a laurel and a
vine,

70 ZANONI.

is ever the symmetry of real genius. The inequalities in
its surface make the moon luminous to man. Giovanni Pai-
siello, Mdestro di Capella, if thy gentle soul could know
envy, thou must sicken to see thy Hifrida and thy Pirro
laid aside, and all Naples turned fanatic to the Siren, at
whose measures shook querulously thy gentle head!

But thou, Paisiello, calm in the long prosperity of fame,
knowest that the New will have its day, and comfortest
thyself that the Hifrida and the Pirro will live for ever.
Perhaps a mistake, but it is by such mistakes that true
genius conquers envy. “To be immortal,” says Schiller,
“live in the whole.” ‘To be superior to the hour, live in
thy self-esteem. The audience now would give their ears
for those variations and flights they were once wont to hiss.
No!—Pisani has been two-thirds of a life at silent work on
his masterpiece: there is nothing he can add to that, how-
ever he might have sought to improve on the masterpieces
of others. Is not thiscommon? The least little critic, in
reviewing some work of art, will say, “pity this, and pity
that;” “this should have been altered—that omitted.”
Yea, with his wiry fiddlestring will be creak out his ac-
cursed variations. But let him sit down and compose, him-
self. He sees no improvement in variations then! Every
man can control his fiddle when it is his own work with
which its vagaries would play the devil.

And Viola is the idol—the theme of Naples. She is the
spoiled Sultana of the boards. ‘To spoil her acting may be
easy enough—shall they spoil her nature? No, I think not.
There, at home, she is still good and simple; and there,
under the awning by the doorway—there she still sits, di-
vinely musing. How often, crook-trunked tree, she looks
to thy green boughs; how often, like thee, in her dreams
and fancies, does she struggle for the light;—not the light of
the stage-lamps. Poor child! be contented with the lamps,
even with the rushlights. A farthing candle is more con-
venient for household purposes than the stars.

Weeks passed, and the stranger did not reappear: mouths

ZANONI. FA

had passed, and his prophecy of sorrow was not yet ful-
filled. One evening, Pisani was taken ill. His success
had brought on the long-neglected composer pressing ap-
plications for concerti and sonata, adapted to his more pecul-
iar science on the violin. He had been employed for some
weeks, day and night, on a piece in which he hoped to ex-
cel himself. He took, as usual, one of those seemingly im-
practicable subjects which it was his pride to subject to the
expressive powers of his art—the terrible legend connected
with the transformation of Philomel. The pantomime of
sound opened with the gay merriment of a feast. The
monarch of Thrace is at his banquet: a sudden discord
brays through the joyous notes—the string seems to screech
with horror. The king learns the murder of his son by the
hands of the avenging sisters. Swift rage the chords,
through the passions of fear, of horror, of fury, and dismay.
The father pursues the sisters. Hark! what changes the
dread—the discord—into that long silvery, mournful music?
The transformation is completed; and Philomel, now the
nightingale, pours from the myrtle-bough the full, liquid,
subduing notes that are to tell evermore to the world the
history of her woes and wrongs. Now, it was in the midst
of this complicated and difficult attempt that the health of
the over-tasked musician, excited alike by past triumph and
new ambition, suddenly gave way. He was taken ill at
night. The next morning the doctor pronounced that his
disease was a malignant and infectious fever. His wife and
Viola shared in their tender watch; but soon that task was
left to the last alone. The Signora Pisani caught the in-
fection, and in a few hours was even in a state more alarm-
ing than that of her husband. The Neapolitans, in common
with the inhabitants of all warm climates, are apt to become
selfish and brutal in their dread of infectious disorders.
Gionetta herself pretended to be ill, to avoid the sick-
chamber. The whole labour of love and sorrow fell on
Viola. It was a terrible trial—I am willing to hurry over
the details. The wife died first!

72 ZANONI.

One day, a little before sunset, Pisani woke partially re-
covered from the delirium which had preyed upon him,
with few intervals, since the second day of the disease ;—
and casting about him his dizzy and feeble eyes, he recog-
nised Viola, and smiled. He faltered her name as he rose
and stretched hisarms. She fell upon his breast, and strove
to suppress her tears.

“Thy mother?” he said. ‘“ Does she sleep?”

“ She sleeps—ah, yes!” and the tears gushed forth.

“Tthought—eh! Iknow not what Ihavethought. But
do not weep—I shall be well now—quite well. She will
come to me when she wakes—will she?”

Viola could not speak; but she busied herself in pouring
forth an anodyne, which she had been directed to give the
sufferer as soon as the delirium should cease. The doctor
had told her, too, to send for him the instant so important
a change should occur.

She went to the door, and called to the woman, who,
during Gionetta’s pretended illness, had been induced to
supply her place; but the hireling answered not. She flew
through the chambers to search for her in vain—the hire-
ling had caught Gionetta’s fear and vanished. What was
to be done? The case was urgent—the doctor had declared
not a moment should be lost in obtaining his attendance;
she must leave her father—she must go herself! She crept
back into the room—the anodyne seemed already to have
taken benign effect—the patient’s eyes were closed, and he
breathed regularly, as in sleep. She stole away, threw
her veil over her face, and hurried from the house.

Now, the anodyne had not produced the effect which it
appeared to have done; instead of healthful sleep, it had
brought on a kind of light-headed somnolence, in which the
mind, preternaturally restless, wandered about its accus-
tomed haunts, waking up its old familiar instinets and incli-
nations. It was not sleep—it was not delirium; it was the
dream-wakefulness which opium sometimes induces, when
every nerve grows tremulously alive, and creates a corre-

ZANONI. 73

sponding activity in the frame, to which it gives a false and
hectic vigour. Pisani missed something—what, he scarcely
knew; it wasa combination of the two wants most essential
to his mental life—the voice of his wife, the touch of his
Familiar. He rose—he left his bed—he leisurely put on
his old dressing-robe, in which he had been wont to com-
pose. He smiled complacently as the associations con-
nected with the garment came over his memory; he walked
tremulously across the room, and entered the small cabinet
next to his chamber, in which his wife had been accustomed
more often to watch than sleep, when illness separated her
from his side. The room was desolate and void. He
looked round wistfully, and muttered to himself, and then
proceeded regularly, and with a noiseless step, through the
chambers of the silent house, one by one.

He came at last to that in which old Gionetta, —faithful
to her own safety, if nothing else—nursed herself, in the
remotest corner of the house, from the danger of infection.
As he glided in—wan, emaciated, with an uneasy, anxious,
searching look in his haggard eyes—the old womau shrieked
aloud, and fell at his feet. He bent over her, passed his
thin hands along her averted face, shook his head, and said
in a hollow voice:

“T cannot find them; where are they?”

“Who, dear master? Oh, have compassion on yourself;
they are not here. Blessed saints! this is terrible: he has
touched me: I am dead!”

“Dead! who is dead? Is any one dead?”

“Ah! don’t talk so; you must know it well: my poor
mistress—she caught the fever from you; it is infectious
enough to kill a whole city. San Gennaro, protect me!
My poor mistress—she is dead—buried, too; and I, your
faithful Gionetta, woe is me! Go, go—to—to—bed again,
dearest master—go!”

The poor musician stood for one moment mute and un-
moving, then a slight shiver ran through his frame; he
turned and glided back, silent and spectre-like, as he had

74. ZANONI.

entered. He came into the room where he had been accus-
tomed to compose—where his wife, in her sweet patience,
had so often sat by his side, and praised and flattered when
the world had but jeered and scorned. In one corner he
found the laurel-wreath she had placed on his brows that
happy night of fame and triumph; and near it, half hid by
her mantilla, lay in its case the neglected instrument.

Viola was not long gone; she had found the physician;
she returned with him; and as they gained the threshold,
they heard a strain of music from within, a strain of pierc-
ing, heart-rending anguish: it was not like some senseless
instrument, mechanical in its obedience to a human hand—
it was as some spirit calling in wail and agony from the
forlorn shades, to the angels it beheld afar beyond the Eter-
nal Gulf. They exchanged glances of dismay. They hur-
ried into the house—they hastened into the room. Pisani
turned, and his look, full of ghastly intelligence and stern
command, awed them back. ‘The black mantilla, the faded
laurel-leaf, lay there before him. Viola’s heart guessed all
at a single glance—she sprang to his knees—she clasped
them—“ Father, father, J am left thee still!”

The wail ceased—the note changed; with a confused as-
sociation—half of the man, half of the artist—the anguish,
still a melody, was connected with sweeter sounds and
thoughts. The nightingale had escaped the pursuit—soft,
airy, bird-like,—thrilled the delicious notes a moment, and
then died away. The instrument fell to the floor, and its
cords snapped. You heard that sound through the silence.
The artist looked on his kneeling child, and then on the
broken cords. . . . “ Bury me by her side,” he said, in a very
calm, low voice; “and that by mine.” And with these
words his whole frame became rigid, as if turned to stone.
The last change passed over his face. He fell to the
ground, sudden and heavy. The chords there, too,—the
chords of the human instrument were snapped asunder. As
he fell, his robe brushed the laurel-wreath, and that fell also,
near, but not in reach of, the dead man’s nerveless hand.

ZANONI. 75

Broken instrument—broken heart—withered laurel-
wreath!—the setting sun through the vine-clad lattice
streamed on all! So smiles the eternal Nature on the
wrecks of all that make life glorious! And not a sun that
sets not somewhere on the silenced music—on the faded

laurel!
ees

CHAPTER X.

“Ché difesa miglior ch’ usbergo e scudo
E la santa innocenza al petto ignudo!”!
GER. Lis., c. viii. 41.

Anp they buried the Musician and his barbiton together,
in the same coffin. That famous Steiner—Primeval Titan
of the great Tyrolese race—often hast thou sought to scale
the heavens, and therefore must thou, like the meaner chil-
dren of men, descend to the dismal Hades! Harder fate
for thee than thy mortal master. For thy soul sleeps with
thee in the coffin, And the music that belongs to his,
separate from the instrument, ascends on high, to be heard
often by a daughter’s pious ears, when the heaven is serene
and the earth sad. Jor there is a sense of hearing that the
vulgar know not. And the voices of the dead breathe soft and
frequent to those who can unite the memory with the faith.

And now Viola is alone in the world. Alone in the home
where loneliness had seemed from the cradle a thing that
was not of nature. And at first the solitude and the still-
ness were insupportable. Have you, ye mourners, to whom
these sibyl leaves, weird with many a dark enigma, shall
be borne, have you not felt that when the death of some
best-loved one has made the hearth desolate—have you not
felt as if the gloom of the altered home was too heavy for
thought to bear?—you would leave it, though a palace, even
for a cabin. And yet—sad to say—when you obey the im-
pulse, when you fly from the walls, when in the strange

1 Better defence than shield or breastplate is holy innocence to
the naked breast !

76 ZANONI.

place in which you seek your refuge, nothing speaks to you
of the lost, have ye not felt again a yearning for that very
food to memory which was: just before but bitterness and
gall? Is it not almost impious and profane to abandon
that dear hearth to strangers? And the desertion of the
home where your parents dwelt, and blessed you, upbraids
your conscience as if you had sold their tombs. Beautiful
was the Etruscan superstition, that the ancestors become
the household gods. Deaf is the heart to which the Lares
call from the desolate floors in vain. At first Viola had, in
her intolerable anguish, gratefully welcomed the refuge
which the house and family of a kindly neighbour, much
attached to her father, and who was one of the orchestra
that Pisani shall perplex no more, had proffered to the
orphan. But the company of the unfamiliar in our grief,
the consolation of the stranger, how it irritates the wound!
And then, to hear elsewhere the name of father, mother,
child—as if death came alone to you—to see elsewhere the
calm regularity of those lives united in love and order,
keeping account of happy hours, the unbroken timepiece of
home, as if nowhere else the wheels were arrested, the
chain shattered, the hands motionless, the chime still!
No, the grave itself does not remind us of our loss like the
company of those who have no loss to mourn. Go back to
thy solitude, young orphan—go back to thy home: the sor-
row that meets thee on the threshold can greet thee, even in
its sadness, like the smile upon the face of the dead. And
there, from thy casement, and there, from without thy door,
thou seest still the tree, solitary as thyself, and springing
from the clefts of the rock, but forcing its way to light, —
as, through all sorrow, while the seasons yet can renew the
verdure and bloom of youth, strives the instinct of the human
heart! Only when the sap is dried up, only when age comes
on, does the sun shine in vain for man and for the tree.
Weeks and months—months sad and many—again passed,
and Naples will not longer suffer its idol to seclude itself
from homage. The world ever plucks us back from our-

ZANONI. (oi

selves with a thousand arms. And again, Viola’s voice is
heard upon the stage, which, mystically faithful to life, is
in nought more faithful than this, that it is the appearances
that fill the scene; and we pause not to ask of what realities
they are the proxies. When the actor of Athens moved all
hearts as he clasped the burial urn, and burst into broken
sobs; how few, there, knew that it held the ashes of his
son! Gold, as well as fame, was showered upon the young
actress; but she still kept to her simple mode of life, to her
lowly home, to the one servant whose faults, selfish as they
were, Viola was too inexperienced to perceive. And it was
Gionetta who had placed her, when first born, in her father’s
arms! She was surrounded by every snare, wooed by every
solicitation that could beset her unguarded beauty and her
dangerous calling. But her modest virtue passed unsullied
through them all. It is true that she had been taught by
lips now mute the maiden duties enjoined by honour and
religion. And all love that spoke not of the altar only
shocked and repelled her. But besides that, as grief and
solitude ripened her heart, and made her tremble at times
to think how deeply it could feel, her vague and early vis-
ions shaped themselves into an ideal of love. And till the
ideal is found, how the shadow that it throws before it
chills us to the actual! With that ideal, ever and ever,
unconsciously, and with a certain awe and shrinking, came
the shape and voice of the warning stranger. Nearly two
years had passed since he had appeared at Naples. Noth-
ing had been heard of him, save that his vessel had been
directed, some months after his departure, to sail for Leg-
horn. By the gossips of Naples, his existence, supposed so
extraordinary, was well-nigh forgotten; but the heart of
Viola was more faithful. Often he glided through her
dreams, and when the wind sighed through that fantastic
tree, associated with his remembrance, she started, with a
tremor and a blush, as if she had heard him speak.

But amongst the train of her suitors was one to whom she
listened more gently than to the rest; partly because, per-

78 ZANONI.

haps, he spoke in her mother’s native tongue, partly because
in his diffidence, there was little to alarm and displease;
partly because his rank, nearer to her own than that of
lordlier wooers, prevented his admiration from appearing
insult; partly because he himself, eloquent and a dreamer,
often uttered thoughts that were kindred to those buried
deepest in her mind. She began to like—perhaps to love
him, but as a sister loves; a sort of privileged familiarity
sprang up between them. If, in the Englishman’s breast,
arose wild and unworthy hopes, he had not yet expressed
them. Is there danger to thee here, lone Viola? or is the
danger greater in thy unfound ideal?

And now, as the overture to some strange and wizard
spectacle, closes this opening prelude. Wilt thou hear
more? Come with thy faith prepared. I ask not the
blinded eyes, but the awakened sense. As the enchanted
Isle, remote from the homes of men,

“ove alcun legno
Rado, o non mai va dalle nostre sponde, ”—1
(Ger. Lib., cant. xiv. 69.)

is the space in the weary ocean of actual life to which the
Muse or Sibyl (ancient in years but ever young in aspect)
offers thee no unhallowed sail:

“Quinci ella in cima a una montagne ascende
Disabitata, e d’ombre oscura e bruna ;
E par incanto a lei nevose rende
Le spalle e i fianchi; e sensa neve alcuna
Gli lascia il capo verdeggiante e vago;

-E vi fonda un palagio appresso un lago.”?

1 Where ship seldom or never comes from our coasts.

? There, she a mountain’s lofty peak ascends,
Unpeopled, shady, shagg’d with forests brown,
Whose sides by power of magic half-way down
She heaps with slippery ice, and frost, and snow,
But sunshiny and verdant leaves the crown
With orange woods and myrtles,—speaks, and lo!
Rich from the bordering lake a palace rises slow.

(Wiffin’s translation. )

BOOK THE SECOND.
ART, LOVE, AND WONDER.

“Diversi aspetti in un confusi e misti. ”}
Ger. Lrs., cant. iy. 5.

CHAPTER I.

“Centauri, e Sfingi, e pallide Gorgoni.” ?
Ger. Lrs., cant. iv. 5.

OnE moonlit night, in the Gardens at Naples, some four
or five gentlemen were seated under a tree, drinking their
sherbet, and listening, in the intervals of conversation, to
the music which enlivened that gay and favourite resort of
an indolent population. One of this little party was a young
Englishman, who had been the life of the whole group, but
who, for the last few moments, had sunk into a gloomy and
abstracted reverie. One of his countrymen observed this
sudden gloom, and, tapping him on the back, said, “ What
ails you, Glyndon? Are you ill? You have grown quite
‘pale—you tremble. Is it a sudden chill? You had better
go home: these Italian nights are often dangerous to our
English constitutions.”

“No, I am well now! it was a passing shudder. I can-
not account for it myself.”

A man, apparently of about thirty years of age, and of a
mien and countenance strikingly superior to those around
him, turned abruptly, and looked steadfastly at Glyndon.

1 Different appearances, confused and mixt in one,
2 Centaurs, and Sphinxes, and pallid Gorgons.

80 ZANONI.

“J think I understand what you mean,” said he; “and
perhaps,” he added, with a grave smile, “I could explain
it better than yourself.” Here, turning to the others, he
added, “ You must often have felt, gentlemen, each and all
of you, especially when sitting alone at night, a strange and
unaccountable sensation of coldness and awe creep over
you; your blood curdles, and the heart stands still; the
limbs shiver, the hair bristles; you are afraid to look up,
to turn your eyes to the darker corners of the room; you
have a horrible fancy that. something unearthly is at hand;
presently the whole spell, if I may so call it, passes away,
and you are ready to laugh at your own weakness. Have
you not often felt what I have thus imperfectly described?
if so, you can understand what our young friend has just
experienced, even amidst the delights of this magical scene,
and amidst the balmy whispers of a July night.”

“Sir,” replied Glyndon, evidently much surprised, “you
have defined exactly the nature of that shudder which came
over me. But how could my manner be so faithful an in-
dex to my impressions?”

“TI know the signs of the visitation,” returned the
stranger, gravely; “they are not to be mistaken by one of
my experience.”

All the gentlemen present then declared that they could
comprehend, and had felt, what the stranger had described.

“According to one of our Hational superstitions,” said
Mervale, the Englishman who had first addressed Glyndon,
“the moment you so feel your blood creep, and your hair
stand on end, some one is walking over the spot which shall
be your grave.”

“There are in all lands different superstitions to account
for so common an occurrence,” replied the stranger; “one
sect among the Arabians holds that at that instant God is
deciding either the hour of your death, or of some one dear
toyou. The African savage, whose imagination is darkened
by the hideous rites of his gloomy idolatry, believes that
the Evil Spirit is pulling you towards him by the hair;

ZANONI. 81

so do the Grotesque and the Terrible mingle with each
other.”

“Tt is evidently a mere physical accident—a derange-
ment of the stomach—a chill of the blood,” said a young
Neapolitan, with whom Glyndon had formed a slight ac-
quaintance.

“Then why is it always coupled in all nations with some
superstitious presentiment or terror—some connection be-
tween the material frame and the supposed world without
us? For my part, I think’”——

“Ay, what do you think, sir?” asked Glyndon, curiously.

“T think,” continued the stranger, “that it is the repug-
nance and horror with which our more human elements re-
coil from something, indeed, invisible, but antipathetic to
our own nature; and from a knowledge of which we are
happily secured by the imperfection of our senses.”

“You are a believer in spirits, then?” said Mervale, with
an incredulous smile.

“Nay, it was not precisely of spirits that I spoke; but
there may be forms of matter as invisible and impalpable to
us as the animalcule in the air we breathe—in the water
that plays in yonder basin. Such beings may have passions
and powers like our own,—as the animalcule to which I
have compared them. The monster that lives and dies in a
drop of water—carnivorous, insatiable, subsisting on the
creatures minuter than himself—is not less deadly in his
wrath, less ferocious in his nature, than the tiger of the
desert. There may be things around us that would be dan-
gerous and hostile to man, if Providence had not placed a
wall between them and us, merely by different modifications
of matter.”

“ And think you that wall never can be removed?” asked
young Glyndon, abruptly. “Are the traditions of sorcerer
and wizard, universal and immemorial as they are, merely
fables?”

“Perhaps yes—perhaps no,” answered the stranger, in-
differently. “But who, in an age in which the reason has
| 60

82 ZANONI.

chosen its proper bounds, would be mad enough to break the
partition that divides him from the boa and the lion—to re-
pine at and rebel against the law which confines the shark
to the great deep? Enough of these idle speculations.”

Here the stranger rose, summoned the attendant, paid
for his sherbet, and, bowing slightly to the company, soon
disappeared among the trees.

“Who is that gentleman?” asked Glyndon, eagerly.

The rest looked at each other, without replying, for some
moments.

“T never saw him before,” said Mervale, at last.

6c Nor 1.?

“Norsl:?

“T know him well,” said the Neapolitan, who was, in-
deed, the Count Cetoxa. “If you remember, it was as my
companion that he joined you. He visited Naples about
two years ago, and has recently returned; he is very rich—
indeed, enormously so. A most agreeable person. I am
sorry to hear him talk so strangely to-night; it serves to
encourage the various foolish reports that are circulated
concerning him.” ‘

“And surely,” said another Neapolitan, “the circum-
stance that occurred but the other day, so well known to
yourself, Cetoxa, justifies the reports you pretend to de-
precate.”

“Myself and my countryman,” said Glyndon, “mix so
little in Neapolitan society, that we lose much that appears
well worthy of lively interest. May I inquire what are the
reports, and what is the circumstance you refer to?”

“As to the reports, gentlemen,” said Cetoxa, courteously
addressing himself to the two Englishmen, “it may suffice
to observe, that they attribute to the Signor Zanoni certain
qualities which everybody desires for himself, but damns
any one else for possessing. The incident Signor Belgi-
oso alludes to illustrates these qualities, and is, I must
own, somewhat startling. You probably play, gentlemen?
(Here Cetoxa paused; and, as both Englishmen had occas

ZANONI. 83

sionally staked a few scudi at the public gaming tables,
they bowed assent to the conjecture.) Cetoxa continued:
“Well, then, not many days since, and on the very day
that Zanoni returned to Naples, it so happened that I had
been playing pretty high, and had lost considerably. I rose
from the table, resolved no longer to tempt fortune, when
I suddenly pefceived Zanoni, whose acquaintance I had
before made (and who, I may say, was under some slight
obligation to me), standing by, a spectator. Ere I could
express my gratification at this unexpected recognition,
he laid his hand on my arm: ‘You have lost much,’ said
he; ‘more than you can afford. For my part, I dislike
play; yet I wish to have some interest in what is going on.
Will you play this sum for me? the risk is mine—the half
profits yours.’ I was startled, as you may suppose, at
such an address; but Zanoni had an air and tone with him
it was impossible to resist; besides, I was burning to re-
cover my losses, and should not have risen had I had any
money left about me. I told him I would accept his offer,
provided we shared the risk as well as profits. ‘As you
will,’ said he, smiling; ‘we need have no scruple, for you
will be sure to win.’ Isat down; Zanoni stood behind me;
my luck rose; I invariably won. In fact, I rose from the
table a rich man.”

“There can be no foul play at the public tables, espe-
cially when foul play would make against the bank?” This
question was put by Glyndon.

“Certainly not,” replied the Count. “But our good for-
tune was, indeed, marvellous—so extraordinary, that a Sicil-
ian (the Sicilians aro all ill-bred, bad-tempered fellows)
grew angry and insolent. ‘Sir,’ said he, turning to my
new friend, ‘you have no business to stand so near to the
table. I do not understand this; you have not acted fair-
ly.’ Zanoni replied, with great composure, that he had
done nothing against the rnles—that he was very sorry that
one man could not win without another man losing; and
that he could not act unfairly even if disposed to do so.

84 ZANONI.

The Sicilian took the stranger’s mildness for apprehension,
and blustered more loudly. In fact, he rose from the table,
and confronted Zanoni in a manner that, to say the least of
it, was provoking to any gentleman who has some quickness
of temper, or some skill with the small sword.”

“ And,” interrupted Belgioso, “the most singular part of
the whole to me was, that this Zanoni, who stood opposite
to where I sat, and whose face I distinctly saw, made no re-
mark, showed no resentment. He fixed his eyes steadfastly
on the Sicilian; never shall I forget that look! it is impos-
sible to describe it, it froze the blood in my veins. The Si-
cilian staggered back, as if struck. I saw him tremble; he
sank on the bench. And then—”

“Yes, then,” said Cetoxa, “to my infinite surprise, our
gentleman, thus disarmed by a look from Zanoni, turned
his whole anger upon me—the—but perhaps you do not
know, gentlemen, that I have some repute with my
weapon?”

“The best swordsman in Italy,” said Belgioso.

“Before I could guess why or wherefore,” resumed
Cetoxa, “I found myself in the garden behind the house,
with Ughelli (that was the Sicilian’s name) facing me, and
five or six gentlemen, the witnesses of the duel about to
take place, around. Zanoni beckoned me aside. ‘This
man will fall,’ said he. ‘When he is on the ground, go to
him, and ask whether he will be buried by the side of his
father in the church of San Gennaro?’ ‘Do you then know
his family?’ I asked, with great surprse. Zanoni made no
answer, and the next moment I was engaged with the Sicil-
ian. To do him justice, his tmbrogliato was magnificent,
and a swifter lunger never crossed a sword; nevertheless,”
added Cetoxa, with a pleasing modesty, “he was run
through the body. I went up to him; he could scarcely
speak. ‘Have you any request to make—any affairs to
settle?? He shook his head. ‘Where would you wish to
be interred?? He pointed towards the Sicilian coast.
‘What!’ said I, in surprise, ‘no¢ by the side of your father,

ZANONI. 85

in the church of San Gennaro?’ As I spoke, his face
altered terribly—he uttered a piercing shriek—the blood
gushed from his mouth, and he fell dead. The most strange
part of the story is tocome. We buried him in the church
of San Gennaro. In doing so we took up his father’s coffin;
the lid came off in moving it, and the skeleton was visible.
In the hollow of the skull we found a very slender wire of
sharp steel: this caused surprise and inquiry. The father,
who was rich, and a miser, had died suddenly, and been
buried in haste, owing, it was said, to the heat of the
weather. Suspicion once awakened, the examination be-
came minute. The old man’s servant was questioned, and
at last confessed that the son had murdered the sire: the
contrivance was ingenious; the wire was so slender, that
it pierced to the brain, and drew but one drop of blood,
which the grey hairs concealed. The accomplice will be
executed.”

“And Zanoni—did he give evidence? did he account
for——” ;

“No,” interrupted the Count: “he declared that he had
by accident visited the church that morning; that he had
observed the tombstone of the Count Ughelli; that his
guide had told him the Count’s son was in Naples—a spend-
thrift anda gambler. While we were at play, he had heard
the Count mentioned by name at the table; and when the
challenge was given and accepted, it had occurred to him to
name the place of burial, by an instinct which he either
could not or would not account for.”

“A very lame story,” said Mervale.

“Yes! but we Italians are superstitious;—the alleged
instinct was regarded Ly many as the whisper of Provi-
dence. The next day the stranger became an object of uni-
versal interest and curiosity. His wealth, his manner of
living, his extraordinary personal beauty, have assisted also
to make him the rage; besides, I have had pleasure in in-
troducing so eminent a person to our gayest cavaliers and
our fairest ladies,”

86 ZANONI.

“A most interesting narrative,” said Mervale, rising.
“Come, Glyndon, shall we seek our hotel? It is almost
daylight. Adieu, Signor!”

“What think you of this story?” said Glyndon, as the
young men walked homeward.

“ Why, it is very clear that this Zanoni is some impostor—
some clever rogue; and the Neapolitan shares the booty,
and puffs him off with all the hackneyed charlatanism of
the Marvellous. An unknown adventurer gets into society
by being made an object of awe and curiosity ;—he is more
than ordinarily handsome; and the women are quite content
to receive him without any other recommendation than his
own face and Cetoxa’s fables.”

“T cannot agree with you. Cetoxa, though a gambler
and a rake, is a nobleman of birth and high repute for cour-
age and honour. Besides, this stranger, with his noble
presence, and lofty air—so calm—so unobtrusive-—has noth-
ing in common with the forward garrulity of an impostor.”

“My dear Glyndon, pardon me; but you have not yet
acquired any knowledge of the world! the stranger makes
the best of a fine person, and his grand air is but a trick of
the trade. But, to change the subject—how advances the
love affair?”

“Oh, Viola could not see me to-day.”

“You must not marry her. What would they all say at
home?”

“Let us enjoy the present,” said Glyndon, with vivacity ;
“we are young, rich, good-looking: let us not think of to-
morrow.”

“Bravo, Glyndon! Here we are at the hotel. Sleep
sound, and don’t dream of Signor Zanoni.”

Px

ZANONL 87

CHAPTER II.
“Prende, giovine audace e impaziente,
L’occasione offerta avidamente. ”!
Ger. Lie., cant. vi. 29.

CLARENCE GLYNDON was a young man of fortune, not

- large, but easy and independent. His parents were dead,

and his nearest relation was an only sister, left in England
under the care of her aunt, and many years younger than
himself. Early in iife he had evinced considerable promise

‘in the art of painting, and rather from enthusiasm than any

pecuniary necessity for a profession, he determined to de-
vote himself to a career in which the English artist gener-
ally commences with rapiure and historical composition, to
conclude with avaricious calculation and portraits of Alder-
man Simpkins. Glyndon was supposed by his friends to
possess no inconsiderable genius; but it was of a rash and
presumptuous order. He was averse from continuous and
steady labour, and his ambition rather sought to gather the
fruit than to plant the tree. In common with many artists
in their youth, he was fond of pleasure and excitement,
yielding with little forethought to whatever impressed his
fancy or appealed to his passions. He had travelled
through the more celebrated cities of Europe, with the
avowed purpose and sincere resolution of studying the divine
masterpieces of hisart. But in each, pleasure had too often
allured him from ambition, and living beauty distracted his
worship from the senseless canvas. Brave, adventurous,
yain, restless, inquisitive, he was ever involved in wild proj-
ects and pleasant dangers—the creature of impulse and the
slave of imagination.

It was then the period, when a feverish spirit of change
was working its way to that hideous mockery of human
aspirations, the Revolution of France. And from the chaos

1 Take, youth, bold and impatient, the offered occasion eagerly.

88 ZANONI.

into which were already jarring the sanctities of the world’s
Venerable Belief, arose many shapeless and unformed
chimeras. Need I remind the reader, that while that was
the day for polished scepticism and affected wisdom, it was
the day also for the most egregious credulity and the most
mystical superstitions,—the day in which magnetism and
magic found converts amongst the disciples of Diderot,—
when prophecies were current in every mouth,—when the
salon of a philosophical deist was converted into a Heraclea,
in which necromancy professed to conjure up the shadows
of the dead—when the Crosier and the Book were ridiculed, *
and Mesmer and Cagliostro were believed? In that Helia-
cal Rising, heralding the new sun before which all vapours
were to vanish, stalked from their graves in the feudal ages
all the phantoms that had flitted before the eye of Paracelsus
and Agrippa. Dazzled by the dawn of the Revolution,
Glyndon was yet more attracted by its strange accompani-
ments, and natural it was with him, as with others, that
the fancy which ran riot amidst the hopes of a social Utopia
should grasp with avidity all that promised, out of the dusty
tracks of the beaten science, the. bold discoveries of some
marvellous Elysium.

In his travels, he had listened with vivid interest at
least, if not with implicit belief, to the wonders told of each
more renowned Ghostseer, and his mind was therefore pre-
pared for the impression which the mysterious Zanoni at
first sight had produced upon it.

There might be another cause for this disposition to credu-
lity. A remote ancestor of Glyndon’s on the mother’s side
had achieved no inconsiderable reputation as a philosopher
and alchemist. Strange stories were afloat concerning this
wise progenitor, He was said to have lived to an age far
exceeding the allotted boundaries of mortal existence, and
to have preserved to the last the appearance of middle life.
He had died at length, it was supposed, of grief for the
sudden death of a great-grandchild, the only creature he
had ever appeared to love, The works of this philosopher,

ZANONI. 89

though rare, were extant, and found in the library of Glyn-
don’s home. ‘Their Platonic mysticism, their bold asser-
tions, the high promises that might be detected through
their figurative and typical phraseology, had early made a
dep impression on the young imagination of Clarence Glyn-
don. His parents, not alive to the consequences of encour-
aging fancies which the very enlightenment of the age ap-
peared to them sufficient to prevent or dispel, were fond, in
the long winter nights, of conversing on the traditional his-
tory of this distinguished progenitor. And Clarence thrilled
with a fearful pleasure when his mother playfully detected
a striking likeness between the features of the young heir
and the faded portrait of the alchemist that overhung their
mantelpiece, and was the boast of their household and the
admiration of their friends, The child is, indeed, more
often than we think, “the father of the man.” ©

I have said that Glyndon was fond of pleasure. Facile,
as genius ever must be, to cheerful impression, his careless
Artist-life, ere Artist-life settles down to labour, had wan-
dered from flower to flower. He had enjoyed, almost to the
reaction of satiety, the gay revelries of Naples, when he
fell in love with the face and voice of Viola Pisani. But
his love, like his ambition, was vague and desultory. It
did not satisfy his whole heart and fill up his whole nature;
not from want of strong and noble passions, but because
his mind was not yet matured and settled enough for their
development. As there is one season for the blossom,
another for the fruit; so it is not till the bloom of fancy
begins to fade that the heart ripens to the passions that the
bloom precedes and foretells. Joyous alike at his lonely
easel or amidst his boon companions, he had not yet known
enough of sorrow to love deeply. For man must be disap-
pointed with the lesser things of life before he can compre-
hend the full value of the greatest. It is the shallow sensu-
alists of France, who, in their salon language, call love “a
folly ;’—Love, better understood, is wisdom. Besides, the
world was too much with Clarence Glyndon. His ambition

90 ZANONI.

of art was associated with the applause and estimation of
that miserable minority of the Surface that we call the
Public.

Like those who deceive, he was ever fearful of being
himself the dupe. He distrusted the sweet innocence of
Viola. He could not venture the hazard of seriously pro-
posing marriage to an Italian actress; but the modest dig-
nity of the girl, and something good and generous in his
own nature, had hitherto made him shrink from any more
worldly but less honourable designs. Thus the familiarity
between them seemed rather that of kindness and regard
than passion. He attended the theatre; he stole behind
the scenes to converse with her; he filled his portfolio with
countless sketches of a beauty that charmed him as an ar-
tist, as well as lover. And day after day he floated on
through a changing sea of doubt and irresolution, of affec-
tion and distrust. The last, indeed, constantly sustained
against his better reason, by the sober admonitions of Mer-
vale, a matter-of-fact man!

The day following that eve on which this section of my
story opens, Glyndon was riding alone by the shores of the
Neapolitan sea, on the other side of the Cavern of Posilipo.
It was past noon; the sun had lost its early fervour, and a
cool breeze sprang up voluptuously from the sparkling sea.
Bending over a fragment of stone near the road-side, he
perceived the form of a man; and when he approached, he
recognised Zanoni.

The Englishman saluted him courteously. “Have you
discovered some antique?” said he, with asmile; “they are
common as pebbles on this road.”

“No,” replied Zanoni; “it was but one of those antiques
that have their date, indeed, from the beginning of the
world, but which Nature eternally withers and renews.”
So saying, he showed Glyndon a small herb, with a pale
blue flower, and he placed it carefully in his bosom.

“You are a herbalist?”

“ it am.”

ZANONI, 91

“Tt is, I am told, a study full of interest.”

“To those who understand it, doubtless.”

“Ts the knowledge, then, so rare?”

“Rare! The deeper knowledge is perhaps rather, among
the arts, Jost to the modern philosophy of commonplace
and surface! Do you imagine there was no foundation for
those traditions which come dimly down from remoter ages—
as shells now found on the mountain-tops inform us where
the seas have been? What was the old Colchian magic,
but the minute study of Nature in her lowliest works?
What the fable of Medea, but a proof of the powers that
may be extracted from the germ and leaf? ‘The most gifted
of all the Priestcrafts, the mysterious sisterhoods of Cuth,
concerning whose incantations Learning vainly bewilders
itself amidst the maze of legends, sought in the meanest
herbs what, perhaps, the Babylonian Sages explored in
vain amidst the loftiest stars. Tradition yet tells you that
there existed a race’ who could slay their enemies from
afar, without weapon, without movement. The herb that
ye tread on may have deadlier powers than your engineers
can give to their mightiest instruments of war. Can you
guess, that to these Italian shores—to the old Circzean Prom-
ontory, came the Wise from the farthest East, to search for
plants and simples which your Pharmacists of the Counter
would fling from them as weeds? The first Herbalists—
the master-chemists of the world—were the tribe that the
ancient reverence called by the name of Zitans.° I re-
member once, by the Hebrus, in the reign of——-_ But this
talk,” said Zanoni, checking himself abruptly, and with a
cold smile, “serves only to waste your time and my own.”
He paused, looked steadily at Glyndon, and continued:
“Young man, think you that vague curiosity will supply
the place of earnest labour? I read your heart. You wish
to know me, and not this humble herb: but pass on; your
desire cannot be satisfied.”

DPlut: Symp., 1. 5, c. 7.
2Syncellus, p. 14.—“ Chemistry the Invention of the Giants. ”

92 ZANONI.

“You have not the politeness of your countrymen,” said
Glyndon, somewhat discomposed. “Suppose I were desir-
ous to cultivate your acquaintance, why should you reject
my advances?”

“T reject no man’s advances,” answered Zanoni; “I must
know them if they so desire; but me, in return, they can
never comprehend. If you ask my acquaintance, it is
yours; but I would warn you to shun me.

“And why are you, then, so dangerous?”

“On this earth, men are often, without their own agency,
fated to be dangerous to others. If I were to predict your
fortune by the vain calculations of the astrologer, I should
tell you, in their despicable jargon, that my planet sat
darkly in your house of life. Cross me not, if you can
avoid it. I warn you now for the first time and last.”

“You despise the astrologers, yet you utter a jargon as
mysterious as theirs. I neither gamble nor quarrel; why,
then, should I fear you?”

“As you will; I have done.”

“Let me speak frankly—your conversation last night
interested and perplexed me.”

“T know it: minds like yours are attracted by mystery.”

Glyndon was piqued at these words, though in the tone
in which they were spoken there was no contempt.

“T see you do not consider me worthy of your friendship.
Be it so. Goodday!” Zanoni coldly replied to the saluta-
tion; and, as the Englishman rode on, returned to his bo-
tanical employment.

“The same night, Glyndon went, as usual, to the theatre.
He was standing behind the scenes watching Viola, who
was on the stage in one of her most brilliant parts. The
house resounded with applause. Glyndon was transported
with a young man’s passion and a young man’s pride:—
“This glorious creature,” thought he, “may yet be
mine!”

He felt, while thus wrapt in a delicious reverie, a slight
touch upon his shoulder: he turned, and beheld Zanoni,

ZANONI. ° 93

“You are in danger,” said the latter. “Do not walk home
to-night; or if you do, go not alone.”

Before Glyndon recovered from his surprise, Zanoni dis-
appeared; and when the Englishman saw him again, he
was in the box of one of the Neapolitan nobles, where
Glyndon could not follow him.

Viola now left the stage, and Glyndon accosted her with
an unaccustomed warmth of gallantry. But Viola, contrary
to her gentle habit, turned with an evident impatience from
the address of her lover. Taking aside Gionetta, who was
her constant attendant at the theatre, she said, in an ear-
nest whisper:

“Oh, Gionetta! He is here again!—the stranger of
whom I spoke to thee!—and again, he alone, of the whole
theatre, withholds from me his applause.”

“Which is he, my darling?” said the old woman, with
fondness in her voice. ‘ He must indeed be dull—not worth
a thought.”

The actress drew Gionetta nearer to the stage, and pointed
out to her a man in one of the boxes, conspicuous amongst
all else by the simplicity of his dress, and the extraordinary
beauty of his features.

“Not worth a thought, Gionetta!” repeated Viola—“ not
worth a thought! Alas, not to think of him seems the ab-
sence of thought itself!”

The prompter summoned the Signora Pisani. “ Find out
his name, Gionetta,” said she, moving slowly to the stage,
and passing by Glyndon, who gazed at her with a look of
sorrowful reproach.

The scene on which the actress now entered was that of
the final catastrophe, wherein all her remarkable powers of
voice and art were pre-eminently calied forth. The house
hung on every word with breathless worship; but the eyes
of Viola sought only those of one calm and unmoved specta-
tor: she exerted herself as if inspired. Zanoni listened and
observed her with an attentive gaze, but no approval escaped
his lips; no emotion changed the expression of his cold and

94 ZANONTI.

half disdainful aspect. Viola, who was in the character of
one who loved, but without return, never felt so acutely the
part she played. Her tears were truthful; her passion that
of nature: it was almost too terrible to behold. She was
borne from the stage exhausted and insensible, amidst such
a tempest of admiring rapture as continental audiences alone
can raise. The crowd stood up—handkerchiefs waved—
garlands and flowers were thrown on the stage--men wiped
their eyes and women sobbed aloud.

“By heavens!” said a Neapolitan of great rank, “she
has fired me beyond endurance. To-night, this very night,
she shall be mine! You have arranged all, Mascari?”

“All, Signor. And the young Englishman?”

“The presuming barbarian! As I before told thee, let
him bleed for his folly. I will have no rival.”

“But an Englishman! There is always a search after
the bodies of the English.”

“Fool! is not the sea deep enough, or the earth secret
enough, to hide one dead man? Our ruffians are silent as
the grave itself:—and I! who would dare to suspect, to ar-
raign the Prince di ——? See to it—this night. I trust
him to you—robbers murder him—you understand; the
country swarms with them; plunder and strip him, the bet-
ter to favour such report. Take three men; the rest shall
be my escort.”

Mascari shrugged his shoulders, and bowed submissively.

The streets of Naples were not then so safe as now, and
carriages were both less expensive and more necessary.
The vehicle which was regularly engaged by the young
actress was not to be found. Gionetta, too aware of the
beauty of her mistress and the number of her admirers to
contemplate without alarm the idea of their return on foot,
communicated her distress to Glyndon, and he besought
Viola, who recovered but slowly, to accept his own carriage.
Perhaps before that night she would not have rejected So
slight a service. Now, for some reason or other, she re-
fused. Glyndon, offended, was retiring sullenly, when

ZANONI. 95

Gionetta stopped him. “Stay, Signor,” said she coaxing-
ly; “the dear Signora is net well_-do not be aagry with
her; I will make her accept your offer.”

Glyndon stayed, and after a few moments spent in ex-
postulation on the part of Gionetta, and resistance on that
of Viola, the offer was accepted. Gionetta and her charge
entered the carriage, and Glyndon was left at the door of
the theatre to return home on foot. The mysterious warn-
ing of Zanoni then suddenly occurred to him; he had for-
gotten it in the interest of his lover’s quarrel with Viola.
He thought it now advisable to guard against danger
foretold by lips so mysterious: he looked round for some
one he knew; the theatre was disgorging its crowds; they
hustled, and jostled, and pressed upon him; but he recog-
nised no familiar countenance. While pausing irresolute,
he heard Mervale’s voice calling on him, and, to his great
relief, discovered his friend making his way through the
throng.

“T have secured you,” said he, “a place in the Count
Cetoxa’s carriage. Come along, he is waiting for us.”

“ How kind in you! how did you find me out?”

“T met Zanoni in the passage.—‘ Your friend is at the
door of the theatre,’ said he; ‘do not let him go home on
foot to-night; the streets of Naples are not always safe.’
I immediately remembered that some of the Calabrian
bravos had been busy within the city the last few weeks,
and suddenly meeting Cetoxa—but here he is.”

Further explanation was forbidden, for they now joined
the Count. As Glyndon entered the carriage and drew up
the glass, he saw four men standing apart by the pavement,
who seemed to eye him with attention.

“ Cospetto /” cried one, “that is the Englishman!” Glyn-
don imperfectly heard the exclamation as the carriage drove
on. He reached home in safety.

The familiar and endearing intimacy which always exists
in Italy between the nurse and the child she has reared,
and which the Romeo and Juliet of Shakespeare in no way

96 ZANONI.

exaggerates, could not but be drawn yet closer than usual
in a situation so friendless as that of the orphan-actress.
Tn all that concerned the weaknesses of the heart, Gionetta
had large experience; and when, three nights before, Viola,
on returning from the theatre, had wept bitterly, the nurse
had succeeded in extracting from her a confession that she
had seen one—not seen for two weary and eventful years—
but never forgotten, and who, alas, had not evinced the
slightest recognition of herself. Gionetta could not com-
prehend all the vague and innocent emotions that swelled
this sorrow; but she resolved them all, with her plain blunt
understanding, to the one sentiment of love. And here she
was well-fitted to sympathise and console. Confidante to
Viola’s entire and deep heart she never could be—for that
heart never could have words for all its secrets, But such
confidence as she could obtain, she was ready to repay by
the most unreproving pity and the most ready service.

“Have you discovered who he is?” asked Viola, as she
was now alone in the carriage with Gionetta.

“Yes: he is the celebrated Signor Zanoni, about whom
all the great ladies have gone mad. They say he is so
rich!—oh, so much richer than any of the Inglesi!—not but
what the Signor Glyndon——”

“Cease!” interrupted the young actress. “ Zanoni!
speak of the Englishman no more.”

The carriage was now entering that more lonely and re-
mote part of the city in which Viola’s house was situated,
when it suddenly stopped.

Gionetta, in alarm, thrust her head out of the window,
and perceived by the pale light of the moon, that the driver,
torn from his seat, was already pinioned in the arms of two
men: the next moment, the door was opened violently, and
a tall figure, masked and mantled, appeared.

“Fear not, fairest Pisani,” said he, gently, “no ill shall
befall you.” As he spoke, he wound his arms around the
form of the fair actress, and endeavoured to lift her from
the carriage. But Gionetta was no ordinary ally—she

ZANONI, 97

thrust back the assailant with a force that astonished him,
and followed the shock by a volley of the most energetic
reprobation. ‘

The mask drew back, and composed his disordered man-
tle.

“By the body of Bacchus!” said he, half laughing, “she
is well protected. Here, Luigi—Giovanni! seize the hag!—
~ quick!—why loiter ye?”

The mask retired from the door, and another and yet
taller form presented itself. ‘“ Be calm, Viola Pisani,” said
he, in a low voice; “with me you are indeed safe!” He
lifted his mask as he spoke. and showed the noble features
of Zanoni.

“Be calm, be hushed,—I can save you.” He vanished,
leaving Viola lost in surprise, agitation, and delight.
There were, in all, nine masks: two were engaged with the
driver; one. stood at the head of the carriage horses; a
fourth guarded the well-trained steeds of the party; three
others (besides Zanoni and the one who had first accosted
Viola) stood apart by a carriage drawn to the side of the
road. To these three Zanoni motioned: they advanced;
he pointed towards the first mask, who was in fact the
Prince di ——, and to his unspeakable astonishment, the
Prince was suddenly seized from behind.

“Treason!” he cried. “Treason among my own men!
What means this?”

“Place him in his carriage! If he resists, his blood be
on his own head!” said Zanoni, calmly.

He approached the men who had detained the coachman.

“You are outnumbered and outwitted,” said he: “join
your lord; you are three men—we six, armed to the teeth.
Thank our mercy that we spare your lives—Go!”

The men gave way, dismayed. The driver remounted.

“Cut the traces of their carriage and the bridles of their
horses,” said Zanoni, as he entered the vehicle containing
Viola, which now drove on rapidly, leaving the discomfited
ravisher in a state of rage and stupor impossible to describe.

i

98 ZANONI.

“ Allow me to explain this mystery to you,” said Zanoni.
“T discovered the plot against you—no matter how; I frus-
trated it thus:—The head of this design is a nobleman,
who has long persecuted you in vain. He and two of his
creatures watched you from the entrance of the theatre,
having directed six others to await him on the spot where
you were attacked; myself and five of my servants supplied
their place, and were mistaken for his own followers. I
had previously ridden alone to the spot where the men were
waiting, and informed them that their master would not re-
quire their services that night. ‘They believed me, and ac-
cordingly dispersed. I then joimed my own band, whom I
had left in the rear, You know all. We are at your
door.”

<>

CHAPTER III.

“When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected ;
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.”
SHAKSPEARE.

ZANONI followed the young Neapolitan into her house:
Gionetta vanished—they were left alone.

Alone, in that room so often filled, in the old happy
days, with the wild melodies of Pisani; and now, as she
saw this mysterious, haunting, yet beautiful and stately
stranger, standing on the very spot where she had sat at
her father’s feet, thrilled and spellbound—she almost
thought, in her fantastic way of personifying her own airy
notions, that that spiritual Music had taken shape and life,
and stood before her glorious in the image it assumed. She
was unconscious all the while of her own loveliness. She
had thrown aside her hood and veil; her hair, somewhat
disordered, fell over the ivory neck which the dress par-
tially displayed; and, as her dark eyes swam with grateful
tears, and her cheek flushed with its late excitement, the

ZANONI, 29

god of light and music himself never, amidst his Arcadian
valleys, wooed, in his mortal guise, maiden or nymph more
fair.

Zanoni gazed at her with a look in which admiration
seemed not unmingled with compassion. He muttered a
few words to himself, and then addressed her aloud.

“Viola, I have saved you from a great peril: not from
dishonour only, but, perhaps, from death. The Prince di
——, under a weak despot and a venal administration, is
aman above the law. He is capable of every crime; but
amongst his passions he has such prudence as belongs to
ambition; if you were not to reconcile yourself to your
shame, you would never enter the world again to tell your
tale. The ravisher has no heart for repentance, but he has
a hand that can murder. I have saved you, Viola. Per-
haps you would ask me wherefore?” Zanoni paused, and
smiled mournfully, as he added, “ You will not wrong me
by the thought that he who has preserved is not less selfish
than he who would have injured. Orphan, I do not speak
to you in the language of your wocers; enough that I know
pity, and am not ungrateful for affection. Why blush,
why tremble at the word? Iread your heart while I speak,
and I see not one thought that should give you shame. I
say not that you love me yet; happily, the fancy may be
roused long before the heart is touched. But it has been
my fate to fascinate your eye, to influence your imagination.
It is to warn you against what could bring you but sorrow,
as I warned you once to prepare for sorrow itself, that Iam
now your guest. The Englishman, Glyndon, loves thee
well—better, perhaps, than I can ever love: if not worthy
of thee yet, he has but to know thee more to deserve thee
better. He may wed thee, he may bear thee to his own free
and happy land, the land of thy mother’s kin. Forget me;

~teach thyself to return and deserve his love: and I tell thee
that thou wilt be honoured and be happy.”

Viola listened with silent, inexpressible emotion, and
burning blushes, to this strange address, and when he had

ec

100 ZANONI.

concluded, she covered her face with her hands, and wept.
And yet, much as his words were calculated to humble or
irritate, to produce indignation or excite shame, those were
not the feelings with which her eyes streamed and her
heart swelled. The woman at that moment was lost inthe
child; and as a child with all its exacting, craving, yet
innocent desire to be loved, weeps in unrebuking sadness
when its affection is thrown austerely back upon itself—so,
without anger and without shame, wept Viola.

Zanoni contemplated her thus, as her graceful head,
shadowed by its redundant tresses, bent before him; and
after a moment’s pause he drew near to her, and said, ina
voice of the most soothing sweetness, and with a half smile
upon his Jip:

“Do you remember, when I told you to struggle for the
light, that I pointed for example to the resolute and earnest
tree: I did not tell you, fair child, to take example by the
moth, that would soar to the star, but falls scorched beside
the lamp. Come, I will talk to thee. This English-
man——” -

Viola drew herself away, and wept yet more passionately.

“This Englishman is of thine own years, not far above
thine own rank. Thou mayst share his thoughts in life—
thou mayst sleep beside him in the same grave in death!
And I, but that view of the future should concern us not.
Look into thy heart, and thou wilt see that till again my
shadow crossed thy path, there had grown up for this thine
equal a pure and calm affection that would have ripened
into love. Hast thou never pictured to thyself a home in
which thy partner was thy young wooer?”

“Never!” said Viola, with sudden energy, “never, but
to feel that such was not the fate ordained me. And, oh!”
she continued, rising suddenly, and putting aside the tresses
that veiled her face, she fixed her eyes upon the questioner;
“and, oh! whoever thou art that thou wouldst read my --
soul and shape my future, do not mistake the sentiment
that—that”—(she faltered an instant, and went on with

ZANONIL 101

downcast eyes),“ that has fascinated my thoughts to thee.
Do not think that I could nourish a love unsought and
unreturned. It is not love that I feel for thee, stranger.
Why should I? Thou hast never spoken to me but to ad-
monish—and now, to wound!” Again she paused, again
her voice faltered; the tears trembled on her eyelids; she
_ brushed them away and resumed. “No, not love—if that
be love which I have heard and read of, and sought to simu-
late on the stage,—but a more solemn, fearful, and, it
seems to me, almost preternatural attraction which makes
me associate thee, waking or dreaming, with images that at
“once charm andawe. ‘Thinkest thou, if it were love, that
I could speak to thee thus? that” (she raised her looks sud-
denly to his) “mine eyes could thus search and confront
thine own? Stranger, I ask but at times to see, to hear
thee! Stranger, talk not to me of others. Forewarn, re-
buke, bruise my heart—reject the not unworthy gratitude
it offers thee, if thou wilt but come not always to me as an
omen of grief and trouble. Sometimes have I seen thee in
my dreams surrounded by shapes of glory and light; thy
looks radiant with a celestial joy which they wear not now.
Stranger, thou hast saved me, and I thank and bless thee?
Is that also a homage thou wouldst reject?” With these
words she crossed her arms meekly on her bosom, and in-
clined lowlily before him. Nor did her humility seem un-
womanly or abject, nor that of mistress to lover, of slave to
master, but rather of a child to its guardian, of a neophyte
of the old religion to her priest. Zanoni’s brow was melan-
choly and thoughtful. He looked at her with a strange ex-
pression of kindness, of sorrow, yet of tender affection, in
his eyes; but his lips were stern, and his voice cold, as he
replied:

“Do you know what you ask, Viola? Do you guess the
danger to yourself—perhaps to both of us—which you
court? Do you know that my life, separated from the
turbulent herd of men, is one worship of the Beautiful,
from which I seek to banish what the Beautiful inspires in

102 ZANONI.

most? Asa calamity, I shun what to man seems the fair-
est fate—the love of the daughters of earth. At present,
T can warn and save thee from many evils; if I saw more
of thee, would the power still be mine? You understand
me not. What I am about to add, it will be easier to com-
prehend. I bid thee banish from thy heart all thought of
me, but as one whom the Future cries aloud to thee to avoid.
Glyndon, if thou acceptest his homage, will love thee till
the tomb closes upon both. I too” (he added, with emo-
tion)—“T, too, might love thee!”

“You!” cried Viola, with the vehemence of a sudden
impulse of delight, of rapture, which she could not sup-
press; but the instant after, she would have given worlds
to recall the exclamation.

“Yes, Viola, I might love thee; but in that love what
sorrow and what change! ‘The flower gives perfume to the
rock on whose heart it grows. <A little while, and the
flower is dead; but the rock still endures;—the snow at its
breast—the sunshine on its summit. Pause—think -well.
Danger besets thee yet. For some days thou shalt be safe
from thy remorseless persecutor; but the hour soon comes
when thy only security will be in flight. Ifthe English-
man love thee worthily, thy honour will be dear to him as
his own; if not, there are yet other lands where love will be
truer and virtue less in danger from fraud and force. Fare-
well; my own destiny I cannot foresee except through cloud
and shadow. I know, at least, that we shall meet again;
but learn ere then, sweet flower, that there are more genial
resting-places than the rock.”

He turned as he spoke, and gained the outer door where
Gionetta discreetly stood. Zanoni lightly laid his hand on
herarm. With the gay accent of a jesting cavalier, he said:

“The Signor Glyndon woos your mistress: he may wed
her. Iknow your love for her. Disabuse her of any caprice
forme. Iam a bird ever on the wing.”

He dropped a purse into Gionetta’s hand as he spoke,
and was gone.

ZANONI. 408

CHAPTER IV.

“Les Intelligences Célestes se font voir, et se communiquent plus
volontiers, dans le silence, et dans la tranquillité de la solitude.
On aura donc une petite chambre ou un cabinet secret, ” etc.1— Les
Clavicules de Rabbi Salomon, chap. 3; traduites exactement du texte
Hebreu par HL, Pierre Morissoneau, Professeur des Langues Orientales,
et Sectateur de la Philosophie des Sages Cabalistes. (Manuscript
Translation. )

Tue Palace retained by Zanoni was in one of the less-
frequented quarters of the city. It still stands, now ruined
and dismantled, a monument of the splendour of a chivalry
long since vanished from Naples with the lordly races of
the Norman and the Spaniard.

As he entered the rooms reserved for his private hours,
two Indians, in the dress of their country, received him at
the threshold with the grave salutations of the East. They
had accompanied him from the far lands in which, accord-
ing to rumour, he had for many years fixed his home. But
they could communicate nothing to gratify curiosity or
justify suspicion. They spoke no language but their own.
With the exception of these two, his princely retinue was
composed of the native hirelings of the city; whom his lav-
ish but imperious generosity made the implicit creatures of
his will. In his house, and in his habits, so far as they
were seen, there was nothing to account for the rumours
which were circulated abroad. He was not, as we are told
of Albertus Magnus or the great Leonardo da Vinci, served
by airy forms; and no brazen image, the invention of magic
mechanism, communicated to him the influences of the stars.
None of the apparatus of the alchemist—the crucible, and
the metals—gave solemnity to his chambers, or accounted
for his wealth; nor did he ever seem to interest himself in

1The Celestial Intelligences exhibit and explain themselves most

freely in the silence and tranquillity of solitude. One will have
then a little chamber, or a secret cabinet, &c.

104 ZANONI.

those serener stadies which might be supposed to colour his
peculiar conversation with abstract notions, and often with
recondite learning. No books spoke to him in his solitude;
and if ever he had drawn from them his knowledge, it
seemed now that the only page he read was the wide one of
Nature, and that a capacious and startling memory supplied
the rest. Yet was there one exception to what in all else
seemed customary and commonplace, and which, according
to the authority we have prefixed to this chapter, might in-
dicate the follower of the occult sciences. Whether at Rome
or Naples, or, in fact, wherever his abode, he selected one
room remote from the rest of the house, which was fastened
by a lock scarcely larger than the seal of a ring, yet which
sufficed to bafile the most cunning instruments of the lock-
smith: at least, one of his servants, prompted by irresistible
curiosity, had made the attempt in vain; and though he
had fancied it was tried in the most favourable time for
secrecy—not a soul near—in the dead of night—Zanoni
himself absent from home, yet his superstition, or his con-
science, told him the reason why the next day the Major
Domo quietly dismissed him. He compensated himself for
this misfortune by spreading his own story, with a thousand
amusing exaggerations. He declared that, as he approached
the door, invisible hands seemed to pluck him away; and
that when he touched the lock, he was struck as by a palsy
to the ground. One surgeon, who heard the tale, observed,
to the distaste of the wonder-mongers, that possibly Zanoni
made a dexterous use of electricity. Howbeit, this room,
once so secured, was never entered save by Zanoni him-
self.

The solemn voice of Time, from the neighbouring church,
at last aroused the lord of the palace from the deep and
motionless reverie, rather resembling a trance than thought,
in which his mind was absorbed.

“Tt is one more sand out of the mighty Hour-glass,” said
he, murmuringly; “and yet time neither adds to, nor steals
from, an atom in the Infinite!—Soul of mine, the luminous,

ZANONI. 105

the Augoeides,’ why descendest thou from thy sphere—
why from the eternal, starlike, and passionless Serene,
shrinkest thou back to the mists the dark sarcophagus?
How long, too austerely taught that companionship with
the things that die brings with it but sorrow in its sweet-
ness, hast thou dwelt contented with thy majestic solitude?”

As he thus murmured, one of the earliest birds that salute
the dawn broke into sudden song from amidst the orange-
trees in the garden below his casement. And as suddenly
song answered song; the mate, awakened at the note, gave
back its happy answer to the bird. He listened; but not
the soul he had questioned, but the heart replied. He rose,
and with restless strides paced the narrow floor. “ Away
from this world!” he exclaimed at length, with an impatient
tone. “Can no time loosen its fatal ties? As the attrac-
tion that holds the earth in space, is the attraction that
fixes the soul to earth. Away, from the dark-grey planet!
Break, ye fetters: arise, ye wings!”

He passed through the silent galleries, and up the lofty
stairs, and entered the secret chamber.

* * * * *
* * * * *

Avyoeidnc—a word favoured by the mystical Platonists—od¢aipa
wuxne avyosidnc, bray pate éxreivyTar ent Tl, pate éow cvvtpéyn pyre
ovvilavy, dAda ott Aaynhrar, @ THY adjberav opi tiv TavTwV, Kal THY Ev
aith.—Marc. AnT., lib. 2.—The sense of which beautiful sentence
of the old philosophy, which, as Bayle well observes, in his article
on Cornelius Agrippa, the modern Quietists have (however impo-
tently) sought to imitate, is to the effect that “the sphere of the soul is
luminous, when nothing external has contact with the soul itself;
but when lit by its own light, it sees the truth of all things and the
truth centred in itself.”

106 ZANONI.

CHAPTER V.

—*“Tand my fellows
Are ministers of Fate. ”
The Tempest.

Tur next day, Glyndon bent his steps towards Zanoni’s
palace. The young man’s imagination, naturally inflam-
mable, was singularly excited by the little he had seen and
heard of this strange being—a spell, he could neither master
nor account for, attracted him towards the stranger. Za-
noni’s power seemed mysterious and great, his motives
kindly and benevolent, yet his manners chilling and re-
pellent. Why at one moment reject Glyndon’s acquaintance,
at another save him from danger? How had Zanoni thus ac-
quired the knowledge of enemies unknown to Glyndon him-
self? His interest was deeply roused, his gratitude appealed
to; he resolved to make another effort to conciliate the un-
gracious herbalist.

The Signor was at home, and Glyndon was admitted into
a lofty saloon, where in a few moments Zanoni joined him.

“T am come to thank you for your warning last night,”
said he, “and to entreat you to complete my obligation by
informing me of the quarter to which I may look for enmity
and peril.”

“You area gallant,” said Zanoni, with a smile, and in
the English language, “and do you know so little of the
South as not to be aware that gallants have always rivals?”

“Are you serious?” said Glyndon, colouring.

“Most serious. You love Viola Pisani; you have for
rival one of the most powerful and relentless of the Nea-
politan princes. Your danger is indeed great.”

“But pardon me!—how came it known to you?”

“I give no account of myself to mortal man,” replied
Zanoni, haughtily; “and to me it matters nothing whether
you regard or scorn my warning.”

ZANONI. 107

“Well, if I may not question you, be it so;—but at least
advise me what to do.”

“Would you follow my advice?”

“Why not?”

“ Because you are constitutionally brave; you are fond of
excitement and mystery; you like to be the hero of a ro-
mance. Were I to advise you to leave Naples, would you
do so while Naples contains a foe to confront, or a mistress
to pursue?”

“You are right,” said the young Englishman, with en-
ergy. “No! and you cannot reproach me for such a reso-
lution.”

“But there is another course left to you: do you love
Viola Pisani truly and fervently?—if so, marry her, and
take a bride to your native land.”

“Nay!” answered Glyndon, embarrassed; “ Viola is not
of my rank. Her profession, too, is—in short, I am en-
slaved by her beauty, but I cannot wed her.”

Zanoni frowned.

“Your love, then, is but selfish lust, and I advise you to
your own happiness no more. Young man, Destiny is less
inexorable than it appears. The resources of the great
Ruler of the Universe are not so scanty and so stern as to
deny to men the divine privilege of Free Will; all of us
can carve out our own way, and God can make our very
contradictions harmonise with His solemn ends. You have
before you an option. Honourable and generous love may
even now work out your happiness, and effect your escape;
a frantic and selfish passion will but lead you to misery and
doom.”

“Do you pretend, then, to read the Future?”

“JT have said all that it pleases me to utter.”

“While you assume the moralist to me, Signor Zanoni,”
said Glyndon, with a smile, “are you yourself so indiffer-
ent to beauty as to act the stoic to its allurements?”

“Tf it were necessary that practice square with precept,”
said Zanoni, with a bitter smile, “our monitors would be

108 ZANONI.

but few. The conduct of the individual can affect but a
small circle beyond himelf; the permanent good or evil that
he works to others lies rather in the sentiments he can
diffuse. His acts are limited and momentary; his senti-
ments may pervade the universe, and inspire generations
till the day of doom. All our virtues, all our laws, are
drawn from books and maxims, which are sentiments, not
from deeds. In conduct, Julian had the virtues of a Chris-
tian, and Constantine the vices of a Pagan. The senti-
ments of Julian reconverted thousands to Paganism; those
of Constantine helped, under Heaven’s will, to bow to
Christianity the nations of the earth. In conduct, the
humblest fisherman on yonder sea, who believes in the
miracles of San Gennaro, may be a better man than Luther.
To the sentiments of Luther the mind of modern Europe is
indebted for the noblest revolution it has known. Our
opinions, young Englishman, are the angel part of us; our
acts, the earthly.”

“You have reflected deeply for an Italian,” said Glyn-
don.

“Who told you I was an Italian?”

“Are you not? And yet, when I hear you speak my
own language as a native, [——”

“Tush!” interrupted Zanoni, impatiently turning away.
Then, after a pause, he resumed in a mild voice—“ Glyn-
don, do you renounce Viola Pisani? Will you take some
days to consider what I have said?”

‘“‘Renounce her—never!”

“Then you will marry her?”

“Tmpossible!”

“Be it so: she will then renounce you. TI tell you that
you have rivals.”

“Yes; the Prince di ——; but I do not fear him.”

“You have another, whom you will fear more.”

“ And who is he?”

“Myself.”

Glyndon turned pale and started from his seat.

ZANONI. 109

“You, Signor Zanoni! —you—and you dare to tell me so?”

“Dare! Alas! there are times when I wish that I could
fear.”

These arrogant words were not uttered arrogantly, but
in a tone of the most mournful dejection. Glyndon was
enraged, confounded, and yet awed. However, he had a
brave English heart within his breast, and he recovered
himself quickly.

“Signor,” said he, calmly, “Iam not to be duped by these
solemn phrases and these mystical assumptions. You may
have powers which I cannot comprehend or emulate, or you
may be but a keen impostor.”

“Well, proceed!”

“JT mean, then,” continued Giyndon, resolutely, though
somewhat disconcerted, “I mean you to understand, that,
though I am not to be persuaded or compelled by a stranger
to marry Viola Pisani, I am not the less determined never
tamely to yield her to another.”

Zanoni looked gravely at the young man, whose sparkling
eyes and heightened colour testified the spirit to support his
words, andreplied: “Sobold! well; it becomes you. But
take my advice: wait yet nine days, and tell me then if you
will marry the fairest and the purest creature that ever
crossed your path.”

“But if you love her, why—why—”

“Why am I anxious that she should wed another?—to
save her from myself! Listen to me. That girl, humble
and uneducated though she be, has in her the seeds of the
most lofty qualities and virtues. She can be all to the man
she loves—all that man can desire in wife. Her soul, de-
veloped by affection, will elevate your own; it will influence
your fortunes, exalt your destiny: you will become a great
and a prosperous man. If, on the contrary, she fall to me,
I know not what may be her lot; but I know that there is
an ordeal which few can pass, and which hitherto no woman
has survived.”

As Zanoni spoke, his face became colourless, and there

110 ZANONI.

was something in his voice that froze the warm blood of the
listener.

“ What is this mystery which surrounds you?” exclaimed
Glyndon, unable to repress hisemotion. “Are youin truth
different from other men? Have you passed the boundary
of lawful knowledge? Are you, as some declare, a sorcerer
or only a——”

“Hush,” interrupted Zanoni, gently, and with a smile of
singular but melancholy sweetness; “have you earned the
right to ask me these questions? Though Italy still boast
an Inquisition, its power is rivelled as a leaf which the first
wind shall scatter. The days of torture and persecution are
over; and a man may live as he pleases, and talk as it suits
him, without fear of the stake and the rack. Since I can
defy persecution, pardon me if I do not yield to curiosity.”

Glyndon blushed, and rose. In spite of his love for
Viola, and his natural terror of such a rival, he felt him-
self irresistibly drawn towards the very man he had most
cause to suspect and dread. He held out his hand to Za-
noni, saying, “ Well, then, if we are to be rivals, our swords
must settle our rights: till then I would fain be frends.”

“Friend! You know not what you ask.”

“ Enigmas again!”

“Enigmas!” cried Zanoni, passionately,—“ay! can you
dare to solve them? Not till then could I give you my right
hand, and call you friend.”

“T could dare everything and all things for the attain-
ment of superhuman wisdom,” said Glyndon, and his coun-
tenance was lighted up with wild and intense enthusiasm.

Zanoni observed him in thoughtful silence.

“The seeds of the ancestor live in the son,” he muttered;
“he may—yet”——He broke off abruptly; then, speak-
ing aloud—* Go, Glyndon,” said he: “we shall meet again,
but I will not ask your answer till the hour presses for
decision.”

ZANONI. 111

CHAPTER VI.

“°Tis certain that this man has an estate of fifty thousand livres,
and seems to bea person of very greataccomplishments. But, then,
if he’s a wizard, are wizards so devoutly given as this man seems
to be?—In short, I could make neither head nor tail on’t. ”—TuE
CouNT DE GaABALIs, Translation affixed to the Second Edition of the
“ Rape of the Lock.”

Or all the weakness which little men rail against, there
is none that they are more apt to ridicule than the tendency
to believe. And of all the signs of a corrupt heart and a
feeble head, the tendency of incredulity is the surest.

Real philosophy seeks rather to solve than to deny.
While we hear, every day, the small pretenders to science
talk of the absurdities of Alchemy and the dream of the
Philosopher’s Stone, a more erudite knowledge is aware
that by Alchemists the greatest discoveries in science have
been made, and much which still seems abstruse, had we the
key to the mystic phraseology they were compelled to adopt,
might open the way to yet more noble acquisitions. The
Philosopher’s Stone itself has seemed no visionary chimera
to some of the soundest chemists that even the present cen-
tury has produced. Man cannot contradict the Laws of
Nature. But are all the Laws of Nature yet discovered?

“ Give me a proof of your Art,” says the rational inquirer.
“When I have seen the effect, I will endeavour, with you,
to ascertain the causes.”

Somewhat to the above effect were the first thoughts of
Clarence Glyndon on quitting Zanoni. But Clarence Glyn-

1Mr. Disraeli, in his Curtosities of Literature, (Article Alchem)
after quoting the sanguine judgments of modern chemists, as to the
transmutation of metals, observes, of one yet greater and more re-
cent than those to which Glyndon’s thoughts could have referred—
“Sir Humphry Davy told me that he did not consider this undiscov-
ered art as impossible; but should it ever be discovered, it would
certainly be useless, ”

112 ZANONI.

don was no “rational inquirer.” The more vague and mys-
terious the language of Zanoni, the more it imposed upon
him. A proof would have been something tangible, with
which he would have sought to grapple. And it would
have only disappointed his curiosity to find the supernatural
reduced to Nature. He endeavoured, in vain, at some
moments rousing himself from credulity to the scepticism
he deprecated, to reconcile what he had heard with the
probable motives and designs of an impostor. Unlike Mes-
mer and Cagliostro, Zanoni, whatever his pretensions, did
not make them a source of profit; nor was Glyndon’s posi-
tion or rank in life sufficient to render any influence obtained
over his mind subservient to schemes, whether of avarice
or ambition. Yet, ever and anon, with the suspicion of
worldly knowledge, he strove to persuade himself that Za-
noni had at least some sinister object in inducing him to
what his English pride and manner of thought considered a
derogatory marriage with the poor actress. Might not Viola
and the Mystic be in league with each other? Might not
all this jargon of prophecy and menace be but artifices to
dupe him? He felt an unjust resentment towards Viola at
her having secured such anally. But with that resentment
was mingled a natural jealousy. Zanoni threatened him
with rivalry. Zanoni, who, whatever his character or his
arts, possessed at least all the external attributes that dazzle
and command, Impatient of his own doubts, he plunged
into the society of such acquaintances as he had made at
Naples—chiefly artists, like himself, men of letters, and
the rich commercialists, who were already vying with the
splendour, though debarred from the privileges, of the
nobles. From these he heard much of Zanoni, already with
them, as with the idler classes, an object of curiosity and
speculation.

He had noticed, as a thing remarkable, that Zanoni had
conversed with him in English, and with a command of the
language so complete, that he might have passed for a na-
tive. On the other hand, in Italian, Zanoni was equally

ZANONI. 113

at ease. Glyndon found that it was the same in languages
less usually learned by foreigners. A painter from Sweden,
who had conversed with him, was positive that he was a
Swede; and a merchant from Constantinople, who had sold
some of his goods to Zanoni, professed his conviction that
none but a Turk, or at least a native of the East, could
have so thoroughly mastered the soft Oriental intonations.
Yet, in all these languages, when they came to compare their
several recollections, there was a slight, scarce perceptible
distinction, not in pronunciation, nor even accent, but in the
key and chime, as it were, of the voice between himself and
a native. This faculty was one which, Glyndon called to
mind, that sect, whose tenets and powers have never been
more than most partially explored—the Rosicrucians—es-
pecially arrogated. He remembered to have heard in Ger-
many of the work of John Bringeret,' asserting that all the
languages of earth were known to the genuine Brotherhood
of the Rosy Cross. Did Zanoni belong to this mystical
Fraternity, who, in an earlier age, boasted of secrets of
which the Philosopher’s Stone was but the least; who con-
sidered themselves the heirs of all that the Chaldeans, the
Magi, the Gymnosophists, and the Platonists had taught;
and who differed from all the darker Sons of Magic in the
virtue of their lives, the purity of their doctrines, and their
insisting, as the foundation of all wisdom, on the subjuga-
tion of the senses, and the intensity of Religious Faith?—
a glorious sect, if they lied not! And, in truth, if Zanoni
had powers beyond the race of worldly sages, they seemed
not unworthily exercised. The little known of his life was
in his favour. Some acts, not of indiscriminate, but judi-
cious generosity and beneficence, were recorded; in repeat-
ing which, still, however, the narrators shook their heads,
and expressed surprise how a stranger should have possessed
so minute a knowledge of the quiet and obscure distresses
he had relieved. ‘Two or three sick persons, when aban-
doned by their physicians, he had visited and conferred
3 1 Printed in 1616.

114 ZANONI.

withalone. They had recovered; they ascribed to him their
recovery; yet they could not tell by what medicines they
had been healed. They could only depose that he came,
conversed with them, and they were cured; it usually, how-
ever, happened that a deep sleep had preceded the recovery.

Another circumstance was also beginning to be remarked,
and spoke yet more in his commendation. Those with
whom he principally associated—the gay, the dissipated,
the thoughtless, the sinners and publicans of the more pol-
ished world—all appeared rapidly, yet insensibly to them-
selves, to awaken to purer thoughts and more regulated
lives. Even Cetoxa, the prince of gallants, duellists and
gamesters, was no longer the same man since the night of
the singular events which he had related to Glyndon. The
first trace of his reform was in his retirement from the gam-
ing-houses; the next was in his reconciliation with an
hereditary enemy of his house, whom it had been his con-
stant object for the last six years to entangle in such a
quarrel as might call forth his inimitable manceuvre of the
stoccata. Nor when Cetoxa and his young companions were
heard to speak of Zanoni, did it seem that this change had
been brought about by any sober lectures or admonitions.
They all described Zanoni as a man keenly alive to enjoy-
ment—of manners the reverse of formal—not precisely
gay, but equable, serene, and cheerful; ever ready to listen
to the talk of others, however idle, or to charm all ears
with an inexhaustible fund of brilliant anecdote and worldly
experience. All manners, all nations, all grades of men
seemed familiar to him. He was reserved only if allusion
were ever ventured to his birth or history. The more
general opinion of his origin certainly seemed the more
plausible. His riches, his familiarity with the languages
of the East, his residence in India, a certain gravity which
never deserted his most cheerful and familiar hours, the
lustrous darkness of his eyes and hair, and even the pecu-
liarities of his shape, in the delicate smallness of the hands,
and the Arab-like turn of the stately head, appeared to fix

ZANONI. 115

him as belonging to one at least of the Oriental races. And
a dabbler in the Eastern tongues even sought to reduce the
simple name of Zanoni, which a century before had been
borne by an inoffensive naturalist of Bologna,’ to the radi-
cals of the extinct language. Zan was unquestionably the
Chaldean appellation for the sun. Even the Greeks, who
mutilated every Oriental name, had retained the right one
in this case, as the Cretan inscription on the tomb of Zeus?
significantly showed. As to the rest, the Zan, or Zaun,
was, with the Sidonians, no uncommon prefix to On.
Adonis was but another name for Zanonas, whose worship
in Sidon Hesychius records. To this profound and un-
answerable derivation, Mervale lstened with great atten-
tion, and observed that he now ventured to announce an
erudite discovery he himself had long since made—viz., that
the numerous family of Smiths in England were undoubted-
ly the ancient priests of the Phrygian Apollo. “For,” said
he, “was not Apollo’s surname, in Phrygian, Smintheus?
How clear all the ensuing corruptions of the august name—
Smintheus—Smitheus—Smithé—Smith! Andeven now, I
may remark that the more ancient branches of that illus-
trious family, unconsciously anxious to approximate at least
by a letter nearer to the true title, take a pious pleasure in
writing their names Smithe!

The Philologist was much struck with this discovery, and
begged Mervale’s permission to note it down as an illustra-
tion to a work he was about to publish on the origin of
languages, to be called Babel, and published in three quartos
by subscription.

1 The author of two works on botany and rare plants.
2 Qée uéyac Keira Zav.*—Cyril contra Julian.

* Here lies great Jove,

116 ZANONI.

CHAPTER VII.

“Learn to be poor in spirit, my son, if you would penetrate the
sacred night which environs truth. Learn of the Sages to allow to
the Devils no power in nature, since the fatal stone has shut ’em
up in the depth of the abyss. Learn of the philosophers always to
look for natural causes in all extraordinary events ; and when such
natural causes are wanting, recur to God.”—THE COUNT DE
GABALIS.

Aut these additions to his knowledge of Zanoni, picked
up in the various lounging places and resorts that he fre-
quented, were unsatisfactory toGlyndon. ‘That night Viola
did not perform at the theatre; and the next day, still dis-
turbed by bewildered fancies, and averse to the sober and
sarcastic companionship of Mervale, Glyndon sauntered
musingly into the public gardens, and paused under the
very tree under which he had first heard the voice that had
exercised upon his mind so singular an influence. The gar-
den was deserted. He threw himself on one of the seats
placed beneath the shade; and again, in the midst of his
reverie, the same cold shudder came over him which Zanoni
had so distinctly defined, and to which he had ascribed so
extraordinary a cause.

He roused himself with a sudden effort, and started to
see, seated next to him, a figure hideous enough to have per-
sonated one of the malignant beings of whom Zanoni had
spoken. It wasa small man, dressed in a fashion striking-
ly at variance with the elaborate costume of the day. An
affectation of homeliness and poverty approaching to squalor,
in the loose trousers, coarse as a ship’s sail—in the rough
jacket, which appeared rent wilfully into holes—and the
black, ragged, tangled locks that streamed from their con-
finement under a woollen cap, accorded but ill with other
details which spoke of comparative wealth. The shirt, open
at the throat, was fastened by a brooch of gaudy stones;

ZANONI. a BBs

and two pendent massive gold chains announced the fop-
pery of two watches.

The man’s figure, if not absolutely deformed, was yet
marvellously ill-favoured; his shoulders high and square ;
his chest flattened, as if Fased in; his pieces: hands
were knotted at the joints, and UES bony and muscular,
dangled from lean emaciated wrists, as if not belonging to
them. His features had the painful distortion sometimes
seen in the countenance of a cripple—large, exaggerated,
with the nose nearly touching the chin; the eyes small, but
glowing with a cunning fire as they dwelt on Glyndon; and
the mouth was twisted into a grin that displayed rows of
jagged, black, broken teeth. Yet over this frightful face
there still played a kind of disagreeable intelligence, an ex-
pression at once astute and bold; and as Glyndon, recover-
ing from the first impression, looked again at h?s neighbour,
he blushed at his own dismay, and recognised a French
artist with whom he had formed an acquaintance, and who
was possessed of no inconsiderable talents in his calling.
Indeed it was to be remarked that this creature, whose ex-
ternals were so deserted by the Graces, particularly delighted
in designs aspiring to majesty and grandeur. Though his
colouring was hard and shallow, as was that generally of
the French school at the time, his drawings were admirable
for symmetry, simple elegance, and classic vigour; at the
same time they unquestionably wanted ideal grace. He
was fond of selecting subjects from Roman History,
rather than from the copious world of Grecian beauty, or
those still more sublime stories of scriptural record from
which Raffaele and Michel Angelo borrowed their inspira-
tions. His grandeur was that, not of gods and saints, but
mortals. His delineation of beauty was that which the eye
cannot blame and the soul does not acknowledge. In a
word, as it was said of Dionysius, he was an Anthropogra-
phos, or Painter of Men. It was also a notable contradic-
tion in this person, who was addicted to the most extrava-
gant excesses in every passion, whether of hate or love,

118 _ ZANONT.

implacable in revenge, and insatiable in debauch, that he
was in the habit of uttering the most beautiful sentiments
of exalted purity and genial philanthropy. The world was
not good enough for him; he was, to use the expressive
German phrase, a world-betterer! Nevertheless, his sarcas-
tic lip often seemed to mock the sentiments he uttered, as
if it sought to insinuate that he was above even the world
he would construct.

Finally, this painter was in close correspondence with
the Republicans of Paris, and was held to be one of those
missionaries whom, from the earliest period of the Revolu-
tion, the regenerators of mankind were pleased to despatch
to the various states yet shackled, whether by actual
tyranny or wholesome laws. Certainly, as the historian of
Italy’ has observed, there was no city in Italy where these
new doctrines would be received with greater favour than
Naples; partly from the lively temper of the people, princi-
pally because the most hateful feudal privileges, however
partially curtailed some years before by the great minister,
Tanuccini, still presented so many daily and practical evils
as to make change wear a more substantial charm than the
meretricious bloom on the cheek of the harlot—Novelty.
This man, whom I will call Jean Nicot, was, therefore, an
oracle among the younger and bolder spirits of Naples; and
before Glyndon had met Zanoni, the former had not been
among the least dazzled by the eloquent aspirations of the
hideous Philanthropist.

“Tt is so long since we have met, cher confrére,” said
Nicot, drawing his seat nearer to Glyndon’s, “that you
cannot be surprised that I see you with delight, and even
take the liberty to intrude on your meditations.”

“They were of no agreeable nature,” said Glyndon;
“and never was intrusion more welcome.”

“You will be charmed to hear,” said Nicot, drawing
several letters from his bosom, “that the good work pro-
ceeds with marvellous rapidity. Mirabeau, indeed, is no

1 Botta,

ZANONI. 119

more; but, mort Diable!/ the French people are now a Mira-
beau themselves.”

With this remark, Monsieur Nicot proceeded to read and
to comment upon several animated and interesting passages
in his correspondence, in which the word Virtue was intro-
duced twenty-seven times, and God not once. And then,
warmed by the cheering prospects thus opened to him, he
began to indulge in those anticipations of the future, the
outline of which we have already seen in the eloquent ex-
travagance of Condorcet. All the Old Virtues were de-
throned for a new Pantheon: Patriotism was a narrow
sentiment; Philanthropy was to be its successor. No love
that did not embrace all mankind, as warm for Indus and
the Pole as for the hearth of home, was worthy the breast
of a generous man. Opinion was to be free as air; and in
order to make it so, it was necessary to exterminate all
those whose opinions were not the same as Mons. Jean
Nicot’s. Much of this amused, much revolted Glyndon;
but when the Painter turned to dwell upon a science that
all should comprehend—and the results of which all should
enjoy, —a science that, springing from the soil of equal in-
stitutions and equal mental cultivation, should give to all
the races of men wealth without labour, and a life longer
than the Patriarch’s, without care,—then Glyndon listened
with interest and admiration, not unmixed with awe.
“Observe,” said Nicot, “how much that we now cherish as
a virtue will then be rejected as meanness. Our oppressors,
for instance, preach to us of the excellence of gratitude.
Gratitude, the confession of inferiority! What so hateful
to a noble spirit as the humiliating sense of obligation?
But where there is equality there can be no means for power
thus to enslave merit. The benefactor and the client will
alike cease, and—”

“And in the meantime,” said a low voice at hand, “in
the meantime, Jean Nicot?”

The two artists started, and Glyndon recognised Zanoni.

He gazed with a brow of unusual sternness on Nicot,

120 ZANONI.

who, lumped together as he sat, looked up at him askew,
and with an expression of fear and dismay upon his dis-
torted countenance.

Ho, ho! Messire Jean Nicot, thou who fearest neither
God nor Devil, why fearest thou the eye of a Man?

“It is not the first time I have been a witness to your
opinions on the infirmity of gratitude,” said Zanoni.

Nicot suppressed an exclamation, and, after gloomily
surveying Zanoni with an eye vigilant and sinister, but full
of hate impotent and unutterable, said, “1 know you not—
what would you of me?”

“Your absence. Leave us!”

Nicot sprang forward a step, with hands clenched, and
showing his teeth from ear to ear, like a wild beast incensed.
Zanoni stood motionless, and smiled at himin scorn. Nicot
halted abruptly, as if fixed and fascinated by the look,
shivered from head to foot, and sullenly, and with a visible
effort, as if impelled by a power not his own, turned away.

Glyndon’s eyes followed him in surprise.

“ And what know you of this man?” said Zanoni.

“T know him as one like myself—a follower of art.”

“Of art! Do not so profane that glorious word. What
Nature is to God, Art should be to Man—a sublime, bene-
ficent, genial, and warm creation. The wretch may be a
painter, “not an artist.”

“And pardon me if I ask what you know of one you thus
disparage.”

“T know thus much, that you are beneath my care if it be
necessary to warn you against him; his own lips show the
hideousness of his heart. Why should I tell of the crimes
he has committed? He speaks crime!”

“You do not seem, Signor Zanoni, to be one of the ad-
mirers of the dawning Revolution. Perhaps you are prej-
udiced against the man because you dislike his opinions?”

“ What opinions?”

Glyndon paused, somewhat puzzled to define; but at
length he said, “Nay, I must wrong you; for you, of all

ZANONI. 121

men, I suppose, cannot discredit the doctrine that preaches
the infinite improvement of the human species.”

“You are right; the few in every age improve the many;
the many now may be as wise as the few were; but im-
provement is at a standstill, if you tell me that the many
now are as wise as the few are.”

“JT comprehend you; you will not allow the law of uni-
versal equality !”

“Law! If the whole world conspired to enforce the
falsehood, they could not make it law. Level all conditions
to-day, and you only smooth away all obstacles to tyranny
to-morrow. A nation that aspires to equality is unfit for
freedom. Throughout all creation, from the archangel to
the worm, from Olympus to the pebble, froin the radiant
and completed planet to the nebula that hardens through
ages of mist and slime into the habitable world, the first
law of nature is inequality.”

“ Harsh doctrine, if applied to states. Are the cruel dis-
parities of life never to be removed?”

“Disparities of the physical life? Oh, let us hope so.
But disparities of the intellectual and the moral, never!
Universal equality of intelligence, of mind, of genius, of
virtue!—no teacher left to the world, no men wiser, better
than others—were it not an impossible condition, what a
hopeless prospect for humanity! No; while the world
lasts, the sun will gild the mountain-top before it shines
upon the plain. Diffuse all the knowledge the earth con-
tains equally over all mankind to-day, and some men will
be wiser than the rest to-morrow. And ¢hisis not a harsh,
but a loving law,—the real law of Improvement; the wiser
the few in one generation, the wiser will be the multitude
the next!”

As Zanoni thus spoke, they moved on through the smil-
ing gardens, and the beautiful bay lay sparkling in the
noontide. A gentle breeze just cooled the sunbeam, and
stirred the ocean; and in the inexpressible clearness of the
atmosphere, there was something that rejoiced the senses.

122 ZANONI.

The very soul seemed to grow lighter and purer in that
lucid air.

“ And these men, to commence their era of improvement
and equality, are jealous even of the Creator. They would
deny an Intelligence—a God!” said Zanoni, as if involun-
tarily. “Are you an Artist, and, looking on the world,
can you listen to such a dogma? Between God and Genius
there is a necessary link—there is almost a correspondent
language. Well said the Pythagorean '—‘A good intellect
is the chorus of divinity.’”

Struck and touched with these sentiments, which he little
expected to fall from one to whom he ascribed those powers
which the superstitions of childhood ascribe to the darker
agencies, Glyndon said, “And yet you have confessed that
your life, separated from that of others, is one that man
should dread to share. Is there then a connection between
magic and religion?”

“Magic! And what is magic? When the traveller be-
holds in Persia the ruins of palaces and temples the ignorant
inhabitants inform him they were the work of magicians!
What is beyond their own power, the vulgar cannot com-
prehend to be lawfully in the power of others. But if by
magic you mean a perpetual research amongst all that is
more latent and obscure in nature, I answer, I profess that
magic, and that he who does so comes but nearer to the
fountain of all belief. Knowest thou not that magic was
taught in the schools of old? But how, and by whom? as
the last and most solemn lesson, by the Priests who minis-
tered to the Temple.* And you, who would be a painter,
is not there a magic also in the art you would advance?
Must you not, after long study of the Beautiful that has
been, seize upon new and airy combinations of a beauty
that is to be? See you not that the Grander Art, whether
of poet or of painter, ever seeking for the TRUE, abhors the
REAL; that you must seize Nature as her master, not lackey

1 Sextus, the Pythagorean.
*Psellus de Demon. (MS.)

ZANONI. 123

her as her slave? You demand mastery over the past, a
conception of the future. Has not the Art that is truly
noble for its domain the Future and the Past? You would
conjure the invisible beings to your charm; and what is
painting but the fixing into substance the Invisible? Are
you discontented with this world? This world was never
meant for genius! ‘To exist, it must create another. What
magician can do more; nay, what science can do as much?
There are two avenues from the little passions and the
drear calamities of earth; both lead to heaven and away
from hell—Art and Science. But art is more godlike than
science; science discovers, art creates. You have faculties
that may command art; be contented with your lot. The
astronomer who catalogues the stars cannot add one atom to
the universe; the poet can call a universe from the atom;
the chemist may heal with his drugs the infirmities of the
human form; the painter, or the sculptor, fixes into ever-
lasting youth forms divine, which no disease can ravage,
and no years impair. Renounce those wandering fancies
that lead you now to myself, and now to yon orator of the
human race: to us two who are the antipodes of each other!
Your pencil is your wand; your canvas may raise Utopias
fairer than Condorcet dreams of. I press not yet for your
decision; but what man of genius ever asked more to cheer
his path to the grave than love and glory?”

“But,” said Glyndon, fixing his eyes earnestly on Zanoni,
“if there be a power to baffle the grave itself ‘ig

Zanoni’s brow darkened. “And were this so,” he said,
after a pause, “would it be so sweet a lot to outlive all you
loved, and to recoil from every human tie? Perhaps the
fairest immortality on earth is that of a noble name.”

“You do not answer me—you equivocate. I have read
of the long lives, far beyond the date common experience
assigns to man,” persisted Glyndon, “which some of the
alchemists enjoyed. Is the golden elixir but a fable?”

“Tf not, and these men discovered it, they died because
they refused to live! There may be a mournful warning

124 ZANONI.

in your conjecture. Turn once more to the easel and the
canvas!” ‘

So saying, Zanoni waved his hand, and, with downcast
eyes and a slow step, bent his way back into the city.

—___-——_—_—_

CHAPTER VIII.

THE GODDESS WISDOM.

“To some she is the goddess great ;
To some the milch cow of the field;
Their care is but to calculate
What butter she will yield. ”
From SCHILLER.

Tus last conversation with Zanoni left upon the mind of
Glyndon a tranquillising and salutary effect. From the
confused mists of his fancy glittered forth again those
happy, golden schemes which part from the young ambition
of art, to play in the air, to illumine the space, like rays
that kindle from the sun. And with these projects mingled
also the vision of a love purer and serener than his life yet
had known. His mind went back into that fair childhood
of genius, when the forbidden fruit is not yet tasted, and
we know of no land beyond the Eden which is gladdened
by an Eve. Insensibly before him there rose the scenes of
a home, with his art sufficing for all excitement, and Viola’s
love circling occupation with happiness and content; and
in the midst of these phantasies of a future that might be
at his command, he was recalled to the present by the clear
strong voice of Mervale, the man of common sense.

Whoever has studied the lives of persons in whom the
imagination is stronger than the will, who suspect their
own knowledge of actual life, and are aware of their facility
to impressions, —will have observed the influence which a
homely, vigorous, worldly understanding obtains over such
natures. It was thus with Glyndon. His friend had often

ZANONI. 125

extricated him from danger, and saved him from the conse-
quences of imprudence; and there was something in Mer-
vale’s voice alone that damped his enthusiasm, and often
made him yet more ashamed of noble impulses than weak
conduct. For Mervale, though a downright honest man,
could not sympathise with the extravagance of generosity
any more than with that of presumption and credulity.
He walked the straight line of life, and felt an equal con-
tempt for the man who wandered up the hill-sides, no
matter whether to chase a butterfly or to catch a prospect of
the ocean.

“T will tell you your thoughts, Clarence,” said Mervale
laughing, “though Iam no Zanoni. I know them by the
moisture of your eyes and the half smile on your lips. You
are musing upon that fair perdition—the little singer of
San Carlo.”

The little singer of San Carlo! Glyndon coloured as he
answered :

“Would you speak thus of her if she were my wife?”

“No! for then any contempt I might venture to feel
would be for yourself. One may dislike the duper, but it
is the dupe that one despises.”

“ Are you sure that I should be the dupe in such a union?
Where can I find one so lovely and so innocent—where one
whose virtue has been tried by such temptation? Does
even a single breath of slander sully the name of Viola
Pisani?”

“TJ know not all the gossip of Naples, and therefore can-
not answer; but I know this, that in England no one would
believe that a young Englishman of good fortune and re-
spectable birth, who marries a singer from the Theatre of
Naples, has not been lamentably taken in. I would save
you from a fall of position so irretrievable. Think how
many mortifications you will be subjected to; how many
young men will visit at your house, and how many young
wives will as carefully avoid it.”

“T can choose my own career, to which commonplace

126 ZANONI.

society is not essential. I can owe the respect of the world
to my art, and not to the accidents of birth and fortune.”

“That is, you still persist in your second folly—the ab-
surd ambition of daubing canvas. Heaven forbid I should
say anything against the laudable industry of one who fol-
lows such a profession for the sake of subsistence; but with
means and connections that will raise you in life, why vol-
untarily sink into a mere artist? As an accomplishment in
leisure moments, it is all very well in ‘its way; but as the
occupation of existence, it is a frenzy.”

“ Artists have been the friends of princes.”

“Very rarely so, I fancy, in sober England. There in
the great centre of political aristocracy, what men respect
is the practical, not the ideal. Just suffer me to draw two
pictures of my own. Clarence Glyndon returns to Eng-
land; he marries a lady of fortune equal to his own, of
friends and parentage that advance rational ambition.
Clarence Glyndon, thus a wealthy and respectable man, of
good talents, of bustling energies then concentrated, enters
into practical life. He has a house at which he can receive
those whose acquaintance is both advantage and honour; he
has leisure which he can devote to useful studies; his repu-
tation, built on a solid base, grows in men’s mouths. He
attaches himself to a party; he enters political life; his
new connections serve to promote his objects. At the age
of five-and-forty, what, in all probability, may Clarence
Glyndon be? Since you are ambitious, I leave that ques-
tion for you to decide! Now turn to the other picture.
Clarence Glyndon returns to England with a wife who can
bring him no money, unless he lets her out on the stage; so
handsome that every one asks who she is, and every one
hears—the celebrated singer Pisani. Clarence Glyndon
shuts himself up to grind colours and paint pictures in the
grand historical school, which nobody buys. There is even
a prejudice against him, as not having studied in the Acad-
emy,—as being an amateur. Who is Mr. Clarence Glyn-
don? Oh! the celebrated Pisani’s husband! What else?

ZANONI. 127

Oh! he exhibits those large pictures. Poor man! they
have merit in their way; but Teniers and Watteau are
more convenient, and almost as cheap. Clarence Glyndon,
with an easy fortune while single, has a large family, which
his fortune, unaided by marriage, can just rear up to call-
ings more plebeian than his own. He retires into the coun-
try, to save and to paint; he grows slovenly, and discon-
tented; ‘the world does not appreciate him,’ he says, and
he runs away from the world. At the age of forty-five,
what will be Clarence Glyndon? Your ambition shall de-
cide that question also!”

“Tf all men were as worldly as you,” said Glyndon, ris-
ing, “there would never have been an artist or a poet!”

“Perhaps we should do just as well without them,” an-
swered Mervale. “Is it not time to think of dinner? The
mullets here are remarkably fine!”

CHAPTER IX.

“Wollt ihr hoch auf ihren Fliigeln schweben,
Werft die Angst des Irdischen von euch !
Flichet aus dem engen dumpfen Leben
In des Ideales Reich !”
Das IDEAL UND DAS LEBEN

“Wouldst thou soar heavenward on its joyous wing?
Cast off the earthly burthen of the Real ;
High from this cramp’d and dungeon’d being, spring
Into the realm of the Ideal. ”

As some injudicious master lowers and vitiates the taste
of the student by fixing his attention to what he falsely calls
the Natural, but which, in reality, is the Commonplace,
and understands not that beauty in art is created by what
Raffaele so well describes—viz., the idea of beauty in the
puinter’s own mind; and that in every art, whether its
plastic expression be found in words of marble, colours or
sound, the servile imitation of nature is the work of jour-

128 ZANONI.

neymen and tyros; so in conduct the man of the world
vitiates and lowers the bold enthusiasm of loftier natures
by the perpetual reduction of whatever is generous and
trustful to all that is trite and coarse. A great German
poet has well defined the distinction between discretion and
the larger wisdom. In the last there is a certain rashness
which the first disdains—

“The purblind see but the receding shore,
Not that to which the bold wave wafts them o’er. ”

Yet in this logic of the prudent and the worldly there is
often a reasoning unanswerable of its kind.

You must have a feeling—a faith in whatever is self-
sacrificing and divine—whether in religion or in art, in
glory or in love—or Common-sense will reason you out of
the sacrifice, and a syllogism will debase the Divine to an
article in the market.

Every true critic in art, from Aristotle and Pliny—from
Winkleman and Vasari, to Reynolds and Fuseli, has sought
to instruct the painter that Nature is not to be copied, but
exalted ; that the loftiest order of art, selecting only the
loftiest combinations, is the perpetual struggle of Humanity
to approach the Gods. The great painter, as the great
author, embodies what is possible to man, it is true, but
what is not common to mankind. There is truth in Hamlet,
in Macbeth and his witches; in Desdemona; in Othello; in
Prospero; and in Caliban; there is truth in the cartoons of
Raffaele; there is truth in the Apollo, the Antinous, and
the Laocéon. But you do not meet the originals of the
words, the cartoons, or the marble, in Oxford Street or St.
James’s. All these, to return to Raffaele, are the creatures
of the idea in the artist’s mind. This idea is not inborn;
it has come from an intense study. But that study has
been of the ideal that can be raised from the positive and the
actual into grandeur and beauty. The commonest model
becomes full of exquisite suggestions to him who has formed

ZANONI. 129

this idea; a Venus of flesh and blood would be vulgarized
by the imitation of him who has not.

When asked where he got his models, Guido summoned
acommon porter from his calling, and drew from a mean
original a head of surpassing beauty. It resembled the
porter, but idealised the porter to the hero. It was true,
but it was not real. There are critics who will tell you
that the Boor of Teniers is more true to nature than the
Porter of Guido! The commonplace public scarcely under-
stand the idealising principle, even of art. For high art
is an acquired taste.

But to come to my comparison. Still less is the kindred
principle comprehended in conduct. And the advice of
worldly Prudence would as often deter from the risks of
Virtue as from the punishments of Vice; yetin conduct, as
in art, there is an ideal of the great and beautiful, by which
men should exalt the hackneyed and the trite of life. Now,
Glyndon felt the sober prudence of Mervale’s reasonings;
he recoiled from the probable picture placed before him, in
his devotion to the one master talent that he possessed, and
the one master passion that, rightly directed, might purify
his whole being as a strong wind purifies the air.

But though he could not bring himself to decide in the
teeth of so rational a judgment, neither could he resolve at
once to abandon the pursuit of Viola. Fearful of being in-
fluenced by Zanoni’s counsels and his own heart, he had
for the last two days shunned an interview with the young
actress. But after a night following his last conversation
with Zanoni, and that we have just recorded with Mervale
—a night coloured by dreams so distinct as to seem prophetic
—dreams that appeared so to shape his future according to
the hints of Zanoni, that he could have fancied Zanoni
himself had sent them from the house of sleep to haunt his
pillow, he resolved once more to seek Viola; and though

without a definite or distinct object, he yielded himself up
to the impulse of his heart.
| 9

|
|

130 ZANONI.

CHAPTER X.

“O sollecito dubbio e fredda tema
Che pensando l’accresci!”?
Tasso, Canzone vi.

Sur was seated outside her door—the young actress!
The sea before her in that heavenly bay seemed literally to
sleep in the arms of the shore; while, to the right, not far
off, rose the dark and tangled crags to which the traveller
of to-day is duly brought to gaze on the tomb of Virgil, to
compare with the cavern of Posilipo the archway of High-
gate Hill. There were a few fishermen loitering by the
cliffs, on which their nets were hung to dry; and at a dis-
tance, the sound of some rustic pipe (more common at that
day than at this) mingled now and then with the bells of
the lazy mules, broke the voluptuous silence—the silence
of declining noon on the shores of Naples. Never, till you
have enjoyed it,—never, till you have felt its enervating,
but delicious charm, believe that you can comprehend all
the meaning of the Dolce far niente ;? and when that luxury
has been known, when you have breathed that atmosphere
of faéry land, then you will no longer wonder why the
heart ripens into fruit so sudden and so rich beneath the
rosy skies and the glorious sunshine of the south.

The eyes of the actress were fixed on the broad blue deep
beyond. In the unwonted negligence of her dress might
be traced the abstraction of her mind. Her beautiful hair
was gathered up loosely, and partially bandaged by a ker-
chief, whose purple color served to deepen the golden hue
of her tresses. A stray curl escaped, and fell down the
graceful neck. A loose morning robe, girded by a sash,
left the breeze, that came ever and anon from the sea, to
die upon the bust half disclosed; and the tiny slipper, that

*O anxious doubt and chilling fear, that grows by thinking!
* The pleasure of doing nothing.

ZANONI. 131

Cinderella might have worn, seemed a world too wide for
the tiny foot which it scarcely covered. It might be the
heat of the day that deepened the soft bloom of the cheeks,
and gave an unwonted languor to the large dark eyes. In
all the pomp of her stage attire—in all the flush of excite-
ment before the intoxicating lamps—never had Viola looked
80 lovely.

By the side of the actress, and filling up the threshold,
stood Gionetta, with her arms thrust to the elbow in two
huge pockets on either side her gown.

“But I assure you,” said the nurse, in that sharp, quick,
ear-splitting tone in which the old women of the south are
more than a match for those of the north, “but I assure
you, my darling, that there is not a finer cavalier in all
Naples, nor a more beautiful, than this Jnglese ; and I am
told that all the Jnglest are much richer than they seem.
Though they have no trees in their country, poor people!
and instead of twenty-four they have only twelve hours to
the day, yet I hear that they shoe their horses with seudi ;
and since they cannot (the poor heretics!) turn grapes into
wine, for they have no grapes, they turn gold into physic;
and take a glass or two of pistoles whenever they are
troubled with the colic. But you don’t hear me, little
pupil of my eyes, you don’t hear me!”

“ And these things are whispered of Zanoni!” said Viola,
half to herself, and unheeding Gionetta’s eulogies on Glyn-
don and the English.

“Blessed Maria! do not talk of this terrible Zanoni.
You may be sure that his beautiful face, like his yet more
beautiful pistoles, is only witchcraft. I look at the money
he gave me the other night, every quarter of an hour, to
see whether it has not turned into pebbles.”

“Do you then really believe,” said Viola, with timid
earnestness, “that sorcery still exists?”

“Believe!—do I believe in the blessed San Gennaro?
How do you think he cured old Filippo, the fisherman, when
the doctor gave him up? How do you think he has

132 ZANONI.

managed himself to live at least these three hundred years?
How do you think he fascinates every one to his bidding
with a look, as the vampires do?”

“ Ah, is this only witchcraft? It is like it—it must be!”
murmured Viola, turning very pale. Gionetta herself was
scarcely more superstitious than the daughter of the musi-
cian. And her very innocence, chilled at the strangeness
of virgin passion, might well ascribe to magic what hearts
more experienced would have resolved to love.

“And, then, why has this great Prince di been so
terrified by him? Why has he ceased to persecute us?
Why has he been so quiet and still? Is there no sorcery
in all that?”

“Think you, then,” said Viola, with sweet inconsistency,
“that I owe that happiness and safety to his protection?
Oh, let me so believe! Be silent, Gionetta! Why have I
only thee and my own terrors to consult? O beautiful
sun!” and the girl pressed her hand to her heart with wild
energy, “thou lightest every spot but this. Go, Gionetta!
leave me alone—leave me!”

“And indeed it is time I should leave you; for the
polenta will be spoiled, and you have eaten nothing all day.
If you don’t eat, you will lose your beauty, my darling, and
then nobody will care for you. Nobody cares for us when
we grow ugly; I know that; and then you must, like old
Gionetta, get some Viola of your own to spoil. Ill go and
see to the polenta.”

“Since I have known this man,” said the girl, half aloud,
“since his dark eyes have haunted me, I am no longer the
same. I long to escape from myself—to glide with the
sunbeam over the hill-tops—to become something that is
not of earth. Phantoms float before me at night; anda
fluttering like the wing of a bird, within my heart, seems
as if the spirit were terrified, and would break its cage.”

While murmuring these incoherent rhapsodies,~a step that
she did not hear approached the actress, and a light hand
touched her arm.

ZANONI. 133

“Viola!—bellissima !/—Viola!”

She turned, and saw Glyndon. The sight of his fair
young face calmed her at once. His presence gave her
pleasure.

“Viola,” said the Englishman, taking her hand and draw-
ing her again to the bench from which she had risen, as he
seated himself beside her, “you shall hear me speak! You
must know already that I love thee! It has not been pity
or admiration alone that has led me ever and ever to thy
dear side; reasons there may have been why I have not
spoken, save by my. eyes, before; but this day—-I know
not how it is—I feel a more sustained and settled courage
to address thee, and learn the happiest or the worst. I
have rivals, I know—rivals who are more powerful than
the poor artist; are they also more favoured?”

Viola blushed faintly; but her countenance was grave
and distressed. Looking down, and marking some hiero-
glyphical figure in the dust with the point of her slipper,
she said, with some hesitation, and a vain attempt to be
gay, “Signor, whoever wastes his thoughts on an actress
must submit to have rivals. It is our unhappy destiny not
to be sacred even to ourselves.”

“But you do not love this destiny, glittering though it
seem; your heart is not in the vocation which your gifts
adorn.”

“Ah, no!” said the actress, her eyes filling with tears.
“Once I loved to be the priestess of song and music; now I
feel only that it is a miserable lot to be slave to a multi-
tude.”

“Fly, then, with me,” said the artist, passionately.
“Quit for ever the calling that divides that heart I would
have all my own. Share my fate now and for ever—
my pride, my delight, my ideal! Thou shalt inspire my
canvas and my song; thy beauty shall be made at once
holy and renowned. In the galleries of princes, crowds
shall gather round the effigy of a Venus or a Saint,
and a whisper shall break forth, ‘It is Viola Pisani!’

134 ZANONI,

Ah! Viola, I adore thee: tell me that I do not worship in
vain.”

“Thou art good and fair,” said Viola, gazing on her lover,
as he pressed nearer to her, and clasped her hand in his.
“But what should I give thee in return?”

“ Love—love—only love!”

“ A sister’s love?”

“Ah! speak not with such cruel coldness!”

“Tt is all I have for thee. Listen to me, Signor: when
I look on your face, when I hear your voice, a certain serene
and tranquil calm creeps over and lulls thoughts—oh! how
feverish, how wild! When thou art gone, the day seems a
shade more dark; but the shadow soon flies. I miss thee
not; I think not of thee; no, I love thee not; and I will
give myself only where I love.”

“ But I would teach thee to love me: fear it not. Nay,
such love as thou describest, in our tranquil climates is the
love of innocence and youth.”

“Of innocence!” said Viola. “Is itso? Perhaps”’—she
paused, and added, with an effort, “ Foreigner! and wouldst
thou wed the orphan! Ah! thow at least art generous. It
is not the innocence thou wouldst destroy !”

Glyndon drew back, conscience-stricken.

“No, it may not be!” she said, rising, but not conscious
of the thoughts, half of shame, half suspicion, that passed
through the mind of her lover. “Leave me, and forget me.
You do not understand, you could not comprehend, the
nature of her whom you think you love. From my child-
hood upward, I have felt as if I were marked out for some
strange and preternatural doom; as if I were singled from
my kind. This feeling (and, oh! at times it is one of de+
lirious and vague delight, at others of the darkest gloom)
deepens within me day by day. It is like the shadow of
twilight, spreading slowly and solemnly around. My hour
approaches: a little while and it will be night!”

As she spoke, Glyndon listened with visible emotion and
perturbation. “Viola!” he exclaimed, as she ceased, “ your

ZANONI. 135

words more than ever enchain me to you. As you feel I
feel. I, too, have been ever haunted with a chill and un-
earthly foreboding. Amidst the crowds of men I have felt
alone. In all my pleasures, my toils, my pursuits, a
warning voice has murmured in my ear, ‘Time has a dark
mystery in store for thy manhood.’ When you spoke, it
was as the voice of my own soul!”

Viola gazed upon him in wonder and fear. Her counten-
ance was as white as marble: and those features, so divine
in their rare symmetry, might have served the Greek with
a study for the Pythoness, when, from the mystic cavern
and the bubbling spring, she first hears the voice of the
inspiring god. Gradually the rigour and tension of that
wonderful face relaxed, the colour returned, the pulse beat;
the heart animated the frame.

“Tell me,” she said, turning partially aside, “tell me,
have you seen—do you know—a stranger in this city? one
of whom wild stories are afloat?”

“You speak of Zanoni? I have seen him—I know him
—and you? Ah! he, too, would be my rival!—he, too,
would bear thee from me!”

“You err,” said Viola, hastily, and with a deep sigh;
“he pleads for you: he informed me of your love; he be-
sought me not—not to reject it.”

“Strange being! incomprehensible enigma! Why did
you name him?”

“Why, ah! I would have asked whether, when you first
saw him, the foreboding, the instinct, of which you spoke,
came on you more fearfully, more intelligibly than before
—whether you felt at once repelled from him, yet attracted
towards him—whether you felt (and the actress spoke with
hurried animation) that with nim was connected the secret
of your life?”

“All this I felt,” answered Glyndon, in a trembling
voice, “the first time I was in his presence. Though all
around me was gay—music, amidst lamp-lit trees, light
converse near, and heaven without a cloud above—my

136 ZANONI.

knees knocked together, my hair bristled, and my blood
surdled like ice. Since then he has divided my thoughts
with thee.”

“No more, no more!” said Viola, in a stifled tone;
“there must be the hand of fate in this. I can speak to
you no more now. Farewell!” She sprang past him into
the house, and closed the door. Glyndon did not follow
her, nor, strange as it may seem, was he so inclined. The
thought and recollection of that moonlit hour in the gar-
dens, of the strange address of Zanoni, froze up all human
passion. Viola herself, if not forgotten, shrank back like
a shadow into the recesses of his breast. He shivered as
he stepped into sunlight, and musingly retraced his steps
into the more populous parts of that liveliest of Italian
cities.

BOO Paw TEHERD.
THEURGIA.
—“i cavalier sen vanno

Dove il pino fatal gli attende in porto. ”!
Gerus. Lis., cant. xv. (ARGOMENTO. )

CHAPTER I.

“But that which especially distinguishes the brotherhood is their
marvellous knowledge of all the resources of medical art. They
work not by charms, but simples. ”—MS. Account of the Origin and
Attributes of the true Rosicrucians, by J. Von D——.

Art this time it chanced that Viola had the opportunity
to return the kindness shown to her by the friendly musi-
cian, whose house had received and sheltered her when first
left an orphan on the world. Old Bernardi had brought
up three sons to the same profession as himself, and they
had lately left Naples to seek their fortunes in the wealthier
cities of northern Europe, where the musical market was
less overstocked. There was only left to glad the house-
hold of his aged wife and himself, a lively, prattling, dark-
eyed girl, of some eight years old, the child of his second
son, whose mother had died in giving her birth. It so
happened that, about a month previous tothe date on which
our story has now entered, a paralytic affection had dis-
abled Bernardi from the duties of his calling. He had been
always a social, harmless, improvident, generous fellow—
living on his gains from day to day, as if the day of sick-
ness and old age never was to arrive. Though he received

1 The knights came where the fatal bark awaited them in the Port.

138 ZANONI.

a small allowance for his past services, it ill-sufficed for his —
wants; neither was he free from debt. Poverty stood at
his hearth—when Viola’s grateful smile and liberal hand
came to chase the grim fiend away. But it is not enough
toa heart truly kind to send and give; more charitable is
it to visit and console. “Forget not thy father’s friend.”
So almost daily went the bright idol of Naples to the house
of Bernardi. Suddenly a heavier affliction than either
poverty or the palsy befell the old musician. His grand-
child, his little Beatrice fell ill, suddenly and dangerously
ill, of one of those rapid fevers common to the south; and
Viola was summoned from her strange and fearful reveries
of love or fancy to the sick-bed of the young sufferer.

The child was exceedingly fond of Viola, and the old
people thought that her mere presence would bring healing;
but when Viola arrived Beatrice was insensible. For-
tunately there was no performance that evening at San
Carlo, and she resolved to stay the night, and partake its
fearful cares and dangerous vigil.

But during the night, the child grew worse, the physician
(the leechcraft has never been very skilful at Naples) shook
his powdered head, kept his aromatics at his nostrils, ad-
ministered his palliatives, and departed. Old Bernardi
seated himself by the bedside in stern silence: here was
the last tie that bound him to life. Well, let the anchor
break, and the battered ship go down! It was an iron re-
solve, more fearful than sorrow. An old man with one
foot in the grave, watching by the couch of a dying child,
is one of the most awfnl spectacles in human calamities,
The wife was more active, more bustling, more hopeful,
and more tearful. Viola took heed of all three. But
towards dawn, Beatrice’s state became so obviously alarm-
ing, that Viola herself began to despair, At this time she
saw the old woman suddenly rise from before the image of
the saint at which she had been kneeling, wrap herself in
her cloak and hood, and quietly quit the chamber. Viola
stole after her,

ZANONI. 139

“Tt is cold for thee, good mother, to brave the air; let
me go for the physician.”

“Child, Iam not going to him, I have heard of one in
the city who has been tender to the poor, and who, they
say, has cured the sick when physicians failed. I will go
and say to him, ‘Signor, we are beggars in all else, but
yesterday we were rich in love. Weare at the close of
life, but we lived in our grandchild’s childhood. Give us
back our wealth—give us back our youth. Let us die
blessing God that the thing we love survives us.’ ”

She was gone. Why did thy heart beat, Viola? The
infant’s sharp cry of pain called her back to the couch; and
there still sat the old man, unconscious of his wife’s move-
ments, not stirring, his eyes glazing fast as they watched
the agonies of that slight frame. By degrees the wail of
pain died into a low moan—the convulsions grew feebler,
but more frequent—the glow of fever faded into the blue,
pale tinge that settles into the last bloodless marble.

The daylight came broader and clearer through the case-
ment—steps were heard on the stairs—the old woman en-
tered hastily: she rushed to the bed, cast a glance on the
patient—“ She lives yet, Signor—she lives!”

Viola raised her eyes—the child’s head was pillowed on
her bosom—and she beheld Zanoni. He smiled on her
with a tender and soft approval, and took the infant from
her arms. Yet even then, as she saw him bending silently
over that pale face, a superstitious fear mingled with her
hopes. “Was it by lawful—by holy art that”-—her self-
questioning ceased abruptly; for his dark eye turned to her
as if he read her soul: and his aspect accused her conscience
for its suspicion, for it spoke reproach not unmingled with
disdain.

“Be comforted,” he said, gently turning to the old man;
“the danger is not beyond the reach of human skill;” and
taking from his bosom a small crystal vase, he mingled a
few drops with water. No sooner did this medicine moisten
the infant’s lips, than it seemed to produce an astonishing

140 ZANONI.

effect. The colour revived rapidly on the lips and cheeks;
in a few moments the sufferer slept calmly, and with the
regular breathing of painless sleep. And then the old man
rose, rigidly, asa corpse might rise—looked down—listened,
and creeping gently away, stole to the corner of the room,
and wept, and thanked Heaven!

Now, old Bernardi had been, hitherto, but a cold be-
liever; sorrow had never before led him aloft from earth.
Old as he was, he had never before thought as the old
should think of death—that endangered life of the young
had wakened up the careless soul of age. Zanoni whispered
to the wife, and she drew the old man quietly from the
room.

“Dost thou fear to leave me an hour with thy charge,
Viola? Thinkest thou still that this knowledge is of the
Fiend?”

“ Ah,” said Viola, humbled and yet rejoiced, “forgive
me, forgive me, Signor. Thou biddest the young live and
the old pray. My thoughts never shall wrong thee more!”

Before the sun rose, Beatrice was out of danger; at noon,
Zanoni escaped from the blessings of the aged pair, and as
he closed the door of the house, he found Viola awaiting
him without.

She stood before him timidly, her hands crossed meekly
on her bosom, her downcast eyes swimming with tears.

“Do not let me be the only one you leave unhappy!”

“And what cure can the herbs and anodynes effect for
thee? If thou canst so readily believe ill of those who
have aided and yet would serve thee, thy disease is of the
heart; and—nay, weep not; nurse of the sick, and com-
forter of the sad, I should rather approve than chide thee.
Forgive thee! Life, that ever needs forgiveness, has, for
its first duty, to forgive.”

“No, do not forgive me yet. Ido not deserve a pardon ;
for even now, while I feel how ungrateful I was to believe
suspect, aught injurious and false to my preserver, ay
tears flow from happiness, not remorse. Oh!” ghe con-

ZANONI. 141

tinued, with a simple fervour, unconscious, in her inno-
cence and her generous emotions, of all the secrets she be-
trayed—“ thou knowest not how bitter it was to believe
thee not more good, more pure, more sacred than all the
world. And when I saw thee—the wealthy, the noble,
coming from thy palace to minister to the sufferings of the
hovel—when I heard those blessings of the poor breathed
upon thy parting footsteps, I felt my very self exalted—
good in thy goodness—noble at least in those thoughts that
did not wrong thee.”

“ And thinkest thou, Viola, that in a mere act of science
there is so much virtue? The commonest leech will tend
the sick for his fee. Are prayers and blessings a less re-
ward than gold?”

“ And mine, then, are not worthless? thou wilt accept of
mine?”

“ Ah, Viola!” exclaimed Zanoni, with a sudden passion
that covered her face with blushes, “thou only, methinks,
on all the earth, hast the power to wound or to delight me!”
He checked himself, and his face became grave and sad.
“ And this,” he added, in an altered tone, “because, if thou
wouldst heed my counsels, methinks I could guide a guile-
less heart to a happy fate.”

“Thy counsels! I will obey them all. Mould me to
what thou wilt. In thine absence, I amas a child that
fears every shadow in the dark! in thy presence, my soul
expands, and the whole world seems calm with a celestial
noonday. Do not deny to methat presence. I am father-
less, and ignorant, and alone!”

Zanoni averted his face, and after a moment’s silence
replied calmly :

“Be it so. Sister, I will visit thee again!”

142 ZANONI.

CHAPTER II.
“Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy.”—SHAKSPEARE.

Wuo so happy as Viola now! A dark load was lifted
from her heart; her step seemed to tread on air; she would
have sung for very delight as she went gaily home. It is
such happiness to the pure to love—but oh! such more
than happiness to believe in the worth of the one beloved.
Between them there might be human obstacles—wealth,
rank, man’s little world. But there was no longer that
dark gulf which the imagination recoils to dwell on, and
which separates for ever soul from soul. He did not love
her in return. Love her! But did she ask for love? Did
she herself love? No; or she would never have been at
once so humble and so bold. How merrily the ocean mur-
mured in her ear; how radiant an aspect the commonest
passer-by seemed to wear! She gained her home—she
looked upon the tree, glancing, with fantastic branches, in
the sun. “Yes, brother mine!” she said, laughing in her
joy, “like thee, I have struggled to the light!”

She had never hitherto, like the more instructed
Daughters of the North, accustomed herself to that deli-
cious Confessional, the transfusion of thought to writing.
Now, suddenly, her heart felt an impulse; a new-born in-
stinct, that bade it commune with itself, bade it disentangle
its web of golden fancies—made her wish to look upon her
inmost self as in a glass. Upsprung from the embrace of
Love and Soul—the Eros and the Psyche—their beautiful
offspring, Genius! She blushed, she sighed, she trembled
as she wrote. And from the fresh world that she had built
for herself, she was awakened to prepare for the glittering
stage. How dull became the music, how dim the scene, so
exquisite and so bright of old! Stage, thou art the Fairy
Land to the vision of the worldly. Fancy, whose music is

ZANONI. 1438

not heard by men, whose scenes shift not by mortal hand,
as the Stage to the present world, art thou to the Future
and the Past!

CHAPTER III.
“Tn faith I do not love thee with mine eyes.”—SHAKSPEARE,

Tur next day, at noon, Zanoni visited Viola; and the
next day, and the next, and again the next;—days that to
her seemed like a special time set apart from the rest of
life. And yet he never spoke to her in the language of
flattery, and almost of adoration, to which she had been ac-
customed. Perhaps his very coldness, so gentle as it was,
assisted to this mysterious charm. He talked to her much
of her past life, and she was scarcely surprised (she now
never thought of ¢e7707) to perceive how much of that past
seemed known to him.

He made her speak to him of her father; he made her
recall some of the airs of Pisani’s wild music. And those
airs seemed to charm and lull him into reverie.

“ As music was to the musician,” said he, “may science
be to the wise. Your father looked abroad in the world;
all was discord to the fine sympathies that he felt with the
harmonies that daily and nightly float to the throne of
Heaven. Life, with its noisy ambition and its mean
passions, is so poor and base! Out of his soul he created
the life and the world for which his soul was fitted. Viola,
thou art the daughter of that life, and wilt be the denizen
of that world.”

In his earlier visits, he did not speak of Glyndon. The
day soon came on which he renewed the subject. And so
trustful, obedient, and entire was the allegiance that Viola
now owned to his dominion, that, unwelcome as that sub-
ject was, she restrained her heart, and listened to him in
silence!

144 ZANONI.

At last he said, “Thou hast promised thou wilt obey my
counsels, and if, Viola, I should ask thee, nay adjure, to
accept this stranger’s hand, and share his fate, should he
offer to thee such a lot—wouldst thou refuse?”

And then she pressed back the tears that gushed to her
eyes—and with a strange pleasure in the midst of pain—
the pleasure of one who sacrifices heart itself to the one
who commands that heart, she answered, falteringly: “If
thou canst ordain it—why—”

“ Speak on.”

“Dispose of me as thou wilt!”

Zanoni stood in silence for some moments; he saw the
struggle which the girl thought she concealed so well; he
made an involuntary movement towards her, and pressed
her hand to his lips; it was the first time he had ever de-
parted even so far from a certain austerity, which perhaps
made her fear him and her own thoughts the less.

“Viola,” said he, and his voice trembled, “the danger
that I can avert no more, if thou linger still in Naples,
comes hourly near and near to thee! On the third day
from this, thy fate must be decided. I accept thy promise.
Before the last hour of that day, come what may, I shall
see thee again, ere, at thine own house. Till then, fare-
well!”

—_———_4—_____.

CHAPTER IV.

“Between two worlds life hovers like a star,
Twixt night and morn. ”
Byron.

WueEn Glyndon left Viola, as recorded in the concluding
chapter of the second division of this work, he was absorbed
again in those mystical desires and conjectures which the
haunting recollection of Zanoni always served to create.
And as he wandered through the streets, he was scarcely
conscious of his own movements till, in the mechanism of

ZANONI. 145

etistom, he found himself in the midst of one of the noble
collections of pictures which form the boast of those Italian
cities whose glory is in the past. Thither he had been
wont, almost daily, to repair, for the gallery contained
some of the finest specimens of a master especially the ob-
ject of his enthusiasm and study.

There, before the works of Salvator, he had often paused
in deep and earnest reverence. The striking characteristic
of that artist is the Vigour of Will; void of the elevated
idea of abstract beauty, which furnishes a model and arche-
type to the genius of more illustrious order, the singular
energy of the man hews out of the rock a dignity of his
own. His images have the majesty, not of the god, but
the savage; utterly free, like the sublimer schools, from the
commonplace of imitation,—apart, with them, from the
conventional littleness of the Real,—he grasps the imagina-
tion and compels it to follow him, not to the heaven, but
through all that is most wild and fantastic upon earth; a
sorcery, not of the starry magian, but of the gloomy wiz-
ard—a man of romance, whose heart beat strongly, griping
art with a hand of iron, and forcing it to idealise the scenes
of his actual life. Before this powerful Will, Glyndon drew
back more awed and admiring than before the calmer beauty
which rose from the soul of Raffaele, like Venus from the
deep. And now, as awaking from his reverie, he stood op-
posite to that wild and magnificent gloom of nature which
frowned on him from the canvas, the very leaves on those
gnomelike, distorted trees, seemed to rustle sibylline se-
crets in his ear. Those rugged and sombre Apennines, the
cataract that dashed between, suited, more than the actual
scenes would have done, the mood and temper of his mind.
The stern uncouth forms at rest on the crags below, and
dwarfed by the giant size of the Matter that reigned around
them, impressed him with the might of Nature and the
littleness of Man. As in genius of the more spiritual cast,
the living man, and the soul that lives in him, are studiously
made the prominent image; and the mere accessories of

146 ZANONI.

scene kept down, and cast back, as if to show that the exile
from Paradise is yet the monarch of the outward world, —
so, in the landscapes of Salvator, the tree, the mountain,
the waterfall, become the principal, and man himself
dwindles to the accessory: The matter seems to reign
supreme, and its true lord to creep beneath its stupendous
shadow. Inert matter giving interest to the immortal man,
not the immortal man to the inert matter. A terrible phi-
losophy in art!

While something of these thoughts passed through the
mind of the painter, he felt his arm touched, and saw
Nicot by his side.

“A great master,” said Nicot, “but I do not love the
school.”

“T do not love, but I am awed by it. We love the
beautiful and the serene, but we have a feeling as deep as
love for the terrible and dark.”

“True,” said Nicot, thoughtfully. ‘“ And yet that feeling
is only a superstition. The nursery, with its tales of
ghosts and goblins, is the cradle of many of our impressions
in the world. But art should not seek to pander to our ig-
norance; art should represent only truths. I confess that
Raffaele pleases me less, because I have no sympathy with
his subjects. His saints and virgins are to me only men
and women.”

“And from what source should painting then take its
themes?”
“From history, without doubt,” returned Nicot, prag-
matically, —“ those great Roman actions which inspire men
with sentiments of liberty and valour, with the virtues of a
republic. I wish the cartoons of Raffaele had illustrated
the story of the Horatii; but it remains for France and her
Republic to give to posterity the new and the true school,
which could never have arisen in a country of priestcraft

and delusion.”

“And the saints and virgins of Raffaele are to you only
men and women?” repeated Glyndon, going back to Nicot’s

ZANONTI. 147

candid confession in amaze, and scarcely hearing the deduc-
tions the Frenchman drew from his proposition.

“Assuredly. Ha, ha!” and Nicot laughed hideously,
“do you ask me to believe in the calendar, or what?”

“But the ideal!”

“The ideal!” interrupted Nicot. “Stuff! The Italian
critics and your English Reynolds have turned your head.
They are so fond of their ‘gusto grande,’ and their ‘ideal
beauty that speaks to the soul! ’—soul!—is there a soul?
I understand a man when he talks of composing for a re-
fined taste—for an educated and intelligent reason—for a
sense that comprehends truths. Butas for the soul—bah!—
we are but modifications of matter, and painting is modifi-
cation of matter also.”

Glyndon turned his eyes from the picture before him to
Nicot, and from Nicot to the picture. The dogmatist gave
a voice to the thoughts which the sight of the picture had
awakened. He shook his head without reply.

“Tell me,” said Nicot abruptly, “that impostor—Za-
noni?—oh! I have now learned his name and quackeries,
forsooth—what did he say to thee of me?”

“Of thee? Nothing; but to warn me against thy doc-
trines,”

“Aha! was that all?” said Nicot. “He is a notable
inventor, and since, when we met last, I unmasked his
delusions, I thought he might retaliate by some tale of
slander.”

“ Unmask his delusions! —how?”

“A dull and long story: he wished to teach an old dot-
ing friend of mine his secrets of prolonged life and philo-
sophical alchemy. I advise thee to renounce so discreditable
an acquaintance.” With that Nicot nodded significant-
ly, and, not wishing to be further questioned, went his
way.

Glyndon’s mind at that moment had escaped to his heart,
and the comments and presence of Nicot had been no wel-
come interruption. He turned from the landscape of Sal-

148 ZANONI:

vator, and his eyé falling on a Nativity by Correggio, the
contrast between the two ranks of genius struck him as a
discovery. That exquisite repose—that perfect sense of
beauty—that strength without effort—that breathing moral
of high art, which speaks to the mind through the eye, and
raises the thoughts, by the aid of tenderness and love, to
the regions of awe and wonder,—ay, that was the true
school. He quitted the gallery with reluctant steps and
inspired ideas; he sought his own home. Here, pleased
not to find the sober Mervale, he leant his face on his
hands, and endeavoured to recall the words of Zanoni in
their last meeting. Yes, he felt Nicot’s talk even on art
was crime; it debased the imagination itself to mechanism.
Could he, who saw nothing in the soul but a combination
of matter, prate of schools that should excel a Raffaele?
Yes, art was magic; and as he owned the truth of the
aphorism, he could comprehend that in magic there may be
religion, for religion is an essential to art. His old ambi-
tion, freeing itself from the frigid prudence with which
Mervale sought to desecrate all images less substantial than
the golden calf of the world, revived, and stirred, and
kindled. The subtle detection of what he conceived to be
an error in the school he had hitherto adopted, made more
manifest to him by the grinning commentary of Nicot,
seemed to open to him a new world of invention. He
seized the happy moment—he placed before him the colours
and the canvas. Lost in his conceptions of a fresh ideal,
his mind was lifted aloft into the airy realms of beauty;
dark thoughts, unhallowed desires, vanished. Zanoni was
right: the material world shrank from his gaze; he viewed
nature as from a mountain-top afar; and as the waves of
his unquiet heart became calm and still, again the angel
eyes of Viola beamed on them as a holy star.

Locking himself in his chamber, he refused even the
visits of Mervale. Intoxicated with the pure air of his
fresh existence, he remained for three days, and almost
nights, absorbed in his employment; but on the fourth morn-

ZANONI. 149

ing came that reaction to which all labour is exposed. He
woke listless and fatigued; and as he cast his eyes on the
canvas the glory seemed to have gone from it. Humiliat-
ing recollections of the great masters he aspired to rival]
forced themselves upon him; defects before unseen magni-
fied themselves to deformities in his languid and discon-
tented eye. He touched and retouched, but his hand failed
him; he threw down his instruments in despair; he opened
his casement; the day without was bright and lovely; the
street was crowded with that life which is ever so joyous
and affluent in the animated population of Naples. He saw
the lover, as he passed, conversing with his mistress by
those mute gestures which have survived all changes of
languages, the same now as when the Etruscan painted yon
vases in the Museo Borbonico. Wight from without beck-
oned his youth to its mirth and its pleasures; and the dull
walls within, lately large enough to comprise heaven and
earth, seemed now cabined and confined as a felon’s prison.
He welcomed the step of Mervale at his threshold, and un-
barred the door.

“ And is that all you have done?” said Mervale, glanc-
ing disdainfully at the canvas. “Is it for this that you
have shut yourself out from the sunny days and moonlit
nights of Naples!”

“ While the fit was on me, I basked in a brighter sun,
and imbibed the voluptuous luxury of a softer moon.”

“You own that the fit is over. Well, that is some sign
of returning sense. After all, it is better to daub canvas
for three days than make a fool of yourself for life. This
little siren?”

“Be dumb! I hate to hear you name her.”

Mervale drew his chair nearer to Glyndon’s, thrust his —
hands deep in his breeches’ pockets, stretched his legs, and
was about to begin a serious strain of expostulation, when
a knock was heard at the door, and Nicot, without waiting
for leave, obtruded his ugly head.

“Good-day, mon cher confrére, I wished to speak to

150 ZANONI.

you. Hein! you have been at work, Isee. This is well—
very well! A bold outline—great freedom in that right
hand. But, hold! is the composition good? You have
the great pyramidal form. Don’t you think, too, that you
have lost the advantage of contrast in this figure; since the
right leg is put forward, surely the right arm should be put
back? Peste/ but that little finger is very fine!”

Mervale detested Nicot. For all speculators, Utopians,
alterers of the world, and wanderers from the high road,
were equally hateful to him; but he could have hugged the
Frenchman at that moment. He saw in Glyndon’s expres-
sive countenance all the weariness and disgust he endured.
After so wrapt a study, to be prated to about pyramidal
forms, and right arms, and right legs—the accidence of the
art—the whole conception to be overlooked, and the criti-
cism to end in approval of the little finger!

“Oh,” said Glyndon, peevishly throwing the cloth over
his design, “enough of my poor performance. What is it
you have to say to me?”

“Tn the first place,” said Nicot, huddling himself together
upon a stool—“ in the first place, this Signor Zanoni—this
second Cagliostro—who disputes my doctrines! (no doubt—
a spy of the man Capet) I am not vindictive; as Helvetius
says, ‘Our errors arise from our passions.’ I keep mine in
order; but it is virtuous to hate in the cause of mankind;
I would I had the denouncing and the judging of Signor
Zanoni at Paris.” And Nicot’s small eyes shot fire, and he
gnashed his teeth.

“Have you any new cause to hate him?”

“Yes,” said Nicot, fiercely. ‘Yes, I hear he is courting
the girl I mean to marry.”

“You! Whom do you speak of?”

“The celebrated Pisani! She is divinely handsome.
She would make my fortune ina republic. Anda republic
we shall have before the year is out!”

Mervale rubbed his hands, and chuckled. Glyndon col-
oured with rage and shame,

ZANONI. 151

“Do you know the Signora Pisani? Have you ever
spoken to her?

“Not yet. But when I make up my mind to do any-
thing, it is soon done. I am about to return to Paris.
They write me word that a handsome wife advances the
career of a patriot. The age of prejudice is over. The
sublimer virtues begin to be understood. I shall take back
the handsomest wife in Europe.”

“Be quiet! What are you about?” said Mervale, seizing
Glyndon, as he saw him advance towards the Frenchman,
his eyes sparkling, and his hands clenched.

“Sir!” said Glyndon, between his teeth, “you know not
of whom you thus speak. Do you affect to suppose that
Viola Pisani would accept you?”

“ Not if she could get a better offer,” said Mervale, look-
ing up to the ceiling.

“A better offer? You don’t understand me,” said Nicot,
“T, Jean Nicot, propose to marry the girl; marry her!
Others may make her more liberal offers, but no one, I ap-
prehend, would make one so honourable. I alone have pity
on her friendless situation. Besides, according to the dawn-
ing state of things, one will always, in France, be able to
get rid of a wife whenever one wishes. We shall have new
laws of divorce. Do you imagine that an Italian girl—and
in no country in the world are maidens, it seems, more chaste
(though wives may console themselves with virtues more
philosophical) —would refuse the hand of an artist for the
settlements of a prince? No; I think better of the Pisani
than you do. I shall hasten to introduce myself to
her.”

“T wish you all success, Monsieur Nicot,” said Mervale,
rising, and shaking him heartily by the hand.

Glyndon cast at them both a disdainful glance.

“Perhaps, Monsieur Nicot,” said he, at length constrain-
ing his lips into a bitter smile, “perhaps you may have
rivals.”

“So much the better,” replied Monsieur Nicot, careless-

152 ZANONI.

ly, kicking his heels together, and appearing absorbed in
admiration at the size of his large feet.

“T myself admire Viola Pisani.”

“Every painter must!”

“T may offer her marriage as well as yourself.”

“That would be folly in you, though wisdom in me.
You would not know how to draw profit from the specula-
tion! Cher confrére, you have prejudices.”

“You do not dare to say you would make profit from
your own wife?”

“The virtuous Cato lent his wife to a friend. I love vir-
tue, and I cannot do better than imitate Cato. But to be
serious—I do not fear you as arival. You are good-look-
ing,andIlamugly. But youare irresolute, and I decisive.
While you are uttering fine phrases, I shall say simply, ‘I
have a don état. “Will you marry me?’ So do your worst,
cher confrére. Au revoir, behind the scenes!”

So saying, Nicot rose, stretched his long arms and short
legs, yawned till he showed all his ragged teeth from ear to
ear, pressed down his cap on his shaggy head with an air
of defiance, and casting over his left shoulder a glance of
triumph and malice at the indignant Glyndon, sauntered
out of the room.

Mervale burst into a violent fit of laughter. “See how
your Viola is estimated by your friend! A fine victory to
carry her off from the ugliest dog between Lapland and the
Calmucks.”

Glyndon was yet too indignant to answer, when a new
visitor arrived. It was Zanoni himself. Mervale, on
whom the appearance and aspect of this personage imposed
a kind of reluctant deference, which he was unwilling to
acknowledge, and still more to betray, nodded to Glyndon,
and saying, simply, “More when I see you again,” left the
painter and his unexpected visitor.

“I see,” said Zanoni, lifting the cloth from the canvas,
“that you have not slighted the advice I gave you. Cour-
age, young artist, this is an escape from the schools; this

ZANONI. 153

is full of the bold self-confidence of real genius. You had
no Nicot—no Mervale at your elbow, when this image of
true beauty was conceived!”

Charmed back to his art by this unlooked-for praise,
Glyndon replied modestly, “I thought well of my design
till this morning; and then I was disenchanted of my
happy persuasion.”

“Say, rather, that, unaccustomed to continuous labour,
you were fatigued with your employment.”

“That is true. Shall I confess it? I began to miss the
world without. It seemed to me as if, while I lavished my
heart and my youth upon visions of beauty, I was losing
the beautiful realities of actual life. And I envied the
merry fisherman, singing as he passed below my casement,
and the lover conversing with his mistress.”

“ And,” said Zanoni, with an encouraging smile, “do you
blame yourself for the natural and necessary return to
earth, in which even the most habitual visitor of the Heay-
ens of Invention seeks his relaxation and repose? Man’s
genius is a bird that cannot be always on the wing; when
the craving for the actual world is felt, it is a hunger that
must be appeased. They who command best the ideal, en-
joy ever most the real. See the true artist, when abroad in
men’s thoroughfares, ever observant, ever diving into the
heart, ever alive to the least as to the greatest of the com-
plicated truths of existence; descending to what pedants
would call the trivial and the frivolous. From every mesh
in the social web, he can disentangle a grace. And for
him each airy gossamer floats in the gold of the sunlight.
Know you not that around the animalcule that sports in
the water there shines a halo, as around the star’ that re-
volves in bright pastime through the space? True art finds
beauty everywhere. In the street, in the market-place, in
the hovel, it gathers food for the hive of its thoughts. In

1The monas mica, found in the purest pools, is encompassed with
ahalo. And this is frequent amongst many other species of animal-
cule, ;

154 ZANONI.

the mire of politics, Dante and Milton selected pearls for
the wreath of song. Who ever told you that Raffaele did
not enjoy the life without, carrying everywhere with him
the one inward idea of beauty which attracted and embed-
ded in its own amber every straw that the feet of the dull
man trampled into mud? As some lord of the forest wan-
ders abroad for its prey, and scents and follows it over
plain and hill, through brake and jungle, but, seizing it at
last, bears the quarry to its unwitnessed cave—so Genius
searches through wood and waste, untiringly and eagerly,
every sense awake, every nerve strained to speed and
strength, for the scattered and flying images of matter, that
it seizes at last with its mighty talons, and bears away with
it into solitudes no footstep can invade. Go, seek the
world without; it is, for art, the inexhaustible pasture
ground and harvest to the world within!”

“You comfort me,” said Glyndon, brightening. “I had
imagined my weariness a proof of my deficiency! But not
now would I speak to you of these labours. Pardon me if
I pass from the toil to the reward. You have uttered dim
prophecies of my future, if I wed one who, in the judgment
of the sober world, would only darken its prospects and
obstruct its ambition. Do you speak from the wisdom
which is experience, or that which aspires to predic-
tion?”

“Are they not allied? Is not he best accustomed to eal-
culation who can solve at a glance any new problem in the
arithmetic of chances?”

“You evade my question.”

“No; but I will adapt my answer the better to your
comprehension, for it is upon this very point that I have
sought you. Listen to me!” Zanoni fixed his eyes earnestly
on his listener, and continued. “For the accomplishment
of whatever is great and lofty, the clear perception of
truths is the first requisite—truths adapted to the object
desired. The warrior thus reduces the chances of battle to
combinations almost of mathematics. He can predict a re-

ZANONI. 155

sult, if he can but depend upon the matevials he is forced
to employ. At such a loss, he can cross that bridge; in
such a time, he can reduce that fort. Still more accurately,
for he depends less on material causes than ideas at his
command, can the commander of the purer science or di-
viner art, if he once perceive the truths that are in him and
around, foretell what he can achieve, and in what he is
condemned to fail. But this perception of truths is dis-
turbed by many causes—vyanity, passion, fear, indolence in
himself, ignorance of the fitting means without to accom-
plish what he designs. He may miscalculate his own
forces; he may have no chart of the country he would in-
vade. It is only in a peculiar state of the mind that it is
capable of perceiving truth; and that state is profound se-
renity. Your mind is fevered by a desire for truth: you
would compel it to your embraces; you would ask me to
impart to you, without ordeal or preparation, the grandest
secrets that exist in nature. But truth can no more be seen
by the mind unprepared for it, than the sun can dawn
upon the midst of night. Such a mind receives truth only
to pollute it; to use the simile of one who has wandered
near to the secret of the sublime Goetia (or the magic that
lies within nature, as electricity within the cloud), ‘Ho
who pours water into the muddy well, does but disturb the
amid, 772:

“What do you tend to?”

“This: that you have faculties that may attain to sur-
passing power: that may rank you among those enchanters
who, greater than the magian, leave behind them an endur-
ing influence, worshipped wherever beauty is compre-
hended, wherever the soul is sensible of a higher world
than that in which matter struggles for crude and incom:
plete existence.

“But to make available those faculties, need I be a
prophet to tell you that you must learn to concentre upon
great objects all your desires? The heart must rest, that

1Tamb, de Vit. Pythag.

"156 ZANONI.

the mind may be active. At present, you wander from aim
to aim. As the ballast to the ship, so to the spirit are
Faith and Love. With your whole heart, affections, hu-
manity, centred in one object, your mind and aspirations
will become equally steadfast and in earnest. Viola isa
child as yet: you do not perceive the high nature the trials
of life will develop. Pardon me, if I say that her soul,
purer and loftier than your own, will bear it upward, asa
sacred hymn carries aloft the spirits of the world. Your
nature wants the harmony, the music which, as the Pyth-
agoreans wisely taught, at once elevates and soothes. I
offer you that music in her love.”

“But am I sure that she does love me?”

“ Artist, no; she loves you not at present; her affections
are full of another. But if I could transfer to you, as the
loadstone transfers its attraction to the magnet, the love
that she has now for me—if I could cause her to see in you
the ideal of her dreams——”

“Ts such a gift in the power of man?”

“T offer it to you, if your love be lawful, if your faith in
virtue and yourself be deep and loyal; if not, think you
that I would disenchant her with truth to make her adore
a falsehood?”

“But if,” persisted Glyndon, “if she be-all that you tell
me, and if she love you, how can you rob yourself of so
priceless a treasure?”

“Oh, shallow and mean heart of man!” exclaimed Zanoni,
with unaccustomed passion and vehemence, “ dost thou con-
ceive so little of love as not to know that it sacrifices all—
love itself—for the happiness of the thing it loves? Hear
me!” And Zanoni’s face grew pale. “Hear me! I press
this upon you, because I love her, and because I fear that
with me her fate will be less fair than with yourself. Why—
ask not, for I will not tell you. Enough! ‘Time presses
now for your answer; it cannot long be delayed. Before
the night of the third day from this, all choice will be for-
bidden you!” :

ZANONI: 157

“But,” said Glyndon, still doubting and stispicious, “ but
why this haste?”

“Man, you are not worthy of her when youask me. All
I can tell you here you should have known yourself. This
ravisher, this man of will, this son of the old Viconti, unlike
you, —steadfast, resolute, earnest even in his crimes, —never
relinquishes an object. But one passion controls his lust—
it is his avarice. The day after his attempt on Viola, his
uncle, the Cardinal , from whom he has large expecta-
tions of land and gold, sent for him, and forbade him, on
pain of forfeiting all the possessions which his schemes
already had parcelled out, to pursue with dishonourable
designs one whom the Cardinal had heeded and loved from
childhood. This is the cause of his present pause from his
pursuit. While we speak, the cause expires. Before the
hand of the clock reaches the hour of noon, the Cardinal ——
will be no more. At this very moment thy friend, Jean
Nicot, is with the Prince di ——.”

“He! wherefore?”

“To ask what dower shall go with Viola Pisani, the morn-
ing that she leaves the palace of the Prince.”

“ And how do you know all this?”

“Fool! I tell thee again, because a lover is a watcher by
night and day; because love never sleeps when danger men-
aces the beloved one!”

“ And you it was that informed the Cardinal ——?”

“Yes; and what has been my task might as easily have
been thine. Speak—thine answer!”

“You shall have it on the third day from this.”

“Be it so. Put off, poor waverer, thy happiness to the
last hour. On the third day from this, I will ask thee thy
resolve.”

“ And where shall we meet?”

“Before midnight, where you may least expect me. You
cannot shun me, though you may seek to do so!”

“Stay one moment! You condemn me as doubtful, irres-
olute, suspicious. Have Ino cause? CanI yield without

158 ZANONI.

a struggle to the strange fascination you exert upon my
mind? What interest can you have in me, a stranger, that
you should thus dictate to me the gravest action in the life
of man? Do you suppose that any one in his senses would
not pause, and deliberate, and ask himself, ‘Why should
this stranger care thus for me?’”

“ And yet,” said Zanoni, “if I told thee that I could ini-
tiate thee into the secrets of that magic which the philoso-
phy of the whole existing world treats as a chimera or
imposture,—if I promised to show thee how to command
the beings of air and ocean, how to accumulate wealth more
easily than a child can gather pebbles on the shore, to place
in thy hands the essence of the herbs which prolong life
from age to age, the mystery of that attraction by which to
awe all danger, and disarm all violence, and subdue man as
the serpent charms the bird; if I told thee that all these
it was mine to possess and to communicate, thou wouldst
listen to me then, and obey me without a doubt!”

“Tt is true; and I can account for this only by the im-
perfect associations of my childhood—by traditions in our
house of ——”

Your forefathers, who, in the revival of science, sought
the secrets of Apollonius and Paracelsus.”

“What!” said Glyndon, amazed, “are you so well ac-
quainted with the annals of an obscure lineage?”

“To the man who aspires to know, no man who has been

- the meanest student of knowledge should be unknown. You

ask me why I have shown this interest in your fate? There
is one reason which I have not yet told you. There is a
Fraternity)as to whose laws and whose mysteries the most
inquisitive schoolmen are in the dark. By those laws, all
are pledged to warn, to aid, and to guide even the remotest
descendants of men who have toiled, though vainly, like
your ancestor, in the mysteries of the Order. Weare bound
to advise them to their welfare; nay, more,—if they com-
mand us to it, we must accept them as our pupils. lama
survivor of that most ancient and immemorial union. This

Z

ZANONI. 159

it was that bound me to thee at the first; this, perhaps,
attracted thyself unconsciously, Son of our Brotherhood, to
me.” aps

“Tf this be so, I command thee, in the name of the laws
thou obeyest, to receive me as thy pupil!”

“What do youask?” said Zanoni, passionately. “Learn
first the conditions. No Neophyte must have, at his initi-
ation, one affection or desire that chains him to the world.
He must be pure from the love of woman, free from avarice

and ambition, free from the dreams even of art, or the hope~

of earthly fame. The first sacrifice thou must make is—\_—

Viola herself. And for what? For an ordeal that the most:

daring courage only can encounter, the most ethereal
natures alone survive! Thou art unfit for the science that
has made me and others what we are or have been; for thy
whole nature is one fear!”

“Fear!” cried Glyndon, colouring with resentment, and
rising to the full height of his stature.

“Fear! and the worst fear—fear of the world’s opinion;
fear of the Nicots and the Mervales; fear of thine own im-
pulses when most generous; fear of thine own powers when
thy genius is most bold; fear that virtue is not eternal; fear
that God does not live in Heaven to keep watch on earth;
fear, the fear of little men; and that fear is never known
to the great.”

With these words Zanoni abruptly left the artist—hum-
bled, bewildered, and not convinced. He remained alone
with his thoughts, till he was aroused by the striking of
the clock; he then suddenly remembered Zanoni’s prediction
of the Cardinal’s death; and seized with an intense desire
“to learn its truth, he hurried into the streets,—he gained
the Cardinal’s palace. Five minutes before noon his Emi-
nence had expired, after an illness of less than an hour.

Zanoni’s visit had occupied more time than the illness of
the Cardinal. Awed and perplexed, he turned from the
palace, and as he walked through the Chiaja, he saw Jean
Nicot emerge from the portals of the Prince di ——.

160 ZANONL

CHAPTER V.

“Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still. ”
SHAKSPEARE.

VENERABLE Brotherhood, so sacred and so little known,
from whose secret and precious archives the materials for
this history have been drawn; ye who have retained from
century to century all that time has spared of the august
and venerable science, —thanks to you, if now for the first
time some record of the thoughts and actions of no false
and self-styled luminary of your Order be given, however
imperfectly to the world. Many have called themselves of
your band; many spurious pretenders have been so called
by the learned ignorance which still, baffled and perplexed,
is driven to confess that it knows nothing of your origin,
your ceremonies or doctrines, nor even if you still have local
habitation on the earth. Thanks to you if I, the only one
of my country, in this age, admitted, with a profane foot-
step, into your mysterious Academe,* have been by you
empowered and instructed to adapt to the comprehension of
the uninitiated some few of the starry truths which shone
on the great Shemaja of the Chaldean Lore, and gleamed
dimly through the darkened knowledge of later disciples,
labouring, like Psellus and Iamblichus, to revive the embers
of the fire which burned in the Hamarin of the East. Though
not to us of an aged and hoary world is vouchsafed the
NAME which, so say the earliest oracles of the earth, “rushes
into the infinite worlds,” yet is it ours to trace the reviving
truths, through each new discovery of the philosopher and
chemist. The laws of Attraction, of Electricity, and of the.
yet more mysterious agency of that Great Principle of Life,
which, if drawn from the Universe, would leave the Uni-

‘The reader will have the goodness to remember that this is said
by the author of the original MS., not by the editor.

ZANONI. 161

verse a Grave, were but the code in which the Theurgy of
old sought the guides that led it to a legislation and science
of its own. To rebuild on words the fragments of this
history, it seems to me as if, in a solemn trance, I was led
through the ruins of a city whose only remains were tombs.
From the sarcophagus and the urn I awake the Genius’ of
the extinguished Torch, and so closely does its shape resem-
ble Eros, that at moments I scarcely know which of ye dic-
tates to me—O Love! O Death!

And it stirred in the Virgin’s heart—this new unfathom-
_ able, and divine emotion. Was it only the ordinary affection
of the pulse and the fancy, of the eye of the Beautiful, of
the ear to the Eloquent, or did it not justify the notion she
herself conceived of it, that it was born not of the senses,
that it was less earthly and human love than the effect of
some wondrous but not unholy charm! I said that, from
that day in which, no longer with awe and trembling, she
surrendered herself to the influence of Zanoni, she had
sought to put her thoughts into words. Let the thoughts
attest their own nature.

THE SELF-CONFESSIONAL.

“Ts it the Daylight that shines on me, or the memory of
thy presence? Wherever I look, the world seems full of
thee; in every ray that trembles on the water, that smiles
upon the leaves, I behold but a likeness to thine eyes. What
is this change, that alters not only myself, but the face
of the whole universe?

* * * * *
How instantaneously leapt into life the power with which
thou swayest my heart in its ebb and flow. Thousands
were around me and I saw but thee. That was the Night
in which I first entered upon the world which crowds life
into a Drama, and has no language but music. How

, 1The Greek Genius of Death.
AL

162 ZANONI.

strangely and how suddenly with thee became that world
evermore connected! What the delusion of the stage was
to others, thy presence was to me. My life, too, seemed
to centre into those short hours, and from thy lips I heard
a music mute to all ears but mine. I sit in the room where
my father dwelt. Here, on that happy night, forgetting
why they were so happy, I shrank into the shadow, and
sought to guess what thou wert to me; and my mother’s
low voice woke me, and I crept to my father’s side, close—
close, from fear of my own thoughts.

“ Ah! sweet and sad was the morrow of that night, when
thy lips warned me of the Future. An orphan now—
what is there that lives for me to think of, to dream upon, to
revere, but thou!

“ How tenderly thou hast rebuked me for the grievous
wrong that my thoughts did thee! Why should I have
shuddered to feel thee glancing upon my thoughts like the
beam on the solitary tree, to which thou didst once liken
me so well? It was—it was, that, lke that tree, I strug-
gled for the light, and the light came. ‘They tell me of
love, and my very life of the stage breathes the language
of love into my lps. No; again and again, I know ¢hat is
not the love that I feel for thee!—it is not a passion, it is
a thought! I ask not to be loved again. JI murmur not that
thy words are stern and thy looks are cold. I ask not if I
have rivals; I sigh not to be fair in thine eyes. It is my
spirit that would blend itself with thine. I would give
worlds, though we were apart, though oceans rolled between
us, to know the hour in which thy gaze was lifted to the
stars—in which thy heart poured itself in prayer. They
tell me thou art more beautiful than the marble images that
are fairer than all human forms; but I have never dared to
gaze steadfastly on thy face, that memory might compare
thee with the rest. Only thine eyes and thy soft, calm
smile haunt me; as when I look upon the moon, all that

passes into my heart is her silent light.
* * * * *

ZANONI. 163

“Often, when the air is calm, I have thought that I hear
the strains of my father’s music; often, though long stilled
in the grave, have they waked me from the dreams of the
solemn night. Methinks, ere thou comest to me, that I
hear them herald thy approach. Methinks I hear them
wail and moan, when I sink back into myself on seeing thee
depart. Thou art of that music—its spirit, its genius. My
father must have guessed at thee and thy native regions
when the winds hushed to listen to his tones, and the world
deemed him mad! I hear, where I sit, the far murmur of
the sea. Murmur on, ye blessed waters! The waves are
the pulses of the shore. They beat with the gladness of the
morning wind—-so beats my heart in the freshness and light

that make up the thoughts of thee!
* * * * *

“Often in my childhood I have mused and asked for
what I was born; and my soul answered my heart, and
said—‘ Thou wert born to worship!’ Yes; I know why the
real world has ever seemed to me so false andcold. I know
why the world of the stage charmed and dazzled me. I
know why it was so sweet to sit apart and gaze my whole
being into the distant heavens. My nature is not formed
for this life, happy though that life seems to others. It
is its very want to have ever before it some image loftier
than itself! Stranger, in what realm above, when the
grave is past, shall my soul, hour after hour, worship at the

same source as thine?

* Xk ** *

“Tn the gardens of my neighbour there is a small foun-
tain. I stood by it this morning after sunrise. How it
sprang up, with its eager spray, to the sunbeams! And
then I thought that I should see thee again this day, and
so sprang my heart to the new morning which thou bring-

est me from the skies.
*K * * SS

* * * *

164 ZANONI.

“TI have seen, I have listened to thee again. How bold
T have become! I ran on with my childlike thoughts and
stories, my recollections of the past, as if I had known thee
from an infant. Suddenly the idea of my presumption
struck me. I stopped, and timidly sought thine eyes.

“¢Well, and when you found that the nightingale refused
to sing ?? —

“‘Ah!? I said, ‘what to thee this history of the heart of
a child?’

“‘Viola,’ didst thou answer, with that voice, so inex-
pressibly calm and earnest!—‘Viola, the darkness of a
child’s heart is often but the shadow of a star. Speak on!
And thy nightingale, when they caught and caged it, refused
to sing !’—

“¢And I placed the cage yonder, amidst the vine-leaves,
and took up my lute and spoke to it on the strings; for I
thought that all music was its native language, and it would
understand that I sought to comfort it.’

“<Ves,’? saidst thou. ‘And at last it answered thee, but
not with song—in a sharp, brief cry; so mournful, that thy
hands let fall the lute, and the tears gushed from thine
eyes. So softly didst thou unbar the cage, and the nightin-
gale flew into yonder thicket; and thou heardst the foliage
rustle; and looking through the moonlight, thine eyes saw
that it had found its mate. It sang to thee then from the
boughs a long, loud, joyous jubilee. And musing, thou
didst feel that it was not the vine-leaves or the moonlight
that made the bird give melody to night; and that the
secret of its music was the presence of a thing beloved.’

“How didst thou know my thoughts in that childlike
time better than I knew myself! How is the humble life
of my past years, with its mean events, so mysteriously
familiar to thee, bright stranger! I wonder—but I do not
again dare to fear thee!

* ** aK rk

“Once the thought of him oppressed and weighed me

ZANONI. 165

down. As an infant that longs for the moon, my being
was one vague desire for something never to be attained.
Now I feel rather as if to think of thee sufficed to remove
every fetter from my spirit. I float in the still seas of
light, and nothing seems too high for my wings, too glori-
ous for my eyes. It was mine ignorance that made me
fear thee. A knowledge that is not in books seems to
breathe around thee as an atmosphere. How little have I
read!—how little have I learned! Yet when thou art by
my side, it seems as if the veil were lifted from all wisdom
and all nature. I startle when I look even at the words I
have written; they seem not to come from myself, but are
the signs of another language which thou hast taught my
heart, and which my hand traces rapidly, as at thy dictation.
Sometimes, while I write or muse, I could fancy that I heard
light wings hovering around me, and saw dim shapes of
beauty floating round, and vanishing as they smiled upon
me. No unquiet and fearful dream ever comes to me now
in sleep, yet sleep and waking are alike but as one dream.
In sleep, I wander with thee, not through the paths of
earth, but through impalpable air—an air which seems a
- music—upward and upward, as the soul mounts on the
tones of alyre! Till I knew thee, I was asa slave to the
earth. Thou hast given to me the liberty of the universe!
Before, it was life; it seems to me now as if I had com-
menced eternity!

“Formerly, when I was to appear upon the stage, my
heart beat more loudly. I trembled to encounter the audi-
ence, whose breath gave shame or renown; and now I have
no fear of them. I see them, heed them, hear them not!
I know that there will be music in my voice, for it is a
hymn that I pour to thee. Thou never comest to the thea-
tre; and that no longer grieves me. Thou art become too
sacred to appear a part of the common world, and I feel

166 ZANONI.

glad that thou art not by when crowds have a right to judge

me.
* * * *

* * * *

“And he spoke to me of ANoTHER: to another he would
consign me! No, it is not love that I feel for thee, Zano-
ni; or why did I hear thee without anger? why did thy
command seem to me not a thing impossible? As the
strings of the instrument obey the hand of the master, thy
look modulates the wildest chords of my heart to thy will.
If it please thee—yes—lIet it be so. Thou art Lord of my
destinies; they cannot rebel against thee! I almost think
I could love him, whoever it be, on whom thou wouldst
shed the rays that circumfuse thyself. Whatever thou
hast touched, I love; whatever thou speakest of, I love.
Thy hand played with these vine-leaves; I wear them in
my bosom. Thou seemest to me the source of all love; too
high and too bright to be loved thyself, but darting light
into other objects, on which the eye can gaze less dazzled.
No, no; it is not love that I feel for thee, and therefore it
is that Ido not blush to nourish and confess it. Shame
on me if I loved, knowing myself so worthless a thing to
thee!

“ ANOTHER!—my memory echoes back that word. An-
other! Dost thou mean that I shall see thee no more! It
is not sadness—it is not despair that seizes me. I cannot
weep. It is an utter sense of desolation. Iam plunged
back into the common life; and I shudder coldly at the
solitude. But I will obey thee, if thou wilt. Shall I not
see thee again beyond the grave? Oh how sweet it were to
die!

“Why do I not struggle from the web in which my will
is thus entangled? Hast thou a right to dispose of me
thus? Give me back—give me back—the life I knew
before I gave life itself away to thee. Give me back the
careless dreams of my youth—my liberty of heart that sang

ZANONI. 167

aloud as it walked the earth. Thou hast disenchanted me
of everything that is not of thyself. Where was the sin,
at least, to think of thee?—to see thee? Thy kiss still
glows upon my hand: is that hand mine to bestow? Thy
kiss claimed and hallowed it to thyself. Stranger, I will
not obey thee.

“Another day—one day of the fatal three is gone! It is
strange to me that, since the sleep of the last night, a deep
calm has settled upon my breast. I feel so assured that
my very being is become a part of thee, that I cannot be-
lieve that my life can be separated from thine; and in this
conviction I repose, and smile even at thy words and my
own fears. ‘Thou art fond of one maxim, which thou re-
peatest in a thousand forms—that the beauty of the soul is
faith—that as ideal loveliness to the sculptor, faith is to
the heart—that faith, rightly understood, extends over all
the works of the Creator, whom we can know but through
belief—that it embraces a tranquil confidence in ourselves,
and a serenc repose as to our future—that it is the moon-
light that sways the tides of the human sea. That faith I
comprehend now. I reject all doubt—all fear. I know
that I have inextricably linked the whole that makes the
inner life to thee; and thou canst not tear me from thee,
if thou wouldst! And this change from struggle into calm
came to me with sleep—a sleep without adream; but when
I woke, it was with a mysterious sense of happiness—an
indistinct memory of something blessed—as if thou hadst
cast from afar off a smile upon my slumber. At night I
was so sad; not a blossom that had not closed itself up as
if never more to open to the sun; and the night itself, in
the heart as on the earth, has ripened the blossoms into
flowers. The world is beautiful once more, but beautiful in
repose—not a breeze stirs thy tree—not a doubt my soul!”

168 ZANONI.

CHAPTER VI.

“Tu vegga o per violenzia o per inganno
Patire o disonore o mortal danno.”!
Oru. Fur., Cant. xiii. 1.

Ir was a small cabinet; the walls were covered with pic-
tures, one of which was worth more than the whole lineage
of the owner of the palace. Oh, yes! Zanoni was right.
The painter is amagician; the gold he at least wrings from
his crucible is no delusion. A Venetian noble might be a
fribble, or an assassin—a scoundrel, or a dolt; worthless,
or worse than worthless, yet he might have sat to Titian,
and his portrait may be inestimable!—A few inches of
painted canvas a thousand times more valuable than a man
with his veins and muscles, brain, will, heart, and intel-
lect!

In this cabinet sat a man of about three and forty; dark-
eyed, sallow, with short prominent features, a massive con-
formation of jaw, and thick, sensual, but resolute lips; this
man was the Prince di ——. His form, above the middle
height, and rather inclined to corpulence, was clad in a
loose dressing-robe of rich brocade. On a table before him
lay an old-fashioned sword and hat, a mask, dice and dice-
box, a portfolio, and an inkstand of silver curiously carved.

“Well, Mascari,” said the Prince, looking up towards his
parasite, who stood by the embrasure of the deep-set barri-
cadoed window—* well! the Cardinal sleeps with his fathers.
I require comfort for the loss of so excellent a relation: and
where a more dulcet voice than Viola Pisani’s?”

“Ts your Excellency serious? So soon after the death
of his Eminence?”

“Tt will be the less talked of, and I the less suspected.

Thou art about either through violence or artifice to suffer either
dishonour or mortal loss.

ZANONI. 169

Hast thou ascertained the name of the insolent who baffled
_us that night, and advised the Cardinal the next day?”

“Not yet.”

“Sapient Mascari! JI will inform thee. It was the
strange Unknown.”

“The Signor Zanoni! Are you sure, my Prince?”

“Mascari, yes. There is a tone in that man’s voice that
I never can mistake; so clear, and so commanding, when I
hear it I almost fancy there is such a thing as conscience.
However, we must rid ourselves of an impertinent. Mas-
cari, Signor Zanoni hath not yet honoured our poor house
with his presence. He is a distinguished stranger—we
must give a banquet in his honour.”

“Ah! and the Cyprus wine! The cypress is a proper
emblem of the grave.”

“But this anon. I am superstitious: there are strange
stories of Zanoni’s power and foresight; remember the
death of Ughelli. No matter! though the Fiend were his
ally, he should not rob me of my prize: no, nor my re-
venge.”

“Your Excellency is infatuated; the actress has bewitched
you.”

“Mascari,” said the Prince, with a haughty smile,
“through these veins rolls the blood of the old Visconti—
of those who boasted that no woman ever escaped their lust,
and no man their resentment. The crown of my fathers
has shrunk into a gewgaw and a toy; their ambition and
their spirit are undecayed. My honour is now enlisted in
this pursuit—Viola must be mine!”

“ Another ambuscade?” said Mascari, inquiringly.

“Nay, why not enter the house itself? The situation is
lonely, and the door is not made of iron.”

“But what if, on her return home, she tell the tale of
our violence? A house forced—a virgin stolen? Reflect;
though the feudal privileges are not destroyed, even a Vis-
conti is not now above the law.”

“Ts he not, Mascari? Fool! in what age of the world,

170 ZANONI.

even if the Madmen of France succeed in their chimeras,
will the iron of law not bend itself, like an osier twig, to
the strong hand of power and gold? But look not so pale,
Mascari, I have foreplanned all things. The day that she
leaves this palace, she will leave it for France, with Mon-
sieur Jean Nicot.”

Before Mascari could reply, the gentleman of the cham-
ber announced the Signor Zanoni.

The Prince involuntarily laid his hand upon the sword
placed on the table; then, with a smile at his own impulse,
rose and met his visitor at the threshold, with all the pro-
fuse and respectful courtesy of Italian simulation.

“This is an honour highly prized,” said the Prince. “I
have long desired to clasp the hand of one so distin-
guished——”

“ And I give it in the spirit with which you seek it,” re-
plied Zanoni.

The Neapolitan bowed over the hand he pressed; but as
he touched it, a shiver came over him, and his heart stood
still. Zanoni bent on him his dark, smiling eyes, and then
seated himself with a familiar air.

“Thus it is signed and sealed; I mean our friendship,
noble Prince. And now I will tell you the object of my
visit. I find, Excellency, that, unconsciously perhaps, we
are rivals. Can we not accommodate our pretensions?”

“Ah!” said the Prince, carelessly, “you then were the
cavalier who robbed me of the reward of my chase. All
stratagems fair in love as in war. Reconcile our preten-
sions! Well, here is the dice-box; let us throw for her.
He who casts the lowest shall resign his claim.”

“Ts this a decision by which you will promise to be
bound?”

“Yes, on my faith.”

“And for him who breaks his word so plighted, what
shall be the forfeit?”

“The sword lies next to the dice-box, Signor Zanoni.
Let him who stands not by his honour fall by the sword.”

ZANONI. nea

“And you invoke that sentence if either of us fail hig
word? Be it so; let Signor Mascari cast for us.”

“ Well said!—Mascari, the dice!”

The Prince threw himself back in his chair; and, world-
hardened as he was, he could not suppress the glow of
triumph and satisfaction that spread itself over his features.
Mascari took up the three dice, and rattled them noisily
in the box. Zanoni, leaning his cheek on his hand, and
bending over the table, fixed his eyes steadfastly on the
parasite; Mascari in vain struggled to extricate himself
from that searching gaze: he grew pale, and trembled—he
put down the box.

“T give the first throw to your Excellency. Signor
Mascari, be pleased to terminate our suspense.”

Again Mascari took up the box; again his hand shook,
so that the dice rattled within. He threw; the numbers
were sixteen.

“Tt is a high throw,” said Zanoni, calmly; “neverthe-
less, Signor Mascari, I do not despond.”

Mascari gathered up the dice, shook the box, and rolled
the contents once more on the table; the number was the
highest that can be thrown—eighteen.

The Prince darted a glance of fire at his minion, who
stood with gaping mouth, staring at the dice and trembling
from head to foot.

“JT have won, you see,” said Zanoni; “ may we be friends
still?”

“Signor,” said the Prince, obviously struggling with
anger and confusion, “the victory is yours. But pardon
me, you have spoken lightly of this young girl—will any-
thing tempt you to yield your claim?”

“ Ah, do not think so ill of my gallantry; and,” resumed
Zanoni, with a stern meaning in his voice, “forget not the
forfeit your own lips have named.”

The Prince knit his brow, but constrained the haughty
answer that was his first impulse.

“Enough!” he said, forcing a smile; “I yield. Let me

172 ZANONI.

prove that I do not yield ungraciously : will you favor me
with your presence at a little feast I propose to give in
honour,”—he added, with a sardonic mockery,—“of the
elevation of my kinsman, the late Cardinal, of pious memory,
to the true seat of St. Peter?”

“Tt is, indeed, a happiness to hear one command of yours
I can obey.”

Zanoni then turned the conversation, talked lightly and
gaily, and soon afterwards departed. .

“Villain!” then exclaimed the Prince, grasping Mascari
by the collar, “you betrayed me!”

“T assure your Excellency that the dice were properly

arranged; he should have thrown twelve; but he is the
Devil, and that’s the end of it.”
. “There is no time to be lost,” said the Prince, quitting
his hold of his parasite, who quietly resettled his cravat.
“My blood is up—I will win this girl, if I die for it!
What noise is that?”

“Tt is but the sword of your illustrious ancestor that has
fallen from the table.”

CHAPTER VII.

“jl ne faut appeller aucun ordre si ce n’est en tems clair et serein. ”!
Les CLAVICULES DU RaBppr SALOMON.

LETTER FROM ZANONI TO MEJNOUR.

My art is already dim and troubled. I have lost the
tranquillity which is power. I cannot influence the de-
cisions of those whom I would most guide to the shore; I
see them wander farther and deeper into the infinite ocean,
where our barks sail evermore to the horizon that lies be-
fore us! Amazed and awed to find that I can only warn

‘No order of spirits must be invoked unless the weather be clear
and serene,

ZANONI. 173

where I would control, I have lookedinto my own soul. It
is true that the desires of earth chain me to the Present,
and shut me from the solemn secrets which Intellect, purified
from all the dross of the clay, alone can examine and sur-
vey. The stern condition on which we hold our nobler and
diviner gifts darkens our vision towards the future of those
for whom we know the human infirmities of jealousy, or
hate, or love. Mejnour, all-around me is mist and haze;
Ihave gone back in our sublime existence; and from the
bosom of the imperishable youth that blooms only in the
spirit, springs up the dark poison-flower of human love.
This man is not worthy of her—I know that truth; yet
in his nature are the seeds of good and greatness, if the
tares and weeds of worldly vanities and fears would suffer
them to grow. If she were his, and I had thus transplanted
to another soil the passion that obscures my gaze and dis-
arms my power, unseen, unheard, unrecognized, I could
watch over his fate, and secretly prompt his deeds, and
minister to her welfare through his own. But time rushes
on! Through the shadows that encircle me, I see, gather-
ing round her, the darkest dangers. No choice but flight
—no escape, save with himor me. With me!—the raptur-
ous thought—the terrible conviction! Withme! Mejnour,
canst thou wonder that I would save her from myself? A
moment in the life of ages—-a bubble on the shoreless sea.
What else to me can be human love? And in this exquisite
nature of hers—more pure, more spiritual, even in its young
affections, than ever, heretofore, the countless volumes of
the heart, race after race, have given to my gaze—there is
yet a deep-buried feeling that warns me of inevitable woe.
Thou, austere and remorseless Hierophant—thou who hast
sought to convert to our brotherhood every spirit that
seemed to thee most high and bold—even thou knowest, by
horrible experience, how vain the hope to banish fear from
the heart of woman. My life would be to her one marvel.
Even if, on the other hand, I sought to guide her path
through the realms of terror to the light, think of the

174 ZANONI.

Haunter of the Threshold, and shudder with me at the
awful hazard! I have endeavoured to fill the Englishman’s
ambition with the true glory of his art; but the restless
spirit of his ancestor still seems to whisper in him, and to
attract to the spheres in which it lost its own wandering
way. There is a mystery in man’s inheritance from his
fathers. Peculiarities of the mind, as diseases of the body,
rest dormant for generations, to revive in some distant de-
scendant, baffle all treatment and elude all skill. Come to
me from thy solitude amidst the wrecks of Rome! I pant
for a living confidant—for one who in the old time has
himself known jealousy and love. I have sought commune
with Adon-Ai: but his presence, that once inspired such
heavenly content with knowledge, and so serene a con-
fidence in destiny, now only troubles and perplexes me.
From the height from which I strive to search into the
shadows of things to come, I see confused spectres of
menace and wrath. Methinks I behold a ghastly limit to
the wondrous existence I have held—methinks that, after
ages of the Ideal Life, I see my course merge into the most
stormy whirlpool of the Real. Where the stars opened to
me their gates, there looms a scaffold—thick steams of
blood rise as from a shambles. What is more strange to
me, a creature here, a very type of the false ideal of com-
mon men—body and mind, a hideous mockery of the art
that shapes the Beautiful, and the desires that seek the
Perfect, ever haunts my vision amidst these perturbed and
broken clouds of the fate to be. By that shadowy scaffold
it stands and gibbers at me, with lips dropping slime and
gore. Come, O friend of the far-time; for me, at least
thy wisdom has not purged away thy human affections:
According to the bonds of our solemn order, reduced noe
to thee and myself, lone survivors of so many haughty
and glorious aspirants, thou art pledged, too, to warn the
descendant of those whom thy counsels sought to initiate
into the great secret in a former age. The last of that
bold Visconti, who was once thy pupil, is the relentless

ZANONI. 175

persecutor of this fair child. With thoughts of lust and
murder, he is digging his own grave; thou mayest yet
daunt him from his doom. And I also mysteriously, by
the same bond, am pledged to obey, if he so command, a
less guilty descendant of a baffled but nobler student. If
he reject my counsel, and insist upon the pledge, Mejnour,
thou wilt have another Neophyte. Beware of another vic-
tim! Come tome! This will reach thee with all speed.
Answer it by the pressure of one hand that I can dare to
clasp!

CHAPTER VIII.

“Tl lupo
Ferito, credo, mi conobbe e ’ncontro
Mi venne con la bocca sanguinosa. ” !
AmintTA, At. iv. sce. i.

At Naples, the Tomb of Virgil, beetling over the cave of
Posilipo, is reverenced, not with the feelings that should
hallow the memory of the poet, but the awe that wraps the
memory of the magician. ‘To his charms they ascribe the
hollowing of that mountain passage; and tradition yet
guards his tomb by the spirits he had raised to construct
the cavern. This spot, in the immediate vicinity of Viola’s
home, had often attracted her solitary footsteps. She had
loved the dim and solemn fancies that beset her as she
looked into the lengthened gloom of the grotto, or, ascend-
ing to the tomb, gazed from the rock on the dwarfed figures
of the busy crowd that seemed to creep like insects along
the windings of the soil below; and now, at noon, she bent
thither her thoughtful way. She threaded the narrow path,
she passed the gloomy vineyard that clambers up the rock,
and gained the lofty spot, green with moss and luxuriant
foliage, where the dust of him who yet soothes and elevates

1The wounded wolf, I think, knew me, and came to me with its
bloody mouth.

176 ZANONI.

the minds of. men is believed to rest. From afar rose the
huge fortress of St. Elmo, frowning darkly amidst spires
and domes that glittered in the sun. Lulled in its azure
splendour lay the Siren’s sea; and the grey smoke of Vesu-
vius, in the clear distance, soared like a moving pillar into
the lucid sky. Motionless on the brink of the precipice, .
Viola looked upon the lovely and living world that stretched
below; and the sullen vapour of Vesuvius fascinated her
eye yet more than the scattered gardens, or the gleaming
Caprea, smiling amidst the smiles of the sea. She heard
not a step that had followed her on her path, and started to
hear a voice at hand. So sudden was the apparition of the
form that stood by her side, emerging from the bushes that
clad the crags, and so singularly did it harmonise in its
uncouth ugliness with the wild nature of the scene imme-
diately around her, and the wizard traditions of the place,
that the colour left her cheek, and a faint cry broke from
her lips.

“Tush; pretty trembler!—do not be frightened at my
face,” said the man, with a bitter smile. “After three
months’ marriage there is no difference between ugliness
and beauty. Custom is a great leveller. I was coming to
_ your house when I saw you leave it; so, as I have matters
of importance to communicate, I ventured to follow your
footsteps. My name is Jean Nicot, a name already favour-
ably known as a French artist. The art of painting and
the art of music are nearly connected, and the stage is an
altar that unites the two.”

There was something frank and unembarrassed in the
man’s address that served to dispel the fear his appearance
had occasioned. He seated himself, as he spoke, on a crag
beside her, and, looking up steadily into her face, continued :

“You are very beautiful, Viola Pisani, and I am not sur-
prised at the number of your admirers. If I presume to
place myself in the list, it is because I am the only one
who loves thee honestly, and woos thee fairly. Nay, look
not so indignant! Listen tome. Has the Prince di ——

ZANONI. 177

ever spoken to thee of marriage?—or the beautiful impostor
Zanoni?—or the young blue-eyed Englishman, Clarence
Glyndon? It is marriage, it is a home, it is safety, it is
reputation, that I offer to thee. And these last, when the
straight form grows crooked, and the bright eyes dim.
What say you?” and he attempted to seize her hand.

Viola shrank from him, and silently turned to depart.
He rose abruptly, and placed himself on her path.

“ Actress, you must hear me! Do you know what this
calling of the stage is in the eyes of prejudice—that is, of
the common opinion of mankind? It is to be a Princess
before the lamps, and a Pariah before the day. No man
believes in your virtue, no man credits your vows; you are
the puppet that they consent to trick out with tinsel for
their amusement, not an idol for their worship. Are you
so enamoured of this career that you scorn even to think of
security and honour? Perhaps you are different from what
you seem. Perhaps you laugh at the prejudice that would
degrade you, and would wisely turnit toadvantage. Speak
frankly to me; I have no prejudice, either. Sweet one, I
am sure we should agree. Now this Prince di——, I have
a message from him. Shall I deliver it?”

Never had Viola felt as she felt then; never had she so
thoroughly seen all the perils of her forlorn condition and
her fearful renown. Nicot continued:

“ Zanoni would but amuse himself with thy vanity; Glyn-
don would despise himself, if he offered thee his name—and
thee, if thou wouldst accept it; but the Prince di —— is in
earnest, and he is wealthy. Listen!”

And Nicot approached his lips to her, and hissed a sen-
tence which she did not suffer him tocomplete. She darted
from him with one glance of unutterable disdain. As he
strove to regain his hold of her arm, he lost his footing, and
fell down the sides of the rock, till, bruised and lacerated,
a pine-branch saved him from the yawning abyss below.
She heard his exclamation of rage and pain, as she bounded
down the path, and, without once turning to look behind,

Cd

178 ZANONI.

regained her home. By the porch stood Glyndon, convers-
ing with Gionetta. She passed him abruptly, entered the
house, and, sinking on the floor, wept loud and passionately.

Glyndon, who had followed her in surprise, vainly sought
to soothe and calm her. She would not reply to his
questions; she did not seem to listen to his protestations
of love, till suddenly, as Nicot’s terrible picture of the
world’s judgment of that profession, which to her younger
thoughts had seemed the service of song and the Beautiful,
forced itself upon her, she raised her face from her hands,
and lookIng steadily upon the Englishman, said, “ False one,
dost thou talk to me of love?”

“By my honour, words fail to tell thee how I love!”

“Wilt thou give me thy home—thy name? Dost thou
woo me as thy wife?” And at that moment, had Glyndon
answered as his better angel would have counselled, per-
haps, in that revolution of her whole mind, which the
words of Nicot had effected, which made her despise her
very self, sicken of her lofty dreams, despair of the future,
and distrust her whole ideal,—perhaps, I say, in restoring
her self-esteem, he would have won her confidence, and
ultimately secured her love. But, against the prompting
of his nobler nature, rose up at that sudden question all
those doubts which, as Zanoni had so well implied, made
the true enemies of his soul. Was he thus suddenly to be
entangled into a snare laid for his credulity by deceivers?
Was she not instructed to seize the moment to force him
into an avowal which prudence must repent? Was not the
great Actress rehearsing a premeditated part? He turned
round as these thoughts, the children of the world, passed
across him, for he literally fancied that he heard the sar-
castic laugh of Mervale without. Nor was he deceived.
Mervale was passing by the threshold, and Gionetta had
told him his friend was within. Who does not know the
effect of the world’s laugh? Mervale was the personation
of the world. The whole world seemed to shout derision
in those ringing tones. Hedrew back—herecoiled. Viola

ZANONI. 179

followed him with her earnest, impatient eyes. At last he
faltered forth: “Do all of thy profession, beautiful Viola,
exact marriage as the sole condition of love?” Oh, bitter
question! Oh, poisoned taunt! He repented it the mo-
ment after. He was seized with remorse of reason, of
feeling, and of conscience. He saw her form shrink, as
it were, at his cruel words. He saw the colour come and
go, to leave the writhing lips like marble; and then, with
a sad, gentle look of self-pity, rather than reproach, she
pressed her hands tightly to her bosom, and said:

“He was right! Pardon me, Englishman; I see now,
indeed, that I am the Pariah and the outcast.”

“Hear me. I retract. Viola, Viola, it is for you to
forgive!”

But Viola waved him from her, and, smiling mournfully,
as she passed him by, glided from the chamber; and he did
not dare to detain her.

——— 4

CHAPTER IX.

“Darne. Ma, chi lung’ é d’Amor,
Trmst. Chi teme ec fugge,
Darne. E che giova fuggir da lui ch’ ha l’ali?
Trrst. Amor nascente ha corte Vali !”*
Aminta, At. ii. se. ii.

Wuen Glyndon found himself without Viola’s house,
Mervale, still loitering at the door, seized his arm. Glyn-
don shook him off abruptly.

“Thou and thy counsels,” said he, bitterly, “have made
me a coward and a wretch. But I will go home—I will
write to her. I will pour out my whole soul; she will for-
give me yet.”

Mervale, who was a man of impenetrable temper, arranged

1Darne. But who is far from Love?—Trrsr. He who fears and

flies. —DArNE. What use to flee from one who has wings?—Tirs1.
The wings of Loye, while he yet grows, are short.

180 ZANONI.

his ruffles, which his friend’s angry gesture had a little dis-
composed; and not till Glyndon had exhausted himself a
while by passionate exclamations and reproaches did the
experienced angler begin to tighten the line. He then drew
from Glyndon the explanation of what had passed, and
artfully sought not to irritate, but soothe him. Mervale,
indeed, was by no means a bad man; he had stronger moral
notions than arecommon amongst the young. He sincerely
reproved his friend for harbouring dishonourable intentions
with regard to the actress.

“ Because I would not have her thy wife, I never dreamed
that thou shouldst degrade her to thy mistress. Better of
the two an imprudent match than an illicit connection.
But pause yet; do not act on the impulse of the moment.”

“But there is notime to lose. I have promised to Zanoni
to give him my answer by to-morrow night. Later than
that time, all option ceases.”

“Ah!” said Mervale, “this seems suspicious. Explain
yourself.” ’

And Glyndon, in the earnestness of his passion, told his
friend what had passed between himself and Zanoni—sup-
pressing only, he scarce knew why, the reference to his an-
cestor and the mysterious brotherhood.

This recital gave to Mervale all the advantages he could
desire. Heavens! with what sound, shrewd common sense
he talked. How evidently some charlatanic coalition be-
tween the actress, and perhaps—who knows?—her clan-
destine protector, sated with possession! How equivocal
the character of one—the position of the other! What
cunning in the question of the actress! How profoundly
had Glyndon, at the first suggestion of his sober reason,
seen through the snare. What! was he to be thus mysti-
cally cajoled and hurried into a rash marriage, because
Zanoni, a mere stranger, told him with a grave face that he
must decide before the clock struck a certain hour?

“Do this, at least,” said Mervale, reasonably enough,
—“ wait till the time expires; it is butanotherday. Baffle

ZANONI. 181

Zanoni. He tells thee that he will meet thee before mid-
night to-morrow, and deties thee to avoid him. Pooh! let
us quit Naples for some neighbouring place, where, unless
he be indeed the Devil, he cannot possibly find us. Show
him that you will not be led blindfold even into an act that
you meditate yourself. Defer to write to her, or to see her,
till after to-morrow. This is.all Task. Then visit her,
and decide for yourself.”

Glyndon was staggered. He could not combat the
reasonings of his friend; he was not convinced, but he
hesitated; and at that moment Nicot passed them. He
turned round, and stopped, as he saw Glyndon.

“Well, and do you think still of the Pisani?”

“Yes; and you—-—”

“Have seen and conversed with her. She shall be
Madame Nicot before this day week! Iam going to the
café, in the Toledo; and hark ye, when next you meet your
friend Signor Zanoni, tell him that he has twice crossed
my path. Jean Nicot, though a painter, is a plain, honest
man, and always pays his debts.”

“Tt is a good doctrine in money matters,” said Mervale;
“as to revenge it is not so moral, and certainly not so wise.
But is it in your love that Zanoni has crossed your path?
How that, if your suit prosper so well?”

“Ask Viola Pisani that question. Bah! Glyndon, she is
a prude only to thee. But I have no prejudices. Once
more, farewell.”

“Rouse thyself, man!” said Mervale, slapping Glyndon
on the shoulder. ‘“ What think you of your fair one now?”

“This man must lie.”

“Will you write to her at once?”

“No; if she be really playing a game, I could renounce
her without a sigh. I will watch her closely; and at all
events, Zanoni shall not be the master of my fate. Let us,
as you advise, leave Naples at daybreak to-morrow.”

182 ZANONI.

CHAPTER X.

“O chiunque tu sia, che fuor d’ogni uso
Pieghi Natura ad opre altere e strane,
E, spiando i secreti, entro al piu chiuso
Spazja tua voglia delle menti umane,
Deh—Dimmi!”!?
Geruvs. Lrs., cant. x. 18.

Earzy the next morning the young Englishmen mounted
their horses and took the road towards Baiz. Glyndon left
word at his hotel that if Signor Zanoni sought him, it was
in the neighbourhood of that once celebrated watering-place
of the ancients that he should be found.

They passed by Viola’s house, but Glyndon resisted the
temptation of pausing there; and after threading the grotto
of Posilipo, they wound by a circuitous route back into the
suburbs of the city, and took the opposite road, which con-
ducts to Portici and Pompeii. It was late at noon when
they arrived at the former of these places. Here they
halted to dine; for Mervale had heard much of the excel-
lence of the macaroni at Portici, and Mervale was a bon
vivant.

They put up at an inn of very humble pretensions, and
dined under an awning. Mervale was more than usually
gay; he pressed the Lacrima upon his friend, and con-
versed gaily.

“Well, my dear friend, we have foiled Signor Zanoni in
one of his predictions, at least. You will have no faith in
him hereafter.”

“The Ides are come—not gone.”

“Tush! If he be the soothsayer, you are not the Cesar.
It is your vanity that makes youcredulous. Thank Heaven,

‘Oh thou, whoever thou art, who through every use bendest Na-
ture to works foreign and strange—and by spying into her secrets,

enterest, at thy will, into the closest recesses of the human mind—O
speak, O tell me!

ZANONI. 183

I do not think myself of such importance that the opera-
tions of nature should be changed in order to frighten
me.”

“But why should the operations of nature be changed?
There may be a deeper philosophy than we dream of—a
philosophy that discovers the secrets of nature, but does
not alter, by penetrating, its courses.”

“Ah! you relapse into your heretical credulity; you
seriously suppose Zanoni to be a prophet—a reader of the
future; perhaps an associate of genii and spirits!”

Here the landlord, a little, fat, oily fellow, came up with
a fresh bottle of Lacrima. He hoped their Excellencies
were pleased. He was most touched—touched to the heart,
that they liked the macaroni. Were their Excellencies go-
ing to Vesuvius? There was a slight eruption; they could
not see it where they were, but it was pretty, and would
be prettier still after sunset.

“A capital idea!” cried Mervale. “What say you,
Glyndon?”

“T have not yet seen an eruption; I should like it much.”

“ But is there no danger?” asked the prudent Mervale.

“Oh not at all; the mountain is very civil at present.
It only plays a little, just to amuse their Excellencies the
English.”

“ Well, order the horses, and bring the bill; we will go
before itis dark. Clarence, my friend—Numne est bibendum;
but take care of the pede libero, which will scarce do for
walking on lava!”

The bottle was finished, the bill paid; the gentlemen
mounted, the landlord bowed, and they went their way in
the cool of the delightful evening towards Resina.

The wine, perhaps the excitement of his thoughts, ani-
mated Glyndon, whose unequal spirits were, at times, high
and brilliant as those of a schoolboy released; and the
laughter of the northern tourists sounded oft and merrily
_ along the melancholy domains of buried cities.

Hesperus had lighted his lamp amidst the rosy skies as

184 ZANONI.

they arrived at Resina. Here they quitted their horses,
and took mules and a guide. As the sky grew darker and
more dark, the mountain fire burned with an intense lustre.
In various streaks and streamlets, the fountain of flame
rolled down the dark summit, and the Englishmen began
to feel increase upon them, as they ascended, that sensation
of solemnity and awe which makes the very atmosphere
that surrounds the Giant of the Plains of the Antique
Hades.

It was night, when, leaving the mules, they ascended on
foot, accompanied by their guide, and a peasant who bore
arude torch. The guide was a conversable, garrulous fel-
low, like most of his country and his calling; and Mervale,
who possessed a social temper, loved to amuse or to instruct
himself on every incidental occasion.

“Ah! Excellency,” said the guide, “your countrymen
have a strong passion for the voleano. Long life to them!
they bring us plenty of money. If our fortunes depended
on the Neapolitans, we should starve.”

“True, they have no curiosity,” said Mervale. “Do you
remember, Glyndon, the contempt with which that old
Count said to us, ‘You will go to Vesuvius, I suppose? I
have never been; why should I go? You have cold, you
have hunger, you have fatigue, you have danger—and all
for nothing but to see fire, which looks just as well in a
brazier as on a mountain.’ Ha! ha! the old fellow was
right.”

“But, Excellency,” said the guide, “that is not all; some
Cavaliers think to ascend the mountain without our help.
I am sure they deserve to tumble into the crater.”

“They must be bold fellows to go alone;—you don’t
often find such.”

“Sometimes among the French, Signor. But the other
night—I never was so frightened—I had been with an Eng-
lish party; and a lady had left a pocket-book on the moun-
tain, where she had been sketching. She offered me a
handsome sum to return for it, and bring it to her at

ZANONI. 185

Naples. So I went in the evening. I found it, sure
enough; and was about to return, when I saw a figure
that seemed to emerge from the crater itself. The air
there was so pestiferous that I could not have conceived a
human creature could breathe it and live. I was so as-
tounded that I stood still as a stone, till the figure came
over the hot ashes, and stood before me, face to face.
Santa Maria, what a head!”

“What! hideous?”

“No; so beautiful, but so terrible! It had nothing
human in its aspect.”

“ And what said the salamander?”

“Nothing! It did not even seem to perceive me, though I
was as near as I am to you; but its eyes seemed to emerge
prying into the air. It passed by me quickly, and, walk-
ing across a stream of burning lava, soon vanished on the
other side of the mountain. I was curious and foolhardy,
and resolved to see if I could bear the atmosphere which
this visitor had left; but, though I did not advance with-
in thirty yards of the spot at which he had first appeared,
I was driven back by a vapour that well-nigh stifled me.
Cospetto ! I have spat blood ever since.”

“Now will I lay a wager that you fancy this fire-king
must be Zanoni,” whispered Mervale, laughing.

The little party had now arrived nearly at the summit of
the mountain; and unspeakably grand was the spectacle
on which they gazed. From the crater arose a vapour,
intensely dark, that overspread the whole background of
the heavens; in the centre whereof rose a flame, that as-
sumed a form singularly beautiful. It might have been
compared to a crest of gigantic feathers, the diadem of the
mountain, high-arched, and drooping downward, with the
hues delicately shaded off, and the whole shifting and
tremulous as the plumage on a warrior’s helmet. The
glare of the flames spread, luminous and crimson, over the
dark and rugged ground on which they stood, and drew an
innumerable variety of shadows from crag and hollow. An

186 ZANONI.

oppressive and sulphureous exhalation served to increase the
gloomy and sublime terror of the place. But on turning
from the mountain, and towards the unseen ocean, the con-
trast was wonderfully great; the heaven serene and blue,
the stars still and calm as theeyes of Divine Love. It was
as if the realm of the opposing principles of Evil and of
Good were brought in one view before the gaze of man!
Glyndon—once more the enthusiast, the artist—was en-
chained and entranced by emotions vague and undefinable,
half of delight and half of pain. Leaning on the shoulder
of his friend, he gazed around him, and heard, with deep-
ening awe, the rumbling of the earth below, the wheels and
voices of the Ministry of Nature in her darkest and most
inscrutable recess. Suddenly as a bomb from a shell, a
huge stone was flung hundreds of yards up from the jaws
of the crater, and, falling with a mighty crash upon the
rock below, split into ten thousand fragments, which
bounded down the sides of the mountain, sparkling and
groaning as they went. One of these, the largest frag-
ment, struck the narrow space of soil between the English-
men and the guide, not three feet from the spot where the
former stood. Mervale uttered an exclamation of terror,
and Glyndon held his breath, and shuddered.

“ Diavolo!/” cried the guide. ‘ Descend, Excellencies—
descend! we have not a moment to lose: follow me close!”

So saying, the guide and the peasant fled with as much
swiftness as they were able to bring to bear. Mervale, ever
more prompt and ready than his friend, imitated their ex-
ample; and Glyndon, more confused than alarmed, followed
close. But they had not gone many yards, before, with a
rushing and sudden blast, came from the crater an enor-
mous volume of vapour. It pursued—it overtook—it over-
spread them. It swept the light from the heavens. All
was abrupt and utter darkness; and through the gloom was
heard the shout of the guide, already distant, and lost in
an instant amidst the sound of the rushing gust, and the
groans of the earth beneath. Glyndon paused. He was

ZANONI. 187

separated from his friend—from the guide. He was alone—
with the Darkness and the Terror. The vapour rolled sul-
lenly away; the form of the plumed fire was again dimly
visible, and its struggling and perturbed reflection again
shed a glow over the horrors of the path. Glyndon recovered
himself, and sped onward. Below, he heard the voice of
Mervale calling on him, though he no longer saw his form.
The sound served as a guide. Dizzy and breathless he
bounded forward; when—hark!—a sullen, slow, rolling
sound in his ear! He halted—and turned back to gaze.
The fire had overflowed its course: it had opened itself a
channel amidst the furrows of the mountain. The stream
pursued him fast-—fast; and the hot breath of the chasing
and preternatural foe came closer and closer upon his cheek!
He turned aside; he climbed desperately, with hands and
feet, upon a crag, that, to the right, broke the scathed and
blasted level of the soil. The stream rolled beside and be-
neath him, and then, taking a sudden wind round the spot
on which he stood, interposed its liquid fire—a broad and
impassable barrier, between his resting-place and escape.
There he stood, cut off from descent, and with no alterna-
tive but to retrace his steps towards the crater, and thence
seek, without guide or clue, some other pathway.

For a moment his courage left him: he cried in despair,
and in that overstrained pitch of voice which is never heard
afar off, to the guide—to Mervale, to return to aid him.

No answer came; and the Englishman, thus abandoned
solely to his own resources, felt his spirit and energy rise
against the danger. He turned back, and ventured as far
towards the crater as the noxious exhalation would permit;
then, gazing below, carefully and deliberately, he chalked
out for himself a path, by which he trusted to shun the
direction the fire-stream had taken; and trod firmly and
quickly over the crumbling and heated strata.

He had proceeded about fifty yards, when he halted
abruptly; an unspeakable and unaccountable horror, not
hitherto experienced amidst all his peril, came over him.

188 ZANONLI.

He shook in every limb; his muscles refused his will—he
felt, as it were, palsied and death-stricken. The horror,
I say, was unaccountable, for the path seemed clear and
safe. ‘The fire, above and behind, burned clear and far;
and beyond, the stars lent him their cheerful guidance. No
obstacle was visible—no danger seemed at hand. As thus
spellbound and panic-stricken, he stood chained to the soil
—his breast heaving; large drops rolling down his brow;
and his eyes starting wildly from their sockets—he saw
before him, at some distance, gradually shaping itself more
and more distinctly to his gaze, a Colossal Shadow—a
shadow that seemed partially borrowed from the human
shape, but immeasurably above the human stature; vague,
dark, almost formless; and differing, he could not tell
where, or why, not only from the proportions but also from
the limbs and outline of man. .

The glare of the volcano, that seemed to shrink and col-
lapse from this gigantic and appalling apparition, never-
theless threw its light, redly and steadily, upon another
shape that stood beside, quiet, and motionless; and it was,
perhaps, the contrast of these two things—the Being and
the Shadow—that impressed the beholder with the differ-
ence between them—the Man and the Superhuman. It was
but for a moment—nay, for the tenth part of a moment,
that this sight was permitted to the wanderer. A second
eddy of sulphureous vapours from the volcano, yet more
rapidly, yet more densely than its predecessor, rolled over
the mountain; and either the nature of the exhalation, or
the excess of his own dread, was such that Glyndon, after
one wild gasp for breath, fell senseless on the earth.

ZANONI. 189

CHAPTER XI.

: “Was hab’ ich
Wenn ich nicht Alles habe?—sprach der Jiingling.” !
DAs VERSCHLEIERTE BILD zu Sars.

MERVALE and the Italians arrived in safety at the spot
where they had left their mules; and not till they had re-
covered their own alarm and breath did they think of Glyn-
don. But then, as the minutes passed, and he appeared
not, Mervale, whose heart was as good, at least, as human
hearts are in general, grew seriously alarmed. He insisted
on returning, to search for his friend; and, by dint of prodi-
gal promises, prevailed at last on the guide to accompany
him. ‘The lower part of the mountain lay calm and white
in the starlight; and the guide’s practised eye could discern
all objects on the surface, at a considerable distance. They
had not, however, gone very far, before they perceived two
forms, slowly approaching towards them.

As they came near, Mervale recognized the form of his
friend. ‘Thank Heaven, he is safe!” he cried, turning to
the guide.

“Holy angels befriend us!” said the Italian, trembling—
“Behold the very being that crossed me last Friday night.
It is he! but his face is human now!”

“Signor Inglese,” said the voice of Zanoni, as Glyndon
—pale, wan, and silent—returned passively the joyous
greeting of Mervale—“ Signor Inglese, I told your friend
that we should meet to-night. You see you have not foiled
my prediction.”

“But how?—but where?” stammered Mervale in great
confusion and surprise.

“TI found your friend stretched on the ground, over-
powered by the mephitic exhalation of the crater. I bore
him to a purer atmosphere; and, as I know the mountain

1“ What have I, if I possess not All?” said the youth.

190 ZANONI.

well, I have conducted him safely to you. This is all our
history. You see, sir, that were it not for that prophecy
which you desired to frustrate, your friend would, ere this
time, have been a corpse: one minute more, and the vapour
had done its work. Adieu; good-night, and pleasant
dreams.”

“But, my preserver, you will not leave us!” said Glyn-
don, anxiously, and speaking for the first time. “ Will you
not return with us?”

Zanoni paused, and drew Glyndon aside. “ Young man,”
said he, gravely, “it is necessary that we should again meet
to-night. It is necessary that you should, ere the first hour
of morning, decide on your own fate. I know that you
have insulted her whom you profess to love. It is not too
late to repent. Consult not your friend—he is sensible and
wise; but not now is his wisdom needed. There are times
in life when from the imagination, and not the reason,
should wisdom come—this, for you, is one of them. I ask
not your answer now. Collect your thoughts—recover your
jaded and scattered spirits. It wants two hours to mid-
night. Before midnight I will be with you.”

“Tncomprehensible being!” replied the Englishman; “I
would leave the life you have preserved in your own hands;
but what I have seen this night has swept even Viola from
my thoughts. A fiercer desire than that of love burns in
my veins—the desire not to resemble, but to surpass my
kind—the desire to penetrate and to share the secret of
your own existence—the desire of a preternatural knowl-
edge and unearthly power. I make my choice. In my an-
cestor’s name, I adjure and remind thee of thy pledge.
Instruct me; school me; make me thine: and I surrender
to thee at once, and without a murmur, the woman whom,
till I saw thee, I would have defied a world to obtain.”

“T bid thee consider well; on the one hand, Viola, a
tranquil home, a happy and serene life. On the other
hand, all is darkness—darkness, that even these eyes can-
not penetrate.”

ZANONI. 191

“But thou hast told me that if I wed Viola I must be
contented with the common existence;—if I refuse, it is to
aspire to thy knowledge and thy power.”

“Vain man!—knowledge and power are not happiness.”

“But they are better than happiness. Say!—if I marry
Viola, wilt thou be my master—my guide? Say this, and
I am resolved.”

“Tt were impossible.”

“Then I renounce her! I renounce love, I renounce
happiness. Welcome solitude—welcome despair; if they
are the entrances to thy dark and sublime secret.”

“T will not take thy answer now. Before the last hour
of night thou shalt give it in one word—ay or no! Fare-
well till then.”

Zanoni waved his hand; and, descending rapidly, was
seen no more.

Glyndon rejoined his impatient and wondering friend;
but Mervale, gazing on his face, saw that a great change
had passed there. The flexile and dubious expression of
youth was for ever gone. The features were locked, rigid,
and stern; and so faded was the natural bloom, that an
hour seemed to have done the work of years.

CHAPTER XII.

“Was ist ’s
Das hinter diesem Schleier sich verbirgt?”!
Das VERSCHLEIERTE BILD zU SaIs.

On returning from Vesuvius or Pompeii you enter Naples
through its most animated, its most Neapolitan, quarter—
through that quarter in which Modern life most closely re-
sembles the Ancient; and in which, when, on a fair day,
the thoroughfare swarms alike with Indolence and Trade,
you are impressed at once with the recollection of that rest-

1 What is it that conceals itself behind this veil?

192 ZANONI.

less, lively race from which the population of Naples de-
rives its origin: so that in one day you may see at Pompei
the habitations of a remote age; and on the Mole at Naples
you may imagine you behold the very beings with whom
those habitations had been peopled.

And now, as the Englishmen rode slowly through the
deserted streets, lighted but by the lamps of heaven, all the
gaiety of day was hushed and breathless. Here and there,
stretched under a portico or a dingy booth, were sleeping
groups of houseless lazzaroni; a tribe now merging its indo-
lent individuality amongst an energetic and active popula-
tion.

The Englishmen rode on in silence; for Glyndon neither
appeared to heed nor hear the questions and comments of
Mervale, and Mervale himself was almost as weary as the
jaded animal he bestrode.

Suddenly the silence of earth and ocean was broken by
the sound of a distant clock, that proclaimed the quarter
preceding the last hour of night. Glyndon started from
his reverie and looked anxiously round. As the final stroke
died, the noise of hoofs rung on the broad stones of the pave-
ment; and from a narrow street to the right, emerged the
form of a solitary horseman. He neared the Englishmen,
and Glyndon recognized the features and mien of Zanoni.

“What! do we meet again, Signor?” said Mervale, ina
vexed but drowsy tone.

“Your friend and I have business together,” replied Za-
noni, as he wheeled his steed to the side of Glyndon. “But
it will be soon transacted. Perhaps you, sir, will ride on
to your hotel.”

“ Alone?”

“There is no danger!” returned Zanoni, with a slight ex-
pression of disdain in his voice.

“None to me;—but to Glyndon?”

“Danger from me! Ah, perhaps you are right.”

“Go on, my dear Mervale,” said Glyndon. “TI will join
you before you reach the hotel.”

ZANONI, 193

Mervale nodded, whistled, and pushed his horse into a
kind of amble.

“Now your answer—quick!”

“T have decided. The love of Viola has vanished from
my heart. ‘The pursuit is over.”

“You have decided?”

“JT have; and now my reward.”

“Thy reward! Well; ere this hour to-morrow it shall
await thee.”

Zanoni gave the rein to his horse; it sprang forward with
abound; the sparks flew from its hoofs, and horse and rider
disappeared amidst the shadows of the street whence they
had emerged.

Mervale was surprised to see his friend by his side a
minute after they had parted.

‘What has passed between you and Zanoni? ”’

“Mervale, do not ask me to-night; I am in a dream.”

“T do not wonder at it, for evenIam inasleep. Let
us push on.”

In the retirement of his chamber, Glyndon sought to recol-
lect his thoughts. He sat down on the foot of his bed, and
pressed his hands tightly to his throbbing temples. The
events of the last few hours; the apparition of the gigantic
and shadowy Companion of the Mystic, amidst the fires and
clouds of Vesuvius; the strange encounter with Zanoni him-
self, on a spot in which he could never, by ordinary reason-
ing, have calculated on finding Glyndon, filled his mind
with emotions, in which terror and awe the least prevailed.
A fire, the train of which had been long laid, was lighted
at his heart—the asbestos-fire, that, once lit, is never to be
quenched. All his early aspirations—his young ambition
—his longings for the laurel, were merged in one passion-
ate yearning to overpass the bounds of the common knowl-
edge of man, and reach that solemn spot between two
worlds on which the mysterious stranger appeared to have
fixed his home.

Far from recalling with renewed affright the remem-

194 ZANONI.

brance of the apparition that had so appalled him, the rec-
ollection only served to kindle and concentrate his curiosity
into a burning focus. He had said aright—love had van-
ished from his heart; there was no longer a serene space
amidst its disordered elements for human affection to move
and breathe. The enthusiast was rapt from this earth; and
he would have surrendered all that mortal beauty ever
promised, that mortal hope ever whispered, for one hour
with Zanoni beyond the portals of the visible world.

He rose, oppressed and fevered with the new thoughts
that raged within him, and threw open his casement for
air. The ocean lay suffused in the starry light, and the
stillness of the heavens never more eloquently preached
the morality of repose to the madness of earthly passions.
But such was Glyndon’s mood that their very hush only
served to deepen the wild desires that preyed upon his soul.
And the solemn stars, that are mysteries in themselves,
seemed by a kindred sympathy to agitate the wings of the
spirit no longer contented with its cage. As he gazed, a
star shot from its brethren, and vanished from the depth
of space!

CHAPTER XIII.

“Oh, be gone!

By Heaven, I love thee better than myself,

For i came hither arm’d against myself. ”

RoMEO AND JULIET.

THE young actress and Gionetta had returned from the
theatre, and Viola, fatigued and exhausted, had thrown her-
self on a sofa, while Gionetta busied herself with the long
- tresses which, released from the fillet that bound them,
half concealed the form of the actress, like a veil of threads
of gold. As she smoothed the luxuriant locks, the old
nurse ran gossiping on about the little events of the night, the
scandal and politics of the scenes and the tire-room. Gio-

ZANONTI. 195

netta was a worthy soul. Almanzor, in Dryden’s tragedy
of Almahide, did not change sides with more gallant in-
difference than the exemplary nurse. She was at last
grieved and scandalized that Viola had not selected one
chosen cavalier. But the choice she left wholly to her fair
charge. Zegri or Abencerrage, Glyndon or Zanoni, it had
been the same to her, except that the rumours she had col-
lected respecting the latter, combined with his own recom-
mendations of his rival, had given her preference to the
Englishman. She interpreted ill the impatient and heavy
sigh with which Viola greeted her praises of Glyndon, and
her wonder that he had of late so neglected his attentions
behind the scenes, and she exhausted all her powers of pane-
gyric upon the supposed object of the sigh. “And then,
too,” she said, “if nothing else were to be said against the
other Signor, it is enough that he is about to leave Naples.”

“Leave Naples!—Zanoni?”

“Yes, darling! In passing by the Mole to-day, there
was acrowd round some outlandish-looking sailors. His
ship arrived this morning, and anchors in the bay. The
sailors say that they are to be prepared to sail with the first
wind; they were taking in fresh stores. They—”

“Leave me, Gionetta! Leave me!”

The time had already passed when the girl could confide
in Gionetta. Her thoughts had advanced to that point
when the heart recoils from all confidence, and feels that it
cannot be comprehended. Alone now, in the principal
apartment of the house, she paced its narrow boundaries
with tremulous and agitated steps; she recalled the fright-
ful suit of Nicot; the injurious taunt of Glyndon; and she
sickened at the remembrance of the hollow applauses which,
bestowed on the actress, not the woman, only subjected her
to contumely and insult. In that room the recollection of
her father’s death, the withered laurel and the broken
cords, rose chillingly before her. Hers, she felt, was a yet
gloomier fate—the cords may break while the laurel is yet
green, The lamp, waning in its socket, burned pale and

196 ZANONI.

dim, and her eyes instinctively turned from the darker
corner of the room. Orphan! by the hearth of thy parents,
dost thou fear the presence of the dead?

And was Zanoni indeed about to quit Naples? Should
she see him no more? Oh, fool, to think that there was
grief in any other thought! The Past, that was gone!—
the Future! there was no Future to her—Zanoni absent!
But this was the night of the third day, on which Zanoni
had told her that, come what might, he would visit her
again. It was, then, if she might believe him, some ap-
pointed crisis in her fate; and how should she tell him of
Glyndon’s hateful words? The pure and the proud mind
can never confide its wrongs to another, only its triumphs
anditshappiness. But at that late hour would Zanoni visit
her—could she receive him? Midnight wasat hand. Still
in undefined suspense, in intense anxiety, she lingered in
the room. The quarter before midnight sounded dull and
distinct. All was still, and she was about to pass to her
sleeping-room, when she heard the hoofs of a horse at full
speed; the sound ceased; there was a knock at the door.
Her heart beat violently; but fear gave way to another
sentiment when she heard a voice, too well known, calling
on her name. She paused, and then with the fearlessness
of innocence descended, and unbarred the door.

Zanoni entered with a light and hasty step. His horse-
man’s cloak fitted tightly to his noble form; and his broad
hat threw a gloomy shade over his commanding features.

The girl followed him into the room she had just left,
trembling and blushing deeply, and stood before him with
the lamp she held shining upward on her cheek, and the
long hair that fell like a shower of light over the half-clad
shoulders and heaving bust.

“Viola,” said Zanoni, in a voice that spoke deep emotion,
“Tam by thy side once more to save thee. Not a moment
is to be lost. Thou must fly with me, or remain the victim
of the Prince di——. I would have made the charge I
now undertake another’s; thou knowest I would—thou

ZANONI. 197

knowest it!—but he is not worthy of thee, the cold Eng-
lishman! I throw myself at thy feet; have trust in me
and fly.”

He grasped her hand passionately as he dropped on his
knee, and looked up into her as with his bright, beseech-
ing eyes.

“Fly with thee!” said Viola, scarce believing her senses.

“With me. Name, fame, honour—all will be sacrificed
if thou dost not.”

“'Then—then,” said the wild girl, falteringly, and turn-
ing aside her face; “then I am not indifferent to thee?
Thou wouldst not give me to another?”

Zanoni was silent; but his breast heaved, his cheeks
flushed, his eyes darted dark and impassioned fire.

“Speak!” exclaimed Viola, in jealous suspicion of his
silence. .

“Tndifferent to me! No; but I dare not say that I love
thee.”

“Then what matters my fate?” said Viola, turning pale,
and shrinking from his side; ‘leave me—I fear no danger.
My life, and therefore my honour, is in mine own hands.”

“Be not so mad,” said Zanoni. “Hark! do you hear
the neigh of my steed?—it is an alarm that warns us of the
approaching peril. Haste, or you are lost!”

“Why dost thou care for me?” said the girl, bitterly.
“Thou hast read my heart; thou knowest that thou art
become the lord of my destiny. But to be bound beneath
the weight of a cold obligation; to be the beggar on the
eyes of Indifference; to cast myself on one who loves me
not; that were indeed the vilest sin of my sex. Ah, Za-
noni, rather let me die!”

She had thrown back her clustering hair from her face
while she spoke; and as she now stood, with her arms
drooping mournfully, and her hands clasped together with
the proud bitterness of her wayward spirit, giving new zest
and charm to her singular beauty, it was impossible to con-
ceive a sight more irresistible to the eye and the heart,

198 ZANONI.

“Tempt me not to thine own danger—perhaps destruc-
tion!” exclaimed Zanoni, in faltering accents. “Thou
canst not dream of what thou wouldst demand—come!”
and, advancing, he wound his arm round her waist. “Come,
Viola; believe at least in my friendship, my honour, my
protection——”

“ And not thy love,” said the Italian, turning on him her
reproachful eyes. Those eyes met his, and he could not
withdraw from the charm of their gaze. He felt her heart
throbbing beneath his own; her breath came warm upon his
cheek. He trembled—He/ the lofty, the mysterious Za-
noni, who seemed to stand aloof from his race. With a
deep and burning sigh, he murmured, “ Viola, I love thee!
Oh!” he continued, passionately, and releasing his hold,
he threw himself abruptly at her feet, “I no more com-
mand; as woman should be wooed, I woo thee. From the
first glance of those eyes—from the first sound of thy voice,
thou becamest too fatally dear to me. ‘Thou speakest of
fascination—it lives and it breathes in thee! I fled from
Naples to fly from thy presence—it pursued me. Months,
years passed, and thy sweet face still shone upon my heart.
I return, because I pictured thee alone and sorrowful in the
world; and knew that dangers from which I might save
thee were gathering near thee and around. Beautiful Soul!
whose leaves I have read with reverence, it was for thy
sake, thine alone, that I would have given thee to one who
might make thee happier on earth than I can. Viola!
Viola! thou knowest not—never canst thou know—how
dear thou art to me!”

It is in vain to seek for words to describe the delight—
the proud, the full, the complete, and the entire delight
that filled the heart of the Neapolitan. He whom she had
considered too lofty even for love—more humble to her
than those she had half despised! She was silent, but her
eyes spoke to him; and then slowly, as aware, at last, that
the human love had advanced on the ideal, she shrank into
the terrors of a modest and virtuous nature. She did not

ZANONI. 199

dare—she did not dream to ask him the question she had
so fearlessly made to Glyndon; but she felt a sudden cold-
ness—a sense that a barrier was yet between love and love.
“Oh, Zanoni!” she murmured, with downcast eycs, “ask
me not to fly with thee; tempt me not to my shame. Thou
wouldst protect me from others. Oh, protect me from thy-
self!”

“Poor orphan!” said he, tenderly, “and canst thou think
that I ask from thee one sacrifice,—still less the greatest
that woman can give to love? As my wife I woo thee, and
by every tie, and by every vow that can hallow and endear
affection. Alas, they have belied love to thee indeed, if
thou dost not know the religion that belongs to it! They
who truly love would seek, for the treasure they obtain, every
bond that can make it lasting and secure. Viola, weep not,
unless thou givest me the holy right to kiss away thy
tears!”

And that beautiful face, no more averted, drooped upon
his bosom; and as he bent down, his lips sought the rosy
mouth: along and burning kiss—danger—life—the world
was forgotten! Suddenly Zanoni tore himself from her.

“ Hearest thou the wind that sighs, and dies away? As
that wind, my power to preserve thee, to guard thee, to
foresee the storm in thy skies, is gone. Nomatter. Haste,
haste; and may love supply the loss of all that it has dared
to sacrifice! Come.”

Viola hesitated no more. Shethrew her mantle over her
shoulders, and gathered up her dishevelled hair; a moment,
and she was prepared, when a sudden crash was heard
below.

“Too late!—fool that I was, too late!” cried Zanoni, in
a sharp tone of agony, and he hurried to the door. He
opened it, only to be borne back by the press of armed men.
The room literally swarmed with the followers of the rav-
isher, masked, and armed to the teeth,

Viola was already in the grasp of two of the myrmidons.
Her shriek smote the ear of Zanoni. He sprang forward;

200 ZANONI.

and Viola heard his wild cry in a foreign tongue! She saw
the blades of the ruffians pointed at his breast! She lost
her senses; and when she recovered, she found herself
gagged, and in a carriage that was driven rapidly, by the
side of a masked and motionless figure. The carriage
stopped at the portals of a gloomy mansion. The gates
opened noiselessly; a broad flight of steps, brilliantly
illumined, was before her. She was in the palace of the
Prince di ——.,

CHAPTER XIV.

“Ma lasciamo, per Dio, Signore, orma
Di parlar d’ira, e di cantar di morte. ”!
Oru. Fur., Canto xvii. 18.

THE young actress was led to, and left alone in, a cham-
ber adorned with all the luxurious and half-Eastern taste
that at one time characterised the palaces of the great seig-
neurs of Italy. Her first thought was for Zanoni. Was
he yet living? Had he escaped unscathed the blades of
the foe? her new treasure—the new light of her life—her
lord, at last her lover?

She had short time for reflection. She heard steps ap-
proaching the chamber; she drew back, but trembled not.
A courage, not of herself, never known before, sparkled in
her eyes, and dilated her stature. Living or dead, she
would be faithful still to Zanoni! There was a new motive
to the preservation of honour. The door opened, and the
Prince entered in the gorgeous and gaudy costume still
worn at that time in Naples.

“Fair and cruel one,” said he, advancing, with a half
sneer upon his lip, “thou wilt not too harshly blame the
violence of love.” He attempted to take her hand as he
spoke.

‘But leave me, I solemnly conjure thee, Signor, to speak of
wrath, and sing of death,

ZANONI. 201

“Nay,” said he, as she recoiled, “reflect that thou art
now in the power of one that never faltered in the pursuit
of an object less dear to him than thou art. Thy lover,
presumptuous though he be, is not by to save thee. Mine
thou art; but instead of thy master, suffer me to be thy
slave.”

“Prince,” said Viola, with a stern gravity, “your boast
isin vain. Your power! Iam not in your power. Life
and death are in my own hands. I will not defy; but Ido
not fear you. I feel—and in some feelings,” added Viola,
with a solemnity almost thrilling, “there is all the strength,
and all the divinity of knowledge—lI feel that I am safe
even here; but you—you, Prince di ——, have brought
danger to your home and hearth!”

The Neapolitan seemed startled by an earnestness and
boldness he was but little prepared for. He was not, how-
ever, a man easily intimidated or deterred from any pur-
pose he had formed; and, approaching Viola, he was about
to reply with much warmth, real or affected, when a knock
was heard at the door of the chamber. The sound was re-
peated, and the Prince, chafed at the interruption, opened
the door and demanded, impatiently, who had ventured to
disobey his orders, and invade his leisure. Mascari pre-
sented himself, pale and agitated: “My lord,” said he, in
a whisper, “pardon me; but a stranger is below, who in-
sists on seeing you; and, from some words he let fall, I
judged it advisable even to infringe your commands.”

“A stranger;—and at this hour! What business can he
pretend? Why was he even admitted?”

“He asserts that your life is in imminent danger. The
source whence it proceeds he will relate to your Excellency
alone.”

The Prince frowned; but his colour changed. He mused
a moment, and then re-entering the chamber, and advanc-
ing towards Viola, he said:

“Believe me, fair creature, I have no wish to take ad-
yantage of my power. I would fain trust alone to the

202 ZANONI.

gentler authorities of affection. Hold yourself queen
within these walls more absolutely than you have ever en-
acted that part on the stage. ‘To-night, farewell! May
your sleep be calm, and your dreams propitious to my
hopes.”

With these words he retired, and in a few moments Viola
was surrounded by officious attendants, whom she at length,
with some difficulty, dismissed; and refusing to retire to
rest, she spent the night in examining the chamber, which
she found was secured, and in thoughts of Zanoni, in whose
power she felt an almost preternatural confidence.

Meanwhile, the Prince descended the stairs, and sought
the room into which the stranger had been shown.

He found the visitor wrapped from head to foot in a long
robe—half gown, half mantle—such as was sometimes worn
by ecclesiastics. The face of this stranger was remarkabie.
So sunburnt and swarthy were his hues, that he must, ap-
parently, have derived his origin amongst the races of the
furthest East. His forehead was lofty, and his eyes so
penetrating, yet so calm in their gaze, that the Prince
shrank from them as we shrink from a questioner who is
drawing forth the guiltiest secret of our hearts.

“What would you with me?” asked the Prince, motion-
ing his visitor to a seat.

“Prince di ——,” said the stranger, in a voice deep and
sweet, but foreign in its accent; “son of the most energetic
and masculine race that ever applied god-like genius to the
service of Human Will, with its winding wickedness and
its stubborn grandeur; descendant of the great Visconti, in
whose chronicles lies the history of Italy in her palmy
day, and in whose rise was the development of the might-
iest intellect, ripened by the most restless ambition, I come
to gaze upon the last star ina darkening firmament. By
this hour to-morrow space shall know it not. Man! unless
thy whole nature change, thy days are numbered!”

“What means this jargon?” said the Prince, in visible
astonishment and secret awe, “Comest thou to menace me

ZANONI. 203

in my own halls, or wouldst thou warn me of a danger?
Art thou some itinerant mountebank, or some unguessed-of
friend? Speak out, and plainly. What danger threatens
me?”

“ Zanoni and thy ancestor’s sword,” replied the stranger.

“Ha! ha!” said the Prince, laughing scornfully, “I half
suspected thee from the first. Thou art then the accom-
plice or the tool of that most dexterous, but, at present,
defeated charlatan? And I suppose thou wilt tell me that,
if I were to release a certain captive I have made, the danger
would vanish, and the hand of the dial would be put back?”

“ Judge of me as thou wilt, Prince di —_—. I confess
my knowledge of Zanoni. Thou, too, wilt know his power,
but not till it consume thee. I would save, therefore I
warn thee. Dost thou ask me why? I will tell thee.
Canst thou remember to have heard wild tales of thy grand-
sire ?—of his desire for a knowledge that passes that of the
schools and cloisters?—of a strange man from the East,
who was his familiar and master in lore, against which the
Vatican has, from age to age, launched its mimic thunder?
Dost thou call to mind the fortunes of thy ancestor?—how
he succeeded in youth to little but a name?—how, after a
career wild and dissolute as thine, he disappeared from
Milan, a pauper, and a self-exile?—how after years spent,
none knew in what climes or in what pursuits, he again re-
visited the city where his progenitors had reigned?—how
with him came the wise man of the East, the mystic Mej-
nour?—how they who beheld him, beheld with amaze and
fear that time had ploughed no furrow on his brow; that
youth seemed fixed, as by a spell, upon his face and form?
Dost thou not know that from that hour his fortunes rose?
Kinsmen the most remote died; estate upon estate fell into
the hands of the ruined noble. He became the guide of
princes, the first magnate of Italy. He founded anew the
house of which thou art the last lineal upholder, and trans- .
ferred his splendour from Milan to the Sicilian Realms.
Visions of high ambition were then present with him night-

204 ZANONI.

ly and daily. Had he lived, Italy would have known a
new dynasty, and the Visconti would have reigned over
Magna-Grecia. He was a man such as the world rarely
sees; but his ends, too earthly, were at war with the means
he sought. Had his ambition been more or less, he had
been worthy of a realm mightier than the Cesars swayed;
worthy of our solemn order; worthy of the fellowship of
Mejnour, whom you now behold before you.”

The Prince, who had listened with deep and breathless
attention to the words of his singular guest, started from
his seat at his last words. “Impostor!” he cried, “can
you dare thus to play with my credulity? Sixty years
have flown since my grandsire died; were he living he had
passed his hundred and twentieth year; and you, whose old
age is erect and vigorous, have the assurance to pretend to
have been his contemporary! But you have imperfectly
learned your tale. You know not, it seems, that my grand-
sire, wise and illustrious indeed, in all save his faith ina
charlatan, was found dead in his bed, in the very hour
when his colossal plans were ripe for execution, and that
Mejnour was guilty of his murder.”

“Alas!” answered the stranger, in a voice of great sad-
ness, “had he but listened to Mejnour, had he but delayed
the last and most perilous ordeal of daring wisdom until the
requisite training and initiation had been completed, your
ancestor would have stood with me upon an eminence which
-the waters of Death itself wash everlastingly, but cannot
overflow. Your grandsire resisted my fervent prayers, dis-
obeyed my most absolute commands, and in the sublime
rashness of a soul that panted for secrets, which he who
desires orbs and sceptres never can obtain, perished the
victim of his own frenzy.”

“He was poisoned, and Mejnour fled.”

“Mejnour fled not,” answered the stranger proudly;
“Mejnour could not fly from danger; for, to him, danger is
a thing long left behind. It was the day before the duke
took the fatal draught which he helieved was to confer on

ZANONI. 205

the mortal the immortal boon that, finding my power over
him was gone, I abandoned him to his doom. But a truce
with this; 1 loved your grandsire! I would save the last
of his race. Oppose not thyself to Zanoni. Yield not
thy soul to thine evil passions. Draw back from the preci-
pice while there is yet time. In thy front, and in thine
eyes, I detect some of that diviner glory which belonged to
thy race. Thou hast in thee some germs of their heredi-
tary genius, but they are choked up by worse than thy
hereditary vices. Recollect that by genius thy house rose;
by vice it ever failed to perpetuate its power. In the laws
which regulate the Universe it is decreed that nothing
wicked can long endure. Be wise, and let history warn thee.
Thou standest on the verge of two worlds, the Past and the
Future; and voices from either shriek omen in thy ear. I
have done. I bid thee farewell!”

“Not so; thou shalt not quit these walls. I will make
experiment of thy boasted power. What, ho! there!—
ho!”

The Prince shouted; the room was filled with his min-
ions.

“Seize that man!” he cried, pointing to the spot which
had been filled by the form of Mejnour. To his inconceiv-
able amaze and horror, the spot was vacant. The mysterious
stranger had vanished like a dream. But a thin and fra-
grant mist undulated, in pale volumes, round the walls of
the chamber. “Look to my lord!” cried Mascari. The
Prince had fallen to the floor insensible. For many hours
he seemed in a kind of trance. When he recovered he dis-
missed his attendants, and his step was heard in his cham-
ber, pacing to and fro, with heavy and disordered strides.
Not till an hour before his banquet the next day did he
seem restored to his wonted self.

206 ZANONI.

CHAPTER XY.

“Oime! come poss *io
Altri trovar, se me trovar non posso. *!
Amint., At. i. se. 11.

Tue sleep of Glyndon, the night after his last interview
with Zanoni, was unusually profound; and the sun streamed
full upon his eyes as he opened them to the day. He rose
refreshed, and with a strange sentiment of calmness, that
seemed more the result of resolution than exhaustion. The
incidents and emotions of the past night had settled into dis-
tinct and clear impressions. He thought of them but
slightly—he thought rather of the future. He was as one
of the initiated inthe old Egyptian mysteries, who have
crossed the gate only to long more ardently for the pene-
tralia.

He dressed himself, and was relieved to find that Mer-
vale had joined a party of his countrymen on an excursion
to Ischia. He spend the heat of noon in thoughtful soli-
tude, and gradually the image of Viola returned to his
heart. It was a holy—for it was a human—image. He
had resigned her; and though he repented not, he was trou-
bled at the thought that repentance would have come too late.

He started impatiently from his seat, and strode with
rapid steps to the humble abode of the actress.

The distance was considerable, and the air oppressive.
Glyndon arrived at the door breathless and heated. He
knocked; no answer came. He lifted the latch and en-
tered. He ascended the stairs; no sound, no sight of life
met his ear and eye. In the front chamber, on a table, lay
the guitar of the actress and some manuscript parts in the
favourite operas. He paused, and summoning courage,
tapped at the door which seemed to lead into the inner
apartment. The door was ajar; and, hearing no sound

* Alas! how can I find another, when I cannot find myself?

a

ZANONI. 207

within, he pushed it open. It was the sleeping chamber
of the young actress, that holiest ground to a lover; and
well did the place become the presiding deity; none of the
tawdry finery of the profession was visible, on the one
hand; none of the slovenly disorder common to the humbler
classes of the south, on the other. All was pure and simple;
even the ornaments were those of an innocent refinement;
afew books, placed carefully on shelves, a few half-faded
flowers in an earthen vase, which was modelled and painted
in the Etruscan fashion. The sunlight streamed over the
snowy draperies of the bed, and a few articles of clothing
on the chair beside it. Viola was not there; but the
nurse!—was she gone also? He made the house resound
with the name of Gionetta, but there was not even an echo
to reply. At last, as he reluctantly quitted the desolate
abode, he perceived Gionetta coming towards him from the
street. The poor old woman uttered an exclamation of joy
on seeing him; but to their mutual disappointment, neither
had any cheerful tidings or satisfactory explanation to afford
the other. Gionetta had been aroused from her slumber
the night before by the noise in the rooms below; but, ere
she could muster courage to descend, Viola was gone! She
found the marks of violence on the door without; and all
she had since been able to learn in the neighbourhood was
that a lazzarone, from his nocturnal resting-place on the
Chiaja, had seen by the moonlight a carriage, which he re-
cognised as belonging to the Prince di ——, pass and re-
pass that road about the first hour of morning. Glyndon,
on gathering, from the confused words and broken sobs of
the old nurse, the heads of this account, abruptly left her
and repaired to the palace of Zanoni. There he was in-
formed that the Signor was gone to the banquet of the
Prince di ——, and would not return till late. Glyndon
stood motionless with perplexity and dismay; he knew not
what to believe, or how to act. Even Mervale was not at
hand to advise him. His conscience smote him bitterly.
He had had the power to save the woman he had loved, and

208 ZANONIL.

had foregoné that power; but how was it that in this Zas
noni himseif had failed? How was it that he was gone to
the very banquet of the ravisher? Could Zanoni be aware
of what had passed? If not, should he lose a moment in
apprising him? Though mentally irresolute, no man was
more physically brave. He would repair at once to the
palace of the Prince himself; and if Zanoni failed in the
trust he had half appeared to arrogate, he, the humble for-
eigner, would demand the captive of fraud and force, in
the very halls and before the assembled guests of the
Prince di ——.

CHAPTER XVI.

* Ardua vallatur duris sapientia scrupis. ” !
Hanr. Jun., Emblem. xxxvii.

WE must go back some hours in the progress of this nar-
rative. It was the first faint and gradual break of the
summer dawn; and two men stood in a balcony overhang-
ing a garden fragrant with the scents of the awakening
flowers. The stars had not yet left the sky—the birds
were yet silent on the boughs; all was still, hushed, and
tranquil; but how ditferent the tranquillity of reviving day
from the solemn repose of night! In the music of silence
there are a thousand variations. These men, who alone
seemed awake in Naples, were Zanoni and the mysterious
stranger, who had but an hour or two ago startled the Prince
di —— in his voluptuous palace.

“No,” said the latter; “hadst thou delayed the accept-
ance of the Arch Gift until thou hadst attained to the years,
and passed through all the desolate bereavements that
chilled and seared myself, ere my researches had made it
mine, thou wouldst have escaped the curse of which thou
complainest now, thou wouldst not have mourned over the
brevity of human affection as compared to the duration of

‘Lofty wisdom is circled round with rugged rocks.

ZANONI. 209

thine own existence; for thou wouldst have survived the
very desire and dream of the love of woman. Brightest,
and, but for that error, perhaps the loftiest, of the secret
and solemn race that fills up the interval in creation between
mankind and the children of the Empyreal, age after age
wilt thou rue the splendid folly which made thee ask to
carry the beauty and the passions of youth into the dreary
grandeur of earthly immortality.”

“T do not repent, nor shall I,” answered Zanoni. “The
transport and the sorrow, so wildly blended, which have at
intervals diversified my doom, are better than the calm and
bloodless tenor of thy solitary way. Thou, who lovest
nothing, hatest nothing, feelest nothing; and walkest the
world with the noiseless and joyless footsteps of a dream!”

“ You mistake,” rephed he who had owned the name of
Mejnour,—“ though I care not for love, and am dead to
every passion that agitates the sons of clay, Iam not dead
to their more serene enjoyments. I carry down the stream
of the countless years, not the turbulent desires of youth,
but the calm and spritual delights of age. Wisely and de-
liberately I abandoned youth for ever when I separated my
lot from men. Let us not envy or reproach each other. I
would have saved this Neapolitan, Zanoni (since so it now
pleases thee to be called), partly because his grandsire was
but divided by the last airy barrier from our own brother-
hood—partly because I know that in the man himself lurk
the elements of ancestral courage and power, which in ear-
lier life would have fitted him for one of us. Earth holds
but few to whom nature has given the qualities that can
bear the ordeal! But time and excess, that have thickened
his grosser senses, have blunted his imagination. I relin-
quish him to his doom.”

“ And still, then, Mejnour, you cherish the desire to re-
vive our order, limited now to ourselves alone, by new con-
verts and allies; surely—surely—thy experience might have
taught thee that scarcely once in a thousand years is born
the being who can pass through the horrible gates that lead

210 ZANONI.

into the worlds without. Is not thy path already strewed
with thy victims? Do not their ghastly faces of agony and
fear—the blood-stained suicide, the raving maniac—rise
before thee, and warn what is yet left to thee of human
sympathy from thy insane ambition?”

“Nay,” answered Mejnour; “have I not had success to
counterbalance failure? And can I forego this lofty and
august hope, worthy alone of our high condition—the hope
to form a mighty and numerous race with a force and power
sufficient to permit them to acknowledge to mankind their
majestic conquests and dominion—to become the true lords of
this planet—invaders, perchance of others, —masters of the
inimical and malignant tribes by which at this moment we are
surrounded, —a race that may proceed, in their deathless des-
tinies, from stage to stage of celestial glory, and rank at
last amongst the nearest ministrants and agents gathered
round the Throne of Thrones? What matter a thousand
victims for one convert to our band? And you, Zanoni,”
continued Mejnour, after a pause—“ you, even you, should
this affection for a mortal beauty that you have dared, de-
spite yourself, to cherish, be more than a passing fancy—
should it, once admitted into your inmost nature, partake
of its bright and enduring essence—even you may brave all
things to raise the beloved one into your equal. Nay, in-
terrupt me not. Can you see sickness menace her—danger
hover around—years creep on—the eyes grow dim—the
beauty fade—while the heart, youthful still, clings and
fastens round your own,—can you see this, and know it is”
yours to—-—”

“Cease!” cried Zanoni, fiercely. ‘“ What is all other fate
as compared to the death of terror? What, when the cold-
est sage—the most heated enthusiast—the hardiest warrior,
with his nerves of iron—have been found dead in their
beds, with straining eyeballs and horrent hair, at the first
step of the Dread Progress,—thinkest thou that this weak
woman—from whose cheek a sound at the window, the
screech of the night-owl, the sight of a drop of blood ona

ZANONI. 211

man’s sword, would start the colour—could brave one glance
oft——-Away! the very thought of such sights for her makes
even myself a coward!”

“When you told her you loved her—when you clasped
her to your breast, you renounced all power to foresee her
future lot, or protect her from harm. Henceforth to her
you are human, and human only. How know you, then, to
what you may be tempted?—how know you what her curi-
osity may learn and her courage brave? But enough of
this—you are bent on your pursuit?”

“The fiat has gone forth.” 5

“And to-morrow?”

“To-morrow, at this hour, our bark will be bounding
over yonder ocean, and the weight of ages will have fallen
from my heart! I compassionate thee, O foolish sage,—
thou hast given up thy youth!”

CHAPTER XVII.

“Atco. Thou always speakest riddles. Tell me if thou art that
fountain of which Bernard Lord Trevizan writ?
“Merc. Lam not that fountain, but I am the water. The foun-
tain compasseth me about. ”
Sanpivoeius, Lew Light of Alchymy.

Tue Prince di —— was not aman whom Naples could
suppose to be addicted to superstitious fancies. Still, in
the south of Italy there was then, and there still lingers, a
certain spirit of credulity, which may, ever and anon, be
visible amidst the boldest dogmas of their philosophers and
sceptics. In his childhood, the Prince had learned strange
tales of the ambition, the genius, and the career of his
grandsire, and secretly, perhaps influenced by ancestral ex-
ample, in earlier youth he himself had followed science,
not only through her legitimate course, but her antiquated
and erratic windings. I have, indeed, been shown in
Naples a little volume, blazoned with the arms of the Vis-

912 ZANONL

conti, and ascribed to the nobleman I refer to, which treats
of alchymy in a spirit half mocking and half reverential.
Pleasure soon distracted him from such speculations, and
his talents, which were unquestionably great, were wholly
perverted to extravagant intrigues, or to the embellishment
of a gorgeous ostentation with something of classic grace.
His immense wealth, his imperious pride, his unscrupulous
and daring character, made him an object of no inconsider-
able fear to a feeble and timid court; and the ministers of
the indolent government willingly connived at excesses
which allured him at least from ambition. The strange
visit, and yet more strange departure, of Mejnour filled
the breast of the Neapolitan with awe and wonder, against
which all the haughty arrogance and learned scepticism of
his maturer manhood combated in vain. The apparition of
Mejnour served, indeed, to invest Zanoni with a character
in which the Prince had not hitherto regarded him. He
felt a strange alarm at the rival he had braved—at the foe
he had provoked. When, a little before his banquet, he
had resumed his self-possession, it was with a fell and
gloomy resolution that he brooded over the perfidious
schemes he had previously formed. He felt as if the death
of the mysterious Zanoni were necessary for the preserva-
tion of his own life; and if at an earlier period of their
rivalry he had determined on the fate of Zanoni, the warn-
ings of Mejnour only served to confirm his resolve.
“We will try if his magic can invent an antidote to the
bane,” said he, half aloud, and with a stern smile, as he
summoned Mascari to his presence. The poison which the
Prince, with his own hands, mixed into the wine intended
for his guest was compounded from materials, the secret
of which had been one of the proudest heirlooms of that
able and evil race, which gave to Italy her wisest and guilt-
iest tyrants. Its operation was quick, yet not sudden—it
produced no pain—it left on the form no grim convulsion,
on the skin no purpling spot, to arouse suspicion;—you
might have cut and carved every membrane and fibre of the

ZANONI. 213

corpse, but the sharpest eyes of the leech would not have
detected the presence of the subtle life-queller. For twelve
hours the victim felt nothing, save a joyous and elated ex-
hilaration of the blood—a delicious languor followed, the
sure forerunner of apoplexy. No lancet then could save!
Apoplexy had run much in the families of the enemies of
the Visconti! :

The hour of the feast arrived—the guests assembled.
There were the flower of the Neapolitan seignorie, the
descendants of the Norman, the Teuton, the Goth; for
Naples had then a nobility, but derived it from the North,
which has indeed been the Nutrix Leonwm, the nurse of the
lion-hearted chivalry of the world.

Last of the guests came Zanoni; and the crowd gave way
as the dazzling foreigner moved along to the lord of the
palace. The Prince greeted him with a meaning smile, to
which Zanoni answered by a whisper: “ He who plays with
loaded dice does not always win.”

The Prince bit his lip; and Zanoni, passing on, seemed
deep in conversation with the fawning Mascari.

“Who is the Prince’s heir?” asked the guest.

“ A distant relation on the mother’s side; with his Ex-
cellency dies the male line.”

“Ts the heir present at our host’s banquet?”

“No; they are not friends.”

“No matter; he will be here to-morrow!”

Mascari stared in surprise; but the signal for the ban-
quet was given, and the guests were marshalled to the
board. As was the custom then, the feast took place not
long after midday. It was a long oval hall, the whole of
one side opening by a marble colonnade upon a court or
garden, in which the eye rested gratefully upon cool foun-
tains and statues of whitest marble, half sheltered by
orange trees. Every art that luxury could invent to give
freshness and coolness to the languid and breezeless heat
of the day without (a day on which the breath of the siroc-
eo was abroad) had been called into existence, Artificial

214 ZANONI.

currents of air through invisible tubes, silken blinds wav-
ing to and fro as if to cheat the senses into the belief of an
April wind, and miniature jets d’eau in each corner of the
apartment, gave to the Italians the same sense of exhilara-
tion and comfort (if I may use the word) which the well-
drawn curtains and the blazing hearth afford to the children
of colder climes.

The conversation was somewhat more lively and intellec-
tual than is common amongst the languid pleasure-hunters
of the South; for the Prince, himself accomplished, sought
his acquaintance not only amongst the beaux esprits of his
own country, but amongst the gay foreigners who adorned
and relieved the monotony of the Neapolitan circles.
There were present two or three of the brilliant Frenchmen
of the old régime, who had already emigrated from the ad-
vancing revolution, and their peculiar turn of thought and
wit was well calculated for the meridian of a society that
made the Dolce far niente at once its philosophy and its
faith. The Prince, however, was more silent than usual;
and when he sought to rouse himself his spirits were forced
and exaggerated. To the manners of his host, those of -
Zanoni afforded a striking contrast. The bearing of this
singular person was at all times characterised by a calm and
polished ease, which was attributed by the courtiers to the
long habit of society. He could scarcely be called gay;
yet few persons more tended to animate the general spirits
of a convivial circle. He seemed, by a kind of intuition, to
elicit from each companion the qualities in which he most
excelled; and if occasionally a certain tone of latent mock-
ery characterised his remarks upon the topics on which the
conversation fell, it appeared to men who took nothing in
earnest to be the language both of wit and wisdom. ‘To the
Frenchmen in particular there was something startling in
his intimate knowledge of the minutest events in their own
capital and country, and his profound penetration (evinced
but in epigrams and sarcasms) into the eminent characters
who were then playing a part upon the great stage of Con-

ZANONI. 215

tinental intrigue. It was while this conversation grew
animated, and the feast was at its height, that Glyndon
arrived at the palace. The porter, perceiving by his dress
that he was not one of the invited guests, told him that his
Excellency was engaged and on no account could be dis-
turbed; and Glyndon then, for the first time, became aware
how strange and embarrassing was the duty he had taken
on himself. To force an entrance into the banquet hall of
a great and powerful noble, surrounded by the rank of
Naples, and to arraign him for what to his boon companions
would appear but an act of gallantry, was an exploit that
could not fail to be at once ludicrous and impotent. He
mused a moment; and, slipping a piece of gold into the
porter’s hand, said that he was commissioned to seek the
Signor Zanoni upon an errand of life and death; and easily
won his way across the court and into the interior building.
He passed up the broad staircase, and the voices and merri-
ment of the revellers smote his ear at a distance. At the
entrance of the reception-rooms he found a page, whom he
despatched with a message to Zanoni. The page did the
errand; and Zanoni, on hearing the whispered name of
Glyndon, turned to his host.

“Pardon me, my lord; an English friend of mine, the
Signor Glyndon (not unknown by name to your Excellency),
waits without—the business must indeed be urgent on
which he has sought mein such an hour. You will for-
give my momentary absence.”

“Nay, Signor,” answered the Prince, courteously, but
with a sinister smile on his countenance, “would it not be
better for your friend tojoinus? An Englishman is welcome
everywhere; and even were he a Dutchman, your friend-
ship would invest his presence with attraction. Pray his
attendance,—we would not spare you even for a mo-
ment.”

Zanoni bowed—the page was despatched with all flatter-
ing messages to Glyndon—a seat next to Zanoni was placed
for him, and the young Englishman entered.

216 ZANONI.

“You are most welcome, sir. I trust your business to
our illustrious guest is of good omen and pleasant import.
If you bring evil news, defer it, I pray you.”

Glyndon’s brow was sullen; and he was about to startle
the guests by his reply, when Zanoni, touching his arm
significantly, whispered in English: “I know why you have
sought me. Be silent, and witness what ensues.”

“You know, then, that Viola, whom you boasted you had
the power to save from danger——”

“Ts in this house!—yes. I know also that Murder sits
at the right hand of our host. But his fate is now separ-
ated from hers for ever; and the mirror which glasses it to
my eye is clear through the steams of blood. Be still, and
Jearn the fate that awaits the wicked!”

“My lord,” said Zanoni, speaking aloud, “the Signor
Glyndon has indeed brought me Hidings not wholly unex-
pected. I am compelled to leave Naples—an additional
motive to make the most of the present hour.”

“And what, if I may venture to ask, may be the cause
that brings such affliction on the fair dames of Naples?”

“Tt is the approaching death of one who honoured me
with most loyal friendship,” replied Zanoni, gravely.
“Tet us not speak of it; grief cannot put back the dial.
As we supply by new flowers those that fade in our
vases, SO it is the secret of worldly wisdom to replace by
fresh friendships those that fade from our path.”

“True philosophy!” exclaimed the Prince. “‘Not to
admire,’ was the Roman’s maxim; ‘Never to mourn’ is
mine. There is nothing in life to grieve for, save, indeed,
Signor Zanoni, when some young beauty on whom we have
set our hearts slips from our grasp. In such a moment we
have need of all our wisdom, not to suecumb to despair,
and shake hands with death. What say you, Signor?
You smile! ‘Such never could be your lot. Pledge me in
a sentiment—‘Long life to the fortunate lover—a quick re-
lease to the baffled suitor!’ ”

“I pledge you,” said Zanoni. And as the fatal wine was

4

————— a a ee ee

ZANONI. 217

poured into his glass, he repeated, fixing his eyes on the
Prince, “I pledge you even in this wine!”

He lifted the glass to his lips. The Prince seemed
ghastly pale while the gaze of his guest bent upon him,
with an intent and stern brightness beneath which the con-
science-stricken host cowered and quailed. Not till he had
drained the draught, and replaced the glass upon the board,
did Zanoni turn his eyes from the Prince; and he then
said, “ Your wine has been kept too long; it has lost its
virtues. It might disagree with many, but do not fear; it
will not harm me, Prince. Signor Mascari, you are a judge
of the grape; will you favour us with your opinion?”

“Nay,” answered Mascari, with well-affected composure,
“T like not the wines of Cyprus; they are heating. Per-
haps Signor Glyndon may not have the same distaste?
The English are said to love their potations warm and
pungent.”

“Do you wish my friend also to taste the wine, Prince?”
said Zanoni. ‘“ Recollect, all cannot drink it with the same
impunity as myself.”

“No,” said the Prince, hastily; “if you do not recom-
mend the wine, Heaven forbid that we should constrain our
guest! My Lord Duke,” turning to one of the Frenchmen,
“yours is the true soil of Bacchus. What think you of this
cask from Burgundy? Has it borne the journey?”

“Ah,” said Zanoni, “let us change both the wine and the
theme.”

With that, Zanoni grew yet more animated and brilliant.
Never did wit more sparkling, airy, exhilarating, flash from
the lips of reveller. His spirits fascinated all present—
even the Prince himself, even Glyndon—with a strange
and wild contagion. The former, indeed, whom the words
and gaze of Zanoni, when he drained the poison, had filled
with fearful misgivings, now hailed in the brilliant elo-
quence of his wit a certain sign of the operation of the
bane. The wine circulated fast; but none seemed conscious
of its effects, One by one the rest of the party fell intoa

218 ZANONI.

charmed and spellbound silence, as Zanoni continued to
pour forth sally upon sally, tale upon tale. They hung on
his words, they almost held their breath to listen. Yet,
how bitter was his mirth!—how full of contempt for the
triflers present, and for the trifles which made their life.

Night came on; the room grew dim, and the feast had
lasted several hours longer than was the customary duration.
of similar entertainments at that day. Still the guests
stirred not, and still Zanoni continued, with glittering eye
and mocking lip, to lavish his stores of intellect and anec-
dote, when suddenly the moon rose, and shed its rays over
the flowers and fountains in the court without, leaving the
room itself half in shadow and half tinged by a quiet and
ghostly light.

It was then that Zanoni rose.

“Well, gentlemen,” said he, “we have not yet wearied
our host, I hope; and his garden offers a new temptation to
protract our stay. Have you no musicians among your
train, Prince, that might regale our ears while we inhale
the fragrance of your orange trees?”

“An excellent thought!” said the Prince. ‘“ Mascari,
see to the music.”

The party rose simultaneously to adjourn to the garden;
and then, for the first time, the effect of the wine they had
drunk seemed to make itself felt.

With flushed cheeks and unsteady steps they came into
the open air, which tended yet more to stimulate that glow-
ing fever of the grape. As if to make up for the silence
with which the guests had hitherto listened to Zanoni,
every tongue was now loosened—every man talked, no man
listened. There was something wild and fearful in the
contrast between the calm beauty of the night and scene,
and the hubbub and clamour of these disorderly roysterers.
One of the Frenchmen, in especial, the young Duc de
R——, a nobleman of the highest rank, and of all the
quick, vivacious, and irascible temperament of his country-
men, was particularly noisy and excited, And as circum-

ZANONI. 219

stances, the remembrance of which is still preserved among
certain circles of Naples, rendered it afterwards necessary
that the Duc should himself give evidence of what occurred,
I will here translate the short account he drew up, and
which was kindly submitted to me some few years ago by
my accomplished and lively friend, il Cavaliere di B——.

“T never remember,” writes the Duc, “to have felt my
spirits so excited as on that evening; we were like so many
boys released from school, jostling each other as we reeled
or ran down the flight of seven or eight stairs that
led from the colonnade into the garden,—some laughing,
some whooping, some scolding, some babbling. The wine
had brought out, as it were, each man’s inmost character.
Some were loud and quarrelsome, others sentimental and
whining; some whom we had hitherto thought dull, most
mirthful; some whom we had ever regarded as discreet and
taciturn, most garrulous and uproarious. I remember
that in the midst of our clamorous gaiety, my eye fell upon
the cavalier, Signor Zanoni, whose conversation had so
enchanted us all; and I felt a certain chill come over me
to perceive that he wore the same calm and unsympathising
smile upon his countenance which had characterised it in
his singular and curious stories of the Court of Louis XIV.
I felt, indeed, half inclined to seek a quarrel with one whose
composure was almost an insult to our disorder. Nor was
such an effect of this irritating and mocking tranquillity
confined to myself alone. Several of the party have told
me since, that, on looking at Zanoni, they felt their blood
yet more heated, and gaiety changed to resentment. There
seemed in his icy smile a very charm to wound vanity and
provoke rage. It was at this moment that the Prince came
up to me, and, passing his arm into mine, led me a little
apart from the rest. He had certainly indulged in the
game excess as ourselves, but it did not produce the same
effect of noisy excitement. There was, on the contrary,
a certain cold arrogance and supercilious scorn in his bear-

220 ZANONI.

ing and language, which, even while affecting so much ca-
ressing courtesy towards me, roused my self-love against
him. He seemed as if Zanoni had infected him; and in
imitating the manner of his guest, he surpassed the origi-
nal. He rallied me on some court gossip, which had hon-
ored my name by associating it with a certain beautiful and
distinguished Sicilian lady, and affected to treat with con-
tempt that which, had it been true, I should have regarded
asa boast. He spoke, indeed, as if he himself had gathered
all the flowers of Naples, and left us foreigners only the
gleanings he had scorned. At this, my natural and na-
tional gallantry was piqued, and I retorted by some sar-
casms that I should certainly have spared had my blood
been cooler. He laughed heartily, and left me in a strange
fit of resentment and anger. Perhaps (I must own the
truth) the wine had produced in me a wild disposition to
take offence and provoke quarrel. As the Prince left me,
I turned and saw Zanoni at my side.

“<The Prince is a braggart,’ said he, with the same smile
that displeased me before. ‘He would monopolise all for-
tune and all love. Let us take our revenge.’

“*And how?’

“<«Ffe has, at this moment, in his house the most enchant-
ing singer in Naples—the celebrated Viola Pisani. She is
here, it is true, not by her own choice; he carried her hither
by force, but he will pretend that she adores him. Let us
insist on his producing this secret treasure, and when she
enters, the Duc de R—— can have no doubt that his flat-
teries and attentions will charm the lady, and provoke all
the jealous fears of our host. It would bea fair revenge
upon his imperious self-conceit.’

“«This suggestion delighted me. I hastened to the Prince.
At that instant the musicians had just commenced; I waved
my hand, ordered the music to stop, and addressing the
Prince, who was standing in the centre of one of the gayest
groups, complained of his want of hospitality in affording
to us such poor proficients in the art, while he reserved for

ZANONI. 221

his own solace the lute and voice of the first performer in
Naples. I demanded half laughingly, half seriously, that
he should produce the Pisani. My demand was received
with shouts of applause by the rest. We drowned the
replies of our host with uproar, and would hear no denial.
‘Gentlemen,’ at last said the Prince, when he could obtain
an audience, ‘even were I to assent to your proposal, I
could not induce the Signora to present herself before an
assemblage as riotous as they are noble. You have too
much chivalry to use compulsion with her, though the Due
de R—— forgets himself sufficiently to administer it to me.’

“JT was stung by this taunt, however well deserved.
‘Prince,’ said I, ‘I have for the indelicacy of compulsion so
illustrious an example that I cannot hesitate to pursue the
path honoured by your own footsteps. All Naples knows
that the Pisani despises at once your gold and your love—
that force alone could have brought her under your roof;
and that you refuse to produce her, because you fear her
complaints, and know enough of the chivalry your vanity
sneers at to feel assured that the gentlemen of France are
not more disposed to worship beauty than to defend it from
wrong.’

“ “You speak well, sir,’ said Zanoni, gravely. ‘The Prince
dares not produce his prize!’

“The Prince remained speechless for a few moments, as
if with indignation. At last he broke out into expressions
the most injurious and insulting against Signor Zanoni and
myself. Zanoni replied not; I was more hot and hasty.
The guests appeared to delight in our dispute. None, ex-
cept Mascari, whom we pushed aside and disdained to hear,
strove to conciliate; some took one side, some another.
The issue may be well foreseen. Swords were called for
and procured. ‘Two were offered me by one of the party.
I was about to choose one, when Zanoni placed in my hand
the other, which, from its hilt, appeared of antiquated
workmanship. At the same moment, looking towards the
Prince, he said, smilingly, ‘The Duc takes your grandsire’s

222 ZANONI.

sword. Prince, you are too brave a man for superstition;
you have forgot the forfeit!’ Our host seemed to me to re-
coil and turn pale at those words; nevertheless, he returned
Zanoni’s smile with a look of defiance. The next moment
all was broil and disorder. ‘There might be some six or
eight persons engaged in a strange and confused kind of
mélée, but the Prince and myself only sought each other.
The noise around us, the confusion of the guests, the cries
of the musicians, the clash of our own swords, only served
to stimulate our unhappy fury. We feared to be inter-
rupted by the attendants, and fought like madmen, without
skill or method. I thrust and parried mechanically, blind
and frantic as if a demon had entered into me, till I saw
the Prince stretched at my feet, bathed in his blood, and
Zanoni bending over him and whispering in his ear. That
sight cooled us all. The strife ceased; we gathered in
shame, remorse, and horror round our ill-fated host—but it
was too late—his eyes rolled fearfully in his head. I have
seen many men die, but never one who wore such horror
on his countenance. At last, all was over! Zanoni rose
from the corpse, and, taking with great composure the
sword from my hand, said, calmly—‘ Ye are witnesses, gen-
tlemen, that the Prince brought his fate upon himself. The
last of that illustrious house has perished in a brawl.’

“T saw no more of Zanoni. I hastened to our envoy to
narrate the event, and abide the issue. I am grateful to
the Neapolitan government, and to the illustrious heir of
the unfortunate nobleman, for the lenient and generous,
yet just, interpretation put upon a misfortune, the memory
of which will afflict me to the last hour of my life.

“ (Signed) Louis Vicror, Duc pE R.”

In the above memorial, the reader will find the most ex-
act and minute account yet given of an event which created
the most lively sensation at Naples in that day.

Glyndon had taken no part in the affray, neither had he
participated largely in the excesses of the revel. For his

ZANONI. 223

exemption from both, he was perhaps indebted to the whis-
pered exhortations of Zanoni. When the last rose from the
corpse, and withdrew from that scene of confusion, Glyn-
don remarked that in passing the crowd he touched Mascari
on the shoulder, and said something which the Englishman
did not overhear. Glyndon followed Zanoni into the ban-
quet-room, which, save where the moonlight slept on the
marble floor, was wrapt in the sad and gloomy shadows of
‘the advancing night.

“How could you foretell this fearful event? He fell not
by your arm!” said Glyndon, in a tremulous and hollow
tone.

“The general who calculates on the victory does not fight
in person,” answered Zanoni; “let the past sleep with the
dead. Meet me at midnight by the sea-shore, half a mile
to the left of your hotel. You will know the spot by a
rude pillar—the only one near—to which a broken chain is
attached. There and then, if thou wouldst learn our lore,
thou shalt find the master. Go;—I have business here yet.
Remember, Viola is still in the house of the dead man!”

Here Mascari approached, and Zanoni, turning to the
Italian, and waving his hand to Glyndon, drew the former
aside. Glyndon slowly departed.

“Mascari,” said Zanoni, “your patron is no more; your
services will be valueless to his heir; a sober man, whom
poverty has preserved from vice. For yourself, thank me
that I do not give you up to the executioner; recollect the
wine of Cyprus. Well, never tremble, man; it could not
act on me, though it might re-act on others; in that it isa
common type of crime. I forgive you; and if the wine
should kill me, I promise you that my ghost shall not haunt
so worshipful a penitent. Enough of this; conduct me to
the chamber of Viola Pisani. You have no further need of
her. The death of the gaoler opens the cell of the captive.
Be quick, I would be gone.”

Mascari muttered some inaudible words, bowed low, and
led the way to the chamber in which Viola was confined,

224 ZANONI.

CHAPTER XVIII.

“Merc. Tell me, therefore, what thou seekest after, and what
thou wilt have. What dost thou desire to make?
*Ance. The Philosopher's Stone. ”
SANDIVOGIUS,

Ir wanted several minutes of midnight, and Glyndon re-
paired to the appointed spot. The mysterious empire which
Zanoni had acquired over him was still more solemnly con-
firmed by the events of the last few hours; the sudden fate
of the Prince, so deliberately foreshadowed, and yet so
seemingly accidental, brought out by causes the most com-
monplace, and yet associated with words the most pro-
phetie, impressed him with the deepest sentiments of ad-
miration and awe. It was asif this dark and wondrous
being could convert the most ordinary events and the mean-
est instruments into the agencies of his inscrutable will;
yet, if so, why have permitted the capture of Viola? — Why
not have prevented the crime, rather than punish the crimi-
nal? And did Zanoni really feel love for Viola? Love,
and yet offer to resign her to himself; to a rival whom his
arts could not have failed to baffle. He no longer reverted
to the belief that Zanoni or Viola had sought to dupe him
into marriage. His fear and reverence for the former now
forbade the notion of so poor an imposture. Did he any
longer love Viela himself? No; when that morning he had
heard of her danger, he had, it is true, returned to the

sympathies and the fears of affection; but with the death .

of the Prince her image faded again from his heart, and he
felt no jealous pang at the thought that she had been saved
by Zanoni,—that at that moment she was, perhaps, beneath
his roof. Whoever has, in the course of his life, indulged
the absorbing passion of the gamester, will remember how
all other pursuits and objects vanished from his mind; how
solely he was wrapped in the one wild delusion; with what

—— »

ZANONI. 225

a sceptre of magic power the despot-demon ruled every feel-
ing and every thought. Far more intense than the passion
of the gamester was the frantic yet sublime desire that
mastered the breast of Glyndon. He would be the rival of
Zanoni, not in human and perishable affections, but in pre-
ternatural and eternal lore. He would have laid down life
with content—nay, rapture, as the price of learning those
solemn secrets which separated the stranger from mankind.
Enamoured of the goddess of goddesses, he stretched forth
his arms—the wild Ixion—and embraced a cloud!

The night was most lovely and serene, and the waves
scarcely rippled at his feet, as the Englishman glided on by
the cool and starry beach. At length he arrived at the spot,
and there, leaning against the broken pillar, he beheld a
man wrapped in a long mantle, and in an attitude of pro-
found repose. He approached and uttered the name of
Zanoni. The figure turned, and he saw the face of a
stranger; a face not stamped by the glorious beauty of
Zanoni, but equally majestic in its aspect, and perhaps still
more impressive from the mature age and the passionless
depth of thought that characterised the expanded forehead,
and deep-set but piercing eyes.

“You seek Zanoni,” said the stranger, “he will be here
anon; but, perhaps, he whom you see before you is more
connected with your destiny, and more disposed to realise
your dreams.”

“ Hath the earth then another Zanoni?”

“Tf not,” replied the stranger, “why do you cherish the
hope and the wild faith to be yourself a Zanoni? Think
you that none others have burned with the same godlike
dream? Who, indeed, in his first youth—youth when the
soul is nearer to the heaven from which it sprung, and its
divine and primal longings are not all effaced by the sordid
passions and petty cares that are begot in time—who is
there in youth that has not nourished the belief that the
universe has secrets not known to the common herd, and
panted, as the hart for the water-springs, for the fountains

“15

226 ZANONI.

that lie hid and far away amidst the broad wilderness of
trackless science? The music of the fountain is heard in
the soul, within, till the steps, deceived and erring, rove
away from its waters, and the wanderer dies in the mighty
desert. Think you that none who have cherished the hope
have found the truth? or that the yearning after the In-
effable Knowledge was given to us utterly in vain? No!
Every desire in human hearts is but a glimpse of things
that exist, alike distant and divine. No! in the world there
have been from age to age some brighter and happier spirits
who have attained to the air in which the beings above
mankind move and breathe. Zanoni, great though he be,
stands not alone. He has had his predecessors, and long
lines of successors may be yet to come.”

“And will you tell me,” said Glyndon, “that in yourself
I behold one of that mighty few over whom Zanoni has no
superiority in power and wisdom?”

“In me,” answered the stranger, “you see one from
whom Zanoni himself learned some of his loftiest secrets.
On these shores, on this spot have I stood in ages that your
chroniclers but feebly reach. The Phcenician, the Greek,
the Oscan, the Roman, the Lombard, I have seen them
all!—leaves gay and glittering on the trunk of the universal
life, scattered in due season and again renewed; till indeed,
the same race that gave its glory to the ancient world be-
stowed a second youth upon the new. For the pure Greeks,
the Hellenes, whose origin has bewildered your dreaming
scholars, were of the same great family as the Norman
tribe, born to be the lords of the universe, and in no land
on earth destined to become the hewers of wood. Even
the dim traditions of the learned, which bring the sons of
Hellas from the vast and undetermined territories of north-
ern Thrace, to be the victors of the pastoral Pelasgi, and
the founders of the line of demi-gods;—which assign to a
population bronzed beneath the suns of the west, the blue-
eyed Minerva and the yellow-haired Achilles (physical
characteristics of the north);—which introduce amongst a

ZANONI. 227

pastoral people, warlike aristocracies and limited monarch-
ies, the feudalism of the classic time; even these might
serve you to trace back the primeval settlements of the
Hellenes to the same region whence, in later times, the
Norman warriors broke on the dull and savage hordes of the
Celt, and became the Greeks of the Christian world. But
this interests you not, and you are wise in your indiffer-
ence. Not in the knowledge of things without, but in the
perfections of the soul within, lies the empire of man aspir-
ing to be more than men.”

“And what books contain that science—from what labor-
atory is it wrought?”

“Nature supplies the materials; they are around you in
your daily walks. In the herbs that the beast devours and
the chemist disdains to cull; in the elements from which
matter in its meanest and its mightiest shapes is deduced;
in the wide bosom of the air; in the black abysses of the
earth; everywhere are given to mortals the resources anda
libraries of immortal lore. But as the simplest problems
in the simplest of all studies are obscure to one who braces
not his mind to their comprehension, as the rower in yonder
vessel cannot tell you why two circles can touch each other
only in one point; so, though all earth were carved over and
inscribed with the letters of diviner knowledge, the charac-
ters would be valueless to him who does not pause to in-
quire the language, and meditate thetruth. Young man,
if thy imagination is vivid, if thy heart is daring, if thy
curiosity is insatiate, I will accept thee as my pupil. But
the first lessons are stern and dread.”

“Tf thou hast mastered them, why not I?” answered Glyn-
don, boldly. “I have felt from my boyhood that strange
mysteries were reserved for my career; and from the proud-
est ends of ordinary ambition, I have carried my gaze into
the clouds and darkness that stretched beyond. ‘The in-
stant I beheld Zanoni, I felt as if I had discovered the
guide and the tutor for which my youth had idly languished
and vainly burned.”

228 ZANONI.

“And to me his duty is transferred,” replied the
stranger. “Yonder lies, anchored in the bay, the vessel
in which Zanoni seeks a fairer home; a little while,
and the breeze will rise, the sail will swell, and the stranger
will have passed, like a wind, away. Still, like the wind,
he leaves in thy heart the seeds that may bear the blossom
and the fruit. Zanoni hath performed his task, he is
wanted no more; the perfecter of his work is at thy side. ——
He comes! I hear the dash of the oar. You will have
your choice submitted to you. According as you decide,
we shall meet again.” With these words the stranger
moved slowly away, and disappeared beneath the shadow
of the cliffs. A boat glided rapidly across the waters; it
touched land; a man leaped on shore, and Glyndon recog-
nised Zanoni.

“T give, Glyndon, I give thee no more the option of happy
love and serene enjoyment. ‘That hour is past, and fate
linked the hand that might have been thine own to mine.
But I have ample gifts to bestow upon thee, if thou wilt
abandon the hope that gnaws thy heart, and the realisation
of which even J have not the power to foresee. Be thine
ambition human, and I can gratify it to the full. Men
desire four things in life—love, wealth, fame, power. The
first I cannot give thee, the rest are at thy disposal. Select
which of them thou wilt, and let us part in peace.”

“Sach are not the gifts I covet. I choose knowledge,
that knowledge must be thine own. For this, and for this
alone, I surrender the love of Viola; this, and this alone,
must be my recompense.”

“T cannot gainsay thee, though I can warn. The desire
to learn does not always contain the faculty to acquire. I
can give thee, it is true, the teacher—the rest must depend
on thee. Be wise in time, and take that which I can assure
to thee.”

“ Answer me but these questions, and according to your
answer I will decide. Is it in the power of man to attain
intercourse with the beings of other worlds? Is it in the

~~ ee T=.

ZANONI. 229

power of man to influence the elements, and to insure life
against the sword and against disease?”

“All this may be possible,” answered Zanoni, evasively,
“tothe few. But for one who attains such secrets, millions
may perish in the attempt.”

“One question more. Thou——”

“Beware! Of myself, as I have said before, I render no
account.”

“Well, then, the stranger I have met this night, are his
boasts to be believed? Is he in truth one of the chosen
seers whom you allow to have mastered the mysteries I
yearn to fathom?”

“Rash man,” said Zanoni, in a tone of compassion, “thy
crisis is past, and thy choice made! I can only bid thee be
bold, and prosper; yes, I resign thee to a master who has
the power and the will to open to thee the gates of an awful
world. Thy weal or woe are as naught in the eyes of his
relentless wisdom. I would bid him spare thee, but he
will heed me not. Mejnour, receive thy pupil!” Glyndon
turned, and his heart beat when he perceived that the
stranger, whose footsteps he had not heard upon the peb-
bles, whose approach he had not beheld in the moonlight,
was once more by his side!

“Farewell,” resumed Zanoni; “thy trial commences.
When next we meet thou wilt be the victim or the victor.”

Glyndon’s eyes followed the receding form of the
mysterious stranger. He saw him enter the boat, and he
then for the first time noticed that besides the rowers there
was a female, who stood up as Zanoni gained the boat.
Even at the distance he recognised the once-adored form of
Viola. She waved her hand to him, and across the still
and shining air came her voice, mournfully and sweetly
in her mother’s tongue—“ Farewell, Clarence—I forgive
thee!—farewell, farewell!”

He strove to answer, but the voice touched a chord at his
heart, and the words failed him. Viola was then lost for
ever; gone with this dread stranger; darkness was round

230 ZANONI.

her lot! And he himself had decided her fate and his own!
The boat bounded on, the soft waves flashed and sparkled
beneath the oars, and it was along one sapphire track of
moonlight that the frail vessel bore away the lovers.
Farther and farther from his gaze sped the boat, till at last
the speck, scarcely visible, touched the side of the ship that
lay lifeless in the glorious bay. At that instant, as if by
magic, up sprang, with a glad murmur, the playful and
freshening wind. And Glyndon turned to Mejnour and
broke the silence.

“Tell me (if thou canst read the future), tell me that her
lot will be fair, and that her choice at least is wise.”

“My pupil!” answered Mejnour, in a voice, the calmness
of which well accorded with the chilling words, “thy first
task must be to withdraw all thought, feeling, sympathy
from others. The elementary stage of knowledge is to
make self, and self alone, thy study and thy world. Thou
hast decided thine own career; thou hast renounced love;
~ thou hast rejected wealth, fame, and the vulgar pomps of
power. What then are all mankind to thee? To perfect
thy faculties, and concentrate thy emotions, is henceforth
thy only aim!”

“ And will happiness be the end?”

“Tf happiness exists,” answered Mejnour, “it must be
centred in a sELF to which all passion is unknown. But
happiness is the last stage of being; and as yet thou art
on the threshold of the first.”

As Mejnour spoke, the distant vessel spread its sails to
the wind, and moved slowly along the deep. Glyndon
sighed, and the pupil and the master retraced their steps
towards the city.

BOOK THE FOURTH.
THE DWELLER OF THE THRESHOLD.

“Sey hinter ihm was will! Ich heb’ ihn auf.”!
Das VERSCHLEIERTE BILD zvU Sals,

CHAPTER I.

“Comme vittima io vengo all’ ara. ”!
Merast., At. ii. sc. vii.

Ir was about a month after the date of Zanoni’s depart-
ure, and Glyndon’s introduction to Mejnour, when two
Englishmen were walking, arm in arm, through the Toledo.

“T tell you,” said one (who spoke warmly), “that if you
have a particle of common sense left in you, you will ac-
company me to England. This Mejnour is an impostor
more dangerous, because more in earnest, than Zanoni.
After all, what do his promises amount to? You allow
that nothing can be more equivocal. You say that he has left
Naples—that he has selected a retreat more congenial than
the crowded thoroughfares of men to the studies in which he
is to initiate you; and this retreat is among the haunts of the
fiercest bandits of Italy—haunts which justice itself dares
not penetrate. Fitting hermitage forasage! I tremble for
you. What if this stranger—of whom nothing is known—be
leagued with the robbers; and these lures for your credulity
bait but the traps for your property—perhaps your life? You
might come off cheaply by a ransom of half your fortune.
You smile indignantly! Well; put common sense out of

1Be behind what there may—I raise the veil.
2 Asa victim I go to the altar.

232 ZANONI.

the question; take your own view of the matter. You are
to undergo an ordeal which Mejnour himself does not pro-
fess to describe as a very tempting one. It may, or it may
not succeed; if it does not, you are menaced with the dark-
est evils; and if it does, you cannot be better off than the
dull and joyless mystic whom you have taken for a master.
Away with this folly; enjoy youth while it is left to you.
Return with me to England; forget these dreams. Enter
your proper career; form affections more respectable than
those which lured you a while to an Italian adventuress.
Attend to your fortune, make money, and become a happy
and distinguished man. This is the advice of sober friend-
ship; yet the promises I hold out to you are fairer than
those of Mejnour.”

“Mervale,” said Glyndon, doggedly, “I cannot, if I
would, yield to your wishes. A power that is above me
urges me on; I cannot resist its influence. I will proceed
to the last in the strange career I have commenced. Think
of me nomore. Follow yourself the advice you give to me,
and be happy.”

“This is madness,” said Mervale; “your health is already
failing; you are so changed I should scarcely know you.
Come; I have already had your name entered in my pass-
port; in another hour I shall be gone, and you, boy that
you are, will be left without a friend, to the deceits of your
own fancy and the machinations of this relentless mounte-
bank.”

“Enough,” said Glyndon, coldly; “you cease to be an
effective counsellor when you suffer your prejudices to be
thus evident. I have already had ample proof,” added the
Englishman, and his pale cheek grew more pale, “of the
power of this man—if man he be, which I sometimes doubt—
and, come life, come death, I will not shrink from the paths
that allure me. Farewell, Mervale, if we never meet
again,—if you hear, amidst our old and cheerful haunts,
that Clarence Glyndon sleeps the last sleep by the shores
of Naples, or amidst yon distant hills, say to the friends of

ZANONI, 200

our youth—‘He died worthily, as thousands of Martyr-
students have died before him, in the pursuit of knowl-
edge.’”

He wrung Mervale’s hand as he spoke, darted from his
side, and disappeared amidst the crowd.

By the corner of the Toledo he was arrested by Nicot.

“Ah, Glyndon! I have not seen you this month. Where
have you hid yourself? Have you been absorbed in your
studies?”

(74 Yes. 2)

“T am about to leave Naples for Paris. Will you ac-
company me? Talent of all order is eagerly sought for
there, and will be sure to rise.”

“JT thank you; I have other schemes for the present.”

“So laconic!—what ails you? Do you grieve for the loss
of the Pisani? ‘Take example by me. I have already con-
soled myself with Bianca Sacchini—a handsome woman
—enlightened—no prejudices. A valuable creature I shall
find her, no doubt. But as for this Zanoni!—”

“What of him?”

“Tf ever I paint an allegorical subject, I will take his
likeness as Satan. Ha! ha! a true painter’s revenge—eh?
And the way of the world, too! When we can do nothing
else against a man whom we hate, we can at least paint his
effigies as the devil’s. Seriously, though, I abhor that
man—”

“ Wherefore?”

“ Wherefore! Has he not carried off the wife and the
dowry I had marked for myself? Yet after all,” added
Nicot, musingly, “had he served instead of injured me, I
should have hated him all the same. His very form, and
his very face, made me at once envy and detest him. I
feel that there is something antipathetic in our natures.
T feel, too, that we shall meet again, when Jean Nicot’s
hate may be less impotent. We, too, cher confrére—we,
too, may meet again! Vive la République! Ito my new
world !”—

234 ZANONI.

“And Ito mine. Farewell!”

That day Mervale left Naples; the next morning Glyn-
don also quitted the City of Delight, alone, and on horse-
back. He went his way into those picturesque, but dan-
gerous parts of the country which at that time were infested
by banditti, and which few travellers dared to pass, even
in broad daylight, without a strong escort. A road more
lonely cannot well be conceived than that on which the
hoofs of his steed, striking upon the fragments of rock that
encumbered the neglected way, woke a dull and melancholy
echo. Large tracts of waste land, varied by the rank and
profuse foliage of the south, lay before him; occasionally,
a wild goat peeped down from some rocky crag, or the dis-
cordant cry of a bird of prey, startled in its sombre haunt,
was heard above the hills. These were the only signs of
life; not a human being was met—not a hut was visible.
Wrapped in his own ardent and solemn thoughts, the young
man continued his way, till the sun had spent its noonday
heat, and a breeze that announced the approach of eve
sprang up from the unseen ocean which lay far distant to
his right. It was then that a turn in the road brought
before him one of those long, desolate, gloomy villages
which are found in the interior of the Neapolitan domin-
ions; and now he came upon a small chapel on one side the
road, with a gaudily painted image of the Virgin in the
open shrine. Around this spot, which, in the heart of a
Christian land, retained the vestige of the old idolatry (for
just such were the chapels that in the pagan age were dedi-
cated to the denion-saints of mythclogy) gathered six or
seven miserable and squalid wretches, whom the Curse of
the Leper had cut off from mankind. They set up a shrill
cry as they turned their ghastly visages towards the horse-
man; and, without stirring from the spot, stretched out
their gaunt arms, and implored charity in the name of the
Merciful Mother! Glyndon hastily threw them some small
coins, and, turning away his face, clapped spurs to his
horse, and relaxed not his speed till he entered the village.

ZANONI. 235

On either side the narrow and miry street, fierce and hag-
gard forms—some leaning against the ruined walls of
blackened huts, some seated at the threshold, some lying
at full length in the mud—presented groups that at once
invoked pity and aroused alarm: pity for their squalor,
alarm for the ferocity imprinted on their savage aspects.
They gazed at him, grim and sullen, as he rode slowly up
the rugged street; sometimes whispering significantly to
each other, but without attempting to stop his way. Even
the children hushed their babble, and ragged urchins,
devouring him with sparkling eyes, muttered to their
mothers, “ We shall feast well to-morrow!” It was, in-
deed, one of those hamlets in which Law sets not its sober
step, in which Violence and Murder house secure—hamlets
common then in the wilder parts of Italy—in which the
peasant was but the gentler name for the robber.

Glyndon’s heart somewhat failed him as he looked around,
and the question he desired to ask died upon his lips. At
length, from one of the dismal cabins emerged a form
superior to the rest. Instead of the patched and ragged
overall, which made the only garment of the men he had
hitherto seen, the dress of this person was characterised by
all the trappings of the national bravery. Upon his raven
hair, the glossy curls of which made a notable contrast to
the matted and elfin locks of the savages around, was placed
a cloth cap with a gold tassel that hung down to his shoulder,
his moustaches were trimmed with care, and a silk kerchief
of gay hues was twisted round a well-shaped but sinewy
throat; a short jacket of rough cloth was decorated with
several rows of gilt filigree buttons; his nether garments
fitted tight to his limbs, and were curiously braided;
while, in a broad parti-coloured sash, were placed two silver-
hilted pistols, and the sheathed knife, usually worn by
Italians of the lower order, mounted in ivory elaborately
carved.

A small carbine of handsome workmanship was slung
across his shoulder, and completed his costume. The man

236 ZANONI.

himself was of middle size, athletic yet slender, with
straight and regular features, sunburnt, but not swarthy;
and an expression of countenance which, though reckless
and bold, had in it frankness rather than ferocity, and, if
defying, was not altogether unprepossessing.

Glyndon, after eying this figure for some moments with
great attention, checked his rein, and asked the way to the
“Castle of the Mountain.”

The man lifted his cap as he heard the question, and,
approaching Glyndon, laid his hand upon the neck of the
horse, and said, in a low voice, “Then you are the cavalier
whom our patron the signor expected. He bade me wait
for you here, and lead you to the castle. And indeed, sig-
nor, it might have been unfortunate if I had neglected to
obey the command.”

The man then, drawing a little aside, called out to the
bystanders, in a loud voice, “Ho, ho! my friends, pay
henceforth and for ever all respect to this worshipful cava-
lier. He is the expected guest of our blessed patron of the
Castle of the Mountain. Long hfe to him! May he, like
his host, be safe by day and by night—on the hill and in
the waste—against the dagger and the bullet—in limb and
in hfe! Cursed be he who touches a hair of his head, ora
baioccho in his pouch. Now and for ever we will protect
and honour him—for the law or against the law—with the
faith and to the death. Amen! Amen!”

“Amen!” responded, in wild chorus, a hundred voices;
and the scattered and straggling groups pressed up the
street, nearer and nearer to the horseman.

“And that he may be known,” continued the English-
man’s strange protector, “to the eye and to the ear, I place
around him the white sash, and I give him the sacred
watchword—‘ Peace to the Brave.’ Signor, when you wear
this sash, the proudest in these parts will bare the head
and bend the knee. Signor, when you utter this watch-
word, the brayest hearts will be bound to your bidding.
Desire you safety, or ask you revenge—to gain a beauty,

ZANONI. 237

or to lose a foe—speak but the word, and we are yours—
we are yours! Is it not so, comrades?” And again the
hoarse voices shouted, ‘“ Amen, Amen!”

“Now, signor,” whispered the bravo, “if you have a few
coins to spare, scatter them amongst the crowd, and let us
be gone.”

Glyndon, not displeased at the concluding sentence,
emptied his purse in the streets; and while, with mingled
oaths, blessings, shrieks, and yells, men, women, and
children scrambled for the money, the bravo, taking the
rein of the horse, led it a few paces through the village at
a brisk trot, and then, turning up a narrow lane to the left,
in a few minutes neither house nor men were visible, and
the mountains closed their path on either side. It was then
that, releasing the bridle and slackening his pace, the guide
turned his dark eyes on Glyndon with an arch expression,
and said:

“Your Excellency was not, perhaps, prepared for the
hearty welcome we have given you.”

“Why, in truth, 1 owght to have been prepared for it,
since the signor to whose house I am bound did not disguise
from me the character of the neighbourhood. And your
name, my friend, if I may so call you?”

“©, no ceremonies with me, Excellency. In the village
I am generally called Maéstro Pdolo. I had a surname
once, though a very equivocal one; and I have forgotten
that since I retired from the world.”

“ And was it from disgust, from poverty, or from some—
some ebullition of passion which entailed punishment, that
you betook yourself to the mountains?”

“Why, signor,” said the bravo, with a gay laugh, “her-
mits of my class seldom love the confessional. However,
I have no secrets while my step is in these defiles, my
whistle in my pouch, and my carbine at my back.” With
that the robber, as if he loved permission to talk at his will,
hemmed thrice, and began with much humour; though as
his tale proceeded, the memories it roused seemed to carry

238 ZANONI.

him farther than he at first intended, and reckless and light-
hearted ease gave way to that fierce and varied play of
countenance and passion of gesture which characterise the
emotions of his countrymen.

“T was born at Terracina—a fair spot, is it not? My
father was a Jearned monk, of high birth; my mother—
Heaven rest her!—an innkeeper’s pretty daughter. Of
course there could be no marriage in the case! and when I
was born, the monk gravely declared my appearance to be
miraculous. I was dedicated from my cradle to the altar;
and my head was universally declared to be the orthodox
shape fora cowl. As I grew up, the monk took great pains
with my education; and I learned Latin and psalmody as
soon as less miraculous infants learn crowing. Nor did the
holy man’s care stint itself to my interior accomplishments.
Although vowed to poverty, he always contrived that my
mother should have her pockets full: and between her
pockets and mine there was soon established a clandestine
communication; accordingly, at fourteen, I wore my cap on
one side, stuck pistols in my belt, and assumed the swagger
of acavalier anda gallant. At that age my poor mother
died; and about the same period, my father, having written
a History of the Pontifical Bulls, in forty volumes, and
being, as I said, of high birth, obtained a cardinal’s hat.
From that time he thought fit to disown your humble
servant. He bound me over to an honest notary at Naples,
and gave me two hundred crowns by way of provision.
Well, signor, I saw enough of the law to convince me that
I should never be rogue enough to shine in the profession.
So, instead of spoiling parchment, I made love to the
notary’s daughter. My master discovered our innocent
amusement, and turned me out of doors; that was disagree-
able. But my Ninetta loved me, and took care that I
should not lie out in the streets with the lazzaroni. Little
jade, I think I see her now, with her bare feet and her
finger to her lips, opening the door in the summer nights,
and bidding me creep softly into the kitchen, where, praised

ZANONI. 239

be the saints! a flask and a manchet always awaited the
hungry amoroso. At last, however, Ninetta grew cold. It
is the way of the sex, signor. Her father found her an ex-
cellent marriage in the person of a withered old picture-
dealer. She took the spouse, and very properly clapped
the door in the face of the lover. I was not disheartened,
Excellency; no, not I. Women are plentiful while we are
young. So, without a ducat in my pocket, or a crust for
my teeth, I set out to seek my fortune on board of a Span-
ish merchantman. That was duller work than I expected;
but luckily we were attacked by a pirate—half the crew
were butchered, the rest captured. I was one of the last—
always in luck, you see, signor—monks’ sons have a knack
that way! The captain of the pirates took a fancy to me.
‘Serve with us?’ said he. ‘Too happy!’ said I. Behold
me, then, a pirate! O jolly life! how I blest the old notary
for turning me out of doors! What feasting, what fighting,
what wooing, what quarrelling! Sometimes we ran ashore
and enjoyed ourselves like princes: sometimes we lay in a
calm for days together on the loveliest sea that man ever
traversed. And then, if the breeze rose and a sail came in
sight, who so merry as we? I passed three years in that
charming profession, and then, signor, I grew ambitious.
I caballed against the captain; I wanted his post. One
still night we struck the biow. The ship was like a log in
the sea, no land to be seen from the mast-head, the waves
like glass, and the moon at its full. Up we rose; thirty of
us and more. Up we rose with a shout; we poured into
the captain’s cabin, I at the head. The brave old boy had
caught the alarm, and there he stood at the doorway, a pistol
in each hand; and his one eye (he had only one!) worse to
meet than the pistols were.

“¢Vield!’ cried I, ‘your life shall be safe.’

“Take that,’ said he, and whiz went the pistol; but the
saints took care of their own, and the ball’ passed by my
cheek, and shot the boatswain behind me. I closed with
the captain, and the other pistol went off without mischief

240 ZANONI.

in the struggle. Such a fellow he was—six feet four with-
out his shoes! Over we went, rolling each on the other.
Santa Maria! no time to get hold of one’s knife. Mean-
while, all the crew were up, some for the captain, some for
me, clashing and firing, and swearing and groaning, and
now and then a heavy splash in the sea! Fine supper for
the sharks that night! At last old Bilboa got uppermost;
out flashed his knife; down it came—but not in my heart.
No! I gave my left arm as a shield, and the blade went
through to the hilt, with the blood spirting up like the rain
from a whale’s nostril! With the weight of the blow the
stout fellow came down, so that his face touched mine;
with my right hand I caught him by the throat, turned him
over like a lamb, signor, and faith it was soon all up with
him—the hoatswain’s brother, a fat Dutchman, ran him
through with a pike.
“*Qld fellow,’ said I, as he turned his terrible eye to me,
‘I bear you no malice, but we must try to get on in the
world, you know.’ The captain grinned and gave up the -
ghost. JI went upon deck—what a sight! Twenty bold
fellows, stark and cold, and the moon sparkling on the
puddles of blood as calmly as if it were water. Well, sig-
nor, the victory was ours, and the ship mine; I ruled mer-
rily enough for six months. We then attacked a French
ship twice our size; what sport it was! And we had not
had a good fight so long, we were quite like virgins at it!
We got the best of it, and won ship and cargo. They
wanted to pistol the captain, but that was against my laws;
so we gagged him, for he scolded as loud as if we were
married to him; left him and the rest of his crew on board
our own vessel, which was terribly battered; clapped our
black flag on the Frenchman’s, and set off merrily, with a
brisk wind in our favour. But luck deserted us on forsak-
ing our own dear old ship. A storm came on, a plank
struck; several of us escaped in the boat; we had lots of
gold with us, but no water! For two days and two nights
we suffered horribly; but at last we ran ashore near a

ZANONI. 241

French seaport. Our sorry plight moved compassion, and
as we had money we were not suspected—people only sus-
pect the poor. Here we soon recovered our fatigues, rigged
ourselves out gaily, and your humble servant was considered
as noble a captain as ever walked deck. But now, alas!
my fate would have it that I should fall in love with a silk-
mercer’s daughter. Ah, how I loved her!—the pretty
Clara! Yes. I loved her so well that I was seized with
horror at my past life! I resolved to repent, to marry her,
and settle down into an honest man. Accordingly, I sum-
moned my messmates, told them my resolution, resigned
my command, and persuaded them to depart. They were
good fellows; engaged with a Dutchman, against whom I
heard afterwards they made a successful mutiny, but I
never saw them more. I had two thousand crowns still

_ left; with this sum I obtained the consent of the silk-mer-

cer, and it was agreed that I should become a partner in
the firm. I need not say that no one suspected that I had
been so great a man, and I passed for a Neapolitan gold-
smith’s son instead of acardinal’s. I was very happy then,
signor, very—I could not have harmed a fly! Had I mar-

_ vied Clara, I had been as gentle a mercer as ever handled

a measure.”

The bravo paused a moment, and it was easy to see that
he felt more than his words and tone betokened. ‘ Well,
well, we must not look back at the past too earnestly—the
sunlight upon it makes one’s eyes water. The day was
fixed for our wedding—it approached. On the evening
before the appointed day, Clara, her mother, her little sis-
ter, and myself were walking by the port, and as we looked
on the sea I was telling them old gossip-tales of mermaids
and sea-serpents, when a red-faced, bottle-nosed Frenchman
clapped himself right before me, and placing his spectacles
very deliberately astride his proboscis, echoed out ‘Sacré
mille tonnerres / this is the damned pirate who boarded the
Niobe!’

“‘None of your jests,’ said I, mildly. ‘Ho, ho!’ said

16

242 ZANONI.

he; ‘I can’t be mistaken: help there!’ and he griped me
by the collar. I replied, as you may suppose, by laying
him in the kennel; but it would not do. The French cap-
tain had a French lieutenant at his back, whose memory
was as good as his chief’s. A crowd assembled; other
sailors came up; the odds were against me. I slept that
night in prison; and in a few weeks afterwards I was sent
to the galleys. They spared my life, because the old
Frenchman politely averred that I had made my crew spare
his. You may believe that the oar and the chain was not
to my taste. I and two others escaped; they took to the
road, and have, no doubt, been long since broken on the
wheel. JI, soft soul, would not commit another crime to
gain my bread, for Clara was still at my heart with her
sweet eyes: so limiting my rogueries to the theft of a beg-
gar’s rags, which I compensated by leaving him my galley
attire instead, I begged my way to the town where I left
Clara. It was a clear winter’s day when I approached the
outskirts of the town. I had no fear of detection, for my
beard and hair were as good asa mask. Oh, Mother of
Mercy! there came across my way a funeral procession.
There, now you know it; I can tell youno more. She had
died, perhaps of love, more likely of shame. Can you
guess how I spent that night? I stole a pick-axe from a
mason’s, and all alone and unseen, under the frosty heavens,
I dug the fresh mould from the grave; I lifted the coffin,
I wrenched the lid, I saw her again—again! Decay had
not touched her. She was always pale in life! I could
have sworn she lived. It was a blessed thing to see her
once more, and all alone, too! But then, at dawn, to give
her back to the earth—to close the lid, to throw down the
mould, to hear the pebbles rattle on the coffin—that was
dreadful! Signor, I never knew before, and I don’t wish
to think now, how valuable a thing human life is. At sun-
rise I was again a wanderer; but now that Clara was gone,
my scruples vanished, and again I was at war with my
betters. I contrived at last, at O——, to get taken on

ZANONI. 243

board a vessel bound to Leghorn, working out my passage.
From Leghorn I went to Rome, and stationed myself at the
door of the cardinal’s palace. Out he came, his gilded
coach at the gate.

“*Ho, father!’ said I; ‘don’t you know me?’

““Who are you?’

“*Your son,’ said I, in a whisper.

“The cardinal drew back, looked at me earnestly, and
mused a moment. ‘All men are my sons,’ quoth he then,
very mildly, ‘there is gold for thee! To him who begs once
alms are due; to him who begs twice jails are open. Take
the hint, and molest me no more. Heaven bless thee!’
With that he got into his coach, and drove off to the Vati-
can. His purse which he had left behind was well sup-
plied. I was grateful and contented, and took my way to
Terracina. I had not long passed the marshes, when I
saw two horsemen approach at a canter.
~ “*You look poor, friend,’ said one of them, halting; ‘yet
you are strong.’

“<“Poor men and strong are both serviceable and danger-
ous, Signor Cavalier.’

“Well said; follow us.’

“T obeyed, and became a bandit. IJrose by degrees; and
as I have always been mild in my calling, and have taken
purses without cutting throats, I bear an excellent charac-
ter, and can eat my macaroni at Naples without any danger
to life and limb. For the last two years I have settled in
these parts, where I hold sway, and where I have purchased
land. Iam called a farmer, signor; and I myself now only
rob for amusement, and to keep my hand in. I trust I have
satisfied your curiosity. We are within a hundred yards
of the castle.”

“And how,” asked the Englishman, whose interest had
been much excited by his companion’s narrative, “and how
came you acquainted with my host?—and by what means
has he so well conciliated the good will of yourself and
your friends?”

244 ZANONI.

Maéstro Paolo turned his black eyes very gravely towards
his questioner. ‘ Why, signor,” said he, “you must surely
know more of the foreign cavalier with the hard name than
Ido. All I can say is, that about a fortnight ago I chanced
to be standing by a booth in the Toledo at Naples, when a
sober-looking gentleman touched me by the arm, and said,
‘Maéstro Pdolo, I want to make your acquaintance; do me
the favour to come into yonder tavern, and drink a flask of
Lacrima.’ ‘Willingly,’ said I. So we entered the tavern.
When we were seated, my new acquaintance thus accosted
me: ‘The Count d’O—— has offered to let me hire his old
castle near B——. You know the spot?’

“*Extremely well; no one has inhabited it for a century
at least; it is half in ruins, signor. A queer place to hire;
I hope the rent is not heavy.’

““Maéstro Pdolo,’ said he, ‘I am a philosopher, and don’t
care for luxuries. I want a quiet retreat for some scientific
experiments. The castle will suit me very well, provided
you will accept me as a neighbour, and place me and my
friends under your special protection. I am rich; but I
shall take nothing to the castle worth robbing. I will pay
one rent to the count, and another to you.’

“With that we soon came to terms; and as the strange
signor doubled the sum I myself proposed, he is in high
favour with all his neighbours. We would guard the old
castle against anarmy. And now, signor, that I have been
thus frank, be frank with me. Who is this singular cava-
lier?”

“Who?—he himself told you, a philosopher.”

“Hem! searching for the philosopher’s stone,—eh? a
bit of a magician; afraid of the priests?”

“Precisely. You have hit it.”

“T thought so; and you are his pupil?”

cc iT am.”

“I wish you well through it,” said the robber seriously,
and crossing himself with much devotion; “I am not much
better than other people, but one’s soul is one’s soul. I do

ZANONI. 245

not mind a little honest robbery, or knocking a man on the
head if need be—but to make a bargain with the devil!—
Ah! take care, young gentleman, take care.”

“You need not fear,” said Glyndon, smiling; “my pre-
ceptor is too wise and too good for such a compact. But
here we are, I suppose. A noble ruin—a glorious pros-
pect!”

Glyndon paused delightedly, and surveyed the scene
before and below with the eye of a painter. Insensibly,
while listening to the bandit, he had wound up a consider-
able ascent, and now he was upon a broad ledge of rock
covered with mosses and dwarf shrubs. Between this emi-
nence and another of equal height upon which the castle
was built, there was a deep but narrow fissure, overgrown
with the most profuse foliage, so that the eye could not
penetrate many yards below the rugged surface of the
abyss; but the profoundness might be well conjectured by
the hoarse, low, monotonous roar of waters unseen, that
rolled below, and the subsequent course of which was visi-
ble at a distance in a perturbed and rapid stream that inter-
sected the waste and desolate valleys. To the left, the
prospect seemed almost boundless; the extreme clearness
of the purple air serving to render distinct the features of a
range of country that a conqueror of old might have deemed
in itself akingdom. Lonely and desolate as the road which
Glyndon had passed that day had appeared, the landscape
now seemed studded with castles, spires, and villages.
Afar off, Naples gleamed whitely in the last rays of the
sun, and the rose-tints of the horizon melted into the azure
of her glorious bay. Yet more remote, and in another part
of the prospect, might be caught, dim and shadowy, and
backed by the darkest foliage, the ruined pillars of the
ancient Posidonia. There, in the midst of his blackened
and sterile realms, rose the dismal Mount of Fire; while,
on the other hand, winding through variegated plains, to
which distance lent all its magic, glittered many and many
a stream, by which Etruscan and Sybarite, Roman and

246 ZANONI.

Saracen, and Norman, had, at intervals of ages, pitched the
invading tent. All the visions of the past—the stormy and
dazzling histories of southern Italy—rushed over the artist’s
mind as he gazed below. And then, slowly turning to look
behind, he saw the grey and mouldering walls of the castle,
in which he sought the secrets that were to give to hope in
the Future a mightier empire than memory owns in the
Past. It was one of those baronial fortresses with which
Italy was studded in the earlier middle ages, having but
little of the Gothic grace or grandeur which belongs to the
ecclesiastical architecture of the same time; but rude, vast,
and menacing, evenin decay. A wooden bridge was thrown
over the chasm, wide enough to admit two horsemen abreast ;
and the planks trembled and gave back a hollow sound as
Glyndon urged his jaded steed across.

A road which had once been broad and paved with rough
flags, but which now was half obliterated by long grass and
rank-weeds, conducted to the outer court of the castle hard
by; the gates were open, and half the building in this part
was dismantled; the ruins partially hid by ivy that was the
growth of centuries. But on entering the inner court,
Glyndon was not sorry to notice that there was less appear-
ance of neglect and decay; some wild roses gave a smile to
the grey walls, and in the centre there was a fountain, in
which the waters still trickled coolly, and with a pleasing
murmur, from the jaws of a gigantic Triton. Here he was
met by Mejnour with a smile.

‘“Welcome, my friend and pupil,” said he; “he who
seeks for Truth can find in these solitudes an immortal
Academe.”

ZANONI. 247

CHAPTER II.

“And Abaris, so far from esteeming Pythagoras, who taught
these things, a necromancer or wizard, rather revered and ad-
mired him as something divine. ”—JAmsBuicu., Vit. Pythag.

THE attendants whom Mejnour had engaged for his
strange abode were such as might suit a philosopher of few
wants. An old Armenian, whom Glyndon recognised as in
the mystic’s set at Naples; a tall, hard-featured woman
from the village, recommended by Maéstro Paolo, and two
long-haired, smooth-spoken, but fierce-visaged youths from
the same place, and honoured by the same sponsorship,
constituted the establishment. The rooms used by the sage
were commodious and weatherproof, with some remains of
ancient splendour in the faded arras that clothed the walls,
and the huge tables of costly marble and elaborate carving.
Glyndon’s sleeping apartment communicated with a kind
of Belvidere, or terrace, that commanded prospects of un-
rivalled beauty and extent, and was separated on the other
side by a long gallery and a flight of ten or a dozen stairs
from the private chambers of the mystic. There was about
the whole place a sombre and yet not displeasing depth of
repose. It suited well with the studies to which it was now
to be appropriated.

For several days Mejnour refused to confer with Glyndon
on the subjects nearest to his heart.

“ All without,” said he, “is prepared, but not all within;
your own soul must grow accustomed to the spot, and filled
with the surrounding nature; for nature is the source of all
inspiration.”

With these words Mejnour turned to lighter topics. He
made the Englishman accompany him in long rambles
through the wild scenes around, and he smiled approvingly
when the young artist gave way to the enthusiasm which
their fearful beauty could not have failed to rouse in a

248 ZANONI.

duller breast; and then Mejnour poured forth to his won-
dering pupil the stores of a knowledge that seemed in-
exhaustible and boundless. He gave accounts the most
curious, graphic, and minute of the various races (their
characters, habits, creeds, and manners) by which that fair
land had been successively overrun. It is true, that his
descriptions could not be found in books, and were unsup-
ported by learned authorities; but he possessed the true
charm of the tale-teller, and spoke of all with the animated
confidence of a personal witness. Sometimes, too, he
would converse upon the more durable and the loftier mys-
teries of Nature with an eloquence and a research which
invested them with all the colours rather of poetry than
science. Insensibly the young artist found himself elevated
and soothed by the lore of his companion; the fever of his
wild desires was slaked. His mind became more and more
lulled into the divine tranquillity of contemplation; he felt
himself a nobler being; and in the silence of his senses he
imagined that he heard the voice of his soul.

It was to this state that Mejnour evidently sought to bring
the Neophyte, and in this elementary initiation the mystic
was like every more ordinary sage. For he who seeks to
DISCOVER must first reduce himself into a kind of abstract
idealism, and be rendered up, in solemn and sweet bondage,
to the faculties which coNTEMPLATE and IMAGINE.

Glyndon noticed that, in their rambles, Mejnour often
paused where the foliage was rifest, to gather some herb or
flower; and this reminded him that he had seen Zanoni
similarly occupied. “Can these humble children of nature,”
said he one day to Mejnour, “things that bloom and wither
in a day, be serviceable to the science of the higher
secrets? Is there a pharmacy for the soul as well as the
body, and do the nurslings of the summer minister not only
to human health but spiritual immortality?”

“Tf,” answered Mejnour, “a stranger had visited a wan-
dering tribe before one property of herbalism was known to
them; if he had told the savages that the herbs which every

ZANONI. 249

day they trampled under foot were endowed with the most
potent virtues; that one would restore to health a brother
on the verge of death; that another would paralyse into
idiocy their wisest sage; that a third would strike lifeless
to the dust their most stalwart champion; that tears and
laughter, vigour and disease, madness and reason, wakeful-
ness and sleep, existence and dissolution, were coiled up in
those unregarded leaves,—would they not have held him a
sorcerer or a liar? To half the virtues of the vegetable
world mankind are yet in the darkness of the savages I
have supposed. There are faculties within us with which
certain herbs have affinity, and over which they have
power. The moly of the ancients is not all a fable.”

The apparent character of Mejnour differed in much from
that of Zanoni; and while it fascinated Glyndon less, it
subdued and impressed him more. The conversation of
Zanoni evinced a deep and general interest for mankind—a
feeling approaching to enthusiasm for Art and Beauty.
The stories circulated concerning his habits elevated the
mystery of his life by actions of charity and beneficence.
And in all this, there was something genial and humane
that softened the awe he created, and tended, perhaps, to
raise suspicions as to the loftier secrets that he arrogated
to himself. But Mejnour seemed wholly indifferent to all
the actual world. If he committed no evil, he seemed
equally apathetic to good. His deeds relieved no want, his
words pitied no distress. What we call the heart appeared
to have merged into the intellect. He moved, thought, and
lived like some regular and calm Abstraction, rather than
one who yet retained, with the form, the feelings and
sympathies of his kind!

Glyndon once, observing the tone of supreme indifference
with which he spoke of those changes on the face of earth
which he asserted he had witnessed, ventured to remark to
him the distinction he had noted.

“Tt is true,” said Mejnour, coldly. “My life is the life
that contemplates—Zanoni’s is the life that enjoys; when

250 ZANONI.

I gather the herb, I think but of its uses; Zanoni will
pause to admire its beauties.”

“And you deem your own the superior and the loftier
existence?”

“No. His is the existence of youth—mine of age. We
have cultivated different faculties. Each has powers the
other cannot aspire to. Those with whom he associates live
better—those who associate with me, know more.”

“T have heard, in truth,” said Glyndon, “that his com-
panions at Naples were observed to lead purer and nobler
lives after intercourse with Zanoni; yet were they not
strange companions, at the best, for a sage? This terrible
power, too, that he exercises at will, as in the death of the
Prince di ——, and that of the Count Ughelli, scarcely
becomes the tranquil seeker after good.”

“True,” said Mejnour, with an icy smile; “such must
ever be the error of those philosophers who would meddle
with the active life of mankind. You cannot serve some
without injuring others; you cannot protect the good with-
out warring on the bad; and if you desire to reform the
faulty, why, you must lower yourself to live with the faulty
to know their faults. Even so saith Paracelsus, a great
man, though often wrong.’ Not mine this folly; I live
but in knowledge—I have no life in mankind!”

Another time Glyndon questioned the mystic as to the
nature of that union or fraternity to which Zanoni had
once referred.

“T am right, I suppose,” said he, “in conjecturing that
you and himself profess to be the brothers of the Rosy
Cross?”

“Do you imagine,” answered Mejnour, “that there were
no mystic and solemn unions of men seeking the same end
through the same means, before the Arabians of Damus,
in 1378, taught to a wandering German the secrets which

‘Tt is as necessary to know evil things as good, for who can

know what is good without knowing what is evil?” etc.—Para-
celsus, De Nat. Rer., lib. 8.

ZANONI. 251

founded the Institution of the Rosicrucians? I allow, how-
ever, that the Rosicrucians formed a sect descended from
the greater and earlier school. They were wiser than the
Alchemists—their masters are wiser than they.”

“And of this early and primary order how many still
exist?”

“ Zanoni and myself.”

“What, two only!—and you profess the power to teach
to all the secret that baffles Death?”

“ Your ancestor attained that secret; he died rather than
survive the only thing he loved. We have, my pupil, no
arts by which we can put Death out of our option, or out of
the will of Heaven. These walls may crush me as I stand.
All that we profess to do is but this—to find out the secrets
of the human frame, to know why the parts ossify and the
blood stagnates, and to apply continual preventives to the
effects of Time. This is not Magic; it is the Art of Medi-
cine rightly understood. In our order we hold most noble—-
first, that knowledge which elevates the intellect; secondly,
that which preserves the body. But the mere art (extracted
from the juices and simples) which recruits the animal vig-
our ‘and arrests the progress of decay, or that more noble
secret which I will only hint to thee at present, by which
HEAT Or CALORIC, as ye call it, being, as Heraclitus wisely
taught, the primordial principle of life, can be made its
perpetual renovator—these, I say, would not suffice for
safety. It is ours also to disarm and elude the wrath of
men, to turn the swords of our foes against each other, to
glide (if not incorporeal) invisible to eyes over which we
can throw a mist and darkness. And this some seers have
professed to be the virtue of a stone of agate. Abaris
placed it in his arrow. I will find you a herb in yon valley
that will give a surer charm than the agate and the arrow.
In one word, know this, that the humblest and meanest
products of Nature are those from which the sublimest prop-
erties are to be drawn.”

“ But,” said Glyndon, “if possessed of these great secrets,

252 ZANONI.

why so churlish in withholding their diffusion? Does not
the false or charlatanic science differ in this from the true
and indisputable—that the last communicates to the world
the process by which it attains its discoveries; the first
boasts of marvellous results, and refuses to explain the
causes?”

“ Well said, O Logician of the Schools ;—but think again.
Suppose we were to impart all our knowledge to all man-
kind, indiscriminately, alike to the vicious and the virtu-
ous—should we be benefactors or scourges? Imagine the
tyrant, the sensualist, the evil and corrupted being possessed
of these tremendous powers; would he not be a demon let
loose on earth? Grant that the same privilege be accorded
also to the good; and in what state would be society? En-
gaged in a Titan war—the good for ever on the defensive,
the bad for ever in assault. In the present condition of the
earth, evil is a more active principle than good, and the
evil would prevail. It is for these reasons that we are not
only solemnly bound to administer our lore only to those
who will not misuse and pervert it; but that we place our
ordeal in tests that purify the passions and elevate the de-
sires. And Nature in this controls and assists us: for it
places awful guardians and insurmountable barriers between
the ambition of vice and the heaven of the loftier science.”

Such made a small part of the numerous conversations
Mejnour held with his pupil,—conversations that, while
they appeared to address themselves to the reason, inflamed
yet more the fancy. It was the very disclaiming of all
powers which Nature, properly investigated, did not suffice
to create, that gave an air of probability to those which
Mejnour asserted Nature might bestow.

Thus days and weeks rolled on; and the mind of Glyn-
don, gradually fitted to this sequestered and musing life,
forgot at last the vanities and chimeras of the world
without.

One evening he had lingered alone and late upon the
ramparts, watching the stars as, one by one, they broke

ZANONI. 253

upon the twilight. Never had he felt so sensibly the mighty
power of the heavens and the earth upon man; how much
the springs of our intellectual being are moved and acted
upon by the solemn influences of nature! As a patient on
whom, slowly and by degrees, the agencies of mesmerism
are brought to bear, he acknowledged to his heart the grow-
ing force of that vast and universal magnetism which is the
life of creation, and binds the atom to the whole. A
strange and ineffable consciousness of power, of the somrE-
THING GREAT Within the perishable clay, appealed to feel-
ings at once dim and glorious,—like the faint recognitions
of a holier and former being. An impulse that he could
not resist led him to seek the mystic. He would demand
that hour his initiation into the worlds beyond our world—
he was prepared to breathe a diviner air. He entered the
castle, and strode the shadowy and star-lit gallery which
conducted to Mejnour’s apartment.

—————SSSS

CHAPTER III.
“Man is the eye of things.”—Hurypu., De Vit. Hum. -

“ * %* % There is, therefore, a certain ecstatical or transporting
power which, if at any time it shall be excited or stirred up by an
ardent desire and most strong imagination, is able to conduct the
spirit of the more outward, even to some absent and far distant
object.”—Von HELMONT.

Tue rooms that Mejnour occupied consisted of two cham-
bers communicating with each other, and a third in which
he slept. All these rooms were placed in the huge square
tower that beetled over the dark and bush-grown precipice.
The first chamber which Glyndon entered was empty.
With a noiseless step he passed on, and opened the door
that admitted into the inner one. He drew back at the
threshold, overpowered by a strong fragrance which filled
the chamber: a kind of mist thickened the air, rather than

254 ZANONI.

obscured it, for this vapour was not dark, but resembled a
snow-cloud, moving slowly, and in heavy undulations wave
upon wave, regularly over the space. A mortal cold struck
to the Englishman’s heart, and his blood froze. He stood
rooted to the spot; and, as his eyes strained involuntarily
through the vapour, he fancied (for he could not be sure
that it was not the trick of his imagination) that he saw
dim, spectre-like, but gigantic forms floating through the
mist; or was it not rather the mist itself that formed its
vapours fantastically into those moving, impalpable, and
bodiless apparitions? <A great painter of antiquity is said,
in a picture of Hades, to have represented the monsters that
glide through the ghostly River of the Dead so artfully,
that the eye perceived at once that the river itself was but
a spectre, and the bloodless things that tenanted it had no
life, their forms blending with the dead waters till, as the
eye continued to gaze, it ceased to discern them from the
preternatural element they were supposed to inhabit. Such
were the moving outlines that coiled and floated through
the mist; but before Glyndon had even drawn breath in
this atmosphere—for his life itself seemed arrested or
changed into a kind of horrid trance—he felt his hand
seized, and he was led from that room into the outer one.
He heard the door close—his blood rushed again through
his veins, and he saw Mejnour by his side. Strong convul-
sions then suddenly seized his whole frame—he fell to the
groundinsensible. When he recovered, he found himself in
the open air, in a rude balcony of stone that jutted from the
chamber; the stars shining serenely over the dark abyss
below, and resting calmly upon the face of the mystic, who
stood beside him with folded arms.

“Young man,” said Mejnour, “judge by what you have
just felt how dangerous it is to seek knowledge until pre-
pared to receive it. Another moment in the air of that
chamber and you had been a corpse.”

“Then of what nature was the knowledge that you, once
mortal like myself, could safely have sought in that icy at-

ZANONI. 255

mosphere, which it was death for me to breathe? Mejnour,”
continued Glyndon, and his wild desire, sharpened by the
very danger he had passed, once more animated and nerved
him; “I am prepared, at least, for the first steps. I come
to you, as, of old, the pupil to the Hierophant, and demand
the initiation.”

Mejnour passed his hand over the young man’s heart—it
beat loud, regularly, and boldly. He looked at him with
something almost like admiration in his passionless and
frigid features, and muttered, half to himself—“ Surely, in
so much courage the true disciple is found at last.” Then,
speaking aloud, he added—“ Be it so; man’s first initiation
isin TRANCE. In dreams commences all human knowledge;
in dreams hovers over measureless space the first faint
bridge between spirit and spirit—this world and the worlds
beyond! Look steadfastly on yonder star!”

Glyndon obeyed, and Mejnour retired into the chamber;
from which there then slowly emerged a vapour, somewhat
paler and of fainter odour than that which had nearly pro-
duced so fatal an effect on his frame. This, on the contrary,
as it coiled around him, and then melted in thin spires into
the air, breathed a refreshing and healthful fragrance. He
still kept his eyes on the star, and the star seemed gradually
to fix and command his gaze. A sort of languor next seized
his frame, but without, as he thought, communicating itself
to the mind; and as this crept over him, he felt his temples
sprinkled with some volatile and fiery essence. At the
same moment a slight tremor shook his limbs and thrilled
through his veins. The languor increased; still he kept
his gaze upon the star; and now its luminous circumference
seemed to expand and dilate. It became gradually softer
and clearer in its light; spreading wider and broader, it
diffused all space—all space seemed swallowed up in it.
And at last, in the midst of a silver shining atmosphere, he
felt as if something burst within his brain—as if a strong
chain were broken; and at that moment a sense of heavenly
liberty, of unutterable delight, of freedom from the body,

256 ZANONI.

of birdlike lightness, seemed to float him into the space it-
self. “Whom now upon earth dost thou wish to see?”
whispered the voice of Mejnour. “Viola and Zanoni!”
answered Glyndon in his heart; but he felt that his lips
moved not. Suddenly at that thought—through this space,
in which nothing save one mellow, translucent light had
been discernible,—a swift succession of shadowy land-
scapes seemed to roll: trees, mountains, cities, seas glided
along, like the changes of a phantasmagoria; and at last,
settled and stationary, he saw a cave by the gradual marge
of an ocean shore—myrtles and orange trees clothing the
gentle banks. On a height, at a distance, gleamed the
white but shattered relics of some ruined heathen edifice;
and the moon, in calm splendour shining over all, literally
bathed with its light two forms without the cave, at whose
feet the blue waters crept, and he thought that he even
heard them murmur. He recognised both the figures.
Zanoni was seated on a fragment of stone; Viola, half re-
clining by his side, was looking into his face, which was
bent down to her, and in her countenance was the expres-
sion of that perfect happiness which belongs to perfect love.
““Wouldst thou hear them speak?” whispered Mejnour;
and again, without sound, Glyndon only answered, “ Yes!”
Their voices then came to his ear, but in tones that seemed
to him strange; so subdued were they, and sounding, as
it were, so far off, that they were as voices heard in the
visions of some holier men, from a distant sphere.

“And how is it,” said Viola, “that thou canst find pieas-
ure in listening to the ignorant?”

“Because the heart is never ignorant; because the mys-
teries of the feelings are as full of wonder as those of the
intellect. If at times thou canst not comprehend the lan-
guage of my thoughts, at times, also, I hear sweet enigmas
in that of thy emotions.”

“Ah, say not so!” said Viola, winding her arm tenderly
round his neck, and under that heavenly light her face
seemed lovelier for its blushes. “For the enigmas are but

ZANONI. 257

love’s common language, and love should solve them. ‘Till
I knew thee—till I lived with thee—till I learned to watch
for thy footstep when absent—yet even in absence to see
thee everywhere!—I dreamed not how strong and all-per-
vading is the connection between nature and the human
Soul. <

“And yet,” she continued, “Iam now assured of what I
first believed—that the feelings which attracted me towards
thee at first were not those of love. I know that by com-
paring the Present with the Past, —it was a sentiment then
wholly of the mind or the spirit! I could not hear thee
now say, ‘Viola, be happy with another!’ ”

“And I could not now tell thee so! Ah, Viola! never
be weary of assuring me that thou art happy!”

“Happy while thou art so. Yet at times, Zanoni, thou
art so sad!”

“Because human life is so short; because we must part
at last; because yon moon shines on when the nightingale
sings to it no more! A little while, and thine eyes will
grow dim, and thy beauty haggard, and these locks that I
toy with now will be grey and loveless.”

“ And thou, cruel one!” said Viola, touchingly, “I shall
never see the signs of age in thee! But shall we not grow
old together, and our eyes be accustomed to a change which
the heart shall not share?”

Zanoni sighed! He turned away, and seemed to com-
mune with himself.

Glyndon’s attention grew yet more earnest.

“But were it so,” muttered Zanoni; and then looking
steadfastly at Viola, he said, with a half smile, “ Hast thou
no curiosity to learn more of the lover thou onco couldst
believe the agent of the evil one?”

“None; all that one wishes to know of the beloved one,
I know, —that thou lovest me!”

“T have told thee that my life is apart from others.
Wouldst thou not seek to share it?”

“T share it now!”
16

258 ZANONI.

“But were it possible to be thus young and fair for ever
till the world blazes round us as one funeral pyre!”

“We shall be so, when we leave the world!”

Zanoni was mute for some moments, and at length he
said:

“ Canst thou recall those brilliant and aerial dreams which
once visited thee, when thou didst fancy that thou wert pre-
ordained to some fate aloof and apart from the common
children of the earth!”

“ Zanoni, the fate is found.”

“ And hast thou no terror of the future?”

“The future! I forget it! Time past, and present, and
to come, reposes in thy smile. Ah! Zanoni, play not with
the foolish credulities of my youth! I have been better
and humbler since thy presence has dispelled the mist of
the air. The Future! well, when I have cause to dread it,
I will ‘look up to heaven; and remember who guides our
fate!”

As she lifted her eyes above, a dark cloud swept suddenly
over the scene. It wrapt the orange trees, the azure ocean,
the dense sands; but still, the last images that it veiled
from the charmed eyes of Glyndon were the forms of Viola
and Zanoni. The face of the one, rapt, serene, and radiant;
the face of the other, dark, thoughtful, and locked in more
than its usual rigidness of melancholy beauty and profound
repose. :

“Rouse thyself,” said Mejnour, “thy ordeal has com-
menced! There are pretenders to the solemn science, who
could have shown thee the absent; and prated to thee, in
their charlatanic jargon, of the secret electricities and the
magnetic fluid, of whose true properties they know but the
germs and elements. I will lend thee the books of those
glorious dupes, and thou wilt find, in the dark ages, how
many erring steps have stumbled upon the threshold of the
mighty learning, and fancied they had pierced the temple.
Hermes, and Albert, and Paracelsus, I knew ye all; but,
noble as ye were, ye were fated to be deceived. Yehad not

ZANONI. 259

souls of faith, and daring fitted for the destinies at which ye
aimed! Yet Paracelsus—modest Paracelsus—had an arro-
gance that soared higher than all our knowledge. Ho!
ho!—he thought he could make a race of men from chem-
istry ; he arrogated to himself the Divine gift—the breath of
life. He would have made men, and, after all, confessed
that they could be but pigmies!* My art is to make men
above mankind. But you are impatient of my digressions.
Forgive me. All these men (they were great dreamers, as
you desire to be) were intimate friends of mine. But they
are dead and rotten. They talked of spirits—but they
dreaded to be in other company than that of men. Like
orators whom I have heard, when I stood by the Pnyx of
Athens, blazing with words like comets in the assembly,
and extinguishing their ardour like holyday rockets when
they were in the field. Ho! ho! Demosthenes, my hero-
coward, how nimble were thy heels at Cheronea! And thou
art impatient still! Boy, I could tell thee such truths of
the past as would make thee the luminary of schools. But
thou lustest only for the shadows of the Future. Thou
shalt have thy wish. But the mind must be first exercised
and trained. Go tothy room and sleep; fast austerely;
read no books; meditate, imagine, dream, bewilder thy-
self, if thou wilt. Thought shapes out its own chaos at
last. Before midnight seek me again!”

1 Paracelsus, De Nat. Rer., lib. i.

260 ZANONI.

CHAPTER IV.

“It ig fit that we who endeavour to rise to an elevation so sublime,
should study first to leave behind carnal affections, the frailty of
the senses, the passions that belong to matter; secondly, to learn
by what means we may ascend to the climax of pure intellect,
united with the powers above, without which never can we gain
the lore of secret things, nor the magic that effects true wonders. ”
—Triremius on Secret Things and Secret Spirits.

Tr wanted still many minutes of midnight, and Glyndon
was once more in the apartment of the mystic. He had
rigidly observed the fast ordained to him; and in the rapt
and intense reveries into which his excited fancy had
plunged him, he was not only insensible to the wants of
the flesh—he felt above them.

Mejnour, seated beside his disciple, thus addressed
him:

“ Man is arrogant in proportion to his ignorance. _Man’s
natural tendency is to egotism. Man, in his infancy of
knowledge, thinks that all creation was formed for him.
For several ages he saw in the countless worlds that sparkle
through space like the bubbles of a shoreless ocean only the
petty candles, the household torches, that Providence had
been pleased to light for no other purpose but to make the
night more agreeable to man. Astronomy has corrected
this delusion of human vanity: and man now reluctantly
confesses that the stars are worlds, larger and more glorious
than his own, —that the earth on which he crawls is a scarce
visible speck on the vast chart of creation. But in the
small as in the vast, God is equally profuse of life. The
traveller looks upon the tree, and fancies its boughs were
formed for his shelter in the summer sun, or his fuel in the
winter frosts. But in each leaf of these boughs the Creator
has made a world—it swarms with innumerable races.
Each drop of the water in yon moat is an orb more populous
than a kingdom is of men. Everywhere, then, in this im-

ZANONI. 261

mense Design, Science brings new life to light. Life is
the one pervading principle, and even the thing that seems
to die and putrefy but engenders new life, and changes to
fresh forms of matter. Reasoning, then, by evident anal-
ogy—if not a leaf, if not a drop of water, but is, no less
than yonder star, a habitable and breathing world—nay, if
even man himself is a world to other lives, and millions and
myriads dwell in the rivers of his blood and inhabit man’s
frame as man inhabits earth, common sense (if your school-
men had it) would suffice to teach that the cireumfluent in-
finite which you call space—the boundless Impalpable
which divides earth from the moon and stars—is filled also
with its correspondent and appropriate life. Is it not a
visible absurdity to suppose that Being is crowded upon
every leaf, and yet absent from the immensities of space?
The law of the Great System forbids the waste even of an
atom; it knows no spot where something of life does not
breathe. In the very charnel-house is the nursery of pro-
duction and animation. Isthat true? Well, then, can you
conceive that space which is the Infinite itself is alone a
waste, is alone lifeless, is less useful to the one design of
universal being than the dead carcass of a dog, than the
peopled leaf, than the swarming globule? The microscope
shows you the creatures on the leaf; no mechanical tube is
yet invented to discover the nobler and more gifted things
that hover in the illimitable air. Yet between these last
and man is a mysterious and terrible affinity. “And hence,
by tales and legends, not wholly false nor wholly true, have
arisen, from time to time, beliefs in apparitions and spectres.
If more common to the earlier and simpler tribes than to
the men of your duller age, it is but that with the first the
senses are more keen and quick. And as the savage can
see or scent, miles away, the traces of a foe, invisible to
the gross sense of the civilised animal, so the barrier itself
between him and the creatures of the airy world is less
thickened and obscured, Do you listen?”
“With my soul!”

~y
Pa
 &

262 ZANONI.

“But first, to penetrate this barrier, the soul with which
you listen must be sharpened by intense enthusiasm, puri-
fied from all earthlier desires. Not without reason have
the so-styled magicians, in all lands and times, insisted on
chastity and abstemious reverie as the communicants of in-
spiration. When thus prepared, science can be brought to
aid it; the sight itself may be rendered more subtle, the
nerves more acute, the spirit more alive and outward, and
the element itself—the air, the space—may be made, by
certain secrets of the higher chemistry, more palpable and
clear. And this, too, is not magic as the credulous call it;—
as I have so often said before, magic (or science that vio-
lates Nature) exists not;—it is but the science by which
Nature can be controlled. Now, in space there are millions
of beings not literally spiritual, for they have all, like the
animaleule unseen by the naked eye, certain forms of
matter, though matter so delicate, air-drawn, and subtle,
that it is, as it were, but a film, a gossamer that clothes the
spirit. Hence the Rosicrucian’s lovely phantoms of sylph
and gnome. Yet, in truth, these races and tribes differ
more widely, each from each, than the Calmuck from the
Greek—differ in attributes and powers. In the drop of
water you see how the animalcule vary, how vast and ter-
rible are some of those monster-mites as compared with
others. Equally so with the Inhabitants of the atmosphere:
some of surpassing wisdom, some of horrible malignity;
some hostile as fiends to men, others gentle as messengers
between earth and heaven. He who would establish inter-
course with these varying beings resembles the traveller
who would penetrate into unknown lands. He is exposed
to strange dangers and unconjectured terrors. That inter-
course once gained, I cannot secure thee from the chances to
which thy journey ts exposed. I cannot direct thee to paths
free from the wanderings of the deadliest foes. Thou must
alone, and of thyself, face and hazard all. But if thou art
so enamoured of life as to care only to live on, no matter
for what ends, recruiting the nerves and veins with the

ZANONI. 263

alchemist’s vivifying elixir, why seek these dangers from
the intermediate tribes? Because the very elixir that pours
a more glorious life into the frame, so sharpens the senses
that those larvee of the air become to thee audible and ap-
parent; so that, unless trained by degrees to endure the
phantoms and subdue their malice, a life thus gifted would
be the most awful doom man could bring upon himself.
Hence it is that though the elixir be compounded of the
simplest herbs, his frame only is prepared to receive it who
has gone through the subtlest trials. Nay, some, scared
and daunted into the most intolerable horror by the sights
that burst upon their eyes at the first draught, have found
the potion less powerful to save than the agony and travail
of Nature to destroy. ‘To the unprepared the elixir is thus
but the deadliest poison. Amidst the dwellers of the
threshold is ONE, too, surpassing in malignity and hatred
all her tribe—one whose eyes have paralysed the bravest,
and whose power increases over the spirit precisely in pro-
portion to its fear. Does thy courage falter?”

“Nay; thy words but kindle it.”

“Follow me, then; and submit to the initiatory labours.”

With that, Mejnour led him into the interior chamber,
and proceeded to explain to him certain chemical operations,
which, though extremely simple in themselves, Glyndon
soon perceived were capable of very extraordinary results.

“Tn the remoter times,” said Mejnour, smiling, “our
brotherhood were often compelled to recur to delusions to
protect realities; and, as dexterous mechanicians or expert
chemists, they obtained the name of sorcerers. Observe
how easy to construct is the Spectre Lion that attended the
renowned Leonardo da Vinci!”

And Glyndon beheld with delighted surprise the simple
means by which the wildest cheats of the imagination can
be formed. The magical landscapes in which Baptista
Porta rejoiced; the apparent change of the seasons with
which Albertus Magnus startled the Earl of Holland; nay,
even those more dread delusions of the Ghost and Image

264 ZANONI.

with which the Necromancers of Heraclea woke the con-
science of the Conqueror of Platzea; '—all these, as the show-
man enchants some trembling children on a Christmas Eve
with his lanthorn and phantasmagoria, Mejnour exhibited
to his pupil.
“ And now laugh for ever at magic when these, the very
tricks, the very sports and frivolities of science, were the
very acts which men viewed with abhorrence; and Inquisi-
tors and Kings rewarded with the rack and the stake.”
“But the Alchemist’s transmutation of metals——”
“Nature herself is a laboratory in which metals, and all
elements, are forever at change. Easy to make gold, easier,
more commodious, and cheaper still, to make the pearl, the
diamond, and the ruby. Oh, yes; wise men found sorcery
in this, too; but they found no sorcery in the discovery that
by the simplest combination of things of every-day use they
could raise a devil that would sweep away thousands of
their kind by the breath of consuming fire. Discover what
will destroy life, and you are a great man!—what will pro-
long it, and you are an impostor! Discover some invention
in machinery that will make the rich more rich and the poor
more poor, and they will build you a statue! Discover
some mystery in art that will equalise some physical dis-
parities, and they will pull down their own houses to stone
you! Ha! ha! my pupil, such is the world Zanoni still
cares for! you and I will leave this world to itself. And
now that you have seen some few of the effects of science,
begin to learn its grammar.”
Mejnour then set before his pupil certain tasks, in which
the rest of the night wore itself away.

1 Pausanias—see Plutarch,

ZANONI. 265

CHAPTER V.

“Great travell hath the gentle nae:

And toyle endured * * * * *
There on a day—
He chaunst to spy a sort of shepheard groomes,
Playing on pipes and caroling apace.

** %* %* He, there, besyde
Saw a faire damzell. ”

SPENSER, Faerie Queene, cant. ix.

For a considerable period, the pupil of Mejnour was now
absorbed in labour dependent on the most vigilant attention,
on the most minute and subtle calculation. Results aston-
ishing and various rewarded his toils and stimulated his
interest. Nor were these studies limited to chemical dis-
covery—in which it is permitted me to say that the greatest
marvels upon the organisation of physical life seemed
wrought by experiments of the vivifying influence of Heat.
Mejnour professed to find a link between all intellectual
beings in the existence of a certain all-pervading and invis-
ible fluid resembling electricity, yet distinct from the known
operations of that mysterious agency—a fluid that connected
thought to thought with the rapidity and precision of the
modern telegraph, and the influence of this fluid, according
to Mejnour, extended to the remotest past—that is to say,
whenever and wheresoever man thought. Thus, if the
doctrine were true, all human knowledge became attainable
through a medium established between the brain of the in-
dividual inquirer and all the farthest and obscurest regions
in the universe of ideas. Glyndon was surprised to find
Mejnour attached to the abstruse mysteries which the
Pythagoreans ascribed to the occult science of NumBERs.
In this last new lights glimmered dimly on his eyes; and
he began to perceive that even the power to predict, or
rather to calculate, results, might by——’

* ** * * *
1 Here there is an erasure in the MS.

266 ZANONI.

But he observed that the last brief process by which, in
each of these experiments, the wonder was achieved, Mej-
nour reserved for himself, and refused to communicate
the secret. The answer he obtained to his remonstrances
on this head was more stern than satisfactory :

“Dost thou think,” said Mejnour, “that I would give to
the mere pupil, whose qualities are not yet tried, powers
that might change the face of the social world? The last
secrets are intrusted only to him of whose virtue the Master
is convinced. Patience! It is Labour itself that is the
great purifier of the mind; and by degrees the secrets will
grow upon thyself as thy mind becomes riper to receive
them.”

At last Mejnour professed himself satisfied with the prog-
ress made by his pupil. ‘The hour now arrives,” he said,
“when thou mayst pass the great but airy barrier,—when
thou mayst gradually confront the terrible Dweller of the
Threshold. Continue thy labours—continue to suppress
thine impatience for results until thou canst fathom the
causes. I leave thee for one month; if at the end of that
period, when I return, the tasks set thee are completed,
and thy mind prepared by contemplation and austere
thought for the ordeal, I promise thee the ordeal shall com-
mence. One caution alone I give thee, regard it as a per-
emptory command—Enter not this chamber!” (They were
then standing in the room where their experiments had been
chiefly made, and in which Glyndon, on the night he had
sought the solitude of the Mystic, had nearly fallen a victim
to his intrusion.) “Enter not this chamber till my return;
or, above all, if by any search for materials necessary to
thy toils, thou shouldst venture hither, forbear to light the
naphtha in those vessels, and to open the vases on yonder
shelves. I leave the key of the room in thy keeping, in
order to try thy abstinence and self-control. Young man,
this very temptation is a part of thy trial.”

With that, Mejnour placed the key in his hands; and at
sunset he left the castle.

ZANONI. 267

For several days Glyndon continued immersed in employ-
ments which strained to the utmost all the faculties of his
intellect. Even the most partial success depended so en-
tirely on the abstraction of the mind, and the minuteness
of its calculations, that there was scarcely room for any
other thought than those absorbed in the occupation. And
doubtless this perpetual strain of the faculies was the object
of Mejnour in works that did not seem exactly pertinent to
the purposes in view. As the study of the elementary
mathematics, for examples, is not so profitable in the solv-
ing of problems, useless in our after-callings, as it is ser-
viceable in training the intellect to the comprehension and
analysis of general truths.

But in less than half the time which Mejnour had stated
for the duration of his absence, all that the Mystic had ap-
pointed to his toils was completed by the pupil; and then
his mind, thus relieved from the drudgery and mechanism
of employment, once more sought occupation in dim conjec-
ture and restless fancies. His inquisitive and rash nature
grew excited by the prohibition of Mejnour, and he found
himself gazing too often, with perturbed and daring curi-
osity, upon the key of the forbidden chamber. He began
to feel indignant at a trial of constancy which he deemed
frivolous and puerile. What nursery tales of Bluebeard
and his closet were revived to daunt and terrify him? How
could the mere walls of a chamber, in which he had so
often securely pursued his labours, start into living danger?
If haunted, it could be but by those delusions which Mej-
nour had taught him to despise. A shadowy lion—a chemi-
cal phantasm! Tush! he lost half his awe of Mejnour,
when he thought that by such tricks the sage could practise
upon the very intellect he had awakened and instructed!
Still he resisted the impulses of his curiosity and his pride,
and, to escape from their dictation, he took long rambles on
the hills, or amidst the valleys that surrounded the castle ;—
seeking by bodily fatigue to subdue the unreposing mind.
One day, suddenly emerging from a dark ravine, he came

268 ZANONI.

upon one of those Italian scenes of rural festivity and mirth
in which the classic age appears to revive. It was a festi-
val, partly agricultural, party religious, held yearly by the
peasants of that district. Assembled at the outskirts of a
village, animated crowds, just returning from a procession
to a neighbouring chapel, were now forming themselves
into groups—the old to taste the vintage, the young to
dance—all to be gay and happy. This sudden picture of
easy joy and careless ignorance, contrasting so forcibly
with the intense studies and that parching desire for wis-
dom which had so long made up his own life, and burned
at his own heart, sensibly affected Glyndon. As he stood
aloof and gazing on them, the young man felt once more
that he was young! The memory of all he had been con-
tent to sacrifice spoke to him like the sharp voice of re-
morse. The flitting forms of the women in their pictur-
esque attire, their happy laughter ringing through the cool,
still air of the autumn noon, brought back to the heart, or
rather perhaps to the senses, the images of his past time,
the “golden shepherd hours,” when to live was but to
enjoy.

He approached nearer and nearer to the scene, and sud-
denly a noisy group swept round him; and Maéstro
Paolo, tapping him familiarly on the shoulder, exclaimed,
in a hearty voice, “ Welcome, Excellency !—we are rejoiced
to see you amongst us.” Glyndon was about to reply to this
salutation when his eyes rested upon the face of a young
girl leaning on Pdolo’s arm, of a beauty so attractive, that
his colour rose and his heart beat as he encountered her gaze.
Her eyes sparkled with a roguish and petulant mirth, her
parted lips showed teeth like pearls, —as if impatient at the
pause of her companion from the revel of the rest, her little
foot beat the ground to a measure that she half hummed,
half chanted. Polo laughed as he saw the effect the girl
had produced upon the young foreigner.

“Will you not dance, Excellency? Come, lay aside your
greatness, and be merry, like us poor devils. See how our

ZANONI. 269

pretty Fillide is longing for a partner. Take compassion
on her.”

Fillide pouted at this speech; and, disengaging her arm
from Pdolo’s, turned away, but threw over her shoulder a
glance half inviting, half defying. Glyndon almost invol-
uuntarily advanced to her, and addressed her.

Oh, yes, he addresses her! She looks down, and smiles.
Paolo leaves them to themselves, sauntering off with a
devil-me-carish air. Fuillide speaks now, and looks up at
the scholar’s face with arch invitation. He shakes his
head: Fillide laughs, and her laugh is silvery. She points
to a gay mountaineer, who is tripping up to her merrily.
Why does Glyndon feel jealous? Why, when she speaks
again, does he shake hishead no more? He offers his hand;
Fillide blushes, and takes it with a demure coquetry.
What! isit so, indeed! They whirl into the noisy circle of
the revellers. Ha! ha! is not this better than distilling
herbs, and breaking thy brains on Pythagorean numbers?
How lightly Fillide bounds along! How her lthesome
waist supplies itself to thy circling arm! ‘Tara-ra-tara, ta-
tara, rara-ra! What the devil is in the measure that it
makes the blood course like quicksilver through the veins?
Was there ever a pair of eyes like Fillide’s? Nothing of
the cold stars there! Yet how they twinkle and laugh at
thee! And that rosy, pursed-up mouth, that will answer so
sparingly to thy flatteries, as if words were a waste of time,
and kisses were their proper language. Oh, pupil of Mej-
nour! oh, would-be Rosicrucian—Platonist—Magian—I
know not what! I am ashamed of thee! What, in the
names of Averroes, and Burri, and Agrippa, and Hermes,
have became of thy austere contemplations? Was it for
this thou didst resign Viola? I don’t think thou hast the
smallest recollection of the elixir or the cabala. Take care!
What are you about, sir? Why do you clasp that small
hand locked within your own? Why do you—Tara-rara
tara-ra, tara-rara-ra, rarara, ta-ra, a-ra! Keep your eyes
off those slender ankles and that crimson bodice! Tara-

270 ZANONI.

rara-ra! There they go again! And now they rest under
the broad trees. ‘The revel has whirled away from them.
They hear—or do they not hear—the laughter at the dis-
tance? They see—or if they have their eyes about them,
they should see—couple after couple, gliding by, love-talking
and love-looking. But I will lay a wager, as they sit under
that tree, and the round sun goes down behind the moun-
tains, that they see or hear very little except themselves!

“Hollo, Signor Excellency! and how does your partner
please you? Come and join our feast, loiterers; one dances
more merrily after wine.”

Down goes the round sun; up comes the autumn moon,
Tara, tara, rarara, rarara, tarara-ra! Dancing again; isita
dance, or some movement gayer, noisier, wilder still? How
they glance and gleam through the night-shadows—those
flitting forms! What confusion—what order! Ha, that is
the Tarantula dance; Maéstro Paolo foots it bravely! Dia-
volo, what fury! the tarantula has stung them all. Dance,
or die; it is fury—the Corybantes—the Menads—the——.
Ho, ho! more wine! the Sabbat of the witches at Bene-
vento is a joke to this! From cloud to cloud wanders the
moon—now shining, now lost. Dimness while the maiden
blushes; light when the maiden smiles.

“ Willide, thou art an enchantress!”

“ Buona notte, Excellency: you will see me again!”

“Ah, young man,” saidan old decrepit, hollow-eyed octo-
genarian, leaning on his staff, “ make the best of your youth.
I, too, once had a Fillide! I was handsomer than you
then! Alas! if we could be always young!”

“ Always young!” Glyndon started, as he turned his gaze
from the fresh fair rosy face of the girl, and saw the eyes
drooping rheum—the yellow wrinkled skin—the tottering
frame of the old man.

“Ha, ha!” said the decrepit creature, hobbling near to
him, and with a malicious laugh. “ Yet I, too, was young
once! Give me a baioccho for a glass of aequa vita!”

Tara, rara, ra-rara, tara, rara-ra! There dances Youth!
Wrap thy rags round thee, and totter off, Old Age!

ZANONI. 271

CHAPTER VI.

“Whilest Calidore does follow that faire mayd,
Unmindful of his vow and high beheast
Which by the Faerie Queene was on him layd. ”
SPENSER, Paerie Queene, cant. x. 8, 1.

Ir was that grey, indistinct, struggling interval between
the night and the dawn, when Clarence stood once more in
his chamber. The abstruse calculations lying on his table
caught his eye, and filled him with a sentiment of weariness
and distaste. But—“ Alas, if we could be always young!
Oh, thou horrid spectre of the old rheum-eyed man! What
apparition can the mystic chamber shadow forth more ugly
and more hateful than thou? Oh, yes; if we could be
always young! But not (thinks the neophyte now)—not
to labour for ever at these crabbed figures and these cold
compounds of herbs and drugs. No; but to enjoy, to love,
to revel! What should be the companion of youth but
pleasure?—and the gift of eternal youth may be mine this
very hour! What means this prohibition of Mejnour’s? Is
it not of the same complexion as his ungenerous reserve
even in the minutest secrets of chemistry, or the numbers
of his cabala?—compelling me to perform all the toils, and
yet withholding from me the knowledge of the crowning
result? No doubt he will still, on his return, show me that
the great mystery can be attained; but will still forbid me
to attain it. Isit not asif he desired to keep my youth the
slave to his age?—-to make me dependent solely on himself?
—to bind me to a journeyman’s service by perpetual excite-
ment to curiosity, and the sight of the fruit he places
beyond my lips?” ‘These, and many reflections still more
repining, disturbed and irritated him. Heated with wine—
excited by the wild revels he had left—he was unable to
sleep. The image of that revolting Old Age which Time,
unless defeated, must bring upon himself, quickened the

272 ZANONE

eagerness of his desire for the dazzling and imperishable
Youth he ascribed to Zanoni. The prohibition only served
to create a spirit of defiance. The reviving day, laughing
jocundly through his lattice, dispelled all the fears and
superstitions that belong to night. The mystic chamber
presented to his imagination nothing to differ from any
other apartment in the castle. What foul or malignant ap-
parition could harm him in the light of that blessed sun!
It was the peculiar, and on the whole most unhappy, con-
tradiction in Glyndon’s nature, that while his reasonings
led him to doubt—and doubt rendered him in moral conduct
irresolute and unsteady—he was physically brave to rash-
ness. Nor is this uncommon: scepticism.and presumption
are often twins. When a man of this character determines
upon any action, personal fear never deters him; and for
the mortal fear, any sophistry suffices to self-will. Almost
without analysing himself the mental process by which his
nerves hardened themselves and his limbs moved, he tray-
ersed the corridor, gained Mejnour’s apartment, and opened
the forbidden door. All was as he had been accustomed to
see it, save that on a table in the centre of the room lay
open a large volume. He approached and gazed on the
characters on the page; they were in a cipher the study of
which had made a part of his labours. With but slight
difficulty he imagined that he interpreted the meaning of
the first sentences, and that they ran thus:

“To quaff the inner life, is to see the outer life; to live
in defiance of time, is to live in the whole. He who dis-
covers the elixir, discovers what lies in space; for the spirit
that vivifies the frame strengthens the senses. There is
attraction in the elementary principle of light. In the
lamps of Rosicrucius, the fire is the pure elementary prin-
ciple. Kindle the lamps while thou openest the vessel that
contains the elixir, and the light attracts towards thee those
beings whose life is that light. Beware of Fear: Fear is
the deadliest enemy to knowledge.” Here the ciphers

ZANONT. 273

changed their character, and became incomprehensible.
But had he not read enough? Did not the last sentence
suffice?“ Beware of fear!” It was as if Mejnour had pur-
posely left the page open—as if the trial was, in truth, the
reverse of the one pretended—as if the Mystic had designed
to make experiment of his courage while affecting but that
of his forbearance. Not boldness, but Fear was the deadli-
est enemy to Knowledge. He moved to the shelves on which
the crystal vases were placed; with an untrembling hand
he took from one of them the stopper, and a delicious odour
suddenly diffused itself through the room. The air sparkled
as if with diamond dust. A sense of unearthly delight—
of an existence that seemed all spirit, flashed through his
whole frame; and a faint, low, but exquisite music crept,
thrilling, through the chamber. At this moment he heard
a voice in the corridor, calling on his name; and presently
there was a knock at the door without. “Are you there,
Signor?” said the clear tones of Maéstro Pdolo. Glyndon
hastily reclosed and replaced the vial; and bidding Pdolo
await him in his own apartment, tarried till he heard the
intruder’s steps depart; he then reluctantly quitted the
room. As he locked the door, he still heard the dying
strain of that fairy music; and, with a light step and a
joyous heart, he repaired to Pdolo, inly resolving to visit
again the chamber at an hour when his experiment would
be safe from interruption.

As he crossed his threshold, Pdolo started back, and ex-
claimed, “Why, Excellency! I scarcely recognize you!
Amusement IJ see is a great beautifier tothe young. Yes-
terday you looked so pale and haggard; but Fillide’s merry
eyes have done more for you than the philosopher’s stone
(Saints forgive me for naming it!) ever did for the wiz-
ards.” And Glyndon, glancing at the old Venetian mirror,
as Pdolo spoke, was scarcely less startled than Pdolo
himself at the change in his own mien and bearing. His
form, before bent with thought, seemed to him taller by half
the head, so lithesome and erect rose his slender stature;

274 ZANONI.

his eyes glowed: his cheeks bloomed with health and the
innate and pervading pleasure. Ifthe mere fragrance of
the elixir was thus potent, well might the alchemists have
ascribed life and youth to the draught!

“You must forgive me, Excellency, for disturbing you,”
said Pdolo, producing a letter from his pouch; “but our
patron has just written to me to say that he will be here
to-morrow, and desired me to lose not a moment in giving
to yourself this billet, which he inclosed.”

“Who brought the letter?”

“ A horseman, who did not wait for any reply.”

Glyndon opened the letter, and read as follows:

“T return a week sooner than I had intended, and you
will expect me to-morrow. You will then enter on the
ordeal you desire; but remember that, in doing so, you
must reduce Being as far as possible into Mind. The senses
must be mortified and subdued—not the whisper of one pas-
sion heard. Thou mayst be master of the Cabala and the
Chemistry; but thou must be master also over the Flesh
and the Blood—over Love and Vanity, Ambition and Hate.
I will trust to find thee so. Fast and meditate till we
meet!”

Glyndon crumpled the letter in his hand with a smile of
disdain. What! more drudgery—more abstinence! Youth
without love and pleasure! Ha, ha! baffled Mejnour, thy
pupil shall gain thy secrets without thine aid!

“And Fillide! I passed her cottage on my way—she
blushed and sighed when I jested her about you, Excel-
lency !”

“ Well, Pdolo! I thank thee for so charming an introduc-
tion. Thine must be a rare life.”

“Ah, Excellency, while we are young, nothing like ad-
venture—except, love, wine, and laughter!”

“Very true. Farewell, Maéstro Pdolo; we will talk
more with each other in a few days.”

ZANONI. 275

All that morning Glyndon was almost overpowered with
the new sentiment of happiness that had entered into him.
He roamed into the woods, and he felt a pleasure that re-
sembled his earlier life of an artist, but a pleasure yet more
subtle and vivid, in the various colours of the autumn foli-
age. Certainly, Nature seemed to be brought closer to him;
he comprehended better all that Mejnour had often preached
to him of the mystery of sympathies and attractions. He
was about to enter into the same law as those mute children
of the forests! He was to know the renewal of life; the sea-
sons that chilled to winter should yet bring again the bloom
and the mirth of spring. Man’s common existence is as -
one year to the vegetable world: he has his spring, his
summer, his autumn, and winter—but only once. But the
giant oaks around him go through a revolving series of ver-
dure and youth, and the green of the centenarian is as vivid
in the beams of May as that of the sapling by its side.
“Mine shall be your spring, but not your winter!” exclaimed
the Aspirant.

Wrapt in these sanguine and joyous reveries, Glyndon,
quitting the woods, found himself amidst cultivated fields
and vineyards to which his footstep had not before wan-
dered: and there stood by the skirts of a green lane that
reminded him of verdant England a modest house—half
cottage, half farm. The door was open, and he saw a girl
at work with her distaff. She looked up, uttered a slight
ery, and, tripping gaily into the lane to his side, he recog-
nised the dark-eyed Fillide.

“Hist!” she said, archly putting her finger to her lip;
“do not speak loud—my mother is asleep within; and I
knew you would come to see me. [It is kind!”

Glyndon, with a little embarrassment, accepted the com-
pliment to his kindness, which he did not exactly deserve.
“You have thought, then, of me, fair Fillide?”

“Yes,” answered the girl colouring, but with that frank,
bold ingenuousness which characterises the females of Italy,
especially of the lower class, and in the southern provinces—

276 ZANONI.

“Oh, yes! Ihave thought of little else. Pdolo said he knew
you would visit me.”

“ And what relation is Pdolo to you?”

“None; but a good friend to us all. My brother is one
of his band.”

“One of his band!—A robber?”

“We of the mountains do not call a mountaineer a ‘rob-
ber,’ Signor.”

“Task pardon. Do you not tremble sometimes for your
brother’s life? The law——”

“Law never ventures into these defiles. Tremble for
him! No. My father and grandsire were of the same call-
ing. I often wish I were a man!”

“ By these lips, I am enchanted that your wish cannot be
realised!”

“Fie, Signor! And do you really love me?”

“With my whole heart!”

- “And I thee!” said the girl, with a candour that seemed
innocent, as she suffered him to clasp her hand.

“But,” she added, “thou wilt soon leave us; and J——”
She stopped short, and the tears stood in her eyes.

- There was something dangerous in this, it must be con-
fessed. Certainly Fillide had not the seraphic loveliness of
Viola; but hers was a beauty that equally at least touched
the senses. Perhaps Glyndon had never really loved Viola;
perhaps the feelings with which she had inspired him were
not of that ardent character which deserves the name of
love. However that be, he thought as he gazed on those
dark eyes that he had never loved before.

-“ And. couldst thou not leave thy mountains?” he whis-
pered, as he drew yet nearer to her.

- “Dost thou ask me?” she said, retreating, and looking
him steadfastly in the face. “Dost thou know what we
daughters of the mountains are? You gay, smooth cava-
liers of cities seldom mean what you speak. With you,
lave is amusement; with us, it is life. Leave these moun-
tains! Well! I should not leave my nature.”

LEONONT: 277

“Keep thy nature ever—it is a sweet one.”

“Yes, sweet waile thou art true; stern, if thou art faith-
less. Shall I tell thee what I—what the girls of this
country, are? Daughters of men whom you call robbers,
we aspire to be the companions of our lovers or our hus-
bands. We love ardently, we own it boldly. We stand by
your side in danger; we serve you as slaves in safety; we
never change, and we resent change. You may reproach,
strike us, trample us as a dog,—we bear all without a
murmur; betray us, and no tiger is more relentless. Be
true, and our hearts reward you; be false, and our hands
revenge! Dost thou love me now?”

During this speech, the Italian’s countenance had most
eloquently aided her words—by turns soft, frank, fierce, —
and, at the last question, she inclined her head humbly,
and stood, as in fear of his reply, before him. The stern,
brave, wild spirit, in which what seemed unfeminine was
yet, if I may so say, still womanly, did not recoil, it rather
captivated Glyndon. He answered readily, briefly, and
freely —“ Fillide—yes!”

Oh, “yes!” forsooth, Clarence Glyndon! Every light
nature answers “ yes” lightly to such a question from lips so
rosy! Have acare—have a care! Why the deuce, Mej-
nour, do you leave your pupil of four-and-twenty to the
merey of these wild cats-a-mountain! Preach fast, and
abstinence, and sublime renunciation of the cheats of the
senses! Very well in you, sir, Heaven knows how many
ages old! but, at four-and-twenty, your Hierophant would
have kept you out of Fillide’s way, or you would have had
small taste for the cabala!

And so they stood, and talked, and vowed, and whis-
pered, till the girl’s mother made some noise within the
house, and Fillide bounded back to the distaff, her finger
once more on her lip.

“There is more magic in Fillide than in Mejnour,” said
Glyndon to himself, walking gaily home; “yet, on second
thoughts, I know not if I quite so well like a character so.

278 ZANONI.

ready for revenge! But he who has the real secret can
baffle even the vengeance of a woman, and disarm all dan-
ger!” ne

Sirrah! dost thou even already meditate the possibility
of treason? Oh, well said Zanoni, “to pour pure water
into the muddy well does but disturb the mud!”

—————-—-_— > -———
CHAPTER VII.
—“Cernis, custodia qualis

Vestibulo sedeat? facies que limina servet?”?
ZENEID, lib. vi. 574.

Anp it is profound night. All is at rest within the old
castle—all is breathless under the melancholy stars. Now
is the time. Mejnour with his austere wisdom—Mejnour,
the enemy to love—Mejnour, whose eye will read thy
heart, and refuse thee the promised secrets, because the
sunny face of Fillide disturbs the lifeless shadow that he
calls repose— Mejnour comes to-morrow! Seize the night!
Beware of fear! Never, or this hour! So, brave youth, —
brave despite all thy errors—so, with a steady pulse, thy
hand unlocks once more the forbidden door!

He placed his lamp on the table beside the book, which
still lay there opened; he turned over the leaves, but could
not decipher their meaning till he came to the following
passage :

“When, then, the pupil is thus initiated and prepared,
let him open the casement, light the lamp, and bathe his
temples with the elixir. He must beware how he presume
yet to quaff the volatile and fiery spirit. To taste, till re-
peated inhalations have accustomed the frame gradually to
the ecstatic liquid, is to know not life, but death.”

He could penetrate no farther into the instructions; the
cipher again changed. He now looked steadily and ear-

1See you what porter sits within the vestibule?—what face
watches at the threshold?

ZANONI. 279

nestly round the chamber. The moonlight came quietly
through the lattice as his hand opened it, and seemed, as
it rested on the floor and filled the walls, like the presence
of some ghostly and mournful Power. He ranged the mys-
tic lamps (nine in number) round the centre of the room,
and lighted them one by one. A flame of silvery and
azure tints sprang up from each, and lighted the apart-
ment with a calm and yet most dazzling splendour; but
presently this light grew more soft and dim, as a thin grey
cloud, like a mist, gradually spread over the room; and
an icy thrill shot through the heart of the Englishman, and
quickly gathered over him like the coldness of death. In-
stinctively aware of his danger, he tottered, though with
difficulty, for his limbs seemed rigid and stone-like, to the
shelf that contained the crystal vials; hastily he inhaled
the spirit, and laved his temple with the sparkling liquid.
The same sensation of vigour, and youth, and joy, and airy
lightness that he had felt in the morning instantaneously
replaced the deadly numbness that just before had invaded
the citadel of life. He stood with his arms folded on
his bosom, erect and dauntless, to watch what should
ensue.
The vapour had now assumed almost the thickness and
seeming consistency of a snow-cloud; the lamps piercing it
like stars. And now he distinctly saw shapes, somewhat
resembling in outline those of the human form, gliding
slowly and with regular evolutions through the cloud.
They appeared bloodless; their bodies were transparent,
and contracted or expanded, like the folds of a serpent. As
they moved in majestic order, he heard a low sound—the
ghost as it were of voice—which each caught and echoed
from the other; a low sound, but musical, which seemed
the chant of some unspeakably tranquil joy. None of these
apparitions heeded him. His intense longing to accost
them, to be of them, to make one of this movement of
aerial happiness—for such it seemed to him—made him
stretch forth his arms and seek to cry aloud, but only an

280 ZANONI.

inarticulate whisper passed his lips: and the movement and
the music went on the same as if the mortal were not there.
Slowly they glided round and aloft, till in the same majes-
tic order, one after one, they floated through the casement
and were lost in the moonlight; then, as his eyes followed
them, the casement became darkened with some object un-
distinguishable at the first gaze, but which sufficed myste-
riously to change into ineffable horror the delight he had
before experienced. By degrees, this object shaped itself
to his sight. It was as that of a human head, covered with
a dark veil, through which glared, with livid and demoniac
fire, eyes that froze the marrow of his bones. Nothing else
of the face was distinguishable—nothing but those intoler-
able eyes; but his terror, that even at the first seemed be-
yond nature to endure, was increased a thousandfold, when,
after a pause, the Phantom glided slowly into the chamber.
The cloud retreated from it as it advanced; the bright
lamps grew wan, and flickered restlessly as at the breath
of its presence. Its form was veiled as the face, but the
outline was that of a female; yet it moved not as move
even the ghosts that simulate the living. It seemed rather
to crawl as some vast misshapen reptile; and pausing, at
length it cowered beside the table which held the mystic
volume, and again fixed its eyes through the filmy veil on
the rash invoker. All fancies the most grotesque, from
Monk or Painter in the early North, would have failed to
give to the visage of imp or fiend that aspect of deadly
malignity which spoke to the shuddering nature in those
eyes alone. All else so dark—shrouded—veiled and larva-
like. But that burning glare so intense, so livid, yet so
living, had in it something that was almost human in its
passion of hate and mockery—something that served to
show that the shadowy Horror was not all a spirit, but
partook of matter enough, at least, to make it more deadly
and fearful an enemy to material forms. As, clinging with
the grasp of agony to the wall—his hair erect—his eyeballs
starting, he still gazed back upon that appalling gaze—the

ZANONI. 281

Image spoke to him—his soul rather than his ear compre-
hended the words it said.

“Thou hast entered the immeasurable region. I am the
Dweller of the Threshold. What wouldst thou with me?
Silent? Dost thou fearme? Am I not thy beloved? Is it
not for me that thou hast rendered up the delights of thy
race? Wouldst thou be wise? Mine is the wisdom of the
countless ages. Kiss me, my mortal lover.” And the
Horror crawled near and nearer to him; it crept to his
side, its breath breathed upon his cheek! With a sharp
cry he fell to the earth insensible, and knew no more till,
far into the noon of the next day, he opened his eyes and
found himself in his bed,—the glorious sun streaming
through his lattice, and the bandit Paolo by his side, en-
gaged in polishing his carbine, and whistling a Calabrian
love air.

CHAPTER VIII.

“Thus man pursues his weary calling,
And wrings the hard life from the sky,
While Happiness unseen is falling
Down from God’s bosom silently. ”
SCHILLER.

In one of those islands whose history the imperishable
literature and renown of Athens yet invest with melancholy
interest, and on which Nature, in whom “there is nothing
melancholy,” still bestows a glory of scenery and climate
equally radiant for the freeman or the slave—the Ionian,
the Venetian, the Gaul, the Turk, or the restless Briton,
—Zanoni had fixed his bridal home. There the air carries
with it the perfumes of the plains for miles along the blue
translucent deep.’ Seen from one of its green sloping
heights, the island he had selected seemed one delicious
garden. The towers and turrets of its capital gleaming

1See Dr. Holland’s Travels to the lonian Isles, etc., p. 18.

282 ZANONI.

amidst groves of oranges and lemons;—vineyards and olive
woods filling up the valleys, and clambering along the hill-
sides; and villa, farm, and cottage covered with luxuriant

_trellises of dark green leaves and purple fruit. For, there,
the prodigal beauty yet seems half to justify those graceful
superstitions of a creed that, too enamoured of earth, rather
brought the deities to man than raised the man to their
less alluring and less voluptuous Olympus.

And still to the fishermen, weaving yet their antique
dances on the sand—to the maiden, adorning yet, with
many a Silver fibula, her glossy tresses under the tree that
overshadows her tranquil cot—the same Great Mother that
watched over the wise of Samos—the democracy of Corcyra
—the graceful and deep-taught loveliness of Miletus—
smiles as graciously as of yore. For the North, philosophy
and freedom are essentials to human happiness. In the
lands which Aphrodite rose from the waves to govern, as
the Seasons, hand in hand, stood to welcome her on the
shores,’ Nature is all-sufficient.

The isle which Zanoni had selected was one of the loveli-
est in that divine sea. His abode, at some distance from
the city, but near one of the creeks on the shore, belonged
to a Venetian, and, though small, had more of elegance than
the natives ordinarily cared for. On the seas, and in sight,
rode his vessel. His Indians, as before, ministered in mute
gravity to the service of the household. No spot could be
more beautiful—no solitude less invaded. To the myste-
rious knowledge of Zanoni—to the harmless ignorance of
Viola—the babbling and garish world of civilised man was

_ alike unheeded. ‘The loving sky and the lovely earth are
companions enough to Wisdom and to Ignorance while they
love!

Although, as I have before said, there was nothing in the
visible occupations of Zanoni that betrayed a cultivator of
the occult sciences, his habits were those of a man who re-
members or reflects. He loved to roam alone, chiefly at

1 Homeric Hymn.

ZANONI. 283

dawn, or at night, when the moon was clear (especially in
each month, at its rise and full), miles and miles away over
the rich inlands of the island, and to cull herbs and flowers,
which he hoarded with jealous care. Sometimes at the
dead of night, Viola would wake by an instinct that told
her he was not by her side, and, stretching out her arms,
find that the instinct had not deceived her. But she early
saw that he was reserved on his peculiar habits, and if at
times a chill, a foreboding, a suspicious awe crept over her,
she forbore to question him. But his rambles were not al-
ways unaccompanied—he took pleasure in excursions less
solitary. Often, when the sea lay before them like a lake,
the barren dreariness of the opposite coast of Cephallenia
contrasting the smiling shores on which they dwelt, Viola
and himself would pass days in cruising slowly around the
coast, or in visits to the neighbouring isles. Every spot of
the Greek soil, “that fair Fable-Land,” seemed to him fa-
miliar; and as he conversed of the Past, and its exquisite
traditions, he taught Viola to love the race from which
have descended the poetry and the wisdom of the world.
There was much in Zanoni, as she knew hin better, that
deepened the fascination in which Viola was from the first
enthralled. His love for herself was so tender, so vigilant,
and had that best and most enduring attribute, that it
seemed rather grateful for the happiness in its own cares
than vain of the happiness it created. His habitual mood
with all who approached him was calm and gentle, almost
to apathy. An angry word never passed his lips—an angry
gleam never shot from his eyes. Once they had been ex-
posed to the danger not uncommon in those then half-
savage lands. Some pirates who infested the neighbouring
coasts had heard of the arrival of the strangers, and the
seamen Zanoni employed had gossiped of their master’s
wealth. One night after Viola had retired to rest, she was
awakened by a slight noise below. Zanoni was not by her
side; she listened in some alarm. Was that a groan that
came upon her ear? She started up, she went to the door;

284 ZANONI.

all was still. A footstep now slowly approached, and Za-
noni entered calm as usual, and seemed unconscious of her
fears. The next morning, three men were found dead at
the threshold of the principal entrance, the door of which
had been forced. They were recognised in the neighbour-
hood as the most sanguinary and terrible marauders of the
coasts—men stained with a thousand murders, and who had
never hitherto failed in any attempt to which the lust of
rapine had impelled them. ‘The footsteps of many others
were tracked to the sea-shore. It seemed that their ac-
complices must have fled on the death of their leaders.
But when the Venetian Proveditore, or authority, of the
island came to examine into the matter, the most unac-
countable mystery was the manner in which these ruffians
had met their fate. Zanoni had not stirred from the apart-
ment in which he ordinarily pursued his chemical studies.
None of the servants had ever been disturbed from their
slumbers. No marks of human violence were on the bodies
of the dead. They died, and made no sign. From that
moment Zanoni’s house—nay, the whole vicinity, was sa-
cred. The neighbouring villages, rejoiced to be delivered
from a scourge, regarded the stranger as one whom the
Pagiana (or Virgin) held under her especial protection.
In truth, the lively Greeks around, facile to all external
impressions, and struck with the singular and majestic
beauty of the man who knew their language as a native,
whose voice often cheered them in their humble sorrows,
and whose hand was never closed to their wants, long after
he had left their shore preserved his memory by grateful
traditions, and still point to the lofty platanus beneath
which they had often seen him seated, alone and thought-
ful, in the heats of noon. But Zanoni had haunts less open
to the gaze than the shade of the platanus. In that isle
there are the bituminous springs which Herodotus has com-
memorated. Often at night, the moon, at least, beheld him
emerging from the myrtle and cystus that clothe the hil-
Jocks around the marsh that embeds the pools containing the

ZANONI. 285

inflammable material, all the medical uses of which, as ap-
plied to the nerves of organic life, modern science has not
yet perhaps explored. Yet more often would he pass his
hours in a cavern, by the loneliest part of the beach, where
the stalactites seem almost arranged by the hand of art, and
which the superstition of the peasants associate, in some
ancient legends, with the numerous and almost incessant
earthquakes to which the island is so singularly sub-
jected.

Whatever the pursuits that instigated these wanderings
and favoured these haunts, either they were linked with,
or else subordinate to, one main and master desire, which
every fresh day, passed in the sweet human CODED, of
Viola, confirmed and strengthened.

The scene that Glyndon had witnessed in his trance was
faithful to truth. And some little time after the date of
that night, Viola was dimly aware that an influence, she
knew not of what nature, was struggling to establish itself
over her happy life.’ Visions, indistinct and beautiful,
such as those she had known in her earlier days, but more
constant and impressive, began to haunt her night and day
when Zanoni was absent, to fade in his presence, and seem
less fair than that. Zanoni questioned her eagerly and
minutely of these visitations, but seemed dissatisfied, and
at times perplexed, by her answers.

“Tell me not,” he said, one day, “of those unconnected
images—those evolutions of starry shapes in a choral dance,
or those delicious melodies that seem to thee of the music
and the language of the distant spheres. Has no one shape
been to thee more distinct and more beautiful than the rest
—no voice uttering, or seeming to utter, thine own tongue,
and whispering to thee of strange secrets and solemn knowl-
edge?”

“No; all is confused in these dreams, whether of day or
night; and when at the sound of thy footsteps I recover,
my memory retains nothing but a vague impression of hap-
piness. How different—how cold—to the rapture of hang-

286 ZANONI.

ing on thy smile and listening to thy voice, when it says—
‘I love thee!’”

“Yet, how is it that visions less fair than these once
seemed to thee so alluring? How is it that they then
stirred thy fancies and filled thy heart? Once thou didst
desire a fairy-land, and now thou seemest so contented with
common life!”

“Have I not explained it to thee before? Is it common
life, then, to love and to live with the one we love? My
true fairyland is won! Speak to me of no other.”

And so night surprised them by the lonely beach; and
Zanoni, allured from his sublimer projects, and bending
over that tender face, forgot that, in the Harmonious Infi-
nite which spread around, there were other worlds than that
one human heart!

CHAPTER IX.

“There is a principle of the soul, superior to all nature, through
which we are capable of surpassing the order and systems of the
world. When the soul is elevated to natures better than itself,
then it is entirely separated from subordinate natures, exchanges
this for another life, and, deserting the order of things with which
it was connected, links and mingles itself with another. ”—IAm-
BLICHUS.

“ Apon-Ai! Adon-Ai!—appear, appear!”

And in the lonely cave, whence once had gone forth the
oracles of a heathen god, there emerged from the shadows
of fantastic rocks a luminous and gigantic column, glitter-
ing and shifting. It resembled the shining but misty spray
which, seen afar off, a fountain seems to send up on a
starry night. The radiance lit the stalactites, the crags,
the arches of the cave, and shed a pale and tremulous
splendour on the features of Zanoni.

“Son of Eternal Light,” said the invoker, “thou to
whose knowledge, grade after grade, race after race, I at-

ZANONI. 287

tained at last on the broad Chaldean plains—thou from
whom I have drawn so largely of the unutterable knowledge,
that yet eternity alone can suffice to drain—thou who, con-
genial with myself, so far as our various beings will permit,
hast been for centuries my familiar and my friend—answer
me and counsel!”

From the column there emerged a shape of unimaginable
glory. Its face was that of a man in its first youth; but
solemn, as with the consciousness of eternity and the tran-
quillity of wisdom; light, like starbeams, flowed through its
transparent veins; light made its limbs themselves, and
undulated in restless sparkles through the waves of its daz-
zling hair. With its arms folded on its breast, it stood
distant a few feet from Zanoni, and its low voice murmured
gently: “My counsels were sweet to thee once; and once,
night after night, thy soul could follow my wings through
the untroubled splendours of the Infinite. Now thou hast
bound thyself back to the earth by its strongest chains, and
the attraction to the clay is more potent than the sympa-
thies that drew to thy charms the Dweller of the Starbeam
and the Air! When last thy soul hearkened to me, the
senses already troubled thine intellect and obscured thy
vision. Once again I come to thee; but thy power even to
summon me to thy side is fading from thy spirit, as sunshine
fades from the wave, when the winds drive the cloud be-
tween the ocean and the sky.”

“Alas, Adon-Ai,” answered the seer, mournfully, “I
know too well the conditions of the being which thy pres-
ence was wont to rejoice. JI know that our wisdom comes
but from the indifference to the things of the world which
the wisdom masters. The mirror of the soul cannot reflect
both earth and heaven; and the one vanishes from the sur-
face as the other is glassed upon its deeps. But it is not
to restore me to that sublime abstraction in which the Intel-
lect, free and disembodied, rises, region after region, to the
spheres, —that once again, and with the agony and travail
of enfeebled power, I have called thee to mine aid. I love;

288 ZANONI.

and in love I begin to live in the sweet humanities of an-
other! If wise yet in all which makes danger powerless
against myself, or those on whom I can gaze from the calm
height of indifferent science, I am blind as the merest mor-
tal to the destinies of the creature that makes my heart
beat with the passions which obscure my gaze.”

“What matter?” answered Adon-Ai. “Thy love must
be but a mockery of the name; thou canst not love as they
do for whom there are death and the grave. A short time!
—like a day in thy incalculable life, and the form thou
dotest on is dust! Others of the nether world go hand in
hand, each with each, unto the tomb, hand in hand they
ascend from the worm to new cycles of existence. For
thee, below are ages; for her, but hours. And for her and
thee—O poor, but mighty one!—will there be even a joint
hereafter? Through what grades and heavens of spiritu-
alised being will her soul have passed when thou, the soli-
tary loiterer, comest from the vapours of the earth to the
gates of light!”

“Son of the Starbeam, thinkest thou that this thought is
not with me for ever? and seest thou not that I have in-
voked thee to hearken and minister to my design? Read-
est thou not my desire and dream to raise the conditions of
her being tomy own? ‘Thou, Adon-Ai, bathing the celes-
tial joy that makes thy life in the oceans of eternal splen-
dour,—thou, save by the sympathies of knowledge, canst
conjecture not what I, the offspring of mortals, feel—de-
barred yet from the objects of the tremendous and sublime
ambition that first winged my desires above the clay—when
I see myself compelled to stand in this low world alone. —
I have sought amongst my tribe for comrades, and in vain.
At last I have found a mate! The wild bird and the wild
beast have theirs; and my mastery over the malignant
tribes of terror can banish their larvee from the path that
shall lead her upward till the air of eternity fits the frame
for the elixir that baffles death.”

“ And thou hast begun the initiation, and thou art foiled!

ZANONI. 289

I know it. Thou hast conjured to her sleep the fairest
visions; thou hast invoked the loveliest children of the air
to murmur their music to her trance, and her soul heeds
them not; and, returning to the earth, escapes from their
control. Blind one, wherefore? Canst thou not perceive?
Because in her soul all is love. There is no intermediate
passion with which the things thou wouldst charm to her
have association and affinities. Their attraction is but to
the desires and cravings of the intellect. What have they
with the passion that is of earth, and the hope that goes
direct to Heaven?”

“But can there be no medium—no link—in which our
souls, as our hearts, can be united, and so mine may have
influence over her own?”

“Ask me not—thou wilt not comprehend me!”

“T adjure thee!—speak!”

“When two souls are divided, knowest thou not that a
third in which both meet and live is the link between
them?”

“JT do comprehend thee, Adon-Ai,” said Zanoni, with a
light of more human joy upon his face than it had ever be-
fore been seen to wear; ‘and if my destiny, which here is
dark to mine eyes, vouchsafed to me the happy lot of the
humble—if ever there be a child that I may clasp to my
bosom and call my own!——”

“ And is it to be man at last, that thou hast aspired to be
more than man?”

“But a child—a second Viola!” murmured Zanoni,
scarcely heeding the Son of Light; “a young soul fresh
from Heaven, that I may rear from the first moment it
touches earth—whose wings I may train to follow mine
through the glories of creation; and through whom the
mother herself may be led upward over the realm of
death!”

“ Beware—reflect! Knowest thou not that thy darkest
enemy dwells in the Real? Thy wishes bring thee near
and nearer to humanity.”

19

290 ZANONI.

“Ah, Humanity is sweet!” answered Zanoni.
And as the Seer spoke, on the glorious face of Adon-Ai
there broke a smile.

* * * *
% * * *
CHAPTER X.

“ ANterna eternus tribuit, mortalia confert
Mortalis ; divina Deus, peritura caducus. ”!
AUREL. PRUD. CONTRA SYMMACHUM, lib. ii.

EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS OF ZANONI TO
MEJNOUR.

LETTER I.

Tuov hast not informed*me of the progress of thy pupil;
and I fear that so differently does Circumstance shape the
minds of the generations to which we are descended, from
the intense and earnest children of the earlier world, that
even thy most careful and elaborate guidance would fail,
with loftier and purer natures than that of the Neophyte
thou hast admitted within thy gates. Even that third state
of being, which the Indian sage’ rightly recognises as being
between the sleep and the waking, and describes imper-
fectly by the name of TRANCE, is unknown to the children
of the northern world; and few but would recoil to indulge
it, regarding its peopled calm as the mdyd and delusion of
the mind. Instead of ripening and culturing that airy soil,
from which nature, duly known, can evoke fruits so rich
and flowers so fair, they strive but to exclude it from their

'The Eternal gives eternal things, the Mortal gathers mortal
things: God, that which is divine, and the perishable that which is
perishable.

* The Brahmins, speaking of Brahm, say: “To the Omniscient the
three modes of being—sleep, waking, and trance,—are not;” dis-
tinctly recognising trance as a third and coequal condition of being.

ZANONI. 291

gaze; they esteem that struggle of the intellect from men’s
narrow world, to the spirit’s infinite home, as a disease
which the leech must extirpate with pharmacy and drugs,
and know not even that it is from this condition of their
being, in its most imperfect and infant form, that Poetry,
Music, Art—all that belong to an idea of Beauty, to which
neither sleeping nor waking can furnish archetype and
actual semblance—take their immortal birth. When we,
O Mejnour, in the far time, were ourselves the Neophytes
and Aspirants—we were of a class to which the actual world
was shut and barred. Our forefathers had no object in life
but knowledge. From the cradle we were predestined and
reared to wisdom, as to a priesthood. We commenced re-
search where modern Conjecture closes its faithless wings.
And with us, those were the common elements of science
which the sages of to-day disdain as wild chimeras, or
despair of as unfathomable mysteries. Even the funda-
mental principles, the large, yet simple theories of Elec-
tricity and Magnetism, rest obscure and dim in the disputes
of their blinded schools; yet, even in our youth, how few
ever attained to the first circle of the brotherhood, and,
after wearily enjoying the sublime privileges they sought,
they voluntarily abandoned the light of the sun, and sank,
without effort, to the grave, like pilgrims in a trackless
desert, overawed by the stillness of their solitude, and ap-
palled by the absence of a goal. Thou, in whom nothing
seems to live but the desire to know—thou, who, indifferent
whether it leads to weal or to woe, lendest thyself to all
who would tread the path of mysterious science,—a Human
Book, insensate to the precepts it enounces; thou hast ever
sought, and often made, additions to our number. But to
these have only been vouchsafed partial secrets; vanity and
passion unfitted them for the rest; and now, without other
interest than that of an experiment in science, without love,
and without pity,—thou exposest this new soul.to the haz-
ards of the tremendous ordeal! Thou thinkest that a zeal
so inquisitive, a courage so absolute and dauntless, -may

292 ZANONI.

suffice to conquer where austerer intellect and purer virtue
have so often failed. Thou thinkest, too, that the germ of
art that lies in the Painter’s mind, as it comprehends in it-
self the entire embryo of Power and Beauty, may be ex-
panded into the stately flower of the Golden Science. It is
a new experiment to thee. Be gentle with thy Neophyte,
and if his nature disappoint thee in the first stages of the
process, dismiss him back to the Real while it is yet time
to enjoy the brief and outward life which dwells in the
senses, and closes with the tomb. And as I thus admonish
thee, O Mejnour, wilt thou smile at my inconsistent hopes!
I, who have so invariably refused to initiate others into our
mysteries—I begin at last to comprehend why the great law,
which binds man to his kind, even when seeking most to
set himself aloof from their condition, has made thy cold and
bloodless science the link between thyself and thy race ;—
why thou hast sought converts and pupils—why, in seeing
life after life voluntarily dropping from our starry order,
thou still aspirest to renew the vanished and repair the
lost—why, amidst thy calculations, restless and unceasing
as the wheels of Nature herself, thou recoilest from the
thought To BE ALonge! So with myself; at last I too,
seek a convert—an equal—lI, too, shudder to be alone!
What thou hast warned me of has come to pass. Love re-
duces all things to itself. Either must I be drawn down to
the nature of the beloved, or hers must be lifted to my own.
As whatever belongs to true Art has always necessarily had
attraction for ws, whose very being is in the ideal whence
art descends, so in this fair creature I have learned, at last,
the secret that bound me to her at the first glance. The
daughter of music—music passing into her being became
poetry. It was not the stage that attracted her, with its
hollow falsehoods; it was the land in her own fancy which
the stage seemed to centre and represent. There the poetry
found a voice—there it struggled into imperfect shape; and
then (that land, insufficient for it) it fell back upon itself.
It coloured her thoughts, it suffused her soul; it asked

ZANONI. 293

not words, it created not things; it gave birth but to emo-
tions, and lavished itself on dreams. At last came love;
and there, as a river into the sea, it poured its restless
waves, to become mute and deep and still—the everlasting
mirror of the heavens.

And is it not through this poetry which lies within her
that she may be led into the large poetry of the universe?
Often I listen to her careless talk, and find oracles in its
unconscious beauty, as we find strange virtues in some
lonely flower. I see her mind ripening under my eyes;
and in its fair fertility what ever-teeming novelties of
thought! O Mejnour! how many of our tribe have un-
ravelled the laws of the universe, have solved the riddles
of the exterior nature—and deduced the light from dark-
ness! And is not the POET, who studies nothing but the
human heart, a greater philosopher than all? Knowledge
and atheism are incompatible. To know nature is to
know that there must be a God! But does it require this
_ to examine the method and architecture of creation? Me-
thinks, when I look upon a pure mind, however ignorant
and childlike, that I see the August and Immaterial One
more clearly than in all the orbs of matter which career at
His bidding through space.

Rightly is it the fundamental decree of our order that
we must impart our secrets only to the pure. The most
terrible part of the ordeal is in the temptations that our
power affords to the criminal. If it were possible that a
malevolent being could attain to our faculties, what disorder
it might introduce into the globe! Happy that it is not
possible; the malevolence would disarm the power. It is
in the purity of Viola that I rely, as thou more vainly hast
relied on the courage or the genius of thy pupils. Bear me
witness, Mejnour! Never since the distant day in which I
pierced the Arcana of our knowledge, have I ever sought
to make its mysteries subservient to unworthy objects;
though, alas! the extension of our existence robs us of a
country and a home; though the law that places all science,

294 ZANONI.

as all art, in the abstraction from the noisy passions and tur-
bulent ambition of actual life, forbids us to influence the des-
tinies of nations, for which Heaven selects ruder and blinder
agencies; yet, wherever have been my wanderings, I have
sought to soften distress, and to convert from sin. My
power has been hostile only to the guilty; and yet, with
all our lore, how in each step we are reduced to be but the
permitted instruments of the Power that vouchsafes our
own, but only to direct it. How all our wisdom shrinks
into nought compared with that which gives the meanest
herb its virtues and peoples the smallest globule with its
appropriate world... And while we are allowed at times to
influence the happiness of others, how mysteriously the
shadows thicken round our own future doom! We cannot
be prophets to ourselves! With what trembling hope I
nurse the thought that I may preserve to my solitude the
light of a living smile!

* *

EXTRACTS FROM LETTER II.

Deeming myself not pure enough to initiate so pure a
heart, I invoke to her trance those fairest and most tender
inhabitants of space that have furnished to Poetry, which
is the instinctive guess into creation, the ideas of the Glen-
doveer and Sylph. And these were less pure than her own
thoughts, and less tender than her own love! They could
not raise her above her human heart, for that has a heaven
of its own.

* * * *

IT have just looked on her in sleep—I have heard her
breathe my name. Alas! that which is so sweet to others
has its bitterness to me; for I think how soon the time may
come when the sleep will be without a dream—when the
heart that dictates the name will be cold, and the lips that
utter it be dumb. What a twofold shape there is in love!

ZANONI. 295

If we examine it coarsely—if we look but on its fleshly
ties—its enjoyments of a moment—its turbulent fever and
its dull reaction, how strange it seems that this passion
should be the supreme mover of the world—that it is this
which has dictated the greatest sacrifices and influenced all
societies and all times; that to this the loftiest and loveliest
genius has ever consecrated its devotion; that but for love
there were no civilisation—no music, no poetry, no beauty,
no life beyond the brute’s.

But examine it in its heavenlier shape—in its utter ab-
negation of self—in its intimate connection with all that is
most delicate and subtle in the spirit—its power above all
that is sordid in existence—its mastery over the idols of
the baser worship——its ability to create a palace of the cot-
tage, an oasis in the desert, a summer in the iceland—
where it breathes, and fertilises, and glows; and the won-
der rather becomes how so few regard it in its holiest
nature. What the sensual call its enjoyments are the least
of its joys. ‘True love is less a passion than a symbol.
Meijnour, shall the time come when I can speak to thee of

Viola as a thing that was?
* * * *

* * * *
EXTRACTS EROM LETTER III.

Knowest thou that of late I have sometimes asked my-
self, “Is there no guilt in the knowledge that has so divided
us from our race?” It is true that the higher we ascend,
the more hateful seem to us the vices of the short-lived
creepers of the earth—the more the sense of the goodness of
the All-good penetrates and suffuses us, the more immedi-
ately does our happiness seem to emanate from Him. But,
on the other hand, how many virtues must lie dead in those
who live in the world of death, and refuse to die! Is not
this sublime egotism, this state of abstraction and reverie—
this self-wrapt and self-dependent majesty of existence, a
resignation of that nobility which incorporates our own

296 ZANONI.

welfare, our joys, our hopes, our fears with others? To
live on in no dread of foes, undegraded by infirmity, secure
through the cares, and free from the disease of flesh, is a
spectacle that captivates our pride. And yet dost thou not
more admire him who dies for another? Since I have loved
her, Mejnour, it seems almost cowardice to elude the grave
which devours the hearts that wrap us in their folds. [
feel it—the earth grows upon my spirit. Thou wert right;
eternal age, serene and passionless, is a happier boon than
eternal youth, with its yearnings and desires. Until we
ean be all spirit, the tranquillity of solitude must. be in-
difference.

EXTRACTS FROM LETTER IV.

I have received thy communication. What! is it so?
Has thy pupil disappointed thee? Alas, poor pupil!
Boat ——

(Here follow comments on those passages in Glyndon’s
life already known to the reader, or about to be made so,
with earnest adjurations to Mejnour to watch yet over the
fate of his scholar.)

But I cherish the same desire, with a warmer heart. My
pupil! how the terrors that shall encompass thine ordeal
warn me from the task! Once more I will seek the Son of
Light.

* * * *

Yes, Adon-Ai, long deaf to my call, at last has descended
to my vision, and left behind him the glory of his presence
in the shape of Hope. Oh, not impossible, Viola, not im-
possible, that we may yet be united, soul with soul.

ZANONI. 297

EXTRACTS FROM LETTER VY. (Many months after the last).

Mejnour, awake from thine apathy—rejoice! A new soul
will be born to the world. A new soul that shall call me
Father. Ah, if they for whom exist all the occupations and
resources of human life—if they can thrill with exquisite
emotion at the thought of hailing again their own childhood
in the faces of their children—if, in that birth, they are
born once more into the Holy Innocence which is the first
state of existence—if they can feel that on man devolves”
almost an Angel’s duty, when he has a life to guide from
the cradle, and a soul to nurture for the Heaven—what to
me must be the rapture to welcome an inheritor of all the
gifts which double themselves in being shared! How sweet
the power to watch, and to guard—to instil the knowledge,
to avert the evil, and to guide back the river of life ina
richer, and broader, and deeper stream, to the paradise from
which it flows! And beside that river our souls shall meet,
sweet Mother. Our child shall supply the sympathy that
fails as yet; and what shape shall haunt thee, what terror
shall dismay, when thy initiation is beside the cradle of thy
child!

CHAPTER XI.

“They thus beguile the way
Until the blustring storme is overblowne,
When weening to returne whence they did stray
They cannot finde that path which first was showne,
But wander to and fro in waies unknowne. ”
SPENSER’S Faerie Queene, book i. canto i. st. 10.

Yes, Viola, thou art another being than when, by the
threshold of thy Italian home, thou didst follow thy dim
fancies through the Land of Shadow; or when thou didst
vainly seek to give voice to an Ideal beauty, on the boards
where Illusion counterfeits Earth and Heaven for an hour.

298 ZANONI.

till the weary sense, awaking, sees but the tinsel and the
scene-shifter. Thy spirit reposes in its own happiness.
Its wanderings have found a goal. In a moment, there
often dwells the sense of eternity; for when profoundly
happy, we know that it is impossible to die. Whenever
the soul feels itself, it feels everlasting life!

The initiation is deferred—thy days and nights are left
to no other visions than those with which a contented heart
enchants a guileless fancy. Glendoveers and Sylphs, par-
don me if I question whether those visions are not lovelier
than yourselves!

They stand by the beach, and see the sun sinking into
the sea. How long now have they dwelt on that island?
What matters!—it may be months, or years—what matters!
Why should I or they keep account of that happy time?
As in the dream of a moment ages may seem to pass, so
shall we measure transport or woe—by the length of the
dream, or the number of emotions that the dreams in-
volves?

The sun sinks slowly down; the air is arid and oppres-
sive; on the sea, the stately vessel lies motionless; on the
shore, no leaf trembles on the trees.

Viola drew nearer to Zanoni; a presentiment she could
not define made her heart beat more quickly; and, looking
into his face, she was struck with its expression; it was
anxious, abstracted, perturbed.

“This stillness awes me,” she whispered.

Zanoni did not seem to hear her. He muttered to him-
self, and his eyes gazed round restlessly. She knew not
why, but that gaze, which seemed to pierce into space, that
muttered voice in some foreign language, revived dimly her
earlier superstitions. She was more fearful since the hour
when she knew that she was to be a mother. Strange crisis
in the life of woman, and in her love! Something yet un-
born begins already to divide her heart with that which had
been before its only monarch!

“Look on me, Zanoni,” she said, pressing his hand

ZANONI. 299

Heturned. “Thou art pale, Viola; thy hand trembles!”

“It is true. I feel as if some enemy were creeping near
m8.”

“And the instinct deceives thee not. An enemy is in-
deed at hand. I see it through the heavy air; I hear it
through the silence: the Ghostly One—the Destroyer—the
PrstiLeNcE! Ah, seest thou how the leaves swarm with
insects, only by an effort visible to the eye? They follow
the breath of the plague!” As he spoke, a bird fell from
the bough at Viola’s feet; it fluttered, it writhed an in-
stant, and was dead.

“Oh, Viola!” cried Zanoni, passionately, “that is death.
Dost thou not fear to die?”

“To leave thee? Ah, yes!”

“And if I could teach thee how Death may be defied—
if I could arrest for thy youth the course of time—if I
could——”

He paused abruptly, for Viola’s eyes spoke only terror;
her cheek and lips were pale.

“Speak not thus—look not thus,” she said, recoiling
from him. “You dismay me. Ah, speak not thus, or I

should tremble—no, not for myself, but for thy child.”

— “Thy child! But wouldst thou reject for thy child the
same glorious boon?”

“ Zanoni!”

“Well!”

“The sun has sunk from our eyes, but to rise on those of
others. To disappear from this world is to live in the
world afar. Oh, lover—oh, husband!” she continued, with
sudden energy, “tell me that thou didst but jest, that thou
didst but trifle with my folly! There is less terror in the
pestilence than in thy words.”

Zanoni’s brow darkened; he looked at her in silence for
some moments, and then said, almost severely :

“ What hast thou known of me to distrust?”

“Oh, pardon, pardon!—nothing!” cried Viola, throwing
herself on his breast, and bursting into tears. “TI will not

300 ZANONLI.

believe even thine own words, if they seem to wrong thee!”
He kissed the tears from her eyes, but made no answer.

“And ah!” she resumed, with an enchanting and child-
like smile, “if thou wouldst give me a charm against the
pestilence; see, I will takeit from thee.” And she laid
her hand on a small antique amulet that he wore on his
breast. ;

“Thou knowest how often this has made me jealous of
the past: surely some love-gift, Zanoni? But no, thou
didst not love the giver as thou dost me. Shall I steal
thine amulet?”

“Infant!” said Zanoni, tenderly; “she who placed this
round my neck deemed it indeed a charm, for she had
superstitions like thyself; but to me it is more than the
wizard’s spell—it is the relic of a sweet vanished time,
when none who loved me could distrust.”

He said these words in a tone of such melancholy re-
proach that it went to the heart of Viola, but the tone
changed into a solemnity which chilled back the gush of
her feelings as he resumed: “ And this, Viola, one day,
perhaps, I will transfer from my breast to thine; yes,
whenever thou shalt comprehend me better—whenever the
laws of our being shall be the same !”

He moved on gently. They returned slowly home; but
fear still was in the heart of Viola, though she strove to
shake it off. Italian and Catholic she was, with all the
superstitions of land and sect. She stole to her chamber,
and prayed before a little relic of San Gennaro, which the
priest of her house had given to her in childhood, and
which had accompanied her in all her wanderings. She
had never deemed it possible to part with it before. Now,
if there was a charm against the pestilence, did she fear
the pestilence for herself? The next morning when he
woke, Zanoni found the relic of the saint suspended with
his mystic amulet round his neck.

“Ah! thou wilt have nothing to fear from the pestilence
now,” said Viola, between tears and smiles; “and when

ZANONL 801

thou wouldst talk to me again as thou didst last night, the
saint shall rebuke thee.”

Well, Zanoni, can there ever indeed be commune of
- thought and spirit, except with equals?

Yes, the Plague broke out—the island home must be
abandoned. Mighty Seer, thow hast no power to save those
whom thou lovest/ Farewell, thou bridal roof!—sweet rest-
ing-place from Care, farewell! Climates as soft may greet
ye, O lovers—skies as serene, and waters as blue and calm.
But that time, can it ever more return? Who shall say
that the heart does not change with the scene—the place
where we first dwelt with the beloved one? Every spot
there has so many memories which the place only can re-
call. The past that haunts it seems to command such con-
stancy in the future. If a thought less kind, less trustful,
enter within us, the sight of a tree under which a vow has
been exchanged, a tear has been kissed away, restores us
again to the hours of the first divine illusion, But in a
home where nothing speaks of the first nuptials, where
there is no eloquence of association, no holy burial-places
_ of emotions, whose ghosts are angels!—yes, who that has
gone through the sad history of Affection will tell us that
the heart changes not with the scene! Blow fair, ye favour-
ing winds; cheerily swell, ye sails; away from the land
where Death has come to snatch the sceptre of Love! The
shores glide by; new coasts succeed to the green hills and
orange groves of the Bridal Isle. From afar now gleam in
the moonlight the columns yet extant of a temple which the
Athenian dedicated to Wisdom: and, standing on the bark
that bounded on in the freshening gale, the votary who had
survived the goddess murmured to himself:

“Has the wisdom of ages brought me no happier hours
than those common to the shepherd and the herdsman, with
no world beyond their village—no aspiration beyond the
kiss and the smile of home?”

And the moon resting alike over the ruins of the temple
of the departed Creed—over the hut of the living peasant—

302 ZANONI.

over the immemorial mountain-top, and the perishable
herbage that clothed its sides, seemed to smile back its
answer of calm disdain to the being who perchance might
have seen the temple built, and who, in his inscrutable
existence, might behold the mountain shattered from its
base.

DOO EY LETH.
THE EFFECTS OF THE ELIXIR.

“Frommt’s den Schleier aufzuheben,
Wo das nahe Schreckniss droht?
Nur das Irrthum ist das Leben,
Und das Wissen ist der Tod. ”!
ScHILLER, Kassandra.

CHAPTER I.

“Zwei Seelen wohnen, ach! in meiner Brust.

Was stehst du so, und blickst erstaunt hinaus?” 2?
Faust.

Ir will be remembered that we left Master Pdolo by the
bedside of Glyndon; and as, waking from that profound
slumber, the recollections of the past night came horribly
back to his mind, the Englishman uttered a cry, and covered
his face with his hands.

“Good morrow, Excellency,” said Pdolo, gaily. “ Corpo
di Bacco! you have siept soundly!”

The sound of this man’s voice, so lusty, ringing, and
healthful, served to scatter before it the phantasma that
yet haunted Glyndon’s memory.

1 Delusion is the life we live,
And knowledge death: oh, wherefore, then,
To sight the coming evils give,
And lift the veil of Fate to Men?
? Two souls dwell, alas! in my breast.
* * * ae
Why. standest thou so, and lookest out astonished?

304 ZANONI.

He rose erect in his bed. “ And where did you find me?
Why are you here?”

‘Where did I find you?” repeated Paolo, in surprise;
“in your bed, to be sure. Why am I here?—because the
Padrone bade me await your waking, and attend your com-
mands.”

“The Padrone, Mejnour!—is he arrived!”

“ Arrived and departed, Signor. He has left this letter
for you.”

“Give it me, and wait without till I am dressed.”

“At your service. I have bespoke an excellent break-
fast: you must be hungry. I ama very tolerable cook: a
monk’s son ought to be! You will be startled at my genius
in the dressing of fish. My singing, I trust, will not dis-
turb you. I always sing while I prepare a salad; it har-
monises the ingredients.” And slinging his carbine over
his shoulder, Pdolo sauntered from the room, and closed
the door.

Glyndon was already deep in the contents of the follow-
ing letter:

“When I first received thee as my pupil, I promised
Zanoni, if convinced by thy first trials that thou couldst
but swell, not the number of our order, but the list of the
victims who have aspired to it in vain, I would not rear
thee to thine own wretchedness and doom; I would dismiss
thee back to the world. Ifulfil my promise. Thine ordeal
has been the easiest that Neophyte ever knew. I asked for
nothing but abstinence from the sensual, and a brief experi-
ment of thy patience and thy faith. Go back to thine own
world; thou hast no nature to aspire to ours!

“Tt was I who prepared Pdolo to receive thee at the
revel. It was I who instigated the old beggar to ask thee
foralms. It was I who left open the book that thou couldst
not read without violating my command. Well, thou hast
seen what awaits thee at the threshold of knowledge. Thou
hast confronted the first foe that menaces him whom the

ZANONL 05

senses yet grasp and enthral. Dost thou wonder that I
close upon thee the gates for ever? Dost thor not compre-
hend, at last, that it needs a soul tempered, and purified,
and raised, not by external spells, but by its own sublimity
and valour, to pass the threshold, and disdain the foe?
Wretch! all my science avails nothing for the rash, for
the sensual—for him who desires our secrets but to pollute
them to gross enjoyments and selfish vice! How have the
impostors and sorcerers of the earlier times perished by
their very attempt to penetrate the mysteries that should
purify, and not deprave! They have boasted of the phi-
losopher’s stone, and died in rags; of the immortal elixir,
and sank to their grave, gray before their time. Legends
tell you that the fiend rent them into fragments. Yes;
the fiend of their own unholy desires and criminal de-
signs! What they coveted thou covetest; and if thou
hadst the wings of a seraph thou couldst soar not from the
slough of thy mortality. Thy desire for knowledge, but
petulant presumption; thy thirst for happiness, but the
diseased longing for the unclean and muddied waters of
corporeal pleasure! Thy very love, which usually elevates
even the mean, a passion that calculates treason amidst
the first glow of lust,—thou, one of us! Thou, a brother
of the August Order! Thou, an Aspirant to the Stars that
shine in the Shemaid of the Chaldean lore! The eagle
can raise but the eaglet to the sun. J abandon thee to thy
twilight!

“But, alas, for thee, disobedient and profane! thou hast
inhaled the elixir; thou hast attracted to thy presence a
ghastly and remorseless foe. Thou thyself must exorcise
the phantom thou hast raised. Thou must return to the
world; but not without punishment and strong effort canst
thou regain the calm and the joy of the life thou hast left
behind. This for thy comfort will I tell thee: he who has
drawn into his frame even so little of the volatile and vital
energy of the aerial juices as thyself, has awakened facul-
ties that cannot sleep—faculties that may yet, with patient

20

306 ZANONI.

humility, with sound faith, and the courage that is not of
the body like thine, but of the resolute and virtuous mind,
attain, if not to the knowledge that reigns above, to high
achievement in the career of men. Thou wilt find the rest-
less influence in all that thou wouldst undertake. Thy
heart, amidst vulgar joys, will aspire to something holier;
thy ambition, amidst coarse excitement, to something beyond
thy reach. But deem not that this of itself will suffice for
glory. Equally may the craving lead thee to shame and
guilt. It is but an imperfect and new-born energy which
will not suffer thee to repose. As thou directest it must
thou believe it to be the emanation of thine evil genius or
thy good.

“But woe to thee! insect meshed in the web in which
thou.hast entangled limbs and wings! Thou hast not only
inhaled the elixir, thou hast conjured the spectre; of all
the tribes of the space, no foe is so malignant to man—and
thou hast lifted the veil from thy gaze! I cannot restore
to thee the happy dimness of thy vision. Know, at least,
that all of us—the highest and the wisest—who have, in
sober truth, passed beyond the threshold, have had, as our
first fearful task, to master and subdue its grisly and ap-
palling guardian. Know that thou canst deliver thyself
from those livid eyes—know that, while they haunt, they
cannot harm, if thou resistest the thoughts to which they
tempt, and the horror they engender. Dread them most
when thou beholdest them not. And thus, son of the worm,
we part! All that I can tell thee to encourage, yet to warn
and to guide, I have told thee in these lines. Not from me,
from thyself has come the gloomy trial, from which I yet
trust thou wilt emerge into peace. Type of the knowledge
that I serve, I withhold no lesson from the pure aspirant;
Tam a dark enigma to the general seeker. As man’s only
indestructible possession is his memory, so it is not in mine
art to crumble into matter the immaterial thoughts that have
sprung up within thy breast. The tyro might shatter this
castle to the dust, and topple down the mountain to the

ZANONI. 307

plain. The master has no power to say, ‘Exist no more,’
to one THOUGHT that his knowledge has inspired. ‘Thou
mayst change the thought into new forms; thou mayst
rarefy and sublimate it into a finer spirit, but thou canst
not annihilate that which has no home but in the memory—
no substance but the idea. EvEery THoUGHT Is A souL!
Vainly, therefore, would I or thou undo the past, or restore
to thee the gay blindness of thy youth. Thou must endure
the influence of the elixir thou hast inhaled; thou must
wrestle with the spectre thou hast invoked!”

The letter fell from Glyndon’s hand. A sort of stupor
succeeded to the various emotions which had chased each
other in the perusal—a stupor, resembling that which fol-
lows the sudden destruction of any ardent and long-nurst
hope in the human heart, whether it be of love, of avarice,
of ambition. The loftier world for which he had so thirsted,
sacrificed, and toiled was closed upon him “for ever,” and
by his own faults of rashness and presumption. But Glyn-
don’s was not of that nature which submits long to condemn
itself. His indignation began to kindle against Mejnour,
who owned he had tempted, and who now abandoned him—
abandoned him to the presence of a spectre. The Mystic’s
reproaches stung, rather than humbled him. What crime
had he committed to deserve language so harsh and dis-
dainful? Was it so deep a debasement to feel pleasure in
the smile and the eyes of Fillide? Had not Zanoni himself
confessed love for Viola?—had he not fled with her as his
companion? Glyndon never paused to consider if there is
no distinction between one kind of love and another.
Where, too, was the great offence of yielding to a tempta-
tion which only existed for the brave? Had not the mystic
volume which Mejnour had purposely left open bid him
but “ Beware of fear”? Was not, then, every wilful provo-
cative held out to the strongest influences of the human
mind in the prohibition to enter the chamber—in the pos-
session of the key which excited his euriosity—in the volume
which seemed to dictate the mode by which the curiosity

308 ZANONI.

was to be gratified? -As, rapidly, these thoughts passed
over him, he began to consider the whole conduct of Me}-
nour either as a perfidious design to entrap him to his own
misery, or as the trick of an impostor, who knew that he
could not realise the great professions he had made. On
glancing again over the more mysterious threats and warn-
ings in Mejnour’s letter, they seemed to assume the lan-
guage of mere parable and allegory—the jargon of the
Platonists and Pythagoreans. By little and little, he be-
gan to consider that the very spectra he had seen—even
that one phantom so horrid in its aspect—were but the de-
lusions which Mejnour’s science had enabled him to raise.
The healthful sunlight, filling up every cranny in his
chamber, seemed to laugh away the terrors of the past
night. His pride and his resentment nerved his habitual
courage; and when, having hastily dressed himself, he re-
joined Pdolo, it was with a flushed cheek and a haughty
step.

“So, Pdolo,” said he, “the Padrone, as you will call
him, told you to expect and welcome me at your village
feast?”

“He did so, by a message from a wretched old cripple.
This surprised me at the time, for I thought he was far
distant. But these great philosophers make a joke of two
or three hundred leagues.”

“Why did you not tell me you had heard from Mej-
nour?”

“Because the old cripple forbade me.”

“Did you not see the man afterwards during the dance?”

“No, Excellency.”

“Humph!”

“ Allow me to serve you,” said Pdolo, piling Glyndon’s
plate, and then filling his glass. “I wish, Signor, now the
Padrone is gone,—not” (added Pdolo, as he cast rather a
frightened and suspicious glance round the room) “that I
mean to say anything disrespectful of him,—I wish, I say,
now that he is gone, that you would take pity on yourself,

ZANONI. 309

and ask your own heart what your youth was meant for?
Not to bury yourself alive in these old ruins, and endanger
body and soul by studies which I am sure no saint could
approve of.”

“Are the saints so partial, then, to your own occupations,
Master Pdolo?”

“Why,” answered the bandit, a little confused, “a
gentleman with plenty of pistoles in his purse need not,
of necessity, make it his profession to take away the pistoles
of other people! It is a different thing for us poor rogues.
After all, too, I always devote a tithe of my gains to the
Virgin; and I share the rest charitably with the poor. But
eat, drink, enjoy yourself—be absolved by your confessor
for any little peccadilloes, and don’t run too long scores at
a time—that’s my advice. Your health, Excellency!
Pshaw, Signor, fasting, except on the days prescribed to a
good Catholic, only engenders phantoms.”

“Phantoms!”

“Yes; the devil always tempts the empty stomach. To
covet—to hate—to thieve—to rob, and to murder—these are
the natural desires of a man who isfamishing. Withafull
belly, Signor, we are at peace with all the world. That’s
yight: you like the partridge! Cospetto/ When I myself
have passed two or three days in the mountains, with noth-
ing from sunset to sunrise but a black crust and an onion,
I grow as fierce as a wolf. That’s not the worst, too. In
these times I see little imps dancing before me. Oh, yes;
fasting is as full of spectres as a field of battle.”

Glyndon thought there was some sound philosophy in
the reasoning of his companion; and, certainly, the more
he ate and drank, the more the recollection of the past night
and of Mejnour’s desertion fadedfrom hismind. The case-
ment was open-—the breeze blew—the sun shone—all Nature
was merry; and merry as Nature herself grew Maéstro
Pdolo. He talked of adventures, of travel, of women, with
a hearty gusto that had its infection. But Glyndon listened
yet more complacently when Pdolo turned with an arch

310 ZANONI.

smile to the praises of the eye, the teeth, the ankles, and
the shape of the handsome Fillide.

This man, indeed, seemed the very personation of animal,
sensual life. He would have been to Faust a more danger-
ous tempter than Mephistopheles. ‘There was no sneer on
his lip at the pleasures which animated his voice. To one
awaking to a sense of the vanities in knowledge, this reck-
less, ignorant joyousness of temper was a worse corrupter
than all the icy mockeries of a learned Fiend. But when
Pdolo took his leave, with a promise to return next day, the
mind of the Englishman again settled back to a graver and
more thoughtful mood. The elixir seemed, in truth, to
have left the refining effects Mejnour had ascribed to it.
As Glyndon paced to and fro the solitary corridor, or, paus-
ing, gazed upon the extended and glorious scenery that
stretched below, high thoughts of enterprise and ambition
—bright visions of glory—passed in rapid succession through
his soul.

“Mejnour denies me his science. Well,” said the painter
proudly, “he has not robbed me of my art.”

What! Clarence Glyndon; dost thou return to that from
which thy career commenced? Was Zanoni right, after all?

He found himself in the chamber of the mystic: nota
vessel—not a herb! the solemn volume is vanished—the
elixir shall sparkle for him no more! But still in the room
itself seems to linger the atmosphere of acharm. Faster
and fiercer it burns within thee, the Desire to achieve,
to create! Thou longest for a life beyond the sensual!—
but the life that is permitted to all genius—that which
breathes through the immortal work, and endures in the
imperishable name.

Where are the implements for thine art? Tush!—when
did the true workman ever fail to find his tools? Thou art
again in thine own chamber—the white wall thy canvas—
a fragment of charcoal for thy pencil. They suffice, at
least, to give outline to the conception, that may otherwise
vanish with the morrow.

ZANON}, 311

The idea that thus excited the imagination of the artist
was unequestionably noble and august. It was derived from
that Egyptian ceremonial which Diodorus has recorded—the
Judgment of the Dead by the Living:* when the corpse,
duly embalmed, is placed by the margin of the Acherusian
Lake, and before it may be consigned to the bark which is
to bear it across the waters to its final resting-place, it is
permitted to the appointed judges to hear all accusations of
the past life of the deceased, and, if proved, to deprive the
corpse of the rights of sepulture.

Unconsciously to himself, it was Mejnour’s description
of this custom, which he had illustrated by several anecdotes
not to be found in books, that now suggested the design to
the artist, and gave it reality and force. He supposed a
powerful and guilty king whom in life scarce a whisper had
dared to arraign, but against whom, now the breath was
gone, came the slave from his fetters, the mutilated victim
from his dungeon, livid and squalid as if dead themselves,
invoking with parched lips the justice that outlives the
grave.

Strange fervour this, O Artist! breaking suddenly forth
from the mists and darkness which the occult science had
spread so long over thy fancies—strange that the reaction
of the night’s terror and the day’s disappointment should
be back to thine holy art! Oh, how freely goes the bold
hand over the large outline! How, despite those rude
materials, speaks forth no more the pupil, but the master!
Fresh yet from the glorious elixir, how thou givest to thy
creatures the finer life denied to thyself!—some power not
thine own writes the grand symbols on the wall. Behind
rises the mighty sepulchre, on the building of which repose
to the dead the lives of thousands had been consumed.
There sit in asemicircle the solemn judges. Black and
sluggish flows the lake. ‘There lies the mummied and
royal dead. Dost thou quail at the frown on his life-like
brow? Ha!—bravely done, O Artist!--up rise the haggard

1Diod,, lib, i.

312 ZANONI.

forms!—pale speak the ghastly faces! Shall not Humanity
after death avenge itself on Power? Thy conception, Clar-
ence Glyndon, is a sublime truth; thy design promises re-
nown to genius. Better this magic than the charms of the
volume and the vessel. Hour after hour has gone; thou
hast lighted the lamp; night sees thee yet at thy labour.
Merciful Heaven! what chills the atmosphere?—why does
the lamp grow wan?—why does thy hair bristle? There!—
there!—there! at the casement!—lIt gazes on thee, the dark,
mantled, loathsome Thing! ‘There, with their devilish
mockery and hateful craft, glare on thee those horrid eyes!

He stood and gazed. It was no delusion—it spoke not,
moved not, till, unable to bear longer that steady and burn-
ing look, he covered his face with his hands. Witha start,
with a thrill, he removed them; he felt the nearer presence
of the Nameless. There it cowered on the floor beside his
design; and, lo! the figures seemed to start from the wall!
Those pale accusing figures, the shapes he himself had
raised, frowned at him and gibbered. With a violent effort
that convulsed his whole being, and bathed his body in the
sweat of agony, the young man mastered his horror. He
strode towards the Phantom; he endured its eyes; he ac-
costed it with a steady voice; he demanded its purpose and

defied its power.

And then, as a wind from a charnel, was heard its voice.
What it said, what revealed, it is forbidden the lips to re-
peat, the hand to record. Nothing, save the subtle life
that yet animated the frame, to which the inhalations of
the elixir had given vigour and energy beyond the strength
of the strongest, could have survived that awful hour.
Better to wake in the catacombs and see the buried rise
from their cerements, and hear the ghouls, in their horrid
orgies, amongst the festering ghastliness of corruption, than
to front those features when the veil was lifted, and listen
to that whispered voice!

“ me * *
* * ae %

ke

ZANONI, 313

The next day Glyndon fled from the ruined castle. With
what hopes of starry light had he crossed the threshold;
with what memories to shudder evermore at the darkness
did he look back at the frown of its time-worn towers!

CHAPTER, II.

“Fausr. Wohin soll es nun gehn?
“ Mepuis. Wohin es Dir gefilit.
Wir sehn die kleine, dann die grosse Welt. ”}
FAvst.

Draw your chair to the fireside, brush clean the hearth,
and trim the lights. Oh, home of sleekness, order, sub-
stance, comfort! Ob, excellent thing art thou, Matter of
Fact!

It is some time after the date of the last chapter. Here
we are not in moonlit islands, or mouldering castles, but
in a room twenty-six feet by twenty-two—well carpeted—
well cushioned—solid armchairs, and eight such bad pic-
tures in such fine frames upon the walls! Thomas Mervale,
Esq., merchant of London, you are an enviable dog!

It was the easiest thing in the world for Mervale, on
returning from his continental episode of life, to settle down
to his desk—his heart had been always there. The death
of his father gave him, as a birthright, a high position in
a respectable, though second-rate firm. To make this estab-
lishment first-rate was an honorable ambition—it was his.
He had lately married, not entirely for money—no! he was
worldly rather than mercenary. He had no romantic ideas
of love; but he was too sensible a man not to know that a
wife should be a companion—not merely a speculation. He
did not care for beauty and genius, but he liked health and
good temper, and a certain proportion of useful understand-

1F, Whither go now?

M. Whither it pleases thee.
== We see the small world, then the great.

314 ZANONI.

ing. He chose a wife from his reason, not his heart, and a
very good choice he made. Mrs. Mervale was an excellent
young woman—bustling, managing, economical, but aftec-
tionate and good. She had a will of her own, but was no
shrew. She had a great notion of the rights of a wife, aud
a strong perception of the qualities that insure comfort. She
would never have forgiven her husband had she found him
guilty of the most passing fancy for another; but, in return,
she had the most admirable sense of propriety herself. She
held in abhorrence all levity, all flirtation, all coquetry—
small vices, which often ruin domestic happiness, but which
a giddy nature incurs without consideration. But she did
not think it right to love a husband over much, She left
a surplus of affection for all her relations, all her friends,
some of her acquaintances, and the possibility of a second
marriage, should any accident happen to Mr. M. She kept
a good table, for it suited their station, and her temper was
considered even, though firm; but she could say a sharp
thing or two, if Mr. Mervale was not punctual to a moment.
She was very particular that he should change his shoes on
coming home—the carpets were new and expensive. She
was not sulky nor passionate— Heaven bless her for that!—
but when displeased, she showed it, administered a digni-
fied rebuke—-alluded to her own virtues—to her uncle, who
was an admiral, and to the thirty thousand pounds which
she had brought to the object of her choice. But as Mr.
Mervale was a good-humoured man, owned his faults, and
subscribed to her excellence, the displeasure was soon over.

Every household has its little disagreements, none fewer
than that of Mr. and Mrs. Mervale. Mrs. Mervale, with-
out being improperly fond of dress, paid due attention to it.
She was never seen out of her chamber with papers in her
hair, nor in that worst of disillusions—a morning wrapper.
At half-past eight every morning Mrs. Mervale was dressed
for the day—that is, till she re-dressed for dinner;—her
stays well laced, —her cap prim, her gowns, winter and sum<
mer, of a thick, handsome silk. Ladies at that time wore

ZANONI. 315

very short waists; sodid Mrs. Mervale. Her morning orna-
ments were a thick gold chain, to which was suspended a gold
watch—none of those fragile dwarfs of mechanism.that
look so pretty, and go so ill—but a handsome repeater
which chronicled Father Time to a moment; also a mosaic
brooch; also a miniature of her uncle, the admiral, set in a
bracelet. For the evening, she had two handsome sets—
necklace, earrings, and bracelets complete—one of ame-
thysts, the other topazes. With these her costume, for the
most part, was a gold-coloured satin and a turban, in which
last her picture had been taken. Mrs. Mervale had an
aquiline nose, good teeth, fair hair, and light eyelashes,
rather a high complexion, what is generally called a fine
bust, full cheeks, large useful feet, made for walking, large
white hands, with filbert nails, on which not a speck of
dust had, even in childhood, ever been known to alight.
She looked a little older than she really was; but that
might arise from a certain air of dignity, and the aforesaid
aquiline nose. She generally wore short mittens. She
never read any poetry but Goldsmith’s and Cowper’s. She
was not amused by novels, though she had no prejudice
against them. She liked a play and a pantomime, with a
slight supper afterwards. She did not like concerts nor
operas. At the beginning of the winter, she selected some
book to read, and some piece of work to commence. The
two lasted her till the spring, when, though she continued
to work, she left off reading. Her favourite study was
history, which she read through the medium of Dr. Gold-
smith. Her favourite author in the belles-letires was, of
course, Dr. Johnson. A worthier woman, or one more re-
spected, was not to be found, except in an epitaph!

It was an autumn night. Mr. and Mrs. Mervale, lately
returned from an excursion to Weymouth, are in the draw-
ing-room—* the dame sat on this side—the man sat on that.”

“Yes, I assure you, my dear, that Glyndon, with all his
eccentricities, was a very engaging, amiable fellow. You
would certainly have liked him—all the women did.”

316 ZANONI.

“My dear Thomas, you will forgive the remark, —but
that expression of yours—‘all the women’ ——”

“T beg your pardon,—you are right.. I meant to say
that he was a general favourite with your charming sex.”

“T understand,—rather a frivolous character.”

“Frivolous! no, not exactly; a little unsteady—very
odd—but certainly not frivolous; presumptuous and head-
strong in character, but modest and shy in his manners,
rather too much so—just what you like. However, to re-
turn; I am seriously uneasy at the accounts I have heard
of him to-day. He has been living, it seems, a very
strange and irregular life, travelling from place to place,
and must have spent already a great deal of money.”

“ A propos of money,” said Mrs. Mervale; “I fear we
must change our butcher: he is certainly in league with the
cook.”

“That is a pity; his beef is remarkably fine. These
London servants are as bad as the Carbonari. But, as I
was saying, poor Glyndon——”

Here a knock was heard at the door. “Bless me,” said
Mrs. Mervale, “it is past ten! Who can that possibly be?”

“Perhaps your uncle the admiral,” said the husband,
with a slight peevishness in his accent. “He generally
favours us about this hour.”

“T hope, my love, that none of my relations are unwel-
come visitors at your house. The admiral is a most enter-
taining man, and—his fortune is entirely at his own dis-
posal.”

“No one I respect more,” said Mr. Mervale, with
emphasis.

The servant threw open the door, and announced Mr.
Glyndon.

“Mr. Glyndon!—what an extraordinary ———” exclaimed
Mrs. Mervale; but before she could conclude the sentence,
Glyndon was in the room.

The two friends greeted each other with all the warmth
of early recollection and long absence. An appropriate

ZANONI. 317

and proud presentation to Mrs. Mervale ensued; and Mrs.
Mervale, with a dignified smile, and a furtive glance at his
boots, bade her husband’s friend welcome to England.

Glyndon was greatly altered since Mervale had seen him
last. Though less than two years had elapsed since then,
his fair complexion was more bronzed and manly. Deep
lines of care, or thought, or dissipation had replaced the
smooth contour of happy youth. To a manner once gentle
and polished had succeeded a certain recklessness of mien,
tone, and bearing, which bespoke the habits of a society
that cared little for the calm decorums of conventional ease.
Still a kind of wild nobleness, not before apparent in him,
characterised his aspect, and gave something of dignity te
the freedom of his language and gestures. «

“So, then, you are settled, Mervale—I need not ask you
if you are happy. Worth, sense, wealth, character, and
so fair a companion deserve happiness, and command it.”

“Would you like some tea, Mr. Glyndon?” asked Mrs.
Mervale, kindly.

“Thank you—no. I propose a more convivial stimulus
to my old friend. Wine, Mervale—wine, eh!—or a bowl
of old English punch. Your wife will excuse us—we will
make a night of it!”

Mrs. Mervale drew back her chair, and tried not to look
aghast. Glyndon did not give his friend time to reply:

“So at last I am in England,” he said, looking round the
room, with a slight sneer on his lips; “surely this sober air
must have its influence; surely here I shall be like the rest.”

“ Have you been ill, Glyndon?”

“Tl! yes. Humph! you have a fine house. Does it
contain a spare room for a solitary wanderer?”

Mr. Mervale glanced at his wife, and his wife looked
steadily on the carpet. “ Modest and shy in his manners—
rather too much so!” Mrs. Mervale was in the seventh
heaven of indignation and amaze!

“My dear?” said Mr. Mervale at last, meekly and inter-
rogatively.

318 ZANONI.

“My dear!” returned Mrs. Mervale, innocently and
sourly.

“We can make up a room for my old friend, Sarah?”

The old friend had sunk back on his chair; and, gazing
intently on the fire, with his feet at ease upon the fender,
seemed to have forgotten his question.

Mrs. Mervale bit her lips, looked thoughtful, and at last
coldly replied: “Certainly, Mr. Mervale; your friends do
right to make themselves at home.”

With that she lighted a candle, and moved majestically
from the room. When she returned, the two friends had
vanished into Mr. Mervale’s study.

Twelve o’clock struck—one o’clock—two! Thrice had
Mrs. Mervale sent into the room to know—first, if they
wanted anything; secondly, if Mr. Glyndon slept on a
mattress or feather-bed; thirdly, to inquire if Mr. Glyn-
don’s trunk, which he had brought with him, should be un-
packed. And to the answer to all these questions was
added, in a loud voice from the visitor—a voice that pierced
from the kitchen to the attic—“ Another bowl! stronger,
if you please, and be quick with it!”

At last, Mr. Mervale appeared in the conjugal chamber—
not penitent nor apologetic—no, not a bit of it. His eye
twinkled, his cheek flushed, his feet reeled; he sang—Mr.
Thomas Mervale positively sang!

“Mr. Mervale! is it possible, sir!——”

““Old King Cole was a merry old soul——’”
“Mr. Mervale! sir!—leave me alone, sir!”
“*And a merry old soul was he——’”
“ What an example to the servants!”
“* And he called for his pipe, and he called for his bowl——’”
“Tf you don’t behave yourself, sir, I shall call—-—”

““Call for his fiddlers three !’ ”

ZANONI, 319

CHAPTER III.

“Tn der Welt weit,
Aus der Einsamkeit
Wollen sie Dich locken. ”!
FAuvst.

Tur next morning, at breakfast, Mrs. Mervale looked as
if all the wrengs of injured woman sat upon her brow.
Mr. Mervale seemed the picture of remorseful guilt and
avenging bile. He said little, except to complain of head-
ache, and to request the eggs to be removed from the table.
Clarence Glyndon—impervious, unconscious, unailing, im-
penitent—was in noisy spirits and talked for three.

“Poor Mervale! he has sost the habit of good fellowship,
madam. Another night or two, and he will be himself
again!”

“Sir,” said Mrs. Mervale, launching a premeditated sen-
tence with more than Johnsonian dignity, “permit me to
remind you that Mr. Mervale is now a married man, the
destined father of a family, and the present master of a
household.”

“Precisely the reasons why I envy him so much. I my-
self have a great mind to marry. Happiness is contagious.”

“Do you still take to painting?” asked Mervale, lan-
guidly, endeavouring to turn the tables on his guest.

“Oh, no; [haveadopted youradvice. Noart, no ideal—
nothing loftier than Commonplace for me now. If I were
to paint again, I positively think yow would purchase my
pictures. Make haste and finish your breakfast, man; I
wish to consult you. I have come to England to see after
my affairs. My ambition is to make money; your counsels
and experience cannot fail to assist me here.”

“ Ah! you were soon disenchanted of your philosopher’s
stone. You must know, Sarah, that when I last left Glyn-
don he was bent upon turning alchemist and magician.”

1 Tn the wide world, out of the solitude, will these allure thee.

320 ZANONI.

“You are witty to-day, Mr. Mervale.”

“Upon my honour it is true. I told you so before.”

Glyndon rose abruptly.

“Why revive those recollections of folly and presumption?

Have I not said that I have returned to my native land
to pursue the healthful avocations of my kind! Oh yes!
what so healthful, so noble, so fitted to our nature, -
as what you call the Practical Life? If we have facul-
ties, what is their use, but to sell them to advantage?
Buy knowledge as we do our goods; buy it at the cheapest
market, sell it at the dearest. Have you not breakfasted —
yet?”
" ‘The friends walked into the streets, and Mervale shrank
from the irony with which Glyndon complimented him on his
respectability, his station, his pursuits, his happy marriage,
and his eight pictures in their handsome frames. Former- —
‘ly the sober Mervale had commanded an influence over his
friend; his had been the sarcasm; Glyndon’s the irresolute
shame at his own peculiarities. Now this position was re-
versed. There wasa fierce earnestness in Glyndon’s altered
temper which awed and silenced the quiet commonplace of
his friend’s character. He seemed to take a malignant de-
light in persuading himself that the sober life of the world
was contemptible and base.

“Ah!” he exclaimed, “ how right you were to tell me to
marry respectably; to have a solid position; to live in de-
corous fear of the world and one’s wife; and to command
the envy of the poor, the good opinion of the rich. You
have practised what you preach. Delicious existence!
The merchant’s desk and the curtain lecture! Ha! ha!
Shall we have another night of it?”

Mervale, embarrassed and irritated, turned the conversa:
tion upon Glyndon’s affairs. He was surprised at the
knowledge of the world which the artist seemed to have
suddenly acquired; surprised still more at the acuteness
and energy with which he spoke of the speculations most
in vogue at the market. Yes; Glyndon was certainly in

ZANONI. 821

earnest; he desired to be rich and respectable,—and to
make at least ten per cent. for his money!

Aiter spending some days with the merchant, during
which time he contrived to disorganise all the mechanism
of the house—to turn night into day, harmony into discord,
to drive poor Mrs. Mervale half distracted, and to convince
her husband that he was horribly henpecked, the ill-omened
visitor left them as suddenl7 as he had arrived. He took a
house of his own; he sought the society of persons of sub-
stance; he devoted himself to the money-market; he seemed
to have become aman of business; his schemes were bold
and colossal; his calculations rapid and profound. He
startled Mervale by his energy, and dazzled him by his suc-
cess. Mervale began to envy him—to be discontented with
his own regular and slow gains. When Glyndon bought
or sold in the funds, wealth rolled upon him like the tide
of a sea; what years of toil could not have done for him in
art, a few months, by a succession of lucky chances, did for
him in speculation. Suddenly, however, he relaxed his
exertions; new objects of ambition seemed to attract him.
If he heard a drum in the streets, what glory like the sol-
dier’s? If anew poem were published, what renown like
the pcet’s? He began works in literature, which promised
great excellence, to throw them aside in disgust. All at
once he abandoned the decorous and formal society he had
courted; he joined himself with young and riotous associ-
ates; he plunged into the wildest excesses of the great city,
where Gold reigns alike over Toil and Pleasure. Through
all, he carried with him a certain power and heat of soul.
In all society he aspired to command—in all pursuits to
excel. Yet whatever the passion of the moment, the reac-
tion was terrible in its gloom. He sank, at times, into the
most profound and the darkest reveries. His fever was
that of a mind that would escape memory—his repose, that
of a mind which the memory seizes again, and devours as a
prey. Mervale now saw little of him; they shunned each
other. Glyndon had no confidant, and no friend.

21

322 ZANONI.

CHAPTER IV.

“Tech fithle Dich mir nahe,
Die Einsamkeit belebt ;
Wie iiber seinen Welten
Der Unsichtbare schwebt. ”!
UHLAND.

From this state of restlessness and agitation rather than
continuous action, Glyndon was aroused by a visitor who
seemed to exercise the most salutary influence over him.
His sister, an orphan with himself, had resided in the
country with her aunt. In the early years of hope and
home, he had loved this girl, much younger than himself,
with all a brother’s tenderness. On his return to England,
he had seemed to forget her existence. She recalled herself
to him on her aunt’s death by a touching and melancholy
letter ;—she had now no home but his—no dependence save
on his affection; he wept when he read it, and was impa-
tient till Adela arrived.

This girl, then about eighteen, concealed beneath a gentle
and calm exterior much of the romance or enthusiasm that
had, at her own age, characterised her brother. But her
enthusiasm was of a far purer order, and was restrained
within proper bounds, partly by the sweetness of a very
feminine nature, and partly by a strict and methodical edu-
cation. She differed from him especially in a timidity of
character, which exceeded that usual at her age, but which
the habit of self-command concealed no less carefully than
that timidity itself concealed the romance I have ascribed
to her.

Adela was not handsome; she had the complexion and
the form of delicate health; and too fine an organisation of

*] feel thee near to me;
The loneliness takes jife—

As over its world
The Invisible hovers,

ZANONI. 328

the nerves rendered her susceptible to every impression that
could influence the health of the frame through the sym-
pathy of the mind. But as she never complained, and as
the singular serenity of her manners seemed to betoken an
equanimity of temperament which, with the vulgar, might
have passed for indifference, her sufferings had so long been
borne unnoticed that 1t ceased to be an effort to disguise
them. ‘Though, as I have said, not handsome, her counte-
nance was interesting and pleasing; and there was that
caressing kindness, that winning charm about her smile,
her manners, her anxiety to please, to comfort, and to
soothe, which went at once to the heart, and made her
lovely—hbecause so loving.

Such was the sister whom Glyndon had so long neglected,
and whom he now so cordially welcomed. Adela had
passed many years a victim to the caprices and a nurse to
the maladies of a selfish and exacting relation. The delicate,
and generous, and respectful affection of her brother was
no less new to her than delightful. He took pleasure in
the happiness he created; he gradually weaned himself
from other society; he felt the charm of home. It is not
surprising, then, that this young creature, free and virgin
from every more ardent attachment, concentrated all her
grateful love on this cherished and protecting relative.
Her study by day, her dream by night, was to repay him
for his affection. She was proud of his talents, devoted to
his welfare: the smallest trifle that could interest him
swelled in her eyes to the gravest affairs of life. In short,
all the long-hearded enthusiasm which was her perilous and
only heritage she invested in this one object of her holy
tenderness, her pure ambition.

But in proportion as Glyndon shunned those excitements
by which he had so long sought to occupy his time, or distract
his thoughts, the gloom of his calmer hours became deeper
and more continuous. He everand especially dreaded to be
alone; he could not bear his new companion to be absent
from his eyes; he rode with her, walked with her, and it

324 ZANONI.

was with visible reluctance, which almost partook of-horrer,
that he retired to rest at an hour when even revel grows
fatigued. This gloom was not that which could be called
by the soft name of melancholy—it was far more intense;
it seemed rather like despair. Often after a silence as of
death,—so heavy, abstracted, motionless, did-it appear, —
he would start abruptly, and cast hurried glances around
him—his limbs trembling, his lips livid, his brows bathed
in dew. - Convinced. that some socret sorrow preyed upon
his mind, and would consume his health, it was the dearest
as the most natural desire of Adela to become his confidante
and consoler. She observed, with the quick tact of the
delicate, that he disliked her to seem affected by, or even
sensible of, his darker moods.- She schooled herself to sup-
press her fears and her feelings. She would not. ask his
confidence—she sought to steal into it. . By little and little,
she felt that she was succeeding. Too wrapped in his own
strange existence to be acutely observant of the character of
others, Glyndon mistook the self-content of a generous and
humble affection for constitutional fortitude; and this qual-
ity pleased and soothed him. ° It is fortitude that the dis-
. eased mind requires in the confidant whom it selects as its
physician. And how irresistible is that desire to communi-
cate! How often the lonely man thought to himself, “‘ My
heart would be lightened of its misery, if once confessed!”
He felt, too, that in the very youth, the inexperience, the
poetical temperament of Adela, he could find one who
would comprehend and bear with him better than any
sterner and more practical nature. Mervale would have
looked on his revelations as the ravings of madness, and
most men, at best, as the sicklied chimeras, the optical
delusions, of disease. Thus gradually preparing himself
for that relief for which he yearned, the moment for his
disclosure arrived thus:

‘ One evening, as they sat alone together, Adela, who in-
herited some portion of her brother’s talent in art, was em-
ployed in drawing, and Glyndon, rousing himself from

ZANONI- 325

meditations less gloomy than usual, rose, and affectionately
passing his arm round her waist, looked over her as she —
sat. An exclamation of dismay broke from his lips—he
snatched the drawing from her hand: “What are you
about?—what portrait is this?”

“Dear Clarence, do you not remember the original?—it
is a copy from that portrait of our wise ancestor which our
poor mother used to say so strongly resembled you. I
thought it would please you if I copied it from memory.”

“ Accursed was the likeness,” said Glyndon, gloomily.
“Guess you not the reason why I have shunned to return to
the home of my fathers?—because I dreaded to meet that
portrait !—because—because—but pardon me—I alarm
you!”

“Ah, no—no, Clarence, you never alarm me when you
speak, only when you are silent! Oh, if you thought me
worthy of your trust! oh, if you had given me the right
to reason with you in the sorrows that I yearn to share!”

Glyndon made no answer, but pacel the room for some
moments with disordered strides. He stopped at last, and
gazed at her earnestly. “Yes, you too are his descendant!
you know that such men have lived and suffered—you will
not mock me, you will not disbelieve! Listen! hark!—what
sound is that?”

_“ But the wind on the housetop, Clarence—but the wind.”

“Give me your hand, let me feel its living clasp, and
when I have told you, never revert to the tale again. Con-

_ceal it from all—swear that it shall die with us—the last of
our predestined race!”

“Never will I betray your trust—I swear it—never
said Adela, firmly; and she drew closer to his side. Then
Glyndon commenced his story. That which, perhaps in
writing, and to minds prepared to question and disbelieve,
may seem cold and terrorless, became far different when told
by those blanched lps, with all that truth of suffering which
convinces and appals. Much, indeed, he conceared, much
he involuntarily softened; but he revealed enough to make

1

326 ZANONI.

his tale intelligible and distinct to his pale and trembling
listener. “At daybreak,” he said, “I left that unhallowed
and abhorred abode. I had one hope still—I would seek
Mejnour through the world. I would force him to lay at
rest the fiend that haunted my soul. With this intent I
journeyed from city to city. I instituted the most vigilant
researches through the police of Italy. I even employed
the services of the Inquisition at Rome, which had lately
asserted its ancient powers in the trial of the less dangerous
Cagliostro. All was in vain; not a trace of him could be
discovered. I was not alone, Adela.” Here Glyndon
paused a moment, as if embarrassed; for in his recital, I
need scarcely say that he had only indistinctly alluded to
Fillide, whom the reader may surmise to be his companion.
“T was not alone, but the associate of my wanderings was
not one in whom my soul could confide—faithful and affec-
tionate, but without education, without faculties to compre-
hend me, with natural instincts rather than cultivated
reason—one in whom the heart might lean in its careless
hours, but with whom the mind could have no commune,
in whom the bewildered spirit could seek no guide. Yet
in the society of this person the demon troubled me not.
Let me explain yet more fully the dread conditions of its
presence. In coarse excitement, in commonplace life, in
the wild riot, in the fierce excess, in the torpid lethargy of
that animal existence which we share with the brutes, its
eyes were invisible, its whisper was unheard. But when-
ever the soul would aspire, whenever the imagination kindled
to the loftier ends, whenever the consciousness of our proper
destiny struggled against the unworthy life I pursued, then—
Adela, then it cowered by my side in the light of noon, or
sat by my bed—a Darkness visible through the dark. If,
in the galleries of Divine Art, the dreams of my youth woke
the early emulation—if I turned to the thoughts of sages—
if the example of the great, if the converse of the wise,
aroused the silenced intellect, the demon was with me as
by a spell. At last, one evening, at Genoa, to which city

ZANONI. 327

[ had travelled in pursuit of the Mystic, suddenly, and
when least expected, he appeared before me. It was the
time of the Carnival. It was in one of those half-frantic
scenes of noise and revel, call it not gaiety, which estab-
lish a heathen saturnalia in the midst of a Christian festi-
val. Wearied with the dance, I had entered a room in
which several revellers were seated, drinking, singing,
shouting; and in their fantastic dresses and hideous masks,
their orgy seemed scarcely human. I placed myself amongst
them, and in that fearful excitement of the spirits which
the happy never know, I was soon the most riotous of all.
The conversation fell on the Revolution of France, which
had always possessed for me an absorbing fascination.
The masks spoke of the millennium it was to bring on earth,
not as philosophers rejoicing in the advent of light, but as
ruffians exalting in the annihilation of law. I know not why
it was, but their licentious language infected myself; and, al-
ways desirous to be foremost in every circle, I soon exceeded
even these rioters in declamations on the nature of the
liberty which was about to embrace all the families of the
globe—a liberty that should pervade nct only public legis-
lation, but domestic life—an emancipation from every fet-
ter that men had forged for themselves. In the midst of
this tirade one of the masks whispered me:

“<“Takecare. One listens to you, whoseems tobe a spy!’

“My eyes followed those of the mask, and I observed a
man who took no part in the conversation, but whose gaze
was bent upon me. He was disguised like the rest, yet I
found by a general whisper that none had observed him
enter. His silence, his attention, had alarmed the fears of
the other revellers—they only excited me the more. Rapt
in my subject, I pursued it, insensible to the signs of
those about me; and, addressing myself only to the silent
mask who sat alone, apart from the group, I did not even
observe that, one by one, the revellers slunk off, and that
IT and the silent listener were left alone, until, pausing from
my heated and impetuous declamations, I said:

328 ZANONI.

“And you, Signor,—what is your view of this mighty
era? Opinion without persecution—brotherhood without
jealousy—love without bondage——’

“*And life without God,’ added the mask, as I hesitated
for new images.

“The sound of that well-known voice changed the cur-
rent of my thought. I sprang forward, and cried:

“*Impostor or Fiend, we meet at last!’

“The figure rose as I advanced, and, unmasking, showed
the features of Mejnour. His fixed eye—his majestic
aspect—awed and repelled me. I stood rooted to the
ground.

“<Ves,’ he said, solemnly, ‘we meet, and it is this meet:
ing that I have sought. How hast thou followed my ad-
monitions! Are these the scenes in which the Aspirant
for the Serene Science thinks to escape the Ghastly Enemy?
Do the thoughts thou hast uttered—thoughts that would
strike all order from the universe—express the hopes of the
sage who would rise to the Harmony of the Eternal Spheres?’

“<Tt is thy fault—it is thine!’ I exclaimed. ‘Exorcise
the phantom! Take the haunting terror from my soul!’

“ Mejnour looked at me a moment with a cold and cyni-
cal disdain, which provoked at once my fear and rage,
and replied:

“No, fool of thine own senses! No; thou must have
full and entire experience of the illusions to which the
Knowledge that is without Faith climbs its Titan way.
Thou pantest for this Millennium—thou shalt behold it!
Thou shalt be one of the agents of the era of Light and
Reason. I see, while I speak, the Phantom thou fliest, by
thy side—it marshals thy path—it has power over thee as
yet—a power that defies my own. In the last days of that
Revolution which thou hailest, amidst the wrecks of the
Order thou cursest as Oppression, seek the fulfilment of thy
destiny, and await thy cure.’

“At that instant a troop of masks, clamorous, intoxicated,
reeling, and rushing as they reeled, poured into the room,

ZANONI. 329

and separated me from the Mystic. I broke through them,
and sought him everywhere, but in vain. All my researches
the next day were equally fruitless. Weeks were consumed
in the same pursuit—not a trace of Mejnour could be dis-
covered. Wearied with false pleasures, roused by re-
proaches I had deserved, recoiling from Mejnour’s proph-
ecy of the scene in which I was to seek deliverance, it
occurred to me, at last, that in the sober air of my native
country, and amidst its orderly and vigorous pursuits, I
might work out my own emancipation from the spectre. I
left all whom I had before courted and clung to:—I came
hither. Amidst mercenary schemes and selfish specula-
tions, I found the same relief as in debauch and excess.
The Phantom was invisible, but these pursuits soon became
to me distasteful as the rest. Ever and ever I felt that I
was born for something nobler than the greed of gain—that
life may be made equally worthless and the soul equally
degraded by the icy lust of Avarice as by the noisier passions.
A higher ambition never ceased to torment me. But, but”—
continued Glyndon, with a whitening lip and a visible
shudder, “at every attempt to rise into loftier existence
came that hideous form. It loomed beside me at the easel.
Before the volumes of Poet and Sage it stood with its burn-
ing eyes in the stillness of night, and I thought I heard its
horrible whispers uttering temptations never to be divulged.”
He paused, and the drops stood upon his brow.

“But, I,” said Adela, mastering her fears, and throwing
her arms around hin—“ but I henceforth will have no life
but in thine. And in this love so pure, so holy, thy terror
shall fade away.”

“No, uno!” exclaimed Glyndon, starting from her.
“The worst revelation is to come. Since thou hast been
here—since I have sternly and resolutely refrained from
every haunt, every scene in which this preternatural enemy
troubled me not, I—I—have—Oh, Heaven! Mercy!
mercy! There it stands—there, by thy side—there—
there!” And he fell to the ground insensible,

330 ZANONI.

CHAPTER V.

“Doch wunderbar ergriff mich’s diese Nacht ;
Die Glieder schienen schon in Todes Macht. ”?!
UBLAND.

A Fever, attended with delirium, for several days de-
prived Glyndon of consciousness; and when, by Adela’s
care, more than the skill of the physicians, he was restored
to life and reason, he was unutterably shocked by the
change in his sister’s appearance. At first, he fondly
imagined that her health, affected by her vigils, would re-
cover with his own. But he soon saw, with an anguish
which partook of remorse, that the malady was deep-
seated—deep, deep beyond the reach of Asculapius and his
drugs. Her imagination, little less lively than his own,
was awfully impressed by the strange confessions she had
heard,—by the ravings of his delirium. Again and again
had he shrieked forth, “It is there—there, by thy side, my
sister!” He had transferred to her fancy the spectre, and
the horror that cursed himself. He perceived this, not by
her words, but her silence—by the eyes that strained into
space—by the shiver that came over her frame—by the
start of terror—by the look that did not dare to turn behind.
Bitterly he repented his confession—bitterly he felt that
between his sufferings and human sympathy there could
be no gentle and holy commune; vainly he sought to re-
tract-—to undo what he had done—to declare all was but
the chimera of an over-heated brain.

And brave and generous was this denial of himself; for,
often and often, as he thus spoke, he saw the Thing of
Dread gliding to her side, and glaring at him as he dis-
owned its being. But what chilled him, if possible, yet

1This night it fearfully seized on me; ay) limbs appeared already
in the power of death,

ZANONI. ool

more than her wasting form and trembling nerves, was the
thange in her love for him; a natural terror had replaced
it. She turned paler if he approached—she shuddered if
he took her hand. Divided from the rest of the earth, the
gulf of the foul remembrance yawned now between his sister
and himself. He could endure no more the presence of the
one whose life Ais life had embittered. He made some
excuses for departure, and writhed to see that they were
greeted eagerly. The first gleam of joy he had detected,
since that fatal night, on Adela’s face, he beheld when he
murmured “Farewell.” He travelled for some weeks
through the wildest parts of Scotland; scenery, which
makes the artist, was loveless to his haggard eyes. A
letter recalled him to London, on the wings of new agony
and fear; he arrived to find his sister in a condition both
of mind and health which exceeded his worst apprehen-
sions.

Her vacant look—her lifeless posture, appalled him; it
was as one who gazed on the Medusa’s head, and felt, with-
out a struggle, the human being gradually harden to the
statue. It was not frenzy, it was not idiotcy—it was an
abstraction, an apathy, a sleep in waking. Only as the
night advanced towards the eleventh hour,—the hour in
which Glyndon had concluded his tale,—she grew visibly
uneasy, anxious, and perturbed. Then her lps muttered,
her hands writhed; she looked round with a look of un-
speakable appeal for succour—for protection; and sudden-
ly, as the clock struck, fell with a shriek to the ground, cold
and lifeless. With difficulty, and not until after the most
earnest prayers, did she answer the agonised questions of
Glyndon; at Jast she owned that at that hour, and that
hour alone, wherever she was placed, however occupied, she
distinctly beheld the apparition of an old hag; who, after
thrice knocking at the door, entered the room, and hobbling
up to her with a countenance distorted by hideous rage and
menace, laid its icy fingers on her forehead; from that mo-
ment she declared that. sense forsook her; and when she

332 ZANONI.

woke again, it was only to wait, in suspense that froze up
her blood, the repetition of the ghastly visitation.

The physician who had been summoned before Glyndon’s
return, and whose letter had recalled him to London, was
a commonplace practitioner; ignorant of the case, and
honestly anxious that one more experienced should be em-
ployed. Clarence called in one of the most eminent of the
faculty, and to him he recited the optical delusion of his
sister. The physician hstened attentively, and seemed
sanguine in his hopes of cure. He came to the house two
hours before the one so dreaded by the patient. He had
quietly arranged that the clocks should be put forward half
an hour, unknown to Adela, and even to her brother. He
was a man of the most extraordinary powers of conversation,
of surpassing wit, of all the faculties that interest and
amuse. He first administered to the patient a harmless
potion, which he pledged himself would dispel the delusion.
His confident tone woke her own hopes—he continued to
excite her attention, to rouse her lethargy; he jested, he
laughed away the time. The hour struck. “Joy, my
brother!” she exclaimed, throwing herself in his arms;
“the time is past!” And then, like one released from a
spell, she suddenly assumed more than her ancient cheer-
fulness. “Ah, Clarence!” she whispered, ‘forgive me for
my former desertion—forgive me that I feared you. I
shall live;—I shall live! in my turn to banish the spectre
that haunts my brother!” And Clarence smiled and wiped
the tears from his burning eyes. The physician renewed
his stories, his jests. In the midst of a stream of rich
humour, that seemed to carry away both brother and sister,
Glyndon suddenly saw over Adela’s face the same fearful
change, the same anxious look, the same restless, straining
eye he had beheld the night before. He rose—he ap-
proached her. Adela started up. ‘ Look—look—look!”
she exclaimed. “She comes! Save me—save me!” and
she fell at his feet in strong convulsions; as the clock, false-
ly and in vain put back, struck the half-hour, |

ZANONI. 333

The physician lifted her in his arms,

“My worst fears are confirmed,” he said, gravely; “the
disease is epilepsy.” '

The next night, at the same hour, Adela Glyndon died.

———E

CHAPTER VI.

“La loi, dont le réegne vous épouvante, a son glaive ieve sur vous:
elle vous frappera tous ; le genre humain a besoin de cet exemple. ”?
—CourTnon.

' “On, joy, joy!—thouart come again! This is thy hand—
these thy lips. Say that thou didst not desert me from the
love of another; say it again—say it ever!—and I will par-
don thee all the rest!”

“So thou hast mourned for me?”

“Mourned!—and thou wert cruel enough to leave me
gold—there it is—there—untouched!” |

“Poor child of Nature! how, then, in this strange town
of Marseilles, hast thou found bread and shelter?”

“Honestly, soul of my soul! honestly, but yet by the
face thou didst once think so fair: thinkest thou that now?”

“Yes, Fillide, more fair than ever. But what meanest
thou?”

“There is a painter here—a great man, one of their great
men at Paris—I know not what they call them; but he rules
over all here—life and death; and he has paid me largely

. but to sit for my portrait. It is for a picture to be given to
the Nation, for he paints only for glory. Think of thy
Fillide’s renown!” And the girl’s wild eyes sparkled; her
vanity was roused. “And he would have married me if I
ze The most celebrated practitioner in Dublin related to the Editor
_ astory of optical delusion, precisely similar in its circumstances and
its physical cause, to the one here narrated.

* The law, whose reign terrifies you, has its sword raised against
you; it will strike.you all; humanity has need of this example,

oot ZANONL

would!—divorced his wife to marry me! But I waited for
thee, ungrateful !”

A knock at the door was heard—a man entered.

“ Nicot!”

“Ah, Glyndon!—hum!—welcome! What! thou art

twice my rival! But Jean Nicot bears no malice. Virtue
ismy dream—my country, my mistress. Serve my country,
citizen; and I forgive thee the preference of beauty. (a
ira! ga tra!”
. But as the painter spoke, it hymned, it rolled through
the streets—the fiery song of the Marseillaise! There was
a crowd—a multitude—a people up, abroad, with colours
and arms, enthusiasm and song;—with song, with enthusi-
asm, with colours and arms. And who could guess that
that martial movement was one, not of war, but massacre—
Frenchmen against Frenchmen? For there are two parties .
in Marseilles—and ample work for Jourdan Coupe-téte!
But this, the Englishman, just arrived, a stranger to all
factions, did not as yet comprehend. He comprehended
nothing but the song, the enthusiasm, the arms, and the
colours that lifted to the sum the glorious lie—“ Le peuple
Frangais debout contre les tyrans !”*

The dark brow of the wretched wanderer grew animated;
he gazed from the window on the throng that marched
below, beneath their waving Oriflamme. They shouted as
they beheld the patriot Nicot, the friend of Liberty and re-
lentless Hébert, by the stranger’s side, at the casement.

“Ay, shout again!” cried the painter—“shout for the
brave Englishman who abjures his Pitts and his Coburgs to
be a citizen of Liberty and France!”

A thousand voices rent the air, and the hymn of the
Marseillaise rose in majesty again. -

“Well, and if it be among these high hopes and this brave
people that the phantom is to vanish, and the cure to come!”
muttered Glyndon; and he thought he felt again the elixir
sparkling through his veins.

1 Up, Frenchmen, against tyrants.

ZANONI. 330

“Thou shalt be one of the Convention with Paine and
Clootz—I will manage it all for thee!” cried Nicot, slap-
ping him on the shoulder; “and Paris——”

“Ah, if I could but see Paris!” cried Fillide, in her joy-
ous voice. Joyous! the whole time, the town, the air—
save where, unheard, rose the cry of agony and the yell of
murder—were joy! Sleep unhaunting in thy grave, cold
Adela. Joy, joy! In the Jubilee of Humanity all private
griefs should cease! Behold, wild Mariner, the vast whirl-
pool draws thee to its stormy bosom. ‘There, the individual
isnot. All things are of the whole! Open thy gates, fair
Paris, for the stranger-cit.zen! Receive in your ranks, O
meek Republicans, the new champion of liberty, of reason,
of mankind! “ Mejnour is right; it was in virtue, in valour,
in glorious struggle for the human race, that the spectre
was to shrink to her kindred darkness.”

And Nicot’s shrill voice praised him; and lean Robes-
pierre—“ Flambeau, colonne, pierre angulaire de l’édifice
de la République” '—smiled ominously on him from his
bloodshot eyes; and Fillide clasped him with passionate
arms to her tender breast. And at his up-rising and down-
sitting, at board and in bed, though he saw it not, the
Nameless One guided him with the demon eyes to the sea,
whose waves were gore.

1“The light, column, and keystone of the Republic.” Lettre du

Citoyen P——. Papiers inédits trouvés chez Robespierre.—Tom. 11,
Deke v.

BOOK THE=SUXTEE

SUPERSTITION DESERTING FAITH.

“Why do I yield to that suggestion,
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair?”
SHAKSPEARE.

CHAPTER I.

“Therefore the Genii were painted with a platter full of garlands
and flowers in one hand, and a whip in the other. ”"—ALEXANDER
Ross, Mystag. Poet.

Accorp1n@ to the order of the events related in this nar-
rative, the departure of Zanoni and Viola from the Greek
Isle, in which two happy years appear to have been passed,
must have been somewhat later in date than the arrival of
Glyndon at Marseilles. It must have been in the course of
the year 1791 when Viola fled from Naples with her mys-
terious lover, and when Glyndon sought Mejnour in the
fatal Castle. It is now toward the close of 1793, when our
story again returns to Zanoni. The stars of winter shone
down on the Lagunes of Venice. The hum of the Rialto
was hushed—the last loiterers had deserted the place of St.
Mark’s, and only at distant intervals might be heard the
oars of the rapid gondolas, bearing reveller or lover to his
home. But lights still flitted to and fro across the windows
of one of the Palladian palaces, whose shadow slept in the
great canal; and within the palace watched the twin Eumen-
ides, that never sleep for man,—Fear and Pain.

“T will make thee the richest man in all Venice, if thou
savest her,” '

ZANONI. 337

“Signor,” said the leech; “your gold cannot control
death, and the will of Heaven—Signor, unless within the
next hour there is some blessed change, prepare your
courage.”

Ho, ho, Zanoni! man of mystery and might, who hast
walked amidst the passions of the world, with no changes
on thy brow, art thou tossed at last upon the billows of tem-
pestuous fear? Does thy spirit reel to and fro?—knowest
thou at last the strength and the majesty of Death?

He fled, trembling, from the pale-faced man of art—fled
through stately hall, and long-drawn corridor, and gained
a remote chamber in the Palace, which other step than his
was not permitted to profane. Out with thy herbs and
vessels. Break from the enchanted elements, O silvery,
azure flame! Why comes he not—the Son of the Starbeam!
Why is Adon-Ai deaf to thy solemn call? It comes not—
the luminous and delightsome Presence! Cabalist! are thy
charms in vain? Has thy throne vanished from the realms
of space? Thou standest pale and trembling. Pale trem-
bler! not thus didst thou look, when the things of glory
gathered at thy spell. Never to the pale trembler bow the
things of glory :—the soul, and not the herbs, nor the silvery-
azure flame, nor the spells of the Cabala, commands the
children of the air; and thy soul, by Love and Death, is
made sceptreless and discrowned!

At length the flame quivers—the air grows cold as the
wind in charnels. <A thing not of earth is present—a mist-
like, formless thing. It cowers in the distance—a silent
Horror! it rises—it creeps—it nears thee—dark in its
mantle of dusky haze! and under its veil it looks on thee
with its livid, malignant eyes—the thing of malignant eyes!

“Ha, young Chaldean! young in thy countless ages—
young as when, cold to pleasure and to beauty, thou stood-
est on the old Fire-tower and heardest the starry silence
whisper to thee the last mystery that baffles Death—fearest
thou Death at length? Is thy knowledge but a circle that
brings thee back whence thy wanderings began? Genera-

22

3038 ZANONI.

tions on generations have withered since we twomet! Lo!
thou beholdest me now!”

“ But I behold thee without fear. Though beneath thine
eyes thousands have perished; though, where they burn,
spring up the foul poisons of the human heart, and to those
whom thou canst subject to thy will thy presence glares in
the dreams of the raving maniac, or blackens the dungeon
of despairing crime, thou art not my vanquisher but my
slave!”

“ And as a slave will I serve thee! Command thy slave,
O beautiful Chaldean!—Hark, the wail of women—hark,
the sharp shriek of thy beloved one! Death is in thy
palace! Adon-Ai comes not to thy call. Only where no
cloud of the passion and the flesh veils the eye of the Serene
Intelligence can the Sons of the Starbeam glide to man.
But J can aid thee!—hark!” And Zanoni heard distinctly
in his heart, even at that distance from the chamber, the
voice of Viola, calling in delirium on her beloved one.

“Oh, Viola, I can save thee not!” exclaimed the Seer,
passionately; “my love for thee has made me powerless!”

“Not powerless; I can gift thee with the art to save
her—I can place healing in thy hand!”

“For both? child and mother—for both?”

66 Both! 19)

A convulsion shook the limbs of the Seer—a mighty
struggle shook him as a child: the ay a and the Hour
conquered the repugnant spirit.

“T yield! Mother and child—save both!” ~

In the dark chamber lay Viola, in the sharpest agonies
of travail; life seemed rending itself away in the groans
and cries that spoke of pain in the midst of frenzy; and
still, in groan and ery, she called on Zanoni, her beloved.
The physician looked to the clock; on it beat—the Heart
of Time,—regularly and slowly—Heart that never sympa-
thized with Life, and never flagged for Death! “The cries

ZANONI. 339

are fainter,” said the leech; “in ten minutes more all will
be past.”

Fool! the minutes laugh at thee; Nature even now, like
a blue sky through a shattered temple, is smiling through
the tortured frame. The breathing grows more calm and
hushed—the voice of delirium is dumb—a sweet dream has
come to Viola. Is it a dream, or is it the soul that sees?
She thinks suddenly that she is with Zanoni, that her burn-
ing head 1s pillowed on his bosom; she thinks, as he gazes
on her, that his eyes dispel the tortures that prey upon
her—the touch of his hand cools the fever on her brow; she
hears his voice in murmurs—it is a music from which the
fiends fly. Where is the mountain that seemed to press
upon her temples? Like a vapor, it rolls away. In the
frosts of the winter night, she sees the sun laughing in lux-
urious heayen—she hears the whisper of green leaves; the
beautiful world, valley and stream, and woodland, lie be-
fore, and with a common voice speak to her—“ We are not
yet past for thee!” Fool of drugs and formula, look to thy
dial-plate!—the hand has moved on; the minutes are with
Eternity; the soul thy sentence would have dismissed still
dwells on the shores of Time. Shesleeps; the fever abates;
the convulsions are gone; the living rose blooms upon her
cheek; the crisis is past! Husband, thy wife lives! lover,
thy universe is no solitude! Heart of Time, beat on! A
while—a little while—joy! joy! joy!—father, embrace thy
child!

ee

CHAPTER II.

—“tristis Erinnys
Preetulit infaustas sanguinolenta faces.
OVID.

Anp they placed the child in the father’s arms! As
silently he bent over it, tears—tears how human!—fell from
his eyes like rain! And the little one smiled through the

1 Erinnys, doleful and bloody, extends the unblessed torches.

01

340 ZANONI.

tears that bathed its cheeks! Ah, with what happy tears
we welcome the stranger into our sorrowing world! With
what agonising tears we dismiss the stranger back to the
angels! Unselfish joy; but how selfish is the sorrow!

And now through the silent chamber a faint, sweet voice
is heard—the young mother’s voice.

“T am here: I am by thy side!” murmured Zanoni.

The mother smiled, and clasped his hand, and asked no
more; she was contented.

* * * *
* * * *

Viola recovered with a rapidity that startled the physician ;
and the young stranger thrived as if it already loved the
world to which it had descended. From that hour Zanoni
seemed to live in the infant’s life; and in that life the souls
of mother and father met as in a new bond. Nothing more
beautiful than this infant had eye ever dwelt upon. It
was strange to the nurse that it came not wailing to the
light, but smiled to the ight as a thing familiar to it be-
fore. It never uttered one cry of childish pain. In its
very repose it seemed to be listening to some happy voice
within its heart: it seemed itself so happy. In its eyes
you would have thought intellect already kindled, though
it had not yet found a language. Already it seemed to
recognize its parents; already it stretched forth its arms
when Zanoni bent over the bed, in which it breathed and
bloomed,—the budding flower! And from that bed he was
rarely absent: gazing upon it with his serene, delighted
eyes, his soul seemed to feed its own. At night and in
utter darkness he was still there; and Viola often heard him
murmuring over it as she lay in a half sleep. But the
murmur was in a language strange to her; and sometimes
when she heard, she feared, and vague, undefined supersti-
tions came back to her—the superstitions of earlier youth.
A mother fears everything, even the gods, for her new-
born. The mortals shrieked aloud, when of old they saw
the great Demeter seeking to make their child immortal!

ZANONL 341

But Zanoni, wrapt in the sublime designs that animated
the human love to which he was now awakened, forgot all,
even all he had forfeited or incurred, in the love that blinded
him.

But the dark, formless thing, though he nor invoked nor
saw it, crept, often, round and round him; and often sat
by the infant’s couch, with its hateful eyes.

CHAPTER III.
“Fuscis tellurem amplectitur alis. ” |—Vireru.
LETTER FROM ZANONI TO MEJNOUR.

Mesnovur, Humanity, with all its sorrows and its joys,
is mine once more. Day by day, I am forging my own
fetters. I live in other lives than my own, and in them I
have lost more than half my empire. Not lifting them
aloft, they drag me by the strong bands of the affections to
their own earth. Exiled from the beings only visible to
the most abstract sense, the grim Enemy that guards the
threshold has entangled me in its web. Canst thou credit
me, when I tell thee that I have accepted its gifts, and en-
dure the forfeit? Ages must pass ere the brighter beings
can again obey the spirit that has bowed to the ghastly one!
And——

*

* *
* * *

In this hope, then, Mejnour, I triumph still; I yet have
supreme power over this young life. Insensibly and in-
audibly my soul speaks to its own, and prepares it even
now. Thou knowest that for the pure and unsullied infant
spirit, the ordeal has no terror and no peril. Thus unceas-
ingly I nourish it with no unholy light; and ere it yet be
conscious of the gift, it will gain the privileges it has been
mine to attain: the child, by slow and scarce-seen degrees,

1 Embraces the Earth with gloomy wings.

842 ZANONI.

will communicate its own attributes to the mother; and con
tent to see Youth for ever radiant on the brows of the two
that now suffice to fill up my whole infinity of thought,
shall I regret the airier kingdom, that vanishes hourly from
my grasp? But thou, whose vision is still clear and serene,
look into the far deeps shut from my gaze, and counsel me,
or forewarn! I know that the gifts of the Being whose
race is so hostile to our own are, to the common seeker,
fatal and perfidious as itself. And hence, when, at the out-
skirts of knowledge, which in earlier ages men called Magic,
they encountered the things of the hostile tribes, they be-
lieved the apparitions to be fiends, and, by fancied com-
pacts, imagined they had signed away their souls; as if
man could give for an eternity that over which he has con-
trol but while he lives! Dark, and shrouded for ever from
human sight, dwell the demon rebels, in their impenetrable
realm; in them is no breath of the Divine One. In every
human creature the Divine One breathes; and He alone can
judge His own hereafter, and allot its new career and home.
Could man sell himself to the fiend, man could prejudge
himself, and arrogate the disposal of eternity! But these
creatures, modifications as they are of matter, and some
with more than the malignity of man, may well seem, to
fear and unreasoning superstition, the representatives of
fiends. And from the darkest and mightiest of them I
have accepted a boon—the secret that startled Death from
those so dear tome. Can I not trust that enough of power
yet remains to me to baffle or to daunt the Phantom, if it
seek to pervert the gift? Answer me, Mejnour; for in the
darkness that veils me, I see only the pure eyes of the new-
born; I hear only the low beating of my heart. Answer
me, thou whose wisdom is without love!

MEJNOUR TO ZANONI.
; Rome.
FALLEN OnE!—I see before thee Evil, and Death, and
Woe! Thou to have relinquished Adon-Ai for the nameless

ZANONL 343

Terror—the heavenly stars for those fearful eyes! Thou,
at the last to be the victim of the Larva of the dreary thres-
hold, that, in thy first novitiate, fled, withered and shriv-
elled, from thy kingly brow! When, at the primary grades
of initiation, the pupil I took from thee on the shores of the
changed Parthenopé fell senseless and cowering before that
Phantom-Darkness, I knew that his spirit was not formed
to front the worlds beyond; for rrar is the attraction of
man to earthiest earth; and while he fears, he cannot soar.
But thou, seest thou not that to love is but to fear?—seest
thou not, that the power of which thou boastest over the
malignant one is already gone? It awes, it masters thee;
it will mock thee, and betray. Lose not a moment; come
tome. If there can yet be sufficient sympathy between us,
through my eyes shalt thou see, and perhaps guard against
the perils that, shapeless yet, and looming through the
shadow, marshal themselves around thee and those whom
thy very love has doomed. Come from all the ties of thy
fond humanity; they will but obscure thy vision! Come
forth from thy fears and hopes, thy desires and passions.
Come, as alone, Mind can be the monarch and the seer,
shining through the home it tenants—a pure, impression-
less, sublime Intelligence!

CHAPTER IV.

“Plus que vous ne pensez ce moment est terrible. ” !
LA Harper, Le Comte de Warwick, Act iii., sc. 5.

For the first time since their union Zanoni and Viola
were separated—Zanoni went to Rome on important busi-
ness. “It was,” he said, “but for a few days:” and he
went so suddenly that there was little time either for sur-
prise or sorrow. But first parting is always more melan-
choly than it need be; it seems interruption to the existence

1 The moment is more terrible than you think,

344 ZANONI.

which Love shares with Love; it makes the heart feel what
a void life will be when the last parting shall succeed, as
succeed 1¢ must, the first. But Viola had a new companion:
she was enjoying that most delicious novelty which ever
renews the youth, and dazzles the eyes, of woman. As the
mistress—the wife—she leans on another; from another are
reflected her happiness, her being—as an orb that takes
light from its sun. But now, in turn, as the mother, she
is raised from dependence into power; it 1s another that
leans on her—a star has sprung into space, to which she
herself has become the sun!
A few days—but they will be sweet through the sorrow!
A few days—every hour of which seems an era to the in-
fant, over whom bend watchful the eyes and the heart.
From its waking to its sleep, from its sleep to its waking,
is a revolution in Time. Every gesture to be noted—every
smile to seem a new progress into the world it has come to
bless!) Zanoni has gone—the last dash of the oar is lost—
the last speck of the gondola has vanished from the ocean-
streets of Venice! Her infant is sleeping in the cradle at
the mother’s feet; and she thinks through her tears what
tales of the fairy-land, that spreads far and wide, with a
thousand wonders, in that narrow bed, she shall have to tell
the father! Smile on—weep on, young mother! Already
the fairest leaf in the wild volume is closed for thee! and

the invisible finger turns the page!
* * * *

% * * *

By the bridge of the Rialto stood two Venetians—ardent
Republicans and Democrats—looking to the Revolution of
France as the earthquake which must shatter their own ex-
piring and vicious constitution, and give equality of ranks
and rights to Venice.

“Yes, Cottalto,” said one, “my correspondent of Paris
has promised to elude all obstacles, and baffle all danger.
He will arrange with us the hour of revolt, when the legions

ZANONI. 345

of France shall be within hearing of our guns. One day in
this week, at this hour, he is to meet me here. ‘This is but
the fourth day.”

He had scarce said these words before a man, wrapped in
his roquelaire, emerging from one of the narrow streets to
the left, halted opposite the pair, and eyeing them for a few
moments with an earnest scrutiny, whispered, “ Salut /”

“ it fraternité,” answered the speaker.

“You, then, are the brave Dandolo with whom the Comite
deputed me to correspond? And this citizen——?”

“Ts Cottalto, who my letters have so often mentioned.” !

“Health and brotherhood to him! I have much to im-
part to you both. I will meet you at night, Dandolo. But
in the streets we may be observed.”

“ And I dare not appoint my own house; tyranny makes
spies of our very walls. But the place herein designated
is secure;” and he slipped an address into the hand of his
correspondent.

“To-night, then, at nine! Meanwhile I have other busi-
ness.” The man paused, his colour changed, and it was with
an eager and passionate voice that he resumed:

“ Your last letter mentioned this wealthy and mysterious
visitor—this Zanoni. He is still at Venice?”

“T heard that he had left this morning; but his wife is
still here.”

“His wife!—that is well!”

“ What know youof him? Think you that he would join
us? His wealth would be ve

“ His house; his address—quick!” interrupted the man.

“The Palazzo di ——, on the Grand Canal.”

“T thank you—at nine we meet.”

_ The man hurried on through the street from which he had
emerged; and, passing by the house in which he had taken

1.I know not if the author of the original MSS. designs, under
these names, to introduce the real Cottalto and the true Dandolo,
who, in 1797, distinguished themselves by their sympathy with the
French, and their democratic ardour.—Ep.

346 ZANONI.

up his lodging (he had arrived at Venice the night before),
@ woman who stood by the door caught his arm.

“ Monsieur,” she said, in French, “I have been watching
for your return. Do you understand me? I will brave all,
risk all, to go back with you to France—to stand, through
life or in death, by my husband’s side!”

“ Citoyenne, I promised your husband that, if such your
choice, I would hazard my own safety to aid it. But,
think again! Your husband is one of the faction which
Robespierre’s eyes have already marked: he cannot fly.
All France is become a prison to the ‘suspect.’ You do but
endanger yourself by return. Frankly, citoyenne, the fate
you would share may be the guillotine. I speak (as you
know by his letter) as your husband bade me.”

“ Monsieur, I will return with you,” said the woman,
with a smile upon her pale face.

“And yet you deserted your husband in the fair sunshine
of the Revolution, to return to him amidst its storms and
thunder!” said the man, in a tone half of wonder, half re-
buke.

“Because my father’s days were doomed; because he had
no safety but in flight to a foreign land; because he was old
and penniless, and had none but me to work for him; be-
cause my husband was not then in danger, and my father
was; he is dead—dead! My husband is in danger now.
The daughter’s duties are no more—the wife’s return!”

“Be it so, citoyenne; on the third night I depart. Be-
fore then you may retract your choice.”

“ Never!”

A dark smile passed over the man’s face.

“O guillotine,” he said, “how many virtues hast thou
brought to light! Well may they call thee ‘Holy Mother,’
O gory guillotine!”

He passed on, muttering to himself, hailed a gondola,
and was soon amidst the crowded waters of the Grand Canal.

*

ZANONI. 347

CHAPTER V.

“Ce que j’ignore
Est plus triste peut-étre et plus affreux encore. ” !
La Harpe, Le Comte de Warwick, Act v. sc. 1.

THE casement stood open, and Viola was seated by it.
Beneath sparkled the broad waters, in the cold but cloudless
sunlight; and to that fair form, that half-averted face,
turned the eyes of many a gallant cavalier, as their gon-
dolas glided by.

But at last, in the centre of the canal, one of these dark
vessels halted motionless, as a man fixed his gaze from its
lattice upon that stately palace. He gave the word to the
rowers—the vessel approached the marge. ‘The stranger
quitted the gondola; he passed up the broad stairs; he en-
tered the palace. Weep on!—smile no more, young mother!
—the last page is turned!

An attendant entered the room, and gave to Viola a card.
with these words in English—“ Viola, I must see you!
Clarence Glyndon.”

Oh, yes, how gladly Viola would see him!—how gladly
speak to him of her happiness—of Zanoni!—how gladly
show to him her child! Poor Clarence! she had forgotten
him till now, as she had all the fever of her earlier life, —
its dreams, its vanities, its poor excitement, the lamps of
the gaudy theatre, the applause of the noisy crowd.

He entered. She started to behold him, so changed were
his gloomy brow, his resolute, careworn features, from the
graceful form and careless countenance of the artist-lover.
His dress, though not mean, was rude, neglected, and dis-
ordered. A wild, desperate, half-savage air had supplanted
that ingenuous mien—diffident in its grace, earnest in its
diffidence—which had once characterized the young wor-

1 That which I know not is, perhaps, more sad and fearful still.

348 ZANONI.

shipper of Art, the dreaming Aspirant after some starrier
lore!

“Ts it you?” she said, at last. ‘Poor Clarence, how
changed!”

“Changed!” he said abruptly, as he placed himself by
her side. “And who am I to thank, but the fiends—the
sorcerers—who have seized upon thy existence, as upon
mine? Viola, hear me. A few weeks since the news
reached me that you were in Venice. Under other pre-
tences and through innumerable dangers, 1 have come
hither, risking liberty, perhaps life, if my name and career
are known in Venice, to warn andsave you. Changed, you
call me!—changed without; but what is that to the ravages
within? Be warned, be warned in time!”

The voice of Glyndon, sounding hollow and sepulchral,
alarmed Viola even more than his words. Pale, haggard,
emaciated, he seemed almost as one risen from the dead,
to appal and awe her. ‘“ What,” she said, at last, in a
faltering voice, “what wild words do. you utter! Can
you——”

“Tisten!” interrupted Glyndon, laying his hand upon .
her arm, and its touch was as cold as death—“ listen! You
have heard of the old stories of men who have leagued them-
selves with devils for the attainment of preternatural powers.
Those stories are not fables. Such men live. Their de-
light is to increase the unhallowed circle of wretches like
themselves. If their proselytes fail in the ordeal, the
demon seizes them, even in this life, as it hath seized me!
—if they succeed, woe, yea, a more lasting woe! There is
another life, where no spells can charm the evil one, or
allay the torture. I have come from a scene where blood
flows in rivers—where Death stands by the side of the
bravest and the highest, and the one monarch is the Guillo-
tine; but all the mortal perils with which man can be beset
are nothing to the dreariness of a chamber where the Horror
that passes death moves and stirs!”

It was then that Glyndon, with a cold and distinct pre-

ZANONT.. 349

cision, detailed, as he had done to Adela, the initiation
through which he had gone. He described, in words that
froze the blood of his listener, the appearance of that form-
less phantom, with the eyes that seared the brain and con-
gealed the marrow of those who beheld. Once seen, it never
was to be exorcised. It came at its own will, prompting
black thoughts—whispering strange temptations. Only in
scenes of turbulent excitement was it absent. Solitude—
serenity—the struggling desires after peace and virtue—
these were the elements it loved to haunt! Bewildered,
terror-stricken, the wild account confirmed by the dim im-
pressions that never, in the depth and confidence of affec-
tion, had been closely examined, but rather banished as
soon as felt,—that the life and attributes of Zanoni were
not like those of mortals, impressions which her own love
had made her hitherto censure, as suspicions that wronged,
and which, thus mitigated, had perhaps only served to rivet
the fascinated chains in which he bound her heart and
senses, but which now, as Glyndon’s awful narrative filled
her with contagious dread, half unbound the very spells
they had woven before,—Viola started up in fear—not for
herself ; and clasped her child in her arms!

“Unhappiest one!” cried Glyndon, shuddering, “hast
thou indeed given birth to a victim thou canst not save?
Refuse it sustenance—let it look to thee in vain for food!
In the grave at least there are repose and peace!”

Then there came back to Viola’s mind the remembrance
of Zanoni’s night-long watches by that cradle, and the fear
which even then had crept over her as she heard his mur-
mured, half-chanted words. And, as the child looked at
her with its clear, steadfast eye, in the strange intelligence
of that look there was something that only confirmed her
awe. So there both Mother and Forewarner stood in
silence, —the sun smiling upon them through the casement,
and dark, by the cradle, though they saw it not, sat the
motionless veiled Thing!

350 ZANONI.

But by degrees better, and juster, and more grateful
memories of the past returned to the young mother. The
features of the infant, as she gazed, took the aspect of the
absent father. A voice seemed to break from those rosy
lips and say mournfully: “I speak to thee in thy child.
In return for all my love for thee and thine, dost thou dis-
trust me, at the first sentence of a maniac who accuses?”

Her breast heaved—her stature rose—her eyes shone with
a serene and holy light.

“Go, poor victim of thine own delusions,” she said to
Glyndon; “I would not believe mine own senses if they
accused its father. And what knowest thou of Zanoni?
What relation have Mejnour and the grisly spectres he in-
voked with the radiant image with which thou wouldst con-
nect them?”

“Thou wilt learn too soon,” replied Glyndon, gloomily.
“And the very phantom that haunts me whispers with
its bloodless lips that its horrors await both thine and thee!
I take not thy decision yet; before I leave Venice we shall
meet again.”

He said, and departed.

——_—_¢

CHAPTER VI.

“Quel est 1’égarement of ton Ame se livre?” !
La Harpr, Le Comte de Warwick, Act. iv. sc. 4.

Aus, Zanoni! the Aspirer, the dark bright one!—didst
thou think that the bond between the survivor of ages and
the daughter of a day could endure? Didst thou not foresee
that until the ordeal was past, there could be no equality
between thy wisdom and her love! Art thou absent now,
seeking, amidst thy solemn secrets, the solemn safeguards
for child and mother, and forgettest thou that the phantom
that served thee hath power over its own gifts—over the

1 To what delusion does thy soul abandon itself?

ZANONI. 351

lives it taught thee to rescue from the grave? Dost thou
not know that fear and distrust, once sown in the heart of
Love, spring up from the seed into a forest that excludes
the stars? Dark bright one! the hateful eyes glare beside
the mother and the child!

All that day, Viola was distracted by a thousand thoughts
and terrors, which fled as she examined then, to settle back
the darklier. She remembered that, as she had once said
to Glyndon, her very childhood had been haunted with
strange forebodings that she was ordained for some preter-
natural doom. She remembered that, as she had told him
this, sitting by the seas that slumbered in the arms of the
Bay of Naples, he too had acknowledged the same forebod-
ings, and a mysterious sympathy had appeared to unite
their fates. She remembered, above all, that comparing
their entangled thoughts, both had then said that with the
first sight of Zanoni the foreboding, the instinct, had spoken
to their hearts more audibly than before, whispering that
“with Him was connected the secret of the unconjectured
life.”

And now, when Glyndon and Viola met again, the haunt-
ing fears of childhood thus referred to woke from their en-
chanted sleep. With Glyndon’s terrors she felt a sympathy
against which her reason and her love struggled in vain.
And still, when she turned her looks upon her child, it
watched her with that steady, earnest eye, and its lips
moved as if it sought to speak to her;—but no sound came.
The infant refused to sleep. Whenever she gazed upon its
face, still those wakeful, watchful eyes!—and in their
earnestness there spoke something of pain, of upbraiding,
of accusation. They chilled her as she looked. Unable to
endure, of herself, this sudden and complete revulsion of
all the feelings which had hitherto made up her life, she
formed the resolution natural to her land and creed; she
sent for the priest who had habitually attended her at Venice,
and to him she confessed, with passionate sobs and intense
terror, the doubts that had broken upon her. The good

352 ZANONI.

father, a worthy and pious man, but with little education
and less sense, one who held (as many of the lower Italians
do to this day) even a poet to be a sort of sorcerer, seemed
to shut the gates of hope upon her heart. His remon-
strances were urgent, for his horror was unfeigned. He
joined with Glyndon in imploring her to fly if she felt the
smallest doubt that her husband’s pursuits were of the
nature which the Roman Church had benevolently burned
_ so many scholars for adopting. And even the little that

\Viola could communicate seemed to the ignorant ascetic

// irrvefragable proof of sorcery and witchcraft; he had, indeed,

‘ previously heard some of the strange rumours which fol-
lowed the path of Zanoni, and was therefore prepared to
believe the worst; the worthy Bartoloméo would have made
no bones of sending Watt to the stake had he heard him
speak of the steam-engine! But Viola, as untutored as
himself was terrified, by his rough and vehement elo-
quence; terrified, for by that penetration which Catholic
priests, however dull, generally acquire, in their vast ex-
perience of the human heart hourly exposed to their probe,
Bartoloméo spoke less of danger to herself than to her
child. “Sorcerers,” said he, “have ever sought the most
to decoy and seduce the souls of the young—nay, the in-
fant;” and therewith he entered into a long catalogue of
legendary fables, which he quoted as historical facts; all at
which an Englishwoman would have smiled appalled the
tender but superstitious Neapolitan; and when the priest
left her, with solemn rebukes and grave accusations of a
dereliction of her duties to her child, if she hesitated to fly
with it from an abode polluted by the darker powers and
unhallowed arts, Viola, still clinging to the image of Za-
noni, sank into a passive lethargy which held her very rea-
son in suspense.

The hours passed; night came on; the house was niches
and Viola, slowly awakened from the numbness and torpor
which had usurped her faculties, tossed to and fro on her
couch, restless and perturbed. The stillness became intoler-

ZANONI. | 353

able; yet more intolerable the sound that alone broke it,
the voice of the clock, knelling moment after moment to its
grave. The Moments, at last, seemed themselves to find
voice, to gain shape. She thought she beheld them spring-
ing, wan and fairy-like, from the womb of darkness; and
ere they fell again, extinguished, into that womb, their
grave, their low, small voices murmured—“ Woman! we
report to eternity all that is done in time! What shall we
report of thee, O guardian of a new-born soul?” She became
sensible that her fancies had brought a sort of partial de-
lirum, that she was ina state between sleep and waking,
when suddenly one thought became more predominant than
the rest. The chamber which, in that and every house
they had inhabited, even that in the Greek isles, Zanoni
had set apart to a solitude on which none might intrude,
the threshold of which even Viola’s step was forbid to cross,
and never, hitherto, in that sweet repose of confidence
which belongs to contented love, had she even felt the curi-
ous desire to disobey—now, that chamber drew her towards
it. Perhaps, there, might be found a somewhat to solve
the riddle, to dispel or confirm the doubt: that thought
grew and deepened in its intenseness; it fastened on her as

\
a

CS

with a palpable and irresistible grasp; it seemed to raise. |

her limbs without her will.

And now, through the chamber, along the galleries thou
glidest, O lovely shape! sleep-walking yet awake. The
moon shines on thee as thou glidest by casement after
casement, white-robed and wandering spirit!—thine arms
crossed upon thy bosom, thine eyes fixed and open, with a
calm, unfearing awe. Mother! it is thy child that leads
thee on. The fairy Moments go before thee. Thou hear-
est still the clock-knell tolling them to their graves behind.
On, gliding on, thou hast gained the door; no lock bars
thee, no magic spell drives thee back. Daughter of the
dust, thou standest alone with Night in the chamber where,
pale and numberless, the hosts of space have gathered

round the seer!
oo

354 ZANONI.

CHAPTER VII.

“Des Erdenlebens
Schweres Traumbild sinkt, und sinkt, und sinkt. ” -
Das IDEAL UND DAS LEBENS.

Sue stood within the chamber, and gazed around her; no
signs by which an Inquisitor of old could have detected the
Scholar of the Black Art were visible. No crucibles and
caldrons, no brass-bound volumes and ciphered girdles, no
skulls and cross-bones. Quietly streamed the broad moon-
light through the desolate chamber with its bare white
walls. A few bunches of withered herbs, a few antiqua
vessels of bronze, placed carelessly on a wooden form, were
all which that curious gaze could identify with the pursuits
of the absent owner. The magic, if it existed, dwelt in the
artiticer, and the materials, to other hands, were but herbs
and bronze. So is it ever with thy works and wonders, O
Genius—Seeker of the Stars! Words themselves are the
common property of all men; yet from words themselves,
Thou, Architect of Immortalities, pilest up temples that
shall outlive the Pyramids, and the very leaf of the Papyrus
becomes a Shinar, stately with towers, round which the
Deluge of Ages shall roar in vain!

But in that solitude has the Presence that there had in-
voked its wonders left no enchantment of its own? It
seemed so; for as Viola stood in the chamber, she became
sensible that some mysterious change was at work within
herself. Her blood coursed rapidly, and with a sensation
of delight, through her veins—she felt as if chains were
falling from her limbs, as if cloud after cloud was rolling
from her gaze. All the confused thoughts which had moved
through her trance settled and centred themselves in one
intense desire to see the Absent One—to be with him. The

'The Dream-Shape of the heavy earthly life sinks, and sinks,
and sinks,

ZANONI. 355

monads that make up space and air seemed charged with a
spiritual attraction, —to become a medium through which
her spirit could pass from its clay, and confer with the spirit
to which the unutterable desire compelled it. A faintness
seized her; she tottered to the seat on which the vessels
and herbs were placed, and, as she bent down, she saw in
one of the vessels a small vase of crystal. By a mechani-
cal and involuntary impulse her hand seized the vase; she
opened it, and the volatile essence it contained sparkled up,
and spread through the room a powerful and delicious fra-
grance. She inhaled the odour, she laved her temples with
the liquid, and suddenly her life seemed to spring up from
the previous faintness—to spring, to soar, to float, to dilate,
upon the wings of a bird.

The room vanished from her eyes. Away—away, over
lands, and seas, and space, on the rushing desire flies the
disprisoned mind!

Upon a stratum, not of this world, stood the world-born
shapes of the sons of Science; upon an embryo world—upon
acrude, wan, attenuated mass of matter, one of the Nebula,
which the suns of the myriad systems throw off as they roll
round the Creator’s throne,’ to become themselves new
worlds of symmetry and glory—planets and suns, that for
eyer and for ever shall in their turn multiply their shin-
ing race, and be the fathers of suns and planets yet to
come.

There, in that enormous solitude of an infant world, which
thousands and thousands of years can alone ripen into form,

1“ Astronomy instructs us, that in the original condition of the
solar system, the sun was the nucleus of a nebulosity or luminous
mass, which revolved on itsaxis, and extended far beyond the orbits
of all the planets; the planets as yet having no existence. Its tem-
perature gradually diminished, and becoming contracted by cooling,
the rotation increased in rapidity, and zones of nebulosity were suc-
cessively thrown off, in consequence of the centrifugal force over-
powering the centralattraction. The condensation of these separate
masses constituted the planets and satellites. But this view of the
conversion of gaseous matter into planetary bodies is not limited to

356 ZANONI.

the spirit of Viola beheld the shape of Zanoni, or rather the
likeness, the simulacrum, the Lemur of his shape, not its
human and corporeal substance,—as if, like hers, the In-
telligence was parted from the clay ;—and as the sun, while
it revolves and glows, had cast off into remotest space that
nebular image of itself, so the thing of earth, in the action
of its more luminous and enduring being, had thrown its
likeness into that new-born stranger of the heavens. There
stood the phantom—a phantom-Mejnour, by its side. In
the gigantic chaos around raved and struggled the kindling
elements—water and fire, darkness and light, at war—
vapour and cloud hardening into mountains, and the Breath
of Life moving like a steadfast splendour over all!

As the dreamer looked, and shivered, she beheld that
even there the two phantoms of humanity were not alone.
Dim monster-forms that that disordered chaos alone could
engender, the first reptile Colossal race that wreathe and
crawl through the earliest stratum of a world labouring into
life, coiled in the oozing matter or hovered through the
meteorous vapours. But these the two seekers seemed to
heed not: their gaze was fixed intent upon an object in the
farthest space. With the eyes of the spirit, Viola followed
theirs; with a terror far greater than the chaos and its hid-
eous inhabitants produced, she beheld a shadowy likeness
of the very room of which her form yet dwelt, its white
walls, the moonshine sleeping on its floor, its open case-
ment, with the quiet roofs and domes of Venice looming
over the sea that sighed below;—and in that room the
ghostlike image of herself! This double phantom—here

our own system ; it extends to the formation of the innumerable suns
and worlds which are distributed throughout the universe. The
sublime discoveries of modern astronomers have shown that every
part of the realms of space abounds in large expansions of attenuated
matter termed nebule, which are irregularly reflective of light, of
various figures, and in different states of condensation, from that of
a diffused luminous mass to suns and planets like our own. ”—From

Mantell’s eloquent and delightful work, entitled Zhe Wonders of
Geology, vol. i. p. 22,

ZANONI. 357

herself a phantom—gazing upon her phantom-self, had in it
a horror which no words can tell, no length of life forego.

But presently she saw this image of herself rise slowly,
feave the room with its noiseless feet—it passes the corri-
dor—it kneels by a cradle! Heaven of Heaven! she be-
holds her child!—still with its wondrous childlike beauty
and its silent wakeful eyes. But beside that cradle there
sits, cowering, a mantled shadowy form—the more fearful
and ghastly, from its indistinct and unsubstantial gloom.
The walls of that chamber seem to open as the scenc of a
theatre. A grim dungeon—streets through which pour
shadowy crowds—wrath and hatred, and the aspect of
demons in their ghastly visages—a place of death—a mur-
derous instrument—-a shamble-house of human flesh—her-
self—her child—all, all, rapid phantasmagoria, chased each
other. Suddenly the phantom-Zanoni turned, it seemed
to perceive herself—her second self. It sprang towards her;
her spirit could bear no more. She shrieked, she woke!
She found that in truth she had left that dismal chamber;
the cradle was before her—the child! all—allas that trance
had seen it, and, vanishing into air, even that dark form-
less Thing!

“My child! my child! thy mother shall save thee yet!”

Cn eS

CHAPTER VIII.

“Qui? Toi! m’abandonner. Ot vas-tu? Non! demeure.
Demeure !” !
La Harper, Le Comte de Warwick, Act iii. sc. 5,

LETTER FROM VIOLA TO ZANONI.

“Tr has come to this!—I am the first to part! I, the™

unfaithful one, bid thee farewell for ever. When thine
eyes fall upon this writing, thou wilt know me as one of
the dead. For thou that wert, and still art my life—I am

1Who? Zhou abandon me!—Where goest thou? No, stay, stay !

an

358 ZANONI.

lost to thee! O lover! O husband! O still worshipped
and adored! if thou hast ever loved me, if thou canst still
pity, seek not to discover the steps that fly thee. If thy
charms can detect and track me, spare me—spare our child!
Zanoni, I will rear it to love thee, to call thee father!
Zanoni, its young lips shall pray for thee! Ah, spare thy
child, for infants are the saints of earth and their media-
tion may be heard on high! Shall I tell thee why I part?
No; thou, the wisely terrible, canst divine what the hand
trembles to record; and while I shudder at thy power—
while it is thy power I fly (our child upon my bosom),—it
comforts me still to think that thy power can read the heart!
Thou knowest that it is the faithful mother that writes to
thee, it is not the faithless wife! Is there sin in thy
knowledge, Zanoni? Sin must have sorrow; and it were
sweet—oh, how sweet, to be thy comforter. But the child,
the infant, the soul that looks to mine for its shield!
Magician, I wrest from thee that soul! Pardon, pardon,
if my words wrong thee. See, I fall on my knees to write
the rest!

“Why did I never recoil before from thy mysterious
lore?—why did the very strangeness of thine unearthly life
only fascinate me with a delightful fear? Because, if thou
wert sorcerer or angel-demon, there was no peril to other
but myself: andnone tome, for my love was my heavenliest
part; and my ignorance in all things, except the art to love
thee, repelled every thought that was not bright and glori-
ous as thine image to my eyes. But now there is another!
Look, why does it watch me thus—why that never-sleeping,
earnest, rebuking gaze? Have thy spells encompassed it
already? Hast thou marked it, cruel one, for the terrors of
thy unutterable art? Do not madden me—do not madden
me!—unbind the spell!

“Hark! the oars without! They come—they come, to
bear me from thee! I look round, and methinks that I see
thee everywhere. Thou speakest to me from every shadow,
from every star. There, by the casement, thy lips last

ZANONI. 359

pressed mine—there, there by that threshold didst thou
turn again, and thy smile seemed so trustingly to confide in
me! Zanoni—husband!—I will stay! I cannot part from
thee! No, no! I will go to the room where thy dear voice,
with its gentle music, assuaged the pangs of travail!—
where, heard through the thrilling darkness, it first whis-
pered to my ear, ‘Viola, thou art a mother!’ A mother!—
yes, I rise from my knees—I am a mother! They come!
lam firm; farewell!”

Yes; thus suddenly, thus cruelly, whether in the delirium
of blind and vnreasoning superstition, or in the resolve of
that conviction which springs from duty, the being for whom
he had resigned so much of empire and of glory forsook
Zanoni. ‘This desertion, never foreseen, never anticipated,
was yet but the constant fate that attends those who would
place Mind beyond the earth, and yet treasure the Heart
within it. Ignorance everlastingly shall recoil from knowl-
edge. But never yet, from nobler and purer motives of
self-sacrifice, did human love link itself to another, than
did the forsaking wife now abandon the absent. Yor right-
ly had she said that it was not the faithless wife, it was the
faithful mother that tled from all in which her earthly hap-
piness was centred. As long as the passion and fervour
that impelled the act animated her with false fever, she
clasped her infant to her breast, and was consoled—re-
signed. But what bitter doubt of her own conduct, what
icy pang of remorse shot through her heart, when, as they
rested for a few hours on the road to Leghorn, she heard
the woman who accompanied herself and Glyndon pray for
safety to reach her husband’s side, and strength to share
the perils that would meet her there! Terrible contrast to
her own desertion! She shrank into the darkness of her
own heart,—and then no voice from within consoled her,

860 : ZANONI.

CHAPTER IX.

“Zukunft hast du mir gegeben,
Doch du nehmst den Augenblick. ”!
KASSANDRA.

“ Mrsnour, behold thy work! Out, out upon our little
vanities of wisdom!—out, upon our ages of lore and life!
To save her from Peril I left her presence, and the Peril
has seized her in its grasp!”

“Chide not thy wisdom, but thy passions! Abandon
thine idle hope of the love of woman. See, for those who
would unite the lofty with the lowly, the inevitable curse;
thy very nature uncomprehended—thy sacrifices unguessed.
The lowly one views but in the lofty a necromancer or a
fiend. ‘Titan, canst thou weep?”

“T know it now—lI see it all! It was her spirit that
stood beside our own, and escaped my airy clasp! O-strong
desire of motherhood and nature! unveiling all our secrets,
piercing space and traversing worlds!—Mejnour, what awful
learning lies hid in the ignorance of the heart that loves!”

“The heart,” answered the Mystic, coldly; “ay, for five
thousand years I have ransacked the mysteries of creation;
but I have not yet discovered all the wonders in the heart
of the simplest boor!” .

“Yet our solemn rites deceived us not; the prophet-
shadows, dark with terror and red with blood, still foretold
that, even in the dungeon, and before the deathsman, I—J
had the power to save them both!”

“But at some unconjectured and most fatal sacrifice to
thyself.”

“To myself! Icy sage, there is no self in love! I go.
Nay, alone; I want thee not. I want now no other guide
but the human instincts of affection. No cave so dark—no

' Futurity hast thou given to me—yet thou takest from me the
moment.

ZANONI. 361

solitude so vast, as to conceal her. Though mine art fail
me—though the stars heed me not—though space, with its
shining myriads, is again to me but the azure void, —I re-
turn but to love, and youth, and hope! when have they ever
failed to triumph and to save?”

BOOK THE SEVENTH.
THE REIGN OF TERROR.

“ Orrida maesta nel fero aspetto
Terrore accresce, e pit superbo il rende ;
Rosseggian gli occhi, e di veneno infetto
Come infausta cometa, il guardo splende.
Gli involve il mento, e sull ’irsuto petto
Ispida e folta la gran barbe scende ;
Hin guisa di voragine profonda
S’apre la bocca @atro sangue tmmonda. ” 3
GER. Lis., Cant. iv., 7.

CHAPTER I.

Qui suis-je, moi qu’on accuse? Un esclave de la liberté, un mar-
tyr vivant de la République.” ’—DiscouRs DE ROBESPIERRE, 8th
Thermidor.

Ir roars—the River of Hell, whose first outbreak was
chanted as the gush of a channel to Elysium. How burst
into blossoming hopes fair hearts that had nourished them-
selves on the diamond dews of the rosy dawn, when Liberty
came from the dark ocean and the arms of decrepit Thral-
dom—Aurora from the bed of Tithon! Hopes! ye have
ripened into fruit, and the fruit is gore and ashes! Beauti-
ful Roland, eloquent Vergniaud, visionary Condorcet, high-

‘A horrible majesty in the fierce aspect increases its terror, and
renders it more superb. Red glow the eyes, and the aspect infected,
like a baleful comet, with envenomed influences, glares around. A
vast beard covers the chin—and, rough and thick, descends over the
shaggy breast.—And like a profound gulf expand the jaws, foul
with black gore.

> Whoam I, J whom they accuse? A slave of Liberty—a living
martyr for the Republic.

ZANONI. 363

hearted Malesherbes!—wits, philosophers, statesmen, pa-
triots,—dreamers! behold the millennium for which ye
dared and laboured!

T invoke the ghosts! Saturn hath devoured his children,’
and lives alone—in his true name of Moloch!

It is the Reign of Terror, with Robespierre the king.
The struggles between the boa and the lion are past; the
boa has consumed the lion, and is heavy with the gorge;—
Danton has fallen, and Camille Desmoulins. Danton has
said before his death, “The poltroon Robespierre—I alone
could have saved him.” From that hour, indeed, the blood
of the dead giant clouded the craft of ‘ Maximilien the
Incorruptible,” as at last, amidst the din of the roused Con-
vention, it choked his voice.? If, after that last sacrifice,
essential, perhaps, to his safety, Robespierre had proclaimed
the close of the Reign of Terror, and acted upon the mercy
which Danton had begun to preach, he might have lived
and died a monarch. But the prisons continued to reek—
the glaive to fall; and Robespierre perceived not that his
mobs were glutted to satiety with death, and the strongest
excitement a chief could give would be a return from devils
into men.

We are transported to a room in the house of Citizen
Dupleix, the menuisier, in the month of July, 1794; or in
the calendar of the Revolutionists it was the Thermidor of
the Second Year of the Republic, One and Indivisible!
Though the room was small, it was furnished and decorated
with a. minute and careful effort at elegance and refinement.
It seemed, indeed, the desire of the owner to avoid at once
what was mean and rude, and what was luxurious and
voluptuous. It was a trim, orderly, precise grace that

1 “Tq Révolution est comme Saturne, elle dévorera tous ses enfans. ”
—VERGNIAUD.

‘2 “Te sang de Danton t’étouffe!” (the blood of Danton chokes
thee) said Garnier de 1’ Aube, when, on the fatal 9th of Thermidor,
Robespierre gasped feebly forth—‘“ Pour la derniére fois, Président
des Assassins, je te demande la parole.” (For the last time, Presi-
dent of Assassins, I demand to speak.)

364 ZANONT.

shaped the classic chairs, arranged the ample draperies,
sank the frameless mirrors into the wall, placed bust and
bronze on their pedestals, and filled up the niches here and
there with well-bound books, filed regularly in their ap-
pointed ranks. An observer would have said, “This man
wishes to imply to you—I am not rich; I am not ostenta-
tious; I am not luxurious; I am no indolent Sybarite, with
couches of down, and pictures that provoke the sense; I
am no haughty noble, with spacious halls, and galleries that
awe the echo. But so much the greater is my merit if I
disdain these excesses of the ease or the pride, since I love
the elegant, and have a taste! Others may be simple and
honest, from the very coarseness of their habits; if I, with
so much refinement and delicacy, am simple and honest, —
reflect, and admire me!”

On the walls of this chamber hung many portraits, most
of them represented but one face; on the formal pedestals
were grouped many busts, most of them sculptured but one
head. In that small chamber Egotism sat supreme, and
made the Arts its looking-glasses. Erect in a chair, before
a large table spread with letters, sat the original of bust and
canvas, the owner of the apartment. He was alone, yet he
sat erect, formal, stiff, precise, as if in his very home he
was not at ease. His dress was in harmony with his pos-
ture and his chamber, it affected a neatness of its own—
foreign both to the sumptuous fashions of the deposed no-
bles, and the filthy ruggedness of the sans culottes. Frizzled
and coiffé, not a hair was out of order, not a speck lodged
on the sleek surface of the blue coat, not a wrinkle crum-
pled the snowy vest, with its under relief of delicate pink.
At the first glance you might have seen in that face nothing
but the ill-favoured features of a sickly countenance. Ata
second glance you would have perceived that it had a power
—a character of its own. The forehead, though low and
compressed, was not without that appearance of thought and
intelligence which, it may be observed, that breadth be-
tween the eyebrows almost invariably gives; the lips were

ZANONI. 365

firm and tightly drawn together, yet ever and anon they trem-
bled, and writhed restlessly. The eyes, sullen and gloomy,
_ were yet piercing, and full of a concentrated vigour, that
did not seem supported by the thin, feeble frame, or the
green lividness of the hues which told of anxiety and disease.
Such was Maximilien Robespierre; such the chamber
over the menuisier’s shop, whence issued the edicts that
launched armies on their career of glory, and ordained an
artificial conduit to carry off the blood that deluged the me-
tropolis of the most martial people in the globe! Such was
the man who had resigned a judicial appointment (the early
object of his ambition) rather than violate his philanthrop-
ical principles, by subscribing to the death of a single fel-
low-creature ;—such was the virgin enemy to capital pun-
ishments, and such, Butcher-Dictator now, was the man
whose pure and rigid manners, whose incorruptible honesty,
whose hatred of the excesses that tempt to love and wine,
would—had he died five years earlier—have left him the
model for prudent fathers and careful citizens to place be-
fore their sons. Such was the man who seemed to have no
vice, till circumstance, that hotbed, brought forth the two
which, in ordinary times, he ever the deepest and most la-
tent in a man’s heart—Cowardice and Envy. To one of
these sources is to be traced every murder that master-fiend
committed. His cowardice was of a peculiar and strange
sort; for it was accompanied with the most unscrupulous
and determined wi//—a will that Napoleon reverenced, a
will of iron, and yet nerves of aspen. Mentally, he was a
hero—physically, a dastard. When the veriest shadow of
danger threatened his person, the frame cowered, but the
ill swept the danger to the slaughter-house. So there he
sat, bolt upright—his small, lean fingers clenched convul-
sively—his sullen eyes straining into space, their whites
yellowed with streaks of corrupt blood, his ears literally
moving to and fro like the ignobler animal’s, to catch every
sound—a Dionysius in his cave,—but his posture decorous
and collected, and every formal hair in its frizzled place.

366 ZANONL

“Yes, yes,” he said in a muttered tone, “I hear them;
my good Jacobins are at their post on the stairs. Pity they
swear so! I have a law against oaths—the manners of the
poor and virtuous people must be reformed. When all is
safe, an example or two amongst those good Jacobins would
make effect. Faithful fellows, how they love me! Hum!
—what an oath was that!—they need not swear so loud—
upon the very staircase, too! It detracts from my reputa-
tion. Ha! steps!”

The soliloquist glanced at the opposite mirror, and took
up a volume; he seemed absorbed in its contents, as a tall
fellow, a bludgeon in his hand, a girdle, adorned with pis-
tols, round his waist, opened the door, and announced two
visitors. The one was a young man, said to resemble
Robespierre in person; but of a far more decided and reso-
lute expression of countenance. He entered first, and
looking over the volume in Robespierre’s hand, for the lat-
ter seemed still intent on his lecture, exclaimed:

“What! Rousseau’s Héloise? A love tale!”

“Dear Payan, it is not the love—it is the philosophy that
charms me. What noble sentiments!—what ardour of
virtue! If Jean Jacques had but lived to see this day!”

While the dictator thus commented on his favourite au-
thor, whom, in his orations, he laboured hard to imitate,
the second visitor was wheeled into the room in a chair.
This man was also in what, to most, is the prime of life—
viz., about thirty-eight; but he was literally dead in the
lower limbs. Crippled, paralytic, distorted, he was yet, as
the time soon came to tell him—a Hercules inCrime! But
the sweetest of human smiles dwelt upon his lips, a beauty
almost angelic characterised his features; ' an inexpressible

*“ Figure d’ange, ” says one of his contemporaries, in describing
Couthon. The address, drawn up most probably by Payan (Ther-
midor 9), after the arrest of Robespierre, thus mentions his crippled

colleague—“ Couthon, ce citoyen vertueux, gui n’a que le ceur et la
téte de vivans, mais qui les a briilants de patriotisme. ” *

ee eS Se eS eee ee
* Couthon, that virtuous citizen, who has but the head and heart
of the living, yet possesses these all on flame with patriotism.

ZANONI. 567

aspect of kindness, and the resignation of suffering but cheer-
ful benignity, stole into the hearts of those who for the first
time beheld him. With the most caressing, silver, flute-like
voice, Citizen Couthon saluted the admirer of Jean Jacques.

“Nay—do not say that it is not the love that attracts
thee; it is the love! but not the gross, sensual attachment
of man for woman. No! the sublime affection for the
whole human race, and, indeed, for all that lives!”

And Citizen Couthon, bending down, fondled the little
spaniel that he invariably carried in his bosom, even to the
Convention, as a vent for the exuberant sensibilities which
overflowed his affectionate heart.*

“Yes, for all that lives,” repeated Robespierre, tenderly.
“Good Couthon—poor Couthon! Ah, the malice of men!
—how we are misrepresented! To be calumniated as the
executioners of our colleagues! <Ah, it is that which pierces
the heart! To be an object of terror to the enemies of our
country—that is noble; but to be an object of terror to the
good, the patriotic, to those one loves and reveres—that is
the most terrible of human tortures; at least, to a suscepti-
ble and honest heart!” *

1 This tenderness for some pet animal was by no means peculiar to
Couthon ; if seemed rather a common fashion with the gentle butchers
of the Revolution. M. George Duval informs us (Souvenirs de la
Terreur, vol. iii., p. 183) that Chaumette had an aviary, to which he
devoted his harmless leisure ; the murderous Fournier carried on his
shoulders a pretty little squirrel, attached by a silver chain; Panis
bestowed the superfluity of his affections upon two gold pheasants ;
and Marat, who would not abate one of the three hundred thousand
heads he demanded, reared doves! Apropos of the spaniel of Cou-
thon, Duval gives us an amusing anecdote of Sergent, not one of
the least relentless agents of the massacre of September. <A lady
came to implore his protection for one of her relations confined in
the Abbaye. He scarcely deigned to speak to her. As she retired
fn despair, she trod by accident on the paw of his favorite spaniel.
Sergent, turning round, enraged and furious, exclaimed, “ Madam,
have you no humanity ?”

2 Not to fatigue the reader with annotations, I may here observe
that nearly every sentiment ascribed in the text to Robespierre is to
be found expressed in his various discourses.

368 ZANONI.

“ How I love to hear him!” ejaculated Couthon.

“Hem!” said Payan, with some impatience. ‘‘ But now
to business!”

‘Ah, to business!” said Robespierre, with a sinister
glance from his bloodshot eyes.

“The time has come,” said Payan, “when the safety of
the Republic demands a complete concentration of its power.
These brawlers of the Comité du Salut Public can only
destroy; they cannot construct. They hated you, Maxi-
milien, from the moment you attempted to replace anarchy
by institutions. How they mock at the festival which pro-
claimed the acknowledgment of a Supreme Being: they
would have no ruler,evenin Heaven! Your clear and vigor-
ous intellect saw that, having wrecked an old world, it be-
came necessary to shape anew one, ‘The first step towards
construction must be to destroy the destroyers. While we
deliberate, your enemies act. Better this very night to
attack the handful of gensdarmes that guard them, than to
confront the battalions they may raise to-morrow.”

“No,” said Robespierre, who recoiled before the deter-
mined spirit of Payan; “I have a better and safer plan.
This is the 6th of Thermidor; on the 10th—on the 10th, ©
the Convention go in a body to the Féte Décadaire. A
mob shall form; the canonniers, the troops of Henriot,
the young pupils de lV Zeole de Mars, shall mix in the
crowd. Easy, then, to strike the conspirators, whom we
shall designate to our agents. On the same day, too,
Fouquier and Dumas shall not rest; and a_ sufficient
number of ‘the suspect? to maintain salutary awe, and
keep up the revolutionary excitement, shall perish by the
glaive of the law. The 10th shall be the great day of
action. Payan, of these last culprits have you prepared a
list?”

“Tt is here,” returned Payan, laconically, presenting a
paper.

Robespierre glanced over it rapidly. ‘“Collot d’Her-
bois!—good! Barrére!—ay, it was Barrére who said, ‘Let

ZANONI. 369

us strike—the dead alone never return.’! Vadier, the sav-
age jester!—good—good! Vadier of the Mountain. He
has called me ‘Mahomet!’ Scélérat/ blasphemer!”

“Mahomet is coming to the mountain,” said Couthon,
with his silvery accent, as he caressed his spaniel.

“But how is this? I donot see the name of Tallien!
Tallien—I hate that man; that is,” said Robespierre, cor-
recting himself with the hypocrisy or self-deceit which those
who formed the council of this phrasemonger exhibited
habitually, even among themselves—“ that is, Virtue and
our Country hate him! There is no man in the whole
Convention who inspires me with the same horror as Tallien.
Couthon, I see a thousand Dantons where Tallien sits!”

“Tallien has the only head that belongs to this deformed
body,” said Payan, whose ferocity in crime, like that of
St. Just, was accompanied by talents of no common order.
“Were it not better to draw away the head,—to win, to
buy him, for the time, to dispose of him better when left
alone? He may hate you, but he loves money!”

“No,” said Robespierre, writing down the name of Jean
Lambert Tallien, with a slow hand, that shaped each letter
with stern distinctness; “that one head is my necessity /”

“T have a small list here,” said Couthon, sweetly—“a
very Small list. You are dealing with the Mountain; it is
necessary to make a few examples in the Plain. These
moderates are as straws which follow the wind. They
turned against us yesterday in the Convention. A little
terror will correct the weathercocks. Poor creatures! I
owe them no ill-will; I will weep for them. But before all
la chére patrie!”

The terrible glance of Robespierre devoured the list
which the man of sensibility submitted tohim. “Ah, these
are well chosen; men not of mark enough to be regretted,
which isthe best policy with the relics of that party; some,
‘foreigners too;—yes, they have no parents in Paris, These

1“Frappons! il n’y a que les morts qui ne reviennent pas. ”"—
BARRDRE.

24

370 ZANONI.

wives and parents are beginning to plead against us. Their
complaints demoralise the guillotine!”

“Couthon is right,” said Payan; “my list contains those
whom it will be safer to despatch en masse in the crowd
assembled at the Féte. His list selects those whom we may
prudently consign to the law. Shall it not be signed at
once? ”

“It zs signed,” said Robespierre, formally replacing his
pen upon the inkstand. “ Now to more important matters.
These deaths will create no excitement; but Collot d’Her-
bois, Bourdon de 1|’Oise, Tallien”’—the last name Robes-
pierre gasped as he pronounced—“ they are the heads of
parties. This is life or death to us as well as them.”

“Their heads are the footstools to your curule chair,”
said Payan, ina half whisper. ‘There is no danger if we
are bold. Judges, juries, all have been your selection.
You seize with one hand the army, with the other, the law.
Your voice yet commands the people——”

“The poor and virtuous people,” murmured Robespierre.

“And even,” continued Payan, “if our design at the
Féte fail us, we must not shrink from the resources still at
our command. Reflect! Henriot, the general of the Paris-
ian army, furnishes you with troops to arrest; the Jaco-
bin club with a public.to approve; inexorable Dumas with
judges who never acquit. We must be bold!”

“ And we are bold,” exclaimed Robespierre, with sudden
passion, and striking his hand on the table as he rose, with
his crest erect, as a serpent in the act to strike. ‘In seeing
the multitude of vices that the revolutionary torrent mingles
with civic virtues, I tremble to be sullied in the eyes of
posterity by the impure neighbourhood of these perverse
men, who thrust themselves among the sincere defenders of
humanity. What!—they think to divide the country like a
booty! I thank them for their hatred to all that is virtuous
and worthy! These men”—and he grasped the list of Payan
in his hand,—“these!—not we—have drawn the line of
demarcation between themselves and the lovers of France.”

ZANONI. dtl

“True, we must reign alone!” muttered Payan; “in
other words, the state needs unity of will;” working, with
his strong practical mind the corollary from the logic of
his word-compelling colleague!

“T will go to the Convention,” continued Robespierre.
“T have absented myself too long—lest I might seem to
overawe the Republic that I have created. Away with
such scruples! I will prepare the people! I will blast the
traitors with a look!”

He spoke with the terrible firmness of the orator that had
never failed—of the moral will that marched like a warrior
onthecannon. At that instant he was interrupted; a letter
was brought to him; he opened it; his face fell—he shook
from limb to limb; it was one of the anonymous warnings
by which the hate and revenge of those yet left alive to
threaten tortured the death-giver.

“Thou art smeared,” ran the lines, “ with the best blood
of France. Read thy sentence! I await the hour when
the people shall knell thee to the doomsman. If my hope
deceive me, if deferred too long—hearken—yread! This
hand, which thine eyes shall search in vain to discover,
shall pierce thy heart. I see thee every day—I am with
thee every day. At each hour my arm rises against thy
breast. - Wretch! live yet a while, though but for few and
miserable days—live to think of me—sleep to dream of me!
Thy terror and thy thought of me are the heralds of thy
doom. Adieu! this day itself, I go forth to riot on thy
fears!”

“Your lists are not full enough!” said the tyrant, with
a hollow voice, as the paper dropped from his trembling
hand. ‘Give them tome!—givethem me! Think again—
think again! Barrére is right—right! ‘Frappons! iln’ya
que les morts qui ne reviennent pas!’ ”

1 See Papiers inédits trouvés chez Robespierre, etc., vol. ii. p. 155.
(No. 1x.)

372 ZANONI.

CHAPTER It.

“Ta haine dans ces lieux n’a qu’un glaive assassin.
Elle marche dans l’ombre. ”!
La Harpe, Jeanne de Naples, Act. iv. sc. 1.

Wuite such the designs and fear of Maximilien Robes-
pierre, common danger—common hatred, whatever was yet
left of mercy or of virtue, in the agents of the Revolution,
served to unite strange opposites in hostility to the universal
death-dealer. There was, indeed, an actual conspiracy at
work against him among men little less bespattered than
himself with innocent blood. But that conspiracy would
have been idle of itself, despite the abilities of Tallien and
Barras (the only men whom it comprised, worthy, by fore-
sight and energy, the names of “leaders”). The sure and
destroying elements that gathered round the tyrant were
Time and Nature; the one, which he no longer suited; the
other, which he had outraged and stirred up in the human
breast. The most atrocious party of the Revolution, the
followers of Hébert, gone to his last account, the butcher-
atheists, who, in desecrating Heaven and earth, still arro-
gated inviolable sanctity to themselves, were equally enraged
at the execution of their filthy chief, and the proclamation
of a Supreme Being. The populace, brutal as it had been,
started as from a dream of blood, when their huge idol,
Danton, no longer filled the stage of terror, rendering crime
popular by that combination of careless frankness and elo-
quent energy which endears their heroes to the herd. The
glawwve of the guillotine had turned against themselves. They
had yelled and shouted, and sung and danced, when the
venerable age, or the gallant youth, of aristocracy or letters,
passed by their streets in the dismal tumbriis; but they shut
up their shops, and murmured to each other, when their

| Hate, in these regions, has but the sword of the assassin. She
moves.in the shade.

ZANONI. 373

own order was invaded, and tailors and cobblers, and jour-
neymen and labourers, were huddled off to the embraces of
the “Holy Mother Guillotine,” with ‘as little ceremony as
if they had been the Montmorencies or the La Trémouilles,
the Malesherbes or the Lavoisiers. “At this time,” said
Couthon, justly, “les ombres de Danton, d’ Hébert, de Chau-
mette, se proménent parmi nous /”*

Among those who had shared the doctrines, and who now
dreaded the fate, of the atheist Hébert was the painter, Jean
Nicot. Mortified and enraged to find that, by the death of
his patron, his career was closed, and that, in the zenith of
the Revolution for which he had laboured, he was lurking
in caves and cellars, more poor, more obscure, more despi-
cable than he had been at the commencement, —not daring
to exercise even his art, and fearful every hour that his
name would swell the lists of the condemned; he was
naturally one of the bitterest enemies of Robespierre and
his government. He held secret meetings with Collot d’ Her-
bois, who was animated by the same spirit; and with the
creeping and furtive craft that characterised his abilities,
he contrived, undetected, to disseminate tracts and invec-
tives against the Dictator, and to prepare, amidst “the poor
and virtuous people,” the train for the grand explosion.
But still so firm to the eyes, even of protounder politicians
than Jean Nicot, appeared the sullen power of the incor-
ruptible Maximilien; so timorous was the movement against
him, that Nicot, in common with many others, placed his
hopes rather in the dagger of the assassin than the revolt
of the multitude. But Nicot, though not actually a coward,
shrank himself from braving the fate of the martyr; he had
sense enough to see that though all parties might rejoice in
the assassination, all parties would probably concur in be-
heading the assassin. He had not the virtue to become a
Brutus. His object was to inspire a proxy-Brutus; and in
the centre of that inflammable population this was no im-
probable hope.

1 The shades of Danton, Hébert, and Chaumette walk among us,

O74 ZANONI.

Amongst those loudest and sternest against the reign of
blood—amongst those most disenchanted of the Revolution—
amongst those most appalled by its excesses, was, as might
be expected, the Englishman, Clarence Glyndon. The wit
and accomplishments, the uncertain virtues that had lighted
with fitful gleams the mind of Camille Desmoulins, had
fascinated Glyndon more than the qualities of any other
agent in the Revolution. And when (for Camille Desmou-
lins had a heart, which seemed dead or dormant in most
of his contemporaries) that vivid child of genius and of er-
ror, shocked at the massacre of the Girondins, and repent-
ant of his own efforts against them, began to rouse the ser-
pent malice of Robespierre by new doctrines of mercy and
toleration, Glyndon espoused his views with his whole
strength and soul. Camille Desmoulins perished, and Glyn-
don, hopeless at once of his own life and the cause of hu-
manity, from that time sought only the occasion of flight
from the devouring Golgotha. He had two lives to heed
besides his own; for them he trembled, and for them he
schemed and plotted the means of escape. Though Glyn-
don hated the principles, the party,’.and the vices of Nicot,
he yet extended to the painter’s penury the means of sub-
sistence; and Jean Nicot, in return, designed to exalt Glyndon
to that very immortality of a Brutus, from which he modestly
recoiled himself. He founded his design on the physical
courage, on the wild and unsettled fancies of the English ar-
tist, and on the vehement hate, and indignant loathing, with
which he openly regarded the government of Maximilien.

At the same hour, on the same day in July, in which
Robespierre conferred (as we have seen) with his allies, two
persons were seated in a small room in one of the streets
leading out of the Rue St. Honoré: the one, a man, ap-

1 None were more opposed to the Hébertists than Camille Des-
moulins and his friends. It is curious and amusing to see these
leaders of the mob, calling the mob “the people” one day, and the
“canaille” the next, according as it suits them. “I know,” says

Camille, “that they, the Hébertists, have all the canaille with
them.” (Ils ont toute le canaille pour eux. )

ZANONI. 375

peared listening impatiently, and with a sullen brow, to his
companion, a woman of singular beauty, but with a bold
and reckless expression, and her face as she spoke was ani-
mated by the passions of a half savage and vehement
nature.

“Englishman,” said the woman, “beware!—you know
that, whether in flight or at the place of death, I would
brave all to be by your side—you know that! Speak!”

“Well, Fillide; did I ever doubt your fidelity?”

“Doubt it you cannot—betray it you may. You tell me
that in flight you must have a companion besides myself,
and that companion is a female. It shall not be!”

“Shall not!” .

“Tt shall not!” repeated Fillide, firmly, and folding her
arms across her breast. Before Glyndon could reply, a
slight knock at the door was heard, and Nicot opened the
latch and entered.

Fillide sank into her chair, and, leaning her face on her
hands, appeared unheeding of the intruder, and the conver-
sation that ensued.

“T cannot bid thee good-day, Glyndon,” said Nicot, as
in his sans culotte fashion he strode towards the artist, his
ragged hat on his head, his hands in his pockets, and the
beard of a week’s growth upon his chin—“I cannot bid
thee good-day, for while the tyrant lives, evil is ever the
sun that sheds its beams on France.”

“Tt is true; what then? We have sown the wind, we
must reap the whirlwind.”

“And yet,” said Nicot, apparently not hearing the reply,
and as if musingly to himself, “it is strange to think that
the butcher is as mortal as the butchered—that his life
hangs on as slight a thread—that between the cuticle and
the heart there is as short a passage—that, in short, one
blow can free France, and redeem mankind.”

Glyndon surveyed the speaker with a careless and haughty
scorn, and made no answer.

“And,” proceeded Nicot, “I have sometimes looked

376 ZANONI.

around for the man born for this destiny, and whenever I
have done so, my steps have led me hither!”

“Should they not rather have led thee to the side of
Maximilien Robespierre?” said Glyndon, with a sneer.

“No,” returned Nicot, coldly—“ no; for lam a ‘swspect’—I
could not mix with his train; I could not approach within
a hundred yards of his person, but I should be seized: you,
as yet, are safe. Hear me!” and his voice became earnest
and expressive—“ hear me! There seems danger in this
action; there is none. I have been with Collot d’ Herbois
and Billaud-Varennes; they will hold him harmless who
strikes the blow; the populace would run to thy support,
the Convention would hail thee as their deliverer—the——”

“Hold, man! How darest thou couple my name with
the act of an assassin? Let the tocsin sound from yonder
tower to a war between Humanity and the Tyrant, and I
will not be the last in the field; but liberty never yet
acknowledged a defender in a felon.”

There was something so brave and noble in Glyndon’s
voice, mien, and manner, as he thus spoke, that Nicot at
once was silenced; at once he saw he had misjudged the
man.

“No,” said Fillide, lifting her face from her hands—
“no! your friend has a wiser scheme in preparation: he
would leave your wolves to mangle each other. He is right;
but——”

“Flight!” exclaimed Nicot; “is it possible? Flight!
how?—when?—by what means? All France begirt with
spies and guards! Flight! would to Heaven it were in our
power!”

“Dost thou, too, desire to escape the blessed Revolution?”

“Desire! Oh!” cried Nicot, suddenly, and, falling down,
he clasped Glyndon’s knees—“oh! save me with thyself!
My life is a torture; every moment the guillotine frowns
before me. I know that my hours are numbered, I know
that the tyrant waits but his time to write my name in his
inexorable list; I know that Réné Dumas, the judge who

ZANONI. 377

never pardons, has from the first resolved upon my death.
Oh! Glyndon, by our old friendship—by our common art—
by thy loyal English faith, and good English heart, let me
share thy flight!”

“Tf thou wilt, so be it.”

“Thanks!—my whole life shall thank thee. But how
hast thou prepared the means—the passports, the disguise,
the »

“T will tell thee. Thou knowest C——, of the Conven-
tion—he has power, and he is covetous. ‘@Qu’on me méprise,
pourvu que ge dine,’’ said he, when reproached for his
avarice.”

“Well 222

“By the help of this sturdy republican, who has friends
enough in the Comité, I have obtained the means necessary
for flight: Ihave purchased them. Foraconsideration I can
procure thy passport also.”

“Thy riches, then, are not in assignats ?”

* No, I have gold enough for us all.”

And here Glyndon, beckoning Nicot into the next room,
first briefly and rapidly detailed to him the plan proposed,
and the disguises to be assumed conformably to the pass-
ports, and then added: “In return for the service I render
thee, grant me one favour, which I think is in thy power.
Thou rememberest Viola Pisani?”

“ Ah—remember! yes!—and the lover with whom she
fled.”

“ And from whom she is a fugitive now.”

“TIndeed—what!—I understand. Sacré bleu! but you
are a lucky fellow, cher confrére.”

“Silence, man! with thy eternal prate of brotherhood
. and virtue, thou seemest never to believe in one kindly ac-
tion, or one virtuous thought!”

Nicot bit his lip, and replied, sullenly, “ Experience is a
great undeceiver. Humph! What service can I do thee
with regard to the Italian?”

1 Let them despise me, provided that I dine,

2°

378 ZANONI.

“T have been accessory to her arrival in this city of snares
and pitfalls. I cannot leave her alone amidst dangers from
which neither innocence nor obscurity is a safeguard. In
your blessed Republic, a good and unsuspected citizen,
who casts a desire on any woman, maid or wife, has but to
say, ‘Be mine, or I denounce you!’—In a word, Viola must
share our flight.”

“What so easy? I see your passports provide for her.”

“What soeasy! Whatso difficult? This Fillide—would
that I had never seen her!—would that I had never enslaved
my soul to my senses! The love of an uneducated, violent,
unprincipled woman, opens with a heaven, to merge ina
hell! She is jealous as all the Furies, she will not hear of
a female companion ;—and when once she sees the beauty
of Viola!—I tremble to think of it. She is capable of any
excess in the storm of her passions.”

“ Aha, I know what such women are! My wife, Beatrice
Sacchini, whom I took from Naples, when I failed with
this very Viola, divorced me when my money failed, and,
as the mistress of a Judge, passes me in her carriage while
I crawl through the streets. Plague on her!—but patience!
patience! such is the lot of virtue. Would I were Robes-
pierre for a day!”

“Cease these tirades!” exclaimed Glyndon, impatiently ;
“and to the point. What would you advise?”

““Leave your Fillide behind.”

“Leave her to her own ignorance—leave her unprotected
even by the mind—leave her in the Saturnalia of Rape and
Murder? No! Ihave sinned against her once. But come
what may, I will not so basely desert one who, with all her
errors, trusted her fate to my love.”

“You deserted her at Marseilles.”

“True; but I left her in safety, and I did not then believe
her love to be so deep and faithful. I left her gold, and I
imagined she would be easily consoled; but, since then, we
have known danger together! And now to leave her alone
to that danger which she would never have incurred but for

ZANONI. 379

devotion to me!—no, that is impossible! A project occurs
tome. Canast thou not say that thou hast a sister, a rela-
tive, or a benefactress whom thou wouldst serve? Can we
not—till we have left France—make Fillide believe that
Viola is one in whom ¢how only art interested; and whom
for thy sake only I permit to share in our escape?”

“Ha, well thought of!—certainly !”

“JT will then appear to yield to Fillide’s wishes, and re-
sign the project, which she so resents, of saving the innocent
object of her frantic jealousy. You, meanwhile, shall your-
self entreat Fillide to intercede with me, to extend the
means of escape to——”

“To a lady (she knows I have no sister) who has aided
me in my distress. Yes, I will manage all, never fear,
One word more—what has become of that Zanoni?”

“Talk not of him—I know not.”

“Does he love this girl still!”

“Tt would seem so. She is his wife, the mother of his
infant who is with her.”

“Wife!—mother! Helovesher! Aha! And why——”

“No questions now. Iwill go and prepare Viola for the
flight; you, meanwhile, return to Fillide.”

“But the address of the Neapolitan? It is necessary I
should know, lest Fillide inquire.”

“Rue M—— T——, No. 27. Adieu!”

Glyndon seized his hat, and hastened from the house.

Nicot left alone, seemed for a few moments buried in
thought. “Oho,” he muttered to himself, “can I not turn
all this to my account? Can I not avenge myself cn thee,
Zanoni, as I have so often sworn, through thy wife and
child? Can I not possess myself of thy gold, thy passports,
and thy Fillide, hot Englishman, who wouldst humble me
with thy loathed benefits, and who hast chucked m¢ thine
alms as to a beggar? And Fillide, I love her; and thy
gold, I love that more! Puppets, I move your strings!”

He passed slowly into the chamber where Fillide yet sat,
with gloomy thought on her brow and tears standing in her

880 ZANONI.

dark eyes. She looked up eagerly as the door opened, and
turned from the rugged face of Nicot with an impatient
movement of disappointment.

“ Glyndon,” said the painter, drawing a chair to Fillide’s,
“has left me to enliven your solitude, fair Italian. He is
not jealous of the ugly Nicot;—ha! ha!—yet Nicot loved
thee well once, when his fortunes were more fair. Dut
enough of such past follies.”

'“ Your friend then, has left the house. Whither? Ah!
you look away—you falter—you cannot meet my eyes!
Speak! I implore, I command thee, speak!”

“ Enfant! and-what dost thou fear?”

“ Fear !—yes, alas, I fear!” said the Italian, and her whole
frame seemed to shrink into itself as she fell once more back
into her seat.

Then, after a pause, she tossed the long hair from her
eyes and, starting up abruptly, paced the room with dis-
ordered strides. At length she stopped opposite to Nicot,
laid her hand on his arm, drew him towards an escritoire,
which she unlocked, and opening a well pointed to the gold
that lay within, and said—“ Thou art poor—thou lovest
money—take what thou wilt, but undeceive me. Who is
this woman whom thy friend visits?—and does he love
er?”

Nicot’s eyes sparkled, and his hands opened and clenched,
and clenched and opened, as he gazed upon the coins. But
reluctantly resisting the impulse, he said, with an affected
bitterness—“ Thinkest thou to bribe me?—if so, it cannot
be with gold. But what if he does love a rival?—what if
he betrays thee?—what if, wearied by thy jealousies, he
designs in his flight to leave thee behind?—would such
knowledge make thee happier?”

“Yes!” exclaimed the Italian, fiercely; “yes; for it would
be happiness to hate and to be avenged! Oh, thou knowest
not how sweet is hatred to those who have really loved.”

“But wilt thou swear, if I reveal to thee the secret, that
thou wilt not betray me—that thou wilt not fall, as women

ZANONI. 381

do, into weak tears and fond reproaches when thy betrayer
returns?”

“ Tears—reproaches!—Revenge hides itself in smiles!”

“Thou art a brave creature!” said Nicot, almost admir-
ingly. “One condition more: thy lover designs to fly with
his new love, to leave thee to thy fate; if I prove this to
thee, and if I give thee revenge against thy rival, wilt thou
fly with me? I love thee!—I will wed thee!”

Fillide’s eyes flashed fire; she looked at him with unut-
terable disdain, and was silent.

Nicot felt he had gone too far; and with that knowledge
of the evil part of our nature which his own heart, and as-
sociation with crime had taught him, he resolved to trust
the rest to the passions of the Italian, when raised to the
height to which he was prepared to lead them.

“Pardon me,” he said; “my love made me too presump-
tuous; and yet it is only that love,—my sympathy for thee,
beautiful and betrayed, that can induce me to wrong,
with my revelations, one whom I have regarded as a brother.
I can depend upon thine oath to conceal all from Glyndon?”

“On my oath and my wrongs, and my mountain blood!”

“Enough! get thy hat and mantle, and follow me!”

As Fillide left the room, Nicot’s eyes again rested on the
gold; it was much—much more than he had dared to hope
for; and as he peered into the well, and opened the drawers,
he perceived a packet of letters in the well-known hand of
Camille Desmoulins. He seized—he opened the packet;
his looks brightened as he glanced over a few sentences.
“This would give fifty Glyndons to the guillotine!” he
muttered, and thrust the packet into his bosom.

O Artist!—O haunted one!—O erring Genius!—Behold
the two worst foes—the False Ideal that knows no God, and
the False Love that burns from the corruption of the senses,
and takes no lustre from the soul!

382 ZANONI.

CHAPTER III.

“ Liebe sonnt das Reich der Nacht. ”!
Der TRIUMPH DER LIEBE.

LETTER FROM ZANONI TO MEJNOUR.

Paris.

Dost thou remember in the old time, when the beautiful
yet dwelt in Greece, how we two, in the vast Athenian
Theatre, witnessed the birth of words as undying as our-
selves? Dost thou remember the thrill of terror that ran
through that mighty audience, when the wild Cassandra
burst from her awful silence to shriek to her relentless god?
How ghastly, at the entrance of the House of Atreus, about
to become her tomb—rang out her exclamations of forebod-
ing woe—“ Dwelling abhorred of Heaven!—humble sham-
ble-house, and floor blood-bespattered!”* Dost thou re-
member how, amidst the breathless awe of those assembled
thousands, I drew close to thee, and whispered, “ Verily, no
prophet like the Poet! This scene of fabled horror comes
to me as a dream, shadowing forth some likeness in my own
remoter future!” As I enter this slaughter-house that’scene
returns to me, and I hearken to the voice of Cassandra ring-
ing inmy ears. A solemn and warning dread gathers round
me, as if I too were come to find a grave, and “the Net of
Hades” had already entangled me in its web! What dark
treasure houses of vicissitudes and woe are our memories
become! What our lives, but the chronicles of unrelenting
Death? It seems to me as yesterday when I stood in the
streets of this city of the Gaul, as they shone with plumed
chivalry, and the air rustled with silken braveries. Young
Louis, the monarch and the lover, was victor of the Tourna-
ment at the Carousel! and all France felt herself splendid

' Love illumines the realms of Night.
2 Asch. Agam., 1098.

ZANONI. 383

in the splendour of her gorgeous chief! Now there is
neither throne nor altar; and what 1s in their stead? I see
it yonder—rtue cuittorine! It is dismal to stand amidst
the ruins of mouldering cities, to startle the serpent and the
lizard amidst the wrecks of Persepolis and Thebes; but more
dismal still to stand as I—the stranger from empires that
have ceased to be—stand now amidst the yet ghastlier ruins
of Law and Order, the shattering of mankind themselves!
Yet here, even here, Love, the Beautifier, that hath led my
steps, can walk with unshrinking hope through the wilder-
ness of Death! Strange is the passion that makes a world
in itself, that individualises the One amidst the multitude;
that, through all the changes of my solemn life, yet sur-
vives, though ambition, and hate, and anger are dead; the
one solitary angel, hovering over a universe of tombs on its
two tremulous and human wings—Hope and Fear!

How is it, Mejnour, that, as my diviner art abandoned
me—as, in my search for Viola, I was aided but by the
ordinary instincts of the merest mortal—how 1s it that I
have never desponded, that I have felt in every difficulty
the prevailing prescience that we should meet at last? So
cruelly was every vestige of her flight concealed from me—
so suddenly, so secretiy had she fled, that all the spies, all
the authorities of Venice, could give me noclue. All Italy
I searched in vain! Her young home at Naples! how still,
in its humble chambers, there seemed to linger the fragrance
of her presence! All the sublimest secrets of our lore failed
me—failed to bring her soul visible to mine; yet morning
and night, thou lone and childless one, morning and night,
detached from myself, I can commune with my child!
There in that most blessed, typical and mysterious of all
relations, Nature herself appears to supply what Science
would refuse. Space cannot separate the father’s watchful
soul from the cradle of his first-born! J know not of its
resting-place and home—my visions picture not the land—
only the small and tender life to which all space 1s as yet
the heritage! For to the infant, before reason dawns—

384 ZANONI.

before man’s bad passions can dim the essence that it takes
from the element it hath left, there is no peculiar country,
no native city, and no mortal language. Its soul as yet is
the denizen of all airs and of every world, and in space its
soul meets with mine—the Child communes with the
Father! Cruel and forsaking one—thou for whom I left
the wisdom of the spheres—thou, whose fatal dower has
been the weakness and terrors of humanity—couldst thou
think that young soul less safe on earth because I would
lead it evermore up to Heaven! Didst thou think that I
could have wronged mine own! Didst thou not know that
in its serenest eyes the life that I gave it spoke to warn, to
upbraid the mother who would bind it to the darkness and
pangs of the prison-house of clay? Didst thou not feel
that it was I who, permitted by the Heavens, shielded it
from suffering and disease? And inits wondrous beauty, I
blessed the holy medium through which, at last, my spirit
might confer with thine!

And how have I tracked them hither? I learned that
thy pupil had been at Venice. I could not trace the young
and gentle Neophyte of Parthenope in the description of
the haggard and savage visitor who had come to Viola before
she fled; but when I would have summoned his rpgEA before
me, it refused to obey; and I knew then that his fate had
become entwined with Viola’s. I have tracked him then,
to this lazar house; I arrived but yesterday; I have not yet
discovered him.

* * * *
* * *

I have just returned from their courts of justice—dens
where tigers arraign their prey. I find not whom I would
seek. They are saved as yet; but I recognise in the crimes
of mortals the dark wisdom of the Everlasting. Mejnour,
I see here, for the first time, how majestic and beauteous
a thing is Death! Of what sublime virtues we robbed our-
selves, when, in the thirst for virtue, we attained the art
by which we can refuse to die! When, in some happy

ZANONL.. 385

clime, where to breathe is to enjoy, the charnel-house swal-
lows up the young and fair—when, in the noble pursuits of
knowledge, Death comes to the student, and shuts out the
enchanted land, which was opening to his gaze, how natural
for us to desire to live; how natural to make perpetual life
the first object of research! But here from my tower of
time, looking over the darksome past, and into the starry
future, I learn how great hearts feel what sweetness and
glory there is to die for the things they love! I sawa
father sacrificing himself for his son! he was subjected to
charges which a word of his could dispel—he was mistaken
for his boy. With what joy he seized the error—confessed
the noble crimes of valour and fidelity which the son had
indeed committed—and went to the doom, exulting that his
death saved the life he had given, not in vain! I saw
women, young, delicate, in the bloom of their beauty; they
had vowed themselves to the cloister. Hands smeared with
the blood of saints opened the grate that had shut them
- from the world, and bade them go forth, forget their vows,
forswear the Divine One these demons would depose, find
lovers and helpmates and be free. And some of these young
hearts had loved, and even, though in struggles, loved yet.
Did they forswear the vow? Did they abandon the faith?
Did even love allure them? Mejnour, with one voice they
preferred to die! And whence comes this courage? because
such hearts live in some more abstract and holier life than
their own. But to live for ever upon this earth, is to live in
nothing diviner than ourselves. Yes, even amidst this gory
butcherdom, God, the Everliving, vindicates to man the
sanctity of His servant, Death!
* x a *

Again I have seen thee in spirit: I have seen and blessed
thee, my sweet child! Dost thou not know me also in thy
dreams? Dost thou not feel the beating of my heart through
the veil of thy rosy slumbers? Dost thou not hear the wings
of the brighter beings that I yet can conjure around thee,

25

386 ZANONI.

to watch, to nourish, and to save? And when the spell
fades at thy waking, when thine eyes open to the day, will
they not look round for me, and ask thy mother, with their
mute eloquence, “why she has robbed thee of a father”?

Woman, dost thou not repent thee? Flying from imagi-
nary fears, hast thou not come to the very lair of terror,
where Danger sits visible and incarnate? Oh, if we could
but meet, wouldst thou not fall upon the bosom thou hast
so wronged, and feel, poor wanderer amidst the storms, as
if thou hadst regained the shelter? Mejnour, still my re-
searches fail me. I mingle with all men, even their judges
and their spies, but I cannot yet gain the clue. I know
that she is here. I know it by an instinct; the breath of
my child seems warmer and more familiar.

They peer at me with venomous looks, as I pass through
their streets. With a glance I disarm their malice, and
fascinate the basilisks. Everywhere, I see the track and
scent the presence of the Ghostly One that dwells on the
threshold, and whose victims are the souls that would aspire,
and can only fear. Isee its dim shapelessness going before
the men of blood, and marshalling their way. Robespierre
passed me with his furtive step. Those eyes of horror
were gnawing into his heart. I looked down upon their
Senate; the grim Phantom sat cowering on its floor. It
hath taken up its abode in the city of Dread. And what
in truth are these would-be builders of a new world? Like
the students who have vainly struggled after our supreme
science, they have attempted what is beyond their power;
they have passed from this solid earth of usages and forms,
into the land of shadow; and its loathsome keeper has seized
them as its prey. I looked into the tyrant’s shuddering
soul, as it trembled past me. There, amidst the ruins of
a thousand systems which aimed at virtue, sat Crime, and
shivered at its desolation. Yet this man is the only
Thinker, the only Aspirant, amongst them all. He still
looks for a future of peace and mercy, to begin—ay! at
what date! When he has swept away every foe. Fool!

ZANONI. 387

new foes spring from every drop of blood. Led by the eyes
of the Unutterable, he is walking to his doom.

O Viola, thy innocence protects thee! Thou whom the
sweet humanities of love shut out even from the dreams of
aerial and spiritual beauty, making thy heart a universe of
visions fairer than the wanderer over the rosy Hesperus
can survey—shall not the same pure affection encompass
thee even here with a charmed atmosphere; and terror itself
fall harmless on a life too innocent for wisdom?

* # * *
* * * *
ee  ————

CHAPTER IV.

“Ombra pid che di notte, in cui di luce
Raggio misto non ¢;
x * * * *
Né pit il palagio appar, né pit le sue
Vestigia; née dir puossi—egli qui fue.

Ger. Lis., cant. xvi.69.

”1

Tue clubs are noisy with clamorous frenzy; the leaders
are grim with schemes. Black Henriot flies here and there,
muttering to his armed troops—‘ Robespierre, your be-
loved, is in danger!” Robespierre stalks perturbed, his
list of victims swelling every hour. ‘Tallien, the Macduff
to the doomed Macbeth, is whispering courage to his pale
conspirators. Along the streets heavily roll the tumbrils.
The shops are closed—the people are gorged with gore and
will lap no more. And night after night, to the eighty
theatres flocks the children of the Revolution, to laugh at
the quips of comedy, and weep gentle tears over imaginary
woes!

In a small chamber, in the heart of the city, sits the

1 Darkness greater than of night, in which not a ray of light is

mixed; * * * * The palace appears no more—not even a vestige—
nor can one say that it has been.

388 ZANONI.

mother, watching over her child! It is quiet, happy noon; the
sunlight, broken by the tall roofs in the narrow street, comes
yet through the open casement, the impartial playfellow of
the air, gleesome alike in temple and prison, hall and hovel;
as golden and as blithe, whether it laugh over the first hour
of life, or quiver in its gay light on the terror and agony
of the last! The child, where it lay at the feet of Viola,
stretched out its dimpled hands as if to clasp the dancing
motes that revelled in the beam. The mother turned her
eyes from the glory; it saddened her yet more. She
turned, and sighed.

Is this the same Viola who bloomed fairer than their own
Tdalia under the skies of Greece? How changed! How
pale and worn! She sat listlessly, her arms dropping on
her knee; the smile that was habitual to her lips was gone.
A heavy, dull despondency, as if the life of life were no
more, seemed to weigh down her youth, and make it weary
of that happy sun! In truth, her existence had languished
away since it had wandered, as some melancholy stream,
from the source that fed it. The sudden enthusiasm of
fear or superstition that had almost, as if still in the un-
couscious movements of a dream, led her to fly from Zanoni,
had ceased from the day which dawned upon her in a foreign
land. Then—there—she felt that in the smile she had
evermore abandoned lived her life. She did not repent—
she would not have recalled the impulse that winged her
flight. Though the enthusiasm was gone, the superstition
yet remained; she still believed she had saved her child
from that dark and guilty sorcery, concerning which the
traditions of all lands are prodigal, but in none do they find
such credulity, or excite such dread, as in the South of
Italy. This impression was confirmed by the mysterious
conversations of Glyndon, and by her own perception of the
fearful change that had passed over one who represented
himself as the victim of the enchanters. She did not,
therefore, repent—but her very volition seemed gone.

On their arrival at Paris, Viola saw her companion—the

ZANONI. 389

faithful wife—no more. Ere three weeks were passed,
husband and wife had ceased to live.

And now, for the first time, the drudgeries of this hard
earth claimed the beautiful Neapolitan. In that profes-
sion, giving voice and shape to poetry and song, in which
her first years were passed, there is, while it lasts, an ex-
citement in the art that lifts it from the labour of a calling.
Hovering between two lives, the Real and Ideal, dwells the
life of music and the stage. But that life was lost ever-
more to the idol of the eyes and ears of Naples. Lifted to
the higher realm of passionate love, it seemed as if the fic-
titious genius which represents the thoughts of others was
merged in the genius that grows all thought itself. It had
been the worst infidelity to the Lost to have descended again
to live on the applause of others. And so—for she would
not accept alms from Glyndon—so, by the commonest arts,
the humblest industry which the sex knows, alone and un-
seen, she, who had slept on the breast of Zanoni, found a
shelter for their child. As when, in the noble verse pre-
fixed to this chapter, Armida herself has destroyed her en-
chanted palace,—not a vestige of that bower, raised of old
by Poetry and Love, remained to say “it had been!”

And the child avenged the father: it bloomed—it thrived
—it waxed strong in the light of life. But still it seemed
haunted and preserved by some other being than her own.
In its sleep there was that slumber, so deep and rigid,
which a thunderbolt could not have disturbed; and in such
sleep often it moved its arms, as to embrace the air: often
its lips stirred with murmured sounds of indistinct affec-
tion—not for her; and all the while upon its cheeks a hue
of such celestial bloom—upon its lips, a smile of such mys-
terious joy! Then when it waked, its eyes did not turn first
to her—wistful, earnest, wandering, they roved around, to
fix on her pale face, at last, in mute sorrow and reproach.

Never had Viola felt before how mighty was her love for
Zanoni; how thought, feeling, heart, soul, life—all lay
erushed and dormant in the icy absence to which she had

390 ZANONI.

doomed herself! She heard not the roar without, she felt
not one amidst those stormy millions,—worlds of excite-
ment labouring through every hour. Only when Glyndon,
haggard, wan, and spectrelike, glided in, day after day,
to visit her, did the fair daughter of the careless South
know how heavy and universal was the Death-Air that girt
her round. Sublime in her passive unconsciousness—her
mechanic life—she sat, and feared not, in the den of the
beasts of prey!

The door. of the room opened abruptly, and Glyndon en-
tered. His manner was more agitated than usual.

“Ts it you, Clarence?” she said in her soft, languid
tones. ‘‘ You are before the hour I expected you.”

‘“Who can count on his hours at Paris?” returned Glyn-
don, with a frightful smile. “Is it not enough that I am
here? Your apathy in the midst of these sorrows appals
me. You say calmly ‘Farewell!’—calmly you bid me
‘Welcome!’—as if in every corner there was not a spy, and
as if with every day there was not a massacre!”

“Pardon me! But in these walls lies my world. . I can
hardly credit all the tales you tell me. Everything here,
save that” (and she pointed to the infant), “seems already
so lifeless, that in the tomb itself one could scarcely less
heed the crimes that are done without.”

Glyndon paused for a few moments, and gazed with
strange and mingled feelings upon the face and form, still
so young, and yet so invested with that saddest of all re-
pose, —when the heart feels old.

“Oh, Viola!” said he, at last, and ina voice of suppressed
passion; “was it thus I ever thought to see you—ever
thought to feel for you, when we two first met in the gay
haunts of Naples? Ah! why then did you refuse my love—
or why was mine not worthy of you? Nay, shrink not!—
let me touch your hand. No passion so sweet as that youth-
ful love can return to me again. I feel for you but asa
brother for some younger and lonely sister, With you, in
your presence, sad though it be, I seem to breathe back the

ZANONL 391

purer air of my early life. Here alone, except in scenes of
turbulence and tempest, the Phantom ceases to pursue me.
I forget even the Death that stalks behind and haunts me
as my shadow. But better days may be in store for us yet.
Viola, I at last begin dimly to perceive how to baffle and
subdue the Phantom that has cursed my life—it is to brave
and defy it. In sin and in riot, as I have told thee, it
haunts me not. But I comprehend now what Mejnour said
in his dark apophthegms, ‘that I should dread the spectre
most when wnseen.’ In virtuous and calm resolution it ap-
pears—ay, I behold it now—there—there, with its livid
eyes!” (and the drops fell from his brow.) “But it shall
no longer daunt me from the resolution. I face it, and it
gradually darkens back into the shade.” He paused,—and
his eyes dwelt with a terrible exultation upon the sunlit
space; then, with a heavy and deep-drawn breath, he re-
sumed—*“ Viola, I have found the means of escape. We
will leave this city. In some other land we will endeavour
to comfort each other, and forget the past.”

“No,” said Viola, calmly; “I have no further wish to
stir, till IT am borne hence to the last resting-place. I
dreamed of him last night, Clarence!—dreamed of him for
the first time since we parted: and, do not mock me, me-
thought that he forgave the deserter, and called me ‘ Wife.’
That dream hallows the room. Perhaps it will visit me
again before I die.”

“Talk not of him—of the demi-fiend!” cried Glyndon,
fiercely, and stamping his foot. ‘Thank the Heavens for
any fate that hath rescued thee from him,”

“Hush!” said Viola, gravely. And as she was about to
proceed, her eye fell upon the child. It was standing in
the very centre of that slanting column of light which the
sun poured into the chamber; and the rays seemed to sur-
round it asa halo, and settled, crown-like, on the gold of
its shining hair. In its small shape, so exquisitely
modelled—in its large, steady, tranquil eyes, there was
something that awed, while it charmed the mother’s pride.

392 ZANONI.

Tt gazed on Glyndon as he spoke, with a look which almost
might have seemed disdain, and which Viola, at least, in-
terpreted asa defence of the Absent, stronger than her own
lips could frame.

Glyndon broke the pause.

“Thou wouldst stay,—for what? To betray a mother’s
duty! If any evil happen to thee here, what becomes of
thine infant?—Shall it be brought up an orphan, in a
country that has desecrated thy religion, and where human
charity exists no more? Ah, weep, and clasp it to thy
bosom! But tears do not protect and save.”

“Thou hast conquered, my friend—I will fly with thee.”

“'o-morrow night, then, be prepared. I will bring thee
the necessary disguises.”

And Glyndon then proceeded to sketch rapidly the out-
line of the path they were to take, and the story they were
to tell. Viola listened, but scarcely comprehended: he
pressed her hand to his heart, and departed.

CHAPTER V.

——“van seco pur anco
Sdegno ed Amor, quasi due Veltri al fianco. ” !
Ger. Lrs., Cant. xx. 117.

Guynpon did not perceive, as he hurried from the house,
two forms crouching by the angle of the wall. He saw still
the spectre gliding by his side, but he beheld not the yet
more poisonous eyes of human envy and woman’s jealousy
that glared on his retreating footsteps.

Nicot advanced to the house; Fillide followed him in
silence. The Painter, an old sans-culotte, knew well what
language to assume to the porter. He beckoned the latter
from his lodge—“ How is this, Citizen? Thou harbourest
a ‘suspect.’”

' There went with him still Disdain and Love, like two greyhounds
side by side,

ZANONI. 393

“Citizen, you terrify me!—if so, name him.”

“Tt is not aman; a refugee—an Italian woman, lodges
here.”

“Yes, au troisiéme—the door to the left. But what of
her?—she cannot be dangerous, poor child!”

“Citizen, beware! Dost thou dare to pity her?”

¢ ia? No; no; indeed. + But-————”

“Speak the truth! Who visits her?”

“No one but an Englishman.”

“That is it—an Englishman, aspy of Pitt and Coburg.”

“ Just Heaven !—is it possible?”

“How, Citizen! dost thou speak of Heaven? Thou must
be an aristocrat!”

“No, indeed; it was but an old, bad habit, and escaped
me unawares.”

“ How often does the Englishman visit her?”

eDaily.”

Fillide uttered an exclamation.

“She never stirs out,” said the porter. ‘“ Her sole occu-
pations are in work, and care of her infant.”

“ Her infant!”

Fillide made a bound forward. Nicot in vain endeavoured
to arrest her. She sprang up the stars; she paused not till
she was before the door indicated by the porter; it stood
ajar—she entered,—she stood at the threshold, and beheld
that face, still so lovely! The sight of so much beauty left
her hopeless. And the child, over whom the mother bent!—
she who had never been a mother!—she uttered no sound—
the furies were at work within her breast. Viola turned,
and saw her; and, terrified by the strange apparition, with
features that expressed the deadliest hate, and scorn, and
vengeance, uttered a cry, and snatched the child to her
bosom. ‘The Italian laughed aloud—turned, descended,
and, gaining the spot where Nicot still conversed with the
frightened porter, drew him from the house. When they
were in the open street, she halted abruptly, and said,
“ Avenge me, and name thy price!”

394 ZANONI.

“My price, sweet one! is but permission to love thee.
Thou wilt fly with me to-morrow nights thou wilt possess
thyself of the passports and the plan.”

“ And they ——”

“Shall, before then, find their asylum in the Conciergerie.
The guillotine shall requite thy wrongs.”

“Do this, and I am satisfied,” said Fillide, firmly.

And they spoke no more till they regained the house.
But when she, there looking up to the dull building, saw
the windows of the room which the belief of Glyndon’s
love had once made a paradise, the tiger relented at the
heart; something of the woman gushed back upon her na-
ture, dark and savage as it was. She pressed the arm on
which she leant convulsively, and exclaimed—“ No, no!—
not him! denounce her—let her perish; but I have slept
on his bosom—not him /”

“Tt shall be as thou wilt,” said Nicot, with a devil’s
sneer; “but he must be arrested for the moment. No
harm shall happen to him, for no accuser shall appear.
But her—thou wilt not relent for her?”

Fillide turned upon him her eyes, and their dark glance
was sufficient answer.

poe Se Se

CHAPTER VI.

“In poppa quella
Che guidar gli dovea, fatal Donzella. ” !
GER. Lis., Cant. xv. 8.

Tue Italian did not overrate that craft of simulation pro-
verbial with her country and her sex. Not a word, not a
look, that day revealed to Glyndon the deadly change that
had converted devotion into hate. He himself, indeed,
absorbed in his own schemes, and in reflections on his own
strange destiny, was no nice observer. But her manner,
milder and more subdued than usual, produced a softening

’ By the prow was the fatal lady ordained to be the guide,

ZANONI, 395

effect upon his meditations towards the evening; and he
then began to converse with her on the certain hope of es-
cape, and on the future that would await them in less
unhallowed lands.

“And thy fair friend,” said Fillide, with an averted eye
and a false smile, “who was to be our companion. Thou
hast resigned her, Nicot tells me, in favour of one in whom
he is interested. Is it so?”

“He told thee this!” returned Glyndon, evasively.
“Well! does the change content thee?”

“Traitor!” muttered Fillide; and she rose suddenly,
approached him, parted the long hair from his forehead,
caressingly, and pressed her lips conyulsively on his brow.

“This were too fair a head for the doomsman,” said
she, with a slight laugh, and, turning away, appeared occu-
pied in preparations for their departure.

The next morning, when he rose, Glyndon did not see the
Italian; she was absent from the house when he left it.
It was necessary that he should once more visit C——,
before his final departure, not only to arrange for Nicot’s
participation in the flight, but lest any suspicion should
have risen to thwart or endanger the plan he had adopted.
C—-—, though not one of the immediate coterie of Robes-
pierre, and indeed secretly hostile to him, had possessed
the art of keeping well with each faction as it rose to power.
Sprung from the dregs of the populace, he had, neverthe-
less, the grace and vivacity so often found impartially
amongst every class in France. He had contrived to enrich
himself—none knew how—in the course of his rapid career.
He became, indeed, ultimately one of the wealthiest pro-
prietors of Paris, and at that time kept a splendid and
hospitable mansion. He was one of those whom, from
various reasons, Robespierre deigned to favour; and he had
often saved the proscribed and suspected, by procuring them
passports under disguised names, and advising their method
of escape. But C—— was a man who took this trouble
only for the rich. “The incorruptible Maximilien,” who

396 ZANONI.

did not want the tyrant’s faculty of penetration, probably
saw through all his manceuvres, and the avarice which he
cloaked beneath his charity. But it was noticeable that
Robespierre frequently seemed to wink at—nay, partially
to encourage—such vices in men whom he meant hereafter
to destroy, as would tend to lower them in the public esti-
mation, and to contrast with his own austere and unassail-
able integrity and purism. And, doubtless, he often grimly
smiled in his sleeve at the sumptuous mansion, and the
griping covetousness of the worthy citizen C——.

To this personage, then, Glyndon musingly bent his way.
It was true, as he had darkly said to Viola, that in proportion
as he had resisted the spectre, his terrors had lost their in-
fluence. The time had come at last, when, seeing crime
and vice in all their hideousness, and in so vast a theatre,
he had found that in vice and crime there are deadlier
horrors than in the eyes of a phantom-fear. His native
nobleness began to return to him. Ashe passed the streets,
he revolved in his mind projects of future repentance and
reformation. He even meditated, as a just return for Fil-
lide’s devotion, the sacrifice of all the reasonings of his
birth and education. He would repair whatever errors he
had committed against her, by the self-immolation of mar-
riage with one little congenial with himself. He had once
revolted from marriage with the noble and gentle Viola! —
he had learned in that world of wrong to know that right is
right, and that Heaven did not make the one sex to be the
victim of the other. The young visions of the Beautiful
and the Good rose once more before him; and along the
dark ocean of his mind lay the smile of reawakening vir-
tue, as a path of moonlight. Never, perhaps, had the con-
dition of his soul been so elevated and unselfish.

In the meanwhile, Jean Nicot, equally absorbed in dreams
of the future, and already in his own mind laying out to
the best advantage the gold of the friend he was about to
betray, took his way to the house honoured by the residence
of Robespierre. He had no intention to comply with the

ZANONI. 397

relenting prayer of Fillide, that the life of Glyndon should
be spared. He thought with Barrére, “il n’y a que les
morts qui ne reviennent pas.” In all men who have de-
voted themselves to any study, or any art, with sufficient
pains to attain a certain degree of excellence, there must be
a fund of energy immeasurably above that of the ordinary
herd. Usually, this energy is concentred on the objects of
their professional ambition, and leaves them, therefore,
apathetic to the other pursuits of men. But where those
objects are denied, where the stream has not its legitimate
vent, the energy, irritated and aroused, possesses the whole
being, and if not wasted on desultory schemes, or if not
purified by conscience and principle, becomes a dangerous
and destructive element in the social system, through which
it wanders in riot and disorder. Hence, in all wise mon-
archies—nay, in all well constituted states, the peculiar
care with which channels are opened for every art and
every science; hence the honour paid to their cultivators,
by subtle and thoughtful statesmen, who, perhaps, for
themselves, see nothing in a picture but coloured canvas—
nothing in a problem but an ingenious puzzle. No state is
ever more in danger than when the talent, that should be
consecrated to peace, has no occupation but political intrigue
or personal advancement. Talent unhonoured is talent at
war with men. And here it is noticeable, that the class of
actors having been the most degraded by the public opinion
of the old régime, their very dust deprived of Christian
burial, no men (with certain exceptions in the company
especially favoured by the Court) were more relentless and
revengeful among the scourges of the revolution. In the
savage Collot d’Herbois, mauvais comédien, were embodied
the wrongs and the vengeance of a class.

Now the energy of Jean Nicot had never been sufficiently
directed to the art he professed. Even in his earliest youth,
the political disquisitions of his master, David, had dis-
tracted him from the more tedious labours of the easel.
The defects of his person had embittered his mind; the

398 ZANONI.

Atheism of his benefactor had deadened his conscience.
For one great excellence of Religion—above all, the Religion
of the Cross—is, that it raises Parrence first into a Virtue,
and next into a Hope. Take away the doctrine of another
life, of requital hereafter, of the smile of a Father upon our
sufferings and trials in our ordeal here, and what becomes
of patience? But without patience, what is man?—and
what a people? Without patience Art never can be high;
without patience Liberty never can be perfected. By wild
throes, and impetuous, aimless struggles, Intellect seeks to
soar from Penury, and a nation to struggle into Freedom.
And woe, thus unfortified, guideless, and unenduring—woe
to both!

Nicot was a villain as a boy. In most criminals, how-
ever abandoned, there are touches of humanity—relics of
virtue; and the true delineator of mankind often incurs the
taunt of bad hearts and dull minds, for showing that even
the worst alloy has some particles of gold, and even the
best that come stamped from the mint of Nature have some
adulteration of the dross. But there are exceptions, though
few, to the general rule; exceptions, when the conscience
lies utterly dead, and when good or bad are things indiffer-
ent but as means to some selfish end. So was it with the
protégé of the atheist. Envy and hate filled up his whole
being, and the consciousness of superior talent only made’
him curse the more all who passed him in the sunlight with
a fairer form or happier fortunes. But monster though he
was, when his murderous fingers griped the throat of his
benefactor, Time, and that ferment of all evil passions—the
Reign of Blood—had made in the deep hell of his heart a
deeper still. Unable to exercise his calling (for even had
he dared to make his name prominent, revolutions are no
season for painters; and no man—no! not the richest and
proudest magnate of the land, has so great an interest in
peace and order, has so high and essential a stake in the
well-being of society, as the poet and the artist)—his whole
intellect, ever restless and unguided, was left to ponder over

ZANONTI. 399

the images of guilt most congenial to it. He had no future
but in this life; and how in this life had the men of power
around him, the great wrestlers for dominion, thriven?
All that was good, pure, unselfish—whether among Royal-
ists or Republicans swept to the shambles, and the deaths-
men left alone in the pomp and purple of their victims!
Nobler paupers than Jean Nicot would despair; and Poverty
would rise in its ghastly multitudes to cut the throat of
Wealth, and then gash itself limb by limb, if Patience, the
Angel of the Poor, sat not by its side, pointing with solemn
finger to the life to come! And now as Nicot neared the
house of the Dictator, he began to meditate a reversal of
his plans of the previous day: not that he faltered in his
resolution to denounce Glyndon, and Viola would neces-
sarily share his fate, as a companion and accomplice, —no,
there he was revolved; for he hated both—(to say nothing
of his old, but never-to-be-forgotten grudge against Za-
noni).—Viola had scorned him, Glyndon had served, and
the thought of gratitude was as intolerable to him as the
memory of insult. But why, now, should he fly from
France?—he could possess himself of Glyndon’s gold—he
doubted not that he could so master Fillide by her wrath
and jealousy that he could command her acquiescence in all
he proposed. The papers he had purloined—Desmoulins’
correspondence with Glyndon—while it insured the fate of
the latter, might be eminently serviceable to Robespierre,

might induce the tyrant to forget his old liaisons with

Hébert, and enlist him among the allies and tools of the
King of Terror. Hopes of advancement, of wealth, of a
eareer, again rose before him. This correspondence, dated
shortly before Camille Desmoulins’ death, was written with
that careless and daring imprudence which characterised the
spoiled child of Danton. It spoke openly of designs against
Robespierre; it named confederates whom the tyrant desired
only a popular pretext to crush. It was a new instrument
of death in the hands of the Death-compeller. What
greater gift could he bestow on Maximilien the Incorruptible?

400 ZANONI.

Nursing these thoughts, he arrived at last before the door
of Citizen Dupleix. Around the threshold were grouped, in
admired confusion, some eight or ten sturdy Jacobins, the
voluntary body-guard of Robespierre—tall fellows, well-
armed, and insolent with the power that reflects power,
mingled with women, young and fair, and gaily dressed,
who had come, upon the rumour that Maximilien had had
an attack of bile, to inquire tenderly of his health; for
Robespierre, strange though it seem, was the idol of the sex!

Through this cortéye, stationed without the door, and
reaching up the stairs to the landing-place, for Robes-
pierre’s apartments were not spacious enough to afford suffi-
cient antechamber for levées so numerous and miscellaneous,
Nicot forced his way; and far from friendly or flattering
were the expressions that regaled his ears.

“ Aha, le joli Polichinelle !” said a comely matron, whose
robe his obtrusive and angular elbows cruelly discomposed.
“ But how could one expect gallantry from such a scarecrow!”

“Citizen, I beg to avise thee’ that thou art treading on
my feet. I beg thy pardon, but now I look at thine, I see
the hall is not wide enough for them.”

“Ho! Citizen Nicot,” cried a Jacobin, shouldering his
formidable bludgeon, “and what brings thee hither?
Thinkest thou that Hébert’s crimes are forgotten already?
Off, sport of Nature! and thank the Ltre Supréme that
He made thee insignificant enough to be forgiven.”

“A pretty face to look out of the N ational window, ” ?
said the woman whose robe the painter had ruffled.

1 The courteous use of the plural was proscribed at Paris. The
Sociétés Populaires had decided that whoever used it should be prose-
cuted as suspect et adulateur! At the door of the public administra-
tions and popular societies was written up—“Ici on s’honore du
Citoyen, et on se tutoye!/!”* Take away Murder from the French
Revolution, and it becomes the greatest Farce ever played before the
Angels!

? The Guillotine.

* “Here they respect the title of Citizen, and they thee and thou
one another, ”

ZANONI. 401

“Citizens,” said Nicot, white with passion, but constrain-
ing himself so that his words seemed to come from grinding
teeth, “I have the honour to inform you that I seek the
Représentant upon business of the utmost importance to the
public and himself; and,” he added, slowly, and malignantly
glaring round, “TI call all good citizens to be my witnesses
when I shall-complain to Robespierre of the reception be-

- stowed on me by some amongst you.”

There was in the man’s look and his tone of voice so
much of deep and concentrated malignity, that the idlers
drew back; and as the remembrance of the sudden ups and
downs of revolutionary life occurred to them, several voices
were lifted to assure the squalid and ragged painter that
nothing was farther from their thoughts than to offer affront
to a citizen, whose very appearance proved him to be an
exemplary sans culotte. Nicot received these apologies in
sullen silence; and folding his arms, leant against the wall,
waiting in grim patience for his admission.

The loiterers talked to each other in separate knots of
two and three; and through the general hum rang the clear,
loud, careless whistle of the tall Jacobin who stood guard
by the stairs. Next to Nicot, an old woman and a young
virgin were muttering in earnest whispers, and the atheist
painter chuckled inly to overhear their discourse.

“T assure thee, my dear,” said the crone, with a myste-
rious shake of the head, “that the divine Catherine Theot,
whom the impious now persecute, is really inspired.
There can be no doubt that the elect, of whom Dom Gerle
and the virtuous Robespierre are destined to be the two
grand prophets, will enjoy eternal life here, and extermi-
nate all their enemies: There is no doubt of it—not the
least!”

“How delightful!” said the girl; “ce cher Robespierre /—
he does not look very long-lived either!”

“The greater the miracle,” said theold woman. “Iam
just eighty-one, and I don’t feel a day older since Catherine
Theot promised me I should be one of the elect!”

26

402 ZANONI.

Here the women were jostled aside by some new comers,
who talked loud and eagerly.

“Yes,” cried a brawny man whose garb denoted him to
be a butcher, with bare arms and a cap of liberty on his
head, “I am come to warn Robespierre. They lay a snare
for him; they offer him the Palais National. On ne peut
étre ami du peuple et habiter wn palais.” '

“No, indeed,” answered a cordonnier; “I like him best
in his little lodging with the menwisier: it looks like one of
as.”

Another rush of the crowd, and a new group were thrown
forward in the vicinity of Nicot. And these men gabbled
and chattered faster and louder than the rest.

“But my plan is——”

“Au diable with your plan. I tell you my scheme
jena

“Nonsense!” cried a third. ‘ When Robespierre under-
stands my new method of making gunpowder, the enemies
of France shall——”

“Bah! who fears foreign enemies?” interrupted a fourth;
“the enemies to be feared are at home. Jy new guillotine
takes off fifty heads at a time!” ;

“But my new Constitution!” exclaimed a fifth.

“ My new Religion, citizen!” murmured, complacently,
a sixth.

“ Sacré mille tonnerres, silence!” roared forth one of the
Jacobin guard.

And the crowd suddenly parted as a fierce-looking man
buttoned up to the chin—his sword rattling by his side, his
spurs clinking at his heel—descended the stairs; his cheeks
swollen and purple with intemperance, his eyes dead and
savage as a vulture’s. There was a still pause, as all with
pale cheeks made way for the relentless Henriot.? Searce

' “No one can be a friend of the people, and dwell in a palace. "—
Papiers inédits trowvés chee Robespierre, ete., vol. ii. p. 182.

> Or Hanriot. It is singular how undetermined are not only the
characters of the French Revolution, but even the spelling of their

ZANONI. 403

had this gruff and iron minion of the tyrant stalked through
the throng than a new movement of respect, and agitation,
and fear, swayed the increasing crowd, as there glided in,
with the noiselessness of a shadow, a smiling, sober citizen,
plainly but neatly clad, with a downcast, humble eye. A
milder, meeker face, no pastoral poet could assign to Cory-
don or Thyrsis—why did the crowd shrink, and hold their
breath? As the ferret in a burrow crept that slight form
amongst the larger and rougher creatures that huddled and
pressed back on each other as he passed. <A wink of his
stealthy eye—and the huge Jacobins left the passage clear
without sound or question. On he went, to the apartment
of the tyrant, and thither will we follow him.

CHAPTER VII.

“Constitutum est ut quisquis eum hominem, dixisset, fuisse, capi-
talem penderet peenam.”!—Sr. AuG., Of the God Serapis, |. 18,
De Civ. Dei, c. 5.

RopeEsPIERRE was reclining languidly in his fauteuil, his
cadaverous countenance more jaded and fatigued than usual.
He to whom Catherine Theot assured immortal life looked,
indeed, like a man at death’s door. On the table before
him was a dish heaped with oranges, with the juice of which
it is said that he could alone assuage the acrid bile that
overflowed his system. And an old woman, richly dressed
(she had been a Marquise in the old régime), was employed
in peeling the Hesperian fruits for the sick Dragon, with
delicate fingers covered with jewels. I have before said
that Robespierre was the idol of the women. Strange, cer-

names. With the historians it is Vergniaud—with the journalists of
the time, it is Vergiauv. With one authority it is Robespierre—
with another, Robevspierre.

1Tt was decreed, that whoso should say that he had been a man
should suffer the punishment of a capital offence.

404 ZANONI.

tainly !—but then they were Frenchwomen! The old Mar-
quise, who, like Catherine Theot, called him “son,” really
seemed to love him piously and disinterestedly as a mother;
and as she peeled the oranges, and heaped on him the most
caressing and soothing expressions, the livid ghost of a
smile fluttered about his meagre lips. At a distance, Payan
and Couthon, seated at another table, were writing rapidly
and occasionally pausing from their work, to consult with
each other in brief whispers.

Suddenly, one of the Jacobins opened the door and, ap-
proaching Robespierre, whispered to him the name of
Guérin.’. At that word the sick man started up, as if new
life were in the sound.

“My kind friend,” he said to the Marquise, “ forgive me;
I must dispense with thy tender cares. France demands
me. Jam never ill when I can serve my country!”

The old Marquise lifted up her eyes to heaven, and mur-
mured—* Quel ange!”

Robespierre waved his hand impatiently; and the old
woman, with a sigh, patted his pale cheek, kissed his fore-
head, and submissively withdrew. The next moment the
smiling, sober man we have before described stood, bend-
ing low, before the tyrant. And well might Robespierre
welcome one of the subtlest agents of his power—one on
whom he relied more than the clubs of his Jacobins, the
tongues of his orators, the bayonets of his armies; Guérin,
the most renowned of his écowtewrs,—the searching, prying,
universal, omnipresent spy—who glided like a sunbeam
through chink and crevice, and brought to him intelligence
not only of the deeds, but the hearts of men!

“Well, citizen, well!—and what of Tallien?”

“This morning, early, two minutes after eight, he went
out.”

“So early? hem!”

“He passed Rue des Quatre Fils, Rue du Temple, Rue

‘See, for the espionage on which Guérin was employed, Les
Papiers inédits, etc., vol. i. p. 866, No. xxviii.

ZANONI. 405

de La Réunion, au Marais, Rue Martin; nothing observable,
except that——_”

“That what?”

“He amused himself at a stall, in bargaining for some
books.”

“ Bargaining for books! Aha, the Charlatan!—he would
cloak the intriguant under the savant! Well!”

“At last in the Rue des Fosses Montmartre, an individual,
in a blue surtout (unknown), accosted him. They walked
together about the street some minutes, and were joined by
Legendre.”

“uegendre! approach, Payan! Legendre, thou hear-
est?

“T went into a fruit-stall, and hired two little girls to go
and play a ball within hearing. . They heard Legendre say,
‘I believe his power is wearing itself out.’ And Tallien
answered, ‘And himself, too. I would not give three
months’ purchase for his life.’ I do not know, citizen, if
they meant thee !”

“Nor I, citizen,” answered Robespierre, with a fell smile,
succeeded by an expression of gloomy thought. “Ha!” he
muttered, “I am young yet—in the prime of life. I com-
mit no excess. No; my constitution is sound—sound.
Anything farther of Tallien?”

“Yes. The woman whom he loves—Teresa de Fontenai—
who lies in prison, still continues to correspond with him;
to urge him to save her by thy destruction. This my
listeners overheard. His servant is the messenger between
the prisoner and himself.”

“So! The servant shall be seized in the open streets of
Paris. The Reign of Terror is not over yet. With the
letters found on him, if such their context, I will pluck
Tallien from his bench in the Convention.”

Robespierre rose, and after walking a few moments to
and fro the room in thought, opened the door, and sum-
moned one of the Jacobins without. To him he gave his
orders for the watch and arrest of Tallien’s servant; and

406 ZANONI.

then threw himself again in his chair. As the Jacobin de-
parted, Guérin whispered:

“Ts not that the citizen Aristides?”

“Yes; a faithful fellow, if he would wash himself, and
not swear so much.”

“ Didst thou not guillotine his brother?”

“But Aristides denounced him.”

“Nevertheless, are such men safe about thy person?”

“Humph! that is true.” And Robespierre, drawing out
his pocket-book, wrote a memorandum in it, replaced it in
his vest, and resumed:

“What else of Tallien?”

“Nothing more. He and Legendre, with the unknown,
walked to the Jardin Hgalité, and there parted. I saw
Tallien to his house. But I have other news. Thou badst
me watch for those who threaten thee in secret letters.”

“Guérin! hast thou detected them? Hast thou—hast
thou——”

And. the tyrant, as he spoke, opened and shut both his
hands as if already grasping the lives of the writers, and
one of those convulsive grimaces, that seemed like an epilep-
tic affection, to which he was subject, distorted his features.

“Citizen, I think I have found one. Thou must know
that amongst those most disaffected is the painter,
Nicot.”

“Stay, stay!” said Robespierre, opening a manuscript
book, bound in red morocco (for Robespierre was neat and
precise, even in his death-lists), and turning to an alpha-
betical index—“ Nicot!—I have him—atheist, sans-culotte
(I hate slovens), friend of Hébert! Aha! N.B. Réné
Dumas knows of his early career, and crimes. Proceed!”

“This Nicot has been suspected of diffusing tracts and
pamphlets against thyself and the Comité. Yesterday even-
ing, when he was out, his porter admitted me into his apart-
ment, Rue Beau-Repaire. With my master-key I opened
his desk and escritoire. I found therein a drawing of thy-
self at the guillotine; and underneath was written—‘ Bowr-

ZANONI. 407

reau deton pays, lis’ arrét de ton chaétiment !’' Tcompared
the words with the fragments of the various letters thou
gavest me; the handwriting tallies with one. See, I tore
off the writing.”

Robespierre looked, smiled, and, as if his vengeance were
already satisfied, threw himself on his chair. “It is well!
I feared it was a more powerful enemy. This man must
be arrested at once.”

“ And he waits below. I brushed by him as I ascended
the stairs.”

“Does he so?—admit! nay—hold! hold! Guérin, with-
draw into the inner chamber till I summon thee again.
Dear Payan, see that this Nicot conceals no weapons.”

Payan, who was as brave as Robespierre was pusillani-
mous, repressed the smile of disdain that quivered on his ©
lips a moment, and left the room.

Meanwhile, Robespierre, with his head buried in his
bosom, seemed plunged in deep thought. “Life is a melan-
choly thing, Couthon!” said he, suddenly.

“Begging your pardon, I think death worse,” answered
the philanthropist, gently.

Robespierre made no rejoinder, but took from his porte-
feuille that singular letter which was found afterwards
amongst his papers, and is marked LXI. in the published
collection.’

“ Without doubt,” it began, “you are uneasy at not hav-
ing earlier received news from me. Be not alarmed; you
know that I ought only to reply by our ordinary courier;
and as he has been interrupted dans sa derniére course, that
is the cause of my delay. When you receive this, employ
all diligence to fly a theatre where you are about to appear
and disappear for the last time. It were idle to recall to
you all the reasons that expose you to peril. The last step,
that should place you sur la sopha de la présidence, but
brings you to the scaffold; and the mob will spit on your face

1 Executioner of thy country, read the decree of thy punishment.

2 Papiers inédits, etc., vol. ii. p. 156.

408 ZANONI.

as it has spat on those whom you have judged. Since, then,
- you have accumulated here a sufficient treasure for existence,
T await you with great impatience, to laugh with you at the
part you have played in the troubles of a nation as credulous
as it is avid of novelties. Take your part according to our
arrangements—all is prepared. I conclude—our courier
waits. I expect your reply.”

Musingly and slowly the Dictator devoured the contents
of this epistle. “No,” he said to himself—“no; he who
has tasted power can no longer enjoy repose. Yes, Danton,
Danton! thou wert right; better to be a poor fisherman than
to govern men.” ?

The door opened, and Payan reappeared and whispered
Robespierre, “All is safe! See the man.”

The Dictator, satisfied, summoned his attendant Jacobin
to conduct Nicot to his presence. The painter entered witha
fearless expression in his deformed features, and stood erect
before Robespierre, who scanned him with a sidelong eye.

It is remarkable that most of the principal actors of the
Revolution were singularly hideous in appearance—from
the colossal ugliness of Mirabeau and Danton, or the villain-
ous ferocity in the countenances of David and Simon, to the
filthy squalor of Marat, the sinister and bilious meanness of
the Dictator’s features. But Robespierre, who was said to
resemble a cat, had also a cat’s cleanness; and his prim
and dainty dress, his shaven smoothness, the womanly
whiteness of his lean hands, made yet more remarkable the
disorderly ruffianism that characterised the attire and mien
of the painter sansculotte.

“And so, citizen,” said Robespierre, mildly, “thou
wouldst speak with me? I know thy merits and civism
have been overlooked too long. Thou wouldst ask some
suitable provision in the state? Scruple not—say on!”

“Virtuous Robespierre, toi gui éclaires l’ univers,? I come

'“Tl raudrait mieux,” said Danton, in his dungeon, “étre un

pauvre pécheur que de gouverner les hommes, ”
* Thou who enlightenest the world,

ZANONI. 409

not to ask a favour, but to render service to the state. I
have discovered a correspondence that lays open a conspir-
acy, of whch many of the actors are yet unsuspected.” And
he placed the papers on the table. Robespierre seized, and
ran his eye over them rapidly and eagerly.

“ Good!—good!” he muttered to himself ;—“ this is all I
wanted. Barrére—Legendre! Ihavethem! Camille Des-
moulins was but their dupe. I loved him once; I never
loved them! Citizen Nicot, I thank thee. I observe these
letters are addressed to an Englishman. What Frenchman
but must distrust these English wolves in sheep’s clothing!
France wants no longer citizens of the world; that farce
ended with Anacharsis Clootz. I beg pardon, Citizen Nicot,
but Clootz and Hébert were thy friends.”

“Nay,” said Nicot, apologetically, “we are all liable to
be deceived. I ceased to honour them when thou didst de-
clare against them; for I disown my own senses rather than
thy justice.”

“Yes, I pretend to justice; that ¢s the virtue I affect,”
said Robespierre, meekly; and with his feline propensities
he enjoyed, even in that critical hour of vast schemes, of
imminent danger, of meditated revenge, the pleasure of
playing with a solitary victim.’ “And my justice shall no
longer be blind to thy services, good Nicot. Thou knowest
this Glyndon?”

“Yes, well—intimately. Hewas my friend, but I would
give up my brother if he were one of the ‘indulgents.’ I
am not ashamed to say, that I have received favours from
this man.”

“ Aha!—and thou dost honestly hold the doctrine that
where a man threatens my life, all personal favours are to
be forgotten?”

66 IMM 17?

1 The most detestable anecdote of this peculiar hypocrisy in Robes-
pierre is that in which he is recorded to have tenderly pressed the
hand of his old school friend, Camille Desmoulins, the day that he
signed the warrant for his arrest.

410 ZANONI.

“Good citizen!—kind Nicot! oblige me by writing the
address of this Glyndon.”

Nicot stooped to the table; and, suddenly, when the pen
was in his hand, a thought flashed across him, and he
paused, embarrassed and confused.

“Write on, kind Nicot!”

The painter slowly obeyed.

“Who are the other familiars of Glyndon?”

“Tt was on that point I was about to speak to thee, Re-
présentant,” said Nicot. “He visits daily a woman, a
foreigner who knows all his secrets; she affects to be poor,
and to support her child by industry. But she is the wife
of an Italian of immense wealth, and there is no doubt that
she has moneys which are spent in corrupting the citizens.
She should be seized and arrested.”

“Write down her name also.”

“But no time is to be lost; for I know that both have a
design to escape from Paris this very night.”

“Our government is prompt, good Nicot—never fear.
Humph!—humph!” and Robespierre took the paper on
which Nicot had written, and stooping over it—for he was
near-sighted—added, smilingly, “Dost thou always write
the same hand, citizen? This seems almost like a disguised
character.”

“T should not like them to know who denounced them,
Représentant.”

“Good! good! Thy virtue shall be rewarded, trust me.
Salut et fraternité !”

Robespierre half rose as he spoke, and Nicot withdrew.

“Ho, there!—without!” cried the Dictator, ringing his
bell; and as the ready Jacobin attended the summons—
“Follow that man, Jean Nicot. The instant he has cleared
the house seize him. At once to the Conciergerie with
him! Stay!—nothing against the law; there is thy war-
rant. The public accuser shall have my instructions.
Away !—quick!”

The Jacobin vanished. All trace of illness, of infirmity

ZANONI. 411

had gone from the valetudinarian; he stood erect on the
floor, his face twitching convulsively, and his arms folded.
“Ho! Guérin!” (the spy reappeared)—‘ take these ad-
dresses! Within an hour this Englishman and this woman
must be in prison; their revelations will aid me against
worthier foes. They shall die—they shall perish with the
rest on the 10th—the third day from this. There!” he
wrote hastily—“ there also is thy warrant !—Off!”

“And now, Couthon—Payan—we will dally no longer
with Tallien and his crew. I have information that the
Convention will not attend the Féte on the 10th. We must
trust only to the sword of the law. I must compose my
thoughts—prepare my harangue. ‘To-morrow, I will reap-
pear at the Convention—to-morrow bold St. Just joins us,
fresh from our victorious armies—to-morrow, from the
tribune, I will dart the thunderbolt on the masked enemies
of France—to-morrow, I will demand, in the face of the
country, the heads of the conspirators.”

—E———

CHAPTER VIII.

“Le glaive est contre toi tourné de toutes parties. ”!
La Harpe, Jeanne de Naples, act iv. sc. 4.

In the meantime, Glyndon, after an audience of some
length with C——, in which the final preparations were
arranged, sanguine of safety and foreseeing no obstacle to
escape, bent his way back to Fillide. Suddenly, in the
midst of his cheerful thoughts, he fancied he heard a voice
too well and too terribly recognised, hissing in his ear,—
“What! thou wouldst defy and escape me! thou wouldst
go back to virtue and content. It is in vain—it is too late.
No, Z will not haunt thee;—hwman footsteps, no less inex-
orable, dog thee now. Me thou shalt not see again till in
the dungeon, at midnight before thy doom! Behold!——”

' The sword is raised against you on all sides.

412 ZANONI.

And Glyndon, mechanically turning his head, saw, close
behind him, the stealthy figure of a man whom he had ob-
served before, but with little heed, pass and repass him, as
he quitted the house of Citizen C——. Instantly and in-
stinctively he knew that he was watched—that he was pur-
sued. The street he was in was obscure and deserted, for
the day was oppressively sultry, and it was the hour when.
few were abroad, either on business or pleasure. Bold as
he was, an icy chill shot through his heart. He knew too
well the tremendous system that then reigned in Paris, not
to be aware of his danger. As the sight of the first plague-
boil to the victim of the Pestilence, was the first sight of
the shadowy spy to that of the Revolution—the watch, the
arrest, the trial, the guillotine—these made the regular and
rapid steps of the monster that the anarchists called Law!
He breathed hard, he heard distinctly the loud beating of
his heart. And so he paused, still and motionless, gazing
upon the shadow that halted also behind him!

Presently the absence of all allies to the spy, the solitude
of the streets, reanimated his courage; he made a step
towards his pursuer, who retreated as he advanced. “ Citi-
zen, thou followest me,” he said. “Thy business?”

“Surely,” answered the man, with a deprecating smile,
“the streets are broad enough for both? ‘Thou art not so
bad a republican as to arrogate all Paris to thyself!”

“Go on first, then. I make way for thee.”

The man bowed, doffed his hat politely, and passed for-
ward. The next moment Glyndon plunged into a winding
lane, and fled fast through a labyrinth of streets, passages,
and alleys. By degrees he composed himself, and, looking
behind, imagined that he had baffled the pursuer; he then,
by a circuitous route, bent his way once more to his home.
As he emerged into one of the broader streets, a passenger,
wrapped in a mantle, brushing so quickly by him that he
did not observe his countenance, whispered—“ Clarence
Glyndon, you are dogged—follow me!” and the stranger
walked quickly before him, Clarence turned, and sickened

ZANONT. 418

once more to see at his heels, with the samé servile smile
on his face, the pursuer he fancied he had escaped. He
forgot the injunction of the stranger to follow him, and
perceiving a crowd gathered close at hand, round a carica-
ture shop, dived amidst them, and, gaining another street,
altered the direction he had before taken, and, after a long
and breathless course, gained, without once more seeing the
spy, a distant quartier of the city. Here, indeed, all seemed
so serene and fair, that his artist eye, even in that imminent
hour, rested with pleasure on the scene. It was a compara-
tively broad space, formed by one of the noble quais. The
Seine flowed majestically along, with bcats and craft rest-
ing on its surface. The sun gilt a thousand spires and
domes, and gleamed on the white palaces of a fallen chiv-
alry. Here, fatigued and panting, he paused an instant,
and a cooler air from the river fanned his brow.

“A while, at least, I am safe here,” he murmured; and
as he spoke, some thirty paces behind him, he beheld the
spy. He stood rooted to the spot; wearied and spent as
he was, escape seemed no longer possible—the river on one
side (no bridge at hand), and the long row of mansions clos-
ing up the other. As he halted, he heard laughter and ob-
scene songs from a house a little in his rear, between him-
self andthe spy. It was a café fearfully known in that
quarter. Hither often resorted the black troop of Henriot—
the minions and /uissiers of Robespierre. The spy, then,
had hunted the victim within the jaws of the hounds. The
man slowly advanced, and pausing before the opened win-
dow of the café, put his head through the aperture, as to
address and summon forth its armed inmates.

At that very instant, and while the spy’s head was thus
turned from him, standing in the half-opened gateway of
the house immediately before him, he perceived the stranger
who had warned; the figure, scarcely distinguishable
through the mantle that wrapped it, motioned to him to
enter. He sprang noiselessly through the friendly open-
ing; the door closed; breathlessly he followed the stranger

414 ZANONI.

up a flight of broad stairs, and through a suite of empty
rooms, until, having gained a small cabinet, his conductor
doffed the large hat and the long mantle that had hither-
to concealed his shape and features, and Glyndon beheld
Zanoni.

—<${_—____\_—_

CHAPTER IX.

“Think not my magic wonders wrought by aid
Of Stygian angels summoned up from hell;
Scorned and accursed be those who have essay’d,
Her gloomy Dives and Afrites to compel.
But by perception of the secret powers
Of mineral springs, in nature’s inmost cell,
Of herbs in curtain of her greenest bowers,
And of the moving stars o’er mountain tops and towers. ”
WiIFFEN’S Translation of Tasso, cant. xiv. 43.

“You are safe here, young Englishman!” said Zanoni,
motioning Glyndon to a seat. “ Fortunate for you that I
came on your track at last!”

“Far happier had it been if we had never met! Yet,
even in these last hours of my fate, I rejoice to look once
more on the face of that ominous and mysterious being to
whom I can ascribe all the sufferings Ihave known. Here,
then, thou shalt not palter with or elude me. Here, before
we part, thou shalt unravel to me the dari enigma, if not
of thy life, of my own!”

“Hast thou suffered? Poor Neophyte!” said Zanoni,
pityingly. ‘“Yes—I see it on thy brow. But wherefore
wouldst thou blame me? Did I not warn thee against the
whispers of thy spirit?—-did I not warn thee to forbear?
Did I not tell thee that the ordeal was one of awful hazard
and tremendous fears?—nay, did I not offer to resign to
thee the heart that was mighty enough, while mine, Glyn-
don, to content me? Was it not thine own daring and rego-
lute choice to brave the initiation? Of thine own free will
didst thou make Mejnour thy master, and his lore thy study!”

ZANONI. 415

“But whence came the irresistible desires of that wild
and unholy knowledge? I knew them not till thine evil
eye fell upon me, and I was drawn into the magic atmos-
phere of thy being!”

“Thou errest!—the desires were in thee; and whether
in one direction or the other, would have forced their way!
Man! thou askest me the enigma of thy fate and my own!
Lock round all being, is there not mystery everywhere?
Can thine eye trace the ripening of the grain beneath the
earth? Inthe moral and physical world alike, lie dark por-
tents, for more wondrous than the powers thou wouldst
ascribe to me!”

“Dost thou disown those powers?—dost thou confess
thyself an impostor?—or wilt thou dare to tell me that thou
art indeed sold to the Evil One?—a magician, whose famil-
iar has haunted me night and day!”

“Tt matters not what Iam,” returned Zanoni; “it matters
only whether I can aid thee to exorcise thy dismal phantom,
and return once more to the wholesome air of this common
life. Something, however, will I tell thee, not to vindicate
myself, but the Heaven and the Nature that thy doubts
malign.”

Zanoni paused a moment, and resumed, with a slight
smile:

“Tn thy younger days thou hast doubtless read with de-
light the great Christian poet, whose muse, like the morning
it celebrated, came to earth ‘crowned with flowers culled in
Paradise.’* No spirit was more imbued with the knightly
superstitions of the time; and surely the Poet of Jerusalem
hath sufficiently, to satisfy even the Inquisitor he consulted,
execrated all the practitioners of the unlawful spells in-
voked, —

“<Per isforzar Cocito o Flegetonte.’ ®

1 — “]’aurea testa

Di rose colte in Paradiso infiora. ”
Tasso, Ger. Lib. iv. 1.
® To constrain Cocytus or Phlegethon,

416 | ZANONI.

But in his sorrows and his wrongs—in the prison of his -
madhouse, know you not that Tasso himself found his
solace, his escape, in the recognition of a holy and spiritual
Theurgia—of a magic that could summon the Angel, or the
Good Genius, not the Fiend? And do you not remember,
how he, deeply versed as he was, for his age, in the mys-
teries of the nobler Platonism which hints at the secrets of
all the starry brotherhoods, from the Chaldean to the later
Rosicrucian, discriminates, in his lovely verse, between the
black art of Ismeno, and the glorious lore of the Enchanter
who counsels and guides upon their errand the Champions
of the Holy Land? His, not the charms wrought by the
aid of the Stygian Rebels;* but the perception of the secret
powers of the fountain and the herb—the arcana of the un-
known nature and the various motions of the stars. His,
the holy haunts of Lebanon and Carmel—beneath his feet
he saw the clouds, the snows, the hues of Ivis, the gener-
ations of the rains and dews. JDid the Christian Hermit
who converted that Enchanter (no fabulous being, but the
type of all spirit that would aspire through Nature up to
God) command him to lay aside these sublime studies, ‘Le
solite arte e uso mio’? No! but to cherish and direct them
to worthy ends. And in this grand conception of the poet
lies the secret of the true Theurgia, which startles your ig-
norance in a more learned day with puerile apprehensions,
and the nightmare of a sick man’s dreams.”

Again Zanoni paused, and again resumed:

“In ages far remote—of a civilization far different from
that which now merges the individual in the state, there
existed men of ardent minds, and an intense desire of
knowledge. In the mighty and solemn kingdoms in which
they dwelt, there were no turbulent and earthly channels
to work off the fever of their minds. Set in the antique

' See this remarkable passage, which does indeed not unfaithfully
represent the doctrine of the Pythogorean and the Platonist, in Tasso,
cant. xiv. stanzas xli. to xlvii. (Ger, Lid.). They are beautifully
translated by Wiffen.

ZANONI. 417

mould of castes through which no intellect could pierce, no
valour could force its way, the thirst for wisdom, alone,
reigned in the hearts of those who received its study as a
heritage from sire to son. Hence, even in your imperfect
records of the progress of human knowledge you find that,
in the earliest stages, Philosophy descended not to the busi-
ness and homes of men. It dwelt amidst the wonders of
the loftier creation; it sought to analyse the formation of
matter—the essentials of the prevailing soul; to read the
mysteries of the starry orbs; to dive into those depths of
Nature in which Zoroaster is said by the schoolmen first to
have discovered the arts which your ignorance classes under
the name of magic. In such an age, then, arose some men,
who, amidst the vanities and delusions of their class, imag-
ined that they detected gleams of a brighter and steadier
lore. They fancied an affinity existing among all the works
of Nature, and that in the lowliest lay the secret attraction
that might conduct them upward to the loftiest. Centu-
ries passed, and lives were wasted in these discoveries; but
step after step was chronicled and marked, and became the
guide to the few who alone had tho hereditary privilege to
track their path. At last from this dimness upon some
eyes the light broke; but think not, young visionary, that
to those who nursed unholy thoughts, over whom the Origin
of Evil held a sway, that dawning was vouchsafed. It
could be given then, as now, only to the purest ecstasies of
imagination and intellect, undistracted by the cares of a
vulgar life, or the appetites of the commonclay. Far from
descending to the assistance of a fiend, theirs was but the

1 Agreeably, it would seem, to the notion of Iamblichus and Plo-
tinus, that the universe is as an animal; so that there is sympathy
and communication between one part and the other; in the smallest
part may be the subtlest nerve. And hence the universal magnetism
of Nature. But man contemplates the universe as an animalcule
would an elephant. The animalcule, seeing scarcely the tip of the
hoof, would be incapable of comprehending that the trunk belonged
to the same creature—that the effect produced upon one extremity
would be ee in an instant by the other.

a

418 ZANONI.

august ambition to approach nearer to the Fount of Good;
the more they emancipated themselves from this limbo of
the planets, the more they were penetrated by the splendour
and beneficence of God. And if they sought, and at last
discovered, how to the eye of the spirit all the subtler modi-
fications of being and of matter might be made apparent;
if they discovered how, for the wings of the spirit, all space
might be annihilated; and while the body stood heavy and
solid here, as a deserted tomb, the freed Jdea might wander
from star to star;—if such discoveries became in truth their
own, the sublimest luxury of their knowledge was but this—
to wonder, to venerate, and adore! For, as one not un-
learned in these high matters has expressed it, ‘There isa
principle of the soul superior to all external nature, and
through this principle we are capable of surpassing the
order and systems of the world, and participating in the
immortal life and the energy of the Sublime Celestials.
When the soul is elevated to natures above itself, it deserts
the order to which it is a while compelled, and by a religious
magnetism is attracted to another, and a loftier, with which
it blends and mingles.’! Grant, then, that such beings
found at last the secret to arrest death—to fascinate danger
and the foe—to walk the revolutions of the earth unharmed;
think you that this life could teach them other desire than
to yearn the more for the Immortal, and to fit their intellect
the better for the higher being to which they might, when
Time and Death exist no longer, be transferred? Away
with your gloomy phantasies of sorcerer and demon!—the
soul can aspire only to the light; and even the error of our
lofty knowledge was but the forgetfulness of the weakness,
the passions, and the bonds, which the death we so vainly
conquered only can purge away!”

This address was so different from what Glyndon had
anticipated, that he remained for some moments speechless,
and at length faltered out:

“But why, then, to me——”

1 From Iamblich, on the Mysteries, c. 7, sect. 7.

ZANONI. 419

“Why,” added Zanoni, “why to thee have been only the
penance and the terror—the Threshold and the Phantom?
Vain man! look to the commonest elements of the common
learning. Can every tyro at his mere wish and will become
the master?—can the student, when he has bought his
Euclid, become a Newton?—can the youth whom the Muses
haunt say, ‘I will equal Homer’?—yea, can yon pale tyrant,
with all the parchment-laws of a hundred system-shapers,
and the pikes of his dauntless multitude, carve, at his will,
a constitution not more vicious than the one which the
madness of a mob could overthrow? When, in that far
time to which I have referred, the student aspired to the
heights to which thou wouldst have sprung at a single
bound, he was trained from his very cradle to the career he
was to run. The internal and the outward nature were
made clear to his eyes, year after year, as they opened on
the day. He was not admitted to the practical initiation
till not one earthly wish chained that sublimest faculty
which you call the Imagination, one carnal desire clouded
the penetrative essence that you call the InretuEect. And
even then, and at the best, how few attained to the last
mystery! Happier inasmuch as they attained the earlier to
the holy glories for which Death is the heavenliest gate.”

Zanoni paused, and a shade of thought and sorrow dark-
ened his celestial beauty.

“ And are there, indeed, others, besides thee and Mej-
nour, who lay claim to thine attributes, and have attained
to thy secrets?”

“Others there have been before us, but we two now are
alone on earth.”

“Impostor! thou betrayest thyself! If they could con-
quer Death, why live they not yet?” !

“@Ohild of a day!” answered Zanoni, mournfully, “have
I not told thee the error of our knowledge was the forget-
fulness of the desires and passions which the spirit never

1 Glyndon appears to forget that Mejnour had before answered the
very question which his doubts, here, a second time suggest.

420 ZANONI.

can wholly and permanently conquer, while this matter
clokes it? Canst thou think that it is no sorrow, either to
reject all human ties, all friendship, and all love, or to see,
day after day, friendship and love wither from our life, as
blossoms from the stem? Canst thou wonder how, with the
power to live while the world shall last, ere even our ordi-
nary date be finished we yet may prefer to die? Wonder
rather that there are two who have clung so faithfully to
earth! Me, I confess, that earth can enamour yet. At-
taining to the last secret while youth was in its bloom,
youth still colours all around me with its own luxuriant
beauty; to me, yet, to breathe is to enjoy. The freshness
has not faded from the face of Nature, and not a herb in
which I cannot discover a new charm—an undetected won-
der. As with my youth, so with Mejnour’s age; he will
tell you, that life to him is but a power to examine; and
not till he has exhausted all the marvels which the Creator
has sown on earth, would he desire new habitations for the
renewed spirit to explore. We are the types of the two
essences of what is imperishable—Arr, that enjoys, and
Science, that contemplates!’ And now, that thou mayst
be contented that the secrets are not vouchsafed to thee,
learn that so utterly must the idea detach itself from what
makes up the occupation and excitement of men, so must
it be void of whatever would covet, or love, or hate; that
for the ambitious man, for the lover, the hater, the power
avails not. And I, at last, bound and blinded by the most
common of household ties—I, darkened and helpless, ad-
jure thee, the baffled and discontented—I adjure thee to
direct, to guide me;—where are they—Oh, tell me—speak!
My wife—my child? Silent!—oh, thou knowest now that
I am no sorcerer, no enemy, I cannot give thee what thy
faculties deny—I cannot achieve what the passionless
Mejnour failed to accomplish; but I can give thee the next
best boon, perhaps the fairest—I can reconcile thee to the

daily world, and place peace between thy conscience and
thyself,”

ZANONI. 421

“Wilt thou promise?”

“By their sweet lives, I promise!”

Glyndon looked and believed. He whispered the ad-
dress to the house whither his fatal step already had
brought woe and doom.

“Bless thee for this,” exclaimed Zanoni, passionately,
“and thou shalt be blessed! What! couldst thou not per-
ceive that at the entrance to all the grander worlds dwell
the race that intimidate and awe? Who in thy daily world
ever left the old regions of Custom and Prescription, and
felt not the first seizure of the shapeless and nameless Fear?
Everywhere around thee, where men aspire and labour,
though they see it not—in the closet of the sage, in the
council of the demagogue, in the camp of the warrior,
everywhere cowers and darkens the Unutterable Horror.
But there, where thou hast ventured, alone is the phantom
visible ; and never will it cease to haunt, till thou canst
pass to the Infinite, as the seraph, or return to the
Familiar, as a child! But answer me this,—When, seek-
ing to adhere to some calm resolve of virtue, the Phantom
hath stalked suddenly to thy side; when its voice hath
whispered thee despair; when its ghastly eyes would scare
thee back to those scenes of earthly craft or riotous excite-
ment, from which, as it leaves thee to worse foes to the
soul, its presence is ever absent, hast thou never bravely
resisted the spectre and thine own horror?—hast thou
never said, ‘Come what may, to Virtue I will cling’ ?”

“ Alas!” answered Glyndon, “only of late have I dared
to do so.”

“ And thou hast felt then that the Phantom grew more
dim and its power more faint.”

“T¢ is true.”

“Rejoice, then!—thou hast overcome the true terror and
mystery of the ordeal. Resolve is the first success. Re-
joice, for the exorcism is sure! Thou art not of those who,
denying a life to come, are the victims of the Inexorable
Horror. Oh, when shall men learn, at last, that if the

422 ZANONI.

Great Religion inculeates so rigidly the necessity of raiTH,
it is not alone that rarrH leads to the world to be; but
that without faith there is no excellence in this—faith is
something wiser, happier, diviner than we see on earth ;—
the Artist calls it the Ideal—the Priest, Faith. The Ideal
and Faith are one and the same. Return, O wanderer!
return. Feel what beauty and holiness dwell in the
Customary and the Old. Back to thy gateway glide, thou
Horror, and calm, on the childlike heart, smile again, O
azure Heaven, with thy night and thy morning-star but as
one, though under its double name of Memory and Hope!”

As he thus spoke, Zanoni laid his hand gently on the
burning temples of his excited and wondering listener; and
presently a sort of trance came over him: he imagined that
he was returned to the home of his infancy; that he was
in the small chamber where, over his early slumbers, his
mother had watched and prayed. There it was—visible,
palpable, solitary, unaltered. In the recess, the homely
bed; on the walls, the shelves filled with holy books; the
very easel on which he had first sought to call the ideal to
the canvas, dust-covered, broken in the corner. Below the
window lay the old churchyard; he saw it green in the dis-
tance, the sun glancing through the yew trees; he saw the
tomb where father and mother lay united, and the spire,
pointing up to Heaven, the symbol of the hopes of those
who consigned the ashes to the dust; in his ear rang the
bells, pealing, as on a sabbath day; far fled all the visions
of anxiety and awe that had haunted and convulsed; youth,
boyhood, childhood, came back to him with innocent desires
and hopes; he thought he fell upon his knees to pray. He
woke—he woke in delicious tears; he felt that the phantom
was fled forever. He looked round—Zanoni was gone.
On the table lay these lines, the ink yet wet:

“T will find ways and means for thy escape. At night-
fall, as the clock strikes nine, a boat shall wait thee on the
river before this house; the boatman will guide thee to a
retreat where thou mayst rest in safety, till the Reign of

ZANONI. 423

Terror, which nears its close, be past. Think no more of
the sensual love that lured, and well-nigh lost, thee. It
betrayed, and would have destroyed. Thou wilt regain
thy land in safety,—long years yet spared to thee to muse
over the past and to redeem it. For thy future, be thy
dream thy guide, and thy tears thy baptism.”

The Englishman obeyed the injunctions of the letter, and
found their truth.

CHAPTER X.

“Quid mirare meas tot in uno corpore formas?” !
PROPERTIUS.

ZANONI TO MEJNOUR.

* * * *
* * * *

“ SHE is in one of their prisons—their inexorable prisons.
It is Robespierre’s order—I have tracked the cause to
Glyndon. This, then, made that terrible connection be-
tween their fates which I could not unravel, but which (till
severed as it now is) wrapped Glyndon himself in the same
cloud that concealed her. In prison—in prison!—it is the
gate of the grave! Her trial, and the inevitable execution
that follows such trials, is the third day from this. The
tyrant has fixed all his schemes of slaughter for the 10th
of Thermidor, While the deaths of the unoffending strike
awe to the city, his satellites are to massacre his foes.
There is but one hope left—that the Power which now
dooms the doomer, may render me an instrument to ex-
pedite his fall. But two days left—two days! In all my
wealth of time I see but two days; all beyond—darkness—
solitude. I may save her yet. The tyrant shall fall the
day before that which he has set apart for slaughter! For
the first time I mix among the broils and stratagems of

1 Why wonder that I have so many forms in a single body?

494 | ZANONI.

“men, and my mind leaps up from my despair armed and

eager for the contest.”
* * % *

* *% * *

A crowd had gathered round the Rue St. Honoré—a
young man was just arrested by the order of Robespierre.
He was known to be in the service of Tallien, that hostile
leader in the Convention, whom the tyrant had hitherto
trembled to attack. This incident had therefore produced
a greater excitement than a circumstance so customary as
an arrest in the Reign of Terror might be supposed to
create. Amongst the crowd were many friends of Tallien,
many foes to the tyrant, many weary of beholding the
tiger dragging victim after victim to its den. Hoarse,
foreboding murmurs were heard; fierce eyes glared upon
the officers as they seized their prisoner; and though they
did not yet dare openly to resist, those in the rear pressed
on those behind, and encumbered the path of the captive
and his captors. The young man struggled hard for
escape, and, by a violent effort, at last wrenched himself
from the grasp. The crowd made way, and closed round
to protect him, as he dived and darted through their ranks;
but suddenly the trampling of horses was heard at hand—
the savage Henriot and his troop were bearing down upon
the mob. The crowd gave way in alarm, and the prisoner
was again seized by one of the partisans of the Dictator.
At that moment a voice whispered the prisoner: “Thou
hast a letter, which, if found on thee, ruins thy last hope.
Give ittome! Iwill bear it to Tallien.” The prisoner
turned in amaze, read something that encouraged him in
the eyes of the stranger who thus accosted him; the troop
were now op the spot; the Jacobin who had seized the
prisoner released hold of him for a moment to escape the
hoofs of the horses,—in that moment the opportunity was

found—the stranger had disappeared.
Se * bd

ZANONI. 425

At the house of Tallien the principal foes of the tyrant’
were assembled. Common danger made common fellow-
ship. All factions laid aside their feuds for the hour to
unite against the formidable man who was marching over
all factions to his gory throne. There, was bold Lecointre,
the declared enemy—there, creeping Barrére, who would
reconcile all extremes, the hero of the cowards; Barras,
calm and collected—Collot d’Herbois, breathing wrath and
vengeance, and seeing not that the crimes of Robespierre
alone sheltered his own,

The council was agitated and irresolute. The awe which
the uniform success and the prodigious energy of Robes-
pierre excited, still held the greater part under its control.
Tallien, whom the tyrant most feared, and who alone could
give head and substance and direction to somany contradic-
tory passions, was too sullied by the memory of his own

-eruelties, not to feel embarrassed by his position as the
champion of mercy. “It is true,” he said, after an animat-
ing harangue from Lecointre, “that the Usurper menaces
us all. But he is still so beloved by his mobs—still so sup-
ported by his Jacobins—better delay open hostilities till
the hour is more ripe. To attempt and not succeed is to
give us, bound hand and foot, to the guillotine. Every
day his power must decline. Procrastination is our best
ally——” While yet speaking, and while yet producing
the effect of water on the fire, it was announced that a
stranger demanded to see him instantly on business that
brooked no delay.

“T am not at leisure,” said the orator, impatiently.
The servant placed a note on the table. ‘Tallien opened
it, and found these words in pencil, “From the prison of
Teresa de Fontenai.” NHe turned pale, started up, and
hastened to the anteroom, where he beheld a face entirely
strange to him.

“Hope of France!” said the visitor to him, and the
very sound of his voice went straight to the heart—“ your
servant is arrested in the streets. I have saved your life,

426 . ZANONI.

and that of your wife who will be. I bring to you this
letter from Teresa de Fontenai.”

Tallien, with a trembling hand, opened the letter, and
read: “Am I for ever to implore you in vain? Again
and again I say—Lose not an hour, if you value my life
and your own. My trial and death are fixed the third day
from this—the 10th Thermidor. Strike while it is yet
time—strike the monster!—you have two days yet. If
you fail—if you procrastinate—see me for the last time as
I pass your windows to the guillotine!”

“ Her trial will give proof against you,” said the stranger.
“Her death is the herald of your own. Fear not the popu-
lace—the populace would have rescued your servant. Fear
not Robespierre—he gives himself to your hands. To-
morrow he comes to the Convention—to-morrow you must
cast the last throw for his head or your own.”

“To-morrow he comes to the Convention! And who are
you, that know so well what is concealed from me?”

“ A man, like you, who would save the woman he loves.”

Before Tallien could recover his surprise, the visitor was
gone.

Back went the Avenger to his conclave, an altered man.
“JT have heard tidings—no matter what,” he cried, “that
have changed my purpose. On the 10th we are destined
to the guillotine. I revoke my counsel for delay. Robes-
pierre comes to the Convention to-morrow; there we must
confront and crush him. From the Mountain shall frown
against him the grim shade of Danton—from the plain
shall rise, in their bloody cerements, the spectres of Verg-
niaud and Condorcet. Frappons!”

“ Frappons!” cried even Barrére, startled into energy
by the new daring of his colleague. “ Frappons! il n’y a
que les morts qui ne reviennent pas.”

It was observable (and the fact may be found in one of
the memoirs of the time) that, during that day and night
(the 7th Thermidor) a stranger toall the previous events of
that stormy time was seen in various parts of the city-—in

ZANONI. 427

the cafés, the clubs, the haunts of the various factions—
that, to the astonishment and dismay of his hearers, he
- talked aloud of the crimes of Robespierre, and predicted
his coming fall; and, as he spoke, he stirred up the hearts
of men, he loosed the bonds of their fear, he inflamed them
with unwonted rage and daring. But what surprised them
most was, that no voice replied—no hand was lifted against
him—no minion, even of the tyrant, cried, “Arrest the
traitor.” In that impunity men read, as in a book, that
the populace had deserted the man of blood.

Once only a fierce, brawny Jacobin sprang up from the
table at which he sat, drinking deep, and, approaching
the stranger, said, “I seize thee, in the name of the Re-
public.”

“Citizen Aristides,” answered the stranger, in a whisper,
“go to the lodgings of Robespierre; he is from home, and
in the left pocket of the vest, which he cast off not an
hour since, thou wilt find a paper; when thou hast read
that, return. I will await thee: and if thou wouldst then
seize me, I will go without a struggle. Look round on
those lowering brows; touch me now, and thou wilt be torn
to pieces.”

The Jacobin felt as if compelled to obey against his will.
He went forth muttering: he returned, the stranger was
still there: “ Mille tonnerres,” he said to him—“T thank
thee; the poltroon had my name in his list for the guillo-
tine.”

With that the Jacobin Aristides sprang upon the table,
and shouted, “ Death to the tyrant!”

428 ZANONI.

CHAPTER XI.

“Te lendemain, 8 Thermidor, Robespierre se décida a prononcer
son fameux discours. ”!
Tuters, Hist. de la Revolution.

Tur morning rose—the 8th of Thermidor (July 26th).
Robespierre has gone to the Convention. He has gone,
with his laboured speech; he has gone, with his phrases of
philanthropy and virtue; he has gone to single out his prey.
All his agents are prepared for his reception; the fierce St.
Just has arrived from the armies, to second his courage and
inflame his wrath. His ominous apparition prepares the
audience for the crisis. “Citizens!” screeched the shrill
voice of Robespierre—“ others have placed before you flat-
tering pictures; I come to announce to you useful truths.
And they attribute to me, to me alone!—whatever of harsh
or evil is committed; it is Robespierre who wishes it; it is
Robespierre who ordains it. Is there a new tax?—it is
Robespierre who ruins you. They call me tyrant!—and
why? Because I have acquired some influence; but how?
in speaking truth; and who pretends that truth is to be
without force in the mouth of the Representatives of the
French people? Doubtless, Truth has its power, its rage,
its despotism, its accents, touching—terrible, which resound
in the pure heart, as in the guilty conscience, and which
Falsehood can no more imitate than Salmoneus could forge
the thunderbolts of Heaven. What am I whom they ac-
cuse? A slave of liberty—a living martyr of the Republic
—the victim, as the enemy of crime! All ruffianism af-
fronts me; and actions legitimate in others are crimes in
me. It is enough to know me to be calumniated. It is in
my very zeal that they discover my guilt. Take from me
my conscience, and I should be the most miserable of men!”

‘The next day, 8 Thermidor, Robespierre resolved to deliver his
celebrated discourse.

ZANONI. 429

He paused; and Couthon wiped his eyes, and St. Just
murmured applause, as with stern looks he gazed on the
rebellious Mountain; and there was a dead, mournful, and
chilling silence through the audience. The touching senti-
ment woke no echo.

The orator cast his eyes around. Ho! he will soon
arouse that apathy. He proceeds: he praises, he pities
himself, no more. He denounces—he accuses. Over-
flooded with his venom, he vomits it forth on all. At
home, abroad, finances, war—on all! Shriller and sharper
rose his voice:

“A conspiracy exists against the Public Liberty. It
owes its strength to a criminal coalition in the very bosom
of the Convention; it has accomplices in the bosom of the
Committee of Public Safety. . . . What is the remedy to
this evil? To punish the traitors; to purify this com-
mittee; to crush all factions by the weight of the National
Authority; to raise upon their ruins the power of Liberty
and Justice. Such are the principles of that Reform.
Must I be ambitious to profess them? then the principles
are proscribed, and tyranny reigns amongst us! For what
can you object to a man who is in the right, and has, at
least, this knowledge—he knows how to die for his native
land! I am made to combat crime, and not to govern it.
The time, alas! is not yet arrived when men of worth can
serve with impunity their country. So long as the knaves
rule, the defenders of liberty will be only the proscribed.”

For two hours through that cold and gloomy audience,
shrilled the Death-speech. In silence it began, in silence
closed. ‘The enemies of the orator were afraid to express
’ resentment: they knew not yet the exact balance of power.
His partisans were afraid to approve; they knew not whom
of their own friends and relations the accusations were de-
signed to single forth. “Take care!” whispered each to
each, “it is thou whom he threatens.” But silent though
the audience, it was, at the first, well-nigh subdued. There
was still about this terrible man the spell of an overmaster-

430 ZANONI.

ing will. Always—though not what is called a great orator
—resolute and sovereign in the use of words, words seemed
as things when uttered by one who with a nod moved the
troops of Henriot, and influenced the judgment of Réné
Dumas, grim President of the Tribunal. Lecointre of Ver-
sailles rose, and there was an anxious movement of atten-
tion; for Lecointre was one of the fiercest foes of the ty-
rant. What was the dismay of the Tallien faction, —what
the complacent smile of Couthon, when Lecointre demanded
only that the oration should be printed? All seemed para-
lysed. At length, Bourdon de |’Oise, whose name was
doubly marked in the black list of the Dictator, stalked te
the tribune, and moved the bold counter-resolution that the
speech should be referred to the two Committees whom
that very speech accused. Still no applause from the con-
spirators: they sat torpid as frozen men. The shrinking
Barrére, ever on the prudent side, looked round before he
rose. He rises, and sides with Lecointre! Then Couthon
seized the occasion, and from his seat (a privilege permitted
alone to the paralytic philanthropist),! and with his melo-
dious voice, sought only to convert the crisis into a triumph.

He demanded, not only that the harangue should be
printed, but sent to all the communes and all the armies.
It was necessary to soothe a wronged and ulcerated heart.
Deputies, the most faithful, had been accused of shedding
blood. “Ah! if he had contributed to the death of one inno-
cent man, he should immolate himself with grief.” Beau-
tiful tenderness !—and while he spoke, he fondled the span-
ielin his bosom. Bravo, Couthon! Robespierre triumphs!
The Reign of Terror shall endure!—the old submission
settles dove-like back in the assembly! They vote the
printing of the Death-speech, and its transmission to all

1M. Thiersin his History, vol. iv. p. 79, makes a curious blunder :
he says, “Couthon s’élance d la tribune.” (Couthon darted towards
the Tribune.) Poor Couthon! whose half body was dead, and who

was always wheeled in his chair into the Convention, and spoke
sitting.

ZANONI. 431

the municipalities. From the benches of the Mountain,
Tallien, alarmed, dismayed, impatient, and indignant, cast
his gaze where sat the strangers admitted to hear the de-
bates. And, suddenly, he met the eyes of the Unknown
who had brought to him the letter from Teresa de Fontenai
the preceding day. The eyes fascinated him as he gazed.
In after times, he often said that their regard, fixed,
earnest, half reproachful, and yet cheering and triumphant,
filled him with new life and courage. They spoke to his
heart as the trumpet speaks to the war-horse. He moved
from his seat; he whispered with his allies; the spirit he
had drawn in was contagious; the men whom Robespierre
especially had denounced, and who saw the sword hanging
over their heads, woke from their torpid trance. Vadier,
Cambon, Billaud-Varennes, Panis, Amar, rose at once—all
at once demanded speech. Vadier is first heard, the rest
succeed. It burst forth, the Mountain, with its fires and
consuming lava! flood upon flood they rush, a legion of
Ciceros upon the startled Catiline! Robespierre falters—
hesitates—would qualify, retract. They gather new cour-
age from his new fears; they interrupt him; they drown
his voice; they demand the reversal of the motion. Amar
moves again that the speech be referred to the Committees
—to the Committees—to his enemies! Confusion, and
noise, and clamor! Robespierre wraps himself in silent
and superb disdain. Pale, defeated, but not yet destroyed,
he stands, a storm in the midst of storm!

The motion is carried. All men foresee in that defeat
the Dictator’s downfall. A solitary cry rose from the gal-
leries; it was caught up; it circled through the hall—the
audience: “A bas le tyrant! Vive la République!” *

1 Down with the tyrant! Hurrah for the Republic!

432 ZANONI.

CHAPTER XII.

Auprés d’un corps aussi avili que la Convention il restait.des
chances pour que Robespierre sortit vainqueur de cette lutte. ”!—
LACRETELLE, vol, xii.

As Robespierre left the hall, there was a dead and omi-
nous silence in the crowd without. . The herd in every coun-
try side with success, and the rats run from the falling
tower. But Robespierre, who wanted courage, never wanted
pride, and the last often supplied the place of the first:
thoughtfully, and with an impenetrable brow, he passed
through the throng, leaning on St. Just, Payan and his
brother following him.

As they got into the open space, Robespierre abruptly
broke the silence.

“How many heads were to fall upon the tenth?”

“Kighty,” replied Payan.

“Ah, we must not tarry so long; a day may lose an
empire; terrorism must serve us yet!”

He was silent a few moments, and his eyes roved suspi-
ciously through the street.

“St. Just,” he said, abruptly, “they have not found this
Englishman, whose revelations or whose trial would have
crushed the Amars and the Talliens. No, no! my Jacobins
themselves are growing dull and blind. But they have
seized a woman—only a woman!”

“A woman’s hand stabbed Marat,” said St. Just.
Robespierre stopped short, and breathed hard.

“St. Just,” said he, “when this peril is past, we will
found the Reign of Peace. There shall be homes and
gardens set apart for the old. David is already designing
the porticos. Virtuous men shall be appointed to instruct

1 Amongst a body so debased as the Convention, there still re-

mained some chances that Robespierre would come off victor in the
struggle.

ZANONI. 433

the young. All vice and disorder shall not be extermi-
nated; no, no! only banished! We must not die yet.
Posterity cannot judge us till our work is done. We have
recalled L’ Htre Supréme ; we must now remodel this cor-
rupted world. All shall be love and brotherhood; and—
ho! Simon! Simon! hold! Your pencil, St. Just!” And
Robespierre wrote hastily. “This to Citizen President
Dumas. Go with it quick, Simon. These eighty heads
must fall to-morrow—to-morrow, Simon. Dumas will ad-
vance their trial a day. I will write to Fouquier Tinville,
the public accuser. We meet at the Jacobins, tonight,
Simon; there we will denounce the Convention itself; there
we rally round us the last friends of liberty and France.”

A shout was heard in the distance behind—“ Vive la Ré-
publique |”

The tyrant’s eye shot a vindictive gleam. “The repub-
lic!—faugh! We did not destroy the throne of a thousand
years for that canaille !”

The trial, the execution of the victims is advanced a day!
By the aid of the mysterious intelligence that had guided
and animated him hitherto, Zanoni learned that his arts
had been in vain. He knew that Viola was safe, if she
could but survive an hour the life of the tyrant. He knew
that Robespierre’s hours were numbered; that the tenth of
Thermidor, on which he had originally designed the exe-
cution of his last victims, would see himself at the scaf-
fold. Zanoni had toiled, had schemed for the fall of the
Butcher and his reign. To what end? A single word
from the tyrant had baffled the result of all. The execu-
tion of Viola is advanced a day. Vain seer, who wouldst
make thyself the instrument of the Eternal, the very dan-
gers that now beset the tyrant but expedite the doom of
his victims! To-morrow, eighty heads, and hers. whose
pillow has been thy heart! To-morrow! and Maximilien
is safe to-night!

28

434 ZANONI.

CHAPTER XIII.

“Erde mag zuriick in Erde stiiuben,
Fliegt der Geist doch aus dem morschen Haus:
Seine Asche mag der Sturmwind treiben,
Sein Leben dauert ewig aus!”?
ELEGIE.

To-morrow!—and it is already twilight. One after one,
the gentle stars come smiling through the heaven. The
Seine, in its slow waters, yet trembles with the last kiss of
the rosy day; and still, in the blue sky, gleams the spire
of Notre Dame; and still, in the blue sky, looms the guillo-
tine by the Barriére du Tréne. Turn to that time-worn
building, once the church and the convent of the Fréres-
Précheurs, known by the then holy name of Jacobins; there
the new Jacobins hold their club. There, in that oblong
hall, once the library of the peaceful monks, assemble the
idolaters of Saint Robespierre. Two immense tribunes,
raised at either end, contain the lees and dregs of the atro-
cious populace—the majority of that audience consisting of
the furies of the guillotine (furies de guillotine). In the
midst of the hall are the bureau and chair of the president—
the chair long preserved by the piety of the monks as the
relic of St. Thomas Aquinas! Above this seat scowls the
harsh bust of Brutus. An iron lamp, and two branches,
scatter over the vast room a murky fuliginous ray, beneath
the light of which the fierce faces of that Pandemonium
seem more grim and haggard. There, from the orator’s
tribune, shrieks the shrill wrath of Robespierre!

Meanwhile, all is chaos, disorder, half daring, and half
cowardice, in the Committee of his foes. Rumors fly from
street to street, from haunt to haunt, from house to house.
The swallows flit low, and the cattle group together before

' Earth may crumble back into earth; the spirit will still escape

from its frail tenement. The wind of the storm may scatter his
ashes ; his being endureth for ever,

ZANONI, 435

the storm. And above this roar of the lives and things of
the little hour, alone in his chamber stood he on whose
starry youth—symbol of the imperishable bloom of the calm
Ideal amidst the mouldering Actual—the clouds of ages had
rolled in vain.

All those exertions which ordinary wit and courage could
suggest had been tried in vain. A1Jl such exertions were in
vain, where, in that Saturnalia of death, a life was the ob-
ject. Nothing but the fall of Robespierre could have saved
his victims; now, too late, that fall would only serve to
avenge.

Once more, in that last agony of excitement and despair,
the Seer had plunged into solitude, to invoke again the aid
or counsel of those mysterious intermediates between earth
and Heaven who had renounced the intercourse of the spirit
when subjected to the common bondage of the mortal. In
the intense desire and anguish of his heart, perhaps, lay a
power not yet called forth; for who has not felt that the
sharpness of extreme grief cuts and grinds away many of
those strongest bonds of infirmity and doubt which bind
down the souls of men to the cabined darkness of the hour;
and that from the cloud and thunderstorm often swoops the
Olympian eagle that can ravish us aloft?

And the invocation was heard—the bondage of sense was
rent away from the visual mind. He looked, and saw—no,
not the being he had called, with its limbs of hght and
unutterably tranquil smile—not his familiar Adon-Ai, the
Son of Glory and the Star—but the Evil Omen, the dark
Chimera, the implacable Foe, with exultation and malice
burning in its hell-lit eyes. The Spectre, no longer cower-
ing and retreating into shadow, rose before him, gigantic
and erect,—the face, whose veil no mortal hand had ever
raised, was still concealed, but the form was more distinct,
corporeal, and cast from it, as an atmosphere, horror, and
rage, and awe. As an iceberg, the breath of that presence
froze the air; as a cloud, it filled the chamber, and black-
ened the stars from heaven.

436 | ZANONL.

“To!” gaid its voice, “I am here once more. Thou hast
robbed me of a meaner prey. Now exorcise thyself from
my power! ‘Thy life has left thee, to live in the heart of a
daughter of the charnel andthe worm. In that life I come
to thee with my inexorable tread. Thou art returned to
the Threshold—thou, whose steps have trodden the verges
of the Infinite! And as the goblin of its phantasy seizes
on a child in the dark,—mighty one, who wouldst conquer
Death, I seize on thee!”

“Back to thy thraldom, slave! If thou art come to the
voice that called thee not, it is again not to command, but
to obey! Thou, from whose whisper I gained the boons of
the lives lovelier and dearer than my own—thou,—I com-
mand thee, not by spell and charm, but by the force of a
soul mightier than the malice of thy being, —thou serve me
yet, and speak again the secret that can rescue the lives
thou hast, by permission of the Universal Master, permitted
me to retain a while in the temple of the clay!”

Brighter and more devouringly burnt the glare from those
lurid eyes; more visible and colossal yet rose the dilating
shape; a yet fiercer and more disdainful hate spoke in the
voice that answered: “Didst thou think that my boon
would be other than thy curse? Happy for thee hadst thou
mourned over the deaths which come by the gentle hand of
Nature—hadst thou never known how the name of mother
consecrates the face of Beauty, and never, bending over
thy first-born, felt the imperishable sweetness of a father’s
love! They are saved, for what?—the mother, for the
death of violence, and shame, and blood—for the dooms-
man’s hand to put aside that shining hair which has en-
tangled thy bridegroom kisses; the child, first and last of
thine offspring, in whom thou didst hope to found a race
that should hear with thee the music of celestial harps, and
float, by the side of thy familiar, Adon-Ai, through the
azure rivers of joy,—the child, to live on a few days, as a
fungus in a burial vault, a thing of the loathsome dungeon,
dying of cruelty, and neglect, and famine. Ha! ha! thou

ZANONI. 437

who wouldst baffle Death, learn how the deathless die if they
dare to love the mortal. Now, Chaldean, behold my boons!
Now I seize and wrap thee with the pestilence of my pres-
ence; now, evermore, till thy long race is run, mine eyes
shall glow into thy brain, and mine arms shall clasp thee,
when thou wouldst take the wings of the Morning, and flee
from the embrace of Night!”

“T tell thee, no! And again I compel thee, speak and
answer to the lord who can command his slave. I know,
though my lore fails me, and the reeds on which I leaned
pierce my side, I know yet that it is written that the life
of which I question can be saved from the headsman.
Thou wrappest her future in the darkness of thy shadow,
but thou canst not shape it. Thou mayst foreshow the anti-
dote; thou canst not effect the bane. From thee I wring
the secret, though it torture thee to name it. I approach
thee—I look, dauntless, into thine eyes. The soul that
loves can dare all things. Shadow, I defy thee, and com-
pel!”

The spectre waned and recoiled. Like a vapour that
lessens as the sun pierces and pervades it, the form shrank
cowering and dwarfed in the dimmer distance, and through
the casement again rushed the stars.

“Yes,” said the Voice, with a faint and hollow accent,
“thou canst save her from the headsman; for it is written
that sacrifice can save. Ha! ha!” And the shape again
suddenly dilated into the gloom of its giant stature, and its
ghastly laugh exulted, as if the Foe, a moment bafiled, had
regained its might. ‘Ha! ha!—thou canst save her life,
if thou wilt sacrifice thine own! Is it for this thou hast
lived on through crumbling empires and countless genera-
tions of thy race? At last shall Death reclaim thee?
Wouldst thou save her?—die for her! Fall, O stately
column, over which stars yet unformed may gleam—fall,
that the herb at thy base may drink a few hours longer the
sunlight and the dews! Silent! Art thou ready for the
sacrifice? See, the moon moves up through Heaven.

438 ZANONI.

Beautiful and wise one, wilt thou bid her smile to-morrow
on thy headless clay?”

“Back! for my soul, in answering thee from depths
where thou canst not hear it, has regained its glory; and I
hear the wings of Adon-Ai gliding musical through the
air.”

He spoke; and, with a low shriek of baffled rage and
hate, the Thing was gone, and through the room rushed,
luminous and sudden, the presence of silvery light.

As the heavenly visitor stood in the atmosphere of his
own lustre, and looked upon the face of the Theurgist with
an aspect of ineffable tenderness and love, all space seemed
lighted from his smile. Along the blue air without, from
that chamber in which his wings had halted, to the farthest
star in the azure distance, it seemed as if the track of his
flight were visible, by a lengthened splendour in the air,
like the column of moonlight on the sea. Like the flower
that diffuses perfume as the very breath of its life, so the
emanation of that presence was joy. Over the world, asa
million times swifter than light, than electricity, the Son
of Glory had sped his way to the side of love, his wings
had scattered delight as the morning scatters dew. For
that brief moment, Poverty had ceased to mourn, Disease
fled from its prey, and Hope breathed a dream of Heaven
into the darkness of despair.

“Thou art right,” said the melodious Voice. “Thy cour-
age has restored thy power. Once more, in the haunts of
earth, thy soul charms me to thy side. . Wiser now, in the
moment when thou comprehendest Death, than when thy
unfettered spirit learned the solemn mystery of Life; the
human affections that thralled and humbled thee a while
bring to thee, in these last hours of thy mortality, the
sublimest heritage of thy race—the eternity that commences
from the grave.”

“O Adon-Ai,” said the Chaldean, as, circumfused in the
splendour of the visitant, a glory more radiant than human
beauty settled round his form, and seemed already to belong

ZANONI. 459

to the eternity of which the Bright One spoke, “as men,
before they die, see and comprehend the enigmas hidden
from them before,‘ so in this hour, when the sacrifice of
self to another brings the course of ages to its goal, I see
the littleness of Life, compared to the Majesty of Death;
but oh, Divine Consoler, even here, even in thy presence,
the affections that inspire me sadden. To leave behind
me in this bad world, unaided, unprotected, those for whom
I die! the wife! the child!—oh, speak comfort to me in
this!”

“And what,” said the visitor, with a slight accent of
reproof in the tone of celestial pity, “what, with all thy
wisdom and thy starry secrets, with all thy empire of the
past, and thy visions of the future—what art thou to the
All-Directing and Omniscient? Canst thou yet imagine
that thy presence on earth can give to the hearts thou lovest
the shelter which the humblest take from the wings of the
Presence that lives in Heaven? Fear not thou for their
future. Whether thou live or die, their future is the care of
the Most High! In the dungeon and on the scaffold looks
everlasting the Eye of Him, tenderer than thou to love,
wiser than thou to guide, mightier than thou to save!”

Zanoni bowed his head, and when he looked up again the
last shadow had left his brow. ‘The visitor was gone; but
still the glory of his presence seemed to shine upon the spot;
still the solitary air seemed to murmur with tremulous de-
light. And thus ever shall it be with those who have once,
detaching themselves utterly from life, received the visit of
the Angel Fairn. Solitude and space retain the splendour,
and it settles like a halo round their graves.

1The greatest poet, and one of the noblest thinkers, of the last

age, said, on his death-bed, “ Many things obscure to me before, now
clear up, and become visible, ”—See the Life of Schiller.

440 ZANONI.

CHAPTER XIV.

“Dann zur Blumenfiur der Sterne
Aufgeschauet liebewarm
Fass’ ihn freundlich Arm in Arm
Trag’ ihn in die blaue Ferne. ’
Unuann, An den Tod.

“Then towards the Garden of the Star
Lift up thine aspect warm with love,
And, friendlike link’d through space afar,
Mount with him, arm in arm, above.’
UHLAND, Poem to DEATH.

He stood upon the lofty balcony that overlooked the
quiet city. Though afar the fiercest passions of men were
at work on the web of strife and doom, all that gave itself
to his view was calm and still in the rays of the summer
moon, for his soul was wrapped from man and man’s nar-
row sphere, and only the serener glories of creation were
present to the vision of the seer. There he stood, alone
and thoughtful, to take the last farewell of the wondrous
life that he had known.

Coursing though the fields of space, he beheld the gossa-
mer shapes, whose choral joys his spirit had so often shared.
There, group upon group they circled in the starry silence,
multiform in the unimaginable beauty of a being fed by
ambrosial dews and serenest light. In his trance, all the
universe stretched visible beyond; in the green valleys
afar, he saw the dances of the fairies in the bowels of the
mountains, he beheld the race that breathe the lurid air of
the volcanoes, and hide from the light of heaven on every
leaf in the numberless forests; in every drop of the unmeas-
ured seas, he surveyed its separate and swarming world;
far up, in the farthest blue, he saw orb upon orb ripening
into shape, and planets starting from the central fire, to
run their day of ten thousand years. For everywhere in
creation is the breath of the Creator, and in every spot

ZANONI. 441

where the breath breathes is life! And alone, in the dis-
tance, the lonely man beheld his Magian brother. ‘There,
at work with his numbers and his cabala, amidst the wrecks
of Rome, passionless and calm, sat in his cell the mystic
Mejnour; living on, living ever while the world lasts, in-
different whether his knowledge produces weal or woe; a
mechanical agent of a more tender and a wiser Will, that
guides every spring to its inscrutable designs. Living on—
living ever—as Science that cares alone for knowledge, and
halts not to consider how knowledge advances happiness;
how Human Improvement, rushing through civilisation,
crushes in its march all who cannot grapple to its wheels; '
ever, with its cabaia and its numbers, lives on to change, in
its bloodless movements, the face of the habitable world!

And, “Oh, farewell to hfe!” murmured the glorious
dreamer. ‘Sweet, O life! hast thou been to me. How
fathomless thy joys—how rapturously has my soul bounded
forth upon the upward paths! ‘To him who for ever renews
his youth in the clear fount of Nature, how exquisite is the
mere happiness to Je / Farewell, ye lamps of heaven, and
ye million tribes, the Populace of Air. Not a mote in the
beam, not a herb on the mountain, not a pebble on the
shore, not a seed far blown into the wilderness, but con-
tributed to the lore that sought in all the true principle of
life, the Beautiful, the Joyous, the Immortal. To others,
a land, a city, a hearth, has been a home; my home has
been wherever the intellect could pierce, or the spirit could
breathe the air.”

1“You colonise the lands of the savage with the Anglo-Saxon—
you civilise that portion of the earth ; but is the savage civilised?
He is exterminated! You accumulate machinery—you increase the
total of wealth: but what becomes of the labor you displace? One
generation is sacrificed to the next. You diffuse knowledge—and
the world seems to grow brighter; but Discontent at Poverty re-
places Ignorance, happy with its crust. very improvement, every
advancement in civilisation, injures some, to benefit others, and
either cherishes the want of to-day, or prepares the revolution of to-
morrow. ”—STEPHEN MONTAGUE.

442 ZANONI.

He paused, and through the immeasurable space, his eyes
and his heart, penetrating the dismal dungeon, rested on his
child. He saw it slumbering in the arms of the pale mother,
and his soul spoke to the sleeping soul. “ Forgive me, if
my desire was sin; I dreamed to have reared and nurtured
thee to the divinest destinies my visions could foresee.
Betimes, as the mortal part was strengthened against dis-
ease, to have purified the spiritual from every sin; to have
led thee, heaven upon heaven, through the holy ecstasies
which make up the existence of the orders that dwell on
high; to have formed, from thy sublime affections, the pure
and ever living communication between thy mother and
myself. The dream was but a dream—it isno more! In
sight myself of the grave, I feel, at last, that through the
portals of the grave lies the true initiation into the holy and
the wise. Beyond those portals I await ye both, beloved
pilgrims!”

From his numbers and his cabala, in his cell, amidst the
wrecks of Rome, Mejnour, startled, looked up, and, through
the spirit, felt that the spirit of his distant friend addressed
him.

“Fare thee well for ever upon this earth! Thy last com-
panion forsakes thy side. Thine age survives the youth of
all; and the Final Day shall find thee still the contemplater
of our tombs. I go with my free will into the land of dark-
ness; but new suns and systems blaze around us from the
grave. I go where the souls of those for whom I resign
the clay shall be my co-mates through eternal youth. At
last, I recognise the true ordeal and the real victory. Mej-
nour, cast down thy elixir; lay by thy load of years!
Wherever the soul can wander, the Eternal Soul of all
things protects it still!”

ZANONI. 443

CHAPTER XV.

“lls ne veulent plus perdre un moment d’une nuit si précieuse. ”
LACRETELLE, tom. xii.

Ir was late that night, and Réné-Francois Dumas, Presi-
dent of the Revolutionary Tribunal, had re-entered his
cabinet, on his return from the Jacobin club. With him
were two men who might be said to represent the one the
moral, the other the physical force of the Reign of Terror:
Fouquier-Tinville, the Public Accuser,and Francois Henriot,
the General of the Parisian National Guard. ‘This formi-
dable triumvirate were assembled to debate on the proceed-
ings of the next day; and the three sister-witches, over their
hellish caldron, were scarcely animated by a more fiend-like
spirit, or engaged in more execrable designs, than these three
heroes of the Revolution in their premeditated massacre of
the morrow.

Dumas was but little altered in appearance, since, in the
earlier part of this narrative, he was presented to the reader,
except that his manner was somewhat more short and severe,
and his eye yet more restless. But he seemed almost a
superior being by the side of his associates. Réné-Dumas,
born of respectable parents, and well-educated, despite his
ferocity, was not without a certain refinement, which perhaps
rendered him the more acceptable to the precise and formal
Robespierre.” But Heuriot had been a lackey, a thief, a
spy of the police; he had drunk the blood of Madame de
Lamballe, and had risen to his present rank for no quality
but his ruffianism; and Fouquier-Tinville, the son of a pro-
vincial agriculturist, and afterwards a clerk at the Bureau
of the Police, was little less base in his manners, and yet
more, from a certain loathsome buffoonery, revolting in his

1 They would not lose another moment of so precious a night.

* Dumas was a beau in his way. His gala dress was a blood-red
coat, with the finest ruffles.

A44 ; ZANONI.

speech; bull-headed, with black, sleek hair, with a narrow
and livid forehead, with small eyes, that twinkled with a
sinister malice; strongly and coarsely built, he looked what
he was, the audacious bully of a lawless and relentless Bar.

Dumas trimmed the candles, and bent over the list of the
victims for the morrow.

“Tt is a long catalogue,” said the President; “eighty
trials for one day! And Robespierre’s orders to despatch
the whole fournée are unequivocal.”

“Pooh!” said Fouquier, with a coarse, loud laugh; “we
must try them en masse. I know how to deal with our jury.
‘Je pense, Citoyens, que vous étes convaincus du crime des
accusés ??' Ha! ha!—the longer the list, the shorter the
work.”

“Oh, yes,” growled out Henriot, with an oath,—as
usual, half drunk, and lolling on his chair, with his spurred
heels on the table—“ little Tinville is the man for des-
patch.”

“Citizen Henriot,” said Dumas, gravely, “permit me to
request thee to select another footstool; and for the rest,
let me warn thee that to-morrow is a critical and important
day; one that will decide the fate of France.”

“A fig for little France! Vive le vertueux Robespierre, la
colonne de la République!? Plague on this talking; it is
dry work. Hast thou no eau de vie in that little cup-
board?”

Dumas and Fouquier exchanged looks of disgust. Dumas
shrugged his shoulders, and replied:

“It is to guard thee against eaw de vie, Citizen General
Henriot, that I have requested thee to meet me here. Lis-
ten, if thou canst!”

“Oh, talk away! thy métier is to talk, mine to fight and
to drink.”

1T think, citizens, that you are convinced of the crime of the
accused ? .

* Long life to the virtuous Robesplerre—the pillar of the Re-
public.

ZANONI. 445

“To-morrow, I tell thee then, the populace will be
abroad; all factions will be astir. It is probable enough
that they willeven seek to arrest our tumbrils on their way
to the guillotine. Have thy men armed and ready; keep
the streets clear; cut down without mercy whomsoever may
obstruct the ways.”

“T understand,” said Henriot, striking his sword so
loudly that Dumas half started at the clank—“ Black Hen-
riot is no ‘Jndulgent.’”

“Look to it then, Citizen—look to it! And hark thee,”
he added, with a grave and sombre brow, “if thou wouldst
keep thine own head on thy shoulders, beware of the eau
de vie.”

“My own head!—sacre mille tonnerres! Dost thou
threaten the General of the Parisian army?”

Dumas, like Robespierre, a precise, atrabilious, and arro-
gant man, was about to retort, when the craftier Tinville
laid his hand on his arm, and, turning to the General, said,
“My dear Henriot, thy dauntless republicanism, which is
too ready to give offence, must learn to take a reprimand
from the representative of Republican Law. Seriously,
mon cher, thou must be sober for the next three or four
days; after the crisis is over, thou and I will drink a bottle
together. Come, Dumas, relax thine austerity, and shake
hands with our friend. No quarrels amongst ourselves!”

Dumas hesitated, and extended his hand, which the
ruffian clasped; and maudlin tears succeeding his ferocity,
he half sobbed, half hiccupped forth his protestations of
civism and his promises of sobriety.

“Well, we depend on thee, mon Général,” said Dumas;
“and now, since we shall all have need of vigour for to-
morrow, go home and sleep soundly.”

“Ves, I forgive thee, Dumas—I forgive thee. I am not
vindictive—I! but still, if a man threatens me—if a man
insults me”—and, with the quick changes of intoxication,
again his eyes gleamed fire through their foul tears. With
some difficulty, Fouquier succeeded at last in soothing the

446 ZANONI.

brute, and leading him from the chamber. But still, as
some wild beast disappointed of a prey, he growled and.
snarled, as his heavy tread descended the stairs. A tall
trooper, mounted, was leading Henriot’s horse to and fro
the streets; and as the General waited at the porch till his
attendant turned, a stranger stationed by the wall accosted
him:

“General Henriot, I have desired to speak with thee.
Next to Robespierre, thou art, or shouldst be, the most
powerful man in France.”

“Hem!—yes, I ought to be. What then?—every man
has not his deserts!” _

“Hist!” said the stranger; “thy pay is scarcely suitable
to thy rank and thy wants.”

“That is true>”

“Even in a revolution a man takes care oi his fortunes!”

“ Diable! speak out, Citizen.”

“JT have a thousand pieces of gold with me—they are
thine if thou wilt grant me one small favour.”

“Citizen, I grant it!” said Henriot, waving his hand
majestically. “Is it to denounce some rascal who has
offended thee?” ;

“No; it is simply this:—write these words to President
Dumas—‘ Admit the bearer to thy presence; and if thou
canst grant him the request he will make to thee, it will be
an inestimable obligation to Francois Henriot.’” The
stranger, as he spoke, placed pencil and tablets in the shak-
ing hands of the soldier.

“ And where is the gold?”

botl s Ish spas

With some difficulty, Henriot scrawled the words dictated
to him, clutched the gold, mounted his horse, and was gone.

Meanwhile Fouquier, when he had closed the door upon
Henriot, said sharply: “How canst thou be so mad as to
incense that brigand? Knowest thou not that our laws are
nothing without the physical force of the National Guard,
and that he is their leader?”

ZANONI. 447

“T know this, that Robespierre must have been mad to
place that drunkard at their head; and mark my words,
Fouquier, if the struggle come, it is that man’s incapacity
and cowardice that will destroy us. Yes, thou mayst live
thyself to accuse thy beloved Robespierre, and to perish in
his fall.”

“For all that, we must keep well with Henriot till we
can find the occasion to seize and behead him. ‘To be safe,
we must fawn on those who are still in power; and fawn
the more, the more we would depose them. Do not think
this Henriot, when he wakes to-morrow, will forget thy
threats. He is the most revengeful of human beings.
Thou must send and soothe him in the morning!”

“Right,” said Dumas, convinced. “I was too hasty;
and now I think we have nothing further to do, since we
have arranged to make short work with our fournée of to-
morrow. I see in the list a knave I have long marked out,
though his crime once procured me a legacy—Nicot, the
Heébertist.”

“And young André Chenier, the poet? Ah, I forgot;
we beheaded him to-day! Revolutionary virtue is at its
acme. His own brother abandoned him!” ?

“There is a foreigner—an Italian woman—in the list;
but I can find no charge made out against her.”

“ All the same we must execute her, for the sake of the
round number; eighty sounds better than seventy-nine!”

Here a huwissier brought a paper, on which was written
the request of Henriot.

“ Ah! this is fortunate,” said Tinville, to whom Dumas

1 His brother is said, indeed, to have contributed to the condem-
nation of this virtuous and illustrious person. He was heard to cry
aloud—“Si mon frére est coupable, qu’il périsse.” (If my brother
be culpable, let him die.) This brother, Marie-Joseph, also a poet,
and the author of Charles 1X., so celebrated in the earlier days of
the Revolution, enjoyed, of course, according to the wonted justice
of the world, a triumphant career ; and was proclaimed in the Champ
de Mars, “le premier des poétes Frangais,” a title due to his mur-
dered brother.

448 ZANONI.

chucked the scroll—“ grant the prayer by all means; so at
least that it does not lessen our bead-roll. But I will do
Henriot the justice to say, that he never asks to let off, but
to put on. Good night! I am worn out—my escort waits
below. Only on such an occasion would I venture forth in
the streets at night.”’ And Fouquier, with a long yawn,
quitted the room.

“ Admit the bearer!” said Dumas, who, withered and
dried, as lawyers in practice mostly are, seemed to require
as little sleep as his parchments.

The stranger entered.

“Réné-Francois Dumas,” said he, seating himself oppo-
site to the President; and markedly adopting the plural, as
if in contempt of the revolutionary jargon; “amidst the
excitement and.occupations of your later life, I know not if
you can remember that we have met before?”

The judge scanned the features of his visitor, and a pale
blush settled on his sallow cheeks—“ Yes, Citizen, I re-
member!”

“And you recall the words I then uttered! You spoke
tenderly and philanthropically of your horror of capital ex-
ecutions—you exulted in the approaching Revolution as the
termination of all sanguinary punishments—you quoted rev-
erently the saying of Maximilien Robespierre, the rising
statesman, ‘The executioner is the invention of the tyrant’;
and I replied that, while you spoke, a foreboding seized me
that we should meet again when your ideas of death and
the philosophy of revolutions might be changed! Was I
right, Citizen Réné-Francois Dumas, President of the Revo-
lutionary Tribunal?”

“Pooh!” said Dumas, with some confusion on his brazen
brow, “I spoke then as men speak who have not acted.
Revolutions are not made with rosewater! But truce to
the gossip of the long-ago. I remember, also, that thou

' During the latter part of the Reign of Terror, Fouquier rarely

stirred out at night, and never without an escort. In the Reign of
Terror, those most terrified were its kings.

ZANONI. 449

didst then save the life of my relation, and it will please
thee to learn that his intended murderer will be guillotined
to-morrow.”

“That concerns yourself—your justice or your revenge.
Permit me the egotism to remind you, that you then prom-
ised that if ever a day should come when you could serve
me, your life—yes, the phrase was, ‘your heart’s blood’—
was at my bidding. Think not, austere judge, that I come
to ask a boon that can affect yourself—I come but to ask a
day’s respite for another!”

“Citizen, it is impossible! I have the order of Robes-
pierre that not one less than the total on my list must
undergo their trial for to-morrow. As for the verdict, that
rests with the jury!”

“TI do not ask you to diminish the catalogue. Listen
still! In your death-roll there is the name of an Italian
woman, whose youth, whose beauty, and whose freedom,
not only from every crime, but every tangible charge, will
excite only compassion, and not terror. Even yow would
-tremble to pronounce her sentence. It will be dangerous
on a day when the populace will be excited, when your
tumbrils may be arrested, to expose youth and innocence
and beauty to the pity and courage of a revolted crowd.”

Dumas looked up, and shrank from the eye of the stranger.

“T do not deny, Citizen, that there is reason in what thou
urgest. But my orders are positive.”

“Positive only as to the number of the victims. I offer
you a substitute for this one. I offer you the head of a man
who knows all of the very conspiracy which now threatens
Robespierre and yourself; and compared with one clue to
which, you would think even eighty ordinary lives a cheap
purchase.”

“That alters the case,” said Dumas, eagerly; “if thou
canst do this, on my own responsibility I will postpone the
trial of the Italian. Now name the proxy!”

“You behold him!”

“Thou!” exclaimed Dumas, while a fear he could not

29

450 ZANONI.

conceal betrayed itself through his surprise. “Thou!—and
thou comest to me alone at night to offer thyself to justice?
Ha!—this is a snare. Tremble, fool!—thou art in my
power, and I can have both /”

“You can,” said the stranger, with a calm smile of dis-
dain; “but my life is valueless without my revelations.
Sit still, I command you,—hear me!” and the light in those
dauntless eyes spellbound and awed the judge. “You will
remove me to the Conciergerie—you will fix my trial, under
the name of Zanoni, amidst your fournée of to-morrow. If
I do not satisfy you by my speech, you hold the woman I
die to save as your hostage. It is but the reprieve for her
of a single day that I demand. The day following the
morrow I shall be dust, and you may wreak your vengeance
on the life that remains. Tush! Judge and condemner of
thousands, do you hesitate—do you imagine that the man
who voluntarily offers himself to death will be daunted
into uttering one syllable at your bar against his will!
Have you not had experience enough of the inflexibility of
pride and courage? President, I place before you the ink
and implements! Write to the gaoler a reprieve of one
day for the woman whose life can avail you nothing, and I
will bear the order to my own prison,—I who can now tell
this much as an earnest of what I can communicate-—while I
speak, your own name, Judge, is in a list of death. I can
tell you by whose hand it is written down—I can tell you in
what quarter to look for danger—I can tell you from what
cloud, in this lurid atmosphere, hangs the storm that shall
burst on Robespierre and his reign!”

Dumas grew pale; and his eyes vainly sought to escape
the magnetic gaze that overpowered and mastered him.
Mechanically, and as if under an agency not his own, he
wrote while the stranger dictated.

“Well,” he said, then, forcing a smile to his lips; “I
promised I would serve you; see, I am faithful to my word.
I suppose that you are one of those fools of feeling—
those professors of anti-revolutionary virtue, of whom I

ZANONI. 451

have seen not a few before my bar. Faugh! it sickens me
to see those who make a merit of incivism, and perish to
save some bad patriot, because it is a son, or a father, or a
wife, or a daughter, who is saved.”

“T am one of those fools of feeling,” said the stranger,
rising. “ You have divined aright.”

“And wilt thou not, in return for my mercy, utter to-
night the revelations thou wouldst proclaim to-morrow?
Come; and, perhaps, thou too—nay, the woman also, may
receive not reprieve, but pardon.”

“ Before your tribunal, and there alone! Nor will I de-
ceive you, President. My information may avail you not;
and even while I show the cloud, the bolt may fall.”

“ Tush!—Prophet, look to thyself! Go, madman; go. I
know too well the contumacious obstinacy of the class to
which I suspect thou belongest to waste further words.
Diable ! but ye grow so accustomed to look on death, that
ye forget the respect ye owe to it. Since thou offerest me
thy head, I accept it. To-morrow, thou mayst repent—it
will be too late.”

“ Ay, too late, President!” echoed the calm visitor.

“But, remember, it is not pardon—it is but a day’s re-
prieve, I have promised to this woman. According as thou
dost satisfy me to-morrow, she lives or dies. J am frank,
Citizen; thy ghost shall not haunt me for want of faith.”

“Tt is but a day that I have asked; the rest I leave to jus-
tice and to Heaven. Your hwissiers wait below.”

452 ZANONI.

CHAPTER XVI.

“Und den Mordstahl seh’ ich blinken ;
Und das Morderauge gliihn!”!
KASSANDRA.

VioLA was in the prison, that opened not but for those
already condemned before adjudged. Since her exile from
Zanoni, her very intellect had seemed paralysed. All that
beautiful exuberance of fancy, which, if not the fruit of
genius, seemed its blossoms; all that gush of exquisite
thought, which Zanoni had justly told her flowed with
mysteries and subtleties ever new to him, the wise one; all
were gone, annihilated; the blossom withered, the fount
dried up. From something almost above womanhood, she
seemed listlessly to sink into something below childhood.
With the inspirer the inspirations had ceased; and, in de-
serting love, genius also was left behind.

She scarcely comprehended why she had been thus torn
from her home and the mechanism of her dull tasks. She
scarcely knew what meant those kindly groups, that, struck
with her exceeding loveliness, had gathered round her in
the prison, with mournful looks, but with words of comfort.
She, who had hitherto been taught to abhor those whom
Law condemns for crime, was amazed to hear that beings
thus compassionate and tender, with cloudless and lofty
brows, with gallant and gentle mien, were criminals, for
whom Law had no punishment short of death. But they,
the savages, gaunt and menacing, who had dragged her from
her home, who had attempted to snatch from her the infant,
while she clasped it in her arms, and laughed fierce scorn
at her mute quivering lips—ruery were the chosen citizens,
the men of virtue, the favourites of Power, the ministers
of Law! Such thy black caprices, O thou, the ever-shift-
ing and calumnious, Human Judgment!

1 And I see the steel of Murder glitter,
And the eye of Murder glow.

ZANONI. 453

A squalid, and yet a gay world, did the prison-houses of
that day present. There, as in the sepulchre to which they
led, all ranks were cast, with an even-handed scorn. And
yet there, the reverence that comes from great emotions re-
stored Nature’s first and imperishable, and most lovely,
and most noble law—Tuxr INEQUALITY BETWEEN MAN AND
MAN! There, place was given by the prisoners, whether
royalists or sans culottes, to Age, to Learning, to Renown, to
Beauty; and Strength, with its own inborn chivalry, raised
into rank the helpless and the weak. ‘The iron sinews and
the Herculean shoulders made way for the woman and the
child; and the graces of Humanity, lost elsewhere, sought
their refuge in the abode of Terror.

“And wherefore, my child, do they bring thee hither?”
asked an old grey-haired priest.

“T cannot guess.”

“Ah! if you know not your offence, fear the worst.”

“And my child?” (for the infant was still suffered to
rest upon her bosom).

“ Alas, young mother! they will suffer thy child to live.”

“ And for this—an orphan in the dungeon!” murmured
the accusing heart of Viola, “have I reserved his offspring!
Zanoni, even in thought, ask not—ask not, what 1 have
done with the child I bore thee!”

Night came; the crowd rushed to the grate, to hear the
muster-roll.1 Her name was with the doomed. And the
old priest, better prepared to die, but reserved from the
death-list, laid his hands on her head, and blessed her
while he wept. She heard, and wondered; but she did not
weep. With downcast eyes, with arms folded on her bosom,
she bent submissively to the call. But now, another name
was uttered; and a man, who had pushed rudely past her,
to gaze or to listen, shrieked out a howl of despair and rage.
She turned, and their eyes met. Through the distance of
time she recognised that hideous aspect. Nicot’s face set-
tled back into its devilish sneer.—“ At last, gentle Neapoli-

1 Called in the mocking jargon of the day, “ The Evening Gazette, ”

454 ZANONI.

tan, the guillotine will unite us. Oh, we shall sleep well
our wedding night!” And, with a laugh, he strode away
through the crowd, and vanished into his lair.

* * *

She was placed in her gloomy cell, to await the morrow.
But the child was still spared her, and she thought it seemed
as if conscious of the awful Present. In their way to the
prison it had not moaned or wept; it had looked with its
clear eye, unshrinking, on the gleaming pikes and savage
brows of the huissiers. And now, alone in the dungeon, it
put its arms round her neck, and murmured its indistinct
sounds, low and sweet as some unknown language of con-
solation and of Heaven. And of Heaven it was! For, at
the murmur, the terror melted from her soul: upward, from
the dungeon and the death—upward, where the happy
cherubim chant the mercy of the All-loving, whispered that
cherub’s voice. She fell upon her knees, and prayed. The
despoilers of all that beautifies and hallows life had dese-
crated the altar, and denied the God!—they had removed
from the last hour of their victims the Priest, the Scripture,
and the Cross!) But Faith builds in the dungeon and the
lazar-house its sublimest shrines; and up, through roofs of
stone, that shut out the eye of Heaven, ascends the ladder
where the angels glide to and fro—PRAYER.

And there, in the very cell beside her own, the atheist,
Nicot, sits stolid amidst the darkness, and hugs the thought
of Danton, that death is nothingness.’ His no spectacle of
an appalled and perturbed conscience! Remorse is the echo
of a lost virtue, and virtue he never knew. Had he to live
again, he would live the same. But more terrible than the
death-bed of a believing and despairing sinner, that blank
gloom of apathy—that contemplation of the worm and
the rat of the charnel-house—that grim and loathsome
NOTHINGNESS which, for his eye, falls like a pall over the

1 “Ma demeure sera bientét LE NuaNntT,” (My abode will soon be
Nothingness) said Danton before his judges,

ZANONI. 455

universe of life. Still, staring into space, gnawing his livid
lip, he looks upon the darkness, convinced that darkness is
for ever and for ever!

cy *k * *

Place, there! place! Room yet in your crowded cells!
Another has come to the slaughter-house.

As the gaoler, lamp in hand, ushered in the stranger,
the latter touched him, and whispered. The stranger drew
a jewel from his finger. Diantre! how the diamond flashed
in the ray of the lamp! Value each head of your eighty at
a thousand francs, and the jewel is more worth than all.
The gaoler paused, and the diamond laughed in his dazzled
eyes. O thou Cerberus, thou hast mastered all else that
seems human in that fell employ! Thou hast no pity, no
love, and no remorse. But Avarice survives the rest, and
the foul heart’s master-serpent swallows up the tribe. Ha!
ha! crafty stranger, thou hast conquered! They tread the
gloomy corridor; they arrive at the door where the gaoler
has placed the fatal mark, now to be erased, for the prisoner
within isto bereprievedaday. The key grates in the lock—
the door yawns—the stranger takes the lamp and enters.

eS SS

CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH AND LAST.

“Cosi vince Goffredo!”!
Ger. Lip., Cant. xx.—44.

Awnp Viola was in prayer. She heard not the opening of
the door; she saw not the dark shadow that fell along the
floor. His power, his arts were gone; but the mystery and
the spell known to her simple heart did not desert her in
the hours of trial and despair. When Science falls as a
firework from the sky it would invade, when Genius withers
as a flower in the breath of the icy charnel, the Hope of a
childlike soul wraps the air in light, and the innocence of
unquestioning Belief covers the grave with blossoms.

1 Thus conquered Godfrey.

456 ZANONI.

In the farthest corner of the cell she knelt; and the in-
fant, as if to imitate what it could not comprehend, bent its
little limbs, and bowed its smiling face, and knelt with her
also by her side.

He stood, and gazed upon them as the light of ae lamp
fell calmly on their forms. It fell over those clouds of
golden hair, dishevelled, parted, thrown back from the rapt,
candid brow; the dark eyes raised on high, where, through
the human tears, a light as from above was mirrored; the
hands clasped—the lips parted—the form all animate and
holy with the sad serenity of innocence and the touching
humility of woman. And he heard her voice, though it
scarcely left her lips—the low voice that the heart speaks—
loud enough for God to hear!

“And if never more to see him, O Father! canst Thou
not make the love that will not die minister, even beyond
the grave, to his earthly fate? Canst Thou not yet permit
it, as a living spirit, to hover over him—a spirit fairer than
all his science can conjure? Oh, whatever lot be ordained
to either, grant—even though a thousand ages may roll
between us—grant, when at last, purified and regenerate,
and fitted for the transport of such reunion—grant that we
may meet once more! And for his child—it kneels to Thee
from the dungeon floor! To-morrow, and whose breast shall
cradle it?—whose hand shall feed?—whose lips shall pray
for its weal below and its soul hereafter?” She paused—
her voice choked with sobs.

“Thou, Viola!—thou, thyself. He whom thou hast de-
serted is here to preserve the mother to the child!”

She started !—those accents, tremulous as her own! She
started to her feet!—he was there,—in all the pride of his
unwaning youth and superhuman beauty! there, in the
house of dread, and in the hour of travail!—there, image
and personation of the love that can pierce the Valley of
the Shadow, and can glide, the unscathed wanderer from

‘the heaven, through the roaring abyss of hell.
With acry, never perhaps heard before in that gloom

ZANONI. 457

vault —a cry of delight and rapture, she sprang forward,
and fell at his feet.

He bent down to raise her, but she slid from his arms.
He called her by the familiar epithets of the old endear-
ment, and she only answered him by sobs. Wildly, pas-
sionately, she kissed his hands, the hem of his garment, but
voice was gone.

“Look up, look up!—I am here—I am here to save thee!
Wilt thou deny to me thy sweet face? Truant, wouldst
thou fly me still?”

“Fly thee!” she said at last, and in a broken voice; “oh,
if my thoughts wronged thee—oh, if my dream, that awful
dream, deceived—kneel down with me, and pray for our
child!” Then, springing to her feet with a sudden impulse,
she caught up the infant, and, placing it in his arms, sobbed
forth, with deprecating and humble tones, “Not for my
sake—not for mine, did I abandon thee, but——”

“Hush!” said Zanoni; “I know all the thoughts that thy
confused and struggling senses can scarcely analyse them-
selves. And see how, with a look, thy child answers
them!”

And in truth the face of that strange infant seemed ra-
diant with its silent and unfathomablejoy. It seemed as if
it recognised the father; it clung—it forced itself to his
breast, and there nestling, turned its bright clear eyes upon
Viola, and smiled.

“Pray for my child!” said Zanoni, mournfully. “The
thoughts of souls that would aspire as mine, are all prayer !”
And, seating himself by her side, he began to reveal to her
some of the holier secrets of his lofty being. He spoke of
the sublime and intense faith from which alone the divine
knowledge can arise—the faith which, seeing the immortal
everywhere, purifies and exalts the mortal that beholds—the
glorious ambition that dwells not in the cabals and crimes
of earth, but amidst those solemn wonders that speak not
of men, but of God—of that power to abstract the soul from
the clay, which gives to the eye of the soul its subtle vision,

458 ZANONI.

and to the soul’s wing the unlimited realm—of that pure,
severe, and daring initiation, from which the mind emerges
as from death, into clear perceptions of its kindred with the
Father-Principles of life and light, so that, in its own sense
of the Beautiful, it finds its joy; in the serenity of its will,
its power; in its sympathy with the youthfulness of the In-
finite Creation of which itself is an essence and a part, the
secrets that embalm the very clay which they consecrate,
and renew the strength of life with the ambrosia of myste-
rious and celestial sleep. And while he spoke Viola listened,
breathless. If she could not comprehend, she no longer
dared to distrust. She felt that in that enthusiasm, self-
deceiving or not, no fiend could lurk; and by an intuition,
rather than an effort of the reason, she saw before her, like
a starry ocean, the depth and mysterious beauty of the soul
which her fears had wronged. Yet, when he said (conclud-
ing his strange confessions), that to his life within life and
above life, he had dreamed to raise her own, the fear of
humanity crept over her, and he read in her silence how
vain, with all his science, would the dream have been.

But now, as he closed, and, leaning on his breast, she felt
the clasp of his protecting arms,—when, in one holy kiss,
the past was forgiven and the present lost, —then there re-
turned to her the sweet and warm hopes of the natural life
--of the loving woman. He was come to save her! She
asked not how—she believed it without a question. They
should be at last again united. They would fly far from
those scenes of violence and blood. ‘Their happy Ionian
isle, their fearless solitudes, would once more receive them.
She laughed, with a child’s joy, as this picture rose up
amidst the gloom of the dungeon! Her mind, faithful to
its sweet, simple instinvts, refused to receive the lofty
images that flitted confusedly by it, and settled back to its
human visions, yet more baseless, of the earthly happiness
and the tranquil home.

“Talk not now to me, beloved—taik not more now to me
of the past! Thou art here—thou wilt save me; we shall

ZANONI. 459

five yet the common happy life; that life with thee is hap-
piness and glory enough tome. ‘Traverse, if thou wilt, in
thy pride of soul, the universe; thy heart again is the uni-
verse to mine. I thought but now that I was prepared to
die; I see thee, touch thee, and again, I know how beauti-
ful a thing is life! See! through the grate the stars are
fading from the sky; the morrow will soon be here—rTuxE
MORROW which will open the prison doors! Thou sayst
thou canst save me—I will not doubt it now. Oh, let us
dwell no more in cities! I never doubted thee in our lovely
isle; no dreams haunted me there, except dreams of joy and
beauty; and thine eyes made yet more beautiful and joyous
the world in waking. To-morrow!—why do you not smile?
To-morrow, love! is not to-morrow a blessed word? Cruel!
you would punish me still, that you will not share my joy.
Aha! see our little one, how it laughs to my eyes! I will
talk to that. Child, thy father is come back!”

And taking the infant in her arms, and seating herself at
a little distance, she rocked it to and fro on her bosom, and
prattled to it, and kissed it between every word; and laughed
and wept by fits, as ever and anon she cast over her shoulder
her playful, mirthful glance, upon the father to whom those
fading stars smiled sadly their last farewell. How beauti-
ful she seemed as she thus sat, unconscious of the future.
Still half a child herself, a child laughing to her laughter—
two soft triflers on the brink of the grave! Over her throat
as she bent fell, like a golden cloud, her redundant hair; it
covered her treasure like a veil of light; and the child’s
little hands put it aside from time to time, to smile through
the parted tresses, and then to cover its face and peep and
smile again. It were cruel to damp that joy, more cruel
still to share it.

“Viola,” said Zanoni, at last, “dost thou remember that,
seated by the cave on the moonlit beach, in our bridal isle,
thou once didst ask me for this amulet?—the charm of a
superstition long vanished from the world, with the creed
to which it belonged. It is the last relic of my native land,

460 ZANONI.

and my mother, on her death-bed, placed it round my neck.
I told thee then I would give it thee on that day when the
laws of our being should become the same.”

“JT remember it well.”

“To-morrow it shall be thine!”

“Ah, that dear to-morrow!” And, gently laying down
her child, for it slept now, she threw herself on his breast,
and pointed to the dawn that began greyly to creep along
the skies.

There, in those horror-breathing walls, the day-star looked
through the dismal bars upon those three beings, in whom
were concentred whatever is most tender in human ties;
whatever is most mysterious in the combinations of the
human mind; the sleeping Innocence; the trustful Affec-
tion, that, contented with a touch, a breath, can foresee no
sorrow; the weary Science, that, traversing all the secrets
of creation, comes at last to Death for their solution, and
still clings, as it nears the threshold, to the breast of Love.
Thus, within, the within—a dungeon; without, the with-
out—stately with marts and ‘halls, with palaces and tem-
ples—Revenge and Terror at their dark schemes and coun-
ter-schemes—to and fro, upon the tide of the shifting
passions, reeled the destinies of men and nations; and hard
at hand that day-star, waning into space, looked with im-
partial eye on the church tower and the guillotine. Up
springs the blithesome morn. In yon gardens the birds re-
new their familiar song. The fishes are sporting through
the freshening waters of the Seine. The gladness of divine
nature, the roar and dissonance of mortal life awake again;
the trader unbars his windows—the flower girls troop gaily
to their haunts—busy feet are tramping to the daily drud-
geries that revolutions, which strike down kings and kaisars,
leave the same Cain’s heritage to the boor—the waggons
groan and reel to the mart—Tyranny, up betimes, holds its
pallid devée—Conspiracy, that hath not slept, hears the
clock, and whispers to its own heart, “The hour draws
near,” A group gather, eager-eyed, round the purlieus of

ZANONI. 461

the Convention Hall; to-day decides the sovereignty of
France—about the courts of the Tribunal their customary
hum and stir. No matter what the hazard of the die, or
who the ruler—this day eighty heads shall fall!
* * * *
* * * *

And she slept so sweetly. Wearied out with joy secure
in the presence of the eyes regained, she had laughed and
wept herself to sleep; and still, in that slumber, there
seemed a happy consciousness that the Loved was by—the
Lost was found. For she smiled and murmured to herself,
and breathed his name often, and stretched out her arms,
and sighed if they touched him not. He gazed upon her
as he stood apart—with what emotions it were vain to say.
She would wake no more to him—she could not know how
dearly the safety of that sleep was purchased. That mor-
row she had so yearned for,—it had come at last. How
would she greet the eve? Amidst all the exquisite hopes
with which love and youth contemplate the future, her eyes
had closed. Those hopes still lent their iris-colours to her
dreams. She would wake to live! To-morrow, and the
Reign of Terror was no more—the prison gates would ba
opened—she would go forth, with their child, into that
summer-world of light. And he ?—he turned, and his eye
fell upon the child; it was broad awake, and that clear,
serious, thoughtful look which it mostly wore watched him
with a solemn steadiness. He bent over and kissed its
lips.

“Never more,” he murmured, “O heritor of love and
grief—never more wilt thou see me in thy visions—never
more will the light of those eyes be fed by celestial com-
mune—never more can my soul guard from thy pillow the
trouble and the disease. Not such as I would have vainly
shaped it must be thy lot. In common with thy race, it
must be thine to suffer, to struggle, and to err. But mild
be thy human trials, and strong be thy spirit, to love and
to believe! And thus, as I gaze upon thee—thus may my

462 ZANONI.

nature breath into thine its last and most intense desire;
may my love for thy mother pass to thee, and in thy looks
may she hear my spirit comfort and console her. Hark!
they come!—Yes, I await ye both beyond the grave!” The
door slowly opened; the gaoler appeared, and through the
aperture rushed at the same instant, a ray of sunlight—it
streamed over the fair, flushed face of the happy sleeper—
it played like a smile upon the lips of the child, that still,
mute and steadfast, watched the movements of its father.
At that moment Viola muttered in her sleep—“ The day is
come—the gates are open! Give me thy hand; we will go
forth! To sea—to sea! How the sunshine plays upon the
waters!—to home, beloved one! to home again.”

“Citizen, thine hour is come!”

“Hist!—she- sleeps! A moment! There! it is done!—
thank Heaven!—and st¢ilZ she sleeps!” He woald not kiss
her lest he should awaken her, but gently placed round her
neck the amulet that would speak to her, hereafter, the
farewell; and promise, in that farewell,—reunion! Heis at
the threshold—he turns again, andagain. The door closes!
He is gone for ever!

She woke at last—she gazed round. “ Zanoni, it is day!”
No answer but the low wail of herchild. Merciful Heaven!
was it then all adream? She tossed back the long tresses
that must veil her sight—she felt the amulet on her bosom
—it wasnodream! “QO God! andheisgone!” She sprang
to the door—she shrieked aloud. The gaolercomes. ‘“ My
husband, my child’s father?”

“He is gone before thee, woman!”

“Whither? Speak—speak!”

“To the guillotine!” and the black door closed again.

It closed upon the Senseless! Asa lightning flash, Za-
noni’s words, his sadness, the true meaning of his mystic
gift, the very sacrifice he made for her, all became distinct
for a moment to her mind—and then darkness swept on it
like a storm, yet darkness which had its light. And, while
she sat there, mute, rigid, voiceless, as congealed to stone,

ZANONI. 463

A vision, like a wind, glided over the deeps within!—the
grim court—the judge—the jury—the accuser; and amidst
the victims, the one dauntless and radiant form.

“Thou knowest the danger to the State-—confess!”

“I know; and I keep my promise. Judge, I reveal thy
doom! I know that the Anarchy thou callest a state ex-
pires with the setting of this sun. Hark! to the tramp
without!—hark! to the roar of voices! Room there, ye
Dead!—room in hell for Robespierre and his crew!”

They hurry into court—the hasty and pale messengers—
there is confusion, and fear, and dismay! “Off with the
conspirator !—and to-morrow the woman thou wouldst have
saved shall die!”

“To-morrow, President, the steel falls on THEE!”

On, through the crowded and roaring streets, on moves
the Procession of Death. Ha, brave people! thou art
aroused at last. They shall not die!—Death is dethroned!
Robespierre has fallen!—they rush to the rescue! Hideous
in the tumbril, by the side of Zanoni, raved and gesticulated
that form which, in his prophetic dreams, he had seen his
companion at the place of death. “Save us!—save us!”
howled the atheist Nicot. “Oh, brave populace! we shall
be saved!” And through the crowd, her dark hair stream-
ing wild, her eyes flashing fire, pressed a female form—
“My Clarence!” she shrieked in the soft southern language,
native to the ears of Viola; “butcher! what hast thou done
with Clarence?” Her eyes roved over the eager faces of
the prisoners; she saw not the one she sought; “Thank
Heaven!—thank Heaven! I am not thy murderess!”

Nearer and nearer press the populace—another moment,
and the deathsman is defrauded. O Zanoni! why still upon
thy brow the resignation that speaks no hope? Tramp!
tramp! through the streets, dash the armed troop: faithful
to his order, Black Henriot leads them on. Tramp! tramp!
over the craven and scattered crowd! Here, flying in dis-
order—there, trampled in the mire, the shrieking rescuers!
And amidst them, stricken by the sabres of the guard, her

464 ZANONI.

long hair blood-bedabbled, lies the Italian woman; and still
upon her writhing lips sits joy, as they murmur, “ Clar-
ence! I have not destroyed thee!”

On to the Barriére du Troéne. It frowns dark in the air—
the giant instrument of murder! One after one to the glaive;
—another and another andanother! Mercy! Oh, mercy! Is
the bridge between the sun and the shades so brief?—brief
asa sigh? There, there—his turn has come. “Die not
yet; leave me not behind. Hear me—hear me!” shrieked
the inspired sleeper. ‘ What! and thou smilest still!”
They smiled—those pale lips—and with the smile, the place
of doom, the headsman, the horror vanished! With that
smile, all space seemed suffused in eternal sunshine. Up
from the earth he rese—he hovered over her—a thing not
of matter—an IpEA of joy and light! Behind, Heaven
opened, deep after deep; and the Hosts of Beauty were
seen, rank upon rank, afar; and “ Welcome,” in a myriad
melodies broke from your choral multitude, ye People of -
the Skies—“ Welcome! O purified by sacrifice, and im-
mortal only through the grave—this it is to die.” And
radiant amidst the radiant, the ImaceE stretched forth its
arms, and murmured to the sleeper, ‘Companion of Eter-
nity !—this it is to die!”

x * *
* x * 3

“fo! wherefore do they make us signs from the house-
tops? Wherefore gather the crowds through the streets?
Why sounds the bell? Why shrieks the tocsin? Hark to
the guns!—the armed clash! Fellow captives, is there
hope for us at last?”

So gasp out the prisoners, each to each. Day wanes,—
evening closes; still they press their white faces to the bars;
and still from the window, and from house-top, they see
the smiles of friends—the waving signals! “Hurrah!” at
last—-“ Hurrah! Robespierre is fallen! The Reign of
Terror isno more! God hath permitted us to live!”

Yes; cast thine eyes into the hall, where the tyrant and

ZANONI. 465

his conclave hearkened to the roar without! Fulfilling the
prophecy of Dumas, Henriot, drunk with blood and alcohol,
reels within, and chucks his gory sabre on the floor. “ All
is lost!”

“Wretch! thy cowardice hath destroyed us!” yelled the
fierce Coffinhal, as he hurled the coward from the window.

Calm as despair stands the stern St. Just; the palsied
Couthon crawls, grovelling, beneath the table; a shot—
an explosion! Robespierre would destroy himself! The
trembling hand has mangled, and failed to kill! The clock
of the Hotel de Ville strikes the third hour. Through the
battered door—along the gloomy passages, into the Death-
hall, burst the crowd. Mangled, livid, blood-stained,
speechless, but not unconscious, sits haughty yet, in his seat
erect, the Master-Murderer! Around him they throng—
they hoot—they execrate! their faces gleaming in the toss-
ing torches! He, and not the starry Magian, the real
Sorcerer! And round fis last hours gather the Fiends he
raised!

They drag him forth! Open thy gates, inexorable prison!
The Conciergerie receives its prey! Never a word again
on earth spoke Maximilien Robespierre! Pour forth thy
thousands, and tens of thousands, emancipated Paris! To
the Place de la Révolution rolls the tumbril of the King of
Terror—St. Just, Dumas, Couthon, his companions to the
grave! A woman—a childless woman, with hoary hair,
springs to his side—“Thy death makes me drunk with
joy!” He opened his bloodshot eyes—“ Descend to hell
with the curses of wives and mothers!”

The headsmen wrench the rag from the shattered jaw!
A shriek, and the crowd laugh, and the axe descends amidst
the shout of the countless thousands. And blackness rushes
on thy soul, Maximilien Robespierre! So ended the Reign

of Terror.
* * *

* * % *

Daylight in the prison. From cell to cell they hurry
30

466 ZANONI.

with the news; crowd upon crowd:—the joyous captives
mingled with the very gaolers, who, for fear, would fain
seem joyous too—they stream through the dens and alleys
of the grim house they will shortly leave. They burst
into a cell forgotten since the previous morning. They
found there a young female, sitting upon her wretched bed;
her arms crossed upon her bosom, her face raised upward;
the eyes unclosed, and a smile, of more than serenity—of
bliss upon her lips. Even in the riot of their joy, they
drew back in astonishment and awe. Never had they seen
life so beautiful; and as they crept nearer, and with noise-
less feet, they saw that the lips breathed not, that the re-
pose was of marble, that the beauty and the ecstasy were
of death. They gathered round in silence; and lo! at her
feet there was a-young infant, who, wakened by their tread,
looked at them steadfastly, and with its rosy fingers played
with its dead mother’s robe. An orphan there in the dun-
geon vault!

“Poor one!” said a female (herself a parent),— “and
they say the father fell yesterday; and now, the mother!
Alone in the world, what can be its fate?”

The infant smiled fearlessly on the crowd, as the woman
spoke thus. And the old Priest, who stood amongst them,
said gently, “Woman, see! the orphan smiles! Tue
FATHERLESS ARE THE CARE OF Gop!”

ARGUMENT.

HUMAN existence, subject to, and exempt from, ordinary conditions
— (Sickness, Poverty, Ignorance, Death).

Science is ever striving to carry the most gifted beyond ordinary
conditions—the result being as many victims as efforts, and the
striver being finally left a solitary—for his object is unsuitable to
the natures he has to deal with.

The pursuit of the Ideal involves so much emotion as to render
the Idealist vulnerable by human passion—however long and well
guarded, still vulnerable—liable, at last, to a union with Instinct.
Passion obscures both Insight and Forecast. All effort to elevate
Instinct to Idealism is abortive, the laws of their being not coincid-
ing (in the early stage of the existence of the one). Instinct is
either alarmed, and takes refuge in Superstition or Custom, or is
left helpless to human charity, or given over to providential care.

Idealism, stripped of insight and forecast, loses its serenity, be-
comes subject once more to the horror from which it had escaped,
and by accepting its aids, forfeits the higher help of Faith :—aspi-
ration, however, remaining still possible; and, thereby, slow resto-
ration ; and also SOMETHING BETTER.

Summoned by aspiration, Faith extorts from Fear itself the say-
ing truth to which Science continues blind, and which Idealism it-
self hails as its crowning acquisition,—the inestimable Proor
wrought out by all labors and all conflicts.

Pending the elaboration of this proof,

Conventionalism plods on, safe and complacent :

Selfish passion perishes, grovelling and hopeless :

Instinct sleeps, in order to a loftier waking : and

Idealism learns, as its ultimate lesson, that self-sacrifice is true re-
demption; that the region beyond the grave is the fitting one for
exemption from mortal conditions ; and that Death is the everlasting
portal, indicated by the finger of God,—the broad avenue, through
which man does not issue, solitary and stealthy, into the region of
Free Existence, but enters triumphant, hailed by a hierarchy of im-
mortal natures.

The result is (in other words), TaaT THE UNIVERSAL HUMAN Lor
Is, AFTER ALL, THAT OF THE HIGHEST PRIVILEGE,

NOTE.

THE curiosity which Zanont has excited among those who think
it worth while to dive into the subtler meanings they believe it in-
tended to convey, may excuse me in adding a few words, not in ex-
planation of its mysteries, but upon the principles which permit
them. Zanoni is not, as some have supposed, an allegory; but be-
neath the narrative it relates, typical meanings are concealed. It is
to be regarded in two characters, distinct yet harmonious—Ist, that
of the simple and objective fiction, in which (once granting the
license of the author to select a subject which is, or appears to be,
preternatural) the reader judges the writer by the usual canons—
viz., by the consistency of his characters under such admitted cir-
cumstances, the interest of his story, and the coherence of his plot;
--of the work regarded in this view, it is not my intention to say
anything, whether in exposition of the design, or in defence of the
execution. No typical meanings (which, in plain terms, are but
moral suggestions, more or less numerous, more or less subtle) can
afford just excuse to a writer of fiction, for the errors he should
avoid in the most ordinary novel. We have no right to expect the
most ingenious reader to search for the inner meaning, if the ob-
vious course of the narrative be tedious and displeasing. It is, on
the contrary, in proportion as we are satisfied with the objective
sense of a work of imagination, that we are inclined to search into
its depths for the more secret intentions of the author. Were we
not so divinely charmed with Faust, and Hamlet, and Prometheus, so
ardently carried on by the interest of the story told to the common
understanding, we should trouble ourselves little with the types in
each which all of us can detect—none of us can elucidate ;—none
elucidate, for the essence of type is mystery. We behold the fig-
ure, we cannot lift the veil. The Author himself is not called upon
to explain what he designed. An Allegory is a personation of dis-
tinct and definite things—Virtues or Qualities—and the key can be
given easily ; but a writer who conveys typical meanings may ex-
press them in myriads. He cannot disentangle all the hues which
commingle into the light he seeks to cast upon truth; and therefore
the great masters of this enchanted soil—Fairyland of Fairyland—

470 NOTE.

Poetry embedded beneath Poetry—wisely leave to each mind to
guess at such truths as best please or instruct it. To have asked
Goethe to explain the Faust would have entailed as complex and
puzzling an answer as to have asked Mephistopheles to explain what
is beneath the earth we tread on. The stores beneath may differ for
every passenger; each step may require a new description; and
what is treasure to the geologist may be rubbish to the miner. Six
worlds may lie under a sod, but to the common eye they are but six
layers of stone.

Art in itself, if not necessarily typical, is essentially a suggester
of something subtler than that which it embodies to the sense.
What Pliny tells us of a great painter of old, is true of most great
painters; “their works express something beyond the works”—
“more felt than understood.” This belongs to the concentration of
intellect which high Art demands, and which, of all the Arts, Sculp-
ture best illustrates. Take Thorwaldsen’s statue of Mercury—it is
but a single figure, yet it tells to those conversant with Mythology
a whole legend. The god has removed the pipe from his lips, be-
cause he has lulled already the Argus, whom you do not see, to
sleep. He is pressing his heel against his sword, because the mo-
ment is come when he may slay his victim. Apply the principle of
this noble concentration of Art to the moral writer; he, too, gives
to your eye but a single figure; yet each attitude, each expression,
may refer to events and truths you must have the learning to re-
member, the acuteness to penetrate, or the imagination to conjec-
ture. But toa classical judge of sculpture, would not the exquisite
pleasure of discovering the all not told in Thorwaldsen’s master-
piece be destroyed if the artist had engraved in detail his meaning
at the base of the statue? Is it not the same with the typical sense
which the artist in words conveys? The pleasure of divining Art
in each is the noble exercise of all by whom Art is worthily re-
garded.

We of the humbler race not unreasonably shelter ourselves under
the authority of the Masters on whom the world’s judgment is pro-
nounced ; and great names are cited, not with the arrogance of
equals, but with the humility of inferiors.

The author of Zanoni gives, then, no key to mysteries, be they
trivial or important, which may be found in the secret chambers by
those who lift the tapestry from the wall; but out of the many solu-
tions of the main enigma—if enigma, indeed, there be—which have
been sent to him, he ventures to select the one which he subjoins,
from the ingenuity and thought which it displays, and from respect
for the distinguished writer (one of the most eminent our time has
produced) who deemed him worthy of an honour he is proud to dis-
play. He leaves it to the reader to agree with, or dissent from, the

ZANONI EXPLAINED. 471

explanation. “A hundred men, ” says the old Platonist, “may read
the book by the help of the same lamp, yet all may differ on the
text ; for the lamp only lights the characters—the mind must divine
the meaning.” The object of a Parable is not that of a Problem; it
does not seek to convince, but to suggest. It takes the thought be-
low the surface of the understanding to the deeper intelligence
which the world rarely tasks. It is not sunlight on the water, it is
a hymn chanted to the Nymph who hearkens and awakes below.

““ZANONI’ EXPLAINED.

Shp Rae oh

Mejnouvr—Contemplation of the Actual—Scirmncr. Always old, and
must last as long as the Actual. Less fallible than Idealism, but
less practically potent, from its ignorance of the human heart.

Zanont—Contemplation of the Ideal—IpEALiIsm. Always necessarily
sympathetic; lives by enjoyment; and is therefore typified by
eternal youth.! Idealism is the potent Interpreter and Prophet of
the Real; but its powers are impaired in proportion to their ex-
posure to human passion.

Viola—Human Instinct. (Hardly worthy to be called Love, as
Love would not forsake its object at the bidding of Superstition. )
Resorts, first, in its aspiration after the Ideal, to tinsel shows;
then relinquishes these for a higher love; but is still, from the
conditions of its nature, inadequate to this, and liable to suspicion
and mistrust. Its greatest force (Maternal Instinct) has power
to penetrate some secrets, to trace some movements of the Ideal,

1“T do not understand the making Idealism less undying (on this
scene of existence) than Science.” — COMMENTATOR. — Because,
granting the above premises, Idealism is more subjected than Sci-
ence to the Affections, or to Instinct, because the Affections, sooner
or later, force Idealism into the Actual, and in the Actual its immor-
tality departs. The only absolutely Actual portion of the work is
found in the concluding scenes that depict the Reign of Terror.
The introduction of this part was objected to by some as out of
keeping with the fanciful portions that preceded it. But if the
writer of the solution has rightly shown or suggested the intention
of the author, the most strongly and rudely actual scene of the age
in which the story is cast was the necessary and harmonious com-
pletion of the whole. The excesses and crimes of Humanity are the
-grave of the Ideal.—AvTHoR.

472 ZANONI EXPLAINED.

but, too feeble to command them, yields to Superstition, —sees
sin where there is none, while committing sin, under a false guid-
~ ance,—weakly seeking refuge amidst the very tumults of the war-
ring passions of the Actual, while deserting the serene Ideal, and
expiring (not perishing, but becoming transmuted) in the aspira-
tion after having the laws of the two natures reconciled.

(It might best suit popular apprebension to call these three the

Understanding, the Imagination, and the Heart.)

Child—NEw-BORN Instinct, while trained and informed by Ideal-
ism, promises a preter-human result by its early, incommunicable
vigilance and intelligence, but is compelled, by inevitable orphan-
hood, and the one-half of the laws of its existence, to lapse into
ordinary concitions.

Aidon-Ai—Farru, which manifests its splendour, and delivers its
Fo oracles, and imparts its marvels, only to the higher moods of the
- goul, and whose directed antagonism is with FEAR; so that those

who employ the resources of Fear must dispense with those of
‘Faith. Yet aspiration holds open a way of restoration, and may
summon Faith, even when the cry issues from beneath the yoke
of Fear.

Dweller of the Threshold—FEAR (or Horror), from whose ghastli-
ness men are protected by the opacity of the region of Prescrip-
tion and Custom. The moment this protection is relinquished,
and the human spirit pierces the cloud, and enters alone on the
unexplored regions of Nature, this Natural Horror haunts it, and
is tobe successfully encountered only by defiance, —by aspiration
towards, and reliance on, the Former and Director of Nature,
whose Messenger and Instrument of reassurance is Faith.

Mervale—CoNnvENTIONALISM.

Nicot—Base, grovelling, malignant PAssron.

~~ Glyndon—UNSUSTAINED ASPIRATION :—Would follow Instinct, but
is deterred by Conventionalism :—is overawed by Idealism, yet
attracted, and transiently inspired; but has not steadiness for
the initiatory contemplation of the Actual. He conjoins its
snatched privileges with a besetting sensualism, and suffers at
once from the horror of the one, and the disgust of the other, in-
volving the innocent in the fatal conflict of his spirit. When on
the point of perishing, he is rescued by Idealism; and, unable to
rise to that species of existence, is grateful to be replunged into
the region of the Familiar, and takes up his rest henceforth in
Custom. (Mirror of Young Manhood. )

Spotliswoode «& Co. Lid., Printers, New-street Square, London,

WIKRARY . UNIVERSITY COLLEGE CHESTER

et: ¥ ef ie a, oe ee ey aby tee d
‘ -— : ; +?

,

‘

rage
