"THE QUEST FOR THE DRAGON OF KOMODO"
By Douglas Burden — Natural History (Journal of the American Museum of Natural History), Vol. XXVII, No. 1, January-February 1927, pp. 3-18
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text extracts Burden's article from the January-February 1927 issue of Natural History magazine, as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier naturalhistory2716newy). The 1927 magazine publication is in the public domain. The extraction is complete: the full article text (photo captions from the original layout are not included).

========================================================================

By  DOUGLAS  BURDEN

Trustee  of  the'American  Museum


FOR  a  long  time  there  have  been
various  fantastic  reports  in  circu-
lation with  regard  to  the  size  and
habits  of  Varanus  komodoensis,  a  big
lizard  from  Komodo,  one  of  the  Lesser
Sunda  Islands  in  Malaysia.  The  first
description  of  the  species  was  given  in
1912  by  P.  A.  Ouwens  of  the  Botanical
Gardens  at  Buitenzorg,  Java.  Since
that  time  only  a  few  skins  and  no
skeletons  have  made  their  way  to
European  museums.  Except  for  the
original  description,  nothing  whatso-
ever has  appeared  which  added  to  our
knowledge  of  these  semimythical
dragon  lizards.

Our  desire  to  study  these  beasts,
coupled  with  the  fact  that  the  Ameri-
can ]\Iuseum  of  Natural  History  had
no  collection  from  the  Lesser  Sunda
Islands,  and  that  there  were  many
interesting  problems  in   geology  and


zoogeography  to  be  worked  out  in  this
region,  finally  resulted  in  our  determin-
ing to  go  to  the  East  Indies.  There-
fore, with  the  big  lizard  as  the  chief
incentive,  a  small  expedition  was
organized,  the  personnel  of  which
included  Dr.  E.  R.  Dunn,  one  of  the
foremost  herpetologists  of  the  United
States,  F.  J.  Defosse,  a  great  hunter
from  Indo-China,  whose  chief  task  was
to  capture  the  lizards  alive,  and  a
Chinese  camera-man  from  Singapore,
Lee  Fai,  by  name.  Mrs.  Burden  pre-
pared herself  to  take  charge  of  the  still
photography.  Through  the  kindness  of
the  Dutch  Government,  we  obtained
the  use  of  an  official  yacht,  the  S.  S.
"Dog,"  for  a  period  of  two  months.
The  Rajah  of  Sumbaw^a,  a  neighboring
island,  acting  on  orders  from  the
Colonial  Government,  assigned  to  us
fifteen  Malav  hunters.     Thev  were  a


NATURAL  HISTORY


wild  outfit,  consistinij;  of  independent
tribesmen  from  the  innermost  jungles
of  the  isles, — and  rough  looking  cut-
throats they  were,  their  mouths  all
stained  from  chewing  betel  nuts,  their
lips  distorted,  and  their  teeth  blackened
or  gone  entirely.


The  S.  S.  "Dog"  on  which  we  traveled  more  than
1500  miles.  This  official  yacht  was  lent  to  our  expedi-
tion by  the  Dutch  Colonial  Government

It  was  in  Bima  that  we  unexpectedly
had  our  first  sight  of  Varanus.  Certain
Chinese  poachers  had  been  brought  in
with  two  large  specimens  which  they
had  just  taken.  The  lizards  caused
great  excitement  among  the  natives,
who  had  known  the  beasts  only  by
villainous  reputation.  The  larger  of
the  lizards  had  increased  this  ill  fame
by  attacking  a  horse  that  wandered  too
near,  and  inflicting  such  damage  that
the  injured  animal  had  to  be  shot.

On  June  9,  after  a  journey  of  15,000
mileS;  we  at  last  sighted  the  island  of
Komodo.  At  the  first  sign,  I  hurried
up  to  the  bridge  and  examined  the
dim  outline  of  mountains  through  the
glasses.     In  some  respects  it  differed


from  what  my  eager  imagination  had
pictured.  Instead  of  lofty  peaks,  there
were  great  areas  of  high  land.  A  few
wisps  of  white  cloud  hung  over  the
mountains,  and  with  the  powerful
lenses  I  could  discern  patches  of  jungle.

It  was  an  important  moment,  yet,
as  I  turned  to  the  captain,  I  noted  that
he  preserved  his  usual  professional
calm.  I  expected  him  to  show  at  least
some  realization  that  we  were  entering
waters  which  were  said  to  be  very
difficult  of  passage,  for  we  were  now  in
Linta  Straits,  of  which  Wallace  writes
that  the  violent  tide  rips  cause  the  sea
to  "boil  and  foam  and  dance  like  the
rapids  below  a  cataract,  so  that  vessels
are  sometimes  swamped  in  the  finest
weather  and  under  the  brightest  skies."
Already  we  were  entering  the  zone  of
rough  water,  and  I  could  see  it  boiling
and  churning  between  the  upraised
coral  reefs  strewn  about.  But  the
captain,  instead  of  barking  out  new  and
excited  orders,  stood  silent,  with  an  air
of  entire  confidence  in  the  boat  and
in  the  orders  already  given.

On  returning  to  the  deck,  I  found  my
companions  attempting  to  continue  the
occupations  of  the  moment,  but  there
was  an  unmistakable  undercurrent  of
excitement.  That  wily  old  hunter,
Defosse,  was  itching  to  stretch  his  legs
on  shore.  I  could  tell  by  the  way  he
was  polishing  his  rifle  and  fingering  the
trigger.  Doctor  Dunn  was  restlessly
thumbing  the  pages  of  his  book,  while
Mrs.  Burden,  swinging  in  a  hammock,
forced  herself  to  continue  with  her
novel  as  if  real  adventure  could  wait.
Lee  Fai,  with  true  Chinese  conceptions
of  geography,  hadn't  the  slightest
notion  where  we  were,  but  rather  ex-
pected to  reach  Manila  soon.

After  all,  however,  the  period  be-
tween sighting  the  island  and  the  actual
landing  was  a  long  one.     There  was


THE  QUEST  FOR  THE  DRAGON  OF  KOMODO


A    N  D  A      SEA         0


fQ


^


The  route  of  the  expedition. — The  dotted  line  represents  the  outward  journey  from  Surabaya,  Java,  to  the
little  town  of  Bima  in  Sumbawa,  thence  to  Komodo  (the  small  island  lying  between  Flores  and  Sumbawa),  and  to
Wetta.  The  crosses  show  the  return  journey  to  Singapore  by  way  of  Api  volcano,  Lombok,  and  the  far-famed  island
of  Bali


really  no  way  for  us  to  show  the  excite-
ment we  felt.  I  have  no  doubt  that  those
intrepid  explorers  who  finally  reached
the  North  and  South  poles  could  say
little  more  than,  ''Well,  here  we  are.
What  now?"

We  were  soon  threading  our  way
among  the  outlying  coral  rocks.  The
beauty  of  the  scene  recalled  to  my  mind
a  bit  of  poetry  by  Oliver  Wendell
Holmes  that  seemed  to  have  been
meant  to  describe  this  very  spot:

The  venturous  bark  that  flings

On  the  sweet  summer  wind  its  purpled  wings

In  gulfs  enchanted  where  the  siren  sings,

And  coral  reefs  lie  bare,
Where  the  cold  sea-maids  rise  to   sun  their
streaming  hair.

As  we  came  closer  to  the  island,  I
could  see  beyond  the  scant  growths  of
tall  "gubbong"  palms  naked  pinnacles
of  rock  whose  black  heads  reared  up
to  the  sky.  Their  sculpture  was  bold
and  their  outline  fantastic.  These
wonderful  phj^siographic  forms  showed
us  at  once  that  Komodo  is  not  lime-
stone, as  has  been  reported,  but  vol-
canic, for  these  striking  features  of  the
landscape  are  volcanic  necks,  or  plugs,
formed  bv  the  coolino-  of  molten  magma


within  the  vents  of  volcanos.  From
the  condition  of  these  plugs  it  was
evident  that  the  volcanic  action  had
ceased  long  since,  for  erosion  had
washed  away  the  cone,  leaving  the  more
durable  igneous  core  standing  aloft
as  a  record  of  the  ancient  turmoil.

It  struck  me  that  the  process  of  ero-
sion was  far  more  advanced  on
Komodo  than  on  the  other  Sunda
islands.  In  the  others  visited  by  the
expedition  it  was  still  in  a  youthful
stage.  Since  the  climatic  conditions
and  the  character  of  the  rock  are  uni-
form throughout  the  chain,  this  differ-
ence indicates  either  that  volcanic
activity  became  dormant  very  early,  or
that  Komodo  is  actually  older  than  the
others — an  interesting  consideration  in
determining  the  reasons  for  the  re-
stricted range  of  Yaranus  komodoefisis.

I  soon  put  aside  theorizing,  however,
for  we  had  slipped  suddenly  from  the
churning  waters  into  the  calm  of  a
little  harbor,  and  had  come  to  anchor
in  the  lee  of  a  tiny  island.  After  the
cramped  quarters  on  the  boat,  we
were  eager  to  land,  and  the  weird
beauty  of  the  spot  was  alread}^  begin-
ning to  work  its  magic.     The  shore


NATURAL  HISTORY


The  home  of  the  dragon  lizard.— A  glimpse  of  the  rugged  mountains  of  Komodo.
sun.  it  was  exhausting  work  to  climb  around  these  precipices


Under  a  broiling,  tropical


was  a  curving  ribbon  of  shining  sand;
bej^ond,  the  tall  gubbongs  stretched
aloft  like  sentiiials  to  the  sky.

As  we  neared  the  beach,  we  jumped
out  of  the  small  boat  and  waded  in  to
shore.     Mrs.  Burden  and  I  ran  along


the  edge  of  the  surf  casting  our  eyes
this  way  and  that  to  enjoy  the  glorious
scenes  that  charmed  us  at  every  turn.
Everywhere  we  caught  signs  of  abun-
dant game, — particularly  deer  and  wild
boar.     They  seemed  to  be  countless.


THE  QUEST  FOR  THE  DRAGON  OF  KOMODO


Just  as  we  went  on  hoai'd  a^ain,  lliesun
was  setting,  and  the  rocky  islets  and
piuple  sea  were  eatehin^  tints  of  gold
Ironi  the  sun  and  showers  of  color  from
the  changing  sky  overhead.

Late  that  night  I  heard  torn  tonis
beating  across  the  water,  a  thrilling
and  barbarous  rhythm,  in  a  ceaseless
monotone.  A  native  prau  was  an-
chored in  the  bay,  and  the  drum  beats
were  a  summons  to  the  god  of  the  winds
to  send  good  blowing  weather  on  the
morrow.  The  potency  of  this  summons
is  never  doubted  by  the  children  of  the
Eastern  Seas.

Early  on  the  morning  of  June  11
we  started  to  explore  the  island.  Our
object  was  to  find  a  camping  site  where
tracks  of  the  big  lizard  were  plentiful.
Defosse  and  Doctor  Dunn  set  out  to
the  north,  w^hile  I  went  directly  west
over  the  mountains.  Lee  Fai,  as
tired  as  if  he  had  been  laboring  for
months,  remained  on  the  ship  in  repose.

After  many  hours  of  hard  climb-
ing, we  reached  the  divide.  Here  we
saw  an  abundance  of  game,  and  I  had
no  difficulty  in  bringing  down  a  fine
buck  which  we  needed  as  meat.

A  da}^  later  I  discovered  a  beautiful
camping  site  at  an  altitude  of  nearly
2000  feet,  w^here  there  was  an  ample
suppty  of  good  water.  It  was  a  glori-
ous spot,  so  I  hurried  back  toward
the  bay  to  announce  my  find.  The
return  was  not  without  adventure,
however,  for  I  had  my  first  encounter
with  a  Komodo  wild  buffalo  or  "  carra-
bao"  which  we  had  not  known  existed
here.  And  I  found  the  beast  a  more
pugnacious  customer,  if  anything,  than
those  of  Indo-China.  I  was  intent
upon  locating  some  blue  pigeons  whose
booming  I  had  heard,  and  pushed  into
some  thick  bamboo  jungle  at  the  edn*''
of  a  w'ater  hole.  The  place  was  far
from  deserted.    First  a  flock  of  ducks


flew  up,  and  tiien  there  was  a  terrific
crashing  off  to  my  right.  A  native
with  me  cried  in  terror  "Carrabao!"
and  at  the  same  moment  I  saw  a  wild
buffalo  not  twenty-five  yards  away,
headed  toward  me.  His  nose  was  in
the  air,  his  horns  seemed  to  be  laid  back
against  his  flanks,  his  nostrils  were  di-
lated, and  from  the  speed  with  which
he  was  coming,  I  saw  that  he  intended
to  charge  me.  I  had  no  steel  bullets,
and  as  lead  bullets  were  of  no  use  in  this
case,  I  took  to  my  heels.  I  was  much
relieved  when  he  finally  stopped  on  the
edge  of  a  thick  jungle  whither  I  had  run
knowing  that  these  animals  will  only
attack  on  hard,  open  ground.

I  arrived  at  the  beach  dead  tired,
and  found  that  Doctor  Dunn  and  De-
fosse  had  enjoyed  a  highly  satisfactory
day.  They  had  found  plenty  of  lizard
tracks,  and  such  a  variety  of  bird  life
that  even  Defosse  felt  that  Komodo
hardly  needed  the  addition  of  tigers
and  elephants  to  make  it  a  sportsman's
paradise. ""'  The  game  birds  included
blue  pheasant,  jungle  fowl,  five  or  six
different  species  of  pigeon  of  untold
beauty,  turtle  doves,  quail,  ducks,  and
a  yellow-legged  running  hen  which  beare
a  close  resemblance  to  the  tinamoo  of
Central  America.  Moreover,  the  noisy
yellow-crested  cockatoos  were  alwaj^s
in  evidence,  flying  over  the  jungle  and
chattering  raucously.

By  the  middle  of  June  we  were  com-
fortably encamped  in  a  spot  command-
ing a  -wide  view.  The  whole  front  of
our  little  hut  was  open  to  the  sea  breeze.
The  roof  of  woven  palm  leaves  was
mellow^  and  bearded  with  age,  and
rattled  dryly  in  the  wind.  From  the
edge  of  it  dangled  all  manner  of
tangled  growths  amid  which  a  swarm  of
malignant  things  found  concealment, —
spiders,  scorpions,  centipedes,  lizards,
snakes, — w^e    never     knew     what    to


NATURAL  HISTORY


Tracks  of  a  large  Varanu."  in  the  mud.     In  the  milUons  of  years  to  come
such  tracks  as  these  may  well  be  the  fossil  imprints  of  an  extinct  species


expect  next.  Very  early  we  found  a
green  pit  viper  there.

Inside,  we  soon  had  many  evidences
of  a  real  home.  Clustered  around  the
lamp  on  the  table  was  a  miscellaneous
collection, — ammunition,  notebooks,
flash  lights,  boxes  of  every  variety.  We
slept  on  a  raised  bamboo  platform.

As  soon  as  we  put  out  baits  for
Varanus,  they  began  to  flock  around  in
considerable  numbers.  Doctor  Dunn
took  his  stand  where  he  could  not  be
seen  by  the  creatures  and  watched  them
all  day.    His  notebooks  soon  began  to


bulge  with  meticulous  notes  recording
every  move  of  each  beast  and  the
exact  time  of  each  move.  Lee  Fai
obediently  went  out  under  orders  to
take  pictures,  but  always  returned  soon,
grumbling  to  himself  that  "walking
much  trouble. ' '  Def osse  was  not  wholly
content  with  scientiflc  observation;
he  wanted  action.  He  pulled  his
mustache;  he  cleaned  his  rifle;  and
his  conversation  always  reverted  to
Indo-China,  and  the  glorious  hunting
in  the  countrj^  north  of  Saigon.
For  the  rest  of  us,  we  found  sufficient


THE  QUEST  FOR  THE  DRAGON  OF  KOMODO


excitement  for  a  while  in  observing  tlie
feeding  habits  of  the  great  dragon
lizards.  For  hours  together  we  watched
them  from  the  "bomas"  or  blinds,  as
they  devoured  the  bait.  Voracious  as
they  were,  it  was  interesting  to  note
what  careful  watch  they  kept,  especially
the  smaller  ones,  who  seemed  terrified
when  an  adult  made  his  appearance.
Whenever  we  saw  a  smaller  one  turn
and  dash  away  with  lightning-like
rapidity,  we  knew  that  a  big  lizard
was  approaching.  For  several  minutes
no  lizard  would  be  seen,  then  suddenly,
from  behind  a  tree,  a  big  black  head
with  two  beady  eyes  would  appear.
For  a  while  it  would  remain  absolutely
motionless;  only  the  hawklike  eyes
would  move,  peering  grimly  from  under
bony  "ej'ebrows,"  while  they  .surveyed
ever}^  inch  of  the  surrounding  terri-
tory. Then,  assured  of  safety,  the
beast  would  lower  his  head,  and  with
his  long,  3^ellow,  bifurcated  tongue  con-
stantly darting  forth,  he  would  move


Mr  Burden  studying  Malay. — It  was  so  cool  in
camp  on  the  siunmit  of  Komodo  that  one  could  sit  in
the  bright  noon  sunlight  without  discomfort

ponderously  toward  the  bait.  As  he
walked,  the  impression  he  gave  was  of
tremendous    weight  and  strength.


The  miraculous  Chu,  our  Chinese  boy  from  Peking,  cooking  at  seashore  camp.    The  palm-leaf  boxUke  structure
— the  handiwork  of  Chu — is  an  improvised  oven


10


NATURAL  HISTORY


Although  the  small  ones  are  I'ather
slim  and  agile,  the  adults  are  thickset,
muscular  creatures  with  very  heavy
bodies.  After  they  have  attained  a
length  of  seven  feet  their  weight  in-


Dr.  E.  R.  Dunn  of  Smith  College,  a  leading  authority
on  reptile  life,  and  herpetologist  of  the  expedition,
holding  a  green  pit  viper.  Komodo  can  boast  of  all
three  classes  of  poisonous  snakes-  cobras,  \'iperp,  and
pit  vipers

creases  out  of  all  proportion  to  their
length,  and  doubles,  I  think,  between
seven  and  eight  feet.

In  the  process  of  gorging,  the  long
sharp  claws  are  used  indiscriminately
for  scraping  and  tearing,  while  the
thin,  recurved  teeth  with  sharp  serrated
edges  are  employed  to  rip  off  chunks
of  the  meat .  The  beast  maneuvers  this
by  seesawing  back  and  forth  on  braced
legs,  giving  a  wrench  at  the  bait  with
every  backward  move.  Seen  thus,
with  jaws  buried  in  the  meat,  and  neck
curved  forward  and  down,  he  bears  a
remarkable   resemblance  to  Tyranno-


saurus  as  restored  in  modern  paintings.

Whatever  he  can  wrench  off,  regard-
less of  size,  is  swallowed  at  a  gulp.
One  big  fellow  took  in  the  whole  hind
quarters  of  a  deer, — hoofs,  legs,  hams,
vertebrae,  and  all.  If  he  is  surprised
when  feeding,  the  result  is  likely  to  be
disastrous,  for  the  weird  beast  becomes
excited    and    immediately    disgorges  .

With  such  pictures  in  mind,  I  tingled
with  excitement  at  my  first  sight  of  one
of  the  huge  creatures  in  the  open.

I  was  at  the  foot  of  the  pinnacle
country,  on  a  gently  sloping  talus
cone  covered  with  short  grass  and  a
few  palm  trees.  This  was  the  very
section  of  the  country  in  which  the
Duke  of  Mecklenburg  is  said  to  have
shot  three  of  the  beasts  in  chance
encounter.  Here  I  saw  a  lizard  working
his  way  slowly  down  the  mountain.  I
scrambled  up  to  a  point  of  vantage,
taking  care  not  to  expose  myself  to
view,  as  the  eye  sight  of  Varanus  is
much  keener  than  that  of  a  deer.  It
was  a  marvelous  picture, — a  prmieval
monster  in  a  primeval  setting.  Had  he
only  stood  up  on  his  hind  legs,  as  I
now  know  he  can  do,  the  dinosaurian
picture  would  have  been  complete.
Against  a  background  of  sunburnt
grass  he  looked  quite  black  with  age.
As  he  approached,  three  pigs  dashed
away  into  the  distance.  Once  he
stopped  for  a  long  time  with  his  nose
buried  deep  in  the  grass,  as  if  scenting
out  some  shrew  or  rat  or  small  lizard  to
add  as  another  choice  morsel  to  his
already  distended  stomach.  In  my
glasses  he  filled  the  whole  field  of
vision,  and  as  there  was  nothing  by
which  to  compare  his  size,  I  could  quite
easily  imagine  him  to  be  twenty^or
thirty  feet  long.  I  was  wrong,  however,
for  they  do  not  exceed  ten  feet  in  length.
I  was  filled  with  a  longing  to  bag  one  of
these  creatures  alive,  and  after  he  disap-


THE  QUEST  FOR  THE  DRAGON  OF  KOMODO


11


poar(>tl  from  si<!;lit,  I  liunicd  hack  to
aiTaiii!;o  for  more  active  ium1inj>;.

It  was  Mrs.  Burden.,  however,  who
had  the  first  exciting  encounter  with
one  of  the  Hzards.  Together  with  De-
fosse,  she  went  out  early  one  morning
to  see  if  any  marauding  Varanus  had
been  at  the  bait  during  the  night.
Upon  reaching  the  bhnd,  they  were  dis-
mayed to  see  that  the  bait  had  been
torn  in  half,  and  the  entire  hind  quarters
devoured.  It  was  hardly  conceivable
that  one  V.  K.  was  responsible  for  so
much  mischief.  As  there  was  now  no
animal  in  sight,  they  hunted  for  tracks
around  the  bait.  Defosse  followed
them  around  on  one  side  of  a  hill,
while  Mrs.  Burden  searched  the  other
side.  Suddenly  a  movement  at  the
edge  of  the  jungle  to  her  right  fixed  her
attention,  and  then  one  of  the  ante-
diluvian monsters  peered  out  from  the
cover  of  the  jungle.  For  a  moment  he
stood  so,  then  with  ponderous  move-
ments he  crawled  out  into  the  light  of
day.  At  the  same  instant,  Mrs.  Burden
sank  motionless  into  the  tall  grass.

As  he  approached  step  by  step,  the
great  bulk  of  his  body  was  held  clear
off  the  ground,  and  the  black  beady
eyes  flashed  in  their  deep  sockets;
from  time  to  time,  as  he  stopped  and
raised  himself  on  his  powerful  forelegs
to  look  around,  she  could  observe  the
blistered  scars  on  his  bony  armor.

"As  he  drew  nearer,"  she  afterward
related,  "I  suddenly  realized  my  pre-
dicament. My  gun  was  propped  against
the  blind  where  I  had  left  it  a  few
moments  earlier.  Defosse  was 'out  of
sight,  and  the  great  reptile  was  con-
tinuing straight  toward  me.  Should  I
jump  up  and  run,  thus  losing  the  largest
lizard  we  had  seen?  Should  I  not  rather
lie  without  moving  in  the  chance  that
Defosse  would  come  back  in  time  to
shoot  him,  or  that  he  would  change  his


course  and  pass  \}y  me  unheeded?

"Nearer  he  came  and  nearer,  his
glim  head  swinging  heavily  from  side
to  side.  I  remembered  all  the  fantastic
stories  I  had  heard  of  these  creatures
attacking  both  men  and  horses,  and
was  in  no  wise  reassured.

"The  creature  was  now  less  than  five
yards  away,  and  its  subtle  reptilian
smell  was  in  my  nostrils.  Too  late  to
leap  from  hiding, — if  I  did,  he  would
surely  spring  upon  me,  rending  me  and
devouring  my  remains  as  he  had
devoured  the  dead  deer.  Better  to
take  my  chances  where  I  lay,  so  I
closed  my  eyes  and  waited.

"Then  I  opened  them  in  time  to  see
Defosse's  head  appearing  over  the  hill.
The  next  instant  there  was  a  flash,  and
a  bullet  buried  itself  in  the  great
monster's  neck.  Like  lightning  he
whirled  and  crashed  toward  the  jungle,
but  the  rifle  once  more  did  its  work,  and
he  lay  still."

Later,  upon  measuring  him,  we  dis-
covered that  he  was  not  quite  ten  feet
long,  but  he  must  have  weighed  around
250  pounds,  and  in  his  stomach  we
found  the  whole  hind  quarters  of  the
deer !

A¥e  were  by  now  even  more  anxious
to  capture  alive  some  of  these  very
large  lizards  for  closer  study.  Several
times  the  Malays  had  seen  a  particu-
larly ugly  brute  on  the  edge  of  the
"prehistoric"  wood,  which  they  ex-
citedly described  as  the  biggest
"boeaja  darat"  (land  crocodile)  yet
seen.  He  was  a  very  wary  fellow^,  and
we  decided  that  the  best  way  to  get  him
alive  would  be  to  build  a  trap  at  the
edge  of  the  forest,  bait  it  with  deer  or
pig,  and  then  hide  close  by  in  a  boma,
ready  to  run  out  and  lash  him  to  a
pole  as  soon  as  he  was  caught  in  the
noose.  Accordingly,  Defosse  killed  an
old  razorback  for  bait  and  the  coolies


12


NATURAL  HISTORY


One  of  the  lizards  shot  by  Mrs.  Burden


set  to  work  on  the  trap.  Heaw  stakes
were  pounded  into  the  ground  all
around  the  bait,,  except  for  a  large
opening  left  at  one  end.  The  stakes
were  then  lashed  together  with  rattan
and  the  whole  contraption  carefulh'
camouflaged  with  branches  and  leaves.
A  Hve  tree  was  selected  as  the  spring
pole.  The  branches  were  cut,  the
rope  tied  to  the  top,  and  then,  \\dth  the
combined  strength  of  fifteen  coolies,
the  tree  was  bent  over  and  the  noose
set  at  the  opening  in  front  of  the  trap.
To  avoid  having  the  trap  sprung  by
some  small  and  unimportant  specimen,
however,  we  arranged  that  the  tree
should  be  released  only  by  a  string
running  along  the  ground  to  the
boma.

A  test  proved  that  this  would  work
perfectly;    already  we  \'isualized  the


surprise  of  the  old  dragon  when  the
noose  should  snare  him  and  the  spring
pole  immediately  snatch  him  aloft
dangling  at  the  end  of  his  tether.  The
trap  was  Defosse's  handiwork,  and  a
credit  to  his  ingenuity.

We  were  on  hand  earh'  next  morning,
for  the  bait  had  already  begun  to  smell.
The  sun  was  well  up  before  anything
happened  to  arouse  our  hopes.  Pres-
ently a  small  V.  K.  appeared  and
maneuvered  around  and  around  the
trap,  not  daring  to  enter.  He  was
followed  soon  by  a  much  larger  beast
about  the  size  of  those  which  we  later
brought  back  to  the  Xew  York  Zoo.
This  one  immediately  entered  the  trap
and  tried  to  drag  the  whole  boar  out,
but  the  razorback  had  been  lashed  in
place,  and  could  not  be  budged.  Pre-
sently I  saw  him  look  up  and  then


Building  the  trap. — Uiie  end  of  this  boxlike  trap  is  left  open.    At  this  opening  the  noose  is  set.    The  natives
are  seen  camouflaging  the  trap  with  leaves.     (From  the  motion  picture)


Setting  the  trap.— The  trap  is  now  completely  camouflaged  so  that  it  lesembles  a  bush.    The  natives  are
bending  the  spring  pole,  while  Def  osse,  at  the  entrance  to  the  trap,  is  setting  the  noose.   (From  the  motion  picture)


-^Ji


HUNGRY

Varanus  komodoen.Hs,  as  he  is  frequentlj'  seen  prowling  around  foraging  among  the  gna>-led  mountains  of
Komodo.    In  the  lowest  picture  he  is  seen  coming  full  speed  toward  the  bait.     (From  the  motion  picture)


14


FEASTING

When  a  dragon  lizard  attacks  his  food,  he  tries  to  swallow  it  whole.    Failing  in  this,  he  rips  and  shakes  it  to
pieces,  greedily  gulping  great  hunics  much  larger  than  hLs  own  head.     (From  the  motion  picture'*


15


16


NATURAL  HISTORY


turn  and  flee  as  if  the  very  devil  were
after  him.

Only  a  very  large  V.  K.  could  create
such  panic  in  one  of  adult  size,  so  we
waited  with  ill-repressed  excitement.
There  was  no  reason  to  lower  our
voices,  as  the  beast  is  practically  stone
deaf,  yet  a  hush  fell  upon  us  which
became  a  positive  strain  as  time  length-
ened into  half  an  hour,  and  no  big  beast
arrived.

Suddenly  a  coolie  peeping  through
the  leaves  at  the  back  of  the  boma
made  a  strange  sound.  Others  looked,
and  stirred  •  with  excitement.  When
I  looked,  I  could  well  understand
their  feelings,  for  what  I  saw  was
a  V.  K.  so  large  and  so  villainous  of
aspect  that  I  trembled  with  instinc-
tive repulsion.

He  started  forward,  headed  straight
for  the  boma.  I  could  see  the  brute,
now,  very  well.  He  looked  black  as  ink.
His  bony  armor  was  scarred  and
blistered.  Half  his  tail  had  been  lost  in
battle.  His  eyes,  deep  set  in  their
sockets,  looked  out  from  underneath
overhanging  brows.  Now  his  footsteps
were  plainly  audible.  He  passed  so
close  to  our  boma  that  I  could  have
reached  out  and  touched  him.

I  was  so  excited  that  I  wondered  at
the  great  calm  shown  by  the  hunter
Defosse.  He  was  able  to  give  his
principal  attention  to  keeping  the
nervous  coolies  quiet,  and  did  not  seem
to  share  the  agony  of  waiting  I  felt  for
the  next  half  hour,  while  the  great
reptile  was  making  up  his  mind
whether  to  enter  the  trap.  He  was
wary  and  suspicious.  He  would  put
his  nose  almost  in  the  noose,  and
then  withdraw  it.  He  inspected  every-
thing closely,  his  snaky  tongue  in
constant  motion.  Then  he  would  walk
away  abruptly,  and  sit  for  five  minutes
at  a  time  looking  into  the  surrounding


jungle.  It  seemed  as  though  we  should
never  take  him.

Then,  of  a  sudden,  it  happened.  He
walked  straight  up  to  the  opening,
stepped  through  the  noose,  and  seized
the  bait.  I  pulled  the  release,  and  the
great  dragon  was  catapulted  into  the
air.  Down  he  came  as  quickly,,  his
great  weight  dragging  the  tree  back
again.  Then  it  was  a  contest  of
strength  between  him  and  the  tree,
which  began  to  crack  noisily  with  the
strain  as  he  clawed  at  the  ground,
tugging  at  the  rope  which  was  tightened
about  his  middle.

The  coolies  rushed  out  to  surround
him,  but  he  held  them  off,  not  only  by
his  fierce  lunges,  but  also  by  vomiting
and  foaming  at  the  mouth.

It  was  now  up  to  Defosse,  who  had
been  practising  with  a  lasso  for  months
past.  His  first  throw  missed  as  well
it  might,  for  the  great  beast  was  leap-
ing in  every  direction.  But  Defosse,
keeping  carefully  and  coolty  out  of
reach,  recoiled  his  rope  as  methodically
as  though  he  were  practising  on  a  tent
peg  in  camp.  -Awaiting  a  favorable
moment,  when  the  lizard  was  trying  to
drag  himself  away  in  the  opposite
direction,  Defosse  stepped  up  close
behind  him,  and  dropped  the  lasso
neatly  about  his  neck.  As  soon  as  the
rope  was  made  fast  to  a  stout  tree  the
lizard  was  ours,  and  it  required  only
the  precaution  of  roping  his  tail  also,
to  prevent  his  damaging  anything  by
its  lashings,  to  enable  ouv  coolies  to  do
their  share  of  the  work.  They  now
brought  their  long  pole,  hog-tied  the
lizard  to  it,  and  carried  him  trium-
phantly back  to  camp.

A  special  cage  had  been  built  for  him,
and  as  we  thrust  him  in  at  one  end,
we  cut  the  thongs  one  by  one,  till  he
was  entirely  free  but  securely  enclosed
And    then    came    fireworks!     Feeling


The  long,  yellow,  protiusible,  bifurcated  tongue  of  the  varanid  lizard  is  used
organ


as  a  sensory


'HP^Ti


The  "rumah"  as  the  natives  call  it,  of  Varanus  komodoensis.  The  deaf  beasts  use  their  long
claws  to  excavate  these  burrows  under  rocks  and  tree  stumps,  and  retiro  into  them  for  the  night


17


18


NATURAL  HISTORY


himself  at  first  free,  and  then  confined
within  four  walls,  he  lashed  himself
into  a  great  fury,  vomiting  and  giving
out  such  a  vile  smell  that  we  left
him.

There  was  a  large  air-hole  at  the  top
of  the  cage,  which  we  had  covered  with
the  strongest  steel  netting  that  could  be
obtained  in  Batavia,  yet  when  we  came
out  the  next  morning  to  look  at  him,
we  found  to  our  dismay  that  the  wire
had  been  ripped  off,  and  the  cage  was
empty.  Thetwisted  steel  and  the  gaping
hole  were  evidence  of  a  strength  which
we  had  never  suspected.  Thus  we  lost
the  greatest  prize  of  our  expedition.
We  had  felt  so  sure  of  him  that  we
hadn't  even  taken  the  precaution  to
photograph  him.

We  caught  many  other  lizards  in  our
traps,  but  none  so  big.  The  Colonial
Government  had  given  us  a  permit  to
kill  or  capture  only  fifteen  of  the  beasts,
so  we  had  to  release  many  of  those
caught.  We  were  enabled,  however,
during  the  process  to  study  the  habits
of  the  animals.  One  evening  we  re-
leased five  on  the  beach  to  test  their
swimming  ability,  and  to  see  whether
they  would  take  to  the  sea  of  their  own
free  will — an  important  question  with
regard  to  their  distribution.  Of  five
lizards  let  loose,  one  large  and  one  small
one  immediately  fled  to  the  sea  without
the  slightest  hesitation.  Two  others
headed  for  the  jungle,  while  a  third  ran
down  the  beach  for  150  yards,  went  up
into  the  grass,  and  then,  after  looking  the


situation  over,  deliberately  proceeded  to
swim  far  out  into  the  bay.  The  largest
one  which  had  taken  to  the  water  sub-
merged for  a  full  two  minutes,  and  then
appeared  a  hundred  yards  away,  swam
down  the  beach  for  a  half  mile,  and
ambled  slowly  off  into  the  jungle.
When  swimming,  their  heads  were
carried  well  up  above  the  surface  of  the
water,  so  that  they  could  be  seen  at  a
great  distance,  but  on  the  whole,  we
considered  them  rather  clumsy  and
ineffective  swimmers.

On  one  point  we  were  greatly  dis-
appointed. We  found  no  eggs,  nor  any
trace  of  them .  But  as  part  of  a  large
herpetological  collection  numbering
several  thousand  specimens  we  did
succeed  in  bringing  out  twelve  dead
and  two  live  Varanus  komodoensis,
sufficient  to  make  an  excellent  museum
group.

Concerning  the  place  of  Varanus
komodoensis  in  evolution,  it  is  interest-
ing to  note  that  these  varanoid  lizards
represent  the  group  from  which  snakes
were  evolved,  which  accounts  for  their
snakelike  appearance,  their  mobile
head,  and  long,  protrusible,  bifurcated
tongue.

According  to  the  most  recent  in-
vestigation, it  has  been  definitely
shown  that  Varanus  komodoensis  is
closely  related  to  the  Australian  mon-
itors which  gave  rise  in  Pleistocene
times  to  such  monsters  as  Megalania
known  to  have  attained  a  length  of
thirty  feet.
