The Light of Egypt, Vol. II
========================================
Thomas H. Burgoyne (1889) — The Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor's textbook, Volume II — completes the two-volume set (scan from the 1900 reprint). Source: https://archive.org/details/burgoyne-1900-light-of-egypt-vol-2. Public domain.

Light of Egypt


or
The Science of the Soul and the Stars


VOLUME II


BY


THOMAS H. BURGOYNE


ZANONI, /’


“Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things
which are, and the things which shall be hereafter; THE
MYSTERY OF THE SEVEN STARS, which thou sawest


in my right hand.”
Revelations, Chap. I, 19 and 20.


The Green Dolphin Bookshop
7915 S.E. Stark Street
Portland, Oregon 97215


REPRINT EDITION 1969


The first edition of Tue Licur or Ecypr, Volume II, was copy-
righted in 1900 by Henry Wagner M.D. and published by the Astro
Philosophical Publishing Company of Denver, Colorado. The 1963
edition is a reprint of the first edition which has been out of print
for many years. The 1965 edition is a reprint of the 1963 edition to-
gether with additional material taken from original manuscripts of
Hermetic Teachers and published by H. O. Wagner, P.O. Box 20333
Montclair Station, Denver, Colorado, 80220. The 1969 reprint edition


is a copy of the 1965 edition.
H. O. Wagner.


ii


Dedication


To the Budding Spirituality of the Occident and
The Rising Genius of the Western Race,
This work is respectfully dedicated,
By the Author


iii


Introduction ....


Chapter I
Chapter II
Chapter III


Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter XI
Chapter XII


Chapter XIII
Chapter XIV
Chapter XV


CONTENTS


The Science of the Soul and the Stars


VOLUME II

So a ae Te Oe ee ee ene LE I
EIN FN ctl gs decane an cece a uh
The Constellations 2222000000... ececeeceececeeseeseeceeeeeeses 12
The Spiritual Interpretation of the

Twelve Houses of the Zodiac...........00.00-00ceeceeceeeoee-- 27
F:Nc}0 (6123 a0) (0) 5 2 a oc een ee ee 33
Astro-Mythology 222...........cecceseccecceceeceececeseseeseesesoees 40
Od ate a alec chseastalattlg dl 46
Alehemiy Part T> (organic ) caaccccscteinceresniacee ceria 52
Alchemy Part II (occult) 000000000 ceccecceseeeeeeee- 63
RTRs deanna sc aueriteeceer aunties 73
Ceremmomial Ma G86 secocccsccsvscscssnisansansoastuseccantcceevanduionrs 80
ee a ee 86
The Tablets of Aith oo... ccccccsssssccsccusssncsnesousonecneses 93
in three parts

Part I the Twelve Mansions.....000000.00.00.2.0.e-e-eee---- 101
Part II the Ten Planetary Rulers.....0.0.00000000.0.00.---..-- 133
Part III the Ten Great Powers of the Universe...... 161
Lets 0\ 5) 021 2 eee 167
Quotations from lessons... eeceeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeees 175
The Mysteries of Er0s.............0.ccccceececceceeceececeseeeeee 197


Vv


PUBLISHER'S PREFACE


No explanation is thought necessary, further than to corroborate
the author in all he has said in his somewhat unusual preface.

We have enjoyed, immensely, our work of giving to the world
this remarkable series of books on Occultism, and appreciate the large
patronage they have received from the reading public, for which we
return our sincere thanks. We hope the near future will give us the
work referred to by the author in his preface, as doubtless it will be a
great revelation of Occult laws that govern our little Earth in its rela-
tion to our Sun and solar system, of which it forms a part, and give
much light on those subjects that have been shrouded in mystery.

“The Light of Egypt” will be found to be an Occult library in
itself, a textbook of esoteric knowledge, setting forth the “Wisdom
Religion” of life, as taught by the Adepts of Hermetic Philosophy. It
will richly repay all who are seeking the higher life to carefully study
this book, as it contains in a nutshell the wisdom of the ages regarding
man and his destiny, here and hereafter. The London and American
first edition, also the French edition, Vol. I, met with lively criticism
from Blavatsky Theosophists, because it annihilates that agreeable
delusion of “Karma” and “Reincarnation” from the minds of all lovers
of truth for truth’s sake.

“The Tablets of th” is a great and mighty work, as it contains
the very quintessence of Occult and Hermetic philosophy, as revealed
by spiritual law. “Penetralia” is a new revelation, and invaluable to
Occult students, as it is the personal experience of a developed soul.

To all lovers of Truth we respectfully recommend this Book of
Books, as it has justly been called by many who are competent to
criticise its teachings. It was the author’s wish that his name be
withheld from the public, knowing full well that the teachings con-
tained in his works will prove his motto: “Omnia Vincit Veritas.”


vii


Now that our author has passed beyond the power of the world
to flatter or condemn, and has given his thought for the uplifting of
the human family, it is but simple justice that he be made known to
the world as its teacher of a higher thought than has preceded him.
He shrank from public notoriety, and modestly refused to be publicly
known to the world as one of its spiritual leaders for the cycle upon
which the Earth and its inhabitants havé entered, but the time has
come to announce publicly the authorship of the works published
anonymously under the symbol of -4, and his writings are to be
judged by their merits, and not by prejudice nor personal bias as
viewed from the human plane of life.

He moved in the world, comparatively unknown to the world at
large, and his greatest friends, though mystified, did not understand
his true worth in spiritual greatness. The mask, or person, often
hides from view the angel in disguise. Therefore our author must be
judged by what he has written, and not by his personators and calum-
niators. The true student of Occultism always judges the tree by its
fruits. If the writings of our author are judged by this standard, they
will stand as a beacon light to higher rounds than ours.


viii


PREFACE


These lessons were issued to a few of my pupils as “Private Studies
in Occultism,” several years ago. The time has now come to give
them to the world as a companion to the first volume of “The Light
of Egypt.”

It is the duty of Occult students to familiarize themselves with
the subjects herein discussed. They should know the ideas of our
ancestors regarding them and be familiar with their thought, in order
to appreciate the sublime wisdom and knowledge of Nature as taught
by them, otherwise we are sure to do them, as well as ourselves, great
injustice. The history of Occultism bears out the fact that there is
very little that is new to the present time.

The arrangement and classification of thought differs during each
cycle of time on the different spirals, and, like the fruitage on lower
rounds of Nature’s progressive wheel of destiny, variety and quality
are diverse, so, likewise, do we find the mental manifestations. This
age, however, is blessed with a great variety and abundance of thought,
in clear-cut language, that should enlighten the races of the Earth with
Mother Nature’s modus operandi in every department of human
thought.

We hope these chapters will aid to this end, and doubtless many
students will find in them the key to unlock the mysteries veiled in
symbol and hieroglyphic by ancient writers. The author’s object has
been to make plain and easy of understanding these subjects. Much,
however, has been left for private study and research, for many large
volumes might be filled if a detailed description of each subject were
entered upon, which task is left for those who feel so inclined. A rich
reward is in store for those spiritual investigators who will follow out
the paths and lines herein mapped out on Spiritual Astrology, Alchemy,
and other subjects. Meditation and aspiration will open up hidden
treasures that will prove a boon to Occult students, for Astrology and
Alchemy are the two grand sciences that explain the why and reasons
for what we see and experience on every plane of life. In this age
there should be no concealing of these Divine truths. We cannot hide


ix


anything in the air, and for this reason the Sun in Aquarius will unearth
and reveal to man all that the present cycle has to give during the
Sun’s passage through this airy sign.

The watery sign, Pisces, through which the Sun manifested during
the past 2,160 years, gave up to man their secret powers and hidden
attributes in steam as a motive power, which man has completely
mastered. He will likewise master the airy forces during the present
sub-cycle of the Sun in Aquarius. Already we see him using liquid
air and compressed air as a motive power, which will gradually take
the place of steam as the Sun gets farther into the sign, or constellation,
of Aquarius. Men will become immensely wiser than they have
been, and it is to be hoped they will leave the written record of their
achievements in science and art to show to future races their status of
mind on every subject for the edification and enlightenment of coming
races.

Our ancestors were denied this great privilege. Consequently
their wisdom is only symbolized to us in a way that it is difficult to
read and interpret correctly, yet we who have the key to their symbols
can read accurately the truth they wish to convey, which stands out
clearly to all capable of understanding and interpreting symbolism and
correspondence correctly. History and Nature repeat themselves in
every cycle of time; therefore these forces and potentialities are natural
to the sign through which the Sun manifests. We can go backward
or forward through the Sun’s Zodiac and read correctly the history
of the hoary past, as well as the present and future, by bearing in mind
the sign and cycle in manifestation at any given period. When the
proper time arrives, a work will be given to the world to prove to
mankind the law of cycles.

God is present in all ages and races, manifesting His love and
wisdom throughout infinite creations, and that He records, in His own
way, the most detailed record of any event which takes place, thus
giving to man a complete history of His works and will, for man’s
enlightenment, so that he, too, may cooperate intelligently with his
God in every way that intelligence wills to manifest. Prehistoric
history is not blotted out from Nature’s laboratory. The Astral Book
of Karmic evolution will one day reveal its hidden treasures to a wait-
ing world in such a manner as to surprise and enlighten mankind as
the recording angels give up those gems of truth they have so jealously


x


guarded for untold cycles of time, simply because the time was not
ripe for its divulgence.

There is a time for everything, and when that time arrives all past
history of our planet’s evolution will be written in an intelligent man-
ner for the illumination and education of man as the masterpiece of
the Living God. In this way man will worship Deity and perfect his
God-nature, even to Angel-hood.

If this volume of “The Light of Egypt” meets with the same
appreciation that was accorded the first volume, which has passed
through four editions, and is still growing in favor every day (besides
being translated into the French), the author will feel that his efforts
have not been wasted, and he trusts the race will have been made
better for having read his writings.

As this is his posthumous contribution to the world, the author
wishes, in this connection, to pay a debt of gratitude and grateful
recognition to his esteemed pupil and friend, Dr. Henry Wagner, who
has so generously published nearly all of his writings. Without his
aid and assistance we would not have been able, of ourselves, to have
given these works to the world. Therefore, honor to whom honor
is due.

Mrs. Belle M. Wagner has been chosen by the Masters as my
spiritual successor and representative of the Hermetic Brotherhood
of Luxor, and thus perpetuate the chain of outward connection be-
tween those in the realm of the higher life with those upon the out-
ward plane.

She is our choice, and a most worthy one to take my place.

I make this statement in this connection for the benefit of my
pupils and Hermetic students generally, as I am being personated by
frauds and imposters, claiming to be Zanoni. Verbam sap.

It is my request that a fac-simile of my signature and symbol
accompany this preface.

Dictated by the author from the subjective plane of life (to which
he ascended several years ago) through the law of mental transfer,
well known to all Occultists, he is enabled again to speak with those
who are still upon the objective plane of life.

The additions found in this volume, not in the original manu-
scripts, have been supplied in this manner. The two planes of life,
the objective and subjective, are scientific facts, no longer disputed


xi


by well-informed minds, and the exchange of thought will become
almost universal among educated minds during the present cycle.
Hence great progress will come to the Earth during the next 2,160
years, while the Sun manifests his glorious influence through the
symbol of the Man.

Thanking each and all who have aided in any way to give my
writings to the world, I am, in love and fraternal greetings, ever yours.

Omnia Vincit Veritas.


tii y


INTRODUCTION TO VOL. II


What study is more sublime, inspiring and profitable, in the high-
est sense, than the “language of the stars”—those silent monitors of the
midnight sky, who reveal His Will as secondary causes in the admin-
istration of universal law? The science of the stars is the Divine
parent of all science.

The more earnest our study, the more recondite our research and
thorough our investigation of the “Science of the Stars,” the more fully
shall we realize the truth of the teacher’s words: “Astrology is the key
that opens the door to all occult knowledge.” It is the key that unlocks
the mysteries of man’s being; his why, whence, whither. Within the
temple of Urania lies concealed the mystery of life. The indices are
there, written by the finger of the Infinite in the heavens above.

It is our privilege to make this language our own, and it should
be the earnest work of every true student of Nature to acquire a right
understanding and correct interpretation of these Divine symbols.
And, as thorough students of any language seek out the derivation of
words and expressions, search for the root, or stem word, and its
origin, so should the student of astrology, by sincere desire and earnest
study, seek to know the origin and root of these starry words and
complex expressions of the “language of the stars.”

The Sun, Moon and five planets* of our solar system are to us
symbols of the reflected and refracted rays of the triune attributes of
the great Central, Spiritual Sun: Life, Light and Love, analogous to
the three primary colors in Nature, which become still further re-
fracted into four secondary or complementary colors, rays or attributes,
the seven constituting the active principles of Nature, the seven rays
of the solar spectrum, the seven notes of a perfect musical scale, there
being throughout a perfect correspondence, and all are but different
modes of vibration or activities of the Supreme Intelligence.

And, as we know, the seven rays of color reflect an almost infinite
variety of tints, that, octave upon octave, are built upon the seven
natural tones in music, so, also, are these seven active principles
divided and subdivided into innumerable forms, qualities and mani-


* Uranus and Neptune belonging to a higher octave.


2 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


festations of the first trinity—Life, Light, Love, life being the mani-
festation of the second two, love and wisdom, which in turn are the
dual expressions of the “One.”

Upon the knowledge of these Divine truths Pythagoras built the
theory of the “music of the spheres.” Let us pause and listen to this
celestial music.

Suns and their systems of planets sound forth the deep bass tones
and rich tenor, while angelic races take the silvery treble of the Divine
melody, octave upon octave, by more and ever more ethereal system
upon system, to the very throne of Deity—the Infinite, Eternal source
of Light, Life and Love. Let us learn, through the knowledge of the
stars, to attune our souls to vibrate to the Divine harmony, so that
we may take our places in the celestial choir and blend our voices with
those of the celestial singers, chanting the Divine anthem: “We Praise
Thee, O God!”

To resume. If we would gain a correct knowledge of astral
science we should study astrology in its universal application, side by
side with its more intricate phase and the details, as manifested upon
the individual man and his material destiny.

Let us digress fora moment. The intellectual minds, the material
scientists, who cavil at the “science of the stars,” declaring it to be
mere fortune-telling, consequently false, do but air their ignorance of
this most profound subject, not knowing that it embraces and contains
all sciences, all religions, that have ever been or ever will be, comprises
all history of every age, of races, empires and nations; that it is the
only true chronology, and marks the destiny, not only of personal man”
on eyery plane, but of the human family as a whole. All mythologies
find their explanation in this starry language, and every religion is
founded upon the movements of our solar system. The rise and fall
of empires and races of men are written in its pages.

To master as far as we are capable, and our limited space of life
here will permit, we must pursue the study in its broad sense, as al-
ready stated, in the external application of the starry influx and upon
the interior planes of action from God to the mineral, the mineral to
man; aye, and man to the angel, finding in every section a complete
and perfect correspondence.

To master the alphabet should be the first step, whose vowels,
diphthongs and consonants are the planets and shining Zodiac. It is


INTRODUCTION 8)


very essential to clearly comprehend the action and reaction of the
planets upon the human organism, as an integral part of the universal
organism; ever remembering that the starry vowels, in combination
with the consonants, or Zodiac, form the infinite expressions comprising
the language of the starry heavens in their threefold manifestation
upon the external planes of life; while the radiant constellations are
the ideas which find expression through this language, which is like-
wise a science, accurate in its mathematical construction and perfect
in geometric proportion.

The student should ever bear in mind that astrology, like every
other science, is progressive. The underlying principles are always
the same. These are like the “laws of the Medes and Persians,” but
the plane of action is constantly changing.

It is a well-established and indisputable truth that from the Sun,
the solar center of our system, is derived all force, every power and
variety of phenomena that manifests itself upon Mother Earth. There-
fore, when we remember that the solar parent passes through one sign
of his celestial Zodiac in 2,160 years, a twelfth part of his orbit of
25,920 years, we see that from each sign in turn he (the Sun) rays
forth an influx peculiar to that special sign; and, as there are no two
signs alike in nature or quality, hence the passage of the Sun from one
sign into another causes a change of polarity in planetary action, which
can be fully demonstrated and conclusively proven. It follows, as a
natural sequence, that the rules formulated and taught by astrologers
in reference to the plane of planetary influence in one sub-cycle will
not hold good in the next. To illustrate: In the year 1881 the Sun
passed from the sign Pisces into Aquarius, thus beginning a new cycle
of solar force. The human race has entered upon a cycle in every
respect differing in nature and action from the past cycle of 2,160 years.
The sign Aquarius is masculine, electric, positive. It is intellectual in
character, scientific, philosophic, artistic, intuitive and metaphysical.
It is the sign of the Man. The truths of the past are becoming ethere-
alized. Our solar parent has scarcely crossed the threshold of the
sign Aquarius, and already we observe in many directions the activities
of the peculiar influx. True, it is but the first flush of the dawn of a
new era, the harbinger of a glorious day to our race. In the light of
this truth, ponder well on the nature of the influx radiating from the
solar center, each orb of his shining family absorbing a different ray,


4 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


or attribute, of solar energy, corresponding to its own peculiar nature.
The Earth, in her annual passage about her solar parent, receives the
harmonious or discordant vibrations of this astral influx according to
the many angles she forms to the various planets.

We see, then, that the Earth is enveloped in an atmosphere, or
zone, of occult force we recognize as humane, mental, positive, etc.,
acting and reacting upon the human family through the laws of vibra- —
tion in strict and exact ratio to its interior capacity to receive and
ability to externalize upon the material plane of being. The results,
as far as this stage of existence goes, will be manifest as man vibrates
harmoniously or otherwise to the stellar cause.

The present sub-cycle producing an entirely different influence
to that of the past cycle, whose force was watery, magnetic and femi-
nine, causes a warring of elements, confusion and uncertainty, until
the old are displaced by the new conditions. We should learn from
these facts that it is folly to brand as false and condemn as worthless
the rules and formulas, and even religious thought, of the past when
we find upon careful investigation and crucial tests their inadequacy
to account for present conditions. They were true in their cycle, and
applied to past conditions and states of mental development. But in
this new era, upon whose threshold we now stand, the vibrations
become more intense. Man’s whole nature is being tuned to a higher
key. We must not forget that these cycles apply to the race in their
effect, and to the individual only as an integral part of the whole. To
illustrate. The sign Aquarius is an electrical, positive, masculine in-
fluence, and will consequently manifest its chief activities upon the
masculine qualities of the human soul; and to-day we have evidence
of this in the gradual enfranchisement of woman, arousing the positive
attributes of her nature in demanding equal rights with her brother,
man, in the political arena, as she has already done in the educational
field. The masculine portion of the race is becoming more aggressive,
mentally, asserting greater individuality, independent thought and
action. The intellect of the race is being directed, however slowly,
into scientific channels, while the human soul is slowly awakening to
a sense of a deathless immortality and a desire for spiritual truth. It
is slowly but surely shaking off the yoke of an effete priesthood and
the fetters of superstition and tyranny.


INTRODUCTION 5


Intelligent man talks of the new scientific and intellectual era
that has dawned upon the world; of the necessity for a new religious
system, based upon scientific truths, which can be demonstrated, com-
bined with the pure spiritual essence found in all systems of religion;
a religion with more spirituality and less theology; a broader charity
and less dogma, and deeper love for God and man, its only creed.

We must now consider the astral influence of the cycle upon the
physical organism of mankind, and particularly of the Western races,
who are moving upon the upward arc of the cycle. It is quite evident
that a radical change must take place in the physical form and con-
stitution with the influx of more intellectual, ethereal and spiritual
vibrations. The organism must become more refined and compact, a
greater degree of sensitiveness be attained, with a highly nervous
system. The forerunner of this superior organism is now apparent in
the numerous schools of physical culture and gymnasiums throughout
the land, the many articles and pamphlets on deep, rythmic breathing
disseminated among the people, and last, but not least, the various
schools of mental healing, etc. The masses look on and wonder, while
they exclaim: “What marvelous changes are coming to the world!”
but are utterly ignorant of the cause of the mysterious change. To
the student of Hermetic Philosophy there is no mystery involved.
He knows the cause, and confidently watches for the effect.

Each one must seek to comprehend for himself, according to
the light he may receive, basing his premises upon the true principles
of astrology, carefully noting the triune aspect of planetary influence
upon humanity, ever remembering that the Sun and Moon are the
great factors in human destiny, and that his premises and conclusions
must occupy the same plane. Having acquired a knowledge of the
science in its application to the individual, take the broader field, or
universal aspect, as it applies to human races, and you will find
the rise and fall of nations, empires and families marked upon the
celestial dial, and in perfect accord with the influence of the Sun
and planets upon Mother Earth, in her various movements. And last,
but most important, seek with an earnest desire for truth to learn the
relation of those glittering constellations of the shining Zodiac to the
human soul and their influence in shaping its eternal destiny. This
will reveal the whole of involution and evolution in a general sense.


6 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


A faithful, earnest and devout study of the “Science of the Starry
Heavens” will lead us on to other planes of thought, relating to still
more interior realms of knowledge than we perhaps now dream of,
and, in the words of the master: “A true knowledge of the stars will
include a true knowledge of the soul,” and we shall realize “the
mystical link that binds the soul to the stars.”

Minniz Hiccin.


CHAPTER I
THE ZODIAC


To the ordinary astrologer the Zodiac is simply a band of space,
eighteen degrees wide, in the heavens, the center of which marks
out the pathway of the Sun during the space of one year of 365 days, etc.

The twelve signs are to him simply thirty degrees of the space
(12 times 30 equal 360), bearing the names of the constellations which
once occupied them. Nay, he, as a rule, still imagines in some sense
that the signs (constellations) are still there, and that the power and
potency of the twelve signs is derived from the stars which occupy
the Zodiacal band of the skies.

But this is not so, as any ordinary astronomer well knows. This
single fact, i.e., the gradual shifting of the constellations, the dis-
placement, let us say, of the starry influx from one sign to another
without any allowance being made in the astrologer’s rules for any
such change, has been one of the greatest obstructions to the popular
spread of the art among educated minds. Argues the scientist: The
“fiery influence of Aries,” if depending upon the stars of that constella-
tion, ought now to be shedding forth their caloric from the sign Pisces,
and Aries ought to be lumbering along with the earthy Taurine nature.
So, also, the lords of these signs ought to be changed, but that they
are not can be proved by the fact that our earliest records of that dim,
historic past show, equally as well as your latest “text-book,” that Mars
is the lord of Aries—a fiery planet in a fiery sign; but astrologers still
say that Pisces is watery and Aries fiery, which is not the case, if the
stars have any influence at all. “It is not necessary,” say these logical
thinkers, “to learn your abstruse science if we can demonstrate that
the very basis upon which your conclusions rest is in every sense funda-
mentally false.” The scientific facts of the case are as follows: The
influence of the twelve signs, as described by astrologers, is a delusion,
because in all ages they are reported the same; whereas we know that
every 2,160 years each sign retrogrades to the extent of thirty degrees,
and, as your art does not make allowance for this, it is false. For, if
the influence of the twelve signs does not emanate from the stars
occupying the space of those signs, it must emanate from nothing—a
doctrine well suited, no doubt, to musty old sages of your superstitious


8 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


Chaldea, but quite out of court in our progressive age—the last decade
of our cultured and scientific nineteenth century.

So far, so good. And so the world rolls along its bright path-
way in the heavens, little heeding the logical conclusions of an
exact science. But to an initiate of those inner principles of our
planet’s constitution all these mental conflicts have a meaning and
a purpose within Nature’s divine economy; for it is neither wise
nor expedient that the masses, with popular science in the lead,
should grasp the truths which Mother Nature reserves alone for
her own devoted priests.

The shining Zodiac, with its myriad constellations and its
perfect galaxy of starry systems, derives its subtle influence, as
impressed astrologically upon the human constitution, from the solar
center of our solar system, NOT FROM THE sTaRS which occupy the
twelve mansions of space. Aries, the fiery, and Pisces, the watery,
are always there, and, instead of its being an argument against
astrology, it is one of its grandest truths that, in all ages and in all
times, Aries, the first sign of the Zodiac has been found ever the same,
equally as well as Pisces the last.

In order to convey our meaning, let us digress for a moment
and bring forth a fitting illustration. The condition of our at-
mosphere and the surrounding objects—vegetation, etc.—have a pe-
culiar condition and a magnetism wholly their own when surveyed
exactly at sunrise. There is a freshness and peculiar sense of buoyancy
not visible at any other time. If this state could be registered by any
instrument and compared with any other set periods during the day,
it would offer a remarkable contrast. Two hours later there is a very
different influence, and at noon there is a wonderful contrast. The
same may be said of sunset, and again at midnight; and, lastly, note
the difference two hours before dawn. This is the coolest period of
the whole twenty-four hours. These are facts, and yet our hearts
are all beating to the same life-flow, and the Earth is no farther
away from the parent Sun; and yet it is the angle at which we, THE
INHABITANTS, receive this Sun’s light that makes all the difference
between dawn and sunset, noon and midnight.

When to these facts it is further added that it is sunrise, noon,
sunset and midnight at the same instant, all the time, to some of the
various, different portions of the globe, it demonstrates most con-


THE ZODIAC 9


clusively that the Earth itself is enveloped, so to say, in a complete
circle of conditions very similar to the twelve signs of the celestial
Zodiac.

If we apply the foregoing illustration to the twelve signs of the
Zodiac, we shall see a perfect analogy. We shall find that when the
Sun reaches the celestial equator, so that it is equal day and equal
night on the Earth, that he is on the line of the celestial horizon; it is
cosmic sunrise. Hence Aries, the fiery Azoth, begins his active influx,
and extends for thirty degrees, equal to two hours of the natural day.

It is the fiery red streams of awakening life that we all manifest
at sunrise; then comes a change of magnetic polarity after the first
fiery flush of cosmic life; the gleeful chattering of the birds and the
cackling of the poultry. A reaction is noted; all things before active
become restful and quiet.

So it is with vegetation, so it is sali infant life, and so it is with
cosmic conditions.

This corresponds with the sign Taurus. It is the solar influx, thirty
degrees removed from his point of equilibrium toward the North. As
this sign represents the powers of absorption, we see that at this period
vegetable and animal life is quietly absorbing, for its own use, the
fiery streams of solar life.

Again we view the activity of solar influx from a different angle
and change of polarity, and all things become active. It is executive
force. This corresponds to the sign Gemini. It is the solar influx,
sixty degrees removed from his point of equilibrium. Then comes
another change of magnetic polarity. It is rest from labor; it is noon.

This corresponds to Cancer. The analogy is perfect. It is the
solar influx, ninety degrees removed from his point of equilibrium
toward the North, and the highest point in the arc of his apparent
journey and of cosmic life. It is the equilibrium of life forces.

Again the fiery influx begins its activity, and, as the hottest part
of the day is about two hours after noon, or middle of the day, so
is solar influx most potent at this point in the Zodiac.

This corresponds to the sign Leo. It is the solar influx, removed
120 degrees from his point of equilibrium and thirty degrees toward
the South. And so on month after month, until the last one, Pisces,
which well corresponds to the watery skies of February and the lifeless
period two hours before dawn of a new day upon the Earth, a new


10 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


year to man and a new cycle in the starry heavens. The Zodiac, then,
as it applies to the human constitution and the science of astrology,
has its foundation in the Sun, the center and source of life to the
planet; and the twelve signs are the twelve great spaces of our Earth’s
annual orbit about her solar parent, each one typical of its month,
and each month typical of its corresponding action upon our Earthy
conditions.

As each sunrise is different in its aspects, so are no two signs of
the Zodiac alike. The sunrise on the first of March is wholly different
from the sunrise upon the first of May. So is the beginning and ending
of each sign, and the beginning and ending of each natural day,
peculiar unto itself.

When we reflect upon the inner laws of this action and inter-
action, we come nearer and nearer to the one great occult fact, viz.:
The Divine Oneness of life.

We find a perfect analogy between the destiny, the life, and ex-
pression of life on the Earth, and the life and material destiny of
embodied man. He, too, has his sunrise, the beginning of a new day
of life, the seedtime, the flowering season, when life wears a roseate
hue; the ripening fruits of experience, his harvest-time—it may be tares
or golden grain; his gradual decay, the ebbing of the life forces and
the icy winter of death; his gentle zephyrs and destructive hurricanes,
floods and tempests, periods of drought and plenty. Within his triune
constitution there are spring tides and low tides of physical, intellectual
and spiritual forces. Man also makes the annual journey about the
solar center, when, at the beginning of each new year to him, the
life forces of his soul are renewed, regalvanized, so to say, according
to the magnetic polarity of his constitution.

And so, every form of life has its Zodiac, its orbit of life and destiny.
It may be infinitesimal, or vast beyond conception, each in its own
peculiar plane. So we see that, the whole visible universe is one vast
organism, the medium of expression for the invisible, real universe—
the soul and God, the great central Sun, the eternal center of all life,
binding the whole into unity—one life.

The celestial signs of the shining Zodiac have no existence to
us apart from the graceful and unwearying motion of our Mother
Earth. She alone makes our seasons, years and destiny; and she alone,


THE ZODIAC 11


by her motion about the Sun, determines the thrones and mansions
of the planetary powers.

The astrological Zodiac of a Saturn or a Mars cannot be like ours.
Their years and seasons are peculiar to themselves and their material
conditions; hence the twelve constellations have no existence as ob-
jective facts of concrete formation or cosmic potentiality. No! But as
unalterable symbols of occult truth, the starry pictures of the shining
constellations have an eternal verity. They pertain to the living reali-
ties of the human soul and its varied experience.

What the mysteries are, and what connection they have with the
twelve constellations, will form the subject of our next chapter.


CHAPTER II


THE CONSTELLATIONS


The twelve great constellations of the zodiacal belt which forms
the Earth’s orbit and the Sun’s shining pathway around the celestial
universe have been considered as mere imaginary figures, or emblems,
invented by an early, primitive people to distinguish the monthly
progress of the Sun and mark out, in a convenient manner, the twelve
great divisions, or spaces, of the solar year. To this end, it is thought,
the various star groups, termed constellations, were fancifully imagined
to represent the various physical aspects of the month, under, or into,
which they were consecrated by the Sun’s passage during the annual
journey, so that, in some sense, the twelve signs, or constellations, were
symbolical, not only of the seasons, but also of the labors of the year.

That such a system seems perfectly natural to the learned myth-
ologist, and that granting the ancients so much is a very great con-
cession toward this childish knowledge is, of course, quite excusable
when we are constantly told, or reminded, that actual science—that is
to say, “exact science,” does not date backward more than a couple of
centuries at most.

Even the modern astrologer, much as he descants upon the in-
fluence of the twelve signs, has but little, if any, real knowledge of
this matter above and beyond the purely physical symbolism above
mentioned. And perhaps it is as well that such a benighted condition
prevails, and that the Divine, heavenly goddess is unsought and
comparatively unknown. The celestial Urania, at least, in such isolation
remains pure and undefiled. She is free from the desecrating influence
of polluted minds.

Such, in brief outline, is the general conception of mankind
regarding the shining constellations that bedeck, like fiery jewels, their
Maker’s crown, and illumine with their celestial splendor the won-
drous canopy of our midnight skies. Is there no more than a symbol of
rural work in the bright radiance of the starry Andromeda, the harbin-
ger of gentle spring? Nothing, think you, but the fruit harvest and the
vintage is in the fiery, flushing luster of Antares and the ominous
Scorpion? Are men so spiritually blind that they can perceive nothing
but the symbol of maturing vegetation and the long summer's day in the


THE CONSTELLATIONS 13


glorious splendor of Castor and his starry mate and brother, Pollux?

It would, indeed, seem so, so dead is the heart and callous the
spiritual understanding of our own benighted day. To the initiate of
Urania’s mysteries, however, these dead, symbolic pictures become
endowed with life; these emblems of rural labor or rustic art trans-
form themselves from the hard, chrysolitic shell and expand into the
fully developed spiritual flowers of spiritual entities, revealing in
their bright, radiating lines the awful mystery of the soul’s genesis,
its evolution and eternal progressive destiny amid the mighty, incon-
ceivable creations yet to come; pointing out each step and cycle in
the soul’s involution from its differentiation as a pure spiritual entity,
a ray of Divine intelligence, to the crystallization of its spiritual forces
in the realms of matter and its evolution of progressive life; the same
eternal symbols of the springtime, the glorious summer, the autumn
and winter of its eternal being.

In making this attempt, probably the very first within the era,
to convey in plain and undisguised terms the interior mysteries of
the twelve constellations, the reader and student is advised to ponder
deeply upon the outlines presented. The subject is too vast to present
in one or two chapters. Therefore we hope that this revelation may
incite the student to further research. The real significance, the true,
spiritual importance of such mysteries, can only be realized and fully
appreciated after prolonged meditation and careful study.

With this brief digression, which we consider needed advice, we
will resume our task, and attempt to usher our student into the weird
labyrinth of Solomon’s starry temple—“the house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens.”


I. Aries 7
“First Aries, in his golden wool.”


This constellation represents the first Divine idea, the “word” of
the Kabbalist, and the first active manifestation of the glorious En
Soph. In other words, it is mind in action, the first pulsation of Deity
in the dual aspects of “Lord and Creator.” To the human soul it is,
and always typifies, the unknown, invisible power which we term
intelligence; that which knows, and gives unto each Deific atom of
life that distinguishing, universal, yet deathless force which not only
constitutes its spiritual identity and physical individuality, but enables


14 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


it to pronounce, in the presence of its Creator, those mystic words: “I am
that I am.” In other words, this beautiful constellation symbolizes the
first pulsation of that ray of pure intelligence which constitutes the Di-
vine Ego of the human soul. It is the force that impels ever onward the
life atom in its evolutionary progress, and reveals to us the beginning, or
first manifestation, of the Divine Ego as an active, self-existing atom of
Infinite spirit, within angelic spheres.

Seeing the actual, spiritual reality symbolized in Aries, how easy
it is to note its full significance upon the external plane when refracted
and reflected into the planes below through the complex action of
the human organism, conveying the same radical influx in the first
astrological month and the first sign of the Zodiac. We can read a
perfect parallel in the astral influx upon the human body, as set forth
in the “Light of Egypt,” Vol. I, which says Aries symbolizes the sacrifice
and represents the springtime, the beginning of a new year. The first
action of pure intelligence brought forth the first expression of form,
and led to the sacrifice of its angelic state, and, having gained the
victory over the lower realms of matter, once more the springtime of
a new life, with the promise of life, light and love.

The sign Aries represents the thinking powers of humanity; in
short, the active, intellectual being, the lord of material creation—Man;
and in its cosmic relations, as shown under “The Occult Application
of the Twelve Signs” (Vol. I), we find the same perfect analogy.


IJ. Taurus &
“He (Aries) turns and wonders at the mighty Bull (Taurus).”

The second constellation of the shining twelve represents the first
reaction of spiritual conception. In other words, it is the mind’s atten-
tion to its own ideas. In the Kabbalah it represents that peculiar state
of executive force whereof it is symbolically said: “And the Lord saw
that it was good,” after each act of creation.

When intelligence first manifests itself form is a matter of neces-
sity, and, as no form can possibly exist without matter, so Taurus is
the first emanation of matter in its most etherealized state. Hence it is
feminine, Venus the ruler thereof, and it represents the first pure form
of the human soul, as it existed in its bright paradise within the angelic
spheres of its parents, and reveals to us the first surprise of intelligence
in embryo, the first sensation of consciousness, so to say—conscious of


THE CONSTELLATIONS 15


its Divine selfhood. Hence “He (the male spirit of pure fire, Aries),
glorious in his golden (solar) wool, turns (expressing reaction) and
wonders at the mighty bull (or material form).” Thus the first idea of
pure intelligence in embryo, the result of action in Aries, becomes
objective to its consciousness and is surprised at its own conception.
It is the first sensation of pure, Divine love within angelic realms, and
it (the male spirit of pure fire) sees that it is good.

Bringing this spiritual reality within our conception, and compar-
ing it with its reflected astrological influx, what a beautiful harmony
we find, and yet so simple that verily we cannot refrain from once more
quoting our old-time, worn, yet, nevertheless, golden law: “As it is
above, so it is below; as on the Earth, so in the sky.” Reflecting that
Taurus is an Earthy sign, and a symbol of servitude, we see that matter
is ever the servant of spirit, a necessary means for the manifestation of
intelligence, again recognized in the fecundating forces of this astro-
logical sign on every plane of its action. And it is ruled by Venus, the
love element in Nature, her sympathies ever finding expression in this
beautiful sign. What can be clearer, more understandable, than, that
the involved principles and Deific attributes, as represented by the
shining constellations, when refracted through the human organism, so
complex in its constitution, reflects qualities which are the external and
parallel expression of the subjective principles, and, further, that form
is absolutely necessary for the manifestation of intelligence?


Ill. Gemini 3


“He (Taurus) bending lies with threatening head, and calls the Twins
(Gemini) to rise. They clasp for fear and mutually embrace.”

This bright constellation (Castor and Pollux), Gemini, is spiritually
representative of the second spiritual action. Hence it is, of course, a
masculine sign and positive. We have witnessed act I of the soul’s
drama, and, as some have said, tragedy, and in this, the third of the
shining twelve, we find the opening scene of act II, viz: The evolution
of the twin souls, or, more correctly, the differentiation of the Divine
soul into its two natural component parts—male and female.

Here we approach one of the most arcane secrets within the wide
scope of Occult philosophy, hence must be exact, and at the same time
clear, in our statements. Note, then, that after the male spirit of pure,
ethereal, divine fire (Aries) had conceived the first idea, and Taurus,


16 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


the material envelope, had given that idea objective existence to its
(the Ego’s) consciousness, we find sensation as the result. No sooner
sensation than aspiration; ie., longing. This closes the action and
the reaction.

Ever, in obedience to the unsatisfied wants of an immortal soul
Nature immediately responds. Hence “He bending lies with threaten-
ing head, (that is demanding),” and calls the twins (the twin souls) to
rise (to appear or evolve forth),” and as a first rude shock caused by
their separation, or, rather, by their separate existence as two distinct,
yet mutually dependent, forces, we have the context.


“They clasp for fear and mutually embrace.”


This most impressive scene in the soul’s drama is one of profound
interest and sublime beauty.

In the Kabbalah we find the same parallel, wherein it is stated:
“And so God created man in His own image (the action of Aries and
Taurus); in His own image (mind) created He him, male and female
created He them.” In other words, Aries, Taurus and Gemini are thus
spoken of in pure allegory.

The mundane Bible of the Jews, like everything else esteemed
sacred, finds its original and perfect expression in the great Astral Bible
of the skies.

To the average student the evolution of the Twin Souls is a pro-
found mystery, embracing, as it does, the whole of involution and
evolution, seeing that this beautiful constellation represents to us the
first recognition, or consciousness, of the Divine Ego of its dual forces,
sensation and aspiration, called forth by the action of Aries and Taurus.
How beautifully has the poet expressed this first pulsation of Divine
love: “They clasp for fear,” etc. Evolved by the Divine will of pure
intelligence, they must ever remain as separate, yet mutually depend-
ent, forces, positive and negative, male and female, upon whose action
and reaction rest the perfect evolvement of the powers and possibilities
of the One.

In order to clearly grasp the whole of these ramifications, we again
invite our student’s careful attention to the same sign, Gemini, in its
astrological aspect, as it is representatively expressed by refraction
upon the human organism. We find that this sign (the representative
of the constellation always) signifies the union of reason with intuition,


THE CONSTELLATIONS 17


and that it governs the arms, hands and executive forces of man.

Surely, as we reflect upon the almost marvelous inter-relationship
between things spiritual and things temporal, we must conclude, with
the man Jesus, that “They have eyes but they see not, and ears, but
alas they hear not.”

If it were not so man would, indeed, by virtue of the latent forces
within him, take the kingdom of Heaven by storm and reign supreme
as enthroned king of all material forms. Man, in his blindness, has
relegated intuition to obscurity; has neglected the cunning of the left
hand and debauched the pure love of the divine state. Consequently,
the executive forces within him are unbalanced, thus rendering him
the slave of material forms, instead of being their lawful sovereign.
Therefore, not until, with clean hands and pure heart, he restores
intuition to her throne, united with reason, can he hope to comprehend
the reality of this arcane mystery of the twin souls, Gemini.


IV. Cancer %
“And next the Twins with an unsteady pace Bright Cancer rolls.”

In this beautiful constellation we witness the reaction of Gemini,
the closing scene in act II. Hence it is, of course, a feminine force we
are observing. In other words, it is that period (or rather one of them)
wherein the Kabbalah expresses the reaction of the En Soph, via his
Creators, as “And behold the Lord saw everything that He had made,
and behold it was very good.”

Just so Cancer, spiritually interpreted, means equalizing, hence
harmony, which is indeed very good as contradistinguished from chaos.

To the human soul Cancer is the period of exalted rest. It is the
highest point in the arc of the Divine Soul’s Angelic Cycle. From this
glorious, but subjective, summit or altitude in the realm of spirit it must
descend.

Restless energy and the still unsatisfied longings of its own im-
mortal nature are the forces that bring such evolution about. Having
evolved the dual forces of its divine nature, the Ego sees that it is good
and rests from its labor. But as this exalted state is purely subjective,
and ideal, it must of necessity, to satisfy the longing for further unfold-
ment and desire to know, descend into material realms and conditions.
From this point begins the soul’s involution downward, until the lowest
point in the arc is reached, viz., Capricorn.


18 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


Refer now to the sign Cancer, and carefully study out the parallel
upon its astrological planes and also under its Occult aspects, as given
forth in the “Light of Egypt,” Vol. I, where we read: “Cancer rules
the respiratory and digestive functions of humanity, and governs the
reflective organs of the brain.” Note the parallel. Within subjective
realms the Divine soul has inspired and assimilated all that is possible
to that angelic state, and knows a period of blissful rest. But the long-
ings of its immortal nature urge on the soul. So we see that the sign
Cancer symbolizes tenacity to life; to live we must breathe and eat and
assimilate upon every plane of our being. It necessarily follows that, the
mentality expressed by Cancer must be susceptible to inspirational
currents; to inspire is to indraw. In its application, we find that this
sign symbolizes love. How beautiful the harmony and contrast of the
constellation and its astrological representative.


V. Leo &
“Then Leo shakes his mane.”


Herein is typified the third grand spiritual action which, as we find
throughout Nature, travel in pairs; hence Leo is a positive, masculine
constellation.

Having attained the highest point in the super-celestial states of
subjective, embryonic existence; having evolved sensation and aspira-
tion; now, inspired by a desire for immortality, the dual soul of the
Divine Ego is once more impelled forward; but, as all evolution works
in spirals, it cannot ascend higher without first apparently descending
lower; so ever onward in its eternal march. This beautiful constellation
symbolizes the first action on the downward portion of the arc. It is
the affinities of the heart, so to say, working from within to without.

Matter, in its more etherealized form, begins to assert its sway.
The allegorical serpent of Eden is working upon the feminine portion,
symbolized by the heart, and, like a magnetic tractor, the soul’s affinities
are drawn downward, and, as if in defiance of all responsibilities, con-
sequences, and Karma, the soul, lion-like, “shakes his mane in the
imperiousness of deathless courage.”

As we read these weird allegories, written by Deity in the starry
vaults of heaven, the interested soul bows in reverence and awe before
that almighty power we term Providence, and the profane call God.

No man has altered these pure records of divinity; no finger has


THE CONSTELLATIONS 19


interpolated one single line. They are as beautifully clear to the soul
now as they were in the very dawn of Nature’s awful creation.

To the Initiate into Urania’s mysteries it is unnecessary to draw a
parallel between the constellation and its astrological sign. They are
too clear, magnificent and impressive to escape notice. To the ma-
jority of students the resembance may not be so apparent, hence, for
their benefit, we will point out a few aspects of this interesting
parallel.

We read that the sign Leo is the “solar Lion of the mysteries,
that, ripens with his own internal heat the fruits brought forth from
the Earth by the moisture of Isis (the soul).” Just so, the Divine Ego,
by its eternal energy and strength, the pure fire of intelligence, ex-
ternalizes through material forms the principles involved in the down-
ward portion of the arc, as qualities and attributes of the soul (re-
flected in the physical man as traits and qualities). Again we are told,
“this sign reveals to us the ancient sacrifice and the laws of its com-
pensation.” In the imperiousness of a deathless courage, the soul de-
fies all consequences and responsibilities. Surely, this is the supreme
sacrifice, to leave its pure, Edenic state to gain knowledge, to evolve
its latent forces. And from this lion of the Tribe of Judah, is born that
Divine love and sympathy which ultimately redeems and purifies the
soul and saves it from death in matter. The laws of its compensation
are fulfilled in the prefected man.

In its intellectual aspect, we learn that the mental forces of those
dominated by this sign are ever striving to attain unto some higher
state. Their ideas are grand, compared with the nature of the con-
stellation, and all that it implies. The reflection is clear, natural and
beautiful. When we reflect upon this awful period in the involution
of the dual souls of the Divine Ego, as symbolized by the constellation,
and the grand truths represented by the astrological sign when re-
fracted through the human organism, the reason for Leo being named
the Royal Sign becomes quite plain.


VI. Virgo mp
“And following Virgo calms his rage again.”


Beautifully expressive are these lines to those who read their mys-
tic import aright. Virgo is the reaction of the leonine force, and is,
consequently, a feminine symbol.


20 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


Action and reaction are the eternal laws upon which the cosmos
is founded. They constitute the inseparable affinities, attraction and
repulsion, of everything within the realm of manifested being. In
this mystic constellation, we see the first ideas of maternal instinct
arise. This is a necessary result of the impulsive action of the heart in
Leo—the reaction from a state of imperious, defiance. The heat of
rage or energy and deathless courage results in the ideas of something
to be encountered, overcome, and of self-preservation. The dual
soul descends still another volve in the spiral of its celestial journey
toward crystallized forms.

Virgo, the Virgin of the skies, and eternal symbol of that Divine,
immaculate conception, shows wherein these forces lie. Here is con-
ceived, in a pure, holy sense, the first instinct of love within the dual
soul. It represents that awful period in the Biblical Garden of Eden,
wherein the virgin wife stands before the tree of knowledge, of good
and evil, where she is fascinated by the allurements of matter and is
unconsciously becoming enveloped in the coils of the serpent. In other
words, after the cosmic force had shaken its mane in defiance of ma-
terial forces, it is the reaction of his subjective half which sees how
good material things are; or, in other words, “and following Virgo
calms his rage again.” The masculine half, or positive force of the
soul, yields to temptation and is soothed by the alluring prospects.

It will be noticed in this connection that pity, reflection, and
compassion, are the peculiar actions of the sign Virgo in the Zodiac
(not the constellation), and that astrologically it governs the bowels.
This symbolism is really very beautiful when closely compared and
studied. That immaculate conception of pure love of the soul for its
other half, upon the astrological plane, becomes refracted and reacts
as compassion and pity. Again, the soul, within subjective realms,
sees how good material things are, and its refraction represents the
assimilating functions of the human organism. It also reveals to us
the significance of the Lord’s Supper. At this stage of its journey, the
Divine Ego knows for the last time that close communion with the
twin soul before the crucifixion, the wine typical of the sacrifice, the
bread, and the sustaining forces, of its own immortal being.

The intellectual aspect of the sign Virgo forms a perfect analogy
to the constellation, and is too evident for further remarks.


THE CONSTELLATIONS 21


VI. Libra =


“Then day and night are weighed in Libra’s scales;
Equal awhile, at last the night prevails.”


Another volve in the spiral, and we reach the grand climax of
the soul’s journey, within the spiritual world.

The nature of this constellation was, for ages, concealed from all
but Initiates; for the reason that, it contains the most important
mysteries connected with the human soul. It is the grand transition
are between the spiritual world and the astral world; in other words,
between ideal conceptions and elemental forms, between the world of
design and the realms of force.

One of the chief mysteries of Libra is, that, it is androgyne, or bi-
sexual, in nature. So far the dual soul has evolved within the realms
of spirituality; here it stands, in the celestial balance, between the two,
giving way to temptation, takes the forbidden fruit and instantly
awakes from its purely spiritual state tc become surrounded by the
illusions of matter. The struggle of the soul with the attracting forces
of matter is very clearly expressed in the line:—


“Equal awhile, at last the night prevails.”


In other words, astral and physical darkness bedim the soul’s
spiritual sight, and, leaving the realms of innocence and bliss, they
sink into the vortex of the great astral world.

The celestial state is now forever lost as a realm of angelic in-
nocence. It can only be regained amid trial, sorrow, suffering, and
experience, and, when regained, it is as Lord and Master, not as the
innocent cherub. But when, having gained or reached the equator of
the upward arc of its progress, and, united once more to its missing
half, gives expression to that deathless force with which it started
from the opposite point, Aries: “I am that I am;” no longer an em-
bryo, but being within the universal soul of being. Before closing this
symbolic constellation, we must reveal the mystery of its bi-sexual
nature. In the higher or first portion of the sign it is --, positive to
some extent, and masculine. The soul is still within the Garden of
Eden and pure, clad in the raiment of God, and is represented by the
Chaldean statues of “The Bearded Venus,” or Venus, the Angel of
Libra, as a morning star, bright Lucifer. But in the latter half, after
the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil (positive and neg-


22, THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


ative, you see) has been partaken of, bright Lucifer falls. The Sun of
the Morning, shorn of his glory, becomes the symbol of night, or
Vesper, the evening star, and the symbol is thus ~, and the soul loses
its heavenly raiment, or spiritual consciousness, and becomes clothed
with matter, the symbol of night.

The sign Libra in the Zodiac, in its astrological aspect, is a very
external correspondence of all the foregoing.


VIII. Scorpio m


“And, longer grown, the heavier scale inclines,
And draws bright Scorpio from the winter signs.”


We now behold the gates of Paradise guarded by the flaming
sword which points to the four quarters of the world. This sword is,
according to Genesis, “to guard the way of the tree of life,” and such,
esoterically, it really is.

The soul is no longer dual, but separated into male and female
personalities; “and behold they see that they are naked.” Stripped of
their spiritual raiment, they feel the chill of matter and the lusts of an
animal nature. They need clothing, “so God made them coats of skin.”
Sex is the symbolism herein typified, and the evolution of the animal
passions of procreation, of multiplication and evolution. It is the
complete entry of the soul into elemental conditions, and the flaming
sword guarding the four quarters of the Earth to the way of life are
the four great realms of the astral world; the way to physical life in
concrete forms; and the way to life eternal through the realms of
the Sylphs, Gnomes, Undines and Salamanders. They are the basis
of all matter, known as Air, Earth, Water and Fire. Here we see that,
through the evolution of sex and its accompanying desire for pro-
creation, these blind forces of Nature find their avenue of expression.
Spiritual consciousness almost lost, and without reason, the soul be-
comes the prey, so to say, of these forces of the astral world, which
is the realm of design. The soul’s creations must be met and van-
quished upon the upward arc of the Cycle of Progress. They guard
or oppose the way to eternal life. Here the soul, having gained the
victory, stripped forever of its earthy raiment and the lusts of the
flesh, arrayed once more in its spiritual raiment, purified and sanctified,
it will stand once more at the gates of Paradise, where, reunited with


THE CONSTELLATIONS 23


its missing half, it will partake of the fruit of the Tree of Life and
become as Gods. Astrologically the correspondence is perfect, and so
thinly disguised as to need no explanation.


IX. Sagittarius 7


“Him Centaur follows with an aiming eye,
His bow full-drawn, and ready to let fly.”


Deeper and deeper sinks the soul into material forms. The evo-
lution of sex has produced the necessary avenues for the entrance of
countless forces, and the soul is now rapidly losing the last vestiges
of its spiritual conscience. In other words, Sagittarius symbolizes that
state of the soul wherein it is descending to its polarizing point, and is,
therefore, the vortex of innumerable opposing forces, seeking expres-
sion in different forms.

“It is the bow (strength or force of the soul), rutt-drawn and
ready to let fly” its arrows (of energy) in any direction that may afford
proper opportunity. Here we see the expression of that deathless, fiery
force, and imperious daring and courage, within more material states;
the primal fire reflected from another angle.

But everything is unsettled. It is a masculine force, and restless, and
is represented under the allegory of the “Tower of Babel” and the
utter dispersion of the people (entities) to the four corners of the
Earth, and finally becomes involved in dense matter, and its migra-
tions are at an end on this side of the Cycle of Necessity.

Upon the astrological plane, the zodiacal sign Sagittarius rules
the motive forces and the pedestrian instinct, the thighs, or basis of
locomotion; hence, we see, even here, a most perfect analogy. This
sign symbolizes, also, the governing forces of humanity, which see the
necessity of law and order; hence government. In this expression, we
find the bow (strength or force) ready to let fly its arrows of energy
in any direction the opportunity may afford; when refracted upon the
human organism and reflected upon the external plane, these forces
manifest as the restless spirit, that ever impels onward, seeking new
fields of expression, out of which develops a sense of order, restraining
and training, or the governing of self and control of others. When we
reflect upon these symbols of starry truths the mind bows in reverence
before the wisdom that created them.


24 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


X. Capricorn v3
“Next narrow horns the twisted Caper shows.”


The Goat, and in the realms of spirit, the crystallized mineral is
the reaction of the former, and shows to us death, inertia and rest;
hence Kronos, or Saturn, the symbol of death, is lord of this state and
condition. It is the polarizing point of the soul’s evolution in matter,
and therefore, forms the lowest arc in the Cycle of Necessity.

Herein we behold the soul, imprisoned within the mineral state.
The fire of the flint, and the spark in the crystal, are the only avenues
of its lonesome expressions. But, as the lowest point, it is also the
promise of a higher, and the symbol of a higher state, and the symbol
of another spiral in its endless life.

This constellation, as the symbol of inertia and death, is also the
symbol of awakening life, and prepares the soul for the more perfect
expression of its powers in its forthcoming upward journey. If we
pause for a moment and consider the force and power necessary to
evolve out of this dark, dense, mineral realm, the foregoing sentence
will become clear and forcible. Hitherto, the soul has been slowly
drawn down into coils of matter, imprisoned by material forces. It has
penetrated the lowest depths, and can go no farther. Rest here, is to
gather strength, force. Mark well the difference and parallel between
Cancer and Capricorn, opposite points in the arc. Cancer is the symbol
of exalted rest within angelic realms; Capricorn the symbol of rest in
dense matter. From the former state the soul is impelled forward on
its downward journey; from the latter state the soul awakens to the
struggle for life on the upward are; and must now give expression
to the positive powers of its immortal being, which have become in-
volved in material form; that shall make it the master, and give it the
victory over death and material forces. Surely, this is truly the promise
of a new day, and higher state of existence.

It will be instructive to study this by a comparison of the zodiacal
sign, Capricorn, as set forth in the “Light of Egypt,” Vol. I, wherein we
read: “This sign signifies the knees, and represents the first principle
in the trinity of locomotion, viz., the joints, bending, pliable, movable.”
The analogy is perfect. The soul, which has been pliant, bending to
material forces, now reverses this action, and bows the knee in awe and
reverence to the higher powers of its being. When refracted upon the


THE CONSTELLATIONS 25


human organism, we find that the cold, lonesome state, and weary
struggle within the mineral realm, becomes love of self, directing its
energies to the attainment of selfish ends. What could be more natural?


XI. Aquarius
“And from Aquarius’ urn a flood o’erflows.”


The soul, released from its crystallized cycle of matter, now rapidly
evolves into states, though material, yet entirely different. Its previous
arc, from Libra to Capricorn, has been amid inorganic matter. It is
now rushing with lightning speed upon its weird, toilsome, upward,
journey through purely organic forms, from vegetable to animal; and,
as all organic forms have their primary origin in water, so does this
celestial urn express the primary conception of this physical state.
Further, to more fully express this, Aquarius is typical of man, as pro-
totype of the last grand goal of the soul’s future material state—in other
words, the last quadrant of the four elements, viz.: Bull, Lion, Eagle,
Man.

There is something exceedingly significant in all this, and the
more we ponder on this spiritual allegory of the shining constellation,
the more we are impressed with the divine wisdom of those early in-
structors of our race, who thus preserved truth in an incorruptible form.

From this weird, but beautiful constellation, we learn how the
soul has progressed, finding innumerable avenues of expression of its
latent forces; the manifestation of its powers in the various chemical
changes, and development of functions expressed through countless
forms, on the lower planes of existence. The sacrifice of its angelic
innocence, the imperious defiance and deathless courage, symbolized
by Leo, have obtained the victory over the lower kingdoms; which
will be incorporated into his vast empire. Yet, unstable as water, it
cannot excel; or, in other words, cannot rise to a higher state within
this arc, of its progressive life.

We find that the astrological expression of this constellation, the
sign Aquarius, governs the legs, and is the natural emblem of the
changeable, moveable, migratory forces, of the body, forming a per-
fect parallel with its interior symbol. There is a great deal contained
in this zodiacal sign worthy of deep study and reflection.


26 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


XII. Pisces *


“Near their loved waves cold Pisces take their seat,
With Aries join, and make the round complete.”


Once more a reaction—the last scene of the soul’s impersonal
drama. The constellation of Pisces is the symbol of rest and expecta-
tion. The soul has now completed the first round, or rung, in the
Cycle of Necessity; and its next state is that of incarnated man. It
has triumphed over every sphere below, and defied, in turn, every
power above, and is now within that sixth state of the embryonic soul-
world that transforms all its past knowledge, sorrow, and suffering,
into experience; and produces the impersonal man.

It has traveled through constellated states within matter and
spirit, and, as a human soul, with reason, intuition, and responsibility,
it will, in its next state, become subject to those same powers when
reflected from a different plane. The twelve constellations of its soul
will manifest a complete rapport with the twelve signs of solar light
and power.

With this we close. The mystic sign of this constellation is “,
or completion, a seal and a sign of its past labors.

And, as we have seen, the shining constellations are the soul’s
progressive history from its genesis, to its appearance within embodied
conditions as man; and so, by correspondence, are the twelve solar
signs symbols of man and his material destiny. The foundation has
been laid, the material and resources are at hand, for his kingdom is
exclusive. With his own hands he must build his temple (the symbol
of the perfected man), each stone accurately measured, cut, polished,
and in its proper place, the proportions symmetrical, hence, harmon-
ious; the keystone of whose arch is Will, its foundation love. This
accomplished, he will have completed the second round of the great
Cycle of Necessity.

And who, after contemplating the wondrous harmony of this
beautiful system, and the complete accord of each part, can refuse to
agree with the truly inspired Addison that—


“Ever moving as they shine,
The hand that made us is divine.”


CHAPTER III


THE SPIRITUAL INTERPRETATION OF THE TWELVE
HOUSES OF THE HOROSCOPE


As a sequel to the foregoing subjects, viz., the Zodiac and con-
stellations, we will add the spiritual interpretation of the twelve houses
of an horoscope, which completes the triune expression of these celes-
tial symbols of eternal truths.

In revealing this mystery, we would impress upon the mind of the
student that the order of the Zodiac is the reverse of the external, in
its spiritual application, to the twelve houses of the horoscope.

As the four cardinal signs, viz., Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capri-
corn, correspond to the four angles of a natal figure, it is our purpose
to explain, first, the symbology of the four angles, or cardinal points;
believing the whole revelation will thus become clear and forcible.

The four angles of the horoscope correspond to the four elements,
the four triplicities, and the four cardinal points, or epochs, in the
soul’s involution from pure spirit to the crystallizing, inert, mineral
state.

The first angle is the ascendant, or House of Life. It is the eastern
horizon, and symbolized by Aries. Upon the interior, this first angle
stands for the birth, or differentiation, of the Divine Ego, as the re-
sult of the creative action, or impulse, of the Deific mind.

The Ego rises upon the eastern horizon of celestial states, a glow-
ing, scintillating atom of pure intelligence, an absolute, eternal Ego,
rising out of the ocean of Infinite Love.

The South angle, meridian, or Tenth House, pertaining to honor,
etc., is symbolized by Cancer; the highest point in the arc of the soul’s
involution, as a differentiated atom of Deity within angelic spheres.

Having evolved the first dual expression of its (the Ego’s) self, the
twin souls—Sensation and Aspiration, or Love and Wisdom, the Ego
rests awhile, radiant with celestial love and wisdom, and inspiring
the Divine breath of life.

Again the restless impulse of the creative purpose arouses the Ego
to further action. The culminating point has been reached, and now
must begin an apparent downward course toward the western horizon.

The seventh angle, or House of Marriage, etc., is represented by


28 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


Libra (the Balance), or point of equilibrium; where the two souls are
still one, balanced upon the western horizon. The alluring tempta-
tions of material illusions draw the souls downward, and, divorced
from their celestial state, the radiance of Divine love becomes ob-
scured, until the twilight of consciousness of that former state is lost
in the night of material conditions.

This house signifies, also, law, and open enemies, and (Libra)
justice. Sex is the law. The antagonism is surely too apparent to re-
quire explanation.

The fourth angle, or Nadir, the point opposite the M. C., signifies
the frozen North, and is symbolized by Capricorn, the crystallizing point
in the soul’s involution. It is death, inertia; that is, crystallization of
the soul’s spiritual forces. It is the lowest point of the arc in the
monad’s downward journey. It is the night, before the awakening
of a new day upon a higher plane of existence.

The remaining houses are the lights and shadows that, fill out
and complete the picture, upon this, the first round of the Cyclic
Ladder.

The Twelfth House, symbolized by Taurus, represents the first
expression of form of the human soul. It is matter in the most ethe-
realized state. It is the trail of the serpent; the silent, secret, tenacious,
negative principle; that ultimately draws the soul down into the vor-
tices of gross matter and death.

The Eleventh, or House of Friends, whose symbol is Gemini, the
Twins, expressive of the first emanation of this sublime relationship,
the dual attributes, love and wisdom, closest friends. It is sensation
and aspiration, which enable the spirit to attain to the exalted state
indicated by the Tenth Mansion.

The Ninth Mansion of the celestial map is the House of Science,
Art, Religion, Philosophy, etc., and its symbol is Leo, the Heart, with
its emotions, love, and longings, and sympathies. Having evolved
the twins, and inspiring the Divine breath of wisdom; glowing with
Deific love, the Ego aspires to know; and all the sympathies of the
soul are aroused. Dauntless and fearless, defying all opposition and
consequences, It (the Ego) is ready to sacrifice this angelic state and
explore the boundless Universe in pursuit of knowledge, and goes
forth on its long voyage upon the ocean of Infinite, fathomless love
and wisdom.


THE TWELVE HOUSES 29


The Eighth, or House of Death and Legacies, is symbolized by
Virgo, the virgin wife, standing before the “Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil,” fascinated by the flattering prospects of greater
power and wisdom. Desire and sympathy draw the soul down into
realms which lead to death, and the beginning of a heritage of sorrow.

The Sixth, or House of Sickness, Menials, and Sorrow, is symbol-
ized by Scorpio. The fall, from Libra through Scorpio (sex), created
the first condition of what we recognize as sickness and affliction. It
is evident that this house is related to the elementals of the astral
plane, which become the servitors of man.

The Fifth, or House of Children, etc., symbolized by Sagittarius,
signifies the offspring of sex (Scorpio), entities sent forth to people
the Earth, to take their chances of life, speculating on its future course,
fearlessly eager for the struggle, gaining pleasure in its migrations and
activities.

The Third House is symbolized by Aquarius. This is the first
step of the upward journey, or evolution, from the inert mineral state.
The changes are now rapid; the journeys innumerable; through
mineral, vegetable, and animal planes, of existence. Here, the Soul
Monad brings into actual practice the knowledge gained oni its long
voyage. The magical powers of the soul are brought into action to
effect these changes in form and function, conquering material forces
and planes of life, transmuting Nature’s elements to its uses and pur-
poses, and writing its history, as it journeys ever onward, step by step.

And further, this house stands in opposition to the Ninth House,
symbolized by Leo; longing to expand its (the Ego’s) possibilities
through trial and suffering; gaining knowledge through bitter expe-
rience; yet fearlessly braving all things; guided and sustained by the
imperial will of spirit. The recompense promised by that supreme
sacrfice has been won in Aquarius—the Man—consecrated now to a
higher existence, baptized in the waters of affliction (experience),
ready to be transmuted into actual knowledge. This is Aquarius, and
the Third House.

The Second House, signified as Pisces, the House of Wealth,
that which has been accumulated on the long and toilsome journey—
the wealth of experience, acquired through trials and struggles. And
now, with higher, greater possibilities, the soul eagerly awaits the
hour when it shall be born again, a conscious, responsible human


30 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


being, to begin the second round of the Cyclic Ladder; on this second
round, to externalize the knowledge gained, to evolve the involved
attributes and forces of being,—a creature of will and intellect, to
work out its destiny, as the lord of material creation.

Observe, the order of the Zodiac is reversed upon the external
human plane. But, Aries is always symbolical of the first angle, and
Libra of the seventh, being the point of equilibrium, while the tenth,
or South, angle becomes Capricorn and the fourth Cancer. The mission
of the soul now is to evolve the positive, spiritual attributes.

Aries rules the brain and the fiery, imperial will. It signifies cour-
age, daring, etc., the first qualities necessary for the battle of life.
Ruling the head, the sign and house show us the ability of man to
view the field of action, to mark his chart, and arm for the war (which
will be incessant); responsible for his acts, a creature of unfolding
consciousness, an individual, whose measure of free will enables him
to wander so far North or South of his celestial equator, within his
orbit, or Zodiac.

The South angle, or Tenth House, now ruled by Capricorn, tells
of the honor, position, fame, etc. (or the reverse) acquired by patient
labor. The crystallized material gains, the concrete result of ambition,
skill, and talent, which will, at the close of his earthly career, become
liquefied by the universal resolvent; symbolized by Cancer upon the
opposite angle, symbolical of the grave, the end of mundane affairs;
when they will be mirrored forth in new forms in that great white
sea, according to the manner in which he gained his worldly accumu-
lations and prestige.

The seventh angle is Libra, House of Marriage; that all-important
relation which may make or mar a life, the Balance is so easily dis-
turbed in its equilibrium. To preserve its harmony, equality must
reign, blending love and wisdom. It is the perfect poise of body, mind,
and soul, achieved by loving obedience to the higher laws of our being
and the true union of intuition and reason.

The Second House, now represented by Taurus, shows us that
personal wealth and possessions must come through patient servitude,
steady application, and diligence, in being able to choose and as-
similate the knowledge, that will enable man to battle with material
conditions, and wrest from the abundant sources of Mother Nature
his share of treasure and experience. It is the battle-ground to which


THE TWELVE HOUSES 31


humanity, armed with brain and will, life and energy, goes forth to
battle with material forces for the bread he must earn by the sweat
of his brow, and through the silent, subtle forces of mind and soul
conquer matter, thus storing up a wealth of knowledge and experience.

The Third House is ruled by Gemini, the Twins, Reason and In-
tuition, the brethren who aid and guide us on our many journeys in
the pursuit of knowledge. As this sign governs the hands and arms
and the executive forces of humanity, we see, that, the hands become
the magical agents of mind, moulding into outward form the ideas con-
ceived in the mind, projecting these into the field of active life, that he
may write a bright record in the Book of Life. The hands should be
kept clean, the images pure; and the perfect poise gained by the equal
exercise of love and wisdom, intuition and reason, making the basis
of education; the evolution of the interior or real self. This is the true
meaning of this house upon the external plane. It is Occult, because
it means projecting the powers of the soul into conscious life, external-
izing the qualities and magical forces of spirit, as shown in the first
instance by Aquarius. This can be accomplished only through pure
desire and aspiration. Otherwise, the unbalanced scales, with floods
and cataclysms, will be the results.

The Fifth House, ruling children, etc., is symbolized by Leo
(the Heart). The joys and sorrows that offspring of every kind bring,
all belong to this House of the Heart. The sacrifice indicated is too
obvious for comment.

The Sixth House governs sickness, disease, etc., and its symbol
is Virgo, an Earthy sign, clearly showing us that the material form is
the matrix, out of which are born disease and suffering. But, the per-
fect assimilation of the fruit of the “Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil;” transmuting the trials, experiences, sorrows, and suffering of the
physical and external life into ttue wisdom; makes man master of his
material universe; and the blind forces of Nature become his servants.
Having accomplished the task, and attained the harmonious poise, or
balance, in Libra, the individualized soul arrives at the eighth step
in the journey.

The Eighth House, or House of Death and Legacies (Scorpio).
The old Adam dies. The sensuous has no place in the balanced, har-
monious being, but recognizes sex as the law, the door to regeneration
now, and that a new legacy is awaiting him.


32 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


The Ninth House, Sagittarius, where, with the knowledge ac-
quired, self sits in judgment upon the works of the hands and mind,
whether or no they have been well done; the sacrifice of the lower
nature properly made, control of the triune being established, the
transmutations correct and accurate, assimilation perfect and free from
dross, harmony gained by loving obedience to the higher law of being,
and thus becomes ruler of his kingdom; the long journey almost ac-
complished, so far as Earth is concerned, perceiving and understand-
ing that all sciences, philosophies, and religions, have their origin from
one primal source. Having penetrated the depths in reverent obedi-
ence to the Divine law of creation, and evolved the attributes of the
dual constitution, the forces of his being become crystallized. He has
reached the culmination of his earthly pilgrimage, and stands forth
the perfected human reflection of the higher self.

The Eleventh House is represented by Aquarius on the human
‘plane. Friends surround and welcome him. These friends are the
pure thoughts, noble impulses, lofty ideals, and generous deeds. The
bread cast upon the Waters of Life returns to nourish and sustain him
in his encounter with the secret foes, symbolized by the Twelfth
House and Pisces. The idols, false ideas, and vampires of his own
creation, are to be cleansed and washed away by the Waters of Love,
the universal solvent that is ever seeking to bring about change and
new forms; born again of water to make the round of the astral Zodiac,
until, having again reached the equator of the ascending arc, where he
is reunited to the missing half of his soul, the true friend of the Edenic
state; the highest point in the arc of human progress won; the honor
and glory of a perfected soul; the Lord and Master, the “I am that
I am,” to rest in peace in the heart of Infinite Love and Wisdom.


CHAPTER IV


ASTRO-THEOLOGY


There is one species of Divine revelation which has not, and can-
not, be tampered with, one great Bible, which forms the starry original
of all Bibles.

This sacred Bible is the great Astral Bible of the skies; its chapters
are the twelve great signs, its pages are the innumerable glittering
constellations of the heavenly vault, and its characters are the per-
sonified ideals of the radiant Sun, the silvery moon, and the shining
planets, of our solar sphere.

There are three different aspects of this sacred book, and in each
aspect the same characters appear, but in different roles, their dress
and natural surroundings being suited to the natural play of their
symbolical parts. In fact, the whole imagery may be likened unto a
play, or, rather, a series of plays, performed by the same company of
artists. It may be a comedy, or it may be melodrama, or it may be
a tragedy; but the principles behind the scenes are ever the same, and
show forth the same Divine Oneness of Nature; demonstrating the
eternal axiom: One truth, one life, one principle, and one word, and in
their fourfold expression, is the four great chapters of the celestial
book of the starry heavens.

In this aspect the visible cosmos may be represented as a kaleido-
scope. The visible constellations, planets, and other heavenly bodies,
are the bits of colored glass; and Deity the invisible force, which keeps
the instrument in motion. Each revolution produces a different pic-
torial figure, which, complete in its harmony of parts, is perfect in its
mathematical proportions, and beautiful in its geometrical designs.
And yet each creation, each form, and each combination of forms, are
produced by the same little pieces of glass; and all of them, in reality,
are optical illusions; i.e., natural phenomena, which deceive the phy-
sical senses. So it is with Cosmic Nature.

It must not, however, be supposed, because of this perfect and
continual illusion of Nature’s playful phenomena, that all visible
creation is purely an illusion of the senses, as some cranky metaphysi-
cians would have it, because this is not so.


34 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


Going back again to our kaleidoscope, we can clearly see that
without it, and its tinted beads, no such optical illusion is possible.
There is, then, a basis of spiritual reality to all visible physical phenom-
ena; but this basis lies concealed, because of the perfect illusion
which the reflected image produces upon the material plane of the
physical senses. The beads themselves are real. These are the basis,
and the different pictures ‘are the result, not of the beads, but of the
angle from which they are reflected to our earthly vision. In other
words, the plane from which we behold the phenomena.

Hence, the nearer we approach the Divine center of our being,
the less complicated Nature’s original designs become, and the farther
we are removed from that central source, the more weird, mysterious,
complicated, and incomprehensible, does Mother Nature appear, to
the finite human mind. And this is especially so, to man’s theological
instinct, his religiosity, that constitutes one of the fundamental factors
of his being.

Nature is ever one in her original truths and their duplicate re-
flections; but ever conflicting and contradictory in her multiplied re-
fractions through the minds of men. Therefore, we will present the
primary concept of that grand Astro-Theology formulated by man’s
great progenitors; and view the simple machinery, by which they
typified to the primitive mind a general outline of Nature’s Divine
providence.

All sacred books begin with an account of physical creation, the
culmination of which, is the appearance of man and woman, as the
parents of the race; and, while they will differ considerably in detail
and make-up, the basic ideas embodied are essentially the same in all
cosmo-genesis; so that in the Jewish Bible, accessible to all, one can
read the primitive story of creation from a Jewish point of view, and,
when read, rest satisfied that he has read the revelation vouchsafed
to man in every age and in every clime. The only difference is one
of mental peculiarity and national custom, along with climatic con-
ditions. Hindoo, Chaldean, Chinese, Persian, Egyptian, Scandinavian,
Druidic and ancient Mexican are all the same—different names and
drapery, to suit the people only, but essentially the same in the funda-
mental ideas conveyed.


ASTRO-THEOLOGY 30


THE CREATION OF THE WORLD

The simple story of creation begins at midnight, when the Sun
has reached the lowest point in the arc—Capricorn. All Nature then
is in a state of coma in the Northern Hemisphere, it is winter time,
solar light and heat are at their lowest ebb; and the various appear-
ances of motion, etc., are the Sun’s passage from Capricorn to Pisces,
60°, and from Pisces to Aries, 30°, making 90°, or one quadrant of
the circle. Then begin in real earnest the creative powers, it is spring
time. The six days are the six signs of the northern arc, beginning
with the disruptive fires of Aries. Then, in their order, Taurus, Gemini,
Cancer, Leo, Virgo; then Libra, the seventh day and the seventh sign,
whose first point is opposite Aries and is the opposite point of the
sphere, the point of equilibrium, equal day and equal night, it is
autumn. It is the sixth sign from Aries, the first creative action, and
so the sixth day following the fiery force, wherein God created the
bi-sexual man. See Genesis, 1:5-27: “So God created man in His own
image; in the image of God created He him, male and female created
He them.”

It is the seventh, or day of the Lord (man), the climax of material
creation and Lord of all living things, and he rests in the blissful
Garden of Eden. This seventh day and seventh sign is the concealed
sacred Libra (=~), the perfect union of the sexes. Then comes the fall
from Libra, through Scorpio, and banishment from the Garden of
Eden. That is the victory of Satan, or Winter, over Summer, etc. It
is useless to repeat the same old, old story. The yearly journey of the
Sun around the constellated dial of Deity is the Astro basis of all
primitive cosmology.


THE SCHEME OF REDEMPTION


In addition to the creation of the world and the fall of man through
sin, we find all people in possession of a grand scheme of redemption,
and, like the former, we shall find them all essentially the same. They
all require a mediator between the angry God and disobedient man,
and they all require that this mediator shall be Divine, or semi-Divine.
Nothing less can satisfy Deity’s demands; or, rather, let us say man’s
own carnal imagination. It is simply another turn of our cosmic ka-
leidoscope, and behold! the actors have changed. Capricorn becomes


36 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


the stable of the Goat, in the manger of which the young Savior of
the world is born. As a type of all, we will take the Gospel Savior.
It is again midnight. The Sun enters the sign Capricorn on the twenty-
first of December. This is the lowest point of the arc, South, and for
three days he is stationary, or in darkness.’ And now it is Christmas
Eve. He (the Sun or Savior) begins to move, and at midnight is born
as the celestial Virgo is rising upon the Eastern quadrant of the skies;
hence the Sun-God is born of a Virgin. Then comes the flight to es-
cape Kronos, or Saturn (ruling Capricorn), who kills the young babes.
There is a period of silence in the God’s history while the Sun is in
transit through the signs Capricorn and part of Aquarius. That is,
he is hidden or obscured by the clouded skies of this period. We hear
of him but once again until he, the Sun-God, or Savior, is thirty years
old, or has transited thirty degrees of space. He has entered the sign
Aquarius (symbolical of the Man.) Now begins the period of miracles.

Let us digress for a space, and refer to our chapter on the con-
stellations. We shall find a perfect analogy between this miracle-
working period and the constellations Aquarius and Pisces, as therein
given. The first miracle we read of is turning water into wine. This
may be seen in a threefold aspect. The Sun-God changes by his life-
forces the waters of winter into the rich vintage of the harvest, where
the Virgin (Virgo) Mother again appears. Again, the wine becomes
the blood—the life offered up on the vernal cross to strengthen, renew
and make merry with new life our Earth and its people. The devil
(or winter), with his powers of darkness, is defeated and man saved.
The final triumph is the crucifixion in Aries, the vernal equinox, about
the twenty-first of March, quickly followed by the resurrection, or
renewal of life. Then the God rises into heaven, to sit upon the throne
at the summer solstice, to bless his people. We read, that, the Savior
of mankind was crucified between two thieves. Very good. The equi-
noctial point is the dividing line between light and darkness, winter
and summer. In other words, the Sun is resuming his northern arc,
to replenish the Earth with his solar force and preserve his people
from death in the coming winter. The life of a Buddha, a Krishna or
a Christ, are all found in their completeness in the life of Horus; while
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are Isis, Horus and Osirus. The same
trinity, under different names, are found in all nations. It is the Sun,
Moon and Human Soul, which is the only true mediator of Man.


ASTRO-THEOLOGY 37


There is another version of this celestial crucifixion, wherein
the Sun-God-Savior, after the supper of the harvest in Virgo, is cruci-
fied at the autumnal equinox upon the equator. We read that he
was dying from the sixth to the ninth hours—three hours, three signs,
or from the 21st of September to the 21st of December, when he is
laid in the tomb. This is the lowest point of the Sun’s journey in
the southern hemisphere, and darkness holds the balance in our north-
ern hemisphere. The three days in the tomb are the three months,
or three signs, before the vernal equinox, or the resurrection, the rising
out of the South to bring salvation to the northern portion of our Earth.

We have now only to glance over various diverging lines of the
same cosmology and the same redemption. All these allegories typi-
fied truths. They all teach the Initiate the mysteries of creation, of
man’s destiny and his necessary Cycle of Material Probation. Some
of the most beautiful parables may be read in this light. Abraham,
and the story of his wanderings in the deserts of Asia Minor; of Lot
and his unfaithful wife, are to be seen still written in the heavens.
Hagar and Ishmael are still there; so also are Esau and his brother
Jacob; the story of Joseph and his brethren; of Sampson and _ his
twelve labors. This is the same beautiful story. The Sun, shorn of
his glory, or solar force, at the autumnal equinox, stands upon the
equator between the two pillars of the temple (or light and darkness),
and pulls down the temple (or signs) into the southern hemisphere.
And behind this we have the eternal truth of the soul, when, giving
way to the allurements of matter (Delilah), the soul is shorn of its
spiritual covering, or conscience, and sinks into matter and death.
And the story of David and Goliath can be read to-day as clearly
as of yore.

They are eternal, spiritual verities of human nature, and record,
not only the history of the human race, its mutations and transmu-
tations, but of the individual man and the suffering and delusive joys
of his material life. Aye, more! It is the record of all his past existence
and a type of his eternal destiny in the future.

Another turn of our cosmic kaleidoscope, and lo! the scene changes
—the play extended, the angles greater, caused by the revolution of
our solar parent through his celestial Zodiac. As the Sun passes out
of one sign into another, or, in other words, forms a different angle
to his own center of force, a new dispensation is born to the world;


38 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


or, rather, re-born under a new guise. The great Sun-God appears
to change his nature and manifests an entirely different set of attri-
butes. That is the way man personified this play of Nature, through his
imperfect conception of the cause of this change. But to him it was,
and is, a truth, and man’s effort to externalize these attributes in a
Divine personality was, and is, strictly from the plane of his mental
development and spiritual unfoldment.

The two pictures of this Astro-Theology, as set forth in the two
divisions of the Jewish Bible, will illustrate our meaning. The Sun
had entered the sign Aries some time prior to the exodus from Egypt.
Aries is the constellation of Mars, the fiery, destructive and warrior
element, or force, in Nature, and we find the Jewish conception of
God a perfect embodiment of these attributes: The Lord of Hosts,
a God mighty in battle, delighting in the shedding of blood and the
smell of burnt offerings, ever marshalling the people to battle and
destroying their foes and the works of his own hands; a God imbued
with jealousy, anger, and revenge. This was the type set up by the
Jewish savior and lawgiver, Moses.

After a period of 2,160 years, we find the Christian cosmology
ushered in. The Sun has entered the sign Pisces, which is ruled by
Jupiter, the beneficent father. The Christ, or mediator, of the Christian
Gospel was an embodiment of the joint qualities of the sign and ruling
planet. Gentle, loving and merciful, His words were messages of
love and peace; His work was with the poor, oppressed and fallen;
he eschewed sacrifices and burnt offerings; a contrite heart was the
best offering; He taught the people that God was their Father, loving
all, just, yet merciful. But a strong taint of the old conception has
remained with the human race, hiding, at times, the beauty of the
latter concept. These are, again, the refractions of eternal truths,
viewed by man from his material plane. The elements are here pre-
sented, the alphabet and its key clearly defined. Therefore, let each one
explore this tangled labyrinth of Astro-Theology for him or herself,
and work out the various correspondencies at leisure. It is enough
to indicate the starry originals of all this seemingly confused mass of
so-called Divine revelation in sacred books.

They, one and all, pertain to the same celestial phenomena, and
the various Bibles are the outcome of man’s serious attempt to tabu-
late and externalize this heavenly order, to record his conceptions


ASTRO-THEOLOGY 39


of these starry aspects and movements with their corresponding effects
upon the Earth.

Probably the purest system to us is that which may yet be derived
from Chaldean sources. This sacerdotal caste were the most perfect
in their astral conceptions and complete in their symbolic system of
recording, and if the great work found in King Sargon’s library in
seventy tablets is ever translated, it will prove of priceless value to
the student of these weird, but sublime, astrological mysteries.

In conclusion, as we reflect upon the fourfold aspect of the
subject that we have presented in outline in these pages, the whole
imagery passes in review before the mental vision. We see that the
radiant constellations of the heavenly vault, with the beautiful re-
flection and counterpart, the shining Zodiac, are the two halves of
the great Cycle of Necessity, the spiral of eternal, universal life, which
binds the whole into unity, and unity into infinity. It is the grand
scheme of creative life. The seven principles of Nature, or Divine
Activities, are the forces producing the phenomena within seven
angelic states, seven kingdoms, and, by seven planets, upon the
external plane; the planets being the passive mediums of the positive
spiritual forces. Upon this dual spiral, which reflects the seven rays
of the solar spectrum is produced seven musical notes; one half of the
spiral in sound and color being the complementary of the other half.
Man, the Earth, and our solar system, are revolving, each orb in its
own key, and its own peculiar ray, meeting and blending with other
spirals, and the whole blending into one mighty spiral Cycle of Pro-
gressive Life, revolving around the Eternal, Infinite Ego—God, ever
involving and evolving the attributes, powers and possibilities of the
One great central source of Being.

It is a grand orchestra, pealing out in richest melody and sublime
harmony, the grand Anthem of Creation: “We Praise Thee, O God.”


CHAPTER V


ATSRO-MYTHOLOGY


The Astro-Mythological system of the ancients, though forming
the last section, so to say, of the mysteries of the Divine Urania, is,
perhaps, the most beautiful of its general features, and perfect in
the complete fulfillment of the purpose for which it was intended, viz.:—
to convey to the human mind a lesson, a moral, a truth in Nature;
and last, but not the least, to serve as a basis upon which its inner
aspirations and its more external faith might rest in security.

When we come to examine the deep, philosophical principles of
such a wise system, we are almost astounded at the result of our
researches and the wisdom of human nature displayed in formulating
such perfect analogies of truth, semi-truth, and of falsehood, according
to the plane occupied by the individual.

Let us take one instance, which will clearly explain all the rest,
for they are built and formulated after the same model. A&®neas, of
Greek myths and fables, is reputed to be the son of Venus by a mortal
father, upon the plane of reality. As that of actual parent and child,
of course this is an utter falsehood. To the rural population of long,
long ago, and their simple, rustic conceptions, it was a truth.

Why so? Because they believed it, and to them it taught the
required lesson of obedience to the powers that be. But if in reality
it was a falsehood, how can it become a truth by the simple addition
of acceptance and belief? Because it possessed a metaphysical truth,
though not a physical one, in the sense accepted.

“£neas, son of Venus, whose history is so beautifully preserved
by the immortal Virgil, was (metaphysically speaking) son of the
goddess, because he was, in his astral and magnetic nature, ruled and
governed by Venus, born under one of her celestial signs and when
she was rising upon the ascendant of the House of Life, even as
Jesus Christos was born of a virgin, because Virgo was rising at His
birth.

Thus Aineas was, in strict metaphysical reality, a son of Venus.
Having satisfied the rural mind, which thus, unconsciously, accepts
an absolute truth under a physical disguise, the metaphysical thinker,


ASTRO-MYTHOLOGY 41


the philosopher, also accepts the same fable, knowing and realizing its
more abstract truth.

But, again, we are met with the objection that such a truth is
only apparently a truth; i.e., on the plane of embodied appearances,
and naturally the question arises, where (if at all) is the real truth
of the mythos? That truth which is beyond the mere metaphysical
thinker and commonplace philosopher; the truth which the Initiates
recognize—where is it? That truth lies far beyond the purview of
Astro-Mythology. It is connected with the center of angelic life.
Sufficient here to say that, as there are seven races of humanity, seven
divisions to the human constitution, seven active principles in Nature,
typified by the seven rays of the solar spectrum, so are there seven
centers of angelic life, corresponding to the seven planetary forces
formulated in “The Science of the Stars,” and, as each one of us must
of necessity belong to one of the particular angelic centers from
which we originally emanated, the Initiate can see no reason why
4Eneas may not in reality belong to that:celestial vortex represented
by Venus upon the plane of material life. This being the case, we
see how beautiful the ancients’ system of temple worship must have
been. The simple rustic, in reverence and awe, accepting the gross
and physical meaning—the only one possible to his dark, sensuous
mind. The scholar and philosopher bow their wiser heads with equal
humility, accepting with equally sincere faith the more abstract form
of the allegory; while on the other hand, the priest and the Initiate,
lifting their loftier souls above the earth and its formulas of illusion
and matter, accept that higher and more spiritual application, which
renders them equally as sincere and devout as their less enlightened
worshipers. It is thus we find these astro-myths true for all time,
true in every age of the world, and equally true of all nations. And
this is the real reason why we find every nation under the Sun pos-
sessing clear traditions relating to the same identical fables, under
different names, which are simply questions of nationality. And when
mythologists, archeologists, and philologists once recognize the one
central, cardinal truth, they will cease to wonder why nations, so
widely separated by time and space, possess the same basic mythology.
They will then no longer attempt its explanation by impossible migra-
tions of races, carrying the rudiments with them. They will find that
this mythology was a complete science with the ancient sages, a uni-


42, THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


versal mystery language, in which all could converse, and that it
descended from the Golden Age, when there was but one nation on
the face of the Earth, the descendants of which constituted the basic
nucleus of every race which has since had an existence. In this light
all is simple, clear, and easy to comprehend—all is natural.

The astronomer-priests of the hoary past, when language was
figurative, and often pictorial, had recourse to a system of symbols
to express abstract truths and ideas. In order to impress the minds
of pupils with a true concept of the attributes of the celestial forces,
we call planets, they personified their powers, qualities, and attributes.
Just as the average mind of to-day cannot conceive of Deity apart
from personality, so did primitive man clothe his ideas in actual forms,
and in these impersonations, they combined the nature of the celestial
orb with that of the zodiacal sign or signs, in which the planet
exerted its chief and most potent activities. For instance, the planet
Mars, whose chief constellation is Aries, was described as a great
warrior, mighty in battle, fierce in anger, fearless, reckless, and destruc-
tive; while the mechanical and constructive qualities were personified
as Vulcan, who forged the thunderbolts of Jove, built palaces for the
gods, and made many useful and beautiful articles. Then, again,
we find that Pallas Athene was the goddess of war and wisdom. She
sprang from the head of Zeus. Aries rules the head, and represents
intelligence. Athene overcame her brother Mars in war, which shows
that intelligence is superior to brute force and reckless courage.

Here, we see three different personages employed to express the
nature of the powers and phenomena produced. They were called
gods and goddesses. This was quite natural, as the planets of our
system are reflections of Divine principles. Esoterically, Mars symbol-
izes strength, victory—attributes of Deity.

Mars is said to have married Venus, teaching us that the union
of skill and beauty are essential in all artistic work.

Mythology tells us that the god Mars was supposed to be the father
of Romulus, the reputed founder of Rome. Romulus displayed many
characteristics of the planet. The mythos is no doubt a parallel to
that of AZneas. Rome was founded when the Sun in his orbit had
entered the sign Aries, and Mars was the god most honored by the
Romans. In time, with the degeneration of human races and _ their
worship, to the rural mind, the subjects of the mythos became actual


ASTRO-MYTHOLOGY 43


personalities, endowed with every human passion and godlike attri-
bute, the former characterizing the discordant influence of the heavenly
bodies upon man.

Gai, Rhea and Ceres, or Demeter (Greek), represent the triune
attributes of Mother Earth. Gai signifies the Earth as a whole, Rhea
the productive powers of the Earth, and Ceres utilizes and distributes
the productive forces of Rhea.

In the charming story of Eros (Divine Love), son of Mars and
Venus, he (Eros), we are told, brings harmony out of chaos. Here,
we see the action of Aries and Taurus, ruled respectively by Mars
and Venus.

The beautiful myth of Aphrodite, born of the sea foam, is Venus
rising out of the waters of winter, to shine resplendent in the western
skies at evening, and typifies the birth of forms, as all organic forms
have their origin in water.

In all lands the Sun was known under various names, typical of
solar energy, especially in reference to the equinoctial and solstitial
colures.

Henry Melville, in his valuable work, “Veritas,” says no reliance
can be placed upon ancient dates, either of Europe, Asia, or anywhere
else, and he conclusively shows that such dates are Astro-Masonic
points on the celestial planisphere, the events recorded being, as it
were, terrestrial reflections of the celestial symbols.

To attempt to wade through all the various systems of mythology,
and explain each in its proper order, would be to write a large en-
cyclopedia upon the subject. We have given a few examples as keys,
and suggest works for study. We have here given the real key, and
the student must fathom particulars for himself. The chief work,
and most valuable in its line, is Ovid’s “Metamorphoses.” The next,
also the most valuable in its line, is “The Mythological Astronomy of
the Ancients,” with notes (these latter are the gist and constitute the
real value), by S. A. Mackey; and last, and, perhaps, in some sense,
not the least, is the “Wisdom of the Ancients,” by Lord Bacon. This
is published in “Bacon’s Essays.”

A careful study of Ovid, with the key which this chapter supplies,
will reveal all that pertains to ancient gods, demi-gods, and heroes,
while a study of Mackey, and a careful comparison with “La Clef”
and “La Clef Hermetique” will reveal all that pertains to cosmic cycles


44 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


and astral chronology, which is the only chronology that is quite
trustworthy, as far as ancient history is concerned.

While we are on this subject, we must point out some of the
delusions, into which the subtle, magical teachings of the Orient would
lead the student.

All the monster sphinx, half human, half animal, etc., which the
ancients have preserved, are simply records of the past. They are
chronological tables of cosmic time, and relate to eras of the past, of
the Sun’s motion, and not by any means to living creatures of ante-
diluvian creations, as some wiseacres have imagined. Many of these
ancient monuments, monstrous in form, are records of that awful
period of floods and devastation known as the Iron Age, when there
was a vertical Sun at the poles; or, in other words, when the pole
of the Earth was ninety degrees removed from the pole of the ecliptic.
To those who can read aright, every lineament tells as plainly as the
written word the history of that awful past, marking the march of time,
recording the revolutions of the Sun in his orbit of 25,920 years, and
relating with wonderful accuracy the climatic changes, in their lati-
tudes, which took place with each revolution of the Sun and cor-
responding motion of the Earth’s pole of less than four degrees. All
the greater myths of the dim past were formulated to express cosmic
time, solar and polar motion, and the phenomena resulting therefrom.
These monuments of antiquity prove that, the ancients knew a great
deal more of the movements of heavenly bodies and of our planet than
modern astronomers credit them with.

Madame Blavatsky, in her “Secret Doctrine,” seriously states that
all these monstrous forms are the types of actual, once living physical
embodiments, and, with apparent sincerity, asserts that the Adepts
teach such insane superstitions.

Such, however, is not the case, neither is there anything true,
or even approaching the truth, in the cosmogony given in the work
in question.

And, lastly, we have but one more aspect of the grand old Astro-
Mythos to present to your notice. This aspect reveals the whole of
the ancient classification of work and labor, and gives us a clear insight
into the original designs, or pictorial representations, of the twelve
signs and the twelve months of the year. It also clearly explains many
things which are to-day attributed to superstitious paganism.


ASTRO-MYTHOLOGY 45


As each month possesses its own peculiar season, so are, or were,
the various labors of the husbandman, and those of pastoral pursuits,
altered and diverted. Each month, then, had a symbol which denoted
the physical characteristics of climate and the temporal characteristics
of work. As the Sun entered the sign, so the temple rites varied in
honor of the labors performed, and the symbol thus became the object
of outward veneration and worship. So we see that the twelve signs,
and principally the four cardinal ones, became Deities, and the symbols
sacred, but in reality, it was the same Sun to which homage was paid.

There is a large sphere of study in this direction, as, of course,
each climate varied the symbol to suit its requirements. In Egypt
there were three months when the land was overflowed with water;
hence, they had only nine working months out of doors, and from this
fact sprang the Nine Muses, while the Three Sirens represented the
three months of inactivity in work, or three months of pleasure and
festivity.

Mackey tells us that the great leviathan mentioned in the Book
of Job was the river Nile.

In nearly all mythologies, we find that the gods assembled on
some high mountain to take counsel. The Olympus of the Greeks and
Mount Zion of the Hebrew Bible mean the same, the Pole-Star; and
there, on the pictured planisphere, sits Cephus, the mighty Jove, with
one foot on the Pole-Star and all the gods gathered below him. The
Pole-Star is the symbol of the highest heaven.

With this we close, leaving the endless ramifications of this deeply
interesting subject to the student’s leisure and personal research, trust-
ing the keys we have given in this chapter and their careful study
may induce the reader and student of these pages to search out for
himself the meaning concealed in all Astro-Mythologies.


CHAPTER VI
SYMBOLISM


At this point of our study it is necessary to make a halt; and,
before proceeding further, to attempt to formulate and realize that,
which, so far, we have been pursuing.

First, then, we have passed in review the Zodiac, and then the
constellations. From this we mentally surveyed both Astro-Theology
and Astro-Mythology; and now, it is our first duty to realize these in
their real significance, and this consists in a clear comprehension of
the Grand Law of Correspondences.

What is this law? It is the law of symbolism, and symbolism,
rightly understood, is the one Divine language of Mother Nature, a
language wherein all can read, a language that defies the united efforts
of both time and space to obliterate it, for symbolism will be the
language of Nature as long as spirit expresses itself to the Divine soul
of man.

No matter where we turn or where we look, there is spread out
to our view a vast panorama of symbolic forms for us to read. In
whatever form, angle, or color they present themselves, the true student
of Nature can interpret and understand their symbolic language aright.
It has been by the personification of Nature’s symbols, that man has
become ignorant of their language. There is no form, sound, nor color
but what has its laws of expression; and only a perfect knowledge of
symbolism will enable man to know the law, power, and meaning, lying
behind such manifestations. The law of expression is exact, and as
unalterable as Deity Himself. The physical senses cannot vibrate
to these interior forces, and through them, comprehend their law.
The physical senses vibrate to the spirit’s expression, not to the
powers, forces, and laws, which brought them into objective existence.

Countless numbers of mystics, if such they deserve to be called,
among present-day students, speak and write very learnedly upon the
“Law of Correspondence,” and few, if any, of them really understand
or know anything at all of that law. The intellect alone cannot solve
the problems of this law. It cannot grasp the true, interior and spiritual
meaning, except in just so far as intellect is capable of externalizing
them. The inmost spiritual truths, that cannot be demonstrated to


SYMBOLISM. 47


the outward senses, never have, nor never will, appeal to any one who
has not the interior ability to comprehend them.

There was a time when men ruled by pure intellect, without its ac-
companying other half, intuition: they were looked upon as monstrosi-
ties. This state of purely intellectual development has been brought
about by the positive, masculine principle, reason, absorbing its counter-
part, the intuition, the feminine portion; and the result, by correspond-
ence, is as fatal as upon the interior plane, where the positive, masculine
soul denies the existence of his mate; thus setting upon his throne, only
a portion of himself as his idol, and then, reasons himself into the belief
that he is complete. Love has been cast out, ignored and forgotten
until at ast she departs, leaving a vacancy, that eternity cannot fill.

This is somewhat similar to their illusive Devachan, an ideal, a
mere mystical sentiment to gush over, but a something they do not
in reality comprehend. Therefore, we shall do our utmost to explain
this universal law, and to point out wherein its first principles are
manifest. Once these are mastered, the Golden Rule will explain all
the rest: “As it is below, so it is above; as on the earth, so in the sky.”

Here, then, is our first lesson on the subject of reality, which con-
stitutes the Hermetic science of Correspondences.

First, realize that a line or an angle, for instance, is something
more than its mere mathematical outline. It corresponds to some
power, force, or principle within the great Anima-Mundi of the mys-
teries, that are trying to find expression, in their evolutionary journey,
in forms. Let us illustrate our meaning. A point or dot is what? Well,
externally it is the alpha of all mathematics. It is the first finite mani-
festation of the spiritual force. Within that dot lies concealed, in
embryo, all the future possibilities of the manifesting principle.

This dot or point is a something to begin with, a form externalized,
from which all future forms may spring forth, and they may be infinite,
both in number and variety. First a primary, simple idea, from which
all ideas and thoughts, intricate and complex, have their being.

A point extended is a straight line, scientifically expressed (whereas
in real truth there is no such thing as a straight line); that is to say,
it is a form increased or multiplied by itself, and therefore, is an
extension in space that can be measured, and each extension means
a new form, an additional symbol. It has taken on new aspects, new
relations, hence contains the second principle of mathematics, so to


48 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


say; but, besides being points, they are symbols. They are principles
in Nature as clearly related to each other as the leaf and the stem of
plant life.

Each monad, or point in the universe, is the beginning of some-
thing; equally so, it is also the termination of its own forces in that
particular action, and will remain inert until it becomes acted upon
by something else.

A point, then, is a primary, simple idea, a straight line. An angle
is the same idea, rendered greater and more complex, and refers to
the same forces upon a different plane, and the more we multiply the
angles the more complex and far-reaching becomes the symbol and
the more numerous and diverse become its planes of action. Here
we will introduce an example. A trine represents three forces or
angles, and, when united, form a trinity, hence harmony. Its apex
(when above) is celestial, therefore represents the male forces of spirit.

A trine reversed also represents the same forces, with its apex in
matter, hence it is negative. In these two complex ideas, clearly rep-
resented by these symbols, we have all matter and spirit; and yet they
are but extensions of our point in space, rendered far-reaching and
complex, by the position and the number of angles presented.

Let us turn the key once again, and we find that, both spirit and
matter possess the same outline in their primal concept, except re-
versed (polarized ).

Let us unite these two trines, and we have a still more potent
form; a symbol almost infinitely complex. We have spirit and matter
united, or, rather, three rays of force, positive, meeting three rays of
force, negative, at a given point. Thus we have six points, also six
sides, the ultimate of which is a cube. All are now equal. It is the first
force of a crystallization (creation) of matter.

Once again let us turn the key, and we have our two conceptions
in a metaphysical sense; the trine with its apex above is as the trine
with its apex below, both the same in form, yet vibrating to very
different planes, and a very different language is required to read
and interpret their meaning aright. The spiritual, or the trine with
its apex above, draws its influence from the celestial, and as it condenses
and takes on form in the trine of matter, it transmits this same Divine
force through its apex, which points below, to matter. The double


SYMBOLISM 49


trine is found upon every plane, obeying the Divine Law of Cor-
respondences.

It is, in this sense, called “Solomon’s Seal,” because it is the grand
hieroglyphic of the Hermetic law: “As it is above, so it is below; as
on the Earth, so in the sky.”

To continue this line of reasoning, or speculation, let us say, would
lead us beyond the firm basis of human reason; it would escape the
grasp of intellect, to which I am compelling this course of instruction
to bend, but it would never take us beyond the real limits of the uni-
verse; yet, not to extend our investigations, we would ever remain
in the lower trine, in the realms of effects, and lose sight entirely of
the trine of spirit, from whence originated the force and potency in
the form of matter.

Therefore it is, that the science of Symbolism has been evolved
and formulated. The symbols, the manifestations, are ever present,
and the study of effects will, to a developed soul, suggest the cause,
the nature of the principle back of it, as well as the law which would
produce such effects. Such is the science of symbolism; and it bounds
and binds back into a religio-philosophical system, each class of
symbols and each plane of manifestation; as securely as modern savants
have defined the province of chemistry, magnetism, and mathematics;
and, so far, these bounds are useful. But it is only a question of time
and space, after all, because, when resolved back, or, let us say, evolved
up into their abstract principles; chemistry, magnetism, and mathe-
matics, are purely arbitrary terms to express special features of the
same one eternal thing or science—which is existence; and it, in turn, is
consciousness; not that external consciousness of existence, not that
knowledge and love of living, but that interior, conscious knowledge,
which tells us why and how we exist, by what force and power we
are sustained and permitted to obey and carry out the law of medium-
ship, reception and transmission, attraction and repulsion, spiritual
and material, that ultimately blend and become as one, the double
trine, and, united with the Divine Ego of its being, becomes complete;
seven, the perfected number of form.

The sum total, then, of all, and the value it may possess to the
individual, is measured by his ability to perceive; for there is nothing
external that is not in some sense mental, and there is nothing mental
that is not in some sense spiritual. The sides of the triangle, physical,


30 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


mental, and spiritual, and the apex where meet the mental and spiritual,
forms the center of contact to higher trines in realms above.

Where mind is not, there are no symbols, no ideas, no’ manifesta-
tions. The spirit has not yet reached that point in its evolutionary
journey where it can yet crystallize its projected force, power, or ideas,
into forms; for everything that is, is the outcome of Divine thought,
and expresses within itself the symbol of its being. This is the arcana
of the Law of Correspondences.

Remember the above teaching, because upon its full compre-
hension rests the ability to read symbols aright. It will aid the soul
to fully realize that, the vast universe is but the mental image of the
Creator; that there is no such thing as manifested existence apart
from mind; and consequently, the infinite worlds that float securely
in space, blushing and scintillating with light of life and love of the
Father, revealing to mortal minds some faint conception of the awful
resources and recesses within Nature’s star-making laboratory, are but
the scintillating reflection of life, the reactions of mental phenomena.
So, too, with the mental creative powers of the mind of man, for, not
a vibration that proceeds from his every thought but what creates its
correspondence in the creative realm of spirit. Hence, symbolism
continues giving to the soul of man, throughout eternity, food for
thought and contemplation.

All symbols, then, are objectified ideas, whether human or Divine;
and as such possess a real meaning; and this meaning is altered, ex-
tended and rendered more complex with every additional thing or
influence by which we find it surrounded, or with which, we find it
correlated. For instance, $1.00 means one dollar; add six ciphers to
the left 0000001., and it is still the same $1.00, and no more, because
their position is previous, or before, the 1. But add the same number
of ciphers to the right, $1,000000, and lo! we find a wondrous change
of force, power, and consequence. We see all the mighty power of
our million of money, and the possibilities and responsibilities with
which, in these days, it becomes associated.

So it is with everything else in Nature. Man pays the penalty
by increased responsibility, for every step in knowledge that he takes,
as well as every dollar in gold he procures. Dollars, as well as talents,
have to be accounted for, and their usefulness increased tenfold. The
dollars must not be buried nor hoarded any more than our talents,


SYMBOLISM 51


but each, unfolded and doubled, so that we may be instrumental in
helping our coworkers in their upward path, in the Cycle of Necessity.
Knowledge is the basic foundation in reading Nature’s language.
Purity of thought, truth in motive, and unselfish benevolence, will lift
the veil that now lies between the two trines, cause and effect, spirit
and matter.

We have given the key and explained the alphabet of this won-
drous law; therefore we close. Each must, by the same rules, work
out the special links in the chain for him or herself. The angle from
which each take their view determines the reading and interpretation
of the symbols presented, whether that be from the apex, the sides or
the base, for every symbol has its trinity in principles and form. Cause
and effect are but the action and reaction; the result is the symbol which
reveals the correspondence of both.


CHAPTER VII
ALCHEMY—PART I


What a weird yet strangely pleasing name the term Alchemy is.
It is simple, yet so infilled and intermixed with the possible verities
of exact science and the philosophical speculations on the infinite and
the unknown, as to elude our mental grasp, as it were, by its own
subtle essence, and defy the keenest analysis of our profoundest gen-
eralizers in science. And yet, in spite of this self-evident truth, how
fascinating the sound of the word becomes to the mystic student’s
ear, and how pregnant with awful and mysterious possibilities it be-
comes, to the immortal powers embodied within the complex human
organism termed man.

Words, if we but knew it, have the same innate, magnetic influence,
and possess the same power of affinity and antipathy, that the human
family possesses; as well as all organic and inorganic forms and sub-
stances; and how sad, to a developed soul, to witness the inharmony
existing in our midst, caused by the misapplication of names.

Most human beings are very conscious of personal, or human
magnetism, and its effects. But they stop right there, and do not
dream of the subtle, silent influences emanating from a name, a word,
and the power existing in words, when properly used. The human
mind is so absorbed in Nature’s manifestations, which are only the
husks, that they fail to see the true, hidden meaning and realities,
concealed beneath the material shell.

We will first notice the meaning of the words which constitute
our subject, viz., Alchemy, then give a brief review of its physical
correspondence, chemistry, and its true relation to its spiritual counter-
part, Alchemy.

“Al” and “Chemy” are Arabic-Egyptian words which have much
more in them than appears upon the surface, and possess a far different
meaning from the one which the terms usually convey to the average
mind. Terms, and the ideas we associate with them, vary according
to the age in which we live. So with those, from which the word
Alchemy is derived.

Let us penetrate beneath the mere verbal husk with which linguis-
tic usage and convenience have clothed them, and which, in the course


ALCHEMY 53


of ages, has become nothing but the dross of decomposed verbiage,
and see if we can excavate the living germ, that has become buried
within. If we can do so, we shall, at the commencement of our study,
have attained unto a realization of the ancient meaning and real sig-
nificance of the terms employed. And this will be no small gain, and
will form no unimportant part of the equipment in our present research.

The Arabians, who derived the whole of their Occult arcana from
the Egyptians, are the most likely to render us the most truthful and
direct significance of the word, and so we find them. Thus, “Al,” mean-
ing “the,” and Kimia,” which means the hidden, or secret, ergo THE
occutt, from which are derived our modern term Alchemy, more
properly Al Kimia. This is very different from the popular conception
to-day, which supposes that the word relates to the art of artificially
making gold by some chemical process, and viewing it only as some
sort of magical chemistry, forgetting that, the science of chemistry
itself is also derived from the Kimia of Arabian mystics, and was con-
sidered as one and the same thing by every writer of the Middle Ages.

At this time, the physical man was not so dense and grasping for
husks; hence the soul and spiritual part had greater control, and could
impart the real, the alchemical side, of Nature to him; hence the Law
of Correspondences was understood, and guided the educated in their
considerations, researches, and conclusions.

Do you ask why, if they were so enlightened, they have veiled
their knowledge from the world at large?

The power of mind over matter was as potent in those days as
now, and the masses were as correspondingly corrupt as they are to-
day. Therefore, to put this knowledge into the hands of the multi-
tude would have been generally disastrous. So they wrote it in mys-
tical language, knowing that all educated students in Nature’s laws,
at that time, would understand; yet they little dreamed how much
their language would be misunderstood in the centuries to follow, by
those who look to their ancient ancestry for aid on subjects that have
become at the present day so lost in mystery.

Having ascertained, beyond question, that Alchemy was, and
consequently is, the secret science of Occultism—not the philosophy,
mind you, but the science; let us proceed, for, we shall find that these
two aspects may often differ, or appear to differ, widely from each
other, though they can never do so in reality, for the latter produces


54 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


and establishes the facts, while the former occupies itself in their
tabulation and deductions. The science constitutes the foundation,
and the philosophy, the metaphysical speculations, which rest thereon.
If these important distinctions are borne in mind, all the apparent
confusion, contradiction, and other intellectual debris, will either
disappear or resolve themselves into their own proper groups, so that
we may easily classify them.

It is at this very point, that, so many students go astray amid the
labyrinths of science and philosophy. They, unconsciously, so mix and
intermingle the two terms, that nine-tenths of the students present
only one side of the question—philosophy, which soon runs into
theory, if not supported by the science, which they have lost in their
volumes of philosophy.

You may say, one subject at a time. Yes, this may be true, if its
twin brother is not absorbed and forgotten.

In this chapter, we shall deal especially with organic Alchemy.

Organic Alchemy deals exclusively with living, organic things,
and in this connection differs from the Alchemy of inorganic matter.
These two aspects may, in this one respect, be compared to organic
and inorganic chemistry, to which originally they belonged; as astrol-
ogy did to astronomy. Alchemy and astrology—twin sisters—were the
parents of the modern offspring, known in chemistry and astronomy
as exact science. These latter, however, deal with shadows and
phenomenal illusions, while the former concern the living realities,
which produce them. Therefore, there can be “no new thing under
the sun,” saith Solomon.

First, let us deal with the most lovely form of our art, that which
pertains to the floral and vegetable kingdoms. Every flower or blade
of grass, every tree of the forest and stagnant weed of the swamp, is
the outcome of, and ever surrounded by, its corresponding degree of
spiritual life. There is not a single atom but what is the external ex-
pression of some separate, living force, within the spaces of A®th, act-
ing in unison with the dominant power corresponding with the type
of life.

If science could only behold this wonderful laboratory within the
vital storehouse of Nature, she would no longer vainly seek for the
origin of life, nor wonder, what may have become of the missing link
in scientific evolution, because, she would quickly realize that, biogen-


ALCHEMY 55


esis is the one grand truth of both animate and inanimate Nature, the
central, living source of which is God. Science would also, further
realize that, this biune life is ever in motion throughout the mani-
fested universe; circulating around the focii of creative activities,
which we term suns, stars, and planets, awaiting the conditions which
are ever present for material incarnation; and under all possible com-
binations of circumstances and conditions, conceivable and inconceiv-
able, adapting itself to continuous phenomenal expression. Links, so
called, in this mighty chain of evolution, may appear to be missing here
and there, and, for that matter, whole types may seem to be wanting,
but, this is only because of our imperfect perception, and, in any case,
can make no real difference with the facts, because, if such be a real-
ity, if there be what we may term missing links in the scheme of evo-
lution, it only shows that spirit, although associated with, is ever in-
dependent of matter.

But matter—what is to become of it? Is it independent of spirit?
The kindness of the Divine spirit heeds not the unconscious mind of
matter and its boasted independence, and works silently on, and at
last, accomplishes its mission—the evolution of matter, the uplifting
of the soul of man, as well as the universe. The blindness of man is
dense, and the saddest part to admit is that, they will so stubbornly
remain so.

If, for one instant, the penetrating eye of the soul could shine
forth through the physical orbs of vision, and imprint the scenes, be-
held behind the veil, upon the tablets of the brain of the physical
organism, a fire would be kindled that, could never be quenched by
the fascinating allurements of the material, perishable things, of
matter.

That development of the real atom of biune life can, and does, go
forward, irrespective of the gradation of physical types, needs no con-
vincing proof, other than visible Nature.

Man is not the outcome of physical evolution, and produced by
a series of blind laws, that lead him upward from protozoa to man, as
a child climbs up stairs, advancing regularly, one step as a time. This
latter conception, we know, is the theory of exact science, but not of
Alchemy, not of the science of Occultism. Man, according to Wal-
lace, Darwin, Huxley, and Tyndall, is what progressive stages of phys-
ical evolution have made him. But the very reverse is true. The fauna


56 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


and flora of past geological periods are what the human soul has
produced, by virtue of its gradual advancement to higher states and
conditions of life, so that, so far from man being the outcome of the
planet’s development, such material progress is the outgrowth of man’s
advancement, proving again that, matter is not independent of spirit,
neither can spirit be independent of matter for its expressions. They
so interblend that, the dividing line cannot be detected by the un-
trained eye of the exact scientist. But, that time is not far distant,
when the scientists will prepare and evolve their interior being to
take up the spiritual thread, exactly where the visible thread ends,
and carry forth the work, as far as the mortal mind of man can pene-
trate, while embodied in the physical form.

God hasten this day is my prayer, for then man will become
more spiritual and aspiring for advancement and knowledge, thus,
setting up vibrations that will create higher and loftier conditions for
the physical man. Aye! then they will know that, even the birth of
the world itself, owes its primal genesis to the desire of the human
atom for earthly embodiment.

Here is where exact science, or the counterpart of Alchemy, be-
comes both profitable and helpful. Says Paracelsus: “The true use of
chemistry is not to make gold, but to prepare medicines.” He admits
four elements—the star, the root, the element and the sperm. These
elements were composed of the three principles, sideric salt, sulphur,
and mercury. Mercury, or spirit, sulphur, or oil, and salt, and the
passive principles, water and earth. Herein we see the harmony of the
two words, Alchemy and Chemistry. One is but the continuation of
the other, and they blend so into each other that, they are not com-
plete, apart.

The chemist, in his analysis of the various component parts of
any form of matter, knows also the proportional combinations; and
thus, by the Law of Correspondence, could, by the same use of the
spiritual laws of Alchemy, analyze and combine the same elements
from the atmosphere, to produce the corresponding expression of
crystallized form. By the same laws, are affinities and antipathies
discovered and applied, in every department of Nature’s wonderful
laboratory.

Chemistry is the physical expression of Alchemy, and any true
knowledge of chemistry is:—not the knowing of the names of the ex-


ALCHEMY 57


tracts and essences, and the plants themselves, and that certain com-
binations produce certain results, obtained from blind experiments,
yet, prompted by the Divine spirit within; but, knowledge born from
knowing the why and wherefore of such effects. What is called the oil
of olives is not a single, simple substance, but it is more or less com-
bined with other essential elements, and will fuse and coalesce with
other oils and essences of similar nature. The true chemist will not
confine his researches for knowledge to the mere examination, analysis,
and experiments, in organic life; but will inform himself equally, in
physical astrology; and learn the nature, attributes, and manifested
influences of the planets, that constitute our universe; and, under
which, every form of organic matter is subject, and especially, con-
trolled by. Then, by learning the influence of the planets upon the
human family; and that special planetary vibration that influences the
individual; he can intelligently and unerringly administer medicines
to remove disease in man.

A familiarity with the mere chemical relations of the planet to
man, makes still more apparent, the mutual affinity of both to the soil,
from which they appear to spring, and to which, they ultimately re-
turn; so much so that, we have become conscious, that, the food we
eat is valuable or otherwise as a life sustainer, in proportion to the
amount of life it contains. We are so complex in our organization
that, we require a great variety of the different elements to sustain all
the active functions and powers within us. Man, being a microcosm,
or a miniature universe, must sustain that universe, by taking into the
system the various elements, which combine to make up the Infinite
Universe of God. Animal flesh is necessary to certain organized forms,
both animal and man. When I say necessary, I do not mean an ac-
quired taste and habit of consuming just so much flesh a day; but a
constitution, which would not be complete in its requirements, with-
out animal flesh. I am thankful such do not constitute the masses.

Science would say, you only require certain combinations of
oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and carbon, to sustain all the activities of
the physical body. Apparently, this is true. Upon the surface it is,
but in reality it is not; because if it were really true there could be
no famines. Science could make bread out of stones, as was sug-
gested at the temptation of Christ in the wilderness. And yet, no one
knows better than the academies of Science, themselves, that their


58 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


learned professors would quickly starve to death, if they were com-
pelled to produce their food from the chemical properties of the rocks.
They can make a grain of wheat chemically perfect, but they cannot
make the invisible germ by which it will grow, become fruitful, and
reproduce itself. They can reproduce from the stones in the street the
same chemical equivalents that go to compose gluten, albumen, and
starch—the trinity which must always be present to sustain life; but
they cannot, by any known process, make such chemical equivalents
of these substances, do the same thing. Now, if not, why not? Science
cannot answer this. A very mysterious shake of the head and pro-
found silence is the only answer. Ask Science how the plant grows,
what causes the atoms of matter to build up root, stem, leaf, bud and
flower, true to the parent species from which the germinal atom came.
What is there behind the plant that stamps it with such striking in-
dividuality? And why, from the same soil, the deadly aconite and
nutritious vegetable can grow, each producing qualities in harmony
with its own nature, so widely different in their effects upon the human
organism, yet, so completely identical as regards the source from which
they appear to spring. There must be a something to account for this,
and this something, ancient Alchemy alone can scientifically reveal and
expound; and, this knowledge lies just beyond that line which calls a
halt to material scientists, and says: “You can go no farther; this is
beyond your purview. The end of the material thread has been
reached, and unless you can connect it with the thread of the next
plane, your researches must stop.”

Before entering upon and answering these vital questions, we
must digress a little, and make ourselves perfectly familiar with the
ideas and revelations of advanced physical science upon the sub-
ject, and for this purpose no more trustworthy guide can be consulted
than the new edition of “The Chemistry of Common Life,” by the
late James F. W. Johnson, M. A., England, and revised by Arthur
Herbert Church, M. A. In chapter IV on page 56 of this work, upon
the anatomy of plant life, we read:

“How interesting it is to reflect on the minuteness of the organs
by which the largest plants are fed and sustained. Microscopic aper-
tures in the leaf suck in gaseous food from the air; the surfaces of
microscopic hairs suck a liquid food from the soil. We are accustomed
to admire, with natural and just astonishment, how huge, rocky reefs,


ALCHEMY 59


hundreds of miles in length, can be built up by the conjoined labors of
myriads of minute zoophytes, laboring together on the surface of a
coral rock; but it is not less wonderful that, by the ceaseless working
of similar microscopic agencies in leaf and root, the substance of vast
forests should be built up and made to grow before our eyes. It is
more wonderful, in fact; for whereas, in the one case, the chief result
is that, dead matter extracted from the sea is transformed into a dead
rock; in the other, the lifeless matter of the earth and air are converted
by these minute plant-builders into living forms, lifting their heads
aloft to the sky, waving with every wind that blows, and beautifying
whole continents with the varying verdure of their ever-changing
leaves.”

Further on in the same chapter, on pages 62-3, the same eloquent
writer continues:

“But the special chemical changes that go on within the plant,
could we follow them, would appear not less wonderful than the
rapid production of entire microscopic vegetables from the raw food
contained in the juice of the grape. It is as yet altogether incompre-
hensible, even to the most refined physiological chemistry, how, from
the same food taken in from the air, and from generally similar food
drawn up from the soil, different plants, and different parts of plants,
should be able to extract or produce substances so very different from
each other in composition and in all of their properties. From the
seed-vessels of one (the poppy) we collect a juice which dries up into
our commercial opium; from the bark of another (cinchona) we ex-
tract the quinine with which we assuage the raging fever; from the
leaves of others, like those of hemlock and tobacco, we distil deadly
poisons, often of rare value for their medicinal uses. The flowers and
leaves of some yield volatile oils, which we delight in for their odors
and their aromatic qualities; the seeds of others give fixed oils, which
are prized for the table or use in the arts * * * These, and a
thousand other similar facts, tell us how wonderfully varied are the
changes which the same original forms of matter undergo in the in-
terior of living plants. Indeed, whether we regard the vegetable as
a whole, or examine its minutest part, we find equal evidence of the
same diversity of changes and of the same production, in compara-
tively minute quantities, of very different, yet often characteristic
forms of matter.”


60 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


From the whole of the foregoing, we observe the exact position
to be the one we have previously stated. If such wondrous things
can be revealed to us through the physical science of chemistry, what
think you must be hidden from our physical sight and knowledge by
the veil which hangs between matter and spirit? Think you not, it is
worth the effort to penetrate beyond that point where the atom dis-
appears from the view of the scientist?

If plants produce such wonderful phenomena in their life and
influence, what must the Divine organism of man have concealed
within his microscopic universe, to study and comprehend? Plant life
is merely the alphabet of the complex, intricate, and multitudinous
‘processes, going on in the human body.

And, as the mechanical microscope of physical science cannot
reveal the why and the wherefore, let us, for a brief moment, disclose
some of the wonders that declare their existence, when subjected to
the pentrating alchemical lens, of the inward spirit. The first thing
that intrudes itself upon our notice, by virtue of its primary import-
ance, is the grand fact of biogenesis—life emanating from life. We
perceive every external form to be the physical symbol of a corres-
ponding degree of spiritual life; that each complete plant represents
a complete cycle, state, or degree of interior existence; that it is made
up and consists of countless millions of separate atoms of life; that
these atoms of spiritual activity are the real instigators of the life and
motion of corresponding material atoms; that they ever obey the
Divine impluse of co-operative unity, in their chemical, as well as
their spiritual affinity. Consequently, everything in the form of ma-
terial substance must be, and is, but the means for the phenomenal
expression of incarnating spirit; the organism of man, a tree, a plant,
or an animal, being no exception to this Divine, omnipresent law of
creative life.

To the true Alchemist there can be no mystery surrounding the
wonderful phenomena mentioned in the work we have quoted, in
plants extracting from the same rocks, soil, and air, qualities so mani-
festly different—deadly poisons, healing balsams, and pleasant aromas,
or the reverse, from the same identical plant foods. Nothing is more
wonderful or mysterious, than, the same alchemical processes, which,
are hourly being enacted within our own bodies. From the same
breath of air and the same crust of bread do we concoct the blood,


ALCHEMY 61


the bile, the gastric juice, and various other secretions; and distil the
finer nervous fluids, that go to build up and sustain the whole of our
mental and dynamic machinery. It is the same ancient story of the
atoms; each part and each function endowing the same inorganic
chemicals with their own spiritual, magnetic, and physical life-quali-
ties, by what appears, to the uninitiated observer, a miraculous trans-
mutation of matter, but which is, in reality, the evolution of organic
form from inorganic materials, in obedience to the Divine law of
spiritual progression. Who could stop with exact science? For, when
we come to consider the apparent mysteries of life and growth by the
aid of this alchemical light, the shadows flee, and all the illusions of
Nature’s phenomenal kaleidoscope vanish before the revelation of the
underlying spiritual realities. We know that the plant, being the physi-
cal expression upon the material plane of a more interior life, en-
dows its outward atoms with their peculiar qualities. These qualities
are not drawn directly from the soil; the soil only becoming the
medium for their complete or incomplete expression, as the case may
be; i.e., supplying the necessary inorganic atoms. Hence, the deadly
qualities of aconite, and the generous life-sustaining qualities of the
nutritious vegetable, being spiritual life endowments, conveyed to
the material substance, abstracted from the soil and withdrawn from
the atmosphere, are no mystery; their effect upon the human organism
being exactly that, which is produced by their spiritual affinity or
antipathy, as the case may be. And this also shows and explains, why
purely inorganic chemical atoms, though they be exactly the same as the
organic substances, from a strictly scientific standpoint, yet fail to
support life, because such chemical equivalents lack the organic spirit-
uality of the interior life, which alone, gives them the power and
function to support the same. They fail to fulfill the requirements
of the alchemical law of life for the support of life—in other words,
biogenesis.

And, too, this organic life may be parted from the plant or
vegetable, if it be too long severed from the medium which transmits
the spiritual life, from the inorganic world to that of organic matter.
Vegetables, fresh from the ground, or parent stem, retain this life if
at once prepared for food, if not overcooked, which is so often igno-
rantly done. This is the secret of sustenance from foods. Nature’s
perfected fruits and vegetables are overflowing with the life-giving


62 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


essences, and, if eaten direct from the tree or parent stem, that life is
not lost, but transmitted to our organisms, and replenishes the wasting
system with a living life. Much less of such food is required to com-
pletely satisfy and nourish the body than if the life had partly de-
parted or been destroyed.

Briefly stated, then, everything within organic Nature is the ex-
pressional symbolic manifestation of spirit; every form being a con-
gregation of innumerable atoms of life, revealing their presence in
material states; each organic form, or, rather, organism, evolving under
the central control of some dominating Deific atom or soul, which, by
virtue of past incarnations and labors in its cycle of evolution, from
the mineral up to man, has achieved the royal prerogative to rule
within its own state. Man being the highest representative form—the
grand finale in the earthly drama—sums up and contains within him-
self everything below, and the germs of everything beyond, this state.
He is truly a microcosm, and represents in miniature the grand Cosmic
Man of the Heavens. Every living force beneath him corresponds to
some state, part, or function, which he has graduated through and
conquered, and which, in him, has now become embodied, as a part
of his universal kingdom. Consequently, all things are directly related
to him, in the grand universal unity of spiritual life.

This cannot be realized and comprehended by the physical man,
nor conveyed to his outer senses by the physical sciences. He must
bring into active use the inner man, the real being, which inhabits
and controls the outer organism, and through its instrumentality, un-
derstand the interior source and workings behind the phenomena of
manifested being. So we see that, exact science cannot take us far,
yet, it is a mighty factor, in the evolution of the microcosm Man, and
in consciously relating him to the Infinite Macrocosm—God, Spirit, All.


CHAPTER VIII
ALCHEMY—PART ILI


Paracelsus, the most celebrated of the alchemists of the Middle
Ages, thus mystically speaks of his art:

“If I have manna in my constitution, I can attract manna from
heaven. Melissa is not only in the garden, but also in the air and in
heaven. Saturn is not only in the sky, but also deep in the ocean and
Earth. What is Venus but the artemisia that grows in your garden,
and what is iron but the planet Mars? That is to say, Venus and Arte-
misia are both products of the same essence, while Mars and iron are
manifestations of the same cause. What is the human body but a con-
stellation of the same powers that formed the stars in the sky? He
who knows Mars knows the qualities of iron, and he who knows what
iron is knows the attributes of Mars. What would become of your
heart if there were no Sun in the Universe? What would be the use of
your ‘Vasa Spermatica’™®* if there were no Venus? To grasp the invisible
elements, to attract them by their material correspondences, to control,
purify, and transmute, them by the ever-moving powers of the living
spirit—this is true Alchemy.”

Thus, in a very few simple words, we find this master of the art
revealing the whole arcana of that mysterious science, which has for
its chief object and goal, the discovery of the “philosopher’s stone,”
which confers upon its fortunate possessor the blessings of immortal
youth. Therefore, we cannot possibly do better in the commence-
ment of our present study than, to minutely examine each particular
sentence and endeavor to discover his true meaning, which, like all
mystical writing, is so apparent, yet cunningly concealed, as to excite
the student’s admiration.

“If I have manna in my constitution, I can attract manna from
Heaven.” The manna here spoken of does not specify any particular
thing, but is of universal application, and is simply used as an unknown
quantity, like x, y, z in mathematics. But, ever since the days of Par-
acelsus, half-initiated mystics and bookworm Occultists, have en-
deavored to discover what this manna really was. Some, the more


* Astral germs of subjective life forms:—it is the latent, “to be”.


64 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


spiritual, were of the opinion that, it was spiritual power, or purity of
spirit; others imagined it to mean special magnetic qualifications,
similar in nature to the so-called gifts of modern spiritualistic media.
The concealment of the truth is unique, and consists in its very sim-
plicity; and, when correctly expounded, should read: “I am the micro-
cosm, and all the visible and invisible universe dwells within me, so
that whatsoever power I have in my constitution, I can attract its
correspondence from Heaven.” Paracelsus must have smiled to him-
self when he wrote “If I have manna,” etc., because his whole writings
strive to prove man the miniature of Deity. Further along, he explains
himself by pointing out the real Law of Correspondence, thus: “Melissa
is not only in the garden, but also in the air, and in Heaven. Saturn
is not only in the sky, but also deep in the ocean, and Earth.” The
illustrations are beautiful. The life of the plant, the “anima floralis,”
pervades the atmosphere and the interior states of spiritual life, where
it becomes in the highest degree beautiful, and beneficial to the soul.
A reference upon this point to “The Light of Egypt” Vol., I, may not
be considered out of place. Upon page 74 it is written: “The flower
that blooms in beauty, breathing forth to the air its fragrance, which
is at once grateful to the senses and stimulating to the nerves, is a
perfect specimen of Nature’s faultless mediumship. The flower is a
medium for the transmission to the human body of those finer essences,
and of their spiritual portion to the soul; for the aroma of the flower is
spiritualized to such a degree as to act upon the life currents of the sys-
tem, imparting to the spiritual body a nutriment of the finest quality.”

Thus, here is where the knowledge of the alchemical attributes
of plants, as applicable to man, can be most beneficially utilized.
Plants and flowers, whose attributes and aromas harmonize with the
complex organism of man, should be selected for the house and garden,
for, they are mediums to transmit the finer essences and aromas to
the spiritual constitution of man; the plant to the physical, and the
aromas and essences of the flowers to the soul.

Antipathies in plants and flowers would bring a similar evil in-
fluence, as the discords of the antagonistic human magnetism. It would
not be so apparent, but more subtle, yet nevertheless effective in result.

Our attention is next drawn to the planet Saturn, which, we are
informed, is not only shining in his starry sphere of the heavens, but
is also buried in the ocean depths and embodied in the stratas of the


ALCHEMY 65


earth. It is almost needless to add that, our author refers to those
substances naturally Saturnine in their quality of life and expression,
such as lead, clay, and coal, among the minerals, and various deadly
plants among the flora, the chief of which is the aconite or monkshood,
so significant of Saturn and the isolated, monkish hermit. After some
repetition, in order to impress the truth of correspondences, our author
exclaims: “What is the human body but a constellation of the same
powers that formed the stars in the sky?” Truly, what else? for, “he
who knows Mars knows the qualities of iron, and he who knows what
iron is knows the attributes of Mars.” Could anything be plainer?
We think not.

From the foregoing, which a long experience and much critical
investigation and research have demonstrated as true, we cannot avoid
the conclusion that Alchemy, equally as well as every other science,
religion, or system of philosophy formulated by man, resolves itself,
ultimately, in all its final conclusions, into the one universal parent
of all wisdom.

Asrroxocy, the Science of the Stars, in unison with the Science
of the Soul, was, and still is, the one sublime center of real learning.
It constituted the sacred fountain of living waters, from whose placid
depths there rayed forth the Divine revelations of man, his whence,
where, and whither; and under the careful conservation of a long line
of gifted seers, it shone forth to the sons of men, as the sacred Her-
metic light in the Astro-Masonic wisdom of Egypt's ancient priesthood.

It is not lost to us to-day. The same book lies open before us
that faced our ancient forefathers. It is standing out clear and distinct,
waiting to be read by the sons of men. We can learn its language, and
from its pages, we ourselves can read our relation to God and our
fellowman. Shall we not heed the whispering intuitions of the soul and
place ourselves in conscious rapport with the whole?

This sublime Book of Wisdom was written by God Himself, to
convey to His children the knowledge of His powers, attributes, and
relation to all creative life. We cannot see that Divine Spirit which we
call God. No; but as long as the finite form exists as such, we will
have the spirit’s manifestations to learn from. Never will the Book
of God be closed to the searching eye of the soul. There will always
be presented to his vision lessons to study, and practical experiments
to perform, to lead the soul into deeper mysteries. Until man fathoms


66 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


his own universe, he cannot understand God. “Know thyself” is as
applicable to-day as when the famous, immortal and mystic utterance
was inscribed on the porch of the temple at Delphi.

Before this wonderful, divinely elaborated, but complex system
can be fully realized, it is necessary that the student should compre-
hend, very distinctly, the two states of existence, the internal and the
external, and become familiar with the laws of correspondences. And
it seems strange that of all Sciences, that of medicine should have so
completely failed to grasp this living truth, since every atom of medi-
cine administered, invariably acts upon this alchemical principle. When
the human organism has become discordant in some of its parts, it is
because the interstellar vibrations have aroused various states within
the human kingdom into a condition of rebellion against the supreme
will. Man’s ignorance favors such seditious movements, and his general
habits and code of morals stimulate them to undue activity. The final
result is disease—disorganization of the parts and functions, and those
medicines corresponding to the same functional degree of life within
the grand man, cure the disorder, when administered properly and in
time, whereas, if given to the perfectly healthy organism, the atoms
produce similar symptoms to the diseases they alleviate, because it
is their mission to either subdue or be subdued, and when disease
prevails the medicinal atoms, acting in unison with the natural parts
and functions they affect, conquer or subdue the inharmony, and vice
versa, as before stated. In all cases of disease and medicine, it is a
simple question of a war between the atoms, and, therefore, the most
potential forces within Nature are always at the command of the true
Alchemist, because he knows how and when to select his fighting
forces, and when to set them in motion, for the best results.

Hahnemann, the founder of the Homeopathic system, has ap-
proached the nearest to this alchemical truth, and as a consequence,
we find it is in actual practice, the most natural, scientific, and suc-
cessful system of medicine, yet given to the world; based, as it is,
upon the well-known law of affinites, “Similia similibus curantur,”
“like cures like,” being a very ancient axiom in the astrological practice
of physic.

Bulwer Lytton, who had become thoroughly convinced of the
great value and importance of uniting ancient Alchemy with modern
medicine, makes the hero of his immortal story declare: “All that we


ALCHEMY 67


propose to do is this: To find out the secrets of the human frame, to
know why the parts ossify and the blood stagnates, and to apply con-
tinual preventives to the effects of time. This is not magic; it is the
art of medicine, rightly understood.”

It is a fact that, the molecules of the body are all changed within
twelve months; that every cell in the human organism is born and
grows to maturity within that space of time. Nature is absolutely
impartial. She draws from the atmosphere that she may reproduce
a fac-simile of everything she finds upon the surface of the body. So,
if there be a sore, or festering ulcer, the atoms which are thrown off
attract similar atoms, so as to reproduce the ulcer or sore, and thus
prevent the disease from getting well of itself until it has worn itself
out.

Further, every vein and canal throughout the entire body, from
youth to maturity, is being coated with carbonate of lime, or lime in
some form. The coating of the walls of the veins in such a manner,
prevents the free circulation of the living matter; then, the real vitality
of the food which we eat, is simply passed off through the pores, or
through the bowels, or through the system, because it is unable to
penetrate through the lime.

If that prevention which produces old age can be attained, then
physical youth will continue.

The first step to take is to dissolve the lime in the body. Drink
nothing but distilled water, in either tea, coffee, or any other form, and
drink freely of the sweet juices of the grape and apple.

The food that we eat contains lime in a living form, and it is the
living lime we need to build up the living bones, for the lime and the
magnesia that we take in the water is crystallized dead mineral, posses-
sing no responsibility of life, and the lime in our food is quite suff-
cient for all purposes. For everything we take in excess, Nature makes
us pay the penalty.

The first principle of long living is to keep all channels of the
body perfect and free from coatings of lime.

The second is that of youthful ideals of the mind. The soul never
grows old.

The third principle is dynamic breathing, which is storing up the
oxygen in sufficient quantities, to supply the tissues with sufficient fuel,
for combustion.


68 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


These three principles, acting in unison, contain the true basis of
physical life and a means of long living. Old age is simply the petri-
faction of the body through lime, and the incorporating of erroneous
thoughts into the organism.

It is the true Alchemy of human existence, and the preventives,
in each and every case must contain the spiritual correspondence to
the cause they seek to remedy; and, though the followers of Hahne-
mann base the whole of their procedure of treatment upon their
master’s fundamental law of “Similia similibus curantur,” yet, there
may be a few rare cases wherein, this undeviating method would not
apply with the required effect. In such a case, the Alchemist would
resort to the well-known law of opposites, and base his treatment upon
the dogma of “Contraria contrariis curantur,” so long the pet theory
of the Allopathic school. They work upon the hypothesis that, like
attracts like, and, if disease exist, those elements must be administered
to set up the vibrations that will produce the polar opposite. If the
body was racked with pain, those medicines would not be given that
would create or increase similar conditions, but, their antipathy would
be introduced into the system or applied locally to extinguish the foe.

So long as mankind remain within the semicrystallized state of
soul development, so as to require the aid of external forces to support
the human throne within its earthly temple, mercenary troops will
exist to supply these supposed supports.

Unquestionably, the astrological law is the true system of medi-
cine, which treats disease by sympathy or by antipathy, according
to the nature of the case, and the efficacy of the remedies at hand.
This method is the only natural one, and has been thoroughly demon-
strated by the numerous “provings of drugs” under Hahnemann’s law.

Happily, the time is not far distant when, the incarnated spirit
will be able to use its own slumbering forces, and subdue all suffering
and symptoms of disease in their very first inception, by virtue of its
purer life and the dynamic potencies of its own interior, spiritual
thought. Already, mental therapeutics is taking an advanced position
among liberal, progressive minds, and nothing demonstrates so clearly
and forcibly the grand, alchemical law of life-growth and decay, as
the imponderable, invisible forces, which, constitute the materia med-
ica, or remedial agents, of mental, magnetic, and spiritual healing.

Perhaps the most recondite subject connected with the healing


ALCHEMY 69


art divine is, the modus operandi of medicinal action, upon the human
body. A subject so simple and self-evident to the Alchemist, remains
a profound mystery to the educated physician of the medical college;
so much so that, we are tempted to ask of them: “Can you explain the
modus operandi of drugs?” Dr. William Sharp, one of the most ad-
vanced physicians of the Homeopathic school, in one of his well-
known “Essays on Medicine,” says: “In respect to the manner of action
of drugs we are in total darkness, and we are so blind that the dark-
ness is not felt. Knowledge of this kind cannot be attained; it is labor
lost and time wasted to go in search of it. True, hypotheses may be
easily conceived; so may straws be gathered from the surface of the
stream. But what are either of them worth? There is this difference
between them—straws may amuse children, and hypotheses are sure to
mislead physicians.”

It is when the Occult Initiate observes to what helpless conditions
the practice of medicine has fallen, that, he would, if he could with
any possiblity of success, implore the angelic guardian of the human
race to open the spiritual sight of men, that they might see, as he sees,
the Divine relationship, and spiritual correspondence, of everything
in the wide universe to man.

Nature’s laws move slowly and imperceptibly, yet surely and
exact, and the time will certainly come when man will be forced into
consciousness of these laws, whether he will or no. Nature is no re-
specter of persons, and those who will not move and progress, in har-
mony with her laws of advancement, must, of necessity, pass out with
the old.

Alchemy, as it relates to the healing art, is the most noble in its
object and beneficial in its effects, of all the many subdivisions of the
sciences, because, it alleviates the pains and morbid afflictions of suf-
fering humanity. We have given quite sufficient of its astrological
aspect in the second part of “The Light of Egypt,” Vol. I, wherein
the four ancient elements are translated into their chemical corres-
pondences of oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon, which still con-
stitute the four primary elements of the most advanced chemistry
to-day. They enter more or less into every organic form and sub-
stance, which is known, in various combinations and proportions. The
human organism is principally composed of them; so, likewise, is the


70 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


food that supports physical life, and the air we breathe is but modi-
fications of the same atoms.

As man’s constitution embraces a microscopic atom of all the
essences and elements, corresponding to the whole; so does the air;
and much, that we depend upon our food to supply, can be extracted
from the atmosphere by breathing. Every breath we breathe is new
life, or death.

Herein is the secret of success or failure, in certain localities, and
under certain conditions. If we have iron within us, could we extract
or attract iron from Saturn’s district? Or, if the element within us
could attract gold, could we obtain it from the coal fields?

Therefore, it is only natural that the medical remedies we em-
ploy to restore the organism, when afflicted with disease, should group
themselves into similar correspondences, and so, in a general sense,
we find them; for we note that the brain, the circulation, the lungs,
and the stomach, are the four chief citadels of the body; the heart,
of course, representing the center of circulation. And this also ex-
plains, further, if that were necessary, why the principal remedies of
the homeopathic system are so speedy and direct in their action. The
four principal drugs, which stand as representatives of their class, are
aconite, belladonna, phosphorus, and pulsatilla. These represent the
quadrant, for light is not more nicely adjusted to the eye, nor sound
to the ear, than aconite to the circulation, belladonna to the brain,
phosphorus to the lungs, and pulsatilla to the stomach; while ramify-
ing in the seven directions indicated by the seven primary planets, we
find stimulants, tonics, narcotics, nervines, alteratives, cathartics and
diuretics, as the natural material correspondences thereof.

That we assign phosphorus to the lungs may appear startling to
the orthodox student, especially when, he calls to mind the fact that
phosphorus has long been recognized in medical science as a brain
food and medicine. Anticipating such mental questions, we reply
that in medicine, from the alchemical view, we are occupying a wholly
different standpoint; i.e., the power of controlling the functional action
of the body, in this view of the case, and the fact that, the lungs and
the brain are in the most perfect affinity, there will remain no mystery
upon the subject.

The Alchemy of stones and gems attracts our next attention.
Affinites and antipathies to the human constitution, are to be found


ALCHEMY All


in these crystallized representatives of the subtle, invisible influences
emanating from our planetary system. They are the mediums for the
transmission of corresponding attributes and influences of existing
powers and potencies, and if carried or worn upon the person, they
will bring the person in direct rapport with the invisible forces within
the universal system.

Here again Hahnemann’s scientific philosophy would prove ef-
fectual, that “Similia similibus curantur.” Would the fiery influence
of a topaz attract much from the realms of a chrysolite? Or, the cry-
stallized, airy forces of a sapphire be a suitable medium for the earthly
forces of a jasper?

Gems and stones are dead or living realities. They live, slumber
and die, and have their potent existence as do the organic forms of
matter. They are, usually, imbued with the vivifying spark of Divinity,
and shine forth and exert their influence through the magical powers
attracted to them from the forces of Nature. A real, living entity abides
within them that can be seen by the clairvoyant vision, and to the
trained student in Occult lore, this entity can be made to become an
obedient servant, giving warning of the approach of danger, impres-
sions of men and things, and warding off discordant influences sur-
rounding us; or that, which we may contact from the magnetic and
personal environments in our relations in the social world: or that
which may be projected to us from the invisible realms of life.

Think you the pryamids would be intact to-day, if the stones from
which they were built had been promiscuously selected? They were
chosen by Adepts in the knowledge of the Laws of Correspondence
and antipathy and affinity. The sphinx also stand as monuments to
the heights of wisdom that man can attain.

Metals also can be followed out on the same lines as the gems
and stones.

Much as we would like to continue, we are compelled to bring
this discourse to a close, even though in doing so we must of necessity
omit much of vital interest to the student. We will, therefore, only
add that the seven basic metals stand as the crystallized representatives
of their respective groups: Gold for the Sun, Silver for the Moon, Tin
for Jupiter, Copper for Venus, Quicksilver for Mercury, Lead for
Saturn and Iron for Mars. Each finds its own sphere of action within
the temporary abiding place of the human soul on earth—the physical


72 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


body. So, likewise, the twelve constallations and their corresponding
talismanic gems, representing in their glittering array the anatomical
Zodiac of the human frame, and typifying the spiritual quality of the
atoms, there congregated, in every degree of life. These, and a thou-
sand other mysteries, had we the time, might be unfolded to the stu-
dent’s view with considerable advantage, but we are compelled to
refrain. The philosopher’s stone is near at hand. Seek it not in remote
spheres or distant parts of the earth, for it is ever around you and with-
in, and becomes the golden key of true wisdom, which prepares the soul
for its higher life and brighter destiny. It is the still, small voice of the
awakened soul, that purges the conscience from suffering, and the
spiritual body from earthy dross. It is that, which treasures not the
corrupting, delusive wealth of Earth, nor the transient powers of
mammon, but garners the fruits which spring from the pure life, and
treasures the jewels of heaven. Vainly will you seek for this stone of
the wise philosopher amid the turmoils, sufferings, and selfishness of
life, unless you accept your mission upon earth as a duty, delegated
to the soul, from Heaven. Eschew the evil thereof, and hold fast that
which is good. To do this, means to expand with the inward truth
and become one of the “pure in heart,” in which blessed state, the
magical white stone, conveying a new name, reveals the living angel
within, to the outward man. Then, and then alone, doth he know
the Adonai.

Such are the Divine, spiritual principles upon which the higher
Alchemy of life is based. They seek only to establish a Divine, con-
scious at-one-ment between the angel, the man, and the universe, and
to this end, we conclude with the words of the immortal Paracelsus:

“To grasp these invisible elements, to attract them by their ma-
terial correspondences, to control, purify, and transmute them by the
ever-moving powers of the living spirit, this is true Alchemy.”


CHAPTER IX
TALISMANS


Words are the symbols of ideas, and bear the same correspondence
to the physical brain as matter does to spirit, a medium of expression,
and are subject to continual change in their application and meaning,
in exact proportion to the changing mental and moral condition of the
people. As the planet, as well as man, is continually progressing, so
must there be a higher and nobler conception of ideas. Hence, words
or expressions must change, to convey the progressive spirit, that is
constantly taking place. Therefore, it is always interesting, as well
as valuable, for the Occult student to go to the root of each word con-
nected with his philosophy, in order to learn the real sense in which
the word was used by the ancients, from whom his mystic lore has
descended. The true meaning, as well as the words themselves, have
become as mystical as the lore itself. Hence, each student must com-
mence as a beginner in any foreign language, which he does not at
present understand. In following this method of procedure he will,
at least, escape the dense and interminable confusion of modern
opinions upon subjects of which the writers thereof, are partially or
wholly ignorant.

No better illustration of this can be afforded than by the word
“Talisman,” derived from the Greek verb “teleo,” which means, pri-
marily, to accomplish, or bring into effect. But, in its real, and there-
fore higher, sense, it means to dedicate, consecrate, and initiate into
the arcana of the temple mysteries. But, in the present day it means
a piece of imposture, connected with some magical hocus pocus of
the ignorant and superstitious mind, a vulgar charm, that is supposed
to bring the owner thereof some material benefit, irrespective of his
mental, magnetic, and moral condition, “and,” says the learned Web-
ster, after describing his idea of such things, “they consist of three sorts,
astronomical, magical and mixed.” But in what sense the “astro-
nomical” differed from the “magical” we are not informed, nor is any
light thrown upon the peculiar nature of that class designated as
“mixed.” In fact, the lexicographer so mixes up his definitions that,


74 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


we are unable to distinguish anything in particular, but his own in-
dividual ignorance.

So it has become, in every branch of learning. Words and
their meanings have become so mixed in their use and application,
that, the world is full of discords and misunderstandings, which
lead into dissensions and contention, among all schools of thought,
sects, and isms; and lastly, though not the least serious, it has reached
into the close relations of the human family.

All writers and speakers, as well as the readers and listeners,
should acquaint themselves with the derivation and meaning of
words.

The fact stands very clearly defined that, Talismans are con-
fused in the minds of the present generation- with magical charms,
which depend for their effects, upon the power of the idea or
thought, which the formulating magician impresses upon the sub-
stance of which they are composed. If the magical artist be expert,
and endowed with an exceedingly potent will, his charm may
become very powerful, when worn by the person for whom it was
prepared. But, if this one grand essential be lacking, no amount of
cabalistical figures and sacred names will have any effect, because,
there can be no potency in symbols apart from the ideas and
mental force they are capable of arousing in the mind of the maker.
Solomon’s Seal is no more powerful, when drawn upon virgin parch-
ment, with a weak will, or in a mechanical state of mind, than a
child’s innocent scribbling upon its slate. But, if the artist realizes
the mysteries symbolized by the interlacing triangles, and can place
his soul en rapport with the invisible elements they outwardly
represent; then, powerful effects are often produced.

I am sorry to say that, the knowledge of charms is not confined
to the creation of beneficial talismans. Its perversion has led to
the diabolical practices of the Voodo and Black Magician, whose
work is wholly, either for gain or revenge. Nothing, but the most
extreme selfishness lies beneath such immoral practices, but, as
there must be a light to reflect a shadow, so a charm must follow
a talisman. Magical charms, then, are simply natural objects, pos-
sessing but little active virtue in themselves, but, owing to the
mediumistic nature of their substances, are endowed with artificial
powers, of temporary duration, by virtue of the idea and thought


TALISMANS 75


impressed upon them, through the mental magic of the maker;
and in this sense, a charm must be clearly distinguished from “teleo,”
the Talisman. The very names suggest their difference, and, above
all other men, students in Occultism should strive to become
thoroughly educated in the true sense of the term, men of letters,
by virtue of (as Ruskin calls it) “the kingship of words.” “Charm”
is derived from the Latin “carmen,” a song that fascinates, and
means to control by incantation, to subdue; while Teleo concerns
the secret powers and wisdom of consecration and initiation. It is
because of modern misuse of antique terms that, we have considered
this somewhat lengthy explanation necessary, in order to clear
away the accumulated debris of the ages, from the true foundation
of our present study.

A Talisman is a natural object, containing the elemental forces
of its own degree of life, in a state of intense activity, and capable
of responding to the corresponding quality of life, outside of itself,
that emanates from the same spiritual state, either by sympathetic
vibration or antagonistic currents, the nature, power, quality, and
degree of life, which the various natural objects represent, being
a part of the temple curriculum of initiation. Hence, the name,
by which the latent power of these natural objects became known,
was in strict harmony with the facts involved.

In order to prevent any possible misconception upon the subject,
let us briefly restate the definition in a different way: A Talisman
is the exact antipodes of a charm. This latter is the artful and tem-
porary result of man’s mental power; the former, the natural pro-
duction of universal Nature, and as permanent and enduring as the
substance of which it is composed, during the present cycle. And
yet in some sense, it may be quite correct to say that, a Talisman
acts like a charm, and vice versa, that charms act like a Talisman,
providing that, the real vital difference between them, is maintained
in the statement.

Now that we have our subject clearly defined, let us carefully
examine how and in what sense a given natural object becomes
Talismanic, for it must appear self-evident to all that, one and the
same substance cannot constitute a Talisman for everyone, and for
everything. They must naturally differ, as widely in their nature
and quality, as mankind differ in physical, mental, moral, ethical,


76 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


and temperamental, development. And, yet, though, man may so
differ from his fellow man; the ignorant Esquimau, killing seals in
his kayak, may belong to the same spiritual quality of life as the
Harvard professor, who obtains his subsistence by daily discourse
upon the sublime harmony of the infinitely small with the infinitely
great, throughout the manifested universe of matter, and wherever
we find this kinship of the spirit, we shall find the same identical
Talisman acting alike upon each, whenever they shall come en
rapport with it. Mental, moral, and physical development, never
alter the real nature of the internal man. Culture only brings to
the surface, into active use, the latent possibilities lying concealed
within the human soul. It only allows him to exercise his functions
upon different planes, and with different effect.

Every natural department of Nature corresponds to some
peculiar specific quality and degree of life. These have been divided,
for the sake of convenience, into four primary groups; and each
group again subdivided into three, corresponding to the four
cardinal, four succedent, and four cadent houses, of the astrological
chart; therefore, the twelve signs of the Zodiac; these constituting
the Cycle of Necessity within physical conditions, wherein, the
ever-measuring or decreeing tidal flow of life from solar radiation
throughout the year, represents the twelve groups of humanity, of
lower animated Nature, of vegetation, and crystallized gems. Every
human being is ushered into the world under the direct influx of one
or more of these celestial divisions, and by virtue of the sign occupying
the horizon at the moment of birth, absorbs such influx, and becomes
endowed with a specific polarity, by virtue of which, he ever afterward,
during such expression within physical conditions, inspires with every
breath, that specific life quality from the atmosphere, corresponding
to the same degree of the universal spirit. Consequently, that gem, or
those gems, representing and corresponding to his House of Life, be-
come to him, a Talisman, because of their relationship—their spiritual
affinity. These are all given in the second part of Vol. I. The metals
never become Talismanic, because of their comparatively negative
degree of life, and for this reason also, they make the most powerful
charms. Certain combinations of metals, and in proper proportions,
increase the potency and magnetic influence of a charm: and here,
too, the laws of antipathy and affinity come into practical use.


TALISMANS Tl


A true expert will know his metals, or metal, and his client, before
commencing his magical work.

Those persons who derive most virtue from a Talisman are those
who belong to the most sensitive, or interior state, within such degree
of life, and who are dominated by one sign only. Thus, if we find
one sign occupying the whole of the House of Life, or practically so,
as when the first face of a sign ascends, we may be sure, other things
not interfering, that such a native will receive great benefit from
wearing its Talismanic gem. If a person of good intellectual powers
and sensitive spirituality, be born when the lord of the ascendant
occupies the rising sign, as, for instance, Mars in Aries, or Sun in Leo,
we may be sure that, the Talismanic gem, in their case, will be
exceedingly powerful, because, all the Astro-physical conditions are
then most favorable for the expression of natural forces, and, if
worn upon, or near that part of the body which the sign rules, the
power and influence is more powerful and beneficial.

In wearing them, take them to you as a part of yourself, a part
of your higher self, a thing to be heeded, listened to and obeyed. They
will usually make their presence most pronounced when something
arises to disturb the harmonious vibrations that naturally and quietly
go on between the person and the interstellar spaces above. They are
like the sensor and motor nerves—they never make their presence
known, except, when danger encroaches.

Having explained in what sense gems become talismanic, we have
now to disclose the modus operandi—the how.

The gems contain the life quality of their own astral nature.
Man, as a higher expression, only, of the same universal biune life,
contains the same. Like two electric currents, man, the positive pole
(comparatively), attracts unto himself the mineral life of the gem,
which thus, becomes the negative pole. A complete circuit is formed
and maintained, as long as they remain in contact. Gems belonging
to a different quality of life, not being en rapport with his astral state,
have no good effect, because, no current flows between them. Thus,
the Talisman acts in unison with the psychic, or soul-principle, of
man, aiding the organism to sustain health, stimulating the mental
perceptions, and spiritual intuition, and affording in a remarkable
manner, many premonitions of coming danger, when the individual
is sufficiently sensitive to perceive them. And now, per contra, as


78 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


there are gems that act in sympathy with man, there must be, and in
fact are, gems that act upon contrary principles; i.e., antagonistic,
and these belong to purely antagonistic elements, as Air to Earth and
Fire to Water, unless the native be born under both forces, as Mars
in Cancer (2) rising, or the latter part of one sign and nearly the
whole of another of an opposite nature, occupying the ascendant.
Such natives are pure neutrals, and such might wear the gems that
belong to the most powerful planet of the horoscope, or that triplicity
holding the most planets; then, they are usually combined, the planet
and the triplicity.

There are, of course, innumerable substances, more or less, capable
of talismanic virtue to particular individuals. But those gems, and
similar ones, that are given in “The Light of Egypt,” Vol. I, are the
most powerful. To these may be added the opal, under Scorpio (1 );
the garnet, under Aries (‘7 ); and the turquoise, under Cancer (% ),
when Saturn is therein; and the aquamarine, under Pisces (3 ); and
among the temporary talismans of vegetation we may add that, the
young shoots, bearing the flower and seed vessels, are the portions
of chief virtue, and the young shoots of trees. These are often used
in locating mines, wells, oils, etc., that lie hidden beneath the surface
of the earth, and in the hands of a negative, sensitive person, seldom
fail to reward the searcher with success. These should always be
gathered when their ruling correspondences are rising, or, better still,
culminating upon the meridian. These will be explained in the chapter
on The Magic Wand.

We have now reached the limits of our present study, and have
only to state that all gems, like the human organism, are in one of
three conditions: alive and conscious, asleep and unconscious, or dead
and powerless. These conditions can only be discovered, in stones,
by the trained lucid or the instructed neophyte. Stones that are
sleeping require to be awakened. This, also, can only be done by
the trained student or Adept. Those that are dead, are useless as
Talismans, no matter how beautiful they appear as ornaments.

Gems and stones are also sexed, and those who wear them would
receive the best effect if they should wear those of opposite sex, al-
though either is powerfully potent in their influence upon the indi-
vidual. How very ignorant the children of men are, of the subtle,
silent, yet obedient servants, that everywhere, surround them. Here,


TALISMANS 79


again, that Divine spark, which lies embedded within the crystallized
forces of Nature, is exerting its subtle, spiritual influence, in making
man’s very selfishness, and love of ornament and show, a means, to
bring forth these silent monitors, knowing ere long that, their true
power and potency will be known, and consciously utilized by him,
as potent factors in his soul’s evolvement and physical development.

The twelve representative gems within the cold stratas of matter,
stand as the material representatives of their stellar counterparts in
the sky, and constitute the beautiful, glittering, but crystallized, Zodiac
of man’s physical anatomy.


CHAPTER X
CEREMONIAL MAGIC


The above title has been selected, chiefly, because, in most works
treating upon magic we find it wrongly used, and therefore, take the
opportunity of explaining the matter, for, there were no such terms
in the vocabulary of the ancient Magi.

It is unfortunate, that, words of ancient origin are not more care-
fully used, and that, we should attach so many different meanings
to the same word. The terms “ceremony” and “ceremonial” are nothing
more nor less than, what that eminent critic, John Ruskin, would
designate as “bastards of ignoble origin,” which, somehow or another,
have usurped the places of “rite” and “ritual.” The word “rite” has
descended to us from the Latin “ritus” of our Roman ancestors, and
they received it from the more ancient “riti” of the Sanskrit, the
Greek equivalent of which is “reo,” and means the method or order
of service to the gods, whereas, “ceremony” may mean anything and
everything, from the terms of a brutal prize fight to the conduct of
divine service within the church. But, no such chameleon-like definition
or construction can properly be placed upon the word “rite,” for
it means distinctly, if it means anything at all, the serious usage
and sacred method of conducting service in honor of the gods, or of
superiors, and requires the attendance of the prophet or priest, or
some one duly qualified to fulfill such sacred functions for the time
being. The ritual of magic, then, is the correct title of this present
study, and as such, we shall, henceforth, term it as we proceed with
the course.

Man is especially, and above all creatures, an organizing force,
and when to this fact, we add the most interior and powerful of his
sentimental instincts—veneration for the powers that be, and for the
higher, invisible forces of Nature, his “religiosity,” as it has been aptly
termed, we cannot wonder that, the earliest races of which we possess
any record are chiefly distinguished for their imposing and elaborate
religious rites. In fact, it is to the stupendous temples and a colossal
sacerdotalism, that, we are indebted for nine-tenths of the relics and
records which we possess of them. So true is this that, from what
we have been able to discover, we are quite justified in asserting that


CEREMONIAL MAGIC 81


the ancient races were, above all other things, a profoundly religious
people. The temple was the center around which revolved all their
genius and art, and the sacred edifice became their grandest achieve-
ment in architecture, and its high priest the most powerful individual
in the state. In fact, it was in consequence of the real power invested
in such sacred office that it was so intimately connected with the
throne, and why royalty so frequently belonged to the priesthood or
exercised priestly functions. And there can be no real doubt, but
that, amongst the pastoral and more spiritual races of Earth’s earliest
inhabitants, the priest, by reason of his superior wisdom, was the
first law-giver; and, by virtue of his sanctity of person and elevation
of mind became their first, primitive king, a patriarchal monarch, whose
scepter and symbol of power was the shepherd’s peaceful crook; just
as among the ruder nomads of the inhospitable North, we find the
greatest hunters invested with the dignity of chief, whose significant
symbol and scepter of royalty, upon their Nimrod thrones, was the
trusty, successful spear. And the times in which we live have had
their full effect upon these symbols, so significant of rule. The mon-
arch has transformed the spear into the less harmful mace, while the
Church has added an inch of iron to the crook. Therefore, the former
has become less war-like, and the latter less peaceful, and, verily, in
actual life we find them so.

The patriarchal sire, head of the tribal household, was the original
priest; and the hearthstone the first altar around which the family
rites were performed; and from this pure and primitive original have
been evolved, through progressive ages, the stately temple and the
sacred person of the despotic pontiff; from the sincere prayer the pure
aspirations of the human heart and the joyous offerings of fruits and
flowers to the invisible powers around them; and from the souls of
their beloved ancestors has arisen the costly and complicated ritual
of theology. And, if the theologians of to-day really knew the lost,
secret meaning of their complicated rituals, and the unseen powers
lying behind their external symbols, their anxieties for the continued
life of their dying creeds would be turned to new hopes and faith,
which could be demonstrated to their equally blind followers; that,
that which they were teaching they knew, and could practically use
the knowledge given forth in their sanctuaries; and, instead of offering
up their supplications to an imaginary, personal Deity, their words,


82 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


rites, and ceremonies, would take on the form and power that such
should command, and they would become truly, what their title
really means, a doctor of the soul. Then could they, intelligently,
lead and direct the souls of their followers to the path of Christ (Truth),
which leads up to salvation; not a vicarious atonement, but gaining
the at-one-ment through the individual soul’s development to a con-
scious relation, to that Divine spirit, we call God, where it can say
“T know.”

Out of those simple gifts, which were the spontaneous offerings
of loving remembrance and unselfish charity, have grown the prayers,
penances, sacrifices, and servile worship, of sacerdotalism. Out of
the paternal consideration and love of the aged sire has evolved the
haughty, chilling pride of the selfish, isolated priest, and which reflects
its baneful influence upon the worshipers at their feet. They have
also changed their once sacred, faithful, and reverent, obedience into
suspicion and distrust, and with the educated to utter disgust. The
light has been extinguished, and priest and people alike are groping
about in darkness.

It is strange, yea, passing strange, the amount of human ignorance
and folly that is revealed. When we look upon this picture and then
upon that, verily we cannot help but ask the question, is mankind
really progressing? We know that it is; we are keenly alive to the
truth that the Anthem of Creation sounds out “Excelsior’—“move on,”
but how, and in what way (spiritually) we fail to comprehend. The
cyclic development of the human soul is an inscrutable mystery.

All the considerations above presented must be thoroughly
weighed and understood in order to arrive at the true value of “the
dogma and ritual of high magic,” as Eliphas Levi terms it; because,
amid the vast array of tinselled drapery, the outcome of man’s vain
conceit and bombastic pride, we shall find very little that can be
considered as vital and really essential to the rites of magic. The
show, the drapery, the priestly ornaments and instruments, are to the
really spiritual Occultist, but, as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal.
That they had, and still have, their legitimate uses, is true, but these
uses do not concern magic, per se, nor its manifold powers. They
awed the popular mind, and impressed upon the masses a due rever-
ence for the powers that be. They were instrumental in holding the
untrained passions of the common herd in check, by a wholesome


CEREMONIAL MAGIC 83


fear of summary vengeance from the gods, so that this pageantry of
magic, the outward priestly show, was more of a politic development
than a spiritual necessity, an astute but, philosophical method of
enabling the educated few to govern the uneducated many. And it
was only when the educational and initiatory rites of the temple became
corrupt, and the priest became the persecuting ally of the king—when,
in real fact, the priest lost his spirituality in the desire for temporal
power and place, that the people began to disbelieve his professions
and rebel against his tyrannical control.

The powers that be, are now wielding their sword of justice, and
unfurling the knowledge of freedom and truth to the aspiring mind
of man. He has begun to feel his bondage and the yoke of oppression.
The words of promise and love, instead of lifting him up to the God
he has been taught to worship, bow him down in slavish obedience
to his priest. Mankind cannot remain in this mental and spiritual
darkness much longer. Already I see the break of day, the dawn
of a new life, a new religion; or, rather, the re-establishing of the true,
which is as old as Time itself. There is but One Law, One Principle,
One Word, One Truth and One God.

The original requirements for the office of priest, and the rites
of magic, were, as shown, a primitive, i.e., pure mind; one that had
outgrown the lusts and passions of youth, a person of responsibility
and experience; and even to this day the priest of the Roman Church
is called by the familiar title of “father.” And as Nature does not
alter her laws and requirements in obedience to the moral development
of the race, we may rest assured that the same requirements, of ten
thousand years ago, still hold good to-day. You may enter your magic
circle, drawn with prescribed rites, and you may intone your conse-
crations and chant your incantations; you may burn your incense in
the brazen censer and pose in your flowing, priestly robes; you may
bear the sacred pentacles of the spirit upon your breast and wave
the magic sword to the four quarters of the heavens; yea, you may
even do more—you may burn the secret sigil of the objurant spirit;
and yell your conjurations and exorcisms till you are black in the
face; but all ‘in vain, my friend—all in vain. It will prove nothing but
vanity and vexation of spirit unless the inward self, the soul, interblends
with the outward Word, and contacting by its own dynamic intensity—
the elemental vibrations of Nature—arouses these spiritual forces to


84 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


the extent of responding to your call. When this can be done, but
not until then, will your magical incantations have any effect upon
the voiceless air. Not the priestly robes nor magic sword, not the in-
cantations, written word, nor mystic circle, can produce Nature’s re-
sponse to Occult rite; but the fire of the inward spirit, the mental
realization of each word and mystic sign, combined with the conscious
knowledge of your own Deific powers—this, and this only, creates
Nature’s true magician.

Who and where can such be found? Are they so few that the
echo answers back “Where and who?” Yet, there are many such upon
the Earth at the present time, but the present mental conditions forbid
them making their identity known. They would not be recognized
and accepted as the true teachers, but reviled and persecuted and
dubbed as insane. But silently, they are sowing the seed of truth that
will spring up and bear fruit, where and when least expected.

Because evil is so active, truth is not lying dormant. The spirit
of God, that Divine spark of Deity within every human soul, never
sleeps, never rests. “On and upward” is its cry. “Omnia vincit veritas.”

The grand sublimity of man’s conception of at-one with the
Infinite Father, at-one with the limitless universe of being, at-one
with, and inheriting, all the sacred rights and inalienable prerogatives
of the ineffable Adonai of the deathless soul, is the only test of man’s
qualification for the holy office; for, as Bulwer Lytton has truthfully
said, “the loving throb of one great human heart will baffle more fiends
than all the magicians’ lore.” So it is with the sacred ritual. One single
aspirational thought, clearly defined, outweighs all the priestly trap-
pings that the world has ever seen.

The success of all incantations depends upon the complete unison
of voice and mind, the interblend of which, produces the dynamic
intonation, that chords with the inward rhythmic vibrations of the soul.
Once this magical, dynamic, vibration is produced, there immediately
springs into being the whole elemental world belonging thereto, by
correspondence. Vocalists who hold their audiences spellbound do
so by virtue of the magical vibrations they produce, and are in reality
practical, even though unconscious, magicians. The same power, to a
degree, lies in the voice when speaking, the graceful movement of the
hand when obeying the will, and the eye rays forth the same dynamic
power and becomes magical in its effects.


CEREMONIAL MAGIC 85


These powers are exercised more upon the physical plane, and
no better illustration can be given, than, the power man is able to
exert over the animal when gazing into its eyes.

Here, as well as in incantations and invocations, within the power
of the will, lies the success or failure.

At this point it may be asked, what, then, is the use of magical
rites, of symbols and priestly robes? We answer, in themselves alone,
nothing, absolutely nothing, except the facility and convenience we
derive from system, order and a code of procedure. To this may be
added the mental force and enthusiasm of soul which such things
inspire, just as men and women may feel more dignified, artistic, and
refined, when dressed in accordance with their ideas. So may the
average priest feel more priestly, holy; and consequently, more power-
ful mentally; when arrayed in the robes of his office and surrounded
by the outward symbols of his power and functions. But, in themselves
alone, there is not, nor can there be, any real virtue. The same may
be said of the incantations. The words used in their composition are
the hieroglyphics of mystical ideas. Therefore, the correct pronuncia-
tion of the words or the grammatical construction of a sentence is
nothing, if the underlying idea is conceived in the mind and responded
to by the soul. Will and motive form the basis of true’ magic.

One word more and we have completed our subject. Magic
swords, rings, pentacles, and wands, may, and often are, powerful
magical agents in the hands of the magician, by virtue of the power,
or charm, that is invested within them when properly prepared; but
apart from such preparation, by those who know, they are as powerless
as unintelligible incantations.

All the foregoing are aids, but if physical manifestations of magical
forces be required, there must always be present the necessary vital,
magnetic pabulum, by means of which such phenomena are made to
transpire; and in every case, to be successful, the assistance of a good
natural magician, or seer, is necessary; for without this essential ele-
ment the whole art, in its higher aspects, becomes abortive.


CHAPTER XI
THE MAGIC WAND


This is the last lesson of our present course that requires a clear
definition of the terms employed in the title thereof, for the twelfth,
and final study is, perhaps, fortunate in having for its title a word
that has not, so far, been misused and distorted from its original sense.

The Magic Wand. The words savor of everything that the young
tyro in Occult art can picture to his mind; of the midnight magician
and his mysterious, if not diabolical, arts, muttering his incantations,
working his gruesome spells, and raising the restless ghosts of the
dead. Strange fancies, these, and yet, so corrupt and ignorant have
become the conceptions of the popular mind regarding the once
sacred Science of the Temple and the psychological powers of Nature,
that we very much question, if the ideas above stated were not very
similar to the originals of each modern student, before he had become
acquainted with the deeper truths—the realities of Occult philosophy.

We will commence our study by a careful investigation of the
original meaning of the words Magic Wand, since those who were
the masters and originators thereof, are far more likely to know
more about them than their degenerate offspring of a later age. Few,
comparatively, would believe that the words magic, mason, and imagi-
nation, are the present unrelated descendants of the same original
conception—the root idea; but such is the case. First, then, we will
examine their modern meanings. Magic is the unholy art of working
secret spells, of using invisible powers, and holding intercourse with
the unseen world of ghosts and demons, by means of enchantments.
It also means the expert deception of the senses by the tricks of a
conjurer, so-called hocus-pocus and fraud, and a magician is either
an evil-minded, superstitious mortal, fool enough to believe in charms,
or an expert pretender and imposter of the first water, who cheats
and deceives the people. A mason is the honorable designation of a
builder, who works in stone; metaphysically, a member of a semi-
secret society, whose sole advantage is social intercourse and standing;
who proclaim fraternity and universal brotherhood theoretically and
practice the reverse in reality; a man who apes the Egyptian Mason,
knows nothing in reality of Hiram, his master; who knows nothing of


THE MAGIC WAND 87


the starry Solomon or his mystic temple in the heavens, which Hiram
built; and who misconceives the import of the three villains, or as-
sassins; and who, further, knows nothing of that wonderful sprig of
myrtle:—in short, a Free Mason, speaking generally, is a man who
delights in ideals, social equality, secret fraternity, and plays at
mysticism; who parades on the Masonic stage and enacts a role he
does not understand. The first meaning, that of a builder, is the most
correct. Lastly, the imagination is the exercise of mental imagery—the
picturings of silent thought.

And now we will proceed backwards. Imagination is from the
word “image,” a form, a picture, and has descended to us from the
Latin “imago,” which, in its turn, was derived from the old Semitic
root, “mag.” Mason comes to us from the Latin “mass,” which means
to mould and form, i.e., to build; and the word “mass,” through var-
ious transformations, was also derived from the root-word “mag.”
Consequently, originally, there was but little difference in the ancient
idea of building pictures in the mind and erecting the mental idea
externally in stone. It is from this fact, that, we have to-day
Mental Masons, a la the secret orders, and stone masons, who labor for
wages. The Mental Masons have merely lost the knowledge of their
art. They should, by rights, be as active and correspondingly useful
to-day as their more physical brothers, the masons of stone.

This art would never have fallen into disgrace and disuse, if their
daily bread, or material accumulations, had depended upon their
efforts in building up the mental, moral, and spiritual attainments,
of each other, and bringing their knowledge into more external use,
by making the material edifice, the physical body, a purer and more
fitting temple, for the Divine soul.

Magic comes from the Latin “magi” and the Greek word “magos,”
which means wise, learned in the mysteries, and was the synonym of
wisdom. The initiated philosopher, the priest, and the wise men, are
all of them included in the “magi.” Again, tracing this word to its
remote ancestor, we find it terminating in the same Semitic root,
“mag,” but of this strange root no one was able to say much, except
that it seemed to belong to the Assyrian branch of the great Semitic
race. But quite recently, thanks to our scientific explorers and archae-
ologists, versed in the mysterious meaning of cuniform inscription;
Assyrian scholars now inform us that they have found the hoary,


88 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


primitive original of it, of magic, magi and imago, etc. It is from an
old Akkadian word, “imga,” meaning wise, holy, and learned, and
was used as the distinguishing title of their wisest sages, priests, and
philosophers, who, as may be supposed, gradually formed a peculiar
caste, which merged into the ruling priestly order. The Semites, who
succeeded the old Akkadian race in the valley of the Euphrates, as a
mere matter of verbal convenience, transformed many of the old
Akkadian words to suit their own articulation, and “imga” became
“mag,” and thus “magi.” The blend between the Semetic and the older
Akkadian race, produced, by fusion of racial blood, the famed Chal-
deans. So that we see how old are the words which many of us daily
use, but with different meaning. Verily, it makes one feel, when he
thinks of magic and its origin, as though he were quite nearly related
to the people who honored King Sargon, the Wise, the earthly original
of the mystic Solomon of Biblical tradition. The term Wand is an
old Saxon word, which primarily signifies to set in motion, to move.
From this we derive our word wander, i.e., to roam, and wandering,
i.e., moving and continually restless.

We have now the original, therefore real, meaning of the words
Magic Wand; thus an object that sets in motion the powers of the
magician, and the magician, an Initiate of the sacred rites—a master
of wisdom, possessing all the resources that enable him to build,
mould, and form; to create in fact, by virtue of his knowledge of the
secret powers of mental imagery and the potential use of his own
imagination. He is both Mental Mason and learned philosopher.

The student may doubtless ask, why all this care and labor re-
garding mere definitions? We reply that, it is because, the real mean-
ing of the words we have purposely selected for the title of our studies
are, in themselves, a far better revelation than we could possibly have
written. Originally, ideas and words were related as absolute ex-
pressions or correspondences, of each other. This is not so now. As
the different races became interblended, the purity of both language
and morals retrograded, and the people grew more to the external.
The intuitions and spirit were compelled to retreat, giving place to
only the intellectual and mental. The blending of the languages gave
birth to many words wherein different meanings were transmitted;
hence, the trouble arising to-day over the numerous interpretations of
a single word.


THE MAGIC WAND 89


Hybrid races have no such thing as a pure language. Their ideas
and language, like their blood, is badly mixed up, confusing, and un-
satisfactory, so far as the real meaning of the words are concerned.
For this very reason we find so many different meanings for the same
word; and also for this reason, we cannot formulate a legal enactment
in the Anglo-Saxon tongue that, a learned lawyer, versed in this
senseless jugglery of words, cannot demonstrate, to the satisfaction of
the courts, means something the very opposite of the real intentions—
the spirit—which the framers thereof, intended it to convey. Anciently,
it required no artful cunning of the lawyer to interpret the laws. The
words had only one simple and obvious meaning. If a language could
be so constructed to-day, and the antiquated precedents of the courts
annihilated; the legal profession would be exterminated inside of
twelve months, and an affliction removed from the people.

The philosophy of the Magic Wand is this. It is a magnetic,
electric conductor for the magician’s will. It directs the flow of his
thought and concentrates it upon a given point in space or an object.
It is, magically, what the sights of a rifle are to a sportsman. It enables
him to focus his powers with exact precision upon the mark against
which, or upon which, his will is directed. Apart from this there is no
power, per se, in the Wand itself, any more than there is in a lightning
conductor without the electric storm. Ergo, the Wand is the con-
ductor, in the magician’s hand, for the lightnings of the soul; and just
as the lightning rod is most useful and most powerful to protect, when
the storm is the strongest; so is the Wand most powerful in the hands
of the most potential magician. We can only transmit through this
Wand the degree of force we may happen to possess in the soul.

In a properly prepared Wand lies the most powerful weapon, to
protect or destroy, that can be placed within a magician’s hands. With
his own spiritual force and knowledge, combined with the magic
power attached to the instrument, nothing can withstand its power,
when directed with a determined and powerful will.

Many substances have been employed in the manufacture of these
Magic Wands. Metals or stones will not serve this purpose, unless
covered with some organic matter. In any case stones are worthless.
The very finest Wands are made from the live ivory of a female ele-
phant. A short Wand, twenty-one inches long, tipped with gold at
the largest end and silver or copper at the other, is very powerful.


90 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


Next to these costly articles are Wands with a gold or copper core, a
wire, in fact, cased with ebony, boxwood, rosewood, cedar or sandal-
wood. English yew also serves the purpose; so does almond wood.
Simpler, less expensive, and almost as effective, are Wands made of
witch-hazel. In fact, apart from the Wands of live ivory, I consider
that witch-hazel is as powerful as the golden Wand. Next in force to
this witch-hazel are the shoots of the almond tree, and, lastly, the
peach and swamp willow.

The proper time to manufacture a Magic Wand is whenever you
can find the person who is able to do the work. But after it is con-

‘ structed it must be thoroughly magnetized, with proper ceremony and
aspiration, the first or the second full Moon after the Sun enters Capri-
corn, at midnight, when the Moon will be culminating in her own
sign upon the mid-heaven.

The best time to cut a shoot of witch-hazel or other material for
a Wand is the first full Moon after the Sun’s entry into Capricorn, at
midnight, and then magnetize it upon the next full Moon at the same
hour.

In conclusion, let us repeat that, the Magic Wand is but the highly
sensitive magical medium for transmitting and concentrating the force
of the learned magician; that it is equally powerful under great excite-
ment of mind, whether used consciously or not. The stream of mental
fire will go in the direction the Wand happens to be pointed, and,
therefore, should never be in the hands of the wicked or foolish, any
more than firearms. It is potential or otherwise, in exact proportion to
the artist’s wisdom and dynamic mentality, and is useless in the hands
of the idiotic or weak-minded. A Magic Wand requires brains and
vigorous mental force to make it effective, just as the steam engine
requires an apparatus for generating the steam, that moves it. With a
determined will, and a mental conception of one’s inward power, any
man or woman can, by means of this sensitive Wand, defy all the
legionaries of Hell, and quickly disperse every form of spiritual iniquity.

The firearms which have become so intricate in their mechanism
and so destructive in their operations, are only a degeneration of the
Magic Wand. The first weapons of warfare and slaughter were very
crude and clumsy, then larger and more destructive, until at last they
have become as fine in texture and mechanical genius, compared with
their early brothers, as the Magic Wand is to-day, above and beyond,


THE MAGIC WAND 91


the present weapons of warfare. At last, the original mode of defense
will be rediscovered and become a utility in the hands of the majority
of mankind. At the same time, the mental and moral nature will be
evolving into better conditions, too, so that their use will not be given
to the ignorant and evildoers, but placed in charge of the educated,
those who are morally capable of leading and ruling.

Yes, we are now stepping upon the plane of reason and intuition,
where right, not might, will prevail and rule the world. -The present
mode of government and rule will be changed, and one of human-
itarian justice take its place.

God hasten the Millenium.


CHAPTER XII


THE, BOOK
WHICH IS CALLED
THE TABLETS OF ATH


THE SACRED SCROLL WHICH IS CALLED


THE TABLETS OF: ATH


Now FOR THE FIRST TIME TRANSCRIBED FROM THE
ASTRAL RECORDS AND DONE INTO A BOOK,
IN THREE PARTS.


By ZANONI, -’


TO WHICH IS ADDED A SERIES OF INTERPRETATIVE REFLECTIONS


FOR THE SPIRITUAL MEDITATION OF THE FAITHFUL.


94 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


FOREWORD


Thy temple is the arch

Of yon unmeasured sky;

Thy Sabbath the stupendous march
Of grand eternity.


To my Brothers and Sisters of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor:


GreEtinc—For some years it has been my desire to leave a spiritual
legacy to the many devoted friends and followers who have braved so
much amid present truth and error for my sake.


In choosing the present work for such a purpose, I have had in
view the deeper spiritual needs of the soul—the prophetic element of the
interior spirit, which can best exalt itself through the contemplation of
Nature’s arcane symbolism of the starry heavens—not the material ex-
pression of the glittering splendors of the midnight sky, but the spiritual
soul-pictures of those blazing systems that reveal to the seeing eye the
shining thrones of the Rulers—the Powers that Be.


Ever since the dawn of intellectual human life upon our Mother
Earth, long before the days of the cave man, or even the first frost that
heralded the coming of the Ice Age, souls have hoped and hungered
and souls have quailed and fallen in their struggles with the mysteries of
God. But ever and anon some bright flower of the race has gained the
spiritual victory. A Messianic soul has responded to aspirations of a
great-hearted, great-souled woman, pregnant with spiritual yearnings
beyond her race, and she has unconsciously blessed her kind for the
generations yet to come with that incarnated mystery—the Son of God.
Blessed, O Woman, is thy patient mission on the earth, and trans-
cendent are the holy mysteries of thy maternity. Every human birth
is a Divine miracle in humanity, performed by the Motherhood of God.


Hence it is that, from the earliest ages of life, triumphant souls
have stormed the gates of the sanctuary and penetrated Nature’s most
occult mysteries and there recorded their spiritual victories. Amid
these sacred records lies one great scroll, that none but the brightest
and bravest may read.


THE TABLETS OF AETH 95


This sacred scroll, sealed with the seven mystic seals of the
heavens, contains The Tablets of A“th, a record of the soul’s experi-
ences upon the planes of both conscious and sub-conscious life—spirit
and matter, that are expressed in a series of universal symbols, which
manifest to the seer the processes of creative life, of spiritual cause
with material effect. And, finally, the mystery of the seven vials and
the seven stars of Saint John are written therein; for the Tablets are
the hieroglyphic keys which unlock the realities of truth involved
within the unrealities of external life, and open up, to the aspiring soul,
inconceivable vistas of knowledge yet possible of realization, within
the Divine womb of the uncreated A&®ther.


Myriads of exalted spirits, who have toiled for the treasure which
doth not corrupt, have added, and are adding, their portion of per-
sonal conception to this universal conception of life, so that the
sacred symbols themselves, inscribed upon these imperishable Tab-
lets, are evolutionary—are slowly unfolding through the eons of time,
and revealing wider and yet deeper processes of the light, life, and
love, of the Motherhood of God.


Therefore, all Divine revelation of infinite truth is limited and
finite as to its conception, when revealed through a finite capacity. All
Divine truths are universal; all personal conceptions of such truths
are limited; hence springs the unquenchable fountain of the one eter-
nal truth, eternally repeating itself, in cosmic as in human life, by
the progressive unfoldment of Nature’s unlimited potentialities.


“The outward doth from the inward roll,
And the inward dwells in the inmost soul.”


The true poet is always a seer, and he might have added that
the inmost soul is the uncreate, and, the yet uncreated itself, lies
buried in the ever eternal beyond; hence the immortality of the human
spirit.

This sacred astral scroll, rightly and reverently studied by the
disciple of the higher law, becomes a boundless source of knowledge
and inspiriation. There is no mood of the mind or yearning of the
soul that cannot be satisfied and refreshed from this inexhaustible
fountain of spiritual truth, no passion of the human heart that cannot
be eased of its burden and soothed of its pain. Its spiritual refresh-


96 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


ment falls like the dew from heaven upon those who are weary and
heavy laden with the trials and sufferings of external life.

Accept it, then, even as it is given unto you. My friends and
brethren, accept it as Zanoni’s last work on earth—his legacy to you,
and may the spirit of the All-Father-Mother, the ineffable spirit of
Life, Light, and Love,—the Unknowable, whom men call God, rest
upon you and be with you now and forever.


THE TABLETS OF AETH 97


INTRODUCTION


To THE Book Wuicu Is CALLep “Ture TaBLets
oF A{TH,” WHEREIN ARE DescCRIBED THE
FORMULAS OF MEDITATION.


THE FORMULAS OF MEDITATION,
TO THE DRAGON, FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH.


“When first, a musing boy, I stood beside
Thy starlit shimmer, and asked my restless heart
What secrets Nature to the herd denied,
But might to earnest hierophant impart;
When lo! beside me, around and o’er,
Thought whispered, “Arise, O seeker, and explore.’


”?


The Tablets of Atth are the culminating expression of symbolical
ideas, and the studious meditation thereof is to be approached and
continued in this wise:

First, commit to memory, as near as may be, all the ideas involved
in the astrological laws and principles laid down in “The Science of the
Stars,” formulated in the second part of “The Light of Egypt,” Vol. I,
especially as regards the symbolism there given and manifestation
thereof on the intellectual plane. Mentally digest these aspects of
truth most thoroughly.

Second, carry forward the same course of mental training with
regard to the preceding chapters in this volume, from No. 1 to No. 12.
There are thirteen chapters, but No. 13, the last one, being “The
Penetralia,” should not be included in this course, but, rightly used,
should be reserved as ‘the last and final revelation for spiritual
contemplation.

The twelve chapters just mentioned continue the great astral laws
given in “The Light of Egypt,” Vol. I, from this plane to that of the
soul life of the human monad (both prior to and after human incar-
nation). At this point we leave the finite and step into the realms of
the infinite. From the sphere of limitations which surround the micro-
cosm we enter the starlit path of the macrocosm, and here, with the


98 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


illimitable ocean of eternal life sweeping onward before us, we hear
the first strains of the Grand March of the Universe burst forth from
the organs of God! The suns of creative life swell the infinite chorus
of sound; archangels swing their fiery batons to the march of the
heavenly host; and all earthly sound has ceased. We are absorbed
in the music of the spheres.

We are now in the realm of universals, the domain of living reali-
ties. The Tarot of Mother Nature revolves before us, revealing her
mystic meanings to the soul. All ideas are symbols, and symbols are
reservoirs for the conservation of thought. And this is a very truth:
Even so on earth as it is in heaven.

The Tablets of A2th, then, constitute a spiritual astrology, a spirit-
ual science of the stars, void of mathematics, yet possessing all the
exactitude of figures, constructed on the principles of astronomy, yet
expressed by the methods of the Kabbalah.

The transmission of spiritual truth from inward to outward form,
though differing according to the age in which it is expressed, is ever the
same in principle. And in the same way that the sacred clavicula of
Solomon became the Tarot of Bohemian gypsies, so did the Tablets of
&th manifest their mysteries in the starry science of Chaldean lore.
But there is this sharp line of demarcation between them, namely, the
Tablets of 4th deal with universal human life and nature, with infinite
principles from which all finite laws radiate. The Tablets of Atth
express and symbolize the cause. All other mundane systems of occult
study, astronomical or metaphysical, are spirito-natural effects, the
individual intellectual fruits, gathered from the one universal tree of
knowledge. Uncreated, Unlimited Potentiality, is the one impersonal
truth shining forever in the Great White Light of God. All the laws,
powers, and principalities, manifested in the moving Universe, are
but the colored rays, blazing with glorious life through the prisms of
matter.

Having stated thus much, the neophyte will perceive in what
meditative sphere of thought the Tablets may be used. The method
of study is, as shown, a purely synthetic deduction of human ideas
from spiritual symbols of universal principles. The Tablets themselves
constitute a grand arcane Tarot of man, God and the universe, and of
all the powers that dwell therein. They may be studied singly, as, for
instance, meditating upon some one great universal idea or principle;


THE TABLETS OF AETH 99


or they may be studied in trines, as they appear in each separate book,
or chapter, or as squares, like two, five, eight, eleven, or as the seal of
two trines, one, three, five, seven, nine, eleven, with No. twelve in the
center, as the revealer of the mystery. And, finally, they may be con-
templated as the Grand Oracle of Heaven, in the following manner:

Make a circle of the tablets, as you would with a pack of Tarot
cards, beginning with No. 1, 7, on the eastern horizon, and proceeding
in the exact opposite order from a figure of the heavens—No. 2, &,
being on the Twelfth House, No. 3, 1%, on the Eleventh, and % on the
M. C. of the figure, as in the Astro-Masonic chart, given in the second
part of “The Light of Egypt,” Vol. I, and so proceed with the rest of
the twelve tablets of the stars. This figure will represent the potential-
ities of the macrocosm, the starry signs symbolizing the possibilities
of things past or to be, and the rulers the active executors thereof.
Study the figure in all its aspects as such, first singly, tablet by tablet,
then as a whole—the cosmos. Next, place the ruler of any given tablet
at the side of the Mansion, and try to penetrate its various meanings,
powers and possibilities. Then proceed the same with a trine and a
square, and, last, with all the rulers, in the order of their celestial
lordship of the signs, each in his appointed place, as a whole Arcana.

In any grave crisis of mental or physical affairs, wherein nations,
and not individuals, are concerned, the tablets may be used as a celestial
scheme of the heavens, thus: Cast a figure of the heavens for the Sun’s
first entry into the sign Aries at the vernal equinox, calculated for the
meridian of the capital city of the country under consideration. De-
grees and minutes are not wanted. Then place the twelve tablets in
place of signs, exactly as they would occur in an astrological figure.
Then place the rulers of the Sun, Moon and planets therein (each
having its own tablet), as they are found to be situated in an ephemeris
for the time of the figure. This done, study the whole from a spiritual
standpoint as the causes and ultimates of the crisis, according to astro
laws.

The foregoing simple directions will, I think, be sufficiently plain
for all purposes, never forgetting that this holy study is not a system
of divination, as commonly understood, but of Divine revelation, in
its highest and most holy religious sense. Long study and most reverent
meditation will be required to master this mystery, and many errors
of judgment will occur to the beginner.


100 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


The interpretative reflections are added for the purpose of guiding
and guarding the spiritually untrained seer from possible error in
fundamental conceptions only. They must not by any means be taken
as a complete revelation of the tablets, but only as a series of skeleton
keys by means of which all things may be revealed to the earnest seeker
thereof. To have added more than is given would only be to defeat the
object of this work. Each seeker for the truth must excavate the mines
of knowledge, and dig further into this universal well of truth for
himself.

Remember that all interpretation will be personal to each student.
Of no one can it be affirmed, “thou hast said,” and so endeth the matter.
Not so. To each, according to his talent, shall the mysteries of the
kingdom be revealed, to every one according to his humility, spiritual
light, and merit. But from the arrogant, the selfish, and spiritually
proud, shall all things be taken away, and truth shroud herself in the
veil of delusion. In simplicity of mind, then, and purity of soul, ap-
proach the Holy of Holies. “Suffer little children to come unto Me,”
saith a messenger of the Most High, “for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven.” Verily, therefore, I say unto you, that not until you can
look upon all the works of Nature—beauty in her nakedness or vice
and crime in their repulsiveness, with pure thought and holy feeling,
can you inherit eternal life.


Here endeth the introduction to the book which is called “The Tablets of 2th.”


THE TABLETS OF AETH 101


CHAPTER XII


PART I
of The Book which is called
THE TABLETS OF AETH


OF THE TWELVE MANSIONS


Here beginneth Chapter I of the Book which is called “The Tablets
of Azth,” wherein is transcribed the First Quadrant of the Twelve
Mansions.


“T sent my soul through the invisible,
Some lesson of that after life to spell;
And by and by my soul returned to me
And answered, ‘I, myself, am Heaven and Hell.’”


“The moving finger writes; and, having writ,
Moves on; nor all your piety nor wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a line,
Nor all your tears wash out a word of it.”


102 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE FIRST


Aries


SYMBOL


A deep blue Sky, a blaze,
as if something were


about to rise.


THE TABLETS OF AETH 103


REFLECTION
TABLET THE FIRST


The blush of dawn of a new life, all nature quivering with the
sense of coming, conscious life; Isis, vibrant with love of the coming
child, her bosom flushed in expectation of the little son soon to breathe
on her yearning breast.


In this we trace the great lesson of preparation, of sending the
light before the form, of the prophecy before the fulfillment. Dawn
must precede sunrise. What you expect will be your destiny.


It is the longing of centuries that incarnates a god, a real Sun-God,
whose vibrant love-life can thrill other lives into prayer—aspiration,
the struggle for eternal life. The dawn represents the expectant
maternity of Nature—God.


O child of Adam! See that thou expecteth much, and that thy aspirations are
reflected in thy outward life.


104 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE SECOND


Taurus


SYMBOL


A red sun


on the horizon


of


an inky sea.


II


THE TABLETS OF AETH 105


REFLECTION
TABLET THE SECOND


Nature has shown forth her glory, as brought forth by young
Horus, but her creative force is still unreflected. The sea is black and
inky. The Son of God is born, but the sea of human life still remains
unconscious, in primeval darkness.


The angles of the Sun and the sea are not yet in right relation to
each other. A few, standing on the watch-towers of life, seeing the
red glow of the risen sun, call “Look!” But the unfortunate ones in
the outer darkness cry, as they beat their breasts; “No! There is no
light! You do but dream!” And yet the Sun of Life has risen—the
Divine light glows.


O child of Adam! Remember that “In Him was life, and life was the light of
man, and the light shineth in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.”


106 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE THIRD


Gemini


x


SYMBOL


Two stars are rising at


angles to each other and


to the Polar star,
while eight stars shine
faintly in the black space

of background. x


THE TABLETS OF AETH 107


REFLECTION
TABLET THE THIRD


The Divine symbol of soul-matehood is here signified in the two
stars rising in the foreground; not only the soul-affinities of humanity,
but the eternal father-mother forces manifested in the biune spirit of
universal life and nature, the two great creative powers, Life and Light,
whose harmony creates love, attraction and repulsion, and the straight
lines of law and justice, which blend in the spiral of mercy.


The two stars are rising at an oblique angle to the pole-star, the
center around which, material things revolve. So, too, life and love
are balanced by the star of wisdom. Love in the spirit is adaption to
the environment in matter and providence in universal life. The eight
stars reveal the mystery of the tablet—universal death, present with
life, the final end of all discord glimmers faintly afar off, and man
questions the love of God, seeing that all things pass away, not realiz-
ing that death is the germinal promise of life, of transformation, of the
realization of unrealized hopes, of the union of loving hearts in their
starry pilgrimage back to the Father’s home.


O child of Adam! Listen unto the words of the Teacher: “I and the Father
are one.” Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven.”


THE TABLETS OF AETH 109


PART I


Here beginneth Chapter 2 of the Book which is called “The Tablets
of Atth,” wherein is transcribed the Second Quadrant of the
Twelve Mansions.


“How they struggle in the immense Universe!
How they whirl and seek!
Innumerable souls, that all spring forth
From the vast world-soul.
They drop from planet to planet,
And in the abyss they weep
For their forgotten land.
These are thy tears, O Dionysus,
O Spirit vast, Divine One, Liberator.
Draw back thy daughters to the breast of light.”


“Ah, love! Could you and I with him conspire
To grasp this sorry scheme of things entire,
Would we not shatter it to bits? And then
Remould it nearer to the heart’s desire.”


110 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE FOURTH


Cancer


25


SYMBOL


A woman's face


unconscious, in trance,


surrounded by


clouds.


IV


THE TABLETS OF AETH 111


REFLECTION
TABLET THE FOURTH


The dreaming woman, whose brooding thoughts shape the coming
man. The race is never any farther advanced than the average thought
of the woman. She is yet sleeping, knowing not her powers. So, not
until she awakes and recognizes herself as conceiving by the Holy
Ghost and the mother of the incarnate God, will that God be brought
forth unto universal knowledge.


In this is the great lesson to woman: Ever remember thy creative
power as the mother of the humanity of the future. The sun in thy
mansion exerts its highest power. Awake, therefore, O soul, and eclipse
not its brightness with thy dreams of sublunary power.


O child of Adam! Ever honor the womb that gave thee birth, and know that
all thy earthly greatness received its seed therefrom. A fountain cannot rise higher
than its source.


112 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE FIFTH


Leo


St


SYMBOL


A man’s arm, bent,
exceedingly muscular,


a knife in the hand,


a streak of lightning


opposite the arm, which is


defying the lightning.


Vv


THE TABLETS OF AETH 13


REFLECTION
TABLET THE FIFTH


Here we have the symbol of the incarnate fire of the spirit defying
the mere natural fire of the heavens. The woman sleeps and broods and
dreams, but the man she has brought forth is awake, and bids defiance
to the fiery forces of Nature. He has armed himself with the keen
knife of action, and with it has conquered the forces of matter. He
has harnessed the lightning, and made the electric fluid his obedient
slave. And thus has he mastered all forces inferior to spirit—that spirit
of conscious life which is his birthright.


The lesson to be gleaned from this is that, the kingdom of Nature
must be taken by storm. Not for rest, but for work, has Mother Nature
sent forth her man child; not for peace, but for battle; not for inertia,
but for effort.


O child of Adam! Arm yourself with the sword—mayhap the sword of affliction
—and, gallantly raising the strong right arm aloft, hurl defiance at the chaos of
Nature, sure that the fire from the Sun of the spirit is burning in every vein of
that arm.


114 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE SIXTH


Virgo


Mm


SYMBOL


A Lotus, rising from the


water, coiled around
its stem a snake,
whose efforts fail to reach


the flower.


VI


THE TABLETS OF AETH 115


REFLECTION
TABLET THE SIXTH


Here we have the sacred flower, symbol of the virgin soul, uncon-
taminated by the snake of passion, which can only enfold the body—
the stem; the snake of matter—of lust—of evil. But the flower of the
spirit—the soul—lifts its pure white petals upward as an incense cup
to the Sun of the Spirit.


In this symbol read the great lesson of the experience of evil. If,
the flower of the soul, blossoms; the mud of the soil and the snake of
the passions are but the surroundings of its roots and stem. Both are
necessary for the perfection of the flower. The roots sink deep into
Mother Earth, and draw nourishment and life, lifting matter upward,
while the snake of passion becomes, under another aspect, the serpent
of wisdom. Coiled around the stem of this life, it gives to the incar-
nated soul that wisdom which later blossoms in the Seraph of the
Sun spheres.


O child of Adam! Take suffering, if it forge the sword of the spirit. Take evil
and passion, and turn them into deep lessons of life, blossoming the evil into good,
changing passion into wisdom. Only “the pure in heart can see God.”


THE TABLETS OF AETH ally


PART I


Here beginneth Chapter 3 of the Book which is called “The Tablets
of th,” wherein is transcribed the Third Quadrant of the Twelve
Mansions.


“To know what really exists, one must cultivate silence with
one’s self, for it is in silence that the eternal and unexpected
flowers open, which change their form and color according to
the soul in which they grow. Souls are weighed in silence, as
gold and silver are weighed in pure water.”


“The worldly hope men set their hearts upon turns to ashes;
or it prospers, and anon, like snow upon the desert’s dusty
face, lighting a little hour or two, is gone.”


118 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE SEVENTH


Libra


SYMBOL


A crowned king, with a
scythe raised in the
air, looks closely at two
boys wrestling
beneath him in a field of
grain, a red poppy


below them.


VII


THE TABLETS OF AETH 119


REFLECTION
TABLET THE SEVENTH


The symbol of Nature’s eternal war for the impossible equilibrium
between spirit and matter; the symbol, also, of Time, which is but
the illusion in which eternity clothes itself; forever putting on and
forever putting off new garments of matter. The crowned king is
the victorious soul, waiting, with the scythe of Time, to reap the harvest
of the world; while incarnated man, as represented in the wrestling
youths, is struggling for that which he did not produce, and which
only death can reap. The poppy reveals the secret of the illusions of
Nature’s master-showman. All earthly things are unreal to the spirit,
which is the only real thing. Man’s effort to hoard and save the things
of this world is injustice to others. The struggle is eternal, and no
matter how careful or cunning man is to monopolize either power,
truth or wealth, swift-footed time will readjust all things without error.


O child of Adam! “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth
and rust doth corrupt and where thieves break through and steal.”


120 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE EIGHTH


Scorpio


m™


SYMBOL


A wide, arid plain, on it a


skeleton; a dull, grey sky,
in which an Eagle soars,
full-fed, it seems, from


the flesh of the skeleton.


VIII


THE TABLETS OF AETH 121


REFLECTION
TABLET THE EIGHTH


A significant symbol to the seer, showing forth the two ultimates
of life and death, of earthly things and sex. Scorpio is both the eagle
of the spirit, soaring aloft, well fed with all that is worth carrying
away from the earth; and also the scorpion, whose natural home is
the desert.


In sex, either way, life is given. Shall it be to your spirit making
fat and full your immortal self, or will the other interpretation be yours?
And will you leave yourself dead and annihilated, a skeleton, to the
Ego, the Divine spirit? For sex is indeed the foundation of all.
Raised to the region of Libra, it is power and magnetism. To the
bosom it is love; to the brain it is enthusiasm. It is the promethian fire
of life, the creative force, giving vigor to whatever region. to which it
is raised; or, lowered, to be spent with no returns, it debases and renders
life a desert of dry bones.


O child of Adam! Reflect on the fall of man from spirit to matter, and com-
bine the wisdom of the serpent with the purity of the dove, and “lest ye partake
of the tree of life ye shall surely die,”


122. THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE NINTH


Sagittarius


x


SYMBOL


A child in a shell, holding
in its hand a feathered lance,
is drawn by five stars,


grouped in an under arc.


THE TABLETS OF AETH 123


REFLECTION
TABLET THE NINTH


The symbol of the conscious soul. The shell is the body, drawn
by the five senses—stars—which form an under arc, to represent the
world of material things and our relation thereto. The child, armed
with the feathered lance, is the soul; riding thus, fully armed, in the
shell of the body, it realizes the duality of truth; that all things are
changeable; and that each thing is true upon the plane of its mani-
festation, while an illusion to that which is interior to its life, while
the soul is in its dream state. Sagittarius represents conservatism and
the permanence of crystallized institutions; but, when the spirit awakes
and bursts the shell of matter, the senses, instead of being the guardians
and jailors of its environment, become its servants, and the means by
which, united as the one Ego, sense-perception, it races o’er the fields
of ASth—a being of life and beauty, shining in the empyrean of God.


O child of Adam! Ever remember that temperament and environment con-
stitute the north and south poles of human possibility, and that ability, combined
with opportunity, is the measure of responsibility.


THE TABLETS OF AETH 125


PART I


Here beginneth Chapter 4 of the Book which is called “The Tablets


of A&th,” wherein is transcribed the Fourth Quadrant of the Twelve
Mansions.


“A hair, perhaps, divides the false and true.
Yes, and a single alif were the clue—
Could you but find it—to the treasure house,
And, peradventure, to the Master, too.”


“Beware, O my son, of self-incense. It is the most dan-
gerous on account of its agreeable intoxication. * * *
Learn, O my beloved, that the light of Allah’s truth will often


penetrate an empty head more easily than one too crammed
with learning.”


126 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE TENTH


Capricorn


v3


SYMBOL


A deep, black ground,
o'er which shimmers a
phosphorescent light; at
each side an aurora
borealis rises, mountain like;


above all, a tiny star.


pA


‘THE TABLETS OF AETH 127


REFLECTION
TABLET THE TENTH


Here is revealed the symbol of the messenger of the Most High.
The star hovers over the phosphorescent light cast on the darkness
as the spirit hovers over the blackness of matter. The aurora borealis
stands as the emblem for the magnetic attraction of Earth on spirit,
the Christ soon to be born in the manger of the Goat; the descent of
the Holy Ghost into material form, so that heavenly truth may illumine
the drear speculum of earthly thought with the Divine iridescence
of celestial light. It is the lowest arc of the cycle that reveals the new
birth of death unto life—the divine egg of Brahma, containing the
promise of the new law: “Peace on Earth, good will towards men.”


O child of Adam! Be thou the star, and not a dweller of the outer darkness,
and “Let your light so shine before men, that, they may see your good works.”


128 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE ELEVENTH


Aquarius


aw
aN


SYMBOL


A stormy sea is seen;


above it the eight stars


shine, brilliant and


clear.


XI


THE TABLETS OF AETH 129


REFLECTION
TABLET THE ELEVENTH


This tablet symbolizes the complete materialization of man—man,
perfect on the earth and the lord thereof, in so far as material forces
are concerned. The storm is the tempest of life, the whirl of the ele-
ments of matter in their battle with the spirit. The eight stars, brilliant
now (for they are the same stars that were dimly seen in Gemini),
show that the conquest of matter is complete, the great fall of spirit
finished; the end of involution. And this would bring stagnation and
death, if peace now ensued. The lesson taught is that, not in peace
and rest can the soul grow; but amidst the earthquakes that shake
thrones, the floods that overwhelm countries, the fires that reduce to
ashes, has the strong man-soul grown to its present state and power.
So fear not the storm, but the calm; not the unrest, but the quiet; fear
not the battle, but the ignoble peace of the coward.


O child of Adam! The astral soul must learn to do and dare. Not over the
brave man’s grave shall it be written, “Rest in peace,” but “I will arise, and go to
my father.”


130 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE TWELFTH


Pisces


3


SYMBOL


A comet, beyond it infinite
things, only dreamed of
as yet, a world floating

in an ocean and in night,
beneath are two hands


clasped palm to palm.


XII


THE TABLETS OF AETH 131


TABLET THE TWELFTH


A revelation of the to be. The comet is the twelfth Avatar, the
herald, coming forth from the starry abyss of the infinite, staying with
us a little while, and then flashing on his shining way to other worlds
than ours, bearing the Divine Word from sun to planet, as the fiery
messenger of God. And here the soul may well ask: “Who? Where?
Whence and Whither?” For behold, he has come, and gone, and


“Earth could not answer; nor the seas that mourn
In flowing purple, of their Lord forlorn;
Nor rolling Heaven, with all his signs revealed
And hidden by the sleeve of night and mom.”


The world floating in the sea of the infinite and resting in night
shows the present state of humanity. But, “the blush of dawn” is
ready to gladden the soul, and the expectant seer, from his lonely vigil
on the hilltop, awaits the sunlight which will soon flood the world anew.


The two clasped hands point to many problems, chiefly soul-
matehood, the message of the starry messenger, universal brotherhood,
and the Father-Motherhood of God.


O child of Adam! Watch and pray, that a voice of the silence may speak
unto you.


Here endeth the four Quadrants of the Tablets of the Twelve Mansions,
wherein are revealed the signs and symbols thereof, as faithfully transcribed from
the sacred roll in the astral records and called “The Tablets of A£th.”


April, 1893.


THE TABLETS OF AETH 133


CHAPTER XII
PART II
of The Book which is called
THE TABLETS OF AETH


OF THE TEN PLANETARY RULERS


134 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


THE TABLETS OF AETH 135


PART II


Here beginneth Chapter I of the Second Part of the Book which is
called “The Tablets of A®th,” wherein is transcribed the First
Trinity of the Planetary Rulers.


“The human heart is the true temple of God; enter ye into
your temples and illumine them with good thoughts. The
sacred vessels, they are your hands and your eyes. Do I say
that which is agreeable to God—doing good to your neighbors?
But, first embellish wherein dwells He, who gave you life.”


“How small soever your lamp be, never give away the oil
which feeds it, but only the light and flame, which crown it.”


136 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE FIRST


The Sun


©


SYMBOL


A flaming splendor,


a center of


light, radiating in all


directions.


THE TABLETS OF AETH 137


REFLECTION
TABLET THE FIRST


The symbol of all created life, spiritual and material; of all good-
ness, human or Divine; the center of all thought, from brutal instinct
to Deific wisdom; of all creations, from starry systems to man, and
from man back again to invisible gas; of all action, from the imper-
ceptible vibrations of nerve energy to the awful destruction of worlds.
All creative potency lies within a Sun sphere. Light is life. The planets
are but the offspring of light and life. So in this symbol, we read
the source of the human Ego, of our own life. We are, as it were,
the planets of the spiritual Sun. Our souls are the attributes of the
Sun, of the spiritual Ego. Only from the Ego can we receive life
eternal and make immortality a fact. Obeying this spiritual life-force,
the human monad is but an attribute, a reflection, of the Divine Ego,
and if it fails to awake to a consciousness of this union, it withers
and dies like a flower plucked from the parent tree of life.


O child of Adam, in reverence and awe do thou meditate upon this Tablet,
for it is a thing of beauty, a being of light, life and love, manifesting its creative
mission. It is the Vicegerent of God, flaming forth His splendors in the sky.


138 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE SECOND


Mercury


u
SYMBOL


An elephant, kneeling be-
tween two square columns; on
one an eagle, on the other a
vulture.

At the side a boy, with bow
and arrows, standing in doubt
which to shoot.


Below these a human face,
composed of various flowers,
whose roots are snakes, a poppy,


forming an eye, which winks.


II


THE TABLETS OF AETH 139


REFLECTION
TABLET THE SECOND


A vision revealing the earthly drama of the microcosm. The
elephant represents the highest expression of intelligence, minus the
spirit; kneeling between the square columns of matter, ie., guarded
by them. The external mind is sleeping, or, at most, dreaming of the
things of the spirit. Above sleeping mind sit the two birds, who
represent spirit and matter, each waiting for the slowly preparing
feast. The boy, the soul with its weapons, has a choice. Shall it be
the sensuality of the flesh that he shall destroy, or the possibilities
of the spiritual life on earth. The problem awaits solution. The
eagle sits ready to bear aloft the spirit of the sleeper. The vulture
hopes for sleep to end in death, that he may live upon the carrion
thereof. The flowers of the external mind have for their roots the
snakes; and, in a larger sense, the flowers of immortality have the
serpent of wisdom for their roots. And the poppy winks. It knows
its own power of illusion, and the double significance of the snake;
the necessity of evil in the evolution of good. It is the Tablet of
Wisdom.


O child of Adam! “Be ye therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves.”


140 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE THIRD


Venus


2


SYMBOL


An altar; on it two cups, one
full, the other spilled; near them
two bleeding hearts, in one a


snake, in the other a dagger.


Above—-clouds, from which
comes a woman's face, a wreath
in the hand, coming out of the
cloud; in the wreath an angel,
going upwards, with wings out-
spread.


Ill


THE TABLETS OF AETH 141


REFLECTION
TABLET THE THIRD


There is but one altar, but one blood of the sacrament in two
cups, but one flesh of the Christ—the Ego—in two hearts, two experi-
ences in love, ecstacy, and pain; two results of experience, the serpent
and the dagger, symbolizing wisdom and affliction. Above the altar
the divine woman holds the wreath encircling the angel. The angel
of immortal life rises from the altar of sacrifice. Some of the wine is
spilled as offering. The cup that is filled is raised to “Ra.” To serve
at the altar of love is the soul-mission of all, even as Christ served
his disciples. Each soul must find its own service, and then the
pilgrims of the Sun return to the mansions of the blessed. The great
mother-god, Venus, Urania, quivers and thrills as she holds forth
her offspring—the angel, the young Eros of life eternal.


O child of Adam, this is the Tablet of Love. Meditate thereon, as the last of
the triune God. In this Tablet lies the secret of suffering and pleasure. He who
vibrates in pain will quiver in ecstacy. Only those who have agonized in Hell can
thrill in Heaven.


142 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


THE TABLETS OF AETH 143


PART II


Here beginneth Chapter 2 of the Second Part of the Book which is
called “The Tablets of Atth,” wherein is transcribed the Second
Trinity of the Planetary Rulers.


“Thou art called forth to this fair sacrifice
For a draught of milk; with the Maruts
Come hither, O Agni!


They who know the great sky, the Visve
Devas without guile; with those Maruts
Come hither, O Agni!


They who are brilliant, of awful shape,
Powerful, and devourers of foes; with the
Maruts come hither, O Agni!


They who in heaven are enthroned as gods,
In the light of the firmament; with the Maruts
Come hither, O Agni!”


“Let us meditate on the adorable light of the Divine Rulers.
May it guide our intellects.”


144 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE FOURTH


The Moon


SYMBOL


NIGHT
A wonderful spider's-web;
The web glitters in the faint


moonlight against a dark back-


ground of blue; moon invisible;


on the outside of web a star, in
the center a spot of light, under-


neath a coffin filled with stones.


IV


THE TABLETS OF AETH 145


REFLECTION
TABLET THE FOURTH


The web of life has caught the monad of the soul and thus in-
carnated the universe, for each soul incarnates its universe at birth,
each one’s world being different, and peculiar unto himself. At the
first breath, the young child polarizes his relations to stars and earth,
and it is the affinity and repulsion which make his life experience.
And the stars weave the web in their lines of sextile, square and
trine, of opposition and conjunction, thus enveloping the monad in
the Circle of Necessity.


Outside the star of the spirit, the Ego, shines clear, free from
the entanglements of the web and unaffected by the magnetic glamour
of the Moon. And lo! the coffin is filled with stones, a symbol of
death and the Moon, which is but a casket of stones. Therefore, little
monad, caught in the tangle of the web of life and the glamour of
earthly things, take heart, for, beyond all, is the star of your being.
Call down the law of that star into yourself, and the web is broken
and waves its tattered shreds in the breeze. The moonlight, the re-
flected light, pales as the Star-Sun of your being rises, and the moon-
light of Earth gives place to the Sun-spheres of Ra.


O child of Adam! The beginning of sorrow is the dawn of spiritual life. The
wise man rules the stars; the fools of Earth obey.


146 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE FIFTH


Mars


SYMBOL


An immense helmet on
pedestal, across which a streak


of lightning flashes;


beside it a naked child painting


pictures on the helmet;


beneath, a broken sword.


Vv


THE TABLETS OF AETH 147


REFLECTION
TABLET THE FIFTH


Can greater irony be shown than in this astral symbol. Mars
is externally represented as a fierce warrior, awful to behold; the
reality, a little child, painting toy pictures on the helmet, too big for
his curly head. The lesson in this is indeed, that the pen is mightier
than the sword; that the big and blustering helmet will become a
plaything for the child. Soon, that the sword of bloodshed, rape,
and ruin, will be broken and war relegated to the past, looked at,
but, as pictures, painted with hideous reality by the childhood of
the race.


The symbol also reveals the great executive forces of humanity,
the child. The soul can paint, execute its ideas, its hopes and its fears
in any color—the lurid red of blood, the black of ignorance and crime,
or in the living light of beauty. All the same, it is the childhood of
man painting its ideals in the material world.


O child of Adam, curb the anger of Mars, that thy painting may set the dove
at liberty. Let the magic of thy soul transform the savage of the desert into the
angel of mercy.


148 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE SIXTH


Jupiter


a
SYMBOL


A cave in the mountain side;
a face like the sphinx comes out
of the cave; there is a blackness
behind it; it looks with upturned
head to a light that is way be-
yond; it is a face that means
something awful, a godlike de-


fiance to the things that are.


VI


THE TABLETS OF AETH 149


REFLECTION
TABLET THE SIXTH


Again we are impressed with the contrast of internal and external
things. Jupiter, the symbol of authority, conservatism, church, and
state, and the stability of human institutions, and the things that are,
as the things that are the best. But oh, how widely different the
internal, the real Jupiter, that governing power of the spirit that
hurls defiance at unjust authority, the cruelty and tyranny of the
world. The soul sees the light beyond, and, emerging from the dark
chasm of matter, knows the battle that must be fought against wrong.
It is the awful—yea, terrible-symbol of defiance to gods and men
who oppose its onward, upward march to the shining goal of light.
Make way, then! Make way! For Earth has given birth to her giant
son—the Spirit. For, listen closely, my friend, to the axiom of Immor-
tality. What is soul? Not the spirit, mind you; not the deathless
Ego, of which you at present, perchance, know absolutely nothing.
Soul is mere memory; a scavenger in earthly states; and a gleaner, a
hired help, in the fields of heaven; and to become immortal, there
must be something more than soul as the result. It must take such a
vital interest in its Lord’s work that, finally it becomes too valuable
to lose, and must be taken into partnership, so to say. The Ego—Lord—
has found a valued servant, a trusted steward, after much seeking,
and at once adopts it as its very own. And so the soul becomes heir
to the heavenly estate and receives the immortal, vital principle of
spiritual union, and awakes from the son of Earth a God-like being,
free from the shackles of Time—a dweller in eternity. The soul must
awake and realize the Deific atom around which it revolves before
it is too late. Unless this is so, the seed of immortal life, sown in
matter by the Ego, has not germinated, and it returns unfruitful and
dies—it is an abortion. Many, many seeds never germinate. Many
good orthodox, but animal-like lives, live, move, and die,—yes, die in
very truth. Would to God I could make all mankind realize this
awful, inconceivable privilege of life, that, Jupiter-like, they would
turn and face the light.


O child of Adam! “It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.”


THE TABLETS OF AETH 151


PART II


Here beginneth Chapter 3 of the Second Part“of the Book which is
called “The Tablets of Ath,” wherein the Third, and last, Trinity
of the Planetary Rulers is faithfully transcribed.


“Thou hast entered the immeasurable regions. I am the
Dweller of the Threshold. What wouldst thou with me?
* *  * Dost thou fear me? Am I not thy beloved? Is it
not for me that thou hast rendered up the delights of thy race?
Wouldst thou be wise? Mine is the wisdom of the countless
ages. Kiss me, my mortal lover.”


“Thus man pursues his weary calling,
And wrings the hard life from the sky,
While happiness unseen is falling
Down from God’s bosom silently.”


152 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE SEVENTH


Saturn


SYMBOL


A human figure with a
scepter of power,
a being of light crowned


with flames.


VII


THE TABLETS OF AETH 153)


REFLECTION
TABLET THE SEVENTH


In the external we remember Saturn as an old man, and as a
skeleton with a scythe—as Time, in fact. But see, O immortal soul,
the real Saturn, as the Angel of Life, having from time gathered the
experiences which crown him with light, holding the rod of power;
the Christ born in the manger of Capricorn, the Goat—life born of
death; the conqueror of evil. He throws off the mask of age, and divine
youth beams on us. He doffs the mantle of rags, and royal splendors
clothe him. He lifts the hood, and behold the crown. He raises the
crutch, and lo! the rod of power. He drops the scythe of death for
the jewel of eternal life.


“Om Mani Padme Um.”
(Oh the jewel in the lotus. )


O child of Adam! Meditate on the transmutations of life. Behold the earthly
miracle of the caterpillar and the butterfly, of the toiling mortal and the trans-
cendent God!


154


THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE EIGHTH


Uranus


ig
SYMBOL


A human eye,
from which
darts lightning
upon


an ocean of matter.


VIII


THE TABLETS OF AETH 155


REFLECTION
TABLET THE EIGHTH


The state of soul and spirit—penetration; the wonderful power
of soul-perception, which sheds its light on all visible things, receiving
their images and interpreting them into the spirit, the all-seer—what
does it not convey? The perception that can see deep into your soul
and see, as it were, the yet unborn thought; that can distinguish the
motive of action; that judges the realities of your soul. Such is the
Astral Uranian. For with us all, are three planes of mind: The drift
plane, the intellectual, and the spiritual, or internal plane; and thought-
reading can be on one or all of these different states. But, only the
Uranian seer can read the inmost mind, and so really know the pos-
sibilities of your spirit.


Imagine an image of soft wax, covered with a sensitive skin. All
impressions on the skin shape the plastic wax, but go no deeper—
do not reach the soul. You can separate these impressions from your
real self, when calm and alone, and look upon emotion as a surface
play. But the tragedies of life strike deep. They affect the soul, and
go to the center of being. “Verbum sap.”


O child of Adam! Watch the tempest of life closely. The Ego may sit calm
amidst the storm, but, if that be stirred—beware! The God acts; the soul alone
watches.


156 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE NINTH


Neptune


=


SYMBOL


IX


THE TABLETS OF AETH 157


REFLECTION
TABLET THE NINTH


An unknown quantity, a hope of progression, ideal love, and all
true mental and spiritual ideals; aspiration to become that which
we feel to be noble and true; the symbol of the monad, the soul which,
receiving its life from the Sun—the Ego—is constantly revealing new
forces and potencies of that God-life. Each soul’s Ego is its maker
and God. The Ego is like the Deific potency of the universe, unlimited
in potential power, but limited by its monad as to what will be evolved
from its awful depth of being. Deity progresses through its expressions
of the cosmos. The Ego, your God, finds progressive expression through
you, through your soul. That soul is not immortal that becomes sepa-
rated from its Ego—its God. So, soul, spread your spiritual wings and
soar upward.


O child of Adam! Know these three things: Eternity is the creator of the
universal life; universal life creates the world, and the world is the creator of time.
And of these, the Universe is Life, and the World is Mind, and Time is the Soul.
The sum total of all is Experience. And this is individual, conscious life—“Jacta est
alea” (the die is cast)—the wings are spread.


158 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


TABLET THE TENTH


The Cypher — the unknown


O


SYMBOL


A Shining Nebulae;
within it a dot,
aimlessly wandering
around an unknown


center.


x


THE TABLETS OF AETH 159


REFLECTION
TABLET THE TENTH


The unknown in very truth. It is everything—it is also nothing.
Inconceivable visions arise within the mental universe, but nothing
assumes definite form. It is all that is past. It is likewise everything
that the future has in store. Amen.


O child of Adam! “Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or loose
the bands of Orion?”


160 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


THE TABLETS OF AETH 161


CHAPTER XII
PART III
of The Book which is called
THE TABLETS OF AZTH


OF THE
TEN GREAT KABBALISTICAL POWERS


or


ANGELS OF THE UNIVERSE


THE TABLETS OF AETH 163


PART III


VISION


Each angel standing in front of the symbol is dimly outlined and
transparent. Through the angel’s form is seen its symbol.


FIRST
A luminous something, which gives the impression of sleep.


SECOND
Something moving, like an ocean.


THIRD
A storm, and lightning.
FOURTH
A mist.
FIFTH


An animal moving, resembling a turtle.


SIXTH
A blue light; in the center a star with three points.


SEVENTH
An expanse of water, a blue sky, a shining disk rising on the
horizon.
EIGHTH
A lurid sky, like a red dawn; in the water floats an egg.


NINTH
Five stars on a convex arc, like a rainbow; the shell of the egg is
broken and forms continents.
TENTH
A man lying fast asleep under a magnificent palm tree, with his
face turned toward the horizon of the sea.


164 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


EXPLANATION


Only the pure in heart can see God, and to those pure souls I
commend the following brief explanation of the Vision of the Angels
of Life, which I have here recorded for the benefit of all whom it
may now and hereafter concern.


In the original Vision of the Tablets of Ath a great circle was
seen, in the center a head, a faint shimmer above the head, as if the
light were about to dawn; a dull, lurid glow beneath, as if of chaos or
hell; the hair around the head like floating clouds, the beard like
strange cloud-streaks. Each sign of the Zodiac surrounding the center
head had within it a faintly seen face. Beginning with the first, it
became more and more distinct and perfect with each sign until it
evolved into godlike beauty in Pisces.


The symbolic planets were around the Zodiac, and beyond these,
making a third grand circle, were the ten Evolutionary Angels. The
vision is that of the evolution of all life, spiritual and material. We
gaze at the cosmic sex mystery, and the discerning mind, the loving
spirit, can read the correspondence of the great sacred conjugal act
of both man and God; of its heights, of its depths, and of all that lies
between.


To aid in meditation on the head at the center, herein is written
a vision, an experience of the soul in the Sleep of Sialam.


The Hermetic brethren encircled my astral body, which was
deeply entranced. “From whence,” the great question, quivered
through my inmost being. To answer that awful problem of the soul
the released spirit went on its fearsome journey, back through star
systems; back, back beyond all stars, back to the blackness of nothing—
that awful nothing, whose outside ring vibrated with fearful flames;
the fiery cherubim, winged, taking all possible shapes, and unformed
living shapes. A human flamed and changed and vanished. The
tornado of whirling, flashing, chaotic life swirled and drove through
the darkness of chaos of nothing from nothing—and that great, unknown
abyss is God! But the life is evolutionary.


THE TABLETS OF AETH 165


Deity is progressive, so never can man cease to be. Never can
he return to that awful center of nothingness, or be absorbed within
the bosom of the unmanifested being. On, and on, and on, with Deific
power, God moves in ever-increasing whirls of evolution.


Thus came the answer of the ages: “From primeval force, from
the mighty breath of unmanifested being, through every phase of action
and reaction, from the energies of storm and lightning, from star-dust
to sunlight, has come the spirit of man!”


And the Astral Brethren understood.


166 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


THE TWO SEALS OF THE EARTH


-——


I
SYMBOL


A human being, with a
flaming, burning


heart.


I]
SYMBOL


A round disk inside a light,


as from a sun, conceived,


but not seen.


So here endeth the Book which is called “The Tablets of Ath,” transcribed
from the astral originals in the Year of Doom MDCCCXCIII.  |°*’


“Omnia Vincit Veritas.”


“Try KincpomM Come.”


Weng Yel,
ee


April, 1893 (Zanoni)


CHAPTER XIII


PENETRALIA


THE SECRET OF THE SOUL


We have now arrived at our final study, which we have approached
step by step amid the labyrinth of the mysteries concealed beneath
the Veil of Isis. We stand at last upon the very threshold of the sacred
Adytum, the “Holy of Holies,” from whence proceeds our final revela-
tion of that inmost conception of Man’s identity with his Creator—the
Penetralia of his Being—the last secret of the incarnated soul.

The written word almost fails us—does fail in fact, when we come
to the difficult task of externalizing ideas, the sublimity of which is
so infinitely beyond the crystallized images of matter that, they can
only be realized in their true glory, when the purified soul can view
them from the ineffable heights of eternal spirit. We are lost, dazed,
at the brilliancy of the spiritual imagery that opens out before us, in
its fathomless stretch of the eternities that are past, of the ever-
imperishable present, and the unborn eternities yet to be; ‘all of them
linked together in one grand chain of spiritual relationship and death-
less identity; as Man, the Angel, God; and God, the Angel, Man; as
the triune Cycle of Being, within the incomprehensible Cycle of
Necessity; which constitutes Nature’s cosmic university for the com-
plete graduation, education, and purification, of that self-conscious,
Deific atom of life, whose expression becomes the human soul. Ah!
my brothers could you, but for one single instant, realize who you are,
where you are journeying, and what your final destiny, every earthly
moment at your disposal would be rightly used, and every hour con-
sidered too short for your efforts to aid your fellow-man. Selfishness,
wealth, and power, would be so utterly contemptible in your sight that
their possession would be considered a fearful affliction and a curse, the
moment they exceeded the comfortable requirements of mundane
existence.

Leave self and the world behind you for the present, and, for
the moment, leave your life, with its manifold vanities, in the outer
court, and together let us cross the threshold and enter the door of


168 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


the Temple. There! At last we have entered the Sacred Sanctuary,
my brother, and we stand face to face with the imperishable truth of
our being—the truth which makes us free, the truth which must ulti-
mately prevail, by virtue of its own inherent Divinity; and we realize
Man as he really is, not as he outwardly seems to be. We view him
as a molecule, composed of a congregation of separate atoms, all of
them held in their places by the centripetal force of the central human
atom of life. And yet, small as he is, small as his kingdom is, compared
with the mighty creation of which he is a part, he possesses all the
inherent qualities of the whole. This, then, is our first conception—
Man, is a microcosmic molecule, an atom of divine life.

The scene changes within the chamber, and upon the shimmering,
luminous veil, yet before us, we view the large and mighty planet
called the Earth. Not as a revolving satellite of the Sun, but as she
really is, a vital organ of the macrocosm, the stellar womb of the solar
system, the matrix which produces the material organic form of
humanity. When “the Earth was without form and void,” as we are
informed in the mystical language of Genesis, the human soul had
not yet reached the state, or grade, in the celestial university that
desired the Earth and its temporary illusions. Hence this state was
void, an unborn idea, the To Be, and darkness, symbolical of complete
lack of life and intelligence, “was upon the face of the deep,” silent
space.

Again the scene changes, and one by one the numberless planets,
planetoids, moons, meteors, comets, and other attendant bodies, pass
before the eye of the soul as we gaze upon the curtain of this Sacred
Penetralia, each orb belonging to some portion of the Astral Man,
each great planet constituting some vital function of the macrocosmic
organism, and conferring those qualities upon each and every single
atom pertaining to that degree of life, so that the solar system becomes
individualized as a grand cosmic organism, its attendant satellites
constituting its vital organs, and the shining Zodiac its outward form.
So, also, each planet is a living, cosmic individual, intensely alive;
living, moving, breathing, and bringing forth its offspring of like
substance, matter, in obedience to the potential demand of incarnating
spirit. The Sun is alive, glowing with life, and constitutes the heart
and arterial center of all the circulating fluids of the stellar anatomy.

Scientists may continue to predict, as they have been predicting,


PENETRALIA 169


the day when solar radiation will cease, but their predictions will prove
as worthless as the sighing of the summer wind, so far as reality is
concerned. “It is an incomprehensible mystery to science,” says Sir
Robert Ball, in his “Story of the Heavens,” “how the Sun has been
able to maintain its heat with such regularity in the past, for there
has been no appreciable change in the Earth’s temperature for thou-
sands of years.” What it is to-day it was ten thousand years ago—yea,
Sir Robert Ball, and will be in ten thousand years to come. You may
wonder, and the Royal College may wonder, but in the meantime the
mighty, pulsating Sun continues beating out its rhythmic vibrations of
spiritual and dynamic life—continues, and will continue, to send the
exhilarating current throughout every atom, to the remotest part of
his solar dominions, and the same current returns to him again, un-
diminished, for the purification which his glowing, transmuting photo-
sphere alone, can give, to be sent forward again, upon its mission of
light, life, and love, around the vital, organic worlds of the astral or-
ganism. There is nothing lost, no radiation of energy dispersed upon
the unformed, lifeless ether. From the radiating solar focus of Divinity
it comes, and to him, undiminished it returns, and so on forever and
ever; until the last Deific atom has won its laggard way back to the
shining throne of God.

The Sun breathes. The pulsating process of dynamic respiration,
eternally repeated during the grand period of a solar lifetime, renews
its vital energies, and supplies itself, with the full abundance of the
ever-living spirit, transmitted from the shoreless ether in which it lives.
It needs no other food, except the magnetic nutriment it receives from
each vital organ, or planet, in return for the electrical life current it
transmits to them. Just as the human lungs inflate themselves with the
vital atmosphere, (which is only the ether, dynamically diluted by the
Earth to harmonize with our conditions), to oxygenate the blood and
add fresh fuel to the physical furnace, or supply finer essences to the
nervous centers. Just as the human heart, with its continual, rhythmic
pulsations, propels forth the circulating fluid to every part of the
human frame; so does the central heart and lungs of the Grander Man
of the Skies, (the Sun) send forth its vitalizing energy to every part of
the universe.

Such are the crowding thoughts, born of interior knowledge, that
flood the mind as we view these sacred revelations within the sacred


170 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


chamber of the soul. As yet, we are gazing upon the undulating flow
of the astral light. We yearn within our utmost being to become the
center of the Penetralia and gaze upon the glorious radiance of the
Adonai, from whose ineffable presence we are only screened by the
last shining veil of semi-transparent matter, that waves and trembles
with every spiritual aspiration. The soul sends forth its pleading
cry for light: “Who and what is God?” Faintly, as the distant vesper
sounds upon the cooling eve, comes the answer: “Who and what art
thou? What canst thou see? What delectable blessing does Nature
vouchsafe to the pure in heart?” We tremble with the awful, yet
thrilling, revelation. We know dimly, yet fail to realize in our out-
ward consciousness the full import thereof. We realize wherein the
mistaken selfhood hath become the only begotten of the Father, but
the revelation is too much, and too little. We know that, faint as the
voice seemed to the yet unprepared soul, an echo only, it was the
voice of the Adonai behind the veil. And now we crave the knowledge
of the Where and Whither.

Again, we see the Earth as the vital function of the interplanetary
being. It is composed of substance termed matter, which substance is
the aggregation of countless atoms, which science has not, and never
can, resolve into their individual selves. These atoms are rings of the
atomless ether, which, thus differentiated from the formless ether,
become centers of force, the center of such force being a vacuum
within the atomic ring—a center so small that a microscope with lens
one thousand times as powerful as the most perfect modern instru-
ment would fail to reveal it. These atoms form systems, under the
control of another apparent vacuum; or, rather, this vacuum seems to
be the focus, or center, about which they revolve. This system con-
stitutes a scientific molecule of matter, and, in response to the innum-
erable vibrations, they assume different forms or dimensions, and be-
come, indifferently, molecules of oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, or car-
bon, as the case may be, all of which are but different modes of mo-
tion of the same primitive atoms, there being in Nature but three
things—Ether, Intelligence, and Motion. What Ether is, no one knows.
We call it the formless spirit, the unmanifest, etc. But, there can be no
doubt but, that Motion is the product of Intelligence, since we never
see Motion but as the manifestation of evolution, and this is the ex-
pression of Mind. Therefore, we have a duality—Ether and Intelli-


PENETRALIA 171


gence; one the living spirit, the other the eternal substance for its
manifestation.

Every molecule of matter is the outward form, the center of
which, is the incarnating spirit, in some degree of progress. Man’s
physical organism is a system of life and development for countless
billions of them. So the Earth, in its functional expression as the
womb of Nature for the outward expression of Man, is only so in a
material sense. He is prior to the planet. He (Man) is only the off-
spring of the planet by virtue of his material body being a part of the
substance of the Earth. This life is a stage, only, of his material
journey; and, just as Man’s body is continually throwing off useless
dead matter and replacing the same with new life, so, too, the count-
less organic forms of Earth are hourly returning to the ground from
which they sprang, and new forms, rising from the same dust, are
taking their places.

Here, then, is the sum total: First is revealed to us the grand
Astral Man, the Zodiac being the outward idea or form, the Sun and
his system the vital functions thereof. The Earth, apart from its
functional expression or place, is also an individual. Man, apart from
forming a molecule of the planetary womb, by comparison, is also an
individual. And, lastly, every molecule of Man’s organism is also, in
reality, an individual, and small only by comparison with the human
frame. And as there are the high Solar Archangels of the Sun, and a
chief amongst these seated upon his throne of fire, so there is an
Archangelic Chief of the Earth, surrounded by descending degrees of
wisdom and power to Man, who also, in his turn, stands as the Deific
center and chief of his being, his soul being the sphere of conscious-
ness, which, when united to the feminine soul, constitutes the Angel
of Life, Eternal. Down still we go, and find that this Divine scale of
life and being is, from the lowly molecule, system upon system climb-
ing, sphere upon sphere, upward and onward, forever, evermore, and
all eternity cannot bring nearer the end of Man’s glorious immortality.

In the full revelation of this divine scheme of creation, so full of
light, life, love, joy and harmony, a scheme void of death and annihila-
tion, the mind once more reflects upon the physical illusions of slowly
advancing scientific thought. Camille Flammarion, the great psycho-
materialist of France, has painted, in his various novels, a lurid, almost
horrible, picture of what the mighty universe must become from the


172 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


logical deductions of his own school of thought; a school which would
be best named as transcendental materialism. According to this con-
ception, “thousands, aye, millions of worlds are rushing through space,
inert, frozen, and dead. Suns have cooled down and ceased to give
forth the life-sustaining element of light, but have still retained their
mighty attraction upon their attendant planets, according to the laws
of gravity, by virtue of their material mass, and thus hold their plan-
etary offspring in the eternal, cold, icy grasp of death. Our Sun,
too, is cooling fast; the Earth has already lost a great portion of her
own internal heat. She has passed her prime of life, and death—cold,
icy death—has already begun to encroach upon her extremities. The
South pole (the feet) is now practically lifeless in one perpetual
covering of ice. So, too, her head; her locks are the white of perpetual
snow. No longer has she the blush and beauty of youth, no longer
adorned with the healthy covering of verdue which youthfulness gives,
and as our geologists prove was once the case. So that, although the
time may still be long, according to our reckoning of years, it is only
a brief moment in eternity when this fair Earth, and also the beauteous
splendor of the silent stars, will be locked forever in darkness, and
the final sleep of doom.” If this be so, we ask of the inmost soul, if
life be but the fitful awakenings of the indestructible spirit, ebbing
and flowing in response to the rise and fall of Nature’s cosmic ba-
rometer and the transmutations of matter; if life is, in reality, but a
brief and passing moment, eternally repeated, from the flush of youth,
“the gilded salon to the bier and the shroud, then why, O why should
the spirit of mortal be proud?” Why aspire to penetrate the inward
realities of life and enter the Holy of Holies—to seek and find out
God? As the rushing torrent of this thought swept o’er the mental
chambers of the soul and saturated the spirit with its icy sting, as it
lay still chained within the prison house of matter, the higher self rose,
sublime in its grandeur, and consciousness of divine relationship, and,
in the last earthly appeal for light, for divine truth, as to Man and
his immortality, it turned in reverence and awe before the still, shim-
mering veil of the sacred Penetralia. The trial had come, the crucial
test, whether of life or death, the final revelation to Man. In purity of
heart and humility of soul we await in agonizing suspense. There is a
thrilling sensation, as though of ten thousand electric currents con-
suming the frame, and a swaying to and fro, as if drifting upon an


PENETRALIA 173


ocean of fire; then a dead silence, so profound that whole eternities
seem to pass, without either beginning or end. And the sight of the
inward spirit is opened slowly. Who? Where? What? For the
shadows have fled, the luminous curtain fades, is gone, and flashing
before the inward sight stands the ineffable Adonai. It is I-you! There
is no God but this, and in one moment the interior consciousness be-
comes at-one-with-self, God, and from that inconceivable height of
profound vision we again look upon Nature. Behold Sun, Moon and
planets in all the original magnificence of their nebulous luminosity;
from nebulous rings we proceed, stage after stage, each producing its
own degrees of life. On, on we pass the ages, the geological cycles of
inconceivable duration in time, but only a mere instant in eternity;
and on and on, as the changes roll, until we see Earth as she is now;
still on, at the ever-urging desire of the triumphant Soul, and a re-
markable change is apparent. From forces, at present latent, there
comes a change; and, instead of so-called physical; electrical races
have superceded the present humanity. Crystallization has ceased;
and all things become lighter in density and more ethereal in nature;
and the orbit of the Earth grows less. Nearer and nearer shines the
mighty Sun; first Vulcan, then the swift messenger of the gods are
indrawn within the solar vortex, each absorption producing a cata-=>
clysmic change upon our Earth. Then comes the turn of Venus, while
slowly and surely the orbit of the Earth contracts, and nearer shines
the Sun. And, finally, the beautiful Earth, her mission over, the last
atom of life beyond her rule, inward she sweeps, and is lost in the
mighty ocean of fire as a stone is lost in the lake. Verily is the word
of prophecy a literal truth: “The Earth shall be destroyed with fire.”
And so on with the rest, each planet in its proper turn fulfilling the
functions at present performed by the Earth, each becoming the grand
theater of material and ethereal life, and the cometary bodies, to-day
chasing unknown orbits in the realms of ether, gradually fall into line
when their erratic cycle is ended, taking the places of the present
outermost planets.

No such thing as death, no such thing as the dark silence of
eternal night, for any organic creation of the Most High. From the
Sun they come, and unto the Sun each must ultimately return, even
as the body of Man, coming from the dust of Earth, must also return
thereto, to be taken up in new forms and furnish substance for other


174 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


degrees of life. And thus will it be, until the Sun, in its mighty solar
heavens of purified spiritual life, will form the last, the final battle
ground of matter, receiving its new life from a greater center than
itself. A glorious solar world, well typified in the last Battle of the Gods,
and the new Earth—a World whereon the Angels tread in superlatively
beautiful forms, clothed with the ideals and emanations of their own
divine purity—Souls clothed in Air, treading the ethereal Realms of
Light, as the children of God, and the inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Must the searching eye of the Soul seek further? Must the in-
satiable thirst of the Spirit launch out upon the trackless infinities of
the yet To Be? Must it still penetrate further in the profound beyond,
where time ceases to be, where the past, present, and the future, are
forever unknown, but exist only as the Deific consciousness of the
eternal Now? No. The Soul at last rests satisfied. The final revelation
is over.

My brother, we have done; and, in closing, have only to add that,
not until the speculating philosophy of earthly schools blends with
the Science of the Spheres in the full and perfect fruition of the wisdom
of the ages, will Man know and reverence his Creator, and, in the
silent Penetralia of his inmost being, respond, in unison with that
Angelic Anthem of Life: “We Praise Thee, O God!”


FINIS of the first edition.


CHAPTER XIV


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS


Quotations and answers from private lessons of Hermetic Teach-
ers. These are in addition to those given in Chapter V, Vol. I, of
The Light of Egypt.

You cannot receive much knowledge from the reading of books.
You must learn to contact the subjective currents of thought and
wisdom by developing the intuitional and spiritual nature, and by
the daily practice of psychomitry, meditation on high spiritual sub-
jects and aspirational breathing with an earnest desire for the true
knowledge of Nature’s occult truths; thus you can contact or call
down knowledge.

In Dynamic Breathing by Genevieve Stebbins, aspirational
breathing is described as follows;—

1. Stand upright in a normal position.

2. The hands being at the sides, raise them slowly so as to de-
scribe a circle, meeting like a spire above the head.

3. While the hands are slowly undergoing this evolution, inhale
while you count seven beats.

4. Hold the hands and breathe in position while you count three
beats.

5. Exhale the breath while you count seven beats, bringing the
hands slowly down in unison, pressed together in front of the face in
the form of prayer, continuing the motion until they part company
at the abdomen.

6. Keep the lungs empty during three beats, and then continue
this exercise.

The mental idea for this exercise is that aspiring for Divine
illumination and power, which exalts the whole being. The imag-
ination responds by feeling the spiritual influx of joyous inspiration.

No matter what we know we have no right to deprive anyone
of their chance or privilege of trying. Each person should be al-
lowed to make their own choice and thus strengthen their own char-
acter and learn from experience.


176 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


After the death of its physical body, a soul does not suffer be-
fore awakening to consciousness. Cremation of the body frees the
soul from matter, then it may awaken more quickly and be free to
seek its proper sphere in the soul world through the laws of affinity
and merit. Its true desires, shown by its life while on earth, deter-
mines the soul sphere where it begins. We begin there where we
leave off here and must correct all former errors before we can ad-
vance.

When a soul is forced from its physical body by obsession, the
soul suffering is caused by its regrets in not being able to remain the
occupant and ruler of its own tenement, conditions and causes of the
change increase or decrease the suffering.

The spiritual birth of a person while yet in the physical body is
not any sudden change in the body. The change takes place slowly.
When the mental and soul qualities have become so refined through
sincere desire and earnest study that they can vibrate to much higher
conditions they are gradually raised to a higher plane of vibration
and this consciousness is slowly impressed upon the physical brain.

The soul is always conscious and knows interiorly, inwardly, the
truths and realities of Nature. And to be soul conscious we must
realize externally the realities of the soul’s knowledge. And to ac-
complish and bring this about we must sensitize and polish our
brain or plate so these truths can be reflected perfectly, external-
ized. Then, and then only, are we soul conscious. Unkind thoughts,
false thoughts, criticism, hasty judgments, fault finding, etc., etc., so
blur our mirror and fog our brain, that the reflections from the Soul
world (the world of realities) become distorted, out of shape, be-
come error and thus constitute non-realities to us.

I reason from the law of correspondences, that, upon the physi-
cal plane, the man or positive nature seeks woman or the negative
nature. So per contra. Upon the Soul plane the feminine soul is
the positive and the masculine soul the negative, consequently the
soul of woman must seek for its true mate, the soul of man. The law
is LOVE. She must, through intense but calm soul love draw to her,
her counterpart or soul mate. After having once met, whether con-
sciously or not, they forever after vibrate in unison, each filling up
the deficiencies in each other. Man desiring this union must not be
too positive or else he will repel and defer the meeting. The physi-


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 177


cal meet upon the personal plane, the mental or intellectual upon
the plane of individuality and the Souls upon the plane of identity
to become as one, the Spiritual Ego.

When the power of imparting joy is equal to the will, the hu-
man soul requires no other heaven. Queen Mab.

The Solar Plexus is the center of contact for occult forces be-
cause we are a septenary being;—a physical trinity, a soul trinity,
and the divine ego (the 7th. or whole). The Solar Plexus is the
center of our physical being. From that region, our body drew from
the physical mother all the requisites for the complete growth, nu-
trition and perfect gestation of our body. Therefore, it must be
the most delicate and sensitive part of our organization, the most
fitting receptacle for the connecting link from the subjective or soul
trinity, the occult forces. The center of our subjective being (the
Soul) vibrates naturally to the center of our physical being. The
spiritual has its center of contact in the crown of the head. The sex-
ual organs are the center of contact for the physical.

Vibration and Polarization. Vibration is an invisible force mov-
ing to and fro between two points or poles. These two points may
be two objective objects or two subjective states, or one may be
objective and the other subjective. These two points of the vibratory
motion determine the polarity of that force moving between them.
If the vibrations are discordant or inharmonious, the obstacles that
lie in the path of this moving force must be removed or one or both
points of polarization must be changed. This is accomplished, wholly
and solely, by or through the will ability. Therefore, the first thing
to do is to cultivate the interior will to a supreme degree and
strength. As an illustration;—overcoming any evil tendency is chang-
ing the polarity of that evil force we vibrate to, that which feeds
and strengthens the evil tendency within us. Or we must desire,
think, act and be the exact opposite of -any evil in us to change the
polarity to good. Truly, “man may be what he wills to be.”

Vibration depends upon the density, firmness and _ sensitiveness
of the object vibrated. A rod of iron will produce a dull thud when
struck, while a fine, dense, tightly strung wire of a musical instru-
ment when struck by the key will give forth a beautiful, pleasing
sound. But a musical instrument requires an operator to produce
the vibrations that result in harmonious music. Iron, coal, stone, etc.,


178 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


in their denseness vibrate to the lowest spheres of earth, but in their
course of evolution these substances become less dense and more
sensitive or refined and the vibrations become finer and more in-
tense. It is so with humankind, the body vibrates to the corres-
ponding atoms of the atmosphere (surrounding conditions), soul
and body should vibrate in perfect harmony. Our souls are the mu-
sicians and our bodies are the instruments, therefore, we must tune
our body by systematic training, care and good attention until it
is in perfect tune and under the absolute control of the soul;—then
the result will be perfect vibration, perfect time, tune, harmony,
allowing us to enjoy the music of the spheres.

Kindle the spark of eternal progress and it can never be
quenched, except by the Neophyte’s own will. Life is eternal and
man can not stop the progress of another, only place a stumbling
block in his path. To gain wisdom, keep alive the spiritual fire, by
earnest work, study and meditation, using the light you now have
and may receive. Action (mental and spiritual) is life, inertia death.
Nor should you neglect the body. Make every effort which duty
imposes upon you to secure the comforts necessary for health,
peace and a quiet mind for study. You will then be making true
progress. Of all creatures, MAN alone, has the God given ability
to consciously develop his spiritual senses so as to be able to use
them in observing the operations of the true laws of life and thus
learn the causes of what we experience here on earth.

Demonstrate by your lives the truths we seek to impart and
you will attract to yourselves peace. These teachings will give you
a greater scope of knowledge than you now dream is possible. Com-
prehension will be more clear and true; not all the world then can
rob you of that interior peace which is the result of unfoldment and
true knowledge of self. As the soul advances in the path of esoteric
knowledge fears and doubts disappear and a firm and abiding faith
take their place.

Monastic life, The rule of Saint I AM;—this subject is a broad
one and I am afraid too intricate to be answered in a letter. A
volume would do but scant justice to it. There are two diametrically
opposite views of monastic life and institutions, both of them ab-
solutely true;—a paradox to be sure but so indeed is everything con-
nected with the human mind. The positive and purely intellectual


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 179


view is that, all things considered, we know but little of earth and
practically nothing of heaven, therefore, the present life is the prob-
lem of man. The future can well afford to look after itself, etc. The
real hero, it is thought, is he who enters into the bustling life of today,
shares its problems, national and individual, in fact, leads an active,
assertive, vital life, and if to this he adds honor, virtue and charity,
conquers all temptations to wrong doing, and finally makes life a
substantial success morally and financially according to the ideal of
his generation, such a man is a true hero, an ideal man, an example
to follow, and considering the plane of life from which this view is
is taken, it is undoubtedly true. This modern hero is a man who lived
amongst men, who did his duty according to law, and who fighting
a good fight, lived merely, worthily and well, and so far as earthly
consideration goes, what more can be desired?

The opposite or spiritually religious view can be summed up
in few words;—Earth is nothing; Take no thought of what ye shall
eat or what ye shall drink, etc. The world is the playground of
Satan, all physical pleasures are snares and entrap the soul. Re-
pentance for uncommitted crime, aspiration and prayer for a peace
which seems ever near and which, in fact, never comes. The atone-
ment of Christ and the Nirvana of Buddha, these are the ascetic
ideas of monks and Sama alike. All the rest of earth becomes to
them 4 curse, a temptation and a snare. The world with its wine,
women and song is a corruption of the flesh and the devil. In fact
all manifested nature, with its love, life and power is but vanity
and vexation of spirit. And even this side from the plane of the
spiritual ideal is true. The two views represent the two opposite
sides of man’s nature, the monk and the merchant. The one seeks
honor with real estate on earth;—the other a crown with undisputed
titles in heaven. They are both right and they are both equally
wrong when life in its one grand aspect is taken into consideration.

Here then is the Hermetic standpoint, the true plane from
which all things must ultimately be viewed. Though before going
further let me borrow an expression from the old astronomer poet
of Persia; “The worldly hope men set their hearts upon, Turns to
ashes or it prospers and anon, Like snow upon the desert’s dusty
face, Lighting a little hour or two is gone.”


180 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


The last line of this quotation contains the real gist of every
perfect rule that will apply to man in his biune nature;—man the
individual and man the enfranchised soul of divinity on earth or in
heaven, within the whirl of worldly life or soaring as a divine
thought amid the stars, the same absolute truth becomes manifest.
This, now, requires an explanation. To begin with I will present you
with a few considerations.

Ist. Man was prior to this present life and will be posterior to it.

2nd. Man is the most perfect expression of the divine idea up
to date, so far as earth is concerned. He is the climax of evolution.

3rd. Man’s nature, broadly speaking, is dual, physical and spirit-
ual, therefore, the interplay brings into being a third factor, the
mental, which is neither wholly one nor the other.

4th. Man as a bi-une entity, if he would be progressive, must
lead two lives and feed both sides of his nature, otherwise, one side
will suffer to the serious detriment of the other. A purely physical
or animal life or existence will starve the soul and result in Spiritual
death, so to speak. On the contrary a purely spiritual life, such as
has been led by some ascetics, destroys the natural functions of the
body and by re-action warps the intellectual faculties so that the
mind, becoming diseased, cannot discern unbiased truth, no matter
how logical such truth may be to others. The mind is warped and
distorts every idea to harmonize with its own dominant error, what-
ever that may be. When the intellectual lens is out of focus angelic
revelations become spiritual delirium.

5th. Man as a dual entity, possessing a threefold nature, physi-
cal, mental and spiritual, has also the possibility of absolute im-
mortality. Man, as man merely, is not immortal, and if nothing be-
yond the animal man is present or sustained when it is present,
nothing but the animal will survive death, and that being matter
will follow the transformations of matter. But man as a spiritual
atom of life is immortal. This spiritual entity should dominate its
human envelope, granting to each zone of its life a proper, lawful
expression in the body, in the mind and in the soul. Such a course
of life is perfect, for it sustains and develops every department
of man’s being.

6th. The true aim of a perfect life is to follow out the law of
evolution which gave it being, which law requires a recognition of


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 181


every phase of life upon its own plane with an eternal aspiration
toward an ideal that evolves and expands in perfect proportion
with our upward march through the eternities yet to come, ever
beyond, but ever bright and clear. When this is attained, instead of
the magnet of our mother earth, we shall follow the shining star of
the Magi whose radiant center is the lode-stone of God.

7th. Therefore, it becomes apparent that the real, true living,
to begin with, consists in taking all things as we find them. Shirk
none. With honest, fearless purpose meet all, and by so doing be-
come a center of power and purpose. Make your own environment
out of the material at hand. The outward doth from the inward
roll, and the inward dwells in the inmost soul.

Having carefully digested the foregoing considerations you
will note that my opinion regarding monastic life is that every-
thing depends upon the monk. A man or woman should have a full
and complete experience of life and love of pleasure, sorrow and
pain; should know what physical pleasure can give and what de-
lights, amidst literature, science and art, the intellectual life has to
offer. When this is the case the man or the woman is no longer
young, but on the contrary, will be matured in body and mind.
Such people are in small danger then of becoming either preju-
diced cranks or hallucinated fools. To these and to these only monas-
tic life, or the retirement from the material strife of the world will
generally prove a great spiritual blessing and profitable to mind
and body and soul. It is then to such as these who in addition to a
spiritual life wish to get back to Nature and live near to the primi-
tive sources of life, away from the city mart, to the heart of the
pines, and there in the “Forest of Arden” resting upon the bosom
of the kindly earth breathe with her, indrawing her vital strength
and learning therefrom those deep mysteries of being which are
the primitive sources of life, religion and art, that I give the simple
rule of the ancient Order founded by Saint I am.


The Rules of Saint I am


1. Each human body becomes its own monastery, church and


temple.
2. Each member of the Order is forever his own Abbot and
earthly superior so far as the rules and conduct are concerned.


182 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


3. There are two days in each year that every member of the
Order shall consider as unworthy of serious concern and these are
yesterday and tomorrow. Yesterday is beyond recall and its only
value is that of experience. Sorrowing over the past is childish and
mental anxiety over the future is simply idiotic, since we do not
live therein. Life is forever the eternal present and all else is vanity
and vexation of spirit. The true life will learn to profit by the past
because of its lessons of errors; to live nobly in the present because
of the here and now, the very nick of time in which all things are
accomplished; and be optimistic with unbounded hope and faith
in the future. But what is said herein about the past must not be
understood as indifference. Keen repentance is required of each
soul for past sin, but it must be sorrow for the sin, not a regret for
the past, not a wish to recall it, but a thankfulness in sorrow that
we may profit by the error as experience, and never again commit
the same fault.

4. Live one day at a time, beginning with the morning medi-
tation as in the rules for training. Assert yourself and be a man or
woman. Speak quietly, refrain from hurry, be calm and enjoy the
beauties of Nature under whatever aspect they present themselves;
for when the Lord God saw everything which He had made, and,
behold, He saw that it was very good.

5. Do good to others and no evil for this is the law of life, its
violation is death. Give of the fruits of thy knowledge for this is
charity. Point out the pathway of eternal life, for this is the essence
of hope and faith. But ever remember that a wise gardener will
not waste his present time in watering a withered tree, for this
will not profit him nor his brethren in this world nor the next.

6. In all things essential be positive and assert your divine
right, become the I AM. In all things non-essential take the line
of least resistance, for it is a criminal waste of energy to fight when
the battle is not worth contention. Let it always be understood
among the members of this ancient order of beings that in all things
essential there must be unity; in non-essentials absolute liberty,
and finally in all things, under all circumstances, there must be
charity.

7. No one should live in idleness, but each must be the sole
judge as to what is work, for life in itself depends for its fruits on


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 183


motion. It is good, bad or indifferent, according to the point of
view and the mental attitude assumed toward it, therefore, mem-
bers may live singly or in community as best suits their needs or
desires and may adopt any number of rules and regulations for
their government from time to time, providing that they do not in
any way conflict with the rules here given of the Saint I AM.

This is, then, the kind and condition of monastic institution
which the Hermetic Brothers consider broad and catholic enough
to admit every one but fanatics, and safe enough in discipline for
every one but fools, and with these two latter the Brothers of Saint
I AM can have no fellowship.

Hymn XV. of the Book of Wisdom, Vol. I, page 130, reads;—

“Strive by concentrating the thought (mind) to liberate the su-
preme Soul, pure and free of the envelopes (Elements) to which
she is united, that the body and the other, in the same wise as is
sifted the grain from the chaff.”

The Elements here referred to are the intelligent forces of
Nature, generated by the four primary elements of Air, Fire, Earth
and Water, or the elementals of the astral planes and attached to
us as we produce or create the corresponding elementals within
our spheres. There are both good and evil in each of these elemen-
tal kingdoms and we create by our thoughts and acts their affini-
ties. To progress we must create the good and overcome and elim-
inate the evil before the Soul is free to advance. The good are
created by acts of kindness, generosity, unselfishness, liberty to all,
energy, ambition, desire, aspiration, activity, expression and fear-
lessness in the cause and promotion of truth, love and charity to
all of God’s creatures, etc., etc. To avoid the evil and malicious in-
habitants of these kingdoms we must not create their affinities by
thoughts of hate, envy, fear, revenge, jealousy, malice, selfishness,
dishonesty, etc., etc. The elementals of fire are known as Salaman-
ders. The elementals of earth are known as Gnomes and the evil
belong wholly to the earth because of their desire of wealth, show,
earthly glory and power, cant, drinking, eating, debaucheries, lusts
of the flesh, monopolies, etc. Here, the desirable creations are those
of duty, power and possessions to meet the duties of the hour, those
we have assumed and those that are thrust upon us. Desire the
comforts for body and mind and the means necessary to accom-


184 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


plish the duties for which we are responsible and the requisites
needed to aid in the furtherance of all movements to assist the im-
provements and uplifting of humanity, etc. The elementals of the
airy kingdom are the Sylphs and the affinities of this realm are the
creations of ideals. So, beware of drawing to yourself the evils
created by false illusions, wrong ideas, jealousy, false thinking, un-
reasonableness, false judgments, insinuations of wrong, defaming,
gossip, etc., etc. Create the good by clean, pure thoughts, beautiful
ideals and ideas, wishing thoughts of kindness, love, good will and
charitableness to all humanity, etc. The Undines belong to the
watery kingdom which is the creative sphere. Therefore, not to bind
ourselves to the evil elementals and powers of this plane, we must
not accept any false creeds or dogmas, no false conceptions of truth,
no false christs, no false teachers, leaders or friends. Nor must we
create any false conceptions of truth, nothing that cannot be proven
by the law of correspondences, “as it is above so it is below; as on
the earth so in the sky.” Conceive in truth and try to know Nature
as taught by this Hermetic rule and live in harmony with the natu-
ral laws of life.


Aphorisms for the Great Truths;—by The Hermetic Teachers.

Concerning life and immortality, my soul longs and asks for,
as the burning sands of the desert cry out for the rain. In the air
I breathe; in the music that comes to my ear; in the beauties of
nature that I see; my inmost soul tells me is my God. Give to
me the ears of knowledge and understanding to hear with; the eyes
of faith and love to see with. Give to me the wisdom to say, I know;
I am—that—I am. Time without beginning, time without end.

Inspiration;—that harp divine whose strings the angels tune,
and set in motion sweet waves of music, that vibrates around the
spheres, that brings to man the tidings of his once celestial state,
and says in tones of heavenly sweetness, to faint and struggling
souls, “Look ever up and onward, thy spirit calls thee home.” God,
Jehovah is, and thou must be.

Omnia, Vincit, Veritas.

The light that shines from the pinnacle of truth, can never grow
dim; the fogs of ignorance and superstition may obscure, but can-
not extinguish. It is your duty and work to aid human improvement,


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 185


to put forth every effort to dispel that fog and set the bells of good
tidings to ringing, peace on earth and good will to all.

Knock, and it will open. (Physical ) work.

Ask, and ye shall receive. (Mental) study.

Seek, and ye shall find. (Spiritual) meditate.

Aphorisms;—subjects for deep thought and silent meditation,
to aid in spiritual growth and understanding.

1. Learn self poise.

2. Learn the inward calm that can express the outward calm.

3. Interior calmness aids the physical confidence and confi-
dence is necessary upon the physical plane.

4, Learn the decision that comes from the inward knowledge.
Never let the seeming to be, nor the wishing it to be so, warp the
judgment.

5. Ignorance is weakness, weakness begets doubt, and doubt
is the undoing of the soul.

6. Be careful of forming a wrong idea of any person or thing,
that you hold in the mind till you make of it a reality; for it will
remain with its parent to give doubt, fear, and will deceive the soul
until the wrong done has been atoned for.

7. An unconquered strife that is hidden in the soul, is more
consuming than a raging fire.

8. Say ye not nay about any person, for ye know not the be-
ginning. Say ye not yea, because ye know not the why. Say ye not
so is so, for only God is absolute.

9. Think not these things at all; for in the thinking ye dwell
longest upon them, and therein lies the greatest danger, for the
undoing of thy self and for the fogging and numbing of thy spiritual
growth.

10. Do and think unto others as you would have them do and
think unto you.

11. Give thou unto an evil one the chain for which he asks, and
straight way in anger at thy generosity will he hang himself to the
end of it.

12. Strive continually for the domination of the spirit over all
the actions of your life. Strive to uplift and beautify all the paths
where in you have to walk and work. By so doing, you open the
door for the inflowing of the spirit.


186 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


13. Faith is the avenue to the soul plane, for which interior
calmness is required.

14. Persistent determination in the face of all obstacles, is true
faith. Faith is strength; by this strength (faith) the soul gains power
to mount higher and higher in its search for knowledge, therefore
its deliverance.

15. Hope is the calm confidence in faith. Hope is the anchor
of the soul. Hope is confidence that one will obtain the object de-
sired. ;
16. Charity and love make all things possible to the soul, that
is earnestly trying to work out its immortal destiny, Love of truth
and the things that represent truth. Charity for those that have not
found the truth, nor the things that stand for truth, and are working
in darkness. Charity, blessed charity, is a balm to the misguided
soul; all else of earth is as naught in comparison to it. Wipe away
the tears, extend the helping hand, and leave the judging and the
judgment to the Most High, thy God.

17. If the water is muddy, you do not clear by stirring; but
by the quiet, steady, process of filtering. If the filtering is applied
a sufficient length of time, the water will surely become clear. So
with the muddy waters of ignorance and misunderstanding, use the
filter, truth and patience, and the muddy water will just so surely
become clear.

18. The soul will grieve; but do not let it grieve for the mental,
nor the physical suffering of those trying to live a conscious life;
that bring on themselves the suffering by a proud feeling of superi-
ority. Spirit attainments should not give a feeling of proud superi-
ority, but a feeling of humility, and true inward charity for others;
not the feeling, I am better than thou, but the God like love and
charity that will search with a strong light to find the smallest mite
of good, in another.

19. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they can see God. He
that is humble in spirit, will be exalted. He that is proud in spirit,
will be laid low. Remember, the soul on the wings of faith, soars
to where its aspirations call it; let not the soul, by its aspirations,
call down the spirit, but be it ever drawn upward by inspirations.

20. Peace on earth and good will to all, is a dictation of the
spirit; unless you can fully feel and express this, your own soul can


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 187


never realize the peace that passes all understanding.

21. Cold intellect, with only the reason to help it, has to gain
its knowledge through external or material avenues. When the in-
tellect alone dominates a person, it will be difficult for them to grasp
the true, interior spiritual meaning; except in so much as it may be
possible to put it into external, or material form, that will appeal
to the intellect only. The inmost spiritual truths, never have, never
can, and never will, appeal to any but those that have the interior
spiritual ability to comprehend them. The spiritual truths here
meant are those, that cannot be demonstrated upon the material
plane, and, where the intellect is the only interpreter.

22. The exterior, or external, may be lighted to any extent to
which the owner wishes, and can exert the powers of his intellect
and reason to obtain. But, what does he see of his possessions?
Only a little of the outside, nothing of his real accumulations of
years, that he has gathered up to beautify the interior of his house.
Let him put the smallest light on the inside and he will immediately
begin to see the forms and outlines of objects, that he could not
have had, even, the faintest idea of, with all of his outside light.
With his interior light, he can open his windows and let others en-
joy with him, or shut his treasures in at will. With his light on the
outside he could not enjoy, nor let any one else enjoy. So, light
that interior spark; if the intellect and reason are in harmony with
the interior, all is well; but if not, then remember, the smallest in-
terior light is as far above the outside light, as the stars, by com-
parison, are above the earth. This external light had much better be
in the minority than trying to outshine the true and real light within.

23. The dew drop that rests on the leaf of the rose at sunrise
is as necessary as the down pour of rain. Grasp firmly in the mind
the fact, and realize it, that in the mighty scheme of creation, ab-
solutely nothing can be lost. To the interior there is no real meaning
to the expression great or small, that is figuratively, not in the literal
sense, for in the various rounds and states, the infinitely great be-
comes the infinitely small, and the infinitely small becomes the in-
finitely great.

24. Hold the strands of life in the mind by the power of intelli-
gence. With the fingers of the soul unweave the threads and trace
them back to the beginning. With the magical power of the will,


188 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


through aspiration and inspiration, bind them together again into
an unbreakable chain, to carry the spirit into those vistas of the fu-
ture, that ever bids it to go higher.

25. Ever keep that fair mirror of the soul, called faith, clear
and bright; never let a ripple mar its placid surface. The divine
truths that you see mirrored in it, are for the hungry soul; to give
it light and knowledge to carry it back to its divine Ego, in the
realms of infinite light that surround the throne of God.

26. As the memory of the past unrolls, Jet neither exaltation
nor fear take possession of the soul. Strive for that perfect calm and
poise that will give the clear sight and understanding, to view pic-
ture after picture, as the recording angel turns backward the leaves
in the book of life.

27. The soul that seeks its divine centre unmindful of trials,
pitfalls and suffering; seeing only the star of its destiny shining afar
off; will shine forth resplendent as it nears the goal.

28. Prove all things by the light of intelligence with a firm,
calm desire to know the truth without prejudice or bias. When the
intuitions of thy soul, after prolonged meditation, flashes her light
upon the mind accept the solution, then weigh this with reason, the
result will be indisputable.

29. The credulous minds always suffer, they are like the foolish
virgins who kept not their lamps (intelligence) trimmed and burning.

30. In the economy of Nature nothing is wasted; from the tiny
dew drop to the building and dissolution of worlds, every atom
serves its purpose; when that purpose is fulfilled, there comes a
change of polarity only; and the same atoms are again utilized by
Nature and Nature’s Supreme Intelligence carries on the process
forever.

31. Over the material destinies of men the planets rule; point-
ing out the time to act and the time to refrain, the time to sow and
the time to reap. They are monitors, (if men would understand )
the active agents of divine intelligence expressing His Will through
the brilliant scintillating jewels of our skies, the radiant gems of the
Master's Crown.

32. Woe to those who place a stumbling block in the path of
any soul’s progress. Always encourage the timid and fearful ones by


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 189


word and thought, for often the right word in the right place is a
strong staff to the weak.

33. Remember that a knowledge of the law of correspondences
is necessary to the correct interpretation of symbols. All manifest
Nature is a symbol of the divine idea; the expressions of an idea
may be manifold.

34. The sincere unqualified love of truth is the best guide in
the path of wisdom.

35. Knowledge without understanding is like a ring of gold in
a swine’s snout.

36. The man who fills his mind with the written words of oth-
ers, without proving or understanding in his soul, gains not wisdom,
but rather the husks.

37. Wisdom may be likened unto refined gold. It is knowledge
refined in the crucible of experience. While understanding makes
wisdom one’s own.

38. The pearl diver must be properly equipped for his work,
else it were a perilous undertaking; just so with the seeker after
Nature’s divine truths. He should know what he 1s about.

39. By their fruits ye shall know them, means, ye shall know
the manner of a person, that is, the plane of intelligence to which
they belong, and not that ye shall sit in judgment to condemn or
extol.

40. Only the pure in heart may see God. Yea, not until the soul,
purified by trial, sorrow and suffering, and having gained complete
mastery of self, then, illumined by the interior light, the soul beholds
the Adonia.

41. The pursuit of wisdom from a pure love of truth and knowl-
edge is the only surety of success. The “Pearl of Great Price” ever
eludes the selfish, ambitious and vain-glorious.

42. Courage, patience and calm confidence in thyself and thy
immortal destiny, will give wings to thy soul, strength to thy spirit
and bring realization of thy soul’s desire.

43. Heed not thy calumniators, for as they have sown, so shall
they reap.

44, Cast thy bread upon the waters. It will return in time to
bless or curse the sender. So let thy bread (ideas, thoughts and


190 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


ideals) be good, pure and light, that it may return to thee in happy
realization of past efforts.

45. The past is like an old garment, worn-out and cast away,
it may have been worn with grace or the reverse, but the present
only is thine, the future is with the Infinite.

46. The pursuit of knowledge is a more royal road than the
pursuit of happiness, because of happiness, no two can experience
the same degree, nor would happiness so called to one, be held as
such by another. But knowledge is the same to all, being neither de-
lusive, nor fleeting. Joy and sorrow, what are they but the fleeting
shadows of a day. But wisdom abideth for all time.

47. The peace that passeth understanding is greatly to be de-
sired. It is calm assurance, confidence, to the soul. The mind reflects
it and the way of divine wisdom is as the light of the Sun.

48. Prayer consists not in the spoken word uttered without un-
derstanding what true prayer is. No, it is the deep unutterable yearn-
ing of the human soul for light, for peace and guidance, that will
sooner or later be realized. Amen.


Finis of Aphorisms by The Hermetic Teachers


Originally, The Pyramid was designed as a perpetual observa-
tory, from which, at any and all times, and in all ages, all the facts
governing the movements of this world could be deduced from ob-
servation of the celestial bodies.

The Riddle of the Sphinx; it symbolizes the astrological basis of
the Egyptian Religion and the growth pattern of life.

The Sphinx has stood for centuries in majestic defiance of all the
destructive forces of time and the mind of man to solve its mysteries.
It is built of living stones.

It symbolizes the esoteric thought of Ancient Egypt, that the
universe and all it contains is pulsating with eternal life, whose source
is a central spiritual sun of infinite, unconditioned wisdom, con-
taining all that is or will be. That all are but parts of one stupendous
whole whose body Nature is and God the soul. That each atom of
eternal life involves from spirit to dense matter, then evolves upward
through vegetable, animal and human to its spiritual source. That
each human being is a miniature universe which its lord or immortal


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 191


ego must learn to control before it can acquire a true understanding
of life.

The Sphinx has the paws of a lion, the body of a bull and the
head of a man. These three units symbolize Osiris (the father), Isis
(the mother), and Horus (the son);—the eternal trinity of life. The
wings of an Eagle are folded close to the body of the bull to indicate
silence.

Now we must show how this astrological symbolism can be in-
terpreted to give this hidden meaning.

Osiris (the father), symbolized by the paws of the lion, repre-
sents the Solar Lion of the Mysteries, whose constellation is Leo. Leo
is the second emanation of the Fiery triplicity and is the constellation
of the Sun. This symbolizes GOD, infinite wisdom, oe spiritual Sun,
the source of eternal life. The Sun passes through’the sign Leo in
the summer, in July and August, the hottest time of thé year.

Isis (the mother), symbolized by the body of a Bull, represents
Apis, the Sacred Bull of the Egyptians, whose constellation is Taurus.
Taurus is the highest emanation of the Earthy triplicity and is the
constellation of the planet Venus. This symbolizes the Universal
Mother, the source of all manifestation. God’s thoughts put into form.
The Sun passes through the sign Taurus in the spring of each year, in
April and May, when the forces of life are striving to make all things
grow.

Horus (the son), symbolized by the head of a Man, represents
the Works Done (all manifestations of God, man being considered
the highest and containing in essence all forms of life below himself ).
Aquarius is the constellation of the archetypal man, and is the lowest
emanation of the Airy triplicity and the constellation of the planet
Uranus.

The Wings of an Eagle, folded close to the powerful body of the
Sphinx, indicate that these intellectual forces work in silence, free of
all material matter.

Thus we have the eternal trinity of life in its highest sense. God,
infinite wisdom (Spiritual Fire, the essence of life) is the source of
all. The spiritual seeds (God’s thoughts) are planted in Earth (sub-
stance), developed in Water (moisture) and evolved into the Air
(atmosphere, space). And all of this is done in silence, is going on


192 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


continually, before our very eyes, yet how little we understand, truly,
mankind are the most ignorant of that which is, life itself.

And again the same thought expressed in a different way.

God, the Spiritual Sun (the Solar Lion, infinite wisdom, life,
vital eternal energy) whose constellation is Leo, the second emana-
tion of the Fiery triplicity, plants his spiritual seeds (Immortal Egos)
in Earth or substance, where they can grow or manifest on each of
the three planes of life, Spiritual, Mental (Astral), and Physical (Ma-
terial).

The Sacred Bull, Taurus (Mother Nature, the slow, patient,
laborious worker who toils without ceasing) with Venus (the Love
element, the procreative forces of life) and the Scorpion (Scorpio)
the Allegorical Serpent, (sex, temptation, desire to experience, to
feel, to live, to produce) all work together through the medium of
water and with the energy of Mars (Action) to produce, form, shape
and manifest the life in the spiritual seeds of the Creator, God. Tau-
rus, the constellation of the planet Venus is the highest emanation of
the Earthy triplicity. Scorpio, the constellation of the planet Mars is
the second emanation of the Watery triplicity. So, the Universal
Mother with the help of Venus (Love), Scorpio (desire and temp-
tation) and Mars (Action) symbolize the eternal urge to imitate the
Creator (God, the Spiritual Sun) striving for diversification, evolu-
tion and perfection.

The spiritual seeds (Fire) are planted in Earth (substance) de-
veloped in Water (moisture) by Love and Action (Mars) and finally
evolve to manifest as Man (the Universal Man, the total of all crea-
tion) in Air (infinite space).

The Universal Man being the final results of all action, growth
or evolution through Mineral, Vegetable, Animal and Human, The
Works Done (good or bad) the manifested results. All are symbolized
by Aquarius, the constellation of Man and the planet Uranus, the low-
est emanation of the Airy triplicity. These total results also symbolize
the accomplishments made by Man with the use of his knowledge
and his actions. How far has he evolved in character toward spiritual
perfection?

All of this is true of the Universal Man (the total of all mani-
festation) and true of each Mortal Man, because each Mortal Man


QUOTATIONS FROM LESSONS 193


is considered a finite or miniature universe containing in essence all
of the qualities and attributes of God, the Infinite Creator of all that
exists.

The religion of Ancient Egypt was a pure theology based on the
laws of Nature as their hierophants saw these laws and forces op-
erate and manifest all the infinite forms of life about them. It took
many hundreds of years of close observation and thousands of accu-
rate records to build the foundation of their faith, And hours upon
hours of patient study, meditation and silent intuitional prayer to ac-
quire the ability to understand and interpret what they saw and re-
corded, before they were able to make an accurate and reliable rec-
ord of their pains taking, laborious, observations.

They only worshiped One God. The others were personified
ideas used as a means to instruct others who were unable to under-
stand without having some thing they could see and feel.

Their God was a Spiritual Sun, infinite wisdom, containing all
that is, was or ever can be. This Sun was dual, Male and Female
(positive and negative, daylight and darkness) and manifested him-
self, in infinite space, in forms of infinite universes;—the Suns being
male or positive and the Planets being female or negative. These
universes contained all that is possible (spiritual, mental and ma-
terial); the planets manifested the life and the suns supplied the vi-
tal energy, the spiritual fire of life, for growth and development or
evolution. The total of all this manifestation was the Universal Divine
Man, God’s thoughts in manifestation, or form.

Each mortal man was considered a finite (miniature) universe,
containing in minute essence all the qualities and attributes of the
infinite creation. And each minute universe was in control of its Lord
or Immortal Ego. It was the God given duty for each person to
KNOW HIMSELF, correct all faults and deficiences, and rule his
kingdom justly.

And notice this;—

The Solar Lion of the Mysteries, the Lion’s Paws, the feet of
God, the father, the foundation, the roots, are at the bottom.

The Sacred Bull, Apis, the body of the mother, the stalk, the
stem, are just above resting on their source.

The Man’s Head, the son, the head, knowledge, understanding,
the flower, the fruit, the harvest, is resting on its body at the top,


194 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


to show the results of all previous efforts;—the struggle to live, grow,
learn and mature to perfection.
Such is the pattern of life on all planes of existence, Spiritual,


Astral (mental), and Physical (material).
FINIS


We believe a great accumulation of valuable ancient manuscripts
are stored in a room located in the head of the Sphinx.


CHAPTER XV


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS


Omnia Vincit Veritas


Expressly arranged for the Exterior Circle
of the
Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor
by T. H. Burgoyne


Private Secretary


196 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


PREFACE


In presenting this revelation of the mysteries of man’s inner na-
ture to the neophytes belonging to the exterior circle of our venerated
order, I am requested to earnestly and solemnly impress upon each
and all, personally and individually, the absolute necessity of study-
ing and thoroughly mastering every detail here laid before you.
Carefully study out every law, action and principle that may arise
in connection with this mighty subject. For it is only by first master-
ing Nature’s alphabet that you can ultimately become Nature’s ex-
pert scholar, whose trained, disciplined soul can read the Arcane
mysteries of the Cosmos, in the clearly written characters traced by
the finger of divinity itself all around you.


Make this Arcanum the subject of long, deep, thoughtful study.
Commit it to memory, so as to be able to repeat it at pleasure, and
when this task is achieved, you will be fully prepared to ascend an-
other step higher in the stairway of Uranias’ sacred temple. In con-
clusion, I must not forget to add that my task throughout has been
but that of an amanuensis on one hand and that of a compiler upon
the other, for truth is ever the same. “There is nothing new under the
sun,” saith the wise man;—and so it is with the contents of this Ar-
canum. Its teachings are as old as the very hills. It is, in fact, but a
re-awakened echo from “The Wisdom of the Ages.”


Fraternally yours,


a ae


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS 197
CHAPTER XV


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS


The Grades of Eros


The grand object of the mysteries of Eros is to build up the
individuality of each Acolyte to the end of evolving the latent powers
within the human soul. And this must be done by impartial study of
ourself, Each person is a miniature universe that he (his Ego) must
learn to rule justly. Each individual is a responsible being, working
out the problem of his own redemption from the thraldom inherited
from ancestry and the dead ages, and forced upon him by external
conditions. These mysteries indicate the way, furnish a chart, and
bid him square his sails and depart for the shining shores of immor-
tality.

The Arcana of Eros is divided into three separate grades, and for
want of better terms can only be described as Formulation, Vitaliza-
tion and Realization. The first two are triune qualities and contain
three principles each. The last is the sum total of the other two and
contains but one definition, thus making up a total of seven, which
number is the symbol of action and completion of all mundane af-
fairs. Taking the principles as they stand in the order of their relative
importance we first come to the grand doctrine and science of Formu-


lation.
I FORMULATION


The three sub-principles of formulation (mental conceptions )
are; Formation, Execution and Reception. They each deal specifi-
cally upon their own special lines with one of the triune attributes
of man’s internal nature. Formation is the Creative attribute whereby
man imitates deity. Execution is the controlling attribute whereby
man receives, conserves or stores up the deific energies and then
imitates the laws of his own creation by radiating and projecting
this borrowed energy upon the lines, and in the special forms and
angles of his own formation (mental creation). Reception is the re-
ceptive quality of the soul, whereby man receives and again trans-
mits to the planes below him the grosser forms or the finer essences


198 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


of the great life-force of the Kosmos, in the exact proportion and ratio
of his soul-development and the higher laws of his mentality.

From this it will be seen that Formulation is not only the first
principle of man’s being, but, that it is at the same time the most
vital one with which we have to deal in soul-development.

It is the absolute foundation of all power, knowledge and energy
possible to embodied humanity.

Formulation then, in every instance, is to be taken absolutely
as the first grand principle to be mastered, studied and applied, in
the search for knowledge, and the endeavor to enlarge the scope and
range of individual power, mental and psychological, and to this
end the following definitions are presented;—(Ist. we must know
what we desire to accomplish )

a. The Formative (negative) principle, is the quiet, steady,
calm, non-turbulent, non-muscular exertion of the human Will. To in-
crease this power and render it practically and magnetically service-
able, a regular daily practice is required. Observe and follow these
rules;—

Place a round white card with a black centre against the wall,
and gaze at it calmly and steadily one minute, willing at the same
time to increase the Attention, Concentration and Abstraction; then
slowly turn the eyes to the blank wall; the optical effect will be an
apparition of the card, (colors reversed) passing slowly across the
line of vision. This may not occur on the first trial, or there may be
no more than one or two appear; but after practice the number
should: and will increase to four, seven or even more. The card may
be of any other colors, and the phantoms will be the exact opposite
or complementary hue. This exercise is intended to develop the
above named power, and its ultimate end and purpose is to enable
the acolyte to fix his mind on anything living or dead and will its
phantom (in the latter case, itself) to appear. Excellent results may
be sooner obtained by using a good magnetic mirror with a white
wafer affixed in the centre thereof.

Do not permit the mind to be disturbed or startled if a face
or figure appears upon the black-white, magnetic sea of the mirror.

If the acolyte does not possess the necessary nerve for this he
had better at once abandon the study of High Magic, which requires


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS 199


heart, courage and persistence for its noblest and most successful cul-
ture.

After the card has been in daily use for six months or more it
may be abandoned either for the wafered mirror, the head of a
brass nail, or better still, three nails; zinc, copper and iron (horse-
shoe nail) arranged in a triangle whose sides are one inch in length;
one end of a fine copper wire should be wound around the three
nails and the other held in the left hand while gazing. The effect is
magnetic and serves to render the attention more firm, positive and
concentrated in a receptive mood. It may and probably will require
from two to three years practice before mental conceptions can be
successfully substituted for those herein recommended.

One great object for the Neophyte to achieve in this steady
practice of formation, is to gradually enable his mind to pierce the
Astral light. When the eye is taken from the card, remember that
that object has become a thing of the past;—reproducing it again in
the phantoms upon the wall is in reality reproducing the past vividly
before you. It may be only a few seconds of time, still no matter how
brief, it is still the past, and careful daily practice will enable the
Neophyte to become more and more potent in this realm of Psychol-
ogy, and render it possible for him to reproduce instantly any ob-
ject or scene of his experience, no matter how remote. This will gradu-
ally lead the soul into the state of not only reading and producing
its own past experience, but of delineating the past history of any
other object or person in all its original reality, through the law of
psychometry. Therefore, simple as this principle of Formation may
seem, it is the first stepping stone in the path of the soul’s ultimate
state of perfection, which is that of the real Master of Mysteries,
the exalted Adept.

b. The executive is the second principle, and is purely volitional
(positive). It is the projecting, ordering, commanding and mentally
enforcing the behests of Desire and Will;—to say, think, feel and
ordain a thing to be or an action to occur, and as such, is the opposite
pole of the first principle, Formation. It is the must and shall be
idea in action, the positive, executive force of the human soul, without
a proper culture and activity of which no great thing, whether within
or without the path of White Magic, can be accomplished. It is the
blessing or cursing energy of the soul and is at once the grandest


200 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


and most terrible force, alike potent for good or evil. Its action
is periodical, its orbit elliptical and its effect magnetic; therefore,
what it takes from you it always returns with interest;—if good,
then good; if evil, then added evil; so beware.

Great care must be taken that there is no other emotion or action
going on in the mind during the executive instant, for this ordaining
power, (especially after the exercise of the Formative), leaps from
the soul like a flash of vivid lighting, traversing space and centering
on its object though oceans flow between, or vast spaces divide; yet
its period of activity and duration never exceeds three to seven sec-
onds of earthly time.

c. The third or Receptive principle consists in placing one’s
self in a receptive position, state, frame of body, mind and feeling,
to receive the message. It is the most important and difficult of the
three great principles, and its results;—especially in affectional lines;
correspond (good attracts good, evil attracts more evil). To exert it
successfully requires a fair development of attention, concentration
and abstraction, in addition to the exercise of the Formative and Ex-
ecutive principles, not merely as regards any special object or power
to be sought, but to induce the Receptive condition itself. When we
strike or sustain a blow we pose the body, hands, face, eyes, nostrils
and mouth; even so is the same rule imperative in the higher or su-
perphysical, metaphysical, mental and ethereal regions of our vast
being, and it must be enforced in order to reach the sublimest of all
receptive powers. There is no Magic save in Formation, Execution
and Reception; and their foundation is Love.

To illustrate our meaning, let us say for example, air and heat
rush in to fill a vacuum, and there can be no vacuum if anything is
there. Similarly one cannot wholly either notice, wish for, will, decree,
or receive the full measure of anything sought, or power desired,
or the entire weight of any mental or metaphysical desideratum, if
half or more of the mind is already occupied by something else
which receives a proportion of its attention and of the heart’s desire.
The vacuum is created by a sincere desire to receive what is sought.

This principle requires the entire devotion, absorption and con-
centration of all the inner being. When a thing is to be done, an
Energy (individual in both senses), hierarchy or special power is to
be invoked and brought down from the aerial kingdoms of the spaces,


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS 201


or evolved and called up from within, the mind must not only be
brought to wholly bear upon the reception thereof, but room within
the Odyllic sphere must be provided for the expected visitor and the
entire attention of the soul be withdrawn and vacated, except for
that special thing, gift, energy or power then sought through the
mysteries of Eros.

This road is a royal one; the weak minded, blind or credulous
can never travel its imperial path, because the higher powers only
have an affinity with those capable of appreciating them; they never
coalesce with starvling souls, and never at all, unless the laws of their
evocation, development, operation and evolution, are earnestly,
calmly, steadily, persistently followed and implicitly obeyed.


II VITALIZATION


The second of the three great principles of the triune soul is
Vitalization, which means life giving. Everything is vitalized in ex-
act proportion to the capacity of reception and transmission. Every
spirit atom or Divine Ego, is in reality a central point or Focus of
Deity for the transmission of life.

The soul Monad projected into matter, in order to evolve the
latent attributes of the divine spirit, is supplied incessantly from its
own state and center with the life force required, and it in return
transmits it to planes and states still lower than itself, involuntarily,
in most instances.

Everything, from the highest Arch-Angelhood to the cold granite
rock and dense veins of mineral, is in a state of reception and trans-
mission. That all human beings in the natural state are mediumistic
(except avaricious misers), some in excess of others, must, to be in
accord with the laws herein revealed, appear perfectly plain, es-
pecially so, when we comprehend the relationship of humanity to
Deity. In a similar manner all material substances are mediumistic
in this sense of the term, viz.; in the degree in which they are capable
of receiving and transmitting Force. In this connection, Hermetic
Science teaches, that active spirit inheres in every grade of matter
as the instigator of life, force and motion, being an attendant upon
the ethereal forces that permeate all worlds and every atom of
space. For in proportion to the refinement of substance is the sphere
vitalized by spirit.


202 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


In the brain and nervous system of the human being the Climax
of Material Vitalization is reached, hence as the Neophyte by training
gradually builds up his individuality, and refines his physical or-
-ganism by throwing off the grosser particles and replacing them
with more ethereal ones, he becomes capable of receiving, retaining
and transmitting the finer and more potential essences of the Astral
Light; consequently his will is correspondingly potent within the
realms of White Magic.

Taken in a general sense Vitalization may be divided into three
separate sections, viz; Inspiration, Exspiration and Breathing. The
latter as the most external embraces the two former. Considered
separately, we have first, Inspiration


“The simple senses crowned his Head,
“Omega, thou art Lord’, they said.”
“Who forged that other influence
That heat of inward evidence?” Tennyson.


The discriminating student will not fail to note much signifi-
cance in the four lines quoted above. The sentiment of the first
couplet is declarative, affirmative, positive, assertive, active, or
briefly, Male. The second couplet is equally distinctive in its senti-
ment, but the diametrical opposite, being that of inquiry, solicitation,
invitation, negation, or Female.

Considered relatively they are polar opposites. They also possess
a broad generalization, or, more properly, a classification of the
world’s creeds and doctrines upon inspiration, its sources and rank.
One class claiming that inspiration is of the senses and _ intellect;
another, that it is external to the senses and intellect. Hermetic
science does not join in alliance with either one of the two doctrines
as against the other, but teaches that both are the complimentary
halves of a complete truth; expressed otherwise, a unity under two
modes of action. When the mode of action is considered, duality
stands squarely before us. Indeed, consciousness itself is due to the
ebb and flow of the energies that pertain to duality. Inspiration means
in-breathing. We inspire the essences and forces of the One Life ac-
cording to our refinement of material structure and adaptation for
receiving it.


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS 203


The Gates of Heaven open inwardly; so does inspiration, and
when we have in-breathed and replenished the body, soul and spirit,
the action becomes polarized, reaction sets in, and we throw off and
transmit all that our system is unable to neutralize or assimilate. This
brings us to the second section of our subject, namely, Exspiration.


EXSPIRATION


Exspiration means out-breathing, out-flowing thoughts, or expul-
sion of any fluidic substance or essence. It also takes the meaning of
loss or extinguishment, and herein stands as the antithesis of inspira-
tion, which is so significant of cumulation and gain. When we further
consider that the framers of our linguistic symbols spoke of breath, and
air or wind, as being or containing the intrinsic Potencies, the inspira-
tion and exspiration of this kind, meant flatly, either gain or loss of
power. Exspiration is the emission, loss or expenditure of power. The
loss or absence of power leaves behind it the attribute or correlative
state, which we call coldness. It is not mere verbal fancy to speak
of the heat and fires of inspiration, for herein we have a veritable
truth. Inspiration and Exspiration are related as the Vishnu and Siva,
preserver and destroyer in oriental religion.

It has been said that no man can serve two masters; but herein
is a paradox, for it is plain that we do seventy times every minute
transfer our subserviency from one to the other of these two
sovereigns; one brings us emancipation and the other takes it away.
The pulse of the heart and the exspiration of spirit is our inspiration,
while we expire to lower forms of life. “Tantalus, thou art living
still.” But the philosopher, looking beyond the scope of the present
times, sees therein the law of faithful compensation and the equipoise
of beneficence, for we are not privileged to reap unless we likewise
sow. It is also an exposition of that law, “Give all thou hast of breath,
or power, or life, in just duty and lawful motive; expire honestly
the corrupted or contaminated matter, and you shall instantly be
filled with the celestial fire and become refined.” Too much inspira-
tion causes levitation, too much exspiration, gravitation.

We now come to the realization of these two sections, the ac-
tuality of both inspiration and exspiration, and which may be total-
ized as Breathing.


204 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


BREATHING


There are two results of breathing; the first is from the inspiration
of common atmosphere which sustains the life of matter, sensation.
The second result is from the inspiration of the magnetic, electric,
more ethereal particles of the air, which support the life of soul and
emotion; the higher, inner, deeper part of man which concerns itself
about infinite and eternal interests. The first gives force, the second
generates power. It is possible to fill the lungs, therefore the brain,
with this last, sifted from the first, and thus the soul, with ascensive
inclination and ability, with the loftier kind of trance-power, known
as the “Sacred Sleep of Sialam,” in which the soul bids defiance to
all barriers which, awake, asleep, or in the mesmeric states, limit and
bound it; with that grand flight-power whereby it can reach infinite
altitudes and sweep with masterly vision the realm of stellar galaxies;
that Sleep of Sialam, in which man may gain whatsoever of knowl-
edge and power he wills, provided it lies within his soul’s capacity
of comprehending and using.

By slowly, regularly breathing, two things occur; to give
strength and power. First, a gain of vitality, therefore, physical life.
The organs instantly extract the vif of the air and discharge their
accumulated load. The exhalent movement is always the longer in
natural breathing; but, if you wish to gain power and have more
ethereal than physical life, the heaving of the chest should be regular
and its inspirations and exspirations of equal duration to obtain a
more harmonious influence and the slow breathing must go on from
ten to twenty minutes at a time. Fix some desired object in the mind
and the ethereal air will be retained in the lungs, brain and nerves
until sufficient reserve force is gained to add new power, thus en-
abling the soul to subdue sense and affording the pure intellect ability
to take lofty, prolonged, and heaven-sublimed flights into the Empy-
rean, or, in any direction fancy or inclination prompts or necessity
suggests.

This is one of the most potential powers within the human soul.

The term AETH signifies that finer essence which the soul
breathes; it fills the spaces, cushions the worlds and penetrates the
outer air just as odors do. It is inhaled by Aethereal beings precisely
as we of earth inhale the influence of matter in its grosser and lower


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS 205


forms. No real divine or celestial energy can be evolved until, by
patient and continued effort, the Neophyte learns to inhale the Aether
while the mind is firmly fixed upon what is in and of it. Thereby he
contacts the essence of power and the denizens of the ethereal and
far-off spaces. Thus doing will he breathe the elements which gen-
erate power in the Human soul.

Remember, O Neophyte, that Goodness alone is Power, Silence
is Strength, Will regaineth Omnipotentence, and Love lieth at the
foundation of all.

These forces should never be trifled with; should never be
brought into action for any mere worldly or temporal motives; be-
cause their sphere of action pertains only to the highest and most
interior states that it is possible for embodied man to penetrate.

Note;—The student should extend this philosophy of exspiration and inspiration
to his body griefs and captious irritants of every kind. Expire them all, cast them
out, and make room for better company, which will flow in like a festive troop
if you will make room and extend them a cordial invitation. Mean thoughts,
passions and low ideals, have killed thousands. You cannot afford to entertain


such guests. Therefore, expire them with your next breath, and bid them an
eternal farewell. T.H.B.


III REALIZATION


All centers, Spheres, Potencies, Hierarchies, and Brotherhoods,
in fact, all things on earth externalized, have their orbits and periods.
In like manner, all conceivable powers, qualities and energies in the
spaces, have the same. There are times when they are, and are not,
contactible, and it is very difficult, if not impossible, for any-one living
in domestic turmoil to contact them at all, save through the exercise
of a resolute, unbending will, and perfect indifference to the surround-
ing inharmony; but there are orders of beings, invisible to material
eyes, who were of earth once, and others who have never been ulti-
mated on, nor incarnated within this external plane of objective life
who understand anything and everything of which man can conceive;
who possess every species of knowledge, and who respond to the de-
sire and invocation of those who follow the same lines of thought
and feeling, who belong to the same state of intelligence, or who
voluntarily place themselves under the essential conditions of rapport
and contact.


206 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


The Neophyte must be careful to divest the mind of all but the
subject in hand; never seek for two dissimilar objects at the same
time, or within seven clear days between thé operations, every one of
which should be prepared for with a full heart by fastings, ablu-
tions and soul aspiration. Study these laws thoroughly nor forget this
caution; nothing can be done except through Law, Order, Rule and a
clear, definite comprehension of the underlying principles set forth
herein, and above all, a perfect Formulation of the objects desired.
But before proceeding further it is advisable to consider one or two
points, which, in the end, will be found to be of great service to the
thinking student of the Philosophy now taught. There is no accident,
nor any such thing as Chance in this life or the worlds beyond; all
external things and events are the results of internal causes, and
there are rules by which they can be forecasted and anticipated by
contacting the intelligences of that sphere. We do not mean by this,
that all human events and occurrences are foreseen by those who
were once denizens of the world we inhabit, and who for redemptive
or other ends may reveal many things to their worthy proteges; but
we mean that within this universe, there is a great central source of
intelligence, power, presence and energy, which necessarily knows all
that was, is, and is to be. This central power must be environed by
colossal mental energies, potentialities in knowledge, only second to its
Supreme Self; nor do we conceive such potencies to be ascended hu-
man beings, who once dwelt in physical bodies, lived, died and rose
again. There are electrical, ethereal, non-material universes, far
grander, vaster and more magnificent than this of ours with all its
amazing splendors, its myriad galaxies and rain-storms of starry sys-
tems; with all its inconceivable distances, and stretch of fathomless
eternities, than this of ours is superior to an anthill. There are Hier-
archies, legions of them, Potencies, Powers, and Intelligencies, not of
human material genesis, before whose amazing sweep of mind the
grandest intellect earth ever has or can produce is as a pebble to a
mountain range, a tiny dewdrop to the mighty rush of oceans’ waters,
a gentle shower to a tempest of rain, a zephyr to the raging typhoon
on its devastating march o’er land and sea.

These beings are the arbiters of the destinies of the worlds, and
the Planetary Angels, originators of the grand drama of external life.


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS 207


The capacity of Deity is boundless; that of man is limited, and
is either vast or contracted in strict accordance with the relative ratio
of his soul development and independence of mere bodily sense, per-
sonal or material bias. Perfect development means perfect at-one-
ment; this atonement is the sacrifice of the lower nature upon the
cross of purification and the evolution of the true Christ within; the
real Christian, beyond all creed, exists only in the truly perfected man.
One so developed can place himself en-rapport with the centers of
celestial life, traverse the spaces, and penetrate the grand arcana
of the universe itself.

Man has not omniscience, but has much penetration; he is not
omnipotent, yet possesses enormous latent powers; he cannot be omni-
present, but is capable of Ubique; that is, of being mentally and spir-
itually in many places and scenes at the same time. A million photo-
graphic instruments will instantly chain a million shadows or images
of any object because all surrounding space is filled with millions of
such prototypes, given off by everything continually; this is even
more true of the soul than of the body, and this fact brings us face to
face with the sublime mystery of Projection and that of its opposite,
Soul-attraction.

Projection means the sending, forcing, compelling of the astral
form, (double or soul symbol) to appear wherever the will may com-
mand through the three principles of Formulation.

Attraction is the exercise of the same power in the opposite di-
rection, to compel the apparition of another. Wherever the Neophyte
has sufficient steady will-force to decree his presence, he may compel
the appearance of whatever phantom or intelligence he chooses, and
may act with enormous force upon whom he desires.

OBSERVE;—Formulation can be excited from two planes; Ist.
from pure intellect, cold and joyless, which is its negative force or
plane; and 2nd. from the heart, the soul-emotional, or love-plane,
which is its positive point of action. Execution is always masculine,
positive, ordering, commanding, electric—of the brain alone. Recep-
tion requires instantaneous transition from the masculine brain to the
tender, soft, loving, emotional side of nature.

Woman is the receptive and Man the executive force. He im-
parts, she receives; so also the intellect of man acts on imperative
principles, her love on receptive ones; this is the law.


208 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


All good works begin and end with devout aspirations, and posing
to receive the boon craved, while desires of an opposite nature be-
gin with, and end on, opposite principles. In all matters connected
with the punishment of wrong, the protection of the weak, and im-
parting power, health and prosperity to others, Execution terminates
the formula, invariably. In actual practice the Neophyte must first
remember that the party or person to be frustrated must be present,
either in person or apparitional presence, which latter can be
achieved by the process of Formulation; this force must be contained
until the apparitional image or images stand out clearly defined be-
fore the operator; then think that which is required to be done and
formulate it just as clearly; at this point the Executive force must be
projected on its orbit. But it must never be forgotten or overlooked,
that this executive force is to be retained within the grasp of the op-
erator during the climax of the formulative moment, and never pro-
jected until the soul is full to overflowing, or it will fail to reach its
object, and, having traversed its orbit, recoil upon the operator and
produce inharmony.

Let us solemnly impress upon each and every Neophyte the
fearful dangers that will overtake him should he ever attempt to use
these powers for evil purposes or the injury of others; therefore, be
warned and rather suffer injustice than retaliate with vengeance.


Note;—In repelling any evil influence that is or may be directed against
him, the Neophyte must use the powers of Execution wisely, not with ven-
geance, but with cold, withering, lofty contempt, desiring neither vengeance
on the one hand nor giving mercy on the other. It is that state of mind which
is calm, cold, heartless and indifferent to all save self-protection; it is a state
of stern, unbending justice, and extremely difficult to be obtained. T.H.B.


PSYCHICAL CULTURE


A brief System of Soul Development, with Rules for Practical
Occult Training, specially adapted to the Natural Requirements of
the Western Members of the Exterior Circle of The Hermetic
Brotherhood of Luxor.


INTRODUCTION
The primary law to be remembered in all and every species of
occult training, is that of equilibrium. The scientific evolution of the


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS 209


latent powers of the human soul is just as much the result of methodi-
cal procedure and constant application as the training and education
of the young. No sudden results can naturally be expected. If there
are, they are premature and abnormal, and instead of cultivating
them, they must be retarded, since the perfect harmony of equilib-
rium has been violently disturbed.

In the cultivation of the psychical powers and attributes of the
soul, ever remember that there must be the seed time and the ma-
turing period before the season of reaping arrives, when we can ex-
pect to gather in the spiritual fruits of our laborious toil and industry.

The Neophyte must, first of all, thoroughly understand what he is
about, and not set blindly to work. He must have a perfect conception
of what spiritual training and discipline is, before he makes any at-
tempt in its actual practice, to enable him to arrive at a fairly correct
idea of this extremely important subject. The following brief but sig-
nificant hints can be very profitably meditated upon.

Occult training, or Psychical culture means, primarily, the en-
franchisement of the soul. Secondly, it means the cultivation and
practical utilization of the spiritual senses of the soul. And lastly, it
means the complete subjugation of every animal passion, principle
and desire within us, to the undisputed harmonious control of the di-
vine selfhood.

Commit these facts well to memory, and also remember, that
vice, habit and passion, or other inharmonious traits of character,
must be conquered. Until this is accomplished we are but the helpless
mediums of matter. It is not the actual, external indulgence in any
particular practices that constitute the real vice, but it is the power,
force and magnetic control which this habit or practice gains over the
inner self, that constitutes the actual transgression against the higher
laws of our being.

Having briefly outlined the broad principle of Psychical culture,
it is now only necessary to add a few words of warning. No practice,
whether it be that of using tobacco immoderately, drinking intoxicants,
or any other petty vice, must be checked immediately, but slowly,
gradually, in fact, almost imperceptibly. A sudden suspension means
a sudden reaction, and above everything else, psychical culture re-
quires quiet repose, equilibrium. No man can take a sudden leap
from Hades to Heaven. It is as well he cannot, because he would be


210 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


out of place and worse off than when in his previously congenial hell,
consequently, it is impossible to jump from the planes of selfish sen-
sual desire, into the realm of spiritual light in a single day, week,
month or year. It is a process of gradual growth;—first, the seed time,
then the maturing period, lastly, the spiritual harvest of heavenly
fruit. Remember this and your spiritual discipline will be conducted
wisely, worthily and well.


RULES FOR OCCULT TRAINING


Ist. The Neophyte must abstain from smoking, the use of intoxi-
cants, flesh eating, etc. The diet must be pure, wholesome, and be
strictly vegetarian in nature.

2nd. Each morning, or as often as possible, the Neophyte must
take a cold or tepid bath, according as the natural constitution is
robust or delicate. When the bath is not convenient, the body must
be well rubbed with a coarse, wet towel.

3rd. During the day, whether engaged in business or otherwise,
there must be a strong, systematic effort made to check the slightest
evil thought, word or deed, and gossip, under all circumstances,
must be completely prohibited. In fact, the Neophyte, while pleasantly
performing the necessary duties of life, must cultivate a quiet, calm,
reserved, self-possessed state of mind, and endeavor to his utmost
to hold in check grief, joy, surprise, pleasure or pain; for be it remem-
bered that the passions and sensations of the body are each and all
but petty, subordinate states, or in other words, centers of occult
force which ever strive to usurp the imperial rule of the true mon-
arch, the human Will. The vast majority of mankind are but mere
slaves of their predispositions and earthly passions, and seem to the
true occultist like an empire divided into innumerable small states,
each of which has a ruling prince of its own, powerful enough to to-
tally ignore any command of his liege lord whenever it suits his pleas-
ure to object. Until the body is brought under the command of the
Will and stands in absolute subjection to the soul, occult progress,
except in degrees, is simply impossible; and this is the greatest bar-
rier with which the Neophyte has to grapple, viz.; SELF;—‘“first
conquer thyself, and then, but not till then, mayest thou hope to con-
quer the forces of Nature,” is the advice of our revered Grand
Master, M. Theon.


THE MYSTERIES OF EROS 211


4th. When the Neophyte has advanced a few degrees on the
path toward self-control, active training should commence immedi-
ately after the morning ablution, and in the evening practice with the
mirror, or crystal meditation which follows the card practice.

5th. When convenient obtain some of the dhoop insense such
as is used in the Hindu temples. Place the mirror or crystal in po-
sition, and, sitting in a passive state of mind, gaze into the center
or focus, repeating this incantation every two or three minutes; “My
soul is one with the Universe, and my Spirit an emanation from
God.”

Then let the mind meditate upon these mystic words, and at the
same time the spiritual soul-sight will slowly but surely penetrate
the Astral light collected from the eyes of the Neophyte upon the
sensitive, magnetic surface of the mirror. The mind should be kept
as spiritual as possible during the practice, and all worldly objects
banished.

6th. The evening practice is very different from the above. The
Neophyte should sit in an easy chair or recline upon a couch in the
most easy position, and then gaze upon the card or wafered mirror,
(see the first of this chapter), and commence to formulate mental or
metaphysical objects, and then try to project them externally upon
the wall or ceiling. He may also find much benefit from a psychic
point of view, if he tries to reproduce any of the objects seen during
the day. This is the grand secret of penetrating the Astral light of
the past. By secret, we mean that this is the commencement of the
pathway that leads to the secrets of the Astral light, itself. Remember
that one can neither make a talisman nor make the powers of a magic
spell for good or evil until he becomes the complete master of the
phase, viz.; “Formulation.” The best time generally for such practice
in the evening, is twilight or near midnight, and at sunrise (just be-
fore) for the morning meditation.

7th. And lastly, the moral tone of the Neophyte’s life must be
pure, spotless and unsullied by selfish desires. Especially must all
sexual relations be carefully guarded, and only participated in after
due thought and careful study of desires and intentions. It is this very
fatal mistake of sex that has ruined thousands of otherwise promising
aspirants for occult initiation.


212 THE LIGHT OF EGYPT


CONCLUDING NOTE


The awful list of powers, attributes and forces set forth in the
works of P. B. Randolph, as attainable by the actual use of the sexual
force, is a terrible snare. It was this fatal mistake that ruined the
unfortunate, misguided Randolph himself. Therefore, remember, if
you value your soul’s immortality, that evil powers can be so gained,
but those who gain them are forever lost. It is the true way to Vou-
dooism and Black Magic. SO BEWARE how you play with the in-
fernal laws which rule the realms of animal nature and outer
darkness.
