The Religion of the Manichees (F. Crawford Burkitt, 1925)
=========================================================
The Donnellan Lectures for 1924 — the first English monograph on Manichaeism. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1925 Cambridge edition.

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS

LONDON: Fetter Lane

YAS

New York
The Macmillan Co.
Bomsay, Catcutra and
Mapras
Macmillan and Co., Ltd.

Toronto

The Macmillan Co. of
Canada, Ltd.

Toxyo
Maruzen-Kabushiki-Kaisha

All rights reserved

TO THE MOST REVEREND THE PROVOST
AND THE FELLOWS OF TRINITY COLLEGE
DUBLIN I DEDICATE THESE LECTURES
IN GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCE OF MANY

_KINDNESSES RECEIVED BOTH RECENTLY

AND IN A PAST GENERATION

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

PREFACE

THE three Lectures here printed were delivered
last June in Trinity College, Dublin, as the Don-
nellan Lectures for 1924. Theit main object is to
bring the wonderful discoveries of original Mani-
chee Literature from Central Asia before a wider
public than at present seems to know of them, and
at the same time to suggest that the Christian
_ element in the Religion of the Manichees is larger
and more fundamental than the scholars of the
last generation were inclined to allow.

I have to express my very grateful thanks to
Prof. Dr A. von Le Coq, Custodian of the Museum —
fir Volkerkunde, Berlin, for his kind permission
to me to reproduce two Illustrations from his
book Die Buddhistiche Spdtantike in Mittelasien
(2nd Part, The Manichaean Miniatures), Berlin,
1923, and to make an adaptation of another for a
Title-Page. The Illustration facing p. 1 shews a
Wall-Fresco found at Khotscho near Turfan
(Chinese Turkestan): the large figure is under-
stood to represent Mani himself, because of the
details of the curious head-dress and the elaborate
costume. As parts of this figure are faint and
mutilated I have made a line-drawing of it as faith-

PREFACE

fully as I could, which will be found facing p. 69.
Facing p. 35 is a fragmentary picture, taken from
a brightly-colouted illuminated ms., which is be-
lieved to represent the Manichaean Sacred Meal
ot Eucharist, perhaps at the annual Festival of
the Chair (Bema) of Mani. My Title-Page was the
Title-Page of a Manichee Roll: I have attempted
to testore the details where they are now torn
away in the original. The Uigur script of the
otiginal was written in vertical columns down
the central Banner, not across. It is not known
for certain what the two Genii stand for, but it
may be conjectured that they represent Land and
Sky (see p. 54, note).

It is my hope that these Illustrations may lead
others, both students of Religion and of Art, to
study the admirable teproductions of Manichaean
writings and drawings in the series which Prof.
v. Le Coq is editing: I am quite sure they are not
so well known in this country as they deserve
to be.

F, C. BURKITT

CAMBRIDGE
November 1924

vi

CONTENTS

PAGE

LECTURE I 3-33
History of the Manichees 3
Sources of our Knowledge $2
Manichaean Account of the Past 16
NOTE ON THE FIVE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD = 33
LECTURE II 37-67
‘Jesus’ in Mani’s System 37
Manichaean Church Organization 43
The Khuastuanift 48
Manichaean Ideas about the Future 63
LECTURE III 71-104
Sources of Mani’s System 7
Bardaisan 76
Martcion 80
Evidence of the documents from Turkestan 85
Worship gi
Syriac and Greek in Manichee terminology 93
Barlaam and Joasaph 97
The World—a Smudge 100
Augustine and the Origin of Evil IOI
APPENDICES 10§—125
I. The Manichaean Hierarchy 105
Il. The Five Pure Elements 107
III. Manichee Fragments in Syriac LEY
IV. The Soghdian Nestorian Lectionary 119
INDEX 127

vii

ILLUSTRATIONS

WALL-FRESCO FROM KHOTSCHO to face p. 1
MANICHAEAN ‘ EUCHARIST” eRe
PortRAIT OF MANI +s paéo

I regret that two interesting studies of some Iranian
elements in Manichaeism by Prof. A. V. Williams Jackson
teached me too late for more than a passing notice here
(J. of Amer. Oriental Soc., vol. 43, pp. 15-25; vol. 44,
pp. 61-72). In the former Article a fresh parallel to
hamotag (see p. 105) is given on p. 18. In the latter two
good emendations in the Frhrist are proposed, both about
titles of the ‘Mother of the Living,’ pp. 65, 67. At the
same time I feel that though single details in Manichaeism
can be illustrated or explained from Zoroastrian sources
the fundamental construction of Mani’s Religion remains
(heretical) Christian.

viii

SURROUNDED BY MANICHEE SAINTS.

>

From a Wall-Fresco

MANI

i

See p

found at Khotscho.

THE RELIGION OF
THE MANICHEES

oe

Sicut pictura cum colore nigro loco suo posito, ita
uniuersitas rerum (si quis possit intueri) etiam cum pecca-
toribus pulchra est, quamuis per se ipsos consideratos sua
deformitas turpet. De Cinitate Dei, xi 23.

o %

rp .

i

ne
‘aa

We

\

Beta
me, x -
(ay
ve y

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES
I

SUNDAY the 20th of Match, a.p. 242, was a
holiday in Seleucia-Ctesiphon, for it was the coro-
nation festival of the new King of Kings, Shapir I,
whose father Ardashir, sixteen years before, had
overthrown the Parthians and founded the Sasanian
_ Empire. Shapur himself was destined to reign for
over thirty years, to take prisoner in battlea Roman
Emperot, to sack the great city of Antioch and look
upon the Mediterranean as a conqueror. But the
official date of the beginning of his reign is even
mote memorable as the Pentecost of the Mani-
chaean Religion. It was on the zoth of March, 242,
that a young man called Mani began to announce
to the crowds assembled in the streets and bazars
of Ctesiphon the new Religion of which he was'
the Prophet. Such was his success that within
a centuty, in the midst of the decay of Graeco-
Roman paganism and the public triumph of
Christianity, it seemed to many observers doubtful
whether Manichaeism would not overwhelm them
both.

Now thete ate no Manichees left. The new
Religion failed to keep a footing in the West, and
it has perished in the land of its birth. But it sur-
vived for mote than a thousand years and only
disappeared, like so much that was ancient and
interesting, in the age when nearly all Asia and
much of Europe was devastated by the Tatar
hordes under Zenghis Khan and Tamerlane.

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

During nearly all that millennium the Manichees
wete a proscribed and persecuted society, of
found a tefuge only in outlying regions at the
edge of the civilized world. A faith that can com-
mand such loyalty must have in it something that
cottesponds to the needs and aspirations of men
and women, something therefore that may be
interesting to us. It is from this point of view
that I have chosen it as a subject for these Lectures.
It is the strange tale of a tragedy of long ago and
far away, but I hope it may awake in the end some
sympathetic echoes in our thoughts.

I propose to begin by sketching the general
outline of the history of the Manichees. This will
lead up to a consideration of the literary sources
upon which our knowledge of them is based, in-
cluding the wonderful discoveries of recent years
in Central Asia. Finally we shall consider the
Manichaean Religion itself, and the philosophy
which underlies it.

The message that Mani announced was, in
brief, that there are two eternal sources or
principles, Light and Dark; that by the regrettable
mixture of Dark with Light this visible and
tangible Universe has come into being; and that
the aim and object of those who are children of
Light is not the improvement of this world, for
that is impossible, but its gradual extinction, by
the separation of the Light particles from the
Dark substance with which they have been mixed.
To our Western ears this is a melancholy and

4

MANI AND HIS FATE

desperate creed, but it is certain that it possessed
a wonderful attraction to the age in which it was
first proclaimed.

In 242 Mani was a young man of twenty-six:
he was about sixty when Bahram I, Shaput’s
gtandson, had. him executed. Mani’s corpse, ot
his flayed skin stuffed with hay, was set up over
one of the gates of the royal city of Gundé-Shapur,
east of Susa, which in consequence was known for
centuries as the Mani-gate. Bahram also pro-
scribed Mani’s religion and attempted to root it
out altogether, but after a whole generation of
missionary effort it had become well established
all through the East, and persecution only drove
it below the surface. Four hundred years later,
when the Sasanian Empire, exhausted by long
wats with Constantinople, fell before the vigour
of the Arab conquerors, the Persian dominions
wete honeycombed with Manichees. No doubt at
first the change must have been to them a great
relief. The first generation of Arabs were probably
unawate of their existence. Persecution directed
against Unbelievers concerned in the first in-
stance the Zoroastrian Fire-worshippers, under
which the old national Religion of the Persians,
now disestablished and harassed with vexa-
tious tegulations, sank into obscurity. But as
soon as the existence of Manichees became
known to Moslem rulers of every sort they
wete tuthlessly suppressed wherever they were
discovered.

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

No continuous history of the Manichees can
be written. All we know from Mohammedan
soutces is that from time to time Manichees—
Arabic writers call them Zindiks—wete detected,
tuined, killed, and held up to execration. They
wete considered by Moslems not merely Un-
believers, the followers of a False Prophet, but
unnatural and unsocial, a danger to the State. Yet
the author of the Fihrist, who lived at the end
of the 1oth century, tells us that he had been
acquainted with about 300 Manichees in Baghdad
alone. All these, of course, were Manichees in
sectet: neither in Christian nor in Mohammedan
lands was Manichaeism a re/igio licita. But Al-
Birini, writing about the year 1000 A.D., says that
“most of the eastern Turks, of the people of
China and Thibet, and some of the Hindus, ad-
here to Mani’s law and doctrine.” In the Frbrist
we tead that the Manichees wete tolerated about
the same period in Samarkand, because the “King
of China”’—probably, says our author, it was the.
Chief of the Taghazghaz? Turks—had threatened __
reprisals if they were killed. The Taghazghaz lived
in Chinese Turkestan, east of Kashgar, round
about the lake or inland sea called on our maps
Lop Not.

These statements of ancient writers were verified

1 Sachau, p. 191.

* This is the name given in Arabic sources, such as the
Fihrist. It is a corruption of Toguz Oghuz, i.e. ‘The Nine
Clans.’ See A. von Le Coq, Manichaica 111 (1922), p. 40.

6

MANICHEE MSS. FROM TURKESTAN

in the early years of this century in a surprising
and most satisfactory fashion. Three or four
scientific expeditions were made to Chinese
Turkestan, and some thousands of fragments of
Mss. were discovered and brought back to Europe,
especially from the neighbourhood of a town called
Turfan. Some hundreds of these fragments are
from Manichaean mss., written in the peculiar
script used by the Manichees, so that we now
‘know something about them from their own
writings, and not only from the refutations of
their adversaries. Unfortunately these newly-found
documents are all scraps, bits of torn books and
rolls, and written in languages as yet imperfectly
known. Were it not for our other sources of
information, from Mohammedan and Christian
opponents, we should be unable to understand the
allusions in the Turfan documents.

Let us now glance at the history of Mani-
chaeism in the Roman Empire. Here again no
continuous account can be given, and some of
the chief sources of information most used by
Christians about the Manichees seem to have been
semi-fabulous. But certain incidents stand out
with startling vividness. One episode in par-
ticular may be told in full in the words of an eye-
witness. Mark, deacon to S. Porphyry of Gaza,
is prejudiced and superstitious and no doubt he
writes some yeats after the events he describes,
but his account of the Manichee missionary who

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

came to Gaza about the year 400 shews us the
movement as a living and active religion. _

About that time (says Mark!) there came to sojourn
in the city [of Gaza] a certain woman of Antioch called
Julia, who was of the abominable heresy of them which
ate called Manichaeans; and knowing that certain persons
were but lately enlightened and not yet stablished in the
holy faith she wrought secretly and corrupted them, be-
witching them by her doctrine, and much mote by gifts
of money. For he that invented the said godless heresy
was not able to catch any otherwise than by the bestowing
of money. For unto those who have understanding their
doctrine is filled full of all blasphemy and condemnation
and old wives’ fables that entice foolish womenfolk and
childish men of vain mind and wit. For out of divers
heresies and opinions of the Greeks did they build up this
their evil belief, desiring by wickedness and craft to take
hold on all men. For they say that there be many gods,
that they may be acceptable unto the Greeks; and more-
ovet they acknowledge nativities and fate and the science
of the stars, in order that they may sin without fear,
holding that the commission of sins is not in us, but cometh
from the necessity of fate.. (86) But they confess Christ
also, for they say that he was made man in appearance;
for they themselves in appearance are called Christians....
For even as a painter making a mixture of divers colours
perfecteth the appearance of a man or a beast or some other
thing for the deceit of them that behold it, that it may seem
to them that are foolish and without understanding to be
true, but to them that have understanding it is a shadow
and a deceit and aninvention of man; soalso the Manichaeans
having drawn out of divers opinions did perfect their own
evil belief, nay rather, having gathered together and mingled
the venom of divers serpents, did prepare a deadly poison
for the destruction of the souls of men. But, as aforesaid,
that pestilent woman having come to the city, certain persons

1 Mark the Deacon, 85-91: I quote from the admirable
translation of G. F. Hill.

eo

MANICHEE MISSIONARIES

wete led away by her deceitful teaching. (87) But after
some days Saint Porphyry, having been informed by certain
of the believers, sent for her and questioned her, who she
was and whence and what manner of belief she held. And
she confessed both her country and that she was a Mani-
chaean. And when they that stood around him were moved
with wrath (for there were certain devout men with him),
the blessed man besought them not to be angered, but with —
patience to exhort her a first and a second time, observin,
the saying of the holy Apostle (Tit. iii 10). Then saith he
to the woman: “Abstain, Sister, from this evil belief, for
it is of Satan.” But she answered: “Speak and hear, and
either persuade or be persuaded.” And the blessed man
said: “Prepare thyself against the morrow and present thy-
self here.” So she took her leave and departed. But the
blessed man, having fasted and prayed much unto Christ
that he would shame the devil, prepared himself against
the next day and called certain of the devout, both clergy
and laymen, to hear the dispute between himself and the
woman. (88) And on the morrow the woman presenteth
herself, having with her two men and as many women;,
they wete young and fair to look upon, and the faces of
them all were pale; but Julia was old in years. And they all
did build their reasoning upon the teaching of this world,
and much more Julia than the others. And their guise was
lowly and their manner gentle, but, as it is said, they were
outwardly sheep and inwardly ravening wolves and
venomous beasts; for hypocrisy is in all their words and
deeds. Then being bidden to sit down they inquired into
the matter. And the saint, holding the holy gospels and
having made the sign of the Cross on his mouth, began to
ask her to declare her belief and she began to speak. And
brother Cornelius the deacon, being skilled in the short-
hand of Ennomus, did at the bidding of the most blessed
bishop note all that was said and disputed, I and brother
Barochas reminding him.

I am sorty to say that Mark now explains that
he did not write the dispute in this book, “seeing

ie”
,

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

that it was long,” so that we have no report of

“the old wives’ fables which the marvel-monger

and magician Julia spake in her foolishness.”
The end was dramatic. Mark goes on to say (89):

After she had said many vain things for many hours and
spoken the customary blasphemies against the Lord and
God of all, Saint Porphyry, being moved by divine zeal,
when he saw Him that comprehendeth all things both seen
and unseen blasphemed by a woman possessed of the devil
and submitting herself to his will, gave forth his sentence
against her, saying: “God, who made all things, who alone
is eternal, having neither beginning nor ending, who is

glorified in trinity, shall smite thy tongue and muzzle —

thy mouth, that thou mayest not speak evil things.”
(90) And straightway with the sentence followed also the
punishment; for Julia began to tremble and het coun-
tenance to be changed, and continuing as in a trance for
a certain time she spake not, but was without voice or
motion, having her eyes open and fastened upon the most
holy bishop. But they that were with her, beholding that
which she suffered, were soreafraid, and sought to awake her
spirit and sang charms into her ear; and there was no speech
and there was no hearing. And after she had been for a
certain time without speech, she gave up the ghost, departing
unto the darkness which she honoured, holding it to belight.

Bishop Porphyry had the old lady properly —

buried: “he was exceeding compassionate,” says
Mark, who adds that the men and women who
had appeared with Julia confessed their error.
“(91) But the blessed man caused them all to curse
Manes, the author of their heresy, after whom
also they were called Manichaeans, and having

instructed them for many days he brought them

into the holy Catholic Church.”
Poor Julia! I have quoted this story almost in

to

ey ; é

CONVERSION OF AUGUSTINE

full, because it gives us so much of the fear and
animosity with which the Manichaean Religion
was tegatded during the centuries when it was a
crusading, missionary Faith. ot
The Manichaean propaganda when at its height —
was not stopped by barriers of language or
culture. It had spread by the middle of the 4th
centuty into the Latin-speaking West, and in
Carthage it secured its most famous convert. For
nine years, from 373 onwards, Augustine was a
Manichee and in various ways the Manichaean
Religion left an enduring impress on his mind,
telics of which can still be traced in actually
current notions. Certainly in the contrasted con-
ceptions of the Citas Dei and the Cinitas Mundi
there is a petceptible teflexion of the Manichee
notion of the eternal realms of Light and Dark.
The experience that S. Augustine had had
setved him well when as a Bishop in Africa he
__ had to withstand Manichee missionaties such as
- Fortunatus and Felix, or to confute Manichee
books of controversy such as that of Faustus.
Several of Augustine’s works still remain among
out chief authorities for the doctrines of Mani-
chaeism. But after Augustine’s day, that is, from
the middle of the sth century onwards, our in-
formation is very scanty. It is all the scantier if
account be taken of the fact that orthodox
Christians ‘often used the word ‘Manichaean’ to
describe heretics whose doctrines were imperfectly

II

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

understood but seemed to impugn the goodness
of God or the salvability of the human body. The
Bogomils of Bulgaria, the “Cathari’ and ‘Patarenes’
of Lombardy, and above all the Albigensians, have
often been called Manichees in ancient and modern
times. It is likely that fragments of their teaching
wete teally derived from Manichaean sources. But
now that we have so much mote exact knowledge
of what the Religion of the Manichees really was
I think it misleading to call these sects, even the
Albigensians, by the name of Manichees. In any
case it is hazardous to use Albigensian material
to illustrate the Religion we are studying.

The chief authorities on which our knowledge
of Manichaeism is based may be grouped in a
geographical order. Beginning with the West, we
have in Latin the writings of S. Augustine, with
which must be associated the De Fide ascribed to
Augustine’s friend Evodius.

In Gteek there are many polemics against the
Manichees, but when looked at carefully it is clear
that the writers are all dependent on a vety few
original authorities. These are (in addition to Mark
the Deacon, quoted above): (1) Alexander of Lyco-
polis; (2) the Acts of Archelaus, by ‘Hegemonius’
(see below); (3) Titus of Bostra; (4) Severus of
Antioch, Homily cxxim1, extant only in Syriac trans-
lations; (5) the Formula of Abjuration, which
convetted Manichees had to pronounce before
teception into the Church (Migne, P.G. 1, 1461-9):

12

~

EXTANT AUTHORITIES

this document in its present form dates only from
the 9th century, but it preserves with a good deal of
fidelity certain names and teligious expressions.
Epiphanius writes copiously against the Mani-
_chees in his Panarion, Heresy 66 (ot 46), but he is
dependent on the Acts of Archelaus and onTitus
of Bostra. The great service he has rendered is to
quote in full the general account of the Manichaean
Religion given in the Acts of Archelaus, a work
otherwise extant only in a Latin translation. This
general account is the kernel of the whole work,
the only part of it which has any scientific value.
In Syriac we have the anti-Manichaean writings
of S. Ephraim who died in 373, only a century
after Mani himself. Certain polemical discourses
in verse by this Church Father have long been
known, but the numerous bitter words contained:
in them against Mani were too vague and allusive
to be of much value to the modern investigator.
Since 1921 we have the two volumes of the late
C. W. Mitchell’s decipherment of Ephraim’s prose
Refutations of Mani, Marcion and Bardaisan, taken
from a 6th century ms. in the British Museum
which is mostly palimpsest and very difficult to
tead!. S. Ephraim, for our purposes, is a very
tiresome writer; he is exceedingly prolix, while

1 §. Epbhraim’s Prose Refutations of Mami, Marcion and
Bardaisan....by C. W. Mitchell, vol. 1, 1912; vol. 11, 1921
(quoted as Mitchell, 1 and 11). Mr Mitchell was a young
Canadian scholar, trained at Cambridge, who was killed
in France in 1917 when on active service as a Chaplain.

13

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

only making the smallest possible direct quota-
tions from his heretical adversaries. But with all
drawbacks his work appeats to me to be of very
gteat importance. He writes in Syriac, in the
language in which most of Mani’s own writings
wete composed, so that the terms and titles by
which he names the technicalities of Manichee
Religion are likely to be Mani’s own names for
them. But further, I venture to think that
Ephraim’s diagnosis of Manichaeism is in essence
more cottect than a great deal that has been written
on it by modern scholars, for he regards it as
mainly a mixture of the heretical systems of
Martcion and of Bardaisan. No doubt this is not
all the truth: there is doubtless a large non-
Christian element in the Manichee Religion, but
its Christian parts do seem to me to have greater
affinity with the Christianity of Marcion and of
Bardaisan than with that of the Catholic Church,
and these parts seem to me to be the living kernel
of the Manichaean system.

Besides Ephraim we have in Syriac the Book of
Scholia by Theodore bar Khoni (or rather, Konai!),
Nestorian Bishop of Kashkar?, who seems to have
lived at the beginning of the 7th century. Theodote,
fortunately for us, quotes directly from a Mani-
chaean writing, so that his witness, though com-

1 The name (,i48) is vocalized Konai in C.U.L. Add.
1998 (Cat. of Camb. U. Libr., p. 444).

* Kashkar, not to be confounded with Kashgar in

Turkestan (see p. 6), was a town or district in Lower
Babylonia, now called Wasit.

14

EXTANT AUTHORITIES

paratively late, is of special value. The Scholia ate
given with a full and illuminating commentary in
Franz Cumont’s Cosmogonie Manichéenne, which is
vol. 1 of his Recherches sur le Manichéisme}.

In Arabic the most important accounts of
Mani and the Manichaean literature are that by
Al-Birini, and the work called the Fyhrist (or
Catalogue) by Mohammed ibn Ishak al-Warrak,
known as An-Nadim. This latter work, the Fihrist
al-‘ulim, a sort of History of Literature, contains
a long chapter on Mani and his writings, which
is one of the most detailed and most accurate
soufces we possess on the subject: it was ad-
mirably edited and translated with copious ex-
planatory notes by Gustav Fliigel in 18622. The
Fibrist was written in 988 a.p., and Al-Birini’s
work about 1000 A.D. '

Finally we have the Manichaean fragments dis-
coveted early in this century in Chinese Turkestan.
In these, and these only, we hear Manichees
speaking for themselves and not through the
tepotts of adversaries. Unfortunately the frag-
ments consist almost entirely of small and often
unintelligible scraps, and they are written either
in the Soghdian language, z.e. a sort of Middle-
Petsian intermediate between the Old-Persian of
the inscriptions and the language used to-day, or

1 Published in 1908. Here quoted as Cumont, 1. The

Severus Homily is quoted as Cumont, 11.
2 Mani, seine Lehre und seine Schriften, von G. Fligel

(quoted as Fliigel by its pages).

TS

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

else in a Proto-Turkish which beats a somewhat _
similar relation to the speech of Constantinople
and Angora. Other documents bearing on the
Manichees and oe from the same region are
in Chinese.
Further, the texts and translations of the frag- :
ments have to be sought for in many different |
publications. Prof. F. W. K. Miller and Prof. A.
von Le Coq write in the Si#zungsberichte and’ Ab-
handlungen of the Berlin Academy, MM. Chavannes
and Pelliot in the Journal Asiatique of Patis. Some
other documents wete published by Prof. Sale-
mann in the Proceedings of the (then) Imperial
Academy of Petersburg, and one very important
text, the Khuastuanift, has been most fully pub-
lished by’ v. Le Coq in the Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society for 1911 from a roll discovered by
Sir Aurel Stein. It is fortunate that for everything
published before 1918 we have an admirable guide
to these newly-found texts in M. Prosper Alfaric’s
Ecritures Manichéennes, a wotk to which I am much

indebted!.

—-

Before attempting to criticise the Religion of
the Manichees, to estimate its influence, its merits
and defects, it is necessary to describe it. In what
follows I have been somewhat eclectic, but I give
references to the authorities wherever it seems
necessary.

From all our sources, from Augustine in the

* See especially 1, pp. 129-138; U1, pp. 126-136.

16

LIGHT AND DARK

_ West to the Manichaean penitential Litany in the

Lat

far North-East, we learn that the Manichees began
with the Two Roots, and to this was added the
Three Moments. The Two Roots, or Principles,

_ ate those of the Light and the Dark; by the Three

Moments they mean the Past, the Present and the
Futuret. Light and Dark are two absolutely dif-
ferent eternal Existences. In the beginning they
wete separate, as they should be. But in the Past
the Dark made an incursion on the Light and
some of the Light became mingled with the Dark,
as it still is in the Present; nevertheless a means of
refining this Light from ‘the Dark was called into
being and of protecting the whole realm of Light
from any further invasion, so that in the Future
the Light and the Dark will be happily separated.

Light and Dark are the proper designations of ,
the two Principles, but conjoined with the idea
of the Light was everything that was Good,
otderly, peaceful, intelligent; with that of the
Dark everything that was Bad, anarchic, turbulent,
material. “The difference between these two

Principles is like that between a King and a Pig:

Light dwells in a royal abode in places suitable
to its nature, while the Dark like a pig wallows
in mud and is nourished by filth and delights
in it?.”” Another expression of this fundamental

1 See Alfaric, 11 66, and the Khuastuanift (quoted below).

2 Cumont, II 97, a quotation from Severus, who is
quoting a work of Mani, very probably that called Kepbalaia
in Greek and Do Bun (i.e. ‘Two Roots’) in Persian.

B I7 2

bi
THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

dualism is that of the Two Trees, the Tree of
Life or Good Tree, and the Tree of Death!. These
ate regatded as filling all Space, and the way this
is described lets us see Mani’s view of the relative
amounts of Light and Dark that he conceived to
exist. In effect three-quarters of Space, all that
extends to East and West and North, is the un-
disputed realm of the Tree of Life. The Tree of
Death is only in the Southern quarter. There the
Tree of Life also exists, but it is invisible, shrouded
from alien gaze by what is variously called its own
‘glory’ and a ‘wall’ raised by ‘God’ for its pro-
tection’. We may fairly infer from this curious
passage that Mani thought of the Light as at least
more than three times as great and powerful as
the Dark nature?. Also we may believe that this
placing of the evil burning black Nature in the
South is a thought that had its origin in the hot
plains of Babylonia.

The most usual Manichaean presentation of the
primordial condition of the Light and the Dark
is that of two contiguous Realms or States, ex-
isting side by side from all eternity without any
commixtute. Each Realm was self-contained and
approptiately organized. In the Realm of Light
dwelt the Father of Greatness with his Light,
his Power, and his Wisdom, forming a sort of

1 Cumont, 11 96, 100 f. 2 Ibid. 11 100-105.

3 If in the comparatively ‘dark’ realm of the South
the ‘dark’ be thought of as twice as great as the ‘light,’ then

ee ig whole the ‘light’ will be five times as great as the
‘dark.’

18

= . '
REALMS OF LIGHT AND DARK

Quaternity which the Greek Manichees called
“Four-Faced!.’ This Supreme Ruler of Light
was tendered Zrvan by the Persian-speaking Mani-
chees, just as we sometimes speak of God as ‘The
Eternal.’ Mani represents the Father of Greatness
as occupying five Dwellings: we should say five
Attributes, for the word is the Syriac form of the
Hebrew Shekinah. These five ate Sense, Reason,
Thought, Imagination, Intention*’—the qualities
of a sane and intelligent mind.

Opposite this blissful Realm or terra lucida, as
S. Augustine calls it, is the Realm of the Dark,
inhabited by the King of the Dark with his rest-
less and infernal brood, a region of suffocating
smoke, of destructive fire, of scorching wind, of
poisonous water, of “darkness which may be
felt®.” I use the familiar phrase from Exodus, ,
though not expressly quoted in our documents,
because it brings out the substantial character of the
‘Dark’ as imagined by the Manichees. We, follow-
ing Aristotle and Milton, know that darkness is

Privation mere of light and absent day4,

1 Manichee converts to Catholicism had to abjure rév

tetparpocwrov Iatépa tot Meyébove (Abjuration, 1461): see

Cumont, 1 8.
2 The five Syriac words are “1am, Msam, <un4,

<hasmm, <hxsh. There is a good Note on them by
Kugener in Cumont,110. For the renderings here adopted
see the separate Note at the end of this chapter (p. 33).

3 Theodore b. Konai in Cumont, 1 11, note.

4 Paradise Regained, tv 400: see J. E. B. Mayot’s Catena
of passages from Augustine and others in illustration of
this phrase (Journal of Philology, 1903, No. 56, pp. 289-292).

19 2-2

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

but to the Manichees it was something positive.
The Syriac word for ‘darkness’ (JeSSoya@) 1s not an
abstract, but rather the Dark substance or place},
as indeed it seems to be in Hebrew, for to the
Psalmist darkness could be ‘sent®.’? We shall see
later on that Mani did not invent this substantial
quality of his ‘darkness,’ but took it over from a
previous philosophy.

The denizens of this pestiferous Realm suited
its character. Mani represents them as groping
about in aimless anarchy, at enmity with each
other, so far as they were aware of each other’s
existence. He was evidently at pains to represent
the Realm of Darkness as being in every way
odious. But we have not yet come to anything
that can properly be described as Evil. The horrible
Dark is peopled with a horrible race appropriate
in character and habits to the place they live in.
Evil began when the Dark invaded the Light.

Mani naturally could not explain how this first
disturbance of the eternal order took place, but
he seems somewhere to have expressed it, that it
was as if the Dark from a far distance smelt and
perceived that there was “something pleasant”
beyond his region’. Here, as elsewhere in many
ancient religions, a conception which has its true

1 As we say ‘in ¢he dark’ in English.

2 Psalm cv 28. It seems something of a marvel to the
Fourth Evangelist that ‘darkness’ cannot ‘take hold of?
light (John i 5).

3 Mitchell, 1, p. lx.

20

THE BEGINNING OF EVIL

root in human nature is expressed and believed in
as a cosmological happening, for I cannot doubt
that Mani’s point is, that the beginning of Evil is
unregulated desire.

But we must not philosophize at this early stage,
still less regard Mani’s cosmological revelations as
allegories. Fantastic as Mani’s Gods or Angels
may be, it is clear that he and his disciples believed
in them as real. The modern investigator has to
be careful on both sides: to be fair to the Religion
of the Manichees we need to remember that the
fantastic myths which Mani taught correspond to
a serious view of the strange mixture of good and
bad, which we feel within ourselves and see in
other human beings; and on the other hand as
histotians we must not treat as allegories the tales
of the Primal Man and the rest of the Manichaean
mythology because to us with our modern
scientific conceptions of the material universe they
sound silly and bizarre.

To this tale of the Primal Man we must now
come. The tale is indeed fundamental to Mani-
chaeism. According to Mani, writing to one
Patticius!, it is useless to consider the origin of
Adam and Eve till one has understanding of
“what happened before the constitution of the
world, and how the War broke out, so as to be

1 Patticius in Latin, Waréxioo in Greek. Fligel, and others
following him, spell this name Fustak, but the ‘u’ only rests
on the vocalization of one of Fliigel’s mss. of the Frhrist.
Shahrastani has Favzk.

21

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

able to separate the nature of Light from the
Dark1.” The story is told in the fullest detail by
Theodore bar Konai, in whose account, as it is
written in Syriac, the various personages are
spoken of by their original Manichaean names?.

The trouble began by the Ruler of the Dark
coming up out of his domain to invade the realms
of Light. Thus the great event, to the issue of
which is due the existence of this world we live
in, came to pass through the unlicensed initiative
of the Powers of Darkness. The invasion caused
consternation in all the Five Realms of Light, for
they were unprovided with defences. “In the
wotld of Light there is no burning Fire such as
could be hurled against the Evil One, no cutting
Iron or suffocating Water, nor any other evil
thing of the sort; everything there is Light and
a free region®.” The Father of Greatness, who saw
that His existing Manifestations (or Shekinahs)
were unable to resist the Enemy, “for they had
been created for tranquillity and peace,”’ decided
to oppose the Powers of Darkness by a new kind
of Being. So “the Father of Greatness evoked
the Mother of Life, and the Mother of Life evoked
the Primal Man‘4.”

Two points call for notice in passing. It must
not be supposed that the Primal Man is Adam:

1 Ap. Aug. c. Ep. Fundamenti, 12.

2 For what follows, see Cumont, 1 13 ff.

3 Severus, ap. Cumont, 1 127.

4 Cumont, 1 14: the Syriac is Maman <x,

22

THE PRIMAL MAN

he is more like the tpdtoa avOpwrooe which
appeats in some Gnostic speculations! in that he
is wholly Divine, consubstantial with the Father
of Greatness, and so is consistently invoked as
God in prayer and praise in Manichee Hymns.
He is ‘consubstantial,’ but not ‘begotten.’ As we
shall see, Manichaeism was always ascetic, even to
the terms in which Mani expressed his cosmology.
All generation was to Mani hateful, for it was a
fresh mixture. To take life was to cut the Parts of
the Light imprisoned in a living body; to produce
fresh life was to perpetuate a state of things that
ought never to have been. It was equally wrong
to sow and to reap, and the Elect Manichees—the
Righteous (xaddiké), as they called themselves—
wete not willing even to break bread lest they
should pain the Light which is mixed with it,
(Mitchell, 1, p. xxx), their food, as we learn from
other sources, being wholly prepared for them by
mete disciples?. In accordance with this the Mani-
chaeans appear to have avoided all words like
‘beget,’ or even ‘create,’ in describing the pro-
duction of the Hierarchy of Light. We hear of the
Father of Greatness and the Mother of Life (or,
of the Living), but the Primal Man is not styled
their Son: Mani seems to have carried through
the idea of the Logos, or mete Word, as the pro-
ducing organ. The Father of Greatness neither .
espouses the Mother of Life nor begets the Primal

1 See Iten. Hager. i 30,. 1.
2 Acta Archelai, ix ad fin.

23

e
THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

Man, but calls («to)—and they existt. The
wotd is not a dialectical peculiarity, but a theo-
logical idiom. There is no syzygy of the Aeons
in Manichaeism, as in the system of Valentinus.
Moreover there is this fundamental difference
between Manichaean and Christian Theology,
whether Catholic or Gnostic, that the Trinity or
the Ogdoad are set forth as primordial, if not
eternal: the resulting Hierarchy or Divine Society
is the natural outcome of the ultimate Divine
Being, and therefore terms of generation were
used, in order to avoid the impression that the
‘Son’ of God was in any way made out of some- |
thing else. But in Manichaean Theology the
Divine Hierarchy was not eternal; it was, like
everything else we know of, the result of the
initiative of Evil, a by-product of unregulated
Desire.

The Primal Man having been called into being,
he was clothed or armed for the fight with the
Five Bright Elements, called in Syriac the Ziwané.
That these were five in number is constantly
assetted; in fact, the Turkish-speaking Manichees
seem to have invoked these Elements by the
cutious name of ‘Five-God.’ But though four of
the five were certainly Light, Wind, Fire and
Water, there is some uncertainty as to what was
the fifth. Augustine (¢. Faust. 11 3) seems to give
aer, the Acta Archelai (ap. Epiph. 659) have vd»,
the Fthrist gives ‘the gentle breeze’ (Jesi!!). I may

1 Similarly Cumont, 1 14.

24

THE PRIMAL MAN’S DEFEAT

add that the Soghdian word seems to be pravabr
and the Uigur Turkish fitura, conventionally
tendered ‘aether1.’

However this may be, the Primal Man, armed
ort clothed with his Five Bright Elements and pte-
ceded by an angel called Nahashbat, beating a
crown of victory, went forth to repel the King of
the Dark. But the result was disaster. The Primal
Man was left lying unconscious on the field of
battle, and the Five Bright Elements were swal-
lowed up by the Dark, which itself is sometimes
tegarded as a single King of Darkness, sometimes
as a plurality, the Sons of the Dark, also called by
Manichees the Archons?. This all-important com-
bat was sometimes represented in Manichaean
documents as not altogether a victory for the

Dark. The Primal Man, it is true, was left lying,

unconscious and his Zivané wete swallowed up,
but both Ephraim (Mitchell, 1, p. Ixxix) and Titus
of Bostra (A 17) tell us that the Zidné were used
by the Primal Man as a bait (S€eap) to catch the
Sons of the Dark. The idea was, they tell us, that
the infernal Powers were weakened by having some
sweetness and light mingled with their substance.

When the Primal Man tecovered from his
swoon, he entreated the Father of Greatness to
come to his support. So a second creation, or

1 See Appendix 11.

2 In Syriac _asied (pl. <\pasi). The word, derived
from the Greek dpxwv, possibly occurs even in the Turkish
Khuastuanift, |. 169.

25

Ro

LAE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

tather evocation, of Light-powets came into being,
which were the Friend of the Luminaries, the
Great Ban and the Living Spirit. What the Friend
of the Luminaries did is not quite certain: possibly
he was responsible for making the Sun and Moon.
We leatn from Ephraim that Ban was the Architect
who planned the Walls that were ultimately to
confine the Powers of Darkness in their infernal
region, while Theodore b. Konai tells us that the
Living Spirit produced the five heavenly Powers
that hold our mixed world together.

But out world was not yet formed, according
to the Manichaean cosmogony. We have not yet
come to the mastering of the Dark Power by the
Light. And indeed how exactly this came about
our accounts do not make clear, except that the
power of the Living Spirit (so Theodore) or of
the Friend of the Luminaries (so the Fzhrist, p. 88)
restored to the Primal Man his divine energy. He
had lost his panoply, and was swallowed up in
the region of the Dark, but he himself was un-
harmed and unpolluted. And so he descended to
the lowest deep of the Abyss and cut the roots
of the Five dark Elements, so that they could
never increase?. Then he returned to the field

1 Cumont, I 21.

* This detail, so far as I know, is only preserved in the
Fibrist (Fligel, p. 89). I accept it here for three reasons:
(1) the Roots correspond to the Myth of the Two Trees,
mentioned above; (2) the tale recurs, with characteristic

differences, in the Book of Hierotheos; and (3) it appears to
be a mythical expansion of Eph. iv 9, 10.

26

ine DEPEAT CHECKED

of battle and took the Powers of Darkness
prisoner.

Thus the primordial invasion of the Light, by
the Dark anarchic Powets was definitely arrested.
But as we now all know, Victory is one thing and
Repatations another. The dark Archons were
defeated and captured, but they had absorbed—in
point of fact, digested—the Five bright Elements,
and the Realm of Light would be for ever poorer
if these were not recovered. The problem now
was not only how to turn the proper region
of Darkness into a prison by encircling it
with an impenetrable Wall, but also how to
extract the absorbed Light from the Archons.
According to Mani our world is the result of this
process.

First of all, a great deal of the Light-substance
was immediately disgorged, and of this the two
pure Luminaries, Sun and Moon, were made,
together with all they required in their course
through the heavens!. But a great deal remained in
the very frames of the Archons, so the Primal Man
(as Ephraim tells us)? “flayed them, and made this
Sky from their skins, and out of their excrement
he compacted the Earth, and out of their bones
he moulded and raised and piled up the Moun-
tains,” so that “in rain and dew the pure Elements
yet remaining in them might be squeezed out.”
Thus to Mani our earth with the visible heavens

1 See Miller, 1 (1904), P: 38 f.
2 Mitchell, 1, p. xxxiii f.

27

e
THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

above us is formed of the dismembered parts of
the evil demons of Darkness. And how, we ask,
is it held together and kept in its place? That, we
ate told, is the task of the Five Beings evoked by
the Living Spirit. There is the Sp/enditenens, as
Augustine calls him (¢. Faust. xx 10), who holds
the world suspended like a chandelier; the “King
of Honour,’ whose tays collect the fragments of
the light-particles; the ‘Adamant,’ with his shield
and spear driving off any tescue-party of the
demons of the Dark; the ‘King of Glory,’ who
rotates the heavenly spheres that surround the
world; and finally the gigantic ‘Atlas,’ on whose
shoulders the whole mass is supported.

The damage done by the invasion of the Realms
of Light was thus localized. The Archons, within
whose bodies some particles of Light had been
absorbed, are held in their place, and now the
Heavenly Powers supplicate the Eternal, the
‘Father of Greatness,’ to evoke some means of
extracting these remaining particles. First He had
evoked the Primal Man, then the Living Spirit,
and now He sends a Third Creation, the Legatus

1 The names ate given by Theodore (Cumont, 1 22, note)
in the original Syriac. Of these the <\=w, or ‘Supporter,’
is mentioned by Ephraim (Mitchell, 11 208.) = p. xcviii),
and the Sp/enditenens in the preceding line. Unfortunately
the first part of this latter name is illegible in the ms.
Theodore gives <as ha el have conjectured that this
is to be connected with Assyr. sabit, Ar. dabit, and Jewish
Aramaic NNI¥, so that the meaning will be ‘Tongs of
Brilliance.’ .

28

. A

:
THE MESSENGER

Tertius, the native name for whom was Iz gadda,
the Messenger.

There was an old myth, used by some of the
Christian Gnostics, which told how Barbelo, the
_gteat Goddess of Gnostic lore, shewed her beauty
to the ‘ Archons,’ who became enamoured of her
and thereby emitted their ‘power.’ This notion
appears in various forms and may vety likely be
the survival of some antique nature-myth. The
myth was borrowed by Mani, and applied to the
Messenger and his attendants, for he appeared to
the captive Archons as a beautiful person of the
Opposite sex to each of them, and they in a passion
of desire began to give out the Light which they
had absorbed from the Ziwdné, or Light-elements.
But with the Light came out also the ‘sin’ which
was engtained in their substance, whereupon the,
Messenger hid himself from them and separated
the Light that had emanated from the Archons
from the ‘sinful’ part. The Light was rescued and
taken up into the Sun and Moon, while the ‘sin’
fell on the earth, partly on the sea, partly on the
dry land. That which fell on the sea turned into a
horrible monster, the image of the King of the
Dark, but Adamas was ready and transfixed his
heart with his great lance®. That which fell on the
dry land turned into Trees, and so living plants

1 Epiphanius, Haer. xxv 2 (on the ‘Nicolaitans’): see
Cumont, 1 67.

2 In other words, exactly like S. George and the Dragon.
Only the Horse is absent.

29)

\

»
THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

came into being. The ‘sin’ of which they are made
is, in fact, according to Manichaean notions, the
sinful substance which ought never to have come
into being, vz. a mixture of the Dark substance
with the Elements of Light. The strange tale which
Mani gave of the origin of plants lent itself to
obscene deductions, which Christian controver-
sialists were not slow to make, but I think that
M. Cumont has sufficiently demonstrated that the
myth, as used by Mani, was consciously ‘volatilisé’
(p. 67). The reason why the ‘Messenger’ must be
introduced in any account of the Manichaean
cosmogony is that he is the heavenly prototype
of the later, human Messengers of the Powers of
Light, the Préstags and Burkhans, sach finally as
was Mani himself. These Messengers of the Light,
accompanied by their virtues, come to men and
are the main agents whereby the remaining Light
in this dark world is to become separated and
rescued from its surroundings.

The creation of animals followed in a somewhat
similar manner, and the Archons began to fear
that all the Light that they had absorbed would
be conjured out of them. So, by a strange process
of generation and cannibalism, the King of the
Dark caused his infernal spouse to give birth to
a fresh being in which was hidden most of the
absorbed Light. This was Adam. He was made
“in the image of God,’ that is to say in the image
of the Divine Messenger who had appeared to the
Atchons. The same parents afterwards produced

30

*
ADAM AND BVE

Eve, but she had in her frame less of the Light.
Adam, on the other hand, was truly a mictocosm,
the image of the universe, of God and matter, of
Light and Dark.

So Jesus, the Ziand,—I cannot here discuss
this epithet!, but in any case it means a heavenly
Being,—was sent down to earth, where Adam
was lying inert on the ground. Jesus, called by
Manichees the Friend*, found him plunged in
_ deep sleep, awoke him, made him move, aroused
him from his slumber, and drove away the
demons that watched over him. Then Adam
looked at himself and knew what he was®. Jesus
shewed Adam some at least of the Heavenly
Hierarchy, and made him realize that though he,
Jesus, was in essence wholly of the Light, the
Light in this world is exposed to all sorts of
dangers, to be torn by wild beasts, eaten by dogs,
always being mixed and imprisoned in the foul
substances that ate derived from the Dark‘. In
this way Adam comes to a knowledge of his true
nature. “Jesus made him stand upright and taste
of the Tree of Life. Then Adam looked and wept,
he lifted up his voice like a roaring lion, he tore

1 See Appendix 11.

2 Cumont, 1 46, last line (cet ami). The epithet ‘Friend’
(ariyadmdn) for the heavenly Jesus is found in Manichaean
texts from Turfan: see Miller, 1 (’04), p. 28.

3 Theodore, ap. Cumont, 1 46f.: Cumont points out
that what is explained to Adam is the doctrine of the
‘suffering Jesus’ that we find among the African Manichees.

4 Ibid. 48.

31

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

his hair and beat his breast, and said: ‘Woe, woe,
to the creator of my body! Woe to him who has
bound my soul to it, and to the rebels who have
brought me to servitude!’”

This is the last of the Manichaean extracts
quoted by Theodore bar Konai. M. Cumont
adds: “By making Adam taste of the fruit of
knowledge Jesus, and not the Tempter, revealed
to him the depth of his misery. But man will
know henceforth the way of enfranchisement. He
must consecrate his life to keeping his soul from
all corporal defilement by practising continence
and renunciation, so as to set free little by little
from the bonds of matter the Divine Substance
within him and disseminated throughout nature,
and thereby join in the great work of distillation
which God is occupied with in the Universel.”
M. Cumont points out that the passage about
Adam quoted above was probably part of the
peroration of the Epistula Fundamenti, against
which S. Augustine polemizes, the Letter of Mani
known as ‘the Great Epistle to Patticius,’ also
called, as M. Alfaric has made probable, by the
Greek name Tpaybareia”,

We have been dealing all this time with what
the Manichees thought of the Past: in the next
Lecture we shall consider their ideas on the
Present and the Future. Of the Past there is little
mote to be said. According to Mani, Adam,

1 Cumont, I 49. 2 Alfaric, 11 58-68.

32

ADAM AND EVE

watned in time, kept away from Eve for a long
petiod, for neither Cain nor Abel was his son; they
wete both sons of the Atchon-brood. At last, how-
ever, Adam forgot his duty and so Seth (or, as
the Manichees called him, Séthi/1) was born, and
in him and his descendants the particles of the
Light are still imprisoned.

1 Jos: see Fliigel, p. 269. The name is also found
among the Mandaeans.

NOTE ON THE FIVE ATTRIBUTES (p. 19)

The five Syriac words quoted on p. 19, note 2, are often
rendered ‘mind’ or ‘thought’ somewhat indiscriminately:
their more exact meaning may be inferred from the fol-
lowing examples:

Hauna (sam) is Sense or Sanity as opposed to madness.
When the kinsmen of Jesus said ‘He is beside himself’ ,
(eEéorn, Mk iii 21), the Syriac has ‘He has gone out of his
hauna.

Mad‘a (<==) is the faculty of Reason that distin-
guishes Man, a faculty that Bardaisan considered distinct
from the soul and Divine (Eph. agst. Bard. t1x: see Mitchell,
11, p. lxxiii),

Re‘yand (<ss—4) is the commonest Syriac word for
Thought ot Mind.

Mabshabtha (<haxu) I tender Imagination, because
it generally seems to contain the notion of something
freshly invented. Thus in Mitchell, 1, p. lxiti, it is said
“sometimes HULE acquired Thought,” but I believe that
“once upon a time HULE got a notion” would be a more
accutate as well as a more idiomatic English rendering.

Tar‘itha (<sa~Ah) has generally the notion of Intention,
the Mind regarded as Will. A good example of its use will
be found in Mitchell, 1, p. 235.

B 33 3

i i to ee

09 “anou 98 “4Sb dd aag -aaysunyy pag, uv 40f poof sv pasaffo Gyviuomasra) 8u1ag yindy puv poasg

 LSIYVHOo, NVAVHOINVA

-tiesa

481 I21 > as > pas
hain pais
waiwo Alt gs
Yom min yom miz‘ar zar
minyanhén dnaphshatha
badmistallan wsalkan. .
“Day by day diminishes
The number of the Souls (below)
As they are distilled and mount up.”

35

(
THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

II

WE have seen what Mani taught about the
Past, about the eternal opposition of Light and
Dark, how the Dark invaded the Realms of Light,
and how thereby our mingled world came into
being. We must now go on to explain the Manichee
view of the Present, i.e. of the time since the
true knowledge of doctrine and conduct has
been given to the world by the great Prophet
Mani.

In the past men for the most part lived in
ignorance and darkness, but God did not leave
himself entirely without witness. In the beginning
of the book called Shabibragan, written by Mani
for King Shapur, son of Ardashir, he says:

Wisdom and deeds have always from time to time been,
brought to mankind by the messengers of God. So in one
age they have been brought by the messenger called Buddha
to India, in another by Zaradusht to Persia, in another by
Jesus to the West. Thereupon this revelation has come
down, this prophecy in this last age, through me, Mani,
messenger of the God of truth to Babylonia.

This quotation is preserved for us by Al-Biruni?:
a few scraps from this famous work surviveamong
the Soghdian fragments from Turfan edited by
Prof. Miiller (1, pp. 16, 17), but unfortunately
there is not enough to make much connected
sense. The sentence quoted by Biruni, however,
is exactly paralleled by a statement in Ephraim
(Mitchell, 1, p. xcviii), which says that the

1 Sachau’s transl., p. 190.

37

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

Manichees “say about Hermes in Egypt, and
about Plato among the Greeks, and about Jesus
who appeated in Judaea, that ‘they are Heralds
of that Good One to the world.’”

It is easy to see what these two passages imply.
They imply a doctrine of a succession of Prophets
of the Truth at divers times and in many countries,
men with whose doctrine Mani believed himself
to be in essential accord. He, of course, was the
last and final mouthpiece of Revelation. Like so
many others, he thought of himself as living in
the ‘last age,’ and as being himself the last and
fullest Herald of the Light. But it is most im-
portant to notice that whereas Hermes! and Plato
and Buddha, and also Zoroaster, stand more or
less on a level with a more or less ethnic and
geographical significance, Jesus in Mani’s system
occupies a peculiar position. He was the last of
. the series before Mani, but he is more than that.
To Mani Jesus was a Divine Being, who appeared
on eatth but was never born of woman; the
Christians believed that Jesus had been really
crucified, but that was their carnal error. And
further, Jesus was not merely the last of the
Prophets before Mani and Mani’s immediate pre-
decessor; Mani regarded himself as the apostle
of Jesus. All his letters began, says Augustine
(c. Faust. x11 4), with ‘Mani, Apostle of Jesus
Christ,’ and this has been confirmed by a frag-

1 That is, of course, ‘Hermes Trismegistus’: see Faustus
ap. Aug. ¢. Faust. xu 1.

38

JESUS IN MANI’S-SYSTEM

ment from Turfan!. The ‘Jesus’ revered by Mani
has a different nature from the Jesus Christ of
orthodox Christian theology, and also from the
Jesus of the Four Gospels. But after all Mani does
mean the same ‘Jesus who appeared in Judaea,’
and therefore it seems to me impossible to treat
Manichaeism apart from its special relation to the
vatious forms of the Christian Religion.

When we ask what réle is assigned to ‘Jesus’
in the Manichee system we ate met by several
difficulties, partly connected with the comparative
scantiness of our information, but still more con-
nected with the difference between the terms and
conceptions of Manichaeism on the one hand and
otthodox Christianity on the other. Orthodox
Christianity more or less starts with the religion of
Judaism, of the Old Testament. The primal anti-,
thesis is between ‘God’ and ‘His Creatures,’ of
which the race of Men is the noblest species. The
main question in Western Christology was whether,
and to what extent, “Jesus who appeared in
Judaea’ was to be reckoned as belonging to ‘God’
ot the Creatures. But to Mani the ultimate anti-
thesis was not between God and Man, but between
Light and Dark. A Man was not a simple unit,
much less an elemental unit, but a particle of
Light enclosed in an alien and irredeemable en-
velope: there is no hope for a Man as such, for
he is essentially a fortuitous conglomeration. The
hope is that his Light-particles—roughly speaking,

1 Miller, 11 (’04), p. 26.

39

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

vety much what we mean by his ‘better self’—
may escape at death from the dark prison-house
of the body. And ‘God’ represents also a con-
ception quite different from the ‘personal,’ trans-
cendent, Jahweh of the Old Testament. As used
by the Manichees it seems to mean anything
wholly composed of and belonging to the Light-
substance. The ‘Mother of the Living,’ the ‘Primal
Man,’ the ‘Messenger,’ etc., are little more than
manifestations of the energy of the Light. They
ate not even, properly speaking, eternal, for they
seem to come into existence to meet a need, as
occasion atises—something like the ‘Angel of the
Lorp’ in the early books of the Old Testament.

With this view of ‘God’ and ‘man,’ it is no
wonder that the Jesus honoured by Mani was
regarded as human only in appearance. But also
He seems to occupy a peculiar position among the
hierarchy of Light. Full as our accounts are of
the Manichee cosmogony, no tale of theirs sur-
vives which purports to give the story of how He
was ‘evoked’ or called into being. He is ‘sent’
when His presence is needed, but no explanation
is given who He is ot how He came to be there.
Alone among the heavenly denizens He has a
personal name, is in fact a person, as Buddha is,
ot Hermes, or Mani himself. No doubt this is
because Jesus, whatever Mani may have thought
about Him, is ultimately a certain Person ‘who
appeared in Judaea’ a little more than two hundred
yeats before Mani began to preach.

40

JESUS IN MANIPS SYSTEM

As to the mannet and fashion of that appearance
Mani does not seem to have been so much of an
innovator as is sometimes supposed, if (as I
believe) his view of the historical Jesus was partly
derived from that of the Marcionites. It is im-
ptobable that he ever saw a copy of the Four
Gospels, and if his knowledge was derived ex-
clusively from the Epistles of Paul, the Syriac
Diatessaron and the Marcionite Gospel,—possibly
from the Gospel of Peter as well,—I can scarcely
wonder that he was unable to think of our Lord
as a teal human being. It is true that Mani did
not believe Him to have been teally born: nor
did Marcion. Nor again did he believe that Jesus
was crucified, for he is said to have held that the
Jews crucified some one else by mistake; but this
again is an ancient heresy, as old as the well- :
known Aets of John.'To Mani historical happenings
of such a kind were profoundly distasteful, in very
truth a ‘scandal.’ But the Manichees believed that
they had in their religion the true “word of the
Cross.” To them ‘Jesus’ meant not only revealed
and visible Light and the ennobling doctrine of
the true destiny of the Divine part of man, but
also man’s life and salvation through Divine suf-
fering. Faustus the African Manichee claims that
he and his held the true Christian doctrine, and
that the ‘suffering Jesus’ is not a Divine Man born
from a human mother and the Holy Spirit, but the
fruit which is man’s food, “hanging on every tree,
produced by the energy and power of the air that

41

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES °

makes the earth conceive.” And he goes on to say:
“Wherefore also our reverence for everything is
like that of you Catholic Christians about the
Bread and the Cup!.”

Augustine does not find it difficult to expose
the inconsistencies in this Christology. And he
asks at the end of a triumphant paragraph why
Jesus who was crucified should be identified with
the powers of vegetation and also with the Divine
Being in the Sun, and not also with the Splendi-
tenens and the Atlas and the Primal Man? But the
answer is clear, and it is of great importance, when
we ate seeking to understand this ancient Religion
and not merely, like Augustine, to refute it. The .
answer is that the Splenditenens and the others
ate only what the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews calls ‘ministering spirits,’ evoked by
Mani for a special purpose or imported by him
from some system or other. But ‘Jesus’ signified
Divine Redemption of man, Divine nourishment
for man, accompanied somehow by the almost
inconceivable idea of Divine suffering for man—
and all this effected by ‘Jesus who appeared in
Judaea.’ These are Christian ideas: they render the
Manichaean religion as set forth by the African

1 Faustus ap. Aug. ¢. Faust. xx 2: necnon et spiritus sancti,
qui est maiestas tertia, Aeris hunc omnem ambitum sedem
JSatemur ac diuersorinm ; cuinus ex uiribus ac spiritali profusione
terram quoque concipientem gignere patibilem lesum, qui est uita
ac salus hominum, omni su. x lars ex ligno. quapropter et nobis
circa uninersa et uobis similiter erga panem et calicem par religio
est.

42

THE MECHANISM OF SALVATION

Faustus a form of Christianity, though doubtless
an inconsistent and heretical form. Above all, they
explain to us how it is that Mani, who denied
the birth and the real crucifixion of Jesus, called
himself nevertheless Jesus’ Apostle, and regarded
himself as the Paraclete whom Jesus had foretold.

It is time now to come to the Present, in the
sense of the Church or Society which Mani set
up. But first there is still one feature of Mani’s
cosmogony which we must consider. It is best
given in the Description of Manichaeism in the
Acts of Archelaus (c. vit), which tells us that
‘when Jesus was sent on His message of salvation
He contrived a vast mechanism, like a water-
wheel with twelve buckets, which takes up the
souls of men and the light-particles in their bodies |
as they die to the Moon, which thus waxes for
fifteen days. While in the Moon the souls are
somehow purged and purified by the Sun, and
then the Moon empties itself of the purged Light,
whereby it wanes for another fifteen days. The
souls when purged are gathered into the Column
of Glory (in Syriac, Eston Shubba)*, which is called
according to the Acts of Archelaus the ‘Perfect
Man.’ Epiphanius, who transcribes the passage,
turns this into anp 6 Té\evoc but I venture to think
he is wrong, and that the myth has its actual origin
in Eph. iv 13, where the Apostle speaks of the
final result of Salvation as the formation of a

1 Mitchell, 11 208, ll. 37, 38.

43

*

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

Perfect Man (cio avdpa rédevov). No doubt Mani
identified this with the Milky Way.

As I said just now, the Acts of Archelaus speak
as if this mechanism was set up by Jesus in His
historical appearance, but this is not borne out by
any other source, and there can be little doubt
that Mani thought of it as coeval with the forma-
tion of the Sun and Moon out of the first vintage
of Light distilled from the Archons. The historical
appearance of Jesus was thought of by Mani as
for instruction and revelation only—especially to
the one really enlightened Apostle, xz. Paul. But
what Paul had only hinted at, he, Mani, the
Paraclete foretold by Jesus, made clear to his
disciples. Mani wrote many books, and the system
which he excogitated, fantastic and bizarre as it
sounds to our ears, seems to have been taught for
centuries by the Manichees, and the Church Order
which he instituted was strictly maintained to the
end.

This Order is one familiar to us in these days
from the Buddhists, but they were not the only
society which adopted it in antiquity, and I may
say at once that I see no sign that Mani was
influenced at all by Buddhism. The Order I mean
is the fundamental division of the Manichee
believers into Monks and Laymen, or as the
Manichees called them the E/ct and the Hearers.
The ‘Elect’ alone was the true Manichee, the
“Hearer’ was no more than an adherent, but the
renunciations exacted of the Elect were severe,

44

pl *

THE ELECT AND THE HEARERS

and their numbets were compatatively small. The
proportion in numbers is not known, but it
ptobably was similar to what obtains in Buddhist
countries. All Manichees were vegetarians, but
the Elect abstained from wine, from marriage and
from property. They were supposed to live a
wandering life, possessing no more than food for
a day and clothes for a year!. Their obligation not
to produce fresh life or to take it was so absolute
that it extended to the vegetable kingdom: they
might neither sow nor teap, nor even break their
bread themselves, “lest they pain the Light which
was mixed with it?.” So they went about, as Indian
holy men do, with a disciple who prepared their
food for them. “And when they wish to eat
bread,” we read in the Acta Archelai (1x), “they
ptay first, saying to the bread ‘I neither reaped '
thee, nor winnowed thee, nor ground thee, nor
set thee in an oven; it was another did this and
brought thee to me, I eat thee innocently.’ And
when he has said this to himself, he says to the
disciple ‘I have prayed for thee!’’”? On the other
hand, it was one of the first duties of the mere
‘Heaters’ to provide food for the ‘Elect,’ so that
in a country where there were any Manichees the
Elect were sute not to starve. Women as well as
men entered the ranks of the Elect, and Ephraim
has a cutious passage in which he rebukes their

1 So Biruni, p. 190, confirmed by a text in Miller, 11

(704), p. 33.
2 Mitchell, 1, p. xxx.

45

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

‘idleness!.’ Poor ladies, there was very little that
their religion permitted them to do! It is in any
case noteworthy that the pious Deacon of Edessa
accuses them of no other peccadilloes*.’

But there was a difference between the inner
attitude of the Manichee ascetic and the orthodox
Christian monk. The latter, whether hermit or
coenobite, had retired from the world with a con-
sciousness of sin and a sense of personal unworthi-
ness. It is not for nothing that ‘mourner’ is one
of the Syriac technical terms for a Christian monk.
The Manichee Elect does not appear to have been
a ‘mourner.’? He was indeed fenced about with
tabus—‘touch not, taste not, handle not,’—but by
virtue of his profession he was already Righteous,
and he was called Zaddika, i.e. ‘the righteous,’ by
his co-religionists. And though he was forbidden
to prepare his food himself, yet a sacramental,

1 Mitchell, 1, p. xciii.

2 Fortunatus, the African ‘presbyter’ of the Manichees,
succeeded in extracting a left-handed testimonial to the
morals of the Manichees from Augustine, who (after some
preliminary fencing) said: “As for your habits, those only
can fully know them who are your Elect. But you know
I was not one of your Elect, but a Hearer, so although I
have been present at your Prayers, as you have asked—
whether you have any Prayers separately by yourselves,
God only knows besides yourselves. I certainly in the
Prayers where I was present saw nothing disgraceful done,
but only noticed contrary to the Faith which afterwards
I have learnt and approved that you make your Prayers
facing the Sun.” Then he goes on to protest that he doesn’t

know what the Elect may do at their ceremonies (Aug.
¢. Fortunatum, 3). How ungenerous!

46

THE ELECT AND THE HEARERS

indeed an actual physical benefit accrued to the
Universe through his eating it. This came to pass
through the particles of Light contained in the
food passing into his own pure body, for what
greater concentration of the Light-substance can
there be upon this earth than the person of an
abstinent, righteous, Elect Manichee? Ephraim
and other orthodox controversialists make merry
over this curious belief, but their own theory of
digestion was not much mote in harmony with
our modern knowledge of the processes of meta-
bolism and the methods by which living tissue is
nourished.

_ Exactly how the fully qualified Manichee separates
the Light that is mixed in the substances with
which he is concerned our documents do not
inform us. I doubt very much whether Mani |
himself had a really consistent theory about it.
But it seems, from what Ephraim says}, that the
Manichees believed that even a couple of the
highest class of Initiates would suffice for what
the world needed.

The Hearers, of course, formed the great bulk
of the Manichaean community. They were allowed
to matty and hold property, in fact, to live in the
world like other folk. Besides these two main
classes there were higher orders, about which we
know little more than the names, and in any case
they wete very few in number. At the head of
all was a Successor of Mani, who was at first

1 See Mitchell, 11, p. xcviii.

47

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

supposed not to quit Babylonia, but this was
afterwatds modified as the result of persecu-
tiont,

The religious duties of the Manichee Hearers
can best be inferred from the Khwastuanift, i.e.
‘Confession,’ an important document that has
been recovered almost in its entirety from the
finds in Chinese Turkestan. Prof. von Le Coq
found the beginning in Manichee script at Kho-
tscho near Turfan, Prof. Radloff brought to
Petersburg a large fragment in Uigur script, and

Sit Aurel Stein found in the district S.E. of Tun-

huang a roll in Manichee script containing almost
all except the beginning. The document is in the
old Turkestan Turkish language and contains a
detailed confession of sins. It has been excellently
edited by v. Le Coq in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society for 1911, pp. 277-314 and again by Prof.
W. Bang in Muséon for 1923 (vol. xxxv1), pp. 137-
242, .

The document consists of a preamble, followed
by a confession of fifteen kinds of sins, each
section ending with the Persian (not Turkish)
formula Manastar birza, which means ‘O cleanse

1 On the various names for the Hierarchy, see the
Separate Note (Appendix 1, p. 105).

* I quote by von Le Coq’s numbered lines (1, 1-39;
1-338). There is a note on the meaning of the word
Khuastuanift by Prof. Miiller in the Si#zungsberichte of the

Berlin Academy for 1909, p. 1212. But why does he call
the Armenian Khostovanutiun a botrowed word?

48

THE KHUASTUANIFT

out spots!1,’ the whole ending with a general
acknowledgement of sinfulness. But the Khuas-
tuanift is more than a mete confession. Each .
section begins by formulating the true Manichee
doctrine, and then goes on to say: “if we, then,
have neglected such a practice or denied such a
doctrine we ate sinful and must cry Mandastar
hirza.” It is thus for practical purposes a profes-
sion of Faith also, and therefore worthy now of
our particular attention. We shall find in it
references to the primordial battle between Light
and Dark already described, and to the scheme
of redemption through the Sun and Moon. But
in order to make the main principle on which the
Khuastuanift is arranged intelligible one or two
points of Manichaean nomenclature and theology
must be borne in mind.
First of all, it is not easy to express what the
Manichees mean when they say ‘God,’ for to them
“God’ is rather a substance than a person, using
these contentious words in their modern con-
notation. Tangri in Manichee Turkish is ‘God,’
kiin is ‘day,’ ai is ‘month.’ The last two words
mean ‘sun’ and ‘moon’ respectively, so that ki ai
tangri is “Sun-Moon-God?.’ This expression occurs
in the Khuastuanift more than half-a-dgzen times,
but it is never quite clear whether it means ‘the

1 The actual formula occurs in the Soghdian Persian
texts, ¢.g. Miiller, 1, p. 61. As to the exact meaning,
Miller, 11 93 gives ‘Befleckung’ for ’astar, and on p. 67
bérza is used in a context which speaks of ‘dirt’ and ‘stink.’

2 In Turkish there is no word for ‘and’!

B 49 4

'

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

~ divine sun and moon’ or ‘the God of the Sun and

Moon’: the two expressions coalesce in this
Turkish and I doubt whether those who used the
Khuastuanift distinguished between the two notions.
It is the same with yartiq tdngri: ate we to render
this ‘the Light-God,’ or ‘the God of the Light,’
ot ‘the divine Light’? I have here chosen to
render ¢dngri by ‘divine’ rather than ‘God,’ be-
cause (as we shall see) the Supreme God when
thought of as personal is called Agrua, i.e. the
Persian Zrvdn, which corresponds almost exactly
with what we mean when we speak of ‘the
Eternal.’ |

Similarly the Primal Man is here called Khor-
muxta, i.e. “Ormuzd,’ but this does not seem to
imply any mixture with Persian or Magian religion
ot myth. Most of the other terms explain them-
selves, such as the Burkhans, i.e. the true Prophets,
ot are at present inexplicable in detail, such as
the exact nature of the vosanti-fast (1. 246) or the
yimki-setvice (ll. 273 ff.).

But further we have to bear in mind the four-
fold nature of God according to Manichee theo-
logy. In the words of the Fibris#1: “Mani en-
joined....belief in the Four great things—God,
His Light, His Power, His Wisdom. And God is
the King of the Paradise of Light, His Light is the
Sun and Moon, His Power is the Five Angels, viz.
the Air, the Wind, the Light, the Water and the
Fire, and His Wisdom is the Holy Religion,”

1 Fligel, pp. 64, 95.

5°

THE KHUASTUANIFT

which last in the Khuastuanift is identified some-
times with the Prophets who announced it, some-
times with the ordinances themselves. In any case
this four-fold conception of the Divine determines
a good deal of the structure of our document.
With these preliminaries we can come to the
Khuastuanift itself. The Prologue sets forth that as
the Divine Khormuzta with the Divine Five came
down from heaven to battle against the forces of
the Demons of Darkness, but was overcome and
became temporarily separated from the eternal
dwelling of the Gods and lost his Divine Light,
so we the penitent Manichees, if we have erred
and lost touch with Azrua the pure bright God
and have become intermingled with the Dark [may
nevertheless hope to be restored even as the
Primal Man was]}. ;
§ 1. Blasphemy against God. ‘The ‘blasphemies’
mentioned are that God has made all things, both
what is Good and what is Bad; that Khormuzta
and the Demon of Darkness are brothers (¢.e. both
cteated by the Good God)?; that it is He, Azrua,
who creates the eternal Gods, that it is God who
produces or destroys individual life. “My God!
in trespass unwittingly to God these great blas-
phemy words should we have spoken, my God!

1 Here is a short lacuna in the text.

2 This was regarded by the Manichees as a Zoroastrian
heresy: “They pray to the burning Fire, and they confess
themselves that their end will be in Fire. And they say that
Ormuzd and Ahriman are brothers...” This important
fragment is printed in Miller, 1 (1904), p. 95.

51 4-2

«

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

now I, Raimast Farzind, I repent, I pray, from

sin escaping, Mandstar birza!””

It would be difficult, I think, to express in fewer
sentences the essential paradoxes of Manichee
theology. It should be noted, in view of § 8, that
this first part of the Khwastuanift is meant to refer
to sins committed before conversion or coming to
a knowledge of the truth.

§ 2. Blasphemy against Sun and Moon, The true
purpose of the divine Sun and Moon is to purify
the Light recovered from the earth. If then, says
our document, we have dated to say that Sun and
Moon ate dead}, that their rising and setting are
mechanical (/. ‘powerless’), and that our bodies
existed before the Sun and Moon, for this un-
witting sin we pray Manastar hirza!

This sounds almost as if the local alternative to
Manichaean belief was the naive idea that each
day sees a new Sun and each month a new Moon,
—like Horace’s Nouaeque pergunt INTERIRE /unae.

§ 3. Blasphemy against and injury to the Divine
Five. The Five divine Elements, Air, Wind, Light,
Water, Fire, which formed the panoply of the
Primal Man (here called ‘Khormuzta’)*, having

1 Sic. The words are kin ai éliir, without ¢ngri (‘divine’):
so omit ‘the God of’ from v. Le Coq’s trans., 1. 23.

2 Prof. v. Le Coq’s translation here requires revision.
Khormuxta (=‘Ormuzd’) corresponds to ’Ofarmizd bé in
Miiller, 11 20, where the parallel in the Fihrist makes it
quite clear that in Manichee nomenclature ‘Ormuzd?’ is
used for the Primal Man, not for the eternal ‘Father of
Greatness,’ who is called Bai Zrvan in the Persian, and

52 4

THE KHUASTUANIFT

been intermingled with the Dark in battling against
Sin and Demontry, were unable to return to heaven
and ate now upon this earth, where they give
tadiancy and light and consistency to the things
it produces: if then, say the Manichees, we have
in any way harmed these divine Elements, “if
with the ten snake-headed finger-ends and the
thirty-two teeth by taking living beings for food
and drink we should ever have pained God, and
so sinned against the dry or wet earth, the five
kinds of animals, or the five kinds of trees, thennow,
my God, escaping sin we cry Manastar birza!”’

§ 4. Offences against the Prophets and the Elect.
The fourth section corresponds to God’s Wisdom,
ze. the true Manichaean religion as revealed by
the Burkhans, or Prophets, culminating in Mani.
If then they have done anything against the
Burkhans in the past or the pure Elect in the
present, or if having accepted God’s Law}, they
should have broken it by not spreading it, then
they say Manastar hirza! |
- 5. Offences against animals, including Man. ‘The

ve kinds of animals are Man, Quadrupeds,
Flying animals, Water animals, and (lowest of all)
Things that creep on the earth: “my God, these
five kinds....should we ever have frightened or

Agrua in the Turkish texts. Prof. Bang (p. 172 ff.) further
has proved that Khormuzta oghlani means ‘Ormuzd’s brood’
ot ‘Ormuzd’s troop,’ not ‘Ormuzd’s sons.’

1 Nom, a word said to be ultimately derived from vépoc,
7.¢. the Manichee Religion.

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

scated, beaten or struck, angered or pained them,
ot killed them”—then we must say Mandstar hirza!

§ 6. Social offences. The ten offences enumerated
ate: Falsehood, petjury, testifying for a wicked
man, persecuting an innocent man, inducing
enmity by tale-bearing, sorcery, killing many
animals, fraud, untrustworthiness in deposits (°),
deeds displeasing to the Sun and Moon, either
before or after the reciters became True Believers.

§ 7. Wrong religious observances done through ig-
norance. A man who adheres to a false Religion or
worships the Demon by the name of God is at
the entrance of the two poison-laden roads that
lead to Hell. If therefore the reciters of the
Khuastuanift have believed in the wrong Prophets,
ot have fasted the wrong fasts, or given the wrong
alms, or tried to acquire merit by doing the wrong
deeds, or have killed living animals in sacrifice,
then—Manastar hirza!

§ 8. Offences committed after entering Religion. The
preamble to this section is worth giving in full,
as it forms a sort of short Manichaean Credo}.

1 The two terms /ngri _yir and yir tngri must sutely be
distinguished. Tzgri_yir means ‘divine land,’ ‘the Paradise
of God,’ as Prof. v. Le Coq translates it (1. 160). But_yir
ingri is here used for the visible ‘earth and heaven,’ 7.e. land
and sky. The use of the term is clear from the Colophon
edited in Turkische Manichaica 111 (1922), p. 34, ll. 10, 11.
Argon yir tngri (1. 169), therefore, should mean the Atchon’s
land and sky, z.e. the Demonic elements in the visible uni-
verse. This way of analysing the phrase explains how dpywv
and /dngri can be used together, which v. Le Coq notes
as strange (p. 303). But it must be noted that Prof. Bang

.

54 9

THE KHUASTUANIFT

Since coming to know the True God and the Pure Law,
we have learned the Law of the Two Roots and the Three
Moments, that the Light-root is God-land, the Dark-root
is Hell-land; yea, we learned what had been’ in existence
before land and sky existed, why God and Demon had
battled against each other, how Light and Dark had inter-
mingled, and who had created land and sky; yea, we learned
in what way this land and sky will be annihilated, and how
Light and Dark will be separated, and what will happen
afterwards: to the divine Azrua, the divine Sun and Moon,
the divine Power, and the Burkhans we turned, we trusted,
we became Hearers (#.e. Manichees). Four bright Seals on
our hearts have we sealed, (1) To Love, the seal of the
divine Azrua, (2) To Believe, the seal of the divine Sun and
Moon, (3) To Fear, the seal of the Five divine elements},
(4) Wise Wisdom, the seal of the Burkhans.

Such is the Manichee Credo, which as will have
been seen is permeated by the four-fold concep-
tion of God to which I referred above. ‘The section
goes on in the usual way to declare that should
the penitents have in any way deserted or violated
their faith, then they beg for restitution by the
usual formula?.
has given reasons for thinking that argon here is a Turkish
word, 4t. ‘backwards’ and so used for ‘ultimately.’

1 Note how the divine Power (Ut. ‘powerful God’) is
identical with the divine Five.

2 A perfectly literal translation of this section of the
Khuastuanift, retaining as far as possible the Turkish idiom,
may be of interest.

“8th. True God, pure Law, since our coming to know...
Two-Roots, Three-Moments Law we knew...Light Root
God-Land, Dark Root Hell-Land we knew...yea, Land-
Heaven when not, what to say there was we knew...
God, Demon, why having battled...Light, Dark, how
intermingled, Earth-Heaven, who to say had created we
knew...yea, argon Earth-Heaven, why it will become

55

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

§ 9. The Ten Commandments. These ate de-
scribed as to be kept “three with the mouth, three
with the heart, three with the hand, and one with
the whole self.” If through bad companions or
through attachment to material things these have
been broken, then they say Manastar birza!*

§ 10. Remissness in worship. Four benedictions
with one mind and heart should be said every day
upon Aztua, the Sun and Moon, the Powerful
God and upon the Burkhans: should these bene-
dictions through our carelessness have failed to
teach their destination, then—Manastar hirza!
~ § xr. Remissness in alms. Seven kinds of alms
should be given as a teligious duty out of what
Heaven has prospered us?. If then we have stinted
out alms, or have given food that should have
been reserved for the Elect to our household or
to wicked men or to evil animals, or have thrown
it away, thus sending the divine Light to the Evil
Place, then—Manastar birza!

nothing...Light, Dark, how they will be parted... .after
this what to say will be we knew...To Azrua-God, to
Sun-Moon-God, to Powerful God, to the Burkhans we
turned, we trusted, ‘Hearers’ we became...Four Light-
Seals in our heart we sealed, 1st, To Love, Azrua-God’s
seal; 2nd, To Believe, Sun-Moon-God’s seal; 3rd, To Fear,
Five-God’s seal; 4th, Wise Wisdom, the Burkhans’ seal.”

1 On the ‘Ten Commandments,’ see below, p. 6o.

* This is a guess at the general sense. The text speaks of
‘angels’ and divine ‘callers’ and ‘answerers,’ who give us
light that ought to go to God for purification. This seems
to mean grain and fruit that ought to go to be eaten by
the Elect Ones.

56 Pa

THE KHUASTUANIFT 2

12. Remissness in fasting. Fifty days vosanti-
\ fast should be kept every year: if we have broken
this fast, or not fasted according to Law and
Ritual, then—Manastar hirza!

§ 13. Remissness in penitence. We should confess
to God, to the Law and to the Elect every day of
the Moon-God (Ze. every Monday). If we hav
been remiss, then—Mandastar birza! .

§ 14. Remissness in other religious duties. Evety
year we should keep seven _yimki-setvices and one
month’s Commandments (chakhshapat). Here again
if we have been remiss—Manastar hirza!

§ 15. “Every day how many evil thoughts do
we think! how many wretched words that should
not be spoken do we speak! how many deeds that
ought not to be done do we do! With evil deeds,
with wretched acts our own selves do we torment!
Yea, daily in what we have eaten, the Five-God’s
Light, through our own selves, our souls, having
walked in the love of the insatiable shameless
Envy-Demon, goes to the Evil Place. Because of
this, my God! from sin escaping we pray Mandstar
birza!”

#

My God! imperfect, sinful are we!
Tormentors, twisters are we!
For the insatiable, shameless Envy-Demon’s sake,
by thought, by word, by deed,
yea, by eyes seeing, by ears hearing, by tongue speaking,
) by hands touching, by legs walking,
long, endlessly do we pain the Five-God’s light, the
dry-wet Earth, the Five kinds living beings, the
Five kinds trees plants,

2” 57

oe

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

Yea, imperfect, sinful are we! a
For the Ten Commandments’, the Seven Alms’, the Three
Seals’ sake the Hearers’ name we hold,
by deed to do we cannot!
Yea, the Light-Gods, the Pure Law, the God-like Ex-
ounders, the pure Elect Ones, whenever we should
ae offended, should have accused of error,
_ Yea, by God’s dectee in word, in meaning, should we not
have walked,
the heart of the Gods should we have twisted,
Yea, the Yimki-observance, fasting, benediction, command-
ment, in Law, in Ritual, whenever we should have
been unable to keep, whenever we should have been
wanting, unavailing,
evety day, every month, trespass, sin do we commit!
To the Light-Gods, to the Law’s Majesty, to the pure Elect
Ones, from trespass, from sin escaping, we pray
Manastar hirza!

This is the conclusion of the Khuastuanift
(Il. 308-338). Most of the allusions are clear
enough, from other Manichaean documents or
from earlier passages in the Khuastuanift itself. The
*Five-God’ is, of course, the remains of the Five
pure elements mixed with the demonic substance
which were absorbed when they were swallowed
by the Archons. Anything that was identifiable
with these pure elements the Manichee held in
reverence, and anything that would free them
from their imprisonment in ‘dark’ matter it was
his duty to do. Equally, it was his duty not to
do anything that tended still further to imprison
these elements. Naturally, therefore, it was his
duty not to pain these elements by killing the
“five kinds’ of animals, and we have seen from

58

MANICHEE MORALS

Il. 80-84 of the Khwastuanift that the five kinds
wete Men, quadrupeds, animals that fly in the air,
animals that live in the water, and lastly those that
creep on the eartht. In Section 3 (ll. 42-57) it is
said that the heavens and the earths all exist on
account of the Five-God, and that of everything
on earth the beauty, soul, strength, light, founda-
tion and root is the Five-God. Therefore the
Manichee must not frighten, scare, beat, strike,
anger ot pain living beings (Il. 87-93), much less
kill them. How kind, how ‘humane’! But further
on in the Khuastuanift, in the eleventh section, we
find that this kindness is purely negative, and that
the Manichee Hearers must not do good unto all
men of to beasts if it in any way interferes with
the sacred duty of feeding the household of faith,
z.¢. the Elect Zaddiks. So if they have stinted '
giving alms, or have been unable to give the
Seven legal kinds of Alms perfectly, which ought
to have gone to God for purification, and instead
have given it to their house and household, or to
men inclined to evil deeds, or to bad living and
moving creatures (¢.g. I suppose, to dogs), and so
the Light has been spilled or dispersed,—then it
seems that they had no other resource but to recite
theit Khuastuanift and to say Manastar hirza!

That is why Augustine can declare to Faustus
(vi 25) that the Manichees break the Sixth Com-
mandment, though they profess never to take

1 Prof. v. Le Cog (p. 302) notes that Augustine knows
of exactly the same division of animals.

59

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

life: “fearing lest a member of yout God should
be bound in flesh,” he says, “you do not give
bread to the hungry. From fear of a fancied
homicide you commit a teal one. So when you
come actoss a hungry man, who may die if you
do not give him food, you are certain to be
reckoned a murderer, either by the Law of God
if you don’t give, or by the Law of Mani if you
do!” Perhaps Augustine is not quite fair: he is
cettainly unsympathetic. But his criticism is con-
cerned with a real difference between Christian
and Manichee ethics. It can be expressed in a
single sentence: Christianity is concerned with
persons, Manichaeism with things. Christian
sympathy goes out to men and women, who are
even in a fallen state regarded as in the i image of
God and for whom Christ has died, and this
sympathy has been in modern times, by a natural
transition, extended to other animals. The sym-
pathy of the Manichee was directed not towards
men, but towards the Light imprisoned in men.
Men wete, to some extent, and at second hand,
in the image of God, but they were only a sort
of pirated copy, made by the evil, dark Archons
to imitate the Messenger of the Light who had
appeared to them.

The Ten Commandments which Manichee

1 As Fliigel remarks (p. 300), Augustine admits in De
Moribus Manichaeorum, 11 16, that Manichees were willing to
give money to the needy, It was Bread and Fruits and Water
that should only be given to the Elect.

6o

MANICHEE MORALS

Heaters had to keep are enumerated for us by
Shahrastani and in the Fihrist (Fliigel, p. 95 f.).
They are to avoid (1) Idolatry, (2) Lying, (3)
Greed, (4) Killing, (5) Adultery, (6) Theft, (7) In-
cantations and Magic, (8) Holding two opinions,
z.e. Doubts about Religion, (9) Slackness and
Negligence in Business, and (10) they are to pray
four (or seven) times in the day. Shahrastani gives
the same list except that for (8) and (9) he sub-
stitutes giving a Tenth in alms and keeping the
Truth. Probably the latter means Manichaean
otthodoxy and so is equivalent to (8), and the
former is really equivalent to (9), for the more
industrious a man is the more he will have to
tithe. Inthe Khuastuaniftthe Commandmentsarenot
enumerated, but it is said that three are to be kept
with the mouth, three with the heart, three with the
hand, and one (doubtless the last) with the whole self.

But the special value of the Khwastuanift lies
not so much in the elucidation of particular details
of the Manichee Religion as the view that it gives
us of that Religion as a whole, as a working system,
apatt from polemics. Prof. Alfaric has given a
fair résumé in his Ecritures Manichéennes (11 134-5):
if mine differs a little from his, it is because I
venture to think the arrangement actually given
is a little more ‘tigoureux’ than he supposes.
M. Alfaric (p. 135) regards God as thought of by
Manichees under the form of a Trinity, but really
they thought of God as a Quaternity, and we have
seen that the Four-fold conception of God—God,

61

* ‘*

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

His Light, His Power, His revealed Wisdom—
recurs again and again, and has a determining effect
upon the very structure of the Khuastuanift.
What are we to think about it as a scheme of
life? Of course, we must not be too much pte-
judiced against the Manichee Religion on account
of its fantastic astronomy. Again, any confession
of sins, real or hypothetical, makes rather melan-
choly reading: it is a pathological document, a
record of ill-health, actual or hypothetical. More-
overt, most religious formularies are somewhat
one-sided and do not depict the whole balance of
the religion with which they are concerned. The
Christian Creeds, for instance, ate admirable
documents in their way, but they do not present
a life-like portrait of the Christian Religion as
a whole: they leave out Christian conduct and
devotion and Christian worship. The Khyastuanift
is in this respect more complete. It begins with
theology, but it goes on to deal with social duties
and ritual obligations. Of the several sections,
five deal with doctrine and six with ritual. It is
obvious at the first glance that Mani’s is an austere
religion, and like all ancient systems a great deal
of importance is laid on correct ritual. It is there-
fore remarkable that three whole sections (§§ 5, 6
and 9) are concerned with social duties, for I
count the distribution of alms in § 11 as a ritual
rather than as a social act. It is indeed ‘a fugitive
and cloistered virtue,’ much mote concerned with
the avoidance of harm than the contrivance of

62

w *
° MANICHEE MORALS

good, but therein it corresponds only too closely
to a great deal of traditional Christian ethics. And
before we judge the Manichaean system too harshly
notice should be taken of the tone of real emotion
that runs through the final General Confession.

What does not appear quite clearly from this
text, or from any other Manichaean document, so
far as I know, is the nature of the forgiveness
asked for. The penitent Christian, who is dealing
with a personal God, is grieved to lose God’s
favour, he is sorry that he has made God sorty.
Perhaps this is what is meant in the Khwastuanift
(ll. 51, 329) by “twisting the heart of the Gods.”
Yet even so, in the Manichee system this is chiefly
done by harming, that is to say, mixing water,
fire, light, wind, with the dirty earth. A tardy
European legislation has made some progress
with the prevention of the pollution of rivers:
this has been done for the benefit of Men who
drink the water or (in some cases) of Fish that live
in it. In a Manichee state such legislation might
conceivably have been undertaken, but it would
have been for the sake of the Water itself, in order
that it might mote easily evaporate altogether and
be lost to this world!

In § 8 of the Khuastuanift the Manichees declare
that they have learned how in the end Light and
Dark will be finally and completely separated, and
also that they know what will happen afterwards.
It is time to finish this Lecture, now that we have

63

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

considered the Manichee doctrine about the Past
and the Present, by glancing at their doctrine about
the Future.

Schemes of eschatology, anticipations of the
End of all things, are liable to change from time
to time, like the unsubstantial pictures in the
clouds of heaven. But the Manichee doctrine
seems to have been singularly stable. Its main
features ate simple enough. The Manichees, like
the Christians, looked forward to a victorious end
of the present state of things. When all the Light
has been distilled and separated from the base
material, then Evil, which is the result of the
mixture of the Light and the Dark, will have dis-
appeared. The ‘Earth of Light’ in which God
dwells and which is itself Divine will be complete
and inviolate, and the powers of the Dark will be
confined within their own original domain, round
which the Heavenly Builder, whom the Syriac-
speaking Manichees called the great Ban, will have
built a wall and fence, so that it will be the Grave
of the Darkness for ever?.

Two points must here be noted in conclusion.
We tread in the Fibrist (p. 90) that after all the
particles of Light that the Sun and Moon can
distil have been extracted from the earth, the earth
itself will be set on fire and it will burn until all
the heavenly material has been refined out from
it: this great final Bonfire will last 1468 years.
No satisfactory explanation of this curious number

1 See e.g. Mitchell, 1, pp. xxx, xlvii, Ixxv.

64

THE FINAL CONFLAGRATION

has been found, but among the fragments of the
eschatological work published by Prof. Miiller
(II, pp. 11-25), which is either a Soghdian trans-
lation of Mani’s Shababragin, or a wotk which
contains extensive extracts from it, we find
on one leaf the Great Fire is spoken of, and
its duration is there given as 1468 years. I
mention this point to illustrate the stability of the
Manichaean doctrine of the future, because it
gives us some right to lay stress on the point that
follows.

Evodius, the friend and correspondent of
S. Augustine, tells us (De Fid. c. Manich. 5) that
the Manichees taught in the Epistula Fundamenti
that the Souls which deliberately preferred Dark-
ness to Light and the sensual life to redemption

will remain for ever conjoined with matter in the '

tegion of the Dark. Such souls, together with the
test of the Dark substance from which all the
Light has been extracted, will be compacted
together in a great round Clod (g/obus). Titus of
Bostra tells us the same!, and the same doctrine is
set forth in the Acta Archelai x, the original Greek
of which, as quoted by Epiphanius, 646, speaks
of the evil man as being for ever dedceuévoo cio
7yv Badov. In agreement with all this we read
at the end of Ephraim’s Third Discourse to
Hypatius:

1 Tit. Bostr. A 41: the sinful souls...év r7 BwAw eura-
yyoacban dpa 7H Kaxig. Aéywv. The wicked Soul is thus turned
into a literal villain, ascriptus glebae.

B 65 5

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

How do they say that some of those Souls who have

sinned much and have been guilty of great unbelief, those
which are found like dregs in the midst of that which they
call soLos,—as they say, that “when the Fire dissolves all,
within it (ze. the Bolus) is collected everything that is
mixed and mingled in created things from the Lights,”
and “those Souls who have done much wickedness are
assigned to the dominion of the Darkness when it is
tormented.”
It will be remembered that Ephraim is writing
in Syriac, and the Manichaean documents with
which he is concerned are not translations from
the Greek but Syriac originals. Yet he intro-
duces BOLOS (wala=) as a Manichaean technical
term.

I venture to think it is clear from all these
testimonies that Mani not only held this doctrine
and gave it a place in one of his principal works,
the Hpayyareia or “Great Epistle to Patticius,”
but that he called this mass of burning filth the
BOLOS, a wotd which is not Syriac at all, but the
Gteek word for ‘a clod?.’

Alexander of Lycopolis, himself a heathen,
treats Manichaeism as a New Christianity. This
view of it has been unpopular in recent years, for
modern scholars have preferred to see in ita more
ot less independent Oriental Religion, and have

1 Mitchell, 1, p. 87 f.: the translation 1, p. Ixxii, must be
corrected by vol. 11, pp. cxxxix and 236.

2 So little is walam a Syriac word that the ancient
Sytiac version of Titus of Bostra, not used by Ephraim
but certainly made before 411 A.D., transliterates it in the
form bélara (Tit. Bost. Syriace, 314°),

66

THE BOLUS

tended to consider the form of it which spread
to the West, and to which Augustine was for so
many years a convert, as an adaptation fitted to a
land where Catholic Christianity had become the
established religion. But the name of the Bolus,
now attested in the Syriac of Ephraim, cannot
have come from anything but a Gteek source. It
suggests to us that Mani drew his inspiration
from the West, as much as, if not more than, from
the East around him.

67 5-2

7

I
“MANI, NEW FULL-MOON!”

See p. 93

oat OE at

“In seeking a doctrine of the Fall...no view will be
found adequate which regards the fall of man as some-
thing which took place in this world under our present
conditions of being.”

Canon PETER GREEN, The Problem of Evil, p. 131.

69

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES
III

WE have now passed in survey the outline of the
Religion of Mani, what he taught about the two
eternal principles of Light and Dark, and about
the Past, the Present and the Future. Where did
he get it from? From what sources did he derive
his ideas? Ought Manichaeism to be classed as
an independent religion or as a Christian heresy?

Of course in one sense it does not matter. The
followers of Mani will not in any case be included
in schemes for the reunion of Christendom, be-
cause there are none. But there is an interest in
tracing the affiliation of ideas, and the better we
understand in what way and from what quarter
Mani came by those that he so attractively put
forwatd to his contemporaries sixteen centuries
ago, the more real and living his system will be
to us to-day.

Obviously Manichaeism is a synthesis, a con-
struction, made of diverse materials. It owed its
success to its attractiveness, for it offered no other
ctedentials. No outstanding miracle was worked
in Mani’s favour, and from the beginning it was
persecuted by the civil and religious authorities
of the civilized world. It is a wonder that it took
toot at all, and again that it did not wither away
after Mani’s execution. Dr Gillis Wetter is no
doubt right in laying stress upon the personality
of Mani himself, the Prophet of his own new
Religion. Unfortunately he no longer stands

71

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

before our eyes as a living man. In the newly-
found fragments from Turkestan he has been
sublimated into a sort of Divine Avatar, and the
Christian accounts such as the Acts of Archelaus
ate too fabulous and spiteful to be of any useto us?.

Both the two main theories about the general
otigin of Mani’s system have had supporters in
ancient times. Most Christian documents, from
Mark the Deacon onwards, treat Manichaeism as
in the main a Christian heresy, while Eznik of
Kolb, the Armenian writer of the 5th century,
writing against Zoroastrianism, treats Manichaeism
as a variety of Persian religion. But he does not
go into it very deeply, and only brings it forward
as another religion, found in Persian lands, which
is Dualistic in character, which nevertheless the
Persians persecuted?.

Mani, before he began his wandering career,
lived in Seleucia-Ctesiphon, then the great centre

of population in Babylonia. In documents written -

long afterwards, in Turkestan, far away to the
north-east, he is called ‘Mani from Babel,’ but
this only means from Lower Mesopotamia, or (as
we should now say) from ‘Iraq. The old city of
Babylon had already become deserted and was
crumbling away, and with it had crumbled away
the old religion of ‘Chaldea’ and the knowledge of

1 For the unhistorical and untrustworthy nature of the
narrative of the Acta Archelai see especially Fligel, pp. 4-30.

2 Fxnik (Schmid’s translation), p. 94 f.

3 Miller, 1m 51.

72

MANI WROTE IN*SYRIAC

the cuneiform script. Chaldaism had come to
mean little more than Astrology. Seleucia, on the
other hand, had been a Greek or semi-Greek city.
With the coming of the Sasanians, when Mani was
a little boy, Persian influence had no doubt greatly
increased, but the ordinary language spoken was
Aramaic, not Persian: this may safely be inferred
from the fact that the language of the Mandaean
teligion, which is a local religion, at least in the
form we know it, is Aramaic. Mani did not write |
in this dialect, so far as we know, but in an
Aramaic that was far more like ‘classical’ Syriac,
the dialect of Edessa. He used a peculiar script,
and his followers used the same for centuties, so
that every scrap of a Manichaean document can
be recognized as such, even if too small or mutilated
to yield a continuous sense. All the Soghdian \
documents from Turkestan and a good many of
the Turkish ones are written in this script. It is
therefore important to notice that the tiny bits
of ‘Manichaean’ writing that have turned up in
the West ate all in the Syriac language, not in
Mandaean or Palmyrene or some other Aramaic
dialect.

Now Seleucia-Ctesiphon was a great matt, a
meeting-place of East and West, in which the
Eastern influence was mainly Persian, while the

1 The largest bits are the vellum fragment published by
Crum (J.R.A.S. for 1919, p. 207) and the papyrus frag-
ments from Oxyrhynchus published by Margoliouth
(J. Egyptian Arch. for 1915, p. 214). See Appendix 111.

73

ie
THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

Western element since the decay of Greek-
speaking civilization in Mesopotamia was Syriac.
To us Syriac is so ‘oriental’ a language, that it
requires a certain effort of mind to remember that
to an inhabitant of Babylonia the chief seats of
Aramaic civilization lay to the West, in the direc-
tion of the Roman Empire. Greek influence, if
we ate about to find it in Manichaeism, will have
come to Mani through a Syriac channel.
“Mani,” says the Fibrist, “composed seven
books, one in Persian and six in Syriac.” Of these
one, the Shabibragan, was composed for the benefit
of King Shapur: no doubt that is the one composed
in Persian, and the circumstances of its composition
explain why it was not in Syriac. Otherwise Mani
wrote in Syriac; it is as a Syriac-speaking, Syriac-
writing personage that he comes before us, so
that the natural source of his inherited or acquired
ideas would be that which was current in the
Syriac literature of his time. Now of the early
writers who are concerned with Mani only one
is a native Mesopotamian, writing in Syriac
himself with a knowledge of the mental atmo-
sphere of the Syriac-speaking world. This is
S. Ephraim, who wrote at Edessa and died there
in 373, but who was born still further to the east
in Nisibis. We turn therefore to Ephraim and
find a quite definite thesis as to the origin of Mani’s
conceptions: according to Ephraim Mani’s system
is a fantastic reproduction of the heretical Christian
1 Fligel, p. 102.

74

~~ i &
DUALISM

philosopher Bardaisan and the heretical Christian
churchman Marcion.

I believe that, in the main, S. Ephraim is right.
But before going on to explain the ideas of
Bardaisan and Marcion there is one preliminary
objection to be considered. Christianity, it may
be said, is monotheistic; Mani’s system is dualistic.
Persian religion, the religion of Zoroaster, is the
vety type of dualistic religion: does not this at
once stamp Manichaeism, which had its rise within
the domains of the Sasanian Empire, on the very
borders of Persia, as a mete variant of Zoto-
astrianism?

The answer is that dualism is not confined to
the religion of Zoroaster. It is a tendency, a view
of the world, found among many who would dis-
claim altogether the name of dualist. There are, '
of coutse, certain things that an orthodox Christian
must not say. He must say that God created all
things, both men and angels, including Satan. But
in practice Satan was believed in as an independent
power, who won victories among men against
the will of God, and was destined to exist for ever
in the company of those souls whom he had
dragged down to Hell. God created Satan good,
no doubt, and afterwards Satan rebelled. But who
cteated the impulse which led Satan to rebel?
Was it eternally there? I am not going now to
discuss these questions, but it is obvious that the
old-fashioned religious view of the Devil is not
so vety different from the ‘dualism’ of Mani.

75

rial

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

To come back to Ephraim, we shall see that
Marcion and Bardaisan were both as dualistic as
Mani, and neither of these, especially Marcion,
can be accused of deriving his ideas from Persia.
Bardaisan, or,as the Greeks called him, Bardesanes,
was known in his own country of Edessa as “the
Atamaean Philosopher.’ He was born in 154 and
must have become convetted to Christianity soon
after it came to Edessa. He was a friend of
Abgar IX, the last real King of Edessa, and was
a man apparently of wealth and certainly of
culture. He enjoyed a great reputation as an
astronomer, and one of his immediate disciples
wrote a book, a sort of Platonic Dialogue, on
Fate, in which Bardaisan himself is the chief
speaker and which no doubt reflects his teaching.
The Chutch decided that Bardaisan was a heretic,
but his heresy is not very apparent in the Dialogue,
and to understand in what it consisted we must
go to a later writer, Moses bar Kepha?, whose
statements, however, are borne out by the less
systematic, but much more ancient, evidence of
Ephraim.

Moses bat Kepha says:

Bardaisan held about this world that it is composed of
Five Entities or primordial Elements (Z¢hyé), viz., Fire and
Wind and Water and Light and Darkness. Each of these
was standing in its own region, Light in the East, Wind

1 Mitchell, 11, pp. iti, cvi.
2 The account of Bardaisan’s doctrines which here

follows is taken from my Introductory Essay prefixed to
the Second Volume of Mitchell’s book, pp. cxxii-cxxxi.

76

BARDAISAN’S PHILOSOPHY

in the West, Fire in the South, Water in the North, the
Lord of them all in the Height, and their Enemy the Dark
in the Depth below. Once upon a time, whether from
some external body or by chance, they were hurled one
against the other, and the Dark ventured to come up from
the Depth to mingle together with them. Then the pure
Entities began to try and keep away from the Dark and ,
appealed to the mercy of the Most High to deliver them
from the dirty colour that was being mingled with them,
z.e. from the Dark. Then, says he, at the sound of the com-
motion the Word of the Intention of the Most High, which
is the Messiah, came down and cut off the Dark from being
in the midst of the pure Elements, and it was hurled down,
and He set up the pure Elements again in their places in
their symbolic cruciform order. As for that mixture which
came into being from the Elements and the Dark their
enemy, He constituted from it this World and set it in
the midst, that no further mixture might be made, while
it is being cleansed by conception and birth till it is perfect.

Exactly what is meant by the last sentence is ,
obscure. Bardaisan regarded man as naturally
mottal and held that only the immortal soul is
tedeemed by Christ. But unlike Mani and Marcion
he was not an ascetic. He was himself a married
man, and did not regard generation and birth with
abhottence as a further enmeshing of the Divine
substance in matter. On the contrary, he seems
to have believed that souls at death who kept the
wotd of Jesus did not taste death, but crossed
ovet into the ‘bridal-chamber of Light!’; and as
fresh generations of men come on, also all con-
taining Souls similar to those which had attained
the region of Light, it must have seemed to Bar-

1 See Mitchell, 11, p. lxxvii.

77

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

daisan that they had derived their substance from
the primordial Mixture. Conception and birth,
therefore, is the process by which something is pro-
duced which has the chance of escaping from this
mixed world and rejoining the pure region of Light.

This final deduction is the very antithesis of
Mani’s, but the premises are very much alike.
Bartdaisan taught that God and the uncreated
eternal Elements, including the harmful Dark,
existed in Space in a happy state of equilibrium
before our World came into being; then some-
thing occurred to disturb this equilibrium, whereby
general disaster was threatened, but God came to
the rescue and confined within certain limits the
damage already done and provided for its eventual
reparation.

All this corresponds in a sense to the ordinary
Christian doctrine of the ‘Fall,’ but it differs from
it inasmuch as it puts the Fall before the con-
struction of our World—nay mote, it makes the
Fall to be the cause of this World, not a regrettable
incident occurring after this World had been made.
In this the Bardesanian doctrine agrees with the

doctrine of Mani, and I venture to think that

S. Ephraim is right when he regards the main
ptinciple of the cosmogony of Mani as derived
from Bardaisan!. A further resemblance between
Bardaisan and Mani is afforded by the fact that
both regard the evil Element as Darkness, ot
rather the Dark Substance.

1 See Mitchell, 1, pp. xc and xcix.

78

BARDAISAN’S. PHILOSOPHY

But Mani and Bardaisan are very different in
their mental outlook. In the ‘Refutations’ of
Ephraim, as also in the Dialogue on Fate, Bardaisan
appears as a matter-of-fact man of science. To us,
no doubt, it is science falsely so called, specula-
tions as groundless as his derivations of the names
of the Aramaic Months. But such as it is, it is
positive doctrine about matter and sense-percep-
tion; there is no parabolic setting forth of the
ways of Divine redemption. Light is light, Fire
is fire, not a part or aspect of God. Bardaisan’s
cosmology is a conflict of forces, Mani’s is a drama
enacted by a crowd of supernatural persons. When
the fatal Mixture has been made, he is not content
until he has excogitated a set of Angels to attend
to it, the Splenditenens to suspend it, the At/as to
beat it up, the Adamas to defend it with spear and
shield. Sun and Moon and the Sun-Moon-God
ate hardly distinguished. In Bardaisan we see the
double influence that has led to monotheism, the
influence of the religion of the Old Testament on
the one hand, which is so jealous of allowing the
name of God to any but the One ultimate Ruler,
and on the other the influence of Greek Philosophy
that from its vety beginnings in Thales and
Heraclitus has tended to take away the constitution
of things from the personal Gods of Olympus and
find it in some Element or combination of Ele-
ments.

But if Mani derived his science from Bardaisan
he went elsewhere for his moral and social

79

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

teaching. Ephraim’s Refutations go far to shew

that here Mani’s master was Marcion. Fifty years

ago Marcion was treated as one of the Gnostics,

and we ate only beginning to realize that he was

not one of any company, but a great and original ,
religious genius, the most remarkable Christian of
the 2nd century. Moreover he founded not a mere

school, but a Church, an organization so well

atranged that notwithstanding almost continual

persecution it was almost as long-lived as that

of Mani. Certainly we see from the numerous

polemical references, and now from Ephraim’s

three elaborate Refutations, that the Marcionites

wete a teal force among the Christians of Meso-

potamia, at least till the 5th century.

The essential fact about Marcion is that he was
a Christian Dissenter. Other heretics were heretics,
because they were only half-Christian, but Marcion’s
religion was essentially Christian and Biblical. He
was a Dissenter from the orthodox interpretation of
the Bible, but his philosophy starts from it. And as
I understand him, Marcion, unlike Bardaisan and
Mani, was only a cosmologist by accident, he was
essentially concerned with morals and the working
of the mind and what may be called the psychology
of forgiveness.

He taught a rather clumsy presentation of the
Universe as consisting of three Regions, one
‘above’ the other. In the highest dwelt the Kind
Stranger, /e Bon Dieu; in the lowest, on the earth,
was the domain of Matter; between them, above

80

MARCION’S RELIGION

the earth, was the domain of the Creator or Maker,
the God of Justice and Law, who had made Man
out of Matter in his own image. I have ventured
elsewhere! to suggest that Marcion would have
made his meaning clearer to us in these days if he
had spoken of his Kind Stranger as being in a
“fourth dimension,’ for the essential thing about
this Stranger who can and will forgive freely is
that He is not in or of this tangible and measurable
world. At least this is so, except in so far as the
vety notions in Marcion’s mind are part of the
whole of Nature. With this proviso, the whole of
Matcion’s system is essentially built upon the
same lines as the religion outlined in Huxley’s
famous Romanes Lecture. Nature is red in tooth
and claw, in this world an eye is exacted for an
eye and a tooth for a tooth (or its equivalent).
Action and reaction ate equal and opposite, and
the Law of the Conservation of Energy seems to
be unbroken. But Man can imagine, more or less,
another world where it is not the case, and his
mind can take refuge in this fairy-land, which is
outside the visible universe.

Matcion, as a matter of fact, was one-sided and
inconsistent, and orthodox writers were able to
shew that even the portions of the Christian
tradition that he retained contained much that did
not square with his views. But they did less than
justice to Marcion’s theory of Religion. After all,
the Gospel was in some sense new, and it is not

1 See Mitchell, 11, p. cxxi.

B 81 6

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

altogether based on the Tradition of the Elders.
The great merit of Marcion as a religious teacher
is that he felt the charm of the Gospel message
apatt from the sanction of the Old Testament.
Ephraim starts off his polemic against Marcion by
appealing to the miracles of the Exodus, and to
alleged confirmations of Old Testament wonders
in the archives of Egypt and Babylon, an argu-
ment which now only raises asmile. But Marcion’s
position is not similarly affected by modern dis-
covery: the God to Whom he gave his allegiance
was always outside of this visible world, and if
the visible world has been found not to be geo-
centric that matters less to him than to those whose
God had His throne “above the bright blue sky.”

Mani followed Marcion in two points: his treat-
ment of the Old Testament and the organization
of his disciples.

Martcion rejected. the Old Testament in the
sense of regarding it as inspired Scripture. The
God of the Old Testament, the God of the Jews,
was not his God. But the narratives of Genesis
as tetold by him played a great part in his religious
theory. Similarly Mani, as we have seen, has a
great deal to tell in the Epistle to Patticius about
Adam and Eve. The story is entirely altered and
a host of fantastic features accompany it, but
apart from the tale in Genesis it never would have
been told at all. Even the order of creation—
plants, animals, men—follows the Bible story.
As Mani took Bardaisan’s cosmology and mytho-

82

MARCION’S RELIGION

logized it, so he seems to have taken Matcion’s
theory of the origin of man and mythologized
that.

Still clearer is his debt to Marcion seen in
otganization. To Marcion, as to Mani, all genera-
tion was abhorrent. It was a doing of the works
of the Creator, a Potentate from whose allegiance
he, Marcion, had escaped. Marriage to the
Marcionite was marriage to Christ, and the
married man or woman who desired to be baptized
into the Marcionite Church had to renounce the
earthly partner. But this rule in practice was not
quite so severe as it sounds to our ears. The
Marcionite catechumen, the unbaptized adherent
of Marcion’s religion, was given a higher status
than the mere adherent in the Catholic Church. |
He was permitted to attend the Eucharist without —
communicating, and most Marcionites seem to
have delayed their baptism, regarding it rather as
a preparation for the life to come than as a means
of grace for living a Christian life in this world.
But this is exactly the organization of the Manichees
into the Elect and the Hearers, the Elect who
had abandoned mattiage and property, and the
Hearets one of whose chief religious duties was
to ptovide food for the Elect, food which as
Faustus the Manichee tells us they regarded as
truly sacramental?.

In regarding as Marcionite this organization
into full members who eschew marriage and

1 See above, p. 42.

83 6-2

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

recognized adherents who may matty, we are
following the lead of S. Ephraim, but it must
not be forgotten that Ephraim’s own orthodox
Church had at least tended to be organized on
vety similar lines. “He whose heart is set to the
state of matrimony, let him marry before baptism,
lest he fall in the spiritual contest and be killed,”
says Aphraates!, writing in the Tigris valley as
late as 345. In Syriac ‘holy’ and ‘continent’ are
synonyms; so far as I can see, it was not till a
couple of generations after the conversion of
Constantine that the social organization of the
Chutch in Mesopotamia was very different from
that of the Marcionites. The rank and file of the
baptized laity were called the Sons of the Covenant,
living in the world in their own homes but not
of it, very much like the Manichaean Elect.

The theory of Ephraim that Mani’s system is
properly to be regarded as derived from those of
Marcion and Bardaisan is strongly supported by
what we read in the Frbrist, although it is evident
that the author of that invaluable work was not
very well informed as to the real opinions of
either of these Christian thinkers. In giving
Mani’s date he gives the date of Marcion and
Bardaisan, evidently because these three names
were grouped together in his authority”. Still more
important is the fact that the first chapter of Mani’s
work The Book of the Mysteries (of which a Table

1 See Early Eastern Christianity, p. 126 ff.
So also Mas‘idi, in the passage quoted by Fliigel, p. 356.

84

MANI AND BARDAIS AN

of Contents is given in the Fibrist) was entitled
“Concerning the Bardesanians.’ We see from this,
that in explaining his own Religion Mani felt at
once the impulse to start from what Bardaisan
and the followers of Bardaisan had taught.

Let us now turn and see how much of all this
theoty of Manichaean origins is borne out by the
newly-found documents of the Manichees them-
selves. One preliminary observation may be made.
Our documents come from Turkestan, they were
written for the use of people whose language and
culture was Turkish. The documents that are not
written in Turki are in a dialect of Middle-Persian,
7.e. a dialect of the national language of the
Sasanian Empire. At a somewhat later period than
most of the Manichaean scraps we find Christian
fragments which must have belonged to a Nes--
totian mission, but it is practically certain that the
Nestorians exercised no influence on Manichaean
literature. The extraneous influences to which this
Turkestan Manichaean literature were exposed
were Buddhistic from ‘Thibet in the south, Chinese
from the east, and Persian from the west. All the
Syriac elements, and a fortiori the Greek elements,
must have been there from the beginning, from
the time of Mani and his immediate successors. If
in dealing with Manichaean sources from Roman
Africa we have to be on our guard lest Christian
and Biblical elements should be only a local im-
portation, brought in because the African Mani-
chees were living in a Christian land, in Turkestan

85

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

it is Persian and Buddhistic elements that are likely
to be local and recent: the Christian elements will
be original constituents of Mani’s religion.

In these fragments from Turkestan the name
of Bardaisan does not occur. Directly polemical
literature indeed is only represented in the isolated
scraps by a single ill-preserved pair of leaves,
called M 28 by Professor F. W. K. Miiller, and
edited by him on pp. 94-5 of his Handschriften-
Reste aus Turfan, «1 (1904). Hardly more than
twenty short lines are legible, or at least have been
transcribed, but in the course of these the writer
attacks those who worship Fire and say that
Ormuzd and Ahriman are Brothers; next he turns
to the Christians who call Mary’s Son (Bar Maryam)
the Son of Addnay, and says that they too, like
the Fire-worshippers, will go into the Hell they
have made for themselves; and then the fragment
breaks off in the middle of the next sentence,
which is directed against ‘the God of Marcion.
It is a pity that more of the piece is not legible,
but what survives is enough to shew that Marcion’s
system was important to this Manichaean theo-
logian, if only by way of conscious opposition.

There ate several direct references to Gospel
events and to the teaching of Jesus in our Mani-
chaean fragments, some agreeing with and others
somewhat differing from the text of our Gospels.
It may be said at once, to avoid any misconcep-
tion, that there is no reason to suppose that the

86

MANI AND THE GOSPELS

Manichees presetved any independent tradition of
the Gospel History. But it is a matter of im-
pottance to our view of Manichaeism to know
from what sort of sources theit knowledge of such
things was derived. Prof. Miller points out that
several of the peculiarities of the fragment M 18
(Miller, 11, pp. 34 f., 109) seem to come from the
apocryphal ‘Gospel of Peter,’ and as the proper
names in M 18 have characteristically Syriac forms
we seem here to go back to a lost Syriac transla-
tion of the Gospel of Peter. The fragment, which
consists of the upper half of a leaf, has the head-
lines ‘Hymns’ and ‘On the Crucifixion.’ It runs
thus:

....“ Truly He is the Son of God!” And Pilate answered:
“T indeed am unconcerned in the blood of this Son of
God.” The centurions and soldiets (Oatriyondn va “istratiyo-'
tan) then received command from Pilate: “Keep this
sectet,” and the Jews gave a (?) promise. But he shews
that on the first day of the week at cockcrow came Maryam,
Shalom, Maryam and many other women; they brought
sweet herbs and nard. Near to the grave were they coming
RRCY oe ANE) «ss 7» as did Maryam, Shalom and ’Arsani’ah
(sic). When the two angels said to them: “Seek not the
Living among the dead! Jesu’s word remember; how in
Galilee He taught you ‘They will give me up and have me
crucified; on the third day from the dead I shall rise.” On
this (?) afternoon go to Galilee, and bear the news to Simon
and the others....”

The first part of this curious passage agtees, as
Miiller points out (p. 109), with the Gospel of
Peter: the latter part does not do so, agteeing more
with Luke xxiv, with touches from Mark (¢.g. the

87

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

name of ‘Shalom’), yet not exactly with what we
know of the Diatessaron. Probably the work, the
headlines notwithstanding, was a controversial
writing, and these are extracts from Christian
writings, perhaps designed to shew inconsistencies
in the orthodox account of the Passion.

Much the same may be said of M 132, which
contains references to John xviii 36 (“My king-
dom is not of this world’’) and to Matt. xxvii 29 f.
(the Crown of Thorns, etc.), though perhaps here
the intention is more in evidence, viz. to shew that
Jesus laid no claim to rule! “in the House of
Jacob and in the race of Israel ?.”

The use of the Gospel in the great apocalyptic
fragment labelled M 475-477-482-472; 470; 473
is different. Here we are dealing with the teaching
of Jesus, and we can gather how it was accepted
by the Manichees with a characteristic perversion.
The first four of these leaves follow in the above
otder, as is clear from the headlines (Miiller, p. 10);
470 and 473 seem to have belonged to the same
book, but there ate no external indications where
they came in it. M 4827. and 472 r. are inscribed
Shabubragan, so that we have either a fragment
of Mani’s famous work, or a quotation from it.
M 477». is inscribed Do Ban Vazurg, ie. “The
Two Great Roots” (or “Principles”’), and M 470r.
has “... Adér Vazurg,” i.e. “...the Great Fire.”
The actual contents agree with the headlines, in

1 The word is broken away (Miiller, 11 36).
2 The fragment has Sara’e/: see below.

oo.

88

MANI AND THE GOSPELS

fact a passage in the Fibrist (Fligel, p. 101) seems
to be based on the text preserved in M 4701. In
the middle of M 4827. is a break of four blank
lines, marking a new section: the text is badly
pteserved and no continuous translation can be
made, but the subject is the End of the World
according to the teaching of Mani. We tead in
M 482 about the New Aeon or Kingdom and the
‘housing’ (bunistan) of the Demons; evidently this
tefers to the Prison or Gtave that Ban, the
Heavenly Builder, is to build in order to confine
the Powers of Darkness in their own region?. We
go on and find a reference to the Moon-God, in
M 472 teferences to the ‘Ship’ (of Light) and to
the Sun-God, and in M 470, as I said just now, we
have a direct parallel to the Fvhrist. All this
belongs to the regular Manichaean circle of ideas. '
But it is preceded by a full paraphrase of Matt. xxv
31-46, the Christian picture of the Last Judgement ~
with the righteous on the right and the wicked
on the left, and the Headlines read “Concerning
the Judgement” | “Of the Son of Man.”

The tale is told almost in the words of the
Gospel. Characteristically the ‘sheep’ and ‘goats’
ate not named, for Manichees have nothing to do
with the lower animals, but the Divine Lord of
the world says to the ‘righteous’ on his right hand
“T was hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, bound, in

1 This is the fragment that also mentions the 1468 years

of the World-Conflagration.
2 See especially Mitchell, 1, pp. xxx, xlvii, Ixxv.

89

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

ptison, a stranger, and ye gave me help,” just as
in the Gospel, and the righteous answer in sut-
ptise “When, Lord, did we do this?” together
with the corresponding words to the wicked. It
is, in fact, a pataphrastic quotation from the
Christian Gospel, and when it comes to the end
in the middle of M 4827. (p. 16) there is the
Rubtic “Here endeth the Coming of the Life-
Giver!,” a title of our Lord very common in
Syriac Christian literature.

I venture to suggest that the Manichee inter-
pretation of the passage was the quite definite one
that the deciding factor in the Last Day will be
whether or no men and women have fed and
clothed and succoured the Manichee Elect. In
a Turkish fragment published by v. Le Coq
(Manichaica 111, p. 11) we read that “Mashiha the
Burkhan,” ze. Jesus the Divine Prophet, has
deigned to say that whoever [does not grudge]
his property and possessions, but gives it as alms
to the needy Elect (dintar), even if thereby he goes
hungry, he will receive it as his eternal treasure.
(p. 12) “Yea, with a single heart believe that one
piece of thy bread, one cup of thy water, will not
lose its reward!” Here quite clearly what is left
undetermined in the Gospel is made quite definite:
the “breihren’ of the heavenly Messiah are the
Elect Manichees.

The exclusiveness of Manichaeism is one of its

1 Hanzapt ’amadishniy “i Zindkar, which would be in
Syriac uur miu hole,

go

WORSHIP OF ANGELS

weakest sides. It is decidedly more exclusive than
Catholic Christianity, and in this respect it is mote
like the Novatians of old and the tendency repte-
sented by the Plymouth Brethren of recent times.
In justice to the Manichees it must be remembered
that they were almost always a persecuted minority.
But the fact still remains, that their theory of
Religion was exclusive, whatever their practice
may have been.

From Polemics let us turn to Worship. It is
evident that there was a good deal of ‘worshipping
of Angels’ among the Manichees, but how much
teal worship, how much Ayperdulia, how much
magic and superstition is implied it would be
difficult to say. Raphael (spelt Rapa’é/), Gabriel,
Michael and Sarael all appear: these obviously
have been simply taken over from Christian
‘soutces and afford another proof of the large part
that such sources played in Manichaean orzgines.
The last name appears to be a miswriting of
‘Israel,’ to which corresponds Jacob the Angel
(Yaqob préstag), who is called the ‘chief of the
angels!.’ With the rejection of the Old Testament
was no doubt connected a gross ignorance of
Jewish history. Other angels are Narsis, Nasti-
quis, Bar Simiis and Qaptiniis: I fear I have failed
to find out anything about these personages.
It is noteworthy that no references are made

1 A list is given Miller, 11, p. 45: the Angel Jacob is in-
voked, p. 56.

oI

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

in these fragments to the Sp/enditenens or the
Alas.

One of the most striking varieties of the
Manichaean hymn-forms is the Sanctus, for which
they used the Syriac word Kadosh!. Thus in
M 75 (Miller, p. 70) we have as part of a Hymn:
“Holy, holy, holy! Holy, holy, holy, to Thy
glorified Kingdom! Holy, holy, holy, to Thee,
Father! Holy, to Thy exalted Name! Holy, holy,
holy, to Thee, Father!” The Hymn goes on
similarly to acclaim God’s Thought and Word,
from which all good thoughts and words come,
and God’s Spirit (or Wind) that blows in the
Divine Kingdom. This use of Kadosh ultimately
comes no doubt from the Vision of Isaiah, but
there is no evidence for any independent use of
the Old Testament by Manichees. This Manichee
Hymn is therefore an adaptation of Christian
usage, and as such may be held to be the earliest
sutviving evidence for the liturgical use of the
Sanctus, for the exclamation ‘ Kadosh’ is not likely
to have been taken from a Christian hymn after
the Manichees were organized asa separate religion.

Similarly Amen is used as a cty of adoration:
“Amen, to thee, first-born Apostle, Divine Lord
Mani, our Saviour!” (Miiller, p. 70 n.).

Very frequently ‘Jesus’ (Yzsho* or Yisho) and
Mani ate invoked together, e.g. “O Jesu ! among
the Gods first New Moon!....Shining God!

1 Also spelt Radosh, with the wrong &. I suppose it to
represent 43m (abs.), not the Hebrew Tp

92

MANICHEE HYMNS

... Thou art God and Full Moon, Jesus Lord,
Full Moon of waxing glory!...Mani, new Full
Moon!....Holy (Kadosh), Jesu, cleanse my stains!
Divine Lord Mani, deliver my soul! Holy, God,
O Light, look upon me! Power, Wisdom, God,
deliver Thou me!!” Or again: “O Jesu, Virgin
of Light! O Lord Mani! Do Thou make peace
within me! O Light-bringer, deliver my soul
out of this born-dead life, deliver my soul out of
this born-dead life!?”” We may quarrel with the
form of expression, both from the literary and the
theological point of view, but it is impossible to
spell through these ancient Middle-Persian ejacu-
lations without being convinced that they once
represented genuine religious emotion.

The main object of the last few paragraphs has:
been to shew how large an element in Manichaean
phraseology is derived from Syriac, and con-
sequently (if we place ourselves in Babylonia,
' where Mani lived) from the West. This is there-
fore a convenient place to note that in another
Hymn (M 32, p. 62 f.) we find the ‘Son of God’
is invoked as “Oh, Lami#ér!” i.e. the Greek word
haparyp, and “Oh, Safsér!” i.e. capipjpa. It is
vety odd to find the latter word in this form
on Persian ground, for it is ultimately derived
from the Persian Shamshér, a scimitar, which
passed into Syriac in the form saphsérd, from

1 M 176, pp. 60-62 (extracts).
2 M 38, p. 77.

93

a
o =
' “

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES
which the Manichaean hymn-writer must have
taken it. Possibly indeed the Manichee use of the
word as a religious term is derived from the Syriac
text of Hebr. iv 12. Another Greek word, trans-
literated into Syriac and then taken over by Mani,
is Paraclete. ‘This does not happen to occur in the
Turkestan fragments, but that Mani really did re-
gatd himself as the Paraclete (Syriac Paraklé{a)
whose coming had been foretold by Jesus is
attested not only in the Fvhrist and the Acts of
Archelaus, but also now by Ephraim (Mitchell, 11,
p. Xcviil).

As is only natural, the Syriac and Syriac-Greek
influence is more apparent in the Persian than in
the Turkish fragments, for the Turkish docu-
ments ate translations or adaptations from the
Persian, and foreign terms and phrases tend to be
dropped at every fresh translation.

If we had Mani’s Syriac writings in full, pre-
setved in the Syriac dialect in which they /were
otiginally written, there can be little doubt, I am
sute, that the Greek element would be seen to be

_ larger than appears from our Persian and Turkish
fragments, which are after all only a small portion
of what was once an extensive literature. It is

Sy no wonder if in the bits of it that have so un-

expectedly come to light particular terms like
Paraclete do not happen to be preserved. Similarly
there is no mention of the Bo/os referred to at the
end of Lecture Il. Nor again do we find the
curious Manichee term for the Sun and Moon as

94

- * .
ne

GREEK TERMS USED BY MANI

Receivers of the Light, which is preserved by
Ephraim, viz. ‘Hypodectae’y a Greek word not
very common in literature, but no doubt only too
familiar to the provincials, for it means ‘receivers
of taxes.’

A Greek word that does not appear in the
Turkestan fragments, or elsewhere certainly in
Manichaean literature, is Hy thy. Ephraim
seems to declare that Hy/e, a word unknown to the
Church, is in all three of the heretical systems of
Marcion, Bardaisan and Mani?, but it is only in
Martcion’s system that the term plays any great
part, and most likely Ephraim only means to assert
that the idea of Hy/, viz. an eternal, uncreated,
unspiritual Element, is present in all three systems.
As Fliigel points out (p. 192), Mani does not
speak of ‘Matter’ but of ‘the Dark,’ as also did \
Bardaisan. It is likely, however, that Greek-
speaking Manichees may have used vdn as an
equivalent for what Mani meant by ‘the Dark.’
It is inaccurate, of course; much nearer to the
thought than Hy is Alexander of Lycopolis’s
ataKtoo Kivno.c, Of as we might say in more
modern terminology “atoms, vortices, electrons,
not subject to natural laws,” and consequently
centres of real anarchy. ;

One isolated sign of Western influence deserves
separate mention. Among the first of the Turfan

1 sane vrodéxrar, Mitchell, 1, pp. xxxvi, xlii; see

i, p. cx.
2 Mitchell, 1, p. xcix.

95

had
a
THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES
fragments published was a single leaf, numbered
M 97, which Prof. Miiller recognized as a passage
from the ‘Shepherd of Hermas?.’ The four narrow
columns correspond to Similitude 1x, 4, 6 f., 18-25,
and refer to the building of the Tower and the
explanation of the Twelve Hills. The Persian
text does not differ in essentials from the Greek,
but it is much mote compressed, in fact it must
have been not a full translation but an epitome of
the prolix original: the leaf which survives covers
a section towards the end of the work, so that we
may infer that the whole of the Shepherd was repre-
sented in the Manichee text. The specially odd
part about the matter is that, so far as we know,
the ‘Shepherd of Hermas’ was not current in
Syriac. I venture to suggest that an explanation
of the appearance of this rendering or epitome
among the Persian-speaking Manichees is a result
of their missions in the West, and that it points
to a curious confusion between Hermas, the
humble but inspired Christian slave, and Hermes
Trismegistus. We know from Ephraim (Mitchell,
Il, p. xcviti) that the Manichees adduced Hermes
along with Plato and Jesus as ‘Heralds of the
Good One to the world,’ and Hermes Trismegistus
is named with honour by the Manichee Faustus
in Africa (Aug. ¢. Faust. x11 1). When therefore
some Western Manichee came across a book of
revelations by ‘Hermas’ he may vety well have

1F, W. K. Miller, in Sitzangsberichte of the Berlin
Academy for 1905, pp. 1077-83.

96

" qe

al

BARLAAM AND JOAS APH

thought it was the Seer and Prophet whom he had
long been taught to revere. In any case the sur-
viving fragment is one more proof of the influence
of the West upon Manichaeism in general.

Before leaving this part of the subject I want
once mote to define the point I desire to make.
No one can study the Manichaean fragments from
Turkestan without being conscious of the influence
of Buddhism in many of the documents, and there
can be little doubt that Buddhist ideas, mythology
and literature had a great share in the general
civilization of the Manichaean communities in
that part of the world. In the Sztyzungsberichte of
the Berlin Academy for 1909 v. Le Coq published
a Turkish fragment (T Hl, D 173¢), which goes
far to shew that the famous story of Barlaam and ©
Joasaph, so popular all over the Christian world
in mediaeval times, reached the West through a
Manichee channel, or rather that it was through
the Manichees that it reached the Arabic-speaking
world and so became known to Greeks in Western

Sytial. In speaking of this important fragment _

v. Le Coq says (p. 1204): “I would regard this
leaf as a proof that an important place is occupied
by Buddhism in the syncretistic religious system
of Mani (at any rate in these regions).” The last
six wotds, though v. Le Coq puts them in a

1 The affiliation may shortly be expressed by saying that

Bodhisattva became Bodisav among the Manichees, but it is
by a confusion in Arabic script that Bodisav became Yoasaf.

B 97 7

>

%
THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES
bracket, make all the difference. Buddhism had
been long at home in Turkestan before the
Manichees established themselves there (v. Le -
Coq, p. 1213), and though the new Religion must
have won many converts it was influenced by the
religion it for a time displaced, just as it was
influenced by Catholic Christianity in North
Africa and the West generally. But I have been
specially concerned in these Lectures with the
otiginal teaching of Mani, with the missionary
Religion that fought for a century-and-a-half on
almost equal terms, as it seemed, with the Church
of the Roman Empire. In this Religion I see no
sure trace of Buddhism as a formative element.
Buddha is mentioned by Mani with respect, as
he mentions Plato and Hermes Trismegistus. He
knew very little, I believe, about these thinkers

except their great names.

The Buddhistic influence in the documents
from Turkestan should not surprise us. It was a
half-Buddhist country, and the wholly Buddhist —
countties were neat at hand. The Syriac, and still

_mote the Gteek elements, on the other hand, must
have been brought by the Manichees themselves;
in other words, they are an integral part of the
Manichaeism of Babylonia, the Manichaeism of
Mani himself. In the circumstances of their trans-
mission I think we have some reason to be sut-
prised that these Syriac and Greek elements ate
so large: they seem to me to shew that S. Ephraim
was tight in looking to the non-Catholic elements

98

3
PESSIMISM AND OPTIMISM

in Sytiac-speaking Christianity, in other words to
Bardaisan and Marcion, as the active soutces of
Mant’s inspiration.

me

And now that we have come to the end of our
sutvey, what are we to say of the Religion of the
Manichees as a whole? Why had it so successful
acateer? Has it anything to say to us now? When
Mani came forward as the Prophet of his new
Religion we must surely recognize that there was
much in it to appeal to human religious instincts.
It is natural to wish to be a son of the Light.
Children cry in the Dark, and ‘a pleasant thing
it is to behold the sun,’ even in sultry Mesopo-
tamia. Moreover Mani seemed to his followers
to have explained what the old religions which |
had gone before him had only hinted at. But
beyond these generalities the philosophy which
underlies the whole structure seems to me to have
even now a cettain attraction, still ‘perceptible
through its fantastic barbarian trappings. The
Religion of Mani is an attempt to explain the
ptesence of Evil in the world we live in, and it —
does combine practical pessimism with ultimate
optimism—perhaps the most favourable atmo-
sphere for the religious sentiment. It is true that —
the Manichees thought of the world we live in as
the result of a regrettable accident, so that no true
imptovement is possible till it is altogether
abolished. As tegards this world they are frankly
pessimistic: it was bad to begin with, and it will

99 a4

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

go from bad to worse. But they believed that
Light is really greater and stronger than the Dark,
that in the end all that was good in their being
would be collected in the domain of Light, a
realm altogether swayed by Intelligence, Reason,
Mind, good Imagination, and good Intention; and
though at the same time there would always exist
another tegion, dark, and dominated by un-—
regulated Desite, it would only be peopled by
beings for whom such a region was appropriate,
and they would be separated off for ever from
invading the region of Light and so producing
another Smudge, such as our present world es-
sentially is, according to the Manichaean view.
The world—a Smudge; that is the view of
Mani, and it was one which he shared with
Bardaisan. He shared with him the concepts of
the attack by the primordial Dark upon the Pure
Elements; the consequent Mixture, or (as I have
ventured to call it) the Smudge; the control of
the damage by the Good God, and a plan for the
eventual redemption of souls from the power of
the Dark element. The idea is that this is the best
of all possible worlds,—considering the citcum- —
stances, considering the ruin out of which it had —
to be constructed. I have placed at the head of
this Lecture a quotation from a thoughtful work
by a well-known modern clergyman, occupied not
with the study of dead Religions but with the life
of men and women in present-day industrial con-
ditions. The conclusion to which Canon Green has

100

x bal

a”

THE WORLD A SMUDGE

come is so near the fundamental assumption of
the Religion of the Manichees that we may well
ask whether Mani and Bardaisan may not have
some right in their contention. Who knows?

I would conclude, not with a query to which
none of us can have an answer, but rather with a
suggestion as to the influence of Manichaeism
upon our traditional ideas about the origin of
Evil. “Of Man’s first disobedience and the fruit
Of that forbidden tree” we learn from S. Paul;
the sin of Adam and its effects was a doctrine
common to all Christendom. But Adam was not
the only great offender. What are we to say of
Satan and his companions? When and why did
the Angels fall?

In the answets to this question given by ancient
Christian thinkers we can distinguish three stages.
First, there is the answer given in pre-Christian
days by the Book of Enoch, which tells us that
the Fall of the Angels took place after Man had
multiplied upon the earth, and the Sons of God
saw the daughters of men that they were fair,
and they took them wives of all that they chose.
Thus the Angels fell through Lust, many years
after Adam’s disobedience: this is the answer
given by Justin Martyr, by Athenagoras, by
Clement of Alexandria and by Tertulliant. A

1 See Gen. vi 1 ff., Enoch viff.: also Just. Ap. 11 5;
Athenag. 24; Clem. Al. Paed. 11 2 and Stromat. 111 329,
v 401; Tert. de Cult. Fem. I 2.

Iof

»

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

second answer tells us that Satan fell through
Envy, envy of Man, God’s new formation, and so
Satan tempted Adam to do wrong. According
to this, therefore, the first beginning of evil was
after the creation of Man, but before he trans-
gressed: this answer is found in Irenaeus and
Cyprian1. The third answer tells us that Satan fell
through Pride, and this is the answer generally
given. It does not appear, however, before
Eusebius, but from Eusebius onward it is ~
generally alleged, ¢.g. by Athanasius, by Cyril
of Jerusalem, by Gregory Nazianzen and by
Chrysostom?

But the writer through whom this opinion most
won acceptance is Augustine. He does not know
indeed how the evil Will came in (de Cimit. Dei,
x11 _7)—how could he?—but it seems that he
knows everything else. It is amusing or pathetic,
according as we take it, to follow Augustine
through the Eleventh Book of the ‘City of God’
and mark how he proves step by step that the
Angels must have been created before the Stars
(see Job xxxviii 7), not on the third or the second
Day, but when God said “Let there be Light!”
(de Ciuit. Dei, x1 9); and when He divided between
the Light and the Darkness He distinguished
between the Good and the Bad Angels (xt 18, 33),

1 Tren. Haer. tv 40, 3 and Epideixis, 16; Cypr. de Zelo e¢
Liuore, 4.

2 Euseb. Praep. vit 16; Athan. de Virgin. 5; Cyr. Hier.
Cat. 11 3; Greg. Naz. Arc. 6.

102

THE ORIGIN OF EVIL

for Satan fell at once, though the evil was not im-
mediately apparent.

Thus according to this view, as Saint Columba
says:

Superbiendo ruerat Lucifer quem formauerat,

and evil came about by Pride before ever Man was
created. According to Augustine, therefore, Man
was formed in a Universe whete there were already
Two Powers, God and Satan, and in the first
battle between these two principles of Light and
Dark the first man came to grief. Is not this the
Manichaean presentation? I venture to suggest
that Augustine was still carrying about with him
more Manichaean ideas than he was conscious of.
Those who look for it can still trace the Mani-
chaean imagery in this 11th book of Augustine’s
great work. Augustine knew that Darkness was’
no more than the absence of Light, but for all
that when in xr 33 he is making a contrast
between the two Angelical Societies, the one
tranquil in its luminous piety, the other turbulent
with its dark cupidities and smoking with the un-
clean mouth of its own loftiness, he uses language
with a curiously Manichaean ring. And while he
was doing this he was binding the imaginations
of fifty generations to come. The learned con-
struction of Augustine passed into the poetical
conceptions of Avitus, of Columba, and finally
(with a characteristic perversion) into those of
Milton.

It is not only a question of primitive myth; it

103

THE RELIGION OF THE MANICHEES

is a theory of conduct, for this view of human
life taught that Man went and still goes wrong
because he had always lived in a Dualistic world,
a wotld where the Light and the Dark existed
in opposition before Man was, and where though
the Light is stronger than the Dark it will never
quite illuminate it altogether. I venture to sug-
gest that a prime factor in the reasons that led
to the spread of these ideas was the preaching that
began on the 2oth of March, 242, in Babylonia
and that for a time madea convert of S. Augustine.

104

APPENDICES

I. THE MANICHAEAN HIERARCHY

THE names of the various grades among the
Manichees ate perhaps not very important,
especially as we do not know the special functions
of the higher grades. But as the details given by
out authorities seem not to be quite harmonious
I have brought them together in a separate Note.

Prof. Miiller in the Berlin Abhand/ungen fot 1912
(Ein Doppelblatt, p. 37) gives the five grades in
a Table thus:

PERSIAN NAME AUGUSTINE FIHRIST (95)
ham6zig magister Lehrer
‘ispasag episcopus Dienender
mahistag presbyter Verwaltender
xrohyvan electus Wahrhaftiger
niydsag auditor Zuhérer

But when we come to examine the authorities
we find that each list contains an element of con-
jecture. The Persian List comes from a Colophon,
in which the writer invokes blessings on three
Manichaean dignitaries: these are no doubt in
otder of dignity. He calls himself a yrdbyvan,
z.e. ‘caller’ or possibly ‘preacher.’ This may very
well be the name of an office rather than of
a gtade in teligion, for all the other evidence
suggests that the Persian term for an Elect
Manichee was ’ardav, i.e. ‘true’ ot ‘genuine,’ cor-
responding to vaddik. Of the other names,
niyoshag ‘heater’ is added by Prof. Miiller from
elsewhere, as it does not happen to come in the

105

APPENDICES

Colophon at this point ; ‘ispasag may vety well be
a Persian adaptation of episcopus; pamoxdg, so fat
as I know, does not occur again in the literature
hitherto published, but several of the Turkish
documents mention the mwapbistag (ot mayistag)*.

Of the names mentioned in the Frhrist (text in
Fliigel, p. 64) the last causes no difficulty; the last
but one is siddik, cottesponding to the Syriac
vaddik and to ‘faithful’; the third is kasis (Rissis),
the regular word for a Christian priest and there-
fore exactly equivalent to Augustine’s presbyter.
The second word in the Fuhbrist is mushammis,
which seems to be a rendering of the Syriac
mshammshana, ‘a deacon’: it is possible that our
Moslem writer has made a mistake in the nomen-
clature of an alien religion; if not, this term may
have been used by the Manichaean ‘bishops’ in
accordance with the principle enunciated in Matt.
xx 26, like seruus seruorum in the Pope’s style.

Finally, the concordance of the Fibrist’s ‘teacher’
(mu‘allim) with Augustine’s magister makes it clear
that the highest dignitary in the Manichee hierarchy
was the Doctor, but whether the Manichees pet-
manently restricted the number to twelve (Aug.
de Haeres. 46, quoted in Fliigel, p. 298) is not
known. |

It should be added that Ephraim four times
uses the term kpbhalpala (<\s\s= a trisyllable,
vocalization uncertain) for the highest Manichee
grade. The word occurs in Mitchell, 11 205, 206,

1 F.g. v. Le Coq, Manichaica 111, pp. 9, 35 f.

106

I. THE MANICHAEAN HIERARCHY

as well as in certain Hymns (ES 3, 100 B, ESL 1,
105). According to the first of these passages there
might be as few as Five of them in the world.
The derivation of the term is quite obscure:
possibly it is a fanciful formation from Kedady,
as if one should say a ‘chapterer’ for one who is
at the head.

Il. THE FIVE PURE ELEMENTS

THE Primal Man, according to the Manichaean
story, was arrayed with the Five Pure Elements
as a sort of panoply when he went forth to fight
with the Demon of the Dark. Ephraim speaks
of them as 410, usually transliterated zIWANE
and supposed to mean ‘brilliant.’ Four of them
were Light, Wind, Water, Fire, but Ephraim
cutiously avoids naming the fifth (Mitchell, 1,
p- Ixxix: see also 11, p. cxxxiv). Indeed I do not
know of any Syriac source that names the fifth
Element at all. On the other hand it is given as
aer by Augustine (¢. Faust. 11 3), and in the Acta
Archelai vx as dy}, which ever since Beausobre
has been regarded as a mere palaeographical cot-
ruption of ayjp. The Arabic (Fligel, Frbrist, p. 87)
gives exit ‘the gentle breeze’ or ‘zephyr.’

The Manichaean documents from Turfan tell
us that the name of this fifth Element was pravabr
in Middle-Petsian and “imtura in Tutkish. Mote-

1 So Epiphanius: the Latin has maria, no doubt a
corruption of materia.

107

APPENDICES

over there survives one important text which
seems to shew that the pure elements were some-
times enumerated as Four, sometimes as Five, a
fact which may explain the curious absence of a
fifth term in our Syriac documents. In Miiller,
Handschriften-Reste aus Turfan 11, p. 38, we tead
(M 98, 1. 8 ff.):
He [(?) the Heavenly Jesus, or the ‘Living Spirit’?]
out of the Wind and Light Water and Fire
which had been refined from the Mixture
two Light-carriers
that of the Sun _ out of the Fire and Light
with 5 walls of aether wind light water and fire
and 12 doors and houses 5 and thrones 3
and soul-collecting angels 5
in the fiery wall
and that of the Moon-God out of the Wind and Water
with 5 walls of aether wind light water and fire
and 14 doors and houses 5 and thrones 3
and soul-collecting angels 5
in the watery wall
made and arranged.

Prof. Miller translates réshan-rahé by ‘Fahrzeug,’
and supposes them to be Augustine’s ‘ships of
Light,’ but the description of them suggests to
me rather the heavenly Orbits or Roads along
which Sun and Moon ate made to travel. It is
to be noted that these ‘Light-orbits’ were called
in Syriac <iAs<, rendered by Cumont ‘circles’
(see Cumont, Recherches 1 31)”. Prof. Bang in his
edition of the Khuastuanift, p. 216, note 2, suggests

1 See Cumont, 1 31.

2 Note that here in the text of Theodore bar Konai the
word ‘Light’ has fallen out after ‘Wind.’

108

II]. THE FIVE PURE ELEMENTS

“Feldlager’ or ‘Pfalz,’ but the word means literally
“Light-way,’ and after all the obvious fact about
the Sun and Moon is that they go along definite
paths in the sky which they never leave; it was
natural therefore to suppose that these paths must
be bounded by heavenly walls.

But I am not hete so directly concerned with
the exact figure and plan of these grandiose con-
structions as with the fact that while the elements
tefined out of the ‘mixture’ are enumerated as
“Wind and Light, Water and Fire,’ the ‘walls’ are
made of the Five elements Aether, Wind, Light,
Water and Fire. Was no ‘Aether’ refined out of
the mixture? Was the Aether never tetained by
the Archons? In any case there seems to be a
hesitancy or inconsistency of presentation, which
goes some way to account for the silence of our
Sytiac texts about this ‘Aether.’

It is worth notice that all the texts which
enumerate Five Elements (Fvhrist, this Persian
text, Khuastuanift 34-37, and the Turkish texts
edited by v. Le Coq, Manichaica 111, p. 16) enumerate
them in the same order, except the corrupt text
of the Acta Archelai.

Fliigel points out (pp. 187, 200) that Shahrastani
treats the ‘Air’ or ‘Aether’ as the ‘spirit’? moving
in the ‘bodies’ of the other Light-elements.
Shahrastani’s words ate: “The species [of the
Light] ate five; four of them are substances
(wl! “bodies’), and the fifth their spirit (lyos)).
And the substances are Fire, Light, Wind and

109

APPENDICES
Water, and their spirit is the Zephyr (eei!), and
this moves in these bodies” (Shahrastani, ed.
Cureton, p. 189). The word for ‘wind’ is ew,
different from that for ‘spirit,’ which is ¢9). In
Syriac, of course, the same word <»o4 is used
for both.

It is in accordance with this view that the
Fihrist says (Fliigel, p. 94) that this Element
Cosi!) is the Life of the world, and the same
idea, no doubt, is reflected in the Persian and
Turkish names. Both syllables of tzntura seem to
mean ‘life’ or ‘living,’ and pravabr seems to mean
‘substance’ or ‘essence.’ In other words these
terms tell us as little of the physical meaning of
this Element as ‘eau-de-vie’ does of brandy.

The Five pure Elements are called by Ephraim
the Five Ziwané (sing. viwand), and no doubt this
is the proper Manichaean Syriac term. But what
does it mean? We have only the consonantal
text (108), and as I said at the beginning of
this Note it is generally supposed to mean ‘the
brilliant ones,’ from zid ‘splendour.’ The Khuas-
tuanift, which uses the curious expression ‘Five-
God’ as the equivalent for ziwdné, says that of
everything on earth the ‘Five-God’ is the Root,
Foundation, Light, Strength, Body and Soul |
(ll. 45-48). This suggests to me that zimand must
originally have meant something more significant
than ‘brilliant.’ Is it not possible that it is really
a Middle-Persian word meaning ‘living one’?

Ito

irae FIVE PURE ELEMENTS -

The Persian for that is yiandag (Miller, 11, pp. 35,
65): it seems to me quite likely that the Syriac
xiwanda 1s a Manichaean adaptation of this.

What makes this conjecture more probable is
that the word xiand is used as a Manichee epithet
for ‘Jesus’ in the text quoted by Theodore bar
Konai. “Jesus the zivand came to Adam and
waked him up from his death-slumber’’ (Cumont,
I 46), going on to explain to him something of
the doctrine about the patibilem Iesum qui est uita
ac salus hominum ab omni ligno suspensus (Ibid. p. 48).
It is obvious that in such a context ‘brilliant’ is
out of place, while ‘living’ or ‘life-giving’ is
exactly appropriate.

The complete answer to these questions cannot
be made till we know what the correct Syriac
equivalent was for the Element which was
variously translated pei, tintura and aer.

lil. MANICHEE FRAGMENTS IN SYRIAC

A FEW ftagments in Manichaean script have
turned up during the last few years in Egypt.
They ate all very small in extent, so small that
no complete sentence survives, but they throw
a cutious side-light on the Manichaean literature
and ptopaganda, and are of especial interest as
pteserving the only known specimens of the
actual dialect of Aramaic used by Manichees, the
language in which no doubt all the main works
of Mani but one were composed.

7 APPENDICES

The fragments fall into three groups: (@) the
British Museum Fragment; (0) Mr Crum’s scraps;
(c) the Oxyrhynchus Fragments.

(2) Brit. Mus. Or. 6201 C (1).

This fragment consists of the inner part of two
conjugate vellum leaves. No whole line is com-
pletely preserved. A photograph was published
in the J.R.A.S. for April 1919 by W. E. Crum,
and a few words transcribed by him were recog-
nized as Syriac by E. W. Brooks. The fragment
is thought to have come from Ashmunain.

col. A (=1 2) col. D (=1 v)
* * * € K OS * * * * * *
x * € Wham Lam as0m * * * x
ook Se. * *« * “S) ee
* * pe AMAIA oe pat 4 ann *
su ise ae Wearao ; 5MMAmMmI0 * £
x * alin anes Shaw. *« & *
* * Wass <am * * %* * *
* * * Camdoaava Koay SK ~ x
* * =D iIim<sa.cam\ * Asazlo <h x
* * pee aes rk 0 ome & &

No continuous translation can be made of this,
particularly as we do not know the length of the
complete lines of writing, but D8 (“beloved
brothers”) saggests a Homily. Note the stop at

III. MANICHEE FRAGMENTS IN SYRIAC

the beginning of A 3: this seems to be a Manichaean
habit, found in mss. from Turfan. Possibly the
subject may have been an exposition of sayings
of Mani, so that Ag, 10 may have run “That
Mani said thus : ‘Do...’”

col. C(=2 1) col. B(=2v)
*¥ * * *® *¥ QA on We Ae ak
* * * Woman —O1e * *
Fee ee ee pe eee
* Of * € * * en ete x x
* * asmil=e=:; sma» am *
* * AX * BA O10 ££ & ¥
*¥ wet Kise Mrwrwis * *
* * ae Asie Bams30 a x
* * ba Lae gs wie! aoa
* * “han >? 10 10 Sha lLaw lee

Here again no translation is possible, but the
language is clearly Syriac. Specially noteworthy
is bar sha‘theh, i.e. ‘immediately’ (B 7), a regular
Edessene Syriac idiom, not I believe found in
Jewish Aramaic. Note also the imperf. formed
with #, not_y, just as in Edessene (B 8).

(0) Five tiny vellum scraps belonging to
Mtr W. E. Crum.

These ate hitherto unpublished, and have kindly
been lent to me for examination. They come from

B 113 8

*,
APPENDICES

Middle Egypt, and appear to have been used to
bind some ancient Coptic Mss.

A. col. 11 fol. ra"
a ON % * a Nasa
@mXo1 ol> * ¥ *# “moil mihh<o
bihs « * * € * Maal» <isrixo

*

col. v1 col. v 2
oats Naw ae
anand hoig t # Blank

12> wish *

The most interesting word here is in v 1, line 1,
for dthalya means ‘eclipse’ (or possibly ‘dragon,’
as an astronomical term). The nature of the argu-
ment in the text cannot be recovered, but its
subject was evidently astronomical.

B. This is a tiny vellum strip containing portions
of eleven lines of writing, but only three or four
letters ate preserved in each line.

C. This an even smaller strip, containing por-
tions of seven lines of writing. One of these lines
contains the word <\jasi<, z.e. ‘Archon,’ the
well-known Manichaean term for the Demon of
the Dark.

D and E ate too small and broken to be read
at all.

(¢) The Oxyrhynchus Fragments.
These were edited by Professor Margoliouth

114

4 >
III. MANICHEE FRAGMENTS IN SYRIAC

in the Journal of Eg yptian Archaeology fot Oct. 1915,
pp. 214-16. Unfortunately Prof. Margoliouth had
misapprehended at least one sign in the Manichaean
alphabet (8), and the transcripts do not in all cases
seem to have been revised by the facsimile, so
that the tentative translations are for the most
part rather misleading.

The fragments are now in the Bodleian Library
(Syr. d 13 P, 14 P) and consist of ten small strips
of papyrus, much totn and in places so much
tubbed as to be illegible. I follow Prof. Mar-
goliouth’s numeration.

Bodl. Syr. d 14 (P).
1. Strip of one line.

<tuly ~ashil = <thuly —wa <l\n [

. who knew not sin on your account sin

This is correctly recognized by Margoliouth as
a quotation from 2 Cor. v 21, but he prefixes +,
which is not in the ms., for the lost word in front
of <A: ends with », so that the missing word
might be ‘ Jesus.’ Margoliouth points out that the
fragment agrees with the Peshitta text in sub-
stituting vuev for nov, but differs from it in
omitting <om after ~...

Here therefore, in this isolated scrap of Mani-
chaean writing, is an agreement with the Syriac
N.T. against all other critical authorities, one more
instance of the dependence of the Manichees upon
Syriac Christendom.

115 8-2

APPENDICES .
Margoliouth’s +~_belongs to the next column
(on the #ft), now quite torn away.
2. Strip of three lines: in two columns, not as
Margoliouth prints it in one.

~ssJaiqg mals o< tk ere ‘ [

Jo a are 5, pL aol e [
AJaxtold Nd Wav AQ ome 123. <\/
The signs between the columns may mark a

quotation.
Translate :

like a man afflicted oppressed and persecuted. .
before a man good true and....
For to whom else have I to say...

In line 2 Margoliouth read su=~ and ~pxs,
and the first word of line 3 »>:\.

This short text is grammatically interesting. The
‘defective’ spellings qpan\ and ~4»< are found
elsewhere, e.g. in the Sinai Palimpsest, but the
use of the ‘absolute’ in ll. 1 and 2 is against the
peculiarly Edessene usage. Still more interesting
is ~\sxs, which is the correct form, used also
in Jewish and Palestinian Aramaic, in Arabic and
in Hebrew, but in Edessene Syriac the root is
spelt with 4 (<hzon, etc.).

3. Strip with fragments of nine lines.

j}+5[
> osm As oh
|fasusal womana paw

116

+ hy +? . ¥
ITI. MANICHEE FRAGMENTS IN SYRIAC
[tte pa eat <le.

jaa — 5
>
* * = <v04[x]=>

Translate (Il. 2 and 3):

.. Lhere was afflicted every righteous man in [the world
Srom| Adam even unto the Saviour [
But I say..... as I [have] said.....

The rest is unintelligible. In 1. 7 a\het I yi//
give him is cleat: possibly the line may mean and
to the [vul|ture I will give him.

wav Saviour or Life-giver is a regular Syriac
title for our Lord, and we have seen (p. 90) that
it was used also by the Manichees.

Bodl. Syr. d 13 (P).
1. “Strip containing a few letters, wherein the

wotd <a hands can be distinguished. Also
some Coptic letters.” So Margoliouth, but all the
writing is clearly Greek. The letters read Ga<
ate the Greek letters xan. Above this is tun.
At right angles to this the letters 1. meta and 2. tect

ate legible.
2, 3, 4. Very small fragments. -

II7 8-3

a
APPENDICES

5. Strip containing fragments of two columns.
< xX. aso eset\ x ¥ :
A ash pelo eo * 2
phlei [ornament] 3
[a/legible| * * * 4
29 BAS 3 x 5
>» [ cut away | 6-8
* wax AM [ties 3
[alegible or blank] puns bit << & 10
| ss wimeda <iloa <am 1
” ie wiama. <i[< 12

This is not continuous enough to translate.
I print this, almost exactly agreeing with Mar-
goliouth, because it is evidently written in regular
Edessene or ‘classical? Syriac, not Mandaean or
some unknown Aramaic dialect.

6. Fragment.

eo to ck aa. *
was <oaniamn ¥

sal, gb Asx x

This of course is a mere incoherent fragment.
I print it, because 1. 2 is quite clear. The letters
ate as printed, v7. KBWZKYA BSA, which can-

not be translated, as Margoliouth does, ‘a despised
Cappadocian.’

118

a
III. MANICHEE FRAGMENTS IN SYRIAC
7. Fragment.

* * Wms * x
Weseiwl & &

0 WIA ,;parsn am KIM

Does the last line mean ‘that shoe in the markets
of Persia’?

It is evident that mete scraps like the last two
may easily offer insoluble riddles. But what is
clear from the longer and mote coherent frag-
ments is that the language used is almost identical
with classical Syriac, and that several known
Manichaean peculiarities reappear in these tiny
remains of the Manichee propaganda in Egypt.

IV. THE SOGHDIAN LECTIONARY

AMONG the remains of Buddhistic, Manichaean
and Christian fragments discovered near Turfan
in Chinese Turkestan are some leaves and patts
of leaves of a Gospel Lectionary written in Syriac
letters in the Soghdian language, a dialect of
Middle-Petsian. The leaves have been excellently
transcribed and edited by Prof. F. W. K. Miiller
in the Abhandlungen of the Berlin Academy for
1912 (Abd. u, pp. 1-111)!, who tecognizes that
they ate fragments of a Lectionary, and that the
Soghdian text is a translation from the Peshitta.

1 FP, W. K. Miller, Soghdische Texte 1.

119

APPENDICES

On going through the fragments I perceived that
the Lectionary is the Nestorian one.

As the fragments ate old (at least roth cent.)
and their origin so peculiar I have thought it ©
wotth while to collect the Lessons in their liturgical
otder, so as to shew what part of the Nestorian
Lectionary is supported by this witness from the far
North-East. As a basis of comparison I have taken
the numbered sections in Camb. Univ. Libr. Add.
1975, a Gospel Lectionary written in a.D. 1586 for
the Church of Mosul (Catal. of C.U.L., pp. 58-80).

Of the 55 fragments edited by Prof. Miiller,
49 belong to the Lectionary. They are contained
on 23 leaves of which a certain number are con-
jugates. As the numbers given to the single frag-
ments ate haphazard I shall quote them also by
Miiller’s pages (¢.g. 67 r1 = M 3).

The few instances in which the Fragments
preserve the beginning of a Lesson with its Rubrics
are alone enough to shew that they come from a
Nestorian Lectionary, e.g. those for the 6th Sunday
in Lent, or for Friday ‘of the Confessors’ (ze.
Friday after Easter). Where the Section (shad) is
given, the number always agrees with Gwilliam’s
numeration as collected from Peshitta mss.

Frg. 64v= Miller, p. 28 f., is the beginning
of the whole book. No doubt the recto is blank,
as is usual in Syriac ss., and very likely it was
pteceded by one (or two) blank leaves as a guard.

1 The full numeration is T. II, B. 67 t (or v): I give
only the numbers, for short.

7

IV. THE SOGHDIAN LECTIONARY

quowSexj oy} ‘a2 “ce oINIVUSTs oy Aq PoUIHUOD ST aray pooetd aq 3
*XOPO7) SY} JO Jes] USHITM ISTH OY} Sem STy} +AU

é
gUe] UT “yA-prot *L]
[yue] ur ‘pung wr]

[yuo] ur yas ast]
[yuo] Ur “yas 3st “AT]

1§ ut [ydidg 30332] “pung [p7£]

[adidg soage “pung puz]

‘oq UT *pung Gib
[‘00q UT ‘puns pz]
‘coq ur ‘puns [ist]

soqep
Tepus[eysy

QI-Z" "TAX “YT

*op—Sz°°a ‘gol

oveee

18+ Ch-gz' TXx ‘VE
**ob—gé A ‘RIT

69 €S-0F° A “IRI
+++ 66-62 7 ‘qof
gz—61° "tT ‘Yyol

eoeeee

(25) -1 } “HRW
og-£9 TIT
alo BHISSIUe Saaval OMY
2H Sot
SOSTO.A
quvyxy

“P aITN?) JO FeIy ISI OY} SVAN

6p—-1 FW = Az (Mh) z1
¥9-19 JW = Az 66
1z—-L1 JW = At (1) 99

(w=alg
b—-£ Ww = aAzLlo

19-09 W = A(H) 41
o9-L$ WW = Ar (mH) Lt

zEW=ABE
zE-of JW = AT gé
708-87 W=AVO

yUOUISeIF

UeIpysos

snus UONIET Sty} UL, gz
eq oq 0 stvadde 179 1

pas Jou
6h
Ly
6¢
gf

4

61

I

6L61
“PPV
ne Se pe SS
suonoo"']

121

APPENDICES

* is
‘() vé pur (1) VE Jo ony st owes oyT, “orb
@ JO SPIsUy oy} Us0q SAVY ysnuT puL “pouTol [TMs ‘soavay oyeSn{u0d ose (1m) IZ pu (1) IZ |

[z0aseq Jo ‘puns yI9] ge-be-'max yof LL Ww =27(41) 99 08
lad BULSStUL Saba Og

Josey Jo ‘puns [q1$] reef —(Cs*ixx -uol 6L W = A 66 6L

Joysey Jo ‘puns [y3$] ** 1 TXX ‘YO ol W = 7 266 6L

€€ TAX ‘yof ol W = 7 166 LE

[J03seqy Jo ‘pung uIP] *eezg-oz- tax ‘yof $L-1L w=ar(m)z1 LL
’ adad BULSSIU SAaDaf OMtg

1[Aepung Man] **°$z-61° *xx ‘yof sLWw=A(m) 12 €L

STOSS3JUO’) 94} JO “sy "°°€€-/z x yep. OI-g FW =I (m1) 1 zL

L§ur STOSSOFUOT) OY} JO “J Qz-9I xe = g-S W=at(t) 1L Zk
[s03seq Joye “qT | §I-b1**x “VV Sw=s() 12 1c

asaq susssiut foe, auo

[zo3Sseqy Joqze */A\] **soz—gi**ax‘yof 1L-oL W=AaA(m)99 ol

[z03s¥q JoIye *T] "the—zescarex yy £$-z$ w=1(m) 99 69

[za3seqy Joqze “Ty ] ZE—-GI ATX ‘YT z$—o$ JW = AI OI 69

or§ ur WaT UT ‘puns 439 -6¢ xt ‘yof sh W=A(M)z1 $$
§§ soyep SOSTOA quoWIs IF 6161
sepusleyy yuuIx| ueIpysog ‘PPV

eee Oe

suonse'T

a22

IV. THE SOGHDIAN*LECTIONARY

‘aamnb & JO saavey oprsur oy} useq aary ysnus (11) 6£ pur (1) 6£
‘zzz d ‘93003005 29g

[vz1 -d aac]

snysovg *S pur s[nt3I9¢g *s]

61§ ur

9§ur

eqqeysreg °S

[seq Jo ‘puns pz£]
[seifq jo ‘puns puz]

,[40uIUINS Jo ‘pung pr£]

['ddy 30] ‘puns wr

__ [sepsody jo ‘pung pz¢]

[Aeq uoysusosy]

—61 A ‘yot

by-SE° Tx “HT
°8*61-Lt° xx ‘eW
See a HX ‘YT

*e°L TAX-Pz TAX “UIT

gb—Sv S
Ss a
€€-1¢ Axx ‘Qe
Le—S$1**xtx “WT

eeeee

°° °St—bz TTx LL
***6r-L1° “THX “yey

eeeree

ce

"+9 96_6- “XI ‘yof
**°LI-Z1 TA "HT
cP—-PE**x “rT

ereeee

***Ly-o€ AIXX "YT

ov W=aAzs
or—gt W = arzs
LIw=ax
IvVW=4X

QI-zI W = Arz() L1
€1-er W = (1) Zt
Lz—-€z JW= Ar (m1) 6€
ZZ—-1Z J = A (1) 6

6b—Sh We = Az (1) 6F

zI-11 JW = A(t) 99
1I-Ol JW = 4 (1) 99

Ne Ax (m1) VE
oL-S$9 W = Az (1) PE

€€-z€ JW =A (q) zx
gf—-VE WW e= Ar (1) zx

LS—€6 W= az (At) 99

123

Sor
Pol.

; APPENDICES
Most of the Lessons agtee exactly with the
Nestorian use, where the beginnings or endings
of the Lessons are preserved, but No. 4 begins
at Matt. i 1, thus including the Genealogy, while
the present Nestorian lesson begins at i 18. Im-

0

*
a

mediately preceding No. 55 is Lk. xvi (1)-16, for _

which I do not know a Nestorian parallel, nor
can I suggest an appropriate Lenten day. In 19
and 21, 77 and 79, Sunday lessons follow im-
mediately on one another, omitting the week-day
commemorations that come in between (in these
cases those of the Evangelists and of the Macca-
baean Martyrs). Evidently, therefore, the Com-
memorations were atranged at the end. Here,
then, belongs the long continuous piece, con-
taining the Lessons for the commemorations of
S. Barsabbas (?) (<=24=) and of SS. Sergius and
Bacchus. The former has the Commemoration
for the Dead, and the latter that of the Syrian
Doctots, which is also the old Lesson for SS. Peter
and Paul, or very nearly. I do not know who is
meant by Barsabbas; possibly the name is not
read correctly. Before these two sets comes a
Lesson ending with Lk. xix 27: this again seems
a novelty.

The Lessons I have put at the end also belong
to commemorations. At the end of Lk. xii 44
comes the catch-words in Syriac, as always in out
Ms., thus: ““A[men, amen, I say to you,] The
Son [cannot] do aught,’ as far as....See at the
Entry of the F[ast.] Commemoration of....”

124

-

_IV. THE SOGHDIAN LECTIONARY

¢

_ The text is Joh. v 19: I take ‘the Entry of the

Fast’ to be a scribe’s error for Mid-Lent!, and
the reference to be to No. 49.

It is evident that these fragments keep very
closely to the Nestorian Gospel Lectionary as
known to us from mss. of the 11th and succeeding
centuries. We may conclude, therefore, that the
Christians of Chinese Turkestan were closely
allied in culture and organization to their brother
Nestorians in Mesopotamia and the Tigris Valley.
The literature they brought to that remote region

is already known to us fairly well from other

‘sources, and indeed it is not likely on general

grounds that they would bring rare or antiquated
books thither. When therefore we find at Turfan
in Manichaean script extracts from the ‘Shepherd
of Hermas’ or legendary amplifications of the
Gospels, it is pretty certain that they belong to a
Manichaean line of transmission, that they belong
to what Mani and his earlier disciples took from
Christian sources, not to what later Manichaeans
may have from time to time assimilated from their
Christian neighbours. In any case this Lectionary
remains an interesting and authentic monument of
Nestotian missionary activity, contemporary with
the famous Chinese monument of Si-ngan-fu.

1 For such ertors in Lectionary notices, see my Early
Syriac Lectionary System, p. 15.

125

INDEX

+f Abjuration, Formula of, 12, 19 n.

Adam and Eye, 30-33, 82
Adamas, 28, 29, 79
Adonay, 86
Ahriman, 51 n., 86
Albigensians, 12
Alexander of Lycopolis, 12, 66, 95
Alfaric, Prosper, 16, 17 n., 32, 61
Alms, 56, 62
Aphraates, 84
Archelaus, Acts of, 12, 13, 23 n.,
24, 43 f., 45, 65, 72, 94, 107,
109
narrative of, untrustworthy, 13,
72 n,
Archons, 25, 27, 29, 54.n., 58, 114
Ardashir, 3, 37
Arsani’ah, 87
Atlas, 28, 79
Augustine, 11
c. Ep. Fundamenti, 22, 32
c. Faustum ii 3, 24, 107; vi25, 59;
REE 45) 355.905 xx 2, ALF, >
XX 10, 28
c. Fortunatum 3, 46n.
de Ciuit. Dei xi 9, 102; xi 23, 1;
Xi 33, 103; xii 7, 102
de Haer. 46, 106
de Morib. Manich, ii 16, 60 n.
Azrua. See Zrvan

Babylon, 72

Baghdad, 6

Bahram I, 5

Ban, 26, 64, 89

Bang, W., 48, 52n., 54n., 108f.
Barbelo, 29

Bardaisan, 14, 75, 76 ff.

Barlaam and Joasaph, 97
Biruni, 6, 15, 37, 45 n.

Bogomils, 12

Bolus, 65 ff.

Bonfire, final, 64 f., 89 n.

Brooks, E. W., 112

Laan Buddhists, 37, 44, 85,
OUT.

Burkhans, 50. See Préstags

Callers and Answerers, 56 n.

Chavannes, E., 16

Columba, 103

Column of Glory, 43

Commandments, Manichaean Ten,
56, 60 f.

Creation and generation, 23, 83

Creation of this world, 27 f.

Credo, Manichaean, 54 f.

Crum, W. E., 73 n., 112.

Cumont, Franz, 15, 30, 32. See
also Theodore and Severus ‘

Dark, the, substantial, 19 f., 78
Dintar. See Zaddik
Dualism, 75

Elect. See Zaddik

Ephraim, Refutations, 13 f., 74, 84,
98. See also p. 129

Epiphanius, 13, 24, 29 n., 65

Evil, beginning of, 21, 24, 78

Evodius, de Fide, 12, 65 é

Eznik, 72

Fall, the, 78, 101 f.

Fasts, 57

Father of Greatness, 19, 22 f., 25,
28. See also Zrvan

Fihrist. See Fligel

Five Elements, 107f.; Five-God,
24. See Ziwané

127

: #

-

INDEX

Flagel, G., 6, 15, 26, 26n., 50,
60n., 72n., 74, 84f., 89, 94,
105 f., 107, 109 f.

Food, 23, 47, 56, 60 n.

Fortunatus, 46 n.

Friend of Luminaries, 26

Futtak, Fatik. See Patticius

George and Dragon, 29 n.

God, Manichee doctrine of, 19, 33,
39 f., 50, 61

Green, Canon P., 69, 100

Gunde-Shapur, 5

Hearers, 44 f., 55, 59, 83, 105
Hermas, 96, 125

Hermes, Trism., 38, 96
Hierotheos, 26 n.

Hill, G. F., 8 n.

Huxley, T. H., 81

Hyle, 95

Hypodectae, 95

Trenaeus, 23, 102
"Israel, 88, 91

Jacob (angel). See Préstags
Jesus, in Manichee theology, 37-43,
90, 92 f.
Friend, 31
patibilis, 31 n., 42.n., 111
Ziwana, 31, 111
Julia, Manichee, 8 ff.

Kashkar (Wasit), 14 n.

Khormuzta. See Ormuzd

Khuastuanift, 16, 25n.,
108, 109, 110

Kings of Glory and Honour, 28

Kphalpala, 106

Kugener, M. A., 19 n.

48-63,

Le Coq, A. von, 16, 48, 52 n., 97.
See also p. 130
Living Spirit, the, 26, 28

Mahistag, 105. See Presbyter

Manistar hirza, 48, 52 ff.

Mani, Manichees, passim

Marcion, 14, 41, 75, 80 ff., 86

Margoliouth, D. S., 73n., 115 ff.

Mark the Deacon, 7 ff.

Mayor, J. E. B., 19n.

Messenger, the, 29 f., 38, 40

Milton, 19, 103

Mitchell, C. W., 13n.
Ephraim

Mixture, 4, 17, 21, 23, 30, 63, 78,
100

Moments, Three, 17, 55

Monday, 57

Moses b. Kepha, 76

Mother of Life, 22 f., 40

Miller, F. W. K., 16. See p. 130

See

Nadim, an-. See Fligel
Nahashbat, 25
Nestorians, 85, 119-125
Nom, 53 n.

Ormuzd, 50, 51, 52 n., 86

Paraclete (Mani), 43, 94
Patticius, 21, 32, 66, 82
Pelliot, Paul, 16
Peter, Gospel of, 87
Plato, 38 :
Porphyry of Gaza, 7 ff.
Pragmateia, 32, 66
Pravahr, 25, 107, 110
Presbyter, 46 n., 105
Préstags, 30, 50, 53, 90
(=angels), 91
Primal Man, 22-27, 40, 50

Radloff, W., 48
Roots, Two, 17, 55, 88
Roshan-rahé, 103

Safsér, 93
Sanctus, 92

128

Satan, 75, 101 ff.

Seleucia-Ctesiphon, 3, 72 f.

Severus of Antioch, Hom. cxxiii,
12, 15n., 17n., 18n., 22 n.

Shabahragan, Seb 65, 74, 88

Shahrastini, 21 n., 61, 109 f.

Shapur I, 3, 37, 74

Shéthil, 33

Ship of Light, 89, 108

Si-ngan-fu, 125

Smudge, original, 100

Soghdian, 15, 119

Splenditenens, 28, 79

Stein, Sir A., 16, 48

Sun and Moon, 27, 29, 43f., 50,
52, 108 f.

Syriac, 33, 66 n., 73 f., 84, 92 f., 96,
107 f., 111-119

Taghazghaz, Toquz Oghuz, 6
Theodore b. Konai, 14, 22, 26,
28 n., 31 n., 108, 111

Genesis vi 1 ff. 101 n.
Job xxxviii 7 102
Psalm cv 28 20 n.
Matthew x 42 90
XX 26 106

XXV 31-46 89 f.

xxvii 29 f. 88

Mark iii 21 33
XVII 87

Luke xxiv 1-11 87
Johni 5 20 n.
XVili 36 88

2 Corinthians v 21 115
Ephesians iv 9, 10 26 n.
iv 13 43

Hebrews iv 12 94

Ephraim, Refutations (ed. Mitchell):
I xxx 23, 45, 64 n.
XXXili 27

129

a «

INDEX

Tintura, 25, 107, 110

Titus of Bostra, 12, 25, 65 n.
Trees, Two, 18, 26 n.

Turfan, 7, 48, 95, 125
Turkestan, Chinese, 6, 15, 85, 98

Valentinus, 24. %
Wetter, G., 71
Women Manichees, 8 f., 45 f.

Zaddik, Zindik, 6, 23, 44 f., 56f.,
59, 83, 90, 105 f.

Zenghis Khan, 3

Zephyr. See Ziwané

Ziwana, Jesus the, 31, 111

Ziwané, the Five, 24, 25, 27, 29, 52,
58, 107-109, 110

Zoroaster, Zoroastrians, 37, 51 n.,
75, 86

Zrvan, 19, 50f., 52n., 55f. See
also Father of Greatness

Ephraim, Refutations (cont.):
I xxxvi, xlii 95

xlvii 64n.
kx 20
Ixiii 33
Ixxii (p. 87) 66
Ixxv 64 n.
Ixxix 25, 107
xc 78
XCili 45 f.
xcix 78n., 95n.
II iii, cvi 76 n.
xxiii 33
xxvii 77 n.
xcvill 28 n., 37, 47, 94, 96
cxl 95 n.
clxxxiii (=I, p. 162) 35
205 f. 106
208 43
235 33
236 66 n.

INDEX

Prof. A. von LE Coa, works quoted:

F.R.A.S. 1911 48, 51-58
Berlin Academy,
Sttzungsberichte 1909 97

Abhandlungen 1922 (=Mani-
chaica 111),

Pp- 9, 35 f. 106 n.

ge 90

16 109

34 54n.

40 6n.

Prof. F. W. K. MULLER, works
quoted:

Berlin Academy,
Sttzungsberichte 1905 96

1909s 48 0.
Abhandlungen 1904 (=Hand-
schriften-Reste aus Tur-

fan 11),
Pp. 10-25 65, 88 f.
16, 17 37
20 52 n.

Abhandlungen 1904 (cont.),

pp. 26 39
28 ol nag
33 45 n.
34 f. 87
35505 ~ 113
36 ’ 88 n.
38 27n., 108
45 91 n.
51 72
56 Sin:
60-62 93
61 49 n.
67 49 n.
7O 92
77 93
93 49 n.
94 f. 51 n., 86

109
Abhandlungen 1912 (=Ein
Doppelblatt), p. 37 105

(=Soghdische Texte 1),
PP- 3-79 119 ff.

CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY W, LEWIS AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS

ne BS

Pe

The religion of the Manichees : Donnel |

1410
B8

R15

4

Burkitt, F. Crawford (Francis Crawford) ' : eo 8 i a

cl

Burkitt, Francis Crawford, 1864-1935.

The religion of the Manichees; Donnellan lectures -
by F. C. Burkitt .... Cambridge ,Eng.,; The Univers:
1925.

viii, 129, (1) p. plates. 194™.
Delivered in Trinity college, Dublin.

1. Manichaeism., I. Donnellan lectures, 1924. 11. Title.

“ a
Library of Congress i) BT1410.B8 CCSC,
ya42f1,