The Sacred Theory of the Earth, Vol. II: The Burning of the World and the New Heavens
Thomas Burnet
The Sacred Theory of the Earth, vol. II (the two last books: of the burning of the world, and of the new heavens and new earth). English translation; text from the 1726 London edition.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_1726_2).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

— wh gu tt — —„—— Re


+ ot
THE SACRED 4


| THEORY.


EET OD Wy E
Containing an ACCOUNT of the |


| Or ginal of he Earth,
TS


1


7 PENN f [CHANGES


Y IV.
2 «<


Which it hath already undergone, or is to
WM undergo, till the ConsummatiON


of all Things,


The T wo LAST Booxs,


| b Foncerning the Burning of the Won r D,


g Au p
5 Concerning the New Heavey, and New Earth,
| =_ & bc .
- — — |
LONDON: -


Printed for J. Hooxe, at the Flower-de-Juce, over- |


againſt St, Dunſtan 8 Church, in Fleetftreet, 1726, |
Sd


? | , '


—
} *.#


*


*.


rer


|;


Moſt EXCELLENT


4 .
>
, ;
1 *
* 8
8 |
3 %
f a
L
,
. e
21
WF . ” - © - * *
P E
.
R
1
Us


WAVING had the Honour to
& preſent the firſt Part of this

2 Theory to your Roy as.
Duc, I preſume to offer
the Second to Your Majeſty. This Part
of the Subject, I hope, will be no leſs


A 2 ac-


—


Tbe Epiſtle fink.


3 for certainly tis of no i
Importance. They both indeed agree
in this, that there is a WORLD made
and deſtroy d in either Treatiſe. But we
are more concern d in what is to come,
than what is paſt. And as the former
Books repreſented to us the Riſe and Fall
of che firſt World; ſo theſe: give an Ac-
count of the preſent Frame of Nature
labouring under. the laſt Flames, and of
the Reſurrection of it in the neaw Heavens
and new Earth; which,: according to the


Divine Womit we are to expect.


— ———U —— ——ů—


* CE ——


Cities that are burnt, are commonly
rebuilt more beautiful and regular than
they were before. And when this World
is demoliſh'd by the laſt Fire, He that
undertakes to rear it up again, will ſup- .
ply the Defects, if there were any of the
former 1 This Theory uppoſes
the preſent Earth to be little better than
an Heap of Ruins; z where yer there is

Room


A?


The Epiſtle Dedicatory.
Room enough for Sea and Land, for
Iſlands and Continents, for ſeveral Coun-
tries and Dominions : But when theſe are
all melted down, and refin'd in the
general Fire, they will be caſt into a bet-
ter Mould, and the Form and Qualities
of the Earth will become Paradiſaical.


But, I fear, it may be thought no
| ery proper Addreſs, to ſhew Your
Majeſt/ a World laid in Aſhes, where
You have fo great an Intereſt Your Self,
and ſuch fair Dominions; and then, to
recompenſe the Loſs, by giving a Re- 2
verſion in à future Earth. But if that
future Earth be a ſecond Paradiſe, to be
enjoyed for a Thouſand Years; with
Peace, Irinocency, and conſtant Health ;

An — there will be, an happy


Exchange for the beſt Crown in this
World. Figs


A'4_- [ con-


|


—
— 4th ad


The Epiftle Dedicatory.


I confeſs, I could never perſuade my-
ſelt that the Kingdom of Chriſt, and of
his Saints, which the Scripture ſpeaks of
ſo frequently, was deſigned to be upon
this preſent Earth. Bur however, upon


all Suppoſitions, they that have done


ſome Good in this Life, will be Sharers
in the Happineſs of that State. To
humble the Oppreſſors, and reſcue the
Oppreſſed, is a Work of Generoſity and
Charity, that cannot want its Reward ;
Yet, Mapam, they are the greateſt
Benefactors to Mankind, that diſpoſe the
World to become Yirtuous; and by their


Example, Influence, and Authority, retrieve
that TR ur RH and Jus ric, that have


been loſt, amongſt Men, for many Ages.
The School-Divines, tell us, thoſe that


act or ſuffer great Things for the Publick


Good, are diſtinguiſh'd in Heaven, by a
Circle of Gold about their Heads. One


would not willingly vouch for that: But


one


The ost Dedicatory.
one may ſafely for what che Prophet
py” which is far greater: Namely, that
They ſhall Thine like Stars in the Firma-


4 4 ment, that turn many to Regbteouſh neſs.


Which ãs not to be underſtood, ſo much,
of the Converſion of ſingle Souls, as of


che turning of Nations and People ; - the


turning of the World to Righteouſneſs.
They that lead on that great and happy


Work; ſhall be diſtinguifhd in Glory
from the reſt: of Mankind,


We are ſenſible, 3 from
Your Great Eximple, that Piety and
Vertue ſeated upon a Throne, draw
many to Imitation, whom ill Principles,


or the Courſe of che World, might have


led another Way. Theſe are the beſt,
as well as eaſieſt Victories, that are
gain d wichout Conteſt, And as Princes
are the Vicegerents of God upon Earth,
ſo when their Majeſty is in Conjunction
wk Goodneſs, it hath a double Cha-
9 A 4 racter


hn,


e Dedicatory.
racter of Divinity upon it: And we owe
them a double Tribute of Fear and
Love. Which, with conſtant Prayers
for Your. M AJESTY 's s preſent. and fu-


„


Pad, by | 10 n Lis „ 29


— fs 0 | .
= * 2 5
* F f
* . 4 #2 kb R ; *
0 =: ed PRs " 4 p
© 4 ; 75 —
RR
e Dur MAJES TYs
6ꝙ + wF Fit
& 2 8 1 :
* 5
„ 7 * " f . f :
65 * 8 f 4 py
, * 9 It oF * ? * s


N * *
*
* * a
, —
_
? {
— % 4
2 4 * -
* £
* * |
' *
— — „ , - Þ


o — 5 S *
. oy = * 5
* F
£ * * - - 4s -
\ : 0
=y
* N
14 "
-- w 4 « * &. os * 4 wy
by
p *
A * 9 * 0 & * & * .
' 3+ P . 1 * 7 |
— „„ 4 &@ * » 2 „ © 4 — © oy
* 4 4 ;
*


—


n * I * w», I 0


Ws.


r


PREFACE


R E ADE R.


Reader in this Preface to the
Third Part of the Theory; ſeeing
it treats upon a Subject own d by
all, and out of Diſpute: The
Conflagration of the World. The Queſtion
will be only about the Bounds and Limits of
the Conflagration, the Cauſes and the Man-
0 ner of it. Theſe I have fixed, according to the
ue Meaſures I could take from Scripture,
nd from Nature. I differ, I believe, from the
common Sentiment in this, that, in following
S. Peter's Philoſophy, I ſuppoſe, that the
| burning of the Earth, will be a true Lique-
| faction or Diſſolution of it, as to the exterior
Region. And that this lays a Foundation for
new Heavens and a new Earth; which ſeems
to me as plain a Doctrine in Chuiſtian Religion,
as the Conflagration ſelf, |


V
bc
* *
.


J have


The PREFACE.

f have endeavour d to propoſe an intelligi-
ble Way, whereby the Eatth may be con-
ſumd by Fire. But if any one can propoſe
another, more probable, and more conſiſtent, I
will be the firſt Man that ſhall give him
Thanks for this Diſcovery. He that loves
Truth for its own fake, is willing to receive
it from any Hand ; as he that truly loves his
Country, is glad of a Victory over the Ene-
my, whether himſelf, or any other, has the
Glory of it. I need not repeat here, what I
have already ſaid upon ſeveral Occaſions, that
tis the Subſtance of this Theory, whether in
this Part, or in other Parts, that T mainly re-
gard and depend upon: Being willing to ſup-
poſe, that many ſingle Explications and Parti-
cularities may be rectified, upon farther Thoughts,
and clearer Light. I know our beſt Writings; in
this Life, are but Eſſays, which we leave to Poſte:
rity to review and. correct.
As to the Style, I always endeavour to ex-
preſs myſelf in a plain and perſpicuous man-
ner; that the Reader may not loſe Time, nor
wait too long, to know my Meaning, To
give an Attendant quick Diſpatch, is a Civility,
whether you do his Buſineſs or no. 1 would
not willingly give any one the Trouble of
reading a Period twice over, to know the
Senſe of it; leſt, when he comes to know it, he
ſhould not think it a Recompence for his Pains.
Whereas, on the contrary, if you are eaſy to your
Reader, he will certainly make you an Allow-
ance for it, in his Cenſure.


\


ou


The PREFACE.


You muſt not think it ſtrange however,
chat the Author ſometimes, in meditating up-
on this Subject, is warm in his Thoughts and Ex.
Leder, For to ſee a World periſhing in
Flames, Rocks melting, the Earth trembling,
and an Hoſt of Angels in the Clouds, one muſt
be very much a Stoick, to be a cold and un-
concerned Spectator of all this. And when
ve are moy'd ourſelves, our Words will have
2 Tincture of thoſe Paſſions which we feel.
Beſides, in moral Reflections which are de-
ſignd for Uſe, there muſt be ſome Heat, as
well as dry Reaſon, to inſpire this cold Clod of
Clay, this dull Body of Earth, which we car-
9 10 ry about with us; and you muſt ſoften and
vpierce that Cruſt, before you can come at
me Soul. But eſpecially when Things future
ate to be repreſented, you cannot uſe too
= ſtrong Colours, if you would give them Life,
and make them appear preſent to the Mind.
1 Farewel.


3
"+.
© 6. #77


co N


—


1 ct lh BE cc


World, or the preſent Frame of Nature, is mutable


| fs ES Fe
IS „„ CR


Gs" 1 N


CHAPTERS


The THIRD Been


„C H inne,,
HE lutroduction; with the Content and 07
der of this T1 reatiſe 2 Page 1
C H A P. II.


The true State of the Queſtion is 2 d. 2715
the general Doctrine of LY Antients, T hat the preſent


and periſpable; to which the ſacred Books agree:
And natural Reaſon can alledge nothing againſt iu. 1


Cs


C HAP. III.


That the World will be deſtroyed by Fire, is hy
Doctrine of the Antients, eſpecially of the Stoicks.
That the ſame Doctrine is more antient than the
Greeks, and deriv'd from the Barbarick Philoſophy ;
and apes roy from Noah, the Father of all tra-
dition ary


oh” The CONTENTS.

* Aitionary Learning. The ſame Doctrine expreſly au-
WV: horized by Revelation, and inrolled into the Sacred
{HP | ; Wa ow RES


We Concerning the Time of the Conflagration, and the
id of the World. What the Aftronomers ſay upon
is Subject, and upon what they ground their Calcu-
_ is. The true Notion of the Great Tear, or of
the Platonick Tear, ſtated and explain d 35


. CHAP. v. T
Concerning Prophecies that determine the End of
| the World ; Of what Order ſoewer, Prophane or
Sacred, Fewiſh or Chriſtian. T bat no certain Fudg-


_ ment can be made from any of them, at what Diſtance
_ 7 are from the Conflagration i DIRLIGS


, ITN:
Concerning the Cauſes of the Conflagration. The
Difficulty of conceiving how this Earth can be ſet on
Here. With a general Anſwer to that Difficulty.
uo ſuppos'd Cauſes of the Conflagration, by the Sun's
drawing nearer to the Barth, or the Barth's throwing
out the central Fire, examin'd and rejected 60


0 CHAP. VII


be true Bounds of the laſt Fire, and bow far it is
Fatal. The natural Cauſes and Materials of it,


c caft into three Ranks. Hrſt, Such as are exterior
aud viſible upon Earth, where the Volcano's of this
Eartb, and their Effects, are conſider d. Secondly,
Such Materials as are within the Earth. Thirdly,


Such as are in the Air 73


CHAP.


The CONTENTS.


CHAP. VIIL


Some new Diſpoſitions towards the Conflagration,
as to the Matter, Form, and Situation of the Earth.
Concerning miraculous Cauſes, and how far the Mini:.
ſtry of Angels may be engaged in this Work 92


CHAP. IX.


How the Sea will be diminiſpd and conſum' d.
How the Rocks and Mountains will be thrown down
end melted, and the whole exterior Frame of the Earth
dliſſolv d into a Deluge of Fire | 104


CHAP. X.


Concerning the Beginning and Progreſs of the
Conflagration, what Part £ the Earth will firſt be
burnt. The Manner of the future Deſtruction of Rome,
according to the Prophetical Indications. The laſt
State and Conſummation of the general Fire 117


CHAP. XI.


An Account of theſe extraordinary Phenomena
and Wonders in Nature, that, according to Scripture,
will precede the Coming of Chriſt, and the Conflagration
. 130


CHAP. XII.
An imperfect Deſcription of the Coming of our Savi-


our, and of the World on Fire 143
T he Concluſion 160


The


The CONTENTS.


The FOURTH BOOK.


.
HE Introduction; that the World will not be
annihilated in the laſt Fire. That we are to
—_-:p:, according to Scripture, and the Chriſtian
8 Doctrine, new Heavens and a new Earth, when theſe
_ e difſulved or burnt up p. 184
5 c HAP. II.
_ The Birth of the new Heavens and the new Earth,
om the ſecond Chaos, or the Remains of the old
RS /orid. The Form, Order, and Qualitiss of the new
Eartb, according to Reaſon and Scripture 191


N


Concerning the Inhabitants of the new Earth. T' bat
natural Reaſon cannot determine this Point. That,
cording to Scripture, the Sons of the firſt Reſur-
erection, or the Heirs of the Millennium, are to be the
bbabitants of the new Earth: The Tef imony of the
RP -ilo/opbers, and of the Chriſtian Fathers, for the
eenovation of the Horld. The firſt Propoſition laid


on . FoL
ie Proof of a Millennium, or of a bleſſed Age t0
rome, from Scripture. A View of the Apocaly pſe,


*


-
1


2 _ - „ n w
** 1 bh
» © Rs = * 1
** 8 A "4
[TAE r * *
Po 2 * „ Fs *
— . 1


DER A
3 e
Saf 4 p 2


= ng don of Chriſt, and of bis Saints 213


CHAP. V. |

, 4 View of other Places of Sfripture, concerning

Jbe Millennium, or future Kingdom of Chrift. .
| : what


Www - — ——„—ʒ— — ——— — — *


aud of the Prophecies of Daniel, in reference to this


The CONTENTS. |
what Senſe all the Prophets have born Teſtimony. con-


gerning it - 220
"00 CHAP. vi. ?
T he Senſe and. Teftimony of the Primitive Church,

concerning the Millennium, or future Kingdom of

Chriſt ; from the Times of the Apoſtles, to the Nicene

Council. The ſecond Propoſition Iaid down, when, by

what Means, and for what Reaſons, that Doctrine

was afterwards neglected or diſcountenanc d 246


HK : 0

The true State of the Millennium, according to
Characters taken from Scripture. Some Miſtakes con-
corning it rectiſied ER


| CHA P. VIII. WON
The third Propoſition laid down, concerning the
Time and Place of the Millennium. Several Argu-
ments us'd to prove, that it cannot be till after the
Conflagration ; and that the new Heavens and yew
Earth, are the true Seat of the bleſſed Millennium 269


The chief Employment of the Millennium D EVO-
TION and CONTEMPLATION 287
HA ab


| Objections againſt the Millennium anſwer d. With f
ſome Cunjectures concerning the State of Things after il
the Millennium: And what will be the final Con-


ſummation of this World 309
| N f . es l {3 MN
be Review of the whole Theory, © © 31


#


A THE


: 8 * 4 . mh . : q * ' 1 7
£1
6)
* y x 4 N
N . b N


1 OF THE


5
4
Pm
x


*
% 1 * . ud
: 9 4 ,
* U 4 —
2 *
f op % .
Pay.”
py
l & > 7
Ad 3
x” I .
—
* .
2
Xa
Sa 23
"bs
pe y - . -
N — 14 >
£ 7% 395
3
.
1 0 * *
Wy | - —


7
3
2


—_—


—


BOOK III.
Concerning the Co NFLAGRATION.


__—c


|


—
FORE © — 8 a
» **


HA F. 1.
The INTRODUCTION: |
With the Contents and Order of this Work.


—¼


1 9 2 — - 2 a 3

$ - Fa 4. _ — 2 * n

is Ps 2 e £ 8 Ik * > es N 4 rs
ww * =) goth 4 by ** 3 1
* b, 3 * —
385 e


Eeing Providence hath planted in all

2 Men a natural Deſire and Curioſity
© BY of knowing Things to come ; and
7 N ſuch Things eſpecially, as concern
==> our particular Happineſs, or the ge-
neral Fate of Mankind ; This Treatiſe may, in
both reſpects, hope for a favourable Reception
Book Ill, 3 amongſt


- 2 ey ec — 3 ˙ ˙ —


2 The Theory of the EARTH.


amongſt inquiſitive Perſons ; ſeeing the Deſign
of it is, to give an Account of the greateſt Revo.
lations of Nature that are expected in future Ages:


and in the firſt Place, of the Conflagration of the


World. In which univerſal Calamity, when all
Nature ſuffers, every Man's particular Concern Wl
muſt nceds be involved. 1

We ſce with what Eagerneſs Men pry into the


Stars, to ſec if they can read there the Death of


a King, or the Fall of an Empire: Tis not the
Fate of any ſingle Prince or Potentate, that we 2


calculate, but of all Mankind : Nor of this or that 1
particular Kingdom or Empire, but of the whole


Earth. Our Enquiries muſt reach to that great


Period of Nature, when all Things are to be diſ-


ſolvd; both Human Affairs, and the Stage where- 2
on they are ated; when the Heavens and the


Earth will paſs away, and the Elements melt


with fervent Heat. We defire, if poſſible, to k
know what will be the Face of that Day, that
great and terrible Day! when the Regions of


the Air will be nothing but mingled Flame and


Smoke, and the habitable Earth turn'd into a 9


Sea of molten Fire.


But we muſt not leave the World in this Diſ-
order and Confuſion, without examining what
will be the Iſſue and Conſequences of it. Whe-
ther this will be the End of all Things, and Na-
ture, by a ſad Fate, lie eternally diſſolvd and
deſolate in this manner? or, Whether we may
hope for a Reſtoration: New Heavens and a
New Earth, which the Holy Writings make
mention of, more pure and perfect than the for-

| mer?


Concerning the CoNELAGRATION. 3


mer? As if this was but as a Refiner's Fire, to
W purge out the Droſs and coarſer Parts, and then
WS caſt the Maſs again into a new and better Mould.
Theſe Things, with God's Aſliſtance, ſhall be
matter of our preſent Enquiry : Theſe make the
gencral Subject of this Treatiſe, and of the re-
maining Parts of this Theory of the Earth. Which
nov, you ſee, begins to be a kind of Prophecy
Wor Prognoſtication of Things to come, as it hath
peen hitherto an Hiſtory of Things paſt; of
ſuch States and Changes as Nature hath already
Nundergone. And if that Account which we have
Niven of the Origin of the Earth, its firſt and
EP aradilfaical Form, and the Diſſolution of it at
ha univerſal Deluge, appear fair and reaſonable;
oc ſecond Diſſolution by Fire, and the Reno-
ation of it out of a ſecond Chaos, I hope, will
deduc'd from as clcar Grounds and Suppoſi-
ions. And Scripture it ſelf will be a more vilt-
ile Guide to us in theſe following Parts of the


-/ 2 Fx
5
o
—
j


„ 2
=_
.

5

5

1

"427 *

vi 7, þ

2:5. 1
1


J
*


$0 bcory, than it was in the former. In the mean
MT inc, I take occaſion to declare here again, as I
ve done heretofore, That neither this, nor any
her great Revolutions of Nature, are brought
pas, by Cauſes purely natural, without the
Fonduct of a particular Providence. And tis
c ſacred Books of Scripture that are the Records
f this Providence, both as to Times paſt, and
We imes to come; as to all the ſignal Changes,
either of the natural World, or of Mankind,
nnd the different Oeconomies of Religion. In
Which reſpects, theſe Books, tho they did not
Wy contain a moral Law, would, notwithſtanding, be,
5 B 2 as


4 The Theory of the EARTH. 2
as the moſt myſtical, ſo alſo the moſt valuable Y
Books in the World. 3
This Treatiſe, you ſee, will conſiſt of Two BE
| Parts: The former whercef is to give an Ac.
| N count of the Conflagration; and the latter, of the
| New Heavens, and New Earth following upon
it; together with the State of Mankind in thoſe
I. new Habitations. As to the Conflagration, we
1 firſt enquire, What the Antients thought concern- i
© ing the preſent Frame of this World: Whether
0 ö it was to periſh or no: Whether to be deſtroyed,
f or to ſtand eternally in this Poſture. Then, in
| what Manner they thought it would be de-
ſtroy'd: By what Force or Violence: Whether
. by Fire or other ways. And with theſe Opini.
_ ons of the Antients we will compare the Doctrine
of the Prophets and Apoſtles, to diſcover and
confirm the Truth of them. In the ſecond Place,
We will examine, What Calculations or Conje.
ctures have been made concerning the Time of
this great Cataſtrophe, or of the End of this
World: Whether that Period be definable or
no; and whether by natural Arguments, or by if
Prophecies. Thirdly, We will conſider the Signs
of the approaching Conllagration: Whcther ach Þ
as will be in Nature, or in the State of human 8
Affairs; but eſpecially ſuch as are taken notice
of, and recorded, in Scripture. Fourthly, Which
is the principal Point, and yet that wherein
the Antients have been moſt ſilent, Nhat Cauſes
there are in Nature, what Preparations, for this
Conflagration: Where are the Seeds of this
univerſal Fixe, or Fuel ſufficient for the Nouriſh:


ing


SEES 9-29 s
4 IJ
COST Oy FIOT TIOLOSS . 4

* Kg r IA, l oF Wb
„ X 25


n geen


3 Woe
>


f Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. &xF
00 Wing of it? Laſtly, In what Order, and by what


WPegrecs the Conflagration will proceed: In


what Manner the Frame of the Earth will be
Fidel ; and what will be the dreadful Coun-
tenance of a burning World.
: Theſe Heads are ſet down more fully in the
Arguments of each Chapter; and ſcem to be
ufficient for the Explication of this whole Mat-
er: Taking in ſome additional Diſcourſes, which,
In purſuing theſe Heads, enter of their own ac-
3 ord, and make the Work more even and intire.
3 Wn the Second Part, we reſtore the World that
- WE had deſtroy'd : Build New Heavens and a
New Earth, wherein Righteouſneſs ſhall dwell.
4 gaabliſh that new Order of Things, which is ſo
I often celebrated by the Prophets: A Kingdom
9 Pf Peace and of Juſticc, where the Enemy of
Nankind ſhall be bound, and the Prince of Peace


Tree of Knowledge, not to wound, but to heal
1 Doe Nations: Where will be neither Curſe, nor
1 2 nor Death, nor Diſeaſe : Where all
hings are new, all Things are more perfect, both
e World it ſef, and its Inhabitants : Where
4 |. c Firſt-born from the Dead, have the Firſt-
Fruits of Glory.

We dote upon this preſent World, and the En-
Voyments of it: And tis not without Pain, and
5 e and Reludancy, that we are torn from
chem; as if our Hopes lay all within the Compals
of this Life. Vet, I know not by what good
Fate, my Thoughts have been always fix'd upon
Things to come, more than upon Things preſent.


"all rule. A Paradiſe without a Serpent, and


B 3 * heſo


\


1
11


6 The Theory of the EARTH. I
Theſe I know, by certain Experience, to be but 1
Trifles; and if there be nothing more conſiderable

to come, the whole Being of Man is no better ;
than a Trifle. But there is Room enough before
us in that we call Eternity, for great and noble
Scenes; and the Mind of Man feels itſelf leſſen d
and ſtraiten d in this low and narrow State; wiſhes
and waits to ſee ſomething greater. And if it | I
could diſcern another World a coming, on this
ſide Eternal Life: a beginning Glory, the beſt Þ
that Earth can bear, it would be a kind of Im.
mortality to enjoy that Proſpect before-hand.
To ſee, when this Theatre is diflolv'd, where |
we ſhall act next; and what Parts; what Saints
and Heroes, if I may ſo ſay, will appear upon
that Stage ; and with what Luitre and Excel-
lency : How caly would it be, under a View
of theſe Futurities, to deſpiſe the little Pomps
and Honours, and the Momentary Pleaſures of


a mortal Life? But I proceed to our Subject.


*
Fi 1
[
RM
*
2
1
1
* 4
=_
3
-»
H x
*
7
- "
"2
"5
"I
1


Cuncerning the CONFLAGRATION.


e IL
The true State of the Queſtion is propos d.


Ai the general Doctrine of the Antients, that
the preſent World, or the preſent Frama of

Nature, is mutable and periſhable: To which
the Sacred Books agree; and natural Reaſon
can alledge nothing againſt it. |


HEN we ſpeak of the End or Deſtru-
1 ction of the World, whether by Fire
yr otherwiſe, tis not to be imagin'd that we
inderſtand this of the Great Univerſe ; Sun,
loon, and Stars, and the higheſt Heavens;


ew Ycars hence, whether by Fire or any other
| ay. This Queſtion is only to be under-
ood of the ſachlunary World, of this Earth and
Furniture; which had its Original about Six
oouſand Years ago, according to the Hiſtory
"FW Loſes; and hath once already been deſtroy-


7 yp wk by . Ky b 3.
he + wb, 4 , WI | Wy 8
S


Manner.
be Stars and Angels inhabit, are not concerned
I 2 this Fate: Thoſe are not made of combu-
dible Matter; nor, if they were, could our
= 7 Flames


8 The Theory of the EARTH:


Flames reach them. Poſſibly thoſe Bodies may
have Changes and Revolutions peculiar to them.
ſelves, but in Ways unknown tous, and after long 1
and unknown Periods of Time. Therefore, when '
we ſpeak ofthe Canflagration ofthe World, theſe 3
have no Concern in the Queſtion; nor any other
Part of the Univerſe, than the Earth and its De- 1

endances. As will evidently appear when we |
3 to explain the Manner and Cauſes of the i
Conflagration.

And as this Conflagration can extend no farther i |
than to the Earth and its Elements, ſo neither can |
it deſtroy the Matter of the Earth; but only the
Form and Faſhion of it, as it is an habitable World. L
Neither Fire, nor any natural Agent, can deſtroy
Matter, that is, reduce it to nothing : It may alter
the Modes and Qualities of it, but the Subſtance i f
will always remain. And accordingly the Apoſtle, | ;
when he ſpeaks of the Mutability of this World,
tays only, The Figure or Faſhion of this Worli ®
paſſes away, 1 Cor. vii. 31. This Structure of the
Earth and Diſpoſition of the Elements; and all
the Works of the Earth, as &. Peter ſays, 2
Epiſt. iii. all its natural Productions, and all the 2
Works of Art or human Induſtry : ; theſe will
periſh, be melted or torn in Pieces by the Fire;
but withott an Annihilation of the Matter, any
more than in the former Deluge. And this will ||
be farther prov'd and illuſtrated | in the Beginning
of the following Books.

The Queſtion being thus ſtated, we are next to
conſider the Senſe of Antiquity upon theſe two


Points: Firſt, Whether this ſublunary World is
_


5


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 9


mutable and periſhable : Secondly, By the Force
and Action of what Cauſes, and in what Manner,
it will periſh; whether by Fire, or otherwiſe.
Aristotle is very irregular in his Sentiments about
the State of the World; he allows it neither Be-
ginning nor Ending, Riſe nor Fall; but wou d have
tit eternal and immutable. And this he underſtands,
not only of the great Univerſe, but of this ſublu-
nary World, this Earth which we inhabit ;
wherein he will not admit there ever have been,
or ever will be, either general Deluges or Con-
flagrations. And, as if he was ambitious to be
thought ſingular in his Opinion about the Eter-
nity of the World, he ſays, All the Antients
before him, gave ſome Beginning or Origin to
the World; but were not, indeed, ſo unanimous
as to its future Fate: Some believing it immu—
table, or, as the Philoſophers call it, incorrupti-
ble; others, That it had its fatal Times and Pe-
8 riods, as leſſer Bodies have; and a Term of Age
prefix d to it by Providence.
YN But before we examine this Point any farther,
will be neceſlary to reflect upon that which
ee noted before, an Ambiguity in the Uſe of the
Word World, which gives frequent Occaſion of
Miſtakes in reading the Ancients : When that
"0 which they ſpeak of the great Untverſe, we
apply to the ſublunary World : Or, on the con-
trary, what they ſpeak of this Earth, we ex-
tend to the whole Univerſe. And if ſome of
them, beſides Ariſtotle, made the World incor-
ruptible, they might mean that of the great
Vnivecſe, which they thought would never be


Nas


3 "I 7 *
n 8
r e 2 of * q
4 w S we
4 "> AAS; > «


3
My”
3 1


.


10


The Theory of the EARTH.


diſſolv d or periſh as to its Maſs and Bulk: But
ſingle Parts and Points of it {and our Earth is


no more) may be variouſly transform'd, and
made habitable and unhabitable, according to
certain Periods of Time, without any Prejudice
to their Philoſophy.
thinks this World will have no Diſſolution : For,
being a Work ſo beautiful and noble, the Good-
neſs of God, he ſays, will always preſerve it. It is
moſt reaſonable to underſtand this of the great
Univerſe ; For, in our Earth, Plato himſelf ad-
mits ſuch Diſſolutions as are made by general De-
luges and Conflagrations; and we contend for no
other. So likewiſe in other Authors, if they ſpeak
of the Immortality of the World, you muſt ob-
ſerve what World they apply it to; and whether
to the Matter or the Form of it: And if you re-
member that ourDiſcourſe proceeds only upon the
ſublunary World, and the Diſſolution of its Form,
you will find little in Antiquity contrary to this
Doctrine. I always except Ariſtotle (who al-
low'd of no Providence in this inferior World)
and ſome Py7hagoreans falſly ſo call'd, being ei-
ther fictitious Authors, or Apoſtates from the Do-
ctrine of their Maſter. Theſe being excepted, up-
on a View ot the reſt, you will find very few Dil-
ſenters from this general Doctrine.

Platos Argument againſt the Diſſolution of
the World, from the Goodneſs and Wiſdom of
God, would not be altogether unreaſonable,


tho apply'd to this Earth, if it was fo to be diſ-


ſolvd, as never to be reſtor'd again. But we
expect New Heavens and a New Earth, upon


the
BEL


So Plato, for Inſtance,


"TO" 2 5
3 =. 8 ö * 28 f
8 8 93


A Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 11
=p Diſſolution of theſe better in all Reſpects,


+ more commodious, a more beautiful. And


© the ſeveral Perfections of the Divine Nature,
EZ Wiſdom, Power, Goodneſs, Juſtice, Sanctity,


cannot be ſo well diſplay d and exemplify d in


any one ſingle State of Nature, as in a Succeſſi-
on of States, fitted to receive one another ac-
cording to the Diſpoſitions of the moral World,
and the Order of Divine Providence. Where-
fore, Plato's Argument from the Divine Attri-
W butes, all Things conſider d, doth rather prove
4 a Succeſſion of Worlds, than that one ſingle


4 World ſhould remain the ſame throughout all


Ages, without Change or Variation. Next to
the Platoniſis, the Stoicks were moſt conſi-
derable in Matters relating to Morality and
3 aue, And their Opinion, in this Caſe, is

well known ; they being look d upon by the Mo-
derns, as the principal Authors of the Doctrine
of the Conflagration. Nor is it leſs known that
the School of Democritus and Epicurus, made
all their Worlds ſubje& to Diſſolution ; and by
a new Concourſe of Atoms reſtor'd them again.
Laſtly, The Ionic Philoſophers, who had Thales
for their Maſter, and were the firſt Naturaliſts
amoneſt the Greeks, taught the ſame Doctrine.
We have, indeed, but an imperfect Account left
us of this Set, and tis great Pity ; for as it was
one of the moſt antient, ſo it ſeems to have
been one of the moſt conſiderable amongſt
the Greeks for Natural Philoſophy. In thoſe
Remains which *Dzogenes Laertius hath pre-
ory: d, of Anaxagoras, Anaximenes, Arche-
laus,


ley —— = — 1 _ _ - > + — —
- 2 RÄꝙ6Ee 22 I > a. - — — — vw


hs The Theory of the EARTH:
laus, &c. all great Megin their Time; we find


that they treated much of the Origin of the
World, and had many extraordinary Notions a.

bout it, which come lame and defective tous. The 7
Doctrine of their Founder, Thales, which made
all Things to conſiſt of Water, ſeems to have a great
Refemblance to the Doctrine of Moſes and St. Pe-
ter about the Conſtitution of the firſt Heavens


and Earth, Gen. i. 2 Pet. ii. 5. But there is little
in Laertius, what their Opinion was about the Diſ-
ſolution of the World; other Authors inform us
more of that. Stobeus, Ecl. Phyſ.1. 1. c. 24. joins
them with Lencippus and the Epicurcans: Simpli.
cius with Heraclitus, and the Stoichs, in this Do-


ctrine about the Corruptibility of the World. So


that all the Schools of the Greet Philoſophers, as
we noted before, were unanimous in this Point,
excepting the Peripateticks ; whoſe Maſter, Ar:-


ftotle, had neither Modeſty enough to follow


the Doctrine of his Predeceſſors, nor Wit enough
to invent any Thing better.

Beſides theſe Sects of Philoſophers, there
were Theologers amongſt the Greeks, more
Antient than theſe Sects, and more Myſtical.
Ariſtotle often diſtinguiſheth the Naturaliſts,
and the Theo/ogues, Ol pure, « FelAorya. Such
were Orpheus and his Followers, who had more
of the antient Oriental Learning, than the ſuc-
ceeding Philoſophers. But they writ their Phi-
loſophy, or Theology rather, Mythologically
and Poetically, in Parables and Allegories, that
needed an Interpretation. All theſe Theologers
ſuppoſed the Earth to riſe from a Chaos; and as

they


Concerning the CoNFLAGRATION. 13


4 ey ſaid that Love was the Principle at firſt,
that united the looſe and ſevered Elements, and
med them into an habitable World ; fo they
*Þppoſed that if Strife or Contention preyail'd,
Sat would again diſſolve and diſunite them, and
educe Things into a Chaos; ſuch as the Earth

ill be in, upon the Conflagration. And it far-
Her appcars, that both theſe Orders of the Learn-
ed in Greece, ſuppos d this preſent Frame of Na-
ture might periſh, by their Doctrine of Periodical
Revolutions, or of the Renovation of the
World after certain Periods of Time; which


W Greeks, and received by them from the ancient
Barbarick Nations: As will appear more at
large in the following Book, CH. 3. In the mean
Time we may obſerve, that Origen in anſwer-
ing Celſus, Lib. 9. about the Point of the Re-
ſurrection, tells him, That Doctrine ought not
to appear ſo ſtrange or ridiculous to him, ſee-
ing their own Authors did believe and teach
the Renovation of the World, after certain Ages
or Periods. And the Truth is, this Renovation
of the World, rightly ſtated, is the ſame Thing
= with the Firſt Reſurrection of the Chriſtians.
And as to the ſecond and general Reſurrection,
when the Righteous ſhall have Ccœleſtial Bo-
dies; tis well known, that the Platoniſts and
Pythagoreans cloathed the Soul with a Cœleſtial
Body, or, in their Language, an Æthereal Ve-
hicle, as her laſt Beatitude or Glorification.
So that Origen might very juſtly tell his Ad-
verſary, he had no Reaſon to ridicule the Chri-


vas a Doctrine common amongſt the Learned


ſtian


—— — —— — — — By


'
k
:
|
f


— =
o- = - = =


7 — -
898 —
— ——— — — — *
— -


— —


2 -


= —
111 — —— —
— —


14 The Theory of the EARTH.


tian Doctrine of the Reſurrection, ſeeing theit
own Authors had the main Strokes of! it in their!


Traditionary Learning.


I will only add one Remark more, before we
leave this Subject, to prevent a Miſtake in tjge
Word Immortal or Immortality, when applied
to the World. As] told you before, the Equi.


vocation that was in that Term World, it being
usd ſometimes for the whole Univerſe, ſome-
times for this inferior Part of it where we live;
{o likewiſe we muſt obſerve, that when this
inferior World is ſaid to be Immortal, by the
Philoſophers, as ſometimes it is, that common-
ly is not meant of any ſingle State of Nature,
or any ſingle World, but of a Succeſlion of


Worlds, conſequent one upon another. As a


Family may be ſaid Immortal, not in any ſingle
Perſon, but in a Succeſſion of Heirs. So as,
many Times, when the Ancients mention the
Immortality of the World, they do not there-
by exclude the Diſſolution or Renovation of it;
but ſuppoſe a Viciſlitude, or Series of Worlds


ſucceeding one another. This Obſervation is


not mine, but was long ſince made by Simpli.
cius, Stobæus, and others, who tell us in what


'Senſe ſome of thoſe Philoſophers who allowed the


World to be periſhable, did yet affirm it to be

immortal: Namely, by ſucceſſive Renovations.
Thus much is ſufficient to ſhew the Senſe and
Judgment of Antiquity, as to the Changeablenels
or Perpetuity of the World. But ancient Learn-
ing is like ancient Medals, more eſteem d for theit
Rarity , than their real Uſe; unleisthe Authority
of


- F, 7 1 *
z 5 7 + * 3 8 "3 — * es WI
— N WW. ee FR, 7 Ade 3 PIE d 4 1 * * A ; bo S 22 mm <
AT ns + = + 3% * — 4 179 : is 0 - -
Nin 2 e * < 2 of 2 off N A Wr } MF * * 4
N nn 3 a+ £2 o z * . e wi 7 222 * "=; 8 r
wo 0 2 «© N or N a 4 * « . \ . — r
* b . * — x \ 4 8 1 . . Pl 6 * — TS
* © & I. 7 a 3 ” \ $106 5 v K * C2
* h - - * 4 „ 1 0 5 . TS 1 4 * =
SIN * 5 „ Ft 5 FS


: . 8 1 3 WF
MEAS ads wore Da Aa
. , " 1 7 C * 3
. 4 3. n T 1 bog Red > . 5 4 15 8
8 Ne „ ee TAELEE ta tt £2 > \
<- 2 ; 7 ©, 6. [4 2 F. a 2 r
FC Oy 094 ory Cc Cc ccc ccc


e

4 .
2 2 1 7
N


-


Concerning the CoNFLARATION. 15


bf a Prince make them currant : So neither will
"eſe Teſtimonies be of any great Effect, un-
; Es they be made good and valuable by the Autho-
ty of Scripture. We muſt therefore add the Teſti-
* 1 onies of the Prophets and Apoſtles, to theſe of the
f breeks and Barbarians, that the Evidence may be
9 I and undeniable. That the Heavens and

Ihe Earth will periſh, or be chang d into another
3 orm, is, ſometimes, plainly expreſs'd, ſometimes
4 Seo and alluded to in Scripture. The
N 3 Davids Teſtimony is expreſs, both for

the Beginning and Ending of the World: In
fal. cii. ver. 25, 26, 27. Of old haſt thon
- : laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Hea-
: ens are the Work of thy Hands. They ſhall
Wriſh, but thou ſhalt endure : Tea, all of them
: all wax old like a Garment ; as a Veſture ſhalt

hou change them, and they ſhall be changed.
But thou art the ſame, and thy Tears ſhall have
: vo End. The Prophet Iſaialis Teſtimony is no leſs
WT cxpreſs, to the ſame Purpoſe, ch. li. 6. Lift up
our Eyes to the Heavens, and look upon the
Earth beneath: For the Heavens ſhall vaniſh
| | away like Smoke, and the Earth ſhall wax old
ile a Garment, and they that dwell therein ſhall
Y die in like Manner. Theſe Texts are plain and
| explicit; and in Alluſion to this Day of the
Lord, and this Deſtruction of the World, the
I r Prophet often uſeth Phraſes that relate to
: As the Concuſſion of the Heavens and the


dations of the World, ch. xxiv. 18, 19. The Di
n. Hoſt of Heaven, ch. xxxiv. 4. And


! Each, If. xiii. 13. The ſhaking of the Foun-


our


16 The Theory of the EAR Tn.


our Sacred Writers have Expreſſions of the
like Force, and relating to the ſame Effect: As
the Hills melting like Wax, at the Preſence of
the Lord, Pſal. xcvii. 5. Shattering once more all
the Parts of the Creation, Hagg. ii. 6: Over-
turning the Mountains, and making the Pillars
of the Earth to tremble, Job ix. 5, 6. If 9 3
reflect upon the Explication given of the De.
luge, in the firſt Part of this Theory, and attend

to the Manner of the Conflagration, as it will


be explain d in the Sequel of this Diſcourſe; you 3
will ſee the Juſtneſs and Fitneſs of theſe Expreili.


ons: That they arc not Poctical Hyperboles, or J |
random Expreſſions of great and terrible TY E
in gencral, but a true Account of what hath
been, or will be, at that great Day of the Lord.
*Tis true, the Prophets ſometimes uſe ſuch like Ex.
preſſions figuratively, for Commotion in Stats lf I
and Kingdoms, but that is only by way of Meta. 3
phor and Accommodation; the true Baſis mY
Rand upon, is, That Ruin, Overthrow, and Dil
ſolution of the Natural World, which was once]
at the Deluge, and will be again, after anothee|
Manner, at the general Conflagration. 3
As to the New Teſtament, our Saviour ſays >


Heaven and Earth ſhallpaſs, away, but his Mord. ; |


ſhall not paſs away, Mat. xxiv. 35. St. Paul ſays, ;
the Scheme of this World; the Faſhion, Form, i
and Compoſition of it, paſſeth away, 1 Cor. vii.
31. And when mention is made of New Head.
vens and a New Earth, which both the Pro-
phet 1/azah, 1/a. Ixv. 17. & Ixvi. 22. and the
Apoſtles St. Peter and St. John, Rev. xxi. 1. 2 Pet.


I. 13.


Conterning the CoN FL RAT ION. 17
i. 13. mention, tis plainly imply'd, that the
Did ones will be diſſolwd. The ſame Thing is
lo imply'd, when our Saviour peaks of a

] R-naſcency, or Regeneration, Mat. xix. 28. hd
t. Peter, of a Reſtitution of all Things, As iii.
4 1. For what is now, muſt be abolifh'd, be-
re any former Order of Things can be reſtor'd
r reduced. In a Word, If there was nothing
In Scripture concerning this Subje&, but thar
iſcourſe of St. Peter's, in his Second Epiſtle,
Wind Third Chapter, concerning the triple Order
Wnd Succeſſions of the Heavens and the Earth;
D = , preſent, and to come; that alone would be
| Convidion, and Demonſtration to me, that
< This preſent World will be diflolv'd.

= You will ſay, it may be, in the laſt Place, we
Want (till the Teſtimony of Natural Reaſon and
hiloſophy, to make the Evidence complete.
= anſwer, *tis enough if they be ſilent, and
Shave nothing to ſay to the contrary. Here are
Witneſſes, Human and Divine, and if none
appear againſt them, we have no reaſon to re-
fuſe their Teſtimony, or to diſtruſt it. Philoſo-
hy will very readily yield to this Doctrine,
that all material Compoſitions are diſſolvable;
and ſhe will not wonder to ſee that die, which
ſhe had ſeen born: I mean this terreftrial
World. She ſtood upon the Chaos, and ſaw it
roll itſelf, with Difficulty, and after many
Strugglings, into the Form of an habitable Earth:
And that Form ſhe ſaw broken down again at
the Deluge; and can as little hope or expect,
now, as then, that it ſhould be everlaſting and
BOOK III. C im-


— —


18 The Theory of the EARTH.


immutable. There would be nothing es | f
or conſiderable in this inferior World, if there
were not ſuch Revolutions of Nature. The
Scaſons of the Year, and the freſh Productions


of the Spring, are pretty in their Way ; but ;


when the (Aunus Magnus) Great Tear comes


about, with a new Order of all Things, in the
Heavens, and on the Earth; and a new Dreſs of


Nature throughout all her Regions, far more
goodly and beautiful than the faireſt Spring;


this gives a new Life to the Creation, and


ſhews the Greatneſs of its Author. Beſides,
theſe fatal Cataſtrophes are always a Puniſh-
ment to degenerate Mankind, that are over-
whelm'd in the Ruins of theſe periſhing Worlds.
And to make Nature herſelf execute the Di.
vine Vengeance againſt rebellious Creatures,
argues both the Power and Wiſdom of that
Providence that governs all Things here below.
Theſe Things Reaſon and Philoſophy approve
of; but if you further require, that they ſhould
ſhew a Neceſ/ity of this future Deſtruction of
the World, from natural Cauſes, with the
T1 ime, and all other Circumſtances of this Effect;
your Demands are unreaſonable, ſeeing theſe
Things do not depend ſolely upon Nature. But
if you will content yourſelf to know what Diſ-
poſitions there are in Nature towards ſuch a
Change; how it may begin, proceed, and be
conſummate, undcr the Conduct of Providence,


be pleaſed to read the following Diſcourſe, for
your further Satisfaction.


CH AP.


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION., 19


n I.


Fat the World will be deſtroyd by Fire, is the
Doctrine of the Ancients, eſpecially of the
= Stoicks. That the ſame Doctrine is more an-
cient than the Greeks, and derivd from the
Barbarick Philoſophy ; and That probably
from Noah, the Father of all Traditionary
Learning. The ſame Doctrine expreſly au-
thorized by Revelation, and inrolld into the
Sacred Canon.


HAT the preſent World, or the preſent
Frame of Nature, will be deſtroy'd, we
have already ſhewn. In what Manner this
Veſtruction will be, by what Force, or what
kind of Fate, muſt be our next Enquiry. The
WP hiloſophers have always ſpoken of Fire and
ater, thoſe Two unruly Elements, as the only
Cauſes that can deſtroy the World, and work
our Ruin; and accordingly, they ſay, all the
great and fatal Revolutions of Nature, either
paſt, or to come, depend upon the Violence of
= thcſe Two; when they get the Maſtery, and
Wy overwhelm all the reſt, and the whole Earth,
in a Deluge, or Conflagration. But, as they
make theſe Two the deſtroying Elements, fo
they alſo make them the purifying Elements.
And, accordingly in their Luſtrations, or their
ERites and Ceremonies for purging Sin; Fire and
Water were chiefly made uſe of, both amongſt
the Romans, Greeks, and Barbarians. And
when theſe Elements over-run the World, it is
5 „ | C 2 | not,


— F i N 7
Nr .
T8... 7
bs
25 "of
„


20 The Theory of the EARTH:


not, they ſay, for a final Deſtruction of it, but to
purge Mankind, and Nature from their Impurities,
| As tor Purgation by Fire and Water, the Stile of 7
| our Sacred Writings does very much accommo.-
date itſelf to that Senſe; and the Holy Ghoſt,
il who is the great Purifier of Souls, is compared in
| his Operation upon us, and in our Regeneration,
ö to Fire or Water. And as for the external World,
S. Peter, 1 Eh. iii. 21. makes the Flood to have been
a kind of Baptiging or Renovation of the World,
And S. Paul, 1 Cor. iii. 13. and the Prophet Mala.
cht, c. iii. 2, 3. makes the laſt Fire, to be a purg-
ing and refining Fire. But to return to the Ancients.
The Stoicks eſpecially, of all other Seats
amongſt the Greeks, have preſerved the Doctrine
of the Conflagration ; and made it a conſiderable
Part of their Philoſophy, and almoſt a Character
of their Order. This is a Thing ſo well known,
that I necd not uſe any Citations to prove it. But
they cannot pretend to have been the firſt Au-
thors of it neither. For, beſides that amongſt
the Greeks themſelves, Heraclitus and Empedo-
cles, more ancient than Zena, the Maſter of the
Stoicks, taught this Doctrine; tis plainly a Branch
of the Barbarick Philoſophy, and taken from
thence by the Greeks, For it is well known, that
the moſt ancient and myſtick Learning amongſt
the Greeks, was not originally their own, but
borrowed of the more Eaſtern Nations, by Or-
ppheus, Pythagoras, Plato, and many more, who
travel'd thither, and traded with the Prieſts for
Knowledge and Philoſophy; and when they
got a competent Stock, returned home, and ſet


up


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 21


o a School, or a Sect, to inſtruct their Country-
Hen. But before we paſs to the Eaſtern Nations,
Et us, if you pleaſe, compare the Roman Philo-
phy upon this Subject, with that of the Greeks.

The Romans were a great People, that made
Shew of Learning, but had little, in reality,
orc than Words and Rhetoricx Their Curi—
ſity or Emulation in Philoſophical Studies was
little, that it did not make different Sects
Ind Schools amongſt them, as amongſt the
Wreeks., I remember no Philoſophers they had,
but ſuch as Tully, Seneca, and ſome of their
9 WP octs. And of theſe Lucretius, Lucan, and
: ow have ſpoken openly of the Conflagration.

Ovid Verſes are well known,


22 quoque in fatis remmiſcitur, affore temps,
As mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia Cœli
le, mundi moles operoſa laboret.


PF Lime decreed by Fate, at length will come,

2 Heavens, and Earth. and Seas, ſhall have

FT their Doom;

4 fry Doom: And Nature's mighty Frame,
pz break, and be diſſolud into a Flame.


We ſee Tully's Senſe upon this Matter, in Sci-
pro's Dream. When the old Man ſpeaks to his
g Nephew Africanus, and ſhews him from the
Clouds, this Spot of Earth, where we live; he
tells him, tho our Actions ſhould be great, and
Fortune favour them with Succeſs, yet there wou'd
be no Room for any laſting Glory in this World;
C 3 for


22 The Theory of the EARTH.
for the World itſelf, is tranſient and fugitive,


And a Deluge, or a Conflagration, which neceſ.
ſarily happen after certain Periods of Time, will
ſweep away all Records of human Actions. As


for Seneca, he being a profeſs d Sroick, we need ;
not doubt of his Opinion in this Point. We may
add here, if you pleaſe, the & \ybelline Verſes, which
were kept, with great Religion, in the Capito!


at Rome, and conſulted with much Ceremony
upon ſolemn Occaſions. Theſe Sybils, were


the Propheteſſes of the Gentiles; and tho their
Writings now have many ſpurious Additions, yet
none doubt but that the Conflagration of the
World, was one of their original Prophecies.

Let us now procced to "the Eaſtern Nations.
As the Romans received the ſmall Skill they had
in the Sciences, from the Greeks ; ſo the Greeks,
receivd their chief Myſtick Learning from the
Barbarians: That is, from the Aguptians,
Perſians, Phemcians, and other Eaſtern Nati.
ons; for tis not only the Weſtern, or Northern
People, that they called Barbarians, but indeed, all
Nations beſides themſelves. For that is com-
monly the Vanity of great Empires, to uncivi-
lize, in a Manner, all the reſt of the World; and
to account all thoſe People harbarous, that are
not ſubj ect to their Dominion. Theſe however,


whom they called ſo, were the moſt ancient


People, and had the firſt Learning that was ever
heard of after the Flood. And amongſt the ſe,
the Egyptians were as famous as any; whoſe
Sentiments in this particular of the Conflagration,
are well known, For Plato, who liy'd amongſt
them


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 23


them ſeveral Years, tells us in his Timers, that
it was the Doctrine of their Prieſts, that the fa-
0 tal Cataſtrophes of the World, were by Fire and
mater. In like manner, the Perſians made their
WW beloved God, Fire, at length to conſume all
Things that are capable of being conſum'd : For
that is ſaid to have been the Doctrine of Hydaſpes,
one of their great Magi, or Wiſe Men. As to


= the Phænicians, I ſuſpect very much, that the Sto-


ic bs had their Philoſophy from them (7. Mar.
> Apol. 2.) and amongſt other Things the Conflagra-
tion. We ſhall take Notice of that hercaſter.
But to comprehend the Arabians alſo, and
Indians, give me leave to reflect a little upon the
Story of the Phenix. A Story well known, and
related by ſome ancient Authors, and is in ſhort this:
The Phenix, they ſay, is a Bird in Arabia, In-
dia, and thoſe Eaſtern Parts, ſingle in her Kind,
never more than one at a Time, and very long-
lived ; appearing only at the Expiration of the
Great Tear, as they call it: And then ſhe makes
herſelf a Neſt of Spices, which being ſet on fire
by the Sun, or ſome other ſecret Power, ſhe ho-
vers upon it, and conſumes herſelf in the Fiames.
But, which is moſt wonderful, out of theſe Aſhes
riſeth a ſccond Phenix, fo that it is not fo
much a Death, as a Renovation. I do not doubt
but the Story is a Fable, as to any ſuch kind of
Bird, ſingle in her Species, living, and dying,
and reviving in that Manner: But tis an Apo-
logue, or a Fable with an Interpretation, and was
intended as an Emblem of the World; which,
after a long Age, will be conſum d in the laſt


C 4 Fire:


_ — —
9 = ”” m * — — 66
PREM — — — — — — — — lb
— — = — — —þ 6
gore „ * — — —
__— - N


— —


2 ” = * —

— 2 Pe — ”y - ws 4

—— 20. — T— —— ff — ů — — Ay
— — — — 2


—


—


=


— —2


of — *
8
*
— 8


24 The Theory of the EARTH. 3
Fire: And from its Aſhes or Remains, will ariſe
another World, or a new-form'd Heavens and |
Earth, This, I think, is the true Myſtery of the
Phenix, under which Symbol the Eaſtern Nati- |
ons preſervd the Doctrine of the Conflagration,
and Renovation of the World. They tell ſome-
what a like Story of the Eagle, ſoaring aloft ſv
near the Sun, that by his Warmth and enlivening i
Rays, ſhe renews her Age, and becomes young =
again. To this the Pſalmiſt is thought to allude,
Pfal. ciii. 5. Thy Youth ſhall be renewed like the
Eagles : Which the Chaldee Paraphraſt renders,
In mundo venturo renovabis, ſicut Aquile, juven-
zutem tuam. Theſe Things to me ſeem plainly
to be Symbolical, repreſenting that World to
come, which the Paraphraſt mentions, and the
firing of this. And this is after the Manner of the
Eaſtern Wiſdom; which always lov'd to go fine, Wl
cloath'd in Figurcs and Fancies. F
And not only the Eaſtern Barbarians, but the
Northern and Weſtern alſo, had this Doctrine of
the Conflagration amongſt them. The Scyz/1ans,
in their Diſpute with the «_Zgyprians about Anti.
quity, argue upon both Suppolitions, of Fire or I
Mater, deſtroying the laſt World, or beginning
This. And in the Weſt, the Celts, the moſt an-
cient People there, had the ſame Tradition; for the
Druids, who were their Prieſts and Philoſophers,
derived not from the Greeks, but of the old Race
of Wiſe Men, that had their Learning tradition-
| ally, 1 as it were, hereditary from the firſt
Ages; Theſe, as Strabo tells us, lib. 4. gave the
World a kind of Immortality, by repeated Reno-
Voaations;


A © > * h
2 4.32; *
.


N "+ : Fo 12 24 *
.
4 a «i 0 Las 4 2
e $8 3 8 15
r WFP a To SS


hs 1


5 Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 25
ww tions; and the Principle that deſtroy'd it, ac-
rding to them, was always Fire or Water. I
Fad forgot to mention in this Liſt, the CValde—
, whoſe Opinion we have from Beroſus, in
iieca, Nat. Queſt. 3. c. 29. They did not
Wnly tcach the Conflagration, but alſo fix d it to
certain Period of Time, when there ſhould
eppen a great ConjunQion of the Planets in
BE cer. Laſtly, we may add, to cloſe the Account,
Ine modern Indian Philoſophers, the Reliques of
Ine old Bragmans: Theſe, as Maffeus tells us,
. 16. Hiſt. Ind. declare, That the World will

e renewed after an univerſal Conflagration.
LVou ſec of what Extent and Univerſality
Wthroughout all Nations, this Doctrine of the
Conflagration hath been. Let us now conſider,
what Defects or Exceſſes there are, in theſe ancient
Opinions, concerning this Fate of the World, and
how they may be rectified: That we may admit
them no further into our Belief, than they are
warranted by Reaſon, or by the Authority of the
Chriſtian Religion. The firſt Fault they ſcem to have
committed about this Point, is this, That they made
theſe Revolutions and Renovations of Nature,
indefinite or endleſs : As if there would be ſuch a
Succeſſion of Deluges and Conflagrations to all
Eternity. This the Hroichs ſeem plainly to have
aſſerted, as appears from Numenius, Philo, S:mpl:-
cius, and others. S. Jerome, Ep. 60. imputes this
Opinion alſo to Origen; but he does not always hit
the true Senſe of that Father, or is not fair and juſt
in the Repreſentation of it. Whoſoeyer held this
Opinion, tis a manifeſt Error, and may be eaſily
| ONT „


26 The Theor of the EARTH.


rectified by the Chriſtian Revelation; which
teaches us plainly, that there is a final period and
Conſummation of all Things that belong to this
Sublunary or Terreſtrial World ; When the
Kingdom ſhall be delivered up to the Father,”
and Time {hail be no more. 1

Another Error they committed in this Dogrine f 3
is, the Identity, or Sameneſs, if I may ſo fay, 0 =
the World's ſucceeding one another. They ate
made, indeed, of the lame Lump of Matter, but they
ſuppoſed them to return alſo in the ſame Form] Y
And, which is worſe, that there would be the
ſame Face of human Affairs; the ſame Perſons and
the ſame Actions over again; fo as the ſecond
World would be but a bare Repetition of the for-
mer, without any Variety or Diverſity. Such 2
Revolution is commonly'call'd the Platonick Tear:
A Period when all Things return to the ſamePoſture Wi
they had been ſome Thouſand of Years before; #4
as a Play acted over again, upon the fame Stage,
and to the ſame Auditory: This is a ground. Y
leſs and injudicious Suppoſition. For, whether
we conſider the Nature of Things, the Earth,
after a Diſſolution by Fire, or by Water, could
not return into the ſame Form and Faſhion it
had before; Or whether we conſider Provi-
dence, it would no way ſuit with the Divine Wit:
dom and Juſtice, to bring upon the Stage again, tho
very Scenes, and that very Courſe of human Affairs,
which it had ſo lately condemn'd and deſtroy d.
We may be aſſur d therefore, that, upon the Dil.
ſolution of a World, anew Order of Things, both
as to Nature and Providence, always appears


And


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION., 27


—


pa what that new Order will be, in both re-
Nas, after the Conflagration, I hope we ſhall, in
> following Book, give a ſatisfactory Account.
heſe arc the Opinions, true or falſe, of the
cients; and chiefly of the Stoicks, concern-
W the Myſtery of the Conflagration. It will
4 dt be improper to enquire, in the laſt Place,
Dy thc Szoicks came by this Doctrine: Whe—
Fer it was their Diſcovery and Invention, or
om whom they learned it. That it was not
Wcic own Invention, we have given ſufficient
round to believe, by ſhewing the Antiquity
: 43 it beyond the Times of the Sroicks. Be—
e what a Man invents himſelf, he can give
he Reaſons and Cauſes of it, as Things upon
vhich he founded his Invention: But the Sto-
4 4, do not this, but, according to the ancient
raditional Way, deliver the Concluſion without
roof or Premiſes. We named Heraclitus and
WEmpedocles, amongſt the Greeks, to have taught
chis Doctrine before the Stoichs; And, accord.
Wing to Plutarch (de Defec. Orac.) Heſind and
Orpheus, Authors of the higheſt Antiquity, ſung of
W this laſt Fire in their Philoſophick Poetry. But I
ſuſpect the Stoichs had this Doctrine from the
= Phenicians ; for if we inquire into the Original of
chat Sect, we ſhall find that their Founder Zens,
was a Barbarian, or Semi-barbarian, derivd from
the Phenicians, as Laertius and Cicero give an
Account of him. And the Phænicians had a
great Share in the Oriental Knowledge, as we
W ice by Sanchoniathions Remains in Enſebins.
And by their 1 Books which Suiadas men-
6: tions,


28 The Theory of the EARTH.


tions, from whence Pherecydes, Pythagorar\
Maſter, had his Learning. We may there.
fore, reaſonably preſume, that it might be from
his Countrymen, the Phænicians, that 2 |
had the Doctrine of the Conflagration. Not that
he brought it firſt into Greece, but ſtrongly revivd
it, and made it almoſt peculiar to his Sect. 1
So much for the Sroichs in particular, and the 4
Greeks in general. We have alſo, you ſee, trac'd
theſe Opinions higher, tothe firſt Barbarick Philo.
ſophers; who were the firſt Race of Philoſophers
_ the Flood. But Joſephus tells a formal Story, i
of Pillars ſet up by Seth, before the Flood; imply.
ing the Foreknowledge of this fiery Deſtruction of
the World, even from the Beginning of it. His
Words, lib. 1. c. 3. are ta this Effect, give what
Credit to them you think fit: Seth and his Fellow
Students, having found out the Knowledge of the
Cæleſtial Bodies, and the Order and Diſpoſition
of the Univerſe ; and having alſo receiv'd from
Adam, a Prophecy, that the World ſhould have a
double Deſtruction, one by Mater, another by Fire:
To preſerve and tranſmit their Knowledge, in
either Caſe, to Poſterity, they raiſed two Pillars, one
of Brick, another of Stone, andi mgrav'd upon them
their Philoſophy and Inventions. And one of
theſe Pillars, the Author ſays (Kar + T, a
was ſtanding in Syria, even to his Time. 1 do
not preſs the Belief of this Story; there being no-
thing, that I know of, in Antiquity, Sacred or Pro-
phane, that gives a joint Teſtimony with it. And
thoſe that ſet up theſe Pillars, do not ſeem to me,
to have underſtood the Nature of the Deluge or
Con-


9 75 2 * 4 - = I. 7 * *
ONT * . thes EIN
8 2


. * e
4 . 2 * . n
4 7 thc, . 2 1 8 it Thad — *
FTC MIS ot
IMC AG es hn ba, FIg << + < TIC. | 2


*
v FX


. > *
oy. 'S4 Ny PT


1 Gy R
rh me Wl. | 7 2 Ai 44


C MPSS.
As 2 os 3
7 —
.


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 29


< bſlagration 3 if they thought a Pillar, cither of
Wick or Stonc, would be ſecure, in thoſe great
aolutions of the Earth. But we have purſued
Doctrine high enough, without the Help of
Te ante-diluvian Antiquities : Namely, to the
iieſt People, and the firſt Appearances of Wiſe
m after the Flood. So that, I think, we may
ay look upon it as the Doctrine of Noah, and
his immediate Poſterity. And, as that is the
gheſt Source of Learning to the preſent World;
ve ſhould endeavour to carry our Philoſophical


ade myſelf, but that they had amongit them,
en in thoſe early Days, the main Strokes, or
WE oncluſions of the beſt Philoſophy : Or, if 1
ay ſo ſay, a Form of ſound Doctrine concern—
g Nature and Providence. Of which Matter,
you will allow me a ſhort Digreſſion, I will
Sgpcak my Thoughts in a few Words.

in thoſe firſt Ages of the World, after the
lood, when Noah and his Children pcopled the
WE arth again, as he gave them Precepts of Morality
Ind Picty, for the Conduct of their Manners ;
which arc uſually call'd Præcepta Noachidarum,
he Precepts of Noah, frequently mention d both
yy the Fews and Chriſtians: So allo he deliver d to
3 em. at leaſt, if we judge aright, certain Maxims,
or Concluſions about Providence, the State of Na-
ö ture, and the Fate of the World: Aud theſe, in


! me Dottrines of Noah, and his Children. Which
made a Syſtem of Philoſophy, or ſecret Know-
lcdge amongſt them, delivered by Tradition


W raditions to that Original: For I cannot per-


Gi may be call'd Dag mata Noachidarum,


f rom


-


|
|
|
|
|
|


2 1
4 . 1
14 . . LY
——_
<A OY -


20 The Theory of the EARTH. 1 :
from Father to Son; but eſpecially preſervd
amongſt their Prieſts and Sacred Perſons, or ſuch
others as were addicted to Contemplation. This
I take to be more ancient than Moſes himſelf, or
the Jewiſh Nation. But it would lead me too
far out of my Way, to ſet down, in this Place,
the Reaſons of my Judgment. Let it be ſuffici.
cnt to have pointed only at this Fountain-head
of Knowledge, and fo return to our Argument.
We have heard, as it were, a Cry of Fire,
throughont all Antiquity, and throughout al!
the People of the Earth. But thoſe Alarums are
ſometimes falſe, or make a greater Noiſe than
the Thing deſerves, For my Part, I never truſt i
Antiquity barely upon its own Account, but al.
ways require a ſecond Witneſs, either from Nature,
or from Scripture : What the Voice of Nature
is, wc ſhall hear all along in the following Trea-
tile, Let us then examine at preſent, what Teſti-
mony the Prophets and Apoſtles give to this an-
cient Doctrine of the Conflagration of the World.
Tac Prophets ſee the World a Firc at a Diſtance,
and more imperfectly; as a Brightneſs in the
Heavens, rather than a burning Flame: But
by, and fcen the Heavens and Earth in a red
Fire; heard the cracking Flames, and the tum-
bling Mountains, 2 Pet. iii. 10. In the Day of
the Lord, The Heavens fhall paſs away with
a great Noiſe, and the Elements ſhall melt with
fervent Heat : The Earth alſo, and the Works
that are therein, ſhall be burnt up. Then, at-
ter a pious Ejaculation, he adds, Yer. 12, Look- Wl
in


* . 4
r


— — — - * -
* 3 + *
3 - —
—


—


2
—
. . ag r—_—
—


g * . 65 ; N 1
9 + hb
es Ang ". 4 Ln

"8 4 + 4 a »F =»


b —— — — —


2 ES wes FW. —
n * _ —
2 — —


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 31
oe for, and haſtening the coming of the Day of
< Fh wherein 75 2 eaUVens hs on Fire, ſhall
= di/olud; and the Elements ſhall melt with
„vent Heat. This is as lively as a Man could
preis it, if he had the dreadtul Spectacle before
Ris Eyes. S. Peter had before taught the ſame
Wocrine (ver. 5, 6, 7.) but in a more Philolophick
WV ay ; deſcribing the double Fate of the M orld,
Water and Fire, with relation to the Nature
d Conſtitution of either World, paſt or preſent.
e Heavens and the Earth were of old, conſiſt.
gg Water, and by Water : Whereby, the World
at then was, being overflozed with li ater, pe-
ed. But the Heavens and the Earth which
e no, by the ſame Word are kept in Store, re-
vcd unto Fire, againſt the Day of Fudgment, and
erdition of Ungodly, or Atheiſtical Men. This
eſtimony of S. Peter being full, direct, and
Explicit, will give Light and Strength to ſeveral
ther Paſſages of Scripture, where the ſame Thing
expreſt obſcurely, or by Alluſion. As when
. Paul lays, The Fire ſhall try every Man's Work
== hat Day, 1 Cor. iii. 12, 13. And our Saviour
ys, The Tares ſhall be burnt in the Fire, at
e End of the World, Matth. xiii. 40, 41, 42.
ccordingly it is ſaid, both by the Apoſtles
Ind Prophets, that God will come to Judgment
Fire. St. Paul to the Theſſalonians, 2 Theſſ.
i. 7, 8. promiſeth the perſecuted Rightcous
; Reſt and Eaſe, When the Lord ſhall be reveal=
4 a from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
ming Fire; taking Vengeance on them that
i not God, &c. And fo to the Hebrews,

4 St.


—


—


— _—
- 2 2
- NED — *
„ — ——ů  — — 2 _ = 5
— — — - - . — - — — - _—
. o — 2 * — -

> —— in 2 - 0s : —_ C — — *

. —— SO PT. — — — — — - = — — =
=_ 0 — - I — — —

2 - — — - —
| - —— — —
. __ - - - _ —


— —


1 —U— ——ĩ—— —2——ũ
2
— *
a ——
— —


as
"I"
— . -
—_
—
* 5 —
— — —
— N -


32 The Theory of the EAR TB.


St. Paul ſays, ch. x. 27, that for wilful Apoſtate;'l
there remaineth no more Sacrifice for Sin, but ll
certain fearful looking for of Fudement, and fen
Indignation, which ſhall devour the Adver ſarie,
or Enemies of God. And in H. xii. ver. 268
27, 28, 29. he alludes to the ſame Thing, when, 1
after he had ſpoken of ſhaking the Heavens, and
the Earth once more, he exhorteth, as St. Peta
does upon the ſame Occaſion, to Reverence ani
godly Fear; for our God is a conſuming Fire. WM
In like manner the Prophets, when they ſpeak Wl
of deſtroying the Wicked, and the Enemies offi
God and Chriſt, at the End of the World, re
preſent it as a Deſtruction by Fire. Pal. xi. 6
Upon the Wicked the Lord ſhall rain Coals, Fire,
and Brimſtone, and a burning Tempeſt : Thi
ſhall be the Portion of their Cup. And Pal. I. 3
Our God ſhall come, and will not be flow: A Fin
ſhall devour before him, and it ſhall be very tem.
peſtuous round about him. And in the Beginning of
thoſe two triumphal Plalms, the lxviiith, and xcviith,
we ſce plain Alluſions to this coming of the Lordi
in Fire. The other Prophets ſpeak in the ſame
Style, of a ficry Indignation againſt the Wicked,
in the Day of the Lord: As in 1/arah Ixvi. 15. Tor
behold the Lord will come with Fire, and with if
tis Chariots like a Whirlwind, to render hu
Anger with Fury, and his Rebuke with Flames
of Fire (and ch. xxxiv. 8, 9, 10) And in Daniel
c. vii. 9, 10. The Ancient of Days is placed up-
on his Seat of judgment, covered in Flames.
T. beheld till the Thrones were ſet, and tht
Ancient of Days did fit, whoſe Garment 2
white


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 33
bite as Snow, and the Hair of his Head like
Ws pure Woo! : His Throne was like the fiery
ame, his Wheels as burning Fire, A fiery
W:rcam iſſued and came forth from before him:
onſand thouſands miniſtred unto him, and ten
ouſand times ten thouſand ſtood before him:
e judgment was ſet, and the Books were
Wc Day of the Lord to the ſame Effect, and in
Wc Colours; Behold the Day cometh, that ſhall
as an Oven: and all the Proud, yea, and
= hat do wickedly, ſhall be as Stubble ; and the
ay that cometh ſhall burn them up, ſaith the
Word of Hoſts, that it ſhall leave them neither
oaot nor Branch. And that Nature herſelf, and
Wc Earth ſhall ſuffer in that Fire, the Prophet
Fephany tells us, c. iii. 8. All the Earth ſhall be


Wis Conſumption of the Earth by Fire, even to the
Wundations of it, is expreſt livelily by Moſes in
Ws Song, Deut. xxxii. 22. A Fire vs kindled in
Wy Anger, and ſhall burn unto the loweſt Hell:
Wd ſball conſume the Earth with her Increaſe, and
on Fire the Foundations of the Mountains.


Wally the firſt and laſt, Moſes and Saint Peter;
= what a great Diſtance of Time they writ
Weir Prophecies, and yet how well they agree,
Wc mult needs conclude they were acted by
Wc ſame Spirit; and a Spirit that ſaw thorough
Wl the Ages of the World, from the Beginning
che End. Theſe Sacred Writers were 10
Emote in Time from one another, that they
Book III. D e "Bo


voured with the Fire of my Fealouſy. Laſtly,


If we reflect upon theſe Witneſſes; and eſpe-


their Authority inconteſtable. And upon th


34 The Theory of the EARTH.


could not confer together, nor conſpire either ini
a falſe Teſtimony, or to make the ſame Prediction. 3 |
But being under one common Influence and Inip
ration, which is always conſiſtent with itſelf, they
have dictated the ſame Things, tho at two thou
ſand Ycars Diſtance ſometimes from one another
This, beſides many other Conſiderations, make


whole Account, you ſee, that the Docttine of ti
future Conflagration of the World, having run thro 3
all Ages and Nations, is, by the joint Conſcull I
of the Prophets and Apoſtles, adopted into tn
Chriſtian Faith.


NAA Af |


CHAP. IV.


Concerning the T ime of the Conflagration, and tf
End of the World. What the Aſtronomers (al
upon this Subject, and upon what they grouli
their Calculations : The true Notion of 1


Great Tear, or of the Platonick Tear, ſtated an
explained.


AVING, in this firſt Section, laid
ſure Foundation, as to the Subject all

our Diſcourſe ; the Truth and Certainty of ti
Conflagration whereof we are to treat; We
will now proceed to enquire after the Tin
Cauſes, aud Manner of it. We are natural
more inquiſitive after the End of the Worl


and the Time of that fatal Revolution, tha
aft


Concerning the ConFLAGRATION; 35


ter the Cauſes of it: For theſe, we know, are
eſiſtible, whenſoever they come, and therefore
e are only ſolicitous that they ſhould not over-
re us, or our near Poſterity. The Romans thought
Ney had the Fates of their Empire in the Books of
Wc Sibyls, which were kept by the Magiſtrates as
WSacred Treaſure. We have alſo our Prophetical
Wooks, more ſacred and more infallible than theirs,
Which contain the Fate of all the Kingdoms of the
Warth, and of that glorious Kingdom that is to ſuc-
ed. And of all Futurities, there is none can be
f ſuch Importance to be enquired after, as this
Wait Scene and Cloſe of all human Affairs.
W If 1 thought it poſſible to determine the Time
the Conflagration from the bare Intuition of
Watural Cauſes, I would not treat of it in this
Wlacc, but reſerve it to the laſt ; after we had
Wrought into View all thoſe Cauſes, weigh'd their
Worcc, and examin'd how and when they would
Woncur to produce this great Effect. But I am
tisfied, that the Excitation and Concourſe of thoſe
W-auſcs does not depend upon Nature only; and
o' the Cauſes may be ſufficient, when all united,
ct the Union of them at ſuch a Time, and in
ach a Manner, I look upon as the Effect of a
Particular Providence; and therefore no Fore-
Wight of ours, or Inſpection into Nature, can diſ-
over to us the Time of this Conjuncture. This
ethod, therefore, of Prediction from natural
auſes being laid aſide as impracticable, all other
lethods may be treated of in this Place, as being
ndependent upon any Thing that is to follow
the Treatiſe; and it will be an Eaſe to the


D - | Argu-


|


36 The Theory of the EARTH.


Argument to diſcharge it of this Part, and clear
the Way by Degrees to the principal Point, which
is, The Cauſes and Manner of the Conflagration.

Some have thought it a Kind of Impiety in MW
a Chriſtian, to enquire after the End of the if
World ; becauſe of that Check which our 82. I
viour gave his Diſciples, when, after his Reſur-·
rection, enquiring of him about the Time of if
his Kingdom, he anſwer'd, It is not for you 10
know the Times or the Seaſons, which the Fa.
ther bath put in his own Power, Ads i. 7.8
And before his Death, when he was diſcourſing
of the Conſummation of all Things, He told
them cxpreſly, that though there ſhould be ſuciif
and ſuch previous Signs as he had mention d, ye,
Of that Day and Hour knoweth no Man; 10
not the Angels that are in Heaven, but my Fatho I
only, Matt xxiv. 36. Be it ſo, that the Diſciple
deſervd a Reprimand, for deſiring to know, by
a particular Revelation from our Saviour, th
State of future Times; when many other Thing
were more neceſſary for their Inſtruction, and
for their Miniſtry. Be it alſo admitted, thai
the Angels, at that Diſtance of Time, could noi
fee thorow all Events to the End of the World;
it does not at all follow from thence, that they doi
not know it now; when, in the Courſe of 1 600
Years, many Things are come to paſs, that may
be Marks and Directions to them to make a Judy
ment of what remains, and of the laſt Period oil
all Things. However, there will be no Danger iu
our Enquiries about this Matter, ſeeing they ar
nor ſo much to diſcover the Certainty, as the U


| -+- certain


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 37


Wcrtainty of that Period, as to human Knowledge.
t us therefore conſider what Methods have been
bſcd, by thoſe that have been curious and buly to
caſure the Daration of the World. |
The Stoicks tell us; hen the Sun and the Stars
Wave drunk up the Seca, then the Earth ſhall be
Purnt. A very fair Prophecy ! But, how long
vill they be a drinking ? For unleſs we can deter-
nine that, we cannot determine when this Com-
0 uſtion will begin. Many of the Antients thought
hat the Stars were noutiſh'd by the Vapouts of the
. Pecan and of the moiſt Earth, (Cicer. de Nat.
WD. %. 2.) and when that Nouriſhment was ſpent,
ing of a fiety Nature, they would prey upon
I 4 e Body of the Earth it ſelf, and conſume that,
err they had eonſum d tie Water. This is old-
A Wſhion'd Philoſophy, and now, that the Nature
$ St thoſe! Bodies is better known, will ſcarce paſs
3 dr cutrent. Tis true, we muſt expect ſome Diſ-
Poſitions towards the Combuſtion of the World,
om a great Drought and Deſiccation of the Earth:
ac this helps us nothing on our Way; for the
ueſtion ſtill returns, 7/her will this immoderate
rought or Dryneſs happen ? and that's as ill to
ole as the former. Therefore, as I fatd before,
have no Hopes of deciding the Queſtion by Phy-
ology or Natural Cauſes ; let us then look up
om the Earth to the Heavens, to the Aſtronomers
ad the Prophets: Theſe think they can define the
ge and Duration of the World; the one by their
rt, and the other by Inſpiration.


D


*
*
3
wn
4 N


7 1 * . . 4 A
r Th: 7 4 k


"_-
* N A + * * 0 . "I
__— r
Mp 98 + HA
wad x i =
= r
_ y >


Wa


—


38 The Theory of the EARTH.


We begin with the Aſtronomers; whoſe Calcu 4
lations are founded either upon the Aſpects and
Configurations of the Planets, or upon the Revolu-
tions of the fixed Stars: or, laſtly, upon that which
they call Annus Magnus, or the Great Tear, what
ſoever that Notion proves to be when it is rightly
interpreted. As to the Planets, Beroſus tells u,
the Chaldeans ſuppoſe Deluges to proceed from ai
great ConjunCction of the Planets in Capricorn, (Sen
Nat. qu. 1. 3. c. 29.) And from a like ConjunQion
in the oppoſite Sign of Cancer, the Conflagration
will enſue. So that if we compute by the Aſtro.
nomical Tables how long it will be to ſuch a Con
junction, we find at the ſame Time how long i
will be to the Conflagration. This Doctrine of thei
Chaldeans ſome Chriſtian Authors have owned
and followed the ſame Principles and Method.
If theſe Authors would deal fairly with Man
kind, they ſhould ſhew us ſome Connexion
betwixt theſe Cauſes and the Effects whidllf
they make conſequent upon them. For tis an
unreaſonable Thing to require a Man's Aſn
to a Propoſition, where he ſees no Dependanc: 43
or Connexion of Terms; unleſs it come by
Revelation, or from an infallible Authority. 1
you ſay, the Conflagration will be at the fill
great Conjunction of the Planets in Cancer,
and I ſay it will be at the next Eclipſe of th
Moon, if you ſhew no more Reaſon for you
Aſſertion than I for mine, and neither of u F
pretend to Revelation or Infallibility, we ma
juſtly expect to be equally credited. Pray wha
Realon can you give why the Planets, * a
cher


— 4 =>
& Fg hes oY EN) * 5 2 5
IN » 3 * BEDS. ar y FR 1 ä
7. % 1 — is * * . wu .
8 * . 3 FS A+; * ” Wi. PX a.


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 39


1 ey meet, ſhould plot together to ſet on Fire
eir Fellow. Planet, the Earth, who never did
em any Harm? But now there is a plauſible
EL caſon for my Opinion; for the Moon, when
lips d, may think herſelf affronted by the Earth
Pterpoſing rudely betwixt her and the Sun, and
aving her to grope her Way in the Dark : She
crefore may juſtly take her Revenge as ſhe can,
at you'll ſay, tis not in the Power of the Moon
ſet the Earth on Fire, if ſhe had Malice enough
Wo doit. No, nor ſay I, is it in the Power of the
ther Plancts that are far more diſtant from the
Harth than the Moon, and as ſtark dull Lumps of
Marth as ſhe is. The plain Truth is, the Planets
Wc ſo many Earths; and our Earth is as much
Planet as the brighteſt of them. Iis carried
bout the Sun with the ſame common Stream,
Ind ſhines with as much Luſtre to them, as
ey do to us: Neither can they do any more
arm to it, than it can do to them. Iis now
ell known, that the Planets are dark opake
odies, generally made up of Earth and Water,
our Globe is; and have no Force or Action,
put that of reverberating the Light which the
Sun caſts upon them. This blind ſuperſtitious
ear or Reverence for the Stars, had its Ori-
zinal from the antient Idolaters : They thought
hem Gods, and that they had Domination over
uman Affairs. We do not indeed worthip
hem, as they did; but ſome Men retain till
Whc ſame Opinion of their Vertues, of their
Rule and Influence upon us and our Affairs,
which was the Ground of their Worſhip.
= D 4 *Tis


s = .
82 „ 4 4 *
AA ' HG tr oh - KW 9 >
nA Ser EE


11


= — a= =_ 3
. os as ors. Te SER > ;
Be bn 6? EDT 5 4 752 MS 4 * 3 3 * 4 1 * ** 4
- - r 2 2 "065 MESSY 2 e 1 wo * * 1 * 1 * =
* £4 1 Iu * > © "EI 2 - WH * N n 72 — 7, > -4 an a "7 4 7 * *
Wh


OS
e 7 «OE 3 * *
Ps "= 5 VEL li <A . 1 n 2 by. R +, HOLE)
bh 7 * * * - LV "1x Calls Iota * 88 » A» A -'Y 2 + * . at &#
EBIT ONT N N 9 2 <1 4 — * lH R K 7 TH" oa ws, 2 8 * 25 r . r
* * * 425 "FF 0 2 AS . * 0 1 ob .: ,
2. 7 14 2


he ors


e—” — LG» * <<. —
RR


———U—ñä́4— —— — — —


40 The Theory of the EARTH.


'Tis full Time now to ſweep away eſe
Cobwebs of Superſtition, theſe Relicks of Pa.
ganiſm. I do not ſee how we are any more |
concern'd in the Poſtures of the Planets, than


in the Poſtures of the Clouds; and you may as


well build an Art of Prediction and Divination,


upon the one, as the other. They muſt not i


know much of the Philoſophy of the Heavens,
or little conſider it, that think the Fate, either of
ſingle Perſons, or of the whole Earth, can depend
upon the Aſpects, or figur d Dances of thoſe Bodies

But you'll ſay, it may be, Tho' no Reaſon can
be given for ſuch Effects, yet Experience docs atteſt
the Truth of them. In the firſt Place, I anſwer,


no Experience can be produced for this Effet ll
we are ſpeaking of, the Conflagration of the
World. Secondly, Experience fallacioufly recor- W


ded, or wholly in favour of one ſide, is no
Proof. If a publick Regiſter was kept of all
Aſtrological Predictions, and of all the Events that
followed upon them, right or wrong, agreeing or
diſagreeing, J could willingly refer the Cauſe to
the 'Determinatian of ſuch a Regiſter, and ſuch
Experience : But that which they call Experi-
ence, is ſo ſtated, that if one Prediction of ten
hits right, or neat right, it ſhall make mote
Noiſe, and be more taken Notice of, than all
the Nine that are falſe. Juſt as in a. Lottery,
where many Blanks are drawn for one Prize,
yet theſe make all the Noiſe, and thaſe arc
forgotten. If any one be ſo lucky as to draw
a good Lot, then the Trumpet ſounds, and his
Name is regiſter d, and he tells his good Fot.

. tune


5 7 8
* a In * * 2
bY. W K 3 328
2 * 4 * AF * 8
. oy
— * * . 8 os


Concerning the COXNFLAGRATION, 41


tune to every Body he meets; whereas thoſe
chat loſe, go ſilently away with empty Pockets,
and arc aftham'd to tell their Loſſes. Such a
Thing is the Regiſter of Aſtrological Expe-
W ricnces ; they record what makes for their Cre.
© dit, but drop all blank Inftances, that would dif:
cover the Vanity or Cheat of their Art.
= So much for the Planets. They have alſo a
pretended Calculation of the End of the World,
from the fix d Stars and the Firmament. Which,
Win ſhort, is this: They tuppoſe theſe Bodies, be-
ſides the Hurry of their Diurnal Motion from Eaſt
to Weſt, quite round the Earth in 24 Hours, to
W have another retrograde Motion from Welt to Eaſt,
W which is more flow and leiſurely : And when they
have finiſhed the Circle of this Retrogradation,
Wand come up again to the ſame Place from
whence they ſtarted at the Beginning of the
World, then this Courſe of Nature will be at an
End; and either the Heavens will ccafe from all
Motion, or a new Set of Motions will be put
a foot, and the World begin again. This is a
Zundle of Fictions tied up in a pretty Knot. In
the firſt Place, there is no ſuch Thing as a ſolid
Firmament, in which the Stars are fixd, as Nails
in a Board. The Heavens are as fluid as out Air,
and the higher we go, the more thin and ſub.
tle is the ethereal Matter. Then, the fix'd Stars
are not all in one Surface, as they ſeem to us,
not at an equal Diſtance. from the Earth, but
are placed in ſeveral Orbs higher and higher ;
there being infinite Room in the great Deep
of the Heavens, every Way, for innumerable
35 | DEE Stars


42 The Theory of the EAR TB.


Stars and Spheres behind one another, to fill and Ee;
beautify the immenſe Spaces of the Univerſe,
Laſtly, the fix'd Stars have no Motion common
to them all, nor any Motion ſingly, unleſs upon
their own Centres; and therefore, never leaving
their Stations, they can never return to any con.
mon Station, which they would ſuppoſe them to
have had at the Beginning of the World. So a; Ml
this Period they ſpeak of, whereby they would
meaſure the Duration of the World, is merely
imaginary, and hath no Foundation in the true
Nature or Motion of the celeſtial Bodies.
But in the third Place, they ſpeak of an Annual
Macnus, a Great Tear : A Revolution ſo call'd,
whatſocver it is, that is of the ſame Extent with
the Length of the World. This Notion, 1
confeſs, is more antient and univerſal, and there. i
fore I am the more apt to believe that it is
not altogether groundleſs. But the Difficulty is,
to find out the Notion of this Great Tear,
what is to be underſtood by it, and then of
what Length it is. They all agree that it is a
Time of ſome orand Inſtauration of all Things,
or a Reſtitution of the Heavens and the Earth
to their former State ; that is, to the State and
Poſture they had at the Beginning of the World;
ſuch therefore as will reſtore the Golden Age,
and that happy State of Nature wherein Things
were at firſt. If fo, if theſe be the Marks and
Properties of this Revolution, which is called the
Great Tear, we need not go ſo far to find the
true Notion and Interpretation of it. Thoſe that
have read the firſt Part of this Theory, may
remem-


a — OY ————
— — 2 ͤ—ß— — —
at + Gs —- — —


— — Ä —— —


—
— —


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 43


emember, that in the 24 Book, Chap. 3. we gave
In Account what the Poſture of the Earth was at
Whc Beginning of the World, and what were the
FC onſequences of that Poſture, a perpernal Spring
End Equinox throughout all the Earth : And if the
WE arth was reſtor d again to thatPoſture and Situation,
all that is imputed to the Great Nar, would im-
mediately follow upon it, without ever diſturbing
or moving the fix d Stars, Firmament, or Planets;
Wand yet at the ſame Time all theſe three would
return, or be reſtored to the ſame Poſture they had
Wat the Beginning of the World; ſo as the whole
Character of the Great Near would be truly fulfill'd,
Wtho' not in that Way which they imagin'd ; but in
another, more compendious, and of eaſier Con-
Wccption. My Meaning is this, It the Axis of the
Earth was rectified and ſet parallel with the Axis
Wof the Ecliptick, upon which the Planets, Firma-
ment, and fix'd Stars are ſupposd to move, all
Things would be as they were at firſt ; a general
Harmony and Conformity of all the Motions of
the Univerſe would preſently appear, ſuch as they
ay, was in the Golden Age, before any Diſorder
came into the Natural or Moral World.

Ass this is an eaſy, ſo I do not doubt, but it
is a true Account of that which was originally
call'd the Great Tear, or the Great Inſtauration;
which Nature will bring to paſs in this ſimple
Method, by rectifying the Axis of the Earth,
without thoſe operoſe Revolutions, which ſome
Aſtronomers have fancied. But however, this
Account being admitted, how will it help us

to define what the Age and Duration of the
World


44 The Theory of the EAR TB.
World will be? 'Tis true, many have undef


taken to tell us the Length of this Great _ Y
and conſequently of the World; but, beſides thy Z
their Accounts are very different, and generally
of an extravagant Length, if we had the true Ac.
count, it would not aſſure us when the Word
would end; becauſe we do not know when i
did begin, or what Progreſs we have already mad
in the Line of Time. For I am ſatisfied, the
Chronology of the World, whether Sacred or Pro
fanc, is loſt; till Providence ſhall pleaſe to re.
trieve it by ſome new Diſcovery. As to profane
Chronology, or that of the Heat bens, the Greeks
and the Romans knew nothing above the Ohm.
piads ; which fell ſhort many Ages of the De.
luge, much more of the Beginning of the World,


| 3 *
4 1 | 1 > | 2 1
b F ' — * n 1 * * an - . 5 "as * f —
. 1 . LINK. * 2 . > ©" x SULTS 1 54 * 8 ? 73 + FS 7


And the Eaſtern barbarous Nations, as they di.
agreed amongſt themſelves, ſo generally they run
the Origin of the World to ſuch a prodigious

Height, as is neither agreeable to Faith, nor Reaſon, Wl
As to ſacred Chronology, tis well known, that Wi


the Difference there is betwixt the Greek, He.


brew, and Samaritan Copies of the Bible, make the


Age of the World altogether undetermin'd : Andi


there is no Way yet found out, how we may
certainly diſcover which of the three Copies is molt
Authentick; and conſequently, what the Age of
the World is, upon a true Computation. Sceing
therefore we have no Aſſurance how long the
World hath ſtood already, neither could we be
aſlur'd how long it hath to ſtand, tho by. this
Annus Magnus, or any other Way, the total Sum,
or whole Term of its Duration was truly known 3

] am


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 45


am ſorry to ſee the little Succeſs we have had
codur firſt Search after the End of the World,
om Aſtronomical Calculations. But tis an uſe-
Wi piece of Knowledge to know the Bounds of
Nur Knowledge; that fo we may not ſpend our
imme and Thoughts about Things that lie out of
Nur Reach. I have little or no Hopes of reſolving
is Point by the Light of Nature, and therefore it
Inly remains now to enquire, whether Providence
Wath made it known by any Sort of Prophecy or
Revelation. Which ſhall be the Subject of the
ol lowing Chapter.


eee
4 CHAP. v.


Concerning Prophecies that determine the End of
= he World : Of what Order ſoever, Profane
or Sacred; Jewiſh or Chriſtian. That no
certain Judgment can be made from any of


them, at what "Diſtance we are now from the
Conflagration. ;


HE Bounds of human Knowledge are

ſo narrow, and the Deſire of knowing
Io vaſt and illimited, that it often puts Mankind
upon irregular Methods of inlarging their Know-
ledge, This hath made them find out Arts of
Commerce with evil Spirits, to be inſtructed by
them in ſuch Events as they could not of them-
ſelves diſcover. We meddle not with thoſe
Myfteries of Iniquity : But what hath appear d
under


46 The Theory of the Ex RTR.


under the Notion of divine Prophecy, relating
to the Chronology of the World: Giving ei.
ther the whole Extent of it, or certain Marks of
its Expiration; Theſe we purpoſe to examine in i
this Place: How far any Thing may, or may
not, be concluded from them, as to the Reſoluti. i
on of our Problem, How long the World will laſt.
Amongſt the Heathens, I do not remember any
Prophecies of this Nature, except the Sigi,
Oracles, as they are uſually called. The antien
Eaſtern Philoſophers have left us no Account
that I can call to mind, about the Time of this F
tality. They ſay, when the Phenix returns, we
muſt expect the Conflagration to ſollow ; but the
Age of the Phenix they make as various and un-Wil
ccrtain, as they do the Computation of their Crea |
Tear, Symbolum amoxalagaows mwonwye gi,
Phænix. Hor. Apol. l. 2. c. 57. which two Thing
are indeed, one and the ſame in Effect. Some o
them, I confeſs, mention 6000 Years for the whole
Age of the World : Which being the famous Pro-
phecy of ghe Fews, we ſhall ſpeak to it largely
hereafter; and reduce to that Head; what broken
Traditions remain amongſt the Heathens of the
fame thing. As to the $zby//zme Oracles, which
were ſo much in Reputation amongſt the Greets
and Romans, they have been tamper'd with ſo
much, and chang'd fo often, that they are be-
come now of little Authority. They ſeem to
have divided the Duration of the World into
ten Ages, and the laſt of theſe they make 2
Golden Age, a State of Peace, Righteouſncis,
and Perfection: But ſeeing they have not deter


min d,


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 47


nin d, in any definite Numbers, what the Length
f cvery Age will be, nor given us the Sum of all,
e cannot draw any Concluſion from this Account,
to the Point in queſtion before us: But muſt
Proceed to the 7ewiſh and Chriſtzan Oracles.

Ss The Jews have a remarkable Prophecy,
which expreſſeth both the Whole, and the Parts
f the World's Duration. The World, they
Way, will ſtand Six thouſand Years : Tus thou-
and before the Law, Two thouſand under the
Law, and Two thouſand under the Meſſiah. This
WProphccy they derive from Elias; but there
Wwcrc two of the Name, Elias the Thesbite,
nd Elias the Rabbin, or Cabbaliſt ; and tis
Wſupposd to belong immediately to the latter of
Wtheſc. Yet this does not hinder, in my Opinion,
but that it might come originally from the for-
mer Elias, and was preſerv'd in the School of
this Elias the Rabbin, and firſt made publick
by him. Or he added, it may be, that Diviſion
of the Time into three Parts, and ſo got a Title
to the whole. I cannot eaſily imagine, that a
Doctor that lived Two hundred Years, or there-
abouts, before Chriſt, when Prophecy had
ceas d for ſome Ages amongſt the Zews, ſhould
take upon him to diate a Prophecy about the
Duration of the World, unleſs he had been ſup-
ported by ſome antecedent Cabbaliſtical Tra-
(dition: Which being kept more ſecret before,
he took the Liberty to make Publick, and fo
WW Vas reputed the Author of the Prophecy: As
many Philoſophers amongſt the Greeks, were
the reputed Authors of ſuch Doctrines as were
: + much


7 — — —


— —


2


us A eb — —
*


thought it was founded in the Hiſtory of the /i


48 The Theory of the EARTH. 7
much more antient than themſelves : But they
were the Publiſhers of them in their Country, ot
the Revivers of them after a long Silence; and ſo
by forgetful Poſterity, got the Honour of the firlt WM
Invention. I
You will think, it may be, the Time is too
long, and the Diſtance too great, betwixt EA
the Thesbite, and this Elias the Rabbin, for if
Tradition to ſubſiſt all the while, or be preſerya
with any competent Integrity. But it appears
from St. Fude's Epiſtle, that the Prophecies oi
Enoch, (who liv'd before the Flood) relating roi
the Day of Judgment and the End of the World i
were extant in his Time, cither in Writing or by
Tradition : And the Diſtance between Enoch and
St. Jude was vaſtly greater than betwixt the two
Elias's. Nor was any fitter to be inſpir'd with
that Knowledge, or to tell the firſt News of that
fatal Period, than the old Prophet Elias, who
is to come again and bring the Alarum' of thei
approaching Conflagration. But however | this
Conjecture may prove as to the original Author
of this Prophecy, the Prophecy itſelf concerning
the Sexmillennial Duration of the World, is
very much inſiſted npon by the Chriſtian Fathers
Which yet I believe is not ſo much for the bare
Authority of the Tradition, as becauſe they


Days Creation, and the Sabbath ſucceeding : As
alſo in ſome other typical Precepts and Uſages
in the Law of Moſes. ' But before we ſpeak of
that, give me Leave to name ſome of thoſe
Fathers to you, that were of this Judgment

an


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 49


Ind ſuppoſed the great Sabbatiſni would ſuc-
Need after the World had ſtood Six thou-
Ind Ycars. Of this Opinion was St Barnabas
nis Catholick Epiſtle, ch. xv. Where he ar-
es, that the Creation will be ended in Six
Wouland Years, as it was finiſh'd in ſix Days:
very Day according to the ſacred and myſti-
Wal Account, being a Thouſand Years. Of the
me Judgment is St. Irenæus, both as to the
Woncluſion, and the Reaſon of it, J. 5. c. 28, 29,
| He faith, the Hiſtory of the Creation in ſix
Days, is 4 Narration as to what is paſt, and a
We rophecy of what is to come. As the Work was
id to be conſummated in 6 Days, and the Sab-
th to be the Seventh: So the Conſummation of
Things will be in 6000 Years, and then the
eat Sabbatiſm to come on in the bleſſed Reign of
Fhriſt. Hippolytus Martyr, Diſciple of Irenæus,
ot the ſame Judgment, as you may ſee in Pho-
us, c. 202. Lattaniius in his Divine Inſtitutions,
7. c. 14. gvies the very ſame Account of the
ate and Condition of the World, and the ſame
roofs for it, and ſo does St. Cyprian, in his Ex-
tation to Martyrdom, c. 18. St. Jerome more
aan once declares himſelf of the ſame Opinion
d St. Auſtin, C. D. J. 20. c. 7. tho he wa-
rs, and was doubtful as to the Millennium, or
eign of Chriſt upon Earth, yet he receives
is Computation without Heſitancy, and upon
e foremention'd Grounds. So Johannes Da-
aſcenus de Lide Orthodoxa, takes ſeven Millen-
aries for the intire Space of the World, from
ie Creation, to the general Reſurrection, the
Book III, Fe Sab-


77 0.


$0 The Theory of the EARTH.


Sabbatiſm being included. And that this was 2
receivd and approv'd Opinion in early Times, ve
may collect from the Author of the ©ue/rio
and Anſwers, ad Orthodoxos, in Juſtm Marty
Who, giving an Anſwer to that Enquiry abou
the ſix thouſand Years Term of the World, ſay;
Me may conjefture from many Places of Scriptun i
that thoſe are in the right, that ſay, fix thou
fand Tears is the Time pre fix d, for the DuratinM
of this preſent Frame of the World, Theſe Au
thors I have cxamin'd wy ſelf: But there are man
others brought in Confirmation of this Opinion
As St. Hilary, Anaſtaſius Simaita, Sanctus Gau
dentius, Q. Julius Hilarion, Funilius Afruul
uus, Iſidorus Hiſpalenſis, Caſſiodorus, Gregori
Magnus, and others, which 1 leave to be e
min d by thoſe that have Curioſity and Leiſure ol
do it. | 5

In the mean time, it muſt be confeſsd, tha
many of theſe Fathers were under a Miſtake, ii
one reſpect, in that they generally thought thi
World was near an End in their Time. An Erro
which we need not take Pains to confute now
feeing we, who live twelve hundred or fourtee
hundred Years after them, find the World till it
being, and likely to continue ſo for ſome conſide
rable Time. But it is eaſy to diſcern whence thell
Miſtake procceded : Not from this Prophecy alone
but becauſe they reckon d this Prophecy aceordiy
to the Chronology of the Sepruagint : Whil
ſetting back the Beginning of the World man)
Ages beyond the Hebrew, theſe ſix thouſand
Years Were very near expir'd in the Time of tho

Col on Os


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 51


ners; and that made them conclude, that the
World was very near an End. We will make

Reflections, in this Place, upon that Chrono-
Sy of the Septuagint, leſt it ſhould too much
Wcrrupt the Thread of our Diſcoutſe. But it is
Weclliry to ſnew how the Fathers grounded this
* of ſix thouſand Years, upon Scrip-
Twas chiefly, as we ſuggeſted beforc, upon
= Feen or the Creation finiſhd in fx
' and the Sabbath enſuing. The Sabbath,
Wy laid, was a Type of the Sabbatiſm, that was
collow at the End of the World, according to
Paul, ch. v. to the Hebrews; and then by Ana-
zy and Conſequence, the fix Days preceding
> Sabbath, muſt note the Space and Duration
the World: If therefore they could diſcover
V much a Day is reckon'd for, in this myſtical
Wmputation, the Sum of the ſix Days would be
iy found out. And they think, that, accord»
W to the Plalmiſt (Pſa/. xc. 4.) and St. Peter,
= £7. iii. 8.) 4 Day may be eſtimated a 7hou-
d Tears, and conſequently fix Days muſt be
unted fix thouſand Years, for the Duration of |
World. This is their Interpretation, and their
terence : But it muſt be acknowledged, that there
an eſſential Weaknels in all typical and allego-
al Argumentations, in compariſon of literal.
nd this being allow'd in Diminution of the Proof,
e may be bold to ſay, that nothing yet appears,
ther in Nature, or Scripture, or human Affairs,
pugnant to this Suppoſition of ſix thouſand |
ears: Which hath Antiquity and the Authority |
the Fathers, on its Side. .."
3 We


*
:


K 9
22
— CES Toe


— —
2 52 Os


—


—_


— "IT" » 7
Fa


« Dies — ih ͤ—u—
——— — ——— — — 6. fo


—
— —


52 The Theory of the EARTH.


feven Seals, the ſeven Trumpets, the ſev


treading under Foot the Holy City, Forty at


Number of Days, or for a Time, Times, a


if ſome of them did reach ſo far, yet becaul


or in what Year they will expire. As for !


We proceed now to the Chriſtian ie
cies concerning the End of the World. I 4 I
not mention thoſe in Daniel, becauſe 1 am nf
ſatisfied that any there ( excepting that of till
fifth Kingdom itſelf) extend ſo far. But i :
the Apocalypſe of St. Fohn, which is the 1
Revelation we arc to expect, there are ſever
Prophecies that reach to the Conſummation q


this World, and the firſt Reſurrection. I


Vials, do all terminate upon that great Period
But they are rather Hiftorical Prophecies tha
Chronological ; they tell us, in their Langu 1
the Events, but do not meaſure or expreſs ii
Time wherein they come to paſs. Others tha
are that may be call'd Chronological, as uf


J
2
3
I


two Months, Apoc. xi. 2. The Witneſſes of
poſing Antichrift One thouſand Two hunan
and fixty Days, Apoc. xi. 3. The Flight(
the Woman into the Wilderneſs, for the ſan


half a Time, Apoc. xii. 6 & 14. And af
The War of the Beaſts againſt the Saints, Fon
#wo Months, Apoc. xiii. 5. Theſe all, jc;
lee, expreſs a Time for their Completion ; at
all the ſame Time, if ! be not miſtaken : Þ
they do not reach to the End of the World. 0


we do not certainly know where to fix tht
Beginning, we muſt ſtill be at a Loſs, whe


ance, if the Reign of the Beaſt, or the Pread


in.


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 53


of the Witneſſes be 1260 Years, as is rea-
Wnably ſupposd; yet if we do not know cer-
Winly when this Reign, or this Preaching begun,
W-ithcr can we tell when it will end. And the
Hochas, or Beginnings of theſe: Prophecies are
W differently calculated, and are Things of fo
Ing Debate, as to make the Diſcuſſion of them
Wogcther improper for this Place. Yet it muſt be
nfeſt, that the beſt Conjectures that can be made
Wnccrning the approaching End of the World,
Wuſt be taken from a judicions Examination of
Wcle Points: And accordingly as we gather up
Wc Prophecies of the Apocalypſe, in a ſucceſſive
Wonmpletion, we ſee how by degrees we draw
erer and nearer to the Concluſion of all. But
= ſome of theſe enlightning Prophecies be ac-
I mpliſhd, we are as a Man that awakes in the
Wight, all is dark about him, and he knows not
v far the Night is ſpent; but if he watch till the
aht appears, the firſt Glimpſes of that will reſolve
$ Doubts, We muſt have a little Patience, and, I
ink, but a little; ſtill eyeing thoſe Prophecies of
e Reſurrection of the Witneſſes, and the Depreſ-
of Antichriſt : Till by their Accompliſhmenr,
e Day dawn, and the Clouds begin to change their
olour, Then we ſhall be able to make a near

ueſs, when the Sun of Righteouſneſs will ariſe.
So much for Prophecies. There are alſo
ens, which are look'd upon as Forerunners
the Coming of our Saviour; and, therefore,
a/ give us ſome Direction how to judge of
e Diſtance or Approach of that great Day.
hus many of the Fathers thought the coming of
| — | Anti-


—


54 He Theory of the EARTH.


Antichriſt would be a Sign to give the Wos
Notice of its approaching End. But we my
eaſily ſce, by what hatin been noted before, w]
it was that led the Fathers into that Miſtak:i
They thought their ſix thouſand Years were ne
an End, as they truly were, according to ti
Chronology they followed : and therefore the
concluded the Reign of Antichriſt muſt be ven
ſhort, whenſocver he came, and that he could n
come long before the End of the World. Iu
we are very well aſſur'd, from the Reyclatio
of Saint Fohn, that the Reign of Antichriſt lt
not to be fo ſhort and tranſient ; and from ti
Proſpect and Hiſtory of Chriſtendom, that ll
hath been already upon his Throne many hui
dreds of Years. Therefore this Sign wholly fall
to the Ground; unleſs you will take it fro
the Fall of Antichriſt, rather than from his fi
Entrance. Others expect the coming of El
to give Warning of that Day, and prepare
Way of the Lord. I am very willing to ada
that Elias will come, according to the Senſc oi
the Prophet Malachi, Chap. iv. 5, 6. but il
will not come wth Obſervation, no more tha
he did in the Perſon of John the Baptiſt ; H
will not bear the Name of Elias, nor tell us
is the Man that went to Heaven in a fiery C
riot, and is now come down again to give
Warning of the laſt Fire. But ſome divine PM
fon may appear before the ſecond coming i
our Saviour, as there did before his firſt comin!
and by giving a new Light and Life to ti
Chriſtian Doctrine, may diſſipate the Miſts of
| eee gn


Cancerning the CONFLAGRATION. 55


rror, and aboliſh all thoſe little Controverſies
i mongſt good Men, and the Diviſions and Ani-
W.oofitics that ſpring from them : Enlarging their
pirits by greater Diſcoveries, and uniting them
ll in the Bonds of Love and Charity, and in the
Wommon Study of Truth and Perfection, Such
Wn Elias the Prophet ſeems to point at; and may
Wc come, and be the great Peace- maker and Pre-
arer of the Ways of the Lord! But at preſent,
Wc cannot from this Sign make any Judgment
hen the World will end.
= Another Sign preceding the End of the World,
„ The Converfon of the Fews ; and this is a
onderful Sign indeed. St. Paul ſeems cxpreſly to
firm it, Rom. xi. 25, 26. But it is differently
aderſtood, either of their Converſion only, or of
heir Reſtoration to their own Country, Libertics
Ind Dominion. The Prophets bear hard upon
his Scnſe ſometimes, as you may ſce in Iſaiah,
kc, Haſea, Amos. And to the ſame purpoſe
the antient Promiſe of Moſes is interpreted, Deut.
an. Let this ſeems to be a thing very uncon-
ceivable: Unleſs we ſuppoſe the ten Tribes to be
aul in ſome hidden Corner of the World, from
W whence they may be conducted again to their own
W Country, as once out of Fever, by a miracu-
lous Providence, and cſtabliſh'd there: Which,
being known, will give the Alarm to all the other
Jeu, in the World, and make an univerſal Con-
flueuce to their old Home. Then our Saviour, by
an extraordinary Appearance to them, as once to
St. Paul, John xix. 37. and by Prophets, Apoc.
L 7. Mat. Xxili. 39. raisd up amongſt them for
E 4 that


36 The Theory of the EARTH.


that purpoſe, may convince them that he is mM
true Meſſiah, and convert them to the Chriſta j
Faith; which will be no more ſtrange, than wall
the firſt Converſion of the Gentile World. But i
we be content with a Converſion of the Few,
without their Reſtoration; and of thoſe two Tribe
only, which are now diſperſed throughout th
Chriſtian World, and other known Parts of th:
Earth: That theſe ſhould be converted to the
Chriſtian Faith, and incorporated into the Chriſtian
Commonwealth, loſing their National Chara
and Diſtinction: If this, I ſay, will ſatisfy the Pro
phecies, it is not a Thing very difficult to be con.
ceived. For when the World is reduc'd to
better and purer State of Chriſtianity, and tha
Idolatry, in a great meaſure remoy'd, which gail
the greateſt Scandal to the eus, they will begin
to have better Thoughts of our Religion, and
be diſposd to a more ingenuous and unpre-
judic'd Examination of their Prophecies con-
cerning the Meſſiah : God raiſing up Men
amongſt them of divine and enlarged Spirits
Lovers of Truth more than of any particulat
Sect or Opinion; with Light to diſcern it, and
Courage to profeſs it. Laſtly, It will be a co;
gent Argument upon them, to ſee the Age ot
the World ſo far ſpent, and no Appearance yet,
of their long expected Meſſiah. So far ſpent,
J fay, that there is no Room lefr, upon any
Computation whatſoever, for the Oeconomy of
a Meſſiah yet to come. This will make them
reflect more carefully and impartially upon
him whom the Chriſtians propoſe, 7 of

Naga.


—
— — ——ö — —


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 37


za, whom their Fathers Crucified at
W-r1/2/em : Upon the Miracles he wrought
his Life, and after his Death; and upon the
Wonderful Propagation ot his Doctrine through-
Nut the World, after his Aſcenſion. And laſtly,
pon the Deſolation of Feruſz/em, upon their
vn ſcattered and forlorn Condition, foretold by
at Prophet, as a Judgment of God upon an un-
Wratcful and wicked People.

This I have ſaid to ſtate the Caſe of the Con-
erſion of the Jes, which will be a Sign of the
Woproaching Reign of Chriſt. But, alas! what
WP ppcarance is there of this Converſion in our
Hays? or what Judgment can we make from a


f ign that is not come to pals? 'Tis ineffectual


do us, but may be of Uſe to Poſterity. Yet


ren to them it will not determine, at what
iſtance they are from the End of the World, but
ea Mark only that they are not far from it.
here will be Signs alſo, in thoſe laſt Days, in
he Heavens, and in the Earth, and in the Sea,
orerunners of the Conflagration; as the Obſcura.


oon of the Sun and Moon, Earthquakes, Roarings
f the troubled Sea, and ſuch like Diſorders in


Ihe natural World, tis true; but theſe are the


cry Pangs of Death, and the Strugglings of Na-
Hure juſt before her Diſſolution, and it will be too
ate then to be aware of our Ruin when it is at
he Door. Yet theſe being Signs or Prodigies
Waken Notice of by Scripture, we intend, God
Willing, after we have explained the Cauſes and
Manner of the Conflagration, to give an Ac-
ount alſo whence bk unnatural *
wi


52 The Theory of the EARTH.


will proceed, that are the Beginnings or immediate


Introductions to the laſt Fire.


Thus we have gone through the Prophecis
and Signs that concern the laſt Day and the la
Fate of the World, And how little have we

learned from them as to the Time of that greafil
Revolution? Prophecies riſe ſometimes with a
even gradual Light, as the Day riſeth upon th
Horizon: and ſometimes break out ſuddenly lik:
a Fire, and we are not aware of their Approacii
"till we ſee them accompliſh'd. Thoſe that cou
cern the End of the World, are of this latter Sor,
to unoblerving Men; but even to the moſt obſet
ving, there will ſtill be a Latitude; we muſt nf
expect to calculate the coming of our Saviou|if
like an Eclipſc, to Minutes and half Minute
There are Times and Seaſons which the FathiW
hath put in his own Power. If it was deſign
to keep theſe Things ſecret, we mult not think
to out wit Providence, and from the Propheciol


rr


that are given us, pick out a Diſcovery that wa?


not intended we ſhould ever make. It is dete.


mind in the Councils of Heaven juſt how fu
we ſhall know theſe Events before hand, and


with what Degree of Certainty : And with thi
we muſt be content, whatſoever it is. Th
Apocalypſe of St. Fohn is the laſt Prophetici
Declaration of the Will of God, and contain
the Fate of the Chriſtian Reilgion to the End
of the World, its Purity, Degeneracy, and Rc
viviſcency. The Head«of this Degeneracy |
call'd The Beaſt, the falſe Prophet, the I bum
Babylon, in Prophetical Terms And fe
ccle.


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 59


W ccleliaſtical Term is commonly call'd Antichriſt.
W hoſe that bear Teſtimony againſt this Degene-
Wacy, are call'd the Mitneſſes: Who, after they
Wave been a long Time in a mean and perſe—
Wutcd Condition, are to have their Reſurrection
And Aſcenſion ; that is, be advanc'd to Power and
Authority. And this Reſurrection of the Mit-
eeſſes, and Depreſſion of Antichriſt, is that which
vill make the great Turn of the World to Righ-
ecouſneſs, and the great Criſis, whereby we may
udge of its drawing to an End. Tis true, there
re other Marks, as the paſling away of the ſecond
oe, Apoc. c. ix. which is commonly thought to
obe the Ottoman Empire; and the Effuſion of the
Viale, Apor. c. xvii The firſt of theſe will be
indeed a very conſpicuous Mark, if it follow upon
the Reſurrection of the Witneſſes, as by the Pro-
phecy it ſeems to do, ch. xi. 14. But as to the
Vials, tho they do plainly reach in a Series to the
End of the World, 1 am not ſatisfied with any
Expoſition I have yet met with, concerning their
preciſe Time or Contents.
= Ina Word, though the Sum and general
Contents of a Prophecy be very intelligible, yet
the Application of it to Time and Perſons may
be very lubricous. There muſt be Obſcurity in
a Prophecy, as well as Shadow in a Picture.
All its Lines muſt not ſtand in a full Light. For
if Prophecies were open and barefac'd as to
all their Parts and Circumſtances, they would
check and obſtruct the Courſe of human Af-
fairs; and hinder, if it was poſſible, their own
Accompliſhment. Modeſty and Sobtiety are
in


60 The Theory of the EAR TU.


in all Things commendable, but in nothing mote
than in the Explication of theſe ſacred Myſteries;
and we have ſeen ſo many miſcarry by a too clo.
and particular Application of them, that we ought YA
to dread the Rock about which we ſee ſo mam
11 Shipwrecks. He that does not err above a Cen.
11 tury, in calculating the laſt Period of Time, from
1} what Evidence we have at preſent, hath, in my
11 Opinion, caſt up his Accounts very well. Bu!
| the Scenes will change faſt towards the Evening Wl
of this long Day, and when the Snn is near ſet.
ting, they will more eaſily compute how far he
hath to run. =


Concerning the Cauſes of the Conflagration.


The Difficulty of conceiving how this Earth can
be ſet on Fire. With a general Anſwer to that
Difficulty. Two ſuppos'd Cauſes of the Con-
flagration, by the Sun's drawing nearer to the
Earth, or the Earth's throwing out the central
Fire, examin d and rejected.


E have now made our Way clear to
the principal Point, The Cauſes of the
Conflagration : How the Heavens and the
Earth will be ſet on Fire, what Materials are
prepared, or what Train of Cauſes, for that
purpoſe. The Antients, who have kept us
Company pretty well thus far, here quite »
ert


ert us: they deal more in Concluſions than
Wauſes, as is uſual in all Traditional Learning.
WA nd the Stoichs themſelves, who inculcate ſo
uch the Doctrine of the Conflagration, and
ake the Strength of it ſuch, as to diſſolve the
Harth into a fiery Chaos, are yet very ſhort and
Wuperficial in their Explications, how this ſhall come
Wo paſs. The latent Sceds of Fire, they ſay, ſhall
very where be let looſe, and that Element will
Wprcvail over all the reſt, and transform every Thing
Winto its own Nature. But theſe are general Things,
What give little Satisfaction to inquiſitive Perſons.
Neither do the modern Authors, that treat of
the ſame Subject, relieve us in this Particular:
hey are willing to ſuppoſe the Conflagration a
ſuperficial Effect, that fo they may excuſe them-
ſelves the Trouble of enquiring aſter Cauſes. Iis
no doubt, in a Sort ſupernatural; and ſo the De-
luge was: Yet Moſes ſets down the Cauſes of the
Deluge, the Rains from above, and the Diſruption
of the Abyſs. So there muſt be Treaſures of Fire
provided againſt that Day, by whoſe Eruption this
ſecond Deluge will be brought upon the Earth.
To flate the Caſe fairly, we muſt firſt re-
preſent the Difficulty of ſetting the Earth on
Fire; tye the Knot, before we looſe it; that
lo we may the better judge whether the Cauſes


cient to overcome ſo great Oppoſgttion. The
Difficulty, no doubt, will be chiefly from the
great Quantity of Water that is about our Globe ;
whereby Nature ſeems to have made Proviſion


from


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 61


that ſhall be brought into View, may be ſuffi-


againſt any Inyaſion by Fire, and ſecurd us


9

.
*
7
i
5
|


62 The Theory of the EARTH.


from that Enemy more than any other. We ſee Ml
half of the Surface of the Earth cover'd with the
Seas, whoſe Channel is of a vaſt Depth and
Capacity: Beſides innumerable Rivers, great and
ſmall, that water the Face of the dry Land, and
drench it with perpetual Moiſture. Then within


the Bowels of the Earth, there are Store. Houſe, il


of ſubterrancous Waters; which are as a Reſerve, al
in caſe the Ocean and the Rivers ſhould be
overcome. Neither is Water our only Security,
for the hard Rocks, and ſtony Mountains, which
no Fire can bide upon, are ſet in long Ranges
upon the Continents and Iſlands; and muſt needs
give a Stop to the Progreſs of that furious Enemy,
in caſe he ſhould attack us. Laſtly, the Earth
itſelf is not combuſtible in all its Parts. Tis not
every Soil that is fit Fewel for the Fire. Clay,
and Mire, and ſuch like Soils, will rather choak and
ſtifle it, than help it on its Way. By theſe Means
one would think the Body of the Earth ſecurd;
and though there may be partial Fires, or Inun-
dations of Fire, here and there, in particular Regi-
ons, yet there cannot be an univerſal Fire through
out the Earth. At leaſt, one would hope for a
ſafe Retreat towards the Poles, where there 13
nothing but Snow, and Ice, and bitter Cold.
Theſe Regions ſure are in no Danger to be burnt,
whatſoever becomes of the other Climates of the
Earth. *
This being the State and Condition of the
preſent Earth, one would not imagine by theſe
Preparations, 'twas ever intended that it ſhould
periſh by an univerſal Fire. But ſuch is 9
the


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. G3


Method of Providence, that the exterior
Te of Things looks one Way, and the Deſign
another; till at length, touching a Spring, as
ere, at a certain Time, all thoſe Affairs change

Naure and Aſpect, and ſhew us which way Pro-
Wcnce inclines. We muſt therefore ſuppoſe,
ore the Conflagration begins, there will be
poſitions and Preparatives ſuitable to ſo great a
Work : and all Antiquity, ſacred and prophane,
Pes ſo far concur with us, as to admit and ſup-
Wc that a great Drought will precede, and an
traordinary Heat and Dryneſs of the Air, to uſher
this fiery Doom. And theſe being Things
Which often happen in a Courſe of Nature, we
Wnnot diſallow ſuch eaſy Preparations, when
Wovidence intends ſo great a Conſequence, The
Weavens will be ſhut up, and the Clouds yield no
ein; and by this, with an immoderate Heat in
e Air, the Springs of Water will become dry,
e Earth chapp'd and parch'd, and the Woods
ad Trees made ready Fewel for the Fire. We
oe Inſtances, in Hiſtory, that there have been
roughts and Heats of this Nature, to that De-
ee, that the Woods and Foreſts have taken Fire,
d the outward Turf and Surface of the Earth,
Without any other Cauſe than the Dryneſs of
Wc Seaſon, and the Vehemency of the Sun.
Ind, which is more conſiderable, the Springs
d Fountains being dry'd up, the greater Ri-
ers have been ſenſibly leſſen d, and the leſſer
uite empty'd, and exhal'd. Theſe Things,
hich happen frequently, in particular Coun-
ies and Climates, may, at an appointed Time,


by


unleſs Providence hath laid ſubterraneous Tres


of the Earth wil! be the laſt conſum d. But it


64 The Theory of the EARTH. 7
by the Diſpoſition of Providence, be more ui 1 |
verſal throughout the Earth; and have if


ſame Effects every where, that we ſee by I 3
perience they have had in certain Places : Ali 9


by this Means, we may conceive it as feaſi 8


to ſet the whole Earth on Fire in ſome lit
Space of Time, as to burn up this, or tu
Country after a great Drought. But 1 meal
this, with Exception till to the main Body off
the Sea; which will indeed receive a great
Diminution from theſe Cauſes, than we ealii
imagine; but the final Conſumption of it will
depend upon other Reaſons, whereof we mull
give an Account in the following Chapters.
As to the Mountains and Rocks, their lot
Heads will fink when the Earthquakes begin ti
roar, at the Beginning of the Conflagration;
we ſhall ſee hereafter. And as to the Earth itſeli
tis true there are ſeveral Sorts of Earth that ar
not proper Fuel for Fire; but thoſe Soils tha
arc not ſo immediately, as clayey Soils, and ſuc
like, may, by the Strength of Fire, be converted
into Brick, or Stone, or earthen Metal, and (0
melted down and vitrified. For, in Concluſion,
there is no terreſtrial Body that does not finally
yield to the Force of Fire, and may either be conver
ted into Flame, incorporated Fire, or into a Liquot
more ardent than either of them. Laſtly, As t0
the Polar Regions, which you think will be a ſaſe
Retreat and inacceſſible to the Fire; tis true,


ſures of Fire there unknown to us, thoſe Parts


5


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 65


to be obſervd, that the Cold of thoſe Regions
oceeds from the Length of their Winter, and
Wir Diſtance from the Sun when he is beyond
> Aquator ; and both theſe Cauſes will be re-
ivy at the Conflagration. For we ſuppoſe the
Wrth will then return to its primitive Situation,
ich we have cxplain'd in the ſecond Book of
Wis Theory, chap. iii. and will have the Sun always
its Æquator; whereby the ſeveral Climates of
Earth will have a perpetual Equinox, and thoſe
aer the Poles a perpetual Day: And therefore
me Exccſs of Cold, and all the Conſequences
it, will ſoon be abated. However, the Earth
l not be burnt in one Day, and thoſe Parts of the
th being uninhabited, there is no Inconveni-
ce that they ſhould be more flowly conſum'd
Wan the reſt,
W This is a general Anſwer to the Difficulty pro-
d about the Poſlibility of the Conflagration;
d being general only, the Parts of it muſt be
ore fully explain d and confirm'd in the Sequel
this Diſcourſe. We ſhould now proceed ditectly
the Cauſes of the Conflagration, and ſhew in
at manner they do this great Execution upon Na-
re: But to be juſt and impartial in this Enquiry,
oughtfirſt to ſeparate the ſpurious and pretended
auſes from thoſe that arc real and genuine ; to
ake no falſe Muſters, nor any ſhew of being ſtron-
t than e are; and if we can do our Work with leſs
dice, it will be more to our Credit; as a Victory is
ore honourable that is gain d with fewer Men.
There are two grand capital Cauſes which
me Authors make uſe of, as the chief An |
Book Ill, F in


66 The Theory of the EARTH.


in this Work, the Sum, and the Central F,
Theſe two great Incendiaries, they ſay, wil be let
looſe upon us at the Conflagration; the one dran.
ing nearer to the Earth, and the other -brcakiny
out of its Bowels into theſe upper Regions. The
are potent Cauſes indeed, more than enough vil
deſtroy this Earth, it it was a thouſand Tine
bigger than it is. But for that very Reaſon, 1M
ſuſpect they are not the true Cauſes; for God ani
Nature do not uſe to employ unneceſſary Mean
to bring about their Deſigns. Diſproportion and
Over-ſufhciency i is one ſort of falſc Meaſures, and
tis a Sign we do not thoroughly underſtand our
Work, when we put more Strength to it than
the Thing requires. Men are tor ward to call i
extraordinary Powers, to rid their Hands of:
troubleſome Argument, and ſo make a ſhor
Diſpatch to ſave themſelves the Pains of furthe
Enquiries ; but as ſuch Methods as theſe com-
monly have no Proof, ſo they give little Satis
faction to an Inquiſitive Mind. This Suppoſition d
burning the Earth, by the Sun drawing nearer and
nearer to it, ſeems to be made in Imitation of th
Story of Phaeton, who driving the Chariot of tit
Sun With an unſteady Hand, came ſo neat te
Earth, that he ſet it on Fire. But however, V
will not reject any Pretenſions without a ,
Trial: Let us examine therefore what Ground
they can have for either of theſe Suppoſitions, d
the Approximation of the Sun to the Earth, d
the Eruption of the Central Fire.
As to the Sun, I deſire firſt to be ſatisfied it
pteſent Matter of Fact: Whether by any 1

* 11 y ſtrumel


0
˖
0
6


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 67


ument or Obſervation it hath or can be diſco.
rd, that the Sun is nearer to the Earth now,
an he was in former Ages? Or, It by any Rea-
ning or comparing Calculations, ſuch a Con-
uſion can be made? If not, this is but an ima-
nary Cauſe, and as eaſily deny'd as proposd.
ſtronomers do very little agree in their Opini-
s about the Diſtance of the Sun: Prolemy,
lbategnius, Copernicus, Tycho, Kepler, and others
ore modern, differ all in their Calculations ;
t not in ſuch a Manner or Proportion, as
ould make us believe that the Sun comes nearer
the Earth, but rather goes further from it. For
e more modern of them make the Diſtance
ater than the more ancient do. Kepler ſays,
> Diſtance of the Sun from the Earth lies be-
ixt 700 and 2000 Semidiameters of the Earth:
it Ricciolus makes it betwixt 700 and 7000:
d Gottefred Wendelme hath taken 14656 Se-
diameters, for a middle Proportion of the
n's Diſtance ; to which Kepler himſelf came
y near in his later Years. So that you ſee
w groundleſs our Fears are from the Ap-
daches of an Enemy, that rather flies from us,
he change Poſtures at all. And we have more
alon to believe the Report of the modern
ronomers, than of the antient, in this Matter;
th becauſe the Nature of the Heavens and of
celeſtial Bodies is now better known, and alſo
cauſe they have found out better Inſtruments and
tter Methods to make their Obſervations.
if the Sun and Earth were come nearer to
e another, either the Circle of the Sun's di-
f | C


|


|
f


\


68 The Theory of the EARTH.


urnal Arch would be leſs, and ſo the P:
ſhorter ; or the Orbit of the Earth's anny
Courſe wonld be leſs, and fo the Year ſhorts
Neither of which we have any Experience d
And thoſe that ſuppoſe us in the Centre of th
World, need not be afraid till they fee Merc
and Venus in 3 Combuſtion, for they lie betwi
us and Danger; and the Sun cannot come
readily at us with his fiery Darts, as at them wh
ftand in his Way. Laſtly, this languiſhing Deat
by the gradual Approaches of the Sun, and th
ureparable Ruin of the Earth, which at laſt mu
follow from it, do neither of them agree wit
that Idea of the Conflagration, which the Seiz
ture hath given us; for it is to come ſuddenly a
unexpectedly, and take us off like a Violent Fey
nor as a lingring Conſumption. And the Ear
is alſo-to be deſtroyed by Fire, as not to ta
away all Hopes of a Reſurrection, or Renovatioi
For we are aſſur d by Scripture, that there will |
new Heavens and a new Earth after theſe a
burnt up. But if the Sun ſhould come ſo near!
as to make the Heavens paſs away with a. No
and melt the Elements with fervent Heat, 2
deſtroy the Form, and all the Works of the Earl
what Hopes or Poſlibility would there be of ak
novation, while the Sun continu'd in this Poſture
Hie would more and more conſume and prey up
the Carcaſs of the Earth, and convert it at leng
either into an Heap of Aſhes, or a Lump of vitrii
Meral.
So much for the Sun. As to the Cent!
Fire, I am. very well fatisfied it is no my
_


 Conrerning the CONFLAGRATION. 6g


ing: All Antiquity hath preſferv'd ſome ſa-
-d Monument of it: The Veſtal Fire of the
mans, which was fo religiouſly attended:
e Prytoneia of the Greeks were to the ſame
rpoſe, and dedicated to Veſta: And the Pyre-
ea of the Perſians, where Fire was kept con-
ually by the Magi. Theſe all, in my Opinion,
d the ſame Origin, and the ſame Signification.
d tho' I do not know any particular Obſerva-
n, that does directly prove or demonſtrate that
re is ſuch a Maſs of Fire in the middle of the
th; yet the beſt Accounts we have of the Gene-
jon of a Planet do ſuppoſe it; and tis agree-
le to the whole Oeconomy of Nature: As a
e in the Heart, which gives Life to her Motions
d Productions. But, however, the Queſtion is
t at preſent, about the Exiſtence of this Fire,
t the Eruption of it, and the Effect of that Erup-
n; which cannot be, in my Judgment, ſuch
onflagration as deſcrib'd in Scripture.

This ; — Fire muſt be enclosd in a Shell
great Strength and Firmneſs; for being of
lf the lighteſt, and moſt active of all Bodies,
would not be detained in that loweſt Priſon
thout a ſtrong Guard upon it. Tis true,
can make no certain Judgment of what
ckneſs this Shell is; but it we ſuppoſe this
e to have a twentieth Part of the Semidia-
ter of the Earth, on either ſide the Centre,
its Sphere, which ſeems to be a fair Allow-
ce; there would ſtill remain nincteen Parts
our Safeguard and Security: And theſe
leteen Parts of the Semidiameter of the


— —T——c__—___——w w_—_ — — n . "7


_ -
, 4 ——


3 Earth


5
1
fl,
'
L |
v
'
*
;
# N
.
ol
9
7
1
; f
5
+»
4
#4 o
*
10 5
1
1
-D
1
5
=
©
1
9
me
14G
L $5]
| Tk
' l
IL
7
: i l
ma
4 17h
ny
0
1
TE
3
x1 1
|
1
11
4
T 4
1 |
'H
"Y =
1
ö [|
Ty
: 7
(
: 1
1
1 3
*
*
—
5 13
4
.
By
5 i
=
=
MB 1
" i
. {i
31
19 F
.
* * 5
nn
5
—
* Wn 7
1
4 (+
1
1
=
=
:
: 4
: Ti
: :
1
9
1
1
1
ö


|
f
"=


4


-
—
—
1
—
— K
2 —— —'⸗


OT


Su__— — 2 — -
-


70 The Theory of the EARTH.


Earth will make 3268 Miles, for a Partitio |
Wall betwixt us and this Central Fire. WW
would be afraid of an Enemy lock'd up in |
ſtrong a Priſon? But you'll ſay, it may be, thi
the Central Fire, at the Beginning of the Worlili
might have no more Room or Space than why
is mention'd; yet being of that AQivity that!

is, and corroſive Nature, it may, in the Spaced
ſome thouſands of Years, have eaten deep int
the Sides of its Priſon ; and ſo come nearett
the Surface of the Earth by ſome hundreds a
thouſands of Miles, than it was at firſt. Thi
would be a material Exception, if it could h
made out. But what Phænomenon is there i
Nature that proves this? How does it appear h
an Obſervation, that the Central Fire gain
Ground upon us? Or is increaſed in Quantity
or come nearer to the Surface of the Earth?!
know nothing that can be offer'd in Proof ofthis
and if there be no Appearance of a Change, nd
any ſenſible Effect of it, tis an Argument there!
none, or none conſiderable. If the Quantity d
that Fire was conſiderably increasd, it muſt neec
beſides other Effects, have made the Body of tit
Earth conſiderably lighter. The Earth having, 0
this Converſion of its own Subſtance into Fil
loſt ſo much of its heavieſt Matter, and got |
much of the lighteſt and moſt active Element il
ſtead of it: and in both theſe reſpects, its Gravit
would be manifeſtly leſſen d. Which if it real
was in any conſiderable Degree, it would dilcc
ver it ſelf by ſome Change, either "as to. !
Motion of the Earth, or as to its Place or Stat
f ER i aan


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 71


hange obſervable, in this or any other reſpect,
reaſonable to preſume that there is no conſide-
ble inward Change, or no great Conſumption of
; inward'Parts and Subſtance ; and conſequently
d great Increaſe of the ccntral Fire.
But if we ſhould admit both an Increaſe and
uption of this Fire, it would not have that
ffect which is pretended, It might cauſe ſome
onfuſion and Diſorder in thoſe Parts of the
arth where i it broke out, but it would not make
univerſal Conflagration, ſach as is repreſented
us in Scripture. Let us ſuppoſe the Earth to
open, or burſt in any Place; under the Pole,
r Inſtance, or under the © /Z£gquator ; and Ict
gape as low as the Arbor Fire: At this
halm or Rupture we ſuppoſe the Fire would
ſh out; and what then would be the Conſe—
ence of this when it came to the Surface of
e Earth? It would either be diſſipated and loſt
the Air, or fly ſtill higher towards the Heavens
a Maſs of Flame. But what Execution in
e mean time would it do upon the Body of the
arth ? Tis but like a Flaſh of Lightning, or a
lame iſſuing out of a Pit, that dies preſently.
eſides, this Central Fire is of that Subtilty and
enuity, that it is not able to inflame groſs
dies : no more than thoſe Metcors we call
ambent Fires, inflame the Bodies to which
ey ſtick. Laſtly, in explaining the Manner
the Conflagration, we muſt have regard
incipally to Scripture; for the Explications
yen there are more to the purpole, than all


in the Heavens. But there being no external


F 4 WP


2 __ 2 4
© MGR „ . BT Oe ——— 1
— — WR”. "_ —
— =
- - — —
— — 499
- *


— SY x4 <a
——̃ —
2 - „


72 The Theory of the EARTH.


it loſe its former Poilc and Libration, and it vil


that the Philoſophers have ſaid upon that ul

ject. Now, as we noted before, tis manifeſt iſ 1
Scripture, that after the Conflagration, there ill E
be a Reſtauration, new Heavens, and a nl
Earth. 'Tis the expreſs Doctrine of St. Pe
beſides other Prophets: We muſt therefore (Ml
poſt the Earth reduc'd to ſuch a Chaos by this |:
Fire, as will lay the Foundation of a new Woti
2 Pet. iii. 12, 13. Which can never be, if tl:
inward Frame of it be broke, the Central Pu
exhauſted, and the exterior Region ſuck d int
thoſe central Vacuitics. This muſt needs mu


thereupon be thrown into ſome other Part of th
Univerſe, as the uſeleſs Shell of a broken Granado
or as a dead Carcaſs, and unprofitable Matter.
Theſe Reaſons may be ſufficient why w
ſhould not depend upon thoſe pretended Cauki
of the Conflagration, the Sun's Advance towatd
the Earth, or ſuch a Rupture of the Earth as wil
Jet out the Central Fire. Theſe Cauſes, I hops
will appear ſuperfluous, when we ſhall have give
an Account of the Conflagration without them,
But young Philoſophers, like young Soldie
think they are never ſufficiently armed; and of
ten take more Weapons, than they can make uk
of, when they come to fight. Not that we alto
gether reject the Influence of the Sun, or of thi
Central Fire; eſpecially the latter: For in thil
great Eſtuation of Nature, the Body of tht
Earth will be much open'd and relaxated ; anc
when the Pores are enlarg'd, the Steams of thi
Fire will ſweat out more plentifully into all f
\ Parts


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 73


darts; but ſtill without any Rupture in the Veſſels,
r in the Skin. And whereas theſe Authors ſup-
noſe the very Veins to burſt, and the vital Blood
o guſh out, as at open Flood-Gates, we only al-
ow a more copious Perſpiration, and think that
ſufficient for all Purpoſes in this Caſe.


CESYIEBY BH BY At ee


CHAP. VII.


The true Bounds of the laſt Fire, and how far
it 1s fatal. The natural Canſes and Mate-
rials of it, caſt into three Ranks: Firſt,
Such as are exterior and viſible upon the Earth ;
where the Vulcano's of the Earth, and their
Effetts, are conſider d. Secondly, Such Mate-
rials as are within the Earth. Thirdly, Such
as are in the Air.


S we have, in the preceding Chapter,

laid aſide thoſe Cauſes of the Confla-
gration which we thought too great and cum-
berſome ; ſo now we muſt, in like manner,
examine the Effect, and reduce that to its juſt
Meaſures and Proportions, that there may be
nothing left ſuperfluous on either ſide; then, by
comparing the real Powers with the Work they
are to do, both being ſtated within their due
Bounds, we may the better judge how they are
proportion'd to one another.

We noted before, that the Conflagration had
nothing to do with the Stars, and ſuperior
Heavens, but was wholly confin d to this ſub-
f lunary


— — —— 7 — — —
— nom — ih —— ——-— A" — —


74 The Theory of the EARTH. EY
lunary World. And this Deluge of Fire wi
have much what the ſame Bounds, that the D-
luge of Water had formerly. This is according YH
to St. Peters Doctrine, for he makes the ſam
Parts of the Univerſe to be the Subject of both:
8 the inferior Heavens and the Earth, 2 Pet,
iii. 5, 6. The Heavens and the Earth. which Wi
were then, periſh'd in a Deluge of Mater: ver. 3.
But the Heavens and the Earth that are nou,
are reſerud to Fire. The preſent Heavens and
Earth are ſubſtituted in the Place of thoſe that
periſh'd at the Deluge, and theſe are to be over.
run and deſtroy d by Fire, as thoſe were by Water,
So that the Apoſtle takes the ſame Regions, and
the ſame Space and Compaſs for the one, as for the
other, and makes their Fate different according to
their different Conſtitution, and the different Or.
der of Providence. This is the Senſe St. Auſtin
gives us of the Apoſtles Words, and thee are the
Bounds he ſets to the laſt Fire; whereof. a mo-
dern Commentator is ſo well aſſur'd, that he ſays
Eſtius in loc. They neither underſtand Divinity,
nor Philoſophy, that would make the Conflagratim
reach above the elementary Heavens.
Let theſe be then its Limits upwards, the
Clonds, Air, and Atmoſphere of the Earth,
But the Queſtion ſeems more doubtful, How ſar
it will extend downwards, into the Bowels of thc
Earth ? 1 anſwer ſtill, to the ſame Depth that the
Waters of the Deluge reach'd : To the lowel
Abyſſes, and the deepeſt Caverns within the Ground.
And ſeeing no Caverns are deeper or lower, at
leaſt according to our Theory, than the on
a | 0


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 75


ft the great Ocean, to that Depth, I ſuppoſe, the
WR age of this Fire will penetrate, and deyour all be-
Worc it. And therefore we muſt not imagine, that
Wonly the outward Turf and habitable Surface of
ne Earth will be put into a Flame and laid waſte :
the whole exterior Region of the Earth, to the
WDcpth of the deepeſt Part of the Sea, will ſuffer
Win this Fire; and ſuffer to that Degrce, as to be


we are not to conceive that the Earth will be
only ſcorcht or charkt in the laſt Fire, there will
be a Sort of Liquefaction and Diſſolution 3 Rev.


a molten Sea mingled with Fire, according to the
Expreſſion of Scriptute. And this Diſſolution may
eels be ſuppos d to reach as low as the Earth
hath any Hollowneſſcs, . Or Can give vent to Smoak
and Flame.

Wherefore, taking theſe for the Bounds and
Limits of the laſt great Fire, the next Thing
to be enquired into, are the Natural Cauſes of
it: How this ſtrange Fate will ſeize upon the
ſublunary World, and with an irreſiſtible Fury
ſubdue all Things to it ſelf. But when I
lay Natural Cauſes, I would not be ſo under-
ſtood, as if I thought the Conflagration was a
pure Natural Fatatir as the Stoicks ſeem to


deed are Natural, but the Adminiſtration of
them is from an higher Hand. Fire is the
Inſtrument, or the executive Power, and hath
no more Force given it than what it hath


Furally ; but the Concurrence of theſe Cau-


les,


melted down, and the Frame of it diſſolv-d. For


xv. 2. 2 Pet. iii. 10. Pſal. xcvii. 5. it will become


do. No, 'tis a mix Fatality ; y; the Cauſes in-


|

[

,

j
N

1

5

4


By A LR
— mY.
mY —


76 The Theory of the EAx ru. N
ſes, or of theſe fiery Powers, at ſuch a Time,.
and in ſuch a Manner, and the Conduct of them
to carry on and complete the whole Work i
without Ceſſation or Interruption, that I look
upon as more than what material Nature could
effect of itſelf, or than could, be brought to
paſs by ſuch a Government of Matter, as is the
bare Reſult of its own Laws and Determinations,
When a Ship (ails gently before the Wind, the
Mariners may ſtand idle; but to guide her in a


: LY 1 *
2 2 K . — TAE es 3 2 1
* * * a oh 2 A f we - 4 4 % * «
\ «IN TIES
2 — 2 '


Let us not, therefore, be too poſitive or preſump-
tuous in our Conjectures about theſe Things; for
it there be an inviſible Hand, Divine or Angelica],
that touches the Springs and Wheels ; it will not
be eaſy for us to determine, with Certainty, the
Order of their Motions. However, 'tis our
Duty to ſearch into the Ways and Works of
God, as far as we can: And we may, without
Offence, look into the Magazines of Nature; ſee
what Proviſions are made, and what Preparations
for this great Day; and in what Method tis mol!
likely the Deſign will be executed.

But before we proceed to mark out Material
for this Fire, give me leave to obſerve one Con-
dition or Property in the Form of this preſent
Earth, that makes it capable of Inflammation.
'Tis the Manner of its Conſtruction, in an hol-
; low


Storm, all Hands muſt be at Work. There ate 6
Rules and Meaſures to be obſervd, even in theſe
Tumults and Deſolations of Nature, in deſtroy ing
a World, as well as in making one, and, therefore, Wh
in both it is reaſonable to ſuppoſe a more than
ordinary Providence to ſuperintend the Work.


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 77


Wow cavernous Form: By reaſon whereof, contain-
Ing much Air in its Cavitics, and having many
Inlets and Outlets, tis in moſt Places capable of
Nentilation, pervious and paſſable to the Winds,
End conſequently to the Fire. Thoſe that have read
Ine former Part of this Theory, Book 1. ch. 6, 7.
now how the Earth came into this hollow and bro-
Nen Form; from what Cauſes and at what Time;
3 Irre at the univerſal Deluge; when there was
a Diſruption of the exterior Earth that fell into

3 Abyſs, and ſo, for a Time was overflow d
vith Water. Theſe Ruins, recover'd from the

WV acct, we inhabit, and theſe Ruins, only will
1 be burnt up; for being not only unequal in their
! Surface, but alſo hollow, looſe, and incompact
within, as Ruins uſe to be, they are made thereby
capable of a ſecond Fate, by Inflammation. Thereby,
ay, they are made combuſtible ; for if the exte-
rior Regions of this Earth were as cloſe and com-
pact in all their Parts, as we have Reaſon to believe
the interior Regions of it to be, the Fire could have
little Power over it, nor ever reduce it to ſuch a
State as is requir d in a compleat Conflagration,
ſuch as ours is to be.

This being admitted, that the exterior Re-
gion of the Earth ſtands hollow, as a well ſet
Fire, to receive Air freely into its Parts, and
hath Iſſues for Smoke and Flame : It remains
to enquire, what Fuel or Materials Nature
hath fitred to kindle this Pile, and to continue
it on Fire till it be conſum'd 3 or, in plain
Words, what are the natural Cauſes and Pre-
paratrues for a Conflagration. The firſt _

mo


\


78 The Theory of the EARTH. 7
moſt obvious Preparations that we ſec in Natute
for this Effect, are the burning Mountains, or Vol.
cano's of the Earth. Theſe are leſſer Eſſays of
Preludes to the general Fire: ſet on purpoſe by
Providence to keep us awake, and to mind us con.
tinually, and forewarn us of what we are to expet i
at laſt, The Earth, you ſee, is already kindled, bloy
but the Coal, and propagate the Fire, and the
Work will go on, I/ a. xxx. 3 3. Tophet is prepare
of old; and when the Day of Doom is come, and
the Date of the World expird, the Breath of the
Tord ſhall make it burn.

But beſides theſe burning Mountains, there are
Lakes of Pitch and Brimſtone, and oily Liquors
diſpers'd in ſeveral Parts of the Earth. Theſe are
to enrage the Fire as it goes, and to fortify it againſt
any Reſiſtance or Oppoſition. Then all the vege-
table Productions upon the Surface of the Earth, as
Trees, Shrubs, Graſs, Corn, and ſuch like; every
thing that grows out of the Ground, is Fewel for
the Fire ; and tho' they are now accommodated
to our Uſe and Service, they will then turn all
againſt us; and with a mighty Blaze, and rapid
Courſe, make a Devaſtation of the outward Fut-
niture of the Earth, whether natural or artificial.
But theſe Things deſerve ſome further Conſiders
tion, eſpecially that ſtrange Phænomenon of the
Volcans's or burning Mountains, which we wil
now conſider more particularly. =
There is nothing certainly. more terrible in all
Nature than fiery Mountains to thoſe that live
within the View or Noiſe of them; but it is not
eaſy for us, who never ſee them, nor heard them,
7 to


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 79


repreſent them to ourſelves with ſuch juſt and

bely Imaginations as ſhall excite in us the ſame

aſſions, and the ſame Horror as they would ex-

ite, if preſent to our Senles. The Time of their

ruption, and of their Raging, is, of all others,

e moſt dreadful ; but, many times, before their

ruption, the Symptoms of an approaching Fit
every frightful to the People. The Mountain

Negins to roar and bellow in its holllow Caverns;
Wrics out, as it were, in Pain to be deliverd of
me Burthen too heavy to be born, and too
ig to be eaſily diſcharged, The Earth ſhakes and
rembles, in Apprchenſt on of the Pangs and Con-
Wulſions that are coming upon her; and the Sun
ten hides his Head, or appcars with a diſcolour'd
ace, pale, or dusky, or bloody, as if all Nature
yas to ſuffer in this Agony. After theſe Fore-
unners or Symptoms of an Eruption, the wide
avs of the Mountain open: And firſt, Clouds of
Smoke iflife out, then Flames of Fire, and after

hat'a Mixture of all Sorts of burning Matter ;
ed hot Stones, Lumps of Metal, half. diſſolvd
inerals, with Coals and fiery Aſhes. Theſe fall
n thick Showers round about the Mountain, and
n all adjacent Parts; and nor only ſo, but are
arried, partly by the Force of the Expulſion, and
partly by the Winds when they are aloft in the
\ir, into far diſtant Countries. As from Italy to
onſtanl ino = 82 and croſs the Mediterranean Sca
into Africk; as the beſt Hiſtorians, Procopius,


Immianus  Marcelimus, and Dion Caſſi ius, have
Pe. l


4 Thele


80 The Theory of the EAR TR.


Theſe Vulcano's are planted in ſeveral Region i
of the Earth, and in both Continents, this of ow 3
and the other of America. For by Report off 3
thoſe that have view'd that new- found Wos 1
there are many Mountains in it that belch o
Smoke and Fire; ſome conſtantly, and others H
Fits, and Intervals. In our Continent, Providence
hath variouſly diſpersd them, without any Ru
known to us; but they are generally in Iſlands, «iii
ncar the Sea. In the A/zatick Oriental Iflands thy
are in great Abundance, and Hiſtorians tell us off
a Mountain in the Ifland Java, that in the Yeu
1586, at one Eruption, killd ten thouſand Peopk
in the neighbouring Cities and Country: Bu
we do not know ſo well the Hiſtory of thok
remote Vulcano's, as of ſuch as are in Eur
and nearer Home. In Iſeland, tho it lie within
the polar Circle, and is ſcarce habitable by realo
of the Extremity of Cold, and abundance of It
and Snow, yet there are three burning Moun
tains in that Iſland; whereof the chief and mol
remarkable is Hecla. This hath its Head alwajs
cover d with Snow, and its Belly always filld witl
Fire; and theſe are both ſo ſtrong in their kind,
and cqually powerful, that they cannot deſiroj
one another. It is ſaid to caſt out, when it rages
beſides Earth, Stones, and Aſhes, a Sort of fla
ming Water; as if all Contrarieties were to meet
in this Mountain, to make it the more periet
Reſemblance of Hell, as the credulous Inhabitants
fancy it to be.

But there are no Vulcano's, in my Opinion


that deſerve our Obſervation ſo much, as wo
that


Fo


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 81


t are in and about the Mediterranean Sea ;
ere is a Knot of them, called the Fulcanian
Lide, from their fiery Eruptions, as if they
Fre the Forges of Vulcan; as Strombolo, Lapa-
and others, which are not ſo remarkable now,
they have been formerly. However, without
pute, there are none in the Chriſtian World to
compared with Atna and Yeſuvius; one
che Iſland of Sicily, and the other in Campa-
„ overlooking the Port and City of Naples.
Wicle two, from all Memory of Man, and the
oſt antient Records of Hiſtory, have been fam'd
their Treaſures of ſubtcrrancous Fires, which
> not yet exhauſted, nor diminifh'd, ſo far as
is perceivable; for they rage ſtill, upon Occa-
n, with as much Fierceneſs and Violence, as
yy ever did in former Ages; as if they had a
Intinual Supply to anſwer their Expences, and
re to ſtand till the laſt Fire, as a Type and Pre-
uration of it, throughout all Generations.
Let us therefore take theſe two Volcano's as
Pattern for the reſt ; ſeeing they are well
own, and ſtand in the Heart of the Chriſti-
World, where, 'tis likely, the laſt Fire will
ake its firſt Aſſault. e_/Erna, of the two, is
ore ſpoken of by the Antients, both Poets and
ſtorians; and we ſhould ſcarce give Credit
their Relations concerning it, if ſome later
uptions did not equal, or exceed the Fame of
| that have been reported from former Ages:
hat it heated the Waters of the Sea, and co-
rd them over with Aſhes; crack'd, or diſ-
I'd the neighbouring Rocks; darken'd the

NE * Sun


8


82 The Theory of the EARTI. 'S
Sun and the Air; and caſt out, not only mig
Streams of Flame, but a Flood of melted Ori
and other Materials: Theſe Things we can noi
believe, having had Experience of greater, or ai
Account of them from ſuch as have been HH
Witneſles of theſe Fires, or of the freſh Ruins a
ſad Effects of them. 1

There are two Things eſpecially, in theſe Ey
tions of Atna, that are moſt prodigious in then
ſelves, and moſt remarkable for our Purpokl
The Rivers of fiery Matter that break out of i
Bowels, or are ſpew'd out of its Mouth; and tin
vaſt burning Stones which it flings into the Au
at a ſtrange Height and Diſtance. As to they
ficry Rivers, or Torrents, and the Matter when
of they are compounded, we have a full Accout
of them by Alphonſus Borellus, a learned Mt
thematician at Za; who, after the laſt great
Eruption in the Year 1669, went into OJ:
while the Fact was freſh, to view and ſur
what c/#7na had done or ſuffer'd ; and he ſay
the Quantity of Matter thrown out of the Mou
tain at that Time, upon Survey, amounted u
ninety three Millions, eight Hundred thin
eight Thouſand, ſeven Hundred and fifty cubici
Paces. So that if it had been extended i
Length upon the Surface of the Earth,
would reach further than ninety three Million
of Paces; which is more than four times the Ci
Cuit of the whole Earth, taking a thouſand Pact
toa Mile. This is ſtrange to our Imagination
and almoſt incredible, that one Mountain ſnoul
throw out ſo much fiery Matter, beſides all the


T >


Concerning the CONFLAGR ATION: 83


Wiſhes that were diſperſt through the Air, far and
ar, and could be brought to no Account.
'Tis true, all this Matter was not actually in-
am'd or liquid Fire; but the reſt, that was
and, Stone, and Gravel, might have run into
lass, or ſome melted Liquor like to it, if it had
Pt been thrown out before the Heat fully reach'd
However, ſixty Million Paces of this Matter,
the ſame Author computes, were liquid Fire,
came out of the Mouth of the Pit in that Form;
Wis made a River of Fire, ſometimes two Miles
Woad, according to his Computation; but, accord-
g to the Obſervation of others who alſo viewed
the Torrent of Fire was ſix or ſeven Miles broad,
d ſometimes ten or fifteen Fathoms deep; and
cd its Way into the Sea near a Mile, preſerving
ſelf alive in the midſt of the Waters.
This is beyond all the infernal Lakes arid
ivers Acheron, Phlegeton, Cocytus ; all that
e Poets have talk'd of: Their greateſt Fictions
bout Hell have not come up to the Reality of
ne of our burning Mountains upon Earth.
agine then, all our FVolcand's raging at once
this manner —— But I will not purſue that
uppolition yet: Give me leave only to add
gere, what I mentioned in the ſecond Place,
he vaſt Burning Stones which this Mountain,
n the time of its Rage and Æſtuation, threw
nto the Air with an incredible Force. This
ame Author tells us of a Stone fifteen Foot
ong, that was ſlung out of the Mouth of the
bit, to a Mile's Diſtance; and when it fell, it
ame from ſuch an Height, and with ſuch a


G 2 Vuoolence,


84 The Theory of the EARTH.


Violence, that it buried it ſelf in the Grounifilſ
eight Foot deep. What Trifles are our Mona
Pieces and Bombs, when compared with thei
Engines of Nature? When ſhe flings, out of ti
wide Throat of a Volcano, a broken Rock, a
twirls it in the Air like a little Bullet; then ly
it fall, to do Execution here below, as Providenclf
ſhall point and direct it! It would be hard to civil
an Account, how ſo great an Impulſe can be g
to a Body ſo ponderous: But there's no difputiv
againſt Matter of Fact; and as the Thoughts d
God arc not like our Thoughts, ſo neither are ll
Works like our Works. |
Thus much for AMtna. Let us now give al
Inſtance in Veſuvius, another burning Mountai
upon the Coaſt of the Mediterranean, which hath
as frequent Eruptions, and ſome as terrible as tho
of c_ Etna. Lib. 66. Dion. Caſſius (one of th
beſt Writers of the Roman Hiſtory) hath given
an Account of one that happened in the Time d
Titus Veſpaſian ; and tho he hath not ſet dow
Particulars, as the former Author did, of the Quat
tity of fiery Matter thrown out at that Time: 30
ſuppoſing that proportionable to its Fiercenel
in other Reſpects, this ſeems to me as dread
an Eruption as any we read of; and was accom
panied with ſuch Prodigits and Commotions il
the Heavens and the Earth, as made it loc
like the Beginning of the laſt Conflagratio!
As a Prelude to this Tragedy, he ſays, then
were ſtrange Sights in the Air, and after thi
followed an extraordinary Drought : Then #!
Earth begun to tremble and quale; 15 th
| 2


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 85


WW ncu/ſions were ſo great, that the Ground
id to riſe and boil up in ſome Places, and in
Vers the Tops of the Mountains ſunk in, or
mbled down : At the ſame Time were great
Woiſes and Sounds heard ; ſome were ſubterra-
ous, like Thunder within the Earth; others
ove Ground, like Groans or Bellowings. The
„ roared, the Heavens ratled with a fearful
%, and then came a ſudden and mighty Crack,
8 if the Frame of Nature had broke, or all the
untains of the Earth had fallen down at once.
length Veſuvius burſt, and threw out of its
omb, firſt, huge Stones, then a vaſt Quantity of
re and Smoke, ſo as the Air was all darkned,
d the Sun was hid, as if he had been under a
Wat Eclipſe. The Day was turn d into Night,
d Light into Darkneſs ; and the frighted People
ght the Giants were making War againſt Hea-
u, and fanſied they ſaw the Shapes and Images
Giants in the Smoke, and heard the Sound of
ir Trumpets : Others thought, the World was
urning to its firſt Chaos, or going to be all con-
ed with Fire. In this general Confuſion and Con-
rnation, they knew not where to be ſafe; ſomerun
of the Fields into the Houſes, others out of the
puſes into the Fields; thoſe that were at Sea
ened to Land, and thoſe that were at Land
deavoured to get to Sea; ſtill thinking every
ace ſafer than that where they were. Beſides
er Lumps of Matter, there was thrown out
the Mountain ſuch a prodigious Quantity of
"es, as coverd the Land and Sea, and filled
Air, ſo as beſides other Damages, the Birds,
| | „ 3 B eaſt S >


36 The Theory of the EARTH.


Beaſts and Fiſhes, with Men, Women, and Ci 3
dren were deſtroy d, within ſuch a Compaſs ; ax
two entire Cities, Herculanium and Pome 3
were overwhelmd with a Shower of Aſhes, a
People were ſitting in the Theatre. Nay, ti
A ſhes were carried, by the Winds, over the Mei
terrancan into Africk, and into Ægypt and Sy
And at Rome they choak'd the Air on à ſud n
fo as to hide the Face of the Sun; Whereupon i
People not knowing the Cauſe, as not having ili
got the News from Campania, of the Eruption;
Veſuvius, could not imagine what the Re
ſhould be ; but thought the Heavens and the Ea
Were coming together, the Sun coming down, (
the Earth going to take its Place above. Th
far the Hiſtorian.
Lou ſec what Diſorders in Nature, and vl
an Alarum, the Eruption of one fiery Mou
tain is capable to make. Theſe Things,
doubt, would have made ſtrong Impreſlio
upon us, if we had been Eye-Witneſles (
them; but I know, Repreſentations made fr
dead Hiſtory, and at a. Diſtance, though i
Teſtimony be never ſo credible, have a mu
leſs Effect upon us, than what we ſee ourleli
and what our Senſes immediately inform us!
I have only given you an Account of two
cano's, and of a ſingle Eruption in either |
them : Theſe Mountains are not very fat d
tant from one another; let us ſuppoſe two fu
Eruptions, as I have mentioned, to happen
the ſame Time, and both theſe Mountains


be raging at once in this Manner; by 1


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 87


ce you have ſeen in each of them ſingly, you
ill eaſily imagine what Terror and Deſolation
Ney would carry round about, by a Conjunc-
Wn of their Fury, and all their Effects, in the
Wir, and on the Earth. Then, if to theſe two you
ould join two more, the Sphere of their Activity
Would ſtill be enlarged, and the Scenes become
zore dreadful, But to compleat the Suppoſition,
Wt us imagine all the Volcano's of the whole
Warth to be prepar'd, and {ct to a certain Time;
hich Time being come, and a Signal given by
rovidence, all theſe Mines begin to play at once;
mean, all theſe fiery Mountains burſt out, and
iſcharge themſelves in Flames of Fire, tear up the
oots of the Earth, throw hot burning Stones,
nd out Streams of flowing Metals and Minerals,
Wd all other Sorts of ardent Matter, which

ature hath lodg'd in thoſe Treaſuries : If all

eſe Engines, I ſay, were to play at once, the

eavens and the Earth would ſeem to be in a

lame, and the World in an univerſal Combuſ-

jon. But we may reaſonably preſume, that

gainſt that great Day of Vengeance and Exe-
ution, not only all theſe will be employ'd, but
lo new Volcano's will be opened, and new
ountains in eyery Region will break out into
dmoke and Flame; juſt as at the Deluge, the
\byſs broke out from the Womb of the Earth,
Ind from thoſe hidden Stores ſent an immenſe
Quantity of Water, which, it may be the Inha-
ditants of that World never thought of be-
ore : So we muſt expect new Eruptions, and
uo new ſulphureons Lakes, and Fountains of
G 4 Oyl,


88 The Theory of the EAR TAU.


Oyl, to boyl out of the Ground: and theſe, 2 1 0
united with that Fewel that naturally grows upon
the Surface of the Earth, will be ſufficient to giv
the firſt Onſet, and to lay waſte all the habitablM
World, and the Furniture of it. I
But we ſuppoſe the Conflagration will go love
pierce under Ground, and diſſolve the SubſtancM
of the Earth to ſome conſiderable Depth : Ther
fore, beſides theſe outward and viſible Preparations
we muſt conſider all the hidden inviſible Mae
rials within the Veins of the Earth; Such arc al
Minerals, or mineral Juices and Concretions tha
arc igniterous, or capable of Inflammation; a
theſe cannot caſily be reckoned up, or eſtimarciſ
ſome of the moſt common are Sulphur, and a
ſulphurcous Bodies, and Earths impregnated wil
Sulphur, Bitumen, and bituminous Concretion;
inflammable Salts, Coal and other Foſſils that at
ardent ; with innumerable Mixtures and Compo
ſitions of theſe Kinds, which, being open'd will
Heat, are unctuous and inflammable, or by At
tion diſcover the latent Seeds of Fire. But belidt
conſiſtent Bodies, there is alſo much volatile Fit
within the Earth, in Fumes, Steams,and Exudatioulf
which will all contribute to this Effect. From thel
Stores under Ground, all Plants and Vegetables
fed and ſupplicd, as to their oily and ſulphureoi
Parts, and all hot Waters in Baths or Fountain
mult have their Original from ſome of theſe, ſons
Mixture or Participation of them; and as to tlt
. Britiſh Soil, there is ſo much Coal incorporatd
wich it, that when the Earth ſhall burns we ha


+ |  Realdl


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 39


W-2ſ0n to apprehend no ſmall Danger from that
Wbtcrrancous Enemy.
T Theſe Diſpoſitions, and this Fewel we find, in
d upon the Earth, towards the laſt Fire. The
ird Sort of Proviſion is in the Air; all fiery
Wctcors and Exhalations cngender'd and form'd in
Woſc Regions above, and diſcharg d upon the Earth
ſeveral Ways. I believe there were no fiery Me-
Fors in the antedeluvian Heavens; which there-
Pre Saint Peter ſays, were conſtituted of Water,


Wc ſays ihe Heavens that are nom, have Trea-
Irres of Fire, or arc reſervd for Fire, as Things
id up in a Store-Houſe for that Purpoſe. We


Ind there is nothing more vehement, impetuous,
Ind irreſiſtible, where their Force is directed. It
ems to me very remarkable, that the Holy
he Deſtruction of the Wicked, in the Nature
fa Tempeſt, or a Storm of Fire, Pſalm xi. 6.
hon the Wicked the Lord ſhall ram Coals,
Fire and Brimſtone, and a burning Tempeſt ;
is ſhall be the Portion of their Cup. And in
he lofry Song of David, Pal. xviii. (which,
n my judgment, reſpects both the paſt Deluge
and the future Conflagration) tis ſaid, Yer. 13,
14, 15. The Lord alſo thundered in the Heavens,


and the Higheſt gave his Voice, Hail. ſtones


and Coals of Fire. Tea, he ſent forth his Ar-
rows and ſcattered them, and he ſhot out Light-
nmgs and diſcomfited them. Then the Channels
of Waters were ſecn, and the Foundations of
"TP Ns 7 e


ad nothing in them but what was watery ; but


Wave Thunder and Lightning, and fiery Tempeſts,


f
]
|


i
|
|
|
{
1
|


*


90 The Theory of the EARTH.


the World were diſcoverd ; at thy Rebuke, (i
| Lord, at the Blaſt of the Breath of thy Noſtrit|f
Pſalm, as alſo by Iſaiah, Iſa. Ixvi. 15. Dan
Dan. vii. 9, 10. and St. Paul, 2 Theſſ. i. 1M
And laſtly, in the Apocalypſe, when the Word
draws to a Concluſion, as in the ſeventh Trump
(Chap. xi. 19.) and the ſeventh Vial (Chap. xvi. 131M
we have ſtill mention made of this fiery Tempeſt iſh
Lightnings and 'Thunderings. i
We may therefore reaſonably ſuppoſe, that, b
fore the Conflagration, the Air will be ſur charge
every where (by a precedent Drought) with half
and fiery Exhalations : And as againſt the Deli
thoſe Regions were burthen'd with Water and mo
Vapours, which were pour'd upon the Earth, nc
in gentle Showers, but like Rivers and Catarad
from Heaven ; ſo they will now be filled wit
hot Fumes and ſulphurcous Clouds, which wil
fometimes flow in Streams and fiery Impreſſion
through the Air, ſometimes make Thunder and
Lightnings, and ſometimes fall down upon th
Earth in Floods of Fire. In general, there is!
great Analogy to be obſerved betwixt the two
Deluges of Water and of Fire, not only as to tit
Bounds of them, which were noted before; bit
as to the general Cauſes and Sources upon whid
they depend, from above and ffom below. At
the Flood, the Windows of Heaven were open
above, and the Abyſs was open'd below ; and tix
Waters of theſe two join'd together to overfiov
the World : In like manner, at the Conflagration,
God will rain down Fire from Heayen, as he did
| ON


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 91


ce upon Sodom; and at the ſame time the ſub-
W.::ncous Store-houſes of Fire will be broken
Pen; which anſwers to the Diſruption of the
Joys: And theſe two meeting and mingling
Socther, will involve all the Heaven and Earth
Flames.
W This is a ſhort Account of the ordinary Stores
f Nature, and the ordinary Preparations for a
Weneral Fire; and, in Contemplation of theſe,
ny the Naturaliſt ſaid boldly, It was one of
e greateſt Wonders of the World, that the World
s not every Day ſet on Fire. We will conclude
is Chapter with his Words, in the ſecond Book
ft his Natural Hiſt. ch. 106, 107. Having given
n Account of ſome fiery Mountains and other
Parts of the Earth that are the Scats and Sources
ff Fire, he makes this Reflection: Seeing this
Element is ſo fruitful, that it brings forth it ſelf,
pd multiplies and encreaſes from the leaſt Sparks ;
vhat art we to expet? from ſo many Fires already
undled on the Earth? How does Nature feed and
atisfy ſo devottring an Element, and ſuch a great
Voracity throughout all the World, without Loſs or
Diminut ion of herſelf ? Add to theſe Fires we have
mentioned, the Stars and the great Sun ; then all
the Fires made for human Uſes ; Fire in Stones, in
Wood, in the Clouds, and in Thunder; IT E X-
CEEDS ALL MIRACLES, IN MT
OPINION, THAT ONE DAY SHOULD
PASS WITHOUT SETTING THE
WORLD ALL ON FIRE.


—


92 The Theory of the EARTH.


44.4.5. 0.4...
CHAP. VII.


Some new Diſpoſitions towards the Conflagratin
as to the Matter, Form, and Situation of tf
Earth. Concerning miraculons Cauſes, au
how far the Miniſtry of Angels may be engagif
m this Work.


E have given an Account, in the precediny

Chapter, of the ordinary Preparations d
Nature for a general Fire; we now are to give an
Account of the extraordinary, or of any new Di:
poſitions, which, towards the End ofthe World, ma
be ſuper-added to the ordinary State of Nature. Ido
not, by theſe, mean Things openly miraculous and
ſupernatural ; but ſuch a Change wrought in Na.
ture, as ſhall ſtill have the Face of natural Cauſes
and yet have a greater Tendency to the Conflagrs
tion. As, for Example, ſuppoſe a great Drought,
as we noted before, to precede this Fate, or a ge-
neral Heat and Dryneſs of the Air, and of the
Earth; becauſe this happens ſometimes in a Courle
of Nature, it will not be look d upon as prodigi-
ous. Tis true, ſome of the Antients ſpeak ofa
Drought of forty Years, that will be a Fore-run-
ner of the Conflagration ; ſo that there will not
be a watery Cloud, nor Rainbow ſeen in the
Heavens, for ſo long a Time. And this they im-
pute to Elias, who at his Coming, will ws the
wa ain,


1 4 2 ; 4 . os
| FINS mo ” * * „„ AER F — San» . a >
n 2 N . "—_ T "os 7 Fe 7
2 s od | W 2 - 1 * 4 : 9 * 2 0


| Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 93
Win, and ſhut up the Heavens to make way


Wounded Suppoſitions; for half forty Years Drought
Wl bring an univerſal Sterility upon the Earth,
d thereupon an univerſal Famine, with innu-
erable Diſeaſes; ſo that all Mankind would be
ſtroyed, before the Conflagration could over-
ke them. fe |

W But we will readily admit an extraordinary
Wrought and Deſiccation of all Bodies to uſher
chis great Fatality. And therefore, whatſoever
e read in natural Hiſtory, concerning former


oughts, of their drying up Fountains and Ri-


r, parching the Earth, and making the out-
Ward Turf take Fire in ſeveral Places; filling the
ir with fiery Impreſſions, making the Woods


Wc by the Heat of the Sun, or a Flaſh of Light-
Wing: Theſe and what other Effects have come
W paſs in former Droughts, may come to pals
pain; and that in an higher Meaſure, and ſo as
be of more general Extent. And we muſt
ſo allow, that by this means, a great degree of
flammability, or Eaſineſs to be ſet on Fire, will
ſuper-· induc d, both into the Body of the Earth,
d of all Things that grow upon it. The
cat of the Sun will pierce deeper into its


d by Chinks and widencd Pores makes way
r their Paſlage to its very Heart. And, on
e other Hand, it is not improbable, but that
pon this general Relaxation, and Incaleſcency
the Body of the Earth, the Central Fire may
EE haye


the laſt Fire. But theſe are exceſſive and ill-


d Foreſts ready Fewel, and ſometimes to kin-


owels, when it gapes to receive his Beams,


„
— — * .— ——
. uot noe oc =D Ar ooo ons OS —— — ——— 4 „ß
— * —_—_ . = — . 28 — . £


have a freer Efflux, and diffuſe itſelf in great


greager degree of Heat acting upon all 1


94 The Theory of the EARTH.


"=
-o


4


abundance every Way; ſo as to affect even thet i


exterior Regions of the Earth, ſo far as vil
make them ſtill more catching, and more con
buſtible. "0
From this external and internal Heat aCtingwlif
on the Body of the Earth, all Minerals, that hav
the Seeds of Fire in them, will be open d, 2
exhale their Effluviums more copiouſly. As $i
ces, when warm'd are more odoriferous, and
the Air with their Perfumes ; fo the Particles d
Fire that are ſhut up in ſeveral Bodies, will cali
fly abroad, when, by a further degree of Relax
tion, you ſhake off their Chains, and, open th
Priſon Doors. We cannot doubt, but there at
many Sorts of Minerals, and many Sorts of Fir
ſtones, and of Trees and Vegetables of this!
ture, which will ſweat out their oily and ſulphur
ous Atoms, when by a general Heat and Dryne
their Parts are looſen'd and agitated.
We have no Experience that will reach |
far, as to give us a full Account what the Stat
of Nature will be at that Time; I mean, aft
this Drought, towards the End of the World;
but we may help our Imagination, by comp
ring it with other Seaſons and Temperamell
of thg Air. As therefore in the Spring the Eu
is fragrant, and the Fields and Gardens are fill
with the ſweet Breathings of Herbs and Flow@
eſpecially after a gentle Rain; when their bog
dies are ſoftened, and the Warmth of tn
Sun makes them evaporate more freely: S0


Bodo


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 95
lies of the Earth, like a ſtronger Fire in the


icles, more deeply incorporated, and more
Wicult to be diſintangled ; 1 mean oily Parts,
Wd ſuch undiſcoverd Parcels of Fire, as lie

d and impriſon'd in hard Bodies: Theſe, I


azwn Out into the Air, which will abound with
t and dry Exhalations, more than with Vapours
{ Moiſture in a wet Scaſon ; and by this Means,
Elements and elementary Bodies will ſtand
dy, and in a proximate Diſpoſition to be in-
_.

Thus much concerning the laſt Drought, and
general Effects of it. In the next Place, we
ſ conſider the Earthquakes that will precede


oted before, that the cavernous and broken
onſtruction of the preſent Earth, was that which
ade it obnoxious to be deſtroy d by Fire; as its
mer Conſtruction over the Abyſs, made it ob-
xious to be deſtroy'd with Water. This Hol-
neſs of the Earth is moſt ſenſible in moun-
nous and hilly Countries, which therefore I
dk upon as moſt ſubject to burning; but the
ain Countries may alſo be made hollow and
ly by Earthquakes, when the Vapours, not
ding an eaſy Vent, raiſe the Ground, and make a
Wy cible Eruption, as at the ſpringing of a Mine.
d tho plain Countries are not ſo ſubje to
Ithquakes as mountainous, becauſe they have
tf ſo many Cavities, and ſubterrancous Vaults,
lodge the Vapours in; yet every Region hath
more


-mbick, will extract another ſort of Parts or


agine, will be in a great meaſure ſet afloat, or


Conflagration, and the Conſequences of them.


- — 1 9 — — — *
m — I" - . * 2 3 r
- 2 ** — — — — —
, — . !ꝗ!! -
= — —


96 The Theory of the EARTH.


more or leſs of them: And after this Drought, 1
Vacuities of the Earth being every where cnlaryii
the Quantity of Exhalations much increas'd, A
the Motion of them more ſtrong and violent, ii
will have their Effects in many Places where .
never had any before. Yet I do not ſuppoſe m
this will raiſe new Ridges of Mountains, like wh
Alps, or Pyreneans, in thoſe Countries that ai
now plain, but that they will break and loo
the Ground, make greater Inequalities in the Sui
face, and greater Cavities within, than what ui
t preſent in thoſe Places: and by this men
the Fire will creep under them, and find a Þ;
ſage thorough them, with more Eaſe than |
they were compact, and every where continu
and unbroken.
But you will ſay, it may be, How doe!
appear that there will be more frequent Eart
quakes towards the End of the World ? If th
precedent Drought be admitted, tis plain thi
fiery Exhalation will abound every where witkil
the Earth, and will have a greater Agitatid
than ordinary; and theſe being the Caulk
of Earthquakes, when they are rarified and |
flamed, . tis reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that in ſud
a State of Nature, they will more frequent
happen, than at other Times. Beſides, Eatti
quakes are taken Notice of in Scripture, as digit
and Fore-runners of the laſt Day, as they ul
ally are of all great Changes and Calamitie
The Deſtruction of Feruſalem was a Type d
the Deſtruction of the World, and the E


cli always mention Earthquakes e
th


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 97


ominous Prodigies that were to attend it.
theſe Earthquakes we are ſpeaking of at
ſent are but the Beginnings of Sorrow, and
to be compard with thoſe that will fol-
afſterwards, when Nature is convuls'd in her
Agony, juſt as the Flames arc ſcizing on
Of which we ſhall hayc Occaſion to ſpeak
eafter.
WTheſe Changes will happen as to the Matter
Form of the Earth, before it is attack d by
laſt Fire: There will be alſo another Change
to the Situation of it; for that will be rectified,
the Earth reſtor'd to the Poſture it had at firſt,
Wncly, of a right Aſpect, and Converſion to the
But becauſe J cannot determine at what
e this Reſtitution will be, whether at the Be-
ning, Middle, or End of the Conflagration, I
not preſume to lay any Streſs upon it. Plato
ms to have imputed the Conflagration to this
ly; which is ſo far true, that the Revolution,
d the Great Tear, is this very Revolution, or
Return of the Earth, and the Heavens to their
| Poſture, But tho this may be contempo-
y with the laſt Fire, or ſome way concomi-
t; yet it does not follow that it is the Cauſe
it, much leſs the only Cauſe. It may be an
caſion of making the Fire reach more caſily
yards the Poles, when by this Change of Situ-
dn their long Nights, and long Winters ſhall be
en away,
The new Diſpoſitions in our Earth which we
dect before that great Day, may be look d
on as extraordinary, but not as miraculous,
becauſe


98 Te Theory of the EARTH.


becauſe they may proceed from natural Ca
But now in the laſt Place, we are to conſif
miraculous Cauſes : What Influence they ni
have, or what Part they may bear, in this n

Revolution of Nature. By miraculous Cauſe if

underſtand either God's immediate Omnipotene |.
or the Miniſtry of Angels; and what may be
form'd by the latter, is very improperly and un
cently thrown upon the former. Tis a g
Step to Omnipotency : and tis hard to dei
what Miracles on this ſide Creation, require
infinite Power. We are ture that the Ang
arc Miniſtring Spirits, and ten thouſand times
thouſand ſtand about the Throne of the Almit
ty, to reccive his Commands and execute!
Judgments. That perfect Knowledge they it
of the Powers of Nature, and of conducting tit
Powers to the beſt Advantage, by adjuſting U
{cs in a fit Subordination one to another, mil
them capable of performing, not only tlil
far above our Force, but even above our [mi
nation: Beſides, they have a radical inher
Power, bclonging to the Excellency of tit
Nature, of determining the Motions of !
ter, within a far greater Sphere than hut
Souls can pretend to. We can only comm
our Spirits, and determine their Motions vi
in the. Compaſs of our own Bodies; but ti
Activity and Empire is of far greater Extent, 1
the outward World is much more ſubjed
their Dominion than to ours. From theſe C
{iderations it is reaſonable to conclude, that!
generality of Miracles may be, and are periom


|


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 99


Angels; it being leſs decorous to employ a
-rcign Power, where a ſubaltern is ſufficient ;
when we haſtily caſt Things upon God, for
k Diſpatch, , we conſult our own Eaſc more
1 the Honour of our Makcr,

take it for granted here, that what is done by
angelical Hand, is truly providential, and of
inc Adminiſtration 3 and alſo juſtly bears the
aracter of a Miracle. Whatſoever may be done
Pure material Cauſes, or human Strength, we
ount natural ; and whatſoever is above theſe;
call ſupernatural and miraculous. Now what
pernatural and miraculous, is either the Effect
in angclical Power, or of a ſovereign and infi-
Power; and we ought not to contound theſe
d, no more than natural and (ſupernatural ; for
e is a greater Difference betwixt the higheſt
zelical Power and Omnipotency, than betwixt
human Power, and angelical. Therefore, as
firſt Rule concerning Miracles is this, that
muſt not fly to Miracles, where Man and Na-
e are ſufficient ; ſo the ſecond Rule is this,
t we mult not fly to a ſovereign infinite Power,
cre an angelical is ſufficient. And the Reaſon
both Rules is the ſame, namely, becaule it
ues a Defect of Wiſdom in all Oeconomics
employ more and greater Means than are ſuffi-
= |

Now to make Application of this to our pre-
It Purpoſe, I think it reaſonable, and alſo
Iicicat,,, to admit the Miniſtry of Angels in
future Conflagration of the World. If
ture will not lay violent Hands upon her
H 2 ſelf,


foo The Theory of the EAR TB.


felf, or is not ſufficient to work her own il
ſtruction, let us allow Deſtroying Angels if
intereſt themſelves in the Work, as the Ex
tioners of the Divine Juſtice and Vengeaif
upon a degenerate World. We have Exam
of this ſo frequently in ſacred Hiſtory, how ti
Angels have executed God's Judgments upon
Nation or a People, that it cannot ſeem new of
ſtrange, that in this laſt Judgment, which by!
the Prophets is repreſented as the Great Dy
the Lord, the Day of his Wrath, and of his Fur
the ſame Angels ſhould bear their Parts, and ca
clude the laſt Scene of that Tragedy which th
had acted in all along. We read of the Def
ing Angel in Ægypt, Gen. xii. 23. of Angels
preſided at the Deſtruction of Sodom, Gen. xix.1
which was a Type of the future Deſtruction oft
World, (Jude vii.) 2. Thefſ. i. 7, 8. and of Ang
that will accompany our Saviour when he com
in Flames of Fire; not, we ſuppoſe, to be Spa
tators only, but Actors and Superintendants ini
great Cataſtrophe.
This Miniſtry of Angels may be either
ordering and conducting ſuch natural Cal
as we have already given an Account of, ot!
adding new ones, if Occaſion be; I mean, i
creaſing the Quantity of Fire, or of ficry V
| terials, in and about the Earth; ſo as f
Element ſhall be more abundant and mo
predominant, and overbear all Oppoſition 55
either Water, or any other Body, can me
againſt it. It is not material whether of ti


two Suppoſitions we follow, provided we all
; | il


Concerning the CoxrLA RATIO NL. 1or


the Conflagration is a Work of Providence,
not a pure natural Fatality. If it be neceſſary
& there ſhould be an Augmentation made of
y Matter, 'tis not hard to conceive how that
be done, cither from the Heavens, or from
Earth, Iſa. xxx. 26. The Prophets ſometimes
ak of multiplying or ſtrengthcning the Light of
Sun, and it may as eaſily be conceiv'd of his
at as of his Light ; as if the Vial that was to be
rd upon it, Rev, xxvi. 8. and gave it a Poner to
ch Men with Fire, had ſomething of a natural
ſe as well as moral. But there is another Stream
ethereal Matter that flows from the Heavens,
recruits the Central Fire with continual Sup-
s; this may be encreas'd and ſtrengthened, and
Effeas convey'd throughout the whole Body
he Earth.
But if an Augmentation is to be made of
eſtrial Fire, or of ſuch terreſtrial Principles
contain it moſt, as Sulphur, Oyl, and ſuch
, I am apt to believe, theſe will encreaſe
heir own accord, upon a general Drought and
Iiccation of the Earth. For I am far from
Opinion. of ſome Chymiſts, that think theſe
nciples immutable, and incapable of Diminu-
or Augmentation. 1 willingly admit that
ſuch Particles may be broken and disfigur'd,
thereby loſe their proper and ſpecifick Vir-
and new ones may be generated to ſupply
Places of the former : Which Supplies, or
Productions being made in a leſs, or greater
aſure, according to the general Diſpoſitions
Nature ; When Nature is heightened into a
. Eind


0
ic
U


102 be Theory of the EARTH.


kind of Fever and Ebullition of all her Juicy
and Humours, as ſhe will be at that Time, yl
muſt expect, that more Parts than ordinary
ſhould be made inflammable, and thoſe that wi

inflam'd ſhould become more violent. Un
theſe Circumſtances, when all Cauſes lean thy
Way, alictle Help from a ſuperior Power will hay
a great Effect, and make a great Change in th
State of the World. And as to the Power of 4
gels, I am of Opinion, that it is very great as1
the Changes and Modifications of natural Bodig
that they can diſſolve a Marble as eaſily as we d
crumble Earth and Moulds, or fix any Liquor
a Moment, into a Subſtance as hard as Cryſi
That they can cither make Flames more yehemea
and irreſiſtible to all Sorts of Bodies; or
harmleſs as lambent Fires, and as ſoft as O71 V
ſee an Inſtance of this laſt, in Nebuchadnezu
ficry Furnace, Daniel iii. 28. where the thi
Children walk'd unconcern'd in the miqdſt of tl
Flames, under the Charge and Protection of 1
Angel: And the ſame Angel, if he had pleas
could have made the ſame Furnace ſeven tim
hottcr than the Wrath of the Tyrant had mil

b.

; We will therefore leave it to their Minil
to manage this great Furnace, when the He
vens and the Earth are on Fire: To conſen
increaſe, direct, or temper the Flames, acco
ing to Inſtructions given them, as they arc
be zutelary or deſtroying. Neither let any B0
think it a Diminution of Providence, to


ee into the Hands of Angels 3 is
l


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 103


ue Rule and Method of it: For to imploy an

Imighty Power where it is not neceſlary, is
> debaſe it, and give it a Task fit for lower
eings. Some think it Devotion and Picty to
avec "recourſe immediately to the Arm of God
d falve all things; this may be done ſometimes
ith a good Intention, but commonly with lit-
e Judgment. God is as jealous of the Glory
f his Wiſdom, as of his Power; and Wiſdom
onſiſts in the Conduct and Subordination of ſe-
eral Cauſes, to bring our Purpoſes to Effect
ut what is diſpatched by an immcdiate ſupreme
Dower, Jeaycs no room for the Exerciſe of Wil
om. To conclude this Point, which J have

duch d upon more than once; We muſt not be
dartial to any of God's Attributes, and Providence
cing a Complexion of many, Power, Wiſdom,
uſtice, and Goodneſs, when we give duc Placc
ind Honour to all theſe, then we muſt honour
DIVINE PROYIDENCE.


4 CHAP.


104 The Theory of the EARTH.
CDI EHY(EBY EBV WEEBYEBY (EBY (699


CHAP. IX.


How the Sea will be diminiſhd and conſiun
How the Rocks and Mountains will be thro:1Mf
down and melted, and the whole exteain
Frame of the Earth difſolud into a Deluge i
Fire. |


E have now taken a View of the Cauſe
| of the Conflagration, both ordinary ani
extraordinary : It remains to conſider the Manne
of it; how theſe Cauſes will operate, and bring
to paſs an Effect fo great and ſo prodigious. We
took Notice before, that the grand Obſtructio
would be from the Sea, and from the Moun-
tains; we mult therefore take theſe to Task it
the firſt Place: and if we can remove them out d
our Way, or overcome what Reſiſtance and Op.
polition they are capable to make, the reſt of thi
Work will not be unealy to us.

The Ocean indeed is a vaſt Body of Waters;
and we muſt uſe all our Art and Skill to dry it
up, or conſume it in a good meaſure, beforc
we can pals our Deſign. I remember the Ad
vice a Philoſopher gave Amaſis King of c/A
yt, when he had a Command ſent him fro
the King of QAthiopia, that he ſhould drink i
the Sea. Amaſis being very anxious and (oli
citous what Anſwer he ſhould make to this
ſtrange Command, the Philoſopher Bias ai

Mos VIS


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 105


isd him to make this round Anſwer to the King,
That he was ready to perform his Command, and
o drink up the Sea, provided he would ſtop the
Nivers from flowing into his Cup while he was
jrinking. This Anſwer baffled the King, for he
ould not ſtop the Rivers ; but this we muſt do,
or we ſhall never be able to drink up the Sea,
pr burn up the Earth. 5

Neither will this be ſo impoſſible as it ſeems
at firſt Sight, if we reflect upon thoſe Preparati-
dns we have made towards it, by a general
Drought all over the Earth. This, we ſuppoſe,
ill precede the Conflagration, and by drying
p the Fountains and Rivers which daily feed the
dea, will by degrees ſtarve that Monſter, or re-
luce it to ſuch a degree of Weakneſs, that it ſhall
ot be able to make any great Reſiſtance. More
han half an Ocean of Water flows into the Sea
very Day, from the Rivers of the Earth, if you
ake them altogether. This I ſpeak upon a mode-


y more Water into the Sea in the Space of a
Lear, than would equal in Bulk the whole Globe
df the Earth. Nay ſome have ventur'd to affirm
his of one ſingle River, the Volga, that runs into
ne Caſpian Sea. Lis a great River indeed, and
ath ſeventy Mouths; and fo it had necd have,
o diſgorge a Mats of Water equal to the Body
ff the Earth, in a Year's Time. But we need
ot take ſuch high Meaſures; there are at
eaſt an hundred great Rivers that flow into the
ea from ſeveral Parts of the Earth, Iſlands

and Continents, beſides ſeycral thouſands of
| leſſer


ate Computation. Ari/forle ſays, the Rivers car-


Br, •ãwͥ


= _
|
|
N
.
1
\
15
==
o
7
:
i
|
L
.
5
' |
[+
7
13
1
i
Mi:
ar;
.
,
J '
.
| j
+
|
.
: l
; j
, -
7 i >
: 11
: FR
1
.
1
7
| 33!
1 5
L
3 '
IKE
'F
3;
1
Y -
3 1
© 8
_
15 f
1
5 *
TY |
1
IK i
|
|
r
9
"1h
179
11 }
my.
[ :
Th. 1
1
N 4
£ %
14
> i
4 :
$


106 The Theory of the EARTH.


leſſer ones; let us ſuppoſe theſe, all together, |


pour as much Water into the Sca-Channel even | 3


Day, as is equal to half the Ocean: And we ſhall


be caſily convinc'd of the Reaſonableneſs of thi |
Suppoſition, if we do but examine the daily E.
pence of one River, and by that make an Eſt.


mate of the reſt. This we find calculated to ou


Hands in the River Po, in Italy; a River c


much what the ſame Bigneſs with our Thame,
and disburthens it ſelf into the Gulpp of Yeni,
Baptiſta Riccioli hath computed how mu
Water this River diſcharges in an Hour, viz,
18000000 cubical Paces of Water, and conk:
quently 432000000 in a Day; which is ſcate
credible to thoſe that do not diſtinctly compute
it. Suppoſe then an hundred Rivers as great a
this, or greater, to fall into the Sea from the
Land; beſides thouſands of leſſer, that pay thei
Tribute at the ſame Time into the great Reccipt
of the Ocean: Theſe all taken together, are c-
pable to renew the Sea twice every four and twen.
ty Hours. Which Suppoſitions being admitted,
if by a great and laſting Drought theſe Rivers wer
dried up, or the Fountains from whence the
flow, what would then become of that yaſt Oct
an, that before was ſo formidable to us?


'Tis likely, you will ſay, theſe great Riven


cannot be dried up, tho' the little ones maj
and therefore we muſt not ſuppoſe ſuch an uni
verſal Stop of Waters, or that they will all fal
by any Drought whatſoever. But great River
being made up of little ones, if theſe fl
thoſe muſt be diminiſhed, if not quit drain


T and


— — — — — — A ur wy wr


LL © © 7, > ry of 2


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 107


and exhauſted. It may be, all Fountains and
Springs do not proceed from the ſame Cauſes,
or the ſame Original; and ſome are much more
opious than others: For ſuch Differences, we
will allow what is due; but ſtill the Dryneſs of
the Air and of the Earth continuing, and all the
Sources and Supplies of Moiſture, both from
above and from below, being leſſen d, or wholly
diſcontinued, a general Decay of all Fountains
and Rivers muſt neceſſarily follow, and conſe-
quently of the Sea, and of its Fulneſ that de-
pends upon them; and that's enough tor our pre-
ſent Purpoſe.

The firſt Step towards the Conſumption of
the Ocean, will be the Diminution or Suſpenſion
of the Rivers that run into it; the next will be
an Evacuation by ſubterraneous Paſſages; and the
laſt, by Eruptions of Fires in the very Channel
of it, and in the midſt of the Waters. As for
ſubterraneous Evacuations, we cannot doubt but
that the Sea hath Outlets at the Bottom of it,
whereby it diſcharges that vaſt Quantity of Water
that flows into it every Day ; and that could not
be diſcharg'd ſo faſt as it comes from the wide
Mouths of the Rivers, by Percolation, or Strain-
ing through the Sands. Seas alſo communicate
with one another by theſe internal Paſſages ; as is
manifeſt from thoſe particular Scas that have no
external Outlet, or Iſſue, though they receive into
them many great Rivers, and ſometimes the Influx
of other Seas. So the Caſpian Sea receives not
only Volga, which we mentioned before, but ſe-
veral other Rivers, and yet hath no viſible Iſſue for

| its


0
4


108 The Theory of the EARTH.


its Waters, The Mediterranean Sea, beſides all MW
the Rivers it receives, hath a Current flowing into
it, at either End, from other Seas; from the
Atlantich Ocean at the Streights of Gibraltar, ani Wi:
from the Black Sea above Conſtantinople ; and
yet there is no Paſſage above Ground, or viſible
Derivation of the Medzterranean Waters out of
their Channel; which ſeeing they do not overfil,
nor overflow the Banks, tis certain they mu
have ſome ſecret Conveyances into the Bowels of
the Earth, or ſubterraneous Communication with
other Seas. Laſtly, from the Whirlpools of the
Sea, that ſuck in Bodies that come within their
Reach, it ſeems plainly to appear, by that Atta
ction and Abſorption, that there is a Deſcent oi
Waters in thoſe Places.
Wherefore when the Current of the River
into the Sea is ſtoppd, or in a great Meaſure
diminiſhed ; the Sea continuing to empty it (elf
by theſe ſubterraneous Paſſages, and having little
or none of thoſe Supplies that it uſed to have
from the Land, it muſt needs be ſenſibly leſſend
and both contract its Channel into a narrower
Compals, and alſo have leſs Depth in the W#
ters that remain. And in the laſt Place, we
muſt expect fiery Eruptions in ſeveral Parts of
the Sea Channel, which will help to ſuck up,
or evaporate the remaining Waters. In the pre
ſent State of Nature there have been ſeveral In-
ſtances of ſuch Eruptions of Fire from the Bot-
tom of the Sea; and in that laſt State of Nature,
when all Things are in a Tendency to Inflam-
mation, and when Earthquakes and *
W


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 109


in be more frequent every where, we muſt
Expect them alſo more frequently by Sea, as well
& by Land. Tis true, neither Earthquakes nor
Fruptions can happen in the middle of the great
Pcean, or in the deepeſt Abyſs, becauſe there are
o Cavities, or Mines below it, for the Vapours
nd Exhalations to lodge in: But it is not ſo
uch of the Sea-Chanel that is ſo deep; and in
other Parts, eſpecially in Streights, and near
lands, ſuch Eruptions, like Sea-Vulcano's, have
requently happened, and new Iſlands have been
ade by ſuch fiery Matter thrown up from the
zottom of the Sea. Thus, they ſay, thoſe Iſlands
n the Mediterranean, call'd the Yulcanian Iſlands,
ad their Original, being Matter caſt up from the
bottom of the Sea, by the Force of Fire, as new
Mountains ſometimes are raiſed upon the Earth.
\nother Iſland in the Archipelago had the ſame
Original; whereof Strabo gives an Account,
16. 1. The Flames, he ſays, ſprang up through
be Waters four Days together, ſo as the whole
ea was hot and burning; and they rais'd by
degrees, as with Engines, a Maſs of Earth,
which made a new Iſland, twelve Furlongs in
ompaſs. And in the ſame Archipelago, Flames
and Smoke have ſeveral times, (particularly in
he Year 1650.) riſen out of the Sea, and
flld the Air with ſulphureous Scents and Va-
ours. In like manner in the Iſland of St. Mz
gbael, one of the Tercera s, there have been,
Wot later Years, ſuch Eructations of Fire and
Flames, ſo ſtrong and violent, that, at the
Depth of a hundred and ſixty Fathoms, hex
| orc'd


110 The Theory of the EARTH.


forc'd their Way through the midſt of the W.
ters, from the Bottom of the Sea into the open
Air, as has been related by thoſe that were Eye.
witneſſes. +

In theſe three Ways, I conceive, the great Force Wi
of the Sea will be broken, and the mighty Ocea iſ
reduced to a ſtanding Pool of putrid Waters, with,
out Vent, and without Recruits. But there wil
ſtill remain, in the midſt of the Channel, a grex
Maſs of troubled Liquors, like Dregs in the Bot.
tom of the Veſſel ; which will not be drunk uy;
till the Earth be all on Fire, and Torrents of meltel
and ſulphureous Matter flow from the Land, and
mingle with this dead Sea. But let us now lea
the Sea in this humble Poſture, and go on to at-
rack the Rocks and Mountains, which ſtand net
in our Way.

See how ſcornfully they look down upon uz
and bid Defiance to all the Elements; they
have born the Thunder and Lightning of Her
ven, and all the Artillery of the Skies, for in.
numerable Ages; and do not fear the crack
ling of Thorns and of Shrubs that burn at thei
Fect : Let the Towns and Cities of the Earth,
fay they, be laid in Aſhes ; let the Woods and
Foreſts blaze away, and the fat Soil of the
Earth fry in its own Greaſe ; theſe Things wil
not affect us; we can ſtand naked in the mid
of a Sea of Fire, with our Roots as deep 4
the Foundations of the Earth, and our Head
above the Clouds of the Air. Thus the
proudly defy Nature; and it muſt be confelsd


that theſe, being, as it were, the Bones of tid
9 0 Earth


__


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 11


Farth, when the Body is burning, will be the
laſt conſum'd ; and I am apt to think, if they
rould keep in the ſame Poſture they ſtand in now,
End preſerve themſelves from falling, the Fire
Fould never get an entire Power over them. But
Mountains are generally hollow, and that makes
hem ſubject to a double Caſualty; firſt, of Earth-
uakes z ſecondly, of having their Roots eaten
away by Water or by Fire; but by Fire eſpecially
n this Caſe: For we ſuppoſe there will be innu-
gerable ſubterraneous Fires ſmothering under
round, before the general Fire breaks out; and
heſe by corroding the Bowels of the Earth, will
ake it morehollow, and more ruinous; and when
he Earth is fo far diſlolv'd, that the Cavities within
he Mountains are fill'd with Lakes of Fire, then
he Mountains will ſink, and fall into thoſe boil-
ng Cauldrons, which in Time will diſſolve them,
hough they were as hard as Adamant.
There is another Engine that will tear the
arth with great Violence, and rend in pieces
hatſoever is above or about thoſe Parts of it;
and that is the Element of Water, ſo gentle
n it ſelf when undiſturb'd : But tis found by
Experience, that when Water falls into liquid
Metals, it flies about with an incredible Impe-
olity, and breaks or bears down every Thing
hat would ſtop its Motion and Expanſion. This
Force I take to come from the ſudden and
rong Rarefaction of its Parts, which make a
Kind of Exploſion, when it is ſudden and ve-
ement; and this is one of the greateſt Forces
e know in Nature: Accotdingly I am apt to
think


— —— EE rn ce eo err Ie
— — - — -


— —— — — — os


112 The Theory of the EARTH.
think, that the marvellous Force of Vulcano


Fragments of the Earth, and other heavy Bodig
'to ſuch a vaſt Height and Diſtance, that it is dont


made by the ſudden Rarefaction of Sea Wateg


that fall into Pans or Receptacles of molten On
and ardent Liquors, within the Cavities of th


 obſerv'd, that Vulcano's are in Mountains, an


tion, rarified, and; by way of Exploſion, fly ou
ing before them whatſoever ſtands in their Wa


preſent Vulcano's and their Eruptions, tis mani


will follow thercupon: and that theſe will con
tribute very much to the ſinking of Mountai


ſtrong Holds of Nature under the Power of tit
general Fire.


all be brought low, in that State of Natut


when they throw out Lumps of Rocks, gte


by this way of Exploſion : And that Exploſig


* 4 E =? 0 TY wo


Mountain; and thereupon follow the Noils
Roarings, and Eruptions of thoſe Places, II


generally, if not always, near the Sea; and wha
its Waters, by ſubterrancous Paſlages, are driya
under the Mountain, cither by a particular Wind
or by a great Agitation of the Waves, they met
there with Metals and fiery Minerals diſſolyd
and are immediately, according to our Suppok


at the Mouth or Funnel of the Mountain, bex
Whether this be a true Account, or no, of th
feſt, that ſuch Caſes as we have mention d, wil


happen in the Conflagration of the Earth, ant
that ſuch Eruptions or Diſruptions of the Eart


the ſplitting of Rocks, and the bringing of all
To conclude this Point : The Mountains wil


cither by Earthquakes, or ſubterrancous Fires


3 Eve


Conrerning the CoFLAGRATION. 113


very Valley ſpall be exalted, and every Moun-
I and Hill ſpall be made low, 1fa. xl. 4. Which
Till be literally true at the ſecond coming of our
Wyiour, as it was figuratively apply'd to his firſt
dming, Like iii. 5. Now, being once levelld

ith the reſt of the Earth, the Queſtion? will only
how they ſhall be diſſolvd? But there is no
W:rcſicial Body indiſſolvable to Fire, if it have a
e Strength and Continuance ; and this laſt
e will have both, in the higheſt degrees; fo
at it cannot but be capable of diſſolving all ele-
entary Compoſitions, how hard or ſolid ſoever
cy be. |
'Tis true, theſe Mountains and Rocks, as I faid
fore, will have the Privilege to be the laſt de-
oy'd. Theſe; with the deep Parts of the Sea,
d the polar Regions of the Earth, will undergo
lower Fate, and be conſum'd more leiſurely.
e Action of the laſt Fire may be diſtinguiſh'd
to two Times, or two Aſſaults; the firſt Aſſault
ll carry off all Mankind, and all the Works of
Earth that arc eaſily combuſtible; and this will
done with a quick and ſudden Motion. But the
ond Aſſault, being employ'd about the Con-
mption of ſuch Bodies, or ſuch Materials, as are
dt ſo eaſily ſubjected to Fire, will be of long
ontinuance, and the Work of ſome Years. And
$ fit it ſhould be ſo; that this flaming World
ay be vicw'd and conſider d by the neighbour-
Worlds about it, as a dreadful Spectacle, and
onument of God's Wrath againſt diſloyal,
d diſobedient Creatures. That by this Ex-
ple, now before their Eyes, they may think
A of


— — ——— OS —— x CECIN


114 The Theory of the EARrn.


of their own Fate, and what may befal then
as well as another Planet of the ſame Elemenyiil
and Compoſition.
Thus much for the Rocks and Mountain;
which, you ſce, according to our Hypotheſis, will
be levell'd, and the whole Face of the Earth
duc'd to Plainneſs and Equality; nay, which i
more, meltcd and diſſolvd into a Sea of liqui
Fire. And becauſe this may ſeem a Paradoy
being more than is uſually ſuppoſed, or take
notice of, in the Doctrine of the Conflagratiq
it will not be improper, in this Place, to give a
Account, wherein our Idea of the Conflagratin
and its Effects, differs from the common Opin
on, and the uſual Repreſentation of it. Tis con
monly ſuppoſed, that the Conflagration of f
World is like the burning of a City, where th
Walls and Materials of the Houſes are not md
ted down, but ſcorch'd, inflam'd, demoliſh'd, a
made uninhabitable: So they think in the bun
ing of the World, ſuch Bodies, or ſuch Parts
Nature, as are fit Fewel for the Fire, will be i
flam'd, and, it may be, conſum'd, or reduc!
Smoke and Aſhes 3 but other Bodies, that:
not capable of Inflammation, will only be ſcord
and defac'd, the Beauty and Furniture of ti
Earth ſpoil'd, and by that means, ſay they, it willl
laid waſte and become uninhabitable. This {cl
to me a very ſhort and imperfe& Idea of |
Conflagration; neither agreeable to Scriptil
nor to the Deductions that may be made fi
Scripture, We therefore ſuppoſe that this
but half the Work; this deſtroying of the 0
| W.


Concerning ihe CONTLAGRATION. 115
ard Garniture 'of the Earth, is but the firſt
ſet, and that the Conflagration will end in a
:dolution and Liquefaction of the Elements
ad all the exterior Region of the Earth; fo
to become a true Deluge of Fire, or a Sea of
re overſpreading the whole Globe of the Earth.
his State of the Conflagration, I think, may
plainly prov'd ; partly by the Expreſſions of
ripture concerning it, and partly from the
novation of the Earth that is to follow upon
Saint Peter, who is our chief Guide in the
xrine of the Conflagration, ſays, 2 Pet. ili.
d, 11. The Elements will be melted with fer-
mt Heat; beſides burning up the Works of
e Earth. Then adds, Seeing all theſe Things
all be diſſolu d, &c. Theſe Terms of Liquefaction
xd Diſſolut ian cannot, without Violence, be
rained to ſimple Devaſtation, and ſuperficial
orching. Such Expreſſions carry the Work a
cat deal further, even to that full Senſe which
e propoſe. Beſides, the Prophets often ſpeak
the melting of the Earth, or of the Hills and
lountains, at the Preſence of the Lord, in the
ay of his Wrath, 1/a. xxxiv. 3, 4. & xliv. I, 2.
ab. i. 5. Pſal. xcvii. 5. And Saint John
{poc. xv. 2.) tells us of a Sea of Glaſs, mingled
ith Fire ; where the Saints ſtood, ſinging: the
dng of Moſes, and triumphing over their Ene-
ies, the Spiritual Pharaoh and his Hoſt, that
ere ſwallowed up in it. The Sea of Glaſs,
uſt be a Sea of molten Glaſs ; it muſt be fluid,
ot ſolid, if a Sea; neither can a ſolid Subſtance
laid to be mingled with Fire, as this was:
e


114 The Theory of the EARTH.


of their own Fate, and what may befal then
as well as another Planet of the ſame Hemel
and Compoſition.

Thus much for the Rocks and Mountain
which, you ſee, according to our Hypotheſis, vi
be levell'd, and the whole Face of the Earth g.
duc'd to Plainneſs and Equality; nay, which
more, melted and diſſolvd into a Sea of liquiliiſ
Fire. And becauſe this may ſeem a Parado
being more than is uſually ſuppoſed, or take
notice of, in the Doctrine of the Conflagratia
it will not be improper, in this Place, to give a
Account, wherein our Idea of the Conflagratia
and its Effects, differs from the common Opin
on, and the uſual Repreſentation of it. Tis con
monly ſuppoſed, that the Conflagration of ti
World is like the burning of a City, where t
Walls and Materials of the Houſes are not md
ted down, but ſcorch'd, inflam'd, demoliſh'd, a
made uninhabitable: So they think in the bur
ing of the World, ſuch Bodies, or ſuch Parts
Nature, as are fit Fewel for the Fire, will be i
flam' d, and, it may be, conſum'd, or reduc!
Smoke and Aſhes ; but other Bodies, that 1
not capable of Inflammation, will only be ſcord
and defac'd, the Beauty and Furniture of ti
Earth ſpoil'd, and by that means, ſay they, it will
laid waſte and become uninhabitable. This ſeel
to me a very ſhort and imperfect Idea of
Conflagration; neither agreeable to Scriptil
nor to the Deductions that may be made fi
Scripture, We therefore ſuppoſe that this
but half the Work; this deſtroying of the ©

Wi


Concerning the CoNAGRATION. 115
ard Garniture of the Earth, is but the firſt
nſet, and that the Conflagration will end in a
ilolution and Liquefaction of the Elements
ad all the exterior Region of the Earth; fo
to become a true Deluge of Fire, or a Sea of
te overſpreading the whole Globe of the Earth.
his State of the Conflagration, I think, may
plainly prov'd ; partly by the Expreſſions of
ripture concerning it, and partly from the
ovation of the Earth that is to follow upon
Saint Peter, who is our chief Guide in the
octrine of the Conflagration, ſays, 2 Pet. ili.
d, 11. The Elements will be melted with fer-
mt Heat ; beſides burning up the Works of
e Earth. Then adds, Seeing all theſe Things
all be diſſolu d, &c. Theſe Temas of L1quefattion
d Diſſolut ian cannot, without Violence, be
rained to ſimple Devaſtation, and ſuperficial
orching. Such Expreſſions carry the Work a
cat deal further, even to that full Senſe which
e propoſe. Beſides, the Prophets often ſpeak
the melting of the Earth, or of the Hills and
lountains, at the Preſence of the Lord, in the
ay of his Wrath, 1/a. xxxiv. 3, 4. & xliv. I, 2.
40. i. 5. Pſal. xcvii. 5. And Saint John
Ipoc. 85 2 tells us of a Sa of Glaſs, mingled
th Fire ; where the Saints ſtood, ſinging the
dng of Moſes, and triumphing over their Ene-
es, the Spiritual Pharaoh and his Hoſt, that
ere ſwallowed up in it. The Sea of Glaſs,
uſt be a Sca of molten Glaſs ; it muſt be fluid,
Wot ſolid, if a Sea; neither can a ſolid Subſtance
> ſaid te be mingled with Fire, as as this was:

I 2 And-


116 The Theory of the EaRTH.


And to this anſwers the Lake of Fire and Brin
ſtone, which the Beaſt and falſe Prophet war
thrown into alive, Apoc. xix. 20. - Theſe all re
to the End of the World, and the laſt Fire, ,
alſo plainly imply, or expreſs rather, that State
Liquefaction which we ſuppoſe and aſſert.
Furthermore, the Renovation of the Woll
or the New Heaven and New Earth, wia
St. Peter, out of the Prophets, tells us (hl
ſpring out of theſe that are burnt and diſſolve!
do ſuppoſe this Earth reduc'd into a fluid Ch
os, that it may lay a Foundation for a ſecon
World. If you take ſuch a Skeleton of
Earth, as your ſcorching Fire would leave |
hind it; where the Fleſh is torn from the Bone
and the Rocks and Mountains ſtand nake
and ſtaring upon you; the Sea, half empty, g
ping at the Sun, and the Cities all in Ruins, at
in Rubbiſh ; how would you raiſe a new Wall
from this? And a World fit to be an Habitaty
for the Righteous ? For ſo St. Peter makes th
to be, which is to ſucceed after the Conflagr:
on, 2 Pet. iii. 13. And a World alſo without
Apoc. xxi. 1. As theſe Characters do not agtt
to the preſent Earth, ſo neither would they 280
to your future one; for if that dead Lump co
revive and become habitable” again, it wol
however retain all the Imperfections of the it
mer Earth, beſides ſome Scars, and Defori
tics of its own. Wherefore, if you would d
the Earth into a new, and better Mould, Je
muſt firſt melt it down; and the laſt Fire,
£1 I


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 117


925 Refiners Fire, will make an Improvement
it, both as to Matter and Form. To conclude,
& muſt be reduc'd into a fluid Maſs, in the Nature
f a Chaos, as it was at firſt ; but this laſt will be
| Ide Chaos, as that was watery; and from this
we it will emerge again into a Paradiſaical World.
zut this being the Subject of the following Book,
ve Will diſcourſe no more of it in this Place.


bi i cl RO RSS iS


K


oncerning the Beginnin 's and Progreſs of the
Conflagration, what Part of the Earth will
firſt be burnt. The Manner of the future De-
ſtruftion of Rome, according to prophetical
Indications. The laſt State and C onſummation
of the general Fire.


Aving remov'd the chief Obſtructions to our
Deſign, and ſhew'd a Method for weakning
e Strength of Nature, by draining the Trench,
d beating down thoſe Bulwarks, wherein ſhe
ems to place her greateſt Confidence : We muſt
ow goto Work ; making Choice of the weakeſt
art of Nature for our firſt Attack, where the Fire
ay be the eaſieſt admitted, and the beſt maintain d,
nd preſerv 00.
And for our better Direction, it will be ot
le to conſider what we noted before, vis.
1 That


118 - The Theory of the EAR TR.


That the Conflagration is not a pure "ati
Fatality, but a 'mix'd Fatality; or a din
Judgment ſupported by natural Cauſes. And i
we can find ſome Part of the Earth, or of H
Chriſtian World, that hath more of theſe natuy
Diſpoſitions to Inflammation than the reſt ; andi
alſo repreſented by Scripture as a more peculiai
Object of God's Judgments at the coming of o
Saviour, we may juſtly pitch upon that Part of tix
World, as firſt to be deſtroy'd : Nature and Pro.
dence conſpiring to make that the firſt Sacrifice u
this fiery Vengeance.

Now as to natural Diſpoſitions, in any Cour
try or Region of the Earth, to be ſet on Fire, thi
ſeem to be chiefly theſe two; Sulphureouſneß d
the Soil, and, an hollow mountainous Conſtrut
on of the Ground. Where theſe two Diſpoſi
ons meet in the ſame Tract or Territory, (the on
as to the Quality of the Matter, and the other:
to the Form) it ſtands like a Pile of fit Material
ready ſet to have the Fire put to it. And at

divine Indications where this general Fire will h
gin, the Scripture points to the Seat of Antichril
whereſoever that is, for the Beginning of it. T!
Scripture, J ſay, points at this two Ways: Fi
In telling us that our Saviour at his coming
Flames of Fire ſhall conſume the wicked One, tl
Man. of Sin, the Son of Perdition, with the Y
rit of his Mouth, and ſhall deſtroy him with l
Brightneſs of his Preſence, 2 Theſſ. i. 7. i
ii. 8. Secondly, under the Name of Myſti
Babylon 3- which is allowed by all to; be.1l
Seat of Antichriſt, and by Scripture "_ ca
e


. 9 # F< A *»


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION, 119


Wcmn'd to the Fire. This we find in plain Words
gerted by Saint Zohbn, in the xviiith Chapter of
Wis Revelations (Verſes 8, 19.) and in the
Wixth (Verſe 3) under the Name of the Great
Vhore 3 which is the ſame City, and the ſame
Peat, according to the Interpretation of Scripture
W (clf, (CH. xvii, xviii.) And the Prophet Daniel,
yhen he had ſet the Antient of Days upon his
cry Throne, ſays, The Body of the Beaſt was
ven to the burning Flame, Dan. vii. 9, 10, 11.
hich I take to be the ſame Thing with what St.
john ſays afterwards, (Apoc. xix. 20.) The Beaſt
nd the falſe Prophet, were caſt alive into a Lake
Fire, burning with Brimſtone. By theſe Places
df Scripture it ſeems manifeſt, that Antichriſt, and
he Seat of Antichriſt will be conſum'd with Fire,
t the coming ofjour Saviour. And tis very rea-
onable and decorous, that the grand Tray tor and
ead of the Apoſtacy, ſhould be made the firſt
xample of the divine Vengeance.

Thus much being allow'd from Scripture,
et us now return to Nature again; to ſeek out
nat Part of the Chriſtian World, that from
ts own Conſtitution is moſt ſubject to burning;
by the Sulphureouſneſs of its Soil, and its fiery

ountains and Caverns. This we ſhall eaſily
ind to be the Roman Territory, or the Country
of Italy: Which, by all Accounts, antient and
modern, is a Store-houſe of Fire; as it it was
condemn'd to that Fate by God and Nature,
and to be an Incendiary, as it were, to the
reſt of the World. And ſeceing My/tical Ba-
bylon, the Seat of Antichriſt, is the ſame Rome,
| | - 4 and


120 The Theory of the EARTH.


and its Territory, as it is underſtood by moſt Ina 1
preters of former, and latter Ages; you ſee boi 1
our Lines meet in this Point; and, that there
Fairneſs, on both Hands, to conclude, that at thi
glorious Appcarance of our Saviour, the Con
gration will begin at the City of Rome, and th
Roman Territory.

Nature hath ſav'd us the Pains of kindling A Fit
In thoſe Parts of the Earth; for, ſince the Memoy
of Man, there have always been ſubterrancoy
Fires in Italy. And the Romans did not preſene
their Veſtal Fire with more Conſtancy, than N
ture hath done her ficry Mountains in ſome Pn
or other of that Territory. Let us then ſuppol;h
when the fatal Time draws near, all theſe bun
ing Mountains to be fill'd and repleniſh'd with
fit Materials for ſuch a Deſign 3 and when ou
Saviour appears in the Clouds, with an Hoi
of Angels, that they all begin to play, as Fit
Works, at the triumphal Entry of a Prince. Lt
Ve ſuvins, Hina, Strongyle, and all the Vil
canian Iſlands, break out into Flames ; and bf
the Earthquakes, which then will rage, let u
ſuppoſe new Eruptions, or new Mountain
opend in the Apennines, and near to Rome; and
to vomit out Fire in the ſame Manner as the oll
Pulcano's. Then let the ſulphureous Ground
take Fire; and ſeeing the Soil of that Count!h
in ſeveral Places, is 10 full of Brimſtone, tha
the Steams and Smoke of it viſibly riſe out d
the Earth; we may reaſonably Pair that ia
will burn openly, and be inflam'd, at that Tim
Laflly, the 3 of the Air, and ti
flaming


. _ 4 N 1 4 2 Y
tots PR” 2 k Sachs 8 2
CET PT © c 8 A * 8 3 22 Þ


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 121


ming Streams of the melting Skies, will mingle
Ind join with theſe Burnings of the Earth; and
ele three Cauſes meeting together, as they can-
Wot but make a dreadful Scene, ſo they will eaſily
Wcſroy and conſume whatſoever lies within the

Wompals of their Fury.
Thus you may ſuppoſe the Beginning of the
Wencral Fire: And it will be carried on by like
Fauſes, though in leſſer Degrees, in other Parts
If the Earth: But as to Nome, there is (till,
my Opinion, a more dreadful Fate that will
tend it; namely, to be abſorp'd, or (wallow'd
p, in a Lake of Fire and Brimſtone, after the
anner of Sodom and Gomorrah. This, in my
doment, will be the Fate and final Concluſion
f Myſtical Babylon, to ſink as a great Mill-
one into the Sea, and never to appear more.
ſcar what the Prophet ſays, A mighty Angel took
p a Stone, like a great Mill ſtone, and caſt it into
e Sea, ſaying, Thus with Violence ſhall that
reat City Babylon be thrown aown, and ſhall
found no more at all, Apoc. xviii. 21. Simply
d be burnt, does not at all anſwer to this
deſcription of its periſhing, by ſinking like a Mill.
one into the Sea, and never appearing more,
or of not having its Place ever more found;
at is, leaving no Remains or Marks of it.
City that is only burnt, cannot be ſaid to
al like a Mill-tone into the Sea ; or, that it
an neuer more be found; for after the Burning
f a City, the Ruins ſtand, and its Place is
ell known : Wherefore, in both Reſpects,
clides this exterior Burning, there mult be
an


122 The Theory of the EAR TR.


an Abſorption of this Myſtical Babylon, tl
Seat of the Beaſt, and thereupon a total Dill
pearance of it. This alſo agrees with the Sud
denneſs of the Judgment, which is a repeat;
Character of it, Chap. xviii. 8, 10, 17, %
Now what kind of Abſorption this will be, int
what, and in what Manner, we may learn fron
what Saint Fohn ſays afterwards, Chap. xix. 20
The Beaſt and the falſe Prophet were cM
elive into a Lake of Fire and Brimſtone. V0
muſt not imagine, that they were bound Han
and Foot, and ſo thrown headlong into thi
Lake; but they were ſwallow'd up alive, the
and theirs, as Corah and his Company; or, to u
a plainer Example, after the manner of Soi
and Gomorrah, which periſh'd by Fire, and at t
ſame Time ſunk into the Dead Sea, or a Laked
Brimſtone.

This was a lively Type of the Fate of Rome, d
Myſtical Babylon: And tis fit it ſhould reſembk
yy wad as well in its Puniſhment, as in its Crime
Neither is it a hard Thing to conceive how {ud
an Abſorption may come to pals, that being
Thing ſo uſual in Earthquakes, and Earthquake
being ſo frequent in that Region. And laſi
That this ſhould be, after the Manner of Joan
turn'd into a Lake of Fire, will not be ati
ſtrange, if we conſider, that there will be mas
ſubterraneous Lakes of Fire at that Time, wht
the Bowels of the Earth begin to melt, and d
Mountains ſpew out Streams of liquid It
The Ground therefore being hollow and rotte


in thoſe Parts, when it comes to be ſhaken *
a mig


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 123
mighty Earthquake, the Foundations will ſink,

4 the whole Frame fall into an Abyſs of Fire
low, as a Mill-ſtone into the Sea. And this


ill give Occaſion to that Cry, Babylon the


reat 1s fallen, is fallen, and ſhall never more
Sc found.


This ſeems to be a probable Account, ac-
ording to Scripture and Reaſon, of the Be-
Winning of the general Fire, and of the particu-
Wc Fate of Rome. But it may be propos d here,
s an Objection againſt this Hypotheſis, that the
editerranean Sea, lying all along the Coaſt of
zaly, muſt needs be a ſufficient Guard to that
ountry againſt the Invaſion? of Fire, or at leaſt
uſt needs extinguiſh it, before it can do much
iſchief there, or propagate itſelf into other
ountries. I thought we had in a good meaſure
revented this Objection before, by ſhewing how
e Ocean would be diminiſhed before the Con-
agration, and eſpecially the Arms and Sinus's
f the Ocean; and of theſe none would be more
ubje&t to this Diminution, than the Mediter-
anean ; for, receiving its Supplies from the
Vcean and the Black Sea, if theſe came to ſink
their Channels they would not riſe ſo high,
sto be capable to flow into the Mediterra-
jean at either End; and theſe Supplies being
ut off, it would ſoon empty itſelf ſo far, partly
Evaporation ; and partly by ſubterrancons
aſſages, as to ſhrink from all its Shores, and
decome only a ſtanding Pool of Water in the
Middle of the Channel: Nay, tis poſlible,
4 Floods of Fire deſcending from the many
Vulcano


5


124 Me Theory of the EAR TR.


Vulcano's upon its Shores, it might itſelf bf
converted into a Lake of Fire, and rather hel
than obſtruct the Progreſs of the Conflagt:

uon. |
It may indeed be made a Queſtion, Whethe
this fiery Vengeance upon the Seat of Antichri
will not precede the general Conflagration, 2
ſome Diſtance of Time, as a Fore runner and
Fore-warner to the World, that the reſt of the
People may have Space to repent ; and particy
larly the Fews, being Spectators of this Tragedy,
and of the miraculous Appearance of our Sai
our, may ſee the Hand of God in it, and be
convinc'd of the Truth and divine Authority
the Chriſtian Religion: I ſay, this Suppoſitiar
would leave Room for theſe and ſome other Pro
phetick Scenes, which we know not well when
to place; but ſeeing The Day of the Lordi
repreſented in Scripture, as one entire Thing
without Interruption or Diſcontinuation, and tha
it is to begin with the Deſtruction of Antichti,
we have Warrant enough to purſue the reſt «
the Conflagration from this Beginning and Inti
duction. |
Let us then ſuppoſe the ſame Preparation
made in the other Parts of the Earth to co
tinue the Fire; for the Conflagration of tix
World being a Work of Providence, we mi
be ſure ſuch Meaſures are taken, as will effe
tually carry it on, when once begun, Tit
Body of the Earth will be looſen'd and broke
by Earthquakes, the more ſolid Parts impteg
nated with Sulphur, and the Cavities fil'd wii
: unctuo


I N *
2
1


|


— —
—— — <— 0 —_ —


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 125


auous Fumes and Exhalations, ſo as the whole
WG will be but as one great Funeral-Pile, ready
ut, and wanting nothing but the Hand of a de-
Woying Angel to give it Fire. I will not take
Won me to determine which Way this devouring
Wncmy would ſteer his Courſe from Italy, or in
hat Order he will advance and enter the ſeveral
egions of our Continent; that would be an Un-
Wcrtaking as uncertain as uſeleſs: But we cannot
pubt of his Succeſs, which Way ſoever he goes;
leſs where the Channel of the Ocean may
ance to ſtop him: But as to that, we allow,
gat different Continents may have different
res: not propagated from one to another, but
f diſtinAt Sources and Originals; and ſo like-
iſe in remote Iſlands; and therefore no long
aſſage, or Trajection, will be requir'd from
hore to Shore: And even the Ocean it ſelf will,
length, be as fiery as any Part of the Land; but
at, with its Rocks, like Death, will be the laſt
hing ſubdued.
As to the animate World, the Fire will over-
un it with a ſwift and rapid Courſe, and all
ving Creatures will be ſuffocated, or conſumed,
t the firſt Aſſault; and at the ſame Time all
e Beauty of the Fields, and the External De-
orations of Nature will be defac'd : Then the
ities and the Towns, and all the Works of
an's Hands, will burn like Stubble before the
ind. Theſe will ſoon be diſpatched ; but
he great Burthen of the Work ſtill re-
mains; which is, that Lzquefat7ion we men-
lond before, or a melting Fire, much more
1 ſtrong


_- - 5
„ 2


—

— —

— DANN af i ns —
_ — —
— — - —


hy CR — ——
Cie. —

— CS — — — — —


5 * e
1 3 P ps
— —
= 22 .


126 The Theory of the EARTH.


x:


ſttong and vehement than theſe tranſient Blazy
which do but (weep the Surface of the Earth
This Liquefaction, I ſay, we prov'd before oy
of Scriptute, as the laſt State of the fiery Deu
Chap. IX. And 'tis this which, at length will make
the Sea itſelf a Lake of Fire and Brimſtone ; when
inſtead of Rivers of Waters which uſed to floy
into it from the Land, there come Streams and N
vulets of ſulphureous Liquors, and purulent mel;
ed Matter, which following the Tract of tha
natural Gravity, will fall into this great Drain d
this Earth; upon which Mixture, the remainin
Parts of ſweet Water will ſoon evaporate, and th
Salt mingling with the Sulphur, will make aDex
Sea, an Aſphaltites, a Lake of Sodom, a Cup d
the Dregs of the Wine of the Fierceneſs of God
Wrath.
| We noted before two remarkable Effects
the burning Mountains, which would cont
bute to the Conflagration of the World, ant
gave Inſtances of both in former Eruptions d
Hina and Veſuvius; one was, of thoſe Ball
or Lumps of Fire, which they throw about i
the Time of their Rage ; and the other, 0
thoſe Torrents of liquid Fire, which rowl dow!
their Sides to the next Seas or Valleys. In til
firſt Reſpect, theſe Mountains are as ſo man
Batteries, planted, by Providence, in {ſcv«*__$
Parts of the Earth, to fling thoſe fiery Bow
into ſuch Places, or ſuch Cities, as are mark
out for Deſtruction; and, in the ſecond Reſpe
they are to dry up the Waters, and the Rive
and the Sea it ſelf, when they fall into
Change


og tu — — — 1


\


Concerning the Cox ARATION. 127


hannel, Annal. Sic. dec. 1. l. 2. c. 4. T. Fas
as, a Sicilian, who writ the Hiſtory of that
and, tells us of ſuch a River of Fire (upon an
Wuption of Ana) near twenty eight Miles long,
W:ching from the Mountain to Port Longina;
Wd might have been much longer, if it had not
cn ſtopt by the Sea. Many ſuch as theſe, and
greater, we ought in Reaſon to imagine, when
te Earth begins to melt, and to ripen towards
Diſſolution: It will then be full of theſe ſulphu-
Sous Juices, as Grapes with Wine; and theſe will
ſqueez d out of the Earth into the Sea, as out
a Wine-preſs into the Receiver, to fill up that
up, as we ſaid before, with the Wine of the

zerceneſs of God's Wrath.
If we may be allowed to bring prophetical
flages of Scripture to a natural Senſe, as
pubtleſs ſome of thoſe muſt that reſpect the
nd of the World ; theſe Phraſes which we
ave now ſuggeſted, of the Wine-preſs of the
rath of God, Apoc. xiv. 10, 19. Ch. xvi. 19.
b. xix. 15. Drinking the Fierceneſs of his
me, poured, without Mixture, into the Cup
his Indignation ; with Expreſſions of the like
ature, that occur ſometimes in the old Pro-
nets, but eſpecially in the Apocalypſe : Theſe,
lay, might receive a full and emphatical Ex-
lication from this State of Things which now
es before us. I would not exclude any other
xplication of leſs Force, as that of alluding
d the bitter Cup, or mixt Potion, that us d
d be given to Malefactors: But that, methinks,
a low Senſe, when applied to theſe Places
| in


128 The Theory of the EARTH.


in the Apocalypſe. That theſe Phraſes ſon
God's remarkable Judgments, all allow; and h
they plainly relate to the End of the World, vii
the laſt Plagues, and the laſt of the laſt Plagueliſſ
Chap. xvi. 19. Beſides, the Angel that preſide
over this Judgment, is ſaid to be an Angel thy
had Power over Fire; and thoſe who are to dint
this Potion are ſaid to be tormented with H
and Brimſtone, Chap. xiv. 10. This preſiding
Angel ſeems to be our Saviour himſelf (Chap. x
I 5.) who, when he comes to execute Divine Ve
geance upon the Earth, gives his Orders in thek
Words, Gather the Cluſters of the Vine of l
Earth, for her Grapes are fully ripe, Ch. xiv. i
19. And thereupon the deſtroying Angel thnf
in his Sickle into the Earth, and gather d th
Vine of the Earth, and caſt it ints the great Wm
preſs of the Wrath of God. And this made a}
tion compounded of ſeveral Ingredients, but u
diluted with Water; TS wexeens ueirs AL
(Ch. xiv. 10.) and was indeed a Potion of Fire an
Brimſtone, and all burning Materials mixt togcthe
The Similitudes of Scripture are ſeldom nice at
exact, but rather bold, noble and great; and a
cording to the Circumſtances which we han
obſerved, this Vineyard ſeems to be the Eartt
and this Vintage the End of the World; tit
preſſing of the Grapes into the Cup or Veſſel ti
receives them, the Diſtillation of burning Liquo!
from all Parts of the Earth into the Trough of il
Sea; and that Lake of red Fire, the Blood of tho
Grapes ſo flowing into it. |


Concerning the CoNFLACRATIOM. 129
Tis true, this Judgment of the Vintage and *
ine · preſs, and the Effects of it, ſeem to aim is
ore eſpecially at ſome particular Region of the i
arth, Chap. xiv. 20. And I am not againſt that,
ovided the Subſtance of the Explication be till
taned, and the univerſal Sea of Fire be that
ich follows in the next Chapter, under the
ame of-a Sea of Glaſs, mingled with Fire, Ch. [|
i. 2. This, I think, expreſſes the higheſt and iſ
mplete State of the Conflagration; when the n
ountains are fled away, and not only ſo, but |
> exterior Region of the Earth quite difloly'd; 1
e Wax before the Sun: The Channel of the W
a filld with a Maſs of fluid Fire, and the ſame
e overflowing all the Globe, and covering the
ole Earth, as the Deluge, or the firſt. Abyſs.
en will the triumphal Songs and Hallelujahs be
gg for the Victories of the Lamb over all. his
emics, and over Nature it ſelf, Apoc. xv. 3, 4.
tat and marvellous are thy Works, Lord God
mighty : Fuſt and true are thy Ways, thou King |
amts. Who ſhall not fear thee, O Lord, and bt
ify thy Name? for thou only art holy: for all Jl!
ations ſhall come and worſhip before thee ; for "ut
Judgments are made manifeſt.


128 The Theory of the EARTH. .
in the Apocalypſe. That theſe Phraſes ſon
God's remarkable Judgments, all allow; and he ]
they plainly relate to the End of the World, wil
the laſt Plagues, and the laſt of the laſt Plagyg

Chap. xvi. 19. Beſides, the Angel that preſide
over this Judgment, is ſaid to be an Angel thy
had Power over Fire ; and thoſe who are to drink
this Potion are ſaid to be formented with Fr
and Brimſtone, Chap. xiv. 10. This preſidi
Angel ſeems to be our Saviour himſelf (Chap. x
I5.) who, when he comes to execute Divine Ve
geance upon the Earth, gives his Orders in the
Words, Gather the Cluſters of the Vine of ii
Earth, for her Grapes are fully ripe, Ch. xiv. 11
19. And thercupon the deſtroying Angel n
in his Sickle into the Earth, and gather th
Vine of the Earth, and caſt it into the great M.
preſs of the Wrath of God. And this made al
tion compounded of ſeveral Ingredients, but u
diluted with Mater; TS nene ancan
(Ch. xiv. 10.) and was indeed a Potion of Fire an
Brimſtone, and all burning Materials mixt togethe
The Similitudes of Scriprure are ſeldom nice a
exact, but rather bold, noble and great; and 1
cording to the Circumſtances which we hat
obſerved, this Vineyard ſeems to be the Earl!
and this Vintage the End of the World ; ti
preſſing of the Grapes into the Cup or Veſſel tl
receives them, the Diſtillation of burning Liquot
from all Parts of the Earth into the Trough of t
Sea; and that Lake of red Fire, the Blood of tho
Grapes ſo flowing into it. :


Concerning the ConrLacration. 129
Tis true, this Judgment of the Vintage and
ine · preſs, and the Effects of it, ſeem to aim
ore eſpecially at ſome particular Region of the
arth, Chap. xiv. 20. And I am not againſt that,
ovided the Subſtance of the Explication be ſtill


hich follows in the next Chapter, under the
ame of à Sea of Glaſs, mingled with Fire, Ch.
Si. 2. This, I think, expreſſes the higheſt and
mplete State of the Conflagration; when the
ountains are fled away, and not only fo, but
> exterior Region of the Earth quite difloly'd;
e Wax before the Sun : The Channel of the
a filld with a Maſs of fluid Fire, and the ſame
e overflowing all the Globe, and covering the
jole Earth, as the Deluge, or the firſt. Abyſs.
cn will the triumphal Songs and Hallelujahs be
g for the Victories of the Lamb over all his
emics, and over Nature it ſelf, Apo. xv. 3, 4.
eat and marvellous are thy Works, Lord God
mighty : Fuſt and trne are thy Ways, thou King
amts. Who ſhall not fear thee, O Lord, and
ify thy Name ? for thou only art holy : for all
ations ſhall come and worſhip before thee ; for
Judgments are made manifeſt,


taned, and the univerſal Sea of Fire be that


130 The Theory of the EARTH.


1
E


ED CEN WDREY 5


CHAP. XI.


An Helens of thoſe extraordinary Phe 22
| and Wonders in Nature, that, according
A cripture, will precede the coming of Chrif
the C Jonflagration of rhe World,


F we reflect upon the Hiſtory of burni

Mountains, we cannot but obſerve, thi
betore their Eruptions, there are uſually ſon
Changes in the Earth, or in the Air, in the
or. in the Sun it ſelf, as Signs and Forerunna
of the enſuing Storm. We may then cal
conclude that when the laſt great Storm is
coming, and all the Vulcano's of the Ea
ready to burſt, and the Frame of the World!
be diffoly'd, there will be previous Signs, ia
Heavens, and on the Earth, to introduce tl
tragical Fate: Nature cannot come to ti
Extremity, without ſome Symptoms of i
Tlneſs, nor die filently without Pangs or Cot
plaint. But we are naturally heavy of Bel
as to Futurities, and can ſcarce fancy any oil
Scenes, or other State of Nature, than whit
preſent, and continually before our Eyes:
will therefore, to cure our Unbelief, take Sci
ture for our Guide, and keep within the Lin
of its Predictions.

The Scripture plainly tells us of Signs,
Prodigies, that will precede the Coming "of
Saviour, and the End of the World: both


-


Concerning the COXNFLAGRATION. 13


he Heavens, and on the Earth. The Sun, Moon;
ind Stars, will be diſturb'd in their Motion, or
\ſpe&t; the Earth and the Sca will roar and trem-
jc, and the Mountains fall at his Preſence, Theſe
ings both the Prophets and Evangeliſts have told
s; but what we do not underſtand, we are {low
o believe; and therefore thoſe that cannot ap-
rchend how ſuch Changes ſhould come to pals
n the natural World, chule rather to allegorize
ll theſe Expreſſions of Scripture, and to make
em ſignify no more than political Changes of
bovernments, and Empires, and the great Confu-
ons that will be amongſt the People and Princes
fthe Earth; towards the End of the World. So
at darkening of the Sun, ſhaking of the Earth;
nd ſuch like Phraſes of Scripture, according to
eſe Interpreters, are to be underſtood only in
moral Senſe. |
And they think they have a Warrant for
is Interpretation, from the prophetick Style
tf the Old Teſtament, where the Deſtruction
f Cities, and Empires, and great Princes, is
ten deſcrib'd by ſuch Figures, taken from the
atural World. So much is true indeed as to
e Phraſe of the old Prophets in ſome Places;
ut I take the true Reaſon and Deſign of
at, to be a typical Adumbration of what was
ntended ſhould literally come to paſs in the
reat and univerſal Deſtruction of the World;
hercof theſe partial Deſtructions were only
hadows and Prefigurations. But to determine
his Caſe; let us take the known and approved
Ne for interpreting Scripture, Not 70 recede
K 2 from


——2— ͤ—Uü⁴ä 32 —— —


"6" ; 4
3 a0


132 The Theory of the EARTH.


from the literal Senſe without Neceſſity, or when
the Nature of the Subject will admit of a litera
Interpretation. Now, as to, thoſe Caſes in th
Old Teſtament, Hiſtory and Matter of Fact vi
ſhew, that they did not come to pals literally, iſ
therefore muſt not be ſo underſtood ; but as for
thoſe that concern the End of the World, as thy
cannot be determin'd in that way, ſecing they
are yet future; ſo neither is there any naturil
Repugnancy or Improbability that they ſhoull
come literally to paſs; On the contrary, from
the Intuition of that State of Nature, one would
rather conclude the Probability or Neceſſity d
them; that there may, and muſt be ſuch Dior.
ders in the external World, before the genen
Diſſolution. Beſides, if we admit Prodigies it
any Caſc, or providential Indications of God
Judgments to come there can be no Cale {up
pos'd, wherein it will be more reaſonable or pro
per to admit them, than when they are to beth
Meſſengers of an univerſal Vengeance and De
ſtruction. |

Let us therefore conſider what Signs Sci.
ture hath taken notice of, as deſtin d to appel
at that Time, to publiſh, as it were, and pu
claim the approaching End of the World; and
how far they will admit of a natural Explic-
tion, according to thoſe Grounds we have a
ready given, in explaining the Cauſes and Man
ner of the Conflagration, Theſe Signs at
chiefly Earthquakes, | and extraordinary Com
motions of the Seas. Then the E 0


bloody Colour of the Sun and Moon;
akin


Sees . —— a


On. F On = * 4
3 3
Le
3 —


— es —
—


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 133


Whaking of the Powers of Heaven, the Fulgurati-
ns of the Air, and the falling of Stars. As to
; arthquakes, we have upon ſeveral Occaſions
Wcwn, that theſe will neceſſarily be multiplied
Wowards the End of the World; when, by an
Wxccis of Drought and Heat, Exhalations will
ore abound within the Earth; and, from the
me Cauſes, their Inflammation alſo will be
Wore frequent, than in the ordinary State of Na-
Pre. And as all Bodies, when dried, become
ore porous and full of Vacuitics; ſo the Body
f the Earth will be at that Time: And the
ines or Cavities wherein the Fumes and Exha-
tions lodge, will accordingly be of greater Ex-
nt, open into one another, and continued thro'
dng Tracts and Regions; by which means, when
n Earthquake comes, as the Shock will be more
rong and violent, ſo it may reach to a vaſt
ompaſs of Ground, and whole Iſlands or
ontinents be ſhaken at once, when theſe
rains have taken Fire. The Effects alſo of
ch Concuſſions, will not only affect Mankind,
t all the Elements, and the Inhabitants of
gem.
I do not wonder therefore that frequent and
eat Earthquakes ſhould be made a Sign of
approaching Conflagration ; and the high-
Expreſſions of the Prophets concerning the
Vay of the Lord, may be underſtood in a literal
nſe, if they be finally referr'd to the general
eſtruction of the World, and not terminated
jicly upon thoſe particular Countries or People,
whom they are at firſt directed. Hear
N what


”


134 _ The Theory of the EARTH.


what Ezekiel ſays upon this Subject, Chap. ni


19, 20, 22. For im my jealouſy and in the Fu


Tfrael : So that the Fiſhes of the Sea, and ti


of my Wrath have I ſpoken ; ſurely in that Dy
there ſhall be a great ſhaking in the Land i


Fow'ls of the Heaven, and the Beaſts f i
Field, and all creeping Things that creep upon ti
Earth; and all the Men that are upon the Face fl
the Earth, ſhall ſhake at my Preſence; and lM


Mountains ſhall be thrown down, and the ſt


1
Places ſhall fall, and every Wall ſpall fall toil


Ground. And I will rain an overflowing Ran


and great Hail ſtones, Fire and Brimſtone. The


Prophet Iſaias, (Chap. xxiv. 18, 19, 20.) deſciibe |


theſe Judgments in Terms as high, and relatin |


to the natural World; The Windows from on hy
are open, and the Foundations of the Earth i
ſhake, The Earth is utterly broken down, il
Earth is clean diſſolved, the Earth is moved en
ceedingly. The Earth ſhall reel to and fro like
Drunkard, and ſhall be removed like a Cottag,
and the Tranſgreſſion thereof” ſhall be heavy ul
it, and it ſhall fall, and not riſe again.
To reſtrain all theſe things to Fudea, as the
adequate and final Object, is to force both tit
Words and the Senſe, Here are manifeſt Ally
ſions and Footſteps of the Deſtruction of ti
World, and the Diſſolution of the Earth; pat
ly as it was in the Deluge, and partly as it ui
be in its. laſt Ruin, torn, broken, and ſha
ter d. But moſt Men have fallen into ti
Error, to fancy both the Deſtructions of ti
World by Water and Fire, quiet, noiſe!


Concerning: the CONFLAGRATION. 135


Things ; executed without any Ruins or - Rup-
res in Nature: That the Deluge was but a
Treat Pool of ſtill Waters made by the Rains,
Ind Inundation of the Sea; and the Conflagrati-
In will be only a ſuperficial Scorching of the
Farth, with a running Fire, Theſe are falſe Ideas,
Ind unſuitable to Scripture: For as the Deluge
tere repreſented a Diſruption of the Abyſs, and
Wonſcquently of the then habitable Earth; ſo the
ture Combuſtion of it, according to the Repre-
W-ntations of Scripture, is to be uſher'd in and ac-
Jompanied with all forts of violent Impreſſions
pon Nature; and the chief Inſtrument of theſe
jolences will be Earthquakes. Theſe will tear
Wc Body of the Earth, and ſhake its Foundations;
end the Rocks, and pull down the tall Moun-
zins; ſometimes overturn, and ſometimes ſwal-
ow up Towns and Cities; diſturb and diſorder
he Elements, and make a general Confuſion in
ature,
Next to Earthquakes, we may conſider the
Roarings of a troubled Sea. This is another Sign
ff a dying World. St. Luke, (Chap. xxi. 25,
26, 27.) hath ſet down a great many of them
ogether: Let us hear his Words: And there
ball be Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon,
md in the Stars; and upon the Earth*Diſtreſs
Nations, with Perplexity; the Sea and the
aves roaring. Mens Hearts failing them for
er, and for looking after thoſe things which
gre coming on the Earth; for the Powers of
eaven ſhall be ſhaken. And then ſhall they
ee the San of Man coming in a Cloud, with
| = < a Power


0
6
y


136 The Theory of the EARTH. WP
 Pomer and great Glory, &. As ſome wou
allegorize theſe Signs, which we noted before,
Jo others would confine them to the Deſtrudia
of Feruſalem. But tis plain, by this coming of
the Son of Man in the Clouds, and the Reden


|
|
i
I
_


tion of the Faithful, (Verſe 28.) and at the (any
Time the Sound of the laſt Trumpet, (Matt. uu
31.) which all relate to the End of the Word
that ſomething further is intended than the Dei
ſtruction of Feruſalem. And though there ve
Prodigies at the Deſtruction of that City and Stat
yet not of this Force, nor with theſe Circum
ſtances. Tis true, thoſe partial Deſtructions au
Calamities, as we obſervd before, of Babyln
Feruſal:m, and the Roman Empire, being Type
of an univerſal and final Deſtruction of all Go
Enemies, have, in the Pictures of them, ſome d
the ſame Strokes, to ſhew they are all from tht
fame Hand, decreed by the ſame Wiſdom, fore
told by the ſame Spirit; and the ſame Power ani
Providence that have already wrought the one, vil
alſo work the other, in due Time, the forme
being ſtill Pledges, as well as Prefigurations, d
the latter. | ;

Let us then proceed in our Explication of th
Sign, the Roaring of the Sea, and the Wat,

applying it to the End of the World. I do nd
look upon this ominous Noiſe of the Sea, 4
the Effect of a Tempeſt, for then it would nd
ſtrike ſuch a Terror into the Inhabitants of tt
Farth, nor make them apprehenſive of ſome
great Evil coming upon the World, as this wil
do; what procceds from viſible Cauſes, 4


— — — — ——


Concerning the CotLARATION. 137


Ich as may happen in a common Courſe of
Nature, does not ſo much amaze us, nor affright
: Therefore tis more likely theſe Diſturbances
We the Sea proceed from below, partly by Sym-
thy and Revulſions from the Land; by Earth-
akes there, and exhauſting the ſubterraneous
Favities of Waters, which will draw again from
Wc Scas what Supplies they can ; and partly by
Warthquakes in the very Sea it ſelf, with Exhala-
ons and fiery Eruptions from the Bottom of it :
hings indeed that happen at other Times, more
r leſs ; but at this Conjuncture, all Cauſes con-
ring, they will break out with more Violence,
d put the whole Body of the Waters into a tu-
ultuary Motion. 1 do not ſee any Occaſion,
this Time, for high Winds; neither can J
ink a ſuperficial Agitation of the Waves
ould anſwer this Phænomenon; but tis ra-
ter from Contorſions in the Bowels of the
Jcean, which make it roar, as it were, for
ain. Some Cauſes impelling the Waters one
ay, and ſome another, make inteſtine Strug-
gs, and contrary Motions; from whence pro-
ed unuſual Noiſes, and ſuch a troubled State of
e Waters, as does not only make the Sea in-
wigable, but alſo ſtrikes Terror into all the ma-
time Inhabitants, that live within the View or
dund of it.
So much for the Earth and Sea. The Face
{ the Heavens alſo will be changed in divers
eſpects; the Sun and the Moon darken'd,
t of a bloody or pale Countenance ; the ce-
fal Powers ſhaken, and the Stars unſettled


in


zs The Theory of the EARTH. ;


in their Otbs. As to the Sun and Moon, they ;
Obſcuration or Change of Colour is no moy |
than what happens commonly before the Eu
tion ofa fiery Mountain. Dion Caſſius, you ſa |
hath taken notice of it in that Eruption of n
caſions in Yeſuvius. And 'tis a Thing of ah
Explication; for, according as the Atmoſphere
more or leſs clear or turbid, the Luminaries a
more or leſs conſpicuous; and, according to th
Nature of thoſe Fumes, or Exhalations that (win
in the Air, the Face of the Sun is diſcolout{
ſometimes one Way, ſometimes another. Ya
ſee, in an ordinary Experiment, when we lod
upon one another through the Fumes of 8
phur, we appear pale like ſo many Ghoſts ; an
in ſome foggy Days, the Sun hangs in the Fi
mament as a Lump of Blood: And both tis
Sun and Moon, at their Riſing, when their Liglt
comes to us through the thick Vapouts of tit
Earth, are red and fiery. Theſe are not Chang
wrought in the Subſtance of the Luminarie
but in the Modifications of their Light, 281
flows to us: For Colours are but Light in
Sort of Diſguile ; as it paſſes through Mediun
of different Qualities, it takes different Forn
but the Matter is ſtill the ſame, and returns!
its Simplicity, when it comes again into a pul
Air.

Now the Air may be changed and corrupt
to a great Degree, tho there appear no vil
Change to our Eye. This is manifeſt from i
ſectious Airs, and the Changes of the *
Wh, | : | 0


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 139


e Storms and Rains, which we feel common-
ſooner than we ſce, and ſome other Creatures
rccive much ſooner than we do. Tis no Won-
r then, if, before this mighty Storm, the Diſpo-
ions of the Air be quite alter'd; cſpecially if we
nſider, what we have ſo often noted before,
at there will be a great Abundance of Fumes
d Exhalations, thro' the whole Atmoſphere of
e Earth, before the laſt Fire breaks out, where-
the Light of the Sun may be tinQtur'd in ſe-
ral Ways: And laſtly, it may be ſo order d
ovidentially that the Body of the Sun may con-
at at that Time ſome Spots, or Maculæ, far
eater than uſual, and by that mcans be really
rkened, not to us only, but to all the neigh-
during Planets: And this will have a proporti-
able Effet upon the Moon too, for the Dimi-
tion of her Light: So that upon all Suppoſi-
dns, theſe Phænomena are very intelligible, if
dt neceſſary Forerunners of the Conflagration.
The next Sign given us, is, that the Powers
Heaven will be ſhaken, By the Heavens
this Place is either underſtood the Planeta-
Heavens, or that of the fx'd Stars; but this
ter being vaſtly diſtant from the Earth, can-
dt be really affected by the Conflagration ;
or the Powers of it, that is, its Motion, or
e Bodies contained in it, any ways ſhaken
diſorder d. But, in Appcarange, theſe cele-
al Bodies may ſcem to be ſhaken, and their
lotions diſorder'd; as in a Tempeſt by Night,
hen the Ship is toſsd with contrary and un-
tan Motions, the Heavens ſeem to fluctuate
over


140 The Theory of the EAR TR.


over our Heads, and the Stars to reel to ili
fro, when the Motion is only in our own v
ſel: So poſſibly the uncertain Motions of g
Atmoſphere, and ſometimes of the Earth
ſelf, may ſo vary the Sight and Aſpect of th
ſtarry Canopy, that it may ſeem to ſhake a
tremble. SEEDS

. But if we underſtand this of the planetary Hy
vens, they may really be ſhaken ; Provideng
either ordering ſome great Changes in the othy
Planets, previouſly to the Conflagration of oy
Planet ; as, 'tis probable, there was a great Chang
in Venus at the Time of our Deluge: Or th
great Shakings and Concuſſions of our Globe:
that Time, affecting ſome of the neighbouriy
Orbs, or at leaſt that of the Moon, may cauk
Anomalies and Irregularities in their Motior
But the Senſe that I ſhould pitch upon chiefly fu
explaining this Phraſe of ſhaking the Powers |
Heaven, comprehends, in a good meaſure, bot
theſe Heavens of the fix'd Stars and of theP!
nets : 'Tis that Change of Situation in the Au
of the Earth, which we have formerly mention
whereby the Stars will ſeem to change their Place
and the whole Univerſe to take another Poſtur
This is ſufficiently known to thoſe that kno!
the different Conſequences of a ſtrait or obliqu
Poſture of the Earth. And as the Heavens an
the Earth were, in this Senſe, once ſhaken, be
fore, namely, at the Deluge, when they 10
their firſt Situation; ſo now they will de
ſhaken again, and thereby return to the Poſiur
they had before that firſt Concuſſion, 9


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 14


I take to be the true literal Senſe of the Pro-
t Haggai, repeated by St. Paul, (Ch. ii. 6.
Heb. xii. 26.) Tet once more I ſhake not the
rth only, but alſo Heaven.
ne laſt Sign we ſhall take Notice of, is that
falling Stars. And the Stars ſhall fall from
aven, ſays our Saviour, Matt. xxiv. 29. We
ſure, from the Nature of the Thing, that this
not be underſtood either of fixd Stars, or
ancts ; for if either of theſe ſhould tumble from
> Skies, and reach the Earth, they would break
ll in Pieces or ſwallow it up, as the Sea does
inking Ship; and at the ſame Time would
t all the inferior Univerſe into Confuſion. It
neceſſary therefore, by theſe Stars, to under-
d eithet fiery Meteors falling from the Middle
gion of the Air, or Comets and Blazing Stars.
d doubt, there will be all ſorts of fiery Metcors
that Timez and, amongſt others, thoſe that
call'd falling Stars ; which, tho' they are not
nſiderable ſingly, yet if they were multiplied in
at Numbers, Falling (as the Prophet ſays, 1/2.
iv, 4.) as Leafs from the Vine, or Figs from
Fig-tree, they would make an aſtoniſhing
pat, But, I think, this Expreſſion does chiefly
er to Comets, which are dead Stars, and may
ly be ſaid to fall from Heaven, when they
we their Seats above, and thoſe æthereal Re-
dns wherein they were fix d, and ſink into
slower World; where they wander about
th a Blaze in their Tail, or a Flame about
lr Head, as if they came on purpoſe to be
; Meſſengers of ſome fiery Vengeance. If
Numbers


142 The Theory of the EAR TB. þ:
Numbers of theſe blazing Stars ſhould fall i


our Heaven together, they would make a dreadif ,
and formidable Appearance; and, I am apt iii


think, that Providence hath ſo contriv'd the Pe
ods of their Motion, that there will be an unyſ
Concourſe of them at that Time, within the Vie
of the Earth, to be a Prelude to this laſt and md
tragical Scene of the ſublunary World.

I do not know any more in Scripture relatiy
to the laſt Fire, that, upon the Grounds lil
down in this Diſcourſe, may not receive a (ati
factory Explication. It reaches beyond the Sim
before-mention'd to the higheſt Expreſſions d
| Scripture: as, Lakes of Fire and Brimſton,
molten Sea mingled with Fire, the Liquefaffu
of Mountains, and of the Earth it (elf. ..
need not now look upon theſe Things as hype
bolical, and poctical Strains, but as barctic
Propheſies, and Things that will literally com
o pals as they are predicted. One thing mon
will be expected in a juſt Hypotheſis, or Tit
ory of the Conflagration ; namely, that |
ſhould anſwer, not only all the Conditions an
Characters belonging to the laſt Fire, but fhoul
alſo make Way, and lay the Foundation
another World to ſucceed this, or of new Hel
vens and a new Earth: For St. Peter bit
taught this Doctrine of the Renovation of il
World, as poſitively and expreſly as that (
165 Conflagration ; and therefore they that to d
plain the Deſtruction of the preſent World,
to leave it afterwards in an eternal Rubbil
without any Hopes of Reſtoration, do oxy
| 4


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 1243
Fer the Chriſtian Doctrine concerning it. But
to our Hypotheſis, we are willing to.ſtand this
rther Trial, and be accountable for the Conſe-
zences of the Conflagration, as well as the An-
edents and Manner of it. And we have ac-
S:dingly, in the following Book, from the Aſhes
this, raiſed a New Earth, which we leave to
Enjoyment of the Readers. In the mean
e, to cloſe our Diſcourſe, we will bid fare-


ell to the preſent World, in a ſhort Review of
laſt Flames. |


AA AATAAAAAA


CHAP. XI.


n imperſect Deſcription of the Coming «5 our
Saviour; and of the World on Fire.


Ectainly there is nothing in the whole
Courſe of Nature, or of Human Affairs,
great and ſo extraordinary, as the two laſt
enes of them, THE COMING OF OUR
AVIOUR, and the BURNING OF THE
ORLD. If we could draw in our Minds

e Pictures of theſe, in true and lively Colours,
e ſhould ſcarce be able to attend to any thing
ſe, or ever divert our Imagination from theſe
o Objects: For what can more affect us,
an the greateſt Glory that ever was viſible
on Earth, and at the ſame; Time the greateſt
Wy crror; a God deſcending at the Head of
| an


144 The Theory of the EARTH.


an Army of Angels, and a burning World und;
his Feet ? e
| Theſe Things are truly above Expreſſion; au
not only ſo, but ſo different and remote fron
our ordinary Thoughts and Conceptions, that h
that comes neareſt to a true Deſcription of them,
ſhall be look'd upon as the moſt extravagant. u
our Unhappineſs to be ſo much uſed to little ui
fling Things in this Life, that when any Thin
great is repreſented to us, it appears fantaſtical, a
Idea made by ſome contemplative or melanchy
ly Perſon: J will not venture therefore, withou
premiſing Grounds out of Scripture, to ſay ay
thing concerning this glorious Appearance. *

to the Burning of the World, I think we han
already laid a Foundation ſufficient to ſupport the
higheſt Deſcription that can be made of it; bu
the Coming of our Saviour being wholly out d
the way of natural Cauſes, it is reaſonable wh
ſhould take all Directions we can from Scripture,
that we may give a more fitting and juſt Account
of that ſacred Pomp. |
I need not mention thoſe Places of Scriptutt
that prove the ſecond Coming of our Saviour it
general, or his Return again to the Earth at tit
End of the World, (Matt. xxiv. 30, 31. 46
i. 11. and iii. 20, 21. Apoc. i. 7. Heb. ix. 28)
No Chriſtian can doubt of this, tis ſo oftet
repeated in thoſe facred Writings z but tic
Manner and Circumſtances of this Coming, ot
of this Appearance, are the Things we nor
enquire into. And, in the | firſt, Place, e
may obſerve, that the Scripture tells us, ot
: ; 4 Savio


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 145


wiour will come in flaming Fire, and with an
oft of mighty Angels; ſo ſays St. Paul to the
heſſalonians, The Lord Jeſus ſhall be revealed
jm Heaven with mighty Angels, in flaming
re, taking Vengeance on them that know not God,
xd obey not the Goſpel of our Lord Feſus Chriſt.
the ſecond Place, our Saviour ſays himſelf,
Mat. xvi. 27.) The Son of Man ſhall come in the
ory of his Father, with his Angels. From which
o Places we may learn; Firſt, that the Ap-
arance of our Saviour will be with Flames of
re. Secondly, with an Hoſt of Angels. Thirdly,
the Glory of his Father : By which Glory of
e Father, I think, is underſtood that Throne of
ory repreſented by Daniel for the Antient of
Jays. For our Saviour ſpeaks here to the
ws, and probably in a Way intelligible to
em; and the Glory of the Father, which they
cre moſt likely to underſtand, would be either
e Glory wherein God appeared at Mount Sinai,
don the giving of the Law, whereof the Apoſtle
caks largely to the Hebrews ; or that which
Paniel repreſents Him in at the Day of Judg-
ent, (Chap. xii. 18, 19, 20, 21.) And this latter
ing more proper to the Subject of our Savi-
rs Diſcourſe, 'tis more likely this Expreſſion
ers to it. Give me leave therefore to ſet down
at Deſcription of the Glory of the Father upon
Throne, from the Prophet Daniel, ch. vii. 9.
nd I beheld till the Thrones were * ſet, and the


* Tis ill render'd in the Engliſh, caſt down. |
Book III. 1 Antient


— — — —
—


146 The Theory of the EARTR.


Antient of Days did ſit, whoſe Garment was ni
as Snow, and the Hair of his Head like the wif
Wool! : His Throne was like the fiery Flame, 4
his Wecls as burning Fire. A fiery Stream (i
and came forth from before him, thouſand thouſan FM
miniſtred unto him, and ten thouſand times il
thouſand ſtood before Him. With this Throne:
the Glory of the Father, let us, it you pleaſe, con
parc the Throne of the Son of God, as it was
by St. John in the Apocalypſe, Chap. iv. 2, &
And immediately I was in the Spirit : and bel
a Throne was ſet in Heaven, and one fat on
Throne. And he that ſat, was to look upon lik
Faſper, and a Sardine Stone: And there nu
Rainbow round about the Throne, in Appearn
like unto an Emerald. And out of the Throne
ceeded Lightnings, and Thunderings, and Vai
&c. and before the Throne was a Sea of Glaſs
unto Cryſtal.

In theſe Repreſentations you have ſome Ben
of the Glory of the Father, and of the Son ; whi
may be partly a Direction to us, in conceivingl
Luſtre of our Saviour's Appearance, Let us!
ther obſerve, if you pleaſe, how external N
will be affected at the Sight of God, or of!
approaching Glory. The Scripture often takes!
tice of this, and in Terms very high and eloqutl
The Yſalmiſt ſeems to have lov'd that Subt
above others; to ſet out the Greatneſs of the!
of the Lord, and the Conſternation of all Natl
at that Time. He throws about his Thun
and Lightning, makes the Hills to melt
Wax, at the Preſence of the Lord, and **

*


Concerning the ConFLacRATION. 147


oundations of the Earth to tremble, as you may
De in the xviiith Palm, and the xcviith, and
Wic civth, and ſeveral others which arc too long
Wo be here inſerted. So the Prophet Habakkuk,
his prophetick Prayer, Chap. iii. hath many
jaculations to the like Purpoſe. And the Pro-
Whct Naſum ſays, The Mountains quake at him,
nd the Hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his
Preſence : yea, the World, and all that dwell
erein. A
But more particularly, as to the Face of Nature,
ſt before the coming of our Saviour, that may
belt collected from the Signs of his coming,
cntion'd in the precedent Chapter. Thoſe all
ecting together, help to prepare and make ready
Theatre, fit for an angry God to come down
pon. The Countenance of the Heavens will be
rk and gloomy 3; and a Veil drawn over the Face
the Sun. The Earth in a Diſpoſition every
here to break into open Flames, The Tops of
xe Mountains ſmoaking ; the Rivers dry, Earth-
uakes in ſeveral Places; the Sea ſunk and retir'd
ito its deepeſt Channel, and roaring, as againſt
dme mighty Storm. Theſe Things will make
e Day dead and melancholy ; but the Night-
enes will have more of Horror in them, when
le blazing Stars appear, like ſo many Furies,
ith their lighted Torches, threatning to ſet all
n Fire. For 1 do not doubt but the Comets will
ar a Part in this Tragedy, and have fomcthing
Kraordinary in them, at that Time; either as to
amber, or Bigneſs, or Nearneſs to the Earth.
clides, the Air will be full of flaming Meteors,
L 2 of


148 The Theory of the EAR TE.


of unuſual Forms and Magnitudes ; Balls of Fin
rowling in the Sky, and pointed Lightning
darted againſt the Earth; mix'd with Claps d
Thunder, and unuſual Noiſes from the Cloud
The Moon and the Stars will be confusd an
irregular, both in their Light and Motions ; x
if the whole Frame of the Heavens was out 9
Order, and all the Laws of Nature were broke
or expird.

When all Things are in this languiſhing q
dying Poſture, and the Inhabitants of the Eat
under the Fears of their laſt End; the Heayw
will open on a ſudden, and the Glory of God ui
appear. A Glory ſurpaſſing the Sun in its great
may ſuppoſe it will bear ſome Reſemblance, a
Proportion, with thoſe Repreſentations that u
made in Scripture, of God upon his Throne. Il
Wonder in the Heavens, whatſoeyer its Fom
may be, will preſently attract the Eyes of all ti
Chriſtian World. Nothing can more aft
them than an Object ſo unuſual, and ſo illuſtriow
and, that (probably) brings along with it tht
laſt Deſtiny, and will put a Period to all hum
Affairs.

Some of the Antients have thought, that ti
coming of our Saviour would be in the del
of the Night, and his. firſt glorious Appearatd
in the midſt of Darkneſs, 2 Pet. iii. 10. 0
is often deſcrib'd in Scripture as Light, or Fl
with Darkneſs round about him. He bout
the Heavens, and came down ; and Dark
was under his Feet. He made TRY 1
3 wn


©» © RR.


\


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 149


vet Place, Pal. xviii. 9, 11, 12. His Pavilion
und about him were dark Waters, and thick
Wds of the Skies. At the Brightneſs that
Ws before him, the thick Clouds paſſed, Plal.
Wii And when God appeared upon Mount
ai, the Mountain burnt with Fire unto the
% of Heaven, with Darkneſs, Clouds and
ck Darkneſs, Deut. iv. 11. Or, as the A-
tle expreſſes it, with Blackneſs, and Darkneſs,
d Tempeſt, Heb. xii. 18. Light is never
Dre glorious than when ſurrounded with
arkneſs; and, it may be, the Sun, at that Time,
l be ſo obſcure, as to make little Diſtinction of
y and Night. But however, this Divine Light
er · bears, and diſtinguiſhes itſelf from common
ght, tho it be at Mid- day. Twas about Noon
at the Light ſhin d from Heaven, and ſurrounded
Paul, Acts xxii. 6. And 'twas in the Day-
e that St. Stephen ſaw the Heavens opened;
s Vit. 55, 56. Sa the Glory of God, and
us ſtanding at the Right Hand of God. This
pht, which flows from a more vital Source, be
Day or Night, will always be predominant.
hat Appearance of God upon Mount Sinai,
uch we mention'd, if we reflect upon it,
| help us a little to form an Idea of this laſt
pearance. When God had declard, that he
uld come down in the Sight of the People,
Text ſays, There were Thunders and Light-
gs, and a thick Cloud upon the Mount, and
Voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud; ſo
1 all the People that was in the Camp trem-
a And Mount Sinai was altogether on a
| L 3 Smoke,


U— —ä —— —
- oe Ko * , —— ——— ð— K . SE" OI I As ee


150 The Theory of the EARTH.


Smoke, becauſe the Lord deſcended upon it oil
Fire. And the Smoke thereof aſcended as til
Smoke of a Furnace, and the whole Mount quite
greatly, It we look upon this Mount as ali
Epitome of the Earth, this Appearance gig
us an imperfect Reſemblance of that which viii
to come. Here are the ſeveral Parts, or mu
Strokes of it; firſt, the Heavens and the Earth vil
Smoke and Fire; then the Appeatance of a Duin
Glory, and the Sound of a Trumpet in the br
ſence of Angels. But as the ſecond Coming d
our Saviour, is a Triumph over his Enemies, an
an Entrance into his Kingdom, and is acted upn
the Theatre of the whole Earth; ſo we are
ſuppoſe, in proportion, all the Parts and Ci
cumſtances of it, more great and magnificent.
When, therefore, this mighty God retun
again to that Earth, where he had once ben
ill treated, not Mount Sinai only, but all th
Mountains of the Earth, and all the Inhab
tants of the World, will tremble at his It
ſence. At the firſt opening of the Heave!
the Brightneſs of his Perſon will ſcatter t
dark Clouds, and ſhoot Streams of Ll
throughout all the Air. But that firſt Appel
ance, being far from the Earth, will ſcm |
be only a great Maſs of Light, without 4
diſtinct Form; till, by nearer Approach
this bright Body ſhews it ſelf to be an AM
of Angels, with this King of Kings for tl
Leader, Then you may imagine how gu
Mankind will tremble and be aſtoniſhed; 1
while they are gazing at this heavenly He


— —— 223 1 —


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 151


e Voice of the Archangel is heard, the ſhrill
dund of the Trumpet reaches their Ears, and
is gives the general Alarum to all the World :
wr he cometh, for he cometh, they cry, to judge
e Earth. The crucity'd God isreturn'd in Glory,
take Vengeance upon his Enemics : Not only
don thoſe that pierced his ſacred Body, with
ails, and with a Spcar, as Jeruſalem; but thoſe
at alſo pierce him every Day by their Profaneneſs,
d hard Speeches, concerning his Perſon, and
s Religion, Now they ſec that God, whom
ey have mock'd, or blaſphem'd, laugh'd at his
[canncſs, or at his vain Threats; they ſce Him,
d are confounded with Shame and Fear; and
the Bitterneſs of their Anguith and Deſpair, call
r the Mountains to fall upon them, 1/2. ii. 29.
ly mto the Clefts of the Rocks, and into theCaves
the Earth, for fear of the Lord, Rev. vi. 16,
. and the Glory of His Majeſty, when he ariſeth
> ſhake terribly the Earth.
As it is not poſlible for us to expreſs, or con-
Ive the Dread, and Majeſty of this Appearance;
d ncither can we, on the other Hand, expreſs
e Paſſions and Conſtcrnation of the People
at behold it. Theſe Things exceed the Mca-
res of Human Affairs, and of Human
houghts; we have neither Words, nor Com-
ariſons, to make them known by. Ttfe grcat-
It Pomp and Magnificence of the Emperors
[ the Eaſt, in their Armies, in their Triumphs,
their Inaugurations, is but like the Sport
nd Entertainment of Children, if compar'd
yu this Solemnity, When God condeſcends
L 4 to


152 The Theory of the EAR TB.


to an external Glory, with a viſible Train u
Equipage; when, from all the Province g
his vaſt and boundleſs Empire, he ſummoyWi
his Nobles, as I may ſo ſay, the ſeveral 0
ders of Angels, and Archangels, to attend h
Perſon ; tho' we cannot tell the Form or Ma.
ner of this Appearance, we know there is ni
thing in our Experience, or in the whole Hiſtol


of this World, that can be a juſt RepreſentationdM


the leaſt Part of it. No Armies ſo numertqy
as the Hoſt of Heaven; and in the midſt of thok
bright Legions, in a flaming Chariot, will fit th
Son of Man, when he comes to be glorified inhi
Saints, and triumph over his Enemies: Ani
inſtead of the wild Noiſes of the Rabble, wia

makes a great Part of our Worldly State, ti}
bleſſed Company will breathe their Ha/lelyai
into the open Air, and repeated Acclamationsd
Salvation to God, which ſits upon the Throne, ati
to the Lamb, Apoc. vii. 10. Now is come Salis
tion and Strength, and the Kingdom of our Gi
and the Power of his Chriſt, ch. xii. 10.

But I leave the reſt to our ſilent Deyotiol
and Admiration. Only give me leave, whill
this Object is before our Eyes, to make a ſhut
Reflection upon the wonderful Hiſtory of ll
Saviour; and the different States which thi
ſacred Perſon, within the Compaſs of ol
Knowledge, hath undergone. We now ſe
him coming in the Clouds, in Glory and It!
umph, ſurrounded with innumerable Ange
This is the ſame Perſon, who, ſo many Hun
dred Yeats ago, enter d Jeruſalem, with *

0


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 153


Hort of Equipage, mounted upon an Als's Colt,
hie the little People, and the Multitude cry'd,
71 oſanna to the Son of David. Nay, this is
Wc ame Perſon, that, at his firſt Coming into
nis World, was laid in a Manger, inſtead of a
Wradlc; a naked Babe dropt in a Crib at Berh-
em (Luke ii. 12.) his poor Mother not hay-
Wn wherewithal to get her a better Lodging,
hen ſhe was to be delivered of this ſacred
Wurthen. This helpleſs Infant, that often
Wanted a little Milk to refreſh it, and ſupport
ts Weakneſs; that hath often cry'd for the
WB: caſt with Hunger and Tears, now appears to
Wc the Lord of Heaven and Earth. If this
Pieine Perſon had fallen from the Clouds in
Mortal Body, cloath'd with Fleſh and Blood,
and ſpent his Life here amongſt Sinners, that
alone had been an infinite Condeſcenſion: But, as
if it had not been enough to take upon him human
Nature, he was content, for many Months, to
live the Life of an Animal, or of a Plant, in the
dark Cell of a Woman's Womb. This i the

Lord's Doing, it is marvellous in our Eyes!
Neither is this all that is wonderful in the
Story of our Saviour. If the Manner of his
Death, be compar'd with his preſent Glory, we
ſhall think either the one or the other incre-
dible. Look up firſt into the Heavens; ſec
how they 'bow under him, and receive a new
Light from the Glory of his Preſence ; then
look down upon the Earth, and ſee a naked
Body, hanging upon a curſed Tree in Golgo-
tha, crucified between two Thieves, wound-
cd,


154 The Theory of the EARTH.


ed, ſpit upon, mock'd, abus d. Is it poſſi,
to belicve, that one, and the ſame Perſon ch
act or ſuffer ſuch different Parts? That he thai
is now Lord and Maſtcr of all Nature, na
only of Death and Hell, and the Powers ol
Darkneſs, but of all Principalities in heavenh
Places, is the ſame Infant Zeſizs, the ſame cw
cified Jeſus, of whoſe Lite and Death the Chi.
ſtian Records give us an Account? The Hiſtoy
of this Perſon is the Wonder of this World; and
not of this World only, but of the Angels aboje
that de/are to look inta it (i Pet. i. 11, 12.)
Let us now return to our Subject. We Xl
the Earth in a languiſhing Condition, read
to be made a Burnt Offering, to appeale tht
Wrath of its offended Lord. When Sogn
was to be deſtroy'd (Gen. xviii.) Abraham it
terceded with God, that he would ſpare it ia
the Righteous Sake; and David (2 Sam. xii
17.) interceded to ſave his guiltlefs Pcopl
from God's Judgments, and the deſtroying
Angel: But here is no Interceſſor for Ma.
kind in this laſt Extremity; none to interpole
where the Mediator of our Peace, is the Part
offended, Shall then, the Righteous periſh will
the Wicked? Shall not the Judge of all itt
Earth do right? Or, if the Righteous be tran
lated and deliverd from this Fire, what {hi
become of innocent Children and Infants? Mu
theſe all be given up to the mercileſs Flame
as a Sacrifice to Moloch? And their tende
Fleſh, like burnt Incenſe, ſend up Fumes d
feed the Noſtrils of Evil Spirits? Can the or 0

| 3 rat


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 155


cl ſmell a ſweet Savour from ſuch Sacrifices?

he greater halt of Mankind is made up of In-

(nts and Children; and if the Wicked be deſtroy'd;

t theſe Lambs, what have they done ? Arc there

o Bowels of Compaſſion for ſuch an harmleſs

ultitude? But we leave them to their Guardian

\ngels, and to that Providence which watches

vcr all Things (Mat. xviii. 10.)

It only remains, therefore, to let fall that Fire
om Heaven, which is to conſume this Holo-
auſt, Imagine all Nature now ſtanding in a
lent ExpeQation to receive its laſt Doom; the
utelary and deſtroying Angels to have their
nſtrutions 3 every Thing to be ready for the
atal Hour; and then, after a little Silence, all
he Hoſt of Heaven to raiſe their Voice, and
ng aloud, LET GOD ARISE, let his Ene-
ies be ſcattered: As Smoke is driven away, ſo
live them away; as Wax melteth before the
Fire, ſo LET the Wicked periſh at the Pre-
ence of God, And upon this, as upon a Sig-
al given, all the ſublunary World breaks into
Flames, and all the Treaſuries of Fire are open d
in Heaven, and in Earth.

Thus the Conflagration begins. If one
ſhould now go about to repreſent h World
on Fire, with all the Confuſions that neccſlari-
ly muſt 'be in Nature, and in Mankind upon
that Occaſion, it would ſeem to moſt Men a
Romantick Scene: Yet we are ſure there mult
be ſuch a Scene; The Heavens will paſs away
th 2 Noiſe, and the Elements will melt with
ent Heat, and all the Works of the 4
= WI


156 The Theory of the EARTH. &
will be burnt up: And theſe Things canal
come to paſs without the greateſt Diſorder
imaginable, both in the Minds of Men, and "Mi
external Nature, and the ſaddeſt Spectacles thy
Eye can behold. We think it a great Mani
to ſee a ſingle Perſon burnt alive; here arg M
lions ſhricking in the Flames at once. Tis fright
ful to us to look upon a great City in Flamg
and to ſee the Diſtractions and Miſery of th
People; here is an univerſal Fire through all the
Cities of the Earth, and an univerſal Maſſuct
of their Inhabitants. Whatſoever the Prophey
forctold of the Deſolations of :Zudea, Zeruſalm
or Babylon (1/a. xxiv. Fer. li. Lament.) in th
higheſt Strains, is more than literally accompliſh!
in this laſt and general Calamity ; and thoſe only
that are Spectators of it, can make its Hiſtory.

The Diſorders in Nature, and the inanimat
World, will be no leſs, nor leſs ſtrange and
unaccountable, than thoſe in Mankind. Even
Element, and every Region, ſo far as tk
Bounds of this Fire extend, will be in a Tv
mult and a Fury, and the whole habitabl
World running into Confuſion. A World b
ſooner deſtroyed than made; and Nature te.
lapſes haſtily into that Chaos-State, out of which
ſhe came by ſlow and leiſurely Motions : As
an Army advances into the Field by juſt and 10
gular Marches ; but when it is broken and rout
ed, it flies with Precipitation, and one canndl
it gives no Mercy; there is nothing but Fury,


and Rage, and Ruin, and Deſtruction, whets
ſocyct


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 157


ever it prevails. A Storm, or Hurricano, tho
be but the Force of Air, makes a ſtrange Ha-
ock where it comes; but deyouring Flames, or
Ichalations ſet on Fire, have ſtill a far greater
Tiolence, and carry more Terror along with them.
bunder and Eathquakes are the Sons of Fire;
d we know nothing in all Nature more impe-
nous, or more irreſiſtibly deſtructive than theſe
vo. And accordingly in this laſt War of the
lements, we may be ſure, they will bear their
arts, and do great Execution in the ſeveral Re-
ons of the World. Earthquakes and ſubterra-
cous Eruptions will tear the Body and Bowels of
ic Earth; and Thunders and convulſive Motions
the Air rend the Skies. The Waters of the Sea
ill boil and ſtruggle with Streams of Sulphur that
n into them; which will make them fume, and
noke, and roar, beyond all Storms and Tem—
ſts; and theſe Noiſes of the Sea will be anſwer'd
ain from the Land, by falling Rocks and Moun-
ins. This is a ſmall Part of the Diſorders of
lat Day.
But tis not poſſible, from any Station, to have
full Proſpect of this laſt Scene of the Earth; for
sa Mixture of Fire and Darkneſs. This new
emple is filld with Smoke, while it is conſe-
ating, and none can enter into it. But J am
pt to think, if we could look down upon this
ming World from above the Clouds, and have
full View of it, in all its Parts, we ſhould think
a lively Repreſentation of Hell it ſelf. For
re and Darkneſs are the two chief Things by
hich that State, or that Place, uſes to be de-


.


© "wot — -


1s melted into a Fluor, like molten Glals, (


158 The Theory of the EARTH.


ther, with all other Ingredients that make
Tophet that is prepared of old, (Iſa. xxx.) Hi
are Lakes of Fire and Brimſtone 3 Rivers oi
melted glowing Matter; ten thouſand Yui
nos vomiting Flames all at once; thick Dat,
nels, and Pillars of Smoke twiſted about vill
Wreaths of Flame, like fiery Snakes; Mountain
of Earth thrown up into the Air, and the He
vens dropping down in Lumps of Fire, The
Things will all be literally true, concerning thi
Day, and that State of the Earth. And if u.
ſuppoſe Beelgebub, and his apoſtate Crew, intk
midſt of this fiery Furnace (and I know. 10
where they can be elſe ;) it will be hard 9
find any Part of the Univerſe, or any State (
Things, that anſwers to ſo many of the Prot
tics and Characters of Hell, as this which is no
before us.

But if we ſuppoſe the Storm over, and ti
the Fire hath got an entire Victory over a
other Bodies, and ſubdued every Thing to itfel
the Conflagration will end in a Deluge of Fire, d
in a Sea of Fire, covering the whole Globe oft
Earth: For, when the exterior Region of the En


running Metal, it will, according to the Natul
of ather Fluids, fill all Vacuities and Depreſſiol
and fall into a regular Surface, at an equal I.
ſtance every where, from its Center. This &
of Fire, like the firſt Abyſs, will cover the Face
the whole Earth, make a kind of ſecond Chad


and leave a Capacity for another World 4 l
4 Lol


*


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 159


om it. But that is not our preſent Buſineſs.
et us only, if you pleaſe, to take Leave of
is Subject, reflect, upon this Occaſion, on the
anity and tranſient Glory of all this habitable
World; how, by the Force of one Element
Wrcaking looſe upon the reſt, all the Varietics of
ature, all the Works of Art, all the Labours of
en, are reduc'd to nothing; all that we admir d
nd ador'd before, as great and magnificent, is
blitcrated or vaniſſd; and another Form and
face of Things, plain, ſimple, and every where
e ſame, overſpreads the whole Earth. Where
e now the great Empires of the World, and
cir great Imperial Cities? Their Pillars, Tro-
hics, and Monuments of Glory ? Shew me
here they ſtood, read the Inſcription, tell me
e Victor's Name. What Remains, what Im-
reſſions, what Difference or Diſtinction do you
te in this Maſs of Fire? Rome itſelt, eternal
zome, the great City, the Emprets of the World,
hoſe Domination and Superſtition, antient and
dern, make a great Part of the Hiſtory of this
arth; what is become of her now ? She laid
er Foundations deep, and her Palaces were
rong and ſumptuous : She glorified herſelf, and
vd deliciouſly ; and ſaid in her Heart, I ſit a
geen, and ſhall ſee no Sorrow. But her Hour
come, ſhe is wip'd away from the Face of the
arth, and buried in perpetual Oblivion. But
s not Cities only, and Works of Mens Hands,
Tt thc cverlaſting Hills, the Mountains and Rocks
Wy" the Earth, are melted as Wax before the Sun;
nd their Place is no where found. Here ſtood.


| + the


160 The Theory of the EAR TR.


the Alps, a prodigious Range of Stone, the Lo
of the Earth, that covered many Countries, ay
reach'd their Arms from the Ocean to the Bly
Sea; this huge Maſs of Stone is ſoften d au
diſſolvd, as a tender Cloud, into Rain. Her
ſtood the African Mountains, and Atlas wit
his Top above the Clouds. There was froza
Caucaſus, and Taurus, and Imaus, and th
Mountains of Aſia. And yonder, towards th
North, ſtood the Rzphzan Hills, cloath'd in le
and Snow. All thee are vaniſh'd, dropt away x
the Snow upon their Heads, and ſwallow q
in a red Sea of Fire, (Revel. xv. 3.) Great al
marvellous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty,
juſt and true are thy Ways, thou King of Sainti
Hallelujah.


* — 8


The CONCLUSION.


F the Conflagration of the World be a Rt
ality, as, both by Scripture and Antiquit

we are aſſur'd it is; if we be fully perſuade
and convincd of this; *'Tis a Thing of tin
Nature, that we cannot keep it long in e
Thoughts, without making ſome moral Rell
ctions upon it. Tis both great in itſelf, an
of univerſal Concern to all Mankind, Wit
can look upon ſuch an Object, a World
Flames, without thinking with himſelf, WK
ther ſhall I be in the midſt of theſe Flame


or no? What is my Security that 1 ſhall :


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 161


under this fiery Vengeance, which is the
rath of an angry God? St. Peter, when he
4 delivered the Doctrine of the Conflagration,
kes this pious Reflection upon it: 2 Ep. iii. 11.
ing then, that all theſe T hings ſhall be diſſolved,
bat manner of Perſons ought you to be, in all
Converſation and Godlineſs £ The Strength of
Argument depends chicfly upon what he had
d before in ver. 7. where he told us, that the
nt Heavens and Earth were reſerved unto Fire
inſt the Day of udgment, and the Perdition
irreligzous Men. We muſt avoid the Crime
n, if we would eſcape the Puniſhment. But
s Expreſſion of zrreligzous or ungodly Men, is
| very general. St. Paul, when he ſpeaks of
fiery Indignation, and the Perſons it is to
| upon, is more diſtinct in their Characters.
ſeems to mark out for this Deſtruction,
ee Sorts of Men chiefly ; The Atheiſts, Infi-
„ and the Tribe of Antichriſt : Theſe are
Words, 2 Thefſ. i. 7, 8. When the Lord Feſus
ul be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty
gels, in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them
ut know not God, and that obey not the Goſpel
our Lord Feſus Chriſt. Then as for Antichriſt
d his Adherents, he ſays in the 2d Chapter,
d vuith Verſe, The Lord ſhall conſume that
ed One, with the Spirit of his Month, and
ul deſtroy him with the Brightneſs of his Com-
„ or of his Preſence. Theſc, you fee, all
r to the ſame Time with St. Peter : Name-
to the Coming of our Saviour, at the Con-
station; and three Sorts of Perſons are
Book III. M chara-


162 * The Theory of the EARTH.


characterized as his Enemies, and ſet out for fy
ſtruction at that Time, Fzr/f, Thoſe that kng
not God ; that is, that acknowledge not God, t
will not own the Deity. Secondly, Thoſe t
hearken not to the Goſpel; that is, that rejectt
Goſpel, and Chriſtian Religion, when they;
preach'd and made known to them: For you ny
not think, that it is the poor barbarous and ignory
Heathens, that ſcarce cver heard of God, or t
Goſpel, that are threatned with this fiery Vengeang
no, tis the Heathens that live amongſt Chriſtian
thoſe that are Infidels, as to the Exiſtencet
God, or the Truth of Chriſtian Religion,
they have had a full Manifeſtation of bot
Theſe are properly the Adverſaries of God a
Chriſt. And ſuch Adverſaries, St. Paul f
in another Place, A fearful fudgment, and
Indignation ſhall devour : (Heb. x. 27.) Whi
{till refers to the ſame Time, and the ſame Perl
we are ſpeaking of, Then as to the third Sor
Men, Antichriſt, and his Followers; bclil
this Text of St. Paul to the Theſſalonians,
plain to me in the Apocalysſe, that My
Babylon is to be conſum'd by Fire; and
Beaſt and Falſe Prophet, to be thrown into
Lake that burns with Fire and Brin
Which Lake is no where to be found till
Conflagration.
You ſee then, for whom Tophet is prep!
of Old; for Atheiſts, Infidels, ang Anticl
ſtian Perſecutors: And they will have for !
Companions, the Devil and his Angels
Heads of the Apoſtaly. Theſe arc all in 0
Rcbelll


Concerning the ConrFLackation. 163


ebellion againſt God and Chriſt, and at De-
ance, as it were, with Heaven; excepting,
ntichriſt, who is rather in a ſecret Conſpira-
7, than an open Rebellion: For, under a
etended Commiſſion from Jeſus Chriſt, he
erſecutes his Servants, diſhonours his Perſon,
drrupts his Laws and his Government, and
akes War againſt his Saints. And this is a
cater Affront and Provocation, if poſſible, than
barefac'd Oppolition would be.

There are other Men, beſides theſe, that
e unacceptable to God, all Sorts of Sinners
d wicked Perſons; but they are not fo pro-
ly the Enemies of God, as theſe we have
entioned. An intemperate Man is an Enemy
himſelf ; and an unjuſt Man is an Enemy to
s Neighbour ; but thoſe that deny God, or
iſt, or perſecute their Servants, are directly,
d immediately Enemies to God : And, there-
e, when the Lord comes in Flames of Fire,
triumph over his Enemies, to take Vengeance
on all that are Rebels or Confpirators againft
and his Chriſt ; theſe Monſters of Men will
the firſt, and moſt exemplary Objects of the
vine Wrath and Indignation.

To undertake to fpeak to theſe three Orders
Men, and convince them of their Error,
i the Danger of it, would be too much for
: Concluſion of a ſhort Treatiſe. And as
the third Sort, the Subjects of Antichriſt,
ne but the Learned amongſt them are al-
„d to be inquiſitive, or to read fuch Things
condemn their Church, or the Governors
M 2 of


\


164 The Theory of the EAR T.


of it; therefore, I do not not expect that th
Engliſh Tranſlation ſhould fall into many of thy
Hands. But thoſe of them, that are pleasd u
look into the Latin, will find, in the Concluſig
of it, a full and fair Warning to come out d
Babylon; which is there proved to be the Churg
of Rome. Then as to thoſe that are Atheiſtical
inclin'd, which I am willing to believe are ng
many; I deſire them to conſider, how mean
Thing it is, to have Hopes only in this Life; a
how uncaſy a Thing, to have nothing but Fe:
as to the Future. "Thoſe, ture, muſt belittle, nx
row Souls, that can make themſelves a Portia
and a Sufficiency, out of what they enjoy her
that think of no more; that deſire no more: I
what is this Life, but a Circulation of little, mea
Actions? We lie down and riſe again; dreſsa
undreſs; feed and wax hungry; work, or pl
and are weary ; and then we lie down again, a
the Circle returns. We ſpend the Day in Tilt
and when the Night comes, we throw a
ſelves into the Bed of Folly, among Drea
and broken Thoughts, and wild Imagination
Our Reaſon lies aſleep by us; and we arc, |
the Time, as arrant Brutes, as thoſe that i
in the Stalls, or in the Field, Are not the
pacities of Man higher than theſe ? And ou
not his Ambition and Expectations to be great
Let us be Adventurers for another Wot
tis, at leaſt, a fair and noble Chance;
there is nothing in this, worth our Thous
or our Paſions. If we ſhould be diſappoiſt
we are ſtill no worſe than the reſt of wy Fell
By Olla


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 165


lortals; and if we ſucceed in our Expectations,
e are eternally happy.
For my Part, I cannot be perſuaded, that any
lan, of atheiſtical Inclinations, can have a great
d generous Soul ; for there is nothing great
the World, if you take God out of it : There-
rc, ſuch a Perſon can have no great Thought,
n have no great Aims, or Expectations, or
eſigns : For all muſt lie within the Compaſs
Life, and of this dull Body. Neither can
0 aye any great Inſtincts or noble Paſſions;
r if he had, they would naturally excite in
greater Ideas, inſpire him with higher No-
dns, and open the Scenes of the intellectual
orld. Laſtly, he cannot have any great
nc of Order, Wiſdom, Goodnels, Providence,
any of the divine Perfections: And theſe are
e greateſt Things that can enter into the
houghts of Man, and that do molt enlarge and
noble his Mind. And therefore I ſay again,
at he that is naturally inclined to Atheiſm, being
ſo naturally deſtitute of all theſe, muſt have a
Wilc and narrow Soul.
But you'll ſay, it may be, this is to expoſtu-
e, rather than to prove: or to upbraid us
ih our Make and Temper, rather than to
dnvince us of an Error in Speculation. Tis
Error, it may be, in Practice, or in Point of
rudence; but we ſeek Truth, whether it make
t us, or againſt us: Convince us therefore
' juſt Reaſoning and direct Arguments, that
IE is a God, and then we'll endeavour
correct theſe Defects in our natural Com-


M 3 Plexion.


Tiberius, that wrought ſuch and ſuch Mitac


166 The Theory of the EARTH. E;


plexion. You ſay well, and therefore 1 A
cndcavour'd to do this before, in another 9
this Theory, in the ſecond Book, ch. 11.
cerning the Author of Nature : Where you ny
ſee, that the Powers of Nature, or of the ma
rial World, cannot anſwer all the Phzxnomenaq
the Univerſe, which are there repreſented. Thi
you may conſult at Leiſure : But in the ma
Time, tis a good Perſuaſive why we fhoul
not caſily give our ſelves up to ſuch Inclinatia
or Opinions, as have neither Generoſity nor!
dence on their Side. And it cannot be ami
that theſe Perſons ſhould often take into th
Thoughts this laſt Scene of Things, the Corfiagn
tion of the World : Secing if there be a 00
they will certainly be found in the Number
his Enemies, and of thoſe that will have thi
Portion in the Lake that burns with Fire at
Brimſtone.
The third Sort of Perſons that we ale!
ſpeak to, are the Incredulous, or ſuch as do n
belicve the Truth of CHriſtian Religion, thouy
they believe there is a God. Theſe are con
monly Men of Wit and Pleaſure, that hai
not Patience enough to conſider, cooly and |
due Order, the Grounds upon which it app
that Chriſtian Religion is from Heaven, al
of divine Authority. They ought, ny ü
firſt Place, to examine Matter of Fad,
the Hiſtory of our Saviour: That £224 Wa
ſuch a Perſon, in the Reigns of "Auguſtus il


in Juda; tanie ſuch a Doctrine; was Cl
0


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 167


ed at Jeruſalem; roſe from the Dead the
d Day, and viſibly aſcended into Heaven.
heſe Matters of Fact be denied, then the
Hatroverſy turns only to an hiſtorical Queſtion,
Wther the Evangelical Hiſtory be a fabulous,
true Hiſtory ? which it would not be proper
examine in this Place. But it Matter of Fact
orded there, and in the Acts of the Apoſtles,
d the firſt Ages of Chriſtianity, be acknow-
ged, as I ſuppoſe it is, then the Queſtion that
1ains is this, //hether ſuch Matter of Fact does

t ſafficiently prove the divine Authority of
0 Chriſt and of his Doctrine? We ſuppoſe it
ſlible, for a Perſon to have ſuch Teſtimonials
divine Authority, as may be ſufficient to con-
ce Mankind, or the more reaſonable Part of
ankind ; and if that be poſlible, what, pray,
wanting in the Teſtimonies of ſeſus Chriſt ?
he Prophecies of the old Teſtament bear Wit-
sto him: His Birth was a Miracle, and his
ic a Train of Miracles; not wrought out
Levity and vain Oſtentation, but for uſeful
d charitable Purpoſes : His Doctrine and Mo-
lity not only blameleſs, but noble; deſigned to
move out of the World the imperfect Religion
the Yes, and the falſe Religion of the Gen-
es; all Idolatry and Superſtition, and thereby
nprove Mankind, under a better and more
rfect Diſpenſation. He gave an Example of a
otlels Innocency in all his Converſation, free
om Vice or any Evil ; and livd in a Neglect
fall the Pomp or Pleaſures of this Life, re-


M 4 berring


168 The Theory of the EARTH.


ferring his Happineſs wholly to another Won
He propheſied concerning his own Death, and
Relurrection; and concerning the DeſtruQion of
Jeruſalem; which all came to pals in a fy
Manner: He alſo propheſied of the Succels ot h
Goſpel; which, after his Death, immediately tad
Root, and ſpread itſelf every Way throughout th
World, maugre all Oppoſition or Perlecutig
from Jews or Heathens. It was not ſuppont
by any temporal Power for above three hundi
Years : nor were any Arts uſed, or Mealures
ken, according to human Prudence, for the Cy
ſervation of it. But, to omit other Things, tix
grand Article of his riſing from the Dead, alcen
ing viſibly into Heaven, and pouring down ti
miraculous Gifts ot the Holy Ghoſt, (according
he had promis d) upon his Apoſtles and their Fe
lowers; this alone is to me a Demonſtration
his divine Authority. To conquer Death,
mount, like an Eagle, into the Skies, and toi
ſpire his Followers with inimitable Gifts and Faa
tics, are Things, without Controverſy, beyond:
human Power; and may and ought to be eſtceni
{ure Credentials of a Perſon ſent from Heaven.
From theſe Matters of Fa& we have all pv
ſible Aſſurance, that Jeſus Chriſt was no Impolil
or deluded Perſon ; (one of which two Chant
ters all Unbelievers muſt fix upon him) but col
miſſion d by Heaven to introduce a new Rclit
on; to reform the World, to remove Judi
and Idolatry ; the beloved Son of God, the gidl
Prophet of the later Ages, the true Meſſiah tn
was to come,


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 169


Jt may be, you will confeſs, that theſe are
cat Arguments, that the Author of our Reli-
jon was a divine Perſon, and had ſupernatural
owers : But withal, that there are ſo many
difficulties in Chriſtian Religion, and ſo many
hings unintelligible, that a rational Man knows
ot how to believe it, though he be inclined to
Imire the Perſon of Jeſus Chriſt. 1 anſwer,
they be ſuch Difficulties as are made only
y the Schools and diſputacious Doctors, you
re not to trouble your ſelf about them, for they
re of no Authority: But if they be in the very
Vords of Scripture, then 'tis either in Things
tactical, or in Things merely ſpeculative. As
d the Rules of Practice in Chriſtian Religion,
do not know any Thing in Scripture obſcure
r unintelligible; and as to Speculations, great
ilcretion and Moderation is to be uſed in the
onduct of them. If theſe Matters of Fact,
hich we have alledged, prove the Divinity of
e Revelation, keep cloſe to the Words of that
Kevelation, aſſerting no more than it aſſerts,
nd you cannot err: But if you will expatiate,
nd determine Modes, and Forms, and Conſe-
uences, you may eaſily be puzled by your own
orwardneſs. For beſides ſome Things that are
their own Nature infinite and incomprehen-
ble, there are many other Things in Chriſtian
\cligion, that are incompleatly revealed ; the
ull Knowledge whereot, it has pleaſed God to
elerve to another Life, and to give us only a
pummary Account of them at preſent, We have
o much Deference for any Government, as not to


cxpect


2
1
„
Ai
o
1
|
i
1
= .
3
*
' "
ar
|
$4
N
bY
4
U
1
1
13
i
„
1
91
14.


— — — — —
—
_—_ —
WOES we .
— —œ—H — 5 — - .


—


expect that all their Counſels and Secrets ſhoy


170 The Theory of the EARTH.


be made known to us, nor to cenſure every At,
on, whoſe Reaſons we do not fully comprehend;
much more in the providential Adminiſtration q
a World, we muſt be content to know ſo mug
of the Counſels of Heaven and of ſupernatury
Truths, as God has thought fit to reveal to us. And
if theſe Truths be no otherwiſe than in a gener
Manner, ſummarily and incompletely revealel
in this Life, as commonly they are, we muſt no
therefore throw off the Government, or reje the
whole Diſpenſation; of whole divine Authority
we have otherways full Proof, and ſatisfacton
Evidence : For this would be, to loſe the Sub
ſtance in catching at a Shadow.

But Men that live continually in the Noiſe d
the World, amidſt Buſineſs, and Pleaſures, their
Time is commonly ſhard betwixt thoſe two, 6
that little or nothing is left for Meditation; t
leaſt, not cnough for ſuch Meditations as requit
Length, Juſtneſs, and Order. They ſhould rein
from the Crowd for one Month or two, to ſtudy
the Truth of Chriſtian Religion, if they hae
any Doubt of it. They retire ſometimes to cus
a Gout, or other Diſeaſe, and diet themlclve
according to Rule; but they will not be at tua
Pains, to cure a Diſeaſe of the Mind, which is
far greater, and more fatal Conſequence. lt the
periſh by their own Negligence or Obſtinacy, tht
Phyſician is not to blame. Burning is the ll
Remedy in ſome Diſtempers; and they would d
well to remember, that the World will flame abou!


their Heads one of theſe Days; and whether or:
4 |


—


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 171


e amongſt the Living, or amongſt the Dead, at
Hat Time, the Apoſtle makes them a Part of the


,
Wewel, which that fiery Vengeance will prey


Pon. Our Saviour hath been true to his Word


Withcrto 3 whether in his Promiſes, or in his
W hicatnings. He promis d the Apoſtles to ſend
own the Holy Ghoſt upon them after his Aſcen-


Won, and that was fully accompliſh'd : He forc-
pid, and threaten'd the Deſtruction of Feruſalem ;
nd that came to paſs accordingly, ſoon after he
ad left the World: And he hath told us allo,
hat he will come again in the Clouds of Heaven,
latt. xxiv. 30. with Power and great Glory;
nd, XXV. 32. Oc. and that will be to judge the
orld. When the Son of Man ffall come in his
lory, and all the holy Angels with him, then
ball he fit upon the Throne of his Glory: and
efore him ſhall be gathered all Nations; and he
vill ſeparate the Good from the Bad; and to the
Vicked and Unbclicvers he will ſay, Ver. 41.
Depart from me, ye Curſed, into everlaſting Fire,
repared for the Devil and his Angels. This
the ſame Coming, and the fame Fire, with
hat which we mention d before out of St. Paul,
Te. i. 7, 8, 9; as you will plainly ſee, if
ou compare Saint Matthew's Words with Saint
Fauls, which are theſe, hen the Lord Jeſus
all be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty
iIngels, in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on
lem that know not God, and that hearken not
0 the Goſpel of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt : Who
all be punifſh'd with everlaſting Deſtruttion,
on, or by, the Preſence of the Lord, and the
Glory


172 The Theory of the EARTH.


Glory of his Power. This, methinks, ſhow
be an awakening Thought, that there is (ſuch i
Thre tning upon Record (by one who new
yet failed in his Word) againſt thoſe that do ny
belicve his Teſtimony. Thoſe that reject hin
now as a Dupe, or an Impoſtor, run a Hau
of ſeeing him hereatter coming in the Cloud
to be their Judge. And it will be too late then
to correct their Error, when the bright Arma
of Angels fill the Air, and the Earth begins u
melt at the Preſence of the Lord.

Ihus much concerning thoſe three Ranks d
Men, whom the Apoſtle Saint Paul ſeems u
point at principally, and condemn to the Flame
But, as I ſaid before, the reſt of Sinnegz
and vicious Perſons, amongſt the Profeſlors d
Chriſtianity, though they are not {ſo diredly
the Enemies of God, as theſe are; yet bein!
Tranſgreſſors of his Law, they muſt expect to
be brought to Juſtice. In every well-governt
State, not only Traitors and Rebels that 6
fend more immediately againſt the Perſon d
the Prince; but all others, that notorioull
violate the Laws, are brought to condign I
niſhment, according to the Nature and De
gree of their Crime: So in this Caſe, Ti
Fire ſhall try every Man's Work, of what Sn
it is. is therefore the Concern of ev
Man, to reflect often upon that Day, and '0
conſider what his Fate and Sentence is like!
to be, at that laſt Trial. The Fews havc 4
Tradition, that Elias ſits in Heaven, and kt
a Regiſter of all Mens Actions, good or *

NIE


Concerning the CONFLAGRATION. 173


nath his Under- Secretaries ſor the ſeveral Nations
. the World, that take Minutes of all that paſſes;
ad io hath the Hiſtory of every Man's Life before
In, ready to be produc'd at the Day of Judg-
ent. I will not vouch for the litcral Truth of
Bis, but it is true in Effect: Every Man's Fate ſhall
e determined that Day, according to the Hiſtory
his Life; according to the Works done in the
leſn, whether good or bad. And, theiciore, it
ught to have as much Influence upon us, as if
very ſingle Action was formally regiſter'd in
eaven.

It Men would learn to contemn this World, it
ould cure a great many Vices at once, And,
(ncthinks, St. Peters Argument, from the ap—
roaching Diſſolution of all Things, ſhould put
s out of Concecit with ſuch pcriſhing Vanities.
uſt and Ambition are the two reiguing Vices of
eat Men; and thoſe little Fires might be ſoon
xtinguiſhed, if they would frequently and ſeriouſſy
editate on this laſt and univerial Fre, which will
put an End to all Paſſions, and all Conten—
1ons. As to Ambition, the Heathens themſelves
ade uſe of this Argument, to abate and repreſs
he vain Affectation of Glory and Greatneſs in this
Vorld. I told you before, the Leſſon that was
given to Scipio Africanus, by his Uncle's
hoſt, upon this Subject: And upon a like
Occaſion and Conſideration, Cæſar hath a
Leſſon given him by Lucan, after the Battle
of Pharſalia ; where Pompey loſt the Day,
and Rome its Liberty. The Poet ſays, Cæſar
took Pleaſure in looking upon the dead Bodies,


and


1H
|

i}

1
1
LA |

ut


0
— — _
I —— ARR EC RI


— —
.


174- The Theory of the EARTH.


and would not ſuffer them to be buried, of
which was their Manner of burying, to
burat : Whereupon he ſpeaks to him in th;
Words. |


Hos, CxsAR, Popultos [i nunc non ufferit Inis,
Uret cum Jerris, uret cum gureite Ponti.
Communis miunao ſupereſt rogus, Oſſibus aſtra
Miſturus. Quocumquè Tua Fortuna vocabit,
He quoque eunt Anime ; nom altius ibis in auras,
Nau meliore loco Stygia ſub nocte jacebis.

Libera fortuna Mors eſt: Capit oimnia Tellus
Quæ genuit; Celo tegitur qui non habet trnam.


Cx SAR, |
Tf now theſe Bodies want their Pile and Urn,
At laſt, with the whole Globe, they're ſure to Vun.
The World expetts one general Fire: And T bou
Muſt go, where theſe poor Souls are wand ring now,
T how It reach no higber, in the ethereal Plain,
Nor 'mongſt the Shades a better Place obtain.
Death levels all: And he that has not Room
To make a Grave, Heaven's Vault ſpall be his Tom.


Theſe are mortifying Thoughts to ambition
Spirits. And ſurcly our own Mortality, and the
Mortality of the World itſelf, may be enough u
convince all conſidering Men, that Vanity g
Vanities, all is Vanity under the Sum; any othe
wiſe than as they relate to a better Life.


WNT &


THE


THEORY


OF TE&


A 3 T H.


n an Account of the


And of all the


ENERAL CHANGES


Vhich it hath already undergone, or is to
undergo, till the Co Ns uu u AT ION


of all Things.


The FouRTEH Book,


oncerning the New Heavens, and New Earth,
AND
oncerning the Conſummation of all Things.


8


2 —


LOND © N:
Printed for J. Hook, in Fleet-Street.


- — — —


—


—— — — _


2 ů ——— — — —


.
4 - . Y
C Z * a
Sv, *
* .
OC N
AP


Wh 5
Ig
WG
| oj G
9
i 2 >
"©


—
7


2 - 46,
2— "EC NS) 4
W


PREFACE


TO THE


EAD E R.


0e it is ſtill my Lot to travel
into new Worlds, having never found

7 | any great Satisfaction in this: As
an aclive People leaves their Habita-
ions in a barren Soil, to try if they
nale their Fortune better elſewhere. I firſt
td backwards, and maded through the Deluge,
the primæ bal World, to ſee Ros they lived
re, and how Nature ſtood in that original Con-
ion. Now I am going forwards, to view the
Heavens and new Earth, Zhat will be after
Conflagration, But, gentle Reader, let me
take you any farther, if you be zeary; I do
love 4 querulous Companion: Unleſs your
ms therefore preſs you forwards, chuſe ra-
r to reſt here, and be content with that Part
the Theory which you have ſeen already. Is
not fair t6 have followed Nature ſo far, 4s
N 70


\
-


The PREFACE.


to have ſeen her twice in her Ruins? „n
ſhouid we ſtill purſue her, even after Death g
D:/ſolution, into dark and remote Futuritiy
To whom therefore ſuch *Diſquiſitions ſeem yy
leſs, or over-curious, let them reſt here; and lin
the Remainder of this Work, which is a kin
PROPHECY concerning the STATE of thin
after the Conflagration, 10 thoſe that are of
D:ſpoſition ſuited to ſuch Studies and Emquriz
Not that any part of this Theory requires my
Learning, Art, or Science, to be Maſter if i
but a Love and Thirſt after Truth, Freed
Judgment, and a Reſignation of our Underſtl
ings to clear Evidence. Let it carry us ul
way it will, an honeſt Engliſh Reader, that In
only at the Senſe as it lies before him, and ith
conſiders nor cares whether it be new or old, ſi
be true, may be a more competent Fudge tha
great Scholar full of his own Notions, and piſ
up with the Opinion of his mighty Known
for ſuch Men think they cannot in Honour «
any thing to be true, which they did not kit
before. To be taught any new Knowledge, i
confeſs their former Ignorance ; and that {i
them in their own Opinion, and, as they tii
in the Opinion of the World, which are
uneaſy Reflections to them. Neither mil *
depend upon Age only for Soundneſs of Jil
ment: Men in diſcovering and owning In
ſeldom change their Opinions after thre
eſpecially if they be leading Opinions : It
then too late, wwe think, to begin the W
again, and as we grow old, the Heart ©
| jrd


Rt


The PREEACE.


its, and cannot open wide enough to take in 4
at Thought.

The Spheres of Mens Underſtandings are as dif-
ent, as Proſpects upon the Earth: Some ſtand
on 4 Rock or a Mountain, and ſee far round
out; others are in an Hollow, or in a Cave;
habe no Proſpect at all. Some Men conſider
thing but what is preſent to their Senſes ; others
tend their Thoughts both to what ts paſt, and
at is future: And yet the faireſt Proſpect in
is Life is not to be compard to the leaſt we
all have in another. Our cleareſt Day here is
iy and hazy ; we fee not far, and what we
ſee, is in a bad Light: But when we have got
tter Boates in the firſt Reſurrection, whereof wwe
e going to treat; better Senſes and a better Unader-
mding, a clearer Light and an higher Station,
r Horizon will be enlarged every Ii ay, both as to
e natural World, and as to the intellectual.

Two of the greateſt Speculations that we are
table of in this Life, are, in my Opinion, The
EVOLUTION OF WORLDS, and
he REVOLUTION OF SOULS; one
Fr the material World, and the other for the intel.
anal, Toward the former of theſe, our Theory
an Eſſay ; and in this our Planet, (which I
pe to conduct into a fixed Star, before I have
ne with it) we grve an Inſtance of what may
in other Planets. 'Tis true, we took our Riſe
o higher than the Chaos, becauſe that cas a
own Principle, and we were not willing to
muſe the Reader with too many ſtrange Sto-
#*s ; as that, I am ſure would have been

e 5 thought


The :REF ACE J
thought one, TO HAVE brought this Ea


from a fixed Star, and then carried it up ali
into the ſame Sphere; which yet, I believe, u
trus Circle of natural Providence.


As to the Revolution of Souls, . 7he Fool


of that Sperulation are more obſture than of |
former; for though we are aſſurd' by Script
that all good Souls will at length have cœliſu
Bodies ; yet, that this is a returning to a 1
mitive State, or to what they had at the fi
Creation, that Scripture has not acquainted

with : It tells us mdced, that Angels fell fin
their primitive celeſtial Glory; and conſequen
we might be capable of a Lapſe as well as they,
De had been in that high Condition with then
but that we ever were there, is not declared tou
by any Revelation. Reaſon and Morality un
indeed ſuggeſt to us, that an innocent Soul, fit)
and pare from the Hands of its Maker, could u
be mnmediately caſt into Priſon, before it had, |
any Act of its own Will, or any Uſe of its «i
Unaerſtauding, committed either Error or &
J call this Body a Priſon, both becauſe it i

Confinement and Reſtraint upon our beſt Facuilt
and Capacities, and is alſo the Seat of Diſed
and Liathſomneſs ; and, as Priſons uſe 10
commonly tends more to debauch Mens Nati
than to improve them.

But though we cannot certainly tell ui
what Circumſtances human Souls were plu
at firſt, yet all Antiquity agrees, Oriental a
Occidental, concerning their Prg - exiſtence


general, in Reſpect of theſe mortal Boats


The PR E F A CE.


d our Saviour never reproaches or correcis the
ss, when they ſpeak upon that Suppaſition,
Wike ix. 18, 19. John ix. 2. Beſides, it ſeems
ne beyond all Controverſy, that the Soul of the
ah did exiſt before the Incarnation, and vo-
W:carily deſcended from Heaven to take upon it
mortal Body. And though it does not appear
Wit all human Souls were at firſt placed in Glory,
t, from the Example of our Saviour, cus ſee
mething greater in them; namely, a Capacity to
united to the Godhead, John iii. 1 3. and vi. 38.
4 62. and xvii. 5. And what is poſſible 10 one,
poſſible to more. But theſe Thoughts are too
wh for us, while we find our ſelves united to no-
hung but diſeaſed Bodies and Houſes of Clay.
The greateſt Fault we can commit, in ſich Specu-
tons, is to be over poſitive and dogmatical : To
inquiſitiue into the Ways of Providence and
be Works of God, is ſo far from being a Fault
bat it is our greateſt Perfection: We cultivate
be higheſt Principles and beſt Inclinations of our
ature, while we are thus employd ; and 'tis
ttleneſs or Secularity of Spirit, that is the
eateſt Enemy to Contemplation. Thoſe that
ould have a true Contempt of this World, muſt
Fer the Soul to be ſometimes upon the Wing, and,
raiſe herſelf above the Sight of this little dark
omt, which we now inhabit. Give her à large
ua free Proſpect of the Immenſity of God's Works,
4 of his inexhauſted Wiſdom and Goodneſs, if
Mu would make her great and good; as the warm
"Ploſopher ſays,


N 3 Give


The PREFACE


Give me a Soul ſo great, ſo high,

Let her Dimenſions ſtretch the Sky;
That comprehends within a Thought,
The whole Extent, 'twixt God and Nought,
And from the World's firſt Birth and Date,
Its Life and Death can calculate,
With all th' Adventures that ſhall paſs,
To evry Atom of the Mals.


But let her be as Goop as GREAT,
Her higheſt Throne a Mercy- Seat;

Soft and diſlolving like a Cloud,
Loling herſelf in doing Good ;

A Cloud that leaves its Place Above,
Rather than dry and uſeleſs move,

Falls in a Shower upon the Earth,

And gives ten thouſand Seeds a Birth;
Hangs on the Flow'rs, and infant Plants,
Sucks not their Sweets, but feeds their Want
So let this mighty Mind diffuſe,

All that's her own to others Uſe ;

And, free from private Ends, retain
Nothing of SELF, but a bare Name.


4 vw 2 4 y
F G ah
,
EIFS
1 =


7D % 76 p 7
— — = oy
WS : } (
= \ %
= —
f 3)


ocerning the New Heavens and New Earth,
AND
ocerning the Conſummation of all Things.


1


he Introduction; That the World will not be
annihilated in the laſt Fire: That we are to
erpect, according to Scripture and the Chriſtian
Doctrine, new Heavens and a new Earth,


woen theſe are diſſolud or burnt up.


FE are now ſo far advanc'd in the Theory

< of the Earth, as to have ſeen the End
of two Worlds; one deſtroy'd by Wa-
ter, and another by Fire. It remains
only to conſider, whether we be yet come to the
"i +- final.


184 The Theory of the EARTH.


final Period of Nature; the laſt Scene of all Thing
and conſequently the utmoſt Bound of our
quirics : Or, whether Providence, which is h
hauſted in Wiſdom and Goodneſs, will raiſe
from this dead Maſs, new Heavens and a nx
Earth; another habitable World, better and mw
perfect than that which was deſtroyed : Tha, |
the firſt World began with a Paradiſe, and
State of Innocency ; ; ſo the laſt may be a Kin
of Renovation of that happy State, whoſe [nh
bitants ſhall not die, but be tranſlated to a ble:
Immortality.
I know tis the Opinion of ſome, that th
World will be annihilated, or reduc'd to
thing, at the Conflagration, and that would pit
an End to all farther Enquiries, But whend
do they learn this? From Scripture or Rea
or their own Imagination? What Inſtance «
Example can they give us of this they call 4
Hilatiom? Or what Place of Scripture can thq
produce, that ſays, the World, in the laſt Fi
ſhall be reduc'd to nothing? If they have nd
ther Inſtance nor Proof of what they affim
tis an empty Imagination of their own, ne
ther agreeable to Philoſophy, nor Divinity: Fit
does not conſume any Subſtance ; it change
the Form and Qualities of it, but the Matt
remains. And if the Deſign had been Anil
lation, the employing of Fire would have bee
of no Uſe or Effect: For Smoke and A hes at
at as great a Diſtance from Nothing, as tt
Bodies themſelves out of which they are made
But theſe Authors ſcem to have but a {m3
Tindu


1


N


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 185


incture of Philoſophy, and therefore it will
e more proper to confute their Opinion from
e Words of Scripture, which hath left us ſuf-
cient Evidence, that another World will ſuc-
ed after the Conflagration of that we now
habit. :

The Prophets, both of the Old and New
eſtament, have left us their Predictions con-
erning new Heavens and a new Earth. So
ys the Prophet 1/aiah, ch. Ixv. 17. Behold 1
reate new Heavens and a new Earth, and the
ormer ſhall not be remembered, or come into Mind;
s not worthy our Thoughts, in compariſon of
hoſe that will ariſe when theſe paſs away. So
he Prophet St. Zohn in his Apocalypſe, when he
as come to the End of this World, ſays, And
ſaw a new Heaven and a new Earth : For the
Heaven and the firſt Earth were paſſed away,
ond there was no more Sea, Apoc. xxi. 1. Where
e dpes not only give us an Account of a new
eaven and a new Earth in general; but alſo gives


hall have 20 Sea, And in the 5th Yerſe, he that
late upon the Throne ſays, Behold I make all
hings new: which, conſider'd with the Antcce-
icnts and Conſequents, cannot be otherwiſe un-
derſtood than of a new World.
But ſome Men make Evaſions here, as to the
ords of the Prophets, and ſay, they are to
be underſtood in a figurative and allegorical
Senſe; and to be apply'd to the Times of the
oſpel, either at firſt or towards the latter End
pt the World; fo as this nem Heaven and new
| . Earth,


a diſtinctive Character of the new Earth, that it


186 Ihe Theory of the EARTH.


Earth, ſignify only a great Change in the mJ
World. But how can that be, ſeeing St. 7
places them after the End of the World? And vi
Prophet 1/aiah connects ſuch Things with his na
Heavens and new Earth, as are not compatible y |
the preſent State of Nature, ch. Ixv. However, i
avoid all Shuffling and Tergiverſation in this Poin
let us appeal to St. Peter, who uſes a plain liter
Style, and diſcourſes downright concerning th
natural World. In his 2d Epiſt. and 3d C
when he had forctold and explain'd the futr
Conflagration, he adds, But we expect new Hu
vens and a new Earth, according to his Promi.
Theſe Promiſes were made by the Prophets; a
this gives us full Authority to interpret their nz
Heavens and new Earth to be after the Conflagu
tion. St. Peter, when he had deſcrib'd the D
ſolution of the World in the laſt Fire, in full al
emphatical Terms, as the paſſmg away the Hu
vens with a Noiſe ; the melting of the Elements
and burning up all the Works of the Earth ; ke
ſubjoins, Nevertheleſs (notwithſtanding this tot
Diſſolution of the preſent World) we, according f
his Promiſes, look for new Heavens and a wa
Earth, wherein dwelleth Righteouſneſs, As if tix
Apoſtle ſhould have ſaid, Notwithſtanding ti
ſtrange and violent Diſſolution of the preſent Heb
vens and Earth, which I have deſcrib'd to you
we do not at all diſtruſt God's Promiſes, co:
cerning new Heavens and a new Earth, that att
to ſucceed theſe, and to be the Seat of the Rig
teous.


Heres


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 187


Here's no room for Allegorics, or allegorical Ex-
ſitions, unleſs you will make the Conflagration
the World an Allegory: For, as Heavens and
irh were deſtroyed, ſo Heavens and Earth are
Wiorcd; and if, in the firſt Place, you underſtand
e natural material World, you muſt alſo under-
ind it in the ſecond Place; they are both Allego-
s, or neither. But to make the Conflagration
Allegory, is not only to contradict St. Peter,
t all Antiquity, ſacred or prophane. And I


cayens and a new Earth, in a literal Senſe, than
e have that the preſent Heavens and Earth ſhall
> deſtroyed in a literal Senſe, and by material
re: Let it therefore reſt upon that Iſſue, as to the
ſt Evidence and Argument from Scripture.

Some will fancy, it may be, that we ſhall have
w Heavens and Earth, and yet that theſe ſhall
annihilated : They would have theſe firſt re-
cd to nothing, and then others created, ſpick
d ſpan new, out of nothing. But why fo,
ay, what's the Humour of that? Leſt Omni—
dtency ſhould want Employment, you would
we it to do, and undo, and do again; as if


urniture, had a better Gloſs, and was more
edible. Matter never wears; as fine Gold,
elt it down never ſo often, it loſes nothing of
Quantity : The Subſtance of the World is the
ime, burnt or unburnt, and is of the ſame
alue and Virtue, new or old; and we muſt
ot multiply the Actions of Omnipotency with-
ut Neceſſity. God does not make, or unmake
things,


fire no more Aſſurance, that we ſhall have new


w. made Matter, like new Cloaths, or new


188 The Theory of the. EAR Tu.


things, to try Experiments: He knows befy,
hand the utmoſt Capacities of every thing, 4
does no vain or ſuperfluous Work. Such Im
nations as theſe, proceed only from want of ty
Philoſophy, or the true Knowledge of the Naty
of God and of his Works, which ſhould alwazsy
carefully attended to in ſuch Speculations as d
cern the natural World. But to proceed in d
Subject. | |

If they ſuppoſe Part of the World to be an
hilated, and to continue ſo, they philoſophizeſi
worſe and worſe : How high ſhall the Annikj
tion reach? Shall the Sun, Moon, and Stars h
reduc'd to nothing? But what have they done, thi
they ſhould undergo ſo hard a Fate? Muſt they i
turn'd out of Being for our Faults ? The who
matcrial Univerſe will not be annihilated at thi
Bout, for we are to have Bodies after the Neſu
rection, and to hve in Heaven. How much ot tit
Univerſe then will you leave ſtanding ? or how ſhi
it ſubſiſt with this great Vacuum in the Heart of i
This Shell of a World is but the Fiction of «
empty Brain; tor God and Nature, in their Wor
never admit of ſuch gaping Vacuities and Emyti
neſles.

If we conſult Scripture again, we ſhall find ii
that makes mention of a Reſtitution and Revit
cency of all Things, at the End of the World, 0
at the Coming of our Saviour. St. Peter, wil

Doctrine we have hitherto follow'd, in his Set
mon to the Fews, after our Saviour's Aſcenſion
tells them, that he will come again, and that then


will be then a Reſtitution of all Things, ſuch
4


Conterning the new Heavens, &c. 189


as promiſed by the Prophets. The Heavens, lays
| muſt receive him until the Time of Reſtitution
all Things ; which God hath ſpoken by the Mouth
his holy Prophets, fmce the World began, Accs iii.

If we compare this Paſſage of Saint Peter's,
ith that which we alledged before, out of his
xcond Epiſtle, it can ſcarce be doubted but that
refers to the ſame Promiles in both Places; and
hat he there calls a e Heaven, and a new Earth,
calls here a Neſtitution of all Things: For the
eavens and the Earth comprehend all, and both
cle are but different Phraſes for the Renovation
the World. This gives us alſo Light how to
derſtand what our Saviour calls the Negenera-
n or Reviviſcency, when he ſhall ſit upon his
hrone of Glory, and will reward his Follow-
san hundred-fold, for all their Loſſes in this
orld, beſides everlaſting Life, as the Crown of
„ Mat. xix. 28, 29. I know, in our Englrſþ
ranflation, we ſeparate 7he Regeneration from
ling upon his Throne, but without any Warrant
om the Original. And ſeeing our Saviour ſpeaks
re of bodily Goods, and ſeems to diſtinguiſh
em ffom everlaſting Life, which is to be the
nal Reward of his Followers; this Regeneration
emsto belong to his Sccond Coming, when the
Vorld ſhall be renew'd or regenerated, and the
ghtcous ſhall poſſeſs the Earth.

Other Places of Scripture that foretel the
ac of this material World, repreſent it al-
ys as a Change, not as an Annihilation. St.
aul ſays, The Figure of this World paſſeth
may, 1 Cor. vii. 31. The Form, Faſhion, and
Diſpo-


190 The Theory of the EARTH.
Diſpoſition of its Parts, but the Subſtance f.
remains: As a Body that is melted down a
diſlolv'd, the Form periſhes,. but the Matter is m
deſtroyed. And the Pſalmiſt ſays, the Heal
and the Earth ſhall be chang d, Pſal. cii, i
which anſwers to this Transformation we ſpe
of. The ſame Apoſtle, in the eighth Chapter:
the Romans, ver. 21, 22, 23, 24. ſhews ah
that this Change ſhall be, and ſhall be for th
better, and calls it a Deliverance of the Cream
from Vanity and Corruption, and a Participain
of the glorious Liberty of the Children of Gul
being a ſort of Redemption, as they have a |
demption of their Bodies.
But ſceing the Renovation. of the World is
Doctrine generally receiv'd, both by antient ar
modern Authots, as we ſhall have Occaſion t
ſhew hercafter, we need add no more, in ti
Place, for Confirmation of it. Some Men are vl
ling to throw all Things into a State of Nothing:
the Conflagration, and bury them there, that the
may not be oblig d to give an Account of t
State of things that is to ſucceed it. 'T hoſe wil
think themſelves bound in Honour to know ere
thing in Theology that is knowable, and find
uneaſy to anſwer ſuch Queſtions and Speculation
as would ariſe upon their admitting a new Wotl
think it more adviſable to ſtifle it in the bit
and fo to bound all Knowledge at the Con
gration. But ſurely fo far as Reaſon or Scriptl
lead us, we may and ought to follow, othcrv!
we ſhould be ungrateful to Providence, that f
us thole Guides; provided we be 4 q
nit


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 191


nſible of our own Weakneſs : And, according -


the Difficulty of the Subject, and the! Meaſure
Light that falls upon, it, proceed with that
jodelty and Ingenuity, that becomes ſuch fallible
quirers after Truth, as we are. And this Rule
'ritings, ſo eſpecially in this; where, though 1
ok upon the principal Concluſions as fully
ov'd, there are ſeveral Particulars, that arc rather
opos'd to Examination, than poſitively aſſerted.


ee ee eee e eee a SR KG


CHAT.


he Birth of the new Heavens and the new
Earth, from the ſecond Chaos, or the Remains
of the old Mord: The Form, Order, and


Qualittes of the new Earth, according to Reaſon
and Scripture,


Aving provid from Scripture, that we are

to expect new Heavens, and a new
arth, after the Conflagration ; it would be
dme Pleaſure and Satisfaction to ſee how this
ew Frame will ariſe, and what Foundation
here is in Nature for the Accompliſhment of
heſe Promiſes. For, though the Divine Power
e not bound to all the Laws of Nature, but
nay diſpenſe with them when there is a Ne-
eſſity ; yet it is an Eaſe to us in our Belief,


Effect.


when we lee them both conſpire in the ſame


192 The Theory of the EAR Tü.
Effect. And in order to this, we muſt conſider}
what Poſture we left the demoliſh'd World, wh,
Hopes there ate of a Reſtauration. And we are n
to be diſcourag'd; becauſe we ſee Things at preſen
wrapt up in a confus d Maſs ; for, according tot
Methods of Nature and Providence, in that du
Womb uſually are the Seeds and Rudiments of a
Embryo-World.
Neither is there, poſſibly, fo great a Confuſin
in this Maſs, as we imagine: The Heart, an int.
rior Body of the Earth, is till entire; and tha
Part of it that is conſum d by the Fire, will be di
ded, of its own accord, into two Regions. Wha
is diſſolyd and melted, being the heavieſt, vil
deſcend as low as it can, and cover and incloſe tt
Kernel of the Earth round about, as a molten d
or Abyſs; according as it is explain 'd and ft
down in the precedent Book. But what is mor
light and volatile, will float in the Air; as Fumeg
Smoke, Exhalations, Vapours of Water, and whit
ſoever terreſtrial Parts can be elevated and ſup
ported by the Strength of Fire. Theſe, all mingle
together, of different Sizes, Figures, and Motions
will conſtitute an opake Cloud, or thick Region
of Darkneſs round the Earth; ſo as the Globe d
the Earth, with its Atmoſphere, aftet the Conti
eration is finiſhed, will ſtand much- what in thc
Form repreſented in this Scheme. |
Now as to the lower of theſe two Regions
the Region of melted Matter, A. A. we fhul
have little Occaſion to take Notice of it; {ccil
it will contribute nothing to the Formation ol
the new World, But the upper Region, ee ,
| | abo


-1 - . 1
8 6 . nh
16 5 .. . : * N.
4 bh N


ee

* *

+ \

& 4 »
=>


& *
„ AY
— —


Le


100
Wong


57


1 NN


9


— 22 r —  .
—


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 193


"we that Orb of Fire, is the true Draught of a
205; or a Mixture and Confuſion of all the
ments, without Order or Diſtinction. Here
particles of Earth, and of Air, and ot Wa»
all promiſcuouſly jumbled together, by the
rce and Agitation of the Fire. But when that
ce ceaſes, and every one is left to its own In-
nation, they will, according to their different
tees of Gravity, ſeparate and fort themſelves
er this manner: Fitſt, the heavieſt and groſſeſt
ts of the Earth will ſubſide, then the watery
tts will follow ; then a lighter ſort of Earth,
ich will ſtop, and reſt upon the Surface of the
ater, and compoſe there a thin Film or Mem-
anc. This. Membrane or tender Orb is the
Rudiment, or Foundation of a new habi-
le Earth: For, according as terreſtrial Parts
upon it, from all the Regions and Heights of
Atmoſphere, or of the Chaos, this Orb will
dw more firm, ſtrong, and immoycable, able
ſupport it felf and Inhabitants roo. And
ing in it all the Principles of a fruitful Soil,
ether for the Production of Plants, or of Ani»
als, it will want no Property or Character of
habitable Earth. And patticularly, will be-
me ſuch an Earth, and of ſuch a Form, as the firſt
radifaical Earth was, which hath been fully de-
bd, in the firſt and ſecond Books of this Theory.
There is no occaſion of examining more ac-
ately the Formation of this ſecond Earth,
Ing it is fo much the ſame with that of the
; which is ſet down fully and diſtinctly,
the fifth Chapter of the firſt Book of this
Book IV. 9 Theory.


194 The Theory of the EARTH,


Theory. Nature here repeats the ſame Way
and in the ſame Method; only the Materials xx
now a little more refin'd, and purg'd by the Fin:
They both riſe out of a Chaos, and that, in cfg
the ſame in both Caſes; for though in forming
the firſt Earth, I ſupposd the Chaos or conf
Maſs, to reach down to the Center, I did thy
only for the Eaſe of our Imagination; that ſo ti
whole Maſs might appear more ſimple and ui
form. But in reality, that Chaos had a (oli
Kernel of Earth within, as this hath ; and thx
Matter which fluctuated above in the Regions d
the Air, was the true Chaos, whoſe Parts, wha
they came to a Separation, made the ſeveral El
ments, and the Form of an habitable Earth, be
twixt the Air and Water. This Chaos, upon &
paration, will fall into the ſame Form and Et
ments; and ſo, in like manner, create or conlt
tute a ſecond Faradiſaical World.

I ſay, a Paradiſaical World; for it appen
plainly, that this new-form'a Earth muſt ag
with that primigenial Earth, in the two pit
Cipal and fundamental Properties. Firſt, it
of an even, entire, uniform, and regular 5
face, without Mountains or Sea. Secondly, ti
it hath a ftraight and regular Situation to |
Sun, and the Axis of the Ecliptick. From i
Manner of its Formation, it appears manitell)
that it muſt be of an even and regular Surf
For the Orb of liquid Fire, upon which the it
Deſcent was made, being ſmooth and unitoi
every where, the Matter that fell upon it WWW


take the fame Form and Mould : And fo the f
\ 4


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 19 4


Fond or third Region, that were ſuperinducd,
vould ſtill imitate the Faſhion of the firſt ; there
xing no Cauſe or Occaſion of any Inequality.
Then as to the Situation of its Axis, this Unifor-
nity of Figure would determine the Center of its
ravity to be exactly in the Middle, and conſe-
zuently there would be no Inclination of one
ole, more than another, to the general Center of
Motion; but, upon a free Libration in the li-
wid Air, its Axis would lie parallel with the
xis of the Ecliptick where it moves. But theſe
Things having been deduc'd more fully in the ſe-
ond Book about Paradiſe and the primigenial
Earth, they need no further Explication in this

place. |
If Scripture had left us ſeveral diſtin&t Cha-
acters of the New Heavens, and the New Earth,
ve might, by comparing with thoſe, have made
full Proof of our Hypotheſis. One indeed
St, John hath left us in very expreſs Terms; There
zas no Sea there, he ſays: His Words are theſe :
Ind I ſaw a New Heaven, and a New Earth;
or the firſt Heaven and the firſt Earth were
paſſed a; AND THERE WAS NO
ORE SEA. This Character is very parti-
cular, and you ſee it exactly anſwers to our Hy-
potheſis; for in the new form'd Earth, the Sea is
overd and inconſpicuous, being an Abyſs, not a
a; and wholly lodg d in the Womb of the Earth.
ind this one Character, being inexplicable upon
any other Suppoſit ion, and very deren from
the preſent Earth, makes it a ſtrong Preſumption
that we have hit upon the true Model of the
O 2 New


„


196 The Theory of the EARTH.


new Heavens and new Earth which St. Jah
ſaw. |

To this Sight of the new Heavens and ny
Earth, St. ohn immediately ſubjoins the Sigh
of the new Fferuſalem, ver. 2. as being conten
porary, and, in ſome reſpects, the ſame Thing
'Tis true, the Characters of the new Feruſalem, i
theſe two laſt Chapters of the Apocalypſe, are ven
hard to be underſtood; ſome of them being in
compatible to a tterreſtrial State, and ſome of eu
to a celeſtial; fo as it ſeems to me very reaſon
able to ſuppoſe, that the vew Fernuſalem, ſpoke
of by St. John, is two-fold : That which he (a
himſelf, ver. 2. and that which the Angel ſhey
ed him afterwards, ver 9. For I do not (ee wit
need there was of an Angel, and of Zaking hm
up into a great and high Mountain, only to ſh
him that which he had ſeen before, at the Fod
of the Mountain: But however that be, we at
to conſider, in this Place, the terreſtrial ne
Feruſalem only, or that which is the mi
Heavens and nem Earth. And as St. Fohn hull
joined theſe two together, ſo the Prop
Iſaiah hath done the ſame thing before, Chu
Ixv. 17, 18. when he had promiſed mew Hi
vens and a new Earth, he calls them und
another Name, Fernſalem ; and they both ul
the ſame Character in Effect, in the Deſcriptid
of their Feruſalem, Ver. 19. Iſaiah ſays, A
I will rejoyce in Jeruſalem, and joy in my Te
and the Voice of weeping ſhall be no more heat
n her, nor the Voice of crying, Apoc. Nil.
4. St. Zohn lays alſo in his Feruſalem, 9


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 197


yell with them, and they ſhall be his People :
1d he ſhall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes;
nd there ſhall be no more Death, neither Sorrow,
Crying, neither ſhall there be any more Pain.
tow in both theſe Prophets, when they treat
don this Subject, we find they make frequent
luſions to Parad:ſe and a paradiſaical State; ſo
they may be juſtly taken as a Scripture Character
f the new Heavens and the new Earth. The
rophet Iſaiah ſeems plainly to point at a paradi-
ical State, throughout that Chapter, by an uni-
ſal Innocency, and Harmleſneſs of Animals;
d Peace, Plenty, Health, Longevity or Immor-
lity of the Inhabitants. St. 7%n alſo hath ſeve-
| Alluſions to Paradiſe, in thoſe two Chapters
nd Ch. xxii. And in his Diſcourſe to the ſeven
hurches, in one Place (Ch. ii. 7.) To him that
vercometh is promiſed, to eat of the Tree of Life,
lich is in the midſt of the Paradiſe of God. And
another Place (Ch. iii. 12.) To him that over-
meth is promiſed, to have the Name of the
Jeruſalem writ upon him. Theſe I take to be
e fame Thing, and the ſame Reward of Chriſti-
n Victors ; the new Jeruſalem, or the new Hea-
ens and new Earth, and the Paradiſe of God.
oy this being the general Character of the new
arth, that it is paradiſuical; and the particular
haracter that it hath no Sea; and both theſe
freeing with our Hypotheſis, as apparently
educible from thoſe Principles, and that
anner of its Formation which we have fet
Own; we cannot but allow, that the Holy
9 Scrip-


)


198 The Theory of the EAR Th.


Scriptures, and the natural Theory agree in thy
Teſtimony, as to the Conditions and Properties
the New Heavens and New Earth.
From what hath been ſaid in this and the preg,
dent Chapter, it will not be hard to interpret why
St. Paul meant by his habitable Earth to com
Ty ofzsptvry Tis MIAASoav. araThe TE jy
1 N av, ſar. ix. 6. which is to be ſubjede
to our Saviour, and not to the Angels. Inth
ſecond Chapter to the Hebrews, ver. 5. he (x
For unto the Angels hath he not put in Subjefin
the WORLD TO COME; ſo we read,
but, according to the ſtricteſt and plaineſt Trani
tion, it ſhould be the habitable Earth to com.
Now, what Earth is this, where our Saviour!
abſolute Sovereign; and where the Government
is neither Human, nor Angelical, but peculia
Theocratical? In the firſt Place, this cannot
the preſent World, or the preſent Earth, be
cauſe the Apoſtle calls it future, or the Earth!
come. Nor can it be underſtood of the Days
the Goſpel ; ſeeing the Apoſtle acknowledges, w
8. that this Subjection, whereof he ſpeaks, |
not yet made. And ſeeing Antichriſt will u
finally be deſtroyed till the Appearance of ov
Saviour, (2 'Theff. ii. 8.) nor Satan bound, will
Antichriſt is in Power; during the Reign d
theſe two (who are the Rulers of the Darkncl
of the World) our Saviour cannot propertly &
ſaid to begin his Reign here, Epheſ. vi. 12. 1
true, he exerciſes his Providence over his Chutd
and ſecures it from being deſtroyed : He cb
by a Power paramount, ſtop the Rage _
| . 5 „5


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 199


tan or Antichriſt ; Hitherto ye ſhall go, and no
ber. As ſometimes when he was upon Earth,
- excrted a Divine Power, which yet did not
roy his State of Humiliation ; ſo he interpoſes
dw when he thinks fit, but he does not finally
ke the Power out of the Hands of his Enemies,
2 out of the Hands of the Kings of the Earth.
he Kingdom is not deliverd up to him, and all
Dominion and Power; Ch. vii, 13, 25, 26. That
| Tongues and Nations ſhould ſerve him. For
t. Paul can mean no leſs in this Place than that
ingdom in Daniel, Heb. ii. 8. ſecing he calls it
utting all Things in Subjettion under his Feet, and
ys that it is not yet done. Upon this account al-
„ as well as others, our Saviour might truly ſay
Pilate, (Joh. xviii. 36. My Kingdom is not of
is World, And to his Diſciples, The Son of
an came not to be miniſtred unto, but to mini-
er, Matt. xx. 28. When he comes to receive
is Kingdom, he comes in the Clouds of Heaven
Dan. vii. 13, 14.) not in the Womb of a Virgin,
e comes with the Equipage of a King and Con-
ueror; with Thouſands and Ten Thoulands of
\ngels; not in the Form of a Servant, or of a
veak Infant, as he did at his firſt coming.
I allow the Phraſe ais» usarwe, or in the
ebrew wn D, the World to come, is ſome-
imes uſed in a large Senſe, as comprehending
all the Days of the Meſſiah, whether at his
dſt or ſecond coming, (for theſe two comings
are often undiſtinguiſned in Scripture) and
relpet the moral World, as well as the natu-
tal. But the Word oixspirn, Orbis habitabilis,
5 04 which


200 The Theory of the EAR TR.


which St. Paul here uſes, does primarily ſi ini
the natural World, or the habitable Earth, in the
proper ule of the Word amongſt the Greeks, and
frequently in Scripture, Luke iv. 5. and i. 2,
Rom. x. 18. Heb. i. 6. Apoc. iii. 1o, Neither
we here exclude the moral World, or the Inhadi.
tants of the Earth, but rather neceſſarily include
them: Both the natural and moral World to com
will be the Scat and Subject of our Saviour
Kingdom and Empire, in a peculiar Manner. But
when you underſtand nothing by this Phraſe bit
the preſent moral World, it neither anſwers th
proper Signification of {Agr nor of c
of the firlt or ſecond Part of the Expreſſion; and
tho' ſuch like Phraſes may be uſed for the Diſpen.
ſation of the Meſſiah in Oppoſition to that ofthe
Law, yet the height of that Diſtinction or Oppoſ.
tion, and the fulfilling of the Expreſſion, depend
upon the ſecond coming of our Saviour, and up
on the future Earth or habitable World, wher
he ſhall reign, and which does peculiarly belong
to him and his Saints.
Neither can this World to come, or this Earth
fo come, be underſtood of the Kingdom ©
Heaven. For the Greek Word will not ben
that Senſe, nor is it ever usd in Scripture for
Heaven. Beſides, the Kingdom of Heaycn,
| When ſpoken of as future, is not properly till tix
laſt Reſurrection and final Judgment. Whereis
this World to come, which our Saviour is to go.
vern, muſt be therefore that Time, and will
then expire. For all his Government as to th


World, expires at the Day of Judgment, 1 Cor.
xv,


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 201


ww. 24, Ofc. and he will then deliver up the Ring-
dom into the Hands of his Father, that he may be
all in all: Having reigned firſt himſelf, and put
gen all Rule and all Authority and Power. So
that St. Paul, in theſe two Places of his Epiſtles,
refers plainly to the ſame Time, and the ſame
Reign of Chriſt ; which muſt be in a futnre World,
and before the /aſ? Day of Fudgement, and there-
fore, according, to our Deductions, in the new
Heavens and the new Farth.


FCC


Kr Hh


Concerning the Inhabitants of the new Earth. That
natural Reaſon cannot determine this Point. That
according to Scripture, the Sons of the firſt Re-
ſurrection, or the Heirs of the Millennium, are
to be the Inhabitants of the new Earth. The
Teſtimony of the Philoſophers, and of the Chri-
ſtian Fathers, for the Renovation of the World.
The firſt Propoſition laid down.


 F 'HUS we have ſettled the true Notion,
according to Reaſon and Scripture, of
the new Heavens and new Earth: But where
are the Inhabitants, you'll fay ? You have taken
the Pains to make us a new World, and now
that it is made, it muſt ſtand empty. When
the firſt World was deſtroyed, there were
eight Perſons preſerv'd, with a Set of living
Creatures of every Kind, as a Seminary or
foundation of another World ; but the Fire,

| | It


culties cannot reach, a ſeaſonable Help and


202 The Theory of the EAR Th.


it ſeems, is more mercileſs than the Water; {
in this Deſtruction of the World, it does not:
pear that there is one living Soul left, of any for,
upon the Face of the Earth. No Hopes of Poke.
rity, nor of any Continuation of Mankind, in the
uſual Way of Propagation ; and Fire is a barten
Element, that breeds no living Creatures in it, not
hath any Nouriſhment proper for their Food 0
Suſtenance.

We are perfectly at a Loſs therefore, ſo fat x
I ſee, for a new Race of Mankind, or how to
People this new form'd World. The Inhabitants
if ever there be any, muſt either come from Hes.
ven, or ſpring from the Earth: there are but theſe
two Ways. But natural Reaſon can determine
neither of theſe, ſees no Track to follow in theſe
unbeaten Paths, nor can advance one Step fat:
ther. Farewell then, dear Friend; I muſt take
another Guide, and leave you here, as Moſes upon
Mount P gab, only to look into that Land, which
you cannot enter. I acknowledge the good Sei
vice you have done, and what a faithful Compa-
nion you have been, in a long Journey ; from the
Beginning of the World to this Hour, in a Tract of
Time of ſix thouſand Years. We have travelled
together thro' the dark Regions of a firſt and ſe-
cond Chaos; ſeen the World twice ſhipwreck:
Neither Water, nor Fire, could ſeparate us; but
now you muſt give place to other Guides.

Welcome, Holy Scriptures, the Oracles of
God, a Light ſhining in Darkneſs, a Treaſury
of hidden Knowledge; and where Human Fs


Supp!)


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 203
Supply to their Defects. We are now come to


the utmoſt Bounds of their Dominion; they have


ade us a New World, but, how it ſhall be in-
habited, they cannot tell; know nothing of the
itory or Affairs of it. This we muſt learn from
other Maſters, inſpird with the Knowledge of
Things to come: And ſuch Maſters we know
none, but the holy Prophets and Apoſtles. We
muſt therefore now put our ſelves wholly under
their Conduct and Inſtruction, and from them
only receive our Information concerning the mo-
ral State of the future habitable Earth,

In the firſt place therefore, the Prophet T/azah
tells us, as a Preparation to our farther Enquiries,
The Lord God created the Heavens, God himſelf
that formed the Earth, he created it not in vain,
be formed it to be inhabited, Iſa. xlv. 18. This
i true, both of the preſent Earth and the future,
and of every habitable World whatſoever, For
to what purpoſe is it made habitable, if not to be
inhabited? That would be, as if a Man ſhould
manure, and plough, and every Way prepare his
bround for Seed, but never ſow it. We do not
build Houſes, that they ſhould ſtand empty, but
look out for Tenants as faſt as we can; as ſoon
s they axe made ready and become tenantable.
But if Man could do things in vain, and with-
out Uſe or Deſign, yet God and Nature never
do any thing in vain; much leſs ſo great a
Work as the making of a World; which if
it were in vain, would comprehend ten thou-
and Vanities or uſeleſs Preparations in it. Me
may therefore, in the firſt place, ſafely con-

| _ Et | clude,


204 The Theory of the EARTH.


clude, that the new Earth will be inhabity

But by whom will it be inhabited? This make
the ſecond Enquiry. St. Peter anſwers this Quel.
on for us, and with a particular Application 9
this very Subject of the vew Heavens and wy
Earth: They ſhall be inhabited, he ſays, by th
Juſt or the Righteous. His Words which we cite
Conflagration of the World, he adds, But ye
_ expett new Heavens and anew Earth, WHERE.
IN DWELLETH RIGHTEOUSNES,
By Rzghteonſneſs here, it is generally agreed, mul
be underſtood rightcous Perſons ; for Rightcoul
neſs cannot be without righteous Perſons. It can-
not hang upon T rees, or grow out of the Ground;
tis the Endowment of reaſonable Creatures. And
theſe righteous Perſons are eminently ſuch, and
therefore call'd Righteouſneſs in the Abſtract, or
purely righteous without Mixture of Vice.

So we have found Inhabitants for the neu
Earth, Perſons of an high and noble Charac-
ter; like thoſe deſcribd by St. Peter, (1 Eph
ji. 9.) A choſen Generation, a royal Preft
hood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People. A
if into that World, as into St. John's neu
Jeruſalem, nothing impure or unrighteous wa
ro be admitted, Apoc. xxl. 27. Theſe being
then the happy and holy Inhabitants ; thc
next Enquiry is, Y/hence do they come? From
what Off. ſpring, or from what Original? We
noted before, that there was no Remnant of
Mankind left at the Conflagration, as theie
was at the Deluge; nor any Hopes of a Reſtau-
| ＋ | N ration


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 205


ation that Way. Shall we then imagine that
heſe new Inhabitants are a Colony wafted over
rom ſome neigbouring World; as from the
oon, or Mercury, or ſome of the higher Pla-

ts? You may imagine what you pleaſe, but
nat ſeems to me not imaginary only, but im-
dracticable: And that the Inhabitants of thoſe
lancts are Perſons of ſo great Accompliſhments,
more than I know ; but I am ſure they are
ot the Perſons here underſtood ; for theſe muſt
xe ſuch as inhabited this Earth before. We look
or new Heavens and new Earth, ſays the Apo-
le: Surely to have ſome Share and Intereſt in
hem, otherwiſe there would be no Comfort in
hat Expectation. And the Prophet Iſaiah ſaid
deore, I create new Heavens and a new Earth,
and the former ſhall come no more in Remem-
drance; but be 7 OU glad and rejoyce for ever
n that which JI create. The Truth is, nonc
an have ſo good Pretenſions to this Spot of
round we call the Earth, as the Sons of Men,
ſeeing they once poſſeſſed it; and if it be reſtor d
gain, tis their Propriety and Inheritance. But
tis not Mankind in general that muſt poſſeſs this
ew World, but the Iſrael of God, according to
he Prophet Iſaiah; or the Juſt, according to
St. Peter; and eſpecially thoſe that have ſuffer'd
tor the Sake of their Religion. For this is that
Palingeneſia, as we noted before, that Renovation,
or Regeneration of all Things, where our Saviour
lays, thoſe that ſuffer Loſs for his Sake, ſhall be
iccompenſed, Matth. xix. 28, 29.

But they muſt be then raiſed from the Dead.
| e l For


206 The Theory of the EARTH.


For all Mankind was deſtroyed at the Cyy
flagration: and there is no Reſource for they
any other way, than by a Reſurrection. Tis true
and St. Fohn (Apoc. xx.) gives us a fair Occ,
ſion to make this Suppoſition, that there will ky
ſome raiſed from the Dead, before the gener
Day of Judgment. For he plainly diſtinguiſhe
of a firſt and ſecond Reſurrection, and makes th
firſt to be a thouſand Years beforc the ſecond
and before the general Day of Judgment. Noy
if there be truly and really a two-fold Reſt
rection, as St. Fohn tells us; and that a Thouſa
Years Diſtance from one another: It may be yy
rationally be pre ſum'd, that thoſe that are raiſe
in the firſt Reſurrection, are thoſe Juſt that vil
inhabit the New Heavens and New Earth;
whom our Saviour promis d to reward in theRe
novation of the World.
For otherwiſe, who are thoſe Juſt that ſul
inhabit the New Earth, and whence do the
come? Or when is that Reſtauration which
our Saviour ſpeaks of, wherein thoſe that ſub
fcr'd for the Sake of the Goſpel ſhall be reward
ed? St. 7ohn ſays, the Martyrs, at this fil
Reſurrection, ſhall live again, and reign will
+ Chriſt: Which ſeems to be the Reward pro
misd by our Saviour, to thoſe that ſuffer d fot
his ſake, and the ſame Perſons in both Places
And I ſaw the Souls of them (ſays St. Fon)
that were beheaded for the Witneſs of Jeſus
and for the Word of God; and which had in
wor ſhipped the Beaſt, &c. and they lived all
reigned 1＋* Chriſt a Thouſand Tears, Apoc. = J
$8 Thee


Concerning the New Heavens, &c, 207


heſe, I ſay, ſeem to be the ſame Perſons, to
yhom Chriſt had before promisd and appropri-
ted a particular Reward. And this Reward of
heirs, or this Reign of theirs, is upon Earth ;
pon ſome Earth, new or old, not in Heaven.
or, beſides that we read nothing of their Aſcen-
jon into Heaven after their Reſurrection; there
xe ſeveral Marks that ſhew, it muſt neceſſarily
de underſtood of a State upon Earth. For Gog
and Magog came from the four Quarters of the
Earth, and beſieged the Camp of the Saints,


nd the beloved City, ver. 9. That Camp and


hat City therefore were upon the Earth. And
ire came down from Heaven, and devoured
them. If it came down from Heaven, it came
pon the Earth. Farthermore, thoſe Perſons
that are raiſed from the Dead, are ſaid to be
Prieſts of God and of Chriſt, and to reign with
im a thouſand Tears, ver. 6. Now theſc
muſt be the ſame Perſons with the Prieſis and
Kings, mention'd in the fifth Chapter, ver. 10.
which are there ſaid expreſly 10 reign upon
Earth, or that they ſhould reign upon Earth.
It remains therefore only to determine, what
Earth this is, where the Sons of the firſt Re-
ſurrectian will live and reign. It cannot be
the preſent Earth, in the ſame State, and un-
der the ſame Circumſtances it is now: For
what Happineſs or Privilege would that be,
to be called back into a mortal Life, un-
der the Neceſſities and Inconveniencies of
ſickly Bodies, and an incommodious World;
luch as the preſent State of Mortality is, and


muſt


208 The Theory of the EARTH.


muſt continue to be, till ſome Change be mg
in Nature. We may be ſure therefore, that;
Change will be made in Nature, before that Tine
and that the State they are raisd into, and tþ
Earth they are to inhabit, will be, at leaſt, Pg
aifaical ; and conſequently can be no other thy
the New Heavens and New Earth, which y
are to expect after the Conflagration.

From theſe Conſiderations, there is a great Fj:
neſs to conclude, both as to the Characters ofthe
Perſons, and of the Place or State, that the Sn
of the firſt Reſurrection will be Inhabitants ofthe
New Earth, and reign there with Chriſt a Thoy
ſand Years. But ſeeing this is one of the prin
pal and peculiar Concluſions of this Diſcourk,
and bears a great Part in this laſt Book of th
Theory of the Earth, it will deſerve a more fili
Explication, and a more ample Proof, to mak:
it out. We muſt therefore take a greater Com:
paſs in our Diſcourſe, and give a full Account
of that State which is uſually call'd the Mill
nium; the Reign of the Saints a Thouſand Yeaty
or the Kingdom of Chriſt upon Earth. but
before we enter upon this new Subject, gi
me leave to cloſe our preſent Argument, about
the Renovation of the World, with ſome Je.
ſtimonies of the anticnt Philoſophers, to thi
purpoſe. 'Tis plain to me, that there wer
among the Antients ſeveral Traditions, or tn
ditionary Concluſions, which they did nd
raiſe themſelves, by Reaſon and Oblctii-
tion, but received them from an unknown
Antiquity. An Inſtance of this is the £7


© flapratii


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 209


ntiquity. An Inſtance of this is the Conflagra-
n of the World ; a Doctrine as antient, for any
hing I know, as the World it ſelf ; at leaſt as
tient as we have any Records, and yet none of
ſe Antients that tell us of it, give any Argu-
ent to prove it. Neither is it any Wonder, for
ey did not invent it themſelves, but received it
om others without Proof, by the ſole Authority
Tradition. In like manner the Renovation of
Morld, which we arc now ſpeaking of, is an
tient Doctrine, both amongſt the Greeks and
aftern Philoſophers : But they ſhew us no Me-
od how the World 'may be renew'd, nor make
y Proof of its future Renovation; for it was
t a Diſcovery which they firſt made, but receiv'd
with an implicit Faith, from their Maſters and
ceſtors : And theſe traditionary Doctrines were
Fore-runners of that Light which was to ſhine
ore clearly at the Opening of the Chriſtian Diſ-
nation; to give a more full Account of the Fate
d Revolutions of the natural World, as well as
the moral.
The Fews, tis well known, held the Re-
uation of the World, and a Sabbath after
Thouſand Years ; according to the Pro-
ecy that was current among them; where-
we have given a larger Account in the
ecedent Book, Chap. v. And that future
ate they called n mary, Olam Hava,
the World to come, which is the very ſame
ih Saint Paul's habitable Earth to come, 5
ui 1 ptAnson, Heb. ii. 6. Neither can I
ly believe, that thoſe Conſtitutions of Moſes


book IV. 1 that


— x ¶ ͤ ꝛf—— —— ——
*


— — — Ci,
— -


210 De Theory of the EarTa.


that proceed ſo much upon a ſeptenary, ot th
Number ſeven, and have no Ground or Reaſon,
the Nature of the Thing, for that particular Nun
ber. I cannot eaſily believe, I ſay, that they ax
either accidental or humourſome, without Deſyy
or Signification; but that they are typical, or x;
preſentative of ſome Septenary State, that doy
eminently deſerve and bear that Character. Mi
in the Hiſtory of the Creation, makes fix Dy
Work, and then a Sabbath: Then, after ſix Yew
he makes a Sabbath. Tear; and after a Sabbathd
Vears, a Year of Jubilee, Levit. xxv. All thel
lefler Revolutions ſeem to me to point at th
grand Revolution, the great Sabbuth or Juin
after ſix Millenaries; which, as it anſwers t
Type in point of Time, fo likewiſe in the Nan
and Contents of it; being a State of Reſt fra
all Labour, and Trouble, and Servitude ; a Sia
of Joy and Triumph, and a State of Renovati
when Things are to return to their firſt Condito
and priſtine Order. So much for the Fews.
The Heathen Philoſophers, both Greeks at
Barbarians, had the ſame Doctrine of tl
Renovation of the World current amon
them, and that under ſeveral Names 1
Phraſes ; as of the Great Tear,” the Reſtau
tion, the Miumdane Periods, and ſuctll
They ſuppos'd ſtated and fix'd Periods of Tit
upon Expiration whercof there would alwe
follow ſome great Revolution of the Wo!
and the Face of Nature would be renew
particularly after the Conflagration, the Son


always ſupposd a new World to ſucceed,
Eee 77; 3


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 211


other Frame of Nature to be erected in the
oom of that which was deſtroyed. And they
e the lame Words and Phraſes upon this Occaſi-
that Scripture uſeth. CHryſippis calls it Apoca-
alis (Lact. l. 7. c. 23.) as St. Peter does,
(fs iii. 21. Marcus Antonius in his Medita-
uns, ſeveral times calls it Palingeneſia, as our
wiour does, Matt. xix. 28. And Numenius hath
yo Scripture words, Ręſurrec tion and Reſtitution,
uſeb. prep, Ev. 1.7. c. 23.) to expreſs this Re-
vation of the World. Then as to the Pato.
cks, that Revolution of all Things hath com-
only been call'd the P/atonick Year, as if Plato
ad been the firſt Author of that Opinion; but
at's a great Miſtake ; he receivd it from the
arbarick Philoſophers, and particularly from the
Eryptian Prieſts, amongſt whom he livd ſe-
ral Vears, to be inſtructed in their Learning.
ut do not take Plato neither to be the
that brought this Docttine into Greece :
or, beſides that the Hy, whoſe Antiquity
je do not well know, ſung this Song of old,
we ſee it Copy'd from them by Vergil in his
burth Eclogue z Pythagoras taught it before
"lato, and Orpheus before them both; and that's
$ high as the Greek Philoſophy reaches,
The Barbarick Philoſophers were more anti-
at; namely, the MAgyptians, Perſians, Chal-
eans, Indian Brackmans, and other Eaſtern
ations, Their Monuments indeed are in Aa
eat meaſure loſt ; yer from the Remains of
d prelery'd in their Writings, we ſee plainly

„ e they


212 he Theory of the EARTH.


they all had this Doctrine of the future Renova.
on. And to this Day the Poſterity of the Brat,
mans in the Eaſt. Indies retain the ſame Notiq,
that the World will be renew'd after the laſt fix
You may ſee the Citations, if you pleaſe, for al
thefe Notions, in the Latin Treatiſe, Ch, y,
which I thought would be too dry and tediousty
be render'd into Engliſh.
Io theſe Teſtimonies of the Philoſophers of al
Ages, for the future Renovation of the World
we might add the Teſtimonies of the Chriſta
Fathers, Greek and Latin, antient-and modem.
I will only give you a bare Liſt of them, and u
fer you to the Latin Treatiſe (Chap. ix.) for ti
Words or the Places. Amongſt the Greek I
thers, Juſtin Martyr, Irenæus, Origen : The
thers of the Council of Nice, Euſebius, Buji
the two Cyrils, of e and Alexandru!
The two Gregories, Nagiangzen and Nye
St. Chryſoſtom, Zacharias Mitylenenſis; and
later Date, Damaſcen, Oecumenius, Euthymut
and others. Theſe have all ſet their Hands ant
Seals to. this Doctrine. Of the Latin Father
Tertullian, Lactantius, St. Hillary, St. Amur
St. Auſtin, St. Ferome ; and many later Ecclel
aſtical Authors. Theſe, with the Philoſophers ve
fore- mention d, I count good Authority, ſacte
and prophane; which J place here as an Oi
guard upon Scripture, where our principal Foce
lies. Theſe three united, and acting in Conjunq d
tion, will be ſufficient to ſecure this firſt Poſt, Wh
F
0


/


to 'prove our firſt Propoſition, which 1s this
That . after the Conflagration of this *
f "7 BY A 1 f ,


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 213


here will be new Heavens and a new Earth; and
hat Earth will be inhabited. (Propoſ. 1.)


4.44 4 SS $44. &
Emir. W.


he Proof of a Millennium, or of a 6leſſed Age
to come, from Scripture. A View of the Apo-
calypſe, and of the Prophecies of Daniel, in re-
ference to this Kingdom of Chriſt and of his
Saints.


E have given fair Preſumptions, if not
Proofs, in the precedent Chapter, that
e Sons of the firſt Reſurrection will be the Per-
dns that ſhall inhabit the yew Earth, or the World
dcome. But to make that Proot complete and
exceptionable, I told you, it would be neceſla-
to take a larger Compals in our Diſcourſe, and
d examine what is meant by that Reign with
brit a thouſand Tears, which is promis d to the
dns of the fir/# Re ſurrection, by St. ohm in the
pocalypſe ; and in other places of Scripture is
ully call'd the Kingdom of Chriſt, ' and the
eien of the Saints: And by Eccleſiaſtical Au-
ors, in Imitation of St. 7ohn, it is commonly
pled, the Millennium. We ſhall indifferently uſe
y of theſe Words or Phraſes; and examine,
t, the Truth of the Notion and Opinion,
ncther, in Scripture, there be any ſuch an
py State promiſed to the Saints under the
onduct of Chriſt; and then we will pro-
a ceed


n o —— — oO"


214 The Theory of the EARTH.


cecd to examine the Nature, Characters, Place wy
Time of it, And ] am in hopes when theſe Thin
arc duly diſcuſs d and ſtated, you will be ſatis
that we have found out the true Inhabitants of i
new Heavens and new Earth; and the true
ſtery of that State which is called the Millennim
or the Reign of Chriſt and of his Saints.

We begin with St. Fon, whoſe Words int
xxth Chapter of the Apocalypſe, ver. 1, 2, 4, 5
are expreſs, both as to the firſt Reſurrection, w
as to the Reign of thoſe Saints that riſe with Cuil
for a Thouſand Years; Satan in the mean Tin
being bound, or diſabled from doing Mitchicf, x
ſeducing Mankind. The Words of the Propli
are theſe; And I ſaw an Angel come down fr
Heaven, having the Key of the bottomleſs?
and a great Chain in his Hand. And he laidh
on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which in
Devil and Satan, and bound him a Thui|,
Tears. And I ſaw Thrones, and they ſat i
them, and udgment was given unto them; 4
T1 ſaw the Souls of them that were beheaded
the Witneſs of Feſus,and for the Word of Gud,
which had not wor ſhipped the Beaſt, neither |
Image, neither had received his Mark upon i
Fore heads, or in their Hands; and they lived.
reigned with Chriſt a thouſand Tears. But the"
of the Dead lived not again until the thouſand Tt
were finiſhed. This is the firft Reſurrection. Bl
and holy is he that hath part in the firſt Rt
rection; on ſuch the ſecond Death hath no Po
but they ſhall be Prieſts of God, and of Chriſt, «
Hall reign with him a thouſand Tears. 4 n

/ 02 3h hs 0


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 21 5


ords do fully expreſs a Reſurrection, and a

eign with Chriſt a thouſand Years. As for that

ticular Space of Time, of a Thouſand Tears,

is not much material to our preſent Purpoſe:

t the Reſutrection here ſpoken of, and the

eign with Chriſt, make the Subſtance of the

ontroverſy, and in effect prove all that we en-

ire after at preſent. This Reſurrection, you

e, is calld the t Reſurrection, by way of

iſtinction from the ſecond and general Reſur—

tion; which is to be placed a Thouſand Years

ter the firſt, And both this firſt Reſurrection,

id the Reign of Chriſt, ſeem to be.appropriated

the Martyrs in this Place: For the Prophet

is, The Seuls . of thoſe that were beheaded for
e Witneſs of Jeſus, &c. they lived and reigned
ith Chriſt a Thouſand Tears. From which
Vords, if you pleaſe, we will raiſe this Doctrine;
a thoſe that have ſuffer d for the Sake of Chriſt,

ud a good Conſcience, ſhall be raiſed from the
Dead a Thouſand Tears be TAS the general Reſur-
fon, and reign with Chriſt in an happy State.

his Propoſition ſeems to be plainly included in
tic Words of St. John, and to be the intended
nle of this Viſion; but you mult have Patience
little as to your Enquiry into Particulars, till, in
eProgreſs of our Diſcourſe, we have brought all
e Parts of this Concluſion into a fuller Light.

In the mean time there is but one Way, that
know of, to evade the Force of theſe Words,
d of the Concluſion drawn from them; and
Wat is, by ſuppoſing that the fir/# Reſurrection
Kc mention'd, is not to be — in a
P 4 | literal


216 The Theory of the EARTH.


literal Senſe, but is allegorical and myſtical, f;
nify ing only a Reſurrection from Sin to a ji,
tual Life: As we are ſaid to be dead in Sin, ui
to be riſen with Chriſt, by Faith and Regency
On. This is a manner of Speech which St. Pa
does ſometimes uſe, as Eph. ii. 6. and ver. |
and Col. 3. 1. But how can this be applied
the preſent Caſe > Were the Martyrs dead in d
*Tis they that are here rais'd from the Dead: 0
after they were beheaded for the Witne
Jeſus, naturally dead and laid in their Gran
were they then regenerate by Faith? There isn
Congruity in Allegories ſo apply'd. Beſides, vi
ſhould they be ſaid to be regenerate a Thouli
Years before the Day of Judgment? or to rei
with Chriſt, after this Spiritual Reſurrection, (ud
a limited Time, a Thouſand Years? Why nott
to Eternity? For in this allegorical Senſe of rj
and reigning, they will reign with him for ed
laſting. Then, after a Thouſand Years, mult:
the Wicked be regenerate, and riſe into a $pl
tual Life? Tis ſaid here, the reſt of the Du
lived not again, until the Thouſand Tears u
finiſhed, ver. 5. That implies, that at the E1
of theſe Thouſand Years, the reſt of the Deadd
live again; which, according tothe Allegory, m
be, that, after a Thouſand Years, all the Wick
will be regenerate, and rais'd into Spiritual Li
Theſe Abſurdities ariſe upon an allegorical


poſition of this Reſurrection, if apply d to ſug
Perſons,


_—_ 7 -— — — — — CY Hw— _— _ . — 8 — — «% ” — — — — —


—_— n — 1 et. —ů 0 a


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 217


But Dr. Hammond, a learned and worthy Di-
ine, (but one that loves to contract and cramp
he Senſe of Prophecies) making this firſt Reſur-
ection allegorical, applies it not to ſingle Per-
ſons, but to the State of the Church in general :
he Chriſtian Church, he ſays, ſhall have a Re-
ſurrection for a Thouſand Years ; that is, ſhall
iſe out of Perſecution, be in a proſperous Con-
lition, and an undiſturbed Profeſſion of the true
Religion, for ſo long a Time. But this agrees
with the Prophecy as little as the former; if it
be a State of the Church in genera], and of the
Church then in being, why is this Reſurrection
apply'd to the Martyrs? Why are they ſaid to


ſome State of the Church, and it would be no
Happineſs to have that revivd again? Then as to
the Time of this Reſurrection of the Church,
where will you fix it? The Prophet Daniel
places this Reign of Chriſt, at, or after the
Diſſolution of the fourth Monarchy ; and Saint
John places it a Thouſand Years before the
aſt Day of Judgment. How will you adjuſt
the allegorical Reſurrection of the Church to


was free, as to Prophecy, yet how would you


theſe Thouſand Years of Happineſs and Pro-
ſperity to the Church? Theſe Authors ſuppoſe
them paſt, and therefore muſt begin them cither
from the firſt Times of the Goſpel, or from
the Time of Conſtantine. Under the firſt Ages
of the Goſpel, were, you know, the great Per-

| * ſecutions


ile ; ſeeing the State they livd in, was a trouble-


theſe Limits? Or if, in point of Time, you


adjuſt it to Hiſtory >? Where will you take.


—
ä = = .
— — = — — 2 —
1 . ago
—


— — ST


_ —
=> _ — — —

JE en. . *
SOA — —


—
——


— 2 — 2 ——„—- — —


— —— — —


— — oo


— —


— err
— _ — — — —— —
—
5 A —
a" - RED
—
= — H——


218 The Theory of the EARTH.


ſecutions by the Heathen Emperors ; could thoſely
call'd the Reign of Chriſt and of his Saints? Wy
Satan then bound? Or was this Epocha but a thay
ſand Years before the Day of Judgment? Andi
you begin this Reſutrection of the Church fron
the Days of Conſtantine, when the Empire hy
came Chriſtian, how will you reckon a thouſani
Years from that Time, for the Continuance d
the Church in Peace and Purity? For the Reign
of Chriſt and of his Saints muſt neceſſarily imp;
both thoſe Characters. Beſides, who are the
of the Dead, (ver. 5.) that lived after the E-
ration of thoſe thouſand Years, if they began a
Conſtantine? And why is not the ſecond Rely:
rection and the Day of Judgment yet come!
Laſtly, you ought to be tender of interpreting the
firſt Reſurrection in an allegorical Senſe, leſt yay
expoſe the ſecond Reſurrection to be made a
Allegory alſo. ST
Io conclude; The Words of the Text are plan
and expreſs for a literal Reſurrection, as to tht
firſt, as well as the ſecond; and there is no alle
gorical Interpretation that I know of, that vil
hold through all the Particulars of the Text, con:
ſiſtently with it ſelf and with Hiſtory. And when
we ſhall have proved this future Kingdom 0
Chriſt from other Places of the Apocalypſe, and
of Holy Writ, you will the more caſily admit
the literal Senſe of this Place; which, you knov
according to the receivd Rule of Interprett5
is never to be quitted or forſaken, without
Neceſlity : But when I ſpeak of confirmily
this Doctrine from other Paſlages of Scripture, |


f A


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 219


o not mean as to that definite Time of a Thou-
1nd Tears, for that is no where elfe mention'd in
e Apocalypſe, or in Scripture, that I know of;
4 ſcems to be mention'd here, in this Cloſe of
Things, to mind us of that Type that was pro-
osd in the Beginning of all Things, of ſax Days
nd a Sabbath; whereof each Day comprehends
Thouſand Years, and the Sabbath, which is
be Millennial State, j hath its Thouſand accord-
g to the known Prophecy of Elias, Book III.
h. v. which, as I told you before, was not only
ecciv'd among the Jews, but alſo own'd by very
any of the Chriſtian Fathers.

Io proceed therefore to other Parts of St. Fohn's
tophecies, that ſet forth this Kingdom of Chriſt ;
he Viſion of the Seven Trumpets is one of the
oſt remarkable in the Apocalypſe; and the Se-
cath Trumpet, which plainly reaches to the End
f the World, and the Reſurrection of the Dead,
pens the Scene to the Millennium; hear the Sound
of it, Ch. xi. 15, 16, 17, 18. The ſeventh Angel
ounded, and there were great Voices in Heaven,
ajing, The Kingdoms of this World are become

the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Chriſt, and
be ſhall reign for ever and ever, And the four
and twenty Elders, which ſat before God on
their Seats, fell upon their Faces, and wor ſhipped
God; ſaying, We give thee Thanks, O Lord
God Almighty, which art, and waſt, and art to
come; becauſe thou haſt taken to thee thy great
Power, and haſt reigned. And the Nations
Were angry, and thy Wrath is come, and the


Time of the Dead, that they ſhould be judged,
an


220 The Theory of the EARTH.


and that thou ſpouldeſt give Reward unto thy 9
wants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and tin
that fear thy Name, ſmall and great, and ſpouli
deſtroy them that deſtroy the Earth, &c, Thi
is manifeſtly the Kingdom of Chriſt ; and vi
this is joined the Reſurrection of the Dead, ani
the rewarding of the ſuffering Prophets and Saint
as in the xxth Chapter. This is that Myſtery o
God that was to be fmiſhed in the Days of th
Voice of the ſeventh Angel, as is ſaid in the xx
Chap. ver. 7. As he hath declared to his Servam
the Prophets; namely, the Myſtery of this King
dom, which was foretold by the Prophets of the
Old Teſtament, and more eſpecially by Dani
as we ſhall ſee hereafter.

The zem Feruſalem (as it is ſet down, Aj
xxi. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.) is another Inſtance or Imag
of this Kingdom of Chriſt, And the Palm. bias
ing Company, Chap. vii. 9, &c. are ſome of th
Martyrs that ſhall enjoy it. They are plainly de.
ſcrib'd there as Chriſtian Martyrs ; (ver. 14.) and
their Reward, or the State of Happineſs they ar
to enjoy, (ver. 15, 16, 17.) is the ſame with that
of the Inhabitants of the new Jeruſalem, Ch. vii.
2, 3,4, Cc. as, upon comparing thoſe two Place,
will eaſily appear. Farthermore, at the Opening
of the Seals, Chap. v. which is another principal
Viſion, and reaches to the End of the World,
there is a Proſpect given us of this Kingdom of
Chriſt, and of that Reward of his Saints. For when
they ſing the new Song to the Lamb, (ver. 9,
10.) they ſay, Thou art worthy to take thi
Book, and to open the Seals thereof ; for I

4


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 221


aft ſain and haſt redeemed us to God, by thy
od; and haſt made us unto our God Kings and
rieſts, and we ſhall reign on the Earth. This
aſt be the ſame State, and the ſame Thouſand-
ears-Reign mention d in the xxth Chap. where
s ſaid, (Ver. 6.) the Partakers of it ſhall be
Prieſts of God, and of Chriſt, ana ſhall reign
with him a Thouſand Tears. 1 |

Another completory Viſion, that extends it
If tothe End of the World, is that of the Seven
zals, Chap. xv. and xvi. And as at the Open-
gof the Seals, ſo at the pouring out the Vials, a
jumphal Song is ſung, and tis call'd the Song of
Voſes and of the Lamb, Ch. xv. 3. Tis plainly
Song of Thankſgiving for a Deliverance, but I do
ot look upon this Deliverance as already wrought,
xfore the pouring out of the Vials, tho it be
lacd before them; as often the grand Deſign and
ſue of a Viſion is plac'd at the Beginning: lt is
vrought by the Vials themſelves, and by their
fuſion, and therefore upon the pouring out of
he laſt Vial, the Voice came out of the Temple
df Heaven, from the Throne, ſaying, Conſumma-
um eſt; It is done, Ch. xvi. 17. Now the Delive-
ance.is wrought, now the Work is at an End; or,
be Myſtery of God is finiſhed, as the Phraſe was
fore, concerning the 7th Trumpet, Chap. x. 7.
ou ſee therefore this terminates upon the ſame
ume, and conſequently upon the ſame State,
ft the Millennium; and that they are the
ame Perſons that triumph here, and reign
here, Chap. xx. you may ſee by the ſame Cha-
atters given to both of them, Ch, xv. 2. Here,
* thoſe


222 The Theory of the EARTH,
thoſe that triumph, are ſaid t have gotten 1/,iihc
Viclory over the Beaſt, and over his Image, ai:
over his Marl, and over the Number of his Nam
Ch. xx. 4. And there, thoſe that reign with Chig ll
are ſaid to be thoſe that had not worſhiped the Bea
neither his Imuge, neither had recerved his Mai
npon their Foreheads, or in their Hands. Theſe x
the ſame Perſons therefore, triumphing over t
ſame Enemies, and enjoying the fame Reward,
And you ſhall ſeldom find any-Doxolopy a
Hallelujah in the Apocalypſe, but tis in Po
ſpect of the Kingdom of Chriſt, - and the Mi
lennial State: This is till the Burthen of the
ſacred Song, the Complement of every. gta
Viſion, and the Life and Strength of the wholt
Syſtem of Prophecies in that Book : Even thol
Hallelnjahs that ate ſung at the Deſtrudin
of Babylon, in the xixth Chapter, ver. 6, 7. at
raisd upon the ſucceeding State, the Rein
Chriſt. For the Text ſays, And I heard at
were a Voice of a great Multitude, and as ii
Voice of many Waters, and as the Voice
mighty Thunders, ſaying, Hallelujah : For Til
LoRD God OMNIPOTENT REIGNETH. Let us|
glad and rejoyce, and give Honour to him: Id
THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB IS COME, AND H
Wire HATH MADE HER SELF READY, This a
pears plainly to be the new Feruſalem, if you co
ſult the 21ſt CH. ver. 2. And I John ſau i
Holy City, new Jeruſalem, coming down fri
God out of Heaven, PREPARED AS A BRI
ADORNED FOR HER HUSBAND: , 'Tis, no dot
the ſame Bride and Bridegroom, in both rey
; th


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 223


ſame Marriage or Preparations for Marriage,
hich are compleated in the Millennial Bliſs, in
e Kingdom of Chriſt and of his Saints.

muſt beg your Patience a little longer, in
ſuing this Argument throughout the Apocalypſe ;
5 towards the latter End of St. Johns Revelation,
is Kingdom of Chriſt ſhines out in a more full
ory ; ſo there are the Dawnings of it in the very
einning and Entrance into his Prophecies. As
the Beginning of a Poem, we have commonly,
a few Words, the Deſign of the Work, in like
anner, Ch. i. 5, 6. St. John makes this Pre-
ce to his Prophecies, From Feſus Chriſt, who is
be faithful Witneſs, the firſt begotten of the
Dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth;
to him that loved us, and waſhed us from our
ins in his own Blood; and hath made us Kings
i Prieſts unto God and his Father; to him be
ory and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen.
bebold, he cometh in the Clouds, &c. In this
'rologue the grand Argument is pointed at, and
at happy Cataſtrophe and laſt Scene, which is to
town the Work, the Reign of Chriſt and of his
jaints at his ſecond Coming. He hath made us
Kmps and Prieſts unto God; this is always the
haraeriſtick of thoſe that are to enjoy the
llennial Happineſs, as you may ſee at the
Opening of the Seals, Ch. v. 10. and in the Sons
If the ft Reſurrection, Ch. xx. 6. And this be-
lg joined to the Coming of our Saviour, puts it
il more out of Doubt. That Expreſſion alſo,
f being waſhed from our Sins in his Blood, is re-
Kated again both at the Opening of the Seals,
| Ch. v.


224 The Theory of the EARTH.


chap. v. 9. and in the Palm: bearing Compy
£52. Vii. 14. both which Places we have cid
bctorc, as referring to the Millennial State,
Give me Leave to add farther, that as in th
general Preface, ſo alſo in the introductory Viſor
of the ſeven Churches, there are, covertly 9
exprelly, in the Concluſion of each, glances upy
the Millennium; as in the firſt to Epheſus, the Py
phet concludes, chap. ii. 7. He that hath an Ey
let him hear, what the Spirit ſays to the Churchy
To HIM THAT OVERCOMETH, WILL I GIVE I
EAT OF THE TREE OF LIFE, WHICH 1s IN
MIDST OF THE PARADISE OF GOD. This isth
Millennial Happineſs which is promiſed to thi
Conqueror ; as we noted before concerning th
Phraſe. In like manner in the ſecond to dn
he concludes, chap. ii. 11. He that overcomah
ſpall not be hurt of the ſecond Death. This im
plies, he ſhall be Partaker of the firſ# Reſurreclin
for that's the Thing underſtood ; as you may (kt
plainly by their being joyn'd in the xxth Chapt
Ver. 6. Bleſſed and holy is he that hath Part
the firſt Reſurrection; on ſuch the ſecond Deutl
hath no Power, but they ſhall be Prieſts of Cu
and of Chriſt, and ſball reign with him a thouſa
Tears. In the third to Pergamns, the Promiſe
chap. ii. 7. To eat of the hidden Manna, to hav
a white Stone, and a new Name written m
But ſeeing the Prophet adds, which no Man kun
eth, ſaving he that receiveth it, we will not pt
ſume to interpret that new State, whatſoever it h
chap. ii. 26, 27. In Thyatira, the Reward is, 1
have Power over the Nations, and to have til


Morn)


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 225


ning Star; which is to reign with Chriſt,
o is the Morning Star, in his Millennial Em-
re: Both theſe Phraſes being us d in that Senſe in
Cloſe of this Book, Ch. iii. 5. In Sard?s the
omile is, To be cloathed in white Raiment, and
to be blotted out of the Book of Life. And
u ſee afterwards the Palme bearing Company
cloathed in white Robes, Ch, vii. 9, 14. and
ole that are admitted into the new Feruſalem,
hap. iii. 1 2. are ſuch as are written inthe Lamb's
wk of Life, Ch. xxi. 27. Then as to Phila-
phia, the Reward promiſed there does openly
rk the Millennial State, by the City of God;
s Jeruſalem which cometh down out of Hea-
from God, compar'd with Ch. xxi. 2. Laſtly,
the Church of Laodicea is ſaid, Ch. iii. 21. To

n that overcometh will I grant to fit with me
my Throne. And that is the uſual Phraſe to
preſs the Dignity of thoſe that reign with Chriſt,
his Millennial Kingdom; as you may ſee, Apoc.
4. Matt. xix. 28. Dan. Vii. 9, 13, 14. So all
ele Promiſes to the Churches aim at one and the
me thing, and terminate upon the ſame Point:
i the ſame Reward expreſs'd in different Ways;
dſecing it is ſtill fix d upon a Victory, and appro-
lated:to thoſe that overcome, it does the more
ally carry our Thoughts to the Millennium, which
the proper Reward of Victors, that is, of Mar-
ts and Confeſlors.
Thus you ſee how this Notion and Myſtery of
e Millennial Kingdom of Chriſt, docs both be-
in and End the Apocalypſe, and run thorough
| its Parts, as the Soul of that Body of Prophe-
Book IV. | Q cies;


—


— — — — —


——
— EI AAAS
— —— —— NS


|
l
i
4
1
|


A OE I —„—


— — —
P
— —
—
— E— — — — — — —
—— —  —— —— —


—


coucht under thoſe Schemes. Wherefore han


Agreement and Concurrence of theſe two gr;


226 The Theory of the EARTH.


cies; a Spirit or Ferment that actuates the wh
Maſs. And if we could thoroughly underſtan
that illuſtrious Scene, at the Opening of this Ay
calyptical Theatre in the ivth and vth CH
I do not doubt but we ſhould find it a Repteſe
tation of the Majeſty of our Saviour in the Go
of his future Kingdom; but I dare nor vent
upon the Explication of it, there are ſo my
Things of Difticulty, and dubious Interpretaig


made theſe Obſervations upon the Prophecies
St. John, we will now add to them ſome Reflefi
ons upon the Prophecies of Daniel: that by


Witneſſes, the Concluſion we pretend to pron
may be fully eſtabliſhed, _

In the Prophecies of Daniel there are two gra
Viſions, that of the Status or Image, Chap. ii. a
that of the four Beaſts, Chap. vii. and both thel
Viſions terminate upon the Millennium, ot i
Kingdom of Chriſt. In the Viſion of the Stau
repreſenting to us the four great Monarchics
the World ſucceſſively, (whereof by the gen
Conſent of Interpreters, the Roman is the four
and laſt, after the Diſſolution of the laſt of then
a fifth Monarchy, the Kingdom of Chrilt
openly introduc'd, in theſe Words : And mt
Days of theſe Kingdoms, ſhall the God of Ht
ven ſet up a Kingdom, which ſhall never bt
ſtroyed; and the Kingdom ſhall not be left to oth
People, but it ſhall break in Pieces, and conſu
all thoſe Kingdoms, and it ſhall ſtand for
Ch. ii. Ver. 44. This may be verified, in b

1 mealule


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 227
calure, by the firſt coming of our Saviour in
e Days of the fourth Kingdom, when his Reli-
on, from ſmall Beginnings, in a ſhort Time
er · ſpread the greateſt Part of the known World.
the Stone cut out without Hands, became a
eat Mountain, and filled the whole Earth, Ver.
35. but the full and final Accompliſhment
this Prophecy cannot be till the ſecond
ming of our Saviour. For not till then will

Ver. 35, break in pieces and conſume all thoſe
mgdoms ; and that in ſuch a manner, that
ey ſhall become like the Chaff of the Summer-
Weſhing Floor, carried away by the Wind; ſo as
Place ſhall be found for them. This, I ſay, will


dt be done, nor an everlaſting Kingdom erected


their place, over all the Nations of the Earth;
Il his ſecond coming, and his Millennial Reign.
But this Reign is declared more expreſly, in the
iſon of the four Beaſts, Ch. vii. Ver. 13. For af-
the Deſtruction of the fourth Beaſt, the Pro-
et ſays, I ſaw in the Night Viſions, and behold
lite the Son of Man, came with the Clouds of
ſeaven, and came to the Antient of Days, and
bey brought him near before him: And there was
ven him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom,
bat all People, Nations and Languages ſhould
ve him ; his Dominion is an everlaſting Do-
un, which ſhall not paſs away; and his
mpdom that which ſhall not be deſtroyed. Ac-
rdingly, he ſays, Ver. 21, 22. The laſt Beaſt,
ud the little Horn, made War againſt the Saints,
Wi the Antient of Days came, and Judgment
Ms given to the Saints of the moſt High; and


Q 2 the


*
1 I
=
7
_ i
1
4.351 4
14
1
* [1
"4
N vi
N
33
' 4
l;
17
.
1
'
.
*
37
[
| 1
| =
|
i, 4
| |
ö
|


ut!
1
11
11
1.


— —ü—ä——
—— — NOSE
a a_—_——
- —
*
- ** Fa I os Apt ;
Re rn =
3


228 The Theory of the EARTH.


the T ime came that the Saints poſſeſſed the Ri.
dom. And laſtly, in Purſuit ſtill of the ſame A.
gument, he concludes to the ſame Effect in fully
Words, ver. 26, 27. But the Fudgment ſu
fit, and they ſhall take away his Dominion, .
conſume and to deſtroy it unto the End, Au
the Kingdom and Dominion, and the Greg
neſs of the Kingdom under the whole Heavn,
ſpall be 8 to the People of the Saints if
the moſt High; whoſe Kingdom is an everlaſtng
Kingdom, and all Dominions ſhall ſerve al
obey him.

Here is the End of the Matter, ſays the Ito
phet, Chap. vii. ver. 28. Chap. xii. ver. 13. Her
is the Upſhot and Reſult of all; here terminat
both the Prophecies of Daniel and St. John, and
all the Affairs of the terreſtrial World. Dari
brings in this Kingdom of Chriſt, in the Conclu-
ſion of two or three Viſions; but St, Fohn hath
interwoven it every where with his Prophecies
from firſt to laſt :: And you may as well open 1
Lock without a Key, as interpret the Aporalyſ
without the Millennium. But after theſe tyo
orcat Witneſſes, the one for the Old Teſtament,
the other for the New, we muſt look into thc
reſt of the ſacred Writers; for tho every {in
gle Author there, is an Oracle, yet the Colt
currence of Oracles is ſtill a farther Demon
ſtration, and takes away all Remains of Doubt0
Incredulity.


CA!


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 229


GI AR V


(View of other Places of Scripture concerning
the Millennium or future Kingdom of Chriſt.
In what Senſe all the Prophets have borne
Teſtimony concerning it.


"HE Wife of Zebedee came to our Saviour,
and begg'd of him, like a fond Mother,
hat her two Sons might fit, one at his Right
and, the other at his Left, when he came into
Kingdom, Matt. xx. 21. Our Saviour docs
ot deny the Suppoſition, or general Ground of
er Requeſt, that he was to have a Kingdom;
ut tells her, the Honours of that Kingdoni were
ot then in his Diſpoſal. He had not drunk
s Cup, nor been baptiz d with his laſt Baptiſm ;
hich were Conditions, both to him and others,
{ entring into that Kingdom. Yet, in another
ace, (Matt. xix. 28.) our Saviour is ſo well
lurd of his Intereſt and Authority there, by the
00d-will of his Father, that he promiſes to his
ciples and Followers, that for the Loſſes they
ould ſuſtain here, upon his Account, and for the
ake of his Goſpel, they ſhould reccive there an
undred-fold, and ſit upon Thrones with him,
dging the Tribes of rael. The Words are
cle; And Feſus ſaid unto them, Verily 1 ſay
Wo you, that ye which have followed me, in
e Regeneration or Renovation, when the Ion
| Man fhall fit in the Throne of his Glory,
' fo faall fit upon twelve Thrones, ndging
Q 3 the


230 Tube Theory of the EARTH.


the twelve Tribes of Iſrael. Theſe Thrones, j
all Reaſon, muſt be underſtood to be the (an
with thoſe, which we mention d in the foreggin
Chapter out of Daniel vii. 9. and Apocal, xx,
and therefore mark the ſame Time, and the (any
State. And ſeeing, in thoſe Places, they plzinh
ſignify the Millennial State, or the Kingdom g
Chriſt and of his Saints, they muſt here ſigh
the ſame, in this Promiſe of our Saviour to h
ſuffering Followers. And as to the Word 5.
bmgeneſi a, which is here tranſlated Regeneratin
tis very well known, that both the Greek Phil
ſophers, and Greek Fathers, uſe that very Wo
for the Renovation of the World; which bt
be, as we ſhall hereafter make appear, at or |
fore the Millennial Statc.
© Our Saviour alſo, in his Divine Sermon upe
the Mount, makes this one of his Beatztud
Bleſſed are the Meek, for they fhall ini
the Earth: But how, I pray, or where,
3 do = Meck inherit the Earth? Neit
preſent, I am ſure, nor in any paſt Ay
Ti the great ones of the World, ambiti
Princes and Tyrants, that flice the Earth amon
them; and thoſe that can flatter them bel
ſerve them in their Intereſts or Pleaſures, |
the next beſt Shares: But 4 meek, modeſt:
humble Spirit, is the moſt unqualified Perk
that can be, for a Court, or a Camp; to ſci
ble for Preferment, or Plunder. Both he,
his ſelf denying Notions, are ridicul'd, as Tit
f no Uſe, and proceeding from Meanne
enden of Spirit. David, who was a Pet


—


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 231


of an admirable Devotion, but of an unequal
Fpirit 5 ſubject to great Dejections, as well as
leyations of Mind; was fo much affected with
he Proſperity of the Wicked in this World,
hat he could ſcarce forbear charging Providence
vith Injuſtice. You may ſee ſeveral Touches of
 repining Spirit in his P/a/ms, and in the Ixxiiid
Pſalm, compos d upon that Subject, you have
doth the Wound and the Cure. Now this Bea-
tude pronounc'd here by our Saviour, was
poken before by David, Tſal. xxxvii. 11. the
ime David, that was always ſo ſenſible of the
ard Uſage of the Juſt in this Life. Our Savi-
ur alſo, and his Apoſtles, preach'd the Docttine
ff the Croſs every where, and foretell the Suf-
rings that ſhall attend the Righteous in this
orld, Therefore neither David, nor our
yiour, could underſtand this Inheritance of
he Earth, otherwiſe than of fome future State,
dr of a State yet to come. But as it muſt be
future State, ſo it muſt be a terreſtrial State;
or it could not be call'd the Inheritance of the
arth, if it was not ſo. And tis to be a State
ff Peace, as well as Plenty, according to the
Vords of the Pſalmiſt, But the Meek ſhall in-
ler the Earth, and ſhall delight themſelves
the abundance of Peace, It follows there-
dre from theſe Premiſſes, that both our Savi-
bur, and David, muſt underſtand ſome future
dtate of the Earth, wherein the AMrzzk will
noy both Peace and Plenty; and this will
ppear to be the future Kingdom of Chriſt,
nen, upon a fuller Deſcription, we ſhall
04: ---. Rave


232 The Theory of the EAR Th.


have given you the Marks and Characters of |

In the mean time, why ſhould we not ſupp
this Earth, which the Meck are to inherit, toy
that habitable Earth to come, which St. Py
mentions (Feb. ii. 6.) and repreſents as ſubjet
to our Saviour in a peculiar Manner, at his Dj
poſal, and under his Government, as his King
dom ? Why ſhould not that Earth be the Subjet
of this Beatitude, the promis'd Land, the Lot d
the Righteous? This 1 am ſure of, that both thi
Text and the former deſerve our ſerious Thoughts
and tho they do not expreſly, and in Terms
prove the future Kingdom of our Saviour, 30
upon the faireſt Interpretations they imply ſuch
State. And it would be very uncaly to give
ſatisfactory Account, either of the Regeneratin
or Renovation, when our Saviour and his Dil
ples ſhall ſit upon Thrones ; or of that Earl
which the Meek ſhall inherit: Or, laſtly, «
that habitable World, which is peculiarly ſubje
to the Dominion of Jeſus Chriſt, without ſuppo
ſing, on this ſide Heaven, ſome other Reign 0
Chriſt and his Saints, than what we ſec, or uh
they enjoy, at preſent.

But to proceed in this Argument, it will be
neceſſary, as I told you, to ſet down ſome Note
and Characters of the Reign of Chriſt and of
Saints, whereby it may be diſtinguiſh'd from til
preſent State and preſent Kingdoms of the Woll
And theſe Characters are chiefly three, Ju
Peace, and Divine Preſence or Conduct, whid
uſes to be called Theocracy. By theſe Charatic
it is ſufficiently diftinguiſh'd from the Kingdom


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 233


this World; which are generally unjuſt in their
Titles or Exerciſe, ſtain'd with Blood, and ſo far
-om being under a particular Divine Conduct,
hat Human Paſlions and Human Vices are the
rings that commonly give Motion to their great-
| Deſigns: But more particularly and reſtrained-
y, the Government of Chriſt is oppos d to the
ingdom and Government of Antichriſt, whole
haracters are diametrically oppoſite to theſe,
xcing Injuſtice, Cruelty, and human or diabolical
(rtifices.

Upon this ſhort View of the Kingdom of
hrilt, let us make Enquiry after it amongſt
the Prophets of the Old Teſtament; and we
ſhall find, upon Examination, that there is
ſcarce any of them, greater or leſſer, but take
notice of this myſtical Kingdom, cither ex-
reſly, or under the Types of Iſrael, Sion, Je-
vſalem, and ſuch-like. And therefore | am
apt to think, that when St. Peter, in his Ser-
mon to the Fews, Ads iii. ſays, all the holy
Prophets ſpoke of the Reſtitution of all Things,
he does not mean the Renovation of the World
ſeparately from the Kingdom of Chriſt, but
complexly, as it may imply both. For there
are not many of -the old Prophets that have
ſpoken of the Renovation of the natural
World, but a great many have ſpoken of the
Renovation of the moral, in the Kingdom of
Chriſt, Theſe are St. Peters Words, As iii.
19, 20, 21, Repent ye therefore, and be con.
terted, that your Sins may be blotted out, when
ihe Times of refreſhing ſhall come from the Pre-
: BT ere fence


234 The Theory of the EARTH.


ſence of the Lord. And he ſhall ſend Feſus Chr
which before was preached unto you; whom ii
Heavens muſt receiue until the Times of REST]
TUTION OF ALL THINGS. The Apoſj
here mentions three Things, the Times of refreh,
ing, the ſecond coming of our Saviour, and the
Times of Reſtitution of all Things: And to th
laſt of theſe he immediately ſubjoins, which Gy
hath ſpoken by the Mouth of all his holy Prophet,
fence the World began. This Reſtitution of ;
Things, I ſay, muſt not be underſtood abſtratty
from the Reign of Chriſt, but as in Conjunction
with it; and in that Senſe, and no other, it j
the general Subject of the Prophets.
To enter therefore into the Schools of the
Prophets, and enquire their Senſe concerning thi
Myſtery, let us firſt addreſs our ſelves to the Pre
phet Iſaiah, and the royal Prophet David; who
ſeem to have had many noble Thoughts or lnſpi
rations upon this Subject. Iſaiah, in the lut
Chapter, from the xviith Verſe to the End, treats
upon this Argument ; and joins together the Re
novation of the natural and moral World, a
St. Peter, in the Place fore- mentioned, ſcemst(
do: And accordingly the Prophet, having &
down ſeveral natural Characters of that State, 4
Indolency and Joy, Longevity, Eaſe, and Plent)
from ver. 18. to the 24th, he there begins the
moral Characters of Divine Fayour, and ſuch a pat
ticular Protection, that they are heard and anſwerd
before they pray. And laſtly, he repreſents it as
State of univerſal Peace and Innocency, ver. 23
The Wolf and the Lamb ſhall feed together, .
h 8


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 235


This laſt Character, which comprehends Peace,
Juſtice and Innocency, is more fully diſplay d by
the ſame Prophet, in the xith Chapter, where
he treats alſo of the Kingdom of Chriſt. Give
me leave to ſet down his Words, ver. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. But with Righteouſneſs ſhall he judge
the Poor, and reprove with Equity, for the Meek
of the Earth : and he ſhall ſmite the Earth with
the Rod of his Mouth, and with the Breath of
his Lips ſhall he ſlay the Wicked. And Righte-
ouſneſs ſpall be the Girdle of his Loins, and Faith-
fulneſs the Girdle of his Rems. The Wolf alfo
ſhall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard fhall
lie down with the Kid; and the Calf and the
young Lyon, and the Fatling together, and a little
Child ſhall lead them. And the Cow and the
Bear ſhall feed, and their youne Ones ſhall lie
down together; and the Lyon fhall eat Straw like
the Ox. And the ſucking Child fhall play on the
Hole of the Aſp, and the weaned Child ſhall put
bis Hand on the Cockatrice-Den. They ſhall not
burt nor deſtroy in all my holy Mountain; for the
Earth ſhall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord,
a the Waters cover the Sea. Thus far the Propher.
Now if we join this to what we noted before,
from his lxvth Chapter, concerning the ſame State,
twill be impoſlible to underſtand it of any Order
ot Things, that is now, or hath been hitherto in the
World; And conſequently it muſt be the Idea of
lome State to come, and particularly of that which
we call the future Kingdom of Chriſt.

The ſame 'pacifick Temper, Innocency and
Juſtice, are celebrated by this Prophet, when
r 59 8 =


—— - — _— — —
—— 8 i


—


236 The Theory of the Earth.


the Mountain of the Lord ſhall be eſtabliſhed i
the Top of the Mountains, Chap. ii. 2, 4. And
he ſhall judge amongſt the Nations, and ſhall u.
buke many People ; and they ſhall beat they
Swords into Plow: ſhares, and their Spears int
Pruning-hooks. Nation ſhall not lift up Swi
againſt Nation, neither ſhall they learn War ay
more. And as to Righteouſneſs, he ſays, in the
xxiiid Chapter, Behold a King ſhall reign in Riyh.
teouſneſs, and Princes ſhall rule in Fudgment, &.
Theſe Places, I know, uſually are apply'd to the
firſt coming of our Saviour; the Peaceablenelz
of his Doctrine, and the Propagation of it tho
all the World. I willingly allow this to be:
true Senſe, ſo far as it will go: But tis one thing
to be a true Senſe to ſuch a Degree, and another
thing to be the final Senſe and Accompliſhment
of a Prophecy. The Affairs of the firſt and ſe-
cond coming of our Saviour are often mingled
together in the Prophecies of the O4 Teſts
ment; but in that Mixture there are ſome Cha
rafters whereby you may diſtinguiſh what be-
longs to his firſt, and what to his * ſecond
coming; what to the Time when he came
to ſuffer, and what to the Time when he ſhall
come to reign. For Inſtance, in theſe Pro-
phecies recited, though there are many Things
very applicable to his firſt coming, yet that
Regality which is often ſpoken of, and that
univerſal Peace and Innocency that will accom-
pany it, cannot be verified of his coming in
the Fleſh, ſeeing it is plain, that in his State
of Humiliation he did not come as a King, 1
5 rule


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 237


le over the Nations of the Earth, (Matt. xx. 21.
1e xXiil. 42.) And he ſays himſelf expreſly,
That his Kingdom is not of this World, John xviii.
6. And the Prayer of Salome, and of the good
Thief upon the Croſs, ſuppoſe it not then pre-
ent, but to come. Then as to the Eſtabliſhment
ff Peace in his Kingdom, it docs not at all ap-
car to me that there is more Peace in the World
ow, than there was before our Saviour came
nto it; or that the Chriſtian Parts of the World
te more peaceable than the Unchriſtian. There-
ore theſe great Promiſes of a pacifick Kingdom,
hich are expreſsd in Terms as high and empha-
ical as can be imagin'd, muſt belong to ſome
ther Days, and ſome other Ages, than what we
ave ſeen hitherto,
You'll ſay, it may be, "Tis not the Fault of the
oſpel that the World is not peaceable, but of
hoſe that profeſs it, and do not practiſe it. This
true, but it does not anſwer the Prophecy; for
hat makes no Exception, and by ſuch a Reſerve
8 this, you may clude any Prophecy. So the
jews (ay, their Meſſiah defers his coming be-
jond the Time appointed by Prophecy, becauſe
ft their Sins; but we do not allow this for a
good Reaſon. The 1ſrae/ztes had their promiſed
aaan, tho they had render'd themſelves unwor-
ty of it; and by this Method of interpreting
Prophecies, all the Happineſs and Glory promiſed
a the Millennial Kingdom of Chriſt may come
o nothing, upon a pretended Forfeiture. Threat-
lings indeed may have a tacit Condition;
Cod may be better than his Word, and, upon
Repen-


238 The Theory of the EAR TB.


Repentance, divert his Jiidgments ; but he canny
be worſe than his Word, or fail of Performang
when, without any Condition expreſs'd, he pg
miles or prophecics good T hings to come : Thy
would deſtroy all Aſſurance of Hope or Faith
Laſtly, this Prophecy concerning pacifick Timo
or a pacrfick: Kingdom, is in the Ixvth Chapter
Iſaiah, ſabjoin'd to the Renovation of the Heaum
and the Earth, and ſeveral Marks of a Change i
the natural World ; which Things we know di
not come to pals at the firſt coming of our Saviou;
there was no Change of Nature then, nor has beet
ever ſince : And therefore this happy Change, bod
in the natural and moral World, is yet to come.
But, as we ſaid before, we do not ſpeak thi
excluſively of the firſt coming of our Saviour, a
to other Parts of theſe Prophecics z for no dout
that was one great Deſign of them. And in i
Prophecics of the Old Teſtament, there are oitel
three Gradations, or gtadual Accompliſhments
the firſt, in ſome King of 1/rael, or ſome be
ſon or Affair relating to 1/rael; as Nations
only: The ſecond, in the Meſſiah at his fil
coming: And the laſt, in the Meſſiah; and il
Kingdom at his ſecond coming. And that whic
we affirm and contend for, is, that the Propheci
fore-mentioned have not a final and total Accon
pliſnhment, either in the Nation of the ets,
at the firſt coming of our Saviour; and this V
abide by. ee
The next Prophet that we mention d 2
Witneſs of the future Kingdom of Chrill,
David; who, in his Pſalms, ſeems to be *
5 | | WI


Concerning the New Heavens, &c. 239
th this Subject above all others: And when he
moſt exalted in his Thoughts and prophetical
aptures, the Spirit carries him into the King-
om of the Meſſiah, to contemplate its Glory,
p ſing Praiſes to its King, and triumph over his
nemies, Pſal. lxviii. Let God ariſe, let his
nemies be ſcattered ; Let them alſo that hate
m flee before him: As Smoak is driven away,
drive them away ; as Wax melteth before the
ire, ſo let the Wicked periſh at the Preſence of
od : But let the Righteous be glad, &c. The
lain Ground he goes upon in this Pſalm, is the
eliverance out of «Zgypr, and bringing the
fatlites into the Land of Canaan ; but when
is once upon the Wing, he ſoars to an higher
Itch (ver. 18.) from the Type to the Antitype ;
d the Days of the Mefliah, the Aſcenſion of
ur Saviour; and, at length, to his Kingdom
d Dominion over all the Earth, ver 32, Oc.
he xlvth Pſalm is an Epithalamium to Chriſt
d the Church, or to the Lamb and his Spouſe.
nd when that will be, and in what State, we
ay learn from St. John, Apoc. xix. 7, 8. and
bap. Xix. 2, 9. Namely, after the Deſtruction
Babylon, in the New Feruſalem's Glory.
he Words and Matter of the two Prophets,
nlwer to one another. Here, in this Pſalm,
ete is a Fight and Victory celebrated as well
a Marriage; and ſo there is in that xixth
hapter of Saint 7ohn. Here the Prophet
us, Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O moſt
iphty, with thy Glory and thy Majeſty.
na in thy Majeſty ride proſperouſiy becauſe of

| Truth


SS
— ——


240 The Theory of the EARTH.


Truth and Meekneſs and Righteouſneſs ; and
right Hand fhall teach thee terrible Things, Th
Throne, O God, is for ever and ever : The Sch
of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter, &c. Pſal. x
3, 4, 6. There St. John {ays, having deſctib
a Conqueror on a white Horſe, Out of his Mau
goeth a ſharp Sword, that with it he ſhould ſni
the Nations, and he ſhall rule them nith a Ry
of Iron; and he treadeth the Wine-preſs of th
Fierceneſs and Wrath of Almighty God: Andk
bath on his Veſture, and on his Thigh a Nan
written, KING of KINGS, and LOA
of LORDS, Apoc. xix. 15, 16. This is the (an
glorious Conqueror and Bridegroom in both Placa
and this Victory is not gain'd, nor theſe Nupti

compleated, till the ſecond Coming of our Savio
' In many other P/aims there are Reffed
ons upon this happy Kingdom, and the Ti
umph of Chriſt over his Enemies, as Pal. ii
Pſal. ix. Pſal. xxi. and xxiv. and xlvii. at
Ixxxv. and cx. and others. In theſe, and ſuch:
Pſalms, there are Lineaments and Colours af
fairer State than any we have yet ſeen upon Fat
Not but that in their firſt Inſtances and Ground
they may ſometimes reſpe& the State of I
or the Evangelical State; but the Eye of the Ito
phet goes farther; this does not terminate il
Sight: His Divine Enthuſiaſm reaches into anoiie
World; a World of Peace, and Fuſtice, and N
_ lineſs ; of Joy, and Victory, and Triumph ot
all the Wicked; and conſequently ſuch a Woll
as neither we nor our Fathers, have yet ſeet
This is an Account of two Prophets Da


7 0 all


Concerning the new. Heavens, &c. 241


| Iſaiah 5and of what they have more openly
lard concerning the future Kingdom of
iſt, But to verify St. Peter's Words, in
t fore-mention'd Place, Acts iii. 21. vis.
at all the Holy Prophets ſince the World
an, have ſpoken of the Reſtauration ot all
ings at the ſecond coming of Chriſt, I ſay,
erify this Aſſertion of St. Peter, we muſt,
pole, that, where the Prophets ſpeak of the
ſtauration and future Glory of Judah and
ruſalem, they do, under thoſe Types, repre-
tto us the Glory and Happineſs of the
urch in the future Kingdom of Chriſt :
d moſt of the Prophets, in this Senſe, and
ler theſe Forms, have ſpoken of this King-
; in foretelling the Reſtauration of Veru-
m and Sion; and happy Days, Peace, Plen-
and Proſperity to the People of 1/rael.

oft of the Prophets, I ſay, from Moſes to


in the xxx of Deut. ver. 4, 5,9. David,
any of thoſe Pſalms we have cited: Iſaiah,
des the Places fore-mention'd, treats amply


ces *. So likewiſe the Prophets Ezekzel,
iel, Hoſea, Joel, Amos, Obadial, Mi-
, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zachary, Malacht :
| theſe have, either expreſly, or under the
pes of Feruſalem and Sion, foreætold happy


J. der. 17, &c, Mich. ch. iv. ch. v. Zeph, iii. 14. &c.
ch. iii. eh. iy,
r N Days,


\


llachi, have ſpoken of this Reſtauration. Mo-


his Subject, chap. li. and in ſeveral other


laiah ch. xi. ch. xliii. ch, xlix. 13, &c. ch. Ixvi. Ezekiel, ch. xxviii.
xxvil, Hoſea, ch. iii. and ch. xiv. Joel iii. 18. Amos, ch. ix,


pal, ch. ii. Zach. li, 10, &c. and ch. ix. 9, & c. and ch. xiv.


— —


|


l
| ,
7
0
ö x!
2 8
a }
* <
:
: 'F
os
f
x


|
'
|
\
= 7
=
e }
: *


242 The Theory of the EAR Th.


Days, and aglorious Triumph to the Church
God. And ſeeing in the New Teſtament, »
in the Prophecies of St. John, the Chrifiy
Church is ſtill repreſented, as under Perſecyy
on and Diſtreſs, till the Fall of Anti- chriſt, aj
the millennial Kingdom; 'tis then, and 1
till then, that we muſt expect the full Accon
pliſhment of theſe Prophecies ; the Reſtauraui
on that St. Peter ſays was ſpoken of, by all
Prophets; and the Myſtery, which St. ohbn(y
(Apoc. x.7.) was declared by his Servants i|
Prophets, and would befiniſh'd under the |
venth Trumpet, which uſhers in the Kingdy
of Chriſt.
It would be too long to examine all theſe]
ces in the Prophets, which you may conſult
Leiſure. However, it cannot ſeem ſtrange ti
Jeruſalem ſhould be us d in a typical or allego
cal Senſe, ſeeing we often find ſuch Applica
ons of it in the New Teſtament ; as Gal. iv. 2
Heb. xii. 22. Apoc. iii. 12. And 'tis very natu
that Zeruſalem reſtor d, ſhould ſignify the (an
thing as new Jeruſalem; and therefore that)
John, by hisnew Jeruſalem, intended the lan
thing, or the ſame State, that the antient Pt
phets did by their Reſtauration of Jeruſal
And if neither can be underſtood in a lite
Senſe, which, I believe, you will not conte
for, they muſt both be interpreted of the!
ture Happineſs and Glory of the Church in t
Kingdom of Chriſt. |
But to conclude this Point wholly as to Sciſ
ture; if we make Reflection upon all the Pal
ges alledged in this and the foregoing Co
| eto og Are
\


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 244


yhether out of the Old or New Teſtament, we
nuſt at leaſt acknowledge thus much, that
ere are happy Days, at one time or other:
Days of Peace and Righteouſneſs; of Joy and
triumph, of external Proſperity, and internal
danctity; when Virtue and Innocency ſhall be
the Throne, and Vice and vitious Men out of
oweror Credit. That there arc ſuch happy Days
ropheſied of in Scripture, and promiſed to the
hurch of God. Whether you call, this the
Reign of Chriſt and of his Saints, or by any other
lame, it is not material at preſent to detcr-
ine; let the Title be what you will, as to
he Subſtance it cannot be denied to be a gene-
al Doctrine of prophetical Scripture. And
ye muſt not imagine, that the Prophets wrote
ike the Poets; feigned an Idea of a roman-
ick State, that never was, nor ever will be,
dnly to pleaſe their own Fancies, or the crc-
lulous People. Neither is it the State of Hea-
en and eternal Life that is here mcant or in-
ended: For, beſides that they had little or
o Light concerning thoſe Notions, in the
Id Teſtament, the Prophets generally, in
heir Deſcription of this Happineſs, either ex-
reſs the Earth, ot at leaſt give plain Marks
df a terreſtrial State, Wherefore, the only
Queſtion that remains, is this, /Yhether theſe
py Days arc paſt already, or to come?
hether this bleſſed State of the Church is
dehind us, or before us? Whether our Prede-
ceſſors have enjoyed it, or our Poſterity is to
Ipect it? For we arc very ſure that it is not
Prelent, The World is full of Wars, and Ru-

V | mours


— —
— — Oy — » 8
E > _ — 6 te a —


—
. Aa”
2
— — —
x —


244 The Theory of the EARTH;


mours of Wars; of Vice and Knavery, of 05
preſſion and Perſecution : and theſe are ti
directly contrary to the Genius and Charag

of the State which we look after.

And if we look for it in Times paſt, we en
go no farther back than the beginning of Chi,
flianity. For St. John, the laſt of the Apoll
propheſied of theſe Times, as to come; and
plac'd them at the End of his Syſtem of Prop
cies; whereby one might conclude, that they ar
not only within the Compaſs of the Chrifi |
Ages, but far advanc'd into them. But howeyer
not to inſiſt upon that at preſent, where will jo
find a thouſand Years, from the Birth of Chi-
ſtianity to this preſent Age, that deſerves the
Name, or anſwers to the Characters of this pur
and paciſicłk State of the Church? The firſt A
ges of Chriſtianity, as they were the moſt pure, ſ
likewiſe were they the leaſt peaceable ; conti
nually,morc or leſs, under the Perſecution ofthe
Heathen Emperors ; and ſo far from being ti
Reign and Empire of Chriſt and his Saints ove
the Nations, that Chriſtians were then, even
where, in Subjection or Slavery; a poor, feebi
helpleſs People, thruſt into Priſons, or throw
ro the Lions, at the Pleaſure of their Princes0
Rulers. Tis true, when the Empire becamt
Chrittian under Con/antzne, in the fourth Cen
tury, there was, for a time, Peace and Proſpe
rity in the Church, and a good Degree of Iu
rity and Piety; but that Peace, was ſoon d
ſturb'd, and that Picty ſoon corrupted. Th
growing Pride and Ambition of the Ecclcl


alticks, "and their calinels to admit or .
9 8 uch


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 245


ce ſuperſtitious Practices, deſtroy'd the Pu-
y of the Church. And as to the Peace of
their Conteſts about Opinions and Doc-
ines, tore the Chriſtians themſelves into
eces; and, ſoon after, an Inundation of
tbarous People fell into Chriſtendom, and
tit all into Flames and Confuſion. After
Eruption of the Northern Nations, Ma—
metaniſm. roſe in the Faſt ; and ſwarms of
racens, like Armies of Locuſts, invaded,
nquer'd, and planted their Religion in ſe—
ral Parts of the Roman Empire, and of the
tiſtianiz d World. And can we call ſuch
mes the Reign of Chriſt, or the Impriſon-
nt of Satan ? In the following Ages, the
rks overran the Eaſtern Empire and the
zek Church, and ſtill hold that miſerable
ople in Slavery. Providence ſeems to have
order'd Affairs, that the Chriſtian World
duld be never without a W OE upon it,
it ſhould fancy it ſelf already in thoſe
ppy Days of Peace and Proſperity, which
 reſery'd for future Times. Laſtly, who-
ver is ſenſible of the Corruptions and Per-
utions of the Church of Rome, ſince ſhe
me to her Greatneſs; whoſocver allows her
be Myſtical Babylon, which muſt fall be-
te the Kingdom of Chriſt comes on, will
Ink that Kingdom duly plac'd by St. John
the End of his Prophecics, concerning the
iſtian Church; and that there fill re-
uns, according to the Words of St. Paul,
7 iv. 9.) 4 Sabbatiſm to the People of


R 3 CHAP.


246 The Theory of the EAR Tn.


Een Av. IV.
TheSenfe and Jeſtimomy of the Primitive C hun


concerning the Millennium, or future King
dom of Chriſt ; from the Times of the AN
ſtles to the Nicene Council. The ſecond 5
poſition laid down. hen, by what Men
and for what Reaſons, that Doctrine a
afterwards neglected or diſcountenanc d.


VO U have heard the Voice of the Projly
and Apoſtles, declaring the future Kin

dom of "Chriſt : Next to theſe, the Primity
Fathers arc accounted of good Authority ; |
us therefore now enquire into their Senſe co
cerning this Doctrine, that we may give S
faction to all Parties; and both thoſe that
guided by Scripture alone, and thoſe that!
a Veneration for Antiquity, may find Pro
ſuitable to their Inclinations and Judgment.
And to make few Words of it, we will
down this Concluſion ; That the millet
King dom of Chriſt was the general Dotir
of the Primitive Church, from the Times
the Apoſtles to the Nicene Council, incluſive
St. John out-liv'd all the reſt of the Apoll
and towards the latter end of his Life, be
baniſh'd into the Ifle of Pathmos, he wrote
Apocalypſe ; wherein he hath given us am
full and diſtinct Account of the millennial N
dom of Chriſt, than any of the Prophets or
ſtles before him. Papias, Biſhop of Hier
and Martyr, one of St. John's Auditors, as Ir od:


1 teſtifies, Iren. Lib 5. c. 33. taught oy *. 7
55 8


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 247
ogrine after St. Fohn. He was the familiar
icnd of Polycarp, another of St. John's Diſ-
les; and either from him, or immediately
om St. Joh s Mouth, he might receive this
xtrine. That he taught it in the Church, is
reed on by all Hands; both by thoſe that are
Followers, as Irenzus; and thoſe that are
t Well- wiſhers to this Doctrine, as Euſebius
jd 7er OMe. |
There is alſo another Channel wherein this
otrine is traditionally deriv'd from St. Zohn,
amely, by the Clergy of Aſia; as Irenzus
ls us in the ſame Chapter. For, arguing the
int, he ſhews that the Bleſſing promis'd to
acob from his Father Iſaac, was not made
od to him in this Life, and therefore he ſays,
ithout doubt thoſe Words had a farther Aim
ud Proſpect upon the Times of the Kingdom:
othey us'd to call the millennial State) when
be Juſt riſing from the Dead, ſhall reign ; and
then Nature renew'd and ſet at Liberty, ſhall
eld Plenty and Abundance of all things ; being
ſt with the Dew of Heaven, and a great
ertility of the Earth according as has been
lated by thoſe Eccleſtaſticks or Clergy, who ſaw
John, he Diſciple of Chriſt ; and heard of him
HAT OUR LORD HAD TAUGHT
ONCERNING THOSE TIMES. This
you ſee, goes to the Fountain Head: The Chri-
lan Clergy receive it from St. John, and St.
fohn relates it from the Mouth of our Saviour.
Lo much for the original Authority of this
hodrinc, as a Tradition; that it was from
t. John, and by him from Chriſt. And as to
34 the


* —


248 The Theory of the Earrty,


with Irenzus, and his Senior. He ſays, M


the Propagation and prevailing of it in the};
mitive Church, we can bring a Witneſs beyqy
all Exception, Juſtin Martyr, cotemporlff


himſelf, and all the Orthodox Chriſtians
Time, did acknowledge the Reſurrettion of off
Fleſh (ſuppole the firſt Reſurrection) and athy
ſand Tears reign in jeruſalem reſtor d, or in H hat 1
new Jeruſalem, Dial. with Tryphon the Jer
According as the Prophets Ezekiel, and li
and others, atteſt with common Conſent. |
St. Peter had ſaid before, Acts iii. 21. That.
the Prophets had ſpoken of it. Then he quot
the lxv Chapter of Iſaiah, which is a Bulwa
for this Doctrine, that never can be broke
And to ſhew the Jew, with whom he h:
this Diſcourſe, that it was the Senſe of ot
Prophets, as well as of theirs, he tells hin
that a certain Man amongſt us Chriſtians, |
Name john, one of the Apoſtles of Chriſt, in
Revelation made to him did propheſy, that t
faithful Believers in Chriſt ſhould live a thi
ſand Tears in the new Jeruſalem; and aft
that ſhould be the general Neſurrection and Dil
of Judgment. Thus you have the Thoug
and Scntiments of Juſtin Martyr, as to hin
{clf; as to all the reputed Orthodox ct
Time} as to the Senſe of the Prophets int
Old Teſtament, and as to the Senſe of St. fl
in the Apocalypſe ; all conſpiring in Con
mation of the millennary Doctrine.
I To theſe three Mtneſles, Papras, Trend
and Putin Martyr, we may add-rwo md
Within the ſecond Age of the Church; 3


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 249


ſhop of Sardis, and St. Barnabas, or who-
cycr was the Author of the Epiſtle under his
ame. This Melito, by ſome, is thought


hom St. Fohn directs the Epiſtle to that
hurch, Apoc. iii. 1. but I do not take him
o be ſo ancient 3 however, he was Biſhop of
at Place, at leaſt in the ſecond Century,
nd a Perſon of great Sanity and Learning:
e wrote many Books, as you may (cc in
t. Jerome; and, as he notes out of Tertul-
an, was by moſt Chriſtians reputed a Pro-
het (De Script. Eccleſ. Dogm. Eccl. c. lv.)
e was alſo a declard Millennary, and is re-
orded as ſuch, both by Jerome and Genna-


ye mention'd, it muſt be very ancient, whoſo-
yer is the Author of it, and before the third
century 3 ſeeing it is often cited by Clemens
lexandrinus, who was himſelf within the
cond Century: The Genius of it is very
nuch Millennarian, in the Interpretation of the
bbath, the promis'd Land, a Day for a thou-


be IVorld. In all which, he follows the Foot-
eps of the Orthodox of thoſe Times; that is,
the Milleunarians. |
So much for the firſt and ſecond Centuries
dt the Church. By which ſhort Account it
ppears, that the millennary Doctrine was Or-
bodox and Catholick in thoſe early Days; for
icle Authors do not ſet it down as a private
Vpinion of their own, but as a Chriſtian Doc-
"me, or an Apoſtolical Tradition. "Tis re-
markable


) be the Angel of the Church of Sardis, to


us. As to the Epiſtle of Barnabas, which


and Tears, and concerning the Renovation of


— — — — — — —


—— 2 — - ——
bd . us A es. -. PR Fn vas — —— — 2 —— — =
—


—— * Ws - by a


— .


— 2
—


— 22
—


—— ——


— — — —
— I ts — —


—
pt nn — + —


52>
— —


25 The Theory of the EAR T


markable what Papas ſays of himſelf, 200
his way of Learning, in his Book call'd, 7},
Explanation of the Words of the Lord, fl
St. Jerome gives an Account of it: (7,
Script. Eccleſ.) He ſays in his Preface, Hedi
not follow various Opinions, but had the J
poſtles for his Authors: And that be en.
ſider d what Andrew, and what Peter ſaid,
what Philip, what Thomas, and other Di
ciples of the Lord; as alſo what Ariſtion,
and John the Senior, Diſciples of the Lord
what they ſpoke. And that he did not pu.
fit ſo much by reading Books, as by the |;
ving Voce of theſe Perſons, which reſoundil
from them to that Day. This hath very much
the Air of Truth and Sincerity, and of a Man
that, in good carneſt, ſought after the Chi-
ſtian Doctrine, from thoſe that were the mol
authentick Tcachers of it. I know Euſelius
in his Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory, gives a double
Character of this Papzas ; in one Place he call
him, A very eloquent Man in all Things, aud
Skilful in Scripture ; and in another, he makes
him a Man of a ſmall Underſtanding, Vid Hie.
ron. Epiſt. 28. ad Lucinium.) But what Ret
{on there is to ſuſpect Euſebius of Partialityn
this Point of the Millennium, we ſhall make ap-
pear hereafter, However, we do not depend
upon the Learning of Papias, or the Depth of
his Underſtanding ;z allow him but to be an ho-
neſt Man and a fair Witneſs, and tis all We
deſire. And we have little reaſon to queſtion
his Teſtimony in this Point, ſeeing it is back!
by others of good Credit; and all 9
ther:


concerning the new Heavens, @c: 251


ere is no Counter-Evidence, nor any Wit-
eſs that appears againſt him: For there is
ot extant, either the Writing, Name, or
emory, of any Perſon that conteſted this
hoctrine in the firſt or ſecond Century: I ſay,
hat call'd in queſtion this millennary Doctrine,
W:0p05d after a Chriſtian Manner, unleſs ſuch
ercticks as denied the Reſurrection wholly,
r ſuch Chriſtians as deny'd the Divine Au-
hority of the Apocalypſe. |
We proceed now to the third Century;
here you find Tertullian, Origen, Victorinus,
Pihop and Martyr ; Nepos e,/Egyptins, Cy-
ian, and, at the End of it, Lactantius; all
penly profeſſing, or implicitly favouring, the
illennary Doctrine. We do not mention
Clemens Alexandrinus, contemporary with
Tertullian, becauſe he hath not any thing,
that I know of, expreſly either for, or againſt
the Millennium: But he takes notice that the
ſeventh Day hath been accounted Sacred, both
by the Hebrews and Greeks, becauſe of the
Revolution of the World, and the Renovation
of all Things. And giving this as a Reaſon
why they kept that Day holy, ſeeing there is
nota Revolution of the World, every ſeven
Days, it can be in no other Senſe than as the
ſeventh Day repreſents the ſeventh Millennary,
In which the Renovation of the World and the


St. Jerome reckons him, in the firſt place, a-
mongſt the Latin Millennaries. And tho his
book, about the Hope of the Faithful, as alſo
flat about Paradiſe, which ſhould have given
{ 1


Kingdom of Chriſt, is to be. As to Tertullian,


252 The Theory of the EAR TH;


us the greateſt Light in this Affair, be by
loſt or ſuppreſs d; yet there arc ſufficient Ind.
cations of his millennary Opinion in his Tra
againſt Marcion, and againſt Fermogeny
St. Cyprian was Tertullian's Admirer, and i
clines to the ſame Opinion, ſo far as one cu
judge, in this particular; for his Period of
fix thouſand Tears, and making the ſeven
Millennary the conſummation of all, is wholj
according to the Analogy of the millenny
Doctrine. As to the two Biſhops, Victn
uus and Nepos, St. Ferome vouches for them:
The Writings of the one are loſt, and of the
other ſo chang'd, that the Senſe of the Author
does not appear there now. But Lactantiu
whom we nam'd in the laſt Place, docs open
ly and profuſely teach this Doctrine, in his
Divine Inſtitutions, (Book vii.) and with the
ſame Aflurance that he does other Parts of the
Chriſtian Doctrine; for he concludes thug
ſpeaking of the Millennium, This is the Doc
trine of the holy Prophets, which we Chriſt
ans follow ; this is our Wiſdom, &c. Vet hea
knowledges there, that it was kept as a My
ſtery or Secret amongſt the Chriſtians, ||
the Heathens ſhould make any perverſe 0
odious Interpretation of it. And for the ſame
or like Reaſon, I believe, the Book of tic
Apocalypſe was kept out of the Hands of tht
Vulgar for ſome time, and not read publickly,
leſt it ſhould be found to have ſpoken too opel
ly of the Fate of the Roman Empire, or of tis
millennial State. |
So much for the firſt, ſecond and third

| Centurics


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 213
nturics of the Church: But by our Con-
fon, we engag d to make out this Proof as
as the Nicene Council, incluſively. The Ni-
Council was about the Year of Chriſt 325.
1we may reaſonably ſuppoſe Lactantius was
enliving 3 at leaſt he came within the Time of
nſtantine's Empire. But however, the Fathers
that Council are themſelves our Witneſles in
Point; for in their Eccleſiaſtical Forms or
mfitutzons, in the Chapter about the Provi-
ce of God, and about the World, they ſpeak
us: The World was made meaner, or leſs per-
, providentially ; for God forefaw that Man
uld Sin: Wherefore we expect new Heavens
lanew Earth, according tothe holy Scriptures,
the Appearance and Kingdom of the great
od, and our Saviour Jeſus Chriſt. And then,
Daniel fays (chap. vii. 18.) The Saints of
e moſt High ſhall take the Ringdom, and
e Earth ſhall be pure, holy, the Land of the
wing, not of the Dead. Which David fore-
mp by the Eye of Faith, cries out,(P/al. xxvii.
believe to ſee the good Things of the
od, in the Land of the Living. Our Saviour
, happy are the Meek, for they ſhall inhe-
t the Earth, Mat. v. 5. And the Prophet
ah ſays, (Chap. xxvi. 6.) the Feet of the meek
ud lowly ſhall tread upon it. So you ſee, ac-
ing to the Judgment of theſe Fathers, there
ll be a Kingdom of Chriſt upon Earth; and
orcoycr, that it will be in the ew Q Heavens
nd the new Earth: And, in both theſe
unts, they cite the Prophets, and our Saviour
Confirmation of them, : 3
Thus


v


/


254 The Theory of the EARTH.

Thus we have diſcharg'd our Promiſe, 3
given you an account of the Doctrine of þ
Millennium, or future Kingdom of Chii
throughout the three firſt Ages of the Chug
before any conſiderable Corruptions t
crept into the Chriſtian Religion. And thy
Authorities of ſingle and ſucceſſive Fath,
we have ſeal'd up all together, with the Dec
ration of the Nicene Fathers, in a Body, TO
that think Tradition a Rule of Faith, o
conſiderable Motive to it, will find it h
to turn off the Force of theſe Teſtimoni,
And thoſe that do not go ſo far, but yet ha
a Reverence for Antiquity and the Primiti
Church, will not eaſily produce better Auth
rities, more early, more numerous, or mo
uncontradicted, for any Article that is nc
fundamental: Yet theſe are but Seconds
the Prophets and Apoſtles, who are truly tl
Principals in this Cauſe. I will leave the
all together, to be cxamin'd and weigh'd byti
impartial Reader. And becauſe they ſeem
me to make a full and undeniable Proof, IV
now, at the Foot of the Account, tet downo
ſecond Propoſition, which is this, That tht
is a millennial State, or a future Kingaon
Chriſt and his Saints, propheſied of and pf
miſed, in the Old and New Teſtament ;
receiv'd by the Primitive Church as a Chri
an and Catholick Doctrin. (Propoſ. 1.)


AVING diſpatch'd this main Poi

to conclude the Chapter and this He:

ot our Diſcourſe, it will be ſome Satie
ee Le


Cencerning the new Heavens, &c. 255


fibly to ſee, How a Doctrine ſo generally
:eiy'd and approy'd came to decay, and al-
oft wear out of the Church, in following
ges. The Chriſtian millennary Doctrine
a not call'd into Queſtion, ſo far as appears
om Hiſtory, before the middle of the third
entury; when Dionyſius Alexandrinus wrote
inſt Nepos, an c/Egyptian Biſhop, who had
clard himſelf upon that Subject. But we
» not find that this Book had any great Ef-
t; for the Declaration or Conſtitution of
je Nicene Fathers was after? and in St. Ve-
nes Time, who wrote towards the End of
je fourth Century, this Doctrine had ſo
uch Credit, that he, who was its greateſt
dyerſary, yet durſt not condemn it, as he
ys himſelf; Que licet non ſequamur, tamen
mare non poſſumus ; quia multi Eecleſtaſtico-
n virorum & martyres iſta dixerunt : Which
lings or Doctrines, ſpeaking of the Millen-
lum, tho we do not follow, yet we cannot
mdemn ; becauſe many of our Churchmen,
d Martyrs have affirmed theſe things. And
hen Apollinarius reply'd to that Book of
Vionyſius, St. Ferome ſays, that, not only
oſe of his own Set, but a great Multitude
| other Chriſtians did agree with Apollina-
us in that particular: Ut preſaga mente jam
nam, quantorum in me rabies concitanda
; That now ] foreſee, how many will be en-
d againſt me, for what I have ſpoken a-
anſt the millennary Doctrine.
We may therefore conclude that in St. Fe-
Mes Time the Millennaries made the greater
eee rl ns


= *


256 The Theory of the EART RH.


Party in the Church; for a little Matter wou
not have frighted him from cenſuring thy
Opinions. St. Jerome was a rough and rugeiif
Saint, and an unfair Adverſary, that uſually
run down with Heat and Violence, wh;
ſtood in his Way. As to his Unfairneſ, he
ſhews it ſufficiently in this very Cauſe, forh
generally repreſents the millennary Dodting
after a /udaical, rather than a Chriſtian Man
ner. And in reckoning up the chief Patron
of it, he always skips Juſtin Martyr ; wh
was not a Man ſo obſcure as to be over. look
And he was a Man that had declar'd himſel
ſufficiently upon this Point; for he ſays, By
himſelf and all the Orthodox of his time, wet
of that Fudgment, and applies both the 4%
calypſe of St. Fohn, and the lxvt Chapter of
1/aiah, for the Proof of it; as we noted before

As St. Jerome was an open Enemy to thi
Doctrine, ſo Euſebius was a back Friend to i
and repreſented every thing to its Diſadyan
tage, ſo far as was tolerably confiſtent withth
Fairneſs of an Hiſtorian. He gives a ſlig
Character of Papas, without any Authorit
for it; and brings in one Gaius, that make
Cerinthus to be the Author of the Apocaly
and of the Millennium (Eccleſ. Hiſt. l. iii. c. 5:
and calls the Viſions there, Teeg/oAvyias, 10
frous Stories. He himſelf is willing to ſhuff
off that Book from John the Evangeliſt to ill
other John a Presbyter ; and to ſhew his Ski
in the Interpretation of it, (. 3. c. 32. 4% v
Conſtan.) he makes the new Je ruſalem in ti
xxith Chapter to be Conſtant ines Jena

1


concerning the new. Heavens, &c. 257


hen he turn d the Heathen Temples there |

to Chriſtian : A wonderful Invention. As 1

Jerome by his Flouts, ſo Euſebius, by ſini-

Inſinuations, endeayour'd to leſſen the

putation of this Doctrine; and the Art they

th usd was, to miſrepreſent it as Fudatcal.

t we muſt not caſt off every Doctrine which
Jews believd, only for that Reaſon ; for
have the ſame Oracles which they had,

d the ſame Prophets; and they have collect-
from them the ſame general Doctrine

at we have, namely, that there will be an

yy and pacifick State of the Church, in fu-

re Times. But as to the Circumſtances of

js State we differ very much: They ſuppoſe
Moſaical Law will be reſtor'd, with all its

mp, Rites, and Ceremonies: whereas we

poſe the Chriſtian Worſhip, or ſomething

re perfect, will then take Place. Vet

Jerome has the Confidence, even there

ete he ſpeaks of the many Chriſtian Clergy

d Martyrs that held this Doctrine; has the

nfidence, I ſay, to repreſent it, as if they

d that Circumciſion, Sacrifices, and all the

daical Rites, ſhould then be reſtor d. Which

ms to me to be a great Slander, and a great

ſtance how far Mens Paſlions will carry them,

miſrepreſenting an Opinion, which they

de a Mind to diſgrace. —.— i

But as we have Reaſon to blame the Par-

ity of thoſe that oppoſed this Doctrine; ſo,

| the other Hand, we cannot excuſe the Pa-

dns of it from all Indiſcretions. I believe »

might partly themſelves make it obno-
book EV. 8 xious


*


258 The Theory of the EARTH,


xious; by mixing ſome things with it, fg
pretended Traditions, or the Books of t
Sybills, or other private Authorities, that hy
ſo ſufficient warrant from Scripture;
things, ſometimes, that Nature would 10
caſily bear, Beſides, in latter Ages, they ſeq

to have dropt one half of the Doctrine, nam
ly, the Renovation of Nature, which Iren.
Juſtin Martyr, and the Antients, join inſe
rably with the Millennium: And by this Wl
miſſion, the Doctrine hath been made le;
telligible, and one Part of it inconſiſtent y
another. And when their Pretenſions ye

to reign upon this preſent Earth, and in i
preſcnt State of Nature, it gave a Jalg
to temporal Princes, and gave occaſion lik
wiſe to many of Fanatical Spirits, under t
Notion of Saints, to aſpire to Dominic
after a violent and tumultuary Manner, T
I reckon as one great Cauſe that brought t
Doctrine into Diſcredit. But I hope by re
cing of it to the true State, we ſhall curet
and other Abuſes for the future.

Laſtly, It never pleas'd the Church of Ri
and ſo far as the Influence and Authority
that would go, you may be ſure it would
depreſs'd and diſcountenanced. I never
met with a Popiſh Doctor that held the
lennium ; and Baronins would have it to

for an Hereſy, and Papas for the Invento
it; whercas, if Jrenæus may be creditec
was receiv d from St. John, and by him!
the Mouth of our Saviour. And neither
Jerome, nor his Friend Pope Damaſus, d


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 239
er condemn it for an Here. It was al-
ys indeed uneafy, and gave Offence to

Church of Rome; becauſe it does not ſuit
that Scheme of Chriſtianity, which they
e drawn. They ſuppoſe Chriſt reigns al-
dy, by his Vicar, the Pope; and treads
on the Necks of Emperors and Kings: 3
they could but ſuppreſs the Northern
25 they call it, they do not know w if
lennium would ſignify, or how the Chaggh
d be in an happier Condition than the. is.
e Apocalyſe,of St. John das ſuppoſe the
e Church under hardſhip and Perſecution;
re or leſs, fot the greateſt Part of the Chtiſ⸗

Ages . namely, for 1260. Nears, while

Witneſſes are in ſack- cloth. But the

urch of Rome hath been/ in proſperity and
OY and the commanding Church in

iendom, for ſo long, or longer, and hath

d the Nations with a Rod of Iron; fe: as

t Mark of the true Church dogs not favour

at all. And the Millennium being proper-

aReward aud Triumph for thoſe that come

of Perſecution, ſuch as have uv'd always

bomp and Proſperity, can pretend to no

ire in it, or Benefit by it. This has made

church of Rowe have al Ways an ill Eye

ae this Doctrine, becaulc it ſeem' d to have

ul Eye upon her; And as ſhe grew in

eador and Greatneſs, ſhe cclipsd and. ob-

rd it more and more; ſo that it would

e been loſt out of the World as an ob-

ct ee Error, if it had not been revived by

„Mie of the Reformation.

8 8 2 CHAP a


200 The Theory of the EARTH:


The true State of the Millennium, accordiy
to Characters taken from Scripture ; ſm
Miſtakes concerning it examin d.


E have made ſufficient Proof of a 1
lennial State, from Sctipture and At
tiquity ; and upon that firm Baſis have ſettle
our ſecond Propoſition. We ſhould now!
termine the Time and Place of this futu
Kingdom of Chriſt : not whether it is to
in Heaven, or upon Earth; for that we
poſe determin d already; but whether it is
be in the preſent Earth, and under the preſe
Conſtitution of Nature, or in the new H
vent, and new Earth, which arc promi
after the Conflagration : This is to make
third Propoſition : And I ſhould have procet
ed immediately to the Examination of it, |
that I imagine it will give us ſome Light
this Affair, if we enquire farther into thet
State of the Millennium, before we detem
its Time and Place. | |

We have already noted ſome moral Ch:
ters of the millennial State ; and the great
tural Character of it is this in general,
it will be Paradiſaical; free from all In
veniencies, either of external Nature, or of
own Bodies. For my part, I do not unc
ſtand, how there can be any conſiderable!
orce of Happineſs without Indolency 3
how there can be Indolency, while we


|


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 261


h Bodies as we have now, and ſuch an ex-
nal Conſtitution of Nature. And as there
aſt be Indolency, where there is Happineſs ;
there muſt not be Indigency, or want of any
e Comforts of Life: For where there is
Igency, there is Solicitude, and Diſtraction,
4 Uncaſineſs, and Fear; Paſſions that do as
urally diſquiet the Soul, as Pain does the
dy. Therefore Indolency and Plenty ſeem
be two eſſential Ingredients of every happy
te; and theſe two, in Conjunction, make
at State we call Paradiſaical. |
Now the Scripture ſeems plainly to exempt
Sons of the new Feruſalem,or of the Millen-
, from all Pain or Want, in thoſe Words,
vc. xxi. 4. And God ſhall wipe away all
urs from their Eyes: And there ſhall be no
re Death, neither Sorrow, nor crying; neither
| there be any more Pain: For the former
gs are paſſed away. And the Lord of that
gdom, He that ſat upon the Throne, aid,
hold I make all Things new, ver. 5. This
novation is a Reſtauration to ſome former
ite; and I hope, not that State of Indigency
(Miſery, and Diſeaſedneſs, which we lan-
lh under at preſent; but to that priſtine
radiſaical State, which was the Bleſſing of
firſt Heavens and the firſt Earth. |
is Health and Plenty are the Bleſſings of
ture; ſo, in Civil Affairs, Peace is the great-
bleſſing: And this is inſeparably annex'd
the Millennium; an indelible. Character of
Kingdom of Chriſt. And by Peace, we
Kitand not only Freedom from Perſecu-
„ tion


262 | The Theory of the EAR TB.
tion upon religious Accounts, but that Nn
on ſhall not riſe up againſt Nation, upon y
Account whatfoever. That bloody Mone
Mar, that hath devoured ſo many Millions
the Sons of Adam, is now at length to
chain'd up; and the Furies, that run throw
out the Earth, with their Snakes and Torch
ſhall be thrown into the Abyſs, to ſting a
prey upon one another: All evil and miſchi
vous Paſſions ſhall be extinguiſhed ; and!
not in Men only, but even in brute Creatur
according to the Prophets. The Lamb and
Lion ſhall lie down together, and the ſicki
Child ſhall play with the Baſilisk. Hy
Days, when not only the Temple of 9.
ſhall be ſhut up for a thouſand Years, andt
Nations ſhall beat their Swords into Pl
ſhares; but all Enmities and Antipathics
ceaſe, all Acts of Hoſtility, throughout
Nature. And this univerſal Peace is 21
monſtration alſo of the former Charader,
niverſal Plenty; for where there is a V
and Neceſſitouſneſs, there will be quarrel!
Fourthly, Tis a Kingdom of Righteoull
as well as of Peace: theſe alſo muſt go t(
ther: For unrighteous Perſons will not
long in Peace, no more than indigent Peril
The Pſalmiſt therefore joins them togeti
and Plenty, alſo, as their neceſſary Preſe
tive, in his Deſcription of the Kingdom
Chriſt, Pſal. lxxxv. 10, 11, 12. Mercy and T
are met together: Righteouſneſs and 7
have kiſſed each other. Truth ſball ſpring


of the Earth, and Rigbrecuſm fa ſpall lot


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 263


om Heaven. Tea, the Lord ſhall give good,
wd our Land ſball yield her Increaſe. This
ill not be a Medley-State, as the preſent
Vorld is, good and bad mingled together; but
choſen Generation, à royal Prieſthood, an holy
ation, a peculiar People. Thoſe that have
Part in the firſt Reſurrection, the Scripture
onounceth them Holy and Bleſſed ; and ſays,
he ſecond Death ſball have no Power over
bm. Satan is alſo bound and ſhut up in the
ttomleſs Pit, and has no Liberty of tempting
ſeducing this People, for a thouſand Years :
ut at the End of that Time, he will mect
ith a degenerate Crew, ſeparate and Aliens
the holy City, that will make War againſt
,and periſh inthe Attempt. In a word, thoſe
ut are to enjoy this State, are always diſtin-
i d from the Multitude, as People redeem-
| from the Earth, (Apoc. v. 9.) that have
ah d their Robes, and made them white in the
ood of the Lamb; and are repreſented as Vic-
rs over the World; with ſuch other Charac-
ts as are incompatible to any but the Righte-
„ Ch. vii. 14. Ch. xiv. 3, 4. ch. xxi. 27.
Fifthly, This will be a State under a peculiar
vine Preſence and Conduct. It is not eaſy
deed to determine the Manner of this Pre-
ace; but the Scripture plainly implies ſome
traordinary divine Preſence to enlighten and
uiven that State. When the new Jeruſalem
s come down, St. John ſays, Apor. xxi. 3.
Ins Heard 4 great voice out of Heaven,
hing, behold the Tabernacle of God is with
len; and he will dwell with them, and
S 4 they


264 The Theory of the EAR TR


they ſhall be his People; and God himſelf ſral Wis
with them,and be their God. And the like is pr
mis d to the Palm- bearing Company, ch. vii. i;
where they are admitted to the Privileges ofth
new feruſalem. When our Saviour was incu
nate, and vouchſafed todwell amongſt the Chil
dren of Men, the ſame Phraſe is us d by this ſam
Author, ec’. Foh. i. 14. The Word was mu
Fleſb, and tabernacled among ſt us; and we if
held his Glory, &c. We read it, He duell
mon ſt us, but render d more cloſely, it is, H
ſet his 7 abernacle among ſt us. And that yhi
the Hebrew: call the 1YIW Shekinah, or d
vine Preſence, Maimon. Mor. Nev. par. l. c.
comes from a Word of the like Significati
and Sound with the Greek Word here us!
Therefore there will be a Shekznah in that Kin
dom of Chriſt; but as to the Mode of it, I at
very willing to confeſs my Ignorance.
The laſt Character that belongs to this Stat
or rather to thoſe that enjoy it, is, that they al
Kings and Prieſts unto God. This is a Ch
rater often repeated in Scripture, and therefal
the more to be regarded. It occurs thrice
the Apocalypſe in formal Terms, ch. i. 6.c.
10. ch. xx, 6. And as to the Regal Dignil
apart, that is farther expreſt, either by theD
nation of a Kingdom, as in Daniels Phra
chap. vii. 18, 22, 27, Or by placing isi
Thrones, with a judicial Power; which is tl
New Teſtament Style, Mat. xix. 28. Luke ui
29, 30. Rev. xx. 4. Theſe two Titles, no dou!
are intended to comprehend the higheſt H
nours that we are capable of; theſe being!


highe


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 265


igheſt Dignities in every Kingdom; and ſuch
were by the Antients, both in the Eaſt and
the Weſt, commonly united in one and the
ame Perſon ; Their Kings being Prieſts, like
Melchiſedeck, or, as the Roman Emperor was,
Pontifex Maximus. But as to the ſacerdotal
haracter, that ſeems chiefly to reſpect the
Temper of the Mind; to ſignify a People de-
licated to God and his Service, ſeparate from the
Vorld, and from ſecular Affairs, ſpending their
ime in Devotion and Contemplation, which
vill be the great Employments of that happy
State. For where there is Eaſe, Peace, and Plenty
ff all Things, refin'd Bodies, and purified Minds,
here will be more Inclination to intellectual
Exerciſes and Entertainments; which they may
attend upon, without any Diſtraction, having
neither Want, Pain, nor worldly Buſineſs.
The Title of King implies a Confluence of
all Things that conſtitute temporal Happineſs.
Tis the higheſt thing we can wiſh any in this


World, to be a King; So as the Regal Dignity .


ſeems to comprehend all the Goods of Fortune,
or external Felicity, and the Sacerdotal, the


Coods of the Mind, or internal; both which


concur in the Conſtitution of true Happineſs.
There is alſo a further Force and Emphaſis in
this Notion of the Saints being made Kings, if
ve conſider it comparatively, with reſpect to
what they were before in this World ; where
they were not only mean and deſpicable, in
Subjection and Servility, but often under Perſe-
cution, abus'd and trampled upon by the Secu-
ar and Eccleſiaſtical Powers, But now the

Scene


. 88 — E ———54 — 8
ww
— — C3 —__ _ —— = *
— — — —


—
—


— Em
——


- — Re N — — —
— — — — 3


—— —
— Po — _ — — —
1 —— —— — * — —


——


— — — *
— — — —
—— — — —
—— — — — — —


3 2 > ©. Iv —
—


—


266 The Theory of the EAR T.


Scene is chang'd, and you fee the reverſe ;
Providence, according as Abraham aid to th
Rich-Man ; Jon, remember that thou in
Life time receivedſt thy good things, and i
wiſe Lazarus evil things: But now he is amn
forted, and thou art tormented. Now they us
{et upon Thrones and Tribunals, who were be
forearraigned as Criminals, and brought befor
tyrannical Judicatures: They are now Lay
and Law-givers to themſelves, in a true Stat
of Royal Liberty, neither under the Dominai
on of evil Men, nor of their own evil Paſſions
Some poſlibly may think, that this hig
Character of being made Prieſts and Kings:
God, is not general to all that enjoy the Mil
nium; but a Prerogative belonging to the Ap
ſtles and ſome of the chief Martyrs, who ar
eminently rewarded for their eminent Service
But Scripture as far as I perceive, applies it t
all that inherit that Kingdom. The redteme
out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and Peuplt
and Nation, are made Kings and PrieſtstoGul
and ſhall reign on the Earth, Apoc. v. 9,10


And in the xx chap, ver. 6. all the Sons of the


firſt Re ſurrection are made Prieſts of God, an


ſhall reign with him a thouſand Tears. Here!
no Diſtinction or Diſcrimination thus far: Not


that we ſuppoſe an unverſal Equality of Co


ditions in the millennial State; but as to al
theſe Characters which we have given of it, |
do not perceive that they are reſtrain d or con
fin'd by Scripture to ſingle Perſons, but make
the general Happineſs of that State, and are the
Portion of every one that is admitted into th
new Feruſalem. 55 Other


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 267


Others poſſibly may think that this Privi-
ege of the firſ? Reſurrection is not common
o all that enjoy the millennial State. For
ho St. John, who is the only Perſon that hath
ade expreſs mention of the firſ? Reſurrection,
and of the thouſand Tears Reign of Chriſt,
goes join theſe two as the ſame thing, and
ommon to the ſame Perſons ; yet I know there
arc ſome that would diſtinguiſh them as things
of a different Extent, and alſo of a different
Nature. They ſuppoſe the Martyrs only will
riſe from the Dead, and will be immediately
tranſlated into Heaven, and there paſs their
Millennium in celeſtialGlory; while the Church
is ſtill here below, in her Millennium, ſuch as
it is: A State indeed better than ordinary, and
free from Perſecution, but obnoxious to all the
lnconveniences of our preſent mortal Life, and
aMedley of good and bad People,without Sepa-
tation. This is ſuch an Idea of the Millennium,
as, to my Eye, hath neither Beauty in it, nor
Foundation in Scripture. That the Citizens
of the new Fernſalem are not a miſcellaneous
Company, but a Community of righteous
Perſons, we have noted before, and that the
State of Nature will be better than it is at
preſent. Bur, befides this, what Warrant have
they for this Aſcenſion of the Martyrs into
Heaven at that Time? Where do we read of
that in Scripture ? And in thoſe things that arc
not Matters of natural Order, but of divine
Oeconomy, we ought to be very careful how
ve add to Scripture.
The Scripture ſpeaks only of the Reſurrec-
. lion


268 The Theory of the EAx ru.


tion of the Martyrs, Apoc. xx. 45. but no .
Word concerning their Aſcenſion into Heaye 4
Will that be viſible? We read of our Savioui att
Reſurrection and Aſcenſion, and therefore y
have Reaſon to affirm them both. We rey
alſo of the Reſurrection and Aſcenſion of the
Witneſſes, (Apoc. xi.) in a figurative Senſe; aul
in that Senſe we may aſſert them upon good cca
Grounds. But as to the Martyrs, we read gf
their Reſurrection only, without any thing ex.
preſt or imply'd about their Aſcenſion. Jy
what Authority then ſhall we add this ney
Notion to the Hiſtory or Scheme of the Mi.
lennium? The Scripture, on the contra, a
makes mention of the Deſcent of the ney
Jeruſalem, Apoc. xxi. 2. making the Earth the
Theatre of all that Affair: And the Cam
of the Saints is upon the Earth, ver. 9. and
theſc Saints are the ſame Perſons, ſo far ascan
be collected from the Text, that roſe from the
Dead, and reign'd with Chriſt, and were Pritt
to God, ver. 4, 5, 6. Neither is there any Di.
ſtinction made, that I find, by St. John, of two
ſorts of Saints in the Millennium, the one in
Heaven, and the other upon Earth. Lally,
the four and twenty Elders, chap. v. 10. tho
they were Kings and Prieſts unto God, were
content to reign. upon Earth. Now who can
you ſuppoſe of a ſuperior Order to theſe fout
and twenty Elders > Whether they repreſent
the twelve Patriarchs and twelve Apoſtles, or
| whomſoever they repreſent, they are placd
next to him that ſits upon the Throne, and
they have Crowns of Gold upon their Heads,

,, lrg chap. i.


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 269


ap. iv. 4. ch. xi. 16. There can be no Marks
Honour and Dignity greater than thefe are;
d therefore ſeeing theſe higheſt Dignitaries in
e Millennium or future Kingdom of Chriſt,
to reign upon Earth, there is no Ground
ſuppoſe the Aſſumption of any other in-
Heaven, upon that Account, or upon thar
ccalion. |
This is a ſhort and general Draught of the
illennial State, or future Reign of the Saints,
cording to Scripture. Wherein I have en-
avour'd to rectify ſome Miſtakes or Miſcon-
ptions about it; that viewing it in its true
lature, We may be the better able to judge,
hen and where it will obtain: which is the
ert Thing to be conſider d.


CH AP. VIII.


he third Propoſition laid ' down, concernin

the Time and Place of the Millennium:
Several Arguments usd, to prove, that
it cannot be till after the Conflagration
and that the new Heavens and the new
Earth are the true Seat of the bleſſed


Millennium,


E now come to the third and laſt Head

| of our Diſcourſe ; to determine the
lime and Place of the Millennium. And ſee-
ing it is indifferent, whether the Proofs lead or
follow the Concluſion, we will lay down the
Concluſion in the firſt Place, that our Buſineſs
my be more in View; and back it with Proofs
4 in


270 The Theory of the EAR TR.


in the following Part of the Chapter. 0
third and laſt Propoſition therefore is thi
That the bleſſed Millennium, Propoſ. 3. (yr
perly ſo called) according as tt is deſcribdi
Scripture, cannot obtain in the preſent Eau
nor under the preſent Conſtitution of Naty
and Providence; but it is to be celebrated in il
new Heavens and new Earth, after the (in
flagration. This Propoſition it may be, vi
ſeem a Paradox or Singularity to many, eye
of thoſe that believe a Millennium: We yil
therefore make it the Buſineſs of this Chapter
to ſtate it, and prove it, by ſuch Arguments:
are manifeſtly founded in Scripture and it
Realog;.: 4-4.

And to prevent Miſtakes, we mult premiſ
this in the firſt Place; that tho' the bleſſed Mi
lennium will not be in this Earth; yet we
allow that the State of the Church here, vil
grow much better than it is at preſent. Ther
will be a better Idea of Chriſtianity, and ac

_ cording to the Prophecies, a full Reſurrecfi
of the Witneſſes, and an Aſcenſion into Powe
and the tenth Part of the City will fall
which things imply eaſe from Perſecution
the Converſion of ſome Part of the Chriftiu
World to the reformed Faith, and a conſide
able Diminution of the Power of Antichrill
But this ſtill comes ſhort of the Happineſs ant
Glory wherein the future Kingdom of Chili
is repreſented; which cannot come to pil
till the Man of Sin be deſtroyed, with a tota
Deſtruction. Afﬀter the Reſurrection of t


Witneſſes, there is a third JOE yet to come
| *


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 271


1 how long that will laſt, does not appear.
it bear proportion with the preceeding
OES, it may laſt ſome hundreds of Years.
q we cannot imagine the Millennium to be-
till that //OE be finiſhed : As neither till
Vals be pour d out, in the xv chap. which
not be all pour'd out till after the Reſurrec-
n of the Witneſſes; thoſe Vials being the
Plagues that compleat the Deſtruction of
tichriſt. Wherefore allowing that the
hurch, upon the Reſurrection and Aſcenſion
the Witneſſes, will be advanc'd into a bet-
t Condition, yet that Condition cannot be
e millennial State; where the Beaſt is utter-
deſtroy d, and Satan bound, and caſt into
e bottomleſs Pit.
This being premis d, let us now examine
hat Grounds there are for the Tranſlation of
ut bleſſed State into the et Heavens and
Earth; ſeeing that Thought, it may be,
many Perſons, will appear new and extra.
rdinary. In the firſt Place, we ſuppoſe it
ut of Diſpute, that there will be ze Hea-
ens and a new Earth after the Conflagration.
his was our firſt Propoſition. and we depend
pon it, as ſufficiently prov'd both from Scrip-
ure and Antiquity, This being admitted,
ow will you ſtock this new Earth? What
le will you put it to? "Twill be a much nobler
ath, and better built than the preſent ; and
; a pity it ſhould only float about, empty and
ſeleſs in the wild Air. If you will not make
the Seat and Habitation of the Juſt in the
vlled Millennium, what will you make it ?
5 How


272 The Theory of the EAR TB.


How will it turn to Account? What hathÞy
vidence deſign'd it for? We mult not ſupp
new Worlds made without Counſel or Dec
And as, on the one Hand, you cannot tell wh
to do with this new Creation, if it be n
thus employ'd; ſo, on the other Hand, it
every way fitted and ſuited to be an hay
and paradiſaical Habitation, and anſwers ;
the natural Characters of the millennial Stat
Which is a great Preſumption that it is deſign
3 |

But to argue this more cloſely upon Sci
ture-grounds : St. Peter ſays, the Righteo
ſhall inhabit the new Heavens and the ne
Earth: 2 Pet. iii. 1 3. Nevertheleſs, according
his Promiſe, we look for new Heavens and ue
Earth, WUEREINDWELLETH RIG!
TEOUSNESS: that is, a righteous Peopl
as we have ſhewn before. But who are thel
righteous People ? That's the great Queſtio
If you compare St. Peter's new Heavens at
new Earth with St. John's Apoc. xxi. 1, 2.


will go far towards theReſolution of this Cu


ſtion : For St. John ſeems plainly to make ti
Inhabitants of the pew Feruſalem to be int!
new Earth. ] ſaw, lays he; new Heavt
and a new Earth, and the new Feruſl


deſcending from God out of Heaven; thers0l
deſcending into this new Earth, which · Ae bi
mention'd immediately before. And there il
T abernacle of God was with Men, ver. 3. an
there he that ſat upon the Throne, ſaid, Beli


1 make all Things new. Referring; ſtill tot


new Heavens and new Earth, as the The


(
her


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 273
here all theſe Things arc acted, or all theſe
enes exhibited ; from the firſt Verſe to the
ghth: Now the new Jeruſalem State being
xc lame. with the Millennial, if the one be i in
le new Heavens and new . Earth, the other
there alſo. And this Interpretation of St.
ohn Word is confirm d and fully aſſur d to us
the Prophet 1ſaiah ; who alſo placeth the
7 and Rejoicing of the yew Feruſalem in the
ew Heavens and new Earth, Chap. Ixv.
18. For behold T create new Heavens anda
Earth; and the former ſhall not be remem.
ed : but be you glad and rejoice for euer in
ut which I create ; for behold, 1 create Jeru-
lem 4 Rejoicing, and her People a Foy:
amely, in that new Heavens and new Earth;
hich anſwers to St. John's Viſion of the new
eryſalem-being let down upon the new Earth.
Totheſe Reaſons,and Deductions from Scrip-
re, we might add the Teſtimony of ſeveral
the Fathers ; I mean of thoſe that were Mil-
nnaxies : For we are ſpeaking now to ſuch as
live the Millennium, but place it in the
reſent Earth before the Renovation; whereas
cantientMi/lennaries ſuppos d the Regenera-
on and Renovation of the World before the
ingdom of Chriſt came: As you may ſee in
Tenæus, + Fuſtin Martyr, Tertullian,
Lactantius, and © the Author ad Orthodoxos.
ind the Neglect of this, I look upon as one
eaſon, as we noted before, that brought that


N. 5. ch. 4 + Dial. cum Trypb. ye Mare.
7. . reſpon. 97
Book IV. * Doctrine


274 The Theory of the EAN TR.


Doctrine into Diſcredit and Decay. For whey
they placd the Kingdom of the Saints Upon
this Earth, it became more capable of bei
abus d, by fanatical Spirits, to the Diſturbance
of the World, and the Invafion of the Rig
of the Magiſtrates, Civil or Eccleſtaſtical, un
der that Notion of Saints; and made then
alſo dream of ſenſual Pleaſures, ſuch as they
| fee in this Life: Or at leaſt gave an Occaſig
and Opportunity to thoſe, that Had a Mindy
make the Doctrine odious, of charging 1 it wit
theſe Conſequences. All theſe Abuſes areci
off, and theſe Scandals prevented, by placin
the Millennium aright : Namely, not in thi
preſent Life,” or on this preſent Earth, but
the new Creation, where Peace and Right )
nets will dwell. And this is our firſt Argum
why we place tlie Millennium in the'new He
vens and new Earth; and'tis taken partly, ye
fee, from the Reaſon of the Thing itſelf, th
Difficulty of aſſi igning any other aſe of then
Earth, and its fitnefs for this; and partly frot
Sceripture-evidence;and partly freq Antiquit
Ihe ſecond Argument fot git Opinion,
this; the preſent Conſtitution of Natute vi
not bear that Happineſs,” tllat is promis d int
Millennium, or is not conſiſtent with it. T
Diſcafes of or Bod ies, the Difordersof out?:
ſtons, the Incommödiouſnefs Gf external N
ture; Indigency, Servility, and the Unpeact
blenets of the World; th&fe are things i!
conſiſtent with the Happineſs that is promis


in the Kingdom of Chriſt. But theſe arc 9
| ia


concuming the new Heavens, &c. 273

| Attendants upon this Life, and inſcpara-

e from tho ꝑreſent State of Nature. Suppoſe

e Millennium was to begin nine or ten
feats hence, as ſome pretend it will; how

all this World, all ona ſudden; be metamor-
hosd into that happy State 3 Apoc. xxi. 4.

o more S, nor crying, nor Pain, nor
Drath,' ſays St/ ohn: All former Things are

if away, Burihow paſt away? Shall we

ot have tlie ſame: Bodies; and the ſame ex-
nal Nature; and the fame Corruptions of the

ir; and the fame Exceſſes and Intemperature

f Scalons? Will there not be the fame Bar-
nncſs of the Gfound; the ſame Number of
cople to. be fed and muſt they not get their
hing by the Sweat of their Brows, with
ile Labour and Drudyety? How then are

|| former! Bvils: paſt away!? And as to pub-

ck Affairs While there are the ſame Ne-
eſſities of human Life, and a Diſtinction of
ations, thoſe Nations ſometimes will have
ontrary Intereſts, will claſh and interfere one

th another; whence Differences, and Con-
, and Wars will ariſe, and the 7houſand
Lears Truce; J am afraid, will be often broken.

Vc might add alſo, that if our Bodies be not
bang d, We ſhall be ſubject to the ſame Ap-
ctites,' and the ſame Paſſions; and upon
noſe Vices will grow, as bad Fruit upon a
bad Tree : TG conclude, ſo long as our Bo-
ues are the ſame, extetnal Nature the ſame,
he Neceſſities of human Life the ſame ;
vhich things are the Roots of Evil; you may


276 TheTheory of the Earth,


call it a Millennium, or what you pleaſe, but
there will be ſtill Diſeaſes, Vices, Wars, Teas
and Cries, Pain and Sorrow in this Mille.
nium; and if fo, tis a Millennium of your own
is quite another thing.

Farthermore, if you ſuppoſe the Millennium
will be upon this Earth, and begin, it may be, Me
ten or twenty Years hence, how will it be in.
troduc'd? How fhall we know when we ae
in it, or when weenter upon it? If we con-
tinue the ſame, and all Nature continue the
ſame, we ſhall not diſcern when we lip into
the Millennium. And as to the moral State
of it, ſhall we all, on a ſudden, become Rig.
and Prieſts to Cod? Wherein will that Change
conſiſt, and how will it be wrought? St. Joby
makes the firſ® Reſurrection introduce the
Millennium; and that's a conſpicuous Mak
and Boundary: But as to the modern or yul-
gar Millennium, I know not how tis uſherd
in. Whether they ſuppoſe a viſible Reſur
rection of the Martyrs, and a viſible Aſcen
ſion; and that to be a Signal to all the World
that the Jubilee is beginning; or whether tis
gradual, and creeps upon us inſenſibly; or the
Fall of the Beaſt marks it: Theſe things need

both Explication and Proof: for to me the
ſeem either arbitrary or unintelligible.
But to purſue our Deſign and Subjed
Thar which gives me the greateſt Scandal
this Doctrine of the vulgar Millennium,
their joining Things together that are really

inconſiſtent


Concerning the new Heavens, Kc. 277


nconſiſtent; a natural World of one Colour,
1d a moral World of another. They will
Lake us happy in ſpight of Nature; as the $70-
ks would make a Man happy in Phalaris his
Bull; ſo muſt the Saints be in full Bliſs in the
illennium, tho' they be under a Fit of the
out, or the Stone. For my part, I could
ever reconcile Pain to Happineſs ; it ſeems to
ne to deſtroy Md drown all Pleaſure, as a
gud Noiſe docs a ſtill Voice: It affects the
erves with Violence, and over-bears all o-
er Motions. But if, according to this mo-
lern Suppoſition, they have the ſame Bodies,
ind breath the ſame Air in the Millennium,
5 we do now, there will be both private and
pidemical Diſtempers, in the ſame Manner
5 now. Suppoſe then a Plague comes and
weeps away half an hundred thouſand Saints
n the Millennium, is this no Prejudice or
Dihonour to the State? Or a War makes a
ation deſolate ; or, in ſingle Perſons, a lin-
pring Diſeaſe makes Life a Burthen ; or a burn-
ing Fever, or a violent Cholick tortures them
to Death; where fuch Evils as theſe reign, chri-
ſten the thing what you will, it can be no bet-
ter than a Mock- Millennium. Nor ſhall I ever
be perſuaded that ſuch a State as our preſent
Life, where an aking Tooth, or an aking
Head, does ſo diſcompoſe the Soul, as to make
her unfit for Buſineſs, Study, Devotion, or any


of the Mind, all its Virtue, and all its Wiſ⸗
dom, are not able to ſtop theſe little Motions,
| 1 3 or


uſeful Employment; and that all the Powers


- — 2
—— — — —


*
* A — —
——ů— —— — — v—I
— * ” a 1
< : — —
n — . -
_— C
— — —
A 2 ＋ — —


{

:

*
:

!

:
10
: :
11
131
FI}

: *
1
1
q
i
| +BY
i.
Y
11
| .
:
1
1
1
|
11 0
G 11

1

! 1
p 4 \

\
:

:

N 9
1

1
8
( ö

1

+

ö #
R #7

i v4

9
N *

5
þ 4

N
„ h 1
11
l \
«1
*
1 .

:
4 [1
4


—


278 The Theory of the EAR NU.
or to ſupport them with Tranguillity: 1c
never perſuade my ſelf, I ſay, that ſuch a Sta
was delign'd by God or Nature, for a State
Happineſs, 1

Our third Argument is this; the futureKing


dom of Chriſt will not take place, till th 7
Kingdom of Antichriſt be wholly deſtroy;


But that will not be wholly deſtroy'd till th
End of the World, and the appearing of o
Saviour; therefore the Millennium will ng
be till then. Chriſt and Antichriſt cann
rcign upon Earth together ; their Kingdom
are oppoſite, as Light and Darkneſs : Beſide
the Kingdom of Chriſt is univerſal, extend
to all the Nations, and leaves no room fo
other Kingdoms at that time, Thus it is
ſcrib'd in Daniel, in the Place mention'd be
fore, chap. Vii. 13, 14. 1 ſaw in the Nl
Hiſions, and behold, one like the Son of Mi
came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came
the Ancient of Days; andthere was given li
Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom; that al
People, Nations, and Languages, ſhould ſeri
him. And again ver. 27. And the 175
and Dominion, and the Greatneſs of the Rig
dom under the whole Heaven, fhall be given
the People af the Saints of the moſt High
whoſe Kingdom is an everlaſting Kingdom, all
all Dominion ſhall ſerve and obey him. Il
ſame Character of Univerſality is given to ti
Kingdom of Chriſt by David, Pfal. ii. au
Pſal. Ixxii. Iſazah ii. 2. and other Prophets
But the moſt direct Proof of bite thi
9 118 N e e


|


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 279
9 where the Beaſt and falſe Prophet
e thrown into the Lake of Fire and Brim-
one, (chap. xix. 20.) before the Millen-
um comes on, chap. xx. This, being caſt in.
4 Lake of Fire burning with Brimſtone,
uſt needs ſignify utter Deſtruction: Not a


)


tion and Conſumption. And that this was
fore the Millennium, of the Beaſt and falſe
cophets being in the Lake of Fire, as of a
hing paſt, and formerly tranſacted. For when
tan, at length, is thrown into the ſame Lake
i ſaid, he is thrown into the Lake of Fire and


rimſtone, where the Beaſt and the falſe Pra-


bets are, Apoc. xx. 10, They were thexe be-
re, it ſeems 3. namely, at the beginning of
e Millengium ; and now at the Concluſion
f it, the Devil is thrown in to them : Be-
des, the Ligation of Satan proves this Point
fectually; for ſo long as Antichriſt reigns,
atan cannot be ſaid to be bound; but he
$ bound at the Beginning of the Millennium,
erefore Antichriſt's Reign was then totally
wird, Laſtly, the Deſtruction of Babylon,
nd the Deſtruction of Antichriſt go together;
ur you ſee Babylon utterly and finally de-
roy'd, (Apoc. xviii. and xix.) before the Mil-
ennium comes on: I ſay, utterly and finally
roy d. For ſhe is not only ſaid to be made
in utter Deſolation, but to be conſum'd by
fire; and abſorpt as a Millſtone thrown in-
o the Sea; and that he ſhall be found no
more at all, chap. xviii. 21. Nothing can ex-
9 preſs


iminution of Power only, but a total Per-


hb ——ä——4ũ —


280 The Theory of the EARTH.
preſs a total and univerſal Deſtruction ms
effectually, or more emphatically. And
is before the Millennium begins; as you m
ſee both by the Order of the Propheſies, yp
particularly, in that upon this Deſtruction, d
 Hallelujah's are ſung, ch. xix. and concludt
thus, ver. 6, 7. Hallelujah, for the God um
potent reigneth. Let us be glad and rj
and give Honour to him; for the Marruge
the Lamb is come, and his Wife hath nu
Her ſelf ready. This, I ſuppoſe, every d
allows to be the millennial State, which ng
approaches, and is making ready, upon t
Deſtruction of Babylon. 50
Thus much for the firſt Part of our Arg
ment, that the Kingdom of Chrift will n
take place, till the Kingdom of Antichriſt
wholly deſtroy d. We arc now to provett
ſecond Part, that the Kingdom of Anticht
will not be wholly deſtroy'd till the End
the World, and the coming of our Savio
This, one would think, is ſufficiently prot
from St. Pauls Words alone, 2 The. il.
The Lord ſball conſume the Man of Sin, who
ſuppos'd the ſame with Antichriſt, with !!
Spirit of his Mouth, and hall deſtroy him wil
the Brightneſs of his coming. He will not the
be deſtroyed before the coming of our Saviou
and that will not be till the End of the Wotlk
For St. Peter ſays, Acts iii. 21. The Heav
muſt receive him, ſpeaking of Chriſt, until
Times of Reſtitution of all things; that is, th
Renovation of the World. And if we J =
KGG) rage i AS rg bes de rt


— ——


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 281
ger that ourSaviour's coming will be in Flames
Fire, as the ſame Apoſtle St. Paul tells us,
Theſſ. i. 7, 8. tis plain, that his coming will
ot be till the Conflagration; in which laſt
lames Antichriſt will be univerſally deſtroy'd,

his Manner of Deſtruction agrees alſo with

e Apocalypſe and with Daniel, and the Pro-
hets of the Old Teſtament, As to the Apoca-
2 Babylon, the Seat of Antichriſt, is repre-

nted there as deſtroy'd by Fire, ch. xviii. 8,
8. ch. xiv. 11. ch. xix. 3, 20. And in Daniel,
hen the Beaſt is deſtroy'd, ch. vii. 11. His
dy was given to the burning Flame. Then
to the other Prophets, they do not, you

now, ſpeak of Antichriſt or the Beaſt in

erms, but under the Types of Babylon, Tyre,
nd ſuch- like; and theſe Places or Princes are
preſented by them as to be deſtroy'd by Fire,

a. xiii, 19. Fer. li. 25. Egek. xxviii, 18.

So much for this third Argument; the fourth
gument is this; the future Kingdom of
riſt will not be till the Day of Judgment

d the Reſurrection; but that will not be till

he End of the World: Therefore, neither

e Kingdom of Chriſt. By the Day of judg-
nent here, I do not mean the final and uni-
erſal Judgment; nor by the Reſurrection,
he final and univerſal Reſurrection; for theſe

il not be till after the Millennium. But

e underſtand here the firſt Day of Judgment

nd the firſt ReſurreCion, which will be at the
"nd of this preſent World; according as St.
n does diſtinguiſh them, in the xxth chap.
che Apocalypſe. Now that the Millennium

. will


\


282 The Theory of the EARTH,


will not be till the Day of Judgment in g
Senſe, we have both the Teſtimonies of 7
niel and of St. ohn. Daniel, in chap. vii
9, Oc. ver. 26, &c. ſuppoſes the Beaſt to nj
till Fudgment ſhall fit, and then they ſpallid
away his Dominion, and it ſhall be giveny
the People of the Saints of the moſt Hig
St. 7ohn makes an explicit Declaration d
both theſe, in his xxth chap. of the Apo
Hyſe, which is the great Directory in this pair
ofthe Millennium; he ſays there were Throng
ſet, as for a Judicature, ver. 4. Then the
was a Reſurrection from the Dead, and tho
that riſe, reigned with Chriſt a thouſand Year
Here's a judicial Seſſion, a Reſurrection, an
the Reign of Chriſt joined together. Ther
is alſo another Paſſage in St. Fohn that jou
the Judgment of the Dead with the Kingdan
of Chriſt; tis in the xich Chapter, under ti
ſeventh Trumpet; the Words are-thele, ve
15. And the ſeventh Angel ſounded, «
there were great Voices in Heaven, ſchig
the Kingdoms of this World are become ti
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Chriſt : al
be ſhall reign for ever and ever, And the fu
and twenty Elders, &c. And the Nati
were angry, and thy Wrath is come, and tl
time of the Dead, that they ſhould be judy
and that thou ſhouldſt give Reward unto 1
Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, 4
them that fear thy Name. Here are two thil
plainly expreſsd and link'd together, T
Judging. of the Dead, and the Kings


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 283
brit ; wherein the Prophets and Saints are
warded. Now as the Judging of the Dead
not in this Lifc, ſo neither is the Reward
the Prophets and Saints in this Life ; as we
e taught ſufficiently in the Goſpel, and by
e Apoſtles, Mat. xix. 28. 1 Thefſ. i. 7. 2
m. iv. 8. 1 Pet. i. 7. and ch. v. 4. Therefore
e Reign and Kingdom of Chriſt, which is
ned with theſe two, cannot be in this Life,
before the End of the World: And as
arther Teſtimony and Confirmation of this,
may obſerve that St. Paul to Timothy hath
ined together theſe three things; the Ap-
wrance of Chriſt, the Reign of Chriſt, and
e judging of the Dead. I charge thee there-
re before God and the Lord feſus Chriſt,
0 ſpall judge the 2 and the dead, at his
hearing, and his Kingdom, 2 Tim. iv. 1.
This might alſo be prov'd from the Order,
tent and Progreſs of the Propheſies of the
calypſe ; whereof ſome are ſuch as reach
the End of the World, and yet mult be ac-
mpliſh'd before the Millennium begins, as
e Vials. Others are ſo far already advanc'd
wards the End of the World, as to leave no
om for a thouſand Years Reign; as the
umpets. But becauſe every one hath his
vn Interpretation of theſe Propheſics, and it
ould be tedious here to prove any ſingle Hy-
ticſis in Contradiſtinction to all the reſt, we
l therefore leave this Remark, to have more
lels Effect, according to the Minds it falls
Pn; and proceed to our fifth Argument.
9 Fifthly,


284 The Theory of the EARTH.


Fifthly, The new Feruſalem State is th
ſame with the millennial State; but the ww
Jeruſalem State will not be till the End oft
World, or till after the Conflagration; then
fore neither the Millennium: That the w
Jeruſalem State is the ſame with the Mille
nium, is agreed upon, I think, by all Mil
naries, ancient and modern: Fuſtin Mari
Irenæus and Tertullian, ſpeak of it in th
Senſe; and ſo do the latter Authors, ſo far
I have obſerved. And St. John ſeemstogy
them good Authority for it; in the xxth ch
of the Apocalypſe, he ſays, the Camp of ii
Saints, and the beloved City were beliegd!
Satan and his gigantick Crew at the Ende
the Millennium: That beloved City ist
new 7Jeruſalem, and you ſee it is the (a
with the Camp of the Saints, or, at leaſt, cot
temporary with it. Beſides, the Marria
of the Lamb was in, or at the Appearand
of the new Jeruſalem, for that was the Sp
of the Lamb, Apoc. xxi. 2. Now this Spo
was rcady, and this Marriage was faid to |
come, at the Deſtruction of Babylon, wii
was the Beginning of the Millennium, ch
xviii. 7. Therefore the new Jeruſalem u
all along with the Millennium, and V
indecd the ſame thing under another Nan
Laſtly, what is this new Feruſalem, if it
not the ſame with the millennial State!
is promis'da Reward to the Sufferers for Chi
Apoc. iii. 12. and you ſce its wonderful Ii
leges, chap, xxi. 3, 4. and yet it is not Hcav
| 2 | 1


/


concerning the new Heavens, &c. 285
eternal Life; for it is ſaid to come down
God out of Heaven, ch. xxi. 2. and ch.iii.12.
an therefore be nothing but the glorious
dom hriſt upon Earth, where the
ts ſhall reign with him a thouſand Years.
ow as to the ſecond Partof our Argument,
tthe new Feruſalem will not come down
Heaven till the End of the World ; of
St. John ſeems to give us a plain Proof or
monſtration; for he places the new Jern-
min the new Heaven and new Earth,
ich cannot be till after the Conflagration.
us hear his Words, Apoc. xxi. 1, 2. And
ww a new Heaven and a new Earth, for
firſt Heaven and the firſt Earth were paſ*
away, and there was no more Sea. And
ohn ſw the holy City, new Jeruſalem,
ing down from God out of Heaven; prepa-
as a Bride adorned for her Husband.
hen the new Earth was made, he ſees the
v Zeruſalem coming down upon it; and
Renovation of the Earth not being till the
nflagration, the ew 7eruſalem could not be
then neither. The Prophet 1/azah had long
fore ſaid the ſame thing, though not in.
ms ſo expreſs ; he firſt ſays, Behold I create
v Heavens and a n2w Earth, wherein you
ul rejoice: Then ſubjoins immediately, Be-
4, I create Feruſalem a rejoicing, Iſa. Ixv.
7,18. This rejoicing isſtill in the ſame Place;
the new Heavens and new Earth, or in


thod, firſt ſets down the new Earth, then
| the


Knew Jeruſalem. And St. John, in a like


286 Type Theory of the EARTH.


the new Feruſalem; and expreſſes the M
of the Prophet 1/azah more diſtinctly.

This leads me to a ſixth Argument to ©
firm our Concluſion : The Tini$0f the þ
ſtitution or Reſtauration of all Things, ſpoke
of by St. Peter and the Prophets, is the (:
with the Millennium; but that Reſtaurati
will not be till the coming of | Chriſt, andi
End of the World; therefore neither the lj
lennium. That this Reſtitution of all th
will not be till the coming of our Savio
St. Peter declares in his Sermon, As iii 1
and that the coming of our Saviour will n
be till the End of the World, or till the Cc
flagration, both St. Paul and St. Peter ſigni
to us, 1 Theſſ i. 7, 8. 2 Pef. iii. 10. the
tore it remains only to prove, that this Re
tution of all Things ſpoken of here by
Apoſtle, is the ſame with the Millennium,
know that which it docs directly and im
diately ſignify, is the Renovation of the Woll
but it muſt include the moral World as we
as the Natural; otherwiſe it cannot be tt
ſaid, as St. Peter does there, that all the Pt
phets have ſpoken. of it. And what ist
Renovation of the natural and moral Wot
but the new Feruſalem or the Millennium!

Theſe Arguments, taken together, have,
me, an irreſiſtible Evidence for the Proof
our Concluſion ; that the bleſſed Millenniut
cannot obtain in the preſent Earth, or bete
the Conflagration ; but when Nature 1s 6


new d, and the Saints and Martyrs ra
| 110


|


Conterming the new Heavens, &c. 287
zm the Dead; then they ſhall reign toge ·


- with Chriſt, in the e Heavens and


»Earth, or in the new Feruſalem ; Satan
ing bound for a thouſand Years.


'C H AP. IX.


)EVOTION and CONTEMPLATION.


E have now done with the Subſtance
of our Diſcourſe ;' which is compre-
ied in'theſe three Propoſitions: :


I. After. the onflagration of this World,
e 5 1 benew Heavens and a new
Earth,andthatE. arth will be inhabited.


IL That 7 4 is an happy millennial- tate,

or @ future Kingdom of Chriſt and his
Saints, propheſied of and promis'd in
tte Old and New Teſtament ; and re-
ceiv'd, by the Primitive. Church, as 4
_ Chriſtian and Catholick Doctrine. TR


I. That this bleſſed millennial-State, ac-
cording as it is deſcribd in Scripture,
cannot take place in the preſent Earth,
nor under the preſent Conſtitution 0 4
.- Nature and Providence ; But is to
cCc(:lebruted in the new Heavens and new
E arth, after the Conflagration.


Theſe thras Propoſitions fupport this Work,

dd, if any, of them be broken, I confeſs
I * en il broken, and ths; Treatiſe is of
no


be e 2 mployment of the Millennium,


* - _ = he 4 *
. _— ˙— at LES
— — . *
um 3
| — — „„


|
|


*
0
?
*
1
1 is 7
| |
T
! FS \
/ \
*8
| ERR
7 8
®. is 1 9
' yd
| '
| Tit [|
FE
} :
1
p |
: -
1
13
i
„ ' N
: 11
1 =
. , ' 1
: l
1 1
+4 4
: * N.
1 a 4
- l ;
j u qt
| 14
U
„
7 '
:
+ PF
F 4
: l 4
14 { 1
14
* 7
4
i 1 1
11
1
Wo 7
BE +:
* *
i ?
: ! l
i! a 4 \
T% l x7
l 1
1 1
F
S190
1 4
1
= D o
| N
11
11 .
1 0 54
l 17
© 4 a
1
| 4 30
N. i
: 17
10 * 5
( p A
/ & *
"i N
1
1
1 f \
, 10 A at
} 1 th
14
al
* ' \y 1
Ul * Fl
[TIL
: 5 . 1
1 ay
- 17 I
+I} * 1
» Lay
J. 1 "
wa
bs * kw,
\ | 1 N
{| N
1 T
1 of :
\ 4 F |
1 ' .
1 * j
.
a £ 4
5 =
: p JP #
. » 1
'1 $187 be
139 4
+8 LY tf
: 3
11 21 FTW
To
1


288 The Theory of the EARTH.


no Effect: But what remains to be ſpoky
to in theſe laſt Chapters, is more circumſia
tial or: modal; and an Error or Miſtake
ſuch things, does not wound any vital Par
the Argument. You muſt not therefore!
aſide your Severity and rigorous Cenſures ;y
are very happy, if, in this Life, we can att
to the Subſtance of Truth; and make ratio
Conjettutes concerning Modes and Circun
ſtances, where every one hath Right to of
his Senſe, with Modeſty and Submiſſion,
velations made to us from Heaven in this
ſent State, are often incompleat, and dog
tell us all; as if it was on purpoſe to ſet
Thoughts a-wotk to ſupply the reſt ; whi
we may lawfully do, provided it be accordi
to the Analogy of Scripture and Reaſon,
Io proceed therefore; we ſuppoſe, asj(
ſee, the new Heavens and the new Earth
be the Seat of the Millennium, and that ne
Creation to be Paradiſiacul: Its Inhabita
alſo to be righteous Perſons, the Saints of ti
moſt High. And ſecing the ordinary Et
ployments of our preſent Life will then MF
needleſs and ſuperſeded, as Military-Affa
Sea-Aﬀairs, moſt Trades and Manufactur
Law, Phyſick, and the laboxious part of Ag
culture; it may be wonder d, how this hap
People will beſtow: their Time; what Ent
tainment they will find in a State of ſo mu
Eaſe, and ſo little Action. To this one mig
anſwer in ſhort, by another Queſtion, H
would they have entertain d *


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 289


-1diſc, if Man had continued in Innocency!
lis is a Revolution of the ſame State, and
refore they may paſs Time as well now as
y could have done then. But to anſwer
re particularly, beſides all innocent Diver-
ns, ingenuous Converſations, and Entertain.
nts of Friendſhip, the greateſt part of their
me will be ſpent in Devotion and Contem-
ion. O happy Employment, and next to
t of Heaven it (ſelf! What do the Saints
ove, but ſing Praiſes unto God, and con-
plate his Perfections! And how mean and
ſpicable, for the moſt part, are the Employ-
nts of this preſent Life, if compar'd with
ole intellectual Actions! If Mankind was
ided into ten Parts, nine of thoſe ten em-
yy their Time to get Bread to their Belly,
d Cloaths to their Back; and what Imper-
ences are theſe to a reaſonable Soul, if ſhe
as free from the Clog of a mortal Body, or
that could be provided for, without Trouble
lols of Time? Corporeal Labour ig, from
ſeed and Neceſſity, but intellectual Exerciſes
e matter of Choice, that plcaſc and perfect at
ge lame Time, W
Devotion warms and opens the Soul, anddil-
les it to receive divine Influences. It ſome-
mes raiſes the Mind into an heavenly Ecſtaſy,
dfills it with a Joy that is not to be expreſs d.
hen it is pure, it leaves a ſtrong Impreſſion
pon the Heart, of Love to God; and inſpires
8 with a Contempt of this World, having
ted the Pleaſures of the World to come. In
Book IV. U the


1 The Theory of the EAR Th.


the State which we ſpeak of, ſeeing the Ty
nacle of God will be with Men, Apoc. xxi. ;,w
may reaſonably ſuppoſe that there will be gre,
ter Effuſions and Irradiations of the HolySpiri
than we have or can expect in this Regione
Darkneſs; and conſequently,all theStrength a
Comfort that can ariſe from privateDeyotigr
And as to their publick Devotions, all Bea
tics of Holineſs, all Perfection of divine Wor
ſhip, will ſhine in their Aſſemblies. What
ſoever David ſays of Sion and Fernſalem, Pf
Ixxxiv. are but Shadows of this Neu Jen
lem, and of the Glory that will be in thoſe &
lemnities, Pal. Ixxxvii. Imagine what a Cat
gregation will be there of Patriarchs, Propheyg
Apoſtles, Chriſtian Martyrs, and Saints oftt
firſt Rank, throughout all Ages: And theſe;
known to one another by their Names an
Hiſtory. This very meeting together of ſu
Perſons, muſt needs create a Joy unſpeakable
But when they unite in their Praiſes to 60
and Bure Lamb, with pure Hearts full of
vine Lovę; when they ſing their Hallelujahst
him that ſits upon the Throne, that hath waſh
them in his Blood, and redeem'd them oute
every Kingdom, and Tongue, and People
and Nation : When, with their Palms in the
Hands, they triumph over Sin and Death, an
Hell, and all the Powers of Darkneſs ; can then
be any thing, on this ſide Heaven, and a Choi
of Angels, more glorious or more joyful!
But why did I except Angels? Why ma
not they be thought to be preſent at theſe Al
| 1 55 ſemblies


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 292


emblics? In a Society of Saints and purified
Spirits, why ſhould we think their Converſe
impoſſible? In the Golden Age, the Gods were
always repreſented, as having freer Intercourſe
ith Men ; and before the Flood, we may rea-
onably believe it ſo. I cannot think, Enoch
2s tranſlated into Heaven without any Con-
erſe with its Inhabitants before he went thi-
her: And ſecing the Angels vouchſafed of-
en, in former Ages, to viſit the Patriarchs up-
on Earth, we may with Reaſon judge, that they
ill much more converſe with the ſame Pa-
tiarchs and holy Prophets, now they are riſer
tom the Dead, and cleans'd from their Sins, and
ated in the New Feruſalem. I cannot but call
o mind, upon this Occaſion, that Repreſentati-
n which St. Paul makes to us, of a glorious
tate and a glorious Aſſembly, too high for this
reſent Earth : "Tis, (Hebr. xii. 22, c.) in
nele Words: But you are come unto Mount
ion, and unto the City of the living God, the
eavenly Jeruſalem, and to an innumerable
ompany of Angels ; to the general Aſſembly
and Church of the Firſt-born, which are writ-
ten in Heaven; and to God the Fudge of all,
and to the Spirits of juſt Men made perfect.
This, I know, ſeveral apply to the Times and
Nate of the Goſpel, in Oppoſition to that of
the Law); and it is introduc'd in that manner;
but here are ſeveral Expreſſions too high for
y preſent State of Things; they muſt re-
pect a future State, either of Heaven, or of the
Millennia Kingdom of Chriſt: And to the
U 2 latter


292 The Theory of the EARTH.


latter of theſe Expreſſions agree, and have:
peculiar Fitneſs and Applicability to it. And
what follows in the Context, ver. 26, 27, 8 fer
About ſhaking the Heavens and the Earth ni ons,
more; removing the former Scenes, and bring on!
ing on a new Kingdom that cannot be ſhaken; mp!
All this, I ſay, anſwers to the Kingdom ai
Chriſt, which is to be eſtabliſh'd in the ner;
Heavens and new Earth. plic
But to proceed in their publick Devotions ou
Suppoſe this Auguſt Aſſembly, inflam'd vi rad
all divine Paſſions, met together to celebtat joat
the Name of God, with Angels intermixt, t in
bear a Part in this holy Exerciſe : And let i cat
Concourſe be, notin any Temple made yit | ill
Hands, but under the great Roof Heaven, (thin:
true Temple of the moſt High,) ſo as all Hill
Air may be fill'd with the chearful Harmony Me 1!
their Hymns and Hallelujahs: Then, in He:
height of their Devotion, as they ſing Pri np
to the Lamb, and to him that fits upon HA
Throne, ſuppoſe the Heavens to open, and tive
Son of God to appear in his Glory, Apoc. en
with thouſands and ten thouſands of Ane on
round about him; that their Eyes may ſee hi Hife
who, for their Sakes was crucified upon Ea en
now encircled with Light and Majeſty. his vi:
raiſe them into as great Tranſports as hum hat
Nature can bear: They will wiſh to be diſlol\Whici
they will ſtrive to fly up to him in the Clou
or to breathe out their Souls in repeated Do
logies of Bleſſing, Ch. v. 13. and Honour, .
Glory, and Power, to bim that ſits apo |

| 4


concerning the new Heavens, &c. 293


hrone, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever.
But we cannot live always in the Flames of

erotion; the Weakneſs of our Nature will not
fer us to continue long under ſuch ſtrongPaſ-
ons, and ſuch Intenſeneſs of Mind. The Queſ-
on is therefore, What will be the ordinary
mployment of that Life? How will they en-
tain their Thoughts, or ſpend their Time?
or we ſuppoſe they will not have that mul-
plicity of frivolous Buſineſs that we have now;
hour our Bodies, about our Children; in
rades and Mechanicks; in Traffick and Na-
ation 3 or Wars by Sea or Land. Theſe
ings being ſwept away wholly, or in a great

eaſure, what will come in their Place? How

ll they find Work or Entertainment for a
ng Life? If we conſider, who they are that
ill have a Part in this firſt ReſurreQion, and
e Inhabitants of that World that is to come,
e may eaſily believe that the moſt conſtant
mployment of their Life will be CONTEM-
ATION. Not that I exclude any innocent

verſions, as I ſaid before; the Entertain—
ents of Friendſhip, or ingenuous Converſa-

lon; but the great Buſineſs and Deſign of that
te is Contemplation, as preparatory to Hea-
en and eternal Glory. It paulatim aſſueſcant
pere Deum, L. 5. c. 32. as Irenæus ſays,
tat they may, by Degrees, enlarge their Ca-
cities, fit and accuſtom themſelves to receive
0a, Or, as he ſays in another Place, That
vey may become capable of the Glory of the
aher; that is, capable of bearing the Glory
| U 3 and.


294 The Theory of the EAR Tk.


and Preſence of God; capable of the hight
Enjoyment of him, which is uſually call'4;
Beatifical Viſion ; and is the Condition gf
Bleſſed: in Heaven.

It cannot be deny'd, that in ſuch a Mile
nial State, where we ſhall be freed from:
the Incumbrances of this Life, and provide
of better Bodies and greater Light of Min
It cannot be doubted, I ſay, but that we gh
then be in a Diſpoſition to make greater pi
ficiency in the Knowledge of all Things, d
vine and intellectual; and conſcquently
making happy Preparations for our entti


upon a further State of Glory ; For there +
nothing certainly does more prepare the Min!
of Man for the higheſt Perfections, than (xe
templation, with that Devotion which en
rally flows from it, as Heat follows Light. Md
this Contemplation hath always a greatet Mat
leſs Effect upon the Mind according to ier
Perfection of its Object; ſo as the Conte te
plation of the divine Nature is, of all othe on
the moſt perfective in it ſelf, and to us, Min
cording to our Capacities and Degree of r
ſtraction. An zmmenſe Being does ſtrane ae
fill the Soul; and Omnipotency, Omniſceſ 4
cy, and infinite Goodneſs, do enlarge and ern
late the Spirit, while it fixtly looks upon ,t1«WIM ul
They raiſe ſtrong Paſſions of Love and ht,
miration, which melt our Nature, and tra gor
form it into the Mould and Image of .
which we contemplate : What the Scripte!
fays of our Transformation into the div,


Likene!


Concerning the new Heavent, &c. 295


ikeneſs; what St. John and the Platoniſts
yy of our Union with God; and whatever is
ot cant in the uyſtical Theology,when they tell
of being deified ; all this muſt ſpring from
ele Sources of Devotion and Contemplati-
n: They will change and raiſe us from Per-
tion to Perfection, as from Glory to Glo-
7, into a greater Similitude and nearer Sta-

4 to the divine Nature.
The Contemplation of God and his W orks
mprehends all Things; for the one makes
euncreated World, and the other the creat-
: And as the divine Eſſence and Attributes
e the greateſt Objects that the Mind of Man
in ſet before it ſelf; ſo next to that are the
feats and Emanations of the Divinity, or
e Works of the divine Goodneſs, Wiſdom
d Power in the created World. This hath
vaſt Extent and Variety, and would be ſuf-
cient to entertain their Time, in that happy
ate, much longer than a thouſand Years ; as
ou will eaſily grant, if you allow me but to
int at the ſeveral Heads of thoſe Speculations.
The Contemplation of the created World di-
des it ſelf into three Parts; that ofthe intellec-
14 World; that of the corporeal ; and the Go-
ernment and Adminiſtration of both, which
uſually call'd Providence. Theſe three, drawn
ito one Thought, with the Reaſons and Pro-
ortions that reſult from them, compoſe that
RAND IDEA, which is the Treaſury and Com-
rchenſion of all Knowledge; whereof we
aye [poken more largely in the laſt Chapter
U 4 of


296 The Theory of the EARTH,


of the ſecond Book of this Theory, under th
Name of the Mundane Idea. But at preſy
we ſhall only mention ſuch Particulars, as m;
be thought proper Subjects for the Meditatio
and Enquiries of thoſe who ſhall enjoy th
happy State which we now treat of,

As to the intellectual World, exceptinge
own Souls, we know little, in this Region
Darkneſs where we are at preſent, more thi
bare Names: We hear of Angels and Arch
gels, of Cherubins and Seraphins, of Prine
palities and Powers, and Thrones, and Do
nions: We hear the Sound of theſe Wor
with Admiration, but we know little of thi
Natures; wherein their general Notion, a
wherein their Diſtinction conſiſts ; what |
culiar Excellencies they have, what Ofc
and Employments, of all this we are ign
rant; only in general, we cannot but ſuppo
that there are more Orders and Degrees
intellectual Beings, betwixt us and the
mighty, than there are Kinds or Species of l
ing Creatures upon the Face of the Eartl
betwixt Man their Lord and Maſter, and tl
leaſt Worm that creeps upon the Ground
nay, than there are Stars in Heaven, or San
upon the Sea-ſhore. For there is an infini
Diſtance and Interval betwixt us. and 60
Almighty, and all that is fill'd with created]
ings of different Degrees of} Perfection, ſtill 4
proaching nearer and nearer to their Mabe
And when this inviſible World ſhall bee


pen'd to us, when the Curtain is drawn,
i t


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 297


the Celeſtial Hierarchy ſet in order before our
Eyes, we ſhall deſpiſe our ſelves, and all the
petty Glories of a mortal Life, as the Dirt un-
der our Fect. 5
As to the corporeal Univerſe, we have ſome
Share already in the Contemplation and Know-
ledge of that; though little in Compariſon of
what will be then diſcover'd. The Doctrine
of the Heavens, fixed Stars, Planets and
Comets, both as to their Matter, Motion and
Form, will be then clearly demonſtrated ; and
what are Myſteries to us now, will become
matter of ordinary Converſation : We ſhall
be better acquainted with our neighbouring
Worlds, and make new Diſcoveries as to the
State of their Affairs. The Sun eſpecially,
the great Monarch of the planetary Worlds;
whole Dominion reaches from Pole to Pole,
and the Greatneſs of his Kingdom is under the
whole Heaven: Who ſends his bright Mel-
ſengers every Day through all the Regions of
his vaſt Empire ; throwing his Beams of
Light round about him, ſwifter and farther
than a Thought can follow: This noble Crea-
ture, I ſay, will make a good part of their
Study in the ſucceeding World. Eudoxus, the
Philoſopher, wiſh'd he might dye like Phaeton,
in approaching too near to the Sun, provided
he could fly ſo near it, and endure it ſo long,
till he had diſcover'd its Beauty and Perfec-
tion. Who can blame his Curioſity? Who
would not venture far to ſee the Court of ſo
great a Prince, who hath more Worlds Owe
2 to.


*
1
U
|
:
:
l l
4 =
: :
.
£
IS]
1 ;
l *
1
4
1
5 FL
[
— Py
TH „
F
}
: *
4 :
:
| *
.
1
ö
„ 1
*
709
Tj
1 1 9
| N
*
1
. 1
* 1
4 -
1 1% |
7
9 x
|
3
{
; 7
1
4 7
4
: *
4
1 {
| .
. 7
1
*
1
12
1
17
7.
FF 3 4
# : 191
}
1 4
7 4
»
o 1
- 7
n
x
_
'F.
$f
(]
1 W..
15
F
*
q
i Q
TY


— — — — ->
P— — — — 2 —
„ OC —
* mo ;
4.


— —


—
” = — ocec.


= — CET — — — — * ＋— — —< 4 — 9. *
— 2. > wr or Re nes Be Rs - - 44s” 2 = a _— =_ W —
* g a Wa TD DR
r ons, — 2 "I
= _—
2


-


*
— —
wa —— —
3 - £ 2 2
- —
” —
- 2 .
* 0


298 The Theory ef the EAR T.


his Command than the Emperors of the Eau
have Provinces or Principalities? Neithe i ior
does he make his Subjects Slaves to his Pleaſure
or Tributaries to ſerve and ſupply his Wantz:
On the contrary, they live upon him, he ng.
riſhes and preſerves them; gives them Fruit
every Year, Corn, and Wine, and all the Con.
forts of Life: This glorious Body, which noyMiP"
we can only gaze upon and admire, will hi":
then better underſtood. A Maſs of Light an;
Flame, and ethereal Matter, ten thouſand
times bigger than this Earth; enlightning
and cnlivening an Orb that exceeds the Bulk
of our Globe, as much as that does the le
Sand upon the Sea-ſhore, may reaſonably h
preſum'd to have ſome great Being at the
Centre of it; but what that is we muſt leave
to the Enquiries of another Life.

The Theory of the Earth will be a commo
Leſſon there; carried through all its Vicik
ſitudes and Periods from firſt to laſt, till it
entire Revolution be accompliſh'd. I tole
you in the Preface, the Revolution of the World
Was one of the greateſt Speculations that we
are capable of in this Life; and this little
World where we are, will be the firſt and caſt
eſt Inſtance of it, ſeeing we have Record
Hiſtorical, or Prophetical, that reach from the
Chaos to the End of the new Heavens and nt
Earth; which courſe of Time makes up the
greateſt part of the Circle or Revolution.
And as what was before the Chaos, was but,
my Opinion, the firſt Remove from a fixed Star


4 T


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 299


\ what is after the thouſand Years Renova-
jon, is but the laſt Step to it again.

The Theory of human Nature is alſo an uſe-
ful and neceſſary Speculation, and will be car-
jed on to Perfection in that State. Having
d the true Diſtinction betwixt Matter and
Spirit, betwixt the Soul and the Body, and
he true Nature and Laws of their Union, the
original Contract, and the Terms ratified by
rovidence at their firſt Conjunction, it will
ot be hard to diſcover the Springs of Action
and Paſſion; how the Thoughts of our Mind
and the Motions of our Body act in dependance
ne upon another. What are the primary Dif-
ferences of Genius's and Complexions, and
ow our Intellectuals or Morals depend upon
em? What is the Root of Fatality, and how
ar it extends? By theſe Lights they will ſec
nto their own and every Man's Breaſt, and
race the Foot-ſteps of the divine Wiſdom in
hat ſtrange Compoſition of Soul and Body.
This indeed is a mix'd Speculation, as moſt
others are, and takes in ſomething of both
orlds, intellectual and corporeal; and may
jlſo belong in part to the third Head we men-
jon d, Providence: But there is no need of
uſtinguiſhing theſe Heads ſo nicely, provided
ve take in, under ſome or other of them,
mat may be thought beſt to deſerve our
Knowledge now, or inanother World. As to
Providence, what we intend chicfly by it here,

the general Oeconomy of our Religion, and
Wat is reveal'd to us in Scripture, concern-


ing


” — ——— — oo


230 The Theory of the EAR TR.


ing God, Angels, and Mankind. Theſe Reo
velations, as moſt in Sacred Writ, are ſho
and incompleat; as being deſign'd for Pradid
more than for Speculation, or to awaken an
excite our Thoughts rather than to ſatisfy then
Accordingly, we read in Scripture of a Triun
Deity ; of God made Fleſh in the Womb of
Virging barbarouſly crucified by the Jews;
ſcending into Hell; riſing again from the Dey
viſibly aſcending intoHeaven; and ſitting atth
Right Hand of God the Father, above Ange
and Archangels. Theſe great things are in
perfectly revealed to us in this Life; whichy
arc to believe ſo far as they are revealed,
hopes theſe: Myſteries will be made mote!
telligible in that happy State to come, whe
Prophets, Apoſtles and Angels, will mect !
Converſation together. | |
In like manner, how little is it we underſtan
concerning the Holy Ghoſ? ? that he deſcent
ed like a Dove upon our Saviour, Mat. ili. il
Like cloven Tongues of Fire upon the Apoſil
the Place being fill'd with a ruſhing might
Wind, Ads ii. That he over-ſhadow'dt
bleſſed Virgin, and begot the Holy Infant, A.
i. 18. That he made the Apoſtles ſpcak 4
forts of Tongues and Languages ex temps
and pour'd out ſtrange Virtues and miradl
lous Gifts upon the Primitive Chriſtians, Luk
i. 35. Theſe things we know as bare Matt
of Fact, but the Method of theſe Operatio!
we do not at all underſtand, Who can te
us now, What that is which we call INSPTK
T10)


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 301


x? What Change is wrought in the Brain,
i what in the Soul, and how the Effect fol-
us Who will give us the juſt Definition
i Miracle? What the proximate Agent is
we: Man, and whether they are all from
, fame Power? How the Manner and Pro-
; of thoſe miraculous Changes in Matter
be concelv'd ? Theſe Things we ſee dark-
and hope they will be ſet in a clearer
ht, and the Doctrines of our Religion more
ly expounded to us, in that future World.
as ſeveral things obſcurely expreſs'd in the
d Teſtament, are more clearly reveal'd in
New; ſo the ſame Myſteries, in a ſuc-
eding State, may ſtill receive a farther Ex-
cation. 2

The Hiſtory of the Angels, good or bad,
akes another Part of this providential Sy-
m., Chriſtian Religion gives us ſome No-
es of both Kinds, but very imperfect; what
tereſt the good Angels have in the Govern-
ent of the World, and in ordering the At-
Irs of this Earth and Mankind? What Sub-
tion they have to our Saviour? And what
at in his Miniſtry 2 Whether they are Guar-
ans to particular Perſons, to Kingdoms, to
mpires? All that we know at preſent, con-
tuing theſe Things, is but conjectural. And
to the bad Angels, who will give us an
count of their Fall and of their former
ondition? I had rather know the Hiſtory of
fer, than of all the Babylonian and Per-
an Kings; nay, than of all the Kings of the
Earth,


302 The Theory of the EARTH,


Earth. What the Birth-right was of |
mighty Prince? What his Dominions? Wh,
his Imperial Court and Reſidence? Hoy
was depos d? For what Crime, and by yh
Power? How he ſtill wages War againſt He
ven, in his Exile? What Confederate, |
hath? What is his Power over Mankind,
how limited > What Change or Damage |
ſuffer d by the Coming of Chriſt, and hy
it alter'd the Poſture of his Affairs? Whe
he will be impriſon'd in the Millennium; u
what will be his laſt Fate and final Dog
whether he may ever hope for a Revoluti
or Reſtauration ? Theſe things lie hid in f
ſecret Records of Providence, which then,
hope, will be open'd to us.


With the Revolution of Worlds, we m


tion d before the Revolution of Souls; whi
is another great Circle of Providence, to
ſtudied hereafter : We know little here, eit
of the Pre-cxiſtence or Poſt-exiſtence ot «
Souls. We know not what they will be, t
the loud Trump awakes us, and calls us ag
into the corporeal World. Who knows h
many Turns he ſhall take upon thisStage oft
Earth, and how many Trials he ſhall have,“
fore his Doom will be finally concluded? WI
knows where, or what, is the State of Hc
Where the Souls of the Wicked are ſaid
be for ever? What is the true State of He
ven? What our celeſtial Bodies? and, V
that ſovereign Happineſsthat is call'd the Be
tifical Viſion ? Our Knowledge and Lo
9 —


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 303


ons of theſe things are, at preſent, very ge-
ral and ſuperficial ; but in the future King-
m of Chriſt, which is introductory to Hea-
n it ſelf, theſe Imperfections, in a great
eaſure, will be done away; and ſuch Prepa-
tions wrought; both in the Will and Under-
nding, as may fit us for the Life of Angels,
d the Enjoyment of God in eternal Glory.
Thus you ſee in general, what will, be the
mployment of the Saints in the bleſſed Mil-
mum: And tho' they have few of the
fling Buſineſſes of this Life, they will not
ant the beſt and nobleſt of Diverſions. *Tis
happy thing when a Man's Pleaſure is alſo

Perfection; for moſt Men's Pleaſures arc

as debaſe their Nature. We commonly
tify our lower Faculties, our Paſſions, and
jr Appetites ; and theſe do not improve, but
preſs the Mind; and beſides they are ſo
ls that the fineſt Tempers are ſurfeited
a little time. There is no laſting Plcaſure
t Contemplation ; all others grow flat and
lipid upon frequent Uſe; and when a Man
th run thorow a Set of Vanities, in the De-
non of his Age he knows not what to do
th himſelf, if he cannot Think; he ſaun-
Is about, from one dull Buſineſs to another
wear out time; and hath no Reaſon to va-
e Life, but becauſe he is afraid of Death:
t Contemplation is a continual Spring of
Ih Pleaſures, Truth is inexhauſted ; and
den once you are in the right Way, the far-
ct jou go, the greater Diſcoveries you make.

| an


304 The Theory of the Earth,


and with the greater Joy. We are ſometim
highly pleaſed, and even tranſported, vi
little inventions in Mathematicks, or Mech
nicks, or natural Philoſophy 3 all theſe thing
will make part of their Diverſion and Ent,
tainment in that State, all the Doctrine
Sounds and Harmony, of Light, Colours, an
Perſpective, will be known in Perfection:
theſc Icall Diverſions, in compariſon of the
higher and more ſerious Speculations, whit
will be the Buſineſs and Happineſs of that Lit
Do but imagine, that they will have t
Scheme of all humane Affairs lying befat
them, from the Chaos to the laſt Period; ti
univerſal Hiſtory and Order of Times; f
whole Occonomy of the Chriſtian Religiot
and of all the Religions in the World; ü
Plan of the Undertaking of the Meſſiah, wi
all other Parts and Ingredients of the Pro
dence of this Earth: Do but imagine th
I fay, and you will caſily allow, that wit
they contemplate the Beauty, Wiſdom at
Goodneſs of the whole Deſign, it muſt nee
raiſe great and noble Paſſions, and a far ricl
Joy than either the Pleaſures or Speculatic
of this Life can exite in us; and this bel
the laſt Act and Cloſe of all human Affa
it ought to be the more exquiſite and clab
rate, that it may crown the Work, ſatisfyt
Spectators, and end in a general Applaul
the whole Theatre reſounding with the Pra
of the great Dramatiſt, and the wonderful!
and Order of the Compoſition.


'
| |
'
|
:
gd?
*
1
3
1
3
= |
MW
'F
3


2 3 in ˖ rr...


—— — — = — —a—— — = -
—


CHA


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 305
CHAs .


hjetions againſt the Millennium, anſwer'd,
IVith ſome Conjectures concerning the State
of Things after the Millennium ; and what
ill be the final Conſummation of this World,


OU (ce how Nature and Providence have
| conſpir'd, to make the Millennium as
ppy a State, as any terreſtrial State can be:
pr, beſides Health and Plenty, Peace, Truth,
{| Rightcouſneſs will flouriſh there, and all
e Evils of this Life ſtand excluded. There
ill be no ambitious Princes, ſtudying Miſ-
ef one againſt another, or contriving Me-
dds to bring their own Subjects into Slavery z
 mercenaty Stateſmen to aſliſt and intrigue
th them, no Oppreſſion from the Power-
V ho Snares or Traps laid for the Innocent,


Knaves, Cheats, Hypocrites ; the Vermin
this Earth, that ſwarm every where. There
Ill be nothing but Truth, Candor, Sincert-
and Ingenuity ; as in a Society or Common-
calth of Saints and Philoſophers : In a Word,
"ill be Paradiſe reſtor d, both as to Innocen-
of Temper, and the Beautics of Nature.

[ believe you will be apt to ſay, if this be
t true, 'tis pity but it ſhould be true: For
$ 4 very deſirable State, where all good
ople would find themſelves mightily at caſe.
at is it that hinders it then? It muſt be
book IV 3 ſome


treacherous Friends, no malicious Enemies,


* = —— —
— OE IT AI —————̃ ——-—
— —— — — — — — — %. i - — - * hy —
my |


— d —
— — — %
g — — > — = _ * — E — —
v—— TT u — — — >
— - 3 — *
4 _— -- * * wo — ——— — q ww = P —
=o, . : = a . — — - =_ I * - =— - 2 — — —
— — — — 8 — —
— —— 2 — - 8 7 — — — * by — w - — =
wo _ WV. 4 S- 6 — Is =
. * * — — + — _ ———O
o — — _ » ——
4 1


— —


— — —


—


-
* — — — ͤ — — —— —
. — — — —
OE] rote — — SH —
— D * . — 5 — 2
- — 8 2 £4. .
_ - oa. I THESES r


306 The Theory of the EARTH.


ſome ill Genius; for Natur tends to ſuch 4
Renovation, as we ſuppoſe; and SCripturg
{peaks loudly of an happy State to be ſome


time or other on this ſide Heaven: An;
what is there, pray, in this preſent World
Natural and Moral, if I may ask with Rey
rence, that could make it worth the whilt
for God to create it, if it never was better, ng
ever will be better? Is there not more M
ſery than Happineſs? Is there not more Vic
than Virtue in this World? As if it hy
been made by a Manichean God. The Earl
barren, the Heavens inconſtant ; Men wick
cd and God offended: This is the Poſture
our Affairs, ſuch hath our World been
therto, with Wars and Bloodſhed, Sickne
and Diſeaſes, Poverty, Servitude and perpe
tual Drudgery for the Neceſlaries of a mon
Life. We may therefore reaſonably hop
from a God infinitely good and powerful, i
better Times and a better State, before t
laſt Period and Conſummation of all Things
But it will be objected, it may be, that, 4
cording to Scripture, the Vices and Wick
neſs of Men will continue to the End of tl
World; and fo there will be no room for (ud
an happy State, as we hope for, Luk. xvlil
Our Saviour ſays, hen the Son of Man comet
ſhall he find Faith upon the Earth? They ſh
eat and drink and play, as before the Deſtructic
of the old World, or of Sodom, (Luke xvii.
c.) and the Wickedneſs of thoſe Men, Je
know, continued to the laſt, This Objecti


mc


(
ay 1


o be


Tears


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 307
ay pinch thoſe that ſuppoſe the Millennium
o be in the preſent Earth, and a thouſand
fears before the coming of our Saviour; for
s Words ſeem to imply that the World will
e in a State of Wickedneſs even till his coming.
ccordingly Antichriſt or the Man of Liu, is
ot ſaid to be deſtroy'd till the coming of our
aviour, 2 T hef. ii. 8. and till he be deſtroy'd,
ye cannot hope for a Millennium. Laſtly,
ſhe coming of our Saviour is always repreſent-
d in Scripture as ſudden, ſurprizing and un-
weſted ; as Lightning breaking ſuddenly
ut of the Clouds, (Luke xvii. 24. and ch. xxi.
14,35.) or as a Thief in the Night, 1 Theſſ. v.
3,4. 2 Pet. iii. 10. Apoc. xvi. 15. But if
here be ſuch a Fore-runner of it as the mil-
ennial State, whoſe Bounds we know, accor-
ling as that expires and draws to an End,
en Will be certainly advertisd of the ap-
roaching of our Saviour: But this Objection,
$1 told you, does not affect our Hypotheſis,
or we ſuppoſe the Millennium will not be till
iter the coming of our Saviour, and the Con-
lagration. And alſo that his coming will be
udden and ſurpriſing ; and that Antichriſt will
ontinue in being, tho' not in the ſame degree
i Power, till that time: So that they that


hiefy concern'd to anfwer this firſt Objection.
But you will object, it may be, in the ſecond
Pace, that this Millennium, whereſocver it
b would degenerate at length into Senſuality;
ind a Mahometan Paradiſe: Fot where there

e ure


place the Millennium in the preſent Earth, are


—
,
— 1 . © = -
—


. — — —
— — — — — — —— —
= — —


18
+ '

1995

t .

1
x

1
j *+*

.

l


308 The Theory of the EARTH!


are earthly Pleaſures and earthly Appetite
they will not be kept always in order withoy
any Exceſs or Luxuriancy ; eſpecially as to thi
Senſes to Touch and Taſte. 1 am apt to thin
this is true, if the Soul have no more Pope
over the Body than ſhe hath at preſent, and o
Senſes, Paſſions, and Appetites be as ftror
as they are now: But according to our EN
plication of the Millennium, we have gie
Reaſon to hope, that the Soul will hare
greater Dominion over the ReſurreQion-Bod
than ſhe hath over this; and you know
ſuppoſe that none will truly inherit the Mi
lennium, but thoſe that riſe from the Dead
Nor do we admit any Propagation there, nd
the Trouble or Weakneſs of Infants, Butth
all riſe in a perfect Age, and never die; bei
tranſlated, at the final Judgment, to meet o
Saviour in the Clouds, and to be with him
ever: Thus we eaſily avoid the Force of ii
Objection. But thoſe that place the Mille
nium in this Life, and to be enjoy'd in the
Bodies, muſt find out ſome new Preſervat!
againſt Vice, otherwiſe they will be continu
ly ſubject to Degeneracy.
Another Objection may be taken from
perſonal Reign of Chriſt upon Earth, wii
is a thing incongruous, and yet aſſerted
many modern Millennaries; that Chriſt ſho
leave that Right-Hand of his Father, to col
and paſs a thouſand Years here below, 11
upon Earth in an heavenly Body: This, Ice
feſs, is a thing I never could digeſt, and A


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 309


we I am not concern'd in this ObjeQion ;
ot thinking it neceſſary that Chriſt ſhould be
erſonally preſent and reſident upon Earth in
je Millennium. I am apt to believe that there

ill be then a ccleſtial Preſence of Chriſt, or
Shekinah, as we noted before; as the Sun is
reſent to the Earth, yet never leaves its Place

the Firmament; ſo Chriſt may be viſibly
onſpicuous in his heavenly Throne, as he was
St. Stephen, Adds vii. 55, 56. and yet never
ave the Right Hand of his Father. And this
ould be a more glorious and illuſtrious Pre-
nce, than if he ſhould deſcend, and converſe
mongſt Men in a perſonal Shape: But theſe
ings not being diſtinctly reveald to us, we
oht not to determine any thing concerning
em, but with Modeſty and Submiſſion.

We have thus far pretty well eſcap'd, and
ept our ſelves out of the reach of the ordina-
j Objections againſt the Millennium: But

ere remains one, concerning a double Reſur-

Hion, which muſt fall upon every Hypothe-
and 'tis this. The Scripture, they ſay,
eaks but of one Reſurrection; whereas the
oCtrine of the Millennium ſuppoſes two; one
t the Beginning of the Millennium, for the
artyrs, and thoſe that enjoy that happy State,
nd the other at the End of it; which is uni-
tlal and final, in the laſt Day of Judgment.
lis true, Scripture generally ſpeaks of the Re-
trection in groſs ; without diſtinguiſhing firſt
id ſecond ; and ſo it ſpeaks of the Coming of
uw Saviour, without Diſtinction of firſt or ſe-

þ Of cond 2.


— 8 rr = - . —= N _ r — * *
7 — ———— — — > * _— —— - — * — = ww — 2 22 - —
— * — wo a> od -
— " < a — a — « *
— — ” — po : — —_ —
* 22 8 0 = 4 m = _-
— — x; Pi - -_ pu — —
— - — — - — 2
— = — -
— — — _ —
* > - - 22 — — — =


n_—
——
\ -
*


— _—
—
—
a —


310 The Theory of the EARTH.


cond; yet it does not follow from that,
there is but one coming ot our Saviour, ſo ne
ther that there is but one Reſurrection. 4;
ſeeing there is one place of Scripture that ſpe,
diſtinctly of two Reſurrecions, namely, f
xx chap. of the Apocalypſe, that is to u
ſufficient Warrant for aflerting two; asthe
are ſome things in one Evangclilt that are n
in anothcr, yet we think them authentick
they d but in one: There are alſo ſome thin
in Dani“ concerning the Meſſiah, and co
ccrning the Reſurrection, that are not in
reſt of the Prophcts; yet we look upon
ſingle Teſtimony as good Authority. St. 7
wrote the laſt of all the Apoſtles, and as f
whole Series of his Prophecies is new, reachi
through the latter Times to the Conſummati
of all Things; ſo we cannot wonder if he!
ſomething more particular reveal'd to him eo
cerning the Reſurrection: That which
ſpoken of before in general, being diſtingui
now into firſt and ſecond, or particular al
univerſal, in this laſt Prophet. See Mr. Med
Some think St. Paul means no leſs, when!
makes an Order in the Reſurrection; 10
riſing ſooner, ſome later, 1 Cor. xv. 23,
1 Theſſ. iv.14, 15, &c. but whether that be
or no, St. Fohn might have a more dili
Revelation concerning it, than St. Paul hi
or any one before him.

After theſe Objections, a great many Q
ries and Difficulties might be propos d rc/atil
to the Millennium : But that's no morc 1

I


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 311


hat is found in all other Matters, remote from
r Knowledge. Who can anſwer all the
geries that may be made concerning Heaven,
Hell, or Paradiſe 2 When we know a Thing

to the Subſtance, we are not to let go our
old, tho' there remain ſome Difficulties unre-
d; otherwiſe we ſhould be cternally ſcep-
al in moſt Matters of Knowledge. Therefore,
o we cannot, for Example, give a full Ac-
unt of the Diſtinction of Habitations and In-
bitants in the future Earth; or, of the Order
the firſt Reſurrettion, whether it be per-
md by degrees and ſucceſſively, or all the In-
abitants of the cet Feruſalem riſe at once, and
ntinue throughout the whole Millennium:
ſay, tho' we cannot give a diſtinct Account of
eſe, or ſuch like Particulars, we ought not
herefore to deny or doubt whether there will be
ww Earth, or a firſt Reſurrettion. For the Re-
elation goes clearly ſo far, and the Obſcurity is
jnly in the Conſequences and Dependences of
; Which Providence thought fit, without farther

ght, to leave to our Search and Diſquiſition.

Scripture mentions one Thing, at the End of
he Millennium, which is a common Difficulty
o all; and every one muſt contribute their
eſt Thoughts and Conjectures towards the So-
lution of it: Tis the ſtrange Doctrine of Gog
and Magog, Apoc. xx. 8, 9. which are to riſe
pin Rebellion againſt the Saints, and be-
ſege the holy City, and the holy Camp:
And this is to be upon the Expiration of the
thouſand Years, when Satan is looſen'd; for


X 4 no


312 The Theory of the EAR TB.


no ſooner will his Chains be knock dd off
he will put himſelf in the Head of this A;
of Giants, or Sons of the Earth, and att;
Heaven, and the Saints of the moſt Hip
But with ill Succeſs, for there will come dg
Fire and Lightning from Heaven, and conſyr
them. This, methinks, hath a great Afﬀaj
with the Hiſtory of the Giants, rebelling y
aſſaulting Heaven, and ſtruck down by Thu
der-Bolts : But that of ſetting Mountains up,
Mountains, or toſſing them into the K
that's the poetical Part, and we muſt note
pect to find it in the Prophecy. The bo
told their Fable, as of a thing paſt, and ſo
was a Fable; but the Prophets ſpeak of i
as of a Thing to come, and ſo it will be a
ality : But how and in what Senſe it is tot
underſtood and cxplain'd, every one hast
Liberty to make the beſt Judgment he can,
Ezekiel mentions Cg and Magog,ch. xxxvi
and xxxix. which I take to be only Types a
Shadows of theſe which we are now ſpeakin
of, and not yet exemplify'd, no more thanh
Temple. And ſeeing this People is to be atti
End of the Millennium, and in the fame Ear
with it, we muſt, according to our Hypothel
plant them in the future Earth, and therefo
all former Conjectures about the Turks, oro
thians, or other Barbarians, are out of Doo
with us, ſeeing the Scene of this Action doe
not lie in the preſent Earth: They arc all
repreſented by the Prophet, as a People di
ſtinct and ſeparate from the Saints, not in the
I Mannel


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 313


anners only, but alſo in their Seats and
abitations; for (Apoc. xx. 8, 9.) they are
zd to come up from the four Corners of
he Earth, upon the Breadth of the Earth, and
here to beſiege the Camp of the Saints and
he beloved City: This makes it ſeem proba-
le to me, that there will be a double Race
f Mankind in that future Earth; very dif-
rent one from another, both as to their
emper and Diſpoſition, and as to their O-
gin: The one born from Heaven, Sons of
od, and of the Reſurrection, who are the
rue Saints and Heirs of the Millennium. The
ther born of the Earth, Sons of the Earth,
generated from the Slime of the Ground, and
he Heat of the Sun, as brute Creatures were
t firſt; This ſecond Progeny or Generation of
Men in the future Earth, I underſtand to be
gnified by the Prophet under theſe borrow-
dor feigned Names of Gog and Magog : And
his Earth-born Race, increaling and multi-
lying after the Manner of Mcn, by carnal
Propagation, after a thouſand Years, grew nu-
merous, as the Sand by the Sea; and there-
upon made an Irruption or Inundation upon
he Face of the Earth, and upon the Habitati-
ons of the Saints; as the barbarous Nations did
tormerly upon Chriſtendom ; or as the Giants
ac laid to have made War againſt the Gods:
but they were ſoon confounded in their im-
prous and ſacrilegious Deſign, being ſtruck
ind conſum'd by Fire from Heaven.


Some


that they were Angels; and another, that the 3


314 The Theory of the EAR TR.


.
Some will think, it may be, that there ip o
ſuch a double Race of Mankind in the Hime


World. alſo: The Sons of Adam, and:
Sons of God ; becauſe it is ſaid, Gen. vi, g
Men began to multiply upon the Face of
Earth, that the Sons oF GoD $aw ry
DAUGHTERS oF MEN, that they were fy
and they took them Wives of all that th
lit d. And it is added preſently, ver. 4. The
were Giants in the Earth in thoſe Day
and alſo after that, when the Sons of G
came in unto the Daughters of Men, and th
bare Children to them; the ſame became mig}
Men, which were of old, Men of Nenon
Here ſeem to be two or three Orders or Rac
in this Ante-diluvian World. The Sons (
God; the Sons and Daughters of Adam; a
a third Sort ariſing from the Mixture and C
pulation of theſe, which are call'd My}
Men of old, or Heroes. Beſides, here a
Giants mention'd, and to which they are t
be reduc'd, it does not certainly appear.

This Mixture of theſe two Races, whatl
ever they were, gave, it ſeems, ſo great 0
fence to God, that he deſtroy'd that Wor
upon it, in a Deluge of Water. It hath bed
matter of great Dithculty to determine, vi
theſe Sons of God were, that fell in Love wil
and married the Daughters of Men. Thel
are two Conjectures that prevail moſt; on


were of the Poſterity of Seth, and diſtinguil
ed from the reſt, by their Picty, and the Wo


4 I


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 315


p of the true God; ſo that it was a great
imme for them to mingle with the reſt of
lankind, who are ſuppos'd to have been I.
Jlaters: Neither of theſe Opinions is to me
tisfactory. For as to Angels, good Angels
ther marry, nor are given in Marriage, Mat.
xii, 30, and bad Angels are not called the
ms of God. Beſides, if Angels were Capa-
le of thoſe mean Pleaſures, we ought in
eaſon to ſuppoſe, that there are Female An-
ls, as well as Male; for ſurcly thoſe Capa-
tics are not in vain through a whole Spe-
zs of Beings, And if there be Female An-
ls, we cannot imagine, but that they muſt
e of a far more charming Beauty than the
owdy Daughters of Men, Then as to the
ne of Seth, it does not appear that there was
y ſuch Diſtinction of Idolaters and true
Vorſhipers before the Flood, or that there
as any ſuch thing as Idolatry at that time,
or for ſome Ages after. Beſides, it is not
ad, that the Sons of God fell in Love with
he Daughters of Cain, or of any degenerate
ace, but with the Daughters of Adam; which
nay be the Daughters of Seth, as well as of
ny other: Theſe Conjectures therefore ſeem
o be ſhallow and ill-grounded, But what the
Diſtinction was of thoſe two Orders, remains
ſet very incertain.
St. Paul to the Galatians, (chap. iv. 21, 22,
Cc.) makes a Diſtinction allo of a double Pro-
ny ; that of Sarah, and that of Hagar: One
Vas born according to the Fleſh, after a 755
: ; tura


316 The Theory of the EAR TR.


tural Manner; and the other by the dh
Power, or in virtue of the divine Promis
This Diſtinction of a natural and ſupernatu
Origin, and of a double Progeny; the one bo
to Servitude, the other to Liberty, repreſent
very well either the Manner of our preſet
Birth, and of our future, at the Re ſurrection
or that double Progeny and double mannerg
Birth, which we ſuppole in the future Ear
Tis true, St. Paul applies this to the Law an
the Goſpel ; but typical Things, you kno
have different Aſpects and Complexions,whic »
are not excluſive of one another; and {6
may be here. But however, this double Ra
of Mankind in the future Earth, to expli
the Doctrine of Gog and Magog, is but a Co
jecture; and does not pretend to be other
wiſe conſidered.
The laſt Thing that remains to be conſidet
ed and accounted for, is the Upſhot and Co
cluſion of all; namely, what will become
the Earth after the thouſand Years expir
Or after the Day of Judgment paſt, and t
Saints tranſlated into Heaven, what will |
the Face of Things here below ? There bein
nothing expreſly reveal'd concerning this,
muſt not expect a poſitive Reſolution of i
And the Difficulty is not peculiar to our H
potheſis; for though the Millennium, and th
final Judgment, were concluded in the pte
ſent Earth, the Quære would ſtill remain, e
would become of this Earth after the laſt Day
So that all Parties are equally concern d, *
equally


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 3 17


ally free, to give their Opinion, What
ill be the laſt State and Conſummation of
s Earth: Scripture, I told you, hath not
efin'd this Point; and the Philoſophers ſay
ery little concerning it. The Stoicks indeed
xcak of the final Reſolution of all things in-
Fire, or into Ether: which is the pureſt
nd ſubtleit ſort of Fire: So that the whole
lobe or Maſs of the Earth, and all particular
zodies, will, according to them, be at laft diſ-
old into a liquid Flame. Neither was this
hoctrine firſt invented by the Stoicks; He-
xlitus taught it long before them, and I take
t to be as ancient as Orpheus himſelf; who
as the firſt Philoſopher amongſt the Greeks :
nd he deriving his Notions from the Bar-
urick Philoſophers, or the Sages of the Eaſt,
hat School of Wiſdom may be look'd upon
5 the true Seminary of this Doctrine, as it
vas of moſt other natural Knowledge.
But this Diſſolution of the Earth into Fire,
may be underſtood two Ways; either that it
vill be diſſolv'd into a looſe Flame, and ſo
diſſipated and loſt as Lightning in the Air,
and vaniſh into nothing ; or that it will be
diſſolvd into a fix'd Flame, ſuch as the Sun
s, or a fix'd Star. And I am of Opinion, that
me Earth after the laſt Day of Judgment, will
de chang d into the Nature of a Sun, or of a
xd Star, and ſhine like them ig the Firma-
ment: Being all melted down into a Maſs of
thereal Matter, and cnlightning a Sphere or
Orb round about it. I have no direct and de-
4 monflrative


318 The Theory of the EARTH.


monſtrative Proof of this I confeſs, but if
nets were once fixed Stars, as I believe ty
were, their Revolution to the ſame State
gain, in a great Circle of Time, ſeems tg
according to the Methods of Providence, wii on
loves to recover what was loſt or decay d.
ter certain Periods, and what was original
good and happy, to make it ſo again, ;
Nature, at laſt, being transform'd into a ll
Glory with the Sons of God, (Rom. viii, 2
I will not tell you what Foundation the
is in Nature, for this Change or Transform
tion from the interiour Conſtitution of th
Earth, and the Inſtances we have ſeen of nc
Stars appearing in the Heavens. I ſhouldle:
the Engliſh Reader too far out of his Wy
to diſcourſe of theſe things: But if there bean
Paſſages or Expreſſions in Scripture, that coun
tenance ſuch a State of things after the Day
Judgment, it will not be improper to tak
Notice of them. That radiant and illuſtriou
Feruſalem, deſcribd by St. Fohn Apoc. v
Ver. 10, 11, 12, &c. compos d all of Gem
and bright Materials, clear and ſparkling, :
a Star in the Firmament: Who can givea
Account what that is? Its Foundations, Wall
Gates, Streets, all the Body of it, reſplende
as Light or Fire > What is there in Nature,
in this Univerſe, that bears any Reſembland
with ſuch a Phænomenon as this, unlcis
be a Sun or afix'd Star? Eſpecially if we ad
and conſider what follows, ver. 23. That 1


City had no need of the Sun, nor of the *


Concerning the new Heavens, &c. 319


ſhine in it, ver. 25. And that there was no
jobt there. This can be no terreſtrial Body;
muſt be a Subſtance luminous in it ſelf,
da Fountain of Light, as a fix'd Star: And
on ſuch a Change of the Earth, or Trans-
mation, as this, would be brought to paſs
2 Saying that is written, DEATH IS SWAL-
WED UP IN VIcToRY. Which indeed St.
a ſeerns to apply to our Bodies in parti-
lar, 1 Cor. xv. 54. But in the eighth Chap.
the Romans he extends it to all Nature,
r. 21. The Creation it ſelf alſo ſhall be de-
rd from the Bondage of Corruption, into
e glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. And
cordingly St. Zohn, ſpeaking of the ſame
ime with St. Paul in that Place to the Co-
thians, namely, of the general Reſurrecti-
n and Day of Judgement, ſays, Death and
lades, which we render Hell, were caſt in-
the Lake of Fire, Apoc. xx. 14. This is
cir being ſwallowed up in Victory, which
. Paul ſpeaks of; when Death and Hades,
Nat is, all the Region of Mortality, the Earth
d all its Dependences, are abſorpt into a
als of Fire; and converted, by a glorious
(tory over the Powers of Darkneſs, into a
uminous Body and a Region of Light.

This great Iſſue and Period of the Earth,
nd of all human Affairs, tho' it ſeem to be
ounded in Nature, and ſupported by ſeveral
Lxpreſſions of Scripture ; yet we cannot, for
ant of full Inſtruction, propoſe it otherwile
han as a fair Conjecture : The Heavens and


the


320 The Theory of the EARTH.


the Earth ſhall flic away at the Day of fuß
ment, ſays the Text, .. xx. II. And th
Place ſhall not be found. This muſt be unde
ſtood of our Heavens and our Earth; and the
flying away muſt be their removing to ſo
other Part of the Univerſe, ſo as their |;
or Reſidence ſhall not be found any my
here below. This is the eaſy and natural Sen
of the Words; and this Tranſlation oft
Earth will not be without ſome Change pr
ceeding, that makes it leave its Place, an
with a lofty Flight, takes its Seat amongſt
Stars. There we leave it; having cot
ducted it for the Space of ſeven thouſand Ye
thro various Changes, from a dark Chaos
a bright Star.


R


i


N
D E
8 0 © —
Co WU) D
— 2 N
2 "oe
2 8 | <= 4
2 T O
| Q O
83 x
4 ES.
8 24
— Ct E 4 8 S
© * SZ
= = =


—


K 8 — — 5 0 — 2 -
- ” = - * -
— —— — . 9 — 8 „ —1wy -§m. 2 —dB —ͤ ——— —


— — —e—0
— 5 - x
F I IT — — —


——
— 8 © —


1 ES > — — . i - -
. — * a — —
— — — — — — — — — — — — - — ”
— ———————— ũ œͤ!A


REVIEW


Of the SAcRED


heory of the Earth.


50 take a Review of this Theory of
the Earth, which we have now
q finiſh'd, we muſt conſider, firſt,

| the Extent of it, and then the
principal Parts whereof it conſiſts :
t reaches, as you ſee, from one End of the
World to the other ; from the firſt Chaos to
e laſt Day, and the Conſummation of all
hings. This probably, will run the length
If ſeven thouſand Years ; which is a. good
ompetent Space of Time to exerciſe our
houghts upon, and to obſerve the ſeveral
Ccenes which Nature and Providence bring in-
d View within the Compaſs of ſo many Ages.
bes The


— —
— _


— —


— —


1
1 U
» ”
*1
il
1
© a |
\ |
| :
20
\ |
1
ti |
iv
7 2 -
o
+, 9%
a
f
|
1 4 ;
4 i
v3:
} .
|
' 9
TN
41 |
i
I
1
x
14
ö \
1 5
7
.


1 1
i) |
4 F
11 |
at \
, \


324 A REVIEW of


The Matter and, principal Parts of thi
Theory are ſuch things as are recorded i
Scripture : We do not feign a Subject, an
then diſcant upon it, for Diverſion ; but e
deavour to give an intelligible and ration;
Account of ſuch Matters of Fact, paſt or fy
ture, as arc there ſpecified and declare
What it hath ſeem'd good to the Holy Gh
to communicate to us, by Hiſtory or Proph
cy, concerning theſeveral States and gener
Changes of this Earth, makes the Argume
of our Diſcourſe : Therefore the Things then
ſelves muſt be taken for granted, in one Sen
or other, ſeeing, beſides all other Proofs, the
have the Authority of a Revelation; and o
Buſineſs is only to! give ſuch an Explication
them, as ſhall approve it ſelf to the Faculti
of Man, and be conformable to Scripture

We will therefore firſt ſet down the Thir


themſelves, that make the ſubject Matter


this Theory; and remind you, of our Expli
tion of them: Then recolle& the gene
Proofs of that Explication, from Reaſon a
Nature; but more fully and particularly ſhe
how it is grounded upon Scripture.
primary Phenomena whereof we are to gl
an Account, arc theſe five or ſix.


I. The Orig mal of the Earth How, a Chi


II. The (5,5 of Paraat iſe, a * the 4
diluwian World.


III. The univerſal Deluge.
IV. The univerſal Con le,


The Theory of the EARTH. 325


v. The Renovation of the World, or the
naw Heavens and new Earth.
VI. The Conſummation of all Things.


heſe are unqueſtionably in Scripture z and
ſe all relate, as you ſee, to the ſeveral
;ms, States and Revolutions of this Earth.
e are therefore oblig d to give a clear and
erent Account of theſe Phenomena, in that
der and Conſecution wherein they ſtand to
e another. 8 |

here are alſo in Scripture ſome other
ings, relating to the ſame Subjects, that may
call'd the ſecondary Ingredients of this Theo-
and are to be referr'd to their reſpective
nary Heads. Such are, for Inſtance,


. The Longevity of the Ante-diluvians.

Il, The Rupture of the great Abyſs, at the
Deluge. |

Il. The appearing of the Rainbow after the

Deluge, as a Sign that there never


ſrould be a ſecond Flood.


heſe things Scripture hath alſo left upon
cord, as Directions and Indications how to
derſtand the ante-diluvian State, and the
luge it ſelf. Whoſoever therefore ſhall un-
take to write the Theory of the Earth, muſt
ik himſelf bound to give us a juſt Explica-
nof theſe ſecondary Phenomena, as well as
the primary ; and that in ſuch a Depen-
ce and Connexion, as to make them give
C receive Light from one another. |

| | Y 3 The


326 A REVIEW of
The former Part of the Task is concern;
the World behind us, Times and Things paß
that are already come to Light: The late em
is concerning the World before us, Times he.
Things to come; that lie yet in the Boſom roc
Providence, and in the Seeds of Nature: An
theſe are chiefly the Conflagration of the Wotle
and the Renovation of it. When theſe:
over and cxpird, then comes the End,
St. Paul ſays, 1 Cor. xv. Then the Heaug
and the Earth fly away, as St. John ſays
Apoc. xx. Then is the Confummation of al
Things, and the laſt Period of this ſublun;
World, whatſoever it is: Thus far the Thed
riſt muſt go, and purſue the Motions of N
ture, till all Things are brought to Reſt an
Silence: And in this latter Part of the The
ry, there is alſo a collateral Phznomenot
the Millennium, or thouſand Years Reign e
Chriſt and his Saints upon Earth, to be cot
ſider'd, For this, according as it is repreſen
cd in Scripture, does imply a Change in t
natural World, as wellas in the Moral; an
therefore muſt be accounted for in the Thet
of the Earth: At leaſt it muſt be there dete
min'd, whether that State of the World, whit
is ſingular and extraordinary, will be befo
or after the Conflagration.
| Theſe are the Principals and Incidents «
this Theory of the Earth, as to the Matte
and Subject of it; which, you ſee, is both in
portant, and wholly taken out of Scripture
As to our Explication of theſe Points, that
PS nay | | 553 : ſufficicnt!


The Theory of the EARTH. 327


uffciently known, being ſet down at large
four Books of this Theory: Therefore it
mains only, having ſeen the Matter of the
Theory, to examine the Form of it, and the
roofs of it; for from theſe two things it
muſt receive its Cenſure. As to the Form, the
haracters of a regular Theory ſeem to be
heſe three; Few and eaſy Poſtulatums ; Union
f Parts; and @ Fitneſs to anſwer, fully and
lurly, all the Phenomena to which it is to
r apply d.
We think our Hypotheſis does not want any
f theſe Characters: As to the firſt, we take
ut one ſingle Poſtulatum for the whole Theo-
ry, and that an eaſy one, warranted both by
Ccripture and Antiquity ; namely, That this
arth riſe, at firſt, from a Chaos : As to the
cond, Union of Parts, the whole Theory
Is but one Series of Cauſes and Effects from
that firſt Chaos. Beſides, you can ſcarce ad-
mit any one Part of it, firſt, laſt, or interme-
date, but you muſt, .in Conſequence of that,
amit all the reſt. Grant me but that the
Deluge is truly explain'd, and I'll deſire no
more Proof for all the Theory : Or, it you
begin at the other End, and grant the new
Heavens and new Earth after the Conflagra-
ion, you will be led back again to the firſt
Heavens and firſt Earth that were before the
Hood. For St. John ſays, that new Earth
vas without a Sea, Apoc. xxl. 1. And it was
Renovation, or Reſtitution to ſome former
Nate of Things: There was therefore ſome
VE Y 4 former


120 4A REVIEW of


former Earth without a Sea; which not ben
the preſent Earth, it muſt be the ante-dilyyiy
Beſides, both St. John, and the Prophet Eſai
have repreſented the new. Heavens and ny
 Earth,as paradiſiacal, according as it W

ved, Book IV. Chap. 2. And having told |
the Form of the new-tuture-Earth, that
will have no Sea, it is a reaſonable Inferene
that there was no Sea in the paradiſur
Earth. However, from the Form of this
ture Earth, which St. Fohn repreſents to
we may at leaſt conclude, that an Earth uit
out a Sea is no Chimera, or Impoſlibilit
but rather a fit Seat and Habitation for ti
 Juſtand the Innocent. | |

Thus you ſee the Parts of the Theory li
and hold faſt one another, according to ti
ſecond Character: And as to the third,
being ſuited to the Phenomena, we mult ref
that to the next Head of Proofs. It may
truly ſaid, that bare Coherence and Unione
Parts is not a ſufficient Proof; the Parts of
Fable or Romance may hang aptly togethe
and yet have no Truth in them : This
enough indeed to give the Title of a juſt Con
poſition to any Work, but not of a tt
one; till it appear that the Concluſions an
Explications are grounded upon good natur
Evidence, or upon good Divine Authorlt)
We'muſt therefore proceed now to the tiir
thing to be conſider'd in a Theory, hat 1
Proofs are? Or the Grounds upon which
ſtands, whether Sacred or Natural!


Accordin


The Theory of the E a K. 329


According to natural Evidence, things are
oved from their Cauſes or their Effects; and
e think we have this double Order of Proofs
r the Truth of our Hypotheſis: As to the
ethod of Cauſes, we proceed from what
more ſimple, to what is more compound,
d build all upon one Foundation. Go but
the Head of the Theory, and you will ſec
e Cauſes lying in a Train before you, from
to laſt; and tho' you did not know the
atural Hiſtory of the World, paſt or future,
ou might, by Intuition, foretel it, as to the
and Revolutions and ſucceſſive Faces of Na-
te, through a long Series of Ages. If we
we given a true Account of the Motions
f the Chaos, we have alſo truly form'd the
it habitable Earth; and if that be truly form'd
e have thereby given a true Account of the
tate of Paradiſe, and of all that depends up-
n it; and not of that only, but alſo of the
niverſal Deluge. Both theſe we have ſhewn
n their Cauſes ; The one from the Form of
hat Earth, and the other from the Fall of it
nto the Abyſs: And tho' we had not been
ade acquainted with theſe things by Anti-
Juity, we might, in Contemplation of the
Cauſes, have truly conceiv'd them as Proper-
tics or Incidents to the firſt Earth. But as to
the Deluge, I do not ſay, that we might have
calculated the Time, Manner, and other Cir-
cumſtances of it: Theſe things were regulated
by Providence, in ſubordination to the moral
World; but that there would be, at one Time
( or


5


of natural Cauſes, as any in the whole The


World; the Reſtitution of all Things men


330 A REVIEW of
or other, a Diſruption of that Earth, or
the great Abyſs, and in Conſequence of i
an univerſal Deluge; ſo far, I think, the Lia
of a Theory might carry us.
Farthermore, in Conſequence of this Dil
ruption of the primæval Earth, at the Deligt
the preſent Earth was made hollow and
vernous, L Theor. Book iii. chap. 7, and,
and by that means, (due Preparations bein
uſed) capable of Combuſtion, or of periſhin
by an univerſal Fire: Vet, to ſpeak ingenuoul
ly, this is as hard a Step to be made, in virty


But in Recompence of that Defect, the Con
flagration is ſo plainly and literally taught usi
Scripture, and avow'd by Antiquity, that ite
fall under no diſpute, as to the Thing it («lf
and as to a Capacity or Diſpoſition to it in ti
preſent Earth, that I think is ſufficiently mad
out.

Then, the Conflagration admitted, in tha
way it is explain'd in the third Book ; the Eart
you ſee, is, by that Fire, reduc'd to a ſecond
Chaos. A Chaos truly ſo call'd; and from that
as from the firſt, ariſes another Creation, ot
new Heavens and a new Earth; by the lam
Cauſes, and in the ſame Form, with the 5.
radiſiacal. This is the Renovation of the


tion'd both by Scripture and Antiquity 3 and b
the Prophet Iſaiah, St. Peter and St. Joln
call'd the new Heavens and new Earth: Wit
this, as the laſt Period, and moſt glorious *


The Theory of the EARTH. 331
all human Affairs, our Theory concludes,
to this Method of Cauſes, whercof we are
ow ſpeaking.

I ay, here it Ends as to the Method of Cau-
5: For tho' we purſue the Earth till farther,
en to its laſt Diſſolution, which is call'd the
onſummation of all Things; yet all that we
ve ſuperadded upon that Occaſion, is but pro-
lematical, and may, without Prejudice to the
heory, be argued and diſputed on either Hand.
do not know, but that our Conjectures there
zy be well grounded; but however, not
pringing ſo directly from the ſame Root, or,
t leaſt, not by Ways ſo clear and viſible, I
eve that Part undecided : Eſpecially ſeeing
e pretend to write no more than the Theory
the Earth, and therefore as we begin no
igher than the Chaos, ſo we are not oblig'd
0 go any farther than to the laſt State of a
erreſtrial Conſiſtency ; which is that of the
ew Heavens and the new Earth.
This is the firſt natural Proof, from the Or-
ler of Cauſes : The ſecond is from the Con-
deration of Effects; namely, of ſuch Effects as
ac already in being: And therefore this Proof
an extend only to that Part of the Theory, that
plains the preſent and paſt Form and Phæno-
mena of the Earth. What is future, muſt be
left to a farther Trial, when the Thing comes
to paſs, and preſent themſelves to be examind
and compar'd with the Hypotheſis. As to the
preſent Form of the Earth, we call all Nature
o Witneſs for us; the Rocks and the Moun-
FE, tains,


|
|


|


332 A REVIEW. of.


tains, the Hills and the Valleys, the deep 200
wide Sea, and the Caverns of the Ground t
Let theſe ſpeak, and tell their Origin: Hon t
the Body of the Earth came to he thus to n
and mangled? If this ſtrange and irregyl
Structure was not the Effect of a Ruin; oerl
of ſuch a Ruin as was univerſal over the Ee
of the whole Globe. But we have given ud
a full Explication of this, in the firſt Part Men
the Theory, from chap. ix. to the End of tu
Treatiſe, that we dare ſtand to the Judgmen
of any that reads thoſe four Chapters to dt
termine if the Hypotheſis does not anſwer t
all thoſe Phænomena, caſy and adequately,
The next Phænomenon to be conſider, i
the Deluge, with its Adjuncts: This alſo i
fully explain'd by our Hypotheſis, in the ii
1119, and vi® Chapters of the firſt Book: Wher
it is ſhewn, that the Moſaical Deluge, thatis
an univerſal Inundation of the whole Eart
above the Tops of the higheſt Mountains
made by a breaking open of the great Abyſ
(for thus far Moſes leads us) is fully explain
by this Hypotheſis, and cannot be conccivdit
any other Method hitherto propos'd. There
are no Sources or Stores of Water ſufficien
for ſuch an Effect, that may be drawn upo
the Earth, and drawn off again, but by ſuppof
ing ſuch and Abyſs, and ſuch a Diſruption ot
it, as the Theory repreſents.
Laſtly, As to the Phænomena of Paradiſe
and the ante-diluvian World, we have ſet the
down in Ordcr in the ſecond Book ; and 1


3 -- ply


r 2
| The Theory of .the Earth 333


to each of; them its proper Explication,

m the ſame, Hypotheſis. We have alſo giv-
in Account of that Character which Anti-
y always aſſignid to the firſt Age of the
orld, or the Golden Age, as they call'd it;
mely, Equality of Seafons: throughout the

1, or a perpetual Equinox. We have alſo
en in all the AdjunQs or Concomitants of
ſc States, as they are mention'd in Scrip-
e. The Longevity of the Ante- diluvians, and
Declenſion of their Age by degrees, after
Flood: As allo; that wonderful Phænome-
n, the Rainbow); which appear'd to Noah
a Sign, that the Earth ſhonld never under-
a ſecond; Deluge. And we have ſhewn
beor. Book ii. ch. 5. J wherein the Force and
opriety of that Sign conſiſted, for confirming
vah's Faith in the Promiſe and in the Divine
SY ib bas 02:2. 5

Thus far we have explain d the paſt Phæno-
ena of the natural World: The reſt are Fu-
ities, which fill lie hid in their Cauſes ; and
e cannot properly prove a Theory from Ef-
Ks that are not yet in Being: But ſo far as
Icy are foretold in Scripture, both as to Sub-
ance and Circumſtance, in Proſecution of the
me Principles we have ante dated their Birth,
nd ſhew'd how they will come to paſs. We
ay therefore, I think, reaſonably conclude,
tat this Theory has perform'd its Task and
aſwer'd its Title; having given an Account
fall the general Changes of the natural World
v far as either Sacred Hiſtory looks backwards,
or


-
—— — — — —


— —


1 {
ä
1 y

;
|
$
.
:
N j
j

*

' G
4

7
N L
ö 1
L 4
11
: i *
: i
. 97
- it

x 14

|

2 +

111
1
1
+»

x

.
5 |
4
N *
7
is ,
S 1
—
1 X
: y -
.
*
1
. PA
* 75
T 1
* BH p
8 1
? =
=o

14
|
+ l
1 14

! „

N {
£ X \
\ 5
= 4 |
1 4 :
1
FR"
: ky
.
3M
 # l

©
\ 1
? er
1 [24
1

17

4

3x

* ki
1
1

13
8
:
1
1
1

, 't

1 1

C. i'\

.

LL
+
1
( i
*
of

* '

CE 7
\ of
| | a
0 *

9

'

2 R
111
FR

SI.
2
=
_
0 1
I

_—_ 7

©

=

K*

þ


: ——


„ ——
5 — * — 5


334 A REVIEW of


or Sacred Prophecy looks forwards ;: fo fir;
the one tells us what is paſt in Nature,

the other what is to come: And if all this)
nothing but an Appearance of Truth, ti,
kind of Fatality upon us to be deceiy'd,


O much for natural Evidence, from t
Cauſes or Effects: We now proceed
Scripture, which will make the greateſt pa
of this Review. The Sacred Baſis upon whid
the whole Theory ſtands, 1 is the Doctrine e
St. Peter, deliver'd in his' ſecond Epiſtle an
third Chapter, concerning the triple Order an
Succeſſion of the Heavens and the Earth; th;
comprehends the whole Extent of our Theor
which indeed is but a large Commentary uf
on St. Peter's Text. The Apoſtle ſets out
three-fold State of the Heavens and Earth, wit
ſome general Properties of each, taken fro:
their different Conſtitution and different Fatt
The Theory takes the ſame three- fold State
the Heavens and the Earth; and explains mo
particularly, wherein their different Conſtit
tion conſiſts; and how, under the Conduct «
Providence, their different Fate depends upo
it. Let us ſet down the Apoſtle's Words, wit
the Occaſion of them; and their plain Sen


according to the moſt caſy and Natural Ex
plication.


2 Pet. iii. ver. 3. Knowing this firſt, thi
there ſhall come in the laſt Days Scoffers, wal
ing after their own Luſts.


4. And ſaying, where is the Promiſe of li
| coming


The Theory of the E ar TH: 335


ning! For fmce the Fathers fell aſleep, all
bings continue as they were from the Begin-
no of the C reation. RE

5. For this they willingly are ignorant of,
at by the Mord of God, the Heavens were o
and the Earth conſiſting of Water and


Aer. 5
6. Whereby the World that then was, being
erflowed with Water, periſhed.
7. But the Heavens and the Earth that are
, by the ſame Word, are kept in Store, re-
woed unto Fire againſt the Day of Judgment,
nd Perdition wad Men.
10. The Day of the Lord will come as a Thief
the Night, in which the Heavens ſhall paſs
vay with a great N. of and the Elements
ball melt with fervent Heat; the Earth alſo
the Works that are therein ſhall be burnt up.
13. Nevertheleſs we, according to his Pro-
iſe, look for new Heavens and a new Earth,
wherern dwelleth Righteouſneſs.
This is the whole Diſcourſe ſo far as relates
o our Subject: St. Peter, you ſee, had met with
ome that ſcoff at the future Deſtruction ofthe
World, and the coming of our Saviour ; and
ey were Men, it ſeems, that pretended to Phi-
lolophy and Argument; and they uſe this Argu-
ment for their Opinion, Seeing there has been
w Change in Nature, or in the World, from the
Beginning to this Time, why ſhould we think
there will be any Change for the future?
The Apoſtle anſwers to this, that they wil-
ingly forget, or arc ignorant, that there were
5 Heavens


36 REVIEW of


Heavens of old, and an Earth, fo. and ſo conf
tuted ; conſiſting of Water and by, Water; b
reaſon whereof that World, or thoſe Heaye:
and that Earth, periſh'd in a Deluge of Water
But, ſaith he, the Heavens and the Earth tha
are now, are of another Conſtitution, fitted ar
reſerved to another Fate; namely to periſh hy
Fire: And after theſe are periſii d, there willh
new Heavens and a new Earth, according i
God's Promiſe, _. |

This is an eaſy Paraphraſe, aad the plain an
genuine Senſe of the Apoltle's Diſcourſe; an
no Body, Ithink, would ever look after any e
ther Senſe, if this did not carty them out of thei
uſual Road, and point to Concluſions whic
they did not fancy. The Senſe, you ſee, hitsth
Objection directly, or the Cavil which thel
Scoffers made; and tells them, that they vainl
pretend that there hath been no change in t
World ſince the Beginning; for there was on
ſort of Heavens and Earth before the Flood, an
another Sort now, the firſt having been deſtro)
at the Deluge. So that the Apaſtle's Argumet
ſtands upon this Foundation, that there is a0
verſity betwixt the preſent Heavens and Eatti
and the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth ; tal
away that, and you take away all the Force
his Anſwer.
Then as to his new Heavens and 1
Earth after the Conflagration, they mult ©
material and natural, in the ſame Senſe an
Signification with the former Heavens WY


Earth; unleſs you will offer open * 5
1


The Theory of the EARTH. 337


e Text. So that this Triplicity of the Hea-
ns and the Earth, is the firſt, obvious, plain
nſe of the Apoſtle's Diſcourſe ; which every
e would readily accept, if it did not draw
er it a long Train of Conſequences, and lead
em into other Worlds than they ever thought
before, or are willing to enter upon now.
But we ſhall have Occaſion by and by, to
amine this Text more fully in all its Circum-
nces : Give me leave in the mean time to
ſerve, that St. Paul allo implies that triple
tation Which St. Peter expreſſes. St. Paul,
ay, in the viii Chapter to the Romans,
20, 21. tells us of a Creation that will be
lem d from Vanity, which are the new Hea-
ns and new Earth to come. A Creation in
jection to Vanity; which is the preſent State
the World; and a Creation that was ſub—
ca to Vanity, in hopes of being reſtored,
ich was the firſt Paradiſiacal Creation: And
ele are the three States of the natural World,
nich make the Subject of our Theory.

To theſe two Places of St. Peter and St.
au, ] might add that third in St. John,
ncerning the new Heavens and new Earth,
ith that diſtinguiſhing Character, that the
th was Without a Sea: As this diſtinguiſh—
lit from the preſent Earth, ſo, being a Ne-
#ut:on or Reſtauration, as we noted before,
muſt be the ſame with ſome former Earth;
d conſequently it implies, that there was
other precedent State of the natural World,
d which this is a Reſtitution, Theſe three
=. Places


338 A REVIEW of


Places I alledge, as comprehending and con
firming the Theory in its full Extent ; But y
do not ſuppoſe them all of the ſame Force
Clearneſs ; St. Peter leads the Way, and gin
Light and Strength tothe other two: When
Point is prov'd by one clear Text, we allo
others, as Auxiliaries, that are not of the (an
Clcarneſs; but being open'd, receive Lig
from the primary Text, and reflect it uponti
Argument. de
So much for the Theory in general:
will now take one or two principal Heads
it, which virtually contain all the rc, ar
examine them more ſtrictly and particularl
in reference to their Agreement with Script
The two Heads we pitch upon, ſhall be o
Explication of the Deluge, and our Expl
tion of the new Heavens and new Eat
We told you before, theſe two were 3s tl
Hinges, upon which all the Theory move
and which hold the Parts of it. in firm Unit
one with another. As to the Deluge,
have explain'd that aright, by the Diſrupti
of the great Abyſs, and the Diſſolution ot tl
Earth that cover'd it, all the reſt follows
ſuch a Chain of Conſequences as cannot |
broken. Wherefore, in order to the Proof
that Explication, and of all that depends upC
it, I will make bold to lay down this Propo
tion, That our Hypotheſis concerning the u
verſal Deluge, is not only more agreeable
< Reaſon and Philoſophy, than any other gel p,
pos'd to the World, but is alſo more agreed


The Theory of the EAR TH. 339


tripture : Namely, to ſuch Places of Scrip-
e as reflect upon the Deluge, the Abyſs,
the Form of the firſt Earth : And parti-
larly to the Hiſtory of Noah's Flood, as re-
4d by Moſes. If I can make this good,
vill, doubtleſs, give Satisfaction to all that
free and intelligent; and I deſire their
tience, if I proceed ſlowly and by ſeveral
ps. We will divide our Task into Parts,
dexamine them ſeparately ; firſt, by Scrip-
ein general, and then by Moſes his Hiſtory
| Deſcription of the Flood. |
Our Hypotheſis of the Deluge conſiſts. of
ee principal Heads, or differs remarkably
three Things from the common Explication.
ſt in that we ſuppoſe the ante-diluvian
th to have been of another Form and Con-
ution from the preſent Earth; with the
is placed under it. | 1
decondly, In that we ſuppoſe the Deluge
have been made, not by any Inundation of
dea, or overflowing of Fountains and Ri-
s; nor (principally) by an Exceſs of Rains;
t by a real Diſſolution of the exteriour Earth,
(Diſruption of the Abyſs which it cover'd:
eſe are the two principal Points; to which
ly be added, as a Corollary,

Thirdly, That the Deluge was not in the
ure of a ſtanding Pool; the Waters lying
er) where level, of an equal Depth, and
th an uniform Surface; but was made by
flactuation and Commotion of the Abyſs
on the Diſruption : Which Commotion be-
Z 2 ing


340 4 REVIEW of.


ing over, the Waters retired into their Ch;
nels, and let the dry Land appear. 10
Theſe are the moſt material and fundame
tal Parts of our Hypotheſis; and theſe be bh
prov'd conſonant to Scripture, there can N
no doubt of the reſt.
We begin with the firſt: That the a
diluvian Earth was of another Form and C
ſtitution from the preſent Earth, with | 5
Abyſs placed under it: This is confirm
Scripture, both by ſuch Places as aſſert al
verſity in general; and by other Places
intimate to us, wherein that Diverſity
ſiſted, and what was the Form of the
Eatth. That Diſcourſe of St. Peter's, y
we have ſct before. you concerning the p
preſent and future Heavens and Earth,
full a Proof of this Diverſity in general,
you mult either allow it, or make the Apoll
Argumentation of no Effect: He ſpeaks pl:
ly of the natural World, The Heavens
the Earth; and he makes a plain Diſtindi
or rather Oppoſition, betwixt thoſe before!
after the Flood. So that the leaſt we cane
clude from his Words, is a Diverſity bety
them; in anſwer to that Identity or Iml
tability of Nature, which the Scoffers prete
ed to have been ever ſince the Beginning.
But tho' the Apoſtle, to me, ſpeaks pla
of the natural World, and diſtinguiſhes |
which was before the Flood, from the preſe
yet there are ſome that will allow neithel
theſe to be contain'd in St. Peter's Wo


The Theory of the EARTH. 341


by that means would make this whole Diſ-
rc of little or no Effect, as to our Purpoſe:
4 ſeeing we, on the contrary, have made
echief Scripture-Baſis of the whole Theory
the Earth, we are oblig d to free it from
e falſe Gloſſes or Miſ-interpretations, that
en the Force of its Teſtimony, or make
holly ineffectual. : |
heſe Interpreters ſay, that St. Peter meant
more than to mind theſe Scoffers, that the
old was once deſtroy'd by a Deluge of Wa-
meaning the Animate World, Mankind
living Creatures: And that it ſhall be de-
red again by another Element, namely, by
. So as there is no Oppoſition or Diverſity
wixt the two natural Worlds, taught or in-
ded by the Apoſtle; but only in reference to
r different Fate or Manner of periſhing, and
tof their different Nature or Conſtitution.
Here are two main Points, you ſee, wherein
Interpretations of this Diſcourſe of the A-
lle's differ, Firſt, in that they make the A-
e (in that ſixth verſe) to underſtand only
World Animate, or Men in brute Crea-
s That theſe were indeed deſtroy'd, but
t the natural World, or the Form and Con-
tion of the then Earth and Heavens. Se-
ly, that there is no Diverſity or Oppoſiti-
made by St. Peter betwixt the antient Hea-
is and Earth, and the preſcnt, as to their
m and Conſtitution. We pretend that theſe
t Miſapprehenſions, or Miſ-repreſentations
ne Senſe of the Apoſtle in both reſpects, and
Z 3 | offer


342 A REVIEW of
offer theſe Reaſons to prove them to he

For the firſt Point; That the Apoſtle ſpe
here of the natural World, particularly in
6th verſe; and that it periſhed, as well 81
animate, theſe Conſiderations ſeem to pry

Firſt, becauſe the Argument or Ground the
Scoffers went upon, was taken from the n
ral World, its Conſtancy and Permanenq
the ſame State from the Beginning; thereſe
if the Apoſtle anſwers ad idem, and takes
their Argument, he muſt underſtand the fu
natural World, and ſhew that it hath bet
chang'd, or hath periſh'd.

You will ſay, i 1 may be, the Apoſtle dothr
deny, nor take away the Ground they went
on, but denies the Conſequence they m
from it; that therefore there would be no Chu
becauſe there had been none. No, neither de
he do this, if by the World in the 6th vetſe,
underſtands Mankind only ; for their Grou
Was this, There hath been no Change i |

natural World ; their Conſequence this, The
fore there will be none, nor any Conflagratic
Now thc Apoſtle's Anſwer according to 1
is this, Jou forget that Mankind hath been
ſtroyd in a Deluge. And what then? Whi
this to the natural World, whereof they we
ſpcaking? This takes away neither Antecede
nor Conſequent, neither Ground nor Inferc

nor any way toucheth their Argument, wil
proceeded from the natural World, to the!
tural World. Thereforelyou muſt either ſupp


that the Apoſtle takes away their Ground,
he takes away nothing. Second


De Theory of the EARTH. 343


Secondly, What is it that the Apoſtle tells
ſe Scoffers they were ignorant of > That
re was a Deluge that deſtroy'd Mankind?
ey could not be ignorant of that, nor pre-
ad to be ſo: It was therefore the Conſtitu-
n of thoſe old Heavens and Earth, and the
ange or Deſtruction of them at the Deluge,
t they were ignorant of, or did not attend
and of this the Apoſtle minds them. Theſe
ffers appear to have been Fews by the
aſs they uſe, Since the Fathers fell aſleep,
ich in both Parts of it is a Fudaical Ex-
ſion ; and does St. Peter tell the Jews
at had Moſes read to them every Sabbath,
at they were ignorant that Mankind was once
red with a Deluge in the Days of Noah?
could they pretend to be ignorant of that
thout making themſelves ridiculous both to
v5 and Chriſtians Xx Beſides, theſe do
it ſeem to have been of the Vulgar amongſt
em, for they bring a Philoſophical Argu-
ent for their Opinion; and alſo in their
y Argument they refer to the Hiſtory of
Wc Old Teſtament, in ſaying, Since the Fa-
bers fell aſleep, amongſt which Fathers, Noah
a; one of the moſt remarkable.


*


There was a Se& amongſt the Fews that held this Perpetuity
| Immutability of Nature; and Maimonides himſelf was of this
mciple, and gives the ſame Reaſon for it with the Scoffers
e in the Text, Quod mundus retinet & ſequitur Conſuetundinem
n. And as to thoſe of the Fews that were Ariſtoteleans, it was
) ſuitable to their Principles to hold the Incorruptibility of
* World, as their Maſter did. Vid. Med. in loc.


| 2 4 | Thirdly,


Thirdly, The Deſi ign of the Apoſtle ; ist
prove them, or to diſpoſe them to the Bel
of the Conflagration, or future Deſtrugion
the World; which I ſuppoſe you will not
ny to be a Deſtruction of the natural Wor
therefore to prove or perſuade this, he my
ule an Argument taken from a precedent
ſiruction of the natural World; for to g
an Inſtance of the pcriſhing of Mankind on
would not reach home to his Purpoſe, 4
you are to obicrve here, that the *.
does not procecd againſt them barely by 4
thority; for what would that have boote
If theſe Scoffers would have ſubmitted 19 4
thority, they had already the Authority ot
Prophets and Apoſtles in this Point; but!
deals with them at their own Weapon, :
oppoſes Reaſons to Reaſons; What hi
been done may be done, and if the natu
World hath been once deſtroyed, tis not har
nor unreaſonable to ſuppoſe thoſe Proph
eies to be true, that ſay, it ſhall be deſtroy
again,

 Fowthly, Unleſs we underſtand here t
natural World, we make the Apoſtle bo
redundant in his Diſcourſe, and alſo very 0
{curc in an eaſy Argument: If his Deſign v
only to tell them that Mankind was once «
firoy'd in a Deluge, what's that to the H
vens and the Earth? The 5th verſe would!
ſuperfluous; which yet he ſeems to make t
Foundation of his Diſcourſe. He might h
told them how Mankind had periſhed befot


wit


The Theory of the Earth. 345
ch a Deluge, and aggravated that Deſtrution
much as he pleas'd, without telling them
the Heavens and the Earth were conſti-
ted then; what was that to the Purpoſe, if
had no Dependence or Connettion with
e other? In the precedent Chapter, ver. 5.
hen he ſpeaks only of the Floods deſtroying
ankind, he mentions nothing of the Heavens
the Earth; and if you make him to intend no
ore here, what he ſays more is ſuperfluous.
[alſo add, that you make the Apoſtle very
blcure and operoſe in a very eaſy Argument:
low caly had it been for him, without this Ap-
wats, to have told them, as he did before,
at God brought a Flood upon the World of
ic ungodly g and not given us ſo much Dith-
uty to underſtand his Senſe, or ſuch a Suſpici-
nand Appearance, thathe intended ſomething
fore ? For that there is at leaſt a great Appear-
nce and Tendency to a farther Senſe, I think
one can deny; and St. Auſtin, Didymus Alex.
bede, as we ſhall ſee hercafter, underſtood it
Jlainly of the natural World; alſo modern Ex-
vlitors and Criticks, as Cajetan, Eſtins, Dru-
us, Heinſius, have extended it to the natural
Vorld, more or leſs, tho they had no Theory
omillead them, nor ſo much as an Hypotheſis
ſupport them; but attended only to the Te-
nor of the Apoſtle's Diſcourſe, which conſtrain-
ed them to that Senſe, in whole or in Part.
Fifthly, The Oppoſition carries it upon the
natural World: The Oppoſition lies betwixt
IC of E e 7, VI, and g voy Be¹ 2 5
I | the


— -


*


346 A REVIEW of


the Heavens that were of old, and the Earth
and the preſent Heavens and Earth, or they;
natural Worlds: And if they will not allo
them to be oppos d in their Natures ( whic
yet we ſhall prove by and by) at leaſt they mu
be oppos d in their Fate; and as this is to po
riſh by Fire, ſo that periſhed by Water; an
if it periſh'd by Water, it periſh'd ; which
all we contend for at preſent.

Laſtly, If we would be as eaſily govern'dii
the Expoſition of this Place, as we are ot othe
Places of Scripture, it would be enough to ſus
geſt, that in Reaſon and Fairneſs of Interpre
tation, the ſame World is deſtroy'd in the et
verſe, that was deſcrib'd in the foregoing verſe
but itſis the natural World that isdeſcrib'd the
the Heavens and the Earth, ſo and fo conf
tuted ; and therefore in Fairneſs of Interpre
tation they ought to be underſtood here; thi
World being the Subject that went immediate
ly before, and there being nothing in the Wold
that reſtrains them to the animate World «
to Mankind. In the iid ch. ver. 5. the Apoſtl
does reſtrain the Word ιααμο . by addin
_ eoeſ3ay, the World of the ungodly ; but he
tis not only illimited, but, according to ti
Context, both preceding and following, tot
extended to the natural World. I ſay by the fo
lowing Context too; for ſo it anſwers to th
World that is to periſh by Fire; which vi
reach the Frame of Nature as well as Mankind

For a Concluſion of this firſt Point, I will ſe
down St. Aufin's Judgment in this Caſe ; wit


it


The Theory of the EARTH. | 347


ſcycral Parts of his Works hath interpreted
s Place of St. Peter, of the natural World.
to the Heavens, he hath theſe Words in his
poſition upon Geneſis, Has etiam abrios
los qirondam periiſſe Diluvio, in quadam ea-
n, que Canonica appellantur, Foutoli legimus.
read in one of the Epiſtles called Canonical,
caning this of St. Peter's, that the aerial
eavens periſhed in the Deluge. And he con-
ems himſelf there to let you know that it was
jot the ſtarry Heavens that were deſtroy'd ; the
aters could not reach ſo high, but the Re-
ions of our Air. Then afterwards he hath
eſe Words, Facilias eos (coelos) ſecundum il.
us Epiſtolæ authoritatem credimus periiſſe, &
jos, ſicut ibi ſcribitur, repoſitos. We do more
gh believe, accor ding to the Authority 7 that
piſtle, thoſe Heavens to have periſhed; and
bers, as it is there written, ſubſtituted in their
Place. In like manner, and to the ſame Senſe,
e hath theſe Words upon Pſal. ci. Aerii uti-
que cli perierunt ut propinqui Terris, ſecundum
uod dicuntur volucres cel; ; ſunt autem & cœli
elorum, ſuperiores in Firmamento, ſed utrum
C iþſe perituri ſint igne, an hi ſoli, qui etiam
lll vio perierunt, diſceptatio eſt aliquanto ſcru-
har inter daffos. And in his Book de Civ.
Dei, he hath ſeveral Paſſages to the ſame pur-
pole, Quemadmodum in Apoſtolica ill Epi-
ola a toto Pars accipitur, quod diluvis periiſſe
uttus eſt mundus, quamvis ſola ejus cum ſuis
(1s pars ima perierit. Theſe being to the
lame Effect with the firſt Citation, I need not


make


348 A REVIEW of


make them Engliſh ; and this laſt Place ref
to the Earth as well as the Heavens, as ſe l *!
ral other Places in St. Auſtin do, whereof y
ſhall give you an Account, when we comet
ſhew his Judgment concerning the ſecon cer
Point, the diverſity of the ante-diluvian ml"
poſt-diluvian World: This being but a Fo"
taſte of his good Will and Inclinations M
wards this Doctrine. ine
Theſe Conſiderations alledg'd, ſo far as c e
judge, are full and unanſwerable Proofs, th
this Diſcourſe of the Apoſtic's comprehend
and refers to the natural World; and conſe
quently they warrant our Interpretation in th
Particular, and deſtroy the contrary. W« ha
but one Step more to make good, That th:
was a Change made in this natural Hor d.
the Deluge, according to the Apoſtle; aut
this is to confute the ſecond Part of their In
terpretation, which ſuppoſeth that St. Pet
makes. no Diſtintion or Oppoſition betwitl
the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth, and th
preſent Heavens and Earth, in that reſpett,
This ſecond Difference bet wixt us, methinł

is ſtill harſher than the firſt ; and contrary te
the very Form, as well as to the Matter of thi
Apoſtle's Diſcourſe. For there is a plain Anti
theſis, or Oppoſition made betwixt the He!
vens and the Earth of old (ver. the 5th) and
the Heavens and the Earth that are now (ver
the 7th) e 3:4 Ne 5 , and el. ge
yes % 1 , and the adverſitive Particle, 9s but,
you ſee marks the Oppoſition ; ſo that 1 1
u


0
J
[
[


The Theory of the EARTH. 349


| and plain according to Grammar and Lo-

k. And that the Parts or Members of this

ppoſition differ in Nature from one another,

certain from this, becauſe otherwiſe the A-
otle's Argument or Diſcourſe is of no Effect,
\ncludes nothing to the Purpoſe; he makes

> Anſwer to the Objection, nor proves any
ing againſt the Scoffers, unleſs you admit that
verſity. For they ſaid, All Things had been
e ſame from the Beginning in the natural

571d; and unleſs he ſay, as he manifeſtly does,
at there hath been a Change in Nature, and
zt the Heavens and Earth that are now,

e different from the ancient Heavens and

arth which periſh'd at the Flood, he ſays no-
hing to deſtroy their Argument, nor to con-

m the prophetical Doctrine of the future
Deſtruction of the natural World.

This, I think, would be enough to ſatisfy any
lear and free Mind concerning the Meaning
ff the Apoſtle; but becauſe I defire to give
s full a Light to this Place as I can, and to
ut the Senic of it out of Controverſy, if poſ-
ble, for the future, I will make ſome farther
kemarks to confirm this Expoſition.

And we may obſcrve that ſeveral of thoſe
Reaſons which we have given to prove, that
the natural World is underſtood by St. Peter,
arc double Reaſons; and do allo prove the
other Point in Queſtion, a Diverſity betwixt
the two natural Iorlds, the ante-diluvian and
the preſent. As for Inſtance, unleſs you ad-
mit this Diverſity betwixt the two natural

Worlds,


350 A REVIEW of


Worlds, you make the 5 verſe in this Ch, W's
ter ſuperfluous and uſeleſs; and you muſt (6,8 of
poſe the Apoſtle to make an Inference he, ©”
without Premiſes. In the vik verſe he mak
an Inference, x J/hereby the World, that the Mt ac
was periſh'd in a Deluge; What docs r e
whereby relate to? by Reaſon of what? Sue
of the particular Conſtitution of the Heaven,
and the Earth immediately before deſcrihd
Neither would it have ſignified any thing t
the Scoffers, for the Apoſtle to have to
them how the ante- diluvian Heavens ant
Earth were conſtituted, if they were conſtitute
juſt in the ſame Manner as the preſent, 4

Beſides, what is it, as I ask'd before, tui
the Apoſtle tells theſe Scoffers they were ig
norant of? does he not tay formally and expreſl
(ver. 5.) that they were ignorant that the Hea
vens and the Earth were conſtituted fo and ſo
before the Flood ? But if they were conſtituted
as theſe preſent Heavens and Earth are, they
were not ignorant of their Conſtitution ? Not
did pretend to be ignorant, for their ov!
( miſtaken) Argument ſuppoſeth it.

But before we proceed any farther, give
me leave to note the Impropriety of our Tran
flation, in the 5 verſe, or latter Part of it


EZ Cor S % 0: vudarwy (vel 9; Ja a/ S.) Gu


* c ay, per aue, Vuloat, uamobrem, Beza. Qua de cauſa:
Grot. Nemo tad — d, per quas 1
aquas. Hoc enim argumentationem Apoſtolicam tolleret, ſwppoverts
que illuſores illos ignoraſſe quod olim fuerit Diluvium; uod [#p-
pom non poſſe ſupra oſtendimus. This

| U


The Theory of the E an Th. 351
is we tranſlate ſcanding in the Water, and
of the Water, which is done manifeſtly
compliance with the preſent Form of the
th, and the Notions of the Tranſlators, and
t according to the natural Force and Senſe
the Greek Words. If one met with this
ntence * in a Greek Author, who would
er render it ſtanding in the Water, and out
the Water? Nor do I know any Latin
anſlator that hath ventur'd to render them
that Senſe, nor any Latin Father ; St. Au-
and St. Ferome I'm ſure do not, but Con-
ens ex aqua, or de aqua, & per aquam;
that later Phraſe alſo ovt5aver 9; Ua),
xs not with ſo good Propriety ſignifiy 7
nd in the Water, as to conſiſt or ſubſiſt by
ater, or by the Help of Water, Tanquam
cauſam ſuſtinentem, as St. Auſtin and Je-
render it. Neither does that Inſtance they
ie from 1 Pet. iii. 20. prove any thing to
e contrary, for the Ark was ſuſtain'd by the
ters, and the Engliſh does render it accord-
ply. | |

The Tranſlation being thus reQified, you


This Phraſe or manner of Speech ows5ave: tx vel & is
It uſual in Greek Authors; and upon a like Subject, Plato
th, r dn „e u be ix mugs dd , Higo;, Vis, but
that ſhould tranſlate Plato, the World ſtands out of Fire, Ma-
„ Cc. would be thought neither Grecian, nor Philoſopher.
te fame Phraſe is us'd in reciting Heraclitus his Opinion,
TTY ix wuges cus ec, 1 815 18 16 eve AU. And alſo in
bales his which is ſtill nearer to the Subject. t Ted b,
„ cνjL eu mera, Which Cicero renders, ex aqua, dixit, con-
omnia. So that it is eaſy to know the true Importance
this Phraſe, and how it is ill render'd in the Engliſh, ſtand-
8 Out of the Water.


3 | ſee


—


352 A REVIEW of
ſee the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth cot
ſiſted of Water, and by Water; which mk
Way for a ſecond Obſervation to prove g
Senſe of the Text; for if you admit no Þ
verſity betwixt thoſe Heavens and Earth, x
the preſent, ſhew us pray, how the preſe
Heavens and Earth conſiſt of Water, and!
Water? What watry Conſtitution have the
The Apoſtle implics rather, that the new He
vens and Earth have a fiery Conſtitutio
We have now Meteors of all Sorts in the A
Winds,' Hail, Snow, Lightning, Thunder, a |
all Things engender'd of fiery Exhalations,
well as we have Rain; but according to «
Theory, Book ii. c. 5. the ante-diluvian Hg
vens, of all theſe Meteors had none but De
and Vapours, or watry Mcteors only ; andthe
fore might very aptly be ſaid by the Apol
to be conſtituted of Water, or to have a wat
ov52o4. Then the Earth was ſaid to conjijt
Water, becauſe it was built upon it, and at f
was ſuſtain'd by it. And when ſuch a Key
this is put into our Hands, that docs ſo cal
unlock this hard Paſſage, and makes it
telligible, according to the juſt Force of
Words, why ſhould we pertinaciouſly adi
to an * Interpretation, that neither agr


with the Words, nor makes any Senſe ti
is conſiderable,


Whether you refer the Words i dur, xi di dur.
rately to the Heayens and the Earth, or both to the Earth
both to both, it will make no great Difference as to out le
pretation, Wo

Third


The Theory of the EARTH. 353
Thirdly, If the Apoſtle had made the ante-di-
wian Heavens and Earth the ſame with the
eſent, his Apodoſis in the 7th verſe, ſhould
jt have been 1 BY yuy Se De, but X 0 oO X, 1
rehn aui. elo, &c. I fay, it would not
ave been by way of Antitheſis, but of Iden-
or Continuation ; And rhe ſame Heavens
Earth are kept in ſtore reſeru'd unto Fire,
c. Accordingly we ſee the Apoſtle ſpeaks
us, as to the Logos, or the Word of God,
7. TW Prue oye, by the ſame Word of God 3
here the Thing is the ſame, he expreſſeth
45 the ſame ; and if it had been the ſame
avens and Earth, as well as the ſame Word
God, why ſhould he uſe a Mark of Op-
ſition for the one, and of Identity for the
her? To this I do not fee what can be fair-
624 REES CF
foutthly, The ante-diluvian Heavens and
uth were different from the preſent, becauſe,
the Apoſtle intimates, they were ſuch, and ſo
nſtituted, as made them obnoxious to a De-
ge; Whereas ours are of ſuch a Form, as makes
Mm incapable of a Deluge, and obnoxious to
* the juſt contrary Fate, Theor,
WR i. c. 2.

If you ſay there was nothing of natural Ten-
ncy or Diſpoſition in either World to their
ſpectiye Fate, but the firſt might as well have
iſhed by Fire as Water, and this by Water
by Fire, you unhinge all Nature and natural
Iovidence in that Method, and contradict
Kt main Scope of the Apoſtle in this Diſ-


rc A a courſe.


354 A REVIEW of
courſe. His firſt Scope is to aſſert, and mi
them of that Diverſity there was betwixt et
antient Heavens andEarth, and theipreſent zu
from that, to prove againſt thoſe Scoffers, t
there had been a Change and Revolution
Nature: And his ſecond Scope ſeems to!
this, to ſhew tha: Diverſity to be ſuch, as,
der the divine Conduct, leads to a different Fat
and cxpos'd that World to a Deluge ; for wh
he had deſcrib'd the Conſtitution of the þ
Heavens and Earth, he ſubjoins, di :
2:60 H LOT apc big UT CAETO. Quia 14
erat, ſaith Grotius, qualem diximns, conſt
tio & Terre ew Cœli. WHEREBTthet
Worldperiſh'd in a Flood of Water. This wh
by notes ſome kind of caſual Dependance,
muſt relate to ſome Means or Conditions
cedent. It cannot relate to Logos, or the WR
of God, Grammar will not permit that; the
fore it muſt relate to the State of the ante:
luvian Heavens and Earth immediately p
mis'd: And to what purpoſe indeed ſhould
premiſe the Deſcription of thoſe Heayens:
Earth, if it was not to lay a Ground fort
Inference ?

Having given theſe Reaſons for the Net
ſity of this interpretation: in the laſt pl
let us conſider St. Auſtin's Judgment
his Senſe upon this Place, as to the Point
Queſtion ; as alſo the Reflections that 10
other of the Ancients have made upon |
Doctrine of St. Peter's, Diaymus Ale
drinus, who was for ſome time St. Jer


The Theory of the EARTH: 355


iter, made ſuch a ſevere Reflection upon
that he ſaid this Epiſtle was corrupted, and
ould not be admitted into the Canon, becauſe
taught the Doctrine of a triple or triform
ld in this third Chapter; as you may ſee in
is Enarr.in Epiſt. Canonicas. Now this three-
d World is firſt that in the 64 verſe, The
Vorld that then was. In the 7th verſe,
e Heavens and the Earth that are now. And
the 136% verſe, We expect new Heavens and
ww Earth, according to his Promiſe. This
ems to be a fair Account that St, Peter taught
e Doctrine of a triple World; and I quote
Teſtimony, to ſhew what St. Peter's Words
naturally import, even in the Judgment of
ethat was not of his Mind; anda Man is
tproncto make an Expoſition againſt his own
pinion, unleſs be thinks the Words very
tnant and expreſs. _

but St. Auſtin owns the Authority of this E-
le, and of this Doctrine, as deriv'd from it,
ing notice of this Text of St. Peter's in ſeve-

Parts of his Works. We have noted three

our Places already to this purpoſe, and we

further take notice of ſeveral Paſlages in

Treatiſe, 4e Civ. Dei, which confirm our

poſition. In his xxthy Book, ch. xxiv. he Diſ-

es againſt Porphyry, who had the ſame Prin-

les with theſe Eternaliſts in the Text; or, if I
5 ſo call themIncorruptarians; and thought

t World never had, nor ever would undergo

Change, eſpecially, as to the Heavens. St.

fm could not urge Porphyry with the Au-

Aa 2 thority


— —


356 A REVIEW of

thority of St. Peter, for he had no Venerati

for the Chriſtian Oracles, but it ſeems he ha
ſome for the Fewiſh; and arguing againſt hi
upon that Text in the Pſalms, Cœli peribunt 4
ſhews, upon Occaſion, how he underſtand; .
Peter's Deſtruction of the old World, Legi
Cælum & Terra tranſibunt, Mundus tranſi, i
puto quod præterit, tranſit, tranſibunt aliquam
mitius ditta ſunt quam peribunt. In Epi
quoque Petri Apoſtoli, ubi aqua inundatus,;

tum erat, periiſſe dictus eſt Mundus, ſatis fi,
rum eſt que pars mundi a toto ſignificata ef, Wl.
quateniis periiſſe aittaſit, & qui Cel repoſii .
ni reſervandi. This he explains more fully.
terwards by ſubjoining a Caution (which

cited before) that we muſt not under


this Paſſion of St. Peter's concerning the


ſtruction of the ante-diluvian World, to .
in the whole Univerſe, and the higheſt
vens, but only the acrial Heavens, and
ſublunary World, In Apoſtolica 11a Epi

a toto pars accipitur, quod Diluvio periſſe

tus eſt Mundus quamuis fola ejus, cum
Celis pars ima perierit. In that Apo ga
Epiſtle, a Jo is ſignified by the whole, 1

the World is ſaid to have periſhed in ibe ir
luge, although the lower part of it only, if
the Heavens belonging to it, periſhed ; tl

the Earth with the Regions of the Air th
long to it. And conſonant to this, in hi
poſition of that ci. Pſalm, upon thoſe WIR,
The Heavens are the Work of thy Hands;
hall periſb, but thou ſhalt endure. This pe


—,


The Theory of the EARTH.


jg of the Heavens, he ſays, St. Peter tells us,
ath been once done already, namely, at
je Deluge: Aperte dixit hoc Apoſtolus
ru, Cel: erant olim G Terra, de aquà
per aquam conſtituti, Dei verbo; per
ud qui factus eft mundus, aqua inundatus
ert; Terra autem & Cali qui nunc ſunt,
; reſervantur. Fam ergo dixit periiſſe Cœlos
Diluvium. TI |
Theſe Places ſhew us, that St. Auſtin under-

od St. Peter's Diſcourſe to aim at the natural
orld, and his periit or periiſſè (ver. 6.) to be of
e ſame Force as peribunt in the P/alms, when
ſaid the Heavens ſhall periſh; and conſe-
ently that the Heavens and the Earth, in this
ther's Opinion, were as really changed and
insformed at the Time of the Flood, as they
ll be at the Conflagration. But we muſt
t expect from St. Auſtin, or any of the An-
nts, a diſtin Account of this Apoſtolical
Kine, as if they knew and acknowledg'd
Theory of the firſt World; that does not
all appear, but what they ſaid was either
m broken Tradition, or extorted from them
the Force of the Apoſtle's Words and their
n dincerity. |

There are yet other Places in St, Auſtin
fthy our Conſideration upon this Subject;
ecially his Expoſition of this iii Chapter of
Peter, as we find it in the ſame Treatiſe,
Cv. Dez, cap. xviii. There he compares
in, the Deſtruction of that World at the

A a 3 Deluge


Deluge, with that which ſhall be at the Con
flagration, and ſuppoſeth both the: Heayer
and Earth to have periſh'd !. Apoffolus roy


memorans factum ante Diluuium, videtur af


monuiſſe quodammodo.:quatenus..im fine hujy
ſeculi mundum iſtum periturum eſſe credem
Nam & illo tempore 2 dixit, qui tu
erat, mundum ; nec ſolum orbem terre, veri
etiam cœlos. Then giving his. uſual Caui
on, that the Stars and ſtarry Heavens ſhoul
not be comprehended. in that mundane De
ſtruction, he goes on, Atque hoc modo (pen
totus acr) cum. terra perierat ; cujus Terr
utique prior facies (nempe ante-diluvian;
fuerat atleta Diluvio. Qui autem nunc ſu
cœli & terra eodem verbo repoſiti ſunit ign n
ſervanai ; Proinde qui Celi & que Terra.
eſt, qui mundus, pro eo mundo qui Diluvio ji
riit, ex eadem aqua repoſitus eſt, ipſe igni u
Viſſimo reſervatur. Here you ſee St. Auſt:
Senſe upon the whole Matter; which is thi
that the natural World, the Earth with
Heavens about it, was deſtroyed and chang
at the Deluge into the preſent Heavens a
Earth; which ſhall again, in like Manner,
deſtroyed and chang'd by the laſt: Fire. A
cordingly, in another place, to add no mo!
he ſaith, the Figure of the. (ſublunary) Wor
ſhall be changed at the Conflagration, 3
was chang d at the Deluge: Tunc figura bi
| mundi, en, vt 5
Thus you. ſee; : we:have St. Auſtin on 0
ſide, in both Parts of our Interpretation; ib


St. Peter


The Theory of the EARTH. 359


Peters Diſcourſe is to be referrd to the
tural inanimate World, and that the preſent
tural World is diſtinct and different from that
ich was before the Deluge. And St. Auſtin
ving applied this expreſly to St. Peter's Doc-
ne by way of Commentary, it will free us
pm any Crime or Affectation of Singularity
the Expoſition we have given of that Place.
Venerable Bede hath followed St. Auſtin's
otſteps in this Doctrine; for, interpreting
Peter's original World (a Kd
Pet. ii. 5. he refers both that and this
þap. iii. 6.) to the natural inanimate World,
hich he ſyppoſeth to have undergone a
hange at the Deluge. His Words are theſe,
n ipſe mundus eſt (nempe quoad matcriam)
uo nune humanum genus habitat, quem in-
witaverunt hi qui ante diluvium fuerunt, ſed
men rectè Originalis Mundus, quaſi alius di-
Ir; quia ſicut in conſequentibus hujus Epi-
le ſcriptum continetur, Ille tunc mundus
ud inundatus periit. Cœlis videlicet qui
int prius, id eſt, cunctis aeris hujus turbulenti
ulis, aquarum accreſcentiun altitudine con-
mptis, ac Terra in alteram faciem, exce-
libus aquis, immutata. Nam etſi montes
qu atque convalles ab initio facti creduntur,
m tamen tanti quanti nunc in orbe cernuntur
wuerſo, *Tis the ſame World (namely, as
the Matter and Subſtance of it) which
Mankind lives in now, and did live in before
be Flood, but yet that is truly called the
IRIGINAL WORLD, being as it were an.
Aa 4 other


3% A NR


other from the preſent. For it is ſaid in i
Sequel of this Epiſtle, that the Warld that ut
then, periſbed in the Deluge; namely, the 3
gions of the Air were conſumed by the Hei
and Exceſs of the Water; and by the ſame ij
ters the Earth was changed into another F
or Face. For although ſome Mountains 3
Valleys are thought to have been made fy
the Beginning, yet not ſuch great ones as y
we ſee throughout the whole Earth.
Lou ſee this Author does not only oyn

Change made at the Deluge, but offers a

farther Explication wherein that Change co
ſiſted, vg. That the Mountains and Inequ

lities of the Earth were made greater th
they were before the Flood; and ſo he mak

the Change, or the Difference bctwint t
two Worlds gradual, rather than ſpecifical,

I may ſo term it. But we cannot wonder

that, if he had no Principles to carry it f

ther, or to make any other Sort of Change

telligible to him. Bede [ De 6 dier. cre

alſo purſues the ſame Senſe and Notionin|

Interpretation of that Fountain, Gen. ii. 5. t

watered the Face of the Earth before the Flod


have recorded this Tradition concerning

Difference, gradual or ſpecifical, both in
ante-diluvian Heavens (G4. Ordin. Gen.
de Iride. Lyran. ibid. Hiſt. Scholaſt. c.!
Rav. Maurus & Gloſſ. Inter. Gen. ii. 5,
Alcuin. Queſt. in Gen. inter. 135.) and
the ante-diluvian Earth, as the ſame Authficy
with


%


The Theory of the EARTH. 361


neſs in other Places: As Hiſt. Schol. c. 34.
off. Ord. in Gen. vii. Alcuin. Inter. 118, &c.
Not to Inſtance thoſe that tell us the Proper-
jes of the ante-diluvian World under the
Name and Notion of Parad;ſe.
Thus much concerning this remarkable
lace in St. Peter, and the true Expoſition
of it ; Which I have the more largely in-
ited upon, becauſe I look upon this Place
s the chief Repoſitory of that great natural
jſtery, which in Scripture is communicated
0 us concerning the triple State or Revolu-
jon of the World. And of thoſe Men that
e ſo ſcrupulous to admit the Theory we
ye propos d, I would willingly know, whe-
er they believe the Apoſtle in what he fays
ncerning the ew Heavens and the new
arth to come? ver. 13. and if they do,
by they ſhould not believe him as much con-
ering the o Heavens and the old Earth
aſt? ver. 5, and 6. which he mentions as for-
mer. But if they believe neither paſt nor to
ome, in a natural Senſe, but an unchange-
dic State of Nature from the Creation to its
mihilation, I leave them then to their Fel-
.- Eternaliſts in the Text, and to the Cha-
Ker or Cenſure the Apoſtle: gives them,
a Tag 1046 aUTAY rich ufulas egeve he, Men
at go by their own private Humour and Paſ-
ons, and prefer that to all other Evidence.
They deſerve this Cenſure, I am ſure, if
Icy do not only disbelieve, but alſo ſcoff, Aon
this


ple, the preſent Temple, and the new Tem.


No, doubtleſs, but of three ſeveral Templt


362 A REVIEW of


this Prophetick and Apoſtolick Doctrine con-
cerning the Viciſſitudes of Nature and :
triple World. The Apoſtle in this Diſcoutſe
does formally diſtinguiſh three Worlds (fer
'tis well known that the Hebrews have nd
Word to ſignify the natural World, but uſ
that Periphraſis, the Heavens and the Eartl
and upon each of them engraves a Name ani
Title that bears a Note of Diſtinction in it
He calls them the o Heavens and Earti
the preſent Heavens and Earth, and the ne
Heavens and Earth. Tis true, theſe thre,
are one, as to Matter and Subſtance ; but the
muſt differ as to Form and Properties ; other
wiſe what is the Ground of this Diſtin8iot
and of theſe three different Appellations? Sup
poſe the Jews had expected Ezekzel's Temyll
for the third, and laſt, and moſt perfect; an
that in the Time of the ſecond Temple the
had ſpoke of them with this Diſtinction, «
under theſe different Names, the old Te


we expect; would any have underſtood tho
three of one and the ſame Temple; nee
demoliſh'd, never chang'd, never rebuilt; :
ways the ſame; both as to Materials and For


ſucceeding one another. And have we I
the ſame Reaſon to underſtand this Templec
the World, whereof St. Peter ſpeaks, to
three-fold in Succeſſion; ſeeing he does
plainly diſtinguiſh it into the o Heavens at


Earth, the preſent Heavens and Earth? an
. th


The Theory of the EARTH. 363


e new Heavens and Earth. And I do the
ore Willingly uſe this Compariſon of the
-mple, becauſe it hath been thought an Em-
-m of the outward World. :
[know we are naturally averſe to entertain
Thing that is inconſiſtent with the general
zme and Texture of our own Thoughts ;
it's to begin the World again; and we often
ect ſuch things without Examination. Nei-
wonder that the generality of Interpre-
beat down the Apoſtle's Words and Senſe
their own Notions; they had no other
zounds to go upon, and Men are not willing,
xecially in natural and comprehenſible things,
put ſuch a Meaning upon Scripture, as is un-
telligible to themſelves ; they rather ven-
re to offer a little Violence to the Words,
they may pitch the Senſe at ſuch a conve-
ent Height, as their Principles will reach to:
id therefore though ſome of our modern
terpreters, whom I mention'd before, have
en ſenſible of the natural Tendency of this
courſe of St. Peter's, and have much ado
bear off the Force of the Words, ſo as not
acknowledge that they import a real Diver-
betwixt the two Worlds ſpoken of; yet
ing no Principles to guide or ſupport them
following that Tract, they are forc'd to
Pp or divert another way. Tis like entring
to the Mouth of a Cave, w are not willing
venture farther than the Light goes : Nor
they much to blame for this, the Fault is
ly in thoſe Perſons that continue wilfully
in


364 A REVIEW of


in their Darkneſs: z and when they cannot oth,
wiſe reſiſt the Light, ſhut their Eyes againg;
or turn their Head another Way.—}But] ,
afraid I have ſtaid too long upon this Arg
ment; not for my own ſake, but to ſatisfy otlicy

You may pleaſe to remember that all tha
have ſaid hitherto, belongs only to the ft
Head: To prove a Diverſity in general betui
the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth, and t
preſent ; not expreſſing what their particy
Form was, And this general Diverſity m
be argued alſo by Obſervations taken fro
Moſes his Hiſtory of the World, before 4
after the Flood: From the Longevity of t
Ante-diluvians; the Rainbow appearing
ter the Deluge; and the breaking open
Abyſs capable to overflow the Earth, T
Heavens that had no Rain-bow, ind une
whoſe benign and ſteady Influence, Men li
ſeven, eight, nine hundred Years and
wards, [See Theor. Book ii. ch. 5. ] mult he
been of a different Aſpect and Confituti
from the preſent Heavens : And thatEarthti
had ſuch an Abyſs, that the Diſruption 0!
made an univerſal Deluge, muſt have been
another Form than the preſent Earth; and th
that will not admit a Diverſity in the t
Worlds, are bound to give us an intelligib
Account of theſe Phxnomena : How t
could poſſibly be in Heavens and Earth, |
the preſent? Or if they were there once,


they do not continue ſo ſtill, if Nature be t
lame! 7


it is


3.


The Theory of the EARTH, 363


We need ſay no more, as to the ante - dilu-
n Heavens; but as to the Earth, we muſt
w, according to the ſecond part of the firſt
cad, enquire, if that particular Form, which
e have aſſign d it before the Flood, be agree-
le to Scripture, You know how we have
ſctibed the Form and Situation of that Earth;
amely, that it was built over the Abyſs, as a
cular Orb, covering and incompaſſing the
aters round about, and founded, as it were,
on them. There are many Paſſages of Scrip-
e that favour this Deſcription; ſome more
preſly, others upon a due Explication. To
is purpoſe there are two expreſs Texts in the
Malms 3 as Pſal. xxiv. 1, 2. The Earth is the
rds, and the Fulneſs thereof; the habitable
old, and they that dwell therein. FOR he


—
s


know ſome would make this Place of no effect by ren-
ring the Hebrew Particle Y juxta, by or near to; ſo they
ould read it thus, he had founded the Earth by the Sea-ſide, and
abliſh'd it by the Floods. What is there wonderful in this,
at the Shores ſhould lie by the Sea-fide? Where could they
ſe? What Reaſon or Argument is this, why the Earth ſhould
the Lord's? The Earth is the Lord's, for he hath founded it near
e Seas, Where is the Conſequence of this? But if he founded it
jon the Seas, which could not be done by any other Hand but his,
ſhews both the Workman and the Maſter. And accordingly in
at other, Pſal. cxxxvi. 6. if you render it, He ſtretched out the
th near the Waters, How is that one of God's great Wonders,
it is there repreſented to be? Becauſe in ſome few Places this
micle is rendered otherwiſe, where the Senſe will bear it, muſt


aug no other Word that ſignifies above more frequently or deter-
Inately than this does, why muſt it ſignify otherwiſe in this Place?


ut does not ſuit to their own Notions, |
upon


u foundedzt upon the * Sea, and eſtabliſhed it


therefore render it ſo when we pleaſe, and where the Senſe will
dear it? This being the moſt uſual Signification of it, and there


en will wriggle any way to get from under the Force of a Text,


— jo — — — —äm4ämäü — —2 —[—ỹ— — hen
= Lan — — 5 — 2 a


— ao


366 A REVIEW of


upon the Floods. An Earth founded upon ti
Seas, andeſtabliſh'd upon the Waters, isnotth
Earth we have deſcrib'd ? The firſt Earth,;
it came from the Hands of its Maker? Why
can we now find in Nature ſuch an Earth, ast
Seas and the Water for its Foundation! Ne
ther is this Text without a ſecond, as a Fellg
Witneſs to confirm the ſame Truth; for!
Pſal. cxxxvi. ver. 4, 5, 6. We read to the ſa
Effect, in theſe Words, To him abo alone a5
great Monders; to him that by li iſdom made.
Heavens; to him that ſtretched out the Eart
above the Waters. We can hardly expreſth;
Form of the ante-diluvian Earth, in Wor
more determinate than theſe are : Let us ther
in the ſame Simplicity of Heart, follow.
Words of Scripture; ſecing this literal Senl
is not repugriant to Nature, but, on the c
trary, agreeable to it upon the ſtriQeſt Eu
mination, And we cannot, without ſom
Violence, turn the Words to any other Senſe
What tolerable Interpretation can theſe adm
of, if we do not allow the Earth once to ha
cncompaſs'd and over-ſpread the Face oft
Waters? To be founded upon the Waters,
be eftabhiſh'd upon the Waters, to be exten:
upon the Waters, what rational or ſatisfactor
Account can be given of theſe Phraſes and Ex
preſſions from any thing we find in the preſen
Situation of the Earth? Or how can they
verified concerning it? Conſult Interpretets
antient or modern, upon theſe two Places; ſe


if they anſwer your Expectation, or anſwerth
2 natura


The Theory of the E ar TH. 367


:rural Importance of the Words, unleſs they
knowledge another Form of the Earth, than
e preſent. Becauſe a Rock hangs its Noſe o-
er the Sea, muſt the Body of the Earth be ſaid
p be ſtretched over the Waters ? Or, becauſe
ere are Waters in ſome ſubterrancous Cavi-
eis the Earth therefore founded upon the Seas?
et ſuch lame Explications as theſe you will
et with ; and while we have no better Light,
e muſt content our ſelves with them; but
hen an Explication is offer'd, that anſwers the
topriety, Force and Extent of the Words, to
ect it, only becauſe it is not fitted to our
mer Opinions, or becauſe we did not firſt
ink of it, is to take an ill Method in ex-
unding Scripture. This Foundation or E/ta-
ment of the Earth upon the Seas, this Ex-
non of it above the Waters, relates plain-
to the Body, or whole Circuit ot the
uth, not to Parcels and Particles of it; as
pears from the Occaſion, and its being join'd
th the Heavens, the other Part of the
World. Beſides, David is ſpeaking of the
rigin of the World. and of the divine Power
nd Wiſdom in the Conſtitution and Situa-
on of our Earth; and theſe Attributes
0 not appear from the Holcs of the Earth,
id broken Rocks, which have rather the Face
a Ruin, than of Wiſdom ; but in that
onderful Libration and Expanſion of the
ſt Earth over the Face of the Waters, ſuſ-
ned by its own Proportions, and the Hand
| his Providence.


Theſe


36 A REVIEW of
Theſe two Places in the Pſalnis bein em.
duly conſiderd, we ſhall more eaſiy unde
ſtand a third Place, to the ſame effect,
the Proverbs ; delivered by W ISDO0 AP"!
concerning the Origin of the World, i
the Form of the firſt Earth, in theſe Woran
Chapter viii. 27. When he prepared the HR”
vens I was there, when HE SET an
or Sphere upon the Face of the Abyſs. \\
render it, when we ſet a Compaſs upon t
Face of the Abyſs; but if we have right
interpreted the Prophet David, tis pli
enough what Compals is here to be unde
ſtood; not an imaginary Circle, (for yh
mould that be thought one of the wond
ful Works of God?) but that exterior 0
of the Earth that was ſet upon the Wate
That was the Maſter-piece of the divine A
in framing of the firſt Earth, and thereto
very fit to be taken Notice of by ſas
And upon this Occaſion, I deſire you tor
flect upon St. Peter's Expreſſion, concert
ing the firſt Earth, and to compare it wi
Solomon's, to ſee if they do not anſwer 0!
another. St. Peter calls it, yy xab:5aca
_ udarwy, an Earth conſiſting, ſtanding, ot ſi
tained by the Waters. And Solomon calls
CoHlnn D in An Orb drawn upon
Face of the Abyſs. And St. Peter ſays, that
done 74 Ayo T8 es, by the Wiſdom of Cd
which is the ſame acy@» or Wiſdom, that he
declarcs her ſelf to have been preſent at |


Work. Add now to theſe two Places, * |
0


The Theory of the EARTH. 369


emention'd out of the Pſalmiſt ; An Earth
nded upon the Sea, (Pal. xxiv. 2.) and an
th ftretched out above the Waters; (Pal.
xxvi, 6.) Can any Body doubt or queſtion 3
tall theſe four Texts refer to the ſame
ing? And ſeeing St. Peter's Deſcription
ers certainly to the ante-diluvian Earth, they
{all refer to it; and do all as certainly and
dently agree with our Theory concerning
Form and Situation of it.
The pendulous Form and Poſture of that
| Earth being prov'd from theſe four Places,
more eaſy and emphatical to interpret in
Senſe that Paſſage in Fob ch. xxvi. 7. He
abet h out the North over the Tohu, (for
t is in the Original) and hangeth the Earth
m nothing. And this ſtrange Foundation or
Foundation of the exterior Earth ſeems to
the Ground of thoſe noble Queſtions pro-
xdto Job by God Almighty, chap. xxxviii.
lere waſt thou,when I laid the Foundations of
Earth? Declare if thou haſt underſtand-
„ whereupon are the Foundations thereof
ined, and who laid the Corner-Stone ? There
a neither Foundation, nor Corner-Stone, in
ut piece of Architecture; and that was it which
ade the Art and Wonder of it. But I have
oken more largely to theſe Places in the
icory it ſelf, Book i. p. 119. And if the
ur Texts before mention'd be conſider d with-


0d out of Scripture, as the Form which


it Prejudice, I think there are few Matters
natural Speculation that can be ſo well


B b Wwe


370 A REVIEW of
we have given to the ante-diluvian Ean
But yet it may be thought a juſt, if ng
neceſſary Appendix to this Diſcourſe, c
cerning the Form of the ante-diluvian Ear
to give an Account alſo of the ante-diluny
Abyſs, and the Situation of it according
Scripture; for the Relation which theſet
have to one another, will be a farther M
to diſcover, if we have rightly determiy
the Form of that Earth. The Abyſs or
hom-Rabbah is a Scripture Notion, and!
Word is not usd, that I know of, int
diſtinct and peculiar Senſe in Heathen
thors. *Tis plain that in Scripture it is
always taken for the Sea (as Gen. i. 2.
Vii. 11. and xlix. 25. Deut. xxxili. 13.
xXXVili. 14. and xxxViii. 16. Pal. xxxiii. 7,
Ixxi. 20. and bxxviii. 15. and cxxxv. 6. 4
XX. 1, 3.) but for ſome other Maſs of
ters, or ſubterraneous Store-houſe. And |
being obſerv'd, we may caſily diſcover
Nature, and ſet down the Hiſtory of the Sc
ture-Abylſs.
The Mother-Abyſs is no doubt that in
Beginning of Geneſis, v. 2. which had not
but Darkneis upon the Face of it, or a thick
liginous Air. The next News we hear of
Abyts is at the Deluge, (Gen. vii. 11.) .
tis ſaid to be broke open, and the Waters
to have drowned the World. It ſeems ti
this Abyſs was clos d up ſome Time bett
the Creation and the Deluge, and had
another Cover than that of Darknels. 4


if


The Theory of the EARTH. 371


we will believe Miſdom, (Prov. viii. 27.)
ho was there preſent at the Formation of
e Earth, an Orb was ſet upon the Face of
e Abyſs, at the Beginning of the World.
That theſe three Places refer to the ſame
byls, I think, cannot be queſtioned by any
t will compare them and conſider them.
hat of the Deluge, Moſes calls there Tehom-
bah, the great Abyſs ; and can there be
greater than the forementioned Mother-
bis? And WISDOM, in that Place in the


Face of the Deep, or of the Abyſs ; chang.
oe Darkneſs for that Orb of the exterior
th, which was made afterwards to incloſe it.
d in this Sort it lay, and under this Cover,
en the Pſalmiſt ſpeaks of it in theſe Words,
a. xxxiii. 7. He gathereth the Waters of
Sea, as in a * Bag; he layeth up the Abyſs
ſtore-houſes. Laſtly, we may obſerve, that


ut at the Deluge, when the Sea was born,
d broke forth as if it had iſſued out of a
omb; as God expreſſeth it to 7ob, ch. xxxviii.
in which Place the Chaldee Paraphraſe
ads it, when it broke forth, coming out of
e Abyſs. Which Diſruption at the Deluge


— *


bp. 86.) though the Enxgliſi Tranſlation read en 4 heap,
utably to the Matter and to the Senſe. | |


B b 3: ſeems


verb, uſeth the ſame Phraſe and Words
th Moſes, Gen. i, 2. TW 122 "WV wpon


s this Mother-Abyſs, whoſe Womb was


— — ! wo — — 2 —
— —̃ aw x — S ——— — — — ——ę— m — —
* — — — -
L429 *
2 2 * 4.


This reading or tranſlating is generally followed, ( Theor,


— — 8 — — 3
-
* — — — a 3 — _
*
_ A. = — "TAKE > ” 2 — 1
— — — = „* 4 — Py —
* * " a — <A = —
—— — —— 8
. — =


— —
—— —
— *


— — — >


: "Ss »
1
1
1
RF
v4 4
o


— = > Ep :
— -


— — 8
Jas > 1 — —ę—e— — — — —
f n - — — — — <-> a"
— —
8 — — . —— - -
> — te. —= — ” -
1 — — —— _ — — pat 8 8
- — = — 4
oe —— ——— — —¾— .. — bn
: TI — — — — a OE — _ — — 2 — —
* — ad — - — _ — 1 * — - =
— 1 — *

- - 2 D = —— =

Þ _ T — n | 8 8


* K. —
3 — — — —— — — — —


—— — — * *


—


—


5 4. APY
— — — —
— — — — — — — 1 — ——


—
— —


— — bs — . * .
— — — — w—_— — Jo nA nt


— —


the Aby ſs, which makes a ſhort Hiſtory of!


broke at the Deluge) it was ſpread as a C


172 4 REVIEW of


ſcems alſo to be alluded to Fob xii. 14, 1 dints
and more plainly, Prov. iii. 20. by his K den


ledge the Abyſſes are broken up. bet


Thus you have already a three-fold Stae H af


firſt, open, at the Beginning; then cy
till the Deluge; then broke open again, 2
is at preſent. And we purſue the Hiſtory
it no farther ; but we are told, Apoc. xx,
That it ſhall be ſhut up again, and the or
Dragon in it, for a thouſand Years. In
mean time we may obſerve from this Fo
and Poſture of the ante-diluvian Abyſs, hi
ſuitable it is and coherent with that Form
the ante-diluvian Earth which St. Peter a
Waters; founded upon the Waters; ſtrat
above the Waters; for if it was the Cover
this Abyſs (and it had ſome Cover that\


or Ice upon the Face of thoſe Waters,
ſo made an Orbis Terrarum, an habital
Sphere of Earth about the Abyſs.


O much for the Form of the ante-diluvi
10 Earth and Abyſs; which as they aptly d
reſpond to one another, ſo, you ec, (
Theory anſwers, and is adjuſted to both; à
I think, ſo fitly, that we have no reaſon hith
to to be diſpleaſed with the Succeſs wen
had in the Examination of it, according
_ Scripture. We haye diſpatch'd the "mw
| by by 01


ke. + oo.


The Theory of the EAR TR. 373


ints in Queſtion, firſt, to prove a Diverſity
general betwixt the two natural Worlds,
betwixt the Heavens and the Earth before
d after the Flood. Secondly, to prove where-
this Diverſity conſiſted; or that the par-
ular Form of the ante-diluvian Heavens and
uth was ſuch according to Scripture, as
e have deſcrib'd it in the Theory. You'll
y, then the Work is done; what needs more,
the reſt follows of Courſe ? For if the ante.
uvian Earth had ſuch a Form as we have
opos'd and prov'd it to have had, there could
no Deluge in it but by a Diſſolution of its
ts and exterior Frame: And a Deluge
made, would not be in the Nature of a
anding-Pool, but of a violent Agitation and
ommotion of the Waters. This is true;
eſe Parts of the Theory are ſo cemented,
at you muſt grant all, it you grant any.
owever we Will try, if even theſe two Par-
ulars alſo may be prov'd out of Scripture ;
lat is, if there be any Marks or Memoran-
ums left there by the Spirit of God, of
ch a Fraction or Diſſolution of the Earth
the Deluge; and alſo ſuch Characters of
e Deluge it ſelf, as ſhew it to have been by
Fluctuation and impetuous Commotion of

& Waters. LS ar,
| To proceed then; that there was a Frac-
Ion or Diſſolution of the Earth at the De-
ge, the Hiſtory of it by Moſes gives us the
Account, ſeeing he tells us, as the princi-
al Cauſe of the Flood, that the Fountains of
Bb 3 the


374 A REVIEW ECG
the great Abyſs were cloven or burſt aſun;
and upon this Diſruption the Waters gy
out from the Bowels of the Earth, as fg
the widen'd Mouths of ſo many Fountzj
1 do not take Fountains there to ſignify
more than Sources or Stores of Water ;
ting alſo this Manner of their Eruption fr
below, or out of the Ground, as Founta
do. Accordingly in the Proverbs, (chap,
20.) 'tis only ſaid, the Abyſſes were br
open. I do not doubt, but this refers tot
Deluge, as Bede, and others underſtand j
the very Word being us'd here, both in lf
Hebrew and 'Septuagint, "P22 #pþay1rey tl
expreſs the Diſttption of 'the Abyſs at t
% Tmen 5 2et or
And this breaking up of the Earth att
Time, is elegantly expreſt in Job, by the bu
ing of the Womb of Nature, when the!
was firſt brought to Light; ch. xxxvili. v
after many Pangs and Throws and Dilacer
ons of her Body, Natute was delivered 0
Burthen, which ſhe had born in het Womb!
teen hundred Years. 19 ROS.
Theſe three Places I take to be Memor
and Proofs of the Diſruption of the E:
or of the Abyſs, at the univerſal Del
And to theſe we may add more out of
Prophets, Job, and the Pfalms, by Way!
Alluſion commonly to the State of Nat
at that Time. The Prophet Iſaiub, in delct
ing the future Deſtruction of the World,
xXxiv. 18, 19. ſeems plainly to allude 1
2 Of rel|


The Theory of the EARTH. 375


ect to the paſt Deſtruftion of it at the De-
ie; 2s appears by that leading Expreſſi-
| the Windows from on high are open,
F S οτν MIN jd; C 75 ve ive hn-
taken manifeſtly from Gen. vii. 11. Then
how the Deſcription goes on; the Windows
mon high are open, and the Foundations o

Earth do ſhake, the Earth is utterly broken
, the Earth is quite diſſolved, the Earth
exceedingly move — are Concuſſions,
Fractions, and Diffolutions, as there
ein the mundane Earthquake and De-
e; which we had expreſt before only
breaking open the Abyſs. By the Founda-
ns of the Earth here and elſewhere, I per-
je many underſtand the Center; ſo by
ing or ſhaking the Foundations, or putting
m ont ' of Courſe, muſt be underſtood a
placing of the Center; which was really
ne at the deluge, as we have ſhewn in
proper Place, Theor. Book ii. Chap. 3.
ye therefore remember, that there was both
iſlocation, as I may ſo ſay, and a Fraction
the Body of the Earth, by that great Fall;
iſlocation as to the Center, and a Fraction
bthe Surface and exterior Region, it will
I anſwer: to all thoſe Expreſſions in the
het, that ſeem ſo ſtrange and extraordina-
Tis true, this Place of the Prophet re-
ds alſo and foretels the future Deſtruction
the World; but that being by Fire, when
Elements ſball melt with fervent Heat, and
Earth with the Works therein ſball be burnt
0D + up,


376 4. REVIEW of


up, theſe Expreſſions of Fractions and Conti
ons, ſcem to be taken originally from |
Manner of the World's firſt diſtruction,;
to be transferrd, by way of Application, e.
repreſent and ſignify the ſecond Deſtrugi
of it, though, it may be, not with the f
Exactneſs and Propriety.
There are ſeveral other Places hn refer
the Diſſolution and Subverſion of the Earth
the Deluge, Amos ix. 5, 6. The Lordof Hi
is he, that toucheth the Earth, and it ſhall my
or be diſſolu d. and it ſhall riſe up uh
like a Flood, and ſhall be drowned as by |
Flood of « Aigypt. By this and by they
verſe the Prophet ſeems to allude to the [
luge, and to the Diſſolution of the Eartht|
'was then. This in Fob ſeems to be al
breaking down the Earth, and overturning
Earth, chap. xii. 14, 15. Behold he break
down and it cannot be built again, He 4
upon Man, and there can de no opening.
hold, he with-holdeth the Waters, and F
dry-up ; alſo he ſendeth them out, and t
overturn the Earth Which Place you
ſee paraphras'd, Theo. Book i. p. 124,
We have already cited, and ſhall hercat
cite, other Places out of 70; and as tl
ancient Author (who is thought to have li
before the Fudaical Oeconomy, and ne:
to Noah than Moſes) ſeems to have had
Præcepta iNoachidarum, ſo al ſo he ſeems
have had the Dogmata Noachidarum ; Wi


were deliver'd. by Noah to his Children
| K ( + 0


The Theory of the EARTH. 377


ofterity, concerning the Myſteries of natu-
Il Providence, the Origin and Fate of the
orld, the Deluge and ante-diluvian State,
tc. and accordingly we find many Strictures
if theſe DoArines inthe Book of Fob. Laſtly,
In the P/alms there are Texts that mention
he ſhaking of the Earth, and the Founda-
® of the World, in reference to the Flood,
if we judge aright 3 whereof we will ſpeak
under the next Head, concerning the raging of
the Waters in the Deluge.

Theſe Places of Scripture may be noted,
a5 left us to be Remembrancers of that ge-
neral Ruin and Diſruption of the Earth at
the Time of the Deluge. But I know it
vill be ſaid of them, that they are not *
Proofs, but Alluſions only : Be it ſo;
what is the Ground of thoſe PT Rep 2
Something muſt be alluded, and ſomething
that hath paſt in Nature, and that is re-
corded in Sacred Hiſtory ; and. what is that,
unleſs it be the univerſal Deluge, and that
Change and Diſturbance that was then in
all Nature? If others ſay, that theſe and
ſuch like Places arc to be underſtood mo-
rally and allegorically, I do not envy them
their Interpretation; but when Nature and
Reaſon will bear a literal Senſe, the Rule
is, that we ſhould not recede from the Let-
ter. But I leave. theſe Things to every one's
Thoughts; which the more calm they
are, and the more impartial, the more ea-
lily they will feel the Impreſſions of Truth :


3 In


378 A REVIEW of

In the mean Time, I procced to the 1o
particular mention'd, The Form of the Dellg
it ſelf.

185 we ſuppoſe to have been, not in th;
Way of aſtanding Pool, the Waters makine
an equal Surface, and an equal Height every
where ; but that the extream Height of the
Waters was made by the extream Agitation
of them; caus d by the Weight and Force o
great Maſſes or Regions of Earth falling at
once into the Abyſs; by which Means, as the
Waters in ſome Places were preſs'd out, and
thrown at an exceſſive Height into the Air
ſo they would alſo in certain Places gape, and
lay bare even the Bottom of the Abyſs; which
would look as an open Grave ready to ſwalloy
up the Earth, and all it bore. Whilſt the Ark;
in the mean time, falling and riſing by theſe
Gulphs and Precipices, fometimes above Water,
and ſometimes under, was a true Type of the
State of the Church in this World: And to
this Time and State David alludes in the
Name of the Church, Pſalm. xlii. 7. Abyſs calls
wnto Abyſs at the Noiſe of thy Cataracis ar
Water-Spouts ; all thy Water and Billos
have gone over me. And again, Pſal. xlvi. 2,
3. in the Name of the Church, Thereforewil
not we fear tho the Earth be removed, and
tho' the Mountains be carried into the midſt 0
the Seas.' The Waters thereof roar and art
troubled, the Mountains ſbake with the ſwel.
| lng thereof. ; £47 8 1079 1 8 | wt f


But


But there is no Peſcription more remark-
ple or more eloquent, than of that Scene of
hings repreſented, Pſalm. xviii. 7, 8, 9, &c.
vhich (till alludes, in my Opinion, to the De-
ge- Scene, and in the Name of the Church.
Ve will ſet down the Words at large.


Ver. 6. In my diſtreſs T called upon the
ord, and crved unto my God; He heard my
Voice out of his Temple, and my Cry came be-
we him into his Ears. =

7. Then the Earth ſhook aud trembled, the
rundations alſb of the Hills moved and were
ſhaken, berauſe he was wroth.

8. There went up a Smoak from his Noſtrils,
md Fire out of his Mouth devoured; Coals
were kindled by it.

9. He bowed the Heavens alſo and came
iron, and Darkneſs was under his Feet.

10, And he rode upon a Cherub and did fly,
be did fly upon the Wings of the Wind.

11. He made Darkneſs his ſecret Place; his
Pavilion round about him was dark Waters
md thick Clonds of the Shy.


Chuds paſſed, Hail and Coals of Fire.
13. The Lord alſo thunder'd in the Hea-
bene, and the Higheſt gave his Voice, Hail
md Coals of Fire. 3
14. Tea, he fent out his Arrows, and ſcat-


ted them ; and he ſhot out Lightnings and


liſcomſited them.
9


15. Then


The Theory of the E att Th. 379


12. At the Brightneſs before him the thick


— — — — —
— — - So =
* « 2
_


1
—— ͤ——— — w


»


- | 2" E
gr bd the ——— — ———— —


1 *
16
1
110
*
|
4
1
A* |.
1
| :
(Jp
. Mr
*
*
18
A f
4907
. 1
14
1
1 3
1s
110
TY
3
1
1
ot
|
3
=


— — —y—
Te
9


———— re ere er oe nee


— ”


— —e•—— —j
— —_ — — MU f
by 3 — -


194

i
{
!
|
|
i 2


me out of great Waters. V vw


' Darkneſs, and no Hurricane could be ſo '!


%


380 A REVIEW of
1 5. Then the Channels of Waters were ſu
and the Foundations of the World were diſe 1
vered; at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blaſ. .
the Breath of thy Noſtrils.
He ſent from above, he took me; he dea


This is a rough, I think, Draught of theFaq
of the Heavens and the Earth at the Deluge,
the laſt Verſes do intimate; and 'tis apply!
to cxpreſs the Dangers and Deliverances o
the Church: The Expreſſions are ſo far to
high to be apply'd to David in his Perſon, an
to his Deliverance from d aul; no ſuch Agonic
or Diſorders: of Nature as are here inſtanc'
were made in Davids Time, or upon his Ad
count; but 'tis a Scheme of the Church, au
of her Pate, particularly, as repreſented b
the Ark, in that diſmal Diſtrefs, when all
Nature was in Confuſion. And though ther
may be ſome Things here intermixt to mak
up rhe Scene, that are not ſo cloſe to the Sub
j ect as the reſt, or that they may be refer d tt
the future Deſtruction of the World; yet tha
is not unuſual, nor amiſs, in ſuch Deſcription
if the great Strokes be fit and rightly placed
That there was Smoak, and Fire, and Water
and Thunder, and Darkneſs, and Winds
and Earthquakes, at the Deluge, we cannol
doubt, if we conſider the Circuniſtances of it
Waters daſh'd and broken made a Smoak ane


olent as the Motions of the Air at that 1
8 | | Then


The Theory of the EARTH 387


nen the Earth was torn in pieces, and its
\1ndations ſhaken. And as to Thunder and
johtning, the Encounters and Colliſions of
ge mighty Waves, and the Cracks of a fal-
ng World, wonld make Flaſhes and Noiſes,
greater and more terrible, than any that
an come from Vapours and Clouds. There
15 an univerſal * Tempeſt, a Conflict and
laſhing of all the Elements; and David
ems to have repreſented it ſo; with God Al-
nighty in the midſt of it, ruling them all.

But I am apt to think, ſome will ſay, all
is is Poetical in the Prophet, and'theſe are
ypcrbolical and figurative Expreſſions, from
hich we cannot make any Inference, as to
he Deluge and the natural World: Tis true,
hoſe that have no Idea of the Deluge, that
jill anſwer to ſuch a Scene of things, as is
ere repreſented, muſt give ſuch a flight
\ccount of this Pſa/m. But on the other
hand, if we have already an Idea of the De-
luge, that is rational, and alſo conſonant to
Scripture upon other Proofs, and the Deſcrip-
tion here made by the Prophet anſwer to that
Idea, whether then is it not more reaſonable to
think, that it ſtands upon that Ground, than
to think it a mere Fancy and poetical Scene of
Things? This is the true State of the Caſe,
and that which we. muſt judge of. Methinks
tis very harſh to ſuppoſe all this a bare Fic-


tr.


See Philo Fudens his Deſcription of the Deluge, both as
to the Commotions of the Heavens, and the Fractions of the
Exth, In his firſt Treatiſe de Abrahamo, mib, p. 279.


tion,


3 A REVIEW of


tion, grounded upon no matter of Fact, yy
no ſacred Story, upon no Appearance of 6
in Nature. If you ſay it hath a moral Sign
fication, ſo let it have, we do not deſſi
that: It hath reference, no doubt, to the Da
gers and Deliverances of the Church; but th
Queſtion is, whether the Words and natur
Senſe be a Fancy only, a Bundle of randy;
Hyperboles? or, whether they relate to th
Hiſtory of the Deluge, and the State of th
Ark there repreſenting the Church? Th
makes the Senſe doubly rich, Hiſtorically aq
Morally; and grounds it upon Scripture a
Reaſon, as well as upon Fancy.

That violent Eruption of. the Sea out oft
Womb of the Earth, which Fob ſpeaks oß,
in my Judgment, another Deſcription of tl
Deluge; tis ch. xxxviii. 8, 9, 10, 11. on
up the Sea with Doors, when it broke fort
as if it had iſſued out of a womb ; when
made the Cloud the Garment thereof, and thit
Darkneſs a ſwadling Band for it. Andin
up for it my decreed. Place.—— Hitherto ſpa
thou come, &c. Here you may ſee the Birth a
Nativity of the Sea, or of Oceanus, deſcribd
how he broke out of the Womb, and what!
firſt Garment and Swadling - Cloaths were


—


TIT 1 — — — * 1
— * - *


Ui comparatis pracedens, Ver. 4, 5, 6. de ortu Telluris, ſum
ab edificio, ita hac altera de ortu maris, ſumitur à partu; & exhibn
Oceanus, primium, ut fœtus incluſus in utero, dein ut erumpens &
downs, denique ut faſciis © primis ſuis panniis tnvoluutuss Alq
aperto Terre utero prorupit aquarum moles, ut proluvies ills, 94
ſimul cum fœtu profundere ſolet puerpera.


namel


The Theory of the EAR TR. 3383


mely, Clouds and thick Darkneſs. This
not refer to any thing, that I know of,
tto the Face of Nature at the Deluge; when
ic Seca Was born, and wrapt up in Clouds
id broken Waves, and a dark impenetrable
it round the Body of the Earth. And this
ems to be the very ſame, that David had
preis d in his Deſcription of the Deluge,
Pal. xviii. 11. He made Darkneſs his ſecret
ace, his Pavilion round about him were dark
aters and thick Clouds of the Skies. For this
45 truly the Face of the World in the Time
{the Flood, tho we little reflect upon it. And
s dark Confuſion every where, above and
low, aroſe from the violent and confus'd
otion of the Abyſs; which was daſh'd in
eces by the falling Earth; and flew into the
r in miſty Drops, as Duſt flies up in a great

in. [See Theor. Book i. p. 136.] |
But I am afraid, we have ſtay'd too long
jon this Particular, The Form of the Deluge;
ang tis but a Corollary from the precedent
ile about the Diſſolution of the Earth.
oever, Time is not ill ſpent about any thing
dat relates to natural Providence, whereof
ie two moſt ſignal Inſtances in our ſacred
Writings, are, the Deluge and the Conflagra-
n. And ſeeing Fob and David do often
lect upon the Works of God in the external
; cation, and upon the Adminiſtrations of
W'ovidence, it cannot be imagin'd, that they
old never reflect upon the Deluge; the
oſt remarkable Change of Nature that ever
4 1 Des bath


184 A REVIEW of


hath been, and the moſt remarkable Judg
ment upon Mankind. And if they have x
flected upon it any where, tis, I think, |
thoſe Places and thoſe Inſtances, which hay
noted; and if thoſe Places do relate to th

Deluge, they arc not capable, in my Judgmen
of any fairer or more natural Interpretatiq
than that which we have given them ; whi
you ſee, how much it favours and confin
our Theory.

I have now finiſhed the Heads I undertoc
to prove, that I might ſhew our Theory t
agrce with Scripture in theſe three princip
Points; firſt, in that it ſuppoſeth a Diverſ
and Difference betwixt the ante-diluvian He
vens and Earth, and the preſent Heavens a
Earth: Secondly, in aſſigning the particul
Form of the ante-diluvian Earth and Abyſ
Thirdly, in explaining the Deluge by a Di
ſolution of that Earth, and an Eruption
the Abyſs. How far I have ſucceeded
this Attempt, as to others, I cannot tell;
I am ſure I have convinced my (elf, and:
ſatisfied that my Thoughts, in that Theo
have run in the ſame Tract with the He
Writings, with the true Intent and Sp
of them. There are ſome Perſons that à
wilfully ignorant in certain things, and othe
that are willing to be ignorant, as the Apoli
phraſeth it; ſpeaking of thoſe Eternaliſtst
denied the Doctrine of the Change and Re
lutions of the natural World: And 'tis not
be expected but there are many ſtill *
[17% | a


The Theory of the EARTH. 385


me Humour, and therefore may be called 14.
woly ignorant; that is, they will not uſe that
zins and Attention that is neceſſary for the
xamication of ſuch a Doctrine, nor Imparti-
ity in judging after Examination; they greedi-
lay hold on all Evidence on one fide, and
lingly forget, or ſlightly paſs over, all Evi-
nce for the other. This, I think, is the Cha-
ter of thoſe that are w2//ingly ignorant; for
o not take it to be io deep as a downright Wil-
| Ignorance, where they are plainly conſci—
sto themſelves of that Wilfulneſs: but where
inſenſible Mixture of human Paſſions in-
nes them one Way, and makes them averſe
the other; and in that Method draws on all
e Conſequences of a willing Ignorance.
There remains ſtill, as I remember, one
poſition that l am bound to make good ;
aid, at firſt, that our Hypotheſis concern-
the Deluge was more agreeable not only to
ripture in general, but alſo to the particu-
Hiſtory of the Flood left us by Moſes; I
„ more agreeable to it than any other Hy-
theſis, that hath yet been propos d. This may
made good in a few Words; for in Mo-
's Hiſtory of the Deluge, there are two prin-
pal Points, the Extent of the Deluge, and
e Cauſes of it; and in both theſe we do
ly agree with that ſacred Author. As to the
xtent of it, he makes the Deluge univerſal ;
Uthe High Hills under the whole Heaven
ere cover d fifteen Cubits upwards. We
lo make it univerſal, over the Face of the
8 Wave


— — — — ̃ ; OG Os AC — OE M i dd
p _ " — — — _- 7 = SE = —
— — — 0 — —— — 8


386 A REVIEW of

whole Earth; and in ſuch a Manner az m

needs raiſe the Waters above the Top of t
higheſt Hills every where. As #0 the Cayſ
of it, Moſes makes them to be the Diſrupti
of the Abyſs, and the Rains, and no mon
and in this alſo we exactly agree with hi

we know no other Cauſes, nor pretend toy
other but thoſe two. Diſtinguiſhing tther
fore Moſes his Narration as to the Subſtan
and Circumſtances of it, it muſt be allow
that theſe two Points make the Subſtance

it, and that an Hypotheſis that differs from
in either of theſe two, differs from it mo
than ours; which, at the worſt, can but differ
Matter of Circumſtance. Now ſeeing the gte
Dithculty about the Deluge is the Quantity


Water required for it, there have been.


Explications propoſed, beſides ours, to remo
or ſatisfy this Difficulty ; one whereof mal
the Deluge not to have been univerſal, or
have reach'd only Judea and ſome neighbo
ing Countrics, and therefore leſs Water wo
ſuthce; the other owning the Deluge to
univerſal, ſupplics it ſelf with Water fromt
divine Omnipotency , and ſays new Wat
were created then for the nonce, and ag!
annihilated, when the Deluge was to ces
Both theſe Explications, you ſee, (and I Kc
no more of Note that are not obnoxious
the ſame Exceptions) differ from Moſes int
Subſtance, or in one of the two ſubſtant
Points, and conſequently more than ours do
The firſt changeth the Flood into Ne
| | ation


The Theory of the EARTH. 387
ational Inundation ; and the ſecond aſſigns
xther Cauſes of it than Moſes had aſlign'd |
\nd as they both differ apparently from the
he Moſaical Hiſtory, ſo you may ſee them re-
ted upon other Grounds alſo, in the third
hapter of the firſt Book of the Theory.

This may be ſufficient as to the Hiſtory of
e Flood by Moſes: But poſſibly it may be
aid, the principal Objection will ariſe from
Moſes his fix Days Creation in the firſt Chap-
er of Geneſis; where another ſort of Earth,
han what we have form'd from the Chaos, is
epreſented to us; namely, a terraqueous Globe
ch as our Earth is at preſent. Tis indeed
cy apparent, that Moſes hath accommodated
is fix Days Creation to the preſent Form of
he Earth, of to that which was before the
res of the People, when he wrote. But it is
great Queſtion whether that was ever in-
nded for a true Phyſical Account of the Origin
f the Earth; or whether Moſes did either Phi-
ſlophize or Aſtronomize in that Deſcription.
he antient Fathers, when they anſwer the
athens, and the Adverſatics of Chriſtianity,
generally deny it; as I am ready to make
od upon another Occaſion. And the Thing
(elf bears in it evident Marks of an Accom-
lodation and Condeſcenſion to the vulgar No-
ions concerning the Form of the World:
hole that think otherwiſe, and would make
literally and phyſically true in all the Parts
it, Idefire them, without entring upon the
ict Merits of the Cauſe, to determine theſe
CCC. ͤ Preli-


388 A REVIEW of


Preliminaries. Firſt, whether the whole Uni.
verſe riſe from a terreſtrial Chaos? Secondly,
what Syſtem of a World this fix Days Cres
tion proceeds upon; whether it ſuppoſes th
Earth, or the Sun, for the Center ? Thirdly
whether the Sun and fix'd Stars are of a later
Date, and a later Birth, than this Globe 0
Earth? And laſtly, where is the Region e
the Super-celeſtial Waters? When they han
determin'd theſe Fundamentals, we will pre
ceed to other Obſervations upon the ſix Day
Work, which will farther aſſure us, that t
a Narration ſuited to the Capacity of the Pee
ple, and not to the ſtrict and phyſical Natur
of Things. Beſides, we are to remember, thi
Moſes muſt be ſo interpreted in the firſt Cha
ter of Geneſis, as not to interfere with hi
ſelf in other Parts of his Hiſtory ; nor to inte
fere with St. Peter, or the Prophet Dau
or any other ſacred Authors, when they tre
of the ſame Matter. Nor laſtly, ſo, as to!
repugnant to clear and unconteſted Scien
For, in things that concern the natural Worl
that muſt always be conſulted.
With theſe Precautions, let them try if th
can reduce that Narrative of the Origin
the World, to phyſical Truth; ſo as to be co
ſiſtent, both with Nature, and with Divi
Revelation every where. It is eaſily reconcl
able to both, if we ſuppoſe it wrote in a vult
Style, and to the Conceptions of the Pcop!
and we cannot. deny that a vulgar Style
often made ule of in the holy Wings 7
2 lee


The Theory of the EARTH, 339


xcly and unconcernedly does Scripture ſpeak
God Almighty, according to the Opinions
fthe Vulgar ? Of his Paſſions, local Motions,
parts and Members of his Body : Which all
te things that do not belong, or are not com-
ible with the Divine Nature, according to
ruth and Science. And if this Liberty be
ken, as to God himſelf, much more may it
e taken as to his Works. And accordingly
e ſee, what Motion the Scripture gives to
e Sun; what Figure to the Earth; what Fi-
ure to the Heavens : All according to the Ap-
arance of Senſe and popular Credulity with-
ut any Remorſe for having tranſgreſſed the
ules of intellectual Truth.
This vulgar Style of Scripture, in deſcribing
e Nature of Things, hath been often miſta-
en for the real Senſe, and ſo become a Stum-
ing-Block in the Way of Truth. Thus the
Inthropomorphites of old contended for the
uman Shape of God, from the Letter of Scrip-
te, and brought many expreſs Texts for their
urpoſe ; but ſound Reaſon, at length, got the
per hand of literal Authority. Then {eyC-
| of the Chriftian Fathers contended, that
here were no Antipodes; and made that
Joarine irreconcilable to Scripture ; But this
b, after a while, went off, and yeilded to Rea-
on and Experience. Then, the Motion of the
th muſt by no means be allow'd, as being
ontrary to Scripture 3 for fo it is indeed, accor-
Ing to the Letter and vulgar Style. But all
clligent Perſons ſee thorough this Argument,
Se and


— — — — =
_ _ — yu — — _ ou
» — 2 4 ;
-
J —— — .
— q — 2 —
= % ww
* DT OO CLLR — —
ws 8 — — — — —
% rc = « = —
3 — 2 2 2
— - \ —
— — —
— — — —
. CE


— -- — — — —— — —
— — — —
_ — "of"
D — 2 ——
= w F 2 — „6
— -— - - — o


— — —U— — — — —


390 A REVIEW of


and depend upon it no more in this Caſe, thy
in the former. Laſtly, the Original of thy
Earth from a Chaos, drawn according to t
Rules of Phiſiology, will not be admitted; hy
cauſe it does not agree with the Scheme of th
ſix Days Creation. But why may not this |
wrote in a vulgar Style, as well as the reſt? Ce
tainly there can be nothing more like a vulg
Style, than to ſet God to work by the Day, a
in {ix Days to finiſh his Task; as he is there
preſented. We may therefore probably hoy
that all theſe Diſguiſes of Truth will at lengt
fall off, and that we ſhall ſee God and
Works in a pure and naked Light.

Thus I have finiſhed what I had to ay
Confirmation of this Theory form Scripturt
I mean of the former Part of it, which
pends chiefly upon the Deluge, and the ant
diluvian Earth. When you have collated tl
Places of Scripture, on either ſide, and |:
them in the Balance, to be wcigh'd one
gainſt another; if you do but find them equ
or near to an equal Poiſe, you know in v
ther Scale the natural Kb arc to be 1a
and of what Weight they ought to be in
Argument of this kind. There isa great D
ference betwixt Scripture with Philoſophy (
its ſide, and Scripture with Philoſophy agall
it, when the Queſtion is concerning the n
tural World: And this is our Caſe; which
now leave to to the Conſideration of the u
prejudic'd Reader, and proceed to the Pre
df the ſecond Part of the Theory.


The Theory of the EARTH. 391


HE latter Part conſiſts of the Confla-
| gration of the World, and the new
Lavens and new Earth; and ſeeing there
no Diſpute concerning the former of theſe
0, our Task will now lie in a little Compaſs:
ing only this, to prove that there will be
w Heavens, and a new Earth, after the


tly done already, in the firſt, ſecond and
rd Chapters of the iv'®* Book, both from
ripture and Antiquity, whether Sacred or
ophane; and therefore, at preſent, we will
ly make a ſhort and eaſy Review of Scrip-
re- Teſtimonies, with deſign cheifly to ob-
te and diſappoint the Evaſions of ſuch, as
ould beat down ſolid Texts into thin Mcta-
ors and Allegories.
e Renovation of the World, are either ex-
fs, or implicit : Thoſe I call expreſs, that
ention the new Heavens and new Earth;
id thoſe implicit, that ſignify the ſame
ting, but not in expreſs Terms. So when
t Saviour ſpeaks of a Palingeneſia, or Re-
mneneration ; (Matt. xix. 28, 29.) or St. Peter,
tan Apocataſtaſis or Reſtitution z (Acts iii.
.) theſe being Words uſed by all Au-
ots, Prophane or Eccleſiaſtical, for the Re-
ation of the World, ought, in reaſon, to


nflagration. This, to my Mind, is ſuffici-


The Teſtimonies of Scripture concerning


Cc 4 be


: * * IS = = ”
— — — — — — — —
be 9 = * 8 - 32 — — — a —_ _ i —
— — : — —_—— — 4 — — — - — — — * . _ <
| * 2 k o . 2 * —— — 2 * — — — — —
_ 4 \ 4 _ b * 2 . „ — —
. —— ĩ . — 222 - — -
= DS . Sew 4 9052 <> ary l — 2 ——
- - — *


J
| SLY
ST |
9 o
þ 08 -
1 \
of}
' j +
TT
U
'


392 A REVIEW of

be interpreted in the ſame Senſe in the H
ly Writings. And in like Manner , whe
St. Paul ſpeaks of his future Earth, ot:
habitable World to come, Hebr. ii. 5. 1 c
1 wiAAnzoe' or of a Redemption or Mcelioratic
of the preſent State of Nature, Roy, ij
21, 22. theſe lead us again, in oth
Terms, to the fame Renovation of the Wor
But there are alſo ſome Places of Scriptur
that ſet the new Heavens and new Ear
in ſuch a full and open View, that |
muſt ſhut our Eyes not to ſee them, $
John ſays, he ſaw them, and obſerved d
Form of the new Earth, Apoc. xi.

1/a. Ixv. 17. The Seer Iſaiah ſpoke of the
in expreſs Words, many hundred Years t
fore. And St. Peter marks the Time wh
they are to be introduc'd, namely, after t
Conflagration, or after the Diſſolution


the preſent Heavens and Earth, 2 Pet.
27 13.


Theſe later Texts of Scripture being
expreſs, there is but one Way left to eludet
Force of them; and that is, by turning t
Renovation of the World into an Allego!
and making the new Heavens and ne
Earth to be allegorical Heavens and Ea
not real and material, as ours are. This!
bold Attempt of ſome modern Authors, V
chufe rather to ſtrain the Word of God, ti
their own Notions. There are AllegoTl
no doubt, in Scripture, but we arc


The Theory of the EARTH. 393


allegorize Scripture without ſome War-
nt; either from an Apoſtolical Interpretati-
1, or from the Neceſlity of the Matter; and
donot know how they can pretend to ei-
er of theſe, in this Cale. However, that
ey may have all fair Play, we will lay
de, at preſent, all the other Texts of
ripture, and confine our ſelves wholly to
. Peter's Words; to ſee and examine whe-
er they are, or can be turn'd into an Alle-
"ry, according to the beſt Rules of Interpre-
tion.

St. Peter's Words arc theſe, 2 Pet. iii.
b 12, 13. Seeing then all theſe Things
ull be diſſolved, what manner of Perſons
gt ye to be in all holy Converſation and
dlineſs * Looking for, and haſting the
oming of the Day of God ; wherem the
tavens being on Fire ſhall be diſſolued,
ud the Elements ſhall melt with fervent
ut. Nevertheleſs we, according to his
romiſe, look for new Heavens and a new
arth; wherein Righteouſneſs ſhall dwell.
he Queſtion is concerning this laſt Verſe,
ether the new Heavens and Earth here
romis'd, are to be real and material Hea-
ens and Earth, or only figurative and alle-
orical, The Words, you ec, are clear;
nd the general Rule of Interpretation is
lis, That we arc not to recede from the
etter, or the literal Senſe, unleſs there be
| Neceſſity from the Subject- matter; ſuch


| Neceſſity, as makes a literal Interpretation
abſurd.


5 — —
„ TAS Fe ——̃ Ü2•—
o —— — . — . wi
Ron * 8 . IE I — —
> — - my
* Ia . id


— ü o


— — —
*


— —
— — — = _


_ = 9 * 1 _— — — —
2 - 8 _— — — — - — — — =
- wats P mA ²˙ X OOO u on oo uno — - - *
has
—
— 2 — Sn — pa — — — —
— n — > — — — * 2
—̃ — - —
_ -
—
= _—
25 — —-— — * -
x J 1 * 2 —


— — 1
——
— wi


r
e R owe OF —_—


—
= = — — —


)


44
4 Fr
'S 7 %
| %
1 ft
y [
, 17
14 l \
F f
i” :
1 1
9
* *
1
115 *
4 1
1
) 71
|
18
*
. * U
1 '
1 i
U


2 2 —


Thi
think
leſs th


hy We
\c Wo!


394 A REVIEW of


abſurd. But where is that Neceſſity in iu
Caſc > Cannot God make new Heayer
and a new Earth, as caſily as he mad
the old ones ? Is his Strength decayed fin


that Time, or is Matter grown more diſe 5 all
bedient? Nay, does not Nature offer he nf

ſelf voluntarily to raiſe a new World ſto 3 wh
the ſecond Chaos, as well as from t Fox
firſt; and, under the Conduct of Providence f a
to make it as convenient an Habitation WM "Pr >
the primeval Earth? Therefore no Neceſſi 4 -
ty can be pretended of leaving the litter, ior
Senſe, upon an Incapacity of the Subjcd 00
matter. EL


The ſecond Rule to determine an
terpretation to be literal or allegorical,
the uſe of the ſame Words or Pharſe i
the Context, and the Signification of thet


heir M
e at 2
id Ear


Q
there : Let's then examine our Caſe accot 15
ding to this Rule. St. Peter had usd thy -


ſame Phraſe of Heavens and Earth twie
before in the ſame Chapter. The old Hel
vens and Earth, ver. 5. The preſent Hei
 wens and Earth, ver. 7. and now he uſeé


ing to
dan
lichte


You
it again, ver. 13, the new Heavens ann

Earth ,
Earth. Have we not then Reaſon to ſuf Tr


pole, that he takes it here in the {am
Senſe, that he had done twice before, fe
real and material Heavens and Earth


leſtro)
ſou f.


In
There is no Mark ſet of a new Signific: d ”%
| ubſta
tion, nor why we ſhould alter the Seng =


of the Words. That he uſed them alw?'


before for the material Heavens and 1 |
thin


bout


The Theory of the EARTH. 395


think none Will queſtion ; and therefore,
leſs they can give us a ſufficient Reaſon,
by we ſhould change the Signification of
+ Words, we are bound by this ſecond
ale alſo, to underſtand rhem in a litteral
nſe. | |
Laſtly, The very Form of the Words,
the Manner of their Dependence upon
e Context, leads us to a litteral Senſe,
xd to material Heavens and Earth. Ne-
ertheleſs, ſays the Apoſtle, we expect new
ſtavens, c. Why Nevertheleſs ! that is,
ty ithſtanding the Diſſolution of the preſent
ſearens and Earth. The Apoſtle foreſaw,
nat he had ſaid might raiſe a Doubt in
heir Minds, whether all Things would not
at an End; nothing more of Heavens
d Earth, or of any habitable World, after
ic Conflagration : And to obviate this, he
ls them, Notw:thſfanding that wonderful
eſolation that I have deſcrib'd, we do, accord-
ing to God's Promiſes, expect new Heavens
nd anew Earth, to be an Habitation for the
uehteous. |
You ſee then the new Heavens and new
arth, which the Apoſtle ſpeaks of, are
ſubſtituted in the Place of thoſe that were
leltroy ed at the Conflagration ; and would
du ſubſtitute allegorical Heavens and Earth
In the Place of Material > Shadow for a
ubſtance > What an Equivocation would it
be in the Apoſtle, when the Doubt was
our the material Heavens and Earth, to
e make


30 ARE VIE m off


make an Anſwer about allegorical. I
The timing of the Thing determines f
Senſe : When ſhall this new World appe:
after the Conflagration, the Apoſtle f


Therefore it cannot be underſtood of ; "
moral Renovation, to be made at, or in | *
Times of the Goſpel, as theſe Allegof ©.
pretend. We muſt therefore, upon all A *
counts, conclude that the Apoſtle intendeq 4
literal Senſe ; real and material Heavens, Wi:
ſucceed theſe after the Conflagration ; whi 1
was the Thing to be prov'd. And I ke


not what Bars the Spirit of God can ſet,
keep us within the Compaſs of a literal Sent
if theſe be not ſufficient. |

Thus much for the Explication of St. 7
fer's Doctrine concerning the new Hexe
and new Earth; which ſecures the ſecot
Part of our Theory: For the Theory tan
upon two Pillars, or two Pedeſtals, the:
te-diluvian Earth and the future Earth;
in St. Peter's Phraſe, the old Heavens at
Earth, and the new Heavens and Eartl
and it cannot be ſhaken, ſo long as the
two continue firm and immoveable, \
might now put an End to this Review, b
it may be expected poſſibly that we ſhou
ſay ſomething concerning the Millenniu
which we.have, contrary to the general Sc
timent of the modern Millennaries, plac
the future Earth. Our Opinion hath this A
vantage above others, that all fanatical Pf


tenſions to Power and Empire in this Woril
| ar


The Theory of the EARTH. 397


by theſe Means, blown away, as Chaff
ore the Wind. Princes need not fear to
dgethroned, to make way to the Saints;
Governments unhinged, that they may
e the World with a Rod of Iron. Thetc
the Effects of the wild Enthuſiaſm; ſecing
yery State which they aim at, is not to be
In this. Earth.
But that our Senſe may not be miſtaken or
apprehended in this Particular, as if we
ught the Chriſtian Church would never,
on this Earth, be in a better and happier
ture than it is in at preſent: We muſt di-
guiſn betwixt a Melioration of the World,
you Will allow that Word; and a Millen—
n. We do not deny a Reformation and
provement of the Church, both as to Peace,
rity, and Piety: That Knowledge may in-
aſe, Mens Minds be enlarged, and Chriſtian
cligion better underſtood : That the Power
Antichriſt ſhall be diminiſh'd, Perſecution
aſe, Liberty of Conſcience allow'd amongſt
eReformed ; and a greater Union and Har-
ony eſtabliſhed : That Princes will mind the
blicx Good, more than they do now; and
 tnemſelves better Examples of Virtue and
e Piety. All this may be, and I hope will
cer long. But the apocalyptical Millen-
um, or the new Jeruſalem, is ſtill another
ater: It differs not in Degree only from the
teſent State, but in a new Order of Things;
th in the moral World and in the natural;
d that cannot be till we come into the new


Heavens


398 A REVIEW of
Heavens and new Earth. Suppoſe what Wo")©
formation you can in this World, there y;
ſtill remain many Things inconſiſtent within
true millennial State; Antichriſt, tho' we;
ned, will not be finally deſtroyed till the cot
Ing of our Saviour, nor Satan bound, A
there will be always Poverty, Wars, Diſca(
Knaves and Hypocrites, in this World, whi
are not conſiſtent with the new Feruſalem,
You ſee now what our Notion is of the M
lennium, as we deny this Earth to be the 8
of it: *Tis the State that ſucceeds the fir
Reſurrection, when Satan is lock d up in it
bottomleſs Pit: The State when the Matty
are to return into Life, and wherein they:
to have the firſt Lot and chief Share: A Stat
which is to laſt a thouſand Years. And Ble
ſed and Holy is he, that hath a Part in tt
on ſuch the ſecond Death hath no Power;
they ſhall be Prieſts of God and Chriſt, a
ſhall reign with him a thouſand Tears. I ye
would ſee more particular Reaſons of our Judy
ment in this Caſe, why ſuch a Millennium
not to be expected in this World; they arc
down in the 87h Chap. of the 4th Book, an
we do not think it necſſary that they ſnoul
be here repeated. |
As to that Diſſertion that follows the Mil
lennium, and reaches to the Conſummation d
all Things ſeeing it is but problematical, V
leave it to ſtand or fall by the Evidence alread)
given; and ſhould be very glad to fee th
%%%§Ü—² OR Conjcctus


The Theory of the EARTH: 399


onjectures of others more learned, in Spe-
[ations ſo abſtruſe and remote from common
nowledge. They cannot ſurely be thought
worthy or unfit for our Meditations, ſecing
hey are ſuggeſted to us by Scripture it ſelf :
ind to what end were they propos'd to us
ere, if it was not intended, that they ſhould
- underſtood, ſooner or later?
| have done with this Review; and ſhall
nly add one or two Reflections upon the
hoie Diſcourſe, and ſo conclude. You have
xn the State of the Theory of the Earth, as
the Matters, Form, and Proofs of it, both
atural and ſacred : If any one will ſubſtitute
better in its Place, I ſhall think my ſelf more
bliged to him, than if he had ſhewed me
he Quadrature of the Circle. But it is not
nough to pick Quarrels here and there ; that
lay be done by any Writing, eſpecially when
is of ſo great Extent and Comprehenſion:
[icy muſt build up, as well as pull down;
nd give us another Theory inſtead of this,
ted to the ſame natural Hiſtory of the Earth,
cording as it is ſet down in Scripture ; and
hen let the World take their Choice. He
hat cuts down a Tree, is bound in Reaſon
0 plant two; becauſe there is an Hazard in
meir Growth and Thriving. .
Then as to thoſe that are ſuch rigorous Scrip-
urilts, as to require plainly demonſtrative and
reſiſtible Texts for every thing they cnter-
Lun or believe; they would do well to reflect
amd conſider, whether, for every Article inthe
| three


ö =. 2 :, a 8 — — Sr
— wah > — = -
«
. — * * nn 8 > oa "a. __ — OY — 4
— — — — ——— 9 — 4 — *


|
T8
.
8
4
| 1"
[]
1
N 17
ö Mi


＋

\

.

Wl

| :
' N

i 1


406 A REVIEW, Ge.


three Creeds (which have no Support fr,
natural Reaſon) they can bring ſuch Texts,
Scripture as they require of others; or a {4
er and juſter Evidence, all things conſider
than we have done for the Subſtance oft
Theory. We have not indeed ſaid all t
might be ſaid, as to Antiquity; that makin
no part in this Review, and being capable {
of great Additions, Burt as to Scripture an
Reaſon I have no more to add: Thoſe th
are not ſatisfied with the Proofs already pri
duc'd upon theſe two Heads, arc under a Fat
good or bad, which is not in my Poyer
overcome. | |


FINIS.


EXCEPTIONS


MADE BY
Mr. ERASMUS WARRE


N.


Againſt the SACRED


THEORY


QF. THE


THE FOURTH EDITION.


LONDON:


Printed for 1 Hooks, at the Flower de Lace in


Fleetftreet, MDCCXXVI,


TO THE


EXCEPTIONS


MADEBY


Mr. ERASMUS WARREN,
AGAINST THE


THEORY of the EARTH.


e it be a Civility to return a ſpeedy An-
ſwer to a Demand or Meſlage, I will not
fail to pay that Reſpect to the late Author
of the Exceptions againſt the Theory of the
Rea Ei. I know, ſhort Follies, and ſhort
Quarrels, are the beſt : And to offer Satiſ-
action at the firſt Opportunity, is the faireſt Way to put
u End to Controverſies. Beſides, ſuch perſonal Alter-


«ons as theſe, are but Res perituræ, which do not de-
de much Time or Study; but, like Repartees, are beſt


ive that Friendlineſs, that fome Allowance may be
Se | © made


21 bs 4 — —
ba Ee ws


Made off hand, and never thought on more. I only.


— .
„


mw 722 = -
— — — — 2 — — — . = - _
me pens: — — its. — * —
„ 5 —— * 2
— — — . —— 3 — >
8 . — — *
N 1 r pag”


— .
" b q 7 3 -
*2, - N r —
— — _ - — — — - . — ou * —
— — — Cs, — + = RET.


HS


404 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


made as to Unaccuracy of Style: Which is always al-
low'd in haſty Diſpatches.

I ſhall make no Excurſions from the Subject, nor uſe
any other Method than to follow the learned Except
from Chapter to Chapter, and obſerve his Steps and Mo-
tions, ſo far as they are contrary to the Theory. But if
he divert out of his Way, for his Pleaſure, or other Reg
ſons beſt known to himſelf, I may take notice of it per
haps, but ſhall not follow him any farther than my Buſi
neſs leads me; having no deſign to abridge his Liberty
but to defend my awn Writings where they are attack
Give me leave therefore, without any other Preface o
Ceremony, to fallro our Work. |


EG EPTIONS
CAA r. I.


'T HIS Chapter is only an Introduction, and treats «

other Things, without any particular Oppoſition t
the Theory. And thereforel ſhall only give youtheCor
cluſion of it, in the Author's own Words: So much fi
zhe firſt Chapter; which"may be reckoned as an lntroaudu
to the following Diſcourſe. Which if any ſhall log upon
4 Collection of Notes, ſomewhat confuſedly put together, ri
ther than a formal, well digeſted Treatiſe, they will ent:
tain the beſt or trueſt Idea of it, A ſevere Cenſute: Bl
every Man beſt underſtands his own Works.


Cuay II.


H ERE he begins to enter upon particular Except
ons: And his firſt Head is againſt the Formation
the Earth, pag. 45. as explained by the Theory. Tot
he gives but one Exception in this Chapter: Namel
That : would have taken up too much Time; the H
being made in fix Days. > "aaa many Separations
the Chaos, and of the Elements, were to be made, 4
cording to the Theory, which could not be diſpatch d
ſo ſhort a Time. To this Exception, the general
ſwer may be this; either you take the Hypotheſis of
ordinary Providence, or of an extraordinary, as to
Time allowed for the Formation of the Earth: If fe
proceed according io an ordinary Providence, the!


mati


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 405


mation of the Earth would require much more Time than
fx Days: But if according to an extraordinary, you may
ſuppoſe it made in ſix Minutes, if you pleaſe. Lwas
plain Work, and a ſimple Proceſs, according to the The-
ory; conſiſting only of ſuch and ſuch Separations, and a
Concretion ; And either of theſe might be accelerated, and
3 in a longer or ſhorter Time, as Providence
thought fit.

However, this Objection does not come well from the
Hands of this Author, who makes all the Mountains of
the Earth (the moſt operoſe Part of it, as one would
think) to be rais'd in a ſmall Parcel of a Day by the
Heat and Action of the Sun ; as we ſhall find in the
tenth Chapter, hereafter. He ſrems to proceed by natural
Cauſes; for ſuch are the Heat and Action of the Sun:
And if fo, he will find himſelf us much ſtraiten'd for
Time, as the Theoriſt can be. But if he ſay, the Work
of Nature and of the Sun was accelerated by an extra-
odinary Power, he mult allow us to ſay the ſame Thing
of the Separations of the Chaos, and the firſt Concretion
of the Earth. For he cannot reaſonably debar us that
Liberty which he takes himſelf, unleſs we have debarr'd
nd excluded our ſelyes. Now tis plain, the I heoriſt
ſever excluded an extraordinary Providence in the For-
nation and Conſtruction of the Earth ; as appears, and 1s
enly expreſs'd in many Parts of the Theory, Eng. Theor.
688. See, if You pleaſe, the Concluſion of the fifth
Chapter, which treats about the Formation of the Earth.
The laſt Paragraph is this : Give me leave only, before we


pms? the Cauſes of this wonderful Structure of the
Earth: *Tis true, we have propos d the natural Cauſes
fit, and I do not know wherein our Explication is falſe or
efeQive; but in Things of this Kind we may eaſily be too
gedulous: And this Structure is ſo marvellous, that it ought
rather to be confider'd as a particular Effect of the Divine
Art, than as the Work of Nature. The whole Globe of the
Water vaulted over, and the exterior Earth banging above
the Deep, ſuſtain d by nothing but its own Meaſures and
Manner of C onſtruction: A Building without Foundation or
Lirner-ſlone. This ſeems to be a Piece of Divine Geome-
Wi er Architecture; and to this, I think, is to be referr'd
lar magnificent Challenge which God Almighty made to
od; Where waſt thou, when I laid the Foundations of
lie Earth? Declare, Ge. Moſes alſo, when he had de-


piceed any farther, to annex here a ſhort Advertiſement,


D 3 | ſerib'd :


-
— —ꝛ —
— —


- — as
- — - —
* — —
. - — — *
— 6 N 8 A — — — wÄ —— 8 — _ 2 * o -
— — 5


—


—


— —


—


—


— —


.
—— — — — — — — 5
* 0 * — - —
—— —Ü— parame eine — ” — = wings — — — 2 = pans Hy — — — — — — — _ <-. —
2 — <wr_n -<Re — code — — — — ——_— — — _ — — — — ut —— — 2 —— - I 2 * 2 = — — - — —
— _—_— — Me — - RT - 3 5 — * — — * — = —
— — — = _ - — - - -» — I * 2 _ - — - 2 — — — P
a - . - — — — — 5 — — — = * — -
- l a * . - — * — - — — 1 — 1
D — * * — I,
— 1 — E > * 2 — 5 - : bs . 4 4 5 6 — — ——
3 — — — — 2 > —— 1 — Sn — — * >> 2 — . 4 — < — - — = - — 1 1 _ bY —
— " * 2 - > N n bo SY wy, —_” « 2 6 * — 6 — — - . = —-_ — * * —— - _ -
— 11 id — —_— — 1 22 £ I « 2 - — — — — —— gs — -\ 1 > * _
— —_ ” 4.4 - - — — * - a- 7 ww = + — 4 + - 1 - =


— __” Wenn Ee
*


ſcrib'd the Chaos, ſaith, The Spirit of God mov'd u
or ſat 1 upon, the Face of the Waters; without all


406 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


doubt, to pro pl ran Effects there. And St. Peter, whe


he ſpeaks of the Form of the Anti-deluvian Earth, hy ij
ſtood, in reference to the Waters, adds, By the Word of


God, or by the Wiſdom of God, it was made ſo. And th;
ſame Wiſdom of God, in the Proverbs, as we obſerved le
fore, takes notice of this very Piece of Work in the Hr


mation of the Earth: When he ſet an Orb over the Face


of the Deep, I was there. ¶MHerefore to the great Archi
tect, who made the boundleſs Univerſe out of nothing, an
form'd the Earth out of a Chaos, let the Praiſe of the ubol
Work, and particularly, of this Maſter-prece, for ever, wi
all Honour, be given. In like Manner, there is a larger Ac
count of Providence, both ordinary and extraordinar
as to the Revolutions of the natural World, in the 1:
Paragraph of the eighth Chapter; and like RefleCtior
are made in other Places, when Occaſion is offer d.

We have not, therefore, any where excluded the luf
ence and Benefit of ſuperior Cauſes, where the Caſe
quires it : Eſpecially, when 'tis only to modify the
fea, as to Time and Diſpatch. And in that Caſe, not
Will have more need of it than himſelf; as we ſhall fir
in the Examination of his tenth Chapter, about the Orig
of Mountains.

The reſt of this ſecond Chapter is ſpent in three E
curſions. One in juſtifying the Carteſian Way of for
ing Light and the Sun, as agreeable to Moſes. Thel
cond about the Jeuiſh Cabala, and Cabaliſtical Inte
zations. And the third about myſtical Numbers. Butt
Theory not being concern'd in theſe Things, I leave the
to the Author, and his Readers, to enjoy the Pleaſure
Profit of them. And proceed to the third Chapter.


CH Ar. III.


N this Chapter a ſecond Exception againſt the Fom
tion of the Earth, as propos'd in the Theory,
ledg'd: And 'tis this; The Fluctuation of the Chaos,
of that firſt watery Globe, would hinder, he ſays,
Concretion of Earth upon its Surface. Not that
were Winds or Storms then, to agitate thoſe Waters;
ther would the Motion of the Earth, or the Rotation


that Globe, diſturb them, as he allows there; but thei


ſturbance would have Riſe from Tides, p. 74. lin. 15,


pon,


againſt the Theory of the ExxT H. 407


or the Ebbings and Flowings of that great Ocean, which,
he ſays, muſt have been then, as well as now: And the
Reaſon he gives, is this; becauſe the Flux and Reflux of
he Sea depend upon the Moon; and the Moon was then
reſent, as he ſays, in our Heavens, or in our Vortex:
And therefore, would have the ſame Effe& then, upon
that Body of Waters which lay under it, that it hath now
won the Sea.
That the Moon was 1n the Heavens, and in our Neigh-
dourhood, when the Earth was form'd, he proves from
the ix Days Creation: and ſpends two or three Pages in
it and Scolding upon this Subject, p. 77, 78, 79. But,
vith his leave, when all is done, his Argument will be
f no Force, unleſs he can prove, that the fourth Day's
reation was before the third. I confeſs, I have heard of
Wager that was loſt upon a like Caſe, namely, Whe-
er Henry VIII. was before Henry VII? But that was
one by Complot in the Company, to whom it was re-
ar'd to decide the Queſtion. We have no Plot here, but
ppeal fairly to that Judge the Exceptor hath choſen,
ely, to.Sctipture, which tells us, that the Moon was
ade the fourth Day, and the Earth was torm'd the third.
herefore, unleſs the fourth Day was before the third,
te Moon could not hinder the Formation of the Earth.
But I hope, ſay you, this is a Miſrepreſentation. The
Mnimadverter ſure would not put the Matter upon this
ſhe. Yes, he does. For when he had oppos'd to our
ormation of the Earth, the Fluctuation of the Waters,
Sd, as he phraſes it, by the bulky Preſence of the
loon, he concludes with theſe Words, (p. 77. Parag. 3.)
Put in reference to this Matter, there is a Doubt made b
e Theoriſt, which muſt be conſider d and removed; other-
We moſt of what hath been ſaid, touching the Inſtability
1 Fludtuation of theſe Waters, will be vain and ground-
ſr: The Doubt is, Whether the Moon were then in our
Merhbourbood. You ſee that Matter is put upon this Iſ-
e, Whether the Moon was in the Neighbourhood of
Ie Earth, at the Time of its Formation. We ſay ſhe was
Nt; and prove it by this plain Argument If ſhe was not
| Being at that Time, ſhe was not in our Neighbourhood :
at unleſs the fourth Day was before the 7h:ra, ſhe was
Nt in Being. Ergo.
on But after all, if the Moon had been preſent then, and
here had been Tides, or any other FluQtuation towards
e Poles, we have no Reaſon to believe, according to
| d 4 the


408 An Anſwer to the Exceptions mad;


the Experiences we have now, that that would have hi
der'd the Formation of the Earth, upon the Surface e
the Chaos. For why ſhould they have hinder'd that mort
than they do the Formation of Ice upon the Surface
the Sea? We know, in cold Regions, the Seas are frozer
notwithſtanding their Tides; and in the Mouths of R
vers, Where there is both the Current and Stream oft
River on one hand, and the Counter-Current of
Tides on the other; theſe, together, cannot hinder t
Concretion that is made on the Surface of the Wate
And our Water is a Subſtance more thin, and eaſily bre
ken, than that tenacious Film was, that cover'd the Cha
WHEREFORE, upon all Suppoſitions, we have Reaſe
to conclude, that no Fluctuations of the Chaos could hit
der the Formation of the firſt Earth.
Laſtly, The Obſervator.oppoſes the Reaſons that
given by the Theoriſt, why zhe Preſence of the Moon w
teſs needful in the fir World. Namely, becanſe the
were no long Winter Nights ; nor the great Pool if t
Sea to move or govern. As to the ſecond Reaſon, tis o
ly hypothetical ; and if the Hypotheſis be true, That the
was no open Sea at that Time, (which mult be elſewhe
examin'd,) the Conſequence is certainly true. But as
the firſt Reaſon, he will not allow the Conſequence, th
the Hypotheſis be admitted. For he ſays, p. 79. 4s th
were no long Winter Nights then, ſo there were no ſt
Summer ones neither: Io that ſet but the one again} the
ther, and the Preſence of the Moon may ſeem to have been,
needful then, in regard of the Length of Nights, as ſhe
now. This looks like a witty Obſervation, but it de
not reach the Point. Is there as much need of the Mod
in Spain, as in Lapland, or the Northern Countrie
There is as much Night in one Place as another, With
the Compaſs of a Vear, but the great Inconvenience
when the Night falls upon the Hours of Travel, or
Hours of Work and Buſineſs; for if it fall only vp
Hours of Sleep, or of Reſt and Retirement, as it de
certainly more in Spain, and in thoſe Climates that
proach nearer to an Equinox; the Moon is there !cls 1
ceſſary in that Reſpect: We can ſleep without Moo
ſhine, or without Light, but we cannot travel, or do Bu
neſs abroad, without Hazard and great Inconvenience,
there be no Light. So that the Reaſon of the Theo
holds good, viz. That there would be more A


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 40g


Moon-ſhine in long Winter Nights, than in a perpetual
uinox.

We proceed now to the reſt of this Chapter, which is
made up of ſome ſecondary Charges againſt this Part of
the Theory, concerning the Chaos and the Formation of
the firſt Earth. As, Firſt, That it is, P. 80, 81. Preca-
mu : Secondly, p. 83. Unphiloſophical : And, Thirdly,
fntiſcriptural ; which we ſhall anſwer in order. He
ems to offer at three or four Inſtances of Precariouſ-
xz, as to the Ingredients of the Chaos, their Proportions
11d Separations ; but his Quarrel is chiefly with the oily
Particles: Theſe he will ſcarce allow at all; nor that they
could ſeparate themſelves in due Time to receive the
terreſtrial, at leaſt in due Proportions.

Firſt, He would have no oily Particles in the Chaos.
Bat why fo, I pray? What Proof or juſt Exception is
there againſt them? Why may not there be original oily
Particles, as well as original ſalt Particles? Such as your
eat Maſter Des Cartes ſuppoſes, Prin. ph. J. 4. F. 8g.
Meteor. c. 1. $. 8. He who conſiders that vaſt Quantity
of oleaginous Matter that is diſpers'd every where, in
Vegetables, in Animals, and in many ſorts of Earths,
nd that this muſt have been from the Beginning, or as
von as the Earth had any Furniture; will ſec Reaſon to
lieve that ſuch Particles muſt be thought original and
imeval; not forg'd below the Abyſs, and extracted
tom the inferior Regions of the Earth: For that would
require a Proceſs of many Ages; whereas, theſe being
e Principles of Fertility, it is reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that
ew World abounds with them more than an old one.
laſtly, If we ſuppoſe oily Particles to be tenuious and
xanchy, as your Philoſopher does, too groſs to be Air,
ad too light for Water; why ſhould we imagine that in
lat vaſt Maſs and Variety of Particles, whereof the Chaos
conſiſted, there ſhould not be any of this Figure, as well
s of others? Or, what Reaſon is there to ſuppoſe, that
here are none of that Figure, but what are brought from
le inferior Regions of the Earth? For, of all others,
lieſe ſeem to be the moſt unlikely, if not incapable, of
ing extracted from thence. And if there be only a gra-
Wl Difference, in Magnitude and Mobility, betwixt the
aticles of Air and Oil, as that Philoſopher ſeems to ſup-
Ple, Prin. phil. J. 4. H. 76. why muſt we exclude theſe
rees, and yet admit the higher and lower?


The


70
ao
| |

Au
1
| ſ if
1 124
1
. | F
' 101
| |
1 14
An
1
:


*


410 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


The ſecond Thing which he charges with Precariof: But,
eſs, is the Separation of this oily Matter, in due time, unde
as to make a Mixture and Concretion with the terreſttiau n


Ter!
his Se
gre vel
For t
peaks
certall
of Fa
matic:
Precec
might
ſecon
Neaſc
{lf 1


Particles that fell from above. This Objection was both
made and anſwered by the Theoriſt ; Eng. Theor. 5. »g
which the Obſervator might have vouchſaf d to have taken
notice of ; and either confuted the Anſwer, or ſpar'
himſelf the Pains of repeating the Objection.

The third n is, concerning the Quantit
and Proportion of theſe Particles: And the fourth, con
cerning the Quantity and Proportion of the Water. The
Exceptor, it ſeems, would have had the Theoriſt to hay
gauged theſe Liquors, and told him the juſt Meaſure and

roportion of each; but, in what Theory or Hypotheſig
is that done? Has his great Philoſopher, in his Hypothelig
of Three Elements, (which the Exceptor makes uſe of

. 52.) or in his ſeveral Regions of the unform'd Eart


in the Fourth Book of his Principles, defin'd the Quantity 80
and Dimenſions of each? Or in the mineral Particles aud come
Juices, which he draws from the lower Regions, does e nd.
determine the Quantity of them? And yet theſe, by then bea
Exceſs, or Defect, might be of great Inconvenience te hcle:
the World: Neither do I cenſure him for theſe Things MW
as precarious. For, when the Nature of a Thing admit de 3
a Latitude, the original Quantity of it is left to be deter Jl 1
min'd by the Effects; and the Hypotheſis ſtands good, ien
neither any Thing antecedent, nor any preſent Phenomer Wi 5nd
can be alledged àgainſt it. of
But if theſe Examples, from his great Philoſopher be 1
not ſufficient, I will give him one from an Author be Mo
yond all Exceptions: And that is from himſelf. Doe ln
the Animadverter, in his new Hypotheſis concerning tho"
Deluge, Ch. 15. give us the juſt Proportions of his Rock tt
Water, and the juſt Proportions of his Rain-Water, that ber
concurred to make the Deluge? I find no Calculations be:
there, but general Expreſſions, that the one was far greater df |
than the other; and that may be eaſily preſumed, con- A
cerning the oily Subſtance, and the watery Chaos: What
Scruples therefore, p. 80, $1. he raiſes, in reference to be
Chaos, againſt the Theoriſt, for not having demonſtrated »i
the Proportions of the Liquors of the Abyſs, fall upon Ml
his own Hypotheſis; for the ſame or greater Reaſons. «r
And you know what the old Verſe ſays, A


Tarpe eſt Dockori, cum culpa redarguit ipſum. But


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 411

But, however, he will have ſuch Exceptions, p. 81. to
hand good 1 the Theoriſt, though they are not good
aint other Perſons ; becauſe the I heoritt ſtands upon
Terms of Certainty, and in one Place of his Book, has
tis Sentence, Ego 1 &c. Theſe Words, I think,
re very exceptionable, if they be taken with the Context:
For this Evidence and Certainty, which the Theoriſt
ſpeaks of, is brought in there in Oppoſition to ſuch un-
retain Arguments, as are taken from the Interpretation
of Fables and Symbols; or from Etymologies and Gram-
matical Criticiſms, which are expreſly mention'd in the
receding Diſcourſe: And yet this Sentence, becauſe it
might be taken in too great an Extent, is left out in the
ſccond Edition of the I heory, and therefore, none had
Reaſon to inſiſt upon it. But I ſee the Exceptor puts him-
ff into a State of War, and thinks there is no foul Play
wainſt an Enemy.

So much for his Charge of Precariouſueſt. We now
tome to the ſecond, which is call'd Unphiloſophicalneſs.
And, why is the Theoriſt, in this Caſe, unphiloſophical ?
becauſe, ſays the Exceptor, he ſuppoſes terreſtrial Par-
ticles to be diſpers'd through the whole Sphere of the
Chaos, as high as the Moon: And why not, pray, if it
tk a mere Chaos? Where, antecedently to Separations,
ll Things are mix'd and blended without Diſtinction of
Gravity or Levity; otherwiſe it is not a mere Chaos:
And when Separations begin to be made, and Diſtinction
of Parts and Regions, ſo far it is ceaſing to be a mere
Chaos. But then, ſays the Obſervator, why did not the
Moon come down, as well as theſe terreſtrial Particles?
[anſwer by another Queſtion, Why does not the Moon
ome down now ? Seeing ſhe is ſtill in our Vortex, and
tt the ſame Diſtance ; and ſo the ſame Reaſon which kee
der up now, kept her up then: Which Reaſon he will not
be at a loſs to underſtand, if he underſtand the Principles
Of his great Philoſopher. |


Fr OT


0 Ep) quidem in ef ſum fententia, ſi in barum rerum de quibus agitur, cog-
tinem, aut aliarum guarumcungue, que moment i ſunt, viſum fuerit Deo aut
Natuy e ut pa teret bominibus ratio per veniendi, ratio ille certa eft, & in alique
Us & invilts evidenti2 fundata : Non conjefuralis, vage, & dubia. Quatem
"mp? ii, qui optims utuntur libertate ſus, & gui maxim? fibi cavent as eprori-
be, "quam ampletterentur.


We


—


412 An Anſwer to the Eæceptiont mad


We come now to the laſt Charge: That the Theor
in this Part of it, is antiſcriptural. And why o ?
cauſe it ſuppoſes the Chaos dark, whereas the Scripty
ſays, there was Light the firſt Day. Well, but does!
Scriprure ſay, that the Chaos was throughly illuminate
the firſt Day? The Exceptor, p. 52. as I remember, mak


"08
) porav


the primigenial Light to have been the Rudiment of a u!
and calls it there, lin. 17. a faint Light, and a fe L anc
Light; and in this Place, lin. 27. a faint Glummering, heoril
then the Sun, in all its Strength and Glory, cannot (omWMreaſo
times diſpel a Miſt out of the Air, what could this {ating
feeble Glimmering do, towards the Diſſipation of ſuch tis o
roſs caliginous Opacity, as that was? This Light me Th:
- ſufficient to make ſome Diſtinction of Day and Ni whi
in the Skies; and we do not find any other Mark of Wii th
Strength in Scripture, nor any other Uſe made of it, Muy
So we have done with this Chapter. Give me e the -
only, without Offence, to obſerve the Style of the haos
ceptor, in reference to Scripture, and the Theory. H on,
apt to call every Thing antiſcriptural, that ſuits not tab!


Senſe; neither is that enough, but he mult alſo call
P. 78. a bold Affront to Scripture. He confeſſes, he h
made, p. 299. per. a little bold with Scripture himſelf,
his new Hypotheſis; how much that [:zt/e will pro
we ſhall ſee hereafter. But however, as to that h
Word, Afronz, a diſcreet Man, as he is not apt tog
an Aftront, ſo neither is he forward to call every c
Word, an Affront: Both thoſe Humours are Extrea
and breed Quarrels. Suppoſe a Man ſhould ſay bold

| God Almighty hath no Right Hand. Oh, might the

| madverter cry, That's a bold Affront to Scripture: Fe

can ſhew you many and plain Texts of Scripture, bot

the 014 Teſtament, and in the New Teſtament,
expreſs Mention is made of God's Right Hand.


will you offer to oppoſe Reaſon and Philoſophy to eco

Words of Scripture, often repeated, and in both 1 <hpott

ments? O Tempora, O Mores! So far as my ObſcrvatllWiten!

reaches, weak Reaſons commonly produce ſtrong ena

fions. When a Man hath clear Reaſons, they ſatis'y or;

quiet the Mind; and he is not much concern'd, We tak
| others receive his Notions, or no: But when we ha
| ſtrong Averſion to an Opinion, from other Motive

Conſiderations, and find our Reaſons doubtful or ing

cient; then, according to the Courſe of human Nat «iz

the Paſſions riſe for a farther Aſſiſtance ; and what s,


azainſt the Theory of the EARTH. 413


in point of Argument, is made up by Invectives aud


rravations. |


CH AP. IV.


PHIS Chapter is chiefly concerning the Central Fire,
L and the Origin of. the Chaos; of both which, the
heorilt had declared he would not treat: And *tis an
wrcaſonable Violence to force an Author to treat of what
his own Diſcourſe. As to the firſt of theſe, ſee what
E Theoriſt hath ſaid, Engl. Theor. p. 451, and 86, 67.
; which Paſſages it is evident, that he did not meddle
ith the central Parts of the Earth ; nor thought it ne-
ry for his Hypotheſis: As is alſo more fully expreſs'd

| the Latin Theory, p. 45. For, do but allow him a
hos from the Bottom of the Abyſs, upwards to the
don, and he deſires no more for the Formation of an
bitable Earth: Neither is it the Part of Wiſdom, ro
da new Subject with unneceſſary Curioſities.

Then as to the Origin of the Chaos, ſee how the The-
it bounds his Diſcourſe as to that, Ezgl. Theor. p.45r.
kid not think it neceſſary to carry the Story and Ori-
ml of the Earth, higher than the Chaos, as Zoroaſter and
mheus from to have done; but taking that for our Foun-
n which Antiquity, ſacred and profane, does ſuppoſe,
natural Reaſon * and confirm, we have form d
Earth from it. To form an habitable Earth from a
nos given, and to ſhew all the great Periods and gene-
Changes of that Earth, throughout the whole Courſe
ts Duration, or while it remain'd an Earth, was the
kquate Deſign of the Theoriſt. And was this Deſign
ſhort or ſhallow, that it could not ſatisfy the great
Ml of the Exeeptor, p. 88. but it muſt be a Flaw in the
potheſis, that it did go higher than the Chaos? We
Ment our ſelves with theſe Bounds at preſent. And
en a Man declares, that he will write only the Roman
ory, will you ſay his Work's imperfe&, becauſe it does
tare in the Perſian and Aſſyrian ? |


5 edmittamus inſuper Ignem Centralem, froe Maſſam ignis in centro Terre ;
ſudem non eft bujus argumenti, Neque partem intimam Chaos, niſi obi ter
Poms, conſidera, cùm ad rem noftram non ſpeflet, Vid. etiam p. 186.


* ;
Theſe


414 Au Anſwer to the Exceptions mags


Theſe Things conſider'd, to ſpeak freely of this CM eth
ter, it ſeems to me, in a great Meaſure, impertinent ; era
leſs it was defign'd to ſhew the Learning of the Obſe
tor, who loves, I perceive, to dabble in Philoſophy, thou Lane
little to the Purpoſe: For, as far as I ſee, his DiſquighMiſiis
ons generally end in Scepticiſm ; he diſputes firſt one vi Cart.
then another; and, at laſt determines nothing. He u e
bles betwixt Des Cartes and Moſes, the Rabbies, the Milan
Znagint, the Platoniſts, Magnetiſme, ſtriate Particles, e u
Pre-exiſtence of Souls: And ends in nothing, as to the t!
mation of the Earth, which was to be the Subject oft
Chapter. We proceed therefore to the next, in hopes Mt
meet with cloſer Reaſoning. ble a


CHAP V. for L


ROM the manner of the Earth's Formation,
Exceptor, p. 106. now proceeds to the Form of


if compleated. And his firſt Exception is, That it wot

want Haters, or Rivers to water it. He ſays, there wo"

either be no Rivers at all, or none, at leaſt, in due ti e
The Theoriſt hath repleniſh'd that Earth with RAe


flowing from the extreme Parts of it, towards the 15
dle, in continual Streams; and watering, as a Garden,
the intermediate Climates. And this conſtant Supply
Water was made from the Heavens, by an uninterrup |
Stream of Vapours, which had their Courſe through 4
Air, from the middle Parts of the Earth towards the


treme; and falling in Rains, return'd again upon the SW"
face of the Earth, from the extreme Parts to the midd b
For that Earth being of an oval or ſomething oblong WP”
gure, there would be a Declivity all along, or Delcqn"

om the Polar Parts towards the Equinoctial; whichg |


Courſe and Motion to theſe Waters. And the Vapo

above never falling in their Courſe, the Rivers would

ver fail below; but a perpetual Circulation would be ee

Bun betwixt the Waters of the Heavens and of
.

This is a ſhort Account of the State of the Water g
the primeval Earth. Which you may ſee repreſented
explain'd more at large, in the ſecond Book of the The *;
Chap. 5. And this, I believe, is an Idea more eaſily Cl
ceiv'd, than any we could form concerning the Wa
and Rivers of the preſent Earth, if we had not Expericl


againſi the Theory of the ExRT H. 415


them. Suppoſe a Stranger, that had never ſeen this
erraqueous Globe, where we live at preſent, but was
old the general Form of it; how the Sea lies, how the
Land, and what was the Conſtitution of the Heavens: If
tis Stranger Was asked his Opinion, whether ſuch an
Earth was habitable; and particularly, whether they could
ve Waters commodiouſly in ſuchan Earth, and how the
and Countries would be ſupplied? I am apt to think,
te would find it more difficult (upon an Idea only, with-
ut Experience) to provide Waters for ſuch an Earth, as
ess at preſent, than for ſuch an one as the primeval
Earth was. Tis true, he would eaſily find Rains, poſſi-
he and natural, but with no Conſtancy or Regularity;
nd theſe, he might imagine, would only make tranſient
orrents, not any fix'd and permanent Rivers. But as
r Fountains deriv'd from the Sea, and breaking out in
Aer Grounds, I am apt to believe, all his Philoſophy
zould not be able to make a clear Diſcovery of them :
but Things that are familiar to us by Experience, we think
ay in Speculation, or never enquire into the Cauſes of
em. Whereas, other Things, that never fall under our
Lyerience, though more ſimple and intelligible in them-
klves, we reject often as Paradoxes or Romances. Let
bs be applied to the preſent Caſe, and we proceed to an-
er the Exceptions.
Let us take that Exception firſt, as moſt material, p. I 14.
ut pretends there would have been no Rivers at all in
& primeval! Earth, if it was of ſuch a Form as the
coriſt had defcrib'd. And for this, he gives one grand
leon, Becauſe the Regions towards the Poles, where
& Rains are fuppos'd to fall, and the Rivers to riſe,
ould have been all frozen and congeal'd; and conſe-
ently, no fit Sources of Water for the reſt of the Earth.
Why weſhould think thoſe Regions would be frozen, and
e Rains that fell in them, he gives two Reafons, the
Vitance, and the Obliquity of the Sun. Asalſothe Ex-
ee Nence we have now, of the Coldneſs and Frozenneſs
thoſe Parts of the Earth. But as to the Diſtance of
bon, He confeſſes, p. 118. that is not the Thing zhat
cr" or chiefly make a Climate cold. He might have
ved, particularly in that Earth, where the Sun was ne-
Ta @ greater Diſtance than the Equator. Then, as to
1 e Obliquity of the Sun, neither was that ſo great, not ſo
at uiderable, in the firſt Earth, as in the preſent. Be-
cried: the Body of that lay in a direct Poſition to * Sun;
| | whereas


416 An Anſtoer to the Exceptions mags


whereas the preſent Earth lies in an oblique. And though
the Polar Circles or Circumpolar Parts of that Earth, did
not lie ſo perpendicular to the Sun as the EquinoQtial, and
conſequently were cooler, yet there was no Danger of
their being frozen or congeal'd. It was more the Moi.


ſture and exceſſive Rains of thoſe Parts that made them


uninhabitable, than the extreme Coldneſs of the Climate
of it ſelf. And if the Exceptor had well conſider'd the
Differences betwixt the preſent and primitive Earth, 3
to Obliquity of Pofition, and that which follows from it
the Length of Nights, he would have found no Reaſo
to have charg'd that Earth with zipping and freezing Coll
where there was not, I believe, one Morſel of Ice, fro
one Pole to another: But that will better appear, if w
conſider the Cauſes of Cold.

There are three general Cauſes of Cold: The Diſtance
of the Sun, his Obliquity, and his total Abſence; I ment
in the Nights. As to Diſtance, that alone mult be of lit
tle Effect, ſeeing there are many Planets (which mult nc
be look'd upon as mere Lumps of Ice) at a far greats
Diſtance from the Sun, than ours : And as to Obliquity
2 ſee it was much leſs conſiderable in the reſpettiy

arts of the Primitive Earth, than of the preſent. Where
fore, theſe are to be conſider'd but as ſecondary Cauſes 0
Cold, in reſpect of the third, the total Abſence of t
Sun in the Night Time: And where this happens to |
long and tedious, there you muſt expect Exceſs of Coll
Now. i: the primitive Earth there was no ſuch Thing
long Winter Nights, but every where a perpetual Eq
nox, or a perpetual Day. And conſequently, there w
no Room or Cauſe of exceſſive Cold in any Part of
But an the contrary, the Caſe is very different in the pr
ſen: Earth; for in our Climate, we have not the Preſent


of the Sun, in the Depth of Winter, half as long as he


abſent; and towards the Poles they have Nights that !:
ſeveral Weeks or Months together: And then 'tis t
the Cold rages, binds up the Ground, freezes the Occ:
and makes thoſe Parts more or leſs uninhabitable.
where no ſuch Cauſes are, you need not fear any ſut
Effects. |
Thus much to ſhew that there might be Rains, W
ters, and Rivers, in the primigenial Earth, and towar
the extreme Parts of it, without any Danger of free
But however, ſays the other Part of the Exception, 704


Rivers would not be made in due Time. That's wh
accordil


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 417


xcording to the Proceſs you take; if you take a mere
aural Proceſs, the Rivers could not flow throughout
e Earth, all on a ſudden; but you may accelerate that
tocels, as much as you pleaſe, by a Divine Hand. As
this Particular indeed of the Rivers, one would think
ere ſhould be no Occaſion for their ſudden flowin

rough the Earth, becauſe Mankind could not be ſudden-


ad the Way, and prepare the Ground in every Country,
xfore Mankind arrived there, that ſeems to be all that
Fould be neceſſary upon their Account: Neither can it be
magined, but that the Rivers would flow taſter than Man-
nd could follow; for it is probable, in the firſt hun-
ted Years, Men did not reach an hundred Miles from
ome, or from their firſt Habitations: And we cannot
ppoſe the Defluxion of Water, upon any Declivity, to
half ſo flow. As to the Channels of theſe Rivers,
e Manner of their Progreſs, and other Circumſtances,
ole Things are ſet down fully enough in the fifth Chapter
the ſecond Book of the Engliſh Theory, and it would
e needleſs to repeat them here.

But the Anti-Theoriſt ſays, this ſlow Production and
opagation of Rivers is contrary to Scripture; both be-
aſe of the Rivers of Paradiſe, and alſo, becauſe Fiſnes
ere made the ſixth Day. As to that of the Fiſhes, he
uſt firſt prove that thoſe were River-Fiſhes; for the Scrip-
Ire, Cen. i. 21. and 22. makes them Sea-Fiſh, and in-
aces in great Whales. But he ſays (p. 113, 114.) it
Il appear in the Sequel of his Diſcourſe, that the Abyſs
buld be no Receptacle of Fiſhes. Lo that Sequel of
8 Diſcourſe therefore we mult refer the Examination of
5 Particular. Then as to Paradiſe, that was but one
le Spot of Ground, ch. xiii. according to the ordinary
pothefis ; which he ſeems to adhere to: And Rivers
Ight be there as ſoon as he pleaſes, ſeeing its Seat is not
a determin'd. But as for the Lands which they are ſaid
traverſe or encompaſs, that they might be the Work of
me, when their Channels and Courſes were extended
d ſettled ; as they would be, doubtleſs, long before the


"1 of Paradiſe, it would be a long Story to handle that
fbute here. And 'tis fit the Authors ſhould firſt agree


|
"8 River, or Rivers. 8


. Cu Ap.


. ̃ͤͤ⁰—w n .


f propagated throughout the Earth: And if they did but


me that Moſes writ that Deſcription ; But as to the Ri-


nongſt themſelves, before we determine the Original


= — — — — —— — — — — — —_
$a = — — 1 —
— 22 — — — Lan a — — ——— ao il... —
— * 7 — — . — -] *


418 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


CHA YI


WE come now to the Deluge, where the great
ception is this, p. 121. I hat according to the The
ry, the Deluge would have come to paſs, whether Mya
kind had been degenerate, or no.

We know Mankind did degenerate, and 'tis a dang
rous Thing to argue upon falſe Suppoſitions; and to
what would have come to pals, in cale ſuch a Thing
not come to paſs: Suppoſe Ada had not finn'd, w
would have become of the Meſſiah? Eph. i. 4. 1 Pe
20. Apoc. xiii. 8. and the Diſpenſation of the Goſ
which yet is ſaid to have been determin'd more early th
the Deluge? Let the Anti-Theoriſt anſwer himſelf
Queſtion, and he may anſwer his own.

But to take a gentler Inſtance, ſuppoſe Adam had
eaten the torbidden Fruit, how could he and all his
ſtcrity have liv'd in Paradiſe? A few Generations we
have fill'd that Place; and ſhould the reſt have been tur
out into the wide World, without any Sin or Faul
theirs? You ſuppoſe the Ante-diluvian Heavens
Earth to have been the ſame with the preſent, and, co
quently, ſubject to the ſame Accidents and Inconven
ces. The Action of the Sun would have been the i
then as now, according to your Hypotheſis: I he f
Exceſſes of Heat and Cold, in the ſeveral Regions
Climates; the ſame Vapours and Exhalations extt
out of the Earth; the ſame Impurities and Corrup
in the Air: And in Conſequence of theſe, the ſame
ternal Diſpoſition to epidemical Diſtempers. Beſides, t
would be the ſame Storms and Tempeſts at Sea, the!
Earthquakes, and other Deſolations at Land. So that
all the Sons and Daughters of Men, to uſe the EX
tor's elegant Style, p. 122. been as pure and bright a
could 777% have dropt out of the 2 of Creation,
ſhould ſtill have been ſubject to all theſe Inconvenis
and Calamities. If Mankind had continued ſpotleſs
undegenerate*till the Deluge, or tor ſixteen hundred Y
they might as well have continued ſo for ſixteen hu
more. And in a far leſs Time, according to their!
fulneſs and Multiplication, the whole Face of the 1
would have been thick covered with Inhabitants: K
Continent and every Iſland, every Mountain 11 a


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 419


Jeſert, and all the Climates from Pole to Pole. But
ould naked Innocency have liv'd happy in the frozen
Zones, where Bears and Foxes can ſcarce ſubſiſt? in
he midſt of Snows and Ice, thick Fogs, and more than
Lin Darkneſs, tor ſome Months together? Would

this have been a Paradiſe, or a paradiſaical State, to
eſe virtuous Creatures? I think it would be more ad-
able for the Exceptor, not to enter into ſuch Diſputes,
rounded only upon Suppoſitions. God's Preſcience is
wallible, as his Counſels are immutable.

But the Exceptor further ſuggeſts, p. 121. that the
ſheory does not allow a judicial and extraordinary Pro-
dence in bringing on the Deluge, as a Puniſhinent upon
lankind. Which, I muſt needs ſay, is an untrue and
.charitable Suggeſtion, as any one may ſee, both in
ke Latin Theory * C 13 6. and in the Eugliſb, in ſe-
era! Places. So at the Entrance upon the Explication of
eDeluge (Theor. p. 92.) are theſe Words, Let xs then
poſe, that at a Time appointed by Divine Providence,
m Cauſes made ready to do that great Execution upon
ful World, that this Abyſs was open'd, aud the Frame of
Earth broke, &c. And accordingly in the Concluſion
that Diſcourſe about the Deluge, are theſe Words,
lheor. p. 144.) In the mean time J do not know any
me to be added in this Part, unleſs it be to conclude with
Idvertiſeraent to prevent any Miſtake or Miſconſtruction,
F this Theory, by explaining the Deluge in a natural
a, or by natural Cauſes, did detract from the Power of
% by which that GREAT FUDGMENT WAS
WUGHT UPON THE WORLD, IN A PROT 1-
ENTIAL AND MIRACULOUS MANNER. Aud
ie three following Paragraphs (Theor. p. 144, 145,
) which conclude that Chapter, there is a tull Ac-
Wt given both of an ordinary and extraordinary Provi-


Nitandums vero, quamvis mundi veteris diſclutionem M rationes Diluvii i-
#odinem cauſarum naturatium, explicemus, quod eo modo magis cla? &


tintelligantur 5 non ided in penam bumani geners or dinatum Fuſe dilu vi-
 P"gulique ipſins motibus pr æfuiſſe providentiam, inficiamur : imo in eo et-
Wim Sapientia divina, quod mundum naturalem morali ita coaptet & at-


et, ut bujus ingenio, illius ordo gy diſpoſitio ſemper reſpondeat : & amborun
WW; me ment if, ſimul concurrant & und compleantur utrinſqus tem, W vis
nes 5 tþſe etiam Apoſtolus Petrus diluuii & excidii mundani cauſas netue
get, cam git, I; Ev, &c.


420 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


dence, in reference to the Deluge, and other great Rey
lutions of the natural World.

But it is a Weakneſs however to think, that, when
Train is laid in Nature, and Methods concerted, fort
execution of a Divine Judgment, therefore it is not pr,
vidential. God is the Author and Governor of the n
tural World, as well as of the Moral: And he ſees th,
rough the Futuritions of both, and hath ſo diſpos'd th
one, as to ſerve him in his juſt Judgments upon the othe
Which Method, as it is more to the Honour of his Wi
dom, ſo it is no way to the Prejudice of his Power «
Juſtice. And what the Exceptor fuggeſts concerning A
theiſts, and their preſum'd Cavils at ſuch an Explicationg
the Deluge, is a Thing only ſaid at random and witho
Grounds. On the contrary, ſo to repreſent the Senſe «
Scripture, in natural Things, as to make it unintelligible
and inconfiltent with Science and Philoſophick Truth, i
one great Cauſe, in my Opinion, that breeds and nouriſhe
Atheiſm. |


CH App. VII.


THIS Chapter is about the Places of Scripture, a
T ledg'd in Confirmation of the Theory: And chief
concerning that remarkable Diſcourſe in St. Peter, 2 5
Piſt. iii. Which treats of the Difference of the Ante: dilt
vian World, and the preſent World. That Diſcourſe
ſo fully explain'd in the Review of the Theory, that 1th!
it is plac'd beyond all Exception. And the Animadvert6
here makes his Exception only againſt the firſt Word
ver. . Aavobaver yap aur; 18 dg. which we thi
render, For this they willingly are ignorant of. But he ge
nerally renders it, wilfully gnorant of, and lays 2 gre
Streſs upon that word wilfully. But if he quarrel Wil
the Engliſh Tranſlation, in this particular, he mult a
fault the Vulgate, and Beza, and all others that [have -
met withal. And it had been very proper for him, in ti
Caſe, to have given us ſome Inſtances or Proots, oute
Scripture or Greek Authors, where this Phraſe ſignifies
wilful and obſtinate Ignorance. He ſays it mult have bee!
a wilful Ignorance, otherwiſe it was not blameable
Whereas St. Peter gives it a ſharp Reproof. 1
There are many Kinds and Degrees of plamerbleifce fret
l


aniw
iudices, fro
a contented Ignorance, an Ignorance from Prejudice n


— A *


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 421


Non-attendance, and want of due Examination. Theſe
ire all blameable in ſome Degree, and all deſerve ſome
Reproof; but it was not their Ignorance that St. Peter
chiefly reproves, but their deriding and ſcoff:zg at the Doc-
tine of the coming of our Saviour, and the Conflagra-
ton of the World. And therefore he calls them, Scoffer-,
walking after their own Luſts.

But the Exceptor ſeems at length inclinable to render
the forementioned Words thus, p. 137. They are wil-
ugly mindleſs or forgetful. And I believe the Iranſla-
ton would be proper enough. And what gentler Re-
proof can one give, than to ſay, you are willing t forget
ſach an Argument, or ſuch a Conſideration ; which im-
plies little more than Non-attention, or an Inclination of
the Will towards the contrary Opinion? We cannot tell
what Evidence, or what Traditions they might have then
concerning the Deluge, but we know they had the Hiſto-
ry of it by Moſes, and all the Marks in Nature, that we
have now, of ſuch a Diſſolution. And they, that pre-
tended to philoſophize upon the Works of Nature, and
the Immutability of them, might very well deſerve that
modeſt Rebuke, that they were willing to forget the firſt
Heavens and firſt Earth, and the Deſtruction of them at
4 Deluge, when they talk'd of an immutable State of

ature, |

Neither is there any Thing in all this, contrary to what
the Theoriſt had ſaid, Theor. c. 1. concerning the ancient
thiloſophers : "That none of them ever invented or de-
monſtrated from the Cauſes, the true State of the firſt
kath. This muſt be granted ; but it is one | hing to de-
monſtrate from the Cauſes, or by way of Theory, and
mother Thing to know at large: Whether by Scripture,
Tradition, or Collection from Effects. The Mutability
ad Changes of the World, which theſe Pſeudo-Chriſtians
would not allow of, was a knowable Thing, taking all
tie Means which they might and ought to have attended
to: At leaſt, before they ſhould have proceeded ſo far as
to reject the Chriſtian Doctrine concerning the future
Hanges of the World, with Scorn and Deriſion. Which
$the very Thing the Apoſtle ſo much cenſur'd them for.

So much for what is ſaid by the Exceptor concernin
this place of St. Peter. To all the reſt he gives an eaſy

nſwer, (in the Contents of this Chapter) viz. That
( b are figurative, and ſo not argumentative. The Places
# deripture upon which the Theory depends, are {tated


Ee 3 dittinectiy


422 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


5 empty Places: Aud hangeth the Earth upon nothing.


next Verſe he mentions Cloxds. But how does it appt


diſtinctly and in order, in the REVIEW: And, to avg;
Repetitions, we muſt ſometimes refer to that, Rexje;
p. 371, 372. particularly, as to two remarkable Place
P/al. xxiv. 2. and Pſal. cxxxvi. G. concerning the Foundati
and Extenſion of the Earth upon the Seas. Which ;
Exceptor quickly diſpatches by the Help of a Particle au
a Figure. dy
The next he proceeds to, is, Pſal. xxxiii. 7. He gathe
eth the Waters of the Sea, as in a Bag: He layeth up;
Abyſs in Store- Houſes. But, he ſays, it ſhould be render!
as on an Heap : Which is the Exg!jh 1 ranſlation. WIH
ther the Authorities produced, in this cafe, by the Theq
riſt, Eug. Theor. p. 117. or by the Exceptor, are mot
conſiderable, I leave the Reader to judge, But, howere
he cites another place, Pſal. Ixxviii. 13. where the ſan
Word is us'd and apply'd to the Red Sea, which cou
not be enclos'd as in a Bag. Take whether Tranflatie
you pleaſe for this ſecond place; it is no Prejudice tot
Theory, if you render it oz an Heap: For it was a Thi
done by Miracle. But the other Place ſpeaks of the
dinary Poſture and Conſtitution of the Waters, which
not on an Heap, but in a Level or ſpherical Convexity w
the reſt of the Earth. This Reaſon the Animadverter v
not pleas'd to take notice of, tho' it be intimated int
ſame Place of the Theory which he quotes, p. $6. UE
that which I might complain of molt, is his unfair Ci
tion of the next Paragraph of the Theory, Eæcep. p. 14
which he applies peculiarly to this Text of ſal. xxxill
whereas it belongs to all the I exts alledg'd out ot!
Pſalms, and is a modeſt Reflection upon the Explicat
of them, as the Reader may plainly fee, if he plcale
look the Theory, and compare it with his Citation.
The next Place he attacks, is, Fob xxvi. 7. He ſtrete
the North over the Tohu, or, as we render it, over


he ſays, p. 141. Job did either accommodate himlelt t0
Vulgar, or elſe was a perfect Platoniſt. Methinks P
ſhould rather be a Jobiſt, if you would have them
imitate one another. Then he makes an Objection,
anſwers it himſelf; concluding, however, that 700 cc
not but mean this of the preſent Earth, becauſe


that every Thing that Fob mentions in that Chapter, 14
to the ſame time ?


-v-


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 423


The next Place, is, Fob xxxviii. 4, 5, 6. here waſt
ky when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? &c. Theſe
loquent Expoſtulations of the Almighty, he applies all
the preſent Form of the Earth: Where he ſays, there
we the Emboſſings of Mountains, the Enameliing of leſſer
eas, the open Work of the vaſt Ocean, and the fret Work of
bel, &c. Theſe make a great Noiſe, but they might all
te apply'd to the Ruins ot an old Bridge, fallen into the
Water. Then he makes a large Harangue in Commenda—
ton of Mountains, and of the preſent Form of the Earth:
Which, if you pleaſe, you may compare with the tenth
Chapter of the Latin Theory, and then make your Judg-
nent upon both.

But it is not enough for the Exceptor to admire the
Keauty of Mountains, but he, p. 146. will make the The-
wilt to do ſo too, becauſe he nath expreſt himſelf much
eas d with the Sight of thein. Can we be pleas'd with
wthing in an Object but the Beauty ot it? Does not the
Theorilt ſay there, in the very Words cited by the Excep-
pr, S.epe loci ihſius inſolentia & ſpectaculorum novitas de-
bat magis quam denuuſtas in rebus notis & communibus.
We are pleas'd in looking upon the Ruins of a Roman
Amphitheatre, or a triumphal Arch, tho? time have de-
ied its Beauty. A Man may be pleas'd in looking upon
Monſter, will you conclude therefore that he takes it
br a Beanty? There are many Things in Objects, beſides
auty, that may pleaſe; but he that hath not Senſe and
uz ment enough to ſee the Difference of thoſe Caſes, and
Fence the Pleaſures ariſe, it would be very tedious to
Kat it into him by Multitude of Words.
after his Commendation of Mountains, he falls up-
m the Commendation of Rain: Making thoſe Coun-
ties, that enjoy it, to be better water'd than by Rivers;
nd conſequently the preſent Earth better than that para-
ical Earth deſcrib'd by the Theoritt. And in this he
ins, he follows the Rule of Scripture, for theſe are his

ords, p. 148. And that theſe Rules, whereby we mea-
ſure the Uſefulneſs of this Earth, and fhew it to be more ex-
lent than that of the Theory, are the moſt true and pro-
er Rules, is manifeſt from God's making uſe of the ſame,
na Caſe not nulike : For he, comparing gypt aud Paleſtine,
Prejers the latter before the former; becauſe in Mgypt the
led wn was watered With the Foot, as a Garden of
Herbs; bt Paleſtine was a Land of Hills and Valleys,
ud drank Water of the Rain of Heaven, Dez. xi. 10, 11.


G Let


_— 7


424 An An ſiver to the Exceptions made


Let this reſt a while: In the mean time let us take nc
tice how unluckily it falls out for the Obſervator, that
Country that had no Rain, ſhould be compared in Serig
ture, or join'd in Privilege, with Paradiſe it ſelf, an
the Garden of God. For ſo is this very A:gypt, Gen. xii
10. tho? it had no Rain, but was water'd by Rivers. Th
Words of Scripture are theſe. Aud Lot lifted up his Eye
and beheld all the Plain of Jordan, that it was well water,
every where (before the Lord deſtroyed Sodom and Gon
rah) even as the Garden of the Lord, like the Land of A
Hir: The Plain of Jordan you ſee is commended tor it
'ruitfulneſs, and being well watered : And as the heigh
of its Commendation, it is compar'd with Agypt, ant
with the Paradiſe of God. Now in Egypt we kno
there was little or no Rain: And we read of none!
Paradiſe :. But they were both water'd by Rivers. There
fore the greateſt Commendation of a Land, for Pleaſur
and Fertility, according to Scripture, is its being wel
water'd with Rivers: Which makes it like a Paradiſe
Surely then you cannot blame the Theoriſt, having thi
Authority beſides all other Reaſons, for making the pars
diſaical Earth to have been thus water'd.
Now let the Exceptor conſider how he will interpre
and apply his place in Deuteronomy, and make it conſiſte
with this in Gezeſts. Till I fee a better Interpretation,
like this very well, tho? quite contrary to his: Namely
That they were not to expect ſuch a Land as At, thi
was a Plain naturally fruitful, as being well water's
but the Land they were to poſſeſs, depended upon
Benediction of Heaven: And therefore they might expeg
more or leſs Fertility, according as they kept God's Co
mandments. And ſo much tor thoſe two Texts 6
Scripture.
Laſtly, The Exceptor, p. 149. in the Concluſion of h
Diſcourſe about that place in Fob, makes a Reflection up
on the Impropriety of thoſe Expreſſions made in Fob, abo
Foundations and Corner: ſtones, if they be apply'd tot
firit Earth deſcrib'd by the Theoriſt. But this ſeems to my
an Elegancy in that Diſcourſe, which he makes a Fault
Whether it be underſtood as an Alluſion only to our ma
ner of Building, by deep Foundations, and ſtrong Cornet
ſtones: Or an ironical Interrogation, as it ſeems to me
implying, that there was no Foundation (ſtrictiy ſo call'd


nor Corner-ſtone, in that great Work, tho' we * |


againſt the Theory of the EAK TH. 425
not build a Cottage or little Bridge, without ſuch Prepa-
ions.
"He proceeds then to the following Verſes in that thirty-
eighth Chapter. Who ſhut up the Sea with Doors, when it broke
forth as if it had iſſ ed out of a Womb? This the Theoriſt
underſtands of the Diſruption of the Abyſs at the Deluge,
when the Sea broke forth out of the Womb of the Earth :
Or out of that ſubterraneous Cavity, where it was enclo-
ſed as in a Womb. *L is plainly imply'd in the Words
of the Text, that the Sea was ſhut up in ſome ¶ umb, be-
fore it broke forth. I deſire therefore to know in what
Womb that was. You will find Interpreters much at a
ofs to give a fair Anſwer to that Queſtion: What was
that enclos'd State of the Sea? And what Place, or Part
of Nature, was that Receptacle where it lay? But the Ex-
ceptor hath found out anew Anſwer. He ſays, it was that
Vomb of Non-entity. Theſe are his Words, 12 juſt then
(it its Creation) gaſbed out of the Worab of Nothing, into
Exiſtence. This is a ſubtle and far-fetch'd Notion. Me-
inks the Womb of Nothing, is much-what the ſame as zo
Womb. And ſo this is no Anſwer. But however let us
conſider how far it would ſuit this Caſe, if it was admit-
ted. If you underſtand the ¶ mb of Noa-entity, Gen. i.2.
the Sea broke out of that Womb the firſt Day, and had
10 Bars or Doors ſet to it, but flow'd over all the Earth
without Check or Control. Therefore that could not
te the Time or State here ſpoken of. And to refer that
keltraint, or thoſe Bars and Doors, to another I ime, which
re ſpoken of here in the ſame Verſe, would be very in-
eiculable in the Exceptor : p. 150. ſeeing he will not al-
ow the Theoriſt to ſuppoſe thoſe Things that are ſpoken
(fin different Verſes, to be underſtood of different Limes.
To conclude, this metaphyſical Notion of the Womb of
Nubiag, is altogether impertinent, at leaſt in this Caſe :
For the Text is plainly 9 of Things local and cor-
*% and this Priſon of the Sea mult be underſtood as
uch,

He proceeds now to the laſt Place alledg'd, Prov. viii.
7, 28. When he prepared the Heavens, I was there:
When be ſet a Compaſs upon the Face of the Deep. The
word MT which we bs aa Compaſs, he ſays, ſignifies no
more than the Rotundity or ſpherical Figure of the Abyls.
And ſo the Senſe will run thus, hen God ſet a Rotundity,
vr ſpherical Figare, upon t he Face of the Abyſs. But where-
„the Word may as well fignity a Sphere or Orb, the

| Theoriſt


— -


— —


——


e
— —
x. 8


— —
— 2


— 2 — — — — — ——— —
— „ - —


Place, and upon ſich an Occaſion, where the great Work


426 An Anſwer to the Exceptions mage


Theoriſt thinks it more reaſonable that it ſhould be ſa
tranſlated: And ſo the Sentence would run thus, e
God ſet an Orb upon the Face of the Deep. And this Dix.
courle of Soſomon's, referring to the Beginning of thy
World, he thinks it rational to underſtand it of the ff
habitable Earth: Which is really an Orb ſet over the Face
of the Deep. 225

One cannot ſwear for the Signification of a Word in
every particular Place, where it occurs: But when there
are two Senſes whereof it is capable, and the one is muc
more important than the other, it is a fair Preſumptionte
take it in the more important Senſe ; eſpecially in ſuch


of the Divine Wildom and Power are celebrated: A
they are here by $9/0m9u. And it cannot be deny'd, tha
our Senſe of the Words is more important than the other
For of what Conſequence is it to ſay, God made the By
of the Abyſs round. Every one knows, that Fluids of thei
own accord run into that F 8 So as that would be
ſmall Remark upon a great Occaſion, _

The Conſtruction of this Orb we ſpeak of, minds!
of an Injuſtice which the Exceptor hath done the Theory
inthe precedent Part of this Chapter, by a falſe Accuſa
tion. For he ſays, the Theory makes the Conſtructione
the firſt Earth to have been merely mechanical. At lea
his Words ſeem to ſignify as much, which are theſe, p. 14
Aud fÞ its Formation, ſpeaking of the firſt Earth, had bee
merely mechanical, as the Theory makes it. That the Col
ſtruction was not merely mechanical, in the Opinion
the Theoriſt, you may ſee, Exg. Theor. p. $8. which
becauſe we have cited it before, we will not here repe
The Theoriſt might alſo complain, that the Exceptor cit
the firſt Edition of the Theory for ſuch Things as ate |
out in the ſecond: Which yet was printed a 1I'welvemont
before his Animadv-rſfions. And therefore in Fairnes
ought always to have conſulted the laſt Edition, and |
Senſe of the Author, before he had cenſured him, 0!
Work. But this unfair Method, it ſeems, pleas'd his H
mour better: p. $1. p. 100, laſt Part, as you may ſee int
Chapter, p. 154. P. 227, 228. h. 244. and in ſeveral oth
Places; where Paſſages are cited and inſiſted upon, th
are no here to be found in the ſecond Edition. Not!
mention his defective Citations, omitting that Part 8
qualifies the Sentence, as p. 99. laſt Citation, __—
where, p. 279, 280. p. 288. I make this Note, Neal


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 427


Reader may judge, how well this anſwers that Siucerity,
with which he proteſt he would examine this Work: Ou
i a Friend and Servant to Truth. And therefore with
ch Candor, Meekneſs, and Modeſty, as becomes one who aſ-
Tunes and glories in ſo fair a Charadter, p. 43.

The reſt of this Chapter is a general Cenſure of Citations
out of Scripture, that are only tropical or figurative
Schemes of Speech. T heſe muſt be made ſo indeed, if
dur Senſe of them be not allow'd. But what Neceſſity is
there Of a figurative Interpretation of all theſe Texts ?
The Rule we go by, and I think all good Interpreters, is
tis, that we are not to leave the literal Senſe, unleſs there
tk a Neceſſity, from the Subject-Matter. And there is no
ſich Neceſſity in this Caſe, upon our Hypotheſis : For it
ſuits with the literal Senſe. And 'tis to beg the Que-
tion, to ſay, the literal Senſe is not to be admitted, becauſe
complies too much with the Theory. But as for that
Text of his own, which he inſtances in, The Pillars of the
Earth tremble, that cannot be underſtood (by the fame
Rule) of Pillars literally; becauſe there are no ſuch Pil-
lars of the Earth, upon any Hypotheſis. 25


CH AP. VIII.


HIS Chapter is concerning that grand Property of
the ante-diluvian Earth, a perpetual Equinox cor a
ght Potition to the Sun. This perpetual Equinox the
Lixcepror will by no means admit. But Pm atraid he
nitakes the Notion : For as he explains it in the two firit
ſections of this Chapter, he ſeems to have a falſe Idea of
he whole Matter. He thinks, I perceive, that when the
kuth chang'd its Situation, it was tranſlated from the
Lquator into the Ecliptick: And that before that Change
u the ante-diluvian State, it moved directly under the
Equator. For theſe are his Words, p. 158. So that in
ter annual Motion about the Sun, namely, the Earth, be-
ore that Change, ſhe was carried directiy ander the Equi-
wal, without any Manner of Obliquity in her Site, or De-
Unation towards either of the Tropicks in her Courſe; aud
therefore could never cut the Equinoctial, by paſſing (as now
ſe is preſumed to do) from one Tropick to the other.
Fiich Words, you ſee, he imagines that the Earth mov'd
Fxperually under the Equator, when it had a perpetual
Winox, And when it came out of that State, into this
| | wherein


428 An An ſiwer to the Exceptions mags


wherein it is now, it did not only change its Poſitio
the Poſture of its Axis, but K allo really —
from one Part of the Heavens into another, namely, from
under the Equator to the Ecliptick, and ſo took anothe
Road in its annual Courſe about the Sun. This is a great
Miſtake : And I cannot blame him, if he was ſo averſe:
admit this Change, ſeeing it lay ſo croſs in his Imagination
For what Pallies or Leavers ſhould we employ to remove
the Earth out of the Equator into the Ecliptick ? Arch;
medes pretended, if he had Ground to plant his Enging
upon, that he would move the Earth out of its Place; but
that it was done before, I never knew, nor heard of: An
if the Exceptor had conſider'd what is ſaid in the Theor
upon that Occaſion, Lat. Theor. li. 2. c. 4. he might cal
fily have prevented his Miſtake. But we ſhall meet wit
the ſame Error again in another Place. Let us conſide
now, what Arguments he uſes againſt this Change.
He ſays, p. 159. If there had been ſuch a Change, cithe
Providence, or Mankind, would havepreſery*d the Meme
ry of it. How far the Memory of it hath been preſerv
we ſhall ſee hereafter. In the mean Time, we will giy
him Inſtances of other Things to reflect upon, that are lo
out of Memory, unleſs he be the happy Man that ſha
retrieve them. The Age of the World hath been preſerv'
either by the Memory of Man, or by the Care of Provi
dence. And was not that both a Thing of Importance, and
of eaſy Preſervation ? Noah could not but know the A
of the World, for he was contemporary with five or fi
Generations, that were contemporary with Adam. An
knowing the Age of the World himſelf, he could not es
ſily forbear, one would think, to tell it to his Sons an-
Poſterity. But, to this Day, we do not know what th
true Age of the World is. There are three Bibles, if]
may ſo ſay, or three Pentateuchs, the Hebrew, Samaritan
and Greek: Which do all differ very confiderably in the
Accounts, concerning the Age of the World : And th
moſt learned Men are not yet able to determine witl
Certainty, which of the three Accounts is moſt authen
tick. Then, what think you of the Place of Parade
How well is the Memory or Knowledge of that preſerv'd
Could Noah be ignorant of it? And was it not a fit Sub
ject to diſcourſe of, and entertain his Sons and Nephews
and by them to communicate it to Poſterity? Vet we ſeel
it ſtill in vain. The Fews were as much at a Loſs as W
are: p. 263, 264, 265. and the Chriſtian F athers, FR


„ , we RT, _ oo


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 429


think, were out in their Opinions, both about the Place
and Conditions of it: Neither do you venture to deter-
mine them your ſelf: So that Paradiſe is loſt in a Man-
ner out of the World. What Wonder then if this ſingle
Property of it be loſt? If the Exceptor had well conſider'd
(Eng. Theor. p. 400, 401.) what the Theoriſt has ſaid
concerning the providential Conduct of Knowledge in
the World, this Doubt or Objection might have been
ſpar'd. |

"After a long Excurſion, little to the Purpoſe, but to
ſew his Reading, p. 166. he tells us next, that Scripture
does not favour this Notion of a perpetual Equinox before
the Flood: And cites Gen. viii. 22. which the TI heorift
had cited as a Place that did ſuggeſt to us that Viciſſitude of
Seaſons that was eſtabliſhed atter the Flood. The Words
ndeed are not ſo determinate in themſelves, but that they
may be underſtood, either of the Reſtauration of a former
Order in the Seaſons of the Year, or of the Eſtabliſhment
of a new one. And in whether Senſe they are to be ta-
ken, is to be determin'd by collateral Reaſons and Conſi-
terations. Such the Theoriſt had ſet down, to make it
probable, that they ought to be underſtood as a Declara-
ton of ſuch an Order of the Seaſons of the Year, as was
tought in at that T'ime, and was to continue to the End of
he World. The Exceptor hath not thought fit to take
totice of, or refute thoſe Reaſons, and therefore they
land good, as formerly. Beſides, the Exceptor mult re-
nember, that this Text ſtands betwixt two remarkable
thzenomena,the Longevity of the Ante-diluvians in the old
World, and the Appearance of the Rainbow in the new.
both which were Marks of a different State of Nature in
te two Worlds.

He further excepts, p. 168. againſt that perpetual Equi-
tor before the Flood, for another Scripture-reaſon : viz.
becauſe the Earth was curſt before that Time, and conſe-
ently, he ſays, had not a perpetual Equinox. But if

lat Curſe was ſupernatural, it might have its Effect in any
oſtion of the Earth. For God can make a Land barren,
the think fit, in ſpite of the Courſe of Nature. \And ſo
e alſo muſt ſuppoſe it to have been in this Caſe. For,
on all Suppoſitions, whether of a perpetual Equinox,
no, the Earth is granted to have been very fruitful at
R * ſo would have continued, if that Curſe had not
aerven'd.


Laſtly,


430 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


Laſtly, He makes that an Argument, p. 169. that
Air was cold and intemperate in Paradiſe, and conſequeny
ly no conſtant Equinox, becauſe Adam and Eve 18
themſelves Aprons to cover their Nakedueſs. So, he cg
feſſes, Interpreters 333 underſtand, that it was to co.


their Nakedneſ5s., But he will not allow that to be the tu
Senſe, but ſays thoſe Fig- Leaves were to keep them war
And the other Interpretation of covering their Naſedacſ
he will not admit, for three Reaſons: Firſt, becauſe th
Scripture, as he pretends, does not declare it ſo. Sy
pray, Gen. iii. 7. Secondly, What Shame, ſays he, ue
there have been betwixt [usband and Wife* Thirdly, lf
was Modeſty; when they were innocent, they ſhould hat
been more modeſt. Some Arguments anſwer themſelye
and I do not think theſe deſerve a Confutation. But,
ſays, p. 170. however God made them Coats of Shins 4
terwards, and that was to be a Defence againſt Cold. H
mult tell us in what Climate he ſuppoles Paradiſe to ha
ſtood: And which way, and how tar Adam and Eve we
baniſh'd from it. When thole Things are determin'd,
ſhall know what to judge of this Argument, and of C.
of Skins.

After Lajtly, Jexpected no more: But he hath two
three Reaſons after the Laſt. As firſt, he ſays, p. 17
upon our Hypotheſis, one Hemiſphere of the Globe mu
have been unpeopled: Becauſe the torrid Zone was ut
paſſable. And was not the Ocean as unpaſlable, upc
your Hypotheſis * How got they into America? Al
not only into America, but into all the Iſlands of t
Earth, that are remote from Continents ? Will you ne
allow us one Miracle, for your many? I'm ſure the Ih
oriſt never excluded the Miniſtry of Angels; and the
could as eaſily carry them thorough the torrid Zone,
over the Ocean. But ſecondly, he ſays, There could

no Rains to make the Flood, if there was a perpetu
Equinox. Were not thoſe Rains, that made the F100
extraordinary, and out of the Courſe of Nature? YC
would give one angry Words that ſhould deny it. E
ſides, the Flood-Gates of Heaven were open'd when!
great Deep was broken up, (Gen. vii. 11.)and no Wond
the Diſruption of the Earth ſhould cauſe ſome extraordin
ry Commotions in the Air, Exg. Theor. p. 135. and
ther compreſs the Vapours, or Hop their uſual Courſe ti
wards the Poles, and draw them down in Streams upc


feveral Parts of the Earth. But the Exceptor ſays, „
coul


1


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 431


old not be, becauſe the Theoriſt makes the Rains fall
efore the Diſruption of the Abyſs. But he does not ſup-
ole the Catar acts of Heaven to have been open'd before,
rhich made the grand Rains. And how unfairly that
alage of the Theory is repreſented, we ſhall ſee here-
ter in the fourteenth Chapter.

Laſtly, He concludes all with this Remark, p. 176.
hat all ſorts of Authors have diſputed in what Seaton
the Year the Deluge came, and in what Seaſon of the
ear the World began: Therefore they thought there were
hen different Seaſons of the Year. Theſe Diſputes, he
onfeſles, did manifeſtly proceed from Inadveriency, or
pmething worſe ; Becaule there could not be any one
Seaſon throughout all the Earth at once. He might have
dded, unleſs upon the Suppoſition of the Theory, which
takes an univerſal Equinox at that Time. And why may
ot that have given Occaſion to the general Belief, That
ke World beg un iu the Spring? And when the true Rea-
on of the I radition was loſt, they fell into thoſe imper-
nent Queſtions, Iz what Seaſor of the Year the World be-
uw, But however, we do not depend upon the Belict,
ther of the Antients or the Moderns, as to the Generali-
For we know they had other Notions of theſe Things
mn what the Theory propoſes; otherwiſe it would have
ken a needleſs Work. But notwithſtanding the general
Lror, that Providence did preſerve ſome Traditions and
eſtimonies, concerning that ancient Truth, we ſhall ſce
the next following Diſcourſe.
do much for Scripture and Reaſons. He now comes
examine Authorities: Namely, ſuch Teftimonics as
re alledg'd by the Theoriſt, to ſhew that there was a
dition among the Antients, of 4 Change that had been,
to the Poſition of the Earth: And conſequently, as to
e Form and Seaſons of the Year. The firſt Teitimony
at he excepts againſt, is, that of Diogenes and Anaxa-
ras; who witnels plainly, p. 177. I bat there had been
n Incl ination of the Earth, or a Change of Poſture, ſince
Was form'd and inhabited. But the Exceptor ſays, they
me not aflign'd a true final Caxſe, nor ſuch as agrees
dich the Theory. The ſecond Teſtimony, is, that of Em-
edcles, p. 178. which he excepts againſt, becauſche hath
It given a good efficient Cauſe of that Change. The
Ard Witnels is Leucippus; againſt whom he makes the
me Exception, p. 179. that he doth not afſign the Cauſes
tht, The fourth Witneſs, is Demecrizas ; whom de,

| p. 180.


p. 180. quarrels with upon the ſame Account. But


gal Grounds of rejecting their Teſtimony, as to matte


the Poſture of the Earth. And this is all we require fro


— —
— ——


432 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


this a fair hearing of Witneſſes? Or are theſe juſt an 1,


of Fact, becauſe they are unskilful in giving the Cauſe
and Reaſons of that matter of Fact? That is not requir
in Witneſſes: And they are often impertinent when the
attempt to do it. The Theoriſt does not cite theſe A
thors to learn of them the Cauſes, either efficient or fin
of that Inclination, or Change of Poſture in the Earth, hy
only matter of Fact: To let you ſee, that according t
their Teſtimony, there was a Tradition in that Tim
which they took for true, concerning a Change made


them. If you pretend to invalidate their Teſtimony, b
cauſe they do not philoſophize well about that Chang
that's as if you ſhould deny that there was ſuch a War
the Peloponneſian War, becauſe the Hiſtorian hath not
ſigned the true Cauſes and Reaſons of it : Or as if
Man ſhould give youthe Hiſtory of a Comet, that appea
in ſuch a Year, was of ſuch a Form, and took ſuch
Courſe in the Heavens; and you ſhould deny there wasat
ſuch Comet, becauſe the ſame Author had not given ago
Account of the Generation of that Comet, nor of theC;
ſes of its Formand Motion. The Exceptions made agait
the Teſtimonies of theſe Philoſophers, ſeem to me to
no leſs injudicious.
After theſe Teſtimonies, he p. 181. makes three ot fo
Remarks or Reflections upon them. But they all conce
either the Time of this Change, or the Cauſes of it. Ni
ther of which the Theoriſt either engag'd or intended
prove from theſe Witneſſes. |
There is ſtill one Teſtimony behind, which the Exce
tor hath ſeparated from the reſt, that he might encounte
ſingly. *Tis another Paſſage from Anaxagoras, wh
both notes this Inclination, and the Poſture of the Heave
and Earth before that Inclination. But here the Except
quarrels, firſt, with the word do,: Becauſe Ambr,
the Monk, would have it to be voxzps;, but withomtl
Authority of any Manuſcript: And, as Caſaubon ia
male. Then, heſays, Aldobrandinus tranſlates it zurbuien
but gives no Reaſon for that Tranſlation, in his Not
Therefore he cannot reſt in this, but in the third Place,
gives another Senſe to op doe. And if that Will
pleaſe you, he hath ſtill a fourth Anſwer inreſerve. |
not like when a Man ſhifts Anſwer ſo often; tis align


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 433


25 no great Confidence in any one. But let us have his
hurth Anſwer. Tis this, That Azaxagoras was a kind
heterodox Philoſopher, and what he lays is not much
obe heeded. Theſe are the Words of the Exceptor,
1184. If this will not ſatisfy, I have one T hing more to
er. Grant that Anaxagoras ſhould mean that very De-
nation, which the T heory would have him, yet this truly
ld contribute little towards the Proof of the Thing. For
was a Man as like to be heterodox; as like to broach
maintain falſe and groundleſs Opinions, as any of the
med Antients. Had he made this Exception againſt
s Witneſs at firſt, it might have ſav'd both himſelf and
ja great deal of Pains. For we do allow, if you can
we a Witneſs to be perſona infamis, or non compos men-
tis ſufficient to invalidate his Teſtimony.
But this is a rude and groundleſs Cenſure; ſhall that
ous Azaxagoras, that was call'd MENS, nar” #oxav,
t be thought ſo much as w2extrs compos; nor have
edit enough for an honeſt Witneſs? I am apt to think,
Im thoſe ee and thoſe Remains we have left
him, that there was not a more conſiderable Man a-
gt the Antients, for Nobleneſs of Mind and natural
owledge. I could bring the Teſtimonies of many an-
It Authors, and of many Chriſtian Fathers, to clear
Reputation, and place it above Envy. Tis generally
now ledg'd, that he firſt introduc'd an intellectual Prin-
ſe, in the Formation of the Univerſe, to diſpoſe and
er confus*'d Matter. And accordingly Euſebius gives
this fair Character, Prep. Evan. I. 10. c. ult. p. 504.
2 dj dh ,%, Sup poge, &c. He firſt redified the
arize of Principles: Fur he did not only diſcourſe about
Matter or Subſtance of the Univerſe, as other Philoſo-
i: But alſo of the Cauſe and Principle of its Motion.
ttheſame Author, in his fourteenth Book, ch. 14. P. 750.
ats and enlarges this Character.
wonder the e of all Men, ſhould leſſen the
e of Anaxagoras. For, beſides his Orthodoxy as to
intellectual World; he was one that eſtabliſh'd the
tion.of Vortices, in the Corporeal. As you may ſee
lem, Alexandrinus, Strom. 2. 2. 364. and in Plato's
ed Phed. p. 99. And tho? the Father, and Socrates,
6 never was a Friend to natural Philoſophy) both
ne him for it, yet the Exceptor, who is deſervedly
Kd with that Syſtem of Vortices, ought to have ſhew'd
ſome Favour and Eſteem for the Sake of this Doc-
5 F trine


434 An Anſwer to the Exceptions mags


trine. Laſtly, as to his moral Temper, his Contempt.
the World, and his Love of Contemplation ; you
have many Inſtances of it in the ſhort Story of his Life
Laertius. And I ſhall always remember that excelſe
Saying of his in Clemens Alexardrinus, Strom. p. 41
Tiv Ocwpiav TS Bis TIO? efvai, x, Thy &md TATAG Labs,
That the End of Life is Contemplation; and that Lien
that accompanies it, or flows from it. 5
But we are not to imagine, that all the Opinions of
antient Philoſophers, are truly convey'd or repreſented an
us. Neither can we, in Reaſon or Juſtice, believe
they could be guilty of ſuch abſurd Notions, as areſo
times fathered upon them. The Exceptor inſtances in
extravagant Aſſertion, (as the Story is told to us) aſcri
to Anaxagoras, of a Stone that fell from the Sun. I.
cannot be literally true, nor literally the Opinion
Angxagoras, if he believed Vortice; therefore methinks
witty a Man as the Exceptor, and ſo well verſed in
modern Philoſophy, ſhould rather interpret this of the
cruſtation of a fix'd Star, and its Deſcent into the lo
World: That a Star fell from the etherial Regions,
became an opake and terreſtrial Body: Eſpecially ſee
Diogenes, as he ſays, ſuppoſes it a Star, Some Things v
znigmatically ſpoken at firſt : And ſome Things aft
wards ſo much corrupted, in paſſing through unski
Hands, that we ſhould be very injurious to the Mem
of thoſe great Men, if we ſhould ſuppoſe every Thing
have come ſo crudely from them, as it is now delive
to us. And as to this Philoſopher in particular ; as
Tonick Phyſiology, in my Opinion, was the moſtcon
rable amongſt the Antients ; ſo there was none, of
Order, more conſiderable than Auaxagorat. Whom,
you ſhould ſuppoſe extravagant, quoad hoc, that it We
not invalidate his Teſtimony in other Things.
Upon the whole Matter, let us now ſum up the
dence, and ſee what it will amount to. Here are f
ſix Teſtimonies of conſiderable Philoſophers : Azax
ras, Diogenes, Empedocles, Leucippus and Democritns.
| Which he might have added Plato, both in his Politicus
Phedo, Li. 2. c. 10. p. 274. if he had pleaſed to!
look'd into the ſecond Edition of the Latin Thi
Theſe Philoſophers do all make mention of a Chi
that hath been in the Poſture of the Earth and the
vens. And tho' they differ in aſſigning Cauſes, or ©
Circumſtances, yet they all agree as to Matter of F


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 435


it there was ſuch a Thing, or, at leaſt, a Tradition of
cha hing. And this is all that the Defendant deſir'd
intcnded to prove from them, as Witneſles in this


uſe.
To theſe Philoſophers, he might have added the Teſti-
onics of the Poets, who may be admitted as Witneſſes
{a Tradition, though it be further queſtioned, whether
at Tradition be true or falſe. Theſe Poets, when they
ak of a Golden Age, or the Reign of Saturn, tell us of
rerpetual Spring, or a Year without Change of Seaſons.
his is expreſly ſaid by Ovid, Ver erat æternum, &c. And
don the Expiration of the Golden Age, he ſays;
Jupiter Autiqui contraxit tempora Veris,
Perque _— Aſſtuſque, & inequales Autumnos,
Et breve Ver, 8 exegit quatuor annum.
ud liv'd in the I ime of our Saviour. And the Tradi-
on, it ſeems, was then a-foot, and very expreſs too.
eto, who was much more antient, hath ſaid the ſame
ting in his Politicus, concerning the Reign of Saturn.
ud if we may have any Regard to Mythology, (vid. Theor.
. 2. c. 10. in fine.) and make Janus the ſame with
aß, which is now an Opinion generally received, that
bwer, that is given him by the Antients, of changing
mes and Seaſons, cannot be better expounded, than by
ktzreat Change of Time, and of the Seaſons of theYear,
at happened in the Days of Noah. Neither mult we
punt it a mere Fable, what is ſaid by the Antients, con-
ming the Inhabitability of the Torrid Zone: And yet that
ner was, if the Earth was never in any other Poſture,
un what it is in now.
Laſtly, as the Philoſophers and Poets are Witneſſes of
ls Tradition, ſo many of the Chriſtian Fathers have
ren ſuch a Character of Paradice, as cannot be under-
bod upon any other Suppoſition, than of aperpetual Equi-
. This Card. Bellarmixe * hath noted to our Hands;


—


"De Grat. prim. bom c. 12.

Acedit ad bec, qudd Par adiſus ita deſtribitur & Sanfto Baſilio, in Libro de Pa-
% A Joan. Damaſceno, Libro ſecundo, de fide,capite undeci mo; d SanftoAugulti-
libro deci mo quarto, de civitate Dei, capit. 10. Ab Alchimo, Avito, & Claud. Ma-
idee, & eliis Supra citatis, Tjidoro, Libro deci mo quarto Etymolog. capite e
& aliis communitey ; ut fuerit in eo ver perpetuum, nulls frigora, null: «ſtus,
* fluvie, nivet, grandines, nullæ etiam nubert; quod ipſum ſignificat ſtripturas
bit primes bomine t in Paradiſh fuiſſe nudos,


F f 2 ; and


436 An Anſwer to the Exceptions mad;


and alſo obſerv'd, that there could not be a perpetual |
quinox in the Countries of Aſia, nor indeed in any topic
Paradiſe, (unleſs it ſtood in the middle of the Torrid Zong
iſt alius tunc fuerit curſus ſolis, quam nunc eſt; unleſ;
Courſe of the Sun, or, Which is all one, the Poſtureof t
Earth, was other wiſe at that Time than what it is 15

Which is atrue Obſervation. The Few:f Doctors alſo,

well as the Chriſtian, ſeem to go upon the ſame Suppo
tion, when they place Paradiſe under the Equinocti

ſee Eng. Theor. p. 351. Becauſe they ſuppos'd it certai
as Eben Ezra tells us, that the Days and Nights were

ways equal in Paradiſe.

We have now done with the Examination of Witne
ſes: Philoſophers, Poets, Fews, and Chriſtians. Fre
all theſe we collect, that there was an Opinion, or T
dition, amongſt the Antienrs, of a Change made in t
State of the natural World, as to the Diverſity of $e
ſons in the Year: And that this did ariſe from the Chan
of the Poſture of the Earth. Whether this Opinion,
this Tradition, was de jure, as well as de facto, is a(Jud
tion of another Nature, that did not lie before us at p
ſent. But the Thing that was only in Debate in this Cha
ter, 2 matter of Fact, which I think we have ſufficient
prov'd.

In the Cloſe of this Chapter, the Exceptor makes ti
Queries: Still by way of Objection to the ante diluvi

Equinox. The firſt is this, p. 185. Suppoſing an Eg
noæ in the Beginning of the World, would it (in Likelybu
have continued to the Flood. If you grant the firſt Part
believe few will ſcruple the ſecond. For why ſhould\
ſuppoſe a Change before there appear any Cauſe for
He ſays, the Waters might poſſibly have weigh'd more
wards one Pole, than towards another. But why |
Waters more than the Air? The Waters were not me
rarified towards one Pole than towards another, no m
than the Air was: For which the Exceptor, p. 180.
Juſtly blam'd Leucippus before. But however, ſays
that Earth would be very unſtable, becauſe, in Procels
Time, there would bean empty Space betwixt the cxteTl
Region of the Earth, and the Abyſs below. But i!
empty Space would be fill'd with ſuch groſs Vapours, U
it would be little purer than Water : And would ſtick
the Earth much cloſer than its Atmoſphere that is cart
about with it. We haye no Reaſon to change the Poſt
of the Earth, till we ſee ſome antecedent Change that


againſt the Theory of the E 1. 437


ea Cauſe of it. And we ſee not any till the Earth broke. *
gut then indeed, whether its Poſture depended barely upor '
s Equilibrium, or upon its Magnetiſm, either, or both
f them, when its Parts were thrown into another Situa-
on, might be changed. For the Parts of a Ruin ſeldom
e in the lame Libration the Fabrick ſtood in. And as to
je Magnetiſm of the Earth, that would change, accord-
ng as the Parts and Regions of the Earth changed their
dituation.

The ſecond Query is this, granting there was ſuch an
Equinox in the firſt World, p. 187. Would not the na-
wal World, towards the latter End of that World, have
en longer, than in the former Periods of the ſame ? Sup-
ofe this was true, which yet we have no Reaſon to be-
tre, that the Days were longer towards the Flood, than
wards the beginning of the World; why is this con—
ry to Scripture ? He tells you how, in theſe Words,
188. That the Days juſt before the Flood were of no un-
al Length, is evident in the very Story of the Flood; the
Duration of which we find computed by Months, conſiſting
f thirty Days a-piece. Whereas had Days been grown
lnger, fewer of them would have made a Month. This is
mere Paralogiſm, or a mere Blunder. For if thirty
Days were to go to a Month, whether the Days were
bnger or ſhorter, there mult be thirty of them; and the
frripture does not determine the Length of the Days. If
tirty Circumgyrations of the Earth makes a Month, whe-
her theſe Circumgyrations are flow or ſwift, thirty are
ll thirty. But! ſuppoſe that which he would have ſaid
md which he had confuſedly in his Mind, was this, that
he Month would have been longer at the Flood than it
ns before. Longer, I ſay, as to extent of 1'ime, or Dura-
fon in general, but not as to number of Days. And you
wuld not cut off a flip of one Day, and tack it to the
text, through the intermediate Night, to make an .
nent for the Whole. Therefore this Objection is ground-
«d upon a Miſtake, and ill Reaſoning, which is now ſuf-
lciently detected. |


4} Om ©


HIS Chapter is againſt the oval Figure of the firſt Earth,
p. 189. which the Theoriſt had aſſerted, and ground-
« upon a general Motion of the Waters, forc'd from
| FF 3 the


433 An Anſiver to the Exceptions made


the EquinoQtial Parts towards the Polar. But before y
proceed to his Objections againſt this Explication, y
mult rectify one Principle. The Exceptor ſeems to {,,
poſe, p. 190. that terreſtrial Bodies have a Nitency inway;
or downwards, towards their central Point. Whereas th
Theoriſt ſuppoſes, that all Bodies moving round, hay
more or leſs, a Nitency from the Centre of their Motion
And that'tis by an external Force that they are preſtdowr
againſt their firſt Inclination or Nitency.
This being premiſed, we proceed to his Exception
Where his firſt and grand Quarrel is about the Uſe of
Word; whether the Motion of the Water from the mid
dle of the Earth towards the Poles, can be call'd defluxut
ſeeing thoſe polar Parts, in this ſuppoſed Caſe, were:
high, or higher than the Equinoctial. I think we d
not ſcruple to ſay ande defluunt ad littora: Tho't
Shores be as high, or higher than the Surface of the $
For we often reſpect, as the Theoriſt did, the middle a
the ſides, in the uſe of that Word: And ſo, defluere
medio ad latera, is no more than prolabi ad latera, B
*tis not worth the while to conteſt about a Word; ef
cially ſeeing 'tis explained in the ſecond Edition of t
Theory, p. 186. by adding dezraſione : But it wouldha
ſpoil'd all this Pedantry, and all his little T'riumphs, if
hag taken notice of that Explication.

Wherefore ſetting aſide the Word, let us conſider
Reaſons againſt this Motion of the Waters towards t
Poles; which, he ſays, could not be, becauſe it wou
have been an Aſcent, not a Deſcent. We allow and ſu
poſe that. But may not Waters aſcend by Force and
truſion; when it is the eaſieſt way they can take to ff
themſelves from that Force, and perſevere in their M
tion? And this is the Caſe we are ſpeaking to. They we
impell'd to aſcend, or recede from the Centre, and it N
eaſier for them to aſcend laterally, than to aſcend dired
ly : Upon an inclined Plain, than upon a perpendicu
one. Why then ſhould we nor ſuppoſe that they toc
that Courſe? Methinks the Obſervator, who ſeems to
much converſant in the Carteſian Philoſophy, might ha
conceived this Detruſion of the Waters towards the Pol
by the Reſiſtance of the ſuperambient Air, as well as the
flowing towards, and upon the Shores, by the Preſſure
the Air under the Moon. And if the Moon continu
always in the ſame Place, or over the middle of the Se


that Poſture of the Waters would be always * gs
oug


LR


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 439


Though it be an Aſcent, both upon the Land and into
e Rivers. And this, methinks, is neither Contradiction,
dor Abſurdity. But an Enemy, that is little us'd to Vic-
ory, makes a great Noiſe upon a ſmall Advantage.

He proceeds now to ſhew, £ 195. that it was improba-
e that the Figure of the firſt Earth ſnould be oval, upon
other Conſiderations. As firſt, becauſe of its Poſition ;
which would be croſs fo the Stream of the Air, that
turns it round, or carries it about the Sun: As a Ship, he
ſys, that ſtands ſide-ways againſt a Stream, cannot fail.
But if that Ship was to turn round upon her Axis, as a
Mill-Wheel, and as the Earth does, what Poſture more
likely ro have ſuch an Effect, than to ſtand croſs to the
(tream that turns it? And the Stream would take more hold
ofan oblong Body, than ofa round. Then, as to its annual
Courſe, which he mentions, that's nothing, but ſo many
Crcumyolutions : For in turning round it is alſo progreſ-
fve,as a Cylinder in rowling a Garden: And three hundred
ixty five Circumgyrations compleat its annual Courſe.
ſo that this Argument turns wholly againſt him, and does
mher confirm the oval Figure ot the Earth.

His ſecond Argument againſt the oval Figure of the firſt
Earth, is the ſpherical Figure of the preſent Earth. And
tow does he prove that? Firſt from Authorities, Azax:-
nander, Pythagoras, and Perminedes thought ſo. But
tow does he prove that their aſſerting the Earth to be
mund, was not meant in Oppoſition to its being plain;
8 the Epicureaus and the Vulgar would have it? I hat
vas the Queſtion Socrates promis'd himſelf to be reſolv'd
aby Anaxagoras, Plat. in Phed. more 1.49 mhareia uv,
Ny Whether the Earth was flat or round. And
ts likely the Diſpute was generally underſtood in that
ſenſe. However the Theoriſt hath alledg*d many more
Authorities than theſe, in favour of the oval Figure of the
tarth, For beſides Empedocles in particular, and thoſe
Whom Plutarch mentions in general, the Philoſophy of
Irpheus, the Phœnician, Aigyptian, and Perſian Philoſo-
ſbert, did all compare the Earth to an Egg; with reſpect
bits oval external Form, as well as internal Compoſi-
lon. Theſe you may ſee fully fer down in the Theory:
Lat. Theor. hi. 2. c. 10. And it had been fair in the
Eiceptor to have taken ſome notice of them, if he
would contend in that way of Authorities. But he has
ought fit rather to paſs them over wholly in Silence.


FF 4 His


1
I
1
1
f


440 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


His Reaſons, p. 197. to prove the Figure of the preſent
Earth to be ſpherical, and not oval, are taken firſt fro
the Conical Figure of the Shadow of the Earth, caſt up-
on the Moon. But that cannot make a Difference ſen
ſible to us at this Diſtance, whether the Body that caſt tie
Shadow was exactly ſpherical or oval. His ſecond Res
ſon is from the Place of the Waters; which, he ſays, would
all retire from the Poles to the Equator, if the poly
Parts were higher. But this has been anſwer'd before
Theſame Cauſe that drives the Waters thither, would make
them keep there: As we ſhould have a perpetual Flood
if the Moon was always in our Meridian: And where
as he ſuggeſts, that by this Means the Sea ſhould be ſha]
loweſt under the Poles; which, he ſays, is againſt Expe
rience: We tell him juſt the contrary, That, according to oui
Hypotheſis, the Sea ſhould be deepeſt towards the Poles
which agrees with Experience. That the Sea ſhould be
deepeſt under the Poles, if it was of an oval Form
55 186. he may ſee plainly by his own Scheme, or by the

heory Scheme: Theor. Lat. li. 2. c. 5. So that if hi
Obſervation be true, of an extraordinary Depth of tht
Ocean in thoſe Parts, it confirms our Suſpicion, that thi
Sea continues ſtill oval. Laſtly, he urges, p. 198. If thi
Earth was oval, Navigation towards the Poles would bl
extremely difficult, it not impoſſible, becauſe upon at
Aſcent. But if there be a continual Draught of Water
from the Equator towards the Poles, this will ballanct
the Difficulty, and be equivalent to a gentle Tide, that car
ries Ships into the Mouth of a River, though upona gta
dual Aſcent.

Thus much we have ſaid in Complacency to the Excep
tor. For the Theoriſt was not oblig'd to ſay any Thing
in Defence of the oval Form of the preſent Earth, ſecing
he had no where aſſerted it: It not being poſſible, as tC
what Evidence we have yet, to determine in what Ordet
the Earth fell, and in what Poſture the Ruins lay after theit
Fall. But however, to ſpeak my Mind freely * this
Occaſion, I am inclinable to believe, that the Earth 1
ſtill oval or oblong. What Things the Anti- theoriſt hat
ſuggeſted, will not decide the Controverſy; nor, it ma
be, any natural Hiſtory, nor any of thoſe Obſervation
that we have already. The Surface of the Sea lies more
regular than that of the Land, and therefore I ſhould thin


that Obſervations made there would have the beſt 1
0 a


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 441


| ould particularly recommend theſe two: Firſt, That
they would obſerve toward the Poles, whether the Sun
iſe and ſet, according to the Rules of a true Globe, or
of a Body exactly ſpherical. Secondly, That they would
obſerve whether the Degrees of Latitude are of equal
Extent in all the Parts of a Meridian; that is, if the
Quantity of Sea or Land that anſwers to a Degree in the
Heavens, be of equal Extent towards the Equator as to-
wards the Poles. Theſe two Obſervations would go the
MT ncareſt of any I know, to determine whether the Figure
er the Earth be truly ſpherical or oblong.


Cuin:Y,


THIS Chapter is concerning the original Mountaint,
and that they were before the Flood, or from the Be-
rnning; which the Exceptor endeavours to prove from
Scripture; not directly, but becauſe Mention is made of
them in the ſame Places where the Beginning of the Earth is
nentioned, p. 291. as Pſal. xc. 1, 2. and Prov. viii. 25.
therefore they muſt be co-eval and contemporary. We
are, I think, noted before, that Things are not always
Smchronal that are mentioned together in Scripture. The
ſtyle of Scripture is not ſo accurate, as not to ſpeak of
Things in the ſame Place, that are to be referr'd to different
Times. Otherwiſe. we muſt ſuppoſe the Deſtruction of
Jeruſalem, and of the World, to have been intended for
heſame Time; ſeeing our Saviour joins them in the fame
Viſcourſe, (Mat. xxiv.) without any Diſtinction of Lime;
r with ſuch a Diſtinction, as rather ſignifies an imme-
late Succeſſion, (ver. 29.) than ſo great a Diſtance as we
now find to be betwixt the Deſtruction of Ferzſalem and
the End of the World. Greater than that, betwixt the
beginning and the Flood: So in the Prophets ſomie-
limes, in the ſame Diſcourſe, one Part is to be referr'd
o the firſt Coming of our Saviour, and another Part
lo the ſecond. I/. ix. 6, 7. Iſa. ix. 1. &c. Luke i. 31,
N, 33. without making any Diſtinction of Time, but
What is to be gather'd from the Senſe. Neither is there
ny Incongruity in the Senſe, or in the Tenor of the
Words, if thoſe Expreflions in the Pſalmiſt be referr'd
to different Times. God exiſted before the Mountains
vere brought forth, and the Earth and the World wr

1 mad


442 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


made. This is certainly true, whether you take it of the
{ame or different Times. And if you take it of different
Times, *tis a way of Speaking we often uſe. As ſyn.
poſe a Man ſhould ſay, concerning the Antiquity of 7; roy
that it exiſted before Rome and Carthage; that does not ne-
ceſſarily imply, that Rome and Carthage were built at the
ſame Time; but only that Troy was before them both. And
ſo this of the Pſalmiſt may be very well thus expreſt, by a
Gradation from a lower Epocha to an higher. Then as for
that Place, Prov. ch. viii. it would be very hard to reduce all
thoſe Things that are mentioned there, (from ver. 22. to
30.) to the ſame Lime of Exiſtence; and there is no Ne
ceſſity from the Words that they ſhould beſo underſtood;
The Deſign and Intention of the Holy Ghoſt is pai
in both theſe Places: In the one to ſer out the Eternit
of God, and in the other, of the Logos in particular. And
this is done by ſhewing their Pre-exiſtence to this Eart
and to all its greateſt and moſt remarkable Parts.

He mentions alſo, p. 202. Deut. xxxiii. 15. where the
Hills are calPd Laſting, and the Mountains Antient. And
therefore they were before the Flood. This is a hard Conſe
quence. The River Kon is call'd the antient River
Fadgp. v. 21. but I do not therefore think it neceſſary, tha
that Brook ſhould have been before the Flood. Thing
may very well deſerve that Character of laſting or antienty
though they be of leſs Antiquity than the Deluge. It ong

ſhould ſay the laſting Pyramids, and antient Babylon, none
could blame the Expreſſion, nor yet think that they wer
therefore from the 3 of the World.

After theſe Allegations from Scripture, p. 205. he de
ſcends to a natural Argument taken from the Mountain
in the Moon; which, he ſays, are much higher than thi
Mountains upon the Earth: And therefore, ſeeing he
Body is leſs, they could not be made by a Diſſolution 0
that Planet, as theſe of the Earth are ſaid to have beeng
Though we are not bound to anſwer for the Mountain
in the Moon, yet however, tis eaſy to ſee that this 15 16

ood Argument: For, befides that the Orb there mg

e more thick, all Ruins do not fall alike. They maß
fall double, or in Ridges and Arches, or in ſteep Pilesf
ſome more than others, and ſo ſtand at a greater Heights
And we have Reaſonto believe that thoſe in the Moon fel a
otherwiſe than thoſe of the Earth; becauſe we do not c 1
her turn round : Nor can we ever geta Sight of her 15 1


A
;
f


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 443


fide, that we might better judge of the Shapes of her whole
Body.
From this natural Argument, p. 206. he proceeds to an
tiſtorical Argument, taken from the 7 almadiſts and Joſe—
phus. The Talmudiſts ſay, that many Giants ſavd them-
ſelves from the Flood upon Mount Sion. But this, the Ex-
ceptor confeſſes, is wholly fabaloas, What need it then be
mentioned as an Argument? Then he ſays, Joſephus re-
ports, that many ſav d themſelves from the Flood upon the
Mountain Baris in Armenia. But this alſo, 8 he
ſays, is falſe in the Groſs, and a formal Fiction. Why then,
ſay I, is it brought in as an Argument? Laſtly, he quotes
a Paſſage out of Plato, who ſays, when the Gods ſhall
drown the Earth, the Herdſmen and Shepherds ſhall ſave
themſelves upon Mountains. And this (d.) the Exceptor
calls a Piece of confus'd Forgery. Why then, ſay I ſtill,
is it alledged as an Argument againſt the Theory? But
however, ſays the Exceptor, theſe I hings argue that many
thought there were Mountains before the Flood. But did
the Theorift ever deny, that it was the vulgar and com-
mon Opinion? Therefore ſuch Allegations as theſe may
de of ſome Uſe to ſhew Reading, but of no Effect at all
to confute the Theory. |
Yet the Exceptor is not content with theſe Stories, but
he muſt needs add a Fourth; which, he ſays, p. 208. is a
plain Intimation that there were Mountains in the Beginning
of the World. Take his own Words for the Story, and
the Application of it. I will only add that traditional
Story which is told of Adam; namely, how that after his
all, and when he repented of his Sin, he bewailed it for
ſeveral hundred of Years, upon the Mountains of India. An-
ther oy Intimation that THERE WERE MOUN-
IAN & in the Beginning of the World. This is a plain
Intimation indeed, that thoſe that made this Fable, thought
there were Mountains then: But is it a Proof that there
really was ſo? As you ſeem to infer. Does the Exceptor
rally believe, that Adam wander'd an hundred Years upon
the Mountains of India? If the Matter of Fact be falſe,
the Suppoſition it proceeds upon may as well be falſe. And
de does not ſo much as cite an Author here, for the one
or the Other.

We are now come to the main Point, a new Hypo-
theſis concerning the Original of Mountains, which the
xceptor, p. 208, 209, c. hath vouchſafed to make for
us: And, in ſhort, it is this. When the Waters were


drain'd


——


= — —— — . 2
4 - = - - w- _— — 2
— — .
— _— - — , * —— =
— —— - * —
— — - - * N
— oe” > OLE - -
— —— = F

.


** ==


_—


es


>. —


— ea ,- . — — —
* v * « =
* — — —
— — — —— —
* * — — 4 T "* ©... FY 2 = * * — —
— py 2 * * —


Co


444 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


drain'd off the Land on the third Day, while it was moif
and full of Vapours, the San, by his Heat, made the Earth
heave and riſe up in many Places, which thereupon be
came Mountains. But leſt we miſtake or miſrepreſent
the Author's Senſe, p. 209. we will give it in his ow
Words. Now the Earth, by this Collection of the Waters
into one Place, being freed from the Load and Preſſure |
them, and laid open to the Sun, the Moiſture within, J
the Heat of his Beams, might quickly be turn'd mtoVapours
And theſe Vapours being ſtill increaſed by the continued ra
rifying Warmth from above, at length they wanted Spar
rr to expand or dilate themſelves. And at laſt, u
enduring the Coafinement they felt, by Degrees heaved 1
the Earth above; ſomewhat after the Manner that Leave
does Dough, when it is laid by a Fire; but much more fur
cibly and unevenly. And liftiug it up thus in numberle
Places, and in ſeveral Quantities, and in various Figure
Mountains were made of all Shapes and Sixes; whole Ori
gin and Properties, he ſays, upon this Hypotheſis, wll be 9
vious, or at leaſt intelligible, to thinking and philoſophick Ming
I muſt confeſs I am none of thoſe thinking and philoſ
hick Minds, to whom this is either obvious or intelligi
le: For there ſeem to me to be a great many palpabl
Defects or Overſights in this new Hypotheſis: Where
this is one of the groſſeſt, that he ſuppoſes the Sun, b
his Heat, the third Day to have raiſed theſe Mountai
upon the Earth; whereas the Sun was not created till th
fourth Day, p. 51. the fourth Day was the firſt Day of t
Sun's Exiſtence : So that it had this powerful Effect,
ſeems, one Day before it came into Being.
But ſuppoſe the Sun had then exiſted: This is a prodigio
Effect for the Sun to perform, in ſo ſhort a Time, and wit
ſo little Force. The greateſt Part of that Day was ſpelt
in draining the Waters from off the Land; which had
long Way to go, from ſome inland Countries, to reac
the Sea, or their common Receptacle. And he ſay
P. 209. without an extraordinary Power, perhaps th ey cowl
not have been drained off the Earth in one Day. Let
then allow, at leait, half a Day for clearing the Ground
ſo the Sun might begin his Work about Noon; and be
fore Night: he had rais'd all the Mountains of one He
miſphere. It will require a ſtrong philoſophick Faith,
believe this could be all done by the Action of the du
and in fo ſhort a Time. Beſides, we muſt conſider, th
the Sun, by Noon, had paſt all the Eaſtern —


—


againſt the Theory of the EARKTH. 445


et covered with Water, or not well drain'd : So thatat-
ter they were dried, he could only look back upon them
with faint and declining Rays. Yet the Mountains of the
Faſt are as great and conſiderable as elſewhere. But
there is ſtill another great Difficulty in the Caſe, as to the
Northern and Southern Mountains of the Earth ; for
they lie quite out of the Road of the Sun; being far re-
mov'd towards either Pole; where, by reaſon ot his Diſ-
tance and Obliquity, his Beams have little Force. How
would he heave up the Riphæan Mountains, thoſe vaſt
Heaps of Stone and Earth, that lie ſo far to the North?
You ſee what Obſervations the Exceptor hath made (p. 119,
320.) concerning the Cold of thoſe Countries: And it
falls out very untowardly for this new Hypothefis, that
the Northern Parts of the Earth, as Norway, Swedeland,
leland, Scythia, Sarmatia, &c. ſhould be ſuch mountai-
nous and rocky Countries; where he had before declar'd
the Sun had ſo little Force. And, indeed, according to
tis Scheme, all the great Mountains of the Earth ſhould
have been under the Equator, or, at leaſt, betwixt the

Tropicks. |
But to examine a little the Manner and Method of this
Treat Action, and what kind of Bodies theſe new Moun-
uins would be; either the Sun drew up only the Surface and
dutward Skin of the Earth, as Cupping-Glaſſes raiſe Bliſ-
ters; or his Beams penetrated deep into the Earth, and
keaved up the Subſtance of it, as Moles caſt up Mole-Hills.
If you take the firſt Method, theſe ſuperficial Mountains
ould be nothing but ſo many Bags of Wind; and not
tall anſwerable to thoſe huge Matles of Earth and Stone,
Whereof our Mountains conſiſt. And if you take the ſe-
ond Method, and ſuppoſe them puſh'd out of the ſolid
Larth, and thrown up into the Air, imagine then how
&ep theſe Rays of the Sun muſt have penetrated ina few
tours Time, and what Strength they muſt have had, to
zitate the Vapours to that Degree, that they ſhould be
ile to do ſuch Prodigies as theſe. Several Mountains,
Won a moderate Computation, are a Mile high from the
Level of the Earth. So that it was neceſſary that the Beams
of the Sun ſhould penctrate at leaſt a Mile deep, in fo
Hort aTime; and there looſen and rarify theVapours, and
den tear up by the Roots vaſt Loads and Extents of
Ground, and heave them a Mile high into the open Air:
And all this in leſs than half a Day. Such T hings ſurely
me beyond all Imagination, and ſo extravagant, that one
cannot,


T
_ _ "PoE" '
— r — 0 ——
I y—w—_ = - 3
— — _ o — —
” —___ ů 7 — 23 —


9
oy
—Þ — - — = — - * - — __ =
— get
— — * : : — = * = *
— _ 5 * —
Z — E — 2 —— —

* B=. % > -

*

—


. ²˙ A =
9 2 2 —


—


446 An Anſiver to the Exceptions made


cannot, in Conſcience, offer them to the Belief of a Man WM"
Can we think that the Sun, who is two or three Hours ini”
licking up the Dew from the Graſs in a May Morning WW"
ſhould be able, in as many more Hours, to ſuck the Alps q
and Pyreneans out of the Bowels of the Earth; and noe”
to ſpend all his Force upon them neither? For he would
have as much Work in other Countries. To raiſe uy
Taurus, for inſtance, and Imaus, and frozen Caucaſys i
Aſia; and the mighty Atlas, and the Mountains of the
Moon in Africk; beſides the Audes in America, which
they ſay, far exceed all the Mountains of our Continent,
One would be apt to think, that this Gentleman never ſa
the Face of a mountainous Country ; for he writes of
them, as if he had taken his Idea of Mountains, and thy
Fen Ridges of Mountains, upon the Earth, from thy
evil's Ditch, and Hogmagog Hills: And he raiſes the
faſter than Muſhrooms out of the Ground. If the new
born Sun, at his firſt Appearance, could make ſuch prea
Havock, and ſo great Changes upon the Face of thy
Earth, what hath he been doing ever ſince? We neye
heard nor read of a Mountain, ſince the Memory of
May, rais'd by the Heat of the Sun. We may therefor
enquire, in the laſt Place,
Why have we no Mountains made now by the fam
Cauſes? We have no Reaſon to believe that the Heat o
Strength of the Sun is leſſen'd ſince that Time; why thet
does it not produce like Effects? But I imagine he hat
an Anſwer for this: Namely, that the Moiſture of th
firſt Earth, when it was new drain'd and marſhy, contribu
ted much to this Effect; which now its Dryneſs hinder!
But beſides, that the Dryneſs of the Earth ſhould rathe
give an Advantage, by the Collection of Vapours withil
its Cavities: However, we might expect, according to thi
Reaſon, that all our drain'd Fens and marſhy Grounds
ſhould preſently be rais'd into Mountains; whereas W
ſee them all to continue arrand Plains, as they were be
fore. But if you think theſe are too little Spots c
Ground to receive a ſtrong Influence from the Sun, tak
Zgypt for an Inſtance : That's capacious enough, and i
overflow'd every Year, and by that Means made ſoft al
moiſt to your Mind, as the new Earth when it riſes iro
under the Abyſs. Why then is not gt converted int
Mountains, after the Inundation and Retirement of Ne
I do not ſee any Qualification wanting, according tot
Exceptor's Hypotheſis : Agypr hath a moiſt Soil, and


ſtrong


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 447


frong Sun, much ſtronger than the Alps or Pyreneans
have; and yet it continues one of the plaineſt Countries
pon the Earth. But there is ſtill a greater Inſtance behind
zpainſt this Hypotheſis, than any of the former; and that
js, of the whole Earth after the Deluge: When it had
deen overflow'd a ſecond Time by the Abyſs, upon the
Retirement of thoſeW aters it would be much what in the
ſme Condition, as to Moiſture, that it was in the third Day,
when it firſt became dry Land. Why then ſhould not the
ume Effect follow again, by the Heat ot the Sun; and
j many new Mountains be rais'd upon this ſecond Drain-
ing of the Earth, as upon the firſt? Theſe are plain and
obvious Inſtances, and as plainly unanſwerable. And
the whole Hypotheſis which this Virtuoſo hath propos'd
concerning the Origin of Mountains, is ſuch an Heap of
Incredibilities, and Things inconſiſtent one with another,
that 'm afraid I ſhall be thought to have ſpent too much
Time in Confutation of it.

In the Concluſion of this Chapter, p.215. he hath an
Attempt to prove that there were Mountains before the
Flood, becauſe there were Metals; which are commonly
found about the Roots of Mountains. But the Theoriſt,
he ſays, to ſhun this great Inconventence, fairly conſents to
the aboliſhing of Metals out of the firſt State of Nature.
Yet he is hard put to it, to prove that the Theoriſt hath any
here aſſerted, whatſoever he thought, that there wereno
Metals then. The firſt Citation he produces, only recites
the Opinion of others, and ſays, p. 216. he Hints they do
wt want their Reaſons. Of the two other Citations out
of the Preface, the firſt does dot reach home, making no
mention of Metals. And the ſecond is wholly miſcon-
raed, and perverted to a Senſe quite contrary to what
the Author intended, or the Context will bear. But how-
ever the Theoriſt appears doubtful, whether there were
Metals or no in the firſt World : And, upon this Doubt,
the Exceptor lays this heavy Charge, p. 215. li. 24. Thus
the Fidelity of Moſes is aſſaulted, and another intolerable
Affront put upon the HOLY GHOST : For do not both
morm us, that the City Enoch was built, and the Ark pre-
pared, before the Flood? But how could either be done without
lron-· Tools? But does either Moſes, or the Holy Ghoſt tell
us, that there were Iron- Tools in building that City, or the
Ark? If they do not, we only affront the Conſequence,
Which the Exceptor draws from the Words, and not the
Authors of them, By what divine Authority 3 _

| nimad-


had ws — 1 — — ws
4 4
$5 I - 2 . A——F © N
— — — - PRE _
—


= _ —
— * #
: 5 2
= * — — _
—— —— — — - - . — —
= = S x — * —
ä —-—-T: ed ES —— — 9 ” — - — =
rer - - =" ab 5 4 : — e
— —
— 2
— — 2 = : — —
- * * 4 - — — -


— „ — . 2
a. + - — -
— — 2 —


. = 4
. TOTS os, <c


— GRID 6c el GEE
Pr — — — . 9 C — ſs
. San = t « ——— — —x— £ -
— —


* —ü— _u i...
ST 2


SD > — ==
— — 2 —— _

I ET ECB
— — —

—


448 An Anſwer to the Exceptions mad;


Animadverter aſſert, that there was Iron, or Iron-Tools. in
Building this City, or that Ark? I'm ſure Scripture doe;
not mention either, upon thoſe Occaſions. And ſeein
it mentions only Gopher Wood and Pitch for the Buildin
of the Ark, Gen. vi. 14. tis a Preſumption rather, that
there were no other Materials us'd. And as to the City
is true, it he fancy the City which Euoch built, to hy!
been like Paris, or London, he has Reaſon to imagine
that they had Iron-Toolsto make it. But ſuppoſe it was,
Number of Cottages, made of Branches of Trees, of
Ofiers and Bulruſhes, (and what needed they any other
Houſe, when the Air was ſo temperate ?) or, if you will
* of Mud-Walls, and a Roof of Straw, with a Fence
about it to keep out Beaſts, there would be no ſuch Ne.
ceſſity of Iron-Tools. Conſider, pray, how long the
World was without knowing the Uſe of Iron, in ſcveral
Parts of it, as in the North, and in America: And yet
they had Houſes and Cities after their Faſhion. For the
Northern Countries you may ſee Olaus Magnus. li. 11,
c. 13. For America, Pet. Martyr. Dec. 1. But the Ex-
ceptor will ſave you your Pains, as to the Indians, for he
ſays himſelf, p. 250. in another Place, that they had no
Inſtruments of Iron, when the Spaniards came amonylt
them. And if in thoſe late Ages of the World, they
were ſtill without the Uſe of Iron, or Iron-Tools, wehave
leſs Reaſon to believe that the Children of Cain had them
four or five thouſand Years before. | |

It is alſo worthy our Conſideration, how many Things
mult have been done, before they could come at thele
Iron-Tools. How came the Children of Cain to dig into
the Earth, I know not to what Depth, to ſeek for a T hing
they had never heard of before, when it was ſo difficult
to dig into the Earth without ſuch Tools? More difficult,
methinks, than to build an Houſe without them. But
ſuppoſe they did this, we know not how; and, amongltY
many other Stones, or Earths, found that which we call
Iron-Ore: How did they know the Nature and Ule ot


—


per ludibrium regant naſuti bomines, unde Architefos & Opificts conduxerit
Cain ad urbem extruendam 5 nos viciſſim eb illis querimus, quo euthore credant
Urbem ex quadratis lapidibus fuiſſe extruftam : gy magno ertificio, multiſſis
Sumptibus, M longi temporis opera, edificium boc conſtitiſſe» Nibil enim aliud *
ligere licet ex verbis Moſit, quam mures ex rudi materid, Cain ſibi & feſteris cite


eundcdiſſe. Cal. in loc. it?


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 449


> Or, if they gueſs'd at that, how did they know the
Fay and Manner of preparing it, by Furnaces, Wind.
orges, and Smelting-mills? 'Thefe would be as hard to
"ke or build, without Iron Tools, as dwelling Houſes,
Ind when they had got a Lump of Iron, till they knew
ww to temper it, they could not make Tools of it (till,
Inleſs Caiz's Children had an Inſpiration from Heaven, |
p not ſee how they could diſcover all theſe Things, in ſo
ort a Time. And this is only to make good what the
heoriſt ſaid, that ſuch an Hypotheſis does not want 18s
ſons. And as to Tubal-Cain, let thoſe that poſitively
ſert that there was no Iron in the firſt World, tell us in
hat Senſe that Place is to be underitood. For, I be-
we, Iron or Braſs is not once mention'd in all the
heory.


| 7
Sh H A Pos XI.


| HIS Chapter is to prove that the Sea was oben before
the Deluge. Tis ſomething barren of philoſophical
Iouments, but we will begin with ſuch as it has, which
e taken from this T'opick, That the Fiſhes could not
e in our Abyſs : p. 224. and that for three Reaſons. Firſt,
eauſe it was too dark. Secondly, too cloſe ; and
Irdly, too cold. As for Coldneſs, methinks he might
ve left that out, unleſs he ſuppoſe that there are no Fiſh
the frozen Seas, towards the North and South; which
Fainſt all Senſe and Experience: For cold Countries
ound moſt in Fiſh. And according to Reaſon, there
mld be more Danger of too much Warmth, in thoſe
terraneous Waters, than of too much Cold, inreſpect
the Fiſhes.
Then as to Darkneſs and Cloſeneſs, this minds me of the
ing of Maimonides: That uo Man ever would believe,


n's Belly, if he had never ſeen the Experience of it.
here's Cloſeneſs and Darkneſs in the higneſt Degree :
id in Animals, that, as ſoon as born, cannot live with-
t Reſpiration. Whereas Fiſhes, of all Creatures, have
« lealt need of Reſpiration, if they have any. And as
t Varkzeſs, how many ſubterraneous Lakes have we
I, Wherein Fiſhes live? And we can ſcarce ſuppoſe the
n and fathomleſs Ocean to have Light to the Bottom;
leaſt when it is troubled or tempeſtuous. How the


G g Eyes


ta Child could live ſo many Months, ſhut up in its Mo-


45 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


Eyes of Fiſh are, or might be, form'd or conform'd. wi,
cannot tell, but we ſee they feed and prey on the Nigt
Time, and take Baits as greedily as on the Day. Butſti
likely they were leſs active and agile in that Abyſs, th;
they are now; their Lite was more {luggiſhthen, andthej
Motions more flow, Fob xxxviii. 8. as being (till inth
Homb of Nature that was broke up at the Deluge. An
as to Air, they would have enough for their imperfe@ wa
of breathing in that State. But if they have a more pe
fect now, which is ſtill a Queſtion, they might hay
ſome Paſlages in their Body open'd, (at the Diſruptione
the Abyſs) when they were born into the Light and fre
Air, which were not open'd before. As we ſee in lt
fants, upon their Birth, a new Paſſage is made into the
Lungs, and a new Circulation of the Blood, which þ
tore took another Courſe.

So much for pretended Reaſons and Philoſophy. Th
reſt of this long Chapter is ſpent either in Conſequen
made from Scripture, or in aprolix Diſcourſe about Rai
As to Scripture, p. 219, 220. he makes this the firll
jection, that, whercas Adam had a Dominion given hi
over the I'iſh of the Sea, it could have no Effect, ifth
were incloſed in the Abyſs. Adam had no more Do
nion given him over the Fiſh of the Sea, than over t
Fowils of the Air; which he could not come at, or ſet
at his Pleaſure, unleſs he could fly into the Air after the
Adam was made Lord of all Animals upon this Ea
and had a Right to uſe them for his Conveniency, v
they came into his Power: Bur I do not believe tl
Adam was made ſtronger than a Lyon, nor could mal
the Leviathan, or command him to the Shore. He
a Right, however, and his Poſterity, to diſpoſe of all Cr
tures for their Ule and Service, whenſoever, upon V
ſion offered, they fell into their Power.

Next he ſays, p. 225, 226. The Waters were gathe
into one Place, and a Firmament was made to diyide
Waters from the Waters. Well, allow this, tell ust.
what was that Firmament? For it is ſaid there, Gen. 1.
that God ſet the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in the!

mament. Therefore you can argue nothing from this,
leſs you ſuppole ſuperceleſtial Waters: Which, When]
have prov'd, we will give you an Account of the
celeſtial, and of the fubterraneous. And here the
ceptor cites tome Things from the Theory, that are n


—
.


againſt the Theory of the Ea RH. 451


me ſecond Edition, and therefore the Theoriſt is not con-
cern'd to anſwer them.

Laſtly, The Exceptor comes to his long Harangue in
Commendation of the Clouds and of Rain 7 Whichtakes
pa great Part of this Chapter. In his Exordium he makes
this Compliment to the Clouds, p. 234. Sometimes the
munt up and fly aloft, as if they forgat, or diſdain d the
Meanneſs of their Origin. Sometimes again they fink and
tp ſo low, as if they repented of their former proud Aſpi-
gt, and did remorſeful humble Penance for their high
Preſumption. And though 1 may not ſay they weep to ex-
ate their Arrogance, or kiſs the Earth with bedewed Cheeks,
in Token of their Penitence, yet they often proſtrate in the
Duſt, and ſweep the loweſt Grounds of all, with their miſty
by Trains. One while they, &c. I his Harangue about


Pages, and, with Submiſſion to better Judginents, I take
to be a Country Sermon, about the Uſefzlaeſs of Rains
ind, I believe, whoſoever reads it, will, both from its
Matter and Form, be of the ſame Opinion. I do not
beak this in Derogation to his Sermon, but he would
we done better, methinks, to have printed it in a
pamphlet by it ſelf; there being no Occaſion for it in this
heory. aca

(58 the Concluſion of the Chapter, p. 246. he
ners an Objection made by the Theoriſt againſt the
moled Iſlands and Continents in the firſt Earth. Name-
That it would render the Propagation of Mankind d:jji-
i, into thoſe broken Parts of the Ii orld. And the many
tpertect ſhifting Anſwers which the Exceptor gives, or
cures without Authority, do but confirm the Ob-
tion of the Theoriſt, or make his Words true, quod Res
ſet difficilis eæplicatu. Which is all that the Theoriſt
d upon that Subject.


CAA N .


| HIS is a ſhort Chapter, and will be ſoon diſpatch'd.

Iis to prove that the Rainboto was before the Flood.
nd notwithſtanding that, a good Sign that there ſhould
er be a Flood again. This is to me a Paradox, buthe
firms it by a greater Paradox: For he ſays, God might
well (as to Significancy, or Authenticalneſs) have ap-
ted the Sun, as the Raizbow, for a Sign that there never


Gg 2 Would


he Clouds and Rain, is purſued for fourtcen or fifteen.


—


rr


— > mn
Pew, ” — p —ů —
r
- * - 2 .


5


— Rr —


452 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


ſhould have been another Flood. So that if God had ſaid to
Noah, I do aſſure thee there ſhall never be a ſecond De-
luge, and for a Sign of this, Behold I ſet the Fun in the
Firmament: This would have done as well, he ſays, as the
Rainbow. That is, in my Judgment, it would have done no.
thing at all more than the bare Promiſe. And if it had doneng
more than the bare Promiſe, it was ſuperfluous. Therefore
if the Rainbow was no more than the Sun would haye
been, it was a ſuperfluous Sign. They to whom theſe
two Signs are of equal Significancy and Effect, lie with
out the Reach of all Conviction, and I am very Willing
to indulge them in their own Opinions.

But he ſays, p. 257. God ſometimes has made things tobe
Signs, that are common and uſual. T has the Fruit of u Tree
rowing in Paradiſe, was made a Sign of Man's Immurta-
ity. Bat how docs it appear that this was a common
Tree; or that it was given to Adam as a Sign that hi
ſhould be immortal? Neither of theſe appear from Scrips
ture. Secondly, he ſays, 2 Kings xiii. 17. Shooting wit
Bow and Arrows upon the Ground, was made a Sign ti
Joaſh of His 8 againſt the Syrians. This was only
a Command to make war againſt Syria, and a Prophec
of Succeſs; both deliver'd in a ſymbolical or hieroglyphi
cal Way. The Command was ſignify'd by bidding thi
King ſhoot an Arrow, which was the Sign of War. And
the Sign of Victory or of divine Aſſiſtance, was the Pro
7 ſtrengthening the King's Hands to draw the Bow

his is nothing as to a Sign given in Nature, or from the
natural World, in Confirmation of a divine Promiſe
Which is the thing we are only to conſider.

All the reſt of this Chapter is lax Diſcourſe withou
Proof. And as to the Significancy of the Rainbow, upol
Suppoſition that it was a new Appearance; and its Inſig
nificancy upon Suppoſition that it was an old Appearance
we have ſpoken ſo fully in the Theory it ſelf, Exg. T bes
Book 2. ch. 5. that it would be needleſs here to make al
longer Stay upon this Argument.


CH AP. XIII.


7 Chapter is concerning Paradiſe; but our Al
thor fairly baulks all the Difficulties in that Dod
trine, and contents himſelf with a few Generals, whick
every body knows. The Doctrine of Paradiſe on
chiefly of two Parts; the Site or Place of it; 2


againſt the Theor'y of the EARTH. 453


State or Properties of it. As to the firſt, if the Exceptor
would have confuted the Theory, he ſhould have ſet down
the Concluſions that are advanc'd by the Theory, (Exg.
Theor. Book. 2. c. 7.) concerning the Place of Paradite,
which are theſe; firſt, the Place of Paradiſe eannot be de-
termin'd by Scripture only. Neither the Word Meked-
dem, (Ger. ii. 8.) nor the four Rivers mentioned there,
make the Place of it defineable. Secondly, The Place
of Paradiſe cannot be determin'd by the Theory. Sceing
then neither Scripture, nor Reaſon determine the Place of
Paradiſe, if we will determine it, it muſt be by Antiquity.
And it we appeal to Antiquity in this Caſe, we ſhall find,
Firſt, That it was not in Meſopotamia. Secondly, That
according to the Plurality of Votes, both amongſt the
Heathen and Chriſtian Authors, it was plac'd inthe other
Hemiſphere. And this is all the Theory ſays upon that
Point. As you may ſee, Eng. T heor. Book 2. ch. 7. and


Lit. Theor. Edit. 2. p. 194. and p. 214, 215. Wherefore


if the Animadverter would undertake to confute the The-
ory in this Point, he ſhould have confuted thoſe four Par-
ticulars. But he flips over theſe, p. 265. and gives us only
a Paraphraſe upon ſome Verſes in the ſecond and third
Chapters of Geneſis, which ſays little to this Purpoſe, and
jet more than it proves.

In the ſecond Place, as to the State and Properties of
Paradiſe, or the ante-diluvian World; the Longevity of
the Ante-dilavians is the Thing he inſiſts upon. But this
ie handles ſo looſely, p. 273. that in the Concluſion of
tis Diſcourſe, one cannot tell whether he affirms it, or
denies it. This ſceptical Humour of the Exceptor hath
been taken notice of before, and 'tis continued in this
Chapter, where there is little or nothing poſitively deter-
min' d. The Theoriſt, on the contrary, expreſly affirms
the Longevity of the Ante-diluvians, and gives theſe Rea-
lons for his Aſſertion. Firſt, Becauſe all the Lives, and
ul the Generations recorded in Scripture, before the Flood,


from Father to Son, in a Line of ſixteen hundred Years,


ae longeval : Of fix, ſeven, eight, nine hundred Years
+picce. Secondly, Antiquity, both Greek and Barbarian
ave atteſted the {ame thing, and recorded the Tradition;
ke the Table of both. Thirdly, The Generations record-
{din Scripture after the Flood, as they exceed the | erm
0 ſucceeding Ages, Eng. Theor. p. 304. ſo they decline
dy degrees from the ante-diluvian Longevity. Laſtly,
405 complains of the Shortneſs of his Life, and F ew-


G 83 | ncls


— — 6. - > =»


= by —— — — £246 l


454 An An er to the Exceptious made


neſs of his Days, in Compariſon of his Forefathers, hen
he had liv'd one hundred and thirty Years; Gen. x1vii.
which had been a groundleſs Complaint, if his Anceſty;;
had not lived much longer.

Theſe two laſt Reaſons the Exceptor has not thought
fit to rake notice of. And, in Anſwer to the two tor.
mer, he hath only the uſual Subterfuges: As, that the
long Lives of the ante-diluvian Patriarchs was a I hing en.
traordinary and providential, confin'd to their Perſons ; not
of a general Extent, nor according to the Courſe of Ny.
ture. But how does this appear? It muſt be made out
either by Scripture or Reaſon. Scripture makes no Di
ſtinction, nor Exception of Perſons in this Cafe; al!
whereot it hath left any Account, as to Term of Lite, arg
declar'd to have liv'd ſeveral hundred of Years. And
why ſhould we not conclude the tame Thing Concerning
the reſt? Then as to Reaſon, you cannot ſuppoſe Long
vity, in that World, againſt Reaſon or Nature, unieſs y
firſt ſuppoſe the Form and Conſtitution of that Worldte
have been the ſame with the preſent: Which is to begthi
Queſtion. Admitting that Form and Conſtitution ot th
firſt Heavens and Earth, which the T heory hath given

Longevity will be a natural Conſequence of it. he
Book 2. ch. 3, & 4. And having ſuch a Courſe 0
Nature laid bctore us, as agrees with the Reports of Scrip
ture, and with general Tradition, why ſhould we qui
that, to comply with an imaginary Preſumption; th
theſe were miraculouſly preſerv'd, and all the reſt we
ſhort-lived? I know he pretends, p. 277. we may as wel
conclude all Men were Giants in thoſe Days, becaulf
Moſes ſays, There were Giants upon the Karth in thi
Days, Gen. vi. 4. as conclude that all Men were [on
lived in thoſe Days, becauſe Moſes mentions ſome th:
were ſo. There had been ſome Pretence for this, if M
ſes had made a Diſtinction of two Races of Men in th
firſt World, long Livers and ſhort Livers; as he hat
dittinguiſh'd the Giant from the common Race of Ma
kind: Or, as he hath ſaid in one Caſe, There were Cian
on the Earth in theſe Days; ſo if he had ſaid in the othe
There were long Livers uon the Earth in thoſe Days, a
upon that, had given us a Lift of the long-liv'd Patrt
archs: This indeed would have made the Caſes prett
parallel. But, on the contrary, Moſes makes no ſuchD
ſtinction of long-living and fhort- living Races, befot


the Flood; nor yet notes it as a Mark of divine Favou
| '


. againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 455


gr extraordinary Benediction upon thoſe Perſons that liv'd
ſ long. Therefore, not to ſuppole it general to Man-
kind at that I ime, is a groundleſs Reſtriction, which is
neither founded upon Scripture nor Reaſon.

As to the ſecond Argument for ante diluvian Longevi-
ty, taken from | radition and the Feſtimony of the An-
tents, he Objects, p. 275, 277. that Foſephas dues not
ſeem to be firm in that Opinion himſelf. But what then?
The Theoriſt lays no Streſs upon Fojephzs's tingle Opini-
on, but reters to the I eltimonies of thoſe Authors, whe-
ther Greeks, or ſuch as have given an Account of the
Agyptian, Chaldean, and Phanician Antiquities: Which
we call'd in by Yep, as Witneiles of this Truth or
Tradition, concerning the long Lives of the firſt Men.
And at laſt, the Exceptor ſeems content, this Tradition
hould be admitted, p. 255. ſeeing the Authors are t00 ma-
w, or too conſiderable, to have their Teſtimouies queſtion 'd
rejected. But then he will make a further Oneſtion,
ey there ſhould not allo be a Tradition concerning the
perpetual Equinox, or perpetual Spriag, upon which this
Longevity depended ? But this Queſtion is fully anſwer'd,
nd the Tradition fully made out before, in the eighth
Chapter, which I need not here repeat. In like manner,
al the ſecondary Queſtions, which he there mentions, de-
ſending upon, and being included in this firſt, receive
their Reſolution from it. For when a perpetual Equi-
(ox is once truly ſtated, there is no Difficulty concern-
ng the reſt.

After theſe Conteſts about Traditions, he hath one or
two Reaſons againſt this ante-diluviun Longevity, p. 279,
%. Firſt, becauſe the Earth, by this Means, would
taye been over-ſtock'd with People before the Time ot
tie Deluge. Secondly, They ſhould all have been of the
lme Longevity before the Flood. Neither of theſe, me-
inks, have any Strength in them. As to the firſt, That
Earth was much more capacious than this is, where the
Yea takes away half of its Surface, and renders it unin—
labitable. And whereas he ſuggeſts, as a Recompence,
lid. That Mountains have more Surface and Capacity
han Plains; that's true, but they are alſo lets habitable,
dy Reaſon of their Barrenneſs and Ruggedneſs. Who
can believe that there are as many People in Zales, as in
ther Parts of Ezxgland, upon the lame Compals of level
Ground? Or no more in Ilolland, than upon alike Num -


g 4 be


ber of Acres upon the Alps or Pyreneans? I here would


4 mw anew — - * 1


— — * ꝶꝙ14 7 - 7
2 ͤ — » ˙—ö — —
*


r


2


24 | wo -


3 —— —


——


OP —


— _ * .
IIS GE CER, Rr ru * -


2


456 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


be room enough for twice as many People as there are int
World, and twice as many Animals, if there was Fogg
enough to nouriſh them. But here I have two things tg
complain of, as foul Play : Firſt, the Exceptor cites the
Theory partially. Secondly, he does not mark the Place
whence he takes that Citation; as if it was on purpoſe
hide his Partiality. The Words he cites are theſe: I/ ue
allow the firſt Couple, at the end of one hundred Years, 0
of the firſt Century, to have leſt ten Pair of Breeders, ic
75 an eaſy Suppaſition, there would ariſe from theſe in fiſtee;
hundred Years, à greater Number than the Earth was cad
pable of; allowing every Pair to multiply in the ſame decu
ple Proportion the firſt Pair did, Eng. Theor. p. 32.*Herg
the Exceptor ſtops, and makes this Inference; that upon
an eaſy Suppuſition, Which the Theoriſt makes and allows
the Earth would have been over-ſtock'd in fifteen hundred
Years. This is an eafy Suppoſition for the firſt Century
as the Theoriſt put it; but it would be a very uncaſy one
for the following Centuries, when they came to beatan
conſiderable Diſtance from the Beginning. And therefor
the Theoriſt tells you, in that very Page, The ſame ble
ſure cannot run equally through all the Ages. And in hi
Calculation you lee, after the firſt Century, he hathtake
only a quadruple Proportion for the Increaſe of Main
As judging that a moderate and reaſonable Meaſure betwix
the higheſt and the loweſt. This the Exceptor might ea
ſily have obſerv'd, 24:4. and as caſily avoided this Nil
application of the Words of the Theorilt.

His ſecond Reaſon againſt the ante-diluvian Longevit)
is flighter than the firſt, p. 280. For he pretends that al
Ante-diluvians, upon that Suppoſition, ſhould have bce
equally long-liv'd. You may as well ſay, that al
the Children of the ſame Parents, and that live in the
ſame Place, ſhould now be equally long-liv'd; the ex
ternal World being the ſame to them all. But, beſides
Accidents, their Stamina and Conſtitutions might then be
of a different Strength, as well as now; tho? they were
born of the ſame Parents, and liv'd in the fame Air. Laſt
ly, he moves a Difficulty about the Multiplication of Ani
mals in the firſt World, p. 2$1. that they would have bee
too numerous before the Flood. I can ſay nothing t
that, nor he neither, upon good Grounds: Unleſs We
knew what Species of Animals were then made, and i
what Degrees they multiplied. The Theoriſt always UP;


poſes a divine Providence to ſuperintend, proparmon, a
g | | ctcry


againſt the Theory of the E\xTH. 457


determine, both the Number and Food of Animals upon
he Earth; ſuitably to the Conſtitution and Circum-
ances of every World. And ſeeing that Earth was no
leſs under the Care and Direction of Providence, than
the preſent, we may conclude that due Meaſures were
uken for adjuſting the Numbers and Food of Animals


in ſuch manner, as neicher to be a Burden to one another,
nor to Man.


SH AP; NIF,


THI S Chapter is againſt the Explication of the Deluge
by the Diſſolution of the Earth. That Diſſolution, las
is pretended, being unfit or inſufficient to produce ſuch an
Ftect. And to prove this, the Ante-theoriſt gives us five
Lyuments, whereof the firſt is this; p. 285. Moſes having
lt us an accurate Deſcription of Paradiſe, according to the
per Rules of Topography, ſuch a Deſcription would have
been improper and inſufficient to determine the Place of
Paradiſe, and conſequently uſeleſs, if the Earth had been
tiſolv*d ; and by that means the Bounds of thoſe Countries,
and the Channels of thoſe Rivers, broken and chang'd.
This Objection, Pm afraid, will tall heavier upon Moſes,
or upon the Exceptor himſelf, than upon the Theoriſt.
However, one would have expected that the Exceptor
hould havedetermin'd here the Place of Paradiſe in virtue
0 that Deſcription. So learned and ſagacious a Perſon,
ring before him an exact Draught of Paradile, according
t the proper Rules of Topography, could not fail to lay his
Finger upon the very Spot of Ground where it ſtood. Yet
do not find that he has ventur'd to determine the Place
of Paradiſe, either in this Chapter, or in the preceding:
Which gives me a great Suſpicion, that he was not ſatis-
d where it ſtood, notwithſtanding the Moſarcal Topogra-
dy. Now if it cannot be underſtood or determin'd by that
topography, one of theſe two things mult be allow'd, ei-
tier that the Deſcription was inſufficient and ineffectual
or that there has been ſome great Change in the Earth,
Wacreby the Marks cf itaredcſtroy'd ; namely, the Bounds
or Countries, and the Courſes of the Rivers. If he take
tie fecond of theſe Anſwers, he joins with the Theoriſt.
lithe firſt, he reflects, according to his way of arguing,
Won the Honour of Moſes, or confutes himſelf. |
But here is ſtill a further Charge, p. 286. Moſess De-
ion. of Paradiſe would have been falſe (which he
1 notes


.
:
* :
x
ö bg
-
*
1 »
©” »
= -
'
,
: 1
I 'F
#*
= * I
«
; l
s
91 1
50 1
1 p "
37
1 N
6
1
1 7
4 .
: S.
o
| J.
4 1
jþ
.
9
Wh
Fe fy.
4
- t
* 4
” (
i |
:
:
: *
* : i
7
*
.
| L 4
* 1
1
V
4 G 4
*
* 1
11
1 1
ty 1
: %
95 4
1 1
+
q 2 :
| +>
N
\ N 4
4 ' &
- 4
: .
FL
5 4
x ; =
i# 135
* 1 l
4 i 44
„
; v1
. { Li
: 1
by
.N -
- q 1
* oy 15}
. , .
:
n "YA
* , :
4 : l o 4
* 4 N
2.38}
v4 F :
- =
: | 9
K e
[1
D « l
! | 1
#1 1
f 4
q j *
4 1
* 1 |
A 3 '
EF
4.5 ! 1
No d ly
=
LY -
- |
: oo
e i
© 1
, 1 :
11
TH | i
KO .
©) 1 ' N
' ;
2 =
#1 4
ol '
s
1 vs ,
L 5 14
- ; 7 7
1 | |
-£ +Y
: 1
Ht ©
.
: 1 [ 4
Fi
"Hz .
in
* b 14
1
3 11
i
4 q
1
by, «1
, :
:
j


- voy
— —
— —
— — 4
— mt
= - — —
> x — —
- — 5 z —


458 An An ſiver to the Exceptions made


notes for horrid Blaſphemy) if the Earth was broken a


the Deluge: For then thoſe Rivers, by which Moſes de
{cries Paradiſe, could not have been before the Flog
But why fo, I pray? The Theoriſt ſuppoſes Rivers be


fore the Flood, in great Plenty; and why not like to theſe}
And if their Channels were very much chang'd by the


Flood, that's no more than what good Interpreters ſup


poſe. Being unable, upon any other Submiſſion, to gt


an Account why it is ſo hard (notwithſtanding Mz


Deſcription) to determine the Place of Paradiſe. Now


where is the blaſphemy of this? Ibid. Horrid Blaſphen
| Sn the 1 hoſt? A rude and injudicious Defeuced
cripture, by Railing and ill Language, is the true Waytq
leſſen and diſparage it: Eſpecially when we make ou
own Conſequences to be of the ſame Authority with thi
Word of God; and whatſoever is againſt them, muſt b.
charg'd with Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt. Is it no
a ſtrange Thing, that the Diſſolution of the Earth ſhould by
made Blaſphemy, when the Prophets and inſpir'd Author
{peak ſo often of the Diſraptions, Fraftions, Concuſſin
and Subverſions of the Earth? See Review, p. 380, Cc. Ant
that very Expreſſion, that the Earth is di{ſolv'd, is aScrip
ture Expreſſion, (P/al. Ixxv. 3. Iſai. xxiv. 19. Amos ix. 5
which, methinks, might have been enough to haveprotect
ed it from the Imputation of Blaſphemy. But there is nc
thing ſafe againſt blind Zeal, and opinionative Ignorance
which, by how much they find themſelves weaker inRea
ſons, by ſo much they become more violent in Paſſions.
But to return to the Objection; upon the whole Mat
ter, he caſts the Burden of the Charge upon Moſes him
ſelf, as we noted before: For take whether Hypothelt
you will, that the Earth was, or was not broken, the Quel
tion ſtill returns, if the Moſaical Topography was zag
and ſufficient, why can we not yet find out the Situatio
of Paradiſe? *I'is now above three thouſand Years fine
Moſes died, and Men have been curious and very inquill
tive in all Ages, to find out the Place of Paradile ; b
it is not found out to this Day to any Satisfaction: 5


that, methinks, upon the whole, the Theory, which tupl


poſeth the Earth very much chang'd, makes the faireſt A


logy both for Moſes and Mankind, in this Particular. Bu


to proceed to his ſecond Argument. | |
Secondly, ſays the Exceptor, p. 288. The Diſſol112:0%


the Earth could not be the Cauſe of the general Hood, vecas |


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 459


would have utterly deſtroy'd Noah's Ark, and all that
vere in it. I thought the Theoriſt had effectually prevented
vis Objection, by putting the Ark under the Conduct of
s Guardian Angels, and of a miraculous Providence;
Eve. Theor. p. 147. Theſe are his Words: [ thizk it had
ren impoſſible for the Ark to have vwd upon the raging A-
xs, or for Noah and his Family to have been preſerv'd, if
lere had not been a miraculous Hand of Providence tu take
are of them. Now, either the Exceptor did not take
yotice of this Paſſage in the Theory, or he does not al-
low that a miraculous Hand was ſufficient to prelerve the
Ark; or thirdly, he made an Objection, which he knew
timſelf to be impertinent. And, I confeſs, I am incli-
nable to think the laſt is true: For as to the firſt, he con-
felles (p. 354-) that the Theory repreſents the Ark, with its
bnardian Angels about it, in the Extremity of the Flood.
And as to the ſecond, he himſelf makes uſe of a mira-
culous Power to preſerve the Ark upon his Hypothetis ;
n Anſwer to the eighth Objection, p. 351, 352, Wc.
Why then may not we make uſe of the fame Power, and
with the fame Effect? It remains therefore, that he- Was
tonſcious to himſelf that he made this Objection to no
purpoſe.
but that is not all: He has alſo ns'd foul Play in his
Citation: For whereas the great Danger of the Ark would
de at the firſt Fall of the Earth, or the Diſruption of the
Abyls; the Theoriſt, he ſays, to prevent this, makes the
Ark to be a float by the Rains, before the Abyſs was bro-
len. But is that all the Theoriſt ſays in that Place?
Does he not aſſign another Way how the Ark might be
rloat? Namely, in a River, or in a Dock. Theſe are
tie Words of the Theory, p. 133, 134. So as the Ark, :f
t old not float upon theſe Rain-Waters, at leaſt taking the
Mantage of a River, or of a Dock or Ciſtera made to re-
leide them, it might be a-flaat before the Abyſs was broken
pen. And theſe Words being in the fame Place whence
te makes his Citation, it mult be a wilful Diſſimulation
hot to take notice of them. But he ſaw they would have
Wenoff the Edge of his Objection, and therefore thought
it not to touch upon them. But after all, there is no
Neceſſity that the Ark ſhould be a-float before the Earth
Ike: Thoſe Things were premis'd in the Fheory, only
o ſoften the Way to Men that are of hard Belict in ſuch
Atraordinary Matters: For the Angels ( whote Miuiltry
e openly own, upon theſe grand Occaſions) could as .
| lv


460 An Anſwer to the Exceptions mad:


ſily have held the Ark a- float, in the Air, as on the W
ter. And the Ark, being an Emblem of the Chure
God certainly did give his Angels Charge over it; that th
ſhould bear it up in their Hands, that it might not be dajy
againſt a Stone. And this having been more than one
proteis'd by the T heoriſt, we mult again conclude this O.
jection ſuperfluous and uſeleſs.
The third Objection is this. If the Earth had been thy
diſſolv'd, p. 289. The preſent Earth would have been, j
bkel:hood of another Figure, than what now it bears. Thel
are his Words; but I ſuppoſe he means, that it would hay
been of another Form, as to Sca and Land. And th
Reaſon he gives is this: Becauſe, ſays he, it would hay
broke firſt in the Equator, and conſequently that Part fil
ling down firſt, would have been ſwallowed up by th
Waters, and become all Sea. Whereas we find, thatui
der the Equator that then was (which he ſuppoſeth (
the preſent Ecliptick) he dry Ground is of moſt ſpaciua
Extent and Continuity. We need not examine his A0
count of Sea and Land, becauſe it proceeds upon a tall
Suppoſition, (See p. 27. before.) He relapſes here into hi
former aſtronomical Error, or to his firſt adds a ſecond
12. | hat the Earth, when it chang'd its Situation, chang)
its Poles and Circles. This is a great Miſtake; the Chang
of Poſition in Reſpe& of the Heavens, did not chang
the Places of its Circles in Reſpect to its own Globe. A
when you change a Sphere or a Globe out of a rig:
tuation into an oblique, the Circles do not change the
Places, as to that Sphere or Globe; but have only anoth
Poſition to the Heavens. The Earth's Ecliprick run
thorough the ſame Places it did before; and the equinod
tial Regions of that Earth were the ſame with the equ
noctial Regions of this, only bear another Poſture to th
Heavens and the Sun. Theſe Circles have not chang
Places with one another, as he imagines; and which
worle, would father this Imagination upon the Theory
in theſe Words, Under the Ecliptick (which, in the pre
ſent Situation of the Earth, ACCORDING TO THY
THEORY) was its Equinodtial, and divided the CU
into two Hemiſpheres, as the Equator does now) the d
Ground, &c. He that affirms this, with Reſpe& to til
Earth, neither underſtands the Theory, nor the Poctrise 4
the Sphere. But let's preſs no further upon a Miſtake. }
The fourth Objection is this; p. 290. That ſuch a Dig


ſolution of the Earth, would have caus'd great Barren ö
a a 2 |


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 461 |


ter the Flood: Partly by turning up ſome dry and un-
aitful Parts of the Earth; and partly by the Soil and
th that would be left upon its Surface. As to the firſt,
willingly allow, that ſome of the interior and barren
parts of the Earth might be turn'd up; as we now ſee in
ountainous and wild Countries ; but this rather confirms
he Theory, than weakens it. Put as to the ſecond, that
he Filth and Soil would have made the Earth more bar-
en, I cannot allow that. For good Husbandmen over-
fow their Grounds, to make their Crop; more rich. And
tis generally ſuppos'd, that the Inundation of Nie, and
the Mud it leaves behind it, makes A:gypz more fruitful.
Beſides, this Part of the Objection lics againſt the com-
mon Explication of the Deluge, as well as againſt that
which is given by the Theory. For it you ſuppoſe an
miverſal Deluge, let it come from what Cauſes you pleaſe,
t muſt overflow all the Earth, and leave Mud and Slime
and Filth upon the Surface of it: And conſequently
cauſe Barrenneſs, according to this Argumentation.

He adds another Conſideration under this Head, p. 292.
namely, that if the Earth had been diſſolv'd in his man-
ner, All the Buildings erected befure the Flood, would have
keen ſhaken down, or elſe overwhelind. Yet we read of
ſme that outſlood the Flood, and were not demoliſh'd.
Such were the Pillars of Seth, aud the Cities Henochia
d Joppa. As to Serh's Pillars, they are generally ac-
counted fabulous; and I perceive the Exceptor will not
jouch for them: For he concludes, (p. 295.) { kzow the
tery Being is queſtion” d of Seth's Pillars, &c. If he will
not defend them, why ſhould I take the Pains to confute
em? I do not love to play with a Man, that will put
tothing to the Stake; that will have his Chance to win,
but can loſe nothing, becauſe he ſtakes nothing. Then
to the City Henochia, it hath no Authority, but that of
Annins Viterbienſis, and his Beroſus: A Book generally
aploded, as fictitious. Laſtly, As to Foppa, the Autho-
ty indeed is better, tho' ſtill uncertain. But however,
luppoſe the Ruins of one Town remain'd after the Flood,
does this prove that the Earth was not difſoly'd? I do nor
doubt, but there were ſeveral Tracts of the Earth, much
greater than that Town, that were not broken all to Pie-
ces by their Fall. But you and your Exgliſb Hiſtorian, are
miſtaken, if you ſuppoſe the Altars and Inſcriptions men-
non'd by Mela, to have been ante-diluvian Altars and In-
leriptions: Unleſs you will make the Fable of has

| an


460 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


ſily have held the Ark a- float, in the Air, as on the WA
ter. And the Ark, being an Emblem of the Chure
God certainly didgive his Angels Charge over it; that i
ſhould bear it up ia their Hands, that it might not be daſj
againſt a Stone. And this having been more than one
proteis'd by the I heoriſt, we mult again conclude this}
jection ſuperfluous and uſeleſs.

The third Objection is this. If the Earth had been th
diſſolv'd, p. 289. The preſent Earth would have been,
bkelihood of another Figure, than what now it bears. Thel
are his Words; but l ſuppoſe he means, that it would hay
been of another Form, as to Sea and Land. And th
Reaſon he gives is this: Becauſe, ſays he, it would hay
broke firſt in the Equator, and conſequently that Part fal
ling down firſt, would have been ſwallowed up by th
Waters, and become all Sea. Whereas we find, thatu
der the Equator that then was (which he ſuppoſeth (
the preſent Ecliptick) zhe dry Ground is of moſt ſpaciu
Extent and Continuity. We need not examine his A0
count of Sea and Land, becauſe it proceeds upon a tall
Suppoſition, (See p. 27. before.) He relapſes here into hi
former aſtronomical Error, or to his firſt adds a ſecond
dix. | hat the Earth, when it chang'd its Situation, chang
its Poles and Circles. This is a great Miſtake; the Chang
of Poſition in Reſpe& of the Heavens, did not chang
the Places of its Circles in Reſpect to its own Globe. A
when you change a Sphere or a Globe out of a right K
tuation into an oblique, the Circles do not change the
Places, as to that Sphere or Globe; but have only anoth
Poſition to the Heavens. The Earth's Ecliprick run
thorough the ſame Places it did before; and the equinod
tial Regions of that Earth were the ſame with the equ
noctial Regions of this, only bear another Poſture to if
Heavens and the Sun. Theſe Circles have not chang \
Places with one another, as he imagines; and which!
worle, would father this Imagination upon the Theory
in theſe Words, Under the Ecliptick (which, in the pre
ſent Situation of the Earth, ACC ORDING TO THY
THEORY) was its Equinodtial, and divided the CI
iato two Hemiſpheres, as the Equator does now) the dry
Ground, &c. He that affirms this, with Reſpe& to tng
Earth, neither underſtands the Theory, nor the Doctrine 9
the Sphere. But let's preſs no further upon a Miſtake. |

The fourth Objection is this; p. 290. That ſuch a Dich


ſolution of the Earth, would have caus'd great Barren .


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 461


ter the Flood: Partly by turning up ſome dry and un-
aitful Parts of the Earth; and partly by the Soil and
th that would be left upon its Surface. As to the firſt,
willingly allow, that ſome of the interior and barren
parts of the Earth might be turn'd up; as we now ſee in
ountainous and wild Countries; but this rather confirms
he Theory, than weakens it. Rut as to the ſecond, that
the Filth and Soil would have made the Earth more bar-
en, I cannot allow that. For good Husbandmen over-
flow their Grounds, to make their Crop more rich. And
tis generally ſuppos'd, that the Inundation of Nie, and
the Mud it leaves behind it, makes A:gypz more fruitful,
Beſides, this Part of the Objection lics againſt the com-
mon Explication of the Deluge, as well as againſt that
which is given by the Theory. For if you ſuppoſe an
miverſal Deluge, let it come from what Cauſes you pleaſe,
t muſt overflow all the Earth, and leave Mud and Slime
and Filth upon the Surtace of it : And conſequently
cauſe Barrenneſs, according to this Argumentation.

He adds another Conſideration under this Head, p. 292.
namely, that if the Earth had been diſſolv'd in his man-
ner, All the Buildings erected before the Tlood, would have
teen ſhaker down, or elſe overwhelind. Net we read of
ſme that outſtood the Flood, and were not demoliſh'd.
duch were the Pillars of Seth, aud the Cities Henochia
ad Joppa. As to Seth's Pillars, they are generally ac-
counted fabulous; and [I perceive the Exceptor will not
5ouch for them: For he concludes, (p. 295.) { kzow the
try Being is queſtion” d of Seth's Pillars, &c. If he will
not defend them, why ſhould I take the Pains to confute
lem? I do not love to play with a Man, that will put
nothing to the Stake; that will have his Chance to win,
but can loſe nothing, becauſe he ſtakes nothing. Then
to the City Henochia, it hath no Authority, but that of
Amnus Viterbienſis, and his Beroſus: A Book generally
aploded, as fictitious. Laſtly, As to Foppa, the Autho-
ity indeed is better, tho' ſtill uncertain. But however,
luppoſe the Ruins of one Town remain'd after the Flood,
does this prove that the Earth was not diflolv d? I do not
doubt, but there were ſeveral Tracts of the Earth, much
greater than that Town, that were not broken all to Pie-
ces by their Fall. But you and your Exgliſh Hiſtorian, are
miſtaken, if you ſuppoſe the Altars and Inſcriptions men-
ton'd by Mela, to have been ante-diluvian Altars and In-
(criptions : Unleſs you will make the Fable of Perſeu,


and


—ñ—— — — —


his Charge with ſo much Bitterneſs, Some Men, they


462 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


and Andromeda, and the Sea-Moxſtery to have been 2
ante-diluvian Fable. Neither hath your Hiſtorian by
jucky in tranſlating thoſe Words of Mela, cum religin
pluriiaa, with the Grounds and Principles of their Religy
on, which ſignify only, wih a religious Care of Superſ}
tion. But to leave Fables, and procced :
His laſt Argument againſt the Dittolution is this, 9. 296
Had the Diſſolution of the Earth been the Cauſe of th
Deluge, I world have made God's Covenant with Nog
a very vain and trifiiag Thing, So much is true, Tha
the Detuge in the Courſe of Nature, will not retun
again in the ſame Way. But unleſs God prevent it, i
both may, and will return in another Way. That is, |
the World continue long enough, the Mountains wil
wear and link, and the Waters in Proportion riſe, and
overflow the whole Earth; as 1s plainly ſhewn, by
parallel Caſe, in the firſt Book of the Theory, ch. iv. Belides
God might, when he pleas'd, by an extraordinary Power
and for the Sins of Men, bring another Deluge uponthd
World. And that is the Thing which Noah feems to hart
fear'd, and which God, by his Covenant, ſecur'd hi
againſt. For, as the Exceptor hath ſaid himſelf, in anſwer
ing an harder Objection, (p. 152.) her God aſſigned t
the Waters the Place of their Abode, he did not intend ti
fortify them in it againſt his own Omnipotence, or 10 dive
himſelf of his Soveraign Prerogative of calling them firth
when he pleaſed. This being allowed, with what welaid
before, that Covenant was not vain nor trifling, either it
Reſpect of an ordinary or extraordinary Providence.
Thus we have done with all the Exceptions againſt thg
Theory: For the two next Chapters are concerning
new Hypotheſis of his own; and the laſt of all except.
not againſt the Truth of the Theory, but the Certainty ol
it. In Reflection upon this whole Matter, give me leave te
declare two Things: Firſt, That I have not knowing!
omitted any Objection that I thought of moment: Se-
condly, That I have not, from theſe Exceptions, toun
Reaſon to change any Part of the Theory, nor to aiter
my Opinion, as to any Particular in it. No doubt there
are ſeveral Texts of Scripture, which, underſtood ac-
cording to the Letter in a vulgar Way, ſtand croſs, both
to this, and other natural Theories. And a Child, that
had read the firſt Chapters of Geneſis, might have obſery d
this as well as the Exceptor ; but could not have loade


lay,


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 463


fy, though of no great Valour, yet will fight excellently
well behind a Wall. The Exceptor, behind a Text ot
Scripture, is very fierce and rugged : But in the open
Field of Reaſon and Philoſophy, he's gentle and tractable.
Eno. Theor. Book 2. c. 9. at the End. The Theoriſt had
declar'd his Intentions, and oblig'd himſelf, to give a
full Account of Moſes his Coſmopœia, or fix Day's Crea-
jm; but did not think it proper to be done in the vulgar
Language, nor before the whole Theory was compleated.
This might have ſpared much of the Exceptor's Pains ;
but till that Account be given, it the Exceptor thinks fir
to continue his Animadverſions, and go through the two
laſt Books, as he hath done the two firſt, it will not be un-
acceptable to the I heoriſt; provided it be done with Sin-
cerity, in reciting the Words, andrepreſenting the Senſe
of the Author,


CHAT. XV.


N this Chapter the Ante-theoriſt lays down a new Hy-
potheſis for the Explication of the Deluge, p.299. And
the War is chang'd, on his Side, from offenſive, to defen-

five, * T'is but tair that he ſhould lie down in his Turn;
and if fome Blows ſmart a little, he muſt not complain,
decauſe he begun the Sport. But let's try his Hypotheſis,
without any further Ceremony, p. 299, 300. Ihe firit
Propoſit ion laid down for the eſtabliſhing of it, is this:

That the Flood was but fifteen Cubits high, above the ordi—
ury Level of the Earth. This is an unmercitul Paradox,
and a very unlucky Beginning; for under what Notion
muſt this Propoſition be received? As a Paſtulatum, or as
a Conclaſron? If it be a Poſtulatum, it mult be clear from
ts own Light, or acknowledg'd by general Conſent. It
cannot pretend to be clear from its own Light, becauſe
tis matter of Fact, which is not known, but by Teſti-
mony. Neither is it generally acknowleg'd ; for the
general Opinion is, that the Waters covered the Tops of
the Mountains; nay, that they were fitteen Cubits higher
than the Tops of the Mountains. And this he contefles
himſelf, in theſe Words, p. 300. We ſhall find there 1s
a great Miſtake in the common Hypotheſis, touching their
Depth: Namely, of the Waters. For whereas they have
been ſuppoſed to be fiſteen Cubits higher than the higheſt
Munntains : They were indeed but fifteen Cubits high in all,


abo ve


464 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


above the Surface of the Earth. And this Opinion, or Doc-
trine, he calls, p. 329. lin. 19. c. 31. The general ſtanding
Hypotheſis : The uſual Hypotheſis : p. 339. lin. 18. The
aſual Senſe they 1 upon the ſacred Story. It muſt not
therefore be made a Poſtulatum, that ſuch an Hypotheſis is
talſe, but the Falſity of it muſt be demonſtrated by good
Proofs. Now do not find that this new Hypotheſis, of
a fifteen Cubit Deluge, offers at any more than one lingle
Proof, namely, from Gen. vii. 20. But before we pro-
ceed to the Examination of that, give me leave to note
one or two Things, wherein the new Theoriſt ſeems tobe
inconſiſtent with himſelf, or with good Senſe.
At his Entrance upon this new Hypotheſis, he hath
theſe Words, (. 300.) Not that I will be bound to defend
what I ſay, as true and real, &c. But why then does he
trouble himſelf or the World, with an Hypotheſis, which
he does not believe to be true and real? Or, if h
does believe it to be ſo, why will he not defend it?
For we ought to defend Truth. But he ſays morecover
(D. 302. lin. 19.) Our Suppoſition ſtauds ſupported by Di
dine Authority; as being founded upon Scripture. Whith
tells us, as plainly as it can ſpeak, that the Waters prevailei
but fifteen Cubits upon the Earth. If his Hypothelis be
founded upon Scripture ; and upon Scripture, as Plain
ly as it can ſpeak, why will not he defend it as true and
real? For to be ſupported by Scripture, and by plai
Scripture, is as much as we can alledge for the Article
2 yu Faith ; which every one ſurely is bound to de
end.
But this is not all the Difficulty we meet with. The
whole Period which we quoted, runs thus: Not tha!
will be bound to defend what I ſay, as true or real; a
more than to believe (what I cannot well endure to ſpeak
that the Church of God has ever gone on in an ration
way of explaining the Deluge: Which yet ſhe maſt need
have done, if there be no other rational Method of e xplat
5 it, and no other intelligible Cauſes of it, than what th
eory has propos d. Now for the Word Theory, put th
Word Exceptor, or Eæceptor's Hypotheſis, and ſee if th
Charge, that the Church of God has ever gone on in an 1
rational way of explaining the Deluge, does not fall
much upon the Exceptor's new Hypotheſis, as upon th
Theory. If the Church Hypotheſis was rational, wha
need he have invented a new one? Why does he not pre


pole that Hypotheſis, and defend it? I'm afraid it *
ound


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 465


hund that he does not only contradict the Church Hypo-
heſis, but reject it as miſtaken and irrational. For what
; the Church Hypotheſis, but the common Hypotheſis?
.300. J. 24.) The general ſtanding Hypothelis; the ꝝſu-
Hypotheſis; the ſual Senſe they put upon the ſacred
ry; all theſe he rejects and diſputes againſt, as you
y ſee in the Places fore- cited: And alſo he calls them,
312. #lt. ſuch Inventions, as have been, and juſtly may be
Ipuſtful, not only to nice and ſqueamiſh, but to the beſtand
ndeſt philoſophick Fudgments. And p. 319. he ſays, by his
Ipotheſis, We are excuſed from running to thoſe Cauſes or
lebe, which ſeem unreaſonable to ſome, and unintelligible
uthers, and #nſatisfactory to moſt, And to name no more,
ſays, p. 330. the ordinary Suppoſition, that the Moun-
ns were cover'd with Water in the Deluge, brings on a
eeſſity of ſetting up a new Hypotheſis for explaining the
md. Now, whoſe Methods, Inventions, and Suppoſi-
ns are theſe, which he reflects upon? Are they not
ecommonly receiv'd Methods and Suppoſitions? *T'is
in, moſt of thoſe which he mentions, (p. 310, 311,
2, 314, 318.) are not the Theoriſt's : For the Theoriſt
[rejected before, (Eng. Theor. ch. a, and 3.) thoſe ve-
Methods and Inventions, which the Exceptor rejects
I; and ſo far he juſtifies the Theory *: Theſe Reflec-
us therefore muſt fall upon ſome other Hypotheſis; and
lat Hypotheſis is that, if it be not the Church Hypothe-
To conclude, I argue thus, in ſhort, to ſhew the Ex-
or inconſiſtent with himſelf in this Particular. The
urch Way of explaining the Deluge, is either rational,
rational. If he ſay it is rational, why does he deſert
and invent a new one? And if he fays it is irrational,
a that dreadful Thing, which he cannot well endure to
t, that the Church of God has ever gone on in an ir-
mal Way of explaining the Deluge, falls flat upon him-


Thus much in general, for his Introduction. We pro-
u now to examine particularly his new Hypothelis :
ich, as we told you before, conſiſts chicfly in this,


The Exceptor reje&s, firſt the Waters of the Ses: Then the Waters in
Wel of the Earth : Then the ſuperceleſtial Waters : Then a new Creation
unt: Then the Meſs of Air chang'd into Water: And laſtly, a partie!
And therefore he pus Men fatally, either upon the Theory, or upon


ly Hypotheſis. Hh That


466 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made
That the Waters of the Deluge were but fifteen Cul


higher than the common unmountainous Surface of:
Earth. This, which ſeems ſo odd and extravagant
. )

ſays, p. 301. is the Foundation of the Hypotheſis. A
which is ſtill more ſurprizing, he ſays this Depth, or rat
Shallowneſs of the Waters of the Deluge, is told us
Scripture, as plainly as it can ſpeak, p. 302. I. 21. T|
mult needs raiſe our Curioſity, to ſee that Place of Ser
ture, which has been overlook'd by all the Learned
therto. Well, 'tis Cen. vii. 20. in theſe words, Ef:
Cubits upwards did the Waters 8 This, methin
is ſomewhat general; for the Baſis of theſe fifteen Cu
is not expreſs'd in theſe Words. But why does our Autt
ſtop in the middle of a Verſe ? Why does he not tr
Scripture as the firſt? And that ſays plainly, that the Ms
rains were cover'd with the Waters. The whole Ve
runs thus: Fifteen Cubits upwards did the Waters prev
AND THE MOUNTAINS WERE COVE
ED. Now, if the Baſis of theſe fifteen Cubits was

common Surface, or plain Level of the Earth, as

new Hypotheſis will have it; how could fifteen Cub

from that Baſis, reach to the Tops of the Mountai

Are the higheſt Mountains but fifteen Cubits higher t

the common Surface of the Earth? 1 Sam. xvii. 4. Ge

was fix Cubits and a Span high; ſo Pic Tenariff we

not be thrice as high as Goliab: Vet David flung a dt

up to his Forehead. Take what Cubit you pleaſe, [a

or common, it does not amount to two Foot. 80
Height of the greateſt Mountains, from Bottom to

muſt not be thirty Foot, or ten Paces, according to

new Hypotheſis. Who ever meaſured Mountains at

Rate? The modern Mathematicians allow for their Hi

a Mile perpendicular, upon a moderate Computat

and that makes three thouſand Foot: How then Cc

Waters that were not thirty Foot high, cover Moun

that were three thouſand Foot high? That the hi

Mountains of the Earth were cover'd with the V

you may ſee expreſs'd more fully in the precedent V

Gen. vii. 19. And the Waters prevailed exceedingly
the Earth. And all the high Hills that were unde

whole Heavens were cover d. There can ſcarce be

more plain and comprehenſive. The Exceptor lays

Scripture tells us, as plainly as it can ſpeak, that the

ters were but fifteen Cubits high from the common Su


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 467


of the Earth: AndI ſay, the Scripture tells us as plainly
4 it can ſpeak, That all the high [ills under the whole
Heaven were covered with Water. And it muſt be a
trange ſort of Geometry, that makes fifteen Cubits of
Water reach to the I op of the higheſt Hills. Laſtly,
e ſame Hiſtoryof Moſes ſays, the Tops of the Mountains
were diſcover'd, when the Waters begun to decreaſe,
Cen. viii. 5. Is not that a plain Demonſtration that they
mere cover'd before, and cover'd with thoſe Waters?

We may therefore ſafely conclude two Things: Firſt,
that this new Hypotheſis, beſides all other Faults, is con-
mary to the general Expoſition of the Text of 11 80 5
decondly, that it is contrary to the general receiv'd Doc-
ine of the Deluge. And if he has deliver'd a Doctrine,
ontrary to theſe two, methinks, it ſhould be hard for him
o maintain his Ground, and not pronounce, at the ſame
ime, what he dreads ſo much to ſpeak, 7 hat the Church
f God has ever gone on in an irrational Way of explaining
e Deluge. But let's reflect a little upon this fifteen-cu-
Deluge; to ſee what Figure it would make, or what
Fiecution it would do upon Mankind, and upon other
reatures. If you will not believe Moſes as to the over-
lowing of the Mountains, at leaſt I hope you will be-
ere him, as to the univerſal Deſtruction made by the De-
we, Hear his Words, Gen. vii. 21, 22, 23. We'll take only
2 laſt Verſe, which is this, Aud every liviug Subſtance
u deſtroyed, which was upon the Face of the Ground,
Wb Man and Cattle, and creeping Things, and the Fowl
the Heavens; and they were deſtroyed from the Earth;
Noah only remained alive, and they that were with
Wn in the Ark. Now I would gladly know, how this
wuld be verified in a fifteen- cubit Deluge? The Birds
'Tould naturally fly to the Tops of I rees, when the
round was wet; and the Beaſts would retire, by De-
tees, to the Mountains and higher Parts of the Earth,
the lower begun to be overflow'd: And if no Waters
ould reach them there, how were they all deſtroy'd,
file they had ſo many Sanctuaries and Places of Refuge?


——_—


**


This he acknowledges, p. 325 · (Ne expound a Text er two of Scripture
1 none ever did ; and deſerting the common receive Senſe, put an unuſuat
i up: them, not to ſay, {3iav £miavoiv, 4 private Interpretation,) and


59s
H h 2 ; Or


*


— . ww I —
— — —
- —


—
IT ——


— —


468 An An fewer to the Exceptions made


Or if you ſuppoſe ſome of theſe Creatures had not
Wit enough to ſave themſelves, (though their Wit ane
Inſtincts lie chiefly in that) at leaſt Mankind would not
be ſo ſtupid ; when Men ſee the Waters begin to riſe
they could not fail to retire into Mountains: And tho
the upper Stories of their Houſes might be ſufficient te
ſave them from fifteen Cubits of Water; yet if Fe
made them think themſelves not ſecure there, whith
could it drive them, but ſtill into higher Places? And at
Houſe ſeated upon an Eminency, or a Caſtle upon
Rock, would be always a ſafe Retreat from this diminy
tive Deluge. I ſpeak all this upon the Suppoſitions of th
Exceptor, p. 215, 216, 292, c. who allows not on
Mountains and Rocks, but alſo Caſtles and Cities befor
the Deluge, built of good Timber, and Stone, and [ror
and ſuch ſubſtantial Materials. But how, in ſuch a Caſe
and in ſuch a State of Things, all Mankind (except Nu
and his Family) ſhould be deſtroy'd by fifteen Cubits c
Water, is a Lump of Incredibilities, too hard and big fe
me to ſwallow.

But there is ſtill another Difficulty, that we have nc
mention'd: As thoſe that were upon the Land might et
lily ſave themſelves from Ruin, ſo thoſe that were upoi
the Sea in Ships, would never come in Danger. Fc
what would it ſignify to them, if the Sea was made
few Fathoms deeper, by theſe new Waters? It wou
bear their Veſſels as well as it did before, and would |
no more to them than a Spring-Tide. And laſtly, ho
ſhall we juſtify the Divine Wiſdom, which gave lug
punctual Orders, for the Building of an Ark, to lay
Noah, and a Set of Creatures for a new World, whe
there were ſo many more eaſy and obvious Ways to pr
ſerve them without that Trouble?

Theſe Obje&ions, in my Opinion, are ſo plain andfu
that it is not needful to add any more: Nor to anſw.
ſuch Evaſions as the new Theoriſt attempts to make |
ſome of them. As, for Inſtance, to that plain Objectic
from Moſes's Words, p. 330. that the Mountains were ©
vered with the Waters; he ſays, firſt, that it is aSynecavc
where the Whole is put for a Part : Or, ſecondly, tis
Hyperbole, where more is ſaid than underſtood: Or, thi!
ly, tis a poetical Hiſtory : Or, laſtly, if none of theſe
do, by the Tops of the Monntains is to be underſtood il
Bottoms of the Mountains, p. 332, 333. and that cu
all. The Truth is, he has taken a great deal of Toe


aàgainſi the Theory of the EARTH. 469


the next Chapter, to cure an incurable Hypotheſis. We
will give you but one Inſtance more: Lis about the Ap-
pearance of the Tops of the Mountains at the Decreaſe of the


Deluge; which argue ſtrongly that they were cover'd in


the Deluge. But take it in his own Words, with the
Anſwer, p. 337. It is recorded, Gen. viii. 5. that the Ma-
ers decreaſed continually until the tenth Month, and on the
firſt Day of the Month WERE THE TOPS OF THE
MOUNTAINS SEEN. Now if the Mountains had nat
been quite under Water, and ſo inviſible for the Time they
were overwhelmed, how could they be ſaid to become viſible
again, or to be ſeen upon the Floods going off: This is a
plain and bold Objection : And after two Anſwers to ir,
which he ſeems to diſtruſt, his third and laſt is this,p. 339.
[f theſe two Conſiderations will not ſatisfy, we muſt carr
mn the Enquiry a little farther, and ſeek for a third. And
truly ſome one or other muſt needs be found out. Third-
h, therefore we conſider, that the Tops of the Mountains
nay be ſaid to be ſeen at the Time mentioned, upon account
if their EMERGENCY OUT OF DARKNESS, NOT
VT OF WATERS. This is his final Anſwer. The Tops
ofthe Mountains, at the Decreaſe of the Deluge, were ſeen;
notthat they were covered before with Water, ſays he, but
with Darkneſs. Where finds he this Account: *T'is nei-
ther in the Text, nor in Reaſon. If it was always ſo dark
md the T'ops of the Mountains and Rocks naked an
grominent every where, how could the Ark avoid them
that Darknefs ? Moreover, if the Deluge was made in
hat gentle way that he ſuppoſes, I ſee no Reaſon to ima-
ju that there would be Darkneſs, after the forty Days
in, For theſe Rains being fallen, and all the Vapours
ud Clouds of the Air diſcharg'd, methinks there ſhould
ave enſued an extraordinary Clearneſs of the Air, as we
often ſee after rainy Seaſons. Well, tis true: But the
Rains he ſuppoſes were no ſooner fallen, but the Sunre-
tated them again in Vapours, with that Force and Swi:t-
tes, that it kept the Air in perpetual Darkneſs. Thus he
lays afterwards, p. 341. He's mightily beholden to the
un, upon many Accounts; and the Sun is no leſs be-


aſe Mountains, and draw up Waters. *Tis well the
dun did not preſently fall to his old Work again, of raifing
Mountains out of this moiſt Earth, as the Exceptor ſays
te did, when the Earth was firſt drain'd. See Chap. 10. That
le contented himſelt to ſuck up the Waters only, and

x Hhyg' | let


tolden to him; for he gave him a miraculous Power to


Opportunity, at the Decreaſe of the Deluge, of making


470 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


let the Earth alone: We are not a little beholden to him
for this. For he ſeems to have had the ſame Power and


new Ravages upon the Earth, that he had before when it
was firſt drain'd. But let's fee how, or whew, theſe Wa.
ters were ſuck'd up, or reſolv'd into Vapours.
Upon the Expiration of the forty Days Rain, whether
was the Air purg'd of Vapours and clear, or no? Yes
it was purg'd, he ſays, (p. 343.) The Atmoſphere u
ne ver ſo exhauſted of Vapours, and never ſo thin, as whe,
the Waters were newly come down. Then, in that clent
Air the Tops of the Mountains) might have been ſeen
if they lay above Water. But Moſes ſays, Gen. viii. 5
it was in the tenth Mouth that they begun to be ſeen
when the Waters were decreas'd ; *twas therefore thi
Waters, notthegroſs Air, that hinder'd the Sight of the
before. And according to this Method of the Excepto
after the firſt forty Days, the Deluge begun to decreaſe
For the Sun forthwith ſet his Engines a-work, and re
ſolv'd the Waters into Vapours and Exhalations at ſuc
a Rate, p. 341. that he preſently made the Atmoſphe
dark with thick Miſts and Clouds; and, in Proportio
leſſen'd the Waters of the Deluge. But we do not rea
in Moſes, of any Abatement in the Deluge, till the En
of one hundred and fifty Days; (Gen. viii. 3.) which
four Months after this Term. The T ruth is, the whole Ne
tion of ſpending the Waters of the Deluge by Evaporati
is no better than what the Exceptor ſuſpected it wouldb
thought, p. 343. A mere Fancy, awhimfical groundleſ Fi
ment. For what could the Sun do, in the Northern an
Southern Parts of the World, towards the exhaling «
theſe Waters? And in the temperate Climates, why ſhoul
they not fall again in Rains, (if he had a Power to exha
them) as they do now? Was not the Earth in the fa
Poſition, and the Sun of the ſame Force? Beſides, whe
does he find this Notion in Scripture, that the Waters“
the Deluge were conſum'd by Evaporation ? Moſes lay
the Waters returned from 7 the Earth, in going and v
turning, Gen. viii. 3, 5. That is, after frequent Rec
procations, they ſettled at length in their Channels; Wh
Bounds were ſet them, that they might not paſs over,!
they return not again to cover the Earth. Seeing theref0
this Notion hath no Foundation, either in Scripture 1
Reaſon, *tis rightly enough ſtil'd, inthe Exceptor's Word
a mere Fancy, and groundleſs Figment. 5


againſt the Theory of” the EARTH. 471


ions. Let us now proceed to the ſecond Part of his
ew Hypotheſis, which is this, p. 303. That the Abyſs, or
T:hom-Rabbah, which was broken open at the Deluge, and
together with the Rains) made the Flood, was nothing
bat the Holes and Caverns of Rocks and Mountains;
which open'd their Mouths at that Time, and pour'd out
agreat Quantity of Water. To ſupport this new Notion
of Tehom-Rabbah, he alledgeth but one ſingle Text of
Scripture, Pſal.1xxviii. 15. He clave the Rocks in the Wil-
derneſs, and gave them Drink, as out of the great Depths ;
that is, copiouſly and abundantly, as if it were out of


generally underſtood: As you may ſee both by Interpre-
ters, and alſo by the Septuagint and Vulgate Tranſlations,
ind thoſe of the Chaldee Paraphraſe, and the Syriack.
But the Exceptor, by all Means, will have theſe Holes
u the Rocks to be the ſame with the 12 Abyſs, or
great Deep, that was broken open at the Deluge: So the
treat Deep was not one Thing, or one continued Cavity,
a5 Moſes repreſents it, but ten thouſand Holes, ſeparate
and diſtant one from another. Neither muſt the great
Deep, according to him, ſignify a /ow Place, but an high
Place: For he confeſles theſe Caverns were higher than
the common Level of the Earth *. But I do not ſee
how, with any tolerable Propriety, or good Senſe, that
which is higher than the Surface of the Earth can be
called the great Deep. An Abyſs in the Earth, or in the
Water, is certainly douwawards, in reſpect of their common
Surface, as much as a Pit is dowawards; and what is
downwards from us, we cannot ſuppoſe to be above us,
without confounding all Dimenſions, and all Names of
Things; calling that low which is high, a Mountain
a Valley, or a Garret a Cellar,

Neither is there any Thing in this Text, P/al. Ixxviii. 15.
that can juſtly induce us to believe the great Abyſs to be
the ſame Thing with Caverns in Rocks. For whether you
luppoſe it to be noted here as a miraculous Thing, that
God ſhould give them Water out of a Roch, or out of a


mw


—


* : . _—— —


2


* P. 30 3. But though theſe Caverns be called Deeps, we muſt not take them
for profound Places, that went down into the Earth, below the common Surface oF
i': On the contrary, they were ſituate above it. |


H h 4 Flint 4.


But] think we have had enough of theſe Shifts and E-


the great Deep. So the next Verſe implies, and ſo it is


472 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


Hit * as plentifully as if it had been out of the great

byſs; or whether you underſtand the Original of Foun.
tajns to be noted here, which are ſaid in Scripture to come
r om the Sea, or the great Abyſs; neither of theſe Senſes
make any Thing to the Purpoſe of the new Hypotheſis, and
yet they are the faireſt and eaſieſt Senſe that can be put
upon the Words; and that which agrees beſt with other
Places of Scripture, where the ſame Matter of Fact, or
the ſame Hiſtory is related: And therefore there can be
no Neceſſity, from this Text, of changing the general
Notion and Signification of Deep, or Abyſs; both from
that which it hath in common Ule, and that which it hath
in Scripture Uſe.

I fay, as inthe common Uſe of Words, Deep, or Ay,
ſignifies ſome low or inferior Place; ſo the general Uſe
of it in Scripture is, in the ſame Senſe, either to ſignify
the Sea, or ſome ſubterraneous Place. Who ſhall deſcend
into the (Abyſs, or) Deep? ſays the Apoſtle, Rom. x. 7. ls
that as much as if he had ſaid, Who ſhall aſcend into the
Holes of the Rocks? And when Jacob ſpeaks of the Blef-
ſings of the Abyſs, or of the Deep, he calls them the Blef-
ſings of the Deep that lyeth under, Gen. xix. 25. In like
Manner, Moſes himſelf calls it the Deep that couched be-
neath, Deut.xxxiii. 13. And I know no Reaſon why we
ſhould not underſtand the ſame Deep there, that he men-
tioned before in the Hiſtory of the Deluge; which there-
fore was ſubterraneous, as this is. Then, as for the other
Uſe of the Word, namely, for the Sea, or any Part
of the Sea, (whoſe Bottom is always lower than the Le-
vel of the Earth,) that is the moſt common Uſe of it in
Scripture. And I need not give you Inſtances which are
every where obvious.

One muſt needs think it ſtrange, therefore, that any Man
of Judgment ſhould break thorough both the common
Uſe of a Word, and ſo many plain Texts of Scripture,
that ſhew the Signification of it, for the ſake of one


EE ——


- * Pſal. cxiv. 7. 8. Tremble, thou Earth, at the Preſence of the Lord, t the
Preſence of the God of Jacob : Which turned the Rock into a ſtanding Walt,
the Flint into « Fountain of Waters,

Numb. xx. 10, 11. And Moſes end Aaron gathered the Cangregation tegetber
before the Rock, and be ſaid unto them, Meer now, you Rebels ; muſt we fetch yo#
Wiler out of this Rock? And Moſes lift up bis Hand, and with bis Red be Jour


Text,


the Reck twice, and the Water came out abundantly.


\


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 473


Text, which, at moſt, is but dubious; and then lay ſuch
Streſs upon that new Signification, as to found a new
Doctrine upon it: And a Doctrine that is neither ſup-
ported by Reaſon, nor agrees with the Hiſtory of the De-
Juge. For, as we noted before, at the Decreaſe of the
Deluge, the Waters are ſaid to return from off the Earth,
Cen. viii. 3. Did they not return to the Places from
whence they came? But if thoſe Places were the Caverns
in the Rocks, whoſe Mouths lay higher than the Surface
of the Deluge, as he ſays they did, p. 303, 305. I ſee no
poſſibility of the Waters returning into them. But the
Exceptor hath found out a mavellous Invention to invade
this Argument. He will have the returning of the Wa-
ters to be underſtood of their returning into their Prin-
ciples, (that is, into Vapours,) not to their Places: In
good Time: So the Dove's returning was her returning
nto her Principles; that is, into an Egg, not into the
Ark. Subtleties ill- founded, argue two Things, Wit and
Want of Judgment. Moſes ſpeaks as plainly of the local
Return of the Waters, in going and returning; as of the
local going and returning of the Raven and Dove. See
Gen. viii. 3, and F. compar'd with Verſe ſeventh and
ninth.

Laſtly, That we end this Diſcourſe; the whole No-
ton of theſe Water-Pots in the Tops of Mountains, and
of the broaching of them at the Deluge, is a groundleſs
Imagination. What Reaſon have we to believe, that there
were ſuch Veſſels then, more than now, if there was no
fraction of the Earth at the Deluge, to deſtroy them?
And he ought to have gag'd theſe Casks, (according to his
own Rule, Ch. 3.) and told us the Number and Capacity
of them, that we might have made ſome Judgment of the
Effect. Beſides, if the opening the Abyſs at the Deluge
bad been the opening of Rocks, why did not Moſes ex-
preſs it ſo; and tell us, that the Rocks were cloven, and the
Waters guſbed out, and ſo made the Deluge? This would
lave been as intelligible, if it had been true, as to tell us
that the Tehom- Rabbah was broken open. But there is not
one Word of Rocks, or the cleaving of Rocks, in the Hiſ-
tory of the Flood. Upon all Accounts, therefore, we
muſt conclude, that this Virtuoſo might have as well ſuſ-
ected, that his whole Theory of the Deluge, as one Part
it, p. 343. would be accounted @ mere Faucy, and
Srounaleſs Fig ment.


.


CHnaPe.


-


474 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


$1 H A Pp. XVI.


T HIS Chapter is made up of eight Objections, 4.

gainſt his own Hypotheſis. And thoſe that have 3
mind to ſee them, may read them in the Author. I haye
taken as much Notice of them as I thought neceſſary, in
the precedent Chapter; and therefore leave the Exceptor
now to deal with them all together. I omitted one Ob-
jection (p. 311.) concerning the 3 up of the Abyßz
and the Fountains of the Abyſs, becauſe it was anſwer'
before in the Ezgl:ffo Theory, p.142. namely, there were
Fountains in the Abyſs, as much as Windows in Heaven;
and thoſe were ſhut up, as well as theſe; that is, ceas'd ta
act, and were put into a Condition to continue the Deluge
no longer. |


CH A. XVII.


THERE is nothing in this Chapter againſt the Truth
of the Theory; but the Author is blam'd for belie-
ving it to be true: I think it had been more blame-worthy
if he had troubled the World with a Theory which he die
not believe to be true, and taken ſo much Pains to com
poſe what he thought himſelf no better than a Romance.
As to what the Theoriſt has ſaid in Reference to his Aſſu
rance or Belief of the Theory, which the Exceptor calls
Poſitiveneſs, upon Examination, I cannot find any Thing
amiſs in his Conduct, as to that Particular. For, firlt, he
impoſes his Sentiments upon no Man ; he leaves every one
their full Liberty of diſſenting. Preface to the Reader at
the End. Laſtly, in Things urely ſpeculative, as theſe are
and no Ingredients of our Faith, it is free to differ from un
another in our Opinions and Sentiments; and ſo 1 remembe
Sr. Auſtin hath obſerved upon this very Subject of Paradiſe,
Wherefore, as we deſire to give no Offence our ſelves, .
neither ſhall we take any at the Difference of Judgment i
others; provided this Liberty be mutual, and that we al
agree to ſtudy PEACE, TRUTH, and a GOOD LIFE
And as the Theoriſt impoſes his Sentiments upon ue
Man; fo, as to Matter of Certainty, he diſtinguiſh
always betwixt the Subſtance of the Theory, and Parti


larities. So, at the latter End of the firſt Book, om oo
* | | -ffor


againſt the Theory of the EARTH 475


efſon is made, Eng. Theor. p. 207. I mean this only,
ſpeaking about Certainty, as zo the general Parts of the
Theory. For as to Particularities, I look upon them only as
problematical ; and accordingly J affirm nothing therein, bus
with a Power of Revocation, and a Liberty to change m
(pinion when I ſhall be better inform'd. And accordingly
he ſays in another Place, Eng. Theor. p. 12. I know how
ſubject we are to Miſtakes, in theſe great and remote Things,
when we deſcend to Particularities, But I am willing to
expoſe the Theory to a full Trial, and to fhew the Way for
ary to examine it, provided they do it with Equity and Sin-
terity. I have no other Deſign than to contribute my Endea-
rours to find out Truth, &c. Laſtly, to cite no more
Places, he ſays, Eng. Theor. p. 402. There are many par-
ticular Explications that are to ve conſider d with more Li-
erty and Latitude; and may, perhaps, upon better Thoughts,
and better Obſervations, be corrected, &c. The Theoriſt
having thus ſtated and bounded his Belief or Aſſurance,
and given Liberty of diſſenting to all others, according
to their particular Judgments or Inclinations, I ſeenothin
unfair or undecent in this Conduct. How could the Ob-
ſervator have made it more unexceptionable? Would he
have had the Theoriſt to have profeſs'd Scepticiſm, and de-
clar'd that he believ'd his own Theoriſt no more than a
Romance or fantaſtical Idea? that had been both to bely
his own Conſcience, and to mock the World. I remem-
ber I have heard a good Author once wiſh, that there
were an Act of Parliament, that whoever printed a Book,
hould, when he took a Licenſe, ſwear, that he thought
the Contents of his Book to be true, as to Subſtance: And
[think ſuch a Method would keep off a great many Im-
pertinencies. We ought not to trouble the World with
cur roving Thoughts, merely out of an Itch of Scriptu-
nency, when we do not believe our ſelves what wewrite.
| muſt always profeſs my Aſſent to the Subſtance of that
Theory ; and am the more confirm'd in it by the Weak-
neſs and Inefficacy of theſe Exceptions. | ”
We need not take Notice of the particular Citations
he makes uſe of, to prove this Paſitiveneſs of the Theo-
tiſt; for they only affirm what we ſtill own: That the
Theory is more than an Idea, or that it is not an imagina-
ry Idea, or that it is a Reality: And, together with its
roofs from Scripture, eſpecially from St. Peter, hath
more than the Certainty of a bare Hypotheſis, or a moral
Certainty, Theſe are the Expreſſions he cites, and we
T Sn Up Own


8 c


476 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


own all, that, in fair Conſtruction, they amount to; any
find no Reaſon, either from the Nature of the Thing, g
from his Objections, to change our Opinion, or make ay
Apology for too much Poſitiveneſs.

I wiſh the Exceptor had not more to anſwer for, at
his Partiality, than the Theoriſt hath, for his Paſitiveneſ.
And now, that we draw to a Concluſion, it will not be
amiſs to obſerve, how well the Exceptor hath anſwere
that Character, which he gave himſelf at the Beginning gf
his Work. Theſe are his Words, p. 43. This I willen
deavour to do, namely, To examine the Theory, wi!h al
Sincerity ; and that only as a Friend and Servant 10 Truth;
Aud therefore, with ſuch Candor, Meekneſs, and Modeſhy

as becomes one who aſſumes and glories in ſo fair a Charac-
ter: And alſo with ſuch Reſpect to the Virtuoſo who writ
zne Theory, as may teſtify to the World, that I eſteem hi
Learning, while I queſtion his Opinion. Tis of little Con.
ſequence what Opinion he has of the Virtudſo, as he calls
him: But let us ſee with what Sincerity and Meekneſs, he
has examin'd his Work. As to his Sincerity, we have
given you ſome Proofs of it before, (p. 26.) both in his de-
tective and partial Citations; and allo, in his never taking
Notice of the laſt Edition of the Theory; where ſeveral
Citations he has made uſe of, are not extant. Now, by

his own Rule, he ought to have had regard to this; for he

fays, (p. 356.) he will there take Notice only of the Er
glifþ Edition, as coming out after the other; and ſo with more

Deliberation and mature T houghts of Things. By the ſame

Reaſon, ſay I, he ought to have taken Notice of the li

Edition of the Theory, as being the laſt Product, and the
moſt deliberate and mature T houghts of the Author. But
this, it ſeems, was not for his Purpoſe.

So much for his Sincerity: Now for his Meemeſs.
So impatient he is to fall upon his Adverſary, that he
begins his Charge in the Preface, and a very fierce one
it is, (p. 3.) The T heoriſt hath aſſaulted Religion, and that
in the very Foundation of it. Here J expected to have
found two or three Articles of the Creed aſſaulted ot
knock'd down by the Theory. But that is not the Cale,
it ſeems, he underſtands ſomething more general, namely,
our contradicting Scripture : For ſo he explains him.
ſelf in the next Page. In ſeveral T hings (as will appear

our Diſcourſe) it contradicts Scripture, and by t00 po-
2 aſſerting the Truth of its T heorems, makes. that t0
be falſe, upon which our Religion is founded. * bo

)


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 477


member, that this contradictin Scripture here pretended, -
is only in natural Things; and alſo obſerve, how far the
Exceptor himſelf, in ſuch Things, hath contradicted Scrip-
ture. As for other Reproofs which he gives us, thoſe that
are more gentle, I eaſily paſs over; but ſomewhere he
makes our Aſſertions, p. 78. to bold an Afﬀront to Scrip-
ture. And in another Place repreſents them, as (either
directly, or conſequentially) p. 286. Blaſphemy againſt the
Holy Ghoſt, which is the unpardonable Sin, Matt. xii. 31.

There is no Pleaſure in repeating ſuch Expreſſions, and
dreadful Sentences. Let us rather obſerve, if the Exceptor
hath not made himſelf obnoxious to them. But firſt, we
muſt ſtate the Caſe truly, that ſo the Blame may not fall
upon the Innocent. The Caſe therefore is this, ¶M hether,
to go contrary to the Letter of Scripture, in Things
that relate to the natural World, be deſtroying the Foun--
dations of Religion, affronting Scripture, and blaſpheming
the Holy Ghoſt? In the Caſe propos'd, We take the Ne-
zative, and ſtand upon that Plea. But the Exceptor hath
taken the Affirmative ; and therefore, all thoſe heavy Charges
muſt fall upon himſelf, if he go contrary to the literal
ſenſe of Scripture, in his philoſophical Opinions or At-
ſertions. And that he hath done ſo, we will give you
lome Inſtances, out of this Treatiſe of his; p. 314. He
lays, It is moſt abſurd to think, that the Earth is the Center
of the World. Then the Sun ſtands ſtill, and the Earth
moves, according to his Doctrine. But this is exprefly
contrary to Scripture, in many Places. The Suu rejoices,
& a ſtrong Man, to run his Race, ſays David, Pſ. xix. 5,6.
His going forth is from the End of the Heaven, and his
Circuit unto the Ends of it, Joſb. x. 12,13. 2 Kings xx.
10, 11. Iſa. xxxviii. 8. No ſuch Thing, fays the Ex-
ceptor; the Sun hath no Race to run; he is fix'd in his
deat, Without any progreſſive Motion. He hath no Courſe
from one End of the Heavens to the other. In like man-
ner, Sun, ſtand thou ſtill upon Gibeon, ſays the ſacred Au-
thor, and the Sun ſtood ſtill. No, ſays the Exceptor, *twas
the Earth ſtood (till, upon that Miracle ; for the Sun al-
ways ſtood ſtill. And 'tis abſurd, yea, moſt abſurd, to
think otherwiſe, p. 157. And he blames Tycho Brahe for
following Scriprure in this Particular. Now, is not this,
in the Language of the Exceptor, to deſtroy the Fonnda-
trons of Religion, to affront Scripture, and blaſpheme againſt
the Holy Ghoſt ? But this is not all: 'I he Exceptor ſays,
(Chap. 10.) the Sun rais'd up the Mountains on the re

273


—


478 An Anſwer to the Exceptions made


Day; and the Sun was not in being till the fourth Day
according to Scripture, Gen. i. 14. The Moon alſo.
which, according to Scripture, was not created till the
fourth Day, he ſays, would hinder the Formation of the
Earth, which was done the third Day. Laſtly, in this new
Hypotheſis, p. 74. he makes the Waters of the Deluge to
be but fifteen Cubits higher than the Plain, or common
Surface of the Earth; which Scripture affirms expreſſ
to have cover'd the Tops of the higheſt Hills, or Moun-
tains, under Heaven, Gen. vii. 19, 20. Theſe two Things
are manifeſtly inconſiſtent. The Scripture ſays, Gen. viii. 5.
they cover'd the Tops of the higheſt Mountainse And the
Exceptor ſays they reached but fifteen Cubits about, or]
upon the Skirts of them. This, I think, is truly to con-
tradict Scripture; or, according to his Talent of loadin
Thingswith great Words, p. 216. T hrs is not only flatly, but
one contradictory to the moſt expreſs Word of the infallible

94, |

Theſe Obſervations, I know, are of ſmall Uſe, un-
leſs, perhaps, to the Exceptor himſelf. But, if you pleaſe,
upon this Occaſion, let us reflect a little upon the literal
Style of Scripture; and the different Authority of that
Style, according to the Matter that it treats of. The
Subject Matter of Scripture is either ſuch as lies without
the Cognizance and Comprehenſion of human Reaſon,
or ſuch as lies within it: If it be the former of thee,
*tis what we call properly and purely Revelation, and
there we muſt adhere to the literal Style, becauſe we have
nothing to guide us but that. Such is the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and the Incarnation; wherein we have no-
thing to authorize our Deviation from the Letter and
Words of :Scripture: And therefore the School-Divines,
who have ſpun thoſe Doctrines into a Multitude of Nice-
tics and Subtleties, had no Warrant for what they did,
and their Concluſions are of no Authority.

The ſecond Matter or Subject of Scripture is fuch as
falls under the View and Comprehenſion of Reaſon,
more or leſs; and, in the ſame Proportion, gives us a Li-
berty to examine the literal Senſe ; how far it is conſiſtent
with Reaſon. and the Faculties of our Mind. Of this
Nature there are ſeveral Things in the holy Writings,
both moral, theological, and natural, wherein we recede
from the Letter, when it is manifeſtly contrary to the
Dictates of Reaſon. 1 will give ſome Inſtances in every
kind: Firſt, as to moral Things. Our Saviour ſa)s,
Mar. v. 29, 30. If thy Right Eye offend thee, 1


againſt the Theory of the EARTH. 479


out: If thy Right Hand offend thee, cut it off. There is
no Man that thinks himſelf obliged to the litera! Practice
of this Doctrine; and yet it is plainly deliver'd, you ſee,
in theſe T'erms in the Goſpel. Nay, which is more,
our Saviour backs and enforces the Letter of this Doc-
trine with a Reaſon: For it is profitable for thee that one of
thy Members ſhould periſh, and not that thy whole Body
ſhould be caſt into Hell : As if he had intended, that his Pre-
cept ſhould have been really executed according to the
Letter. In like manner our Saviour ſays, F any Man
will ſue thee at Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have
thy Cloak alſo. And yet there is no Chriſtian ſo good-
natur'd as to practiſe this, nor any Caſuiſt ſo rigid as to
enjoy it, according to the Letter. Other Inſtances you
may ſee in our Saviour's Sermon upon the Mount, where
we do not ſcruple to lay aſide the Letter, when it is judg'd
contrary to the Light of Nature, or impracticable in hu-
man Society.

In all other Things alſo, that lie within the Sphere of
human Reaſon, we are allowed to examine their Practi-
cability, or their Credibility. To inſtance in ſomething
theological, the Words of Conſecration in the Sacra-
ment. Our Saviour, when he inſtituted the laſt Supper
us'd theſe Words: This ts my Body, taking the Bread
into his Hand; which Words, join'd with that Action,
are very formal and expreſſive; yet we do not ſcruple
to forſake the literal Senſe, and take the Words in ano-
ther Way: But upon what Warrant do wethis? becauſe the
literal Senſe contains an Abſurdity; becauſe it contradicts
the Light of Nature; becauſe ir is inconſiſtent with the
Idea of a Body, and ſo deſtroys it ſelf. In like Manner,
upon the Idea of the Divine Nature, we diſpute abſolute
Reprobation, and Eternity of Torments, againſt the Let-
ter of Scripture. And, laſtly, whether the Reſurrection
Body conſiſts of the ſame individual Parcels and Parti-
cles, whereof the mortal Body conſiſted, before it was
putrefied or diſpers'd? And, Phil. iv. 3. Apoc. iii. 5. and
XX. 12. Whether the Books of Life are to be underſtood in
a literal Senſe? |

The laſt Head is of ſuch Things as belong to the na-
tural World. And to this may be reduced innumera-
ble Inſtances, where we leave the literal Senſe, if incon-
ſiſtent with Science or Experience. And the Truth is,
if we ſhould follow the vulgar Style and literal Senſe of
Scripture, we ſhould all be Authropomorphites, as to the


Nature .


480 An An ſiver to the Excep tions made


Nature of God: And as to the Nature of his Works in
the external Creation, we muſt renounce Philoſophy and
natural Experience, if the Deſcriptions and Accounts
given in Scripture, concerning the Heavens, the Earth,
the Sea, and other Parts of the World, be received xz
accurate and juſt Repreſentations of the State and Proper.
ties of thoſe Bodies. Neither is there any Danger, leſt
this ſnould affect or impeach the Divine Veracity; for
Scripture never undertook, nor was ever deſigned to teach
us Philoſophy, or the Arts and Sciences: And whatſo.
ever the Light of Nature can reach and comprehend, is
improperly the Subje& of Revelation. But ſome Men,
out of Love to their own Eaſe, and in Defence of their
Ignorance, are not only for a Scripture Divinity, but alſo
for a Scripture Philoſophy. Tis a cheap and compendi-
ous Way, and ſaves them the Trouble of farther Study
or Examination. |
Upon the whole, you ſee, it is no Fault to recede
from the literal Senſe of Scripture; but the Fault is, when
we leave it without a juſt Cauſe: As it is no Fault for a
Man to ſeparate from a Church, or for a Prince to make
War againſt his Neighbour, but to do the one or the other,
without a juſt Cauſe, is a real Fault. We all leave the
literal Senſe in certain Caſes, and therefore that alone
is no ſufficient Charge againſt any Man. But he that
makes a Separation, if I may ſo call it, without good
Reaſons, he is truly obnoxious to Cenſure. The great
Reſult of all, therefore, is this, to have ſome common
Rule to direct us, when every one ought to follow, and
when to leave, the literal Senſe. And that Rule which
is generally agreed upon by good Interpreters, is this, No:
to leave the literal Senſe, when the Subje&-Matter will
bear it, without Abſurdity or Incongruity. This Rule!
have always propoſed to my ſelf, and always endeayour-
ed to keep cloſe to it. But ſome inconſiderate Minds
make every Departure from the Letter, let the Matter or
Cauſe be what it will, to be an Affront to Scripture:
And there, where we have the greateſt Liberty, I mean
in Things that relate to the natural World, they have 10
more Indulgence or Moderation, than if it was an In-
trenchment upon the Articles of Faith. In this Particu-
lar I cannot excuſe the preſent Animadverter ; yet, |
mult needs ſay, he is a very Saint in Compariſon of an-
other Animadverter, who hath writ upon the ſame Sub-
ject; but neither like a Gentleman, nor like a Chriſtian,
nor likea Scholar. And ſuch Writings anſwer themſelves.
. A SHORT


A SHORT


CONSIDERATION


Mr. ERASMUS WARREN's


DEFENCE


EXCEPTIONS


AGAINST THE


THEORY of the EARTH.


195


In a LETTER 70 a Friend.


HAVE read over Mr. Erafmns Warren's
Defence of his Exceptions againſt h Theor

of the Earth; which, it may be, few will do
after me; as not having Curiofity or Patience


Pivate or little Uſe. Such Altercations as theſe, are to
jou, Ibelieve, as they are to me, a fort of Folly ; but


I 1 the


1 7 to read ſuch a long Pamphlet, of


— . UV bw.ydp . —  —


482 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


the Aggreſſor muſt anſwer for that, who makes the Troy.
ble unavoidable to the - Defendant. And 'tis an unplea-
ſant Exerciſe, akind of Wild-gooſe-chaſe ; where he that
leads muſt be followed, through all his Extravagancies.
The Author of this Defence muſt pardon me, if I have
leſs Apprehenſions both of his Judgment and Temper
than I had before: For, as he is too verboſe and long.
winded ever to make a cloſe Reaſoner ; ſo it was unex-
pected to me to find his Style ſo captious and angry, az
It is in this laſt Paper. And the ſame Strain continuing
to the End, I was ſorry to ſee that his Blood had been
kept upon the Fret, for ſo many Months together, as the
Pamphlet was a making.
He might have made his Work much ſhorter, without
any Loſs to the Senſe. If he had left out his popula
Enlargements, juvenile Excurſions, Stories and Strains of
Country-Rhetorick, (whereof we ſhall give you ſome
Inſtances hereafter) his Book would have been reduc'd !
half the Compaſs : And if from that reduc'd half, you
takeaway again trifling Altercations and pedantick Repar
tees, the Remainder would fall into the Compals of:
few Pages. For my part, I am always apt to ſuſpect
Man that makes me a long Anſwer; for the preciſe Poin
to be ſpoken to, in a multitude of Words, is caſily loſt
and Words are often multiplied for that very Purpoſe.
However, it his Humour be verboſe, it might have been
at leaſt, more eaſy and inoffenſive; there having been n
Provocation gjven him in that kind. But let us guels, |
you pleaſe, as well as we can, what it was in the late
Anſwer, that ſo much diſcompoſed the Exceptor and al
tered his Style: Either it muſt be the Words and Lan
guage of that Anſwer, or the Senſe of it, without Re
ſpect to the Language. As to the Words, 'tis true, he
gives ſome Inſtances of Expreſſions offenſive to him; ye
they are but three or four, and thoſe, methinks, not ver)
high, p. 31. tho' he calls them the Brats of Paſſion; the
are theſe, indiſcreet, rude, injudicious and unc haritable
Theſe Characters, it ſeems, are applied to the Exceptor
in ſome part of the Anſwer, upon Occaſion offer'd; ani
whether thoſe Occaſions were juſt or no, I dare appeal t
your Judgment. As to the Word rade, which ſeemst
molt harſh, I had ſaid indeed, that he was rade to Auaæx
agoras; and ſo he was, not to allow him to be a competen
itneſs in matter of Fact, whom all Antiquity, 1acre
and prophane, hath repreſented to us as one of the ret


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Farth, 483


Men amongſt the Antients. I had allo ſaid in another
Place, that a rude, and injudicious Defence of Scriptare,
by Railing and ill Langnage, is the true way to leſſen and
diſparage it. This I ſtill juſtify as true; and if he apply it
to himſelf, much good may it do him. I do not remem-
ber tlat it is any where ſaid, that he was rade to the
Theoriſt ; if it be, 'tis poſſibly upon his charging him with
Blaſphemy, horrid Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt, for
ſaying, the Earth was difſolv'd at the Deluge. And J ap-
peal to any Man, whether this is not an zxchar:zable, and
a rude Charge. If a Man had curſed God, or call'd our
Saviour an Impoſtor, what could he have been charg'd
with more, than Blaſphemy, horrid Blaſphemy ? And if the
ſame things be ney upon a Man, for ſaying, the Earth
was diſſolv'd at the Deluge, either all Crimes and Errors
muſt be equal, or the Charge mult be rude. But however
it muſt be rude in the Opinion of the Theoriſt, who thinks
this neither Crime nor Error.

What ſays the Defence of the Exceptions to this;
þ. 153. it makes uſe of Diſtinctions for Mitigation of the
Centure ; and ſays, it will udirectly, conſequentially, or
reduively be of blaſphemons Importance. Here Blaſphe-
my is changed into blaſphemors Importance, and horrid
Blaſphemy into conſequential, (5c, But taking all theſe Mi-
teations, it ſeems however, according to his Theology,
all Errors in Religion are Blaſphemy, or of blaſphemous
Inportauce, For all Errors in Religion muſt be againſt
Scripture one way or other; at leaſt conſequentially, in-
directly, or reductively; and all that are fo, according to
the Doctrine of this Laber, muſt be Blaſphemy, or of
blaſphemons Importance. T his is crude Divinity, and the
Anſwerer had Reaſon to ſubjoin what he cited before,
that a rude and injudicious Defence of Scripture, is the
true way to leſſen and diſparage it. |

Thus much for rade and uncharitable; as for the other
two Words, indiſcreet and injudicious, I cannot eaſily be
induc'd to make any Apology for them. On the contra-
ty, Pm afraid I ſhall have Occaſion to repeat theſe Cha-
atters again, eſpecially the latter of them, in the Peru-
fal of this Pamphlet. However, they do nor look like
Brats of Paſſion, as he calls them ; but rather as cooland
quiet Judgments, made upon Reaſons and Premiſſes. I
had forgot one Expreſſion more: The Anſwer, it ſeems,
lmewhere calls the Exceptor a Dabler in P-:loſ»phy,

It 2 which


484 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of tie


which he takes ill: But that he is a Dabler, both in Phi.
loſophy and Aſtronomy, I believe will evidently appear
upon this ſecond Examination of the ſame Paſſages upon
which that Character was grounded. We will therefore
leave that to the Trial, when we come to thofe Paſſages
again, in the following Diſcourſe.

. Theſe, Sir, as far as I remember, are the Words and
Expreſſions which he hath taken Notice of, as offenſive
to him, and Effects of Paſſion. But, methinks, theſe
cannot be of Force ſufficient to put him ſo much out of
Humour, and change his Style ſo much, as we find it to
be in this laſt Pamphlet: And therefore I am inclinable
to believe, that 'tis the Senſe, rather than the Words, or
Language of the Anſwer, that hath had this Effect upon
him; and that ſome unhappy Paſſages, that have expos'
his Miſtakes, were the true Cauſes of theſe Reſentments,
Such Paſſages I will gueſs at, as well as I can, and note
them to you as they occur to my Memory.

But give meleave, firſt, upon this occaſion of his new
way of Writing, to diſtinguiſh and mind you of three ſorts
of arguing, which you may call reaſoning, wrangling, and
ſcolding. In fair reaſoning, Regard is had to Truthonly,
not to Victory, let it fall on whether ſide it will. But
in wrangling and ſcolding, 'tis Victory that is purſued
and aim'd at in the firſt Place, with little Regard to Truth.
And if the Contention be managed in civil Terms, tis but
wrangling ; if in uncivil, 'tis ſcolding. I will not fo far
anticipate your Judgment, as to rank this Arguer in any of
the three Orders: It you have Patience to read over his
Pamphlet, you will beſt ſee how and where to ſet him in
his proper Place. |

We now proceed to thoſe Paſſages in the Anſwer,
which probably have moſt exaſperated the Author of the
Exceptions and the Defence, Exc. p. 77, &c. In his Ex-
ceptions he had ſaid, the Moon being preſent, or in her
preſent Place in the Firmament, at the time of the Chaos,
ſhe would certainly trouble and diſcompoſe it, as ſhe does
now the Waters of the Sea; and, by that Means, hinder
the Formation of the Earth. To this we anſwer'd, that
the Moon that was made the fourth Day, could not hinder
the Formation of the Earth, which was made the third Day.
This was a plain intelligible Anſwer; and at the ſametime
diſcover'd ſuch a maniteſt Blunder in the Objection, as
could not but give an uneaſy Thought to him that made it.


How -


—


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 485


However we mult not deny, but that he makes ſome
Attempt to ſhift it off in his Reply; for he ſays, Def. p. 12.
The Earth formed the third Day was Moſes's Earth, which
the Exceptor contends for ; but the Earth he diſputes a-
gainſt is the Theoriſts, which could not be formed the third
Day. He ſhould have added, and therefore would be hin-
der'd by the Moon, otherwile this takes off nothing. And
now the Queſtion comes to a clear State; for when the
Exceptor ſays, the Moon would have hinder'd the Forma-
tion of the Earth, either he ſpeaks upon Maſes's Hypotheſis,
or upon the Theoriſt's Hypotheſis. Not upon the Theoriſt's
Hypotheſis, for the Theoriſt does not ſuppoſe the Moon
preſent then; Eccl.p.77, 78. Def. P. 73- J. 12,13. Aud
if he ſpeaks upon Moſes's Hypotheſis, the Moon that was
made the fourth Day, muſt have hinder'd the Formation
of the Earth the third Day. So that the Objection is a
Blunder upon either Hypotheſis.

Furthermore, whereas he ſuggeſts that the Anſwerer
makes uſe of Maſes's Hypotheſis to confute his Adverſa-
ry, but does not follow it himſelf : *Tis ſo far true, that
the Theoriſt never ſaid that Moſes's fix Days Creation
was to be underſtood literally ; but however it is juſtly
urged againſt thoſe that underſtand it literally, and they
muſt not contradict that Interpretation, which they own
and defend.

So much for the Moon, and this firſt Paſſage, which I
ſuppoſe was troubleſome to our Author, But he makes
the ſame Blunder in another Place, as to the Sun: Both
the Luminaries, it ſeems, ſtood in his Way. In the tenth
Chapter of his Exceptions, he gives us a new Hypotheſis
about the Origin of Mountains, which, in ſhort, is this;
that they were drawn or ſack'd out of the Earth by the
Influence and Inſtrumentality of the Sun: Whereas the
Sun was not made, according to Moſes, till the fourth
Day, and the Earth was form'd the third Day. *Tis an
unhappy Thing to ſplit twice upon the ſame Rock, and
won a Rock ſo viſible. He that can but reckon to
four, can tell whether the third Day, or fourth Day
came ſooner.

To cure this Hypotheſis about the Origin of Mountains,
he takes great pains in his Defence, pag. 97, 98, 99, 100,
101. and attempts to do it by help of a Diſtinction, di-
viding Mountains into Maritime and Inland. Now ' tis
true, ſays he, Theſe maritime Mountains, and ſuch as were
trade with the Hollow of the Sea, muſt riſe when that was

| | Ii 3 —_—


486 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


Junk or depreſt ; namely, the third Day. Vet inland one;
he ſays, might be raiſed ſome earlier, and ſome later.
and by the Influence of the Sun. This is a weak and
vain Attempt to defend his Notion ; for, beſides that this
Diſtinction of maritime and inland Mountains, as ariſing
from different Cauſes, and at different Times, is without
any Ground, either in Scripture or Reaſon, if their diffe-

rent Origin was admitted, the Sun's extracting theſe inland
Mountains out of the Earth, would ſtill be abſurd and
incongruous upon other Accounts.
Scripture, I ſay, makes no ſuch Diſtinction of Moun-
tains, made at different Times, and from different Cau-
ſes. This is plain, ſeeing Moſes does not mention Moun-
tains at all in his fix Days Creation, nor any where elle,
till the Deluge: What Authority have we then to make
this Diſtinction ; or to ſuppoſe that all the great Moun-
tains of the Earth were not made together? Beſides, what
length of Time would you require, for the Production of
theſe inland Mountains? Were they not all made within
the ſix Days Creation? Hear what Moſes ſays at the end
of the ſixth Day. Thus the Heavens and the Earth were
finiſhed, and all the Hoſt of them, Gen. c. xxi. Aud om the}
ſeventh Day, God ended his Workwhich he had made. Now
if the Exceptor ſays, that the Mountains were all made
wichin theſe ſix Days, we will not ſtand with him for a}
Day or two; for that would make little Difference as to
the Action of the Sun. But if he will not confine their
Production to Moſes's fix Days, how does he keep tothe}
Moſaical Hypotheſis ? Or how ſhall we know where he
will ſtop in his own Way? For if they were not made
within the fix Days, for any thing he knows, they might}
not be made till the Deluge; ſeeing Scripture no where
mentions Mountains before the Flood. |
And as Scripture makes no Diſtinction of maritime
and inland Mountains, ſo neither hath this Diſtinction any
Foundation in Nature or Reaſon: For there is no appay
rent or diſcernable Difference betwixt maritime and inland
Mountains, nor any Reaſon why they ſhould be thought
to proceed from different Cauſes, or to be rais'd at diffe-
rent Times. The maritime Mountains are as rocky, 48
ruderous, and as irregular and various in their Shape ng
Poſture, as the inland Mountains. They have no diltincy
tive Characters, nor any different Properties, internal 0
external, in their Matter, Form, or Compoſition, that can
give us any Ground to believe, that they came e


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 487


{erent Original. So that this Diſtinction is merely preca-
rious, neither founded in Scripcure nor Reaſon, but made
for the nonce to ſerve a Turn.

Beſides, what Bounds will you give to theſe maritime
Mountains? Are 13 from inland Moun-


tains barely by their Diſtance from the Sea, or by ſome
other Character? If barely by Diſtance, tell us then how


tar from the Sea do the maritime Mountains reach, and


where do the inland begin, and how ſhall we know the Ter-
minalis Lapis? Eſpecially in a continued Chain of Moun-
tains, that reach from the Sea many hundreds of Miles,
inland; as the Alps from the Ocean to Pontas Exxinus,
and Taurus, as he lays, Def. p. 143. fifteen hundred Miles
in length, trom the Chineſe Occan to theSeaof Pamphy-
la, In ſuch an uninterrupted Ridge of Mountains, where
do the Land-Mountains end, and Sea-Mountains begin?
Or what Mark is there, whereby we may know that they
are not all of the {ame Race, or do not all ſpring from
the ame Original? Such obvious Enquiries as theſe, ſhew
ſufficiently, that the Diſtinction is merely arbitrary and
fictitious. _ |

But ſuppoſe this Diſtinction was admitted, and the ma-
titime Mountains made the third Day, but inland Moun-
tains I know not when: The great Difficulty (till remains,
How the Sunrear'd up theſe inland Monntains afterwards ?
Or if his Power be ſufficient for ſuch Effects, why have
we not Mountains made ſtill to this Day? Seeing our
Mountain-maker, the Sun, is ſtill in the Firmament, and
ſeems to be as buſy at Work as ever. TI he Defender hath
made ſome Anſwer to this Queſtion, in theſe Words,
Def. y. 9g. The Queſtion is put, why have we no Mountains
made now? It might as well have been ad, ſays he, Why
does not the Fire make a Doug h- baba Loaf ſwell and buff up *
And, he ſays, this Anſwer muſt be ſatisfactory to the Que-
ſton propounded. It mult be, that is, for want of a berrer ;
tor otherwiſe this Dough-compariſon is unſatisfactory
upon many Accounts. Firſt, there was no Ferment in
the Earth, as in this Dough- cake; at leaſt it is not prov'd,
or made appear, that there was any. Nay, in the Eæxcep-
025, When this Hypotheſis was propos'd, there was no

ention at all made of any Ferment or Leaven in the
Earth; but the Effect was wholly imputed to Vapours and
the Sun. But to ſupply their Defects, he now ventures to
add the Word fermentive, as he calls it. {b:d. lin. 2 A
jermentive, flatuleut Principle, which heav d up the Earth,


11 4 as |


-
— —
—


— r P .
— — > 0 —


488 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


as Leaven does Dough. But, beſides, that this is a mere
roundleſs and groſs Poſtulatum, to ſuppoſe any ſuch
23 in the Earth; if there had been ſuch a Principle,
it would have ſwollen the whole Maſs uniformly, heay'g
up the exterior Region of the Earth every where, and ſo
not made Mountains, but a ſwollen bloated Globe.

This, Sir, is a ſecond Paſſage, which I thought might
make the Defender uneaſy. We proceed now to a third
and fourth in his Geegraphy and Aſtronomy. In the 14th
Chapter of his Exceptions, p. 289. ſpeaking of the Change
of the Situation of the Earth, from a right Poſture to an
oblique, he ſays, according to the Theory, the Ecliptick in
the primitive Earth, was its Equinoctial now. I his, he |
is told by the Anſwer, is a great Miſtake; namely, to
think that the Earth, when it chang'd its Situation, chang d
2416 Poles and Circles. What is now reply'd to this? He
Speaks againſt a Change, ſays the Defence, in the Poles and
Circles of the Earth; a meedleſs Trouble, and occaſioned ly
his own Overſight. For had he but look d into the Errata, |
he might hade ſeen there, thattheſe Parentheſes, upon which
be grounded what he Joys, Peale have been left out, 80
this is acknowledg'd an Erratum, it ſeems, but an Erra-
zum Typegraphica ; not in the Senſe, but only in the
Parentheſes, which, he ſays, ſhould have been left out.
Let us then lay aſide the Parentheſes, and the Sentence
ſtands thus: For under the Ecligzich, which in the primitive
Situation of the Earth, according tothe Theory, was its Equi-
noctial, and divided the Globe into two Hemiſpheres, as the
Equator does now. The dry Ground, c. How docsthis
alter or mend the Senſe? Is it not ſtill as plainly affirm'd,
as before, that according to the Theory, the Ecliptick in
the primitive Earth was equinoctial? And the ſame thing is
ſuppos'd throughout all this Paragraph, Exc. p. 289, 200.
And if he will own the Truth, and give Things their pro-
per Name, *tis downright Ignorance, or grols Miſtakein
the Doctrine f the Sphere, which he would firſt father
upon the Theory, and then upon the Parentheſes.

And this leads me to a fourth Paſſage, much-what of
the ſame Nature, where he would have the Earth to have
been tranſlated out of the Æquator into the Ecliptick, and
to have chang'd the Line of its Motion about the Sun,
when it chang'd its Situation. His Words are theſe,
Exc. p. 158, 159. So that in her annual Motion about the
Sun, ſhe, namely the Earth, before her Change of Situa-
tion, was carried diredtly under the Equinoctial M Roy

| arc,


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 489


Miſtake; the Earth mov'd in the Ecliptick, both before
and after her Change of Situation; for the Change was
not made in the Circle of her Motion about the Sun, but in
her Poſture or Inclination in the ſame Circle: Where-
as he ſuppoſes that ſhe ſifred both Poſture, and alſo her
Circuit about the Sun, Ibid. p. 159. as his Words are in
the next Paragraph. But we ſhall have Occaſion to re-
flect upon this again in its proper Place, We proceed
now to another aſtronomical Miltake. ,

A fifth Paſſage, which probably might diſquiet him, is
his falſe Argumentation at the end of the eighth Chapter
concerning Days and Months, Exc. p. 187. He ſays there,
if the natural Days were longer towards the Flood than
at firſt, (which no body however affirms) fewer than
thirty would have made a Month; whereas the Duration
of the Flood is computed by Months, conſiſting of thirty
Days a-piece; Therefore, ſays he, they were no longer than
ordinary. This Argumentation the Aaſwer told him, was
a mere Paralogiſin, ur a mere Blunder : For thirty Days
are thirty Days, whether they are longer or ſhorter; and
Scripture does not determine the Length of the Days.
There are ſeveral Pages ſpent in the Defence, to get off
the Blunder : Let's hear how he begins, p. 78, 79, 80, 81.
Tho” Scripture does not limit or account for the Length of
Days expreſly, yet it does it implicitly, and withal very
plaraly and intelligibly. This is deny'd: And if he makes
this out, that Scripture does very plainly and intelligibly
determine the Length of Days at the Deluge, and makes
them equal with ours at preſent, then, I acknowledge, he
hath remov'd the Blunder; otherwiſe it ſtands the fame,
unmoy'd and unmended. Now obſerve how he makes
this out : For, ſays he, Scriptare gives us to underſtand,
ibat Days before the Flood, were of the ſame Length, that
they are of now, BY [INFORMING US, that Moaths
and Years, which were of the ſame Length then that they
are of at preſent, were made up of the ſame Number of
Days. 5 the Blunder is ſtill continued, or, at beſt,
it is but transferr'd from Days to Months, or from
Months to Years. He ſays, Scripture informs us that
Months and Years were of the ſame Length then, that they
are of at preſent. If he mean by the ſame Lengrh, the
ſame Number of Days, he relapſes into the old Blunder,
and we (till require the Length of thoſe Days. But if
Scripture informs us that the Months and Years at the


Flood, were of the ſame Length that they are of now.


according


1 4 2%... 9" mera
' .


-
——— re


490 A ſhort Conſideration of the Deſence of the


according to any abſolute and known Meaſure, diſtinq
from the Namber of Days, then the Blunder is ſav'd. Let's
{ee therefore by whether of theſe two Ways he proves it
in the next Words, which are theſe: For how could there
be juſt twelve Months in the Year, at the time of the De.
luge; and thirty Days in each of thoſe Months, if the Days
then had not conſiſted, as they do now, of twenty four Hours
a-piece? We allow a Day might then conſiſt of twenty
tour Hours, if the Diſtiuction of Hours was ſo ancient.
But what then? the Queltion returns concerning the Length
of thoſe Hours, as it was before concerning the Length of
the Days; and this is either idem per idem, or the ſame Er-
ror in another Inſtance. If you put but Hours in the place
of Days, the Words of the Anſwer have till the ſame
Force: Twenty four Hours were to go to a Day, whether
the Hours were longer or ſhorter. and Scripture does ant de-
termine the Length of the Hours, This, you lee, is (till
the ſame Caſe, and the ſame Paralogiſm hangs upon both
Inſtances,

But he goes on ſtill in this falſe Trad, in theſe Words:
And as Providence hath ſo ordered Nature, that Days (that
depend upon its diurnal Motion) ſpould be meaſur'd by Cir-
cumgyratious of the Earth ----- So it hath taken Care that
each of theſe Circumrotations ſhould be performed in twenty
four IIours; and conſequently that every Day fhould be fut
ſo long, that thirty of them (in way of roundreckouing) might
complete a Month, Admit all this, that thirty Days com-

plete a Month; ſtill if Scripture hath not determin'd the
Length of thoſe Days, nor the Slownels or Swittnels of
the Circumgyrations that make them, it hath not deter-
min'd the Length of thoſe Months, nor of the Years that
depend upon them. This one would take to be very in-
telligible; yet he goes on in the ſame Maze, thus: But now
had the Circumgyrations of the Earth grown more flow to-
wards the Deluge (by ſuch Cauſes as the Exceptor ſuggeſte 4
ſo as every Day had conſiſted of thirty Hours, &c. But

how ſo, 1 This is a wild Step; why thirty Hours?
Where does Scripture ſay ſo, or where does the Ther
ſay ſo? We ſay the Day conſiſted then, as now, of twenty
four Hours, whether the Hours were longer or thortcr
and that Scripture hath not determin'd the Length of thole
Hours, nor conſequently of thoſe Months, nor conle-
quently of thoſe Years. So after all this ado, We are
juſt where we were at firſt, namely, that Scripture not
having determin'd the abſolute Length of any aw *


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 491


cannot by that determine the Length of any other. And
by his ſhifting and multiplying Inſtances, he does but 40
ſurda abſurdis accumulare, ne perpluant.

We offer'd before, in our Anſwer, to give the Ex-
ceptor ſome Light into his Miſtake, by diſtinguiſhing in
theſe Things, What 1s abhſolute from what is relative: The
former whereof cannot, under theſe or any ſuch like Cir-
cumſtances, be determin'd by the latter. For Inſtance:
A Man hath ten Children, and he will not ſay abſolutely
and determinatively what Portion he will give with any
one of them; but he ſays, I will give my eldeſt Child a
tenth Part more than my ſecond; and my ſecond a ninth
Part more than my third ; and my third an eighth Part
more than my fourth; and ſo downwards, in proportion to
the youngeſt : Not tell ing you, in any abſolute Sum,
what Money he will give the youngeſt, or any other; you
cannot, by this, tell what Portion the Man will give with
any of his Children. I leave you to apply this, and pro-
ceed to a nearer Inſtance, by comparing the Meaſures of
Time and Longitude. If you know how many Inches
make a Foot, how many Feet a Pace, how many Paces a
Mile, &'c. you cannot by theſe Numbers determine the
abſolute Quantity of any one of the aforeſaid Meaſures,
but only their relative Quantity as to one another. So it
Scripture had determin*'d, of how many Hours a Day con-
ited ; of how many Days a Month; of how many
Months a Year ; you could not by this alone determine
tie abſolute Duration or Quantity of any one of theſe, nor
whether they were longer or ſhorter than our preſent
Hours, Days, Months, or Years. And therefore, I ſay
ſtill, as I ſaid at firſt, thirty Days are thirty Days, whether


they are longer or ſhorter ; and thirty Circumgyrations of


the Earth are thirty, whether they be flower or ſwifter :
Ard that no Scripture-Proof can be made from this, either
directly or conſequentially, that the Days before the Flood
were, or were not, longer than they are at preſent. Bur
we have been too long upon this Head.

We proceed now from his Aſtronomy to his Philoſo-
phy. *T'was obſerv'd in the Auſwer, p. 38. that the Ex-
ceptor in the Beginning of the ninth Chapter, ſuppos'd
terreſtrial Bodies to have a Nitency inwards, or dj5wuwards
towards the Center. This was noted as a falſe Principle
in Philoſophy, and to rectify his Miſtake, he now replies,
Def. p. 82. That he underſtood that Expreſſion only of
ſelf-central and quieſcent Bodies ; Whereas, in truth, the


Queſtion


492 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


Queſtion he was ſpeaking to, was about a fluid Bod
turning upon its Axis. But however, let us admit hi;
new Senſe, his Principle, I'm afraid, will ſtill need Re&j.
fication; namely, he affirms now, that quieſcent earthly
Bodies are impreguated with a Nitency inward, or dow.
ward towards the Center. I deny alſo this reform'd Prin.
Ciple; if Bodies be turn'd round, they have a Nitency up-
wards, or from the Center of their Motion. If they be
not turn'd round, nor mov'd, but quieſcent, they have ng
Nitency at all, neither upwards nor downwards, but are
indifferent to all Lines of Motion, according as an exter-
nal Impulſe ſhall carry them, this Way or that Way. 50
that his [mpregnation with a Nitency downwards, is an 0c-
cult and filitious Quality, which is not in the Nature of
Bodies, whether in Motion or in Reſt. The Truth is,
the Author of the Exceptions makes a great Flutter about
the Carteſian Philoſophy, and the Copernican Syſtem, but
the frequent Miſtakes he commits in both, give a juſt
Suſpicion that he underſtands neither.

Laſtly, we come to the grand Diſcovery of a fiſteen.
cubit Deluge, which, it may be, was as uneaſy to him
upon ſecond Thoughts, as any of the reſt ; at leaſt one
would gueſs ſo, by the Changes he hath made in his Hy-
potheſis. For he hath now, in this Defence, p. 181, 182.
reduc'd the Deluge to a Deſtruction of the World by
Famine, rather than by Drowning. I do not remember
in Scripture any Mention made of Famine in that great
Judgment of Water brought upon Mankind ; but he
thinks he hath found out ſomething that favours his Opi-
nion; namely, that a good Part of Mankind at the De-
luge, were not drown'd, but ſtarv'd for want of Viduals.
And the Argument is this, becauſe in the Story of the De-
luge, Men are not ſaid to be around, but to periſh, die,
or be deſtroy d. But are they ſaid any where in the Story
of the Deluge, to have been famiſp d? And when God
ſays to Noah, Gen. vi. 17. I will bring a Flood of Waters
upon the Earth, to 2 all Fleſh ; does it not plainly
ſignify, that that Deſtru&ion ſhould be by drowning ? But
however, let us hear our Author ; when he had been ma-
king ulè of this new Hypotheſis of ſtarving, to take oft
ſome Arguments urged againſt his fifteen-cubit Deluge,
( particularly, that it would not be ſufficient to nee
Mankind) he adds theſe Words by way of Proof: ef.

p. 182. And methinks there is one T hing which ſeems to me
ſinuate, that a good Part of the auimal World might 125 1


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 493


come to an End thus; by being driven to ſuch Siraights b
the overflowing Waters, as to be FAMISH Dor STARV 3
% Death. T he Thing is this, in the Story of the Deluge,
it is no where ſaid of Men and living Creatures, that 2
were drown'd, but they died, or were deſtroyed. Thoſe
that are drow#s'd are deſtroy d, I imagine, as well as thoſe
that are flared; ſo this proves nothing. But that the De-
ſttuction here ſpoken of, was by drowning, ſeems plain
enough, both from God's Word to Noah before the
Flood, and by his Words after the Flood, when he makes
his Covenant with Noah, in this Manner: I will eftablijh
my Covenant with you, neither ſhall all Fleſh be cut off any
more by the Waters of a Flood, Gen. ix. 11. Now, to be
cut off, or deſtroy'd- by the Waters of a Flood, is, me-
thinks, to be drown'd: And I take all Fleſh to compre-
hend the animal World, or, at leaſt, all Mankind. Ac-
cordingly our Saviour tays, Matth. xxiv. 39. in Noa#'s
Time, zhe Flood came and took them all away; namely, all
Mankind. |
This is one Expedient our Author hath found out, to
help to bear off the Inconveniencies that attend his fifteen-
eubit Deluge; namely, by cOnperring a good Part of it
into a Famine. But he hath another Expedient to join to
this, by increaſing the Waters; and that is done by making
the common Surface of the Earth, or the higheſt Parts of
It, as he calls them, Def. 165 and 180, to nig, ambi-
guoufly, or any Height that pleaſes him; and conſequent-
lj fifteen Cubits above that, ſignifies alſo what Height he
thinks fit. But in reality, there is no Surface eommon
o the Earth, but either the exterior Surface, whether it be
lig or low; or the ordinary Level of the Earth, as it is
i Globe or Convex Body. If by his common Surface he
mean the exterior Surface, that takes in Mountains as well
5 Lowlands, or any other ſuperficial Parts of the Earth.
And therefore, if the Deluge was fifteen Cubits above this
common Surface, it was fifteen Cubits above the higheſt
ountains, as we ſay it was. But, it by the common
vurface he mean the common Level of the Earth, as it is
iGlobular or Convex Body, then we gave it a right Name,
When we call'd it the ordinary Level of the Earth; name-
h that Level or Surface that lies in an equal Convexity
with the Surface of the Sea: And his fifteen Cubits of
Vater from that Level, would never drown the World.
altly, if by the common Surface of the Earth, he under-
land a third Surface, different from both theſe, * muſt
5 ene


494 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


define it, and define the Height of it; that we may knqz
how far this fifteen-cubit Deluge riſe, from ſomeknoyy
Baſis. One known Batis is the Surface of the Sea, and
that Surface of the Land that lies in an equal Convexity
with it: Tell us then, if the Waters of the Deluge were
but fifteen Cubits higher than the Surface of the Sea, that
we may know their Height by ſome certain and determi.
nate Meaſure; and upon that examine the Hypotheſ:
Bat tell us they were fifteen Cubits above, not the Moun.
tains or the Hills, but the Highlands, or the higheſt Par;
of the common Surface of the Earth, and not to tell us the
, Height of theſe higheſt Parts from any known Baſis; nor

how they are diltinguiſh'd from Hills and Mountains,
which incur our Senſes, and are the Meaſures given vs
by Moſes: This, I ſay, is but to cover his Hypotheſis with
Ambiguities, when he had made it without Grounds, and
to leave room to ſet his Water-Mark higher or lower, a5
he ſhould fee Occaſion or Neceſſity. And of this indeed
we have an Inſtance in his laſt Pamphlet; for he has raisd
his Water-Mark there, more than an hundred Cubits higher
than it was before. In his Exceptions, he ſaid, p. 300. nt
that the Waters were no where higher than juſt fifteen Cu.
bits above the Ground, they might in moſt Places be thirty
forty, or fifty Cubits higher. But, in his Defence, he ſays
P. 180. the Waters might be an Hundred or two hundred
Cubits higher than the general ordinary Plain of the Eatth
Now what Security have we, but that, in the nextPam
phlet they may be five hundred or a thouſand Cubits
higher than the ordinary Surface of the Earth ?

This is his ſecond Expedient, raifing his Water-Mark
indefinitely. But if theſe two Methods be not ſufficient
to deſtroy Mankind, and the animate World, he hath yet
a third, which cannot fail; and that is, deſtroying them by
evil Angels, Def. p. 90. Flectere fi nequeo This is his la
Refuge; to which Purpoſe he hath theſe Words, Hh:
Heaven was pleas'd to give Satan leave, be causd the Fir
to conſume Job's Sheep, and cauſed the Wind to deſtroy by
Children. And how eafily could theſe Spirits, that are M.
viſters of God's Vengeance, have made the Waters of 14
Flood fatal to thoſe Creatures that might have {raped them
if any could have done it? As ſuppoſe an Eagle, or.
Faulcon ; the Devil and his Crew catch them all, and hehe
their Noſes under Water: However, methinks, this |
not fair Play to deny the Theoriſt the Liberty to my


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 493
uſe of the Miniſtry of good Angels, when he himſelf makes


uſe of evil Spirits.

Theſe, Sir, and ſuch like Paſſages, where the Notions
of the Exceptor have been expos'd, were the Cauſes, I
imagine, of his angry Reply. Some Creatures, you know,
are more fierce after they are wounded; and ſome, upon a
gentle Chaſe, will fly from you ; but if you preſs them, and
put them to Extremities, they turn, and fly in your Face,
[ ſee, by our Author's Example, how eaſily, in theſe per-
ſonal Altercations, Reaſoning degenerates into Wrangling,
and Wrangling into Scolding. However, it I may judge
from theſe two Hypotheſes which he hath made, about
the Riſe of Mountains, and a fifteen-cabit Deluge, of all
Trades, I ſhould never adviſe him to turn Hypotheſic-
Maker. It does not ſeem at all to lie to his Hand; and
Things never thrive that are undertaken, Diis iratis, Ge-
nogne ſiniſtro.

But as we have given you ſome Account of this Au-
thor's philoſophical Notions, ſo it may be you will ex-
pet that we ſhould entertain you with ſome Pieces of
his Wit and Eloquence. The Truth is, he ſeems to de-
light and value himſelf upon a certain kind of Country-
Wit and popular Eloquence, and I will not grudge you
the Pleaſure of enjoying them both, in ſuch Inſtances as
remember. Speaking in Contempt of the Theory and
the Anſwer, (which is one great Subject of his Wit) he
expreſſes himſelf thus, Def. p. 48. But if Arguments be
ſo weak, that they will fall with a Phillip, why ſhould
greater Force be uſed to beat them down? Jo draua Rapier
to ſtah a Fly, or to charge a Piſtol to kill a Spider, I think
world be prepoſterous. | think ſo too; in this we are a-
freed. fn another Place, being angry with the Theoriſt,
that he would not acknowledge his Errors to him, he hath
theſe Words, p. 108. Tig anlucky for one to run his Head
oainſt a Poſt ; but when he hath done, if he will ſay he did
not do it, and ſtand in, and deſend what he ſays, tis a
n he is as ſenſeleſs as he was unfortunate, and is fitter to
be pitied than confuted. This Wit, it may be, you'll ſay
s downright Clownery. The'I ruth is, when I obſerv'd,
in reading his Pamphlet, the Coarſeneſs of his Repartees,
and of that ſort of Wit wherein he deals moſt, and pleaſes
himſelf, it often rais'd in my Mind, whether I would or
no, the Idea of a P?darnt, of one that had ſeen little of
the World, and thought himſelf much wittier and wiſer
than others would take him to be: I will give you but one


- Inſtance


496 A Hort Conſideration of the Defence of the
Inſtance more of his ruſtical Wit. Telling the Theorig
of an Itch of Writing, p. 214. Methinks, ſays he, he migbt
have laid that prurient Humour, by ſcratching himſelf with
the Briars of a more innocent Controverſy, or by SC RU}.
BING SOUNDLY againſt ſomething elſe than the Hi
Scripture. He ſpeaks very ſenſibly, as if he underſtood
the Diſeaſe, and the Way of dealing with it: But I think
Holy Scripture does not come in well upon that Oe.
caſion.

All this is nothing, Sir, in compariſon of his popular
Eloquence: See with what Alacrity he runs it off-hang,
in a Similitude betwixt Adam and a Lord Lieutenant of
County, p. 113. When the King makes a Gentleman
Lord Lieutenant of a County, by virtue of his Commiſſun
is he preſently the ſtrongeſt Man that is in it? Does it en-
able him to encounter whole Regiments of Soldiers in hi;
ſingle Perſon ? Does it impower him to carry a Cann
upon his Neck? Or when the great Gun is fired , to cath
the Bullet as it flies, and put it up in his Pocket * So whey
God gave Adam Dominion over the Fowls, did he mean that
he ſhould dive like a Duck, or ſoar like a Falcon? That le
ſhould ſwim as naturally as the Swan, and hunt the Kite ur
Hobby, as Boys do the Wren? Did he mean that he ſhould
hang up Oſtriches in a Cage, as People do Linnets, or fetch
down the Eagles to feed with his Pullen, and make then
perch with his Chickens in the Henrooſt?

So much for the Fowls; now for the Fiſh. 14:4. When
God gave Adam Dominion over the Sea, was be to be able
to dwell at the Bottom, or to walk on the Top of it? To
drain it as à Ditch, or to take all its Fry at once in a
Drag-Net? Was he to hore the Shark, as we do young
Pickarels; or to bridle the Sea-Horſe, and ride him for a
Pad; or to put a Slip upon the Crocodile's Neck, and play
with him as with a Dog ? &c. Sir, I leave it to you, as
a more competent Judge, to ſet a juſt Value upon his
Gifts and Elocution. For my Part, to ſpeak freely, dull
Senſe, in a phantaſtick Style, is to me doubly nauſeous.

But leſt I ſhould cloy you with theſe luſcious Harangues,
I will give you but one more; and 'tis a Miſcellany ot
ſeveral Pieces of Wit together. Def. p. 68. Should twenty
Mariners, ſays he, confidently affirm that they ſailed in
Ship from Dover to Calais, b a brisk Gale out of a Pair c
| Bellows? Or if forty Engineers ſhould poſitively ſwear, that
the Powder-MMill near London was late blown up, U ©


Mine then ſprang at Great Waradin in Hungary, 2


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 497


they not be grie vouſiy perjur'd Perſons ? ------ Or if the
[litorian that writes the Peloponneſian Mar, had told that
the Soldiers who fell in it, fought only with Sun-beams, and
lnole Caurrants which grew t rereabouts, and that hundreds
and thouſands were ſtabb'd with the one, and knocked on the
Head with the other; who would believe that ever there
were ſuch Weapons in that War, that ever there was ſuch
a fatal Mar in that Country? Even ſo, &c. Thele, Sir,
are Flights and Reaches of his Pen, which I dare not
cenſure, but leave them to your Judgment.

Thus much is to give you a Taſte only of his Wit and
Floquence; and if you like it, you may find more of the
ſame Strain, here and there, in his Writings. Ihave only
one Thing to mind him of, zhaz he was deſired by the
Theoriſt, Eng. Theor. p. 401. to write in Latin (if he was
a Scholar) as being more proper for a Subject of this Nature.
f he had own'd and follow'd that Character, I'm apt to
think it would have prevented a great many Impertinen-
ces: His Tongue, probably, would not have been ſo
fippant in popular Excurſions and Declamations, as we
now find it. Neither is this any great Preſumption or
Raſhneſs of Judgment, if we may gueſs at his Skill in
that Language by his T ranſlations here and there: Except.
293. Cum plurima Religione is rendered with the Prin-


Raleigh in his Tranſlation, he that follows a bad
nnſlator, without Correction or Notice, is ſuppos'd to
now no better himſelf : And this will appear the more
obable, if we conſider another of his Tranſlations, in
is preſent Work. Rei Perſonam he tranſlates the Repree
nation of the Thing, inſtead of the Perſon of the G uilty,
t the Perſon of him that is Reus not Actor: And in this
dare ſay, he was ſeduc'd by no Example. But leſt we
Nould be thought to miſrepreſent him, take his own

ords, ſuch as they are, Def. 168, 169. Yea, thy” it
bas ſpokem never ſo poſitively, it was but to ſet forth
EI PERSONA „to make the more full and lively Repre-
nation of the oppoſed Thing. Here, you ſee, he bach
Made a double Blunder ; firſt, in jumbling together 2 7
nd Thing; then, if they could be jumbled together, Rei
'rſma would not ſignify the full and lively Repreſentation
the Thing, but rather a Diſguiſe or perſonated Repreſen-
Aon of the Thing. However, I am ſatisfied from theſe
llances, that he had good Reaſon, notwithſtanding the
K k Caution


ha, —— *


n


ple of their Religion. And if he ſay he followed Sir


498 A. ſbort Confideration of the Defence of the


Caution or Deſire of the Theoriſt to the contrary, t
write his Books in his Mother's Tongue.

Thus we have done with the firſt Part, which was tg
mark out ſuch Paſſages, as we thought might probably
have enflam'd the Author's Style in this Reply: Wher
Men are reſolved not to own their Faults, you kno
there is nothing more uneaſy and vexatious to them
than to ſee them plainly diſcovered and expos'd. We
muſt now give you ſome Account of the Contents of
his Chapters, ſo far as they relate to our Subject. Cha,
Nothing. Chap. II. is againſt extraordinary Providemc
or that the Theoriſt ſhould not be permitted to hay
Recourſe to it upon any Occaſion. This Recourſe i
extraordinary Providence being frequently objecded it
other Places, and of ule to be diſtinctly underſtood; v
will ſpeak of it apart at the latter end of the Letter
Chap. III. is about the Moon's hindring the Formation if th
Earth before ſhe was formed herſelf, or in our Neighiu
hood, as we have noted before. Another Thing in th
Chapter, is, his urging oily or oleaginous Particles nott
have been in the Chaos, but made ſince: I'll give a ſho
Anſwer to this; either there was or was not oleagiss
Matter in the new-made Earth, (I mean in its ſuperf
cial Region,) when it came firſt out of a Chaos ? If the
was, there was alſo in the Chaos,out of which that Earth w
immediately made: And if there was no oleaginot
Matter in the new-made Earth, how came the Soil to
ſo fertile, ſo fat, ſo unctuous?) I ſay not only fertile, b
8 fat and unctuous: For he uſes theſe ve

ords frequently in the Deſcription of that Soil, Ex
. 211. Def. p. 69, and p. 98. And all fat and unctuo

iquors are oleaginous; and accordingly we have u
thoſe Words promiſcuouſly, in the Deſeriprion of t
Region; (Eng. Theor. Chap. V.) underſtanding only fu
unctuous Liquors as are lighter than Water, and ſ
above it, and conſequently would ftop and entang!et
terreſtrial Particles in their Fall or Deſcent : And ſee
ſuch unctuous and oleaginous Particles were in the nei
made Earth, they muſt certainly have been in the Mat
out of which it was immediately formed, namely, nt
Chaos. All the reſt of this Chapter we are willing
gave in its full Force; apprehending the Theory, ot.
\nſwer, tt be in no Danger from ſuch Argumentatie


* .
; ,


n .
Or Ren tions.


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 499


The fourth Chapter is very ſhort, and huh nothing argu-
mentative. The fifth Chapter is concerning the Cold in
the circumpolar Parts, which was ſpoken co in the An-
ſwer ſufficiently, and we ſtand to that: What is added
about extraordinary Providence, will be treated of in its
proper Place. The fixth Chapter is alſo ſhort, againſt
this Particular, that it is not ſafe to argae upon i ee
actually falſe. And I think there needs no more to prove
it, than what was ſaid in the Anſwer. Chap. VII. is chiefly
about Texts of Scripture, concerning which I fee no Oc-
caſion of ſaying any more than what is ſaid in the Review
of the Theory. He ſays, (v. 49.) that the Theoriſt catches
himſelf in a Trap, by allowing that Pſ; xxxiii. 7. is to be
underſtood of the ordinary Poſture of the Waters, and yet
applying itto their extraordinary Poſture under the Vaulr
of the Earth: But that was not an extraordinary Poſture
according to the Theoriſt, but their natural Poſture
in the firſt Earth: Yet I allow the Expreſſion might have
been better thus, in @ level or ſpherical Convexity, as the
Earth. He interprets MM (p. 53.) which we render
the Garden of the Lord, Gen. xiii. x. not to be Pa-
radiſe, bur any pleaſant Garden; yet gives us no Autho-
ity either of ancient Commentator or Verſion, for this no-
vel and paradoxical Interpretation. The Septuagint
render it napd3&cO* 75 bes ; The Vulgate, Paradiſus Do-
nini, and all ancient Verſions that I have ſeen, render it
to the ſame Senſe. Does he expect then that his ſingle
Word and Authority ſhould countervail all the ancient
Tranſlators and Interpreters? To the laſt Place alledged by
the Theoriſt, Prov. viii. 28. he ſays, the Anſwerer charges
tim unjuſtly, that he underſtands by that Word ND no
more than the Rotundity or ſpherical Figure of the Abyſs;
which, he ſays, is a Point of Nonſenſe: [ did not think
the Charge had been ſo high however, ſeeing ſome-In-
terpreters underſtand it ſo: But if he underſtand by zm
the Banks or Shores of the Sea, then he ſhould have told
us how thoſe Banks or Shores are DINN 12 IV ſuper fa-
diem Abiſſi, as it is in the Text. | f |

Page 59. He ſays the Exceptor does not miſrepreſent
the Theoriſt when he makes him to affirm the Conſtructi-
on of the firſt Earth to have been merely mechanical; and
he cites to this purpoſe two Places, which only prove, that
the Theoriſt made uſe of no other Cauſes, nor ſee any

cfe& in them; but never affirm'd that theſe were the
buly Cauſes. You may ſee his Words to this purpoſe ex-

Kk 2 preſly


$00 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


preſly, Eng. Theor. p. 88. whereof the Exceptor was
minded in the Auſwer, p. 3. In the laſt Paragraph of
this Chapter, p. 60. if he afirms any Thing, he will haye
the Pillars of the Earth to be underſtood literally. Where
then, pray, do theſe Pillars ſtand that bear up the Earth?
Or if they bear up the Earth, what bears them up? What
are their Pedeſtals, or their Foundations? But he ſays Hy.
potheſes muſt not regulate Scripture, though in natural
Things, but be regulated by it, and by the Letter of it: |
would gladly know then, how his Hypotheſis of the Mo-
tion of the Earth, is regulated by Scripture, and by the
Letter of it? And he unhappily gives an Inſtance. juſt
contrary to himſelf, namely, of the Anthropomorphites ;
for they regulate natural Reaſon and Philoſophy, by the
Letter or literal Senſe of Scripture, and therein fall into
a groſs Error: Yet we muſt not call the Author ia judi-
cious, for fear of giving Offence.

The eighth Chapter, ibid. begins with the Earth's being
carried directiy under the Equinoctial, before its Change of
Situation; without any manner of Obliquity in her Site,
or Declination 8 either of the TRIES in HER
COURSE. Here you ſee, when the Earth changed its
Situation, it chang'd according to his Aſtronomy, two
Things; its Site, and its Courſe; its Site upon its Axis,
and its Courſe in the Heavens: And ſo he ſays again in
the next Paragraph, Put the Caſethe Earth 600 her Poſture,
and alſo her Circuit about the Sun, in which ſhe perſiſted
till the Deluge. Here is plainly the ſame Notion repeated;
that the Earth changed not only its Site, but alſo its Road
or Courſe about the Sun: And in conſequence of this, he
ſuppoſes its Courſe formerly to have been under the Equi-
noctial, and now under the Ecliptick ; it being tranſlated
out of the one into the other, at its Change. Yet he
ſeems now to be ſenſible of the Abſurdity of this Doc-
trine, and therefore will not own it to have been his Senle;
and as an Argument that he meant otherwiſe, healledges,
that he declared before, that by the Earth's right Situation
to the Sun, is meant that the Axis of the Earth was always
kept in a Paralleliſm to that of the Ecliptick, p. 61. But
what's this to the Purpoſe? I his ſpeaks only of the Se
of the Earth, whereas his Error was in ſuppoſing its Coxr/e
or Annual Orbit about the Sun, as well as its Site upon its
own Axis, to have been different, and changed at the De-
luge; as his Words already produced againlt him, plainly


ſtify.
teltity What


ali n_—S a kool dS ©% 3 AS «© ws. gms «SA ans ca ca


anus oa TT. enkmT. oi... ST. - mM.


—


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 501
What follows in this Chapter, is concerning the perpe-
tual Equinox: And as to the reaſoning Part of what he
ſays in Defence of his Exceptions, we do not grudge him
the Benefit of it, let it do him what Service ic can. And
as to the hiſtorical Part, he will not allow a Witneſs to
be a good Witneſs, as to Matter of Fact, if he did not aſ-
ſign true Cauſes of that Matter of Fact. To which I
only reply, tho* Tiverton Steeple was not the Cauſe of
Goodwin Sands, as the Kentiſh Men thought, yet their
Teſtimony was ſo far good, that there were ſuch Sands,
and ſuch a Steeple. He alfo commits an Error as to the
Nature of Tradition : When a Tradition is to be made our,
it is not expected that it ſhould be made appear that none
were ignorant of that Tradition in former Ages; or that
all that mentioned it, underſtood the true Grounds and
Extent of it ; but it is enough to ſhew the plain Foot-
ſteps of it in Antiquity, as a Concluſion, tho” they did not
know the Reaſons and Premiſſes upon which it depended.
For Inſtance, the Conflagration of the World is a Doc-
trine of Antiquity, traditionally deliver'd from Age to
Age; but the Cauſes and Manner of the Conflagration,
they either did not know, or have not deliver'd to us.
In like manner, the firſt Age and State of the World
was without Change of Seaſons, or under a perpetual
Equinox: Of this we ſee many Footſteps in Anutiquity,
zmongſt the Jews, Chriſtians, Heathens, Poets, Philo-
ſophers; but the Theory of this perpetual Equinox, the
Cauſes and Manner of it, we neither find, nor can rea-
lonably expect, from the Antients : So much tor the
Equinox.
This Chapter, as it begun with an Error, ſo it un-
happily ends with a Paralogiſm ; namely, that, becaxſe
thirty Days made a Month at the Deluge, therefore thoſe
ays were neither longer nor ſhorter than ours are at
preſent, Tho? we have ſufficiently expoſed this before,
yet one thing more may be added, in anſwer to his
confident Concluſion, in theſe Words: But to talk, as
the Auſwerer does, that the Month ſhould be lengthened by
the Days being ſo, is a fearful Blunder indeed: For let the
Days (by ſlacke ning the Earth's diurnal Mot ion ) have been
never ſo long, yet (its Annual Motion continuing the ſame
the Month muſt needs have kept its N Length, only
fewer Days would have made it up. Lis not uſual for a
Man to perſevere ſo confidently in the ſame Error, as if
the Intervals of Time, Hours, Days, Months, Years,
K


K 3 could


502 A ſbort Conſideration of the Deſence of the


could not be proportionably increas'd, ſo as to contain
one another in the ſame Proportion they did before, and
yet be every one increas'd as to abſolute Duration. Take
a Clock, for Inſtance, that goes too flow ; the Circuit
of the Dial-plate is twelve Hours, let theſe repreſent the
twelve Signs in his Zodiack, and the Hand to be the Earth
that goes through them all; and conſequently, the whole
Circuit ot the Bal eiae repreſents the Year. Suppoſe,
as we ſaid, this Clock to go too flow, this will not hin—
der, but {till fifteen Minutes make a Quarter in this Clock,
four Quarters make an Hour, and twelve Hours the whole
Circuit of the Dial-plate : But every one of theſe Inter-
vals will contain more Time than it did before, accord-
ing to abſolute Duration, or according to the Meaſures
of another Clock that does not go too flow : This is the
very Caſe which he cannot or will not comprehend, but
concludes thus in Effect, that becauſe the Hour conſiſts
{till of four Quarters in this Clock, therefore it is no
longer than ordinary.

he ninth Chapter alſo begins with a falſe Notion, that
Bodies quieſcent (as he hath now alter'd the Caſe) have 4
Nitency downwards : Which Miſtake we rectified before,
it he pleaſe. Then he proceeds to the «val Figure of
the Earth, and many Flouriſhes and Harangues are made
here to little purpoſe; for he goes on upon a falſe Suppo-
ſition, that the Waters of the Chaos were made oval by
the Weight or Gravitation of the Air; a Thing that never
came into the Words or Thoughts of the Theoriſt. Yet
upon this Suppoſition he runs into the Deſerts of b:lebul-
gerid, Def. p. 85, 86. and the Waters of Mare del Zar ;


Words that make a great Noiſe, but to no Effect. If he had f
pleas*d he might have ſeen the Theoriſt made no Uſe of the
Weight of the Air upon this Occaſion, by the Inſtance he
gave of the Preſſure of the Moon, and the Flux of the
Waters by that Preſſure: Which is no more done by
the Gravitation of the Air, than the Banks are preſt in a


iwift Current and narrow Channel, by the Gravitation of


the Water. But he ſays, rarified Air makes leſs Reſilt-
ance than groſs Air; and rarified Water in an Eolipile,
it may be he thinks, preſſes with leſs Force than unrari-
fied. Air poſſibly may be rarified to that Degree as 10
leſſen its Reſiſtance; but we ſpeak of Air moderately |
agitated, ſo as to be made only more brisk and active.
Moreover, he ſays, the Waters that lay under the Poles
muſt have riſen perpendicularly, and why might they — a


GO dE. w—_ 0


1
7
3
2
4
3
"= C
I
-2
*
=
2


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth, 503

well have done ſo under the Equator? The Waters
t lay naturally and originally under the Poles, did not
at all; but the Waters became more deep there, by
ſe that were thruſt thither from the middle Parts of

Globe. Upon the whole, I do not perceive that he
h weaken'd any one of the Propofitions upon which
Formation of an oval Earth depended; which were
ſe : Firſt, That the Tendency of the Waters from the
ntre of this Motion, would be greater and ſtronger in
; Equinoetial Parts, than in the Polar, or in thoſe
rts where they moved in greater Circles; and conſe-
ently ſwifter, than in thoſe where they were moved in
ſer Circles and flower. Secondly, Agitated Air hath
ore Force to repel what preſſes againſt it than ſtagnant
r; and that the Air was more agitated and rarified un-
r the EquinoQial Parts, than under the Poles. Thirdly,
aters hinder'd and repell'd in their primary Tendency,
ce the eaſieſt way they can to free themſelves from that
Ice, fo as to perſevere in their Motion. Laſtly, To
, laterally upon a Plain, or to aſcend upon an inclin'd
ain, is eaſier than to riſe perpendicularly. Theſe are
e Propoſitions upon which that Diſcourſe depended, and
lo not find that he hath diſprov'd any one of them.
nd this, Sir, is a ſhort Account of a long Chapter, Im-
rtinences omitted. 22

Chapter X. Is concerning the Original and Cauſes of
lountains, which the Exceptor unhappily imputes to the
eat and Influence of the Sun. Whether his Hypotheſis
effectually confuted or not, Iam very willing to ſtand
the Judgment of any unconcern'd Perſon, that will
we the Patience to compare the Exceptions and the An-
ver, in this Chapter. Then, as to his Hiſtorical Argu-
ents, as he calls them, to prove there were Mountains
fore the Flood, from Grants that ſaved themſelves from
e Flood upon Mount Sion, and Adam's wandering ſeveral
uindred of Years upon the Mountains of India: Theſe,
ad ſach like, which he brought to prove that there were
lountains before the Flood, ke now thinks fit to re-
ounce, Def. p. 97. and ſays he had done ſo before by an
zticipative Sentence: But if they were condemn'd be-
Ire by an anticipative Sentence, as Fables and Forge-
es, why were they ſtuff*d into his Book, and us'd as
aditional Evidence againſt the Theory?


Laſtly, He contends in this Chapter for Iren and Iron


'vols before the Flood, and as early as the Time of Cain:
i M$ becauſe


—_—
-
ea i a Aid


2 — " mon. a.
—
2 2


— — —
— 2 ——


— N ——ů ů ht
— 8 FY 1 | — —
2 > — = =
4 _ =: 22 d — 4
* - ; a
” RE .—


=


504 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


becauſe he huilt a City, which, he ſays, could not be
built without Iron and Iron-Tools: To.whichit was an-


iwer'd, Azſ. p. 49, 5o. that, if he faucied that City of


Cain's, like Paris of London, he had Reaſon to believe
that they had Iron tools to make it: But ſuppoſe it was a
Number of Cottages, made of Branches of Trees, of
Ofiers and Bulruſhes; or, if you will, of Mud-Walls
and a Roof of Straw, with a Fence about it to keep
ou Beaſts, there would be no ſuch Neceflity of Iron-

oo0ls. | *

Conſider, pray, how long the World was without
knowing the Uſe of Iron, in ſeveral Parts of it, as in
the Northern Countries and America, and yet they had
Houſes and Cities after their Faſhion. And to come
nearer Home, conſider what Towns and Cities our An-
ceſtors, the Britains, had in Caeſar's Time, more than two
thouſand Years after the Time of Cain: Com. Ii. 5. Op-
pidum Britauni vocant, cum Sylvam impeditam vallo at-
que foſſa munierant; quo 8 hoſtium nitandæ cauſa,
conveaire conſueverunt : Why might not Henochia, Caiu's
City, be ſuch a City as this?

And as to the Ark, which he alſo would make a Proof
that there were Iron and Iron-Tools before the Flood,
1bid. twas anſwer'd, that Scripture does not mention
Iron op Iron-Tools in building of the Ark; but only
Gopher ood and Pitch: To which he replies, Def. p. 103.
If Seripture's Silence concerning Things be a Groundof Pre.
ſumption that they were not, what then ſhall we think of
an oval and unmountainous Earth, an mcloſed Abyſs, a
paradiſaical World, and the like, which the Scripture makes
uo mention of: I cannot eaſily forbear calling this an -
judicious Reflection, tho? I know he hath been angry with
that Word, and makes it a Brat of Paſjion : But I do
aſſure him, I call it ſo coolly and calmly. Whena Thing
is deduc'd by natural Arguments and Reaſon, the Silence
of Scripture is enough: If he can prove the Motion of the
Earth by natural Arguments, and that Scripture is ſilent
in that Point, we deſire no better Proof. No in all
thoſe Things which he mentions, an oval and unmoun-
tainous Earth, an incloſed Abyſs, a paradiſaical World,
Scripture is at leaſt ſilent; and therefore 'tis natural At-
guments muſt determine theſe Caſes: And this ill reaſon-
ing he is often guilty of, in making no Diſtinction be-
twixt Things that are, or that are not prov'd by _
oy SITE gdh ee gue le ia lb he


ral At
Script
Ch,
now)
before
Anſuv
cernil
laviſh
That
Worl.
F his
in Ad
tified
vers C
vers C
Theor
Thin!
fruitf
ther 8
og
ay
ny 1
Ch
new
IS MC
The 1


Exceptions againſt the Theory of e Earth. 50g


\rguments, when he appeals to the Interpretation of
ture.

þap. XI. Is to prove an open Sea (ſuch as we have
before the Flood: All his Exceptions were anſwered
re, Anſw. c. 11. and I am content to ſtand to that
wer, reſerving only what is to be ſaid hereafter con-
ing the literal Senſe of Scripture. However, he is too
h in ſome Expreſſions here, as when he ſays, (p. 115.)
t Adam died before ſo much as one Fiſh appeared in the
1d: And alittle before he had ſaid, p. 114. For Fiſhes,
s Hypotheſis be believed, were never upon this Earth
dam's Time. Theſe Expreflions, I ſay, cannot be juſ-
d upon any Hypotheſis: For why might not the Ri-
of that Earth have Fiſh in them, as well as the Ri-
of this Earth, or as our Rivers now? I'm ſure the
"ry, or the Hypotheſis he mentions, never ſaid any
ng to the contrary, but rather ſuppos'd the Waters
ful, as the Ground was. But as to an open Sea, whe-
Side ſoever you take, that there was, or was not any
Ire the Flood; I believe, however, Adam, to his dying
7, never ſaw either Sea or Sea-fiſh, nor ever exercis'd
Dominion over either. |

hap. XII. Is concerning the Rainbow, and hath no
Argument in it, nor Reinforcement : But aQueition
10oved, whether as well neceſſarily ſignifies as much.
2 real Queſtion to be conſider'd here, ſetting aſide Pe-
try, is this, whezher that Thing (Sun or Rainbow, or
other) could have any Significancy as a Sign, which
ified no more than the bare Promiſe would havedone
hout a Sign: This is more material to be conſider'd
2 than whether as well and as mach ſignify

ame.

-bap. XIII. Is concerning Paradiſe, and to juſtify or
uſe himſelf why he baulked all the Difficulties, and
| nothing new or inſtructive upon that Subject: But he
uld make the Theoriſt inconſiſtent with himſelf in that
had ſaid, Def. p. 125. that either Scripture nor Reaſon
ermine the Place of Paradiſe; and yet determines it by


Judgment of Chriſtian Fathers. Where's the Incon-


zncy of this? The Theory, as a Theory, is not con-
ned in a Topical Paradiſe; and ſays moreover that nei-
r Scripture, nor Reaſon, have determin'd the Place of
but it we refer our ſelves to the Judgment and T'radi-
n of the Fathers, and ſtand to the Majority of their
tes, (when Scripture and Reaſon are ſilent,) they *


> > —_ CT TO O——_ — —
— —
— — ” þ m4 7


506 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the Z


fo far determin'd it, as to place it in the other Hemi. Wand the
ſphere, rather than in this, and ſo exclude that ſhallow Giants
Opinion of ſome Moderns, that would place it in Me. {WMankir
ſopotamia: And to baffle that Opinion was the Deſign of inction
the Theoriſt, fas} this Author alſo ſeems to take notice Mmentio!
P. 131. 1
After this, and an undervaluing of the Teſtimonies of M-!7*r5,
the Fathers, he undertakes to determine the Place of Pa. WM Propor


radiſe by Scripture, and particularly that it was in Meſo. Wl mentio
potamia, or ſome Region thereabouts. And his Argu- binary
ment is this, becauſe in the laſt Verſe of the third Chapter Ml tell me
ot Geneſis, the Cherubrms and flaming Sword are ſaid to be Wl before
plac'd -o, p4pn. which he ſays is, to the Eaſt of te Vor-
Garden of Eden. But the Septuagint (upon whom he Wl gui a
mult chiefly depend for the Interpretation of the Word WI ,²)/j;
Opn in the firſt Place, Chap. ii. 8.) read it here 4=6vawr, Will both t.
T3 xp Th. puch. And the VL ulgate renders it, Ante he me!
Paradiſum voluptatis ; and according to the Samaritan Th


for the
tants C
be att.
much
and y
thoſe |
Joſep
Moſes
monie
does
was I
Years
Lives
often
a1CCO1
them
not h


falſe
N


Pentateuch, *tis render'd ex adverſo Now, what bettet
Authorities can he bring us for his Tranſlation ? ] do not
find that he gives any, as his uſual Way is, but his own
Authority. And as for the Word pn, in the ſecond
Chapter and eighth Verſe, which is the principal Place,
"tis well known, that except the Septuagint, all the an-
tient Verſions, Greek and Latin, (beſides others) render it
to another Senſe: And there is a like Uncertainty 0
Tranſlation in the Word jay, as we have noted elſe-
where. Laſtly, the Rivers of Paradiſe, and the Countries|
they are ſaid to run through or encompaſs, are differently
underſtood by different Authors, without any Agreement
or certain Conclufion : But theſe are all beaten Subjects,
which you may find in every Treatiſe of Paradiſe, and
therefore 'tis not worth the Time to purſue them here.
Then he proceeds to the Longevity of the Ante-Diluvians,
which, ſo far asI can underſtand him to affirm any Thing,
he ſays, p. 139. was not general; but the Lives of ſome
few were extraordinary, leugthen'd by a ſpecial Bleſſing
the Elongation being a I ork of Providence, not of Nature.
This is a cheap and vulgar Account, (and fo are all th
Contents of this Chapter) prov'd neither by Scripture, non
Reaſon, and calculated for the Humour and Capacity oy
thoſe that love their Eaſe more than a diligent Enquiry
after Truth. He hath indeed a bold Aſſertion afterwards
that Moſes does diſtinguiſh as much, or more, betWig


two Races of Men before the Flood; the one Long- Liver q
all


vian
and 1
0
es
—
ſona
and
ſhoy


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth, 507


je other Short-Livers; as he hath diſtinguiſh'd the
s before the Flood, from the common Race of
ind. Theſe are his Words, p. 141. 1s not his Diſ-
# equally plain in both Caſes ? ſpeaking of this fore-
oned Diſtinction: Or, if there be any Difference, does
t diſtinguiſh better betwixt Long-Livers, and Short-
s, than he does betwixt Men of gigantick and of uſual
2rtion ? Let's ſee the Truth of this; Moſes plainly made
ion, Gen. vi. 4. of two Races of Mankind: The or-
y Race, and thoſe of a gigantick Race, or Giants. Now,
ne where he plainly makes mention of HHort-Livers
e the Flood: And if ke no where makes mention of
Livers, but of Long-Livers only, how does he diſtin-
.as plainly of theſe two Races, as he did of the other
for in the other he mentioned plainly and ſeverally
the Parts or Members of the DiſtinQtion, and here
entions but one, and makes no Diſtinction.
hen he comes to the Ileſtimonies cited by Joſephus
he Longevity of the Aute-Diluviaus, or firſt Inhabi-
of the Earth: And theſe he roundly pronounces to
terly falſe. This Gentleman does not ſeem to be
h skill'd in Antiquity, either ſacred or prophane;
yet he boldly rejects theſe Teſtimonies (as he did
e of the Fathers before) as zzterly falſe, p. 142. which
phas had alledged in Vindication of the Hiſtory of
. The only Reaſon he gives is, becauſe theſe Teſti-
lies ſay, they liv'd a zhouſaxd Years ; whereas Moſes
not raiſe them altogether ſo high. But the Queſtion
not ſo much concerning the preciſe Number of their
rs, as about the Exceſs of them beyond the preſent
es of Men, and a round Number in ſuch Caſes is
n taken inſtead of a broken Number. Beſides, ſeeing,
ording to the Account of Moſes, the greater Part of
n lived above nine hundred Years, at leaſt he ſhould
have ſaid theſe Teſtimonies in Joſephus were atterly
„F but falſe in part, or not preciſely true.
Now, he comes to his Reaſons againſt the ante-dilu-
1 Longevity, which have all had their Anſwers before,
| thoſe we ſtand to. But I wonder he ſhould think it
ſonable, p. 144, 145. that Mankind throughout all
es, ſhould increaſe in the ſame Proportion as in the firſt
e: And, if a decuple Proportion of Increaſe was rea-
able at firſt, the ſame ſhould be continued all along;
| the Product of Mankind, after ſixteen hundred Years,
uld be taken upon that Suppoſition. I ſhould not grudge
to


3
CI


2 —̃— en — z — . Ra
” —


„ V


—
—


2


. ”
X _ n * EF
— - —— — * . — 2 = " > + 4 > E 7 — . — Ip
* F. 4 f * 2 3 0 r DD —_— 3 2 — -- : >
: — — — 2 — — s & * . L * 9 L \ . — , 5 - — * 8 - — — yy
— I . * - r * 2 — 2 2 2 - * A ar a= Pl, — — — : - — * =
— — _ — a —— oy — — * > >; — = —_ — * — iy — a p — * 2 — 1 - 2 5 — — pull > > 4
=” Eo NS: TE Eo es, * —— * 22 * >A ; D — = _— |
* — 3 — * a _ * "> al 22 — 2 22 — 4 "a — * I 1 - "PoE * — * 4 - - — 5
* = = — 2 — w - C = * — —
= > — Pr — ae 6 — = v |
4 _ hs „ — ————A _ — — — — . — _ —— — * * 0
—— Mt — — —V— — angie, — = - — J — — = —
. — — A 3 2 2 —— — — — _ _ _ _—_ |
« > E — 4 a = . . ” —
jon £ a — — — — . — - — — my 5 ——
= a * 2 IT — FIAT — i - : — — 2 —— ———— — 82 — "IS —— N
— — — x g — — . —
— of _ __ ae n - = - — 5 Y * _
2 8 — -
5 = — TIES » - 2
- — 9 —


508 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


to admit that the firſt Pair of Breeders might leave ten Pair
but that every Pair of theſe ten ſhould alſo leave ten Pair,
without any Failure; and every Pair in their Children
ſhould again leave ten Pair; and this to be continued, with-
out Diminution or Interruption, for ſixteen hundred Years,
is not only a hard Suppoſition, but utterly incredible, For
ſtill the greater the Number was, the more Room there
would be for Accidents of all Sorts; and every Failure
towards the Beginning, and proportionably in other Parts,
would cut off Thouſands in the laſt Product.

Chap. XIV. Is againſt the Diſſolution of the Earth, and
the Diſruption of the Abyſs at the Deluge, ſuch as the
Theory repreſents. Here is nothing of new Argument,
but ſome Strokes of railing Wir, after his Way : He had
{ſaid in his Exceptions, that the Diſſolution of the Earth was
horrid Blaſphemy: Now he makes it reductive Blaſphemy,
as being iadirectly, conſequentially, or reductively, p. 153,


154. contrary to Scripture. By this Rule, we told him,


all Errors in Religion would be Blaſphemy; and if he ex-
tend this to Errors in, Philoſophy alſo, 'tis ſtill more harſh
and injudicious. I worider how he thinks the Doctrine
which he owns, about the Motion of the Earth, ſhould


eſcape the Charge of Blaſphemy; that being not only in-
directly, but directly and plainly contrary to Scripture.
Wie thought that Expreſſion, he Earth is diſſolved, being
a Scripture Expreſſion, would thereby have been protected
from the Imputation of Blaſphemy, and we alledged to
3.) La. xxiv. 19. 4.
He would have done well to have proved
theſe Places in the Prophets Iſaiah and Amos, to have been
figarative and tropological, as he calls it; for we take them

Piſlolution of the Earth, which lite-
rally came to paſs at the Deluge: And he not having pro-
ved the contrary, we are in Hopes (till that the Diſſolution
of the Earth may not be horrid Blaſphemy, nor of blaſ-


that Purpoſe, ( beſides Pſal. Ixxv.


mos ix. 5.


both to relate to the


Phe mous Importance.


Then having quarrell'd with the Guard of Angels, which
the Theoriſt had aſſigu'd for the Preſervation of the Ark,
in the Time of the Deluge, he falls next into his Blunder,
that the Equator and Echiptick of the Earth were inter-
chang'd, when the Situation of the Earth was chang'd.
This Error in the Earth is Co ſin-German to his former
Error in the Heavens, viz. that the Earth chang'd 1ts
Tract about the Sun, and leap'd out of the Equator into
The Truth
is,


the Eclipiick, when it chang'd its Situation.


E;


is, this (
nation:
ever, the
winded,
laying tl
whole I
and ſhe?)
er
pogra
Ther
nd Cai
tended
manded
gentos
Anthor
nged a
ummag
And
tion of
before :
i elſe
Seth's |
he ſup
ſtood 2
chia be
this mi.
be prep
do 1
Towr
before
are thi
ing; 1
And t
ble, b
Miſes
than t
t0 ano
ly; 45
Mort,
tortec
were
the I
migh
Citie:
had 9


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 509


s Copernican Syſtem ſeems to lie crols in his Imagi-
: I think he would do better to let it alone. How-
ho? at other Times he is generally verboſe and long-
d, he hath the Senſe to pals this by in a few Words;
the Blame upon certain Parentheſes or Semicircles,
e Innocency notwithſtanding we have fully clear'd,
zew'd the Poiſon to be ſpread throughout the whole
raph, which is too great to be made an Erratum
raphicam. |
en after, p. 160, 161. Hermus, Caiſter, Menander
alus; Nile and its Mad, Piſcenius Niger, who con-
with Septimus Severus for the Empire, and repri-
d his Soldiers for hankering after Wine: Du Val, an
ous French Writer, and Cleopatra and her admired
ony ; He concludes, that the Waters of the Deluge
amongſt the Fragments, with laſting, inceſſant, and
aginable Turbulence.
d ſo he comes to an Argument againſt the Diſſolu-
of the Earth, p. 162. That, all the Buiidings erected
the Flood, would have been ſhaken down at that Time,
e overwhelmed. He inſtanc'd in his Exceptions in
Pillars; Henochia, Cain's City; and Joppa: Theſe
ppos'd ſuch Buildings as were made before, and
after the Flood. But now, Serh's Pillars and Hleno—
being diſmiſs'd, be inſiſts upon Foppa only, and ſays,
nuſt have conſiſted of ſuch Materrals, as could never
-pared, formed and ſet up, without Iron- Tools. Tho'
not much believe that Joppa was an ante-diluvian
n, yet whatever they had in Cæin's Time, they might,
e the Deluge, have Mortar and Brick, which, as they
he firſt ſtony Materials, that we read of, for Build-
ſo the Ruins of them might ſtand after the Deluge.
that they liad no other Materials is the more proba-
becauſe after the Flood, at the Building of Babel,
s plainly intimates that they had no other Materials
thoſe. For the Text ſays, Gen. xi. 3. They ſaid one
other, Go to, let us make Brick, and burn them thorongh-
nd they made Brick for Stone, and Slime had they for
tar, But now this Argument, methinks, may be rc-
d upon the Exceptor with Advantage: For, if there
2 no Diſſolutions, Concuſſions, or Abſorptions, at
Deluge, inſtead of the Ruins of Foppa, methinks we
1t have had the Ruins of an hundred ante-dilus1an
es ; eſpecially, if, according to his Hypotheſis, they
good Stone, and good Iron, and all other Materials,
Ut


* 3
7 22 — — = A
— as 5 — - *
— ——— Sw


x +a
— — —
—
- =
- — —
q 2 a 4
— hs
— 2.


7 nd ep tl...


510 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


fit for ſtrong and laſting Building: And, which is alſo oil tbe N.
be onder d. that ĩt 2 but a deen d Detuge: 0 nor
that Towns built upon Eminences or high Lands, wou hard!
be in little Danger of being ruin'd, much leſs of bei“ {till
aboliſh'd. | bs

His laſt Argument, (p. 163.) proves, if it prove 1 A
Thing, that God's Promiſe 2) ho World mould not 1 which
drown'd again, was a vain and trifling Thing to us, why vailed
know it muſt be burn'd : And conſequently, if Noah un. Word
derſtood the Conflagration of the World, he makes it 1 e


vain and trifling Thing to Noah alſo. If the Exceptor el et,
light in ſuch Concluſions, let him enjoy them, but they TR l,
are not at all to the Mind'of the Theoriſt. ; Les
Chapter XV. Now, we come to his new Hypotheſis of V


that
ture
wou
Scri
to
indir
ever
Plac
den


a fifteen-cubit Deluge; and what Shifts he hath made to
deſtroy the World with ſuch a diminutive Flood, we
have noted before: Firſt, by raiſing his Water-Mark, and
making it uncertain: Then by converting the Deluye, in
a great Meaſure into a Famine: And, Laſtly, by deltroy-
ing Mankind and other Animals, with evil Angels. We
ſhall now take notice of ſome other Incongruiries in his
Hypotheſis. When he made Moſes's Deluge but f/tcen
Cubits deep, we ſaid that was an anmerciful Paradox, aud
ask'd whether he would have it receiv'd as a Poſtulatum,


Or as a Concluſion. All he anſwers to this, is, that the _
ſame Queſtion may be ask'd concerning ſeveral Parts of 0
the Theory; p. 166. Particularly, that the primitive Earth 0 7
had no open Sea. Whether is that, ſays he, to be receiv'd 7

as a Poſtulatum, or as a Concluſion? The Anſwer is ready, For
as a Concluſion, deduced from Premiſſes, and a Series ot 7 f
antecedent Reaſons. Now, can he make this Anſwer =
for his fifteen-cubit Deluge? Muſt not that ſtill be a *
Poſtulatum, and an unmerciful one? As to the Theory, =
there is but one Poſtalatam in all, viz. that the Earth riſe 10
from a Chaos, All the other Propoſitions are deduc'd from 8
Premiſſes, and that one Poſtulatum alſo is prov'd by a
Scripture and Antiquity. We had noted further in the 1
Anſwer, that the Author had ſaid in his Exceptions, that 15
he would not defend his Hypotheſis as true and real; and 5
we demanded thereupon, Mh then did he trouble him- 4
ſelf or the World with what he did not think zrze and | ,
real? Lo this he replies, Many have written ingenious and 5
uſeſul Things, which they never believ'd to be true and X


real. Romances ſuppoſe; and poetical Fictions: Will you
have your fifteen-cubit Deluge paſs for ſuch? Bur then
. the!


4


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 511


Miſchief is, where there is neither Truth of Fact,
Ingenuity of Invention, ſuch a Compoſition will
ily paſs for a Romance, or a good Fiction. But there
ill a greater Difficulty behind. The Exceptor hath un-
pily ſaid, Exc. p. 302. Our Suppoſition ſtands ſupported
Divine Authority, as being founded upon Scripture ;
ich tells us as plainly as it can Jpear, that the Waters pre-
led but fifteen Cubits upon the Earth. Upon which
ords the Anſwerer made this Remark, Anſ. p.67. If
Hypotheſis be founded upon Scripture, and upon Scrip-=
e as plainly as it can ſpeak, why will he not defend it as
UE and REAL ? For to be ſupported by Scriptare, and
plain Scripture, is as much as we can alledge for the
ticles of our Faith. To this he replies now, Def. p. 168.
t he begg'd Allowance at firſt, to male bold with Scrip-
e a little: This is a bold Excuſe, and he eſpecially, one
2uld think, ſhould take heed how he makes bold with
ripture, leſt, according to his own Notion, he fall in-
ee or ſomething of blaſphemons Importance,
lirectly, conſequentially, or reductively, at leaſt : How-
er, this Excuſe, if it was a good one, would take no
ace here; for to underſtand and apply Scripture, in that
nſe that it ſpeaks as plainly as it can ſpeak, is not to
ake bold with it, but modeſtly to follow its Dictates
d plain Senſe.
He feels this Load to lie heavy upon him, and ſtrug-
es again to ſhake it off with a Diſtinction. When he
id his fifteen-cubit Deluge was ſupported by Divine Au-
ority, &c. this, he ſays, ibid. was ſpoken by him, in an
potheticſꝶ or ſuppuſitious Way, and that it cannot poſſibly
underſtood otherwiſe by Men of Senſe. Here are two
rd Words: Let us firſt underſtand what they ſignify, and
en we ſhall better judge how Men of Senſe would un-
erſtand his Words. His hypothetick or ſuppoſitious Way,
far as I underſtand it, is the ſame Thing as by way of
uppoſitiun: Then his Meaning is, he ſappoſes his fifteen-
ubit Deluge is ſupported by Divine Authority, and he
ppoſes it is founded upon Scripture, as plainly as it can
beat: But this is to ſuppoſe the Queſtion, and no Man of
enſe would make or grant ſuch a Suppoſition; ſo that I
o not ſee what he gains by this hypozhezickand ſuppoſitious
Yay. But to draw him out of this Miſt of Words, ei-
her he affirms this, that his Hypotheſis is ſupported by Di-
ine Authority, aud founded upon Scripture as plaialy as it
earn


512 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the
can ſpeak, or he denies it, or he doubts of it: If heaffirm
it, then all his Excuſes and Diminutions are to no pur.
poſe, he muſt ſtand to his Cauſe, and ſhew us thoſe plain
Texts of Scripture; it he deny it, he gives up his Cauſe,
and all that Divine Authority he pretended to; if he
doubt of it, then he ſhould have expreſs'd himſelf douht-
fully: As, Scripture may admit of that Senſe, or may be
thought to intimate ſuch a thing, but he ſays with a Plero-
phory, Scripture ſpeaks it as plainly as it can ſpeak : And
ro mend the Matter, he unluckily ſubjoins in the follow.
ing Words, p. 168, 169. Tea, tho' it was ſpoken never ſo
Poſitively, it was but to ſet forth REI PERSONAM:
To make a more full and lively Repreſentation of the ſup.
poſed thing. He does well to tell us what he means by
Rei Perſonam; for otherwiſe no Man of Senſe, as his
Phraſe is, would ever have made that I ranſlation of thoſe
Words. But the Truth is, he is ſo perfectly at a Loſs
how to bring himſelf off, as to this Particular, that in
"= Confuſion, he neither makes good Senſe nor good

ati. | |

Now he comes to another Inconſiſtency which was
charg*d upon him by the Anſwerer: Namely, that he re-
jects the Church Hypotheſis concerning the Deluge, and
yet had ſaid before, Exc. p. 300. I cannot believe (which
I cannot well endure to ſpeak) that the Church hath ever
* on in an irrational Way of explaining the Deluge:

hat he does rej ect this Church Hypotheſis, was plainly
made out from his own Words, becauſe he rejects the
common Hypotheſis ; (ſee the Citation in the Anſwer, p. GS.)
the general landing Hypotheſis ; the uſual Hypotheſis , the
uſual Senſe they put upon ſacred . &c. Theſe Citati-
ons he does not think fit to take Notice of in his Reply;
bur puts all upon this general Iſſue, which the Anſwerer
concludes with: The Charch Way of explaining the Ve-
luge, is either rational or 1 If he ſay it is ratio-
nal, why does he deſert it, and invent a new one: And
if he ſay it is irrational, then that dreadful rhing, which
he cannot well endure to ſpeak, that the Church of God
hath ever gone on in an irrational Way of explaining the
2 falls flat upon himſelf. Let's hear his Anſwer to
this Dilemma. Def. p. 170. We ſay, ſays he, that the Church
May of explaining the Deluge, (by creating and annihilating
Waters tor the Nonce) is very rational. Then fay I {til},
why do you deſert ir, or why do you trouble us with a


new one? Either his Hypotheſis is more rational m
the


the (
tiona
us W.
ratio!
him,


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 513


Church Hypotheſis, or leſs rational: If leſs ra-
21, why does he take us off from a better, to amuſe


with a worſe? But if he ſay, his Hypotheſis is more


onal than that of the Church : Then Woe be to
„ in his own Words, p. 171. that ſo black a Blemifh
ld be faſten d upon the wiſeſt and nobleſt Society in the
ld, as to make himſelf more wiſe than they, and his
potheſis more rational than theirs. The Truth is,
Gentleman hath a mind to appear a Virtuoſo, for the
7 Philoſophy, and the Copernican Syſtem; and yet
uld be a Zealot for Orthodoxy, and the Church-Way
>xplaining Things : Which two Deſigns do not weil
ee, as to the natural World; and betwixt two Stools
alls to the Ground, and proves neither good Church-
1, nor good Philoſopher.
ut he will not (till be convinc'd that he deſerts the
irch Hypotheſis, and continues to deny the Deſertion
heſe Words. Ib:d. We ſay we do not deſert or reject
Church-MWay of explaining the Deluge. Now, to diſ-
er whether theſe Words are true or falſe; let us ob-
e, Firſt, What he acknowledges to have ſaid againſt
Church Hypotheſis : Seconaly, What he hath ſaid more
n what he acknowledges here. He acknowledges, that
aid, the Church Hypotheſis might be diſguſtful to the
and ſoundeſt philoſophick Fudgments ; and this is no
d Character. Vet this is not all, for he bath fairly
pp'd a principal Word in his Sentence, namely, jaſtiy,
c. p. 312. His Words in his Exceptions, were theſe,
h Inventions (Which he applies to the Church Hypo-
lis) as have been, and FUST LY may be diſguſtful, not
to nice and ſqueamiſh, but to the beſt and ſoundeſt
ſophick Fudgments. Now judge, whether he cited this
tence before, truly and fairly, and whether in theſe
ords, truly cited, he does not diſparage the Church
potheſis, and juſtify thoſe that are diſguſted at it.
He farthermore acknowledges, that the uſual Ways of
laining the Deluge ſeem unreaſonable to ſome, and un-
lligtble to others, and unſatisfactory to the moſt : But, it
ms, he will neither be of theſe, ſome, others, or moſt.
{tly, He acknowledges that he ſaid, Def. p. 171. The
nary Suppoſition, that the Mountains were covered with
aers in the Deluge, brings on a Neceſſity of ſetting up a
w Hypotheſis for explaining the Flood. If ſo, what was
s ordinary Suppoſition? was it not the Suppoſition of the
urch? And was that _— as made it neceſlary to ſet
1 up


— — — —
— — 5 8
— — —
— -
—
—
_


:
.
,"
1
|
:
:
.
F
S
"RA
* 14

11.

.

'S .

4 | +
l J.
4
: E

i
i —
a8 1
14
ö 4
111

1
„

Ich;
+

: o

11715
4
:
=

32
o
U

.

"7:

4 1
Vy

$1877 3
Walt 7
14
14
$ £1 :


«4 ; T
14
#
7” 4
1
*
*


= ERTIES wants" IA
_ 3 5
» had *


514 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


up a new Hypotheſis for explaining the Flood? then the But t
old Hypotheſis was inſufficient or irrational. the I
Thus much he acknowledges; but he omits what we W of th
noted before, his rejecting or 3 the common that
Hypotheſis, the general ſtanding Hypotheſis, the uſual Senſe WM whe!
they put upon the Sacred Story, &c. And do not all theſe ſhou
Phraſes denote the Church Hypotheſis ? He farther omits, four
that he confeſs'd, ( Excep. p. 325.) he had expounded a MI {mal
Text or two of Scripture about the Deluge, ſo as none ever that
did; and, deſerting the common receiv'd Senſe, puts an un- fence
uſual Gloſs upon them. And is not that common receivd Picc
Senſe the Senſe of the Church, and his anuſual Glſs con- Mea
trary to it? Laſtly, he ſays, by his Hypotheſis, We need not ceſs
fly to a neu Creation of Waters, and gives his Reaſons at v
large againſt that Opinion; which you may lee, Excepr, luge
1 313. Now, thoſe Reaſons he thought either to be god we!
Reaſons or bad Reaſons; if bad, why did he ſet them he r
down, or why did he not confute them? If good, they to a
ſtand good againſt the Hypothefis of the Church; for he Imp
makes that neu Creation and Annihilation of Waters at 185,
the Deluge to be the Hypotheſis of the Church, Def. p. 170. had
I fear I have ſpent too much Time in ſnewing him utterly ping
inconſiſtent with himſelf in this Particular. And Iwon- incx
der he ſhould be ſo ſollicitous to juſtify the Hypotheſis the |
of the Church in this Point, ſeeing he openly difſents from beto
it in a greater; I mean in that of the Sytem of the World Ml that
Hear his Words, if you pleaſe, to this Purpoſe, Def. p. 136. and
And what does the famous Ariſtotelian Hypotheſes ſeem to bem Pur
ow, but a Maſs of Errors; where ſuch a Syſbem was con- L
zriv'd for the Heavens, and ſuch a Situation aſjign'd to the Teh;
Earth, as neither Reaſon can approve, nor Nature allow in e.
Yet ſo proſperous and prevailing was this Hypotheſis, that it Roc
was generally receiv'd, and ſucceſsfully propagated for mam 5.31
Ages. This proſperous prevailing Error, or Maſs of Er wer,
rors, was it not eſpouſed and ſupported by the Church Ml accc
And to break from the Church in greater Points, and I c
ſcruple it in leſs, is not this to ſtrain at Gnats, and ſw al Vn
tow Camels? = jou
So much for his Inconſiſtency with himſelf: The rel Cay
of this Chapter in the Anſwer, ſhews his Inconſiſtenc _ of t
with Moſes, both as to the Waters covering the 1 ops o, king
the Mountains, which Moſes affirms, and the Except (ys
denies; and as to the Decreaſe of the Deluge, Which Exp
Moſes makes to be by the Waters retiring into the1 ben
ons


Chanels, aſter frequent Reciprocations, going and *


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth, 513
the Exceptor ſays, the Sun ſuck'd up the Waters from
Earth, juſt as he had before ſuck'd the Mountains out
he Earth: Theſe Things are ſo groundleſs, or ſogroſs,
it would be tedious to inſiſt longer upon them. And
ereas it is not reaſonable to expect that any others.
uld be idle enough, as we mult be, to collate three or
r Tracts, to diſcern where the Advantage lies in theſe


il Altercations ; I deſire only, if they be ſo diſpos'd;


t they would collate the Exceptions, Anſwer, and De-
e in this one Chapter, which is our Author's Maſter-
ce: And from this I am willing they ſhould take their
-aſures, and make a Judgment of his good or bad Suc-
$ in other Parts.
What Shifts he hath us'd to make his fifteen-cubit De-
e ſufficient to deſtroy all Mankind, and all Animals,
have noted before; and here it is (p. 181, 182.) that
reduces them to Famine. And after that he comes
a long Excurſion of ſeven or eight & 77 about the
verfebiion of Shipping after the Floo \ Def. p. 183z
5, Cc. a good Argument for the Theoriſt, that they
not an open Sea, Iron- Tools, and Materials for Ship-
g before the Flood: For what ſhould make them fo
xpert in Navigation for many Years and Ages after
> Flood, if they had the Practice and Experience of it
ore the Flood: And what could hinder their having
it Practice and Experience, if they had an open Sea;
d all Iron and other Materials, for that Uſe and
rpoſe ?
Laſtly, he comes to his Notion of the great Deep, or
hom-Rabbah, Def. p. 191. which he had made before;
expreſs Words, to be the Holes and Caverns in the
Docks; I ſay, in expreſs Words; ſuch as theſe, Exc:
312. Now ſuppoſing that the Caverns in the Mountains
re this great Deep, ſpeaking of Moſes's great Deep,
cording to this new Hypotheſis. He ſays farther, (p. 105.)
caſe it be urg'd, that Caverns, eſpecially Caverns ſo high
nate, cannot properly be called the great Deep. here
u ſee his own Objection ſuppoſes that he made thoſe
averns the great Deep. And in the ſame Page, ſpeaking
the Pſalmiſt's great Deeps, (in his own Senſe of ma-
ng them Holes in Rocks,) and Moſes's great Deep, he
ys, the ſame Thing might be meant by both. By all theſe
xprefſions one would think it plain, that by his great Deep
meant his Caverns in Rocks; yet now, upon Objecti-
ns urged againſt it, he ſeems deſirous to fly off from that
| TRE OY by ___ Notion;


- — —
r


—_— a
—
D


LP
-


*
— — — — —
— — —
" *
*


"RAS
_——
, wh


516 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


Notion, but does not yet tell us plainly what muſt be
meant by Moſes's great Deep: If he, upon ſecond Thoughts,
would have the Sea to be underſtood by it, why does he
not anſwer the Objections that are made by the Theoriſt
againſt that Interpretation? Engl. Theor. p. 110, Cc.
Nay, why does he not anſwer what he himſelf had ob-
jected before (Except. p. 310.) againſt that Suppoſition?
He ſeems to unſay now, what he ſaid before, and yet
ſubſtitutes nothing in the Place of it, to be underſtood by
Moſes's Tehom- Rabbah.

Chap. XVI. is a few Words concerning theſe Expreſ.

ſions of ſhutting the Windows of Heaven, and the Foun.
tains of the Abyſs, after the Deluge: And theſe were both
ſhut alike, and both of them no leſs than the Caverns in
the Mountains.
Chap. XVII. hath nothing of Argumentation or Philo-
ſophy, but runs on in a popular declamatory Way, and
(it I may uſe that forbidden Word) injudicious. All
amounts to this, whether we may not go contrary to the
Letter of Scripture, in natural Things, when that goes con-
trary to plain Reaſon. This we affirm, and this every one
mult affirm, that believes the Motion of the Earth, as our
Virtuoſo pretends to do: Then he concludes all with an
harmonious Cloſe, that he follows the great Example of
a Reverend Prelate, Def. p. 215. and militates under that
Epiſcopal Banner. I am willing to believe that he wrote at
firſt, in hopes to curry Favour with certain Perſons, by
his great Zeal for Orthodoxy ; but he hath made ſuch au }
Hotch-potch of new Philoſophy and Divinity, that I be-
lieve it Will ſcarce pleaſe the Party he would cajole; nor
ſo much as his Reverend Patron. I was ſo civil to him in
the Anſwer, as to make him a Saint in compariſon of
the former Animadverter ; but, by the Stile and Spirit of
this laſt Pamphlet, he hath forfeited with me all his Saint-
ſhip, both abſolute and comparative.

Thus much for his Chapters; and as to his Reflections
upon the Review of the Theory, they are ſo ſuperficial and |
inconſiderable, that I believe he never expected that they
ſhould be regarded: I wonder however, that he ſhould de-
cline an Examination of the ſecond Part of the Theory:
It cannot be for want of good Will to confute it; he hath }
ſhewn that to the Height, whatſoever his Power was:
Neither can it be for want of Difference or Diſagreement }
in Opinion, as to the Contents of this latter Part; for he |
hath reckou'd the Millennium amongſt the Errors of the

antient
|


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth. 517


tient Fathers, (Def. p. 136.) and the Renovation of the
orld he makes Allegorical, (p. 224, Sc.) It mult there-
re be for want of ſome third Thing, which he belt
os.

But before we conclude, Sir, we muſt remember that
> promiſed to ſpeak apart to two Things, which are
en objected to the Theoriſt by this Writer, and to little
rpoſe; namely, his flying to extraordinary Providence,
d his flying from the /zzeral Senſe of Scripture. As to
traordinary Providence, is the Theoriſt alone debarr'd
m recourſe to it, or would he have all Men debarr'd,
well as the Theoriſt? If ſo, why doth he uſe it fo


ach himſelf? And if it be allow'd to others, there is no


aſon it ſhould be deny'd the Theoriſt, unleſs he have
own'd it, and ſo debarr'd himſelf that coinmon Privi-
e: But the contrary is manifeſt, in a multitude of Places,
th of the firſt and ſecond Part of the Theory, Eng. Theor.
144, . For, beſides a Diſcourſe on Purpoſe upon
at Subject, in the eighth Chapter of the firſt Book,


the laſt Chapter, and laſt Words of the ſame Book


Latin) he does openly avow, both Providence ( Natu-
| and Moral) and Miracles; in theſe Words, Denigue
m certiſſimum ſit a divina Providentia pendere res omnes,
juſcunque ordinis, & ab eadem vera miracula edita
e, &. And as to the ſecond Part of the Theory,
e Miniſtry of Angels is there acknowledg'd frequently,
th as to natural and moral Adminiſtrations. From all
hich Inſtances it is manifeſt, that the Theoriſt did nor
bar himſelf, by denying either Miracles, angelical M:-
ry, or extraordinary Providence: But, if the Exceptor
ſo injudicious (pardon me that bold Word) as to con-
und all extraordinary Providence with the Acts of Omni-
tency, he muſt blame himſelf for that, not the Theoriſt.
he Creation and Annbilation of Waters is an Act of
re Omnipotency: This the Theoriſt did not admit of
the Deluge; and if this be his Fault, as it is frequently
jected to him, (Def. p. 9, 66, 170, c.) he perſeveres
it ſtill, and in the Reaſons he gave for his Opinion, which
e no where confuted: Exg. Theor. p. 25, 26. But as
r Acts of angelical Power, he does every where acknow-
dge them in the great Revolutions, even of the natural
Vorld : Theor. Lat. p. 5 Engl. p. 146, 147. If the Ex-
ptor would make the
e Miniſtry of Angels, and have recourſe as freely and
frequently to that, as to this; if he would make all
Ut 3 extra-


ivine Omnipotency as cheap as


— — - F* - b :


.
1
=
© 4
4 :
U :
b3 7
}
U þ
1
1717
p } 4
*
1
A, 0
J d
+4 :
= * iy
a *, f
4: 4
.
'
f |
Wo.
14
nt
3,
wr
-
*
N 11
1
A. 4
1
1
1
N 1
i *7 :
y Fi it
, *
: . 40
17
1
. ++YJ
+ 3
* Y q
1%
. Ä
Y 2
. ”
ry n
+3
43
'
4
A
N »
4 * :
£ l
7
on”
43
f 6 F \
*
|
7 1
60
7 1
.
4 Tr
*
=


518 A ſbort Conſideration of the Defence of the
extraordinary Providencethe ſame, and all Miracles, and
ſet all at the Pitch of infinite Power, this may be an Ef.
fect of his Ignorance or Inadvertency, but is no way im-
putable to the Theoriſt. |
In the next Place it may be obſerv'd, that the Theoriſt
hath no where aſſerted, that Moſes's Coſmopœia (which
does not proceed according to ordinary Providence) is to
* literally underſtood; and therefore what is urg'd againſt
im from the Letter of that Coſmopœia, is improperly urg'd
and without Ground. There are as good Reaſons, and
better Authorities, that Moſes's fix Days Creation ſhould
not be literally underſtood, than thereare, why thoſe Texts
of Scripture that ſpeak about the Motion of the Sun, ſhould
not be literally underſtood: And as to the Theoriſt, he
had often intimated his Senſe of that Coſmopœia, that it
was expreſs d more humano, & ad captum populi, as appears
in ſeveral Paſſages in the Latin Theory: Speaking of the
Moſaical Coſmogonia, he hath theſe Words, Theor. lib. 2.
£.8. Conſtat hæc Coſmopœia duabus partibus, quarum pri-
ma, maſſas generales atque rerum inconditarum ſtatum ex.
hibet ; ſequiturque eadem principia, & eundem ordinem,
guem Antiqui uſque retinuerunt. Atque in hoc nobiſcum con-
zeniunt omnes fere mterpretes Chriſtiani; nempe, Tohu
Bohu Moſaicum idem eſſe ac Chaos Antiquorum. Tenebras
2 &c. hucaſque convenit Maſi cum antiquis Phils-
ſopbis, methodum autem illam Philoſophicam hic ab-
rumpit, aliamque orditur, humanam, aut, ſi mavis, Theo-
logicam; qua, motibus Chaos, ſecundum leges nature, &
divini amoris actionem, plane neglectis, & ſucceſſivis ipſius
zuutationibus in varias regiones, & elementa: His inquan


poſthabitts, popularem narrationem de orta rerum hoc modo


inſtituit: Res omnes viſibiles in ſex claſſes, &c. This is a
plain Indication how the Theoriſt underſtood that Coſmo-
pœia: And accordingly in the Exgliſp Theory the Author
lays, p. 402. &c. I have not mention'd Moſes's Coſmo-
pceia, my I thought it deliver'd by him as a Law-giver,
not as a Philoſopher ; which ] intend to ſhew at large in
another Treatiſe, nit thinking that Dial, proper for the
vulgar Tongue. The Exceptor was alſo minded of this
in the Anſwer, p. 66. Now, 'tis much that he, who hath
ſearch'd all the Corners, both of the Engl


vious Paſſages as theſe, but ſtill make Objections from
the Letter of the Moſaical Coſmopœia, which affect the


Theoriſt no more than thoſe Places of Scripture that |


ſpeak


and Latin |
Theory, to pick Quarrels, ſhould never obſerve ſuch ob-


Exceptions againſt the Theory of the Earth, 519
eak of the Motion of the Sun, or the Pillars of the
arth.

In the laſt Place, the Theoriſt diſtinguiſh'd two Me-
ods for explaining the natural World, that of an ordi-
ry, and that of an extraordinary Providence: And thoſe
at take the ſecond Way, he ſaid, might diſpatch their
ask as ſoon as they pleas'd, if they engag'd Omnipo-
ncy in the Work. But the other Method would require
ime, it muſt proceed by diſtinct Steps, and leifurely Mo-
ons, ſuch as Nature can admit; and, in that ReſpeR, it
ight not ſuit with the buſy Lives, or impatient Studies
* moſt Men, whom he left notwithſtanding to their Li-
rty, to take what Method they plcas'd, provided they
ere not troubleſome in forcing their haſty Thoughts
on all others. Thus the Theoriſt hath expreſs'd him-
If at the End of the firſt Book, c. 12. Interea cam non
mes d natura ita compoſiti ſimus, ut Philoſophie ſtudiis
lectemur: Neque etiam liceat multis, propter occupationes
te, iiſdem vac are, quibus per ingenium licuiſſet; 11s jure
rmittendum eſt, compendiario ſapere, &relictis viis na-
re & cauſarum ſecundarum, que ſæpe longiuſculæ ſunt,
r cauſas ſuperiores philoſophari; idque potiſſimum, cum ex
s affedtibus hoc quandoq ue fieri poſſit; quibus, vel male
ndatis, aliquid dandum eſſe exiſtimo, modo non ſint tur-
lenti. Thus the Theoriſt, you lee, ſets two Ways before
em; and 'tis indifferent to him whether they take, if they
ill go on their Way peaceably. And he does now, more-
er, particularly declare, That he hath no Ambition, ei-
er to make the Exceptor, or any other of the ſame Dic
fitions of Will, and the ſame Elevation of Underſtand-

. Proſelytes to his Theory. :
hus much for Providence: As to the literal Senſe of
ripture, I find, if what was noted before in the Anſwer,
82, $3, Sc. had been duly conſider'd, there would be
tle need of Additions upon that Subject. The Matter
as ſtated freely and diſtinctly, and the Remarks or Re-
Cons which the Exceptor hath made in his Defence
on this Doctrine, are both ſhallow and partial. I ſay
tial, in perverting the Senſe, and ſeparating ſuch Things
manifeſtly depend upon one another. Thus the Ex-
ptor falls upon that Expreſſion inthe Anſwer, Def. p. 202.
t us remember that this contradicting Scripture, here pre-
ded, is only in natural Things, where he ſhould have
ded the other Part of the Sentence, and alſo obſerve how
the Exceptor himſelf, in ſuch Things, hath contradicted
| | L1-4 Scripture,


520 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


Scripture. Here he makes an odious Declamation, asif
the Anſwerer had confeſs'd that he coutradicted Scripture
in natural Things; whereas the Words are contradiQing
Scripture, here pretended; and 'tis plain by all the Dit:
courſe, that *tis the literal Senſe of Scripture that is here
ſpoken of, which the Exceptor is alſo ſaid to contradi,

uch an unmanly Captiouſneſs ſhews the T'emper and
Meaſure of that Spirit, which, rather than ſay nothing, will
miſrepreſent the plain Senſe of an Author. In like man-
ner, when he comes to thoſe Words in the Anſwer,
The Caſe therefore is this, whether 20 go contrary to the
Letter of Scripture in Things that relate to the natural Warll,
be deſtroying the Foundation of Religion, affronting Scrip.
ture, and blaſpheming the Holy Ghoſt. Def.p.206. He ſays,
Ibis is not to ſtate the Caſe truly, for it is not, ſays he,

Coing contrary to the Letter of Scripture that draws ſuch
evil Conſequences after it, but going contrary to the Letter
of Scripture, where ttis ao ws And this the Theoriſ
does, he ſays, and the Exceptor does not. But who ſays
ſo befides himſelf ? This is fairly to beg the Queſtion;
and can he ſuppoſe the Theoriſt ſo eaſy as to grant this
without Proof? It muſt be the Subject Matt er that deter-
mines, what is, and what is not, to be literally under.
ſtood. However, he goes on, begging {till the Queſtion
in his own behalf, and ſays, Thoſe Texts of Scripture,
that ſpeak of the Motion and Courſe of the Sun, are not tak


to be underſtood literally. But why not? Becauſe the li- M.
teral Senſe is not to his Mind? Of four Texts of Scrip- pol
ture which the Theoriſt alledg'd againſt him, for the Mo- . cu
tion of the Sun, he anſwers but one, and that very ſu- Se
perficially, to ſay no worſe. Tis Pſal. xix. where the at
Sun at his riſing is ſaid to be as a Bridegroom coming out tut
of his Chamber, and to rejoice as a Lend Man to run his the
Race : And his going forth is from the end of the Heaven, lit
and his Circuit to the end of it, p. 207. which he anſwers

with this vain Flouriſh: Then the Sun muſt be a Man, and ſig
muſt be upon his Marriage, and 5 be dreſs'd in fine le
Clothes, as a Bridegroom is : Then he muſt come out of a lit
Chamber, and muſt give us more Light, and caſt no more A
Heat, than a Bridegroom does, &c. If a Man ſhould ri- th
dicule at this rate, the Diſcourſe of our Saviour con- g'
cerning Laxarus in Abraham's Boſom, and Dives in Hell, bi
with a great Gulph betwixt them, yet talking audibly to 1
one another; Lak. xvi. and that Lazarus ſhould be ſent J


ſo far, as from Heaven to Hell, only to dip the a £4
| L


Exceptions againſt the Theory of #he Earth. 521


Finger in Water, and cool Dives's Tongue. He that
ouid go about thus to expoſe our Saviour's Parable,
ould have a thankleſs Office, and effect nothing: For
e Subſtance of it would ſtand good (till ; namely, that
lens Souls live after Death, and that good Souls are in
State of Eaſe and Comfort, and bad Souls ina State of
liſery. In like manner, his ridiculing ſome Circumſtan-
s in the Compariſon made by the Pſalmiſt, does not at
| deſtroy the Subſtance of that Diſcourſe; namely, that
e Sun moves in the Firmament, with great Swittneſs
id Luſtre, and hath the Circuit of its Motion round
e Earth. This is the Subſtance of what the Pſalmiſt de-
ares, and the reſt is but a Similitude, which need uot
literally juſt in all Particulars. |
After this, he would fain perſuade the Theoriſt, that he
th excuſed the Exceptor for his receding from the literal
enſe, as to the Motion of the Earth; Def p. 208. Be-
wſe he hath granted, that in certain Caſes, we may and
uſt recedefrom the literal Senſe. But where, pray, hath
e granted, that the Motion of the Earth was one of
'oſe Caſes ? Yet ſuppoſe it be ſo, may not the Theoriſt
en enjoy this Privilege of receding from the literal
enſe upon occaſion, as well as the Exceptor? If he will
ve, as well as take this Liberty, let us mutually enjoy
: but he can have no Pretence to deny it to others, and
ke it himſelf. It uſes to be a Rule in Writing, that a
lan muſt not fxltum fingere Lectorem. You mult ſup-
oſe your Reader to have common Senſe. But he that ac-
uſes another of Blaſphemy for receding from the literal
enſe of Seripture in natural Things, and does himſelf
the ſame Time, recede from the literal Senſe of Scrip-
Ire, in natural I hings; one wauld think, gzoad hoc, ei-
der had not, or would not exerciſe common Senſe, ina
teral Way. x
Laſtly, he comes to the common known Rule, aſ-
gn'd to direct us, when every one ought to follow, or
cave the literal Senſe; which is, p. 215. not to leave the
teral Senſe, when the Subject Matter will bear it, without
loſurdity or Incongruity. This he repeats in the next Page
ws. The Rule is, when no Rind of Abſurdities or {ncon-
ruities accrue to any Texts, from the literal Senſe. If this
e his Rule, to what Texts does there accrue any Abſur-
ity or Incongruity, by ſuppoſing the Sun to move? For
cripture always ſpeaks upon that Suppoſition, and not
ne Word for the Motion of the Earth. Thus he my
tne


mum


522 A ſhort Conſideration of the Defence of the


the Rule; but the Anſwerer ſuppoſed, that the Abſurdity
or Incongruity might ariſe from the Subject Matter. And
accordingly he ſtill maintains, that there are as juſt Rea.
ſons, (from the Subject Matter,) and better Authorities, for
receding from the literal Senſe in the Narrative of the
fix Days Creation, than in thoſe Texts of Scripture, that
{peak of the Motions and Courſe of the Sun: And to af.
firm the Earth zo be mov'd, is as much Blaſphemy, and
more contrary to Scripture, thanto affirm itto have been
Aiſſolv'd, as the Theoriſt hath done.

Sir, I beg your Excuſe for this long Letter, and leave
it to you to judge whether the Occaſion was juſt or no,
I know ſuch N as theſe muſt needs make bad Mu-
ſick to your Ears: Tis like hearing two Inſtruments play,
that are not in Tune, in Concert with one another: But
you know Self-Defence, and to repel an Aſſailant, is al-
ways allow'd; and he that begins the Quarrel, muſt an-
ſwer for the Conſequences. However, Sir, to make
amends for this Trouble, I am ready to receive your
Commands upon more acceptable Subje&s. |


Your moſt humble Servant, &c.


R


EFLECTIONS


UPON THE


OF ME


Occaſion'd by a


Late EXAMINATION of it.


In a Err tro 4 FRIEND.


LON DO N:


at the Flower- de-Luce in
M. DCC. xxvi.


HO ORE,


Fleet-Street.


].


Tinted for


Advertiſement of the Bookſeller.


& I HE following Tract hath been much enquired
after by ſome curious Perſons, but was ſo ſcarce,
that a Copy could not be procured at the Time of the
Printing the former Edition of the Theory. Since that,
an intimate Friend of Dr. Burnet's 2 favoured me
with a Copy; ſo that the Reader may be aſſured, it
25 genuine, aud was wrote by Dr. Burnet; and it i
* it may very well deſerue 4 Place in hi;
ar ks,


— — — ——— _—— — —
—


t 7, 7, FIR === :;
". RA — \ = 2? — MN FAN
<\- a ©


= *


/ |
l A = TY W


Receiv'd the Honour of your Letter, with
the Book you was pleas'd to ſend me, con-
A1 raining an Examination of the Theory of
RE ie Earth: And, according as you deſire, I
all give you my Thoughts of it, in as nar-
| row a Compals as I can. The Author of
e Theory, you know, hath ſet down in three Propoſi-
ons, the Foundation of the whole Work; and ſo long as
ofe Propoſitions ſtand firm, the Subſtance of the Theory
ſafe, whatſoever becomes of particular Modes of Ex-
lication in ſome Parts; which are as Problems, and
jay be explained ſeveral Ways, without prejudice to the
rinciples upon which the Theory ſtands.

The Theoriſt takes but one ſingle Poſtulatum, viz. That
he Earth roſe from a Chaos: This is not call'd into Que-
tion; and this being granted, he lays down three Propoſi-
ons conſecutively. Firſt, That the primitive or ante-di-
ian Earth was of a different Form and Conſtruction from
he preſent Earth. Secondly, That the Face of that Earth,
it roſe from a Chaos, was ſmooth, regular and uniform;
vithout Mountains or Rocks, and without an open Sea.
Thirdly, That the Diſruption of the Abyſs, or Diſſulution
f that primeval Earth, and its Fall into the Abyſs, was the
auſe of the univerſal Deluge, and of the Deſtruction of the
— World: As alſo of the irregular Form of the preſent

arth.

Theſe are the three Fundamental Propoſitions laid down
n the fourth, fifth and ſixth Chapters of the Theory. And
or a farther Proof and Confirmation of them, eſpe-
ally of the laſt, another Propoſition is added (Chap. VII.)
n theſe Words, The preſent Form and Structure of the


arth


—


* *


-


*
-
- : G
F 1
$34 1
A 14
1 81
: :
*
* *
N
* 3 * o
{vs 1
* "Go 5
1 x
413i |
26 $ : :
£1 | 4
'T l
its :
1 0
at
.
5 * 'F :, kl
: aſp :
4
: « :
it * Ll .
T3 1:
1 7
,
i®
| ;
14
9
11
=
® l \
v7 }
* %
l F
+ is
, :
- : *
: *
4
4 IF :
A 1
= : TT. l
N 14
ba & &
x | .
fn $
« '£ 4 1
1
1 14
1
24
1 1 9
1 .
E 5
*
* l
.
1 7
14 % 8 «
\ Sigh
7 c
7 :
: \ G
.
1
ot
WA |
by 3 1
118 4 .
91
| +18
J
7
- : y
iS. -
T7 i,
U
. 5
111


7 : — * * *
0 4 . TEES a = *
— tte bios wir 7 EE — — s
a — E20 N = N — 2 1
— — p —— 2 — - IS 2 — — 2 *
| 2.3 "2 2: : * :
— _ ==> 2 2 = — — 2
S — — — — — N —
rn 4 — 22
- £0 — . * a
— — __ — j 2 2 22 2 ö L
922 1 0 -
— — - y * — 80 -
* T — *
= 4 — a - — — — 6 hos mo —


0 A dt vita „„ + 9%: 9 47
- TS —
— — — a ge ome
— K


vities, and other broken and dis figur'd Parts of the Earth,


nox, in that primitive Earth. This, tho” a


526 Reflections upon the


Earth, both as to the Surface, and as to the interior Pari: made
of it, ſo far as they are acceſſible and known to us, 4 God
exactly anſwer to the foregoing Theory, concerning the toth
Form and Diſſolution of the firſt Earth, and is not ſo juſtly us

explained by any other Hypotheſis yet known. This is of- the 1


fer'd as a Proof 4 Poſteriori, as they call it, or from the ters

Effects; to ſhew the Conſent and Agreement of the Parts eithe
and Conſtruction of the preſent Earth, to that Suppoſition ſome
of its being a ſort of Ruin, or the Effect and Remains of he fi
a Diſruption or Diſſolution. And to make this good, the and


Theoriſt draws a ſhort Scheme of the general Form of
the preſent Earth, and its Irregularity : Ihen ſhews more
particularly the Marks or Signatures of Ruin or Diſtup-
tion in ſeveral Parts of it; as in Mountains and Rocks,
in the great Chanel of the Sea, and in ſubterraneous Ca-


Theſe Concluſions, with their Arguments, are the Sum othi
and principal Contents of the firſt Book; but I muſt alſo WI bea
mind you ofa Corollary in the ſecond Book, drawn from Fo
theſe primary Propoſitions, which concerns the Situation v2.


of the primitive Earth: For the Theoriſt ſuppoſes, that the On:
Poſture of that Earth, or of its Axis, was not oblique to
the Axis of the Sun, or of the Ecliptick, as it is now,
but lay parallel with the Axis of the Sun, and perpendi- on
cular to the Plane of the Ecliptick ; by reaſon of which
Poſition, there was a perpetual Spring, or perpetual Equi-
nſequence
only from the firſt Propoſitions, I thought fit to mind you
of, as being one of the peculiar and diſtinguiſhing Charac-
ters of this Theory. |
T his being the State of the Theory, or of thoſe Parts of
it that ſupport the reſt, and wherein its Strength conſiſts,
he that will attack it to purpoſe, muſt throw down, in the
firſt Place, theſe leading Propoſitions. If the Examiner
had taken this Method, and contuted the Proofs that are
brought in Confirmation of each of them, he needed have
done no more; for the Foundation being deſtroyed, the
Superſtructure would fall of its own accord. But if, in-
ſtead of this, you only pick out a looſe Stone here ot
there, or ſtrike off a Pinacle, this will not weaken the
Foundation, nor have any conſiderable Effect upon the
whole Building. Let us therefore conſider, in the firlt }
Place, what this Examiner hath ſaid againſt theſe fundamen-
tal Propoſitions, and accordingly you will better judge of
the reſt of his Work.


His firſt Chapter is to ſhew, that the Deluge might be
m


— 1


Theory of the Earth. 527


ide by a Miracle: But whoever denied that? No doubt
od by his Omnipotency may do whatſoever he pleaſes,
the utmoſt Extent of Poſlibilities. But he does not tell
wherein this Miracle conſiſted? Doth he ſuppoſe that
e Deluge could be made without any Increaſe of Wa-
rs upon the Earth? If there was an Increaſe of Waters,
ther they were created a-new, or brought thither from
me other Part of the Univerſe : So far is plain; and if
: ſuppoſes a new Creation of Waters for this Purpoſe,
d an Annihilation of them again at the end of the Flood,
had been fair to have anſwered the Arguments that are
ven againſt that Hypotheſis, in the third Chapter of the
"gl Theory. And ſeeing there is no mention made of
iy ſuch ching in the ſacred Hiſtory, if he aſſerts it, he
uſt bring ſome Proof of his Aſſertion; for we are not
pon ſuch Terms, as to truſt upon bare Word. On the
ther Hand, if he proceed upon ſuch Waters as were al-
ady in being, and for his purpoſe either bring down ſu-
erceleſtial Water, or bring up ſubterrancous, he mult tell
s what thoſe Waters are, and muſt anſwer ſuch Objecti-
ns as are brought againſt either ſort in the ſecond and
ird Chapters of the Theory; we muſt have ſome fix'd
oint, ſome Mark to aim at, if the Caſe be argued. Up-
nthe whole, Ithink this his firſt Chapter might have been
aar'd, as either affirming nothing particularly, or giving
o Proof of what is affirm'd.

In his next Chapter about the Chaos, I was in hopes to
ave found ſomething more conſiderable, but (beſides his
ong eæcerpta out of the Theory, both here and elſewhere,
yhich make a good part of his Book) I find nothing but
wo ſmall Objections againſt the Formation of the firſt
:arth, as it is deſcrib'd by the Theoriſt. This Examiner
ays, p. 37, 38. That the little earthy Particles of the
Zhaos would not ſwim upon the Surface of Oil, or any
uch unctuous Liquor; for how little ſoever, yet being
arthy, and Earth being heavier than Oil, they muſt de-
cend through it. But he grants that Duſt will ſwim up-
n Oil ; and I willingly allow, if theſe deſcending Parts
vere huge Lumps of ſolid Matter, ſuch as we ſhall meet
with in his next Chapter, they would eaſily break through
oth the Oil and the Water under it; but that little tenui-
dus Particles or ſmall Duſt ſhould ſwim upon Oil, I think is
no wonder: And he is ſo kind as to note an Inſtance of
this himſelf, and to ſubjoin his Reaſons for it. We ſee
Duſt, faith he, p. 38, 39. though ſpecitically heavier than
Oil, yet not to ſiuk when caſ{ upon it. And the Reaſon


is


528 Re flectious upon the


is, becauſe all terreſtrial Bodies, tho' fluid in their kind
yet in ſome degree reſiſt Separation ; and conſequently, |


add, viſcous Liquors which have ſome ſort ot Entangle.


ment am - themſelves, reſiſt Separation more than o.
thers. Then he remarks farther, that according as Bo.
diesareleſs, they have more Surface in Proportion to their
Bulk, and conſequently, that ſmall Bodies, whoſe Weigh;
or Force to ſeparate the Parts of the Fluid is but very little,
may have a Fur face ſo large, that they cannot overcome the
Reſiſtance of the Fluid: That is, they cannot make Way fr
their Deſcent through the Fluid, and therefore muſt ſwim
upon the Surface of it. Be it ſo, then the Particles here
mentioned by the Theoriſt, being little, and of large Sur.
faces in Proportion to their Bulk, would ſwim upon the
Surface of the Fluid, or mix with it, which is all the


Theoriſt affirms or ſuppoſes: And as this tender Film grey


into a Cruſt, and that into a ſolid Arch, the Parts of it would
mutually ſupport one another; the Concave Superficies of
the Orb overſpreading and leaning upon the Waters: And
this alſo ſhews that his Inſtance of a ſolid Globe ſinking in
a Fluid, is little to the Purpoſe in this Caſe.

But he hath a ſecond Objection behind, p. 40. or ano-
ther Conſideration to provethat thoſe little Particles would
pierce and paſs through this oily Liquid. This Conſidera-
tion is, the great Height of the Place from which they
deſcended ; whereby, he thinks, they would acquire ſuch
a Celerity and Force in their Deſcent, that they muſt needs
break through this Orb of oily Liquors when they came
at it. But this is to ſuppoſe that they deſcended without
Interruption, or without having their Courſe ſtopp'd, and
their Force broken in ſeveral Parts of their Journey.
This is an arbitrary and groundleſs Suppoſition: For theſe
floating Particles did not fall like aStone, or a ponderous
Body, in one continued Line, but rather like Fleaks of
Snow, hovering and playing in the Air, their Courſe be-
ing often interrupted and diverted, aud their Force bro-
ken again and again, before they came tothe end of their
Journey; ſo that this Suggeſtion can be of no Force or
Effect in the preſent Caſe. However, if that will gratify
him, we can allow that thouſands and millions ot theſe
little Particles might flip or creep through this clammy
Liquor, yet there would enough of them be entangled
there to make it, firſt, agroſs Liquid, then a ſort of Con-
cretion, ſo as to ſtop the ſucceeding Particles from paſ-
ng through it. oy"

h


ave done with all that is argumentative in this .


Theory of the Earth. 529

: But this Writer is pleaſed to go ſometimes out of his
y of Philoſophiſing, to make Reflections of another
d. Accordingly, here and elſewhere he makes Inſi-
ions and Suggeſtions, as if the Theoriſt did not own the
nd of Providence, or of a particular and extraordinary
»widence in the Formation of the Earth; or as if all
ings in the great Revolutions of the natural World were
ried on ſolely by material and mechanical Cauſes. This
ggeſtion ought to be taken Notice of, as being contrary
the Senſe of the Theoriſt, as it is expreſs'd in ſeveral
ces. In ſpeaking of the Motions of the Chaos, the The-
ſt makes the 22 Hand of Providence which keeps all
mgs in Weight and Meaſure, to be the inviſible Guide of
ts Motions, p. 457. And in concluding his Diſcourſe
ut the Formation of the Earth (Chap. V. p. 45.) the
eoriſt ſays, This Structure is ſo marvellous, that it ought
her to be conſider'd, as a particular Effect of the Divine
t, than as the Work of Nature; with many other Re-
rks there to the ſame purpoſe. Then as to the Diſſolu-
n of the Earth, and the Conduct of the Deluge, tis made
raculous alſo by the Theoriſt * : And upon that Occaſion
Account is given of Providence, both ordinary and ex-
ordinary, in reference to the Government of Nature;
d that not only as to the Formation and Diflolution of
eEarth, but alſo as to its Conflagration and Renoyation :
r the Theoriſt always puts thoſe great Revolutions un-
the particular Conduct and Moderation of Providence.
ſtly, As to the whole Univerſe, he is far from making
t the Product either of Chance or Neceſſity, or of any
rely material or mechanical Cauſes; as you may lee at
ge in the two laſt Chapters of the Theory, Book II. So
u what this Author hath ſaid (rudely enough, accord-
to his Way) of Mr. Wotton, Introd. p. 15. that he
her underſtands no Geometry, or elſe that he never read
C. his Principles, may with a little Change be apply'd
himſelf in this Caſe, that either. he never read over,
does not remember, or, which 1s {till worſe, does

fully miſrepreſent what the Theoriſt hath wrote upon
is Subject. The Sum of all is this, Deus non deficit in
ceſſarus, nec redundat in ſuperfluis: God is the God of
ature ; and the Laws of Nature are his Laws: Theſe we
e to follow ſo far as they will go, and where they tall
Ort, we muſt riſe to higher Principles; but we ought not
introduce a needleſs Exerciſe > divine Power, for

over to our Ignorance. * . 1


* Engl, Theor, Chap. VIII. 2. gs fg


m | Ts


530 Reflectious upon the


To conclude this Chapter, I will leave one Advertiſe. Sto
ment with the Examiner concerning the Chaos. When by
he ſpeaks of the World's riſing from the Moſazck Chaos, ow
if by Worldhe underſtand the whole Univerſe, as he ſeems his
to do; not this inferior World only, but the fix'd Stars poſ
alſo, and all the Heavens: If that, I ſay, be his Mean- E
ing and Opinion, he will meet with other Opponents be- is 0
ſides the Theotift, that will conteft that Point with him.
We come now to the third Chapter, concerning the ſwi
Mountains of the Earth, which is a Subject indeed that de. vith
ferves Conſideration, feeing it reaches to the three funda-


ur
mental Propoſitions before mentioned, and the Form of yo.
the ante-diluvian Earth ; which Formthe Examiner would ner
have to be the ſame with that of the preſent Earth, to have mu
had Mountains and Rocks, an open Chanel of the Sea, An
with all the Cavities and Irregularities within or without to!
the Surface ot it, as at preſent. If he can prove this, he not
needs go no farther ; he may ſpare his Pains for the reſt: Me
P11 undertake that the Theoriſt ſhall make no farther De- ]
fence of his Theory, if the Examiner can make good (p.
Proof of this one Conclufion. But, on the other Hand, WM wh
the Examiner ought to be ſo ingenuous as to acknow- po!
ledge that all that he hath ſaid beſides, till this be proy'd, Joy
can be of little or no Effect, as to the Subſtance of the ſin]
Theory. Let us then conſider how he raiſes Mountains pre
and Rocks, and gives us an Account of all the other In- Is 1
equalities that we find in the preſent Form of the Earth, lid
by an immediate Formation or DeduQion from the Chaos. WI the
To ſhew this, he ſuppoſes, p. 49, 51. that the Chaos had Wl He
Mountains and Rocks ſwimming in it, or, according to un


his Expreſſion, huge Lumps of ſolid Matter. Theſe are WM we
Things, I confeſs, which Inever heard of before in a Chaos; inc
which hath been always deſcrib'd and ſuppos'd a Mats of WW i!
fluid Matter all over. But this Author confidently ſays, Co!
p. 48. We muſtconclude THEREFORE, thatthe Chao: WM we
was not ſo fluid a Maſs, &c, This therefore refers us to }
an antecedent Reaſon, which is this; he fays, ibid. to of
make the Chaos an entirely fluid Maſs is hard to be gtan - an
ted, ſince the greateſ Parts of Bodies we have inthe Earth .
at leaſt ſo far as we can diſcern, are hard and ſolid, and
there 15 not ſucha Quamtity of Water in the Earth, as uon
requifite to ſoften r them all; befides a great part of
them, as Stones and Metals, are nncapable of being lig uiſied
by Water. Very good, what is this to the Theory? Does
the Theoriſt any where affirm or ſuppoſe that 3


Theory of the Earth. 531
tones or Metals in the Chaos; or that they were liquified
Water? This mult refer to ſome Hypotheſis of his
wn, or to ſome other Author's Hypotheſis that ran in
is Mind: The Theoriſt owns no ſuch Doctrine or Sup-
oſition.

However, let's conſider how this new Idea of a Chaos
confiſtent with the Laws of Nature: What made theſe
uge Lumps of ſolid Matter, whether Stone or Metal, to
vim in the fluid Maſs ? This is againſt all Rules of Gra-
ity, and of Staticks, as he ſeems to acknowledge, and
rged it when he thought it to his Purpoſe. In the prece-
ent Chapter (p.42.) when he ſpeaks of Stones and Mi-
erals, he ſays, Tit certain that theſe great heavy Bodies
nſt have ſunk to the Bottom, if they were left to themſelves £
ind he that will not allow Duſt or little earthy Particles,
) float upon anoily Liquor, I wonder how he will make,
ot little Particles, but theſe huge ſolid Lumps of Stone,
letals, or Minerals, to float in the Chaos.

He ſeems to own and be ſenſible of this Inconvenience,
p. Fo.) and thereupon finds an Expedient or Evaſion
rhich a lefler Wit would not have thought on. He ſup-
oſes, p. 51. that theſe huge firm ſolid Lumps were hol-
bw, like empty Bottles, and that would keep them from
nking. But who told him they were hollow? Is not this


recarious? Or, if one would uſe ſuch Terms as he does,


not this chmerical and ridiculous? What made thoſe ſo-
d firm Lumps hollow ? When, or where, or how were
heir inward Parts fcrap'd out of them? Nor would this
lollowneſs, however they came by it, make them ſwim,
nleſs there was a mere Vacuum in each of them. If they
rere filled with the liquid Matter of the Chaos, they would
adeed be lighter than if wholly ſolid; but they would
ill be heavier than any equal Bulk of the fluid Chaos, and
onſequentty would fink in it; the Preponderancy that
vould ariſe from the Shell or ſolid Part ſtill re |
Now let's conſider how ſuch Mountains, or long Ridges
Mountains as we have upon the Earth, were formed
nd ſettled by theſe floating Lumps. He ſays, p. 50, 51.


art of theſe Lytmps or Maſſes ſtanding out, or being higher


an the Fluid, would compoſe a Moumain, as there are
lountains of Ice that float upon the Northern Seas. But
re not Mountains of Rock and Stone, ſuch as ours com-
10nly are, heavier than Mountains of Ice, that is ſpecifi-
ally lighter than Water? This might have been conſider'd
y the Examiner in drawing the Parallel : And ftill I'm at
Loſs what Fluid it is he means, when he ſays, I heſe


\


M m 2 Lump.


632 Reflections upon the
Lumps or Maſſes ſtanding out, or being higher than the
Fluid. Does he mean by this Fluid the whole Chaos? Did
theſe Mountains ſtand at the Top of the Chaos, partly
within, and partly above it? Then what drew them down
below, if they ſtood equally pois'd there in their Fluid, and
as high as the Moon, if the Chaos reach'd ſo high. This,
one would think, could not be his Meaning, tis ſo extraya-
gant; and yet there was no other Fluid than the general
-haos, till that was divided and diſtinguiſh'd into ſeveral
Maſſes. Then, indeed, there was an Abyſs, or Region
of Waters that covered the interior Earth, and was ſepa-
rate from the Air above. Let us then ſuppoſe this Abyſs
to be the Waters or Fluid this Author means, upon which
his Mountains ſtood; then the reſt of the Earth, as it came
to be form'd, muſt be continu'd and join'd with theſe Moun-
tains, and in like Manner laid over the Waters; ſo as in
this Method, you ſee, we ſhould have an Orb of Earth built
over the Abyſs. This is a very favourable Stroke for the
Theorilt, and grants him in Effect his principal Conclu-
ſion, vi. That the firſt ante-diluvian Earth was built over
he Abyſs : This being admitted, there could be no univer-
ſal Deluge without a Diſruption of that Earth, and an E-
ruption of the Abyſs, which is a main Point gain'd. And
*tis plain we make no falſe Logick in collecting this from
his Principles and Conceſſions: For, as we ſaid before, if
theſe Mountains were founded upon the Abyſs, they mult
have a Continuity and Conjunction with the reſt of the
Surface of the Earth, if they were ſuch as our Mountains


are now, and ſo all the habitable Earth muſt be ſpread upon


the Abyſs.


But ſtill he hath another Difficulty to encounter, how


the great Chanel of the Sea was made upon this Suppoſi-


tion: Why was not that Part of the Globe fill'd up by the
Deſcent of the earthy Particles of the Chaos as well as |


the reſt? The Chanel of the Ocean is commonly ſup-


pos'd to take up half of the Globe, how came this gaping |
Gulph to remain unfill'd, ſeeing it was encompals'd with }
the Chaos as well as any other Parts? Was the Motion |
of the Particles ſuſpended from deſcending upon that Part

lt and after-
wards. thrown out again to make room for the Sea? This f
may deſerve his Conſideration, as well as the Mountains:
And how dextrous ſoever this Author may be in other
I hings I know not, but, in my Mind, he hath no good
Hand in making Mountains; and I'm afraid he would have |


of the Globe; or were they fill'd up at


no better Sueceſs in forming the Chanel of the Sea, hic h
he is wiſely pleaſed to take no Notice of. And


Theory of the Earth. 533


And indeed the Examiner ſeems to be ſenfible himſelf
that he hath no good Luck in aſſigning the efficient Cauſes
of Mountains from the Chaos, and therefore he is wil-
ing to bear off from that Point, and to lay the whole
Streſs upon their final Cauſes, without any regard to their
Origin, or how they came firſt into being. His Words are
theſe, p. 52. But ſuppoſing the efficient Cauſes of Moun-
rains unknown, or impoſſible to be aſſigu d, yet ſtill there re-
main the final Cauſes to be enquir d into, which will do as
well for our Purpoſe, with what follows there concerning
hoſe Authors that exclude final Cauſes. If there be ſuch
Authors, let them anſwer for themſelves, the Theoriſt is
10t concern'd. Grant the firſt Point, that Mountains
could not ariſe from any known efficient Cauſes in the
firſt Concretion of the Chaos, or in the firſt habitable Earth
that roſe from it, the Theoriſt readily allows (as appears
fully in the two laſt Chapters of the ſecond Book of the Eng.
Theor.) the Uſe of final Cauſes in the Contemplation of
Nature, as being great Arguments of the Wiſdom and
Goodneſs of God. But this ought not to exclude the ef-
ficient Cauſes in a Theory, otherwiſe it would be no The-
ory, but a Work of another Nature. Though a Man knew
the final Cauſeof a Watch or Clock, namely, to tell him
the Hour of the Day, yet, if he did not know the Con-
ſtruction of its Parts, what was the Spring of Motion,
what the Order of the Wheels,. and how they mov'd the
Hand of the Dial, he could not be ſaid to underſtand that
little Machine; or at leaſt not to underſtand it ſo well as
he that knew the Conſtruction and Dependance of all its
Parts, in virtue whereof that Effect was brought to paſs.
In many Caſes we do not underſtand the final Cauſes,
and in many we do not underſtand. the efficient ; but, not-
withſtanding, we muſt endeavour, fo far as we are able,
to join and underſtand them both; the End and the Means
to it: For by the one, as well as the other, the divine
Power and Wiſdom are illuſtrated ; and ſeeing every Ef-
fect hath its efficient Cauſe, if we cannot reach it, we mult
acknowledge our Speculations to be ſo far imperfect.

After this Excurtion about final Cauſes, he concludes,
p. 54. That it is impoſſible to ſubſiſt or live without Rocks
or Mountains ; conſequently no Earth is habitable with-
out Rocks and Mountains. But how can he tell this ?
Hath he been all over the Univerſe to make his Obſerva-
tions? or hath he had a Revelation to tcll him that there
is no one habitable Planet throughout all the Works of
God, but what is of the ſame Form with our Earth as to

M m 3 Rocks


534 Refleft1ions upon t he
Rocks and Mountains. Who hath ever obſerv'd Moun-
tains and Rocks in Jupiter, or in the Remains of Saturn?
1 ſhould think ſuch a general Aſſertion as he makes, a bold
and unwarrantable Limitation of the divine Omniſcience
and Omnipotency. Who dares conclude that the infinite
Wiſdom and Power of God is confin'd to one ſingle
Mode or Fabrick of an habitable World? Weknow there
are many Planets about our Sun beſides this Earth, and of
different Poſitions and Conſtructions: Neither do we
know but there may be as many about other Suns, or fix'd
Stars: Muſt we ſuppoſe that they are all caſt in the ſame
Mold? that they are all formed after the Model of our
Earth, with Mountains and Rocks, and Gulphs and Caverns?


Urbem, quam dic unt Romam, Melibee, putavi
Stultus ego, huic noſtre ſimilem. |


This was the Judgment of the Shepherd, who could
imagine nothing different, or nothing better than his own
Town or Village; thoſe may imitate him that pleaſe.
"Tis true, Saum cuique pulchrum, is an uſual Saying, but
we think that to proceed from Fondnefs rather, and Self-
Conceit, than from a true and impartial Judgment of
Things. In contemplating the Works of God, we ought
to have Reſpect to his Almighty and Infinite Wiſdom,
Thv To\uTaixaoy vb, multiformem ſapientiam Dei, rather
than to the Meaſures of our own Experience and Under-
_ ſtanding. We may remember how an * Heathen hath up-

braided and derided that Narrowneſs of Spirit, Quæ tante
ſunt animi anguſtie, ut fi Seryphi natus 155 nec unquam
egreſſus ex Iuſuld, in qua Lepuſculos Vulpeculaſque ſape
vidiſſes, non crederes Leones & Pantheras eſſe, cum tibi
ſquales eſſent diceretur: Si vero de Elephanto quis diceret,
etiam rideri te putares. We may as well ſay, that there
can be no Animals of another Form from thofe we have
upon this Earth, as that there can be no Worlds, or habi-
table Earths of another Form and Structure from the pre-
fent Earth. An quicquam tam puerile dici poteſt, fays the
ſame Author, quam ſi ea genera belluarum qua in Rubro
mari, Indidve gignautur, nulla eſſe dicamus* Atqui ne cu-
riofiſſimi quidem hamines exquirendo audire tam multa poſ-
ſunt, quam ſunt multa que Terre, Mari, Paludibus, Flu-


minibus exiſtunt ; que negemus eſſe quia nunguam vidimus* |}


I mention ſuch Inſtances to ſhew, that *tis Raſhneſs or
Folly, to confine the Varieties of Providence and Nature,


—


bs Cic, FC Net, Deer. te Is | to


Theory of the Earth. 535


to the narrow Compaſs of what we have ſeen, or of what
falls under our Imagination. This is a more ſtrange and
aſſuming Boldneſs, as he terms it, & 54. than what he a-
der in the Situation of Mountains, nor Regularity in their
Form and Shape. If the Examiner knows any, why
does he not tell us what it is, and wherein it conſiſts? Is it
neceſſary that Mountains ſhould be exact Pyramids or
Cones, or any of the regular Bodies? or rang'd upon the
Earth in Rank and File, or in a quincuncial Order, or like
pretty Garden-Knots? If they had been deſign'd for Beau-
ty, this might have done well; but Providence ſeems on
Pupoſe to have left theſe Irregularities in their Figure and
Site, as Marks and Signatures to us, that they are the Ef-
fects of a Ruin.

But to ſhew farther and more particularly the Neceſſity
of Mountains, the Examiner ſays, p. 55. and 61. Without
them *tis impoſſible there ſhould be Rivers, or without
Rivers an habitable World. Neither of thefe Propoſitions
ſeems to me to be ſure ; they run ſtill upon Impoſſibilities,
Which is a nice Topick, and lies much out of our Reach.
I think Vapours may be condens'd other Ways than by
Mountains, and an Earth might be ſo fram'd, as to give
a Courſe to Rivers, though there were no particular Moun-
tains, if the general Figure, of it was higher in one Part
than another. Then as to the abſolute Neceſſity of Rivers,
to make an Earth habitable, that is queſtionable too. We
are told by good Authors, of ſome Countries or Iſlands
that have no Rivers or Springs, and yet are habirable and
fruitful, being water'd by Dews. This may give us an
Advertiſement, from a Part to the Whole, that an Earth
may be made habitable without Rivers. If at firſt Vapours
aſcended, and felt down in Dews, ſo as to water the whole
Face of the Earth, Gen. ii. 6. God might, if he had pleas'd,
have continued the fame Courſe of Nature. And it is the
Opinion of many Interpreters, and ſeems to have been an
antient Tradition, that there was no Rain till the Deluge.
If there was no Rainbow in the firſt Earth, (which I think
the Theorift hath undeniably prov'd, Theor. Book II. c. 5.)
it will be hard to prove that there were then any water
Clouds in the habitable Parts of the Earth. And our belt
Obſervators will allow no Clouds or Rains in the Moon,
(and ſome of them no Rivers,) yet will not ſuppoſe the
Moon unhabitable. To conclude, *tis a great Vanity to


1—


—


Galil. SM. Cœſ. p. 133. Hugen, Ceſmetb. 1. 2. P. 115.
Mm 4 ſay


536 Reflections upon the
5 no worſe, for ſhort- ſighted Creatures, and of narrow
fary and indiſpenſable to the Frame and Order of an habi-
table World.

Me proceed to his fourth Chapter; which is to ſhew
the Inconveniencies that would fall upon the Inhabitants
of the Earth, in caſe it had ſuch a Poſture as the Theoriſt
hath afſign'd to the ante-diluvian Earth: Namely, that its
Axis was parallel to the Axis of the Ecliptick, or perpen-
dicular to its Plane, and not oblique as it ſtands now. But
will this Author vouch, that there are no habitable Planets
in the Uniyerſe, or even about our Sun, that have this Po-
{ture which he blames ſo much? Jupiter is known to have
a perpetual Equinox, and his Axis parallel, to the Axis of
the Ecliptick ; and Mars hath little or no Obliquity that is
obſervable. Aud muſt this be a Reflection upon Provi-
dence? Or mult we ſuppoſe, that theſe Planets have no In-
habitants, or that their Habitations are very bad and in-
commodious ? Jupiter is the nobleſt Planet we have in
our Heaven, whether you conſider. its Magnitude, or the
Number of its Attendants. If then a Planet of that Or-
der and Dignity, have ſuch a Poſition and Aſpect to the
Sun, why might not our Earth have had the ſame, proper


to that State, and agreeable to the Divine Wiſdom? Yet-


he is ſo bold as to ſay, or ſuppoſe, p. 66. That this cannot
well agree with the infinite Wiſdom of its Maker ; as if he
was able to make a Meaſure or Standard for all the Works
of God. Tis a crude and injudicious Thing, from a few
Particulars, the reſt unknown, to make an univerſal Con-
cluſion, Which forward Wits are apt to do. Hos daiyz
Sri. Ad pauca reſpiciens, facile prouunctas, was
Ariſtotle's Obſervation of old, and it holds in all Ages.

I his Examiner, p. 76. cenſures the Theoriſt very rudely,
{or making uſe of phyſical Cauſes, and not arguing from
final Cauſes, which, he ſays, are the true Principles of natural
Philoſophy. But, if this be the Uſe he makes of final Caules,


to tell God Almighty what is beſt to be done, in this r


that World, I had rather content myſelf with phy/ical
Cauſes, to know what God hath done, and conclude it to
be the beſt, and that we ſhould judge it ſo, if we had the
ſame Extent of Thought and Proſpe& its Maker had.
There are indeed ſome final Cauſes that are ſo manifeſt,
that I ſhould think ir Sortiſhneſs or Obſtinacy for a Man
to deny them; but I ſhould alſo think that Man preſump-
tuous, that ſhould pretend to draw the Scheme and Plan
of every World, from his Idea of fizal Cauſes. There

| | are


Theory of the Earth. 537


e ſome Men that mightily cry out againſt Reaſon, yet
ne more fond of it than they are, when they can get
on their Side: So ſome Men inveigh * bit
auſes, when others make ule of them, and yet as gladly
any make uſe of them themſelves, when they can make
em ſerve their Purpoſe; and when they cannot reach
em, then they deſpiſe them, and are all for final Cauſes.
his Author ſays, p. 63. God always chaſes ſuch Conſtitu-
1s and Poſitions of ploy 7 as bring with them the great-
Good and Utility to the Univerſe. Very true, to the Uni-
-rſe? but who made him judge what is beſt to the Uni-
erſe? Does he look upon this Earth as the Univerſe,
hereof it is but a ſmall Particle, or an Atom in com-
ariſon? Muſt there be no Variety in the numberleſs
Vorlds which God hath made? Muſt they all be one and
ie ſame Thing repeated again and again? That I'm ſure does
ot well agree with the infinite Wiſdom and Power of God.
But ſuppoſe we did confine our Thoughts to this Earth,
ve may be aſſur'd that it hath undergone and will under-
o, within the Compaſs of its Duration, very different
tates, and yet all accommodate to Providence. Thoſe
nat ſuppoſe the Heavens and the Earth never to have had
ny other Conſtitution and Conſtruction than what they
ave now, or that there hath never been any great Change
nd Revolution in our natural World, follow the very
Doctrine which St. Peter oppoſes and confutes in his ſe-
ond Epiſtle, Chap. 3. I mean the Doctrine of thoſe Scaf-
ert, as he calls them, who ſaid, Al] Things, the Heavens
nd the Earth, have remained im the ſame State they are in
wow, from the Beginning, or from the Creation, and are to
'ontinue ſo. In Confutation of this Opinion, St. Peter
here minds them of the Change made at the Deluge, and
ff the different Conſtitution and Conſtruction of the Hea-
ens and the Earth, before and after the Deluge, whereby
hey were diſpos'd to undergo a different Fate, one by
Water, and the other by Fire. And he tells us in the
ame Place, that after the Conflagration, there will be
ew Heavens and a eb Earth: So that there is no one
ix'd and permanent State even of this Earth, accordin
o the Will and Wiſdom of Providence. But enough hat
deen ſaid by the Theoriſt upon this Subject (Theor. Lat.
I. c. 1 & 2. Review, p. 160, c. Archæol. I. 2. c 3, 5, 6.)
And if they will not conſider the Arguments propos'd
there, *twould be in vain to repeat them here.
Theſe Things premis'd, let's conſider what Inconve-
niencies are alledged, or what Arguments againſt that Equa-
| | | lity


538 Reſtec tions upon the
lity of Seafons, or the grand Cauſe of them, the Paralle.
liſm of the Axis of the Earth, with the Axis of the Sun.
He ſays, upon this Suppoſition, there is more Heat now in
the Climates of the Earth, than could have beenthen. And
What if there be? Whether his Computation (which is
aim'd againſt another Author) be true or falſe, tis little
to the Theory: If the Heat was equal and moderate in
the temperate and habitable Climates, who would defire
the extreme Heats of Summer? But he ſays, p. 66. That
Heat would not be ſufficient for the Generation of Vege-
tables. How does that appear? ſuppoſing that Heat con-
ſtant throughout the whole Year. Does he think there are
no Vegetables in Japiter, which hath ſtill the ſame Poſi-
tion the T heoriſt gave to the ante-diluvian Earth. And as
to Heat, that Planet is at vaſtly a greater Diſtance from
the Sun than our Earth, and conſequently hath ſo much
leſs Heat; yet I cannot believe that great Planet to be only
a huge Lump of bald and barren Earth. As to our ante-
diluvian Earth, *tis probable that the Conſtitution of
Plants and Animals, was different then from what it is
now, as their Longevity was different, to which any
Exceſſes of Heat or Cold are noxious; and the Frequency
and Multiplicity of Generations and Corruptions in the
prefent Earth, is Part of that Vanity to which it was ſub-
jected. But this Examiner ſays moreover, If the firſt
Earth had that Poſition, the greateſt Part of it would not
be habitable. But how much lefs habitable would it be
than the preſent Earth ? where the open Sea, which was
not then, takes up half of its Surface, and makes it un-
habitable. "Tis likely the torrid Zone was unhabitable in
that Earth ; but *tis probable the Poles or Polar Parts were
more habitable than they are now, ſeeing they would
have the Sun, or rather Half-Sun perpetually in their Ho-
rizon: And as to the temperate Climates, as we call them,
they would be under ſuch a gentle and conſtant Warmth,
as would be more grateful to the Inhabitants, and more
proper and effectual for a continual Verdure and Vegeta-
tion, than any Region of the preſent Earth is now. f
Hut this Objector does not conſider, on the other hand,
what an hard Life they would lead in thoſe Days, at leaſt
in many Parts of the Earth, if the Seaſons of the Year
were the ſame they are now, and they confin'd to Herbs,
Fruits, and Water; for that was the Diet of Mankind till
the Deluge. Should we nat think it an unmerciful Impo-
ſition now, to be interdicted the Uſe of Fleſh-Meat all the


Vear long? Or rather is it poſſible that the Life of Ma


Theory of the Earth. 539
Id be ſapported by Herbs and Fruits, and Water in the
der Climates, where the Winters are ſo long and barren,
the Cold ſo vehement? But, if you fuppoſe a perpetual
ing throughout the Earth, the Heavens mild, and the
ces of Fruits and Plants more nutritive, that Obje&ion
uld ceaſe, and their Longevity be more intelligible.
Ne come now to the Caufes of the Change in the Po-
re of the Earth, where the Theoriſt hath fet down his
njectures, what he thought the moſt probable to be
Occaſion of it: Namely, either ſome Inequality in
| Libration of the Earth, after it was diſſolved and bro-
1; or a Change in the Magnetiſm of its Body, conſe-
ent upon its Diſſolution, and the different Situation of
Parts. Butthis Examiner will neither allow any Change
have been made in the Poſition of the Earth ſince the
ginning of the World; nor, if there was a Change, that
-ould be made from ſuch Cauſes. The firſt of theſe
ints you fee is Matter of Fact; and fo it muſt be prov'd,
tly by Hiftory, and partly by Reaſon. Some Things are
ted before, which argue that the ante-diluvian Earth was
ferent from the preſent, in its Frame and Conſtitution,
alfo in reference to the Heavens; and the Places ate
erred to, where the Matter is treated more largely by
2 Theoriſt. If it be granted, that there was a permaneng
range made in the State of Nature at the .d or any
her Time, but deny'd that it was made by a Change of
e Situation of the Earth, and the Conſequences of it,
en this Writer muſt afſign ſome other Change made,
hich would have the ſame Effects; that is, which will
ſ{werand agree with tlie Phenomena of the firſt Earth,
d alſo of the pteſent. When this is done, if it be clear
d convictive, we mult acquieſce in it: But I do not ſee
at it is ſo much as attempted by this Author.
This ſuppos'd Change, I fay, is Matter of Fact, and
erefore we muſt conſult Hiſtory and Reaſon for the
roof or Diſproof of it. As to Hiſtory, the Theoriſt hath
ted to this Purpoſe Leucippus, Anaxagoras, Democritus,
mpedocles, Plato and Diogenes. Theſe were the moſt re-
owned Philoſophers amongſt the Antients; and all theſe
xeak of an Inclination of the Earth or the Poles, which
ath been made in former Ages. Theſe, one would think,
night be allow'd as good Witneſſes of aformer Tradition
oncerning a Change in the Situation of the Earth, when
othing is brought againſt them. And this Change 1s par-
cularly call'd by Plato dvapuogia Or dvwpraid, a Diſharmony
r Diſconcerting of the Motions of the Heavens, which
ne


540 Reflectious upon the


he makes the Source and Origin of the preſent Evils and
Inconveniencies of Nature. Beſides, he dates this Change
from the Expiration of the Reign of Saturn, or when Fapiter
came to take the Government upon him : And this, you
know, in the Style of thoſe Times, ſignifies the End of the
Golden Age. T hus far Plato carries the Tradition: Now,
the Poets tell us expreſly that there was a perpetual Spring,
or a perpetual Equinox in the Time of Saturn, and that the
Inequality of the Year, or the Diverſity of Seaſons was
firſt introduc'd by Jupiter. The Authors and Places are
well known and noted by the Theoriſt ; I need not repeat
them here. You ſee what this Evidence amounts to, both
that there hath been a Change, and ſuch a Change, as al-
ter'd the Courſe of the Year, and brought in a Viciſſitude
of Seaſons; and this according to the DoCEtrines or Tra-
ditions remaining amongſt the Heathens. I he Fews and
Chriſtians ſay the ſame Thing, but in another Manner: They
do not ſpeak of the Golden Age, nor of the Reign of Sa-
turn or Fupiter, but of the State of Paradiſe, or Gan-Eden;
and concerning that, they ſay the ſame I hings, which the
Heathen Authors ſay, in different Words. The Few;
make a perpetual Equinox in Paradiſe, the Chr:/tans a per-
petual Serenity, a perpetual Spring ; and this cannot be
without a different Situation of the Earth from what it hath
now. He may ſee the Citations if he pleaſe, in the Theory,
or Archæologia.
It were to be wiſh'd, that this Examiner would look a
little into Antiquity, when he hath Time: It may be, that
would awaken him into new Thoughts, and a more fa-
vourable Opinion of the Theory as to this Particular. Give
me leave to mind him in his own Way, what ſome antient
Aſtronomers have ſaid relating to this Subject. Baptiſta
Mantnanus , ſpeaking of the Longevity of the Ante-
Diluvians, ſays, Erant illis, ut Aſtronomia & Experiments
conſtat, Coli propitiores ; volunt namque Aſtronomi, &c.
This he explains by an uniform and concentrical Motion
of the Heavens and the Earth, at that Time; to which he
imputes the great Virtue of their Herbs and Fruit, and the
long Lives of their Animals. Petras Aponenſis, who liv d
above an Age before Mantuan, gives us much what the
ſame Account : For making an Knfwer to this Queſtion,
utrum natura humana ſit debilitata ab eo quod antiquitus,
necne? He ſays, Cum capita Zodiaci mobilis & immobilis
ordinate & directè cuncurrebant, tunc virtus perfectiori mo-


w—_


* De Patien, J. „ . 27,


ao


Theory of the Earth. 541


{0 a primo principio per medias canſas taliter ordinatas forti”
ri modo imprimebatur in iſta inferiora, cum cauſe tunc ſib
zvicem correſpondeant Propter quod concludendum eſt,
unc naturam humanam illo tempore, ut ſic fortiorem &
ongæviorem extitiſſe. I give it in his own Words as they
Ire in his Conciliator. Differ. .

Georgius Pictorius , or an Author under his Name,
into the ſame Queſtion about the Longevity of the Ante-
liluvians, gives a like Anſwer from the ſame Aſtronomer,
n theſe Words: Petrus Aponenſis adfert rationem, & pro
vario carſu & diſpaſitione cœlorum mods vitam humanam bre-
viari, modo product ſcribit. Ex Aſtronomia argumentum colli-
pens, cùm ait duos Codiacos, unum in nond ſphera, alterum in
octavã (quam Firmamentum vocant) ininitio rerum & tempo-
rum, ſic a Deo fuiſſe diſpoſitos, ut Aries Arieti, Taurus Tauro,
Geminis Gemini jungerentur : & amborum coeuntibus in u-
num viribas fortior in Terras fieret fluxus. Unde herhas tunc
ſalubriores & fructus terre meliores, & longiores vitas ani-
mantium fuiſſe atfirmat. Sed denno illd ſyderali diſſolutd ab
invicem per motum ſocietate, totum ait inferiorem mundum
egrotare, atque per decrementum claudicare cœpiſſe. This,
you ſee, is Aſtronomy in an old-faſhion'd Drets ; but you
can eaſily take off the Diſguiſe, and apply it to the true
Syſtem of the Heavens. The ſame Author refers you, for
a more full Explication of that Matter, to his Lectiones ſuc-
ciſivæ, Dial. prim. which Book I have not yet had an Oppor-
tunity to ſee. I believe it is in his Opera Philologica, printed
in Octavo at Baſil. | |

But ſince the firſt writing ofthe Theory, there have been
HEthiopick Antiquities produc'd from an Abyfline Philoſo-
pher, and tranſmitted to us by Franciſco Patricio in his Di-
alogues. If that Account he gives of the Æthiopian Arche-
olog:a be true and genuine, they exceed all other upon this
Subject: For they do not only mention this Particular, of
the Unity of Seaſons in the primitive Earth, but the other
principal Parts of the Theory: As the Concuſſion and
Fraction of the Earth; that the Face of it before was ſmooth
and uniform, and upon that Diſruption it, came into ano-
ther Form, with Mountains, Rocks, Sea and Iflands.


Theſe and other ſuch Characters are mentioned there,


whereof the Examiner may ſee an Account, if he pleaſe,
in the laſt Edition of the Exgliſh Theory, p. 189. Ihe Story
indeed is ſurprizing, which way ſoever you take it, whether it
was the Invention of that Abyſſiue Philoſopher, or a rcal


* Queſt. Piz. Per. 3. full. . 4. Tra


*
+
+
S +


542 Reflections upon the
Tradition deriv'd from the Aitbiopian Gymnoſophiſts,
However that be, there are otherwiſe ſuch conſpicuous
Footſteps in philoſophick Hiſtory, and in what may be
call'd Eccleſiaſtick, amongſt the Nen and Chriſtians, of
ſome Revolution in the Syſtem of the World, as muſt
give occaſion to any thinking Man to ſuppoſe, that there
hath been a Change made in the Situation of the Earth,
This, by ſome of the forementioned Authors, is afcrib'd ex-
| pe to the Earth; and what by others (according to their
ypotheſis) is aſcrib'd to the higher Heavens, we know
upon a juſt Interpretation belongs to the Earth. Thoſe
den Age, as are not intelligible upon any other Suppoſi-
tion, mutt alſo bereferr'd to this Change of the Site or Po-
ſture of the Earth: So that upon all Accounts (mediately
or immediately) the Matter of Fact, that the Earth hath
undergone ſuch a Change, is teſtified by Hiſtory, Antiqui-
ty and Tradition. It deſerves alſo to be obſerv'd, that
there was a general Tradition amongſt the Antients, con-
cerning the Inhabitability of the Torrid Zone ; which may
be an Argument or Confirmation, that there was a State
of Nature at one time or other, when this was true, and
that ſach a general Opinion could not ariſe, and be con-
tinued ſo long without ſome Foundation.

So much for Hiſtory to determine Matter of Fact: Now
as to Reaſon (which we mentioned as the other Head, to
prove or diſprove this Conclufion.) That the Form of
the primitive Earth which is aſſign'd by the Theoriſt, be-
ing ſuppos'd, namely, that it was regular, uniform, and
had an equal Libration, it would naturally take an even
and parallel Poſition with the Axis of its Orbit, or of the
Ecliptick, as is ſet down more at large in the enn:
Nor can any Reaſon be alledg'd to the contrary. is
true, this Examiner, p. 83. notwithſtanding any Unifor-
mity and Equilibration of that Earth, pretends it would be
indifferent to any Poſition, or retain any Poſition given, as
a Sphere will do, put in a Fluid. This might be, if that
Sphere or Globe was reſting; but if it was turn'dabout its
Axis, and the Axis of the Fluid (which is the preſent Caſe)

it would certainly take a Poſition parallel to the Axis of its
Fluid, if there was no other Impediment. ;

The Matter of Fact being ſettled with the Cauſe of it,

what the Cauſes of the Change were, is more problema-

tical. The Philoſophers forecited gave their Reaſon ; Ar:-

ſtarchus Samius gives another, 4. Comet by ſome is

made the occaſion of it: The Theoriſt thinks that my _
i oluti


- Theory of the Earth. 543
olution dt the Earth was the fundamental Cauſe, and that
je Change came to paſs at that time, as many Indications
nd Arguments ſhew. And as to the immediate Cauſe or
auſes of it, I know none more probable than what the
*heoriſt hath propoſed; Eng. Theor. p. 267. Either the
ange of its Center of Gravity, or of its Magnetiſm ;
he Line of Direction to thoſe magnetick Particles, and
heir paſſing through the Earth being ſo alter'd, as to turu
he Earth into another Poſture, and hold it there. As to
hoſe Expreſſions that he ſeems to quarrel with, of the
nclination of the Earth, or the Pole, towards the Sun,
tis the Expreſſion of theantient Philoſophers, tho? I think
t might more properly be called an Obliquation. Then
that the former State is called ſitas rectus, is another Ex-
preſſion which he findsfault with ; though every one ſees
that a right Situation in ſuch Places, is vppoſed to an ob-
ſique, orinclined Poſition to the Axis of the Sun or Ecli
tick, and had been called parallel in ſeveral other Places;
and which he himſelf, þ- 71. ſometimes, as well as other
Authors “, calls a right Poſition. This is but trifling about
Words: If he grants that the primitive Earth being uni-
form, and conſequently equally pois'd, its Axis would be
parallel (which for ſhortneſs, is ſometimes call'd right) to
the Axis of its Orbit, and is now in a different and ob-
lique Poſture, this is all the Theoriſt deſires, as to Matter of
Fact. Iconceive the whole Matter thus: When the Earth
was in that even and parallel Poſture with the Axis of the
Sun, it had a perpetual Equinox and Unity of Seaſons,
the Equatot and Ecliptick being coincident : And as to the
Heavens, they with the fix'd Stars mov'd or ſeem'd to
move uniformly and concentrically with the Earth. But
when the Earth chang'd its Poſture to that which it hath
now, the Vear became unequal, and the Equator and E-
cliptick became diſtinct Circles, or, if you will, a new
Circle aroſe from that Diſtinction. The Earth in the mean
time continuing its annual Courſe in the Ecliptick, had
the Poſition of its Axis chang'd to a Paralleliſm with the
Axis of the Equator, which it holds throughout the whole
Year. As to the Heavens, they ſeem'd to turn upon an-
other Axis, or other Poles than they did before, and differ-
ent from thoſe of the Sun or the Earth: And this funda-


ws 4 FE WI "LE - —_— 8


* Perpetuo enim illic fruuntur Zquinoftio, quoniam axem 'motus diurni Fu-
fiter rellum fer me babet ad planum itineris ſui circa Selem, net ut Tellus obti-


Tum, Hugen, Coſmoth. p- 105.


mental


544 Reflections upon the


mental Change in the Site of the Earth, had a farther Chain
of Conſequences, as is noted by the Theorilt, in reference
to the State both ot the animate and inanimate World.
This is, in ſhort, the State of the Caſe, which is ſometimes
expreſs'din different Terms, eſpecially by the Antients,
who generally followed another Syſtem of the Heavens
and the Earth, and were not always accuratein their Ex.
preſſions. .
This Author would ſquare and conform all the Planets
to the Model of the preſent Earth: Whereas there is Di-
verſity of Adminiſtrations in the natural World, as well
as ſpiritual, yet the ſame Providence every where. The
Axes of the Planets are not all parallel to that of the Sun,
nor all oblique; and thoſe that are ſo, have not all the
ſame Degrees of Obliquity, yet we have Reaſon to think
them all habitable. In ſome there are no different Sea-
ſons of the Vear, and in ſome they differ in another man-
ner than ours; and the Periods of their Years are very dif-
ferent. In like manner, as to the Days, in ſome they are
longer, in others ſhorter: In the Moon a Day laſts four-
teen or fifteen of our Days, and their Nights are propor-
tionably longer than our Nights. In Faupiter, the Days
are but of five Hours, and ſo the Nights; that Planet being
turned in ten Hours about his Axis. In Mercary we know
little what the Seaſons or Days are, but its Year malt be
much ſhorter than ours; as alfo is that of Venus; and
their Heat from the Sun, muſt be much greater. J-
piter and Saturn are at vaſt Diſtances from the Sun, and mult
proportionably have leſs Heat; and Saturn muſt have a grea-
ter Difference of Summer and Winter than we have, by
reaſon of his greater Obliquity to the Sun. Theſe and
ſuch like Obſervations, ſhew what Vanity it is to make
an univerſal Standard from the State of our Earth: Or to
ſay, this is beſt, and to make Things otherwiſe, would
be inconſiſtent with the infinite Wiſdom of their Maker,


as this Examiner, p. 66. pretends to do.


x


But to return to his Objections: This he ſuggeſts, ibid. as
one, that in caſe of a perpetual Equinox, the annual Mo-
tion of the Earth about the Sun would be to no Purpoſe.
Of this we are no competent Judges, no more than of
the other Differences foremention'd in the' Conditions. of
the Planets, Yet, in that Caſe, a Diſtinction and Compu-
tation of Time might be made, by their Aſpect to the dif-
ferent Signs of the Zodiack. There may be, (for any
Thing we know,) in the Extent of the Univerſe, Planets,

des Hao Or


Theory of the Earth. 545


r great _ Bodies, that have no Courſe about their
zuns, for Reaſons beſt known to their Maker; and others
hat have no diurnal Motion about their Axes: Nor ought
uch States, tho? very different from ours, to be concluded
ncongruous. If this Objection of his were of any Force,
t would lie againſt Jupiter as well as againſt the ante-
liluvian Earth. And this minds me of his Objection
aken from Saturn and Fupiter, whoſe Axes, he ſays, are
nclined to the Axis of the Ecliptick ; and yet, according
to the Theoriſt, they have ſuffer'd no Deluge. This is an
unhappy Argument, for I think it hath two Errors in it:
But let us ſet down his Words, that there may be no Miſ-
take or. Miſrepreſentation, p. 76. Another Argument
which may be brought to convince the Theoriſt that the Axis
of the Earth was at firſt inclined to the Plane of the Eclip-
zick is, that it is certain by Obſervation, that Saturn and
Jupiter (whom the Theoriff will allow to have ſuffered no

eluge as yet) have their Axes not perpendicular, but in-
clined tothe Planets of their Orbits ; and the Poſition is trae
of all the other Planets, as far as they can be obſerv'd. And
therefore, c. Pirſt, as to Saturn, I'm ſure the Theoriſt
never thought that Planet to be now in its original Form,
but to be broken, and to have already ſuffer'd a Diſſolu-
tion, as you may ſee in both Theories, Eugliſb and Latin *.
Then as to the Poſition of Jupiter, I know not whence
he has this certain Obſervation, that its Axis is oblique to
the Plane of its Orbit: Fur I Hugenuius tells us juſt the con-
trary, and that it hath a perpetual Equinox. Let theſe
Things be examin'd, and hereafter let us be cautious how
we take Things upon the Examiner's Word, if he be found
to have committed two Faults in one Objection.

Farthermore, he intimates, (p. 94.) that the Theoriſt hath
no Mind to the Notion of Attraction; | believe fo too,
nor in Philoſophy to any other Notion that is unconceiva-
ble. He muſt tell us how this Attraction differs from an
occult Quality, whether it is a mechanical Principle or no;
and if not, from what Principle it ariſes. When he hath
told us this, we ſhall be better able to judge of it.

After all, to conclude this Chapter, the one grand Queſ-
tion with the Theoriſt (wharſoever there may be with
other Authors) is this, whether the Earth has chang'd its
Situation ſince the Beginning of the World: And that it
has done ſo, the Theoriſt does ſtill poſitively maintain.

Having inſiſted more largely upon theſe four firſt Chap-


# *


7 cſmotb. P 135


* Engl. p. 220, Wc, bot. . 107»
dh | N N | ters,


546 Reflections upon the


ters, as being moſt fundamental in the Controverſy, we
ſhall diſpatch more readily this fifth and the ſeventh, lea-
ving the ſixth Chapter to a more particular Diſquiſition in
the laſt Place. | |
This fifth Chapter is deſigned againſt the Rivers of the
primitive Earth, according to that Origin and Derivation
that is given them by the T heoriſt. But it is to be noted in
the firſt Place, that ſuppoſing they had any other Origin ot
Courſe than what is there aflign'd (excepting only an Ori-
gin from Mountains,) the Theory continues (till in Force.
For this Point about the Waters of the firſt Earth, and
the Explication of them, is one of thoſe Explications that
admit of Latitude and Variety; and therefore as to the
Theory, the Queſtion is only this, Mhetber an habitable
Earth may have Rivers without Mountains. For if any
Earth may have them without Mountains, why not the
primitive Earth? Now it will be hard for the Examiner, or
any Other, to prove, that in every World, where there are
Waters and Rivers, there are Mountains. We intimated
before, that the general Frame of an Earth might be ſuch
as would give a Courſe to Waters without particular
Mountains. But we will leave that at preſent to a farther
Conſideration, and obſerve now What his Proofs are, that
there could be no Rivers in the primitive Earth.
Firſt he ſays, p. 87. According to the Theorift's own Hy-
potheſis, there could be no Rivers for a long Time after the
For mation of the Earth, Where is this ſaid by the Theo-
riſt? His Hypotheſis ſuppoſes, that the ſoft and moiſt Earth
could not but afford Store of Vapours at firſt, as this Au-
thor in another Place hath noted for the Senſe of the The-
Oriſt, (p.86.) and now he ſays the quite contrary : The
Chanels of the Rivers indeed would not be ſo deep and
hollow at firſt as they are now, their Cavities being wrought
by Degrees; but ſtill there would not want Vapours to
ſupply them.
Then he ſays, p. 88. when that firſt Moiſture of the
Earth was leſſened, there could be no Supply of Vapours
from the Abyſs; ſecing the Heat of the Sun could not
reach ſo far, nor raiſe Vapours from it, or at leaſt not in

4 ſufficient Quantity, as he pretends to prove hereafter:
But in the mean Time he ſpeaks of great Cracks or Pits,
whoſe Dimenſions and Capacities he examines at Pleaſure,
and by theſe he makes the Theoriſt to ſuppoſe the Vapours
to aſcend, Now I do not find that the Theoriſt makes
any Mention of theſe Pits, nor any Uſe of thoſe Cracks for
that Purpoſe. The only Queſtion is, whether the Heat -

.


= 3 — E we — wits a —_ «a: as Yeo


„ . 4 . „ e K


Theory of the Earth. 547
the Sun in that Earth would reach ſo low as the Aby ſs,
when the Earth was more dried, aud its Pores enlary'd :
Sothat this Objection, as he ſtates it, ſeems to refer to ſome
other Author. x
But no ſuppoſing theV apours tais'd, he conſiders what
Courſe they would take, or which Way they would move
in the open Air. But before that be examin'd,. we mutt
take Notice how unfairly hedeals with the Theoriſt, when
he ſeems to make him ſuppoſe, de gf. that Mountains
make way for the Motion and Dilatation of the Vapours ;
which he never ſuppos'd, nor is it poſſible he ſhould ſup-
pow it in the firſt Earth, where there were no Mountains.
Neither does the Theoriſt ſuppoſe, as this Author would
inſinuate, that Mountains or Cold dilate Vapours, but on
the contrary, that they fog and compreſs them, as the
Words are cited, even by the Examiner a little before, p. 86.

Then as to the Courſe of the Vapours, when they are
rais'd, the Theoriſt ſuppoſes that would be towards the
Poles and the coldeſt Climates. But this Author ſays, p. 97.
they would all move Weſtward, or from Eaſt to Welt;
there being a continual Wind blowing from the Eaſt to Weſt,
according to the Motion of the Sun. Whether that Wind
come from the Motion of the Sun, or of the Earth, (which
is contrary,) is another Queſtion; but however, let them
move at firſt to the Weſt, the Queſtion here is, here
they would he condens'd, or where they would fall. And
there is little Probability that their Condenſation would be
under the Equator, where they are moſt agirated, but ra-
ther by an Impulſe of new Vapours, they would ſoon di-
vert towards the Poles, and loſing their Agitation there,
would fall in Dews or Rains. hich Condenſation be-
ing made, and a Paſſage open'd that Way for new ones to
ſupply their Places, there would be a continual Draught
of Vapours, from the hotter to the colder Parts of the

arth. |

We proceed now to the ſeventh Chapter, which is ina
good Meaſure upon the ſame or a like Subject with this,
namely, concerning the Penetration of the Heat of the
Sun into the Body of the Earth. This, he fays, p. 148.
cannot be to any conſiderable Depth; nor could it paſs
the exterior Orb of the firſt Earth, and affect the Abyſs, or
raiſe Vapours from it. To prove this, he ſuppoſes that ex-
terior Earth divided into ſo many Surfaces as he pleaſes,
then ſuppoſing the Heat diminiſhed in every Surface, he
concludes it could not poſſibly paſs through ſo many. Thus

you may divide an Inch into an hundred or a thouſand Sur-
| Nona faces,
7


$48 Reflectious upon the


faces, and prove from thence, that no Heat of the Sun
could pierce through an Inch of Earth. We muſt rather
conſider Pores than Surfaces in this Caſe; and whether
thoſe Pores were ſtraight or oblique, the Motion would pafs
however, though not the Light: And the Heat of the Sun
might have its Effect, by a direct or indirect Motion, to a
great Depth within the Earth, notwithſtanding the Multi-
tude of Surfaces that he imagines. Thoſe that think a
Comet, upon its nearer Approach to the Sun, would be
dierc'd with its Heat through and through; and to ſuch a
Bees as to become much hotter than red hot Iron, will
not think it ſtrange, that at our Diſtance from the Sun, its
Heat ſnould have ſome proportionable Effect upon the in-
ward Parts of the Earth. And all thoſe imaginary ſolid Sur-
faces do not hinder, you ſee, the magnetick Particles from
running through the Body of the Earth, and making the
Globe one great Magnet.


But let thoſe Conſiderations have what Effect they can,


this Suppoſition however is nothing peculiar to the The-
oriſt. I know ſome learned Men think the Heat of the
Sun does penetrate deep into the Bowels of the Earth; o-
thers think it does not, and either of them have their Ar-
mms Theſe alledge the equal Temper of Vaults and
ines at different Seaſons of the Year : The other ſay, tis
true, ſubterraneous Places keep their Equality of Temper
much better than the external Air, and thoſe Differences
that appear to us, are in a great Meaſure by compariſon
with:the Temper of our Bodies. Then for their own O-
e 5 an Argument from the Generation of
etals and Minerals in the Bowels of the Earth, and other
ſubterraneous Foſſiles. Theſe, we ſee, are ripen'd by de-
grees in ſeveral Ages, and cannot, as they think, be brought
to Maturity, and raiſed into the exterior Earth, without the
Heat and Influence of the Sun: Of the ſame Sun that ac-
tuates all the vegetable World, that quickens Seeds, and
raiſes Juices into the Roots of our deepeſt, and Tops of our
higheſt Oaks and Cedars.
ut let this remain a Problem; I will jnftance in ano-
ther remarkable Phænomenon, which is molt for the preſent
| Purpoſe, I mean Earthquakes. Let us conſider the Cauſes
of them, and the Depths of them: I think all agree, that
Earthquakes ariſe from the Rarefaction of Vapours and Ex-
halations, and that this Rarefaction muſt be made by
ſome Heat; and no other is yet proved to us by this Au-
thor than that of the Sun. Thenas to the Depth of Earth-
quakes, we find they are deeper than the Bottom * the
| | ea:


* > wa ws 6; my 2A fad + 2A ©


AG „ i dd Oy AAmTRMPRMmB Sg A AGO


6. n as *


Theory of the Earth. 549


Sea: For, beſides that they communicate with different
Countries divided by the Sea, they are found ſometimes to
ariſe within the Sea, and from the Bottom of it, at great
Depths. This ſeems to prove, that there may be a ſtrong
Rarefaction of Vapours and Exhalations far within the
Bowels of the Earth; and the Theoriſt defires no more. It
in the preſent Conſtitution of the Earth, there may be ſuch
Concuſſions and Subverſions for a great Extent, we have
no Reaſon to believe, but there might be (ata Time appoint-
ed by Providence) an univerſal Diſruption, as that Farth
was conſtituted. Finally, whatſoever the Cauſes of this
Diſruption and Diſſolution were, *tis certain there was a
Diſruption of the Abyſs, and that Diſruption univerſal as
the Deluge was; which anſwers ſufficiently the Deſign of
the Theory. However, if he have a mind to ſee, how this
agrees with Hiſtory, both ſacred and prophane, he may
conſult, if he pleaſes, what the Theoriſt hath noted upon
that Argument, Archæol. I. 2. 5.4. beſides other Places.

But this Author ſays farther, That ſuppoſing ſuch a Diſ-
ruption of the Abyſs, and Diſſolution of the exterior Earth,
no univerſal Deluge however could follow upon it; be-
cauſe there could not be Water enough left in the Abyſs
to make or occaſion ſuch a Deluge: For the Rivers of the
Earth being then ſupply'd from the Abyſs, by ſuch a Time,
or before the Time of the Deluge, he ſays, there would be
no Water left in it. Thus he goes from one Extreme to
another: Before he ſaid, the Power of the Sun could not
reach or affect the Abyſs to draw out any Vapours from it;
now he would make the Evaporation ſo exceſſive, that it
would have emptied the great Abyſs before the Deluge.
This is a great Undertaking, and to make it good he takes
a rom Compals: He pretends to ſhew us, what Quantity
of Water all the Rivers of the Earth throw into the Sea
every Day; and beginning with the River Po, and taking
his Meaſure from that, he ſuppoſes there are ſuch a cer-
tain Number of equivalent Rivers upon the Face of the
whole Earth; and if the Po caſts ſo much Water into the
Sea, the reſt will caſt ſo much more, and in Consluſion
ſo much as would empty the Abyſs.

You will eaſily believe, Sir, there muſt be great Uncer-
tainties in this Computation: But, if that was certain, as it
is far from it, ſtill he goes npon Suppoſitions that are not
allow'd by the Theoriſt. For, firſt, he ſuppoſes the Wa-
ters of the preſent Sea to be equal to the Waters of the
great Abyſs: Whereas, ſuppeſing them of the ſame Depth,
there would be near twice as much Water in the great


Nn 3 Deep |


— —


— N — = Py * — — —3 . 0 22 — — 5 * 7 — — - ——, 3
— —
— _ — 4 - w bun nn gee — = — *
— e EI Se —— co — * 445 : — = 4 —
2 27 5 4 * 9 8 — o —_ *
— 2 * — — 34 tt aa 7 _ — 1 — ©
_—


— m
—


$50 Reections upon the
Deep, as is now in the Ocean; ſeeing the Abyſs was ex-
tended under the whole Earth, and the Sea reaches but to
half of it. Secondly, He ſhould prove that the Rivers of
the ante-diluvian Earth were as many, and as great, as we
have now. The Torrid Zone then had none, and much
Jeſs would ſerve the temperate Climates than is requiſite
now for the Earth. Beſides, the Rivers of that Earth
were not ſupplied by Vapours only from the Abyſs, but
alſo from all the Earth, and all the Waters upon the
Earth: And when the Rivers were partly loſt and ſpent in
the Torrid Zone, they were in a great Meaſure exhal'd
there, and drawn into the Air by the Heat of the Sun, and
would fall again in another Place, to makenew Rains and
a new Supply to the Rivers. So, in like manner, when
he ſuppoſes, p. 158. the Rivers that were upon the Earth,
at the Time of the Diſruption ot the great Deep, to have
thrown themſelves off the Land, as if they were loſt ; and
makes a Computation haw much Water all the Rivers
of the Earth amount to: This, I ſay, is a needleſs Com-
putation as to the preſent Purpoſe. For whatſoever Maſs
of Waters they amounted to, it would not be loſt : If
they fell down and joined with the Abyſs, they would in-
creaſe its Store, and be thrown up again by the Fall of the
Fragments, making ſo much a greater Maſs to overflow
the Earth; So that nothing is gain'd by this Suppoſition.
T! he Effect would be the ſame as to the Deluge: Whether
the Waters above the Earth, and thoſe under the
Earth met together ſooner or later, when their Forces
were joined, they would ſtill have the ſame Effect, as we
{aid before of the Vapours. And to conclude that Point,
the whole Sum of Waters, or Vapours convertible into
Waters, that were from the Beginning, or at any Time,
would ſtill be preſerv'd above Ground, or under Ground:
hoe _ would turn to the ſame Account, as to the

lood.

Theſe Waters and Vapours all collected, the Theoriſt
ſuppoſes ſufficient, upon a Diſſolution of the Earth, to
make the Deluge: Not indeed in the Nature of a Stand-
ing Pool, as it is uſually conceiv'd ; a quiet Pool, I ſay,
overtopping and ſtanding calm over the Heads of the
higheſt Mountains; but as a ruſhing Sea, overflowing and


ſweeping them with its raging Waves and impetuous Fluc--


tuations, when it was violently forc'd out of all its Cha-

nels, andthe Vapours condens'd into Rain. Such an In-

undation as this, would be ſufficient to deſtroy both _
; an


Theory of the Earth. 551


ad Beaſt, and other Creatures, thoſe few excepted, that
ere miraculouſly preſerv'd in the Ark. This is the Theo-
it's Explication of the Deluge, and I ſee nothing in this
\rgument, that will deſtroy or weaken it. |

Now, this being the State of the Deluge, accerding to
he Theoriſt, what this Author ſays in the next Paragraph
2 we 7 is either a Miſrepreſentation, or an Equivoca-
ion. For the eight Oceans requir'd by the Theoriſt, is the
Juantity of Water neceſſary for a Deluge in the Way of a
;tanding Pool: Whereas this Author repreſents it, as if
he Theoriſt required fo much Water to make a Deluge
upon his Hypotheſis. This, I ſuppoſe, upon Reflection,
he Author cannot but ſee to be a Miſtake, or a wilful
Miſrepreſentation.

This is the Sum of his ſeventh Chapter : There are be-
ides ſome Suggeſtions made, which it may be were intended


for Objections by the Author: As when he ſays, (p. 151.)


that the Heat of the Sun would be intolerable upon the
Surface of the Earth, if it could pierce and operate upon
the Abyſs. We allow, that its Heat was intolerable in
the Torrid Zone, which thereby became unhabitable; and
there only the Sun was in its full Strength, and had its
greateſt Effect upon the Abyſs. But in the other Climates,
the Heat would be moderate enough; nay, ſo moderate,
that this Author ſays in another Place, p. 66, 69, Sc. it
would not be ſufficient to ripen Fruits, and in the Whole,
of leſs Force than it is now in the preſent Conſtitution of
the Earth. So apt is Contention to carry one out of one
Extreme into another. |

His laſt Obje&ion is about the Duration of the Flood,
that it could not laſt in its Force a hundred and fifty Days, it
it had been made by a Diſſolution of the Earth, and an Erup-
tion of the Abyſs, But as this is affirm'd by him without
Proof, ſo the contrary is ſufficiently explain'd and made
out, both in the Latin and Exgliſþ Theory, p. 52, 56.

[ had forgot to tell him, that he ought not to ſuppoſe,
as he ſeems to do, when he is emptying the Abyls, (p. 165.
that after the Torrid Zone was ſoak'd with Waters by the
Iſſues of the Rivers, no more Waters or Vapours were
drawn from it then, than were before, or conſequently no
leſs from the Abyſs. For when the middle Parts of the
Earth had drunk in thoſe Waters, the Force of the Sun
would be leſs upon the Abyſs through thoſe Parts, and the
Vapours would be more and greater from them, than be-
fore when they were drier, and in the ſame Proportion
they needed leſs Supplies from the Abyts.

Nn 4 CHAP,


$52 Reflectious upon the
CHAP. VI.
Concerning the Figure of the Earth,


Deferr'd the Conſideration of this Chapter to the laſt,

becauſe I thought it of a more general Concern, and
might deſerve a fuller Diſquiſition. *Tis now, you
know, become a common Controverſy or Enquiry, what
the Figure of the Earth is. Many think it not truly Sphe-
rical, as it was imagin'd formerly, but a Spheroie, either
oblong or oblate ; that is, either extended in Length to-
ward the Poles, like an oval; or, on the contrary, ſwel-
ling in Breadth under the Equator, and ſo ſhorter than a
juſt Sphere betwixt Pole and Pole, and broader in the
middle Parts. Tis true, the Theoriſt is not directly con-
cern'd in this Controverſy, becauſe he does not in the
Theory affirm the preſent Earth to be oblong or oval, not
knowing what Change might be made at its Diſſolution.
However, it may be worth the while to enquire what
Arguments are bought, either from Cauſes or Effects, to
determine the Figure of the Earth, whether paſt or preſent.

"Tis eaſy indeed by Obſervation to determine, that the
Earth is a convex Body, not plain, as the Epicareans fanſied;
and convex on all Sides, and therefore in ſome ſort or-
bicular; but whether it be truly ſpherical, thoſe common
Obſervations will not determine. The Theoriſt nam'd
and pointed at ſuch Obſervations, as. he thought would
be moſt likely to diſcover the preciſe Figure of the Earth:
As to obſerve, for Inſtance, whether the Extent of a De-
gree was the ſame all the Earth over, in different La-
titudes, or at different Diſtances from the Equator. Then
to obſerve whether the Shade of the Earth in a total E-
clipſe of the Moon be truly round, or any other ways
irregular, And alſo to obſerve, if towards the Poles,
the Return of the Sun into their Horizon, be according to
the Rules of a ſpherical Surface of the Earth. Let us
conſider theſe ſeparately, as to the preſent Earth.

As to the Meaſure of a Degree in different Latitudes,
we find that Authors are not all of the ſame Mind. Some
will have them unequal, and in ſuch a manner, accord-
ing to their Diſtance from the Equator, as from that to
infer, that the Earth is oblong. This Examiner takes
Notice of Dr. Eiſenſinidius, as one that hath made that
Obſervation, and that Inference from it, and gives him
very rude Words upon that occaſion, making hima Man
of prodigious Stupidity, and Careleſueſi, p. 140. and _


—
—


FFF e. s


Theory of the Earth. 553


that did vor underſtand the firſt ſix Elements of Euclid, or
indeed thoſe of common Senſe, p. 143. Whatſoever this
Profeſſor was, he was not the firſt that made that Obſerva-
tion and Inference. For another Mathematician, better
known, had made the ſame, ſome time before him: Imean
Milliet Deſchales, in his general Principles of Geography, Fr.
FI, propel 29. But, *tis true, he ſays, this Coen: of
his, that the Figure of the Earth is oval or ecliptick, would
not be well grounded, if the Shade of the Earth in Lunar
Eclipſes was found to be always perfectly round; of
which we ſhall have occaſion to ſpeak hereafter. For
this, which he makes a Scruple againſt his own Opinion,
is by others made an Occafion of ſuſpecting that the Earth
is really Oval. But we mult alſo acknowledge, that the
ſame Deſchales in his Latin Works does not own the Ob-
ſervation, but owns the Inference, which is that the Ex-
aminer quarrels with. He owns it, I ſay, in theſe Words,
* Si figura terre eſſet ovalis, plura milliaria decurrenda eſ-
ſent verſus AMquinoctialem ad inveniendum in ele vatione
poli mutationem unius gradus quam verſus polos. And he
gives this Reaſon, Quid ovalis en prope vertices mino-
rem ſpheram imitatur: verſus Æmquinoctialem autem in ma-
jorem ſpbæram degenerat. And again, having taken No-
tice of the various Computations of a Degree upon the
Earth, he ſubjoins t, Hæc obſervationum diſcrepantia non-
nullis ſuſpicionem fecit, Tellurem non omninò ſphæricam eſſe,
ſed ſphæroidem ellipticam, ita ut verſus polos in minorem
circulum abiret. Sed opus eſt pluribus obſervationibus ad id
perſuadendum. The heoriſt did not aſſert either the Ob-
ſervation to be true or the Inference, but markè'd it as an
Obſervation that deſerv'd to be enquir'd into, in order to
determine the Figure of the Earth. Forit ſeems apparent,
that if the Body of the Earth be ovicag or oblate, the
Extent of a Degree will not be really the ſame as if it was
truly ſpherical. Neither do I know any ſingle Obſerva-
tion that would give us more Light, or better help us to
diſcover what the Configuration of the Earth is, than the
Meaſure of a Degree exactly taken in different Latitudes.
I happened lately to be in Company with a learned
Gentleman, and amongſt other Things that fell into Diſ-
courſe, I ask'd his Opinion, what Inequality there would
be in the Degrees of the Earth, in caſe it was oval, and
where it would fall; whether they would be greater to-
wards the Poles, or towards the Equator. e were
ſuddenly interrupted by the coming in of new Company,


—


* ceigr. 1. 1. Pp 6. { lui. Prop. 36.


but


554 Reflectious upon the


but he ſaid he would ſend me his Thoughts upon a little


rude near the Pole, and D H (which by Inſpection with-
out farther Demonſtration is evidently bigger) thoſe near


Reflection; and accordingly, after a few Days he w wal |

pleaſed to ſend me this Letter. F 1550 oy

SIR, 8 [

HF -ving now ſome Leiſure (the Elections for Parlia- ne

ment, wherein I had any Concern, being over) J De!

have here ſent you my [Thoughts on a Subject we lately hy

| diſcours'd of at Kenſington. Whether in caſe the Earth Di
5 is a long Spheroid, the Degrees of Latitude would be »
i greater near the Equator, or near the Poles. I conceive _
| they would be greater near the Equator. Let the Ellipfis De
BDC F. repreſent the Earth, draw the Line g p. which x

May be a Tangent to the Ellipſis, and likewiſe meeting he

re

re

ne

0¹

L

I

el

p.

al

*

F

d

E

N

t

|

g

8

g | 0
with the Axis BC, and its Tranſverſe FD (after they are f

ö | produc'd) make the Triangle g Ay an Iſoſceles, and con- a
ſequently the Angles at the Baſe Ag, Apg each 45 De-

grees. I ſay HC will meaſure the 45 Degrees of Lati- |


| the Equator. (I ought to have premis'd that B and C re-
| preſent the Poles.) It is plain the Inhabitants at 77 will be
| in the Latitude of 45 Degrees, by reaſon their —


Theory of the Earth. 555


Plane g is by Conſtruction 45 Degrees diftan 1
e Horizon of the Inhabitants under the Line at D, which
es parallel to the Axis B C.

It the Earth be a broad Spheroid, D and F repreſenting
ic Poles, then by the ſame Method of Reaſoning, the
Yegrees of Latitude will be greateſt near the Poles : But
s the longeſt and ſhorteſt Diameter of the Earth has in
o Wiſe ſo great a Diſproportion as in their Figure (their
Jifference not exceeding the two hundredth Part at moſt}
ne Inequality of the Degrees of Latitude will be propor-
jonably leſs ; but in all Caſes, the long Spheroid makes the
Degrees greateſt near the Equator; and the broad Spheroid
hoſe greateſt near the Poles, I hope in a Fortnight to
ave the Satisfaction of ſeeing you in London, and remain,


Sir, Your moſt Humble Servant.


The Examiner would do wellto confider this, leſt all the
reproachful Characters he caſts upon Eiſenſmidius, ſhould
recoil upon himſelf. Tis Prudence, as well as good Man-
ners not to be fierce and vehement in Cenſures, tor fear
of a Miſtake, and aBlackblow. However, thepretended
Demonſtration which this Examiner brings to prove, thar,


in caſe the Earth was oblong, the Degrees would be great:
er toward the Poles, does not affect Eiſenſmidius, tor it
proceeds upon a Suppoſition which that Author does not


allow; namely, that the Vertical Lines, or the Lines of
Gravity are to be drawn directly to the Center of the
Earth: Whereas Eiſenſmidius ſuppoſes they ought to be
drawn at right Angles, to the Tangent of each reſpective
Horizon, and would not in all Figures lead directly to the
Center. However, we do not wonder that he is ſo rude
to Strangers, ſeeing he bears ſo hard in other places, upon
ſome of our own learned Countrymen.

We proceed now to the Theoriſt's ſecond Obſervation,
about Lunar Eclipſes and the Shade of the Earth. This
Shade is generally preſumed to be exactly round, as the
Section of a Cone: And yet the beſt Aſtronomers have
doubted of it, and ſome upon that Occaſion have doubted
of the Figure of the Earth. Kepler 4 in an Obſervation
of a Lunar total Eclipſe, not finding the Shade of the
Earth perfectly round, but rather oblong, #z ejus dimetiens
a Zona Torridg conſurgentis fit minor dimetiente ejus a
Polis Terre ſurgentis, ſuſpects that the Figure of the


tw —


.


1 E pbe mer. Par. 2» p 1624 «


fo


— — 52
— .
— 4


4
— —
4 —
- >, A =, **


Earth was ſo too. And that we muſt conclude it to be


A


556 Reflections upon the
ſo from this Obſervation, if there was not ſome Obliqui.
ty in the Rays of the Sun, whereof he ſhews no Cauſe or
Occaſion. Si retinenda eſſet, inquit, rectitudo radiorum
Globus ipſe Terre ſiet oviformis, diametro per Polos longi-
ore. And a like Obſeryation to this he cites from Tycho
Brahe, in a central, or next to central Eclipſe of the
Moon. Theſe two great Aſtronomers, it ſeems, did not
find the Shade of the Earth to be juſtly conical ; and
thereby take away the Reaſon or leſſen the Doubt, which
hindered M. Deſchales from concluding (upon another Ob-
ſervation) the Figure of the Earth to be oval. |
The third Obſervation of the Theoriſt remains, which
is about the Return of the Sun unto the polar Parts of the
Earth, whether that be according to the Rules of a ſpheri-
cal Surface, The Obſervations that have been made hi-
therto in the Northern Climates about the Return of the
Sun to them, make it quicker than will eaſily conſiſt with
a ſpherical Figure of the Earth; much leſs are they favour-
able to a gibbous Form: For that Gibboſity under the Equa-
tor muſt needs hinder the Appearance and Diſcovery of the
Sun in the reſpective polar Parts, more than a ſpherical
Figure would do. Now it hath been obſerv'd in Nora
Zembla, that the returning Sun appear'd to them ſeven-
teen Days ſooner than they expected, according to the
Rules of Aſtronomy, the Earth being ſuppoſed truly ſphe-
rical; and this may be thought an Argument that the
Earth is rather depreſs'd in its middle Parts. I leave the
Matter to farther Examination. I know *tis uſually im-


puted to Refractions, but that is upon the Preſumption |


that the Earth is juſtly ſpherical ; and a better Anſwer (up-
on that Suppoſition) I think cannot be found. Though,
I think, it will not be eaſy in that Way, and upon that


Solution to make all the Phænomena agree, or to ſhew |


that the Refractions could make ſo great a Difference.
However, this is no improper Topick to be conſider'd in
referenceto the Determination of the Figure of the Earth,
and for that purpoſe it was noted by the Theorift.

We have now done with that fide of the Queſtion,
that reſpects the oblong Figure of the Earth, and it re-


mains to conſider the other Part; I mean the Opinion of


thoſe that make the Earth protuberant about the Equator,
or an oblate Spheroid. This the learned Monſieur Hu-


gens* thinks may be prov'd by Experiments made about


the different Vibrations of Pexdulums in different Lati-


—


of Diſc, de a Peſant. Þ* 1455 Oc.


—


— — 2


tudes


Fe


a 8


Theory of the Earth. 557
des of the Earth. *Tis found, he ſays, by Experience
at a Pendulum near the Equator, makes its Vibrations
ower than another of the ſame Length, farther from the
quator; and gives an Inſtance of it from an Experiment
ade at Caie ne in America (which is four or five Degrees
rom the Equator) compar'd with another made at Paris.
'rom this T'rial he concludes, firſt, that the Gravitation
5 leſs under and near the Equator than towards the Poles,
ccording to their ſeveral Degrees of Latitude. Then he
nfers, by Conſequence, that the Land and the Sea are
igher towards the Equator, than towards the Poles. And
n Concluſion, that the Figure of the Earth is protuberant
nd gibbous in the Middle, and more flatted, or of a ſhor-
er Diameter betwixt Pole and Pole.

In this Concluſion, you ſee, there are ſeveral Things to be
conſidered according to the Premiſſes. Firſt, Matter of
Fact, concerning the Inequality of Vibrations in equal
Pendulums, according to their different Latitudes; then
the following Inferences made from that Inequality. As
to the Matter of Fact, Monſieur Hugens ſeems to be doubt-
ful himſelf: He does not vouch it from his own Experi-
ence, but he takes it from the Report of Monſieur R:cher ;
whoſe Per ſon or Character I do not know, nor whether
his Relation be extant in Print. However, Monſieur Ha-
gens ſpeaks dubiouſly of the Experiment, as ſuch an one
whereof we ought to expect farther Confirmation. For


he ſays *. we cannot trult entirely to this firſt Obſervation,
YS 1, * .


whereof we have not any Circumſtance noted to us; and
ſtill leſs to thoſe that are ſaid to be made at Guadaloupe, (at
a greater Latitude,) where the Pendule is ſaid to be ſhorter
by two Lines than that at Paris. 4 We muſt expect to be
more juſtly iaform'd of theſe different Lengths Pendules,
as well under the Line as in other Climates, And he re-
fers us to a farther Trial by his Clocks, rectified for a ſe-
cond Voyage, whereof I have yet heard no Report. If
Matter of Fa& be dubious, or Experiments diſcordant,
we cannot be aſſur'd of the Concluſion. It were to be


wiſh'd, that this different Gravitation in different Lati-


tudes, might be prov'd by other Experiments than that of
the Pendulum. Methinks, in ponderous Bodies, this Dit-
ference might become ſenfible : Not indeed by a Balance
or Scales, for the ſuppoſed Decreaſe of Gravity would
have the ſame Effect upon the Counterpoiſe as upon the Bo-
dy weighed; but by other Powers that do not depend im-


—


* *


oF Dift. de ta Peſant. Þ» 149. + 1b:d, P+ 165,


mediately


— — —— , —


558 Reflections upon the

mediately upon Gravity, as Springs, or any other Engine:
or by Rarefactions, or whatſoever hath the Force to raiſe
ſuſtain, or remove ponderous Bodies. For ſuch Power,
have a leſs Effect with us than near the Equator, where
the Gravitation of Bodies that make the Counterpoiſe, js
ſuppoſed to be much leſſen d. Neither do I know if they
have try'd the Barometer, whether that will diſcover any
ſuch Elevation, at, or near the Equator ; the Mercury
ſinking there much lower than with us, or indeed to no-
thing, if the Height be comparatively 10 great as is ſuppo-
ſed. It ſeems ſtrange, that the Difference of ſeventeen
Miles (call it little, or call it great, compar'd with the
Semidiameter of the Earth) ſhould have a ſenſible Effet
upon Pendulums and upon nothing elle.

Methinks, that Height of the Equator ſhould make a
different Horizon (as to the Heavens, or the Earth, and
Sea) Eaſt and Welt, from North and South; the Figure
of the Earth being a Sphere one way and a Spheroid in the
other. The Sea alſo mult be a prodigious Depth at the
Equator ; deeper by ſeventeen Miles, than at or near
the Poles. I would gladly know what Experience there
is of this. Then in reference to our Rivers, how ſwift
and rapid, upon this Hypotheſis, muſt the Rivers be that
Tiſe at or near the Equator, or how ſlow the Motion of
thoſe that aſcend towards it, if at all they can be ſuppo-
ſed to climb ſo great an Hill. The great River of the
Amazons, in Southern America, is in ſome Parts of it four
or five Degrees from the Equator, others ſay much more;
yet runs up to the Equator with that vaſt load of Water, and
throws it ſelf there into the Ocean. In the Northern A-
merica, Rio Negro is repreſented to us, as having a longer
Courſe againſt the bent of the Earth, and croſſing the
Equator, falls down Southward ſeveral Degrees : So
the Nile in Africa croſſes the Line, and hath a long
Courſe on this ſide of it. Rivers do not riſe higher by
a natural Courſe than their Fountain's Head, and Hy-
drographers uſually aſſign two Foot, or two Foot and an
half in a Mile for the Deſcent of Rivers, but upon this
Hypotheſis there will be fourteen or fifteen Foot (in re-
ſpec of the Center of the Earth) for every Mile, in Ri-
vers deſcending from the Equator ; which is a Precipita-


tion rather than a navigable Stream. Suppoſe a Canal


cut from the Equator to the Pole, *rwould be a Paradox
to ſaythe Water would not flow inthis Chanel, nor del-
cend towards the Pole, having fourteen or fifteen Foot
Deſcent for every Mile, according to your Figure =o iy

| arti;


FFC EE oe wy ad. tet Oh -R.


9 — * a


Theory of the Earth. 559


Earth: And alſo it would be as great or a greater Paradox,
to ſuppoſe that Rivers would ri ſe to the Equator, and with
the ſame Celerity (as we ſee they do) upon an Aſcent of
ſo many Feet. And afterall, to conclude the Argument,
if this Difference of Pendulums be found, it will ſtill bear
a Diſpute from what phyſical Cauſes that Difference
proceeds.

Thus far we have conſidered what Arguments have been
brought for the oblate Figure of the Earth from Effects;
and have noted ſuch Obſervations to be made, as we
thought might be uſeſul for Diſcovety of Truth, on
what ſide ſoever it may fall. We are now to conſider an
Argument taken from the Cauſes, and brought by theſe
Authors to prove the ſame ſpheroidical Figure of the
Globe. To this purpoſe they obſerve, as is obvious and
reaſonable, that in the ee Motion of the Earth, the
middle Parts about the Equator (where the Circles are
greateſt, and conſequently the Motion 1wifteſt) would
fly off with a greater Force, and ſo rife higher than the
other Parts that were mov'd in leſſer Circles in the tame
time, and would have leſs Force to remove themſelves
from the Center of their Motion. This is agreed on
all Hands, and was own'd by the Theoriſt in a fluid
Globe turn'd about its Axis, in caſe there was no Im-
pediment to hinder the riſing or receſſion of thoſe
middle Parts. But before we ſpeak to that, on both
ſides you ſee it muſt be ſuppos'd and granted, that the
Globe of the Earth was once fluid, or the exterior
Orb of it; and we ought to conſider when, or at
what Time this was. It muſt have been ſurely at the
firit Formation of the Earth, when it roſe from a
Chaos, and before its Parts were conſolidated and
grown hard. Suppoſing then that the interior Orb of
the Earth was once cover'd over with an Orb of Wa-
ter, the Queſtion will be, how this Orb of Water
came to be cover'd with dry Land, or came to be
divided into Land and Water, as it is now.


Let


Wa nd = 1H we = oy ww = niy bs mint bd Wo WARE = ww kk 41 — Oo  - Wu — on hon WW 88 Vo” ow Wy PP...” wt 2


JN


0 Wl


\\ys
00 |
Wy


}
tt
} I


1
Wh 1
WY
} V 1359
*


5
5%
Wo


I
W.
Wash |
\


00


}
| 1 g


}


1 \


WALLIN) lj
I.)

\
Ny
]


yy)
NIN
\ 10


}
WON
Wend


|!
|
|


j
it,


if }
J } } 1 |
Wh 0 Jr 100


ö
\ U


|
|


Wer


} *


\
WY)
ih


g
)


1


1 0 , : 4 | | | ; Y %% | | Y
Wen 10


\


— —
— ——
n


i


WEHHHHNY
WT) \y; 113 * 1
i) (NG W W 1


* N Mei,
NN * £0040)


55055 W J ty "ll
5 WY | ' ; 1 % %% / a k |
] ) WAP | MIA 1 11 1 |
uy Wil | |

57

%,

76559


—
—
——


N g


— —


0 Wy 550


ö


190
7%
1%
)


— —


0 1
NN


— ü
—


J

*
1 0, %%% &
) 16000 10 | 11 —
} } * Vi
ER BL
10% 50% % J 2


05
Mi je


WINK
I) Wl ,


Wy
)
{pp


n 1 8 ao
_— ——_— — 0 — ——


— — -
n — 25S = — Fi? — - — — th... noon —— — — —
- — — — — 2 7 ” — - — © — — — ——


——— — — — —
— — — —


Theory of the Earth. 56k

Let (A) repreſent an Hemiſphere of the Earth, in its
firſt State, when covered with Water ; and (B) the ſame
Hemiſphereasitis now. This Author muſt teil us, con-
ſiſtently with his Hypotheſis, how the Earth could paſs out
of one of theſe States into the other, without paſſing
through ſome intermediate State; or how this Change was
made in its Surface, from what Cauſes, and in what man-
ner. If the firſt Earth was a Concretion upon the Face of
the Waters, then indeed it would have the ſame Figure
with tlie watery Globe under it; but if it was from the
Beginning in this preſent Form firm and ſolid, as it is now
rocky and mountainous, then the Queſtion is, how the
Parts or Regions of the Earrh about the Equator could
be raiſed above a ſpherical Figure, or into an oblate
Spheroid, as they ſay the Earth is now. I take it for
granted, that they ſuppoſe the Land raiſed as well as the
Water; for otherwiſe the Ocean would overflow at thoſe
Parts of the Earth. Suppoſe then the Waters raiſed 5 the


Circumvolution of the Earth, how was the Terra firma


rais'd, or how could it be raĩs d by that or any ſuch Cauſe?
Theſe Queſtions are no matter of Difficulty to the
Theoriſt, who ſuppoſes the firſt Earth to have covered the


Waters, and to have taken their Shape, whatſoever it was,


as upon a Mold: Then upon its Diſſolution and Diſtup-
tion at the Deluge, to have fallen into that uneven and
uninterrupted Form it hath now. But ſeeing this Method
does not pleaſe the Examiner, he mult tell us how, upon
his Hypotheſis, the Land or ſolid Parts of the Earth could
be rais'd above a ſpherical Convexity into ſuch a gibbous
Figure, as he ſuppoſes them now to have under the E-
quator. . |
Monſieur Hagens makes this broad Spheroid of the
Earth to have been the Effect of Gravity in the Formation
of the Earth; the Matter whereof being then turned round,
it would, as he thinks, be brought to ſettle in this oblate
Figure. Very well! But this muſt be in its very firſt Con-
cretion from a Chaos, before it was fix d and compact as
it is now; for the Rotation of the Earth could have no
ſuch effect upon it after it was hard. Now if you admit
the exterior Globe of the Earth, to have been in ſuch a


State betwixt Fixtneſs and Fluidity, it will lead us directly


to the Theoriſt's Hypotheſis, which ſuppoſes a ſoft and
'ender Concretion at firſt, over all the Face of the Wa-


1


N. Hugens de la Peſant. p. 152. It eft @ croire, % la Terre 4 pris
ti?» figure, lors gu elle @ eſtè aſſemblee par Veffet de {a Peſanterr : ſa manere
© 427 «fr [err d menvement citrcutarre de 24 beuret,


Go ters,


—


$62 Refleftions upon the


ters. I ſay, over all the Face of theaters: For it muſt be
univerſal; both becauſe there is no Reaſon why theſe earthy
Particles that made the Concretion, fhould not fall upon
one Part of the Globe, as wellas upon another; and alſo
if they did not fall upon the Equinoctial Parts, how came
there to be Land in that part, or that Land rais'd higher
than the reſt, as this Hypothefis will have it?

In theſe Remarks upon the protuberant Figure of the
Earth, you ſee it is allow'd, that there would be a greater
Tendency from the Center in the middle Parts of theGlobe,
and the Waters would riſe there, if there was no Impedi-
ment. But the Theoriſt did believe that the Vortex, or
circumfluent Orb was ſtreighter, or of a ſhorter Diameter
there than through the Poles ; and conſequently the Waters
having leſs room to dilate, would be preſs'd and detruded
towards the Poles. T heſe Authors, it may be, will allow
no Vortices to the Planets; but then they muſt aſſign ſome
Other ſufficient Cauſe to carry the Planets in their periodi-
cal Motions (and with the fame Velocity for innumerable
Ages) about their common Center; and the Secondary
about their Primary: As alſo what gives them their diurnal
Rotation, and the different Pofition of their Axes. Nei-
ther would it be eaſy to conceive, how a great Maſs of
fluid and volatile Matter, having no Current, or Determi-
nation any one way, and being often check'd in its pro-
greſſtve Motion, ſhould not fall into circular Motions,
or into Vortices of one ſort or other; eſpecially if you
place in this Maſs ſome great ſolid Bodies turned about
their Axes.

Theſe are more general Problems; and when they are
determin'd with Certainty, we ſhall better judge of the
Particulars that depend upon them. But I ſay till, that
neither Figure of the Earth, oblong or oblate, can be
prov*d fromthe Rotation of the Earth and its Gravity, with-
out ſuppoſing the Globe form'd into that Shape betore it


came to be harden'd. before it came to be loaded and ſtiffen d


by Rocks and ſtony Mountains. Therefore upon bothHypo-
theſes it muſt be al low'd, that there was fuch a Time, ſuch a
State of the Earth, when its tender Orb was capable of thoſe
Impreſſions and Modifications; and that Orb muſt have lain
above the Waters, not under them, nor radicated to the
Bottom of them, for then ſuch Cauſe could not have had
ſuch an Effect upon it. And in the laſt place, this Con-
cretion upon the Waters muſt have been throughout all
the Parts of the Earth, or all the Parts of the Land which
are now rais d above a ſpherical Susface ; and no _


Theory of the Earth. 563


ean be given, as we noted before, why the reſt ſnould not
be cover d as well as thoſe. So that in effect both the Hy-
potheſes ſuppoſe that all the watery Globe was at firſt co-
ver'd with an earthy Concretion.

Now this being admitted, you have confirm'd the main
Point of the Theory: Namely, that the Abyſs was once,
or at firſt cover*d with a terreſtrial Concretion, or an Orb
of Earth. Grant this, and we'll compound for the reſt,
let the Earth atpreſent be of what Figure it will : If there
was ſuch an original Earth that cover'd the Waters, both
the Form and Equilibration of the Earth may eaſily ap-
pear, and how by 2 Diſſolution of it a Deluge might ariſe.
But as to the preſent Earth, the Theoriſt never affirm'd
that its Figure was oval, but he* noted ſuch Obſervations
made or to be made, as he thought might be proper to deter-
mine its Figure, and {till defires that they may be purſu-
ed. He added alſo, that he would be glad to receive any
new ones, that would demonſtrate the preciſe Figure of
the Earth. And accordingly, he is willing to conſider in
this Particular and all others, the Arguments and Remarks
of ſuch eminent Authors, as have lately given a new
Light to the Syſtem of the World.

his may ſuffice to have ſpoken in general concernin

theſe two ſpheroidical Figures of the Earth. We mut
now conſider what particular Objections are made by the
Examiner againſt its oval Figure. He ſays, p. 103, 104, Sc.
admitting the oval Figure of that firſt Earth, it would not
be capable however, to give a Courſe to the Rivers from
the polar Parts, towards the EquinoQial. And his Reaſon
is this; becauſe the ſame Cauſes which caſt the Abyſs or
the Ocean towards the Poles, would alſo keep the Rivers


from deſcending from the Poles: But there is no Parity of


Reaſon betwixt the Abyſs or the Ocean, and the Rivers.
We ſee in the Flux and Reflux of the Ocean, let the Cauſe


of it be what it will, it hath not that Effect upon Rivers,


nor upon Lakes, nor upon leſſer Seas ; yet the Circum-
rotation of the Earth continues the fame. And his con-
founding the Ocean and Rivers in the ante-diluvian Earth
is ſo much the worſe, ſeeing there never was an Ocean
and Rivers together in that Earth. While there was an
open Ocean, there were no Rivers, and when there were
Rivers, there was no open Ocean, but an inclos'd Abyſs:
So though he makes large Tranſcripts there and elſewhere
out of the Theory, he does not ſeem always to have
well digeſted the Method of it. |


® Goh. Tteer. lib, 2. p. 185.


O0 2 After


—
—


-- — + —— —


Ew Refleftions upon the


After thts Objection, the Examiner charges the Theo.
riſt with want of Skill in Logick ; but his Charge is
rounded upon another Miſunderſtanding or Miltepre-
2 e pretends there, p. 107. that the Theoriſt
hath made ſuch a Ratiocination as this. Al Bodies by
reaſon of the Earth's diurnal Rotation, do endeavour to re-
cede from the Axis of their Motion; but by reaſon of the
Preſſure of the Air, and the Streightneſs of the Orb, they
caunot recede from the Axis of their Motion, thereſore they
will move towards the Poles, where they will come nearer
to the Axisof their Mation. Theſe are the Examiner's Words
in that Place, whereheſays he will put the Theoriſt's Rea-
ſoning in other Words : But I do not like that Method,
unleſs the Examiner were a more judicious or faithful Pa-
raphraſt than he ſeems to be: Let every one be tried by
their own Words, and if there be any falſe Logick or
Nonſenſe in the forecited Words of the Examiner, let it
fall upon their Author. The Theoriſt ſaid “, that Bodies,
by reaſon of the Earth's Motion did, conari a centro ſui
mots recedere : Theſe Words this Tranſlator renders, ca-
deauonr to recede from the Axis of their Mation ; and by
changing the Word Center into Axis (whether careleſly
or wilfully I know not) of plain Senſe he hath made Non-
ſenſe ; and then makes this Conclufion, p. 108. (which
follows indeed from his own Words, but not from thoſe
of the Theoriſt) becauſe a Bodies do endeavour to recede
from the Axis of their Motion, therefore they will endea-
wVour to go to the Axis of their Motion.

The Theoriſt's Argumentation was plainly this: Seeing
in the Rotation of the Earth, Bodies tend from the Cen-
ter of their Motion, if they meet with an Impediment
there, they will move laterally in the next eaſieſt and
openeſt way; and therefore the Waters under the E-
quator being ſtopp'd in their firſt Tendency, would di-
vert towards the Poles; wherein, I think, there is no
falſe Logick. That there was no Impediment there,
he muſt prove by other Arguments than his own Dic-


tates or bare Aſſertion, which will not paſs for a Proof.


He proceeds now to diſcourſe of the centrifugal Force
and the Effects of it, together with Gravity : But he ſhould
have given us a better Notion of the centrifugal Force,
than what he ſets down there; for he ſays (p. 110. J. 24.)
A centrifugal Force, is that Force by which a Body is draws
zowards the Center: This is a ſtrange Signification of that


ets —


* Tbeer. 1 6, 2. Co Fo P- 186. 7 ®
1 1 Os Word.


—— ——— —àwdᷓmZů2.—-ꝑ᷑ꝑ!“uu OR - —— —


8 „ „ —


—


Theory of the Earth. 565


Word. And in the next Page (p. 11 I. J. 22.) he ſays, by
this centrifugal Force, Bodies endeavour to recede rom the
Center of their Motion; which is true, but contrary to
what he ſaid juſt before. I think *tis Gravity, not cen-
trifugal Force, that brings Bodies towards the Center.

But to paſs by this Contradiction, and to proceed:
What he ſays, from others, about the Proportions of the
centrifugal Forceand Gravity in Bodies turn'd round, and
particularly in Fluids, how they would fly off more or
leſs, according to the Circles of their Motion, was al-
ways (as hath been mention'd before) ſuppos'd and al-
low'd by the Theoriſt, if there was no Reſtraint or Preſ-
{ure upon one Part more than another of the fluid Globe:
So that he might have ſpared here ſix or ſeven Pages.

In like manner, he * have ſpar'd what he hath tran-
ſcrib'd in his following Pages from thoſe excellent Au-
thors we referr'd to before, about calculating the Dimi-
nutions of Gravity made by the centrifugal Force, indif-
ferent Latitudes; with other ſuch Excurtions. Theſe, I
ſay, might have been ſpar'd, as needleſs upon this Occa-
ſion, or to the Confutation of the Theory, till the princi-
pal Point, upon Which they depend, be better prov'd. I
made bold to ſay, they were tranſcrib'd from thoſe Au-
thors, as any one may ſee that pleaſes to conſult the Ori-
ginals, Newz. Philoſ. Nat. Pric. Math. I. 3. prop. 18,
19, 20. Hugens Diſconr. de la cauſe de la Peſantear, p.
147, 148, Sc. And this French Diſcourſe of Montieur
Hugens, he hath not ſo much as once nam'd, though he
hath taken ſo much from it. And after all, when theſe
Things are determin'd in Speculation, it will {till be a
Queſtion what the true phyſical Cauſes of them are.

At laſt, for a farther Confirmation of the broad ſpheroi-
dical Figure of the Earth, he adds an Obſeryation from
the Planet Jupiter, which is found to be of ſuch a Figure.
And therefore, he ſays, p. 137, 138. We need not doubt,
but that the Earth, which is a Planet like the reſt, and
turns round its Axis, as they do, is of the ſame Figure, He
might as well conclude, that every Planet, as well as the
Earth, js of the ſame Figure. And what Reaſon can he
give, Why all the Planets that have a Rotation upon their
Axis, are not broad Spheroids, as well as thoſetwo which
he ſuppoſes to be ſo ? If that be a ſufficient Cauſe, and
be found in other Planets as well as thoſe, why hath it
not the ſame Effect? Or he might as well conclude, that
the Earth hath a perpetual Equinox, becauſe Jupiter hath
to, This is the ſame I'anlt which he hath ſo often com-

| | mitted,


566 Reflections upon the


mitted, of meaſuring all the Works of God by one or
two. It a Man was tranſported into the Moon, the
neareſt Planet; or into Mercury that is ſo near the Sun, or
into Saturn, (or any of his Satellites) that is ſo remote ſrom
it; would he not find, think you, a much different Face
and State of thoſe Planets, from what we have upon this
Earth? Inhabitants of a different Conſtitution, the Furni-
ture of every World different, Animals, Plants, Waters,
and other inanimate Things: As alſodiftcrent Viciſſitudes
of Days and Nights, and the Seaſons of the Year; ac-
Eording to their different Poſitions, Revolutions and
Forms? Therefore not without Reaſon we noted before,
how much the Narrowneſs of fomeMensSpirits, Thoughts
and Obſervations, confine them to a particular Pattern and
Model, nor conſidering the infinite Variety of the divine
Works, whereof we are not competent Judges.

Now comes in his rude Cenſure of Dr. Eiſenſmidius,
both for his Mathematicks and bad Logick, or want ot
common Senſe; but to this we have ſpoken before. Hz
alſo, in the tame Paragraph, p. 142. wonders at the Theo-
riſt's ſtrange Logick, to make the centrifugal Force of
Bodies - ab the Earth, to be the Cauſe of its oblong Fi—
gure. That indeed would be ſtrange Logick if it was
made the proximate Cauſe of it. But that is not the The-
Oriſts's Logick but the Examiners, as it is diſtorted and
miſtepreſented by him. The Theoriſt ſuppos'd the Preſ-
ſure of that Tumour of the Waters, occaſion'd by the
centritugal Force (as its original Cauſe) to be the imme-
diate Cauſe of the oblong Figure of the Earth; and that
Preſſure ſuppos'd, there is nothing illogical in the Infe—
rence. He had formerly taken Notice, p. 102, 103. of
this Reaſon, from the Streightneſs of the Orb in that Part,
when he gave the Iheoriſt's Account of that Figure; but
he thought fit to forget it now, that his Charge might not
appear lame.

This, Sir, is a ſhort Account of this Author's Objec-
tions; but there are ſome Things'ſo often repeated by him,
that we are forc'd to take Notice of them more than
once; as that about Miracles and final Cauſes. Hetruly
notes, p. 31. that to be a much eafter and ſhorter Way of
giving an account of the Deluge, or other Revolutions of
Nature: But the Queſtion is not, which is the ſhorteſt and
caſieſt Way, but which is the trueſt. No Man in his Sen-
ies can queſtion the divine Omnipotency, God could do
rhele Things purely miraculouſly, if he pleas'd ; but the
hing to be confider*d is, whether, according to the 3
med


rr


Theory of the Earth. 567


thods of Providence, in the Changes and Revolutions ot
the natural World, the Courſe of Nature and of natura!
Cauſes is not made ule of ſo far as they will go. Both
Maſes and St. Peter mention material Cauſes, but al ways
including the divine Word and Superintendency. The
'Theoritt does not think (as is ſufficiently teſtified in ſeve-
ral Places) that purely material and mechanical Cauſes,
guided only by the Laws of Motion, could form this
Earth, and the Furniture of it ; and does readily believe
all Miracles recorded in Holy Writ, or elſewhere, well
grounded : But Miracles of our own making or imagi-
ning, want Authority to ſupport them. Some Men when
they are at a loſs in the Progreſs of their Work, call in
a Miracle to relieve them in their Diſtreſs. You know
what hath been noted both by * Philoſophers and others
to that purpoſe. | |
As to final Cauſes, the Contemplation of them is ver
uſeful to moral Purpoſes, and of great Satisfaction to the
Mind, where we can attain to them. But we mult not
pretend to prove a thing to be ſo or ſo in Nature, becauſe
we fancy it would be better ſo; nor deny it to be in ſuch
a manner, becauſe to our Mind it would be better other-
wife. Almighty Power and Wiſdom, that have the whole
Complex and Compoſtion of the Univerſe in View, take
other Meaſures than we can comprehend or account for.
Even in this ſmall Earth that we inhabit, there are ſevera!
Plants and Animals, which to us appcar uſeleſs or noxious,
and yet no doubt would be found proper for this State, it
we had the whole Proſpect and Scheme of Providence.
As to efficient Cauſes, they mult be either material or
immaterial, and whatſoever is prov'd to be the immediate
Effect of an immaterial Cauſe, is ſo much the more ac-
ceptable to the Theoriſt, as it argues a Power above Mat-
ter. But as to purely material Cauſes, they muft be me-


® Plat, Cratyl. m. p. 425. Ex A, ννe £77 TAG WANAVIG KA a
Seuy ger, bes: atpoviec. Cum rei alicujus angufti:cs batent, ad mathina;
cenfugiunt d Deos inducunt, This is alſo remark'd and render'd in other
Words by Tully de Nat. Deer. 1, 1. Cum explicare argumenti exitum non peteftis,
eonfugitis ad Deum. St. Auſtin alſo ſpeaking about the ſuperceleſtial Wa-
ters, hath noted this Method, and reprov'd it; in thete Words, Nec qui/quans
os ita debet refellere, ut dicat ſecundum omnipotentiam Dei cui euntta ſunt poſſibilia,
por tere not eredere aques etiam tam graves quam novimus atque ſentimus, caleſti
eorport in quo ſunt dera, ſuper fuſas: Nunc enim quemadmedum Deus inſtituerit na-
raf rerum ſecundum Scripturam eJus, nos guærere convenit, non autem quod Ne
© 15 vel ex its ad miraculum omni potent iæ ſuæ velit cperari, J. 2. Gen, ad (it,


3 ſee Diſcretion and Moderat ion is to be uſed in theſe and ſuch-like
Mutters.


chanical ;


4 5 1 |

558 Reflections upon the, &c.
chanical ; there being no other Modes, or Powers of Mat-
ter (at leaſt in the Opinion of the Theoriſt) but what are
mechanical: And to explain Effects by ſuch Cauſes, is
properly natural Science.

We have taken Notice before of this Author's ambigu
ous uſe of Words, without declaring in what Senſe hc
uſes them: And he is no leſs ambiguous as to his Opin'i-
ons. When he ſpeaks of the Origin and Formation 0:
the WORLD, he does not tell us what he means by tha:
Word; whether the great Compound of the Univerſe, ©:
that ſmall Part only where we reſide. His centrifuge
Force he interprets in contrary Senſes, or in contrar;
Words, and reſerves the Senſe to himſelf. Sometimc:
he ſpeaks of the Motion of the Sun, and ſometime:
of the Motion of the Earth, and ſticks to no Syſtem
Neither does he tell us what he means by the 1
ſaical Abyſs, or Tehom Rabbah, which the Theoriſt ſup-
poſes to have been broken up at the Deluge. We oug|:
to know in what Senſe and Signification he uſes Words
or Phraſes; atleaſt if heuſe themin a difterent Senſe from
that of the Lheoriſt's.

I know, Sir, you will alſo take Notice of his hard Words
and coarſe Language, as, ts falſe, that's abſurd, that's
ridiculous. This, you will ſay, is not the uſual Lan-
guage amongſt Gentlemen; but we find it too uſual with
ſome Writers, according to their particular Temper and
Experience in the World. For my part, I think Rude-
neſs or Diſingenuity in examining the Writings of au-
other Perſon, fall more heavy (in the Conſtruction of fait
Readers) upon him that uſes them, than upon him tha:
ſuffers them. Jam, |


SIR,


Nur moſt humble Servant,


HS


d


f” [
MVSEVM
NICV,


-
